LR alae aly 
sats 
nena 


Zivent b y 


si Oe 
pA a ee 
wes 


we 


ee 


proreeiow 


eta, 


VV t 
FEB 18 1922 
“y Cy 
Oh ogiga, gene 


ati ol PAC Tot RS ey, 
Gaebelein, Arno Clemens, 
1861-1945. 


Christianity or religion? 


Princeton Thealogical Seminary Lib 


https://arch ive.org/details/ch ristianit 


6% “ 
he 7 
5 . ™ 
3 ae 
Soy" hoa ay 
} : 
- A cen hi 
~ 4 
‘ pa. 
) ¢ rts 
S44 34 
. j ie me ‘te 
: 
+ : 
eu 
a 
Cah ee 
sy oT 
j <Any 
: Ya) 
a» f 
er 
aE 
~o 
. * 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 


Sa 


f { 
.- aA 
pr st 
ai 
bah 
é 
4‘ 
i] 
z = 7 7 
= 
r 5 
™~ c My r 4 
, 


’ 
. 


t 


; on : y “al. ‘ , P is 
f wai? ee ea ae 
Ve Oat ms « ¢ - , ae 7 fet iy Phe 


CHRISTIANITY 


RELIGIO 
. 


a. 


<< ry a 
~% 44 \ hy 


A STUDY OF THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH 
OF REIIGION AND THE SUPERNATURALISM 
OF CHRISTIANITY 


By 


ARNO CLEMENS ‘GAEBELEIN, D.D. 


Author of The Annotated Bible; 
Exposition of the Gospel of John; Matthew; 
ActssBtc., Etc. 


PUBLICATION OFFICE “OUR HOPE” 


456 FourtH Avenue, New Yorxk City 


And All Booksellers 


Copyright, 1927. | 
Arno C. Garsezetn, D.D. 
New York 


CONTENTS 


Page 
PESO LAI VaRy del uric Wicd Ah etal a nk Maal ati 4 
‘Po LUV ce ee MINT RA MeCN RR NO MAG ERO RR 5 
Perc aity OP REIZION | hile yea cw 10 
Origin and Development of Religion......... 16 
Origin and Growth of Religion in the Light of 
AC SAL Ey Re EIS RI RN aR Aa corp Hrs Mure 62 
IAC VOR sie Ce tea ea lalyt shal Gin w aye 96 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The following works have been consulted by the 
author of this volume. 


The Sacred Books of the East, published by the 
Oxford University Press: The Vedic Hymns; the 
Upanishads; the Pali Texts; the Laws of Manu; 
the Zend-Avesta; and others. 


The Science of Religion. By Professor F. Max Muller. 


The Origin and Growth of Religion. 
By Professor F. Max Miller. 


The Genesis and Growth of Religion. 
By Dr. S. H. Kellogg. 


This Believing World. By Rabbi Lewis Browne. 


The Ancient World and Christianity. 
By E. De Pressense, D.D. 


Oriental Religions and Christianity. 
By Frank F. Ellinwood, D.D. 


The History of Religions. 
By Theodore H. Robinson, D.D. 


Lectures on the Religion of Egypt. 
By P. Le Page Renouf. 


Darwinism. By Alfred Russell Wallace. 

Principles of Sociology. By Herbert Spencer. 

A pologetik. By Professor Ebrard. 

The Final Faith. By W. Douglass Mackenzie, D.D. 
Is Christianity the Final Religion? By A. C. Bouquet. 


Christianity or Religion P 


CHAPTER I 
Religion 


The word religion has a very prominent place in 
the vocabulary of the civilized nations. It is used 
in the twentieth century as in no preceding one. 
But what is religion? It has baffled logical defi- 
nition. Weare still waiting for a satisfying answer, 
one which covers the many phases and expressions 
of thisterm. Hundreds of attempts have been made 
by pagan thinkers, by almost every school of phi- 
losophy, as well as by leading theologians, yet we 
are wrestling more than ever with this word. 

Professor Max Miller in his “‘Origin and Progress 
of Religion” says: ‘‘With regard to religion, it is 
no doubt extremely difficult to give a definition. 
The word rose thousands of years ago; it was 
retained while what was meant by it went on 
changing from century to century, and it 1s now 
often applied to the very opposite of what it was 
originally intended to signify.”?! This has been the 
verdict of philosophers and of all students of 
comparative religion. Another Oriental scholar, the 
late Dr. S. H. Kellogg, in his splendid volume ‘“The 
Genesis and Growth of Religion,” a work to which 
we shall refer frequently, declares that “the defini- 
tion of such a familiar word might, at first, seem a 
sufficiently easy matter; but it is evident, from the 
great number and diversity of definitions which have 
been given, that practically it has been found very 


1Origin and Growth of Religion.” 
i 


6 | Religion 


difficult.”’2 We could add the similar testimony of 
many other outstanding thinkers. 

The Latin ‘‘Religio” in its etymological meaning 
is also not quite clear. It has been derived from two 
Latin verbs: relegere and religare. The first means, 
to gather up again, to consider or ponder; the 
second, to fasten, to hold back. Cicero derived the 
word religion from relegere, while many others 
traced it to religare. Among those who derive it 
from the second verb we find Servius, Lactantius 
and Augustinus. They declared that it means, to 
hold back; that which binds man and puts certain 
obligations upon him. 

It is impossible to give all the leading attempts 
which have been made to define religion. We cite 
a few to show what diversity of opinion has been 
expressed. 

Thales belonged to the earliest thinkers of Greece 
(600 B. C.). He is the ancestor of Darwin and his 
school, for Thales declared that water was the 
beginning of all things. With this statement he 
attacked the current religious belief that the gods 
had made the world. While Thales has not left a 
definition of religion, it seems evident that the prob- 
lems with which philosophy deals were suggested and 
started by what is called religion. The history of 
philosophy bears witness to the fact that all phil- 
osophers were, and are, forced to deal with this term. 

Seneca gave a noble definition by saying religion 
is ‘“Cognoscere Deum et imitari,” to know God and 
to imitate Him. | 

We pass by Plato and Aristotle, and other phil- 
osophers of antiquity, and their respective schools, 
and listen to some of the more modern thinkers. 

2Page 3. 


Religion 7 


Immanuel Kant tells us: “‘Religion is morality. We 
possess religion when we look upon all our moral 
duties as divine commands.” 

The father of Pantheism, in a modern sense, 
Spinoza,the Dutch Jew, gave the following definition: 
“Religion is the love of God, founded on a knowledge 
of His divine perfections.” 

Fichte, the successor and disciple of Kant, took 
a somewhat different view; he says: ‘“‘It is conscious 
morality which, in virtue of that consciousness, is 
mindful of its origin from God.” 

Hegel speaks of it as ‘‘perfect freedom,” a defi- 
nition which is wholly inadequate. The German 
Rationalist Strauss expressed himself rather vaguely 
about religion in his work “The Old and the New 
Faith.” When he speaks of it he follows Schleier- 
macher’s estimate, that religion consists of absolute 
dependence, it is neither a knowing or a doing, but 
a determination of the feelings. Yet we find the 
following paragraph in the work of Strauss: “The 
world is to us the workshop of the rational and the 
good. That on which we feel ourselves absolutely 
dependent is by no means a brute power, before 
which we must bow in silent resignation. It is 
order and law, reason and goodness, to which we 
surrender ourselves with loving confidence. In our 
inmost nature we feel a kinship between ourselves 
and that on which we depend. In our dependence 
we are free, and pride and humility, joy and resig- 
nation, are mingled together in our feeling for all 
that exists.” This may be taken as his definition of 
religion. 

Wolfgang von Goethe said, ‘‘Religion is a feeling 
for what is above, around and beneath us.” 

Dr. Martineau defines religion as “‘belief in an 


8 | Religion 


ever living God, a divine mind and will ruling the 
universe, and holding moral relations with man- 
kind.” Teichmiller in “Der Christliche Glaube’’® 
says, ‘‘Religion consists of fear, of aesthetic feelings, 
such as admiration for the beautiful, and of moral 
feelings.”” Professor Reville gave the following as 
his result of his research: ‘‘Religion is the determina- 
tion of human life by the sentiment of a bond uniting 
the human mind to that mysterious mind whose 
domination of the world and of itself it recognizes, 
and to whom it delights in feeling itself united.” 
Feuerbach, a German Rationalist, makes religion to 
be a selfish desire. ‘‘All religion,” he says, ‘“‘is 
covetousness, which manifests itself in prayer, 
sacrifice and faith.”” But in his ‘‘Essence of Christ- 
ianity,” he makes a true statement when he declares, 
*“*the sick heart of man is the source of all religion, 
and of all misery.”’ A similar thought was expressed 
by Heraclitos (in the sixth century before Christ); 
he saw religion as one of the diseases from which all 
humanity suffers, but termed it a sacred disease. 

Professor Flint speaks of religion as ‘“‘man’s belief 
in a Being or beings, mightier than himself, inacess- 
ible to his senses, but not indifferent to his senti- 
ments and actions, with the feelings and practices 
which flow from such beliefs.” 

Principal Caird gives as the essence of religion the 
fact that, “‘the infinite has ceased to be merely a far 
off vision of spiritual attainment, and ideal of inde- 
finite future perfection, but has become a present 
reality.’’4 

Professor Max Miller, a great Oriental scholar, has 
left two answers to the question ‘What is Religion?” 


3Page 5. 
“Philosophy of Religion,” p. 295. 


Religion 9 


In a lecture on the ‘‘Science of Religion,” delivered 
at the Royal Institute in London in 1873 he said: 
“Religion is a mental faculty which, independent of, 
nay, in spite of sense and reason, enables man to 
apprehend the infinite under different names and 
under varying disguises. Without that faculty, no 
religion, not even the lowest worship of idols and 
fetishes, would be possible, and if we but listen 
attentively, we can hear in all religions a groaning 
of the spirit, a struggle to conceive the unconceivable, 
to utter the unutterable, a longing after the Infinite, 
a love of God.’’5 

But later in his Gifford lectures, delivered in 1888, 
he says: ‘‘Religion consists in the perception of the 
Infinite under such manifestations as are able to 
influence the moral character of man.’’® 

We add one more definition, given by Dr. S. H. 
Kellogg: ‘‘Religion essentially consists in man’s 
apprehension of his relation to an invisible Power 
or powers, able to influence his destiny, to which he 
is necessarily subject, together with the feelings, 
desires, and actions, which this apprehension calls 
forth.’’? 

It is beyond the scope of this volume to take up 
these different definitions, to scrutinize them closely 
and to show that they do not express fully the mean- 
ing of religion in its different expressions. Each 
lacks something, and this is true of all other defini- 
tions offered by philosophers and theologians. We 
are therefore still waiting for a complete answer to 
the question, “What is Religion?” 


5Origin and Growth of Religion,” p. 21. 
Natural Religion,” p. 188. 
™Genesis of Religion,” p. 21. 


CHAPTER II 
The Universality of Religion 


While scholars have not yet found a correct and 
satisfying answer to the question “What is Reli- 
gion?” religion, beyond controversy, is a universal 
fact in the entire history of humanity. Religion is 
confined exclusively to the human race. It is un- 
known in the world of beings below man, nor is it 
known in the world of beings above man. Below . 
man is the animal creation. The evolutionist may 
speak of an animal ancestry of man, but the fact 
remains that between the most degraded human 
being, the cannibal, and the highest developed ape 
there is an unbridgeable gulf. Scientists have trained 
chimpanzees and other monkeys. They have been 
taught to assume certain manners. They sit at the 
table, handling knife and fork correctly, eat almost 
like human beings, even smoke pipes and cigarettes. 
But can this ape ever be taught to bow the knee 
and worship a being above himself? Has the most 
intelligent chimpanzee ever shown anything like a 
tendency to fetish worship? Did that chimpanzee 
ever think of making a god out of one of his ances- 
tors and practicing afterward ancestral worship? 
In studying ape-life has any scientist ever discovered 
a chimpanzee or gorilla raising his arms in adoration 
to the sun? Certainly not; and why not? Because 
animals have no religious instinct or faculty; they 
know nothing of religion. The great fact is that the 
religions and moral phenomena which are present 
in the entire human race isolate mankind from 
animals. 

Above man is found another class of beings. They 
are the angels of God. Man is made a little lower 

10 


The Universality of Religion 11 


than the angels. Between man and the angels is 
another fixed gulf. We know much about the angels 
from the Bible. While they worship and adore, and 
are God’s ministers, the servants He uses, religion 
as known among men, is unknown among angels. 


Religion is confined to the human race. Its 
beginning however, as far as scientific research is 
concerned, is shrouded in mystery. The scientist is 
unable to discover anything about the religious senti- 
ments of primitive man. The prehistoric man has 
left no records of his religious life. That religion 
started at a certain point of human existence we 
shall demonstrate later when we consider the real 
origin of all religions in the light of the Bible. 


The searcher for light as to the earliest concep- 
tions of the unseen at the dawn of human history has 
no means whatever whereby he can find out the 
thoughts and feelings of primitive man as to religion. 
The scientist may assume certain things as to the 
religion of primitive man, and build upon these 
different assumptions certain theories, as has been 
done in the camp of evolutionism, but it is only 
guess-work, 


That man from the very beginning had a religious 
instinct is a fact which needs no scientific demon- 
stration. M. de Quatrefages in a great work,! con- 
siders religious sentiment to be the distinctive trait 
of humanity. But this evolutionist goes too far 
when he says that, “apart from this there is no 
essential difference between man and the brute 
creation.” Dr. E. de Pressensé answers this assump- 
tion in the following words: ““This is an exaggeration; 
for before man can rise to the religious sentiment, to 


17ommes Fossiles, p. 456. 


12 _ The Universality of Religion 


the intuition of a higher life and of spiritual forces, 
he must possess faculties capable of grasping the 
general in the particular, that is to say he must 
possess the power of reasoning on the life of which 
he is conscious within himself. Now the brute 
creation never attains to this. With this reservation, 
we admit that the religious sentiment is the peculiar 
characteristic of man; it is part of his very being. 
It is an intuitive and spontaneous development of his 
nature. He turns instinctively to the Divine as the 
magnet to the pole . . . If man were nota 
religious being by nature, he would never become 
religious.” 

Religion therefore is universal. The most careful 
research has yielded this interesting fact. 


**There is not a spot upon the earth where the 
influence of religion is not felt,’ says Dr. Waitz in 
his great work.’ Dr. Tylor in his ‘Primitive 
Culture” states: ‘‘So far as I can judge from the 
immense mass of accessible evidence, we have to 
admit, that the belief in spiritual beings appears 
among all low races with whom we have attained 
to thoroughly intimate acquaintance.’’4 


Certain explorers of the unknown territories of 
continents used to report that they had found 
tribes of men who had absolutely no conception of 
any religion. They branded them as the “‘missing 
link,” the fictitious creatures invented to fill that 
existing gap between the animal world and the 
world of human beings. But when missionaries 
followed the explorer, prompted by the constraining 
love of God, when they began to live among these 


The Ancient World and Christianity,” p. 8. 
8““Anthropologie der Natur Volker,” p. 171. 
4°*Primitive Culture,” p. 384. 


The Universality of Religion 13 


savages, learned their languages, and gained their 
confidence, the hasty conclusion of the explorer was 
soon proved incorrect. Years ago one who dis- 
covered a number of islands stated that all the 
inhabitants were so low in the human scale that they 
had no conception of anything religious. But this 
man spent exactly a day among them, without being 
able to converse with them. The Great Dr. Living- 
stone on the other hand said, ‘““There is no need of 
beginning to tell the most degraded people of South- 
ern Africa of the existence of God, or a future state, 
both of these facts being universally admitted by 
them: 

Professor Tiele in his ‘‘Outline of Religion’? main- 
tains: ““[he statement that there are nations or 
tribes which possess no religion rests either on 
inaccurate observations, or on a confusion of ideas. 
No tribe or nation has yet been met with destitute 
of belief in any higher beings, and travelers who 
asserted their existence have been afterwards refuted 
by facts. It is legitimate, therefore, to call religion, 
in its more general sense, an universal phenomenon 
of humanity.”? Professor Muller bears a similar 
testimony. ‘‘We may safely say that, in spite of all 
researches, no human beings have been found any- 
where who do not possess something which to them 
is religion; or, to put it in the most general form, a 
belief in something beyond what they can see with 
their eyes.” 

We cite an interesting case. In 1845 certain 
Catholic missionaries went to Western Australia to 
establish Christian missions there. They took great 
pains to ascertain the religious sentiments of the 
savages, and for a long time they seem to have been 
unable to discover even the faintest traces of any- 


14 _ The Universality of Religion 


thing that could be called religious worship. After 
three years of mission life, the leader of these mis- 
sionaries declared that the natives did not adore 
anything in the form of a deity, true or false. Yet he 
found out that they had a religious conviction, that 
they believed in an Omnipotent Being, Creator of 
heaven and earth, whom they call Motogon, and 
whom they imagined as a very tall, powerful and 
wise man. His mode of creation was by breathing. 
To create the earth he said, “Earth, come forth!” 
and he breathed, and the earth was created. And 
in the same manner he created the sun, the trees, 
and animals. They also believed in a being whom 
they called Cienga, the author of evil. This latter 
being is the unchainer of the whirlwind and the 
storm, and the invisible author of the death of their 
children, wherefore these natives feared him ex- 
ceedingly. 

Well has it been said that “‘religion is not a new 
invention.” Some scholars, like the positivist, 
Dr. Gruppe, declared that religion is a compara- 
tively recent invention. Modern discoveries lead- 
ing closer and closer to the cradle history of the 
race, the discoveries made in Assyria and Egypt, 
prove beyond the shadow of a doubt that religion 
is not a new invention, but as old as the human 
race itself. It is, if not as old as the world, at least 
as old as the world we know. As soon as we know 
anything of the thoughts and feelings of man, we 
find him in possession of religion, or rather pos- 
sessed by religion. The oldest literary documents 
are everywhere religious. ‘‘Our earth,” as Herder 
says, “‘owes the seeds of all higher culture to reli- 
gious tradition, whether literary or oral.” ‘‘Even 
if we go beyond the age of literature, if we explore 


The Universality of Religion 15 


the deepest levels of human thought, we can dis- 
cover in the crude ore which was made to supply 
the earliest coins and counters of the human mind, 
the presence of religious ingredients.’’® 

In concluding this chapter we state once more the 
following important facts. Religion is confined to 
the human race; man possesses a religious instinct or 
faculty. Religion is a universal fact, no nation or 
tribe of people has ever been discovered without 
a religious belief. Religion is not a new invention, 
but is as old as the race itself. 


5“Origin and Growth of Religion,” p. 4. 


CHAPTER III 
The Origin and Development of Religion 


We reach now the most important question con- 
cerning religion. What is the origin of the religious 
phenomenon in the entire human race? Homer, 
that early poet, wrote, ‘“‘As young birds ope their 
mouths for food, all men crave for the gods.’’! 
How is it that human beings have such a craving 
for the unseen? Where does it come from? And 
if man has the religious instinct, how did he get it? 
What is its source? Furthermore there is a most 
interesting development of the different religions. 
The history of religion is an almost inexhaustible 
study. There is Animism, Fetishism, Henothism, 
Monotheism, all kinds of philosophies, cults and 
occult systems. How can we account for all these? 
There is an enormous bibliography in existence, 
much of it inaccessible to the common reader. On 
the other hand, books are now published, like a 
volume which popularizes the false and unscientific 
theory of the origin of religion, a work which must 
do an immense amount of harm among young 
people.? 

Modernism endorses the infidel theories as to the 
origin of religion. It is fully committed to a hypoth- 
esis which lacks a real scientific support. Mod- 
ernistic leaders, with a show of learning, speak of 
research, great scholarship and original, or advanced, 
thinking. All is aimed to discredit the fact of in- 
spiration concerning the origin of man and to up- 
hold evolution. Hence the origin and growth of 
religion is explained by them by this naturalistic 


1Cdys.” III:48. 
This Believing World.” 


16 


The Origin and Development of Religion 17 


theory, that man having a simian parenthood, grad- 
ually developed not only physically, but mentally, 
and originated from some anthropoid ape-ancestry 
the religious sentiment. But here we halt and ask 
a question. We have shown in the preceding chapter 
that the animal world knows nothing of the religious 
instinct inherent in the human race. We have stated 
that the religious phenomenon isolates the human 
race from the animal world. How then is it pos- 
sible that man coming from the animal could de- 
velop this phenomenon, when the same is unknown 
in the animal creation? Why, furthermore, do 
chimpanzees, gorillas and other species of simians 
not develop the religious sentiment, but on the con- 
trary manifest a total inability in this direction? 
But the whole question demands a closer scrutiny. 

The Evolutionist in attempting to explain the 
origin of religion claims that certain savage races 
living now on earth, possessing an undeveloped reli- 
gious sentiment, are a perfect picture of what man 
was many thousands of years ago, when he started 
on his upward march from his animal ancestry. 
But some go still further. They claim that prim- 
itive man was very much lower, intellectually and 
spiritually, than the very lowest of the savages of 
today. These claims do not rest at all upon scien- 
tific knowledge, but are only an assumption. The 
assumption is that man came into existence gradu- 
ally by a process of an entirely natural descent 
from an inferior order of the animal world. This 
theory is claimed to be well established by scientific 
research; it is called a scientific truth; but it is 
far from that. The entire claim, as already stated, 
is nothing but an assumption, which is not yet 
proved, and we confidently add, which will never 


18 The Origin and Development of Religion 


be proved. But why such a positive assertion? Be- 
cause that which is not truth can never be scienti- 
fically demonstrated and proven. The descent of 
man from anthropoid apes is exposed as an inven- 
tion by a higher form of knowledge, the knowledge 
given to man by divine revelation. True scientific 
research will ultimately demonstrate this and dis- 
pose completely of the assumption of man’s natural 
descent. 

In writing this we do not forget that men of 
learning, able scientists, painstaking in their search, 
persistently assert that the origin of man can be 
explained by merely natural processes. They fully 
endorse old pagan theories as to the origin of man, 
formulated in modern times into a system by Dar- 
win and others. Modernists in pulpits, and others 
in cap and gown, make much of this fact, that 
great scientists are on the side of this hypothesis, 
and then make it appear in their public utterances 
as if this is the truth which has been conclusively 
proved. Beginning with our high schools we find 
this assumption taught as truth to our young people, 
but the real truth as to the origin of the human 
race, the truth as written in the Bible, is ridiculed, 
sneered at and termed unscientific and legendary. 

Why not listen to the other side? There is an- 
other side. Is it true that all the great scientists 
of today and of yesterday back up this assumption? 
Modernistic preachers and professors are not honest 
in making such a claim. There are great outstand- 
ing scientists, geologists, biologists, and archaeolo- 
gists of world-wide fame who are on the other side, 
and oppose this assumption. Our space forbids to 
quote extensively the late Dr. Dawson, Agassiz and 
other authorities, who were and are anti-evolu- 


The Origin and Development of Religion 19 


tionists. The ‘‘fournal of the Transactions of the 
Victoria Institute” of 1890 (Vol. XXVI, pp. 258- 
260) contains the testimony of the then eminent 
Professor Virchow of the University of Berlin.? He 
was one of the greatest, one of the most famous 
scientists who ever lived. As President of the lead- 
ing European Anthropological Societies he gave a 
most interesting testimony against the evolutionary 
invention. We quote him as reported in the Journal. 
“When we met in Vienna twenty yearsago .. . 
there was a general expectation that man’s descent 
from the ape or some other animal, would be dem- 
onstrated. . . . This, Darwinism has not, up 
to the present time, succeeded in doing. In vain 
have the links which should bind man with the ape 
been sought; not a single one is to be recorded. 
The so-called ‘Fore-man,’ the Pro-Anthropos which 
should represent the link, has never yet been found. 
No man of real learning professes that he has seen 
him. . . . Perhaps some one may have seen 
him in a dream, but when awake he will never be 
able to say that he has come across him. Even 
the hope of his future discovery has fallen far into 
the background; he is now scarcely spoken of; for 
we live not in a world of imagination or dreams, 
but in an actual world, and this has shown itself 
extremely unyielding. . . . At present we only 
know that among archaic men none have been found 
that stood nearertheapethanmenoftoday. . . 

It is clear that among all uncivilized tribes there is 
not a single one that would stand at all nearer to 
the ape than to us.’’4 


We could fill many pages with more recent anti-evolution 
testimony by leading scientists. 


‘See “Genesis and Growth of Religion,” Kellogg, p. 30-3] 


20 The Origin and Development of Religion 


This was spoken almost a generation ago. But 
have there not been new discoveries since then affirm- 
ing the Darwinian theory? The contrary has taken 
place. Darwinism is in a coffin. The lid has been 
put on. Nail after nail has been driven in by the 
statements of other leading scientists. Some de- 
clare that Darwinism is dead once and for all, with- 
out any hope of a resurrection. 

Alfred Russell Wallace, associate of Darwin and 
one of the foremost evolutionists, made in his work 
on *‘Darwinism” some noteworthy admissions as to 
the moral, intellectual and spiritual faculties of man. 
While he believed the Darwinian theory of the origin 
of species by natural selection, he also declared that 
the other faculties of man could never have been 
developed from animals. ‘“These special faculties 
we have been discussing,’ he writes, ‘‘clearly point 
to the existence in man of something which he has 
not derived from his animal progenitors—something 
which we may best refer to as being of a spiritual 
essence or nature. . . . These faculties could 
not possibly have been developed by means of the 
same laws which have determined the progressive 
development of the organic world in general, and 
also of man’s physical organism.” ® ‘These higher 
faculties in man he then shows “point clearly to 
an unseen universe—to a world of spirit to which 
the world of matter is altogether subordinate.” 
Wallace furnishes a fine evidence against the whole 
evolutionary system. 

When evolutionists declare, in trying to explain 
the origin of religion, that primitive man ‘‘could 
not have been conscious of his superiority to other 
animals, nor of his personality, and his spiritual 

'Darwinism, pp.474-476,. 


The Origin and Development of Religion 21 


nature; his religion could only have been a kind 
of indistinct chaotic naturism” (Professor Pfleiderer) 
they base this verdict upon the evolution assump- 
tion and not upon real scientific facts. 

Well says Dr. S. H. Kellogg that in spite of cer- 
tain facts ‘‘we still affirm, without hesitation, that 
modern science has not thereby advanced a single 
step toward the proof of a purely naturalistic evo- 
lution; and that therefore, all those theories which 
assume such a semi-bestial condition as character- 
istic of the first man, and from this assumption 
argue as to what was and was not possible to primi- 
tive man in religious thought, are essentially unsci- 
entific; unscientific in that they assume that to be 
proved which as yet is not established as fact, but 
still remains in the region of pure hypothesis.” ° 

And now before we proceed in our investigation 
of the origin of religion we give an illustration of 
how religion came to be according to this natural- 
istic conception. We select one of the latest pro- 
ductions, ‘“This Believing World.” The author is 
Rabbi Lewis Browne. Recently the editorial staff 
of “The Christian Century,” a Journal of Religion 
published in Chicago, with a large nation-wide cir- 
culation, recommended the ten most important reli- 
gious books to the Christian public. Among them 
we find this book. Let us see then what the edi- 
torial staff of ““The Christian Century”? recommends. 

The book begins with a chapter on ‘‘How It All 
Began.” The first sentence is this: “‘In the begin- 
ning there was fear; and fear was in the heart of 
man; and fear controlled man.” Everything around 
primitive man inspired him with fear. ‘‘And he, 
poor gibbering half-ape, nursing his wounds in some 
Genesis and Growth of Religion,” p. 41. 


Za The Origin and Development of Religion 


draughty cave, could only tremble with fear.” He 
did not know that much of the evil which befell 
him was accidental. He had the conception, the 
poor half-ape, that all things in nature bore him 
malice, for he had not yet discovered that some 
things were inanimate. All objects, sticks, stones, 
storms and all else he looked upon as animate. 
Then he gradually found out that fighting back the 
enemy-objects was of no avail. Ifa boulder crushed 
down on him, it was no use hitting the boulder. Then 
the idea took hold on him that if he addressed these 
inanimate objects with words, that this might help. 
*““He thought words might avail; strange syllables 
uttered in groans, or meaningless shouts accom- 
panied by beating tom-toms. Or he tried wild 
dances, or luck charms.”’ He felt some spells would 
work. He believed that the things which haunted 
him could be appeased. He found that he had to 
have faith in himself. So faith was born under these 
conditions, and man began as a half-ape to develop 
religion. But long before man thought of religion 
proper, he tried to control the powers of the uni- 
verse by magic. 

Then the half-ape, the cave man, made a step 
forward. He discovered that besides having a body, 
he had a spirit. How did he find it out? Bya 
dream. He dreamt of fighting huge beasts during 
the night at some distant place. He awoke in the 
morning in the same cave. So he discovered that 
he was dual, had a body anda spirit. Then he 
found out what death meant; the other part, the 
soul, had left the body. He found he had a soul, 
which was invisible, and then he discovered souls, 
or spirits, in everything. Thus Animism came into 


The Origin and Development of Religion 23 


existence; he had reached the animistic stage of re- 
ligion, when endowing inanimate objects with super- 
natural powers, and believing that spirits dwell in 
different objects, which he then worshipped. Like 
other writers of the same stamp, Mr. Browne de- 
clares that millions of savages in the world today 
are still clinging to this primitive faith which once 
must have been the faith of all human beings. 
After that he developed the knowledge that there 
are two kinds of spirits, those who are friendly and 
those who are hostile. After he had tried a long 
time to overcome the evil spirits he made another 
discovery, he found that he could bring some of 
these spirits to be friendly and win them over to 
his side. A complete revolution in the practice of 
religion then ensued. He found out that he could 
exploit these unseen spirits. Then the medicine- 
man, the Shaman came into existence with his rattle 
to drive away evil spirits. Fetishism was also prac- 
ticed. The first fetishes, Browne surmises, were 
probably pebbles, which later became amulets with 
magical power. The manufacture of fetishes became 
a sacred profession. Thus the professional holy 
man, the priest, was originated. Idol worship fol- 
lowed. It was used in the beginning to drive away: 
evil spirits, and to bring the good spirits near. The 
origin of sacrifice is explained as follows: ‘The idol 
was smeared with blood or oil, in the hope that 
some good spirit might come and lick the redolent 
bait, and perhaps remain. And then periodically 
the smearings were renewed in order to hold the 
good spirit fast. Again and again they were re- 
newed, until in time the practice became a fixed 
rite. After that, in place of mere smearings of blood 


24 The Origin and Development of Religion 


whole carcasses were offered to the good spirit lodg- 
ing in the idol. And thus sacrifice began.”’ Then 
the idol needed a shelter and they built a hut for it. 
“‘And thus the first church was built!” Finally 
after centuries and millennia passed, man advanced 
in his thinking. 

The erstwhile ape, half-ape and caveman, became 
a shepherd and a farmer. He resorted to all kinds 
of magical practices; coercive rites were invented; 
prayer also was discovered. ‘“‘In time of drought he 
offered sacrifices of food and psalms of praise to 
the sun and moon and sky.” Agriculture developed 
and with it certain festivals. These festivals were 
in the beginning extremely lewd; they consisted in 
sex orgies. Priests were gradually employed in the 
art of sacrificing at these festivals. Then came 
priestcraft into its fullest power. Certain sacra- 
ments were next originated. Rites at marriage and 
at the burial of the dead were invented. Finally 
the great gods came into existence, including the 
Jehovah, a tribal god of the primitive Hebrews. 
*‘Many centuries still had to run their course before 
any one could imagine a deity who was the one 
God of the Universe. Men still continue to be 
polytheists, believing in many gods.” 

But how did the sense of sin originate? The 
author gives the following explanation: ‘‘Crime, 
which was really an offense against society, came 
to be thought of principally as sin against a god. 
And because often no one could put his finger upon 
the punishment visited upon the offender by the 
god, the idea of conscience arose. The god, it came 
to be believed, punished the wicked in secret ways, 
sending evil spirits into them to gnaw on their souls 

7Pages 38-39. 


The Origin and Development of Religion 25 


and give them no rest. And when it was seen that 
many of the wicked seemed quite untroubled by 
evil consciences, quite unperturbed by secret pun- 
ishments, then the idea of future suffering was 
advanced. It was claimed that even though some 
of the wicked went scot free in this world, in the 
next they would not be nearly so fortunate.” § 
**The actual course of development out of which 
were evolved these ideas of sin, conscience and post- 
mortem retribution, was, to be sure, not nearly so 
simple as made out here. [or centuries men fum- 
bled about to lay hold of these ideas, blundering 
off into the most pathetic errors, and beating their 
way back only with the horridest pain. But finally 
the great task was accomplished, and morality, at 
the cost of being religionized was preserved.” ® 

What credulity is needed to accept all this as 
truth! And such a book is recommended by the 
editorial staff of a so-called “‘Christian” Journal of 
Religion! But we must add what the author of 
**This Believing World” says after these cock-sure 
assertions. 

“Unhappily that outline (“How It All Began’’) 
reads as though given with complete assurance. 
Despite all the ‘perhapses’ and ‘probablys’ scattered 
throughout the story, it still reads as though the 
writer knew for certain just what had happened. 
Actually he knows nothing of the sort. All he knows 
is what many learned anthropologists, after much 
painstaking research, have surmised to be the truth. 
Of course they might have surmised quite badly. 
Their underlying theory may be entirely wrong, and 
religion instead of having been originally created to 


8Page SOs 
*Page 53, 


26 The Origin and Development of Religion 


elude or conquer fear, may have arisen quite inde- 
pendently of it. Religion may be an altogether 
primal instinct in the human race, something just 
as old and fundamentally innate as fear itself. Who 
knows?” 1° This is at least an honest confession. 
Who knows? Certainly not the philosopher, nor 
the atheistic evolutionist. But as we shall find, the 
origin of religion, as well as the universality of reli- 
gion, is made known to us by the higher knowledge, 
given by direct revelation, and is supported by true 
scientific research in ethnology. 

The author of “This Believing World” says that 
the learned anthropologists “might have surmised 
badly” and that there is a possibility that “their 
underlying theory may be entirely wrong.” This is 
exactly what can be demonstrated. It can be dem- 
onstrated in a conclusive, scientific way, that 1s by 
facts, that they surmised badly and that their under- 
lying theory, not may be, but is entirely wrong. 

We shall now face the question. According to 
the naturalistic explanation of the origin of religion, 
so solidly resting on the assumption of a physical 
evolution, religion started with Fetishism. It is 
claimed that the fetish worshipers living today in 
Australia, Africa, and elsewhere, are still in the 
initial stage of religion; what fetish-worshiping 
savages are today primitive man was thousands of 
years ago, when he found his way upward from his 
animal ancestry. 

What is Fetishism? It is the worship of inani- 
mate objects in which supposedly supernatural 
powers reside. Animism is closely connected with it. 
It is the belief in spirits also residing in different 
objects. The word Fetish is derived from the Portu- 

10Page 59-60. 


The Origin and Development of Religion 27 


guese word “‘feiticos,” used for an amulet or a talis- 
man. Portuguese sailors came in touch with sav- 
ages in the eighteenth century, and seeing them wor- 
ship certain objects coined this word fetish; this 
was in 1760. In the same year a small volume 
appeared in which the fetish cult was described and 
traced. The author was De Brosses.!! He wrote 
two more volumes. The leading assertion De Brosses 
made is that all nations began their religious wor- 
ship with Fetishism; this in time developed into 
Polytheism, and Polytheism was followed by Mono- 
theism, the worship of one God. This is the uni- 
versal path which has been followed by most sci- 
entists who tried to solve the enigma of religion. 


But is it scientific to assert that Fetishism is the 
first religious effort of the human race, and that the 
present-day Fetishism among savages reflects the 
worship of primitive man? Is it scientific to assert 
that animistic worship after having been practiced 
for many centuries shaped itself into polytheistic 
worship and this again, after many, many centuries 
had come and gone was followed by Monotheism, 
conceived by the expansion of the human mind? 


Can all this be scientifically demonstrated? Or is 
it possible to show in a really scientific way that 
Monotheism was the original worship of the human 
race in the beginning, and that in process of time 
the original worship degenerated into Polytheism, 
Fetishism and Animism? 


One of the leading authorities on the earliest form 


11°T)u culte des Dieux Fétiches, ou paralléle de l’ancienne 
Religion de l’?Egypte avec la Religion actuelle de Nigrite.” 
De Brosses, the correspondent of Voltaire, one of the out- 
standing characters of the Voltairian period, was born in 
1709 and died in 1777. On the instigation of the celebrated 
Buffon, De Brosses devoted himself to this research, 


28 The Origin and Development of Religion 


of religion says: ‘““The most recent investigations 
indicate that the civilization of the primitive men 
was of no higher type than that of the present sav- 
ages; nay, it had not even advanced so far; and 
in such a civilization no purer religious beliefs, ideas 
and usages are possible than those which we find 
among existing communities.” 

This assertion by Professor Tiele, as well as other 
anthropologists, claims that primitive men could not 
have been higher in their religious conception than 
the lowest savages on earth today. They are forced 
to maintain this on account of their belief in the 
physical evolution of man. But this assertion is 
disproved scientifically by two facts, which show 
that the savages today in the state of animistic- 
fetish worship do not reflect the religious condition 
of primitive men. ‘These two facts establish the 
truth that the savages of today are degenerated 
types. 

The first fact is the linguistic phenomenon. The 
language of savage tribes shows a remarkably high 
state of development, and points clearly to a higher 
form of intellectual and spiritual life, which must 
have existed previously among these tribes. Those 
who maintain that man has been working his way 
up from his simian ancestry, also believe in a gradual 
development of human speech. They say that the 
first sounds coming from the throat and lips of 
primitive man must have been akin to animal 
grunts, or like the chattering of monkeys in some 
jungle. As man climbed upward human speech was 
correspondingly developed. They also claim that 
the savage, fetish-worshiping tribes in Africa and 
elsewhere have but poorly constructed languages. 
Then they argue from the case of these low-down 


The Origin and Development of Religion 29 


savages to that of the primitive men, and infer that 
primitive men were once in the same state as the 
savages of today. 

One of the greatest philologists, supreme in com- 
parative philology, Prof. Max Miller of Oxford, con- 
tradicts the assumption as to the language of sav- 
ages In a most.positive way. 

In his “‘Origin of Religion” he writes, ‘‘All the 
stories of tribes without languages—more like the 
twitterings of birds than the articulate sounds of 
human beings—belong to the chapter of ethnolo- 
gical fables; and what is more important still, is 
that many of the so-called savage languages have 
been shown to possess a most perfect, in many 
cases a too perfect, that is to say, too artificial, a 
grammar, while their dictionaries possess a wealth 
of names any poet mightenvy. . . . Every lan- 
guage, even that of the Papuans and Veddas, is 
such a masterpiece of abstract thought, that it would 
baflie the ingenuity of many philosophers to pro- 
duce anything like it. In many cases the grammar 
of the so-called savage dialects bears evidence to a 
far higher state of culture possessed by these people 
in former times.” 1? 

The fact that these savages have such a highly 
developed language can be explained only by a 
superior ancestry. ‘Their ancestors stood on a higher 
level, while the descendants degenerated and were 
dragged down to fetish-worship. We add to the 
testimony of Professor Miller the testimony of sev- 
eral missionaries. Dr. S. H. Kellogg in his work 
quotes the Rev. Mr. Comber, who is the author of 
a fine grammar and dictionary of the Congo lan- 
guage. He tells us that in his study of the language 


#2°Origin of Religion,” 


30 The Origin and Development of Religion 


he met with ‘“‘new surprises at every point and 
turn, as the richness, flexibility, exactness, subtlety 
of idea and nicety of expression, of the language 
revealed themselves.”” And that “this wealth in 
idea and form does not specially characterize Congo, 
but is possessed by the whole family of Bantu lan- 
guages to a greater orlessextent.” He rightly adds, 
“‘the widespread possession of these qualities points 
to their existence in the parent stem, which must 
have been of a high class.”” To this is added the 
testimony of the Rev. J. Leighton Wilson, who 
labored among the Mpongwe speaking people in 
Africa. As to the speech of these now fetish-wor- 
shiping tribes, he tells us that “this great family 
of languages, if the Mpongwe dialect may be taken 
as a specimen, is remarkable for its beauty, ele- 
gance, and perfectly philosophical arrangement, as 
well as for its almost indefinite expansibility.”” Dr. 
Kellogg, himself a missionary in India, gives his own 
experience. ‘Similar testimony is given as to the 
Santali, one of the dialects of the degraded aborigines 
of India, like the Bantu languages of Africa, only 
reduced to writing by the missionaries. An experi- 
enced laborer among that people has told the writer 
that, in the conjugation of the verb, for example, 
the Santali rivals, if it does not excel, the Greek, 
in its capacity for discriminating the most delicate 
and refined distinctions of thought.”!® Well does 
the same writer draw this logical conclusion: “In 
the presence of such facts as those which have been 
mentioned, it is obviously of no force to argue that 
because many savage races now know of no worship 
except that of fetishes or various nature-spirits, 
therefore, that inasmuch as primitive man could not 


18“Genesis and Growth of Religion,” p. 47. 


The Origin and Development of Religion 31 


have stood higher than these, he could not have 
had any correct conception of God. If there is 
evidence that savages are degenerate families of 
men, then the primitive man may easily have been 
in religious capacity their superior.”!4 And this 
evidence, that the savages of today are degenerate 
families, or tribes, their language has furnished us. 

But there is a second fact, which is stronger, and, 
we believe, conclusive, which demonstrates that 
Fetishism and Polytheism, as practiced in the world 
of today, are the degenerate expressions of a purer 
form of religion. Behind all Fetishism and Poly- 
theism stands Monotheism. Therefore Monotheism, 
the belief that there is one God, was not reached 
in the human race by an evolutionary process, after 
uncountable centuries, but Monotheism was once 
the religious belief of all nations. This is not guess- 
work; it is obtained by facts, and therefore scien- 
tific. The history of the world bears abundant evi- 
dence that religions have been corrupted. The great 
religions of the world manifest a corruption of their 
primitive purity. If this can be proved then the 
whole evolutionary theory of the origin and growth 
.of religion collapses. The men who still teach this 
theory, and boast of it as scientific discovery, are 
consequently the most unscientific, for an unproven 
assumption is not science at all. So let us see. 

We shall prove our contention by three facts. 
The first is the fact that unimpeachable testimony, 
resting on painstaking and scholarly research, given 
by the most reliable witnesses, shows clearly that 
many of the fetish-worshipping savages possess a 
belief in an invisible, personal God. The second 
fact is that it has been proved that all the great 
~ Genesis and Growth of Religion,” p. 50. 


32 The Origin and Development of Religion 


religions of antiquity, and their offspring, the great 
religious systems of the modern non-Christian world, 
the religions of Assyria, Chaldea, Babylonia, Egypt, 
India, Persia and China, all started with a monothe- 
istic belief, and degenerated later. And the third 
fact is that the Bible, the most trustworthy histor- 
ical record in the possession of the human race, 
shows that there was a primitive religion of Mono- 
theism, and therefore, by its testimony disproves 
the evolutionary assertion that Fetishism was the 
religion of primitive men. 

I. That fetish and demon worshiping tribes of 
the very lowest grade have together with their super- 
stitious belief a belief in a higher Being, who is 
above all fetishes and spirits, has been many times 
verified by missionaries who lived for years among 
them, and also by different travelers. There is 
probably no savage tribe living today, given to the 
worship of evil spirits and fetishes, that is desti- 
tute of a conception of a supreme Spirit who is 
above everything and who governs everywhere. 

In the ‘‘Hibbert Lectures” delivered in Westmin- 
ster Abbey in 1878, on the question, “Is Fetishism 
a primitive form of Religion?’ Professor Max 
Muller quotes a goodly number of scholarly authori- 
ties to answer the question negatively. ‘These au- 
thorities are almost one in concluding that the 
African Negro fetish worshipers believe either in 
gods, or in a supreme good God, the creator of the 
world, and that they possess in their dialects par- 
ticular names for Him. Often no visible worship 
is paid to the Supreme Being, but to fetishes only. 
The learned anthropologist, Dr. Waitz, declares that 
the belief of the Negroes on the Gold Coast in a 
supreme God is very old. He adds that they in- 


The Origin and Development of Religion 33 


voke Him very rarely, that they call Him “their 
great friend” or “He that made us.’ Only when 
in great distress they call out, ““‘We are in the hands 
of God; He will do what seemeth right to Him.” 
This was, many years ago, confirmed by Basle 
Missionaries in “Die Basel Missions Magazin.” 
Other fetish worshiping tribes have prayers to the 
supreme Being for protection against sickness and 
death.}5 

After many quotations and illustrations Professor 
Max Miller concluded the lecture as to Fetishism’s 
being a primitive form of religion with the following 
words: ‘My position then is simply this: it seems to 
me that those who believe in a primordial Fetishism 
have taken that for granted which has to be proved.” 
Then after enumerating their unproved assertions 
and conclusions he says: “My most serious objection 
is that those who believe in Fetishism as a primitive 
and universal form of religion, have often depended 
on evidence which no scholar, nor historian, would 
feel justified to accept.’’!6 

Concerning the tribes of northern and southern 
New Guinea, Dr. J. Leighton Wilson gives the fol- 
lowing testimony: ‘““The belief in one great supreme 
Being who made and upholds all things is universal. 
Nor is this idea imperfectly or obscurely developed 
in their minds. The impression is so deeply en- 
graved upon their mental and moral natures, that 
any system of atheism strikes them as too absurd, 
and preposterous to require a denial. All the tribes 
in the country with which the writer has become 
acquainted, and they are not a few, have a name 
for God, and many of them have two or more, sig- 


15Waitz: Anthropologie II, p. 172. 
16Hibbert Lectures, 1878, p. 123. 


34 The Origin and Development of Religion 


nificant of His character as Maker, Preserver, and 
Benefactor” . . . ‘“‘the prevailing notion seems 
to be that God, after having made the world and 
filled it with inhabitants, retired to some remote 
corner of the universe, and has allowed the affairs 
of the world to come under the control of evil 
spirits; and hence the only religious worship which 
is performed is directed to these spirits, the object 
of which is to court their favor, or ward off their 
displeasure.” 

We add but one more testimony, given by Dr. 
S. H. Kellogg. In speaking of the degraded abor- 
iginal tribe of India, the Santals, actual worshipers 
of demons, Dr. Kellogg wrote twenty-five years ago: 
**The Santals, the most numerous and important of 
these aboriginal tribes, have a tradition, universally 
accepted by them as true, that in the beginning 
they were not worshipers of demons as now. They 
say that very long ago, their first parents were 
created by the living God; that they first worshiped 
and served Him; that they were seduced from their 
allegiance by an evil spirit, Marang Buru, who per- 
suaded them to drink an intoxicating liquor, made 
from the fruit of a certain tree. In consequence, 
they came under the power of the evil spirit, and 
hence, from that time until now, have had to wor- 
ship and serve him, instead of the one God of their 
fathers. That this remarkable tradition, so wonder- 
fully like the Genesis story, can have been derived 
from this, through direct or indirect communication 
with Judaism or Christianity, is apparently, in this 
case, out of the question; for, from an unknown 
antiquity, the Santals, in common with other cog- 
nate non-Aryan tribes, holding similar traditions, 


The Origin and Development of Religion 35 


have lived in the mountains and jungles, far off the 
lines of travel, commerce and conquest.”}” 

It is therefore an established fact that fetish wor- 
shiping tribes have, co-existing with their supersti- 
tions, a belief in a God who is above all; many of 
their traditions show that the worship they prac- 
tice now is a corruption of higher and purer religion. 

The great mass of evidence brought to light, fully 
confirming this fact, we must leave untouched. 
Even Herbert Spencer in his ‘‘Principles of So- 
ciology” concedes the fact that “‘most savage tribes 
have had ancestors in higher state.” 

II. Still greater is the evidence brought to light 
by reliable and able scholars that the great religions 
of antiquity, the religions of Egypt, Assyria, Chaldea, 
Babylonia, India, Persia and China, as well as the 
present day oriental religions, all started with a 
Monotheistic conception and degenerated in course 
of time into Polytheism and even Fetishism. Here 
we are confronted with an immense amount of 
trustworthy evidence uncovered by eminent scien- 
tists, who have deciphered the great records of the 
past, the Sumerian, Accadian and other cuneiform 
inscriptions, as well as the hieroglyphics of Egypt. 
The work is still going on, showing that the further 
back we go, the purer becomes the religious senti- 
ment. The evidence which has been unearthed is 
conclusive, and proves an evolution not upward, 
starting with Polytheism and merging into Mono- 
theism, but an evolution downward, starting with the 
purest Monotheism and degenerating into Polytheism. 
We shall confine ourselves to a very few evidences. 

Let us take Egypt first. The excavations there, 


17*Genesis and Growth of Religion,” pp. 60-61. 


36 The Origin and Development of Religion 


the opening of the tombs of Pharaohs and explora- 
tion of pyramids, have brought to light a very an- 
cient and remarkable civilization, the age of which 
cannot be fully ascertained. The first dynasty of 
Egypt has been placed around 3400 B. C. The lit- 
erature and the monuments of ancient Egypt are 
very abundant, and all have yielded a large amount 
of rich and important religious information. While 
Polytheism is very much in evidence, it has been 
demonstrated that a chaste and pure Monotheism 
preceded it all. 

We have before us a copy of the Hibbert Lec- 
tures, delivered in 1879 by P. Le Page Renouf on 
the “‘Religion of Ancient Egypt.” This great scholar 
traced back the worship of the different gods of 
Egypt, and shows how in the ancient texts in which 
Ra, Osiris, Amon and all other gods disappear, ex- 
cept as simple names, the Unity of God is asserted 
in the noblest language of Monotheistic religion.}8 

No scholar is better entitled to be heard on this 
subject than the late Emanuel de Rouge, whose 
mature judgment is as follows:!° 

*‘No one has called in question the fundamental 
meaning of the principal passages by the help of 
which we are able to establish what ancient Egypt 
has taught concerning God, the world and man. 
The first characteristic is the Unity of God most 
energetically expressed: God one, sole and only; 
no others with Him. He is the only Being—living 
in Truth. Thou art One, and millions of beings 
proceed from Thee. He has made everything, and 
He alone has not been made—the simplest, the most 
precise conception. 


18Hfibbert Lectures, p. 89. 
19Annales de la Philosophie Chretienne—Tome XX, p. 327. 


The Origin and Development of Religion 37 


“Are those noble doctrines then the result of cen- 
turies? Certainly not; for they were in existence 
more than two thousand years before the Christian 
era. On the other hand, Polytheism, the sources of 
which we have pointed out, develops itself and pro- 
gresses without interruption until the time of the 
Ptolemies. It is, therefore, more than five thou- 
sand years since, in the valley of the Nile, the hymn 
began to the Unity of God and the immortality of 
the soul, and we find Egypt in the last stages ar- 
rived at the most unbridled Polytheism. The belief 
in the Unity of the supreme God and in His attri- 
butes as Creator and Lawgiver of man, whom He 
has endowed with an immortal soul—these are the 
primitive notions, enchased, like the indestructible 
diamonds, in the midst of the mythological super- 
fetations accumulated in the centuries which have 
passed over that ancient civilization.” 

To this conclusive testimony Dr. Renouf adds: 
“It is incontestably true that the sublimer portions 
of the Egyptian religion are not the comparatively 
late result of a development or elimination from the 
grosser. ‘The sublimer portions are demonstrably 
ancient; and the last stage of Egyptian religion, 
that known to the Greek and Latin writers, heathen 
or Christian, was by far the grossest and most 
corrupt.’’?° 

From this and other sources we learn that the 
order of development of the Egyptian religion was 
not from the lower to the higher forms, but the 
reverse. It is the most ancient Egyptian literature 
which contains the purest faith. 

Many pages could be devoted to the evidences 
of the same nature in connection with the religion 


20Hibbert Lectures, p. 91. 


38 The Origin and Development of Religion 


of the different Shemitic races. The earliest in- 
scriptions dating back to about 3750 B. C., during 
the reign of Sargon I, confirm the existence of Poly- 
theism. Throughout Assyrian history, covering 
about thirty centuries, not a speck of evidence is 
found that these powerful Shemites advanced to- 
wards Monotheism; on the contrary, they main- 
tained their Polytheism and became increasingly 
corrupt. Originally they had the belief in one God. 
Shemitic races seem to have had a higher concep- 
tion of the Deity than all other races of antiquity. 
This is ascertained by the names expressing Deity, 
as found in the earliest inscriptions, like the old 
Assyrian Ilu, the Hebrew £/, derived from a root 
which means “‘to be strong,” while other Shemitic 
names for God are the names of worship and fear. All 
these early Shemitic names are of a high moral order 
and must be traced back to an age when they still 
formed one great family, when they occupied their 
great home-center in the valley of the Euphrates. 
In that remote age they had the highest concep- 
tion of the “‘Shem,’*! the supreme Being, God 
Almighty; He was the object of fear and worship. 
Early, after the homeland was left and they were 
scattered, the process of degradation began; the 
great Shemitic family drifted into religious corrup- 
tion of the worst kind. ‘They began to worship 
“the hosts of heaven,” the Sun, Moon and the 
Stars. Next they conceived the idea of sex-distinc- 
tion in the different gods they had invented. Then 
followed the most infamous idolatry combined with 
the most awful cruelties and unspeakable, unnat- 
ural lust. The primitive, pure Shemitic religion be- 
came the most horrible nature worship. The most 


21°Shem” in Hebrew means ‘‘Name.”’ 


The Origin and Development of Religion 39 


abominable rites were practiced under the name of 
religion; it became so vile that judgment was the 
only remedy, as we shall learn later when we turn 
to the Bible. 

We cannot enlarge here on the ancient Baby- 
lonian religion and its earliest literature, the so-called 
**Magical Texts” so successfully deciphered and ably 
explained by Francois Lenormant. Scholars claim 
that these earliest records of the race go even be- 
yond 3750 B. C. They reveal Animism, the wor- 
ship of spirits, with which inanimate objects were 
supposedly endowed. But behind these magical 
texts Monotheism also has been traced. 

Still more interesting is the study of the religion 
of the Indo-Aryans, the far away ancestry of the 
European races, the Latins, the Greeks, the Teu- 
tonic-Aryan races, etc. Charles Kingsley’s words 
are worth quoting: ““Those simple forefathers of 
ours looked round upon the earth, and said within 
themselves, ‘Where is the All-father, if All-father 
there be? Not in this earth; for it will perish. 
Nor in the sun, moon or stars; for they will perish 
too. Where is He who abideth forever?’ Then 
they lifted their eyes and saw, as they thought, 
beyond sun, moon and stars, and all which changes 
and will change, the clear blue sky, the boundless 
firmament of heaven. That never changed; that 
was always the same. Theclouds and storms rolled 
far below it, and all the bustle of this noisy world; 
but there the sky was still, as bright and calm as 
ever. The All-father must be there, unchangeable 
in the unchanging heaven; bright, and pure, and 
boundless like the heavens; and like the heavens 
too, silent and far off.” 

This is not poetic imagination; it is the truth 


40 The Origin and Development of Religion 


confirmed by the highest philological and documen- 
tary evidence. We quote again from Professor Max 
Miller’s “Hibbert Lectures”? of 1878. 

*‘And how did they call that All-father? Five 
thousand years ago, or it may be earlier, the Aryans, 
speaking as yet neither Sanskrit, Greek nor Latin, 
called him Dyu Patar, Heaven-father. Four thou- 
sand years ago, or it may be earlier, the Aryans 
traveled southward to the rivers of the Penjab called 
him Dyaush-pita, Heaven-father. Three thousand 
years ago, or it may be earlier, the Aryans on the 
shores of the Hellespont called him Zeus pater, 
Heaven-father. 

“Two thousand years ago, the Aryans of Italy 
looked up to that bright heaven above, hoc sublime 
candens, and called him /u-piter, Heaven-father. 
And a thousand years and more ago the same 
Heaven-father was invoked in the dark forests of 
Germany by our own peculiar ancestors, the Teu- 
tonic Aryans, and his old name of Tiu or Zio was 
then heard, perhaps for the last time.’’”? 

But the ancient writings, the Vedas, the Vedic 
hymns, give the conclusive evidence. It is true that 
even in the earliest Vedic period we find a number 
of deities mentioned, such as Indra, the god of 
rain; Vayu, the god of wind; the Maruts, or gods 
of the storm; Surya, the sun-god; Ushas, the god- 
dess of the dawn and Agni, the god of fire. But 
they were looked upon as the various manifesta- 
tions of the one, great, supreme Being. 

The phenomena of that early Vedic religion have 
been described by Professor Max Miller in the fol- 
lowing words: “There is a Monotheism that precedes 
the Polytheism of the Veda; and even in the invo- 

22Page 209. 


The Origin and Development of Religion 41 


cations of their innumerable gods, the remembrance 
of a God, one and infinite, breaks through the mist 
of idolatrous phraseology, like the blue sky that is 
hidden by passing clouds.’ In that early period 
of Vedic religion the religious and moral corruptions 
of Hinduism were unknown. Nothing then was 
heard of caste, transmigration; there was no idol 
worship, no authorized infanticide, no widow-burn- 
ing, no demon worship, no foolish philosophizing. 
On the other hand in the early Vedic hymns are 
many sublime passages; many of these passages are 
echoes of the common traditions concerning creation, 
the fall of man and the deluge, which belong to the 
very earliest conceptions of mankind. We quote 
one. 


“In the beginning there was neither aught nor naught, 
There was neither sky nor atmosphere above. 

What then enshrouded all the teeming universe? 

In the receptacle of what was it contained? 

Was it enveloped in the gulf profound of water? 


“There was neither death nor immortality. 

There was then neither day nor night, nor light nor dark- 
ness, 

Only the Existing One breathed calmly self-contained, 

Naught else but Him there was, naught else above, beyond; 

Then first came darkness, hid in darkness, gloom in gloom, 

Next all was water, chaos indiscreet 

In which the One lay void, shrouded in nothingness, 

Then turning inward by self-developed force 

Of innery fervor and intense abstraction grew.’’*4 


Here is an echo of the Bible account of creation. 
We quote still another passage of the Rig-Veda. 


“What God shall we adore with sacrifice? 
Him let us praise, the golden child that rose 
In the beginning, who was born the lord— 
The one sole lord of all that is—who made 
The earth, and formed the sky, who giveth life, 
Who giveth strength, whose bidding gods revere, 
Whose hiding place is immortality, 


23History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 559. 
*4Rig-Veda; Hymn 129. Sir Monier Williams’s translation, 


42 The Origin and Development of Religion 


Whose shadow death; who by His might is king 
Of all the breathing, sleeping, waking world, 
Who governs men, beasts . . . to whom 
Both earth and heaven, established be His will, 
Look up with trembling mind. 


Such was the original Monotheistic belief of the 
Indo-Aryans. Polytheism and Fetishism were then 
unknown. It would take a book of several hundred 
pages to trace the downward path of this original 
conception of Deity, as it can be traced through 
many centuries in India. Today there is much 
Fetish and Animistic worship in India, even among 
the Aryan Hindus. It is the result of the same 
process of evolution through which Egypt, the Shem- 
itic races and others passed, not upward, but down- 
ward. Pantheistic philosophies expressed in the 
Upanishads developed into the so-called Shad-Dar- 
shana, which became a system of agnosticism. 
Brahmanism developed, producing an overbearing 
sacerdotal system; the Brahmans also gave the 
first expression to the teaching of caste, while the 
pantheistic teaching formulated the doctrine of trans- 
migration. ‘Then Buddhism arose as a protest 
against Brahmanism. Buddha Gautama (500 B. C.) 
was an agnostic and his system is agnostic. ‘The 
legends woven around Buddha sprang up after his 
death, and were produced through many centuries 
before and after Christ. The religious history of 
India is indeed “‘confusion worse confounded,” end- 
less philosophies of pantheism and atheism, and 
moral degradation, with almost countless idol gods. 
Let another speak. 

‘**The greatest thinkers of India through the by- 
gone centuries have not been gradually approaching 
the conception of God as one and personal, but have 


25Rig-Veda; Hymn 121. Sir Monier Williams’s translation. 


) 


The Origin and Development of Religion 43 


steadily drifted away from it. In the pre-Vedic 
period and in the earliest beginning of the Vedic age, 
the Indo-Aryans seemed to have still retained a con- 
ception, somewhat hazy and ill defined, of one Father 
in heaven; and even when worshiping God under 
the forms of natural objects and visible phenomena, 
they recognized Him as One, and as personal power, 
everywhere manifested behind the visible and mate- 
rial world. But now and for centuries past, the 
people of India, as a whole, with one consent have 
identified the Creator with the creature, the most 
Holy One with the sinner, and therewith continu- 
ally justify themselves, not only for every form of 
Polytheism, Fetish worship, Idol worship, or no 
worship at all, but not the less, by a logic which on 
their premises is unanswerable, for the commission 
of grossest impurities and the most flagrant crimes.”° 

Such is the origin and growth of religion every- 
where among the early races, a different thing from 
the puerile inventions of certain infidels, popular- 
ized in the book from which we quoted.?’ 

Another ancient system is Zoroastrianism, which 
is still held by the modern Parsees. It was a pro- 
test against the nature worship of the Vedas, an 
attempt among the Zend-speaking people of ancient 
Persia to call them back to the Monotheistic faith, 
which they had forsaken. Zoroaster was a strong 
believer in one God, the creator of heaven and earth. 
The Zend-Avesta in its most ancient portion bears 
witness to it in the following words: 


“That I shall ask thee, tell me right, O Ahura! 

Who was in the beginning the father and creator of righte- 
ousness? 

Who created the path of the sun and the stars? 


26“Genesis and Growth of Religion,” pp. 223, 224. 
27°°T his Believing World.” 


AA The Origin and Development of Religion 


Who causes the moon to increase and wane, but thou? 

Who is holding the earth and the skies above it? 

Who made the waters and the trees of the field? 

Who created the lights, of good effect, and the darkness? 

Who created the sleep of good effect and the activity? 

Who created the morning, noon and night? 

Who has prepared the Bactrian home? 

To become acquainted with these things I approach thee, 
O Mazda. 

Beneficent Spirit! Creator of all Beings! 

That I shall ask thee, tell it me right, O Ahura.” 


Thus Ahuramazda is given as the name of the 
creator of all things. Yet the original teachings of 
Zoroaster developed into Dualism, two gods, one 
good and one evil, and into Poly-demonism, for to 
the two deities, Ahuramazda and Ahriman, the evil 
one, the great serpent, were added a multitude of 
inferior beings and personifications of them. Zoroas- 
trianism thus tells the same story. 

The prominent religions of China are Confucian- 
ism and Taoism. But 1800 years before Confucius 
and Laotze was the ‘“‘golden age”? of the dynasty 
of Yao and Shun. Confucius compiled the records 
of the Shu-king, but excluded on account of his 
own agnosticism nearly all its original references to 
religion, which in these ancient documents are de- 
cidedly Monotheistic. Professor Legge, of Oxford, 
in his master work on ‘“The Religions of China” 
says: “Five thousand years ago the Chinese were 
Monotheists, but even then there was a struggle 
with nature-worship and divination.” The same 
authority cites a remarkable prayer of an Emperor 
of the Ming Dynasty (1538 A. D.) which reflects 
the original, ancient belief in one God. There are 
many evidences that beneath the degraded religious 
worship of the Chinese today is still found the con- 
ception of one supreme Being as He was worshipped 
in the days of the Emperor Shun, 2356 B. C. It has 


The Origin and Development of Religion 45 


been related by Hudson Taylor, the founder of the 
China Inland Mission, that the fishermen of the 
Fukien Province when a storm arises pray to the 
goddess of the sea, but when that does not avail 
they throw all the idols aside and pray to the 
*““Great-grandfather in Heaven.” ‘Father’ is a great 
conception to the Chinese mind. ‘‘Great-grand- 
father’ is higher still, and means with them the 
Supreme. 

The Femple of Heaven at Peking perpetuates the 
ancient Monotheistic faith of China, while China 
of today is filled with Polytheism. 


“Within the gates of the southern division of the 
capital and surrounded by sacred grove, so exten- 
sive that the silence of its deep shade is never broken 
by the noise of the busy world around it, stands the 
Temple of Heaven. It consists of a single tower, 
whose tiling of resplendent azure is intended to 
represent the form and color of the aerial vault. 
It contains no image; but on a marble altar a bul- 
lock is offered once a year as a burnt sacrifice, while 
the monarch of the empire prostrates himself in 
adoration of the Spirit of the Universe. This is the 
high place of Chinese devotion, and the thoughtful 
visitor feels that he ought to tread its courts with 
unsandalled feet, for no vulgar idolatry has entered 
here. ‘This mountain top still stands above the 
waves of curruption, and on its solitary altar there 
still rests a faint ray of its primeval faith. The 
tablet which represents the invisible deity is in- 
scribed with the name Shangte, the Supreme Ruler.’’?8 
We do not know how far this worship has been af- 
fected by the upheavals in China, for Dr. Martin 


28“The Chinese,” by Dr. Martin, p. 99. 


46 The Origin and Development of Religion 


wrote these words many years ago. When the great 
Chinese scholar Dr. Legge visited this sanctuary he 
actually put off his shoes, before ascending the great 
altar, feeling that amidst all the mists and darkness 
of the national superstition, a trace of the glory of 
the Infinite Jehovah still lingered. 


Wherever we dip in and search among the ancient 
beliefs of the different nations we discover the same 
development of the religious phenomenon. Central 
America and South America, the history of the 
Aztecs, the former great civilizations in Central 
America and Peru, all bear the same witness of an 
ancient Monotheism, which became corrupted. We 
add but one more witness, the witness given by the 
aborigines of the North American continent, the 
great Indian races. As is well. known, they all be- 
lieved in the “‘Great Spirit’? who is above all. The 
heathen Chippewas pray to Manedo, whom other 
Indians call Manitou, the Creator of the world. The 
history of Moravian Missions among the Indians 
gives the story of a Mohican chief who asked that 
a Moravian missionary might be sent tothem. This 
chief said: ‘Do not send us a man to tell us that 
there is a God, we all know that; or that we are 
sinners, we all know that; but send one to tell us 
about salvation.’”°° Many similar evidences are 
found among the numerous tribes of Indians still 


29Since writing the above a missionary from China has given 
us the following information: ‘‘The great annual sacrifice in 
the Temple of Heaven, Peking, came to an end with the over- 
throw of the Manchus,the Tsing dynasty, and the re-establish- 
ment of the Chinese Republic, though Yuan Shih Kai, the 
first permanent President, later observed it with imperial 
pomp and great solemnity as part of an ill advised and 
short-lived effort to establish himself as the first Emperor of 
the new Chinese dynasty under the title of Hung Hsien.” 


Dr. A. C. Thompson, ‘The Moravians.” 


The Origin and Development of Religion 47° 


existent, even among the serpent worshiping Hopis 
in Arizona, the Navajos and the tribes on the Pacific 
coast, in Alaska, and the Eskimos in the Arctic 
circle. 

Perhaps the greatest anthropologist is Dr. Ebrard, 
possessing a scholarship which perhaps no present- 
day authority can claim. In his monumental work 
“Apologetics” he goes deep in his investigations, 
which are found in the second and third volumes 
of this great work. Then he sums it all up in these 
words: “‘We have nowhere been able to discover 
the least trace of any forward or upward movement 
from Fetishism to Polytheism, and from that again 
to a gradually advancing knowledge of the one God; 
but on the contrary, we have found among all the 
peoples of the heathen world a most decided ten- 
dency to sink from an earlier and relatively purer 
knowledge of God toward something lower.” This 
is scientific. Evolution, as believed by rationalists, 
whether in the realm of the physical or the religious, 
is unscientific. 

III. We now turn to the most reliable record of 
all, the Bible. We need not enlarge here on the 
trustworthiness of the Holy Scriptures. Nor do we 
need to devote any space to the glorious vindication 
of the historical records, how the attacks on the 
historical and ethnological statements of the Bible 
have been conclusively answered and silenced by 
the spade of the archaeologist. All this is well 
known, but nevertheless some men with their little 
knowledge, “‘the dangerous thing,” still harp on the 
former infidel, unproven assertions of destructive 
critics, that the Bible is historically incorrect. 

What we have demonstrated in the foregoing 
pages, as to the development of religion among the 


48 The Origin and Development of Religion 


different nations, is decisively affirmed and con- 
firmed by the Word of God. In the historical rec- 
ords of the Scriptures we discover the same story of 
a primitive religion and its corruption. In ournext 
chapter, when we shall trace more definitely the 
record of the Bible as to the origin and develop- 
ment of religion, we shall make some further im- 
portant and interesting discoveries. 

The first chapters of the Bible give us the begin- 
ning of all things. The opening of the Book of 
Genesis has been branded by rationalists, by in- 
fidel critics and by the present day Modernists, as 
legendary and mythical. They point to the fact that 
the story of Genesis, Chapters i-xi, is also in pos- 
session, in some form, of the Chaldeans, the Egypt- 
ians, the Iranians, the Indo-Aryans, the Chinese, 
the Peruvians and other nations, and that the same 
story can be traced in the mythologies of the Greeks 
and Romans. The different races of antiquity pos- 
sess records as to the creation of the world, the 
golden age of long ago, the fall of man, the deluge 
and the story of Noah. Then it is claimed that the 
Hebrews preserved the same legends and embodied 
them in their national sacred Book, the Old Testa- 
ment. We take for instance the so-called “‘Chaldean 
Genesis.’ It is claimed that Moses, and others with 
him, worked over the records inscribed on tablets 
and cones in cuneiform languages, and put these 
records into the sacred writings of the Hebrews. 
But this is once more only an assumption which can 
never be proved scientifically. Anyone who com- 
pares the ‘Chaldean Genesis,” the traditions of the 
Shemitic families, with the record of the Bible will 
see at once that the cuneiform account is a per- 
version, while the Genesis record, written by Moses, 


The Origin and Development of Religion 49 


carries with it the conviction of genuineness and 
reliability. According to the Bible there was a 
time when the human race was a unit. The human 
race possessed at that time a primeval faith and 
religion. The great events of creation, connected 
with man, the fall of man (so much ridiculed by the 
evolution-modernists), the cradle-history of the race, 
the deluge and events connected with it, were handed 
down by oral tradition from generation to genera- 
tion. The forefathers of the different races carried 
with them the knowledge of these historical facts, 
but in course of time they became perverted and 
took on different colorings, according to the na- 
tional peculiarities of these races. Moses in his 
account gives the true information as to these pre- 
historic events. How did he obtain it? Did he 
have in his possession the ancient Chaldean docu- 
ments? Did his Egyptian training enable him to 
write as he did? We answer these questions unre- 
servedly with, No! Nor do we concede even the 
possibility of his having received his information 
through documents or through other channels. And 
how is it that in an age when other nations also 
began to write down their cosmogonies that Moses 
wrote in such a chaste way, without any mytholog- 
ical embellishment, which makes the records of 
those nations so ridiculous? How is it that he wrote 
truths as to creation which science has never been 
able to disprove, but on the contrary, which science 
~ had to acknowledge as being the correct order? 
There is only one answer possible. He received his 
information by direct revelation from our Creator- 
God. This is perfectly logical. The creature of the 
dust is unable to find out God by searching; nor 
can any man by searching find a solution of the 


50 The Origin and Development of Religion 


origin of the Universe and of man. A personal God, 
who has given His creature, man, the capacity to 
know Him and to worship Him, and to be in His 
fellowship, demands a personal revelation of Him- 
self, as well as those things which cannot be known 
by searching. This revelation as to the beginning, 
creation, man and his early history, has been given 
through the divinely inspired pen of Moses. From 
the record of Genesis we learn that the religion of 
the antediluvian world was Monotheism, the wor- 
ship of the true God. ‘The corruption which set 
in at the close of that age must have been produced 
by a false worship, by following evil spirits (Gene- 
Sis V1). 

After the deluge the sons of Noah and their off- 
spring kept together. For a time they continued in 
the worship of God. Then something happened. 
Before we reach this in the record of the first book 
of the Bible we find an ethnological table, in which 
the generations of the sons of Noah are traced after 
the flood (Genesis x). It is absolutely correct, as 
shown by such scholars as George Ebers, and 
others. In the chapter which follows we read: 
**And the whole earth was of one language, and of 
one speech”? (Genesis xi:1). They kept together in 
the territory, which was probably the scene of the 
beginning of the race, the land of Shinar. Then 
fear took hold on them that they might be scattered. 
They thought of making themselves a name; _in- 
stead of worshiping the Name. ‘They undertook 
to build a city and a tower that should reach into 
heaven. ‘Then their common language was con- 
fused and they were scattered abroad upon the face 
of all the earth. They began their wanderings, and 
though they carried with them the knowledge of 


The Origin and Development of Religion 51 


God, and the traditional knowledge of the events 
of the past, they soon gave up the Monotheistic 
belief and became idolators, Animistic and Fetish 
worshipers. The descendants of Shem, the Shem- 
ites, became likewise corrupted. 

In the possession of the writer is an interesting, 
original Babylonian “‘cone,”? covered with a cunei- 
form inscription. It was found in the debris of the 
once flourishing Ur in Chaldea. The late Professor 
Dr. Clay of Yale University furnished a transla- 
tion which assures us that the cone dates back to 
the regin of King Libit-Ishtar, and that it was used 
as a votive object in an idol temple which stood in Ur. 
It was made at the time when Abraham lived there 
with his family. The cone confirms the Biblical 
statement that Terah, the Shemite, the father of 
Abraham, was a worshiper of idols. ‘‘*Your fathers 
dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, 
even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father 
of Nahor; and they served other gods” (Joshua 
xxiv:2). Undoubtedly Abraham, who became 
through grace the friend of God, was originally a 
worshiper of idols. 

The Lord of heaven appeared unto him. He 
called him to separation, and as he was obedient 
God revealed Himself to him. The descendants of 
Abraham received the revelation of the Creator- 
God, Jehovah-Elohim. It is sufficient to say, with- 
out enlarging, or tracing the entire history of the 
chosen people, that there was manifested among 
them a constant tendency to leave the Monotheistic 
belief and to turn to the corrupt and corrupting 
worship of other nations. Though Jacob knew 
Jehovah, yet idols, images and fetishes were found 
in’ his household (Genesis xxxv:2-4). When the 


52 The Origin and Development of Religion 


sons of Jacob were enslaved in Egypt, the great 
mass of them forgot God and fell in with the Egyp- 
tian idol worship. Then Jehovah did signs and won- 
ders in Egypt. They witnessed both the faithfulness 
and the power of the God of their fathers. He re- 
deemed them out of Egypt by the blood of the Pass- 
over Lamb, and at the Red Sea He redeemed them 
by power. Soon after they turned under the leader- 
ship of Aaron to the Egyptian animal-worship. 
**They made a calf in Horeb, and worshiped the 
molten image. Thus they changed their glory into 
the similitude of an ox that eateth grass. They 
forgot God their Saviour, who had done great things 
in Egypt” (Psalm cvi:19-21). ‘They joined them- 
selves also unto Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of 
the dead” (Psalm cvi:28). 

The Canaanitish nations, once Monotheists like 
the other primitive nations, had turned to such hor- 
rible nature-worship, and had plunged into an in- 
describable corruption, so that their utter extermin- 
ation was the only merciful remedy left. God com- 
mitted the execution of his righteous sentence to 
His people Israel. He also warned constantly 
against the horribly vile practices of these nations. 
But what took place? ‘“They did not destroy the 
nations concerning whom the Lord commanded 
them, but were mingled among heathen, and learned 
their works. And they served their idols, which 
were a snare unto them. Yea, they sacrificed their 
sons and their daughters to devils, and shed inno- 
cent blood, the blood of their sons and of their 
daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of 
Canaan, and the land was polluted with blood. 
Thus were they defiled with their own works, and 
went awhoring with their own inventions” (Psalm 


The Origin and Development of Religion 53 


cvi:34-39). In every period this tendency to leave 
the worship of Jehovah and to turn to idols is only 
too manifest. The great and illustrious son of 
David, Solomon, with a wisdom which has become 
proverbial, with honor and glory heaped upon him 
by the kindness of God, after he had the most strik- 
ing manifestations of Jehovah, turned away from 
Him. “For it came to pass when Solomon was old, 
that his wives turned away his heart after other 
gods, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord 
his God, as was the heart of David his father. For 
Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the 
Zidonians, and after Milcom, the abomination of 
the Ammonites. . . . Then did Solomon build 
an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of 
Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for 
Molech, the abomination of the Ammonites. And 
likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt 
incense and sacrificed unto their gods” (I Kings 
x1:8). 

The house of Israel went from bad to worse in 
the most abominable idol worship, in spite of the 
fiery warnings of the prophets of Jehovah, till finally 
they were carried away into Assyria. The house of 
Judah followed in the same path of degradation, 
as it is written: “‘Moreover, all of the chief priests 
and the people transgressed very much after all 
the abominations of the heathen, and polluted the 
house of the Lord which He had hallowed in Jeru- 
salem. And the Lord God of their fathers sent to 
them by His messengers, rising up betimes, and 
sending; because He had compassion on His people, 
and on His dwelling place. But they mocked the 
messengers of God, and despised His words, and 
misused His prophets, until the wrath of the Lord 


54 The Origin and Development of Religion 


rose against His people, till there was no remedy” 
(2 Chronicles xxxvi:14-16). They were carried away 
into Babylon. 

The Bible fully sustains our argument. ‘The same 
evolutionary development downward from Mono- 
theism, a primitive faith, to idol worship with all 
its corruption, which we have so fully demonstrated 
as existent among the different races or tribes, is 
fully confirmed by the sad history of Israel’s apos- 
tasy. 

We must not overlook the fact that the Bible 
gives other hints as to a primitive religion. As we 
have seen, research has revealed such a primitive 
faith, held for a time by the different nations. We 
point first of all to the ancient Book of Job. The 
book does not contain an allegory but actual his- 
tory. The exact time when Job lived cannot be 
fully ascertained. But there can be no question 
that he lived in the patriarchal age, perhaps con- 
temporary with Abraham, or even before Abraham. 
Internal evidences bring this to light. Job and his 
three friends, and also Elihu, who appeared last, 
had a remarkable knowledge of God, as well as 
the character of God. The glory of God as wit- 
nessed to in creation is a prominent feature in this 
book. Here too we find the two age-long questions, 
‘‘How shall a man be just with God?” and “If a 
man die, shall he live again?” Here also is found 
the longing for a daysman, an umpire. ‘‘Neither is 
there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his 
hand on both of us” (Job ix:33). The whole book 
demonstrates a primitive religion. 

We mention Melchizedek (Genesis xiv:17-20). 
Some have imagined that this person, so mysteri- 
ously introduced, without an account of his ances- 


The Origin and Development of Religion 55 


try, the beginning or the end of his days (Hebrews 
vii:1-3) must have been a theophany, perhaps the 
oft-appearing ‘‘Angel of Jehovah.” But this is 
not so. He was a real person. He was king in Salem 
(Ur-Salem, undoubtedly Jerusalem, originally the 
Canaanitish capital). He also was a priest, the 
“priest of the most high God” (El Elvon). He 
represented the still lingering primitive faith in the 
midst of an ever-increasing Polytheism, with its 
accompanying abominations. 

In the history of Abraham, Abimelech, king of the 
Philistines, is mentioned. One cannot read the rec- 
ord without receiving the impression that the Phil- 
istines at that time still retained a vestige of the 
ancient primitive belief in the God of Heaven, for 
God came to Abimelech in a dream. God com- 
manded Abraham to pray for Abimelech; a friendly 
covenant was also made by Abimelech with Abra- 
ham, which Abimelech renewed with Isaac. 

Centuries later we see the Philistines given over 
completely to Polytheism; the Monotheistic faith 
was abondoned. The worship of Dagon, the fish- 
god, had supplanted it. Beelzebub was the god of 
Ekron. 

Mesopotamia possessed the knowledge of God, 
but idolatry was rapidly replacing the primitive 
faith. While Abraham had left the old homeland, 
being called away from the scene of the encroaching 
false worship, his brother Nahor remained there. 
When Abraham’s servant visited Mesopotamia we 
find that Laban and Bethuel still acknowledged 
Jehovah (Genesis xxiv:50). Years later when Jacob 
visited Haran and met Laban, Nahor’s son, we get 
evidence as to how the faith of their fathers was 
being given up. Rachel, the daughter of Laban, 


56 The Origin and Development of Religion 


Jacob’s wife, had stolen the gods which Laban wor- 
shiped. Laban said, “Wherefore hast thou stolen 
my gods?” (Genesis xxxi:30). The Septuagint trans- 
lates the word “Gods” with ‘‘Idols.” 

As we learned, ancient Egypt possessed in the 
beginning a pure monotheistic faith. A confirma- 
tion of this we find in the story of Joseph. When 
Joseph had interpreted the dreams of Pharaoh, the 
king and his counselors acknowledged the interpre- 
tation as from God. ‘‘And Pharaoh said to his ser- 
vants, Can we find such a one as this, a man in 
whom the Spirit of God is?’ (Genesis xli:38) 

Before we conclude this chapter and examine the 
testimony of the Bible as to religion, its beginning, 
development and universality, we shall call atten- 
tion to the fact that the same corruption, which 
we have traced in the foregoing pages, is in evi- 
dence in the new dispensation, the Christian era. 

The greatest revelation of God is not written in 
His works, in the physical creation, the heavens and 
the earth, but it is given in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
the Son of the living God. His self-witness is con- 
clusive; “I and my Father are one” (John x:30); 
and ‘He that seeth Me hath seen the Father” 
(John xiv:9). He came to make visible the invisible 
God. In Him God came down to man, and through 
Him man is brought back to God. 

Supernaturalism connected with His Person, His 
words, His works, the reader will find unfolded in 
the second part of this volume. Here we point to 
the fact that He announced on earth a new form 
of worship. It was to be a spiritual worship, a 
Monotheistic worship, a worship of God as Father. 
**The hour cometh, and now is, when the true wor- 
shipers shall worship the Father in spirit and in 


The Origin and Development of Religion 57 


truth, for the Father seeketh such to worship Him. 
God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must 
worship Him in spirit and in truth” (John vi:23, 24). 
Such a worship and worshiping body came into 
existence by the Holy Spirit. The body is the 
Church of Jesus Christ, composed of believing Jews 
and Gentiles. 

For a time, in the beginning of the Church, we 
behold this pure worship. It was founded on noth- 
ing but the divinely communicated doctrines of the 
Apostles, resting upon the words, and more s0, 
upon the great redemption work of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. It did not last very long. Soon corruption 
set in, a corruption which was foreseen by the Apos- 
tles. They wrote their warnings, at a time when the 
Church knew nothing of this corruption. 

A priestly class arose in the Church and by its 
assumption, an assumption nowhere warranted by 
the teachings of Christ and the doctrines of the 
Apostles, led to the corruption of Christianity. ‘The 
priest-caste culminated in the Pontifex Maximus, 
a term and a position aped after paganism. It 
would be impossible to follow here the history of the 
corruption of Christianity and the true worship. 
One thing after another was introduced, the wor- 
ship of saints, the supposed relics, bones of men and 
women, the worship of images, Mariolatry, the use 
of amulets and other foolish and idolatrous inven- 
tions. The church sank lower and lower; Chris- 
tianity became heathenized, for pagan worship had 
been revived and was fully established in Christen- 
dom. Within scarcely six centuries from the estab- 
lishment of the Church a vile corruption had taken 
place. This worship of statues, bones, pictures, 
wooden and metallic images, was nothing else but 


58 The Origin and Development of Religion 


a revival of Polytheism and Fetishism, as well as 
ancient Animism. Thus it appeared to Mohammed. 
This “‘Christian idolatry’’ was to him the same thing 
as the Arabian Koreish. The armies of the false 
prophet swept over the whole idolatrous system and 
wrought an unspeakable destruction, wiping out 
everything. It was the judgment of God. 

The same corruption is still here, for Romanism 
holds on tenaciously to shrines, relics of the saints, 
worship of saints, angels, pictures, images and nu- 
merous other things. Thus in the midst of Chris- 
tendom we find an illustration of the same process 
of corruption which we have traced in the ancient 
nations and in the existing non-Christian religions. 
Romanism, while it is a religion, is not Christianity. 

The tendency in Protestantism to return to the 
same beggarly elements of the world, the corrupt 
‘*religious”’ world, is only too evident to need fur- 
ther comment. As the end of this age approaches 
pagan worship on Christian ground will be revived, 
and finally culminate in the worst form of false wor- 
ship, the worship of the Man of Sin, the son of 
perdition (2 Thessalonians ii). The Patmos vision 
of the beloved disciple furnishes the prophetic evi- 
dence. The Babylon of long ago, the starting point 
of Polytheism, looms up again, as we learn from 
the capstone of the Bible, the Book of Revelation 
(Chapter xvii).*4 . 

We must not leave unmentioned another line of 
corruption of true Christianity, a corruption which 


31[t has been shown that the Romish idolatrous worship 
going on under the name of “Christian” is patterned after 
the old Babylonish worship. That is why in Revelation 
Papal Rome is called, ““Babylon the great, the mother of 
harlots.”” Dr. Hislop in his book, ‘“The Two Babylons” 
gives the evidence. Our readers will find our own exposition 
of Revelation helpful. 


The Origin and Development of Religion 59 


is going on today. ‘The inspired pen of the Apostle 
Paul wrote almost 1900 years ago what should take 
place in Christendom. The Spirit of God predicted 
through him a departure from the faith revealed in 
a supernatural way. The predictions are given con- 
cerning a time when professing Christians would 
leave the faith and give heed to seducing spirits 
and doctrines of demons (I Timothy iv:1). 

Again we read of a time when sound doctrine 
would no longer be endured, when professing Chris- 
tians would turn their ears away from the truth, 
and would accept fables instead of it (2 Timothy 
iv:3). In the same Epistle we find the prediction 
that those who have a form of godliness (an out- 
ward Christian profession) would deny the power of 
godliness and live as the heathen live. (Compare 
Romans i:29-32: the heathen moral characteristics, 
with 2 Timothy ii:1-5). In these predictions and 
others given by Peter, John and Jude, we have the 
same downward evolution, instead of a process of 
upward development. 

The whole history of Christendom bears witness 
to the correctness of these divinely given anticipa- 
tions, and never before as much as in the twentieth 
century. ‘Those who leave the supernatural faith 
of Christianity, the faith in supernaturalism, follow 
the same path which was followed by ancient na- 
tions thousands of years ago. Spiritism, for instance, 
flourishes in the midst of Christendom. The Spirit- 
ism of today is the same as was practiced in Egypt, 
in Babylon, in Assyria and Persia thousands of years 
ago. It is the same with Theosophy. Many thou- 
sands of people in Great Britain, in France, Ger- 
many, and also here in the United States are adher- 
ents of this system. What is it? A transplanting 


60 The Origin and Development of Religion 


of the corrupt philosophies of Hinduism and eso- 
teric Buddhism upon western, so-called ‘‘Christian”’ 
ground. Christian Science belongs to the same class. 
As has often been said, it is neither Christian nor 
is it science. It is unchristian, anti-christian, and 
unscientific. As a metaphysical system, it is a 
revival of what was in the world thousands of 
years ago. 

And the Modernist! He comes with the plea for 
a new religion. Deliberately he turns his back on 
the great doctrines of the Christian faith. Delib- 
€rately he denies the cardinal articles of the super- 
naturally revealed truth of God. In doing this he 
is set adrift. He begins his wandering; it leads 
him further and further away. Jude speaks of Mod- 
ernists as ‘‘wandering stars” (Jude, verse 13). The 
wandering stars in the universe are bodies, or parts 
of bodies, which detached themselves from a solar 
system. They left the center. They became eccen- 
tric. And thus they are no longer controlled by 
certain laws; the circles they may bring them fur- 
ther and further away and they rush into greater 
darkness, till a catastrophe ends their wanderings. 
Such is Modernism. It has left Christ, the super- 
natural Christ, the Christ of God. It has detached 
itself. It wanders about aimlessly. As we have 
pointed out before, Modernism rests upon a denial 
of supernatural revelation and upon the hypothesis 
of evolution. Physically and spiritually man is 
developing upward. We have demonstrated all this 
as being assumptive, and therefore unscientific. 
To this we add the fact that Modernism gives itself 
the lie, for Modernism is but an evidence of the 
downward tendency of the race. 

What we have shown to be the truth in the 


The Origin and Development of Religion 61 


religious phenomenon collectively is also confirmed 
by the individual experience. True believers often 
sing: 
**Prone to wander, Lord, I feel it; 
Prone to leave the God [ love.” 


Only a hypocrite will deny the truth of these lines. 
There is in every heart possessing the knowledge of 
God this tendency to leave the truth, to forsake it. 
The experience is so prominent that it does not 
need further elucidation. Where does this tendency 
in the entire human race come from? How is it 
that man in the beginning had a monotheistic be- 
lief, knew God, and then turned away and became 
a worshiper of idols? How can it be explained, this 
path of corruption, this downward evolution? Let 
us see. 


CHAPTER IV 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion in the 
Light of the Bible 


The Bible! The Book of all books! We often 
hear it said in our days that other nations have 
their Bibles also. The sacred writings of the East 
are meant, the Rig-Veda, the Zend-Avesta, the 
Upanishads, the Laws of Manu, the Koran and 
others. We possess these volumes and have spent 
much time in studying them. The longer we read 
the more we feel as though walking in a dismal 
swamp. One looks for a ray of light, for something 
to satisfy the craving of the human soul, but as 
one reads on all becomes darker. And there is 
much that is unmoral and immoral. Yea, some 
portions of these ‘“‘sacred writings” are so filthy, 
so horribly obscene, that their translation has never 
been attempted. 

We put down the volume and reach out for the 
one Book. As soon as we open it and begin to read, 
even in its historical portion, we feel that we have 
left the dismal swamp with its filth and mire and 
have been transported into a fragrant meadow, with 
its refreshing green bathed in bright sunshine. 

The Bible is the inerrant Word of God. Its sixty- 
six books are not a collection of religious writings, 
advancing certain theories, but they constitute one 
body, breathing with life and power. From the 
first verse in Genesis to the last verse in Revelation 
there is a wonderful continuity of thought, without 
any clash of opinion; all is a harmonious whole. 
This fact necessitates one great author, one who 
guided the thoughts of each writer and who in- 
structed them to write as they did. This guiding 

62 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 63 


and supervising author is the Spirit of God. “‘All 
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is pro- 
fitable for doctrine, for reproof, for instruction in 
righteousness” (2 Timothy 11:16). “For prophecy 
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy 
men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Sprit’ {2° Peter’1:21). 

We approach this wonderful Book to find out if 
it contains a solution of the religious phenomenon 
as it is in the world of human beings. Logically, a 
perfect solution must be found in this Book, since 
the Spirit of God is the author of it. If the Bible 
also should leave us at sea, if no satisfactory light 
is thrown on this question as to the origin, growth 
and universality of religion, the Holy Scriptures 
would have to be rejected as insufficient, because of 
their failure to account for this greatest of all 
phenomena. 

But we are not disappointed in our expectations, 
for the Bible gives such a solution, in fact the only 
reasonable one. As we trace it we shall find that 
the research of scientists, anthropologists, archaeolo- 
gists, and those who study more especially the dif- 
ferent religions, have confirmed, though in an im- 
perfect way, the revealed Biblical account of religion. 

Sublime is the opening verse of the Bible. No 
other book begins in such a way. ‘‘In the begin- 
ning God, created the heavens and the earth.” 
There is no statement, or argument, to prove the 
existence of a supreme Being. Why not? Because 
it is not needed. The Creator knows that He does 
not need to demonstrate His existence to a creature 
He has created and destined to be in fellowship 
with Himself. ‘The first verse of the Bible is itself 
a wonderful answer to all the erroneous beliefs in 


64 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


the world as to God, creation and matter. Atheism, 
Materialism, Pantheism, Polytheism, Fetishism, 
Animism, and Evolutionism, are all answered by the 
sentence which in the Hebrew has only seven words. 
In this one sentence, the truth is revealed as to 
the origin of all things in heaven and on earth. No 
science will ever be able to write such a sentence, 
and if it ever should, it would mean only a rever- 
ential acknowledgment of what was written thou- 
ands of years ago. God, eternal, self-existing, called 
into existence the heavens and the earth. God in 
His eternity transcends human reason, for this is 
finite; He is infinite. Matter came into existence 
by Himself; matter is therefore not eternal. 

Revelation is silent as to the time when God 
created the heavens and the earth, nor will science 
ever find out how old the physical earth and the 
surrounding heavens are. Guesses vary from ten 
million to one thousand million years. The different 
periods which the science of geology teaches are 
accounted for in the second verse of the Bible. Here 
we find the original creation plunged into chaos. 
It had undergone a cataclysmic change, a fact which 
science has discovered. ‘There was darkness and all 
was covered by water. 

Then, in a not very remote age, but recently, the 
earth was brought up out of the chaotic condition 
and vegetation, animal life and finally man ap- 
peared on it. The Bible reveals the dignity of the 
human race. Its positive teaching is that man was 
created and not evolved. The highest authority, 
the Lord Jesus Christ, has affirmed this fact, that 
man was brought forth by a creative act of God. 
(Mark x:6). Man was created in the image and 
likeness of God. In the Gospel of Luke the first 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 65 


man, Adam, is called the son of God (Luke 11:28). 
Paul, when on Mars Hill in Athens, quoted from 
Greek poets to demonstrate this truth. ‘“‘For in 
Him we live, and move, and have our being; as 
certain also of your own poets have said, For we 
are also His offspring” (Acts xvii:28). As to the 
antiquity of the human race we can rest assured 
that the remote ages given by numerous scientists 
are nothing but guesses. While certain scientists 
in examining skulls and bones of pre-historic men 
gave verdicts-as to their age varying from ten to 
fifty thousand years and more, other equally able 
and painstaking scientists upset their estimates com- 
pletely and proved that the skulls and bones were 
but a few thousand years old. 

The creation of man was a definite act of God. 
With man’s creation a special class of beings came 
into existence, distinct and separated from the animal 
world. This creative act is described in the following 
words: ‘And the Lord God formed man out of the 
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils, 
the breath of life; and man became a living soul” 
(Genesis 11:7). Man was created a physical and a 
spiritual being. Besides having a wonderfully made 
body, he also possessed soul and spirit. God alone 
has immortality, that is, essential immortality. But 
when God breathed into the nostrils of man He 
communicated to him a spiritual nature, and with 
it endless being. The breath of God cannot be 
anything less. As such a being man was created 
for fellowship with his Creator, to enjoy Him and 
live for His glory. That man was not an unintel- 
ligent, chattering ape, or half-ape, as evolutionists 
teach, is likewise proved by the Genesis record. 

God brought before Adam, the first man, the dif- 


66 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


ferent animals, to see what he would call them. 
He named them all. ‘And Adam gave names to 
all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every 
beast of the field’? (Genesis 11:20). He possessed 
intelligent speech. He had discernment as to the 
character of the creation below him, the different 
animals. He was not at a loss as to the proper 
word descriptive of the different beasts. And the 
names he pronounced were acknowledged as correct. 
*‘And whatsoever Adam called every living creature, 
that was the name thereof” (Genesis ii:19). 

God placed him in a special environment of 
beauty, the garden of Eden. He gave him dominion 
over the earth. He held communion with the first 
man and with the woman taken out of his side. 
Such was the exalted position of the progenitor of 
the human race. | 

Man created in innocency was subjected to a 
very simple test. He was warned of the conse- 
quences of disobedience. A mysterious being ap- 
peared on the scene, and by his subtlety this being 
led man to the act of disobedience which accom- 
plished his fall. 

We realize that, while we tersely restate these 
familiar Bible-truths, there are many difficulties and 
problems connected with the history of the crea- 
tion of man, with the origin and originator of evil, 
with the fall of man, and other parts of the Mosaic 
account. ‘To enter into all these is not the object 
of this volume. 

The Biblical record then gives us two facts as 
to the first man. The first fact is that man was 
created in the image and likeness of God. He did 
not ascend out of a mysterious and undefinable 
Slime-pit. On account of the nature which man 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 67 


received in creation he possesses a faculty and capa- 
city for religion. This is the primary solution of 
the problem of religion, the reason why everywhere 
in the human family is found the religious phe- 
nomenon. It arises out of the fact that man was 
created as a spiritual being. The revelation which 
the Bible gives as to the origin and nature of man is 
fully attested by the fact that man wherever he may 
be found craves for the fellowship of the supreme 
Being in whose existence he is forced to believe. 
Therefore the whole race feels that there is an invi- 
sible, a supernatural power on which man is depen- 
dent, with which he must reckon. As we have seen, 
the recognition of this Power is universal. 

The second fact is, that man was disobedient and 
transgressed. That which the Bible calls ‘‘sin’’ came 
into human existence. ‘The spiritual nature of man 
was changed into a nature of sin. As the history 
of the race progressed this evil nature worked out 
into its horrible fruit, and man’s body, soul and 
spirit became corrupted. He was dragged down. 
Any one can sneer at the third chapter of Genesis 
and reject its message as unhistorical, yet the fact 
of sin and its awful fruitage remains, and is only 
too evident. The greatest teacher said: ‘Out of 
the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, 
fornications, thefts, false witnesses, blasphemies”’ 
(Matthew xv:19). Throughout the Bible we have a 
great demonstration of the sin fact. The horrible 
outworking of the corrupt nature of man, acquired 
by disobedience, is faithfully described. The depths 
of human depravity are sounded and its filth is 
brought to the surface. God Himself in giving His 
estimate of man declares: ““There is none righteous, 
no not one. There is none that understandeth, 


68 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


there is none that seeketh after God. They are all 
gone out of the way, they are together become un- 
profitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not 
one’ (Romans iii:10-12). No civilization, no legis- 
lation, and no reformation can change the acquired 
sinful nature of man. The unnatural vices, as well 
as gross licentiousness of ancient nations, the Assy- 
rians, Chaldeans, Phoenicians, Romans and Greeks, 
are still being practiced, and that in the very midst 
of a boasting ‘‘Christian civilization.” 

_ With the loss of man’s innocency the conscience 
faculty came into prominence. Man knows the dif- 
ference between good and evil, he is capable of 
recognizing moral law and religious obligation. But 
more than the conscience faculty, the consciousness 
of sin and its accompanying guilt became the strong- 
est factor in the development of religion. Here is 
where the naturalist is at sea. He tries to account 
for the universal sin-consciousness, but fails miser- 
ably, like the Rabbi who wrote the book to which 
we referred in the preceding chapter. Dr. S. H. 
Kellogg says: “It is one of the most remarkable 
characteristics of modern naturalistic theories of the 
development of religion, that, for the most part, 
they ignore this universal consciousness of sin, and 
quietly assume that religious development has pro- 
gressed under normal conditions, and thus also, 
must have been marked, on the whole, as a pro- 
gressive elevation and continuous improvement of 
man’s religious ideas. But this common assumption 
is in contradiction to most manifest and indisput- 
able facts. Conscience in all ages has steadily 
witnessed that man’s moral relation to the Power 
with’ whom in religion he has to do, is not what 
it should be. All religions agree in taking it for 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 69 


granted that in this relation there is something ab- 
normal, which, somehow, through religion, needs, if 
possible, to be set right. In a word they testify 
always and everywhere, that man feels himself to be 
a sinner, and, because of this, out of harmony with 
the Power which rules the universe. About this fact 
there is no room for debate. One may, if he will, 
regard this universal feeling as a groundless super- 
stition. But such an individual opinion cannot re- 
move the fact, that, as a rule, the great mass of 
men, and the noblest, purest natures and deepest 
thinkers, most of all, have sadly recognized this fact 
of a moral disharmony between themselves and that 
mysterious Power which conscience discerns in 
facure.: + 

All the religions of the world have wrestled, and 
still do so, with the problem of sin, realizing that 
sin has disturbed the creature’s relation with the 
Creator. Turning again to the Genesis record we 
read of the fear and dread which followed the first 
man’s disobedience. The eyes of the man and the 
woman were opened. ‘“‘And they knew that they 
were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together 
and made themselves aprons” (Genesis iii:7). The 
learned philosopher and the Modernist may smile 
at such a record and call it a “‘kindergarten story,” 
but the history of religion reveals the same attempt 
of man to hide his nakedness. It is still so in the 
modern religious world. Then followed greater fear. 
‘*And they heard the voice of Jehovah-Elohim, walk- 
ing in the garden. And Jehovah-Elohim called unto 
Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?” (Gene- 
sis 11178). And'man answered, “I was afraid’)... 
and I hid myself.”” Fear and dread on account of 

1*Genesis and Growth of Religion,” p. 192, 193. 


70 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


sin against God are accompanying factors in the 
development of the different religions. 

‘How natural, then, how inevitable indeed, that 
sin should powerfully influence the development of 
religion; as inclining men always to wrong views of the 
nature and character of God! How natural that we 
should see—as we do see—many religions which ex- 
press little else than the consciousness of fear and 
dread; dread of a great God, or gods on high, or 
malign unseen powers resident in nature! How evi- 
dent again, that, because the consciousness of sin 
awakens fear of retribution from the unseen Power 
against whom man has sinned, therefore, inasmuch 
as fear is painful, men will be unfailingly predis- 
posed to look with favor upon such views of God, 
or of the world, or of both, as, if assumed to be 
true, diminish or remove the ground of fear! How 
natural thus that men should ever be inclined to 
imagine gods like unto themselves, who therefore, 
as themselves unholy, are not greatly displeased 
with the sinfulness of man!”’ ? 

Before we leave the chapter in which these great 
underlying facts of the religious phenomenon are 
revealed in embryo, we call attention to two more 
/facts. Jehovah-Elohim sought his guilty creatures. 
He came on the scene of their sin and shame to 
seek and to save that which was lost. This ex- 
presses the Love and the Mercy of God. Then He 
gave the first prophetic promise. “I will put enmity 
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed 
and her seed; it shall bruise thy head and thou 
shalt bruise his heel’’ (Genesis 111:15). Greater minds 
and greater scholars than many of the present day 
Modernists and their friends, Jews who have aban- 

“Genesis and Growth of Religion,” p. 197, 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 71 


doned the faith of their fathers, have seen in this 
statement the redemptive program of God, in which 
is announced the conflict of coming ages and the 
final victory over evil, symbolically seen in the 
bruising of the head of the serpent. “The seed of 
the woman” is the first prediction of a coming 
redeemer. Many religions which came into exist- 
ence long after these words were spoken contain 
faint echoes of a coming Saviour, and of a future 
blissful state_of the earth and its inhabitants, a 
bringing back of the “golden age.” 

The second fact is the institution of sacrifice on 
the threshold of history. Cain and Abel were wor- 
shipers; Abel, whose offering was accepted, brought 
of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. 
Who instructed him to bring such an offering? Ere 
the first pair were driven from the garden of the 
Lord we read that Jehovah-Elohim made them coats 
of skin (Genesis 11:21). This necessitated the slay- 
ing of an animal. In all probability sacrifice as the 
means of the right approach into the presence of 
God was revealed at that time. Sacrifice holds a 
prominent place in all ancient religions, as well as 
in many others. To follow the history of sacrifices, 
how extensively they are propagated, altered and 
perverted, including the horrible customs of human 
sacrifice, and much else, would require a volume in 
itself. In Genesis true sacrifice as a means of ap- 
proach into the presence of God in worship is made 
known. It was soon followed by perversions, but 
restored many centuries later, in the divinely com- 
manded Levitical institutions among the people 
Israel. 

Four facts underlying the religious phenomenon 
in the race are therefore seen in the Bible: Man’s 


i 


72. = The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


creation, the fact of sin and its consequences; the 
promise and hope of redemption; the fact of sacrifice. 
It would be interesting to trace the Genesis story 

in the deciphered inscriptions of ancient monuments, 
and the records and myths of the Accadians and 
Sumirs, who occupied ancient Chaldea, and the 
curious Babylonian records. Creation, the fall of 
man and the deluge are found, in a perverted form, 
in these ancient documents. A cylinder, of great 
antiquity, is in the British Museum, and represents 
a man and a woman by a tree; on one branch of 
the tree are two large fruits, towards which they 
are stretching out their hands. Behind the woman 
appears a serpent. ‘This is obviously one of the 
most pronounced echoes of the Genesis revelation. 
The story of the Deluge has been reconstructed 
almost entire, by means of fragments of a national 
poem found in the library of Assurbanipal. It would 
be interesting to show how the original Cherubim 
hold a place as idolatrous imitations in the ancient 
religions of Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, Moab, 
Ammon, Rome and Greece. It would be interesting 
to quote the translation of some of the recovered 
fragments of traditional lore, like the following 
Assyrian account of the deluge. 

Make a ship after this ; 

- + »« Idestroy the sinner and life . 

Cause to go in the seed of life, all of i it, 

To the midst of the ship, 

The ship which thou shalt make 

Six hundred (?) cubits shall be the measure of its length 

And sixty cubits the amount of its breadth and height. 

‘ Into the deep launch it. 

I received and said to Hea my Lord, 

The shipmaking thou commandest me, 


When I shall have made 
Young and old will deride me. 


It would be interesting to verify the sin and guilt 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 73 


consciousness as expressed in the old Chaldean reli- 
gion. We give an illustration in the following quo- 
tation, from a pentitential poem. 


Lord, let the fierce anger of thy heart be appeased! 

Let the God whom I know not be pacified toward me! 

Let the God who knows the unknown be pacified! 

Let the mother-goddess who knows the unknown be appeased! 
I eat the bread of thine anger, 

I drink the waters of anguish, 

I feed without knowing it, on transgression against my God. 
I walk without knowing it, in short-coming 

Towards my mother-goddess. 

Lord, my faults are very great! 

Very great are my sins! 


It would be interesting to go the Vedic hymns, the 
Zend-Avesta, to the literature of Brahmanism, and 
to other writings, and trace there the same per- 
verted traditions. We must leave this great field 
untouched. 


Man left the presence of His Maker. Sin alien-— 


ated him. Leaving God’s fellowship, man carried 
in his bosom a threefold consciousness: God-con- 
sciousness; Sin-consciousness; and the conscious- 
ness of endless being, which we may term Eternity- 


consciousness. ‘They are still the universal con-_ 


sciousness of the entire race, in spite of the twen- 
tieth century Atheists, who, with their denials, lie 
against their own conscience, for Atheism is conta- 
natural with man. 

Primitive men had two sources of religious knowl- 
edge. ‘The knowledge which they obtained in the 
works of creation, and traditional knowledge. 

The first is mentioned in the language of the 
Bible in the following passages: ‘“The heavens de- 
clare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth 
His handywork” (Psalm xix:1). “Because that 
which may be known of God is manifest in them; 
for God hath showed it unto them. For the invi- 


74 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


sible things of Him from the creation of the world 
are clearly seen, being understood by the things 
that are made, even His eternal power and God- 
head; so that they are without excuse’”’ (Romans 
i:19-20). There is a revelation of God in nature; 
all nature bears witness to the Creator; all crea- 
tion manifests His glory. This knowledge of God 
as the Creator, His eternal power and Godhead, 
was in the possession of primitive men. 

They also possessed knowledge by tradition. 
Physical life was in the beginning not limited to 
seventy or eighty years; man lived not for a num- 
ber of decades but for centuries, because the human 
body had not yet been weakened by the ravages of 
continued vices. The primitive men knew nothing 
of the dread diseases and epidemics which after- 
wards became the curse of the race. According to 
the record of Genesis the first man lived nine hun- 
dred and thirty years, and Methusaleh lived thirty- 
nine years longer than Adam. The knowledge of 
the great events of the beginning of the race was 
then easily preserved by oral tradition. 

As we have proved in the preceding chapter, the 
belief in one God, Monotheism, was the original 
faith of the great nations of the East, which later 
became Fetishists and Polytheists. ‘The Monothe- 
istic belief was handed down from those early days 
by tradition. According to the Biblical account 
there were then two classes among men, those who 
believed and those who believed not; the Sethites 
and the Cainites. The Sethites in their generations 
(Genesis v) preserved the primitive faith, worshiped 
God and sought His fellowship. The Cainites built 
cities and an advancing civilization. 

But the world did not improve. The fallen nature 


& 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 75 


of man asserted itself. Polygamy, murder and all 
kinds of violence developed among those who be- 
lieved not. Finally a great and mysterious corrup- 
tion led to a great judgment of God (Genesis vi).® 
We quote the divine record. ‘‘And God saw that 
the wickedness of man was great in the earth and 
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart 
was only evilcontinually. . . . And God looked 
upon the earth and, behold, it was corrupt; for all 
flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. And 
God said unto Noah, the end of all flesh has come 
before me; for the earth is filled with violence 
‘through them; and, behold, I will destroy them 
with the earth” (Genesis vi:5, 13). 

The deluge as God’s judgment followed. The 
Biblical account is confirmed by distorted traditions 
of many ancient nations; geology also adds its tes- 
timony that such a catastrophe overtook the earth. 

Noah and his house passed through the flood. 
The sons of Noah, Shem, Ham and Japheth, were 
told to replenish the earth. As stated before, they 
were together for a time with their descendants, 
speaking one language, and undoubtedly adhering 
to the primitive belief. Then the proud fallen nature 
of man manifested itself again. In the land of 
Shinar judgment came upon them, when instead of 
worshiping the Name of God, they attempted to 
make themselves a name. The confusion of tongues 
and their dispersion followed. As they separated 
they carried away the knowledge of God and the 
traditional information. Soon it was given up, and 
the result was departure from the living God and 
the establishment of idolatry. 

In the Epistle to the Romans, the document which 


83Mythology also has an echo of Genesis vi:1-6. 


76 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


a greater thinker (Samuel Coleridge) pronounced 
‘the profoundest document in the possession of the 
human race,” the inspired writer, the Apostle Paul, 
gives us the after-history, as to religion, of the scat- 
tered sons of Noah and their descendants. ‘‘Because 
that when they knew God, they glorified Him not 
as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in 
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was dark- 
ened. Professing themselves to be wise, they be- 
came fools, and changed the glory of the uncorrupt- 
ible God into an image made like to corruptible 
man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creep- 
ing things’ (Romans 1:21-23). ‘The words which 
follow show what resulted morally; body, soul, and 
spirit were corrupted. Uncleanness through lust and 
vile affections was the result. 

Then we read: ‘‘And even as they did not like 
to retain the knowledge of God, God gave them 
over to a reprobate mind”’ (Romans 1:28). Here ts 
religious evolution! Man knew God; he knew God 
as Creator; he knew God through oral tradition. 
He did not retain God in his knowledge; he was 
unthankful, because man is unholy. His proud 
heart refused to believe in God eternal. He set 
out to know God by wisdom, by searching. Then 
as they turned away from God, soon he became a 
fool. Human sinfulness and foolishness invented 
idolatry. Man worshiped man and his ancestors; 
then he turned to the birds; next came fourfooted 
beasts, the bull, the cat and other creatures, and 
finally the creeping things. Such is the religious 
degradation of fallen man. We remind the reader 
that we have seen how this inspired Apostolic ac- 
count of the origin and growth of religion, this true 
evolutionary process, is perfectly and completely 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 77 


confirmed by the research in ancient religions of the 
race. 

The various religious systems are therefore ac- 
counted for by the Bible. They came into existence 
when man gave up the knowledge of the Creator. 
The different ancient and pagan religions are the 
expressions of the darkened, sinful heart of man, the 
gropings for light. They are efforts to bridge the 
chasm, which human consciousness knows to exist, 
on account of sin, between God and sinful’ man. 
The sacrifices of these religions are the expression 
of attempts at reconciliation. Thus the race drifted 
into Polytheism, Fetishism, and Animism. The 
path was not upward but downward; nor did later 
philosophy lead to the light. Darkness and moral 
corruption followed. Over it all may be written 
another sentence of the Bible: ‘““The world by wis- 
dom knew not God” (I Corinthians 1:21). The true 
knowledge of God cannot be recovered by searching, 
nor can man find his way back to God and to fel- 
lowship with Him. Equally impossible is it for 
man to do anything to remedy the evil within. 

Only a direct revelation of God can give to man 
the knowledge he needs. But is there such a revela- 
tion? Has God revealed Himself, and has He in 
this revelation solved the great problems of sin and 
the reconciliation of fallen man to Himself? These 
are most vital questions. 

There lived in Ur of the Chaldees a descendant of 
the family of Shem. His name was Terah; he had 
three sons, Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Ur was, as 
we learn from Chaldean sources, the chief center of 
the worship of the moon-god, Sin, for the worship 
of idols was then fully established. Terah, as we 
have seen before, was a worshiper of idols, and un- 


78 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


doubtedly the sons of ‘Terah shared in the idol-wor- 
ship of the father. One day Terah, Abram and 
his wife Sarai, Lot, his grandson, and his family, left 
Ur of the Chaldees to go into the land of Canaan. 
What occasioned this change of residence? Was it 
on account of their nomadic life? There was an- 
other reason. “‘Now Jehovah had said unto Abram, 
Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, 
and from thy father’s house, unto a land that I will 
show thee” (Genesis xii:1). The New Testament 
gives additional information. “The God of glory 
appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was 
in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran, and 
said unto him, Get thee out of thy country, and 
from thy kindred, and come into the land which I 
shall show thee. Then came he out of the land 
of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Haran, and from 
thence, when his father was dead, he removed him 
into this land, wherein ye now dwell” (Acts vii:2-4). 
Another passage of Scripture says: “By faith Abra- 
ham, when he was called to go out into a place 
which he should after receive for an inheritance, 
obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he 
went”? (Hebrews xi:8). 

Here again we have to face modern day denials. 
Destructive critics and Reformed Jews have gone 
so far as to deny the historicity of Abraham. With 
such a denial of the real existence of Abraham they 
brand the Biblical record as fictitious, and further- 
more they impeach the trustworthiness of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, who spoke of Abraham as a real person. 

Let us remember that for several millennia the 
Jews used the phrase “Abraham Abinu’’—our father 
Abraham. It was used a thousand years ago. Ac- 
cording to the New Testament it was used two 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 79 


thousand years ago. The Jews used it before Christ. 
Isaiah, seven hundred years before Christ, wrote 
‘Look unto Abraham your father’’( Isaiah 1i:2), as 
he also writes of Abraham ‘“‘the friend of God” 
(Isaiah 1xi:8). God’s covenant with Abraham is 
often mentioned by the Prophets and in the Psalms. 
Could all this possibly and logically originate in a 
person who never existed? It is not the object of 
this volume to answer destructive criticism in its 
assertion as to the Mosaic writings, the Pentateuch. 
All these arguments denying the Mosaic authorship 
of the Pentateuch, claiming a post-exilic origin of 
most of it, as well as of many Psalms and the mes- 
sages of some of the Prophets, are mere assumption; 
they have not been proved in a scientific way. 


It is strange that a member of the race which 
sprang from Abraham, Rabbi Lewis Browne, in his 
book on ““This Believing World,” can dismiss the 
great event of Abraham’s call in the following paren- 
thetical statement: “Only later did they (the 
Hebrews) try their fortune in Canaan in the west. 
(The tradition that Abraham—evidently a tribal 
sheikh who led one of the sorties into Canaan— 
came from Ur of the Chaldees, may have that much 
baste. in fact.’’) + 


In spite of all these denials the fact remains that 
the Hebrews from the beginning of their history pos- 
sessed a religion of the purest Monotheism. How 
did it originate? We have seen that Monotheism 
was the religious belief of the earliest races and was 
followed by Polytheism. But Abraham left Poly- 
theism and became a Monotheist. Was the universal 
law of the corruption of religion arrested in his 


4"This Believing World,” p. 225. 


80 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


case? Did he by himself discover that the worship 
of the one God is the truth? 

Ernest Renan in his “Studies of Religious His- 
tory and Criticism” attempts a solution of the mono- 
theistic conception and worship of the Hebrews. 
He says: ‘The Indo-European race, distracted by 
the variety of the universe, never by itself arrived 
at Monotheism. The Shemitic race, on the con- 
trary, guided by its firm and sure sight, instantly 
unmasked Divinity, and without reflection or reas- 
oning attained the purest form of religion that hu- 
manity has known.” ‘Then he gives further explana- 
tion. ‘“‘When and how did the Shemitic race arrive 
at the notion of the divine unity, which the world 
has admitted on the face of its teaching? I think 
it was by a primitive intuition and from its earliest 
days . ... the Shemitic race reached, evidently 
without an effort, the notion of the supreme God.”’® 
But this is another assumption. The Hebrews did 
not have a special genius for Monotheistic religion; 
nor did they discover “‘without an effort” the truth 
as to the one God; nor did they maintain this be- 
lief of themselves. The Hebrews were far from being 
loyal to Monotheism. ‘Their history is filled for 
many centuries with the sad record of their apos- 
tasy and conformation to the Fetishism and Poly- 
theism of surrounding nations. 

The question has been asked: “‘Is the one God 
a product of Israel, or is Israel a product of the 
one God?” ° 

Modernism and Reformed Judaism answer by 
saying ‘“The one God is a product of Israel.” The 
Hebrew nation invented and developed what they 


5Pages 115-116. 
6Professor Ebrard in ‘‘Apologetik; Vol. II, s 306, ving 


Xe: 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 81 


term the Yahveh (Jehovah) cult. We quote once 
more from Rabbi Lewis Browne. He writes in 
“This Believing World’; as follows: ‘“‘It was far 
from a perfect faith—this cult instituted by Moses. 
One must remember that it was founded over thirty 
two hundred years ago, by the chieftain of a horde 
of marauding desperadoes just come out of bondage. 
It was as crude and savage as were the Hebrews 
themselves. At its root lay the idea that there was 
but one god for the Hebrews. For other tribes 
there might be other gods, but for the Hebrews 
there was only Yahveh. This Yahveh (or Jehovah, 
as his name is usually mispronounced) was probably 
the spirit dwelling in a certain desert volcano called 
Sinai or Horeb; and from time immemorial he had 
been worshiped by a bedouin tribe called the Kenites. 
Now Moses, according to tradition, had once dwelt 
amongst the Kenites, and had married the daughter 
of their chief priest. When it became necessary for 
his band of runaway Hebrews to be provided with 
a god, it was therefore only natural for Moses to 
choose Yahveh. He took his forlorn followers to 
the very foot of the Holy Mountain of Yahveh, 
located somewhere in the desert, and solemnly com- 
mitted them there to this god. Ten commandments 
were given as the basis of the worship. A covenant 
was entered into; a holy contract binding the 
Hebrews to worship Yahveh, and Yahveh to favor the 
Hebrews. Ten commandments were given as the 
basis of the worship of the deity; and it was under- 
stood that so long as they were observed, the He- 
brews should be assured of his Divine protection. 
An “ark” was built as a haven for the roving spirit 
of Yahveh—it was probably a sort of tribal fetish 
—and the Hebrews carried it at the head of their 


82 The True Origin and Growth of Religion — 


columns in every sortie.””’7 Then this Rabbi de- 
clares that this tribal god, supposed to live in a 
volcano, was gradually developed. ‘“The final idea 
of Yahveh accepted by the Hebrews was not the 
product of a sudden revelation, but a gradual evo- 
lution .’ Centuries later the conception that 
he must be God was reached. ‘‘And thus was at- 
tained the first rung in the ladder which brought 
Yahveh up to the throne of God. Yahveh was now 
no more a mere glutton for sacrifices; he was the in- 
flexible Commander of Justice.” ® All this is not 
original. Itis the product of Gentile infidelity. All 
infidelity, whether it is pagan, Jewish, or “‘baptized,” 
is unscientific. Destructive Criticism may boast of 
a scientific method; it is the very opposite. 

The truth is that “Israel is the product of the 
one God,” who in sovereign grace called the son of 
Terah to leave idolatry behind. He responded to 
the supernatural call and turned to God from idols, 
becoming the ‘“‘friend of God.” The history which 
follows, rightly called “‘sacred history,” fully demon- 
strates that “‘Jsrael 1s the product of the one God.” 
This is the only possible logical explanation of Israel’s 
wonderful history and equally wonderful preserva- 
tion. Jehovah-God made unconditional promises to 
Abraham. “I will bless them that bless thee, and 
curse him that curses thee; and in thee shall all 
nations be blessed” (Genesis xii:3). Jehovah-God 
promised Abraham a posterity which should be “as 
the dust of the earth” (Genesis xiii:16) and as “the 
stars of heaven” (Genesis xv:5). They multiplied 
according to the promise, and centuries later they 
are found in Egypt; “and the children of Israel 


7Pages 229, 230, 
8Page 239. 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 83 


were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multi- 
plied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land 
was filled with them” (Exodus 1:7). They were not 
‘a marauding band of desperadoes.”’ 

The beautiful story of the opening chapters of 
Exodus, how Jehovah-God remembered His cove- 
nant with Abraham, with Isaac and Jacob, and de- 
livered them out of the house of bondage, and the 
Passover, still kept by real Jews as the great memo- 
rial feast, are branded by Rationalists as unhistor- 
ical invention as is their desert journey for forty 
years. Every bit of the miraculous element is ruled 
out. Jehovah dwelling in His glory in the midst of 
Israel is compared to “a sort of tribal Fetish.” The 
Book of Leviticus with its sacrificial laws, its declara- 
tion as to the holiness of Jehovah-God, the great 
laws given to Israel by which they were distinguished 
from other nations, all, according to the destructive 
critical school, came into existence after the Baby- 
lonian exile, and was somehow patterned after Baby- 
lonish worship. What a master deception the Pen- 
tateuch then is! A deception which outranks any 
other religious deception! But is it? A thousand 
times, No! 'The evidence that Israel is the product of 
the one God, is the history of Israel itself and the God- 
revelation given Israel. He reveals Himself, in deal- 
ing with the nation; His character; His attributes; 
His omnipotence; His omniscience; His holiness, 
righteousness, love, mercy, grace, and His faithful- 
ness. This manifestation of the character of God as 
given in Israel’s history, demanding holiness and 
righteousness, yet long suffering and merciful, ever 
mindful of His covenant promises, is the logical evi- 
dence of supernatural revelation. It could not be in- 
vented by religious genius. ‘True, as a nation, Israel 


84 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


was unfaithful. God had to deal with them in judg- 
ments. Yet at all times there was a remnant pre- 
served, which did not share the departure of the 
nation from Jehovah their God, a remnant which 
adhered to the faith of their fathers, even down to 
the final record of the Old Testament, when those 
who feared Jehovah came together to think upon 
His Name. (Malachi iii:16-17). 

We pass over the evidences which we might gather 
from the poetical books, from the Psalms, and from 
the ethical messages of the mighty men of God, all 
sustaining the fact that Israel was produced by the 
one God. But we turn briefly to one other great 
evidence that the Old Testament is the revelation 
of Jehovah-God. This evidence is the fact of 
Prophecy. 

In the so-called second part of Isaiah, written 
by the same Isaiah who wrote the first part, we 
find some important declarations, not made by 
Isaiah but by Jehovah, whose mouthpiece he was. 
‘‘Produce your cause, saith Jehovah; bring forth 
your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob. Let 
them bring them forth, and show us what shall hap- 
pen; let them show the former things, what they 
be, that we may consider them, and know the latter 
end of them; or declare us things to come. Show 
the things that are to come afterward, that we may 
know that ye are gods” (Isaiah xli:21-23). ‘This 
sublime passage contains a challenge to the idol gods 
of Babylon to reveal the things which have been, 
the former things, and the things which shall be. 
Then Jehovah uttered that great testimony as to 
Himself, “I am God, and there is none else; 1 am 
God and there is none like me.” This is followed 
by these words; “Declaring the end from the be- 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 85 


ginning, and from ancient times the things that are 
not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, andI 
will do all my pleasure” (Isaiah xlvi:9-10). 

Vitringa defined prophecy as “‘a prediction of some 
contingent circumstance or event in the future re- 
ceived by immediate or direct revelation.”? Prophecy 
is the revelation of events before they come to 
pass; it is history pre-written. The prediction of 
future events, though it has often been attempted, 
because man longs to know the future, is an im- 
possibility. God only knows the future, for He is 
omniscient. ‘This is the meaning of the passages 
we quoted from Isaiah; God alone knows the future 
and He alone can make future events known. 

The fact of Bible prophecy is disbelieved by ra- 
tionalists, destructive critics, and by Modernists. 
If they were to concede the prophetic element in 
the Bible they would support an evidence that the 
Bible is supernatural and therefore the revelation 
of God. A perfect God cannot give an imperfect 
and faulty revelation, it must be a perfect and in- 
fallible revelation. ‘To overcome this logic the en- 
tire fact of prophecy is ruled out. We give a few 
illustrations. 

In the book of Isaiah we read a prophecy con- 
cerning a king, whom God could use in the restora- 
tion of Jerusalem and the temple, after the cap- 
tivity of the Jews had passed. The king’s name is 
Cyrus. But Cyrus was unborn at that time, nor 
had the Jews been carried into Babylon. All was 
over a hundred years in the future. How is this 
possible? If Isaiah wrote of himself it would have 
been impossible to give such a precise prediction. 
If Jehovah is nothing but ‘‘a spirit who dwelt,” or 
was supposed to dwell “in a desert volcano,” it 


86 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


it would be equally impossible. But the omniscient 
Jehovah, who knows the end from the beginning, 
can name an unborn king and predict human his- 
tory and make known human destiny. The mod- 
ernistic infidel cannot assent to this. He has in- 
vented a theory that a certain man assumed the 
name of Isaiah. He cannot quite deny the histor- 
icity of a man by the name of Isaiah, who, according 
to the critics, wrote a very small portion of the book 
which bears his name. Some say a Deutero anda 
Trito Isaiah wrote the rest. The fraud who, claim- 
ing to be Isaiah, assumed the honored name of the 
great prophet, wrote, it is taught, the chapters in 
which King Cyrus is mentioned after Cyrus had 
been born and after he had commanded the re- 
building of the city and of the temple. But the 
whole theory of a Deutero or a Trito Isaiah, to 
maintain the beloved word ‘“‘science,”? so much used 
by critics, is wholly unscientific. Internal evidences 
of the Book of Isaiah prove scientifically that there 
is only one Isaiah. 

We mention the Book of Daniel. Here are found 
great prophecies concerning the rise and the fall of 
world empires. The writer of the book was Daniel, 
the Prime Minister of Babylon. The predictions 
found in this book show that the Babylonian Em- 
pire, in existence then, would be followed by the 
Medo-Persian; after that should come the Graeco- 
Macedonian, and finally the Roman World-empire. 
There are also further predictions as to these em- 
pires, while other prophecies concern the Jews and 
great future events. In order to deny the fact of 
prophecy, critics teach that the book came into 
existence in the time of the Maccabees. They claim 
that an unknown Jew assumed the name of Daniel, 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 87 


and that the Book of Daniel was not written in the 
sixth century before Christ. But this is again an 
invention. In attacking the authenticity of the 
Book of Daniel the critics have suffered some of 
their worst defeats. In the same manner all other 
prophecies have been treated. 

‘But Bible prophecy is proved a supernatural fact. 
It is impossible to demonstrate that the prophecies 
found in the Bible were written after the predicted 
events had passed into history. But it can be shown 
that these prophecies were spoken long before their 
fulfillment came. Without entering deeper into this 
argument we point to the prophecies of Moses con- 
cerning the people Israel, prophecies which predict 
their dispersion, not only dispersion past, but the 
present world-wide dispersion and a future restora- 
tion. Again prophets like Ezekiel, Nahum, and 
others, predicted the fall of Babylon, Nineveh; they 
predicted the history of Egypt and other great 
nations. The literal and startling fulfilment of 
these prophecies is sufficient proof that they are 
not human guesses, but divine revelations. ‘The 
fact of fulfilled prophecy is a potent argument for 
the inspiration of the Bible. 

Let us turn now to Messianic prophecy. The 
prophecy of a coming Redeemer is the great out- 
standing fact in Jehovah’s revelation to His people 
Israel. It is unique in every way; in vain do we 
turn to the religious writings of ancient nations to 
find anything like it. Its uniqueness and harmony 
cannot be explained by psychological theories and 
inventions. The Messianic hope which permeates 
the history of Israel, which is still the hope of at 
least a part of Judaism, can only be explained on the 
ground of supernatural revelation; and such it is. 


88 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


“The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy” 
(Rev. xix:10). It means that in prophecy is given 
the testimony of Jesus. The Greek word “‘Jesus”’ 
is transcribed from the Hebrew “‘Jehoshua,” which 
means ‘“‘Jehovah is Salvation.” Peter, the fisher- 
man of Galilee, in writing about prophecy says, 
that the prophets of God were inspired to write 
beforehand “the sufferings of Christ, and the glory 
that should follow’ (1 Peter i:11). 

The Messianic prophecy concerns the Person of 
the Redeemer, Jehoshuah, the Jehovah-Saviour, the 
Messiah-King, and His work of Redemption. By 
His work not only Israel is to be finally redeemed 
and receive the blessings and the glory promised 
in the oath-bound covenant of Jehovah, but the 
Gentiles are likewise to receive salvation, and to 
know Jehovah, walking in His light. When finally 
Messiah is King over all the earth, His glory and 
the knowledge of it will cover the earth as the 
waters cover the depth of ocean. 

As we have seen, the third chapter of Genesis 
contains the first promise of redemption. Here both 
the Person of the Redeemer and His work are men- 
tioned. He is to be the ‘‘seed of the woman”; the 
serpent is to bruise His heel; He will ultimately 
bruise the serpent’s head. The word ‘‘seed” is sig- 
nificant and of much importance. Found for the 
first time in this prophetic promise, the embryo out 
of which all subsequent prophecy is developed, it 
occurs throughout the Bible. Critics have labored 
to eliminate this one word; they have, under the 
camouflage of a ‘‘new translation” (like Professor 
Moffatt’s) attempted to invent a substitute for the 
word “seed.” The word ‘‘seed” indicates that the 
coming Redeemer comes from the race, however 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 89 


not as the seed of man, but as the seed of the woman. 
In the ancient prophecy of Noah, Shem is made 
prominent, inasmuch as ‘“‘Jehovah-Elohim” is es- 
pecially mentioned. ‘“‘Blessed be ‘Jehovah-Elohim’ 
of Shem” (Genesis ix:26). In course of time the 
Jehovah-Elohim, forgotten by the descendants of 
Shem, revealed Himself to Abraham, the son of 
Terah. Jehovah spoke to Abraham of a “seed” in 
whom all the nations of the earth are to be blest. 
Isaac, the wonder-seed, born as the seed of prom- 
ise, is the prophetic type of the true seed of the 
woman. How illuminating is the New Testament 
comment on the promised seed! ‘‘Now to Abraham 
and his seed were the promises made. He saith 
not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, 
And to thy seed, which is Christ (Messiah)” (Gal- 
atians 11:16). 

The promises made to Abraham are confirmed 
to Isaac and to Jacob. Jacob had twelve sons, the 
progenitors of the twelve tribes of Israel. Out of 
which one is to come the seed? Again we hear the 
voice of prophecy. Judah is the tribe from which 
the promised seed is to come. (Genesis xlix:10). 
From the house of Jesse of the tribe of Judah is 
selected the youngest son, David. He becomes the 
chosen of Jehovah, the man after God’s own heart, 
the shepherd-king. Jehovah promises him a son. 
Not Solomon is the promised One, but another, 
who is to be the seed. Jehovah makes a covenant 
with David, a covenant of grace (2 Samuel vii). 
Then the Spirit of God enlightened David, opened 
his vision, and David became a prophet. His 
prophecies in the Psalms are wonderful. Suffering 
and the glory, is the matchless theme of the in- 
spired king. 


90 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


What a mine of prophetic information are the 
Psalms! Here we read of the Messiah’s character, 
His holiness and separation from sinners, His meek- 
ness and His lowliness. Here are His prayers pre- 
written. But above everything else we find in the 
Psalms the Messiah’s rejection and His sufferings. 
What a prophecy is the Twenty-second Psalm! 
Here we read the story of the coming One, His 
suffering from the side of Jews and Gentiles, and 
deeper still His suffering as the forsaken One. The 
story of the Cross is revealed in an astonishing 
manner. All through the Psalms the humiliation 
of the Messiah, His suffering and rejection, are 
prophetically pictured. Again we read of His res- 
urrection (Psalm xvi) and of His ascension to the 
right hand of God (Psalms Ixviii and cx). David 
knew that the seed would be his son and his Lord. 
The glory of the Messiah was seen by David and 
is recorded in the Psalms. The One whom the people 
Israel rejected, whom the Gentiles refused to own 
as King (Psalm ii) will be enthroned on Zion’s hill 
and receive the nations for His inheritance and the 
ends of the earth for His possession. David beheld 
the glories of His Kingdom, the ingathering and the 
worship of the nations (Psalm Ixxii). 

The life of David itself is a prophecy. He passed 
through deep suffering, and was the anointed one of 
Jehovah, yet rejected and crownless. Finally he 
was triumphant over all his enemies and crowned 
king over all Israel. Thus his own experience fore- 
shadows the experience of the Messiah. 

Solomon reigned in peace for forty years. The 
riches and glory of his kingdom were typical of the 
kingdom of the Messiah. 

The prophecies of the sixteen prophetic books of 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 91 


the Bible unfold the same theme, Messiah, His suf- 
fering and His glory. The greatest of all prophecies 
are written in the Book of Isaiah. Some twenty 
times Isaiah speaks of Him as the Holy One of 
Israel. The Messiah is Jehovah, the I AM; He is 
Creator and Redeemer. Israel is to be saved by 
Him; all the ends of the earth are invited to look 
unto Him and be saved. (Chapters xl-xlix.) 


But the Creator-Redeemer is manifested as a 
man, the seed of the woman. He is to be born a 
child, yet the child is, a Son given. ‘‘For unto us 
a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the 
government shall be upon His shoulder: and His 
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The 
Mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince 
of Peace” (Isaiah ix:6).2 As He is the seed of the 
woman, His supernatural birth is announced. 
(Chapter vii:14). We read of His character (Chap- 
ter xlii:1-3); of His message (Chapter xli:1-2); of 
His miraculous power which He would manifest 
(Chapter xxxv:6). Though He is Jehovah, the Re- 
deemer of Israel, He comes in humiliation, the Ser- 
vant of Jehovah. In five chapters the Servant’s 
path is traced prophetically (Chapters xlix-liv). 
It finds its goal in the fifty-third chapter. Here 
prophecy pictures the Holy One, the Creator- 
Redeemer, as despised and rejected, bearing the 
griefs and sorrows of others; wounded for their 
transgressions, bruised for their iniquities. He is 
seen carrying the iniquities of all, when as a lamb 


9Some critics have stated that inasmuch as Isaiah says, 
**A child 1s born, a son is given,’ the prophecy could not 
mean Christ, who was born 700 years after this was written. 
The objection is puerile. The prophet is projected into the 
future and beholds that which is to come as already accom- 
plished, 


92. The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


he was brought to the slaughter, and opened not 
His mouth. He made His soul an offering for sin; 
He was stricken for the transgression of His people. 
He died, but rose from the dead, and entered into 
glory. 

What power has blinded the understanding of 
men who claim superior scholarship to attempt the 
denial of these prophecies? What power is it which 
leads them to suggest different theories to explain 
away the supernatural character of these predictions, 
so that the only Saviour of man might be discredited? 
What credulity is needed to accept their “‘findings”’! 
If this progressive unfolding of Messianic prophecy 
is the production of human genius, why, then, is 
such a production confined to the Hebrew race exclu- 
sively, and nothing like it found anywhere else? 

The most prominent invention is the theory that 
the Messiah is not a Person, but the nation Israel. 
This theory is taught by Reformed Judaism, and 
has been accepted by the Destructive Critical 
School. It is taught in all the Modernistic semin- 
aries, like Union Theological Seminary of New York, 
and other institutions of the leading denominations. 

Let Rabbi Browne speak once more. After de- 
claring in his book that the five books of Moses 
were mostly written after the Babylonian exile, that 
the many myths and taboos found in the Penta- 
teuch strikingly resemble those of the Babylonians, 
that the priestly law-code is post-exilic, he writes: 
“This Jewish law-code was prepared solely in anti- 
cipation of the day when the old Messianic promise 
would be fulfilled. No one seemed to know just 
when that day would come; but all expected it in 
the near, the very near future. And the greatest 
prophet of the exile, that unnamed genius whom we 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 93 


call Deutero (second) Isaiah, pictured the glory of 
that day in words that the Jews never forgot. He 
brought the self-exaltation of Israel to its climax, 
investing the future of the people with a dignity 
and a significance such as no earlier prophet had 
dreamed of. According to this unnamed prophet, 
the whole people of Israel was the Messiah, ‘the 
Anointed One.’ All Israel was ‘the suffering ser- 
vant of the \Lord,’ the ‘light unto the Gentiles, 
that the Lord’s salvation may be unto the end of 
the earth. . . . Such was.the Gospel of that 
unnamed Jew whose words are recorded in Chapters 
40-55 of the Book of Isaiah.’’ 19 


Logically this interpretation, that Israel, the na- 
tion, is the Messiah, is impossible. The Servant of 
Jehovah is an individual and not a nation. The 
way the Critics attempt to overcome this difficulty 
we cannot follow here. Let us remember this mod- 
ern interpretation is unknown in the earliest Rab- 
binical literature.!! The great scholars of Chris- 
tianity, whose learning and piety made them master- 
teachers, never doubted the ancient Jewish, as well 
as historic Christian, interpretation of the suffering 
Servant of Jehovah, the sin-bearer, as being the 


Messiah. 


Isaiah the prophet also beheld the glory of the 
Messiah and the glory of His Kingdom. He and 
his contemporary, Micah, predicted a glorious future 
for Israel, the nations, and even for creation itself. 
Jerusalem is to become the great center of the 
future kingdom. Nations will learn war no more. 
They will turn their swords into plowshares and 


10°'This Believing World,” p. 224. 


"The reverend and ancient book Zohar interprets Isaiah 
lili as meaning the Person of Messiah, 


94 The True Origin and Growth of Religion 


their spears into pruning hooks. That which has 
been attempted, and is now being attempted among 
the leading nations, to outlaw war, will then come 
to pass, when nations will learn war no more and 
when righteousness and peace will kiss each other. 
Groaning creation will find rest. ‘“The wolf also 
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall 
lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young 
lion together, and a little child shall lead them” 
(Isaiah xi:6). Other prophets add their God-given 
testimony. Ezekiel beheld the drama of the final 
conflict, and described the future house of the Lord, 
the returning Lord with His glory, the blessings which 
follow, and the dwelling of the Lord in the midst 
of His people. Daniel saw the Messiah, coming in 
the clouds of heaven to claim His kingdom. Prophet 
after prophet speaks of the Messianic hope. 

This hope never died in Israel. It is still alive 
today. Without this hope the whole history of Israel 
and its preservation is an unsolvable enigma. 

Messianic prophecy and the Messianic hope reach 
back to the beginning of the race. Its promise is to 
bring man back into the fellowship of God, to bridge 
the gulf, to take away the curse, and bring righte- 
ousness and glory to this earth, so that finally heaven 
and earth join into a never ending ‘“‘Hallelujah.” 

All this cannot be accounted for on purely nat- 
uralistic ground. The only solution is the super- 
natural. Grant the existence of a supreme Being, 
all-intelligent, all-wise, all-loving, and the objections 
against the supernatural, brought by the finite mind 
of man, crumble into dust. 

We see then in the Old Testament something dif- 
ferent from the religious development of other 
nations. We behold a supernatural revelation. 


The True Origin and Growth of Religion 95 


That revelation makes known God and His char- 
acter; it brings God into history. God has spoken. 
He has spoken in Prophecy. For prophecy is not 
an empty dream. It promises what is nowhere else 
promised. 

Has the Messianic hope been realized? Is the 
world still waiting for this Messianic hope? What 
is Christianity? Is Christianity nothing but a reli- 
gious system? Is it a religion? Is Christianity 
final, or is man to discover another and a better 
religion? ‘These are the questions which will be 
answered in our concluding chapter. And vital 
questions they are. 


CHAPTER V 
Christianity 


Is Christianity a Religion? Such a question will 
occasion surprise in ngt a few minds, for we have 
accustomed ourselves to speak of heathen religions, 
of the Mohammedan religion, the Buddhistic reli- 
gion, and also of the Christian religion. The com- 
mon practice is to speak of the great religions of 
the world, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism and Con- 
fucianism, and then to include Christianity as one 
of the great world-religions. In doing so we put 
Christianity on the same level with these other reli- 
gions. The same is done with Him, who is not the 
founder of a religion, but something infinitely higher, 
the Lord Jesus Christ. He is often called’ the 
founder of a great religion, a great religious leader, 
and put into the same class with Zoroaster, Buddha 
Gautama, Confucius, Socrates and Mohammed. It 
is erroneous to call Christianity a religion, and it is 
equally erroneous to call the Lord Jesus Christ the 
founder of a religion. 

We have seen what the great religious systems of 
the world are. We have followed the growth of dif- 
ferent religions. We have learned something of their 
origin. We saw that the race knew God in the 
beginning, and that the sinful heart of man gave 
up the original knowledge of God as Creator. Poly- 
theism and other false worship followed; foolish 
philosophies were originated. Men tried to find that 
which cannot be discovered by searching, to know 
that which is unknowable so far as man’s power is 
concerned, to satisfy the craving of his soul and to 
be back in the fellowship of God. Such is the his- 
tory of religion. 

96 


Christianity 97 


Is then our Christianity such an attempt to solve 
the problems of human existence, a searching for the 
truth, or a philosophical effort to explain God, the unt- 
verse, man, his origin and relation to the supreme 
Being? If so, then it is a religion and must be 
classed with the other existing religious systems, 
which have been in the past and which are in the 
world today. If such is the case then Christianity 
is as unable to give assurance to man, or to satisfy 
the soul-hunger of man, or to bring man back to 
God, as the other religions are unable to accom- 
plish this result. If so, then Christianity is not 
trustworthy. Furthermore, we should be forced to 
look for something else, something which man needs 
and which is not found in Christianity. 

It would then be entirely logical, to say, as is 
being said today among the ever increasing ration- 
alists in Christendom, that since Christianity is a 
religion, it has defects as other religions have de- 
fects, that it is, for this reason, not the final religion. 
Modernism is aiming at this very thing. This move- 
ment tries to strip Christianity of certain elements, 
thus reducing it to a religion, and, having accom- 
plished this, to produce a new religion, better suited 
to the needs of the times than Christianity. This 
is the goal of Modernism. 

But is Christianity a religion? No! Christianity 
is supernatural revelation. 

We have learned that in the Old Testament is 
found the supernatural revelation of God. But 
Christianity is the highest of all supernatural reve- 
lation. What is supernaturally revealed in Chris- 
tianity is final; there can be no higher revelation 
than that which ts given in Christianity. If Chris- 
tianity is robbed of its supernatural character then 


98 Christianity 


it is a mere religion and has no more power to save 
man, to bring the knowledge of God to the starv- 
ing souls of men, than Buddhism, Brahmanism or 
Confucianism. This robbery of the supernatural ele- 
ment of Christianity is being carried on today. It has 
had its awful effects on the Oriental races with their 
religions. Ever since the ‘‘Parliament of Religions” 
during the World’s Fair in Chicago in 1894, Orientals, 
Hindus, Buddhists, and others, have considered the 
countries called “‘Christian’” a good field for their 
propaganda. They call Christianity a “sister-reli- 
gion,’ and some go so far as to claim that Bud- 
dhism has something better to offer. This serious 
situation is made worse by the fact that Modernism 
has its missionaries among those nations, not to 
save their souls from eternal night, but to produce 
in some way a feeling of kinship, and through west- 
ern influences lift them out of moral degradation. 
These missionaries in teaching Christianity elim- 
inate the supernatural. Instead of speaking of the 
eternal Christ, His Godhead and His great work, 
they speak of the ‘‘Christ-spirit,” as if the Christ- 
spirit had power to save man. 

We shall now see in what the supernatural reve- 
lation of Christianity consists. We shall point out 
seven supernatural facts found in Christianity, which 
are the evidences that Christianity is not a human- 
religious system, that it is not the result of a reli- 
gious evolutionary process. These are the seven facts. 

1. A Supernatural Foundation. II. A Supernat- 
ural Person. III. His Supernatural Work of Re- 
demption. IV. His Supernatural Survival. V. A Su- 
pernatural Message. VI. A Supernatural Power. 
VII. A Supernatural Future Manifestation and Con- 
summation. 


Christianity 99 


1. 4 Supernatural Foundation. The foundation 
of Christianity is the supernatural revelation in 
that part of the Bible which we call the Old Testa- 
ment. It has been assumed that Christianity or, 
as is generally said, the Christian religion was de- 
veloped from Judaism. If this were true, then 
Christianity also might be looked upon as being 
the product of evolution in the realm of religion, 
and if so, then what hinders Christianity from being 
ousted by another evolutionary religious system? 

But Christianity is not fully developed Judaism. 
It is the confirmation of the God-revelation in the 
Old Testament; it is the fulfilment, or at least 
partial fulfilment of the supernaturally revealed 
Messianic hope; it is crowning God-revelation in 
the manifestation of Him whose coming had been 
announced for thousands of years, and finally, it is 
in Him and through Him, the highest revelation of 
the Fatherhood of God and the highest possible re- 
demption and glory of those human beings who 
believe and accept this revelation. Such is Chris- 
tianity. 

The basis of all is the Old Testament supernat- 
ural revelation. Without this foundation the New 
Testament would be a deception. And without Chris- 
tianity in 1ts supernatural character the Old Testa- 
ment revelation would be equally a deception unworthy 
of our confidence. 

But what is the drift of modern Theology? Look 
at its parentage. Bible Criticism which has become 
a destructive factor started in the eighteenth cen- 
tury. The man who is called the “Sir Isaac Newton 
of Criticism” is Jean Astruc. He was a French 
physician, a Freethinker, who led an immoral life. 
In 1753 he wrote a small volume on ‘“‘Conjectures 


100 Christianity 


Regarding the Original Memoirs in the Book of 
Genesis.” In this work Astruc quoted the two 
names of God used in Genesis, the names Elohim 
and Jehovah, and claimed that the use of these two 
names demonstrated that two different documents 
had been used in the composition of the book. He 
invented the hypothesis of an Elohist and Jehovist 
writer. It was reserved for a German rationalist, 
Professor Eichhorn, to formulate the denial of the 
unity and inspiration of Genesis into a system. He 
coined the phrase “‘Higher Criticism,’ and has been 
called the “father” of it. He introduced successfully 
the theory of Astruc into the theological institutions 
of Germany. On account of his learning the theory 
took hold of the minds of thousands. Who was 
Professor Eichhorn? Let another Critic answer. 
Ewald, himself such an advocate of this theory, 
wrote: “We cannot fail to recognize that, from the 
religious point of view, the Bible was to him a 
closed Book.” 

Such is the paternity of the now widely accepted 
Bible-Criticism. After Eichhorn came others, Pro- 
fessors Vater and Hartman, who tried to undermine 
the Mosaic authorship of Genesis by still another 
theory. Professor De Wette, of Heidelberg, followed 
closely in the steps of Eichhorn. Bleek improved 
the theory still further. Then we mention Hupfeld, 
Kuenen, Davidson, Robertson Smith, Canon Driver, 
George Adam Smith, Briggs, W. Harper, Marcus 
Dods, down to the present generation with such 
advocates of the theory as Drs. Shailer Mathews, 
Harry Emerson Fosdick, and others. Sir George 
Adam Smith, for instance, says what all Modernists 
believe today: that “the framework of the first 


Christianity 101 


eleven chapters of Genesis is woven from the raw 
material of myth and legend.” 

This destructive criticism is called “‘scientific.” 
Is it? Canon Dyson Hague has described the Pen- 
tateuch Criticism as follows: 


‘*They conjecture that these four suppositive documents 
were not compiled and written by Moses, but were probably 
constructed somewhat after this fashion: For some reason, 
and at some time, and in some way, someone, no one knows 
who, or why, or when, or where, wrote Jehovist. Then some- 
one else, no one knows who, or why, or when, or where, wrote 
another document, which is now called Elohist. And then 
at a later time, the critics only know who, or why, or when, 
or where, an anonymous personage, whom we may call Re- 
dactor I, took in hand the reconstruction of these documents, 
introduced new material, harmonized the real and apparent 
discrepancies, and divided the inconsistent accounts of one 
event into two separate transactions. Then some time after 
this, perhaps one hundred years or more, no one knows who, 
or why, or when, or where, some anonymous personage wrote 
another document, which they styled Deuteronomist. And 
after awhile another anonymous author, no one knows who, 
or why, or when, or where, whom we will call Redactor II, 
took this in hand, compared it with Jehovist and Elohist, 
revised them with considerable freedom and, in addition, 
introduced quite a body of new material. Then someone 
else, no one knows who, or why, or when, or where, probably, 
however, about 525, or perhaps 425, wrote the Priestly Code; 
and then another anonymous Hebrew, whom we may call 
Redactor III, undertook to incorporate this with the tripli- 
cated composite Jehovist, Elohist and Deuteronomist, with 
what they call radactional additions and insertions.” 


Professor William Henry Green, later Professor 
at Princeton, an able scholar, in his masterwork, 
‘*The Unity of Genesis” says: ‘“‘All tradition, from 
whatever source it is derived, whether inspired or 
uninspired, unanimously affirms that the first five 
books of the Bible were written by one man, and 
that man was Moses. There is no counter testi- 
mony in any quarter.” No answer to Professor 
Green’s great book has been published. 

The destructive criticism tends toward the ruin 


102 - Christianity 


of both the supernatural God-revelation and the 
prophetic element in the Old Testament, as well 
as the overthrow of the supernaturalism of Chris- 
tianity. It would rob us of everything. 


II. A Supernatural Person. Modernism calls that 
Person, Jesus, the Carpenter’s Son, or, the Prophet 
of Galilee, terms used nineteen hundred years ago 
by the Sadducees, the modernists of that period. 
We prefer to call Him, the Lord Jesus Christ, the 
eternal Son of God, Jehoshuah, the Jehovah-Saviour. 


We listen to Him in one of the great testimonies 
concerning Himself. ‘‘dnd He said unto them, Ye 
are from beneath, I am from above; ye are of thts 
world; I am not of this world” (John viii:23). } 


This sublime utterance was made in the presence 
of the religious Jewish teachers of that day. The 
testimony is unique. No religious teacher of the 
past ever dared to make such a statement. Zoro- 
aster, Buddha Gautama, Confucius, Laotze, Soc- 
rates, Plato and Mohammed never made a similar 
claim. Why not? Because they knew their origin 
was of this world, that they were from beneath. 
Yet some of these religious teachers and leaders were 
centuries later declared by their followers to have 
possessed divinity. But not one of them made such 
a claim as the Lord Jesus Christ did. These reli- 
gious leaders of past ages were teachers of ethics, 
who claimed to possess truth and light. But did 
any one of them ever say, as the Lord said, “I am 


1In our exposition of the “‘Gospel of John,” we give indis- 


putable evidence that the fourth Gospel is the work of the 
Apostle John, written by him towards the close of the first 
century. The historic evidence of the Johannine authorship 
is so perfect that the authenticity of the Gospel of John is 
as firmly established as the authenticity of the Synoptics. 


Christianity 103 


the Truth” and “I am the Light of the World?” 
They spoke of a way of approach to the Unseen; 
but none of them ever said: “I am the Way” or 
**I am the Door.” ‘They spoke of the soul-need of 
man, but none ever dared to say, “I am the Bread 
of Life; he that cometh to me shall never hunger; 
and he that believeth on me shall never thirst’ 
(John vi:35). They also spoke of life; but none 
ever declared “I am the Life,’ nor do we hear them 
giving the assurance, “‘Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
he that believeth on me hath everlasting life’? (John 
vi:47). They spoke of an hereafter: Buddha in- 
vented his meaningless Nirvana, and Mohammed 
his sensual heaven. None of these religious leaders 
ever said: “Let not your heart be troubled, ye be- 
lieve in God, believe also in me. In my Father’s 
house are many mansions: if it were not so I would 
have told you. I go to prepare a place for you” 
(John xiv:1-2). No religious teacher ever demanded 
worship for himself, even as the supreme Being is 
worshiped. But the Lord Jesus Christ said: “All 
men should honor the Son, even as they honor the 
Father. He that honoreth not the Son honoreth 
not the Father which sent Him” (John v:23). Those 
religious leaders spoke of the works of a higher being, 
or of gods; none ever said, ‘‘“My Father worketh 
hitherto, and I work”? (John v:17). Resurrection 
from the dead as a demonstration of the power of 
God is one of the great revelations of the Old Tes- 
tament. Only God can bring life out of death. 
The Lord Jesus Christ alone made the claim: “As 
the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth 
them; even so the Son quickeneth whom He will” 
(John v:21) and He demonstrated this power by 


104 Christianity 


raising the dead. Did Zoroaster, Buddha or any 
other religious leader ever make a similar claim? 
Did they ever raise the physically dead? 

But more than that. The Lord Jesus Christ 
claimed equality with God. He spoke of Himself 
as being one with God; He told His disciples that 
seeing Him meant seeing the Father. “I and My 
Father are one’ (John x:30). “He that hath seen 
Me hath seen the Father” (John xiv:9). He also 
claimed many times that He came into the world 
as the Sent One of the Father. “I came forth from 
the Father, and am come into the world: again, 
I leave the world, and go to the Father” (John 
xv1:28). Where do we hear in the realm of reli- 
gion a voice like His? Then He bore a definite 
witness as to His pre-existence. Before the aston- 
ished Jews He said: ‘‘Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
Before Abraham was, I am” (John viii:58). Their 
keen intellects realized at once that He claimed to 
be “Jehovah” the eternal, self-existing One, and 
they picked up stones to stone Him. Engaged in 
prayer, to which His eleven disciples listened, occu- 
pied in this holy exercise He uttered this request: 
*‘And now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with Thine 
own self, with the glory which I had with Thee 
before the world was’? (John xvii:5). 

All this confirms the fact that He is from above; 
that He is not of this world. He is supernatural. 
All the great attributes of Godhead are ascribed to 
Him throughout the New Testament Scriptures: 
Eternity, Immutability, Omnipotence, Omniscience 
and Omnipresence. He manifested these attributes 
when living on earth. He displayed the Creator’s 
power. The miracles He did are not superstitious 


Christianity 105 


fables; the record carries with it the deep attesta- 
tion of truth and genuineness. 

Let us look also at His moral glory as an evi- 
dence that He is from above and not of this world. 
Here the contrast with other religious teachers and 
leaders is equally striking and conclusive. He towers 
over and above every other human being. All reli- 
gious teachers and all others, though teaching mor- 
ality, were fallible, sinful, erring creatures. Some 
of them, like Mohammed, were even sensual im- 
postors. 

The Gospels show forth His perfect sinlessness. 
He never confessed sin. He taught His disciples 
to pray for forgiveness. He never asked for pardon. 
There is no hint of guilt anywhere nor is there the 
slightest trace of personal blameworthiness. He 
knew no sin, which means He had no sin-nature; 
and therefore He did not sin. He challenged His 
enemies to scrutinize His life and to convince Him 
of sin. There was no answer to this challenge. In 
every way He was undefiled; He was perfect. He 
never made a mistake; there was no need for Him 
to recall a single word, nor did He ever need to 
vindicate Himself or to retrace a single step. 

We also have the record of His superhuman 
knowledge. Well did Peter say, “‘Lord, Thou 
knowest all things.’”? He read Nathanael’s heart, 
and knew what happened under the fig tree (John 
i:4). He knew the whole life story of the Samaritan 
woman at the well (John iv:1-15). He knew the 
coin in the bottom of the lake, which a fish had 
picked up (Matt. xvii:24-27). He knew the heart 
troubles of His disciples, as He knew the secret plot- 
tings of His enemies. ‘‘He needed not that any 


106 Christianity 


man should testify of man; for He knew what was 
in man” (John ii:25). 

And His lovely character of meekness, lowliness, 
unostentatiousness, kindness, love and mercy! ‘The 
Gospel records have been called “‘terse”’; they cover 
but a fraction of His earthly life. Yet the record 
is so deep and inexhaustible that the last word can 
never be spoken. 

And so it is with His sublime teachings. They 
reveal the wisdom which is from above. Never man 
spake as this man, was the testimony of the officers 
sent to arrest Him (John vii:46). Other teachers 
gave instructions and also gave ethical teachings, 
mixed with puerile, unreasonable and foolish asser- 
tions. Why did the Lord Jesus Christ never teach 
anything which would appear nineteen hundred 
years later as unreasonable? 

The answer to all, and much more which we 
must pass by, is simply this, He is from above and 
not of this world. 

He is not the product of the human race. The 
law of evolution can never explain Him. If He 1s 
only a human being, a man ltke any other man, then 
His Person 1s an unexplainable enigma, which baffles 
all solution. 

The words we have quoted, “I am from above 

- » JI am not of this world” solve it all and 
explain everything. 

He was truly man. How did He become man? 
Since He was from above, pre-existent, one with 
God, sharing His holiness and righteousness, a nat- 
ural birth is beyond the range of possibility. If He 
came into human existence like any other human 
being, He would have had a fallen nature, the nature 
of sin. His self-witness of being not of this world 


Christianity 107 


would be untrue. All He was, His character, His 
words and His works, demand a supernatural en- 
trance into human existence. And such is revealed 
in the Holy Scriptures. He is the promised seed of 
the woman, the fulfilment of prophecy. He is the 
child born and the Son given, the One ‘“‘whose goings 
forth have been from of old, from everlasting” 
(Micah v:2).. In the very first chapter of the New 
Testament we read that He was “‘conceived by the 
Holy Spirit,” as was announced to His Virgin- 
mother, Mary of Nazareth, in fulfilment of Isaiah’s 
prophecy (Isaiah vii:14). His human body was 
called into existence by a creative act of the Spirit 
of Life and Power. This explains all and demon- 
strates the supernaturalness of Himself and His Life. 

Modernists tell us, after their futile attempts to 
impeach the reliability of Matthew’s and Luke’s 
account of the Virgin-birth, that it is really unes- 
sential whether we believe in such a biological mir- 
acle or not. It is all-essential, for without it we 
have no real Saviour, no divine Lord. And they 
also say that Christ never mentioned His Virgin- 
birth. What then did He mean when He said, 
“ITamfromabove . . . Iam not of this world?’ 
This is His testimony to His supernatural birth. It is 
the rock of Christianity. It confirms the God- 
revelation in the Old Testament. If this supernat- 
ural birth is abandoned, as it is today in a part 
of Protestant Christendom, the collapse of super- 
natural Christianity, with its assurance, its hope, 
comfort and peace, must inevitably follow. Those 
who accept this denial have stepped on the road 
which leads into the fog of uncertainty and finally 
into the night of despair. 

But how does Rationalism explain the fact that 


108 Christianity 


the Virgin-birth is recorded in the documents of 
Christianity, and that the Church has from the 
beginning held this faith? 

They tell us that there is a superstitious tendency 
in the human race to claim for the founders of dif- 
ferent religions, like Buddha Gautama, Zoroaster 
and others, a pre-human existence and a supernat- 
ural birth, and that, therefore, the Christian con- 
ception concerning Christ must likewise be looked 
upon as such a superstitious belief. Some claim 
that the Apostles derived their conception of Christ 
from this source, while others think it was the 
product of their own brains, because they were such 
enthusiastic admirers of Jesus. Still others have 
adopted the religious-historic method. They insist 
that when the founders of the Christian religion, 
the Apostles, abandoned Judaism, they absorbed 
these current superstitions in order to invest the new 
religion with the supernatural, and thus reproduced 
the legends of a supernatural birth in their belief, 
only in a highly developed form. 

Let us look at these claims. Without taking all 
the different religious leaders into consideration, we 
shall take as an illustration Buddha Gautama. We 
select him for the reason that Buddhists assert that 
Christianity has borrowed its teachings from Bud- 
dhism. German sceptics have also brought the 
charge that Christianity aped after Buddhism. 
Theosophists, so numerous: today, and Esoteric 
Buddhists, have taken hold of this false claim and 
have made much of it. Some Modernists have also 
fallen in line, even going so far as to claim that 
Christ Himself followed Buddha and taught as he 
taught, self-renunciation, etc. The Gospels, accord- 
ing to this theory, are in part a repetition of the 


Christianity 109 


life and the legends of Buddha. Another theory is 
that the Alexandrian Church worked over the Gos- 
pel story at a later date, introducing the record of 
a supernatural birth and other supernatural ele- 
ments. In other words, the Gospels are plagiarized 
and fraudulent documents, and therefore, untrust- 
worthy. The whole assertion is so very thin that 
some rationalistic scholars and thinkers have them- 
selves given an answer. 

For instance, Ernest Renan says of the Gospel 
of Mark that, “It is full of minute observations, 
coming doubtless from an eyewitness”; he also as- 
serts that the Synoptics, Matthew, Mark and Luke, 
were composed in substantially their present form, 
by the men whose names they bear. They were 
not later embellished by legends and myths. As they 
were written in a historic age they were open to 
serious challenge. But in vain do we look for any 
contradiction in contemporary history. 

Who was Buddha? According to Buddhist au- 
thorities, Gautama was born in the sixth century 
B. C., as the son of a prominent Rajah, about 
eighty miles from Benares. His mother, the prin- 
cipal wife of the Rajah, was for many years child- 
less and died not long after the birth of this her 
only son. He married in his youth and lived a life 
of pleasure. After the birth of a son, certain mor- 
bid tendencies came to a head. He left secretly 
his magnificent palace and began a life of asceticism. 
For a number of years he tried Hindu self-mortifi- 
cation, which almost made an end of his life. Then 
he abandoned asceticism and became atheistic. He 
passed through great struggles. Sitting under the 
shade of an Indian fig tree, the famous Boddhi tree, 
he finally gained the victory. He began to preach 


110 Christianity 


self-emancipation as the way of life. Thus began 
his career as ‘“The Enlightened.”? He was now a 
Buddha and claimed to have obtained Nirvana. 
Then he gathered groups of disciples, whom he 
formed into an order of mendicants; he also organ- 
ized female followers into a society of nuns. The 
idea, invented many centuries later, that he left 
his palace to become a saviour, is totally uncon- 
firmed by the earliest Buddhist literature. He be- 
came a Buddha when he was thirty-five years old, 
and died a natural death from indigestion when 
eighty. Before his death his system had attained 
a very wide popularity. This is the best and most 
reliable information gained from Buddhist literature 
several centuries before Christ. 

The Buddhist Legends. ‘There are many legends 
which cluster round the life and work of Buddha 
Gautama. The Buddhist Canon was fixed by the 
Council of Patna 242 B. C. In vain do we look 
in this Canon for these Buddhist legends, as to 
his divinity, pre-existence, and supernatural birth. 
They were then (some 200 years after his death) 
unknown. Yet these legends which came later to 
the foreground are generally taken, by Theosophists 
and others, to be the source of a good part of the 
story of Christ in the Gospels. 

These legends are “‘drawn from certain poetical 
books written much later, and holding about the 
same relation to the Buddhist Canon that the ‘Para- 
dise Lost’ and ‘Paradise Regained’ of Milton bear 
to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments. 
Who would think of quoting ‘Paradise Lost’ in any 
sober comparison of Biblical truth with the teaching 
of other religions?’’? 


2Oriental Religions and Christianity, p. 162. 


Christianity 111 


The fact is that these legends about Buddha and 
his supernatural origin cover at least two centuries 
before Christ and almost six centuries after Christ. 
There is more than a grave suspicion that some of 
them are imitations of what is written as to Christ 
in the New Testament. ‘The inventors of these 
legends evidently wanted to link the name of Buddha 
with Christ, just as Hindus have named Him as an 
incarnation of Vishnu for the western world, as was 
Krishna for the eastern. Buddha himself gives evi- 
dence against those legends, before they ever came 
into existence. He denied that he was divine, but 
distinctly claimed to be nothing but a plain man. 
He had no faith whatever in a divine revelation. 
He rejected the authority of the Vedas, which were 
acclaimed as inspired. All he knew he had acquired 
by himself. He was a teacher of self-salvation. He 
did not come to save men, to bring them back into 
fellowship with God; but he tried to show men 
the way by which they could save themselves.$ 


Let us now examine briefly a sample of the in- 
vented legends. The Birth-Stories of Ceylon (Ja- 
takas) represent him as having been born five hun- 
dred and thirty times, after he became a fore- 
ordained Buddha. As a specimen of his prepara- 
tory experience of being fitted for Buddhaship, this 
source informs us that he was born eighty-three 
times an ascetic, twenty-four times a Brahman, 
eighteen times a monkey; as a deer he appeared 
ten times, as an elephant six times, as a lion ten 
times. At least once he was a thief, a gambler, a 
frog, a hare and a snipe. He was also embodied 


8Christianity stripped of the supernatural, of the Cross 
and its blessed redemption, brings the same results: salva- 
tion by character. 


112 Christianity 


in a tree. And upon this ridiculous nonsense is 
based the assertion that he was pre-existent! 

Let us hear about his supernatural birth. Accord- 
ing to the so-called ‘‘Northern Legends,’ Buddha 
Gautama was incarnated for the purpose of bringing 
relief to a distressed world. He was miraculously 
conceived—entering his mother’s side in the form 
of a white elephant. All nature manifested its joy 
on the occasion. The ocean bloomed with flowers; 
all beings from many worlds showed their wonder 
and sympathy. Many miracles were wrought even 
during his childhood, and every part of his career 
was filled with marvels. At his temptation Mara, 
representing Satan, came to him mounted on an 
elephant sixteen miles high and surrounded by an 
army of demons eleven miles deep. Upon such 
foolish inventions rests the assumption of Modern- 
ists that the Incarnation of our Lord, His Virgin- 
birth, is also an unbelievable legend. If the birth 
account of Christ had in it the statement of an 
elephant sixteen miles high, or similar nonsense, its 
rejection would be more than warranted. But put 
over against such delusions the simple, chaste and 
reasonable account of the Virgin-birth of the Son 
of God. : 

The heavenly messenger said to Mary of Naza- 
reth: ‘Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, 
and bring forth a son, and shalt call His name, 
Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the 
Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give 
unto Him the throne of His father David: and He 
shall reign over the house of Jacob forever; and 
of His kingdom there shall be no end.” And when 
Mary answered, “How shall this be, seeing I know 
" 4Oriental Religions and Christianity, p. 164-168. 


Christianity 113 


not a man?” the Angel gave her this information: 
“The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the 
power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: there- 
fore also that holy thing which shall be born of 
thee shall be called the Son of God”? (Luke i1:31-35). 
It is so simple, and yet so deep that the depths 
have never been sounded! 

The Buddha and other legends and similar fables 
came into existence centuries after these religious 
teachers lived. No such thing happened in regard 
to the Gospel records, though we are often told 
that the supernatural facts in the life of Christ, 
His birth, His miracles and other events were added 
later; that they cannot be trusted, and that hence 
they must be considered forgeries. The historical 
evidences of the Gospel records, their genuineness 
and reliability, are so strong that the charge brought 
against them that later hands added legends, looks 
to the writer like a wilful attempt to undermine 
their authority. 

We cannot even attempt to follow similar legends 
in connection with Zoroaster and other religious 
teachers. All, every one of them, are from beneath. 
All, every one of them, are of the world and breathe 
the things of the world. Only One is from above 
and not of this world, Jesus Christ, the Son of the 
living God. 

III. His Supernatural Work of Redemption. ‘The 
Lord Jesus Christ, the God-Man, constantly used 
two expressions which demonstrate His pre-existence 
and also the work which He came to do. These 
two expressions are “J came’ and “I am sent.” No 
natural man can claim consciousness of having come 
into existence to accomplish a certain great work; 
nor can a natural man say that he is conscious of 


114 Christianity 


having been sent directly by God, and then in inti- 
mate fellowship with God to fulfill his divinely 
appointed mission. Certain men may have claimed 
to have come, and to have been sent, as instru- 
ments of God, but their claims were self-deception 
and hallucination. 

But let us listen to the claims of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. ‘‘For the Son of Man is come to save that 
which was lost”? (Matt. xviii:11). ‘“The Son of Man 
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister and 
to give His life as a ransom for many” (Mark x:45). 
“IT am come in My Father’s name” (John v:43). 
“I am not come of Myself, but He that sent Me 
is true, whom ye know not” (John vii:28). “I pro- 
ceeded forth and came from God; neither came I 
from Myself, but He sent Me” (John viii:42). “Iam 
come a light into the world” (John xii:46). ‘‘And 
no man hath ascended up to heaven, but He that 
came down from heaven, even the Son of Man which 
is in heaven” (John iii:13). “‘I came down from 
heaven, not to do Mine own will, but the will of 
Him that sent Me” (John vi:38). “I am the living 
bread which came down from heaven”’ (John vi:41). 
*‘And the Father Himself who hath sent Me, hath 
born witness of Me. . . . and whom He hath 
sent ye believe not”? (John v:36, 38). “The living 
Father hath sent Me” (John vi:57). He spoke of 
Himself in prayer as the Sent One (John xviu:3, 21, 
23.025) 

Such assertions as these demand His pre-existence 
and the execution of a work for which He was sent, 
and for which He came into the world. What was 
this work? Did He come to be a reformer, to advo- 
cate the abolition of certain then existing evils, like 
slavery? Did He come to live before men a perfect 


Christianity 115 


human life so that they might imitate His example? 
Did He come to be a way-shower? Or did He come 
to bring a philosophy which explains the mysteries 
of life? Or was it for the purpose of founding a new 
and more satisfactory religion? 

If any of these things as well as others unmen- 
tioned, were the object of His coming and of His 
work on earth, then He would be upon the same 
level with reformers, good, moral men, philosophers 
and founders of religions, who preceded Him. Into 
this class He is put by all who deny the real object 
of His mission for which God, His Father sent Him. 

But let us proceed at once to the work which He 
came to do, and the reason He was sent from above. 
He came to seek and to save that which 1s lost. He 
was sent to be the Saviour and Redeemer of man. 

It is very true that in His coming we havethe 
highest God-revelation. He is the image of the 
invisible God; in His Person God was made visible. 
*“No man hath seen God at any time; the only 
begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, 
fie hath declared Him’?) (John) 1:18): It 1s: very 
true that He brought God down to man. But how 
is man to be brought back to God? His incarna- 
tion could not accomplish this greatest need. Nor 
could His words of wisdom and comfort, His blame- 
less, holy life bring this about. 

Who is going to answer the age-long question, 
“How can a man be just with God?’ Man needs 
salvation. How can he be saved? The human race, 
as we have seen, possessing God and sin conscious- 
ness, bowed down with the burden of guilt, has 
struggled unsuccessfully to find an answer. Every- 
where in the history of religion from its very start - 
we find sacrifices and self-mortification as means to 


116 Christianity 


remove sin and guilt consciousness. ‘They were all 
in vain. The chasm between a holy God and sinful 
man remained unbridged. Man could not himself 
find his way back to God. He tried self-improvement 
and good works; but all in vain. Job voiced the 
failure of such attempts. “If I wash myself with 
snow water, and make my hands as never so clean;- 
yet shalt Thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine 
own clothes shall abhor me” (Job ix:30, 31). If 
man is to know the way back to God and to know 
how he can be reconciled, God alone can give him 
this knowledge. Not man, the offender, can dic- 
tate terms of peace and reconciliation to the Being 
whose laws he has broken, but the offended One 
must state the terms which suit His own holy char- 
acter and on which He can afford to display His 
divine mercy. 

Has God done this? If He has done so, if He 
has made known the way back to Himself whereby 
man can once more enjoy His fellowship and call 
Him (as a forgiven sinner) “my God and my Father,” 
this way must be found unmistakably in His own 
self-revelation. And the way He has made known 
must satisfy His eternal righteousness, must vindi- 
cate His holiness, and must also make known His 
character of Love and Mercy. If His self-revelation 
concerned only His Omnipotence, His Omniscience 
and His Omnipresence, and not the needs of a world 
of sinners and how those needs have been met, it 
would be an insufficient revelation omitting the 
most vital object. 

The Bible answers all. In the Old Testament 
revelation we find more than a revelation of a com- 
ing Redeemer; we find also the work of that Re- 
deemer, showing that He is the One who brings 


Christianity 117 


man back to God, and procures for man redemption 
and acceptance with God. This great work can be 
traced throughout the Old Testament, in history, 
in divinely appointed institutions of a typical char- 
acter, and in direct prophecies. Although such a 
statement is met by the ridicule of certain religious 
leaders, we shall pass over their denials; the posi- 
tive and constructive teaching of the divine revela- 
tion is the best answer. 

Next to the first prophetic promise (Genesis iii:15) 
we have an act of God, which is the beginning of a 
line of salvation-revelation, extending through the 
entire Bible and which finds its glorious end in the 
work of the Lord Jesus Christ as the Redeemer of 
men. “Unto Adam also and to his wife did Jehovah 
Elohim make coats of skin” (Genesis iii:21). The 
man and the woman tried to cover their nakedness, 
but the fig leaves were insufficient. Then God pro- 
vided a covering. An innocent creature, presum- 
ably, hadtobeslain. Its blood was shed and through 
this sacrificial act the man and the woman received 
the garment which covered their nakedness. Abel 
knew, undoubtedly, the meaning of it, and there- 
fore “he offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice 
than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he 
was righteous, God testifying of his gifts, and by it 
he being dead yet speaketh” (Hebrews xi1:24), for 
Abel died for his brother’s sin. To follow this great 
line of salvation-revelation in every detail would fill 
a volume itself. We but trace the strong and out- 
standing marks of it. 

Immediately after Abraham had believed, this 
belief being counted to him for righteousness, the 
father of the faithful brought sacrifices which were 
commanded by God: an heifer, a goat, a ram, a 


118 Christianity 


turtle-dove and a pigeon. Later in the sacrificial 
code of Israel these sacrifices became very promi- 
nent, not only for the present need of His chosen 
people, but also as prophetic types of one great con- 
summating sacrifice not brought by God’s people 
but by the Lord Himself. Isaac is the seed prom- 
ised to Abraham; he foreshadows another, even 
Him who is the seed of the woman. Was it only 
as a test that Abraham was commanded ““Take now 
thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, 
and get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer 
him there for a burnt offering’? (Genesis xxii:1-2)? 
It was a test, but also a prophetic picture of the 
greatest event of human history. 

Israel is in Egypt. A night of death and judg- 
ment comes for that land. His people must be shel- 
tered and delivered. They are commanded to take 
lambs. The head of a house follows the divine 
directions and chooses a lamb without blemish. 
But it is not sufficient to take this lamb in its per- 
fect condition and present it when the angel of death 
goes from house to house. It has to be slain and 
the blood has to be put on the lintel and the two 
side posts of their dwellings. Jehovah said, “I am 
Jehovah. And the blood shall be for you a token 
upon the houses where you are, and when [I see 
the blood, I will pass over you” (Exodus xii:13). 

The blood-delivered people received directions 
through Moses to build a place for. worship, con- 
structed after a heavenly pattern. How insignifi- 
cant that tabernacle was in comparison with the 
great and magnificent temples of Egypt and other 
nations who erected then their religious edifices! 
A priesthood was instituted. In that place of wor- 
ship Jehovah was visibly present in a symbol of 


Christianity 119 


His own holy and unapproachable character. The 
approach into His presence was only possible by 
blood. Offerings and sacrifices were brought con- 
tinually, year in and year out, not at certain times 
only, but daily. In that worship blood was the 
leading thing. All was dedicated and all was wor- 
ship by blood, and blood alone. ‘‘For when Moses 
had spoken every precept to all the people according 
to the law,.he took the blood of calves and goats, 
with water and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and 
sprinkled both the book, and all the people, Saying, 
This is the blood of the testament which God hath 
enjoined unto you. Moreover he sprinkled with blood 
both the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the min- 
istry. And almost all things are by the law purged 
with blood, and without the shedding of blood there 
is no remission” (Hebrews ix:19-22). 

Once a year the God-appointed high priest went 
into the holiest, ‘not without blood, which he of- 
fered for himself, and the errors of the people” 
(Hebrews ix:7). The whole Levitical institution, 
the tabernacle, its altars and furniture, the different 
sacrifices, the offerings, and everything else down 
to its minutest details, foreshadows the great redemp- 
tion to come, and contains a marvelous wisdom, 
which, under the enlightening influence of the Spirit 
of God, shows forth redemption in its different 
phases. To say, as is said, that these institutions 
and ceremonies were copied from Babylonish wor- 
ship and introduced into Israel after the exile is 
historically untrue. 

But all these sacrifices, the lambs, bulls and goats 
with all their blood could not give rest and peace, 
nor could they take away sins. They were but 
shadows. “For the law having a shadow of good 


120 Christianity 


things to come, and not the very image of the things, 
can never with those sacrifices which they offered 
year by year continually make the comers there- 
unto perfect. For then would they not have ceased 
to be offered? because that the worshipers once 
purged should have had no more conscience of sins. 
For in those sacrifices there is a remembrance made 
again of sins every year. For it is not possible that 
the blood of bulls and of goats should take away 
sins” (Hebrews x:1-4). But why were they insti- 
tuted, if the blood of those sacrifices could not take 
away sins? ‘They were for the believing Israelite the 
objects of faith. He looked to the future for a ful- 
filment of what those sacrifices foreshadowed. They 
were “‘the shadow,” and only the shadow “‘of good 
things to come.” 

So it is with the serpent of brass. One look to 
the serpent on a pole was sufficient to give life to 
the dying Israelites (Numbers xxi). All this and 
much more is prophetic of the Redeemer’s great 
work. But there are also direct prophecies. Such 
we find in the Psalms and in the prophetic Books. 

These prophecies cannot be interpreted as referring 
to “certain unknown individuals,” nor can they 
point towards the experiences of the writers, such 
as King David. Much less can they be explained 
by the nation Israel. They speak of a Holy One. 
It is true that Israel in certain passages is spoken 
of as the Servant of Jehovah, called to serve, and 
ultimately becoming that, which Israel has never 
yet been. But the Servant of Jehovah, so wonder- 
Person is Jehovah Himself manifested in the flesh, 
the Immanuel. He, by His work, is the Redeemer 
of Israel. That Servant is the God of Israel. “Israel 


Christianity A 


shall be saved in Jehovah with an everlasting sal- 
vation” (Isaiah xlv:17). ‘‘There is no God else 
beside Me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none 
beside Me. Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all 
the ends of the earth, for I am God and there is 
none else” (Isaiah xvl:21, 22). Let some Modernist 
or Jewish Rabbi explain Isaiah xlix:5-12 as meaning 
nothing but the nation! It is the story of Jehovah, 
the Saviour, fehoshuah. He is seen formed from the 
womb (His Virgin-birth). His work with Israel is 
not successful. They despise Him. But the Gen- 
tiles receive the light, and “by the fall of Israel 
salvation comes,” through Him, ‘‘to the Gentiles’’ 
(Romans xi:11). The despised One has a glorious 
reward. They come from everywhere to worship 
Him, while He delivers those who sit in darkness. 
It is not Israel, but Jehovah, as Servant, who tells 
out His suffering when we read: “I gave My back 
to the smiters, and My cheeks to them that plucked 
off the hair; I hid not my face from shame and 
spitting’ (Isaiah 1:6). 

Then follows in Isaiah that matchless chapter 
which shows the Servant despised and rejected of 
men, stricken and afflicted; yea, bruised by Him 
who sent Him. He suffers not for His sins; He 
could not suffer for His iniquities, for He is the 
Holy One. But He suffers for others. He is wounded 
for transgressions; He is bruised for iniquities, not 
His own; iniquity is laid upon Him; His stripes 
bring healing; His holy soul was made an offering 
for sin. And as a result of this substitutionary suf- 
fering, this Servant of Jehovah in whose mouth 
there was no deceit,5 who had done no violence, 


°Ho, all ye Modernists, please apply this for us to the 
nation Israel! 


Wed Christianity 


receives glory. By His knowledge the righteous 
Servant, because He bore the iniquities of others, 
shall justify many. He is to have a seed and shall 
see the travail of His soul. This glorious chapter 
ends with three great statements: He was numbered 
with the transgressor; He bore the sins of many; 
He made intercession for the transgressors. 

This great prophecy of the suffering of the Holy 
One of Israel, who is Jehovah, by whom and for 
whom all things were created, who, according to 
prophecy, was to come to this earth in the form 
of man, clothed with a human body, which was 
formed by the Spirit of God, is the great and un- 
shakable revelation of the redemption work which 
man needs in order to be “just with God,” the 
work which alone can bring man back to God. 

Without touching upon other prophecies® let us 
turn at once to the Work of Christ. The great 
redemption work foreshadowed and predicted in 
the Old Testament was fulfilled by Him. The work 
which brings man back to God is the work of the 
Cross and not the work of His character and holy 
life. His death, sacrificial and not as a martyr, re- 
veals God’s plan and God’s terms of redemption, 
and also makes known the wisdom of God, as to 
how He can bea Just God and a Saviour. ‘The recon- 
ciliation was effected by the death of the Son of 
God, the Lord Jesus Christ. Peace was made in 
the Blood of the Cross. The unbridgeable chasm 
between a holy God, a God of Light, and unholy 
man in the darkness of sin, which human religions 
tried unsuccessfully to span, is bridged. God Him- 


6We quote some of the other outstanding prophecies which 
also predict the Messiah. Psalms xxii, lxix, cix; Micah v:1; 
Zechariah ix:9-11; xi:12-13; xiii:7; and many others; includ- 
ing Jonah and his typical experience. 


Christianity 123 


self put across that great chasm the Cross of His 
Son. This is the only way open for lost man. The 
Cross is the meeting place of a holy, righteous God 
and the lost sinner; and there, yes, there alone 
God can kiss lost man, press him to His bosom, 
and lift him out of his guilty distance into the 
eternal sunshine of His Father love. ‘There, yes 
there alone, is found hope for the hopeless, help 
for the helpless, peace for the restless, unspeakable 
joy for the joyless, and perfect justification for the 
condemned. But let us draw nearer. 

He who is from above and not of this world came 
to do this. Frequently He spoke of an hour for 
which He had come from above. ‘‘Mine hour is 
not yet come.”” And when this hour looms up, when 
-the shadow of the cross falls across His human 
path, we hear Him say ‘‘Now is My soul troubled; 
and what shall I say? Father save Me from this 
hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour’ 
(John xii:27). That hour was appointed by God in 
His omniscience before the foundation of the world, 
for the Cross was with God not an afterthought but 
His forethought. ‘‘Wherefore when coming into the 
world, He saith, Sacrifice and offering Thou would- 
est not, but a body hast Thou prepared Me (His 
Virgin-birth). In burnt offerings and sacrifices for 
sin hast Thou had no pleasure. Then I said, Lo, I 
come (in the volume of the book it is written of 
Me) to do Thy will, O God” (Hebrews x:5-7). The 
eternal salvation will of God is accomplished in the 
Cross. To that Cross every sacrifice in the Jewish 
dispensation points, as well as the sprinkled blood 
and the ministration of the high priest. John, the 
forerunner, knew all this, for he bore witness of Him 


and His work when he said: ‘‘Behold the Lamb of 


124 Christianity 


God, which taketh away the sin of the world” (John 
1:29). 

In this great redemption work we are face to face 
with the supernatural. No finite mind can compre- 
hend the full meaning of the sufferings of the Holy 
One, through which He passed from Gethsemane to 
Calvary, where He bowed His blessed thorn-crowned 
head and uttered the glorious victor’s shout, “‘It is 
finished!’ In the sentence pronounced upon man 
after his fall (Genesis i11:16-19) four words are men- 
tioned: sweat, thorns, sorrow and the dust of death. 
He who came to be the second man, the Lord from 
heaven, in the agony of His holy soul passed through 
such deep sorrow that “‘His sweat was as it were 
great drops of blood”? (Luke xxii:44). What awful 
physical pain followed! Mocked and crowned with 
a crown of thorns which was put upon His holy 
head, the outward symbol of the curse of sin, He 
was reviled and passed through all the suffering of 
which the Prophets and the Psalms had spoken. 
Unjustly condemned, He was put to death and 
nailed to a cross of shame. He suffered in Himself; 
He suffered from cruel men, energized by the power 
of darkness. 

However, nothing supernatural is connected with 
these sufferings, the crowning with thorns, the cruel 
scourging, the smiting of the face, the marring of 
the visage, the spitting, the nailing to the cross, and 
the mockery and ridicule heaped upon Him. If this 
were all that was needed to bring man back to God, 
to procure redemption to the uttermost and give 
the guilty conscience rest and peace, we might well 
hesitate and question. The mystery is deeper than 
the physical sufferings through which He passed in 
our behalf. The heart of the sacrificial death of the 


Christianity 125 


Son of God must be sought not in His own suffering, 
and suffering from men alone, but in His suffering 
from the side of God Himself, whose righteousness 
and holiness He shared, whose righteousness and 
holiness He only could meet and satisfy. What that 
meant is known to God alone. We can repeat the 
deep sayings of the Scriptures without being able 
to fathom that which is supernatural. It was God 
who dealt with Him as the substitute of sinners. 
“God made Him sin for us, who knew no sin; that 
we might be made the righteousness of God in Him” 
(2 Corinthians 11:21). He was made a curse for us 
(Galatians iii:13). God alone could make Him a 
curse for us; God alone could make Him sin for us. 
What happened in those three mysterious hours, 
when the Cross and the Lord of Life were en- 
shrouded in darkness, when He tasted death, deeper 
death than physical death, when His soul was made 
an offering for sin, can never be discovered. 

“My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me? 
(Psalm xxii:1; Matthew xxvii:46). Our pen rests. 
We stop and worship. 

It was then that He drank the cup filled with all 
that we deserve. It was then that He paid the price 
of our redemption. 

“Christ died for our sins according to the Scrip- 
tures.”” If He died for anything else, for anything 
less than that, then His death is more than an un- 
explainable act; it is the greatest injustice which 
ever happened, and if so, we would have to lift 
our mortal hand to heaven and charge the Throne 
of Righteousness with this unjust act. 

According to'divine’revelation death is in the world 
on account of sin. “The soul that sinneth it shall 
die.” Man dies, because the wages of sin is death. 


126 Christianity 


This harmonizes with the righteousness of God. But 
here is One who never sinned. Has death a claim 
on such a One? We answer “NO!” And He testi- 
fied to this fact, that His life could not be taken 
from Him. All attempts to kill Him were futile. 
Several times the Jews tried to stone Him. No 
stone could strike Him, neither could they cast Him 
down from a precipice, nor could the ship which 
filled with water sink. We speak of man as being 
*‘Mortal’’; was He mortal as other men are mortal? 
Then if He died as other men die, if He died for 
the principles He advocated, or as a martyr, or as 
an example, He too was a sinner and could not be 
the Saviour. If Christ did not die for our sins, 
then we are plunged back into hopelessness. Man 
must continue his endless and despairing search for 
righteousness and peace, and close his eyes to enter 
eternity without an assuring hope. 

But Christ died for our sins. The Rock of Ages, 
the Rock of Salvation, the Rock of Eternity, stands 
and will ever stand. Let them blast at this Rock. 
Let them try to dislodge the Stone of Israel, the 
cornerstone upon which all rests. That Stone will 
some day smite and grind His enemies to powder. 
(Daniel 11:34; Matthew xxi:44). 

And is it true that the Cross and its work has 
made peace and brings lost man back home to God, 
as a forgiven sinner, to be now a beloved child? 
Millions living in different continents give the an- 
swer. And from above millions more shout their 
“Hallelujah” as an answer. They all believed and 
still believe the fact of John ii:16: “‘For God so 
loved the world, that He gave His only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth on Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life,” 


Christianity 127 


LIV. His Supernatural Survival. The Lord Jesus 
Christ died on the Cross. His death was not a 
gradual ebbing away of life; there was no physical 
exhaustion. No physically exhausted man can cry 
with a loud voice as He did. ‘Jesus, when He had 
cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the spirit” 
(Matthew xxvii:50). It was the victor’s cry, the 
shout of triumph. He who had said that He would 
give His life, gave it on the cross. There was at once 
a supernatural answer attesting the value and the 
power of His redemption work. It was the heavenly 
“Amen” to His great utterance “It is finished”! 
“And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in 
twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth 
did quake, and the rocks rent”? (Matthew Xxvii:51). 
An unseen hand from above tore the heavy veil, 
which hung before the sacred part of the place of 
worship, the place into which the high priest every 
year entered with the sacrificial blood. And now 
there is no more need to part that veil once a year; 
another, a permanent way has been made, by which 
at all times the sinner can draw near unto God and 
face Him in His Holiness. A better blood has been 
shed; a better priest has made possible the access 
into the presence of God. 

In addressing his Hebrew Christian brethren the 
writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews says: “Having 
therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holi- 
est by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, 
which He hath consecrated for us, through the veil, 
that is to say, His flesh; and having a high priest 
over the house of God; let us draw near with a 
true heart in full assurance of faith. Mh 
(Hebrews x:19-22), All sacrifices of animals are 
now forever ended, nor is there a priest needed with 


128 Christianity 


his earthly ministrations. The Son of God, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, is both the sacrifice and the priest. 
The quaking earth and the rent rocks bore another 
supernatural testimony that Creation’s Lord had 
become Creation’s Redeemer. The Roman Cen- 
turion with his men who were witnesses of all, 
were deeply convicted, and these pagans testified, 
“Truly this was the Son of God!” 

He had died. There could be no mistake about it. 
A rationalistic theory, which is still held by some, 
claims that He had not actually died; He had only 
collapsed, but the invention is so ridiculous that it 
needs no further comment. His side had been 
pierced and blood and water had gushed forth, the 
evidences of His real death, as well as the redeem- 
ing and cleansing power of His work. 

He was buried; the Lord of Creation who rested 
on the seventh day when Creation had been fin- 
ished, rests again on the seventh day in a tomb; 
His work is finished. 

Could He rest there forever? Could His body 
share the fate of other human bodies? Can it be 
true of Him also, “Dust to dust and ashes to ashes”? 
Did that tomb, that new sepulchre, that rock hewn 
tomb, where He was laid in fulfilment of prophecy 
(Isaiah liii:9) remain sealed with the Roman seal 
and remain unopened? 

Modernism answers with a bold, Yes. It is the 
answer which infidelity has always given. If it 1s 
the right answer, then that unopened tomb in which 
the body of the Lord Jesus was laid to see corrup- 
tion would be the grave of all our hopes. 

What would it mean? It would mean that He 
was not the Son of God; that the words He spoke, 
“T am from above; I am not of this world,” are 


Christianity 129 


not true, that all His testimony concerning Himself 
must be dismissed as self-deception. It would mean 
that He is not the Virgin-born Son of God, and that 
therefore He must have been a sinner, who shared 
the common fate of the race when His body saw 
corruption. It would mean that all His sufferings 
cannot redeem man, for if His body remained in 
the grave, the death He died has no more meaning 
than the death of any other human being. It would 
mean that the wonderful revelation as to man’s 
redemption, made known throughout the Old Testa- 
ment, is a concoction of falsehood. Thus the foun- 
dation upon which Christianity rests would fall to 
pieces, and Christianity instead of being the highest 
revelation, would be nothing but a religious impos- 
ture. If this were true, then the race would be 
plunged into a night of endless despair and hope- 
lessness. 

But why should we write all this in our own 
words, when weightier words than ours are written 
in the New Testament? 

“Now if Christ be preached that He rose from 
among the dead, how say some among you that there 
is no resurrection of the dead? But tf there be no 
resurrection of the dead, then 1s Christ not risen; and 
if Christ be not risen, then 1s our preaching in vain 
(Modernists, take notice!), and your faith 1s also 
vain. Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God, 
because we have testified of God that He raised up 
Christ, whom He raised not up, tf so be that the dead 
rise not. For tf the dead rise not, then Christ 1s not 
raised. And if Christ be not raised, your faith 1s 
vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also which 
are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. If 1n this 
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men 


130 Christianity 


most miserable’ (1 Corinthians xv:12-19). This is 
the divine, unanswerable logic. 

And triumphantly the Spirit of God adds: “But 
now 1s Christ risen from among the dead.” 

It is true that the Modernist uses the word “resur- 
rection”! Yet he speaks of the resurrection of 
Christ in a far different way than Scripture speaks 
of it. He tells us that it is a “spzrttwal’” resurrection. 
Christ lives by His words, by His example, and 
by His spirit. So the Modernist constantly speaks 
of the “Christ-spirit.”’ Pardon, ye great scholars, 
but a “‘spiritual resurrection of Christ” is sheer 
nonsense! 

The New Testament does not teach such a spir- 
itual resurrection, but a physical resurrection. This 
physical resurrection of Christ is the cornerstone 
upon which hope and assurance rest. It is also 
claimed that the literal resurrection is undemon- 
strated; it is called unscientific. Science searches 
for facts; if reasonable facts are found, a theory 
is no longer a theory, but truth. The physical res- 
urrection of Christ is not an unproved theory, but 
it is truth, for it is proved by indisputable facts. 
Trustworthy documents, which no real scholarship 
has ever been able to impeach, give us these facts. 
The Gospel records contain them. Critics point to 
contradictions in the different accounts of the res- 
urrection of Christ; the claim is made that they 
cannot be harmonized. Under the careful and spir- 
itual search of the Christian who approaches these 
records not with doubt but with confidence, these 
seeming discrepancies become evidences of divine 
inspiration. If the writers of the Gospels had been 
impostors they would have taken care to avoid what 
might appear a “flaw” in their testimony; they 


Christianity 131 


would have made their accounts harmonious, so as 
to cover up their fraud. 

The fact remains that the tomb was empty; the 
body had disappeared. What became of the body 
of Jesus? How strange it is that the disciples who 
had heard Him speak so often of “rising from the 
dead on the third day’? should have forgotten all 
about it. It was ordered thus. But His enemies 
had not forgotten His sayings. They were familiar 
with them. ‘The day after Christ had died the 
chief priests and the Pharisees went before Pilate. 
“Sir,”? said they to the Roman Governor, “we remem- 
ber that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, 
after three days I will rise again. Command there- 
fore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third 
day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him 
away, and say unto the people, He is risen from 
the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the 
first”? (Matthew xxvii:63-64). Pilate had no love 
for the Jews; he hated them as only a Roman 
could hate. He was a politician. And so he con- 
sented: “Ye have your watch; go your way, make 
it as sure as ye can.”’ Was it sneer, or was it fear 
that the Man he had condemned, of whose guiltless- 
ness he was convinced, might rise again? 

An immense stone is put before the sepulchre; 
the sacred seal of Rome is placed upon it. A strong 
Roman watch is set. 

The next day the Roman watch rushes back to 
the city, frightened to death. There has been an 
earthquake. A supernatural being, with a shining 
countenance like lightning, with raiment white as 
snow, has suddenly appeared. ‘The stone is rolled 
away and the sacred seal has been broken. Then 
the women, who have gone to the sepulchre never 


132 Christianity 


expecting to find an empty tomb, hear the great 
news, “He is not here, for He is risen.” After a 
while they see the Risen One. His disciples, reluc- 
tant to believe, come and see the empty sepulchre. 
The watch, having recovered, does not go to Pilate 
to report what they have experienced. They make 
their report to the chief priests. A hasty council 
meeting is summoned. What is to be done? A Jew- 
ish trait comes to the foreground. Money is going 
to fix this matter. So they give large money unto 
the soldiers on the condition that they say, “His 
disciples came by night, and stole him, while we 
slept.” What about the Governor? ‘We will at- 
tend to him,” the chief priests assure the soldiers, 
‘We will see to it that you will escape punishment.” 
““So they took the money and did as they were 
taught” (Matthew xxviii). This fabrication, next 
to the assertion that Christ had not actually died, 
has been the stock in trade of infidels down to our 
own times. 

How can any sane man believe this? How could 
the watch know while they slept what was going 
on around them? How is it that the whole watch 
slept and committed an offense which Rome often 
punished with death? Their sleep was so sound 
that they did not hear the approaching disciples. 
How soundly they slept when that heavy stone 
was rolled away, that not one of them awoke to 
give the alarm! And when the disciples, carrying 
the lifeless body of Christ, stepped across the sleep- 
ing soldiers, not one of them was disturbed. After 
all, the frightened, scattered, cowardly disciples were 
not cowards at all. They were mighty, courageous 
men. ‘They risked their lives in stealing the body. 
Believe it if you can! 


Christianity 133 


“Tie showed Himself alive after His passion by 
many infallible proofs, being seen of His disciples 
for forty days.” Thus writes Luke, the beloved 
physician (Acts i:3). Paul writes, “He was seen 
of Cephas, then of the twelve; after that, He was 
seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of 
whom the greater part remain unto this present, 
but some are fallen asleep. After that He was seen 
of James; then of all the Apostles” (1 Corinthians 
xv:5-7). If five hundred men said they saw one 
alive who had died on a cross, and their witness 
is falsehood, what was their motive? Did they 
earn glory and earthly advantages by inventing a 
lie? What consciences these impostors must have 
had, that some of them died without making a 
clean breast of this colossal fraud, stating that they 
had seen one alive whose body was still in the grave. 

But is not Paul’s list of witnesses not incomplete? 
He forgot to mention the women. He was badly 
informed, some say. But the reason is a different 
one. The power which moved his pen restrained 
him from mentioning the women, for the reason 
that the Spirit of God knew that infidels in later 
times would charge the women with being hysterical 
and with having invented the resurrection story. 
So Paul is constrained to omit the testimony of the 
women, to show that their testimony can be dis- 
pensed with and that there are enough other wit- 
nesses to prove His physical resurrection. 

But there is still another witness, Paul the great 
Apostle himself. ‘‘And last of all He was seen of 
me also, as of one born out of due time” (1 Corinth- 
ians xv:8). He mentions himself last, though his tes- 
timony is not by any means the least. The famous 
Saul of Tarsus, the Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee, 


134 Christianity 


the proud religionist, the learned man and Roman 
citizen, had persecuted the Church. He hated the 
name of Christ. His mission was never realized. 
Instead of denouncing Christ he arose in a syna- 
gogue and preached that Christ Jesus is the Son 
of God. He went from synagogue to synagogue to 
give the same testimony. No wonder that every- 
one who heard him was amazed and said, “Is not 
this he that destroyed them which called on this 
Name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that in- 
tent, that he might bring them bound unto the 
chief priests?’ (Acts ix:21). 

How did this sudden conversion come about? 
Was it natural or supernatural? What efforts have 
been made to explain it in a natural way! Infidels 
and rationalists have surmised that it may have 
been a lightning stroke; others invented a theory 
that Paul suffered from epilepsy, which the Greeks 
called a holy disease. But the after life of this 
man cannot be explained by a thunderstorm, nor 
by an epileptic fit. How he suffered! What tor- 
tures and privations he endured on account of his 
unflinching testimony! And finally his faith and 
testimony resulted in the martyr’s death. There 
is no explanation of his conversion apart from the 
account which he gives himself. On the road to 
Damascus he had seen the risen Son of God in the 
glory light above; he heard His voice. He learned 
then that the Crucified One lives, that He is the 
Christ, the Son of God. Because of this supernat- 
ural experience Paul included himself in the list of 
witnesses of the physical resurrection of Christ. 

Two more evidences of His physical resurrection 
are of importance. The first is the worshipping true 
Church on earth. How did this body, unknown in 


Christianity 135 


the Old Testament, come into existence? The 
Church of Jesus Christ, a universal body, composed 
of Jews and Gentiles of every continent, worships, 
not on the Jewish Sabbath, but on the first day 
of the week. The true Church commemorates on 
that day the fact that Christ died and rose again. 
The Church is founded on the Rock of the Risen 
Christ, the Son of God. He said, “Upon this rock 
I will build My Church, and the gates of Hades shall 
not prevail against it” (Matthew xvi:18). History 
proves the truth of this promise. The Church will 
always worship thus; no infidelity and no Modern- 
ism can stop this worship. So will all future his- 
tory make good the statement of the Christ of God, 
that His Church can never be defeated. It is im- 
possible that this worship was started and main- 
tained for nearly two thousand years without the 
reality of the fact upon which it rests. The exist- 
ence of the true Church on earth, that organism of 
which Christ risen from the dead is the head, wit- 
nesses to His physical resurrection. 

The second witness is the individual true be- 
liever and his experience. The true believer knows 
Christ in an experimental way. He has found in 
Him a Saviour. He has tested His promise to give 
rest to those who come unto Him. He came to 
Him with a sin-burdened conscience, and, believing 
on Him, as the sin-bearer, the believer has been 
justified and given peace with God. He has believed 
on the Son of God risen from the dead and has re- 
ceived a new nature and in it eternal life. He has 
fellowship with Him, whom he knows as a friend. 
He prays to Him, seeks help and counsel from Him. 
He knows that He is the ever-living high priest, 
and comes to the throne of grace to find help in 


136 Christianity 


time of need. He experiences His power in the con- 
flict below; He receives from Him comfort and 
peace in sorrow and affliction. The believer’s life 
and experience is a witness that Christ is risen and 
lives at the right hand of God. 

Such are the indisputable evidences of His phys- 
ical resurrection. ‘Tell us, ye deniers of His literal 
resurrection, where is Christ today? Is He the glo- 
rified Man at the right hand of the Father? Is He 
for you the ever living priest and advocate? Can 
you pray to Him with confidence? If He is 
not risen from the dead, how could He have as- 
cended? If He did not ascend, how can He be 
present with God, appearing there in our behalf? 
And if He is non-existent as the First Begotten from 
the dead, how can He be, as the New Testament 
teaches, the Head of the new Creation and the 
Lord of all? 

The denial of His supernatural survival, His physi- 
cal resurrection, means the total destruction of the 
Christian faith and the faith of a Christian. 

V. The Supernatural Message. The supernatural 
facts we have briefly unfolded demand a supernat- 
ural message to the human race. It must be a 
message which is found nowhere else, far above any 
message of the world-religions, a message which is 
from above and not of this earth. Such a message 
is not contained in the Synoptics, which record the 
sayings, the teachings, and the parables of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Here is one of the errors of Chris- 
tendom. Many think, for instance, that the Sermon 
on the Mount contains this message. The “‘golden 
rule” is described as a message, and that Christ in 
giving this rule showed the way for the betterment 
of the race. It is also pointed out by the enemies 


Christianity 137 


of supernatural Christianity that Buddhism contains 
similar sayings, that Buddha Gautama taught at 
least some of the same truths which Christ taught, 
and that, inasmuch as Buddhism antedates Chris- 
tianity, Christ and His followers must have copied 
from this system. This assertion is groundless, for 
it has been proved conclusively that some of the 
supposed sayings of Buddha were copied from the 
Gospels and are not original. 

“It is in accordance with the very genius of Bud- 
dhism to borrow. It has absorbed every indigenous 
superstition and entered into partnership with every 
local religious system, from the Devil worship of 
Burma and Ceylon to the Taouism of China and 
Shinto of Japan. In its long continued contact with 
Christianity it has changed from the original athe- 
ism of Gautama to various forms of theism, and in 
some of its sects at least, from a staunch insistence 
on self-help alone to an out and out doctrine of sal- 
vation by faith. This is true of the Shin and Yodo 
sects of Japan. From recognizing no God at all at 
first, Buddhism had, by the seventh century A. D., 
a veritable trinity, with attributes resembling those 
of the Triune God of Christianity, and by the tenth 
century it had five trinities with one supreme Adi- 
Buddha over them all. Every one may judge for 
himself whether these later interpolations of the 
system were borrowed from the New Testament 
Trinity, which had been proclaimed throughout the 
East ten centuries before.’’? 

Modern Buddhism claims to go back to the orig- 
inal teachings of Buddha Gautama. One Buddhist 
authority makes the following declaration: ‘‘Bud- 
dhists teach the reign of perfect goodness and wis- 


™Oriental Religions and Christianity,” p. 167. 


138 Christianity 


dom without a personal god, continuance of individ- 
uality without an immortal soul, eternal happiness 
without a local heaven, the way of salvation with- 
out a vicarious saviour, redemption worked out by 
each one himself without any prayers, sacrifices and 
penances, without the ministry of ordained priests, 
without the intercession of saints, without divine 
mercy. These and many others which have become 
the fundamental doctrines of the Buddhist religion, 
were recognized by the Buddha in the night of his 
enlightenment under the Boddhi-tree.’’® 

The Modernist who has accepted this theory, that 
some of the sayings of Christ in the Gospel are of 
Buddhist origin, should listen to one of his own 
brethren. Professor Kuenen who had no use for 
supernatural Christianity, wrote, “I think we may 
safely affirm that we must abstain from assigning 
to Buddhism the smallest direct influence on the 
origin of Christianity.” 

The teachings of Christ given in the Synoptics 
transcend the precepts of all religious leaders of the 
past. Yet, while it is true that we do not find in 
them the great, supernatural message of Chris- 
tianity, we discover under careful study that this 
message is anticipated. It is different with the 
fourth Gospel, written by the Apostle John. Here 
we have teachings of Christ which are vastly dif- 
ferent from the words of Christ reported by Mat- 
thew, Mark and Luke. We cannot enter into all the 
reasons why the beloved disciple wrote this Gospel 
about forty years after the Synoptics had been writ- 
ten and widely circulated. We state but one. Dur- 
ing those forty years strange and erroneous teach- 
ings as to the Person and Work of Christ were 

8Buddhist Catechism, by Subhadra. 


Christianity 139 


advanced, and began to trouble the Church. The 
system which later wrought such havoc, Gnosticism, 
was started in that period; as well as others which 
have been revived in certain movements in the mod- 
ern world. It was then that the Spirit of God 
moved the aged John to record the words of Christ 
which silence all these errors. The authenticity of 
the fourth Gospel has been questioned; it has been 
assigned to the middle or end of the second century. 
If the Apostle John did not write this Gospel, will 
some critical scholar tell us who wrote it? The evi- 
dence is overwhelmingly on the side of the Johannine 
authorship. 

Here, then, we find the words of Christ which 
contain the foundation of the great supernatural 
message which Christianity brings to man. Peter 
voices the testimony of the whole Church when he 
says: “Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the 
words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure 
that Thou art that Christ, the Son of the living 
God” (John vi:68-69). ‘Two facts must here be 
remembered. The first is that all the teachings the 
Lord gives in the fourth Gospel as to eternal life, 
the free gift of it, and all that goes with it, are 
spoken in anticipation of His sacrificial death and 
His physical resurrection. The second, that it was 
not yet the full, the complete supernatural message. 
This we learn from His own words to the disciples. 
“T have yet many things to say unto you, but ye 
cannot bear them now. MHowbeit, when He, the 
Spirit of Truth, is come, He will guide you into all 
‘truth: for He shall not speak of Himself; but what- 
soever He shall hear, that shall He speak: and He 
will show you things to come. He shall glorify Me, 
for He shall receive of Mine, and shall show it 


140 Christianity 


unto you” (John xvi:12-14). He said, “I am the 
Truth”; He also spoke of the Word as being Truth; 
but here He speaks of the “Spirit of Truth,” that 
is, the Holy Spirit of God. In time he would make 
known the many things which the Lord Jesus did 
not fully reveal to His own. 

But the Spirit of Truth did not come as the final 
great revealer till the Lord Jesus had died, had 
risen from the dead, and had gone back to the 
Father (John vii:38-39). His coming and His reve- 
lation to give the full, supernatural message of Chris- 
tianity was dependent on the great sacrificial work 
of the Son of God, and on His glorification. We 
must turn to the Epistles, those great and inexhaust- 
ible documents of Christianity, to find the consum- 
mating, glorious and supernatural message. It was 
given after Christ finished the work He came to do, 
and after the Holy Spirit came to earth. 

God can now, after His Son has met His own 
righteousness and satisfied it, open the floodgates of 
His Love, and pour forth the riches of His Grace 
in Christ Jesus, more fathomless than the sea. Now 
are made known the secrets of His loving heart, 
which in former ages were unrevealed. Isaiah wrote 
seven centuries before Christ: “For since the begin- 
ning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived 
by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside 
Thee, what He hath prepared for him that waiteth 
for Him (Isaiah lxiv:4). The pious, God-fearing 
Israelite must have understood by these words that 
God had wonderful riches in store when He (the 
Messiah) should come, for whom they waited. In 
the New Testament this passage is quoted. “But 
as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the 


Christianity 141 


things which God hath prepared for them that love 
Him. But God hath revealed them unto us by His 
Spirit’? (1 Corinthians 11:9-10). As the context 
shows, it is the hidden wisdom of God ordained 
before the world unto our glory. 

The message is the Gospel of Christ. The word 
‘Gospel’? means ‘“‘good news.” In this Gospel is 
revealed the wisdom and the power of God. The 
chosen instrument to make this supernatural mes- 
sage known, to unfold it in all its simplicity and in 
all its glory is the Apostle Paul. He did not orig- 
inate this great message; nor did he receive it from 
some other Apostle. Rather was it given to him by 
revelation. “But I certify you, brethren, that the 
Gospel which was preached of me is not after man. 
For I neither received it of man, neither was I 
taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ” 
(Galatians 1:11, 12). 

The cry has been raised, “Back to Christ.” It 
sounds well, but it bodes ill. Paraphrased, it has 
this in it, “‘Back to Christ, and away from Paul.” 
Paul is charged with having, with his master mind, 
formulated a system of theology and eschatology. 
He is charged with having put together this Gospel 
and plan of salvation, making it rest entirely on the 
vicarious suffering of Christ, His resurrection, literal 
ascension, and literal return. It is said that the 
teachings of Christ in the Sermon on the Mount 
and His other ethical teachings have in them noth- 
ing of the doctrines of the Apostle. Paul conceived 
them all and promulgated them as his views. And 
so the cry is raised, ‘‘Back to the original teachings 
of Christ, to His philosophy of life; the Christ-spirit 
is what we need.” Then all kinds of erroneous 
statements are made, such as the teachings of the 


142 Christianity 


Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man, and 
it is claimed that Christ taught these things. Even 
Socialism is defended by the teachings of Christ. 

But Paul assures us that the Gospel he preached 
and taught was given him by the revelation of Jesus 
Christ. That Gospel is in itself the evidence that 
it is supernatural and not invented by the human 
brain. It is this Gospel which has the stamp of 
supernaturalism. 

What a message of grace and glory it is! So 
simple that the child can grasp it; so deep that 
no saint has ever fathomed its depths. It is the 
message of the Love of God. In this message, “‘God 
commendeth His love toward us, in that, while we 
were yet sinners, Christ died for us” (Romans v:8). 
This is the great expression of the Love of God. 
“In this was manifested the love of God toward us, 
because that God sent His only begotten Son into 
the world, that we might live through Him. Herein 
is love, not that we loved God, but that God loved 
us, and sent His Son to be the propitiation for our 
sins” (1 John iv:9, 10). Apart from this, knowledge 
of the love of God and the God of Love is impossible. 

In the Epistle to the Romans, in which the great 
man of God unfolds the Gospel of the salvation of 
God, the Spirit of God through him gives first a 
picture of the desperate condition in which the whole 
race, Jew and Gentile, is found. All are guilty before 
God. All are lost; the Jew with his unkept law, 
the Gentile without a law. Paul describes the de- 
gradation of the race. Man is found in a horrible 
pit of darkness and filth. There is no way out. 
Man has no strength to save himself. All the efforts 
he makes to leave the pit are unavailing. If he is. 
to be saved, God must save him. 


Christianity 143 


God reached down into this pit; His hand in sal- 
vation is His Son, the Lord Jesus Christ. What 
He has done, His blessed suffering and death on 
the Cross, enables God, in His righteousness, to save 
man in a righteous way. God maintains His righte- 
ousness and is just, and the justifier of him which 
believes in Jesus. Laying hold on the pierced hand 
of Christ, the helpless sinner is lifted out of the pit. 
He is declared justified, acquitted, for his guilt has 
been righteously met. He has peace with God, not 
through his own works, but through the work of 
another, even Christ. He is accepted, and the very 
love of God is shed abroad in his heart. He is no 
longer linked to the first man, from whom he re- 
ceived a nature of sin, but he is now in Christ the 
second man, whose righteousness, life and glory he 
shares (Romans v:12-21). Life and power are be- 
stowed, that he can live in righteousness and holi- 
ness. The filthy garments of unrighteousness and 
sin are gone, and the garment of righteousness, pro- 
vided by God in Christ, typified by God’s act in 
Eden, covers now the forgiven sinner. Sin has no 
more power and dominion over the saved believer; 
he needs no longer to serve sin, but can yield his 
members in a life of righteousness unto God. 

The way of salvation in Christ leads still higher 
in this Epistle. The summit is reached in the 
eighth chapter. It begins with the assurance that 
there is no more condemnation to those who have 
accepted the message and are found covered by the 
work of Christ and identified with Him; it ends 
with the assurance of no separation, in time and 
in eternity, from the Love of God, which is in Christ 
Jesus, our Lord. On this great peak the sonship 
of the forgiven sinner is declared, “And if children 


144 Christianity 


then heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus 
Christ.”” A forgiven past, a triumphant present, 
and a glorious, never-ending future! Justified and 
glorified! Then Paul utters his great, inspired shout, 
a shout in which all blood-washed sinners can join. 

“What shall we then say to these things? If God 
be for,us, who can be against us? He that spared 
not. His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, 
how shall He not with Him also freely give us all 
things? Who shall lay anything to the charge of 
God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he 
that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, 
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand 
of God, who also maketh intercession for us” 
(Romans viii:31-34). 

All things in Christ and with Christ! Here is 
where the finite mind must halt; not even the 
boldest faith can imagine what it all means and 
includes. The Christ who died as the substitute of 
sinners, who arose from the dead, is now, as the 
glorified Man, at the right hand of God, crowned 
with glory and honor. “God raised Him from the 
dead and gave Him glory” (1 Peter 1:21). He who 
had become man and glorified God in a holy life 
on earth, and more so in His sacrificial death, had 
to be rewarded. This is the demand of God’s 
righteousness. While the Lord Jesus Christ, as very 
God, shares all the glory of the Godhead, as the 
incarnate Son of God He acquired glory. Of this 
acquired glory He spoke in prayer, that these for 
whom He died might be sharers of it. “The glory 
Thou hast given Me I have given them” (John 
Xvii:21). He bestows upon believers His own glory. 
Blessed truth! All we deserve, He met it all; all 
He deserves He gives to those for whom He died. 


Christianity 145 


The message tells us that all who accept Christ 
as their Saviour receive His glory and acquired 
riches as God’s own heir. ‘‘For ye know the grace 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though He was rich, 
yet for your sakes He became poor, that ye through 
His poverty might be rich” (2 Corinthians viii:9). 
What riches, then, are these which are given to 
those who trust in Him? They are the unsearchable 
riches of Christ which His love, the love that pass- 
eth knowledge, has put on the side of those who 
have accepted Him. The message unfolds these 
riches of Christ. It tells us that the ultimate goal 
of redemption is that the believer is to be like the 
risen Christ, conformed to His image, that He 
might be the firstborn of many brethren (Romans 
vuli:29). ‘To each member of the race who has be- 
come by faith identified with Him is promised the 
redemption of the body, that the present body, 
subject to disease, pain and death, on account of 
sin, shall in the future be changed and be*fashioned 
like unto His own glorious body (Philippians iii:21). 
John, the beloved disciple, tells us that we are the 
children of God, and that it has not yet appeared 
what we shall be. He adds triumphantly: “But 
we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be 
like Him, for we shall see Him as He is” (1 John 
11:2). In other words, the message declares that 
what the risen Christ is in glory that every true 
believer is to be. The day will come when He, the 
Lord of all, will bring many sons unto glory. Then 
the fulness of glory will be manifested, when all 
who accepted His redemption will possess with Him, 
as joint heirs, all things, and enjoy His eternal fel- 
lowship in never-ending glory in the Father’s house, 
which His mighty work has prepared for the recep- 


146 Christianity 


tion of those who were once the enemies of God 
by wicked works. 

But even with these wonderful facts before us, of 
God’s offer in this message of the Gospel and His 
promises for eternity, we are only able to spell out 
its A-B-C. We but know in part. To know the 
supernatural message in all its meaning we must 
wait till the day comes, when we shall no longer 
look into a glass darkly but when “we shall know 
as we are known.” 

And all these riches are the riches of grace, of 
free, unmerited favor. It is not of works, but the 
gift of God, bestowed without money and without 
price on all those who believe. 

What a glorious message it is! this supernatural 
message of Christianity. Could there be for man 
a higher message than this? Could even God do, 
or give anything better than He has done, than He 
has given, what He offers now on His own gracious 
terms? If He should give a million worlds it would 
not be greater than what He has done. Could He 
give a greater gift than the unspeakable gift of the 
Son of His Love? Could He do anything greater 
than to make Him, who knew no sin, sin for us, 
and put upon Him our iniquities and our transgres- 
sions? Could He do anything greater than He has 
done in offering to lost man all he needs without 
money and without price? Could He promise any 
greater glory to His erstwhile enemies than the 
glory of sonship, which makes man, redeemed in 
Christ, the heir of all things? Reverently speaking, 
God has in this supernatural message revealed such 
riches of Grace and Glory as He cannot excel. 

Indeed Christianity is the highest and most glori- 
ous revelation of{God in the manifestation of His 


Christianity 147 


Son, the Lord Jesus Christ; it is the highest and 
most glorious revelation of the salvation of man 
and his future destiny in Christ. 

But unbelief puts another question: Is Chris- 
tianity the final religion? Rationalism says that it 
is not. The process of evolution in religious things 
cannot be permitted to be arrested with Chris- 
tianity. Such is the proud boast of the proud 
scholar of the twentieth century. Man is looking 
for something higher and better. Tell us what will 
it be? What has the intellect of man to offer in 
place of supernatural Christianity? Come with me 
to the dying bed of a lost soul. Life is fast ebbing 
away. A few hours more and the soul of this man 
will have left its earthly house and will enter eter- 
nity, never to return to this earthly scene. He 
knows he is a lost sinner. How can he die in peace 
and face His Maker as a forgiven sinner? He must 
have a message whicl will change his dread and 
fear into joy unspeakable and full of glory! The 
best the intellectual unbeliever can do is to send for 
a poor, uneducated Salvation Army man to tell the 
story of Christ’s death for the ungodly, the mes- 
sage of the sacrificial work of Christ which has made 
peace for him, and to teach the dying sinner to say: 

“‘Tust as I am, without one plea 
But that Thy blood was shed for me, 


And that Thou bid’st me come to Thee; 
Oh Lamb of God, I come, I comel”’ 


This is the great and crowning evidence of the 
supernaturalness of the true message of Christianity, 
it saves, it gives peace, it changes the dying groan 
into a shout of victory. Any other message is pow- 
erless. With what confidence the Apostle Paul wrote 
to Rome; “For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of 


148 Christianity 


Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation 
unto every one that believeth; to the Jew first, 
and also to the Greek” (Romans i:16). Not that 
he meant he had to apologize for this Gospel. He 
knew it would not leave him ashamed. If he went 
to the synagogue and preached it there, it would 
not leave him ashamed; Jews were saved by hear- 
ing and believing this message. If he went to licen- 
tious, wicked Corinth, it did not leave him ashamed. 
It saved the vile Corinthians. If he went among 
the Barbarians and preached the God-given mes- 
sage, it manifested its power. And as he went to 
Rome, he knew that in the great world city the 
Gospel would also be the power of God unto sal- 
vation. Thus it has always been, since Christ died 
and rose again. The true Gospel of Christ has 
demonstrated itself as the greatest and most vic- 
torious power in the world. 

The history of Christian Missions gives this great 
evidence. And if today men go forth into pagan 
countries with another gospel, the gospel of Mod- 
ernism, what will be the result? Nothing but de- 
feat, and in the end a shameful confusion. The 
saddest thing of all is when the representatives of 
that other gospel make a compromise with Bud- 
dhism, Hinduism, speaking of the good which is 
in these and other religious systems, and then make 
an attempt at reforming them. 

Modernism proposes a Christian religion without 
a supernatural Christ, without His supernatural re- 
demption work, without His supernatural survival 
and glorious existence at the right hand of God. 
In doing this Modernism turns back to the beg- 
garly elements of world religions, and produces an- 
other lifeless and powerless system, unable to save 


Christianity 149 


man and to give him comfort, assurance, and peace. 
There is nothing outside of supernatural Christianity, 
which in a supernatural message offers free and full 
salvation to man. 

But let Modernism try to invent a “new religion.” 
Christianity remains the highest possible revelation 
of God, and the Gospel the highest possible super- 
natural message. Let Modernism try to displace 
supernatural Christianity. We need not fear for 
our holy faith. Christianity is unconquerable, it is 
final and eternal. All its enemies will pass away, 
but He, who is the author and finisher of faith, 
remains. He is the eternal Christ. 

VI. The Supernatural Power. The supernatural 
Christ, His great redemption and the redemption 
message, demand a supernatural power. This power 
is the Holy Spirit. Without enlarging on the doc- 
trine of the Holy Spirit in both Testaments, we 
must remember the outstanding fact that this Spirit 
is not an influence but a divine Person. It is there- 
fore in order to speak of Him as God the Holy 
Spirit. 

The Holy Spirit is prominently and intimately 
connected with the life and work of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. He was “conceived by the Holy Spirit’; 
the Spirit came upon the Virgin Mary of Nazareth. 
He produced the body which the Holy One received 
in incarnation. In this way the Lord Jesus received 
a sinless nature in a sinless human body. Objection 
is made to this statement on account of Mary; she 
had a sinful nature. Was not some of this nature 
communicated to the Lord Jesus? How Roman 
theologians have met this difficulty by inventing an 
immaculate conception of Mary is well known. 
But there is no need for that. He, who took on 


150 Christianity 


this body, is the Holy One. By His own power of 
holiness He repudiated every taint of sin; no sin 
was in Him, for the simple reason of His own 
holiness. 

When He entered upon His public ministry as 
the promised Messiah, when at Jordan He declared 
by His baptism that He had come to take the sin- 
ner’s place in death, the Holy Spirit came upon 
Him in the form of a dove. While He testified, 
“the Father who dwelleth in Me,” it is equally 
true that the Spirit of God dwelt in Him and that 
the fulness of the Godhead was thus in Him. What 
Isaiah had predicted concerning Him was fulfilled, 
the Spirit of the Lord God was upon Him for the 
preaching and the work He came to do (Isaiah 
Ixi:l; Luke iv:16-20). He was led by the Spirit 
(Matthew iv:2). By the Spirit He cast out evil 
spirits and did other works (Matthew xii:28). And 
finally by the eternal Spirit He offered Himself 
without spot to God (Hebrews ix:14). 

The same Spirit of life and power who dwelt in 
Him, by whom He gave commandment to His apos- 
tles even after His resurrection, He promised as a 
free gift to His disciples. He encouraged them to 
pray for this gift. “If ye then, being evil, know 
how to give good gifts unto your children; how 
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the 
Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?” (Luke xi:13). 
Immediately before His passion He gave to His 
eleven disciples still greater promises. He said: 
“T will not leave you orphans” (John xiv:18). He 
assured them that He would ask the Father to 
give them another Comforter, the Spirit of Truth. 
The word “Comforter” is in the Greek “‘Parakletos,” 
one called along side of another person to help that 


Christianity 151 


person. It is translated in 1 John ii:1 “Advocate.” 
He told them that this Spirit whom the Father 
would send should be with them, upon them and 
in them: He would be the indwelling and the abiding 
Spirit. He also described the work He would do in 
them and through them. (John xv:26; xvi:7-15). 
After His resurrection He demonstrated His power 
as the Lord, the life-giving Spirit, by breathing upon 
His disciples and by saying, “Receive ye the Holy 
Spirit” (John xx:22). 

All these promises could not be fulfilled till Christ 
had died and had returned as the Risen One to the 
Father. Therefore, before leaving them, He com- 
manded them that they should not depart from 
Jerusalem, but wait there for the promise of the 
Father (Acts i:4). The promise was fulfilled on the 
great historic day of Pentecost. The Holy Spirit 
was then given to the assembled disciples; He came 
to possess them individually, and He baptized them 
collectively into a body, which is the Church of 
Jesus Christ. There is no need to go back to the 
promise of Christ and ask Him to send His Spirit, 
for He sent Him. He is the great witness that 
Christ is at the right hand of God. He bears wit- 
ness to Christ; He testifies of Him. His testimony 
to Christ includes all Christ is, all Christ has done, 
and unfolds every glory of Christ. He dwells in 
every heart which has accepted Christ and believes 
the message of the Gospel, so that each becomes 
the temple of the Holy Spirit (1 Corinthians Wiley. 
He is also dwelling in the true, the invisible Church, 
for the Church is “the habitation of God through 
the Spirit”? (Ephesians ii:22). ‘This is also a super- 
natural fact of Christianity. 

How does the Holy Spirit display His supernat- 


152 Christianity 


ural power in and through believers in the Lord 
Jesus Christ? He is the great agent in the new 
birth. The Lord taught that man by nature is 
dead; without spiritual life, he is spiritually dead 
(John v:25). In order to live for God man needs 
first of all the gift of life. The Lord selected Nico- 
demus to teach the necessity of the reception of 
life in a new birth. Nicodemus was a fine specimen 
of a religious man, for he was a Pharisee; he was a 
fine moral man, for he held a position as ruler; and 
he was a well educated man, for he was the teacher 
in Israel. Yet in spite of his religiousness, his 
morality and his education, he was spiritually dead 
and was not fit to be in the kingdom of God. There-« 
fore the Lord told him, “Ye must be born again” 
(John iii:3). The Lord emphasized the absolute 
necessity of a new birth, a birth from above. He 
spoke of the Spirit as the power of the new birth— 
“born of the Spirit,” and “what is born of the 
Spirit is spirit” (John iii:5-6). The Spirit of God 
gives life by His divine power to the believing sinner. 
He receives a-spirit-nature, called the divine nature; 
the reception of this new nature is the new birth. 
The Holy Spirit imparts this new nature in His 
own unfathomable way, for the Lord said: ‘‘The 
wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the 
sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh 
and whither it goeth: so is everyone that is born 
of the Spirit?’ (John iii:8). 

This spirit nature separates the believer from the 
world. The Holy Spirit is the separating power in 
the believer, who by the indwelling Spirit becomes 
one spirit with the Lord (1 Corinthians vi:17). He 
that is born again is therefore separated unto the 
Lord; he belongs to Him. 


Christianity to3 


We have quoted the words of the Lord Jesus, 
“Tamfrom above . . . Iam not of this world.” 
The believing sinner, being born from above by the 
Spirit, separated from the world, separated unto 
God, is therefore also not of this world. This the 
Lord declared Himself, when in His high-priestly 
prayer He said, speaking of all who accept Him, 
*‘they are not of the world even as I am not of the 
world” (John xvii:14, 16). This is a deep and won- 
derful revelation. It leads us back to His death 
and resurrection. He gave His life and took it 
again that believers may receive this life in Him. 
The parable of the corn of wheat illustrates this 
(John xii:24). The corn of wheat dies, and through 
death reproduces itself. 

The new nature, and the Holy Spirit dwelling in 
that nature, makes the development of spiritual life 
in fellowship with God possible. If the law of the 
Spirit is permitted to operate, the believer walks not 
in the flesh, but in the Spirit, and does not fulfill 
the lusts of the old nature, which is still in him, 
but no longer controls him (Romans viii:2-9). A 
righteous and separated life is made possible by the 
supernatural gift of the Spirit of God. 

The Holy Spirit also produces fruit; a spiritual 
character is the result of His work. The high call- 
ing of the true Christian on earth is to walk even 
as Christ walked (Galatians v:22-24; 1 John ii:6). 

This indwelling Spirit witnesses to the fact of 
sonship; by Him the believer calls God ‘‘Father,” 
and has access into His presence (Romans viii:15, 16; 
Ephesians ii:18). He is in the believer the seal of 
ownership; for he is sealed by the Spirit until the 
day of complete redemption (Ephesians i:13; iv:30). 
He bestows gifts on the true Church. In the be- 


154 Christianity 


ginning of Christianity He manifested Himself in 
supernatural gifts, such as the gifts of miracles, of 
healing, and of speaking in different tongues. After 
Christianity had been established, and the full reve- 
lation had been given through the doctrines of the 
Apostles, these supernatural gifts ceased, for this 
present age is the age of faith, and not of sight. 
The attempts to revive these sign gifts have been 
proved more than once to be spurious.° 

Without giving a complete analysis of the work 
of this supernatural power, we mention the fact 
that the Spirit of God leads the believers into all 
the Truth; He guides to service; He gives power 
in service for God; He teaches how to pray effec- 
tually; He keeps and sustains in trials and sorrows. 

The Christian Church in our times seems to have 
forgotten the noble and wonderful story of the mar- 
tyrs. What a story it is! No Church historian has 
ever been able to tabulate the thousands upon thou- 
ands who were cruelly tortured and put to death 
under pagan Rome; nor do we know the exact 
number of the martyrs who suffered under Papal 
Rome. Their names and deeds are all recorded in 
heaven. Stephen was the first martyr. As the 
stones fell upon him to crush out his life, he said, 
“Tord Jesus, receive my spirit . . . Lord, lay 
not this sin to their charge” (Acts viii:59-60). The 
Lord Jesus had prayed on the cross the same prayer; 
He commended His spirit into the hands of the 
Father. It was the supernatural power of the Holy 


°Church history reveals the fact that at different times 
the Pentecostal gift of speaking in foreign tongues was re- 
vived, and also the gift of miracles. But all these different 
movements, as we have shown in our book on ‘“‘The Healing 
Question,” were found to be spurious. It is the same with 
the present day Pentecostalism and the claims of faith 
healers, 


Christianity 155 


Spirit which enabled Stephen to utter the same 
words. In reading the great work of Fox, “‘Acts and 
Monuments,” giving the story of the martyrs, we 
were impressed with the fact that the great majority 
of martyred men and women, as the flames burned 
their bodies, breathed out their lives in the same 
manner as Stephen. Instead of groanings and curses, 
they sang praises; they prayed for their enemies; 
they died in.the assurance of eternal life and glory. 
No psychological laws can explain all this. Super- 
natural power was upon them, and in fulfilment of 
the assuring words of their Lord, ““Be of good cheer, 
I have overcome the world,” (John xvi:33) they 
overcame. The Spirit of God gave them the vic- 
tory. | 

How many of the present-day Modernists, should 
they be called upon to seal their denials with the 
martyr’s death, would march triumphantly to the 
stake and commend their spirits into the hands of 
the Lord? How many of them denying a super- 
natural revelation, the supernatural Christ and His 
work, His supernatural survival and His presence 
in glory (as Stephen beheld Him), would sing songs 
of praise and songs of glory as they passed out of 
life into eternity? The Spirit of God on earth, 
indwelling the believer and the true Church, is the 
demonstrating supernatural power of Christianity. 

VII. A Future Supernatural Manifestation. We 
come now to the final supernatural fact of Chris- 
tianity. Christianity has the promise of a future 
crowning manifestation. What is it? The Lord 
Jesus Christ spoke frequently to His disciples that 
they would see Him no more; He would return to 
the Father and go back to heaven whence He came. 
But this is not all. He promised that He would 


156 Christianity 


return. He assured them that the world, which be- 
held Him on a cross between two thieves, would 
some day see Him again, not in humiliation but 
in glorious exaltation. This promise holds a promi- 
nent place in His teachings. He spoke of coming 
in the clouds of heaven in great power and glory 
(Matthew xxiv:29-31). 

In comforting His sorrowing disciples He said, 
“T will come again and receive you unto Myself, 
that where I am ye may be also (John xiv:3). He 
mentioned in parables such a return. When His 
disciples and others thought that the kingdom, 
promised to Israel, should appear immediately, He 
spoke a parable in which He compared Himself to 
a nobleman who “went into a far country to receive 
a kingdom and to return” (Luke xix:12). He com- 
pared Himself to a bridegroom who is to receive 
the bride. But while he tarried the virgins slumbered 
and slept. Finally, the parable tells us, He will 
come (Matthew xxv:1-13). 

He also described the signs of His coming. He 
spoke of the political, the moral, the religious and 
physical conditions prevailing during the present 
age, and the conditions He will find on earth when 
He returns (Matthew xxiv:1-24; Luke xviii:8). 

He promised rewards to His faithful servants. 
When He receives His throne of glory, His disciples 
will also reign with Him (Matthew xix:28). When 
He sits upon the throne of His glory, He predicted, 
He will judge the nations (Matthew xxv:31). He 
frequently exhorted His disciples to live and to 
serve in anticipation of His return; their loins should 
be girded and their lights burning bright (Luke 
xii:35). Here is one of His most impressive com- 
mandments: “Take heed, watch and pray; for ye 


Christianity 157 


know not when the time is. For the Son of Man 
is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, 
and gave authority to his servants, and to every 
man his work, and commanded the porter to watch. 
Watch ye, therefore, for ye know not when the 
master of the house cometh, at even, or at mid- 
night, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning; 
lest coming suddenly, he find you sleeping. And 
what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch” (Mark 
X111:33-37). 

Nor must we forget His testimony given in the 
presence of His accusers. The high priest asked 
Him, ‘‘Art Thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?’’ 
Then He answered, ‘‘I am, and ye shall see the Son 
of Man sitting on the right hand of power, and 
coming in the clouds of heaven” (Mark xiv:61-62). 
Dramatically the high priest rent his clothes and 
charged Him with blasphemy. Their bound victim 
had claimed Deity, the place of power, and had 
asserted His identity with the One whom Daniel 
beheld in his night vision, the King over all the 
earth (Daniel vii:13-14). 

What startling statements these are! The writer 
has no sympathy whatever with the fanatical per- 
versions of this doctrine, invented by unbalanced 
minds. In a life time of service for God he has 
combatted the error systems which have distorted 
and mutilated these plain and direct statements of 
Christ concerning His return. But we wish to say 
that no true theologian can afford to ignore the 
eschatology of the Lord Jesus Christ. And if he 
does, or if he belittles it, he will soon find himself 
in the fog of Modernism. But more remains to be 
said about the pledged return of Christ. 

At His ascension, beings from another world an- 


158 Christianity 


nounced His return. “This same Jesus, which is 
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in 
like manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven” 
(Acts i:10-12). Equally significant it is that the 
doctrine of a second coming of Christ becomes in 
the Epistles one of the great central doctrines of 
Christianity. ‘The greatest truths cluster around 
His return. All hope rests upon this future event. 
It is the very polar star of the Church, for the 
Church of Jesus Christ, according to the teaching 
of the New Testament, is not a permanent institu- 
tion in the world. Her destiny is to be with the 
glorified Head in heaven. This destiny can be real- 
ized only with His return. Then the portals of the 
Father’s house with its many mansions will swing 
open to receive the sons of glory. 

The redemption of the body in a resurrection of 
incorruption is inseparably connected with this fu- 
ture coming of Christ. To those living in that day 
is promised a supernatural translation, in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye. There will be a reunion, 
and believers will find again their loved ones who 
died in Christ. The following New Testament pass- 
ages verify all this: 1 Thessalonians iv:13-18; 
1 Corinthians xv:51-58; Philippians i11:21; Colos- 
sians 11:4; 1 John ii:1-2. 

Rewards for faithful service can be bestowed only 
when He comes again. Paul bears witness to this 
in writing his last epistle from the Roman prison. 
“I have fought a good fight, I have finished my 
course, I have kept the faith: henceforth is laid up 
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, 
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and 
not to me only, but unto all them that love His 
appearing” (2 Timothy iv:7-8). He taught by reve- 


Christianity 159 


lation the bestowal of rewards, when believers at 
His coming appear before the award seat of Christ 
(1 Corinthians iii:11-13; iv:5). 

In the Epistle to the Romans is penned another 
revelation which is connected with the return of 
Christ. All creation, groaning on account of man’s 
sin, will be delivered from its groans (Romans viii: 
19-22). 

The last Book of the Bible makes known the great 
victory which is in store for the despised and re- 
jected Christ, when He comes the second time. It 1s 
then that the prophecy in Genesis 11:15 will be fully 
accomplished through the complete defeat of the 
serpent. Evil is dethroned. A mighty shout is 
heard, ‘‘Alleluia! for the Lord God Omnipotent 
reigneth.” . . . “The kingdoms of this world 
are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of His 
Christ; and He shall reign for ever and ever’ 
(Revelation xix:6; xi:15). 

Throughout the New Testament this blessed hope 
is revealed in its practical bearing; it is the purify- 
ing, the separating power in the life and experience 
of the Christian (1 Thessalonians iv:18; 1 John 
lito). 

All we have briefly written as to this future mani- 
festation of Christ, promised by Himself and un- 
folded by the Spirit of God as one of the great 
doctrines of Christianity, is unknown in the different 
ancient and present day religious systems. ‘True, 
some of them have faint echoes of a coming “‘golden 
age’ and the final conquest of evil. But the New 
Testament revelation is gloriously unique, and is 
found nowhere else. 

What about the founders and teachers of the 
world religions? Did any religious leader ever make 


160 Christianity 


the positive claim that at some future time he would 
return? Did Buddha Gautama, before he died of 
indigestion, tell his admiring disciples, “You will see 
me again, coming in the clouds of heaven”? What 
about Zoroaster? We know very little of his life.1° 
Did this religious teacher and reformer promise, 
“TI will come again”? What about Mohammed? 
Did this sensual, false prophet tell his hordes that 
they should watch for his return? What about the 
modern men and women who assumed leadership, 
claiming some kind of a divine revelation or com- 
mission? Did Joseph Smith, the author of the 
Mormon fraud, promise a second coming? Or did 
Mrs. Mary Baker Eddy, with all her audacious 
claims, have the temerity to announce before her 
death that she would come back in a visible manner? 
There has never been a religious teacher or leader 
who made such a claim or who left a promise of 
this kind. 

The One, and the only One, who has promised 
such a second coming, is the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Some liberalists oppose this great testimony of 
Christ by denying that Christ ever made such pre- 
dictions, claiming that these predictions are inter- 
polations. Others say that His words, and the 
teachings of the Apostles in the Epistles reflect the 
then current belief among the Jews, taken from 
certain apocalyptic writings. They charge the Apos- 


Zoroaster, also called Zarathustra, the shining One, was 
born in Bactria. Having fled to the desert to escape the spec- 
tacle of evil, he brought back with him his doctrine. which 
owing to the patronage of the King of Bactria quickly spread. 
He is said to have been married three times. It was from the 
third marriage, contracted in a higher sphere, that the de- 
liverer was looked for to complete his work. The figure of 
Zoroaster was so early enveloped in the myth of his dei- 
fication, that it is impossible to distinguish the basis of truth 
in his history. Some scholars doubt if he ever lived, 


Christianity 161 


tle Paul with having formed his views from these 
sources. As if such a wonderful revelation as is 
recorded in 1 Thessalonians iv:13-18 could have 
been invented by the ingenuity of a man. If it 
were the product of the brain of the Apostle, then 
he practiced a fraud, for he claimed distinctly to 
have received it by the Word of the Lord. The com- 
mon weapon of Modernism against the doctrine of 
a second, glorious and personal coming of Christ is 
sneer and ridicle. In doing this the liberalist veri- 
fies Scripture, for Peter predicted: ‘“‘Knowing this 
first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, 
walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is 
the promise of His coming? for since the fathers fell 
asleep all things continue as they were from the 
beginning of creation.” 

What does the revelation of God predict as to 
_ the future of the earth and the race upon it? It 
predicts a future of glory, a time when nations will 
turn swords into plowshares and spears into prun- 
ing hooks (Isaiah 11:4); a time of blessing and glory, 
a time when the earth will be covered by the glory 
of the Lord as the waters cover the deep (Habakkuk 
11:14). Even animal creation will be changed, and 
peace will reign on earth, while all polytheism, and 
every false worship will cease, and the one Lord of 
All will be adored (Zechariah xiv:9). But that glo- 
rious future is always connected in both testaments 
with the visible manifestation of the Lord. The 
great predicted blessings and glories are the results 
of His coming. The golden age will then come. 

Greek and Roman mythology mention such an 
age. It is given as the earliest of the four ages, 
the ideal period when the earth, under Saturn’s 
reign, produced fruits without cultivation, when 


162 Christianity 


there was no warfare, and man lived in perfect 
happiness, before sin ever entered the world. It is 
a faint echo of the Edenic condition, before sin and 
death had come. Classical pagan writers such as 
Plautus, Lucretius, Catullus, Cicero, Sallust, Vergil, 
Livy, Ovid, Horace, Hesiod and others, all stated 
their firm belief in the return of the golden age. 
Some expressed the opinion that a divine person 
would descend from heaven, and that through his 
advent the golden age would dawn once more. 
Vergil, who lived in the century before Christ, wrote 
in his Eclogae the following lines: 

The last Age decreed by the Fates is come, 

And a new frame of all things doth begin; 

A holy progeny from heaven descends, 

Auspicious in his birth, which puts an end 

To the iron age, from which shall rise, 

The golden age most glorious to behold. 

Where did these heathen poets get such a con- 
ception? About 280 B. C. Ptolemy II is said to 
have requested the Jews to send seventy rabbis to 
Alexandria for the translating of the Old Testa- 
ment into Greek. It was done; the translation pro- 
duced is known as the Septuagint. The Hebrew 
Scriptures were made available for the Greek-speak- 
ing world, and Vergil undoubtedly learned from 
reading the Hebrew Prophets that through One 
coming from above the golden age of righteousness 
and peace would come back to the world. 

Similar conceptions are found in other religious 
systems. Here Zoroastrianism must be especially 
considered. After the death of this religious re- 
former Mithraism was revived. Mithra!! was the 
sun-god. ‘There was to be a final victory over 


The “Shamash” of the Chaldeans and the “Helios” of 
the Greeks. 


Christianity 163 


Ahriman, the god of evil. Mithra became the im- 
personation of the delivering power, many mysteries 
being connected with this belief. Zoroaster himself, 
though he had been exalted to the dignity of a divine 
being, was looked upon as unable to win the final 
victory. Earth was awaiting a coming divine hero, 
who alone would be able to complete the work begun, 
driving Ahriman back into the eternal darkness, and 
inaugurating the “golden age,” the era of endless 
and unalloyed bliss. There was to be a great day 
which would bring the consummation of all things. 

Modernism, in its outspoken attempt to discredit 
and undermine the revelation of the Bible, tries to 
show that the eschatology of the Old and New 
Testament is mostly due to the influence of Zoro- 
astrianism. ‘The Jews, it is said, having come under 
Persian control through the conquest of King Cyrus, 
learned then to believe in an Ahriman, a personal 
devil, whom they called Satan. They also adopted 
the idea of a day of consummation from the Persian 
religion. ‘The enemies of the Bible charge that the 
Biblical and Apocryphal descriptions of future 
events, as described in Daniel and in the Revela- 
tion, are in greater part borrowed from Zoroastrian- 
ism and Mithraism. They also explain the change 
of the Jewish Sabbath, the seventh day, to the first 
day of the week, by the customs of Mithraism, 
which had a sun-day. Paul, it is charged, intro- 
duced some of this Mithraist belief. 

All this is mere supposition, a groundless and 
bold assumption. Even a superficial reading of the 
majestic prophecies in the Old Testament shows their 
superiority in every way, and compared with the 
Zoroastrian-Mithra beliefs, the latter appear more 
than ridiculous. There is in the Old Testament 


164 Christianity 


such a harmony in the predictions of the future and 
consummating events, the great Yom-/Jehovah—the 
day of the Lord, and the blessing and glory which 
follow that day for Israel, the nations, and all crea- 
tion, which is totally unknown in the so-called 
*‘Apocryphal Literature.” The puerile elements 
_ which are found in that class of literature are lack- 
ing entirely in the prophecies of the Bible. The 
question as to the date and authoriship of the Old 
Testament Books enters largely into this argument. 
It is claimed that “‘ripe and mature scholarship” has 
discovered that the greater part of these books were 
put together after the Exile. But the “ripe and 
mature scholarship” is not altogether in the posses- 
sion of Modernists. There is just as much “ripe 
and mature scholarship,” and even more, which 
refutes conclusively the suppositions of destructive 
‘criticism. 

But it all comes back to the supernatural One, 
Christ Jesus. The prophetic teachings He gave are 
in greater part restatements of what the Prophets 
before Him had written. He confirmed the Old 
Testament eschatological teachings of a coming day 
of manifestation. He taught that the Jehovah who 
will then be manifested is He Himself. He assured 
His disciples that there will be a palingenesia, a re- 
generation, or re-creation, when He comes and occu- 
pies the throne as King of kings and Lord of lords 
(Matthew xix:28; Revelation xix:11-16). Of this 
regeneration Peter also testified, as “‘that which had 
been spoken by the mouth of all His holy prophets” 
(Acts ili:19-20). 

According to the Modernist, the Lord Jesus must 
have accepted the legends of Zoroastrianism, and 
must have shared in the common, but erroneous, 


Christianity 165 


beliefs of the Jews adopted after the Exile. For 
the Modernist this is quite easy to accept, for Christ 
was nothing but a man, and not the infallible Son 
of God, who knows all things and whose holy lips 
could only teach the truth. According to the Mod- 
ernist all the teachings of Christ about a personal 
devil, and His actual temptation by that being, are 
the myths of Babylonia and Persia. His claim of 
a second coming must therefore be traced to the 
same sources. 

But Christ was not a mere man, a religious teacher. 
As we have seen, He is from above: He is not of 
this world. He did not come to found a new reli- 
gion. He is supernatural in His origin, in His life, 
in His teachings, and in His works. No other ex- 
planation of His Person is possible. With this be- 
lief, founded logically on facts, and more so, on 
divine revelation, extending over several thousand 
years, the theories and assumptions of Modernism 
go to pieces. 

The Lord Jesus Christ promised a personal, a 
visible and glorious return. As we have seen, this 
future coming had a prominent part in His public 
ministry. We learned that some of the vital truths 
and doctrines of Christianity are linked with His 
second coming. On it depends the fulfilment of 
unfulfilled prophecy. The day must come when He 
shall be crowned as King, when as the Prince of 
Peace He will abolish war, when all false worship 
will cease, when every knee must bow and every 
tongue must confess Him as Lord (Philippians ii:10- 
11). Is this coming to pass? 

Let us suppose that it is mot coming to pass. 
Let us suppose that He will not return. Let us 
suppose that there is no such place as the Father’s 


166 Christianity 


house, to which He has gone and to which He prom- 
ised to take His own. Let us suppose that all the 
other promises and predictions recorded in the Gos- 
pels remain unfulfilled. Let us suppose the Person 
of Jesus Christ will never again be seen. 

What Would All This Mean? It would be the 
demonstration that Christianity has no supernatural 
foundation and no supernatural Christ. It would 
mean that the Lord Jesus Christ was not the eternal 
Son of God, for He made predictions which were 
not true, and if such is the case we would have to 
disown Him as the infallible teacher come from 
heaven. It would mean that His incarnation through 
the Virgin-birth is not true, but patterned after the 
myths and legends taught in pagan religions. It 
would mean that His miracles are inventions of 
clever men. It would mean the complete collapse of 
the scheme of redemption, that His sacrificial death 
cannot save, cannot help man back to God, cannot 
give peace. It would mean that the entire belief in 
a supernatural revelation recorded in the Old Tes- 
tament must be forever abandoned, for it is demon- 
strated a failure. It would mean that we have no 
revelation which can be trusted. It would mean 
that the millions of human beings who lived and 
died believing this revelation, praying and hoping 
for the final fulfilment of what this revelation 
promises, were deceived. It would mean a church 
without a destiny, a world without a hope. It 
would mean that the race must keep on searching 
hopelessly for a solution of the unseen, and of human 
destiny, which can never be found. It would mean 
a night of increasing darkness and despair. It would 
mean that the victory belongs to the powers of evil. 
It would mean that the atheist who says in his 


Christianity 167 


heart, “There is no God” is not a fool, but the 
wisest man in all creation. It would mean that the 
Modernist with his denial of the supernatural after 
all is right, and that the millions of the past and of 
the present who believed in the revelation of God, 
and in the Christ of God, were and are misguided 
dupes. 

We dare not say in concluding this volume, “‘sup- 
posing whatthe Lord Jesus Christ predicted should 
come true,” for we are sure that every word the 
Son of God spoke on earth, and every word which 
the Prophets wrote under divine inspiration, will 
ultimately find its glorious fulfilment. This con- 
viction is shared by millions of true believers, who 
in spite of the modern drift still hold to an infallible 
revelation of God in the written Word and who 
believe in the supernatural Christ as the living Word. 

And when 1t comes to pass, as it surely will, what 
will it mean? What will it mean when the long- 
expected second advent takes place? It will demon- 
strate the supernaturalism of Christianity. It will 
be the crowning evidence that the Book of books 
is the revelation of God. It will mean that the 
Jewish Prophets were not Jewish enthusiasts who 
copied pagan traditions and pagan inventions, but 
that “‘they spoke as they were moved by the Holy 
Spirit.” It will mean that Peter’s great confession, 
“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God” 
is true. It will mean that the Lord Jesus Christ 
is the Virgin-born Son of God, that He is “the 
Way, the Truth and the Life.” It will mean that 
His death was not a martyr’s death, but that He died 
for our sins. It will mean that He rose physically 
from among the dead. His second advent as the 
glorified Son of Man will be the evidence that He 


168 Christianity 


was, ever since His ascension, the mediator between 
God and man, the priest and advocate of His people. 


It will mean that the message of the Gospel is 
God’s salvation. It will demonstrate that millions 
who believed on Him were saved. It will mean 
the glorious destiny of the Church. It will mean the 
resurrection of those who have fallen asleep, and a 
blessed reunion of all the redeemed. It will mean 
the victory of the Seed of the woman, the end of 
the age-long conflict, the dethronement of evil and 
the enthronement of righteousness. It will mean 
the answer to the prayer, ‘“Thy kingdom come,” in 
the establishment of His kingdom. It will mean 
the realization of universal peace and universal 
righteousness. It will mean that all the world will 
turn to God and worship the King of Righteousness 
and the King of Peace. It will mean the accomplish- 
ment of every vision; it will mean that which no 
pen can describe. Glory and blessing everywhere, 
for Israel, bowing then before Him whom their 
fathers rejected and delivered into the hands of the 
Gentiles; glory and blessing for the nations of the 
earth, whose false worship ends forever. ‘The 
““solden age” has come. Groaning creation will 
groan no more, for He who bore the crown of 
thorns has removed the curse. 


And it will mean something else. His return will 
bring the complete and final answer to every form 
of infidelity and Rationalism, Atheism, Agnosticism, 
Pantheism, and Evolutionism. It will spell the final 
and ignominious defeat of Modernism and every 
other movement and cult which denies the Christ 
of God and His redemption work. 


And here we rest. 


Christianity 169 


We wait with His true Church for the coming 
day of victory, which, perchance, may not be de- 
layed much longer. With the Apostolic Church, 
with all the Saints of God throughout this age, we 
“wait for His Son from heaven.” We wait for the 
coming, crowning vindication of supernatural Chris- 
tianity. 

“For the vision 1s yet for an appointed time, but 
at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, 


wait for it; because it will surely come, 1 will not 
tarry.” (Habakkuk i ii:3.) 


A 
Tes CPL Y Giale ss a als ore a else wieder (ends a2 
rE CCR gc eae bakiath'a bu ace aio ais Manreuetle 55 
ERT ey eG TSG Be diy ol a's li Paley shar aes es Denies 
CA PETICIANG 2c Ui 6) fs v's aig 6 shake) bia etal taeraiery 46 
Pee Mean ad dy a isa ahs ean cs woe es 10, 11 
DLS PME Cre ash acd sta a! 6 ke wi ehete L622 Mola Td: 
BRI OV a oer ns) a uravna sh 4calbl ear hia sanett Shek Wy? 
MTC i a lols eA A Doig oULN sal g ta! Wel alt 6 
MRS ar eos ete Seravats tateteratesralaletefekele ‘slecele' e) ¥ia\¢ 40, 42 
BA Ete as Sets sos a Gd8sib a a! h wie 4s wie, sala erases 38 
DP Ve AU nad pid sb sid ates alan odie aco lar gtoin’s 99 
TENG WN IY Sit ae hy ois) Hicks! ab ek sever d ielap wig oe 73 
Peerimutes or Godhead... hie ee ote vee ale 104. 
0 SE CHEESES a er A DG eB 6 
BM ha: eae sg ai his tdic «owes heisiabenete 46 

B 
RM te hak Milne). cry abstad ob avretigr WebtSalel a Sool oed 50, 75 
TAS Goins Veh chases %slin crete er akshetovals'>| ats 2,30 R09 
ROR AT Th CONE CI digs Viet som ais ot a mie eae | 
Pe he 47, 54, 56, 62 
PUREE AUMISTIVGS Race es Fo a ale ails 6 alice lane, eid a (6 (ebae te 42 
Browne, Rabbi Lewis............ 2IG2SS 192 Sloe 
aa AUT AIA sherk he RN elvue Soh Meal eres eats 42, 109 
RPT PRN 4 2 Vistas els ay ie tele hie! Share ys ead 42, 137 
REPS RIOD ENS Mire nee es Mie cce Satta ats eins ie)e 110 

C 
PMCID Aly 2 Gar ks ope Hine helene anes i ate e el 8 
MAGI ISIINALIONS Ai skewed a Go we oe releeie hens 52 
eT APATHETIC 2 hits ciate ie tates ws, Sahsre whe aia ote 46 
BE ea CT CDESIS Nii stele s ide a edie ood eles winl alten 48 
Serer eae ar, Re Rrra ca eata a wach mene 64 
Peer rah ty artis ect aws sane os stohateb sland 44, 48 
(Shristiahy. sas. Th ee Ea SUIS AC AP IRN ov neg 135 
TLS TE Ve vista Watched Aad a atta aus Sieh ehote's chaque) 96 
Ohristianity and, buddhism. ote... ti. sao ale 108 
Ghristianity and Religion. piece cee ce 3 ole 96 
Christian Science, ) 35... - Pr Sel as St ROR See 60 


COR C Hie y ua erecta Nth, eae 57, 134, 154, 131 
CEST UU ae BOOS 
Clay) Professor)... 20. 8a bt oe) ee =)! 
COTAUCTATISTIN Ye he I See ate si ke en 44 
IONSCLENLCE ei as OU wid aby ears, ac eee ieee a 68 
CEATION Pe eiee eleeekie nian eee eee 63 
Creation OF Man un etisalat 3 ee 64 
Creation; time Of. e gy. elke! s olen uicie = ee 64 
D 
Dae Ona aU Ca ula ee ne 86, 94 
Darwinismies wee ee ois ails ole ee eee ale ae 6,19 
ATI ee RL ENR Ce a 89 
De Brosses eee eee a aaa ya | 
Deityrof Canister ee ee eee 103, 104 
Shue Oh NO ue lh ae ay aa fe 
Deluge, Assyrian account.........+.seeeeees 72 
E 
Ebers, George) 0 ick ee ties ole ees <n tenn 50 
Ebrard) Drie pile see's 5 mvieiele oie leie e 47 
SVE ye tate a clad all Bete atala slate wea 35, 36, 07; ene 
Hichhorn, Profs ey ae ae an eue tlre ecaielole see 100 
TE pistes svete lone es Pe ie tes aca ae 140 
Ps ir OS eo iain ee eet a ce blackh eve dvelg Cte ae 47 
1 Di ig20 Cs EERIE OMAP ca PARA A a NLU RE a FR 100 
"Ae a Ted MARCIE EOE Oe VIE GRA Mauna MibmeRCeUUE NE 0 94 
F 
Palliok Man ire eae Sac ieee er 66 
Betishismu Mie ee eee 16, 26, 27; '31, 32) SoG yee 
Penerbach ici awe lei oleae) hls) o eae a 8 
BCH ee ee ood eo eae! Shave lala tata che ean 7 
MAING LOB yids 21816 os, ieya cok mle: sig 5 ane 8 
BE CT ECTI AT ib) cece eleva lesoles ess! toms atole ates tee ian 19 
G 
CF ETOSTE A Ai Cae'  Wetite telah eteie ei eaweeceds fg aaa 48 
Gifford Lectures... iaicc/xiacein Geoeedavee\= ate] @ eee 9 
Goethe, Wolfgang von. ......+--eeer eee ceee 7 
CZOldeni A wer Eieiehs eniehaa eer eR ee Ryty < 162 


Gospels i.5 Wir nincaie isis bia .nyaiv ie eiecerase ‘4 igh alate 136 


Index 173 


Green, Professor William Henry............. 101 
yey DOs aI ere a See ETA MeL S ap 14 
H 
Ga LIV SONG. 0e 8 oe sul adla W xs Uibiotsia 101 
Ee i Fa ikiwe Binh Gar wiatara bl etme elas 8 
eye i kik eles aie eae s dia alaraltens 8 
ee Ie UN sla gla dilg eleievatavelalaie dot aeais 8 
Piper Lectures. to. e 324'93;'30,'975,40 
RUMP IOUT TCIGTI Me 20. civ cai's abe amis o sib ta! Sslere 4th 99 
ME OMEPISE TRU Gch chsa SILng Sa lala ly nail 140, 149 
EPR. CUO MAN a ly cule yNGal oh aligl a Wi biattatete a gy 16 
PAA RNVCOLMCTISE, 0 Uh sch sia ye twin «ane wie ae 106 
ECU loys, WOM MO Ls Wie al atele 28 
I 
er Ney Vk yg lata" Clini os Wie! aia allt 42 
MRT ee gee aie re wl 08 ss lol Uh halite Fy he 40, 42, 48 
Pt ee eps Pie eset alg G" atgh a eh sla Mieiiala.'e eto diihes Foy WAR WGP | 
LE NE Geist gi aia Tegel) sin leis atenaialelatasie 53 
UMETICAICA Oe ci ici si eis) elala aisles galas bo ace altel 80 
J 
OAS ES ee STOR HR a Ona 52, 56 
MER ETE Laeh sale see at ison atelsdalaltla'e a al b cies des 54 
TA ARR a MRP AGRA a a ie aor 56 
“Ne OS aN seg) AT ls Sa AEA ee 53 
K 
Re TPMTV AN FEL vera sty cea vid a) slbyes pian aa\s ai Wena 7 
ere Oe PAT ie siete’. bie 5, 9, 21, 29; 30, 34, 42 
ROY PO USLIOS Cuoco aan selva ue ine syees 39 
Bee eT TOLESSOL itv sists cralaisia'etalcloie's als sidintd 138 
L 
PACA TPIS disso Meee gia usin ote lelalie se tele 6 
RPE RNS nC ic tas east ala lorie ani e's eis ateiele ut ware pi a8. 
MRO LE TOIESSOLL iat ac ciie aves ag ele semis gs ata 44, 46 
PPAMOTINATIEN CLANCOIB Ss cocina so gals sie: slave te eI el So 


PVA ASTON ITs oats totsteleiatehetetengiel sd ieee) dipiele eda 13 


174 Index 


M 
Martiny Dra iss ottaeaiins fa esie cate ea 45 
Martineaus Drs ilove eh ea 7 
Melchizedeley ting a ek vr 54 
Mesopotamiads'.’) it ayes, 0s ofein oe ee 55 
Messianic: Hoper ee) ee rr 94, 99 
Messianic; Dine yy). Uae eS ee 88 
Mica lanty ier Pey) Peg ean i Wo inet he ee er 93 
Missing Dink scale neeh eee 6a) en 12 


Modernism... .16, 18, 48, 52, 60, 92, 98, 100, 101, 
107, 128, 130, 138, 148, 149, 163, 164, 165, 168 
Monotheism..............16, 27, 31, 40, 50) 7479 


MEOSeS iii 3's! 8 yi heels Ae aaele nae a ie ee te er 48, 50 
Muller, Prot. Max...) 0.0). 0.00.5; S Allg pee 
N 
New Berth ues Ui lalate eee rr 152 
Poa ye Mea Mt oa nie a he baa, err 50 

O 
Old Testament fs ..4 one ie ly eee 99 
Oriental Religions, Spread of.........2. 20% 98 

Pp 
Parsees yoy Uk aie What: een ts ke adr 43 
Pauly Apostle, ei Ce aoe ee 133, 141 
Pentateuchts a 0b isos eyeloe nnn eile) eae ae 82, 100 
BileiderersProf, coy) ON ee Ue 21 
PUSEITES MK esl) 2 gtd eal ol ee ee er 55 
Prato Pete nae cay Pik tas UMaine 6 
Petvaheremiuma tiie 2G Miia tee 31, 35, 55, Soe 
Pontifex) Maximus)? fuses oy Cee SY 
Bressense, Dr. (Eiider kn. iue eer Ce 11 
Brophecy iain tant ins aales } e hibinee ao) ern 84 
Prophecy —-Hirst vay). vic wie oo doe nee 70, 88 
Prophecy——Messianicw.. 02.000). eee 87 
Protestantisny sc 4.0.8 vite ss ais eee ee 58 
Meals ti dials culaee oo aat cua taa ee 89, 90 


R 
Perrys ae ected what cle deg fe NAR te ate 113 
Pere ah Lory Re wre he. Cai ais DAVEE iae, 6 
“ce Le Et a UR a A a mr s0 A) fois NS be 
Feeligion, and Animal Creation. 22 i./0 0 fo 10 
eee ttaLOP VOLITION: WC saul nem tes natok 16, 20 
Pereiomwand the Bible: iar eee ee 63, 66 
Pee PION. AWeHnitions. ys 6. lees oe seas Chapter 1 
Religion, Origin and Development... .16, 62, 76, 96 
Bean OTiVersalitY; ic..7 os fe age ees 11 
eee I GHATISLIN CGH Me a Paes ene acon Thy 
ceo agate PSEC MR GIA GIA la CRUE Oe AER a 80, 109 
Mere tnebage Ni ale ee eat 365/37 
BUEMIBPeCIIO@n OIsnristiy ye bk fii) ys ie ys 127 
BRITE TIS LG 0. hs leaa eo els aodsbe ie tose ceeds 155 
Lila id Sone Re RG GR PE ey i eR aS ZF OT N98 
PeemerretON) AM INGLUTE. Se oe ele wal liewslele sors 73 
evelation—Supernatural..0.. 00.4... 6 ee. 94 
Ch TS SUES os aU SOS a ese eg aR enc Aa RE FY 8 
MEST Aa ee ee ee ee CUE ye aera 58 
MIS MAVIISELE TOs. i. yoy VV tie elena aioe yay 75 
Mee TANMel ene... hile ssp tetyesl ddier eke svete 36 
S 
eee ECOEV TILIN GS coy eke oe Rieke Manse Soe 62 
Sadducees....... a BE lS RNY OC tm ec bce VO 102 
BeaRrerIAaACH ert se ere he Quake ily einer eas le 7 
“FESS hy SARTRE ra a en 6 
UPS FS 5 UREA Ege Gl ita SRD OL Re ay RPP 6 
MR er irl aris Spun aaa ehote wr unkay Une B8,o1 
Shemitic Races..... aoe 
hag ph hap ate MONA BS ABARAT oA a RAE par 67, 69 
CLEVES) «aig es GNI SEE aS PSL ea MD 53, 90 
South America..... SE RW Ui tivaWeeett ace ts, Raw 46 
Pe CCH PIETDELU ty). cin id sek abe hyde Ab tne EMD 
«carn 0 NERS ea Sn, Aca RR OSI ECHR oe 7 
RC ET SUI IAS Sco ove i a ea rir ah RE 59 
aR TISE TA tOPsO NGA a OMS el a A a OE fj 
TIPEQATOFAD(E ACTS Hast Suite Mee La edaleah dls 98 


BURT ODILION Me i nig, bls Cele kala! adap et 32, 45 


T 
Taoism ee a ae Ie 44 
Vavlor) Hudson usa tai, i er 45 
Teiehmuller yy cei, Wa ee % 
Temple of Heaven, 2.0: Gea ive ey se 45 
A hales yo rh ON Ua ea 6 
Wheosop byes cic iow. wojsdeg ane eae en 59 
Thompson, Dr. Ai Cu. a 2. 46 
Piele, Profi orca ie vie ue bode) «ie 13, 28 
Tradition es wy a a ar 74 
DV OR ee eile cin Wiehe digie ntathln sodece sehen a 12 
U 
Re hah tolar cSt LOST NTN at er aa 
V 
WEIR ym neat Cire ue aia) ee ee 29, 40, 41 
Virchowy Prot. oto en iene Bieler 19 
Mirein mirth Or Cnristy ay mica eee eee 106, 107, 112 
WwW 
Waite Dor rae ilae ela Okla Ohne eee 12, OAsnae 
Wallace, Alfred Russell... 0c. ee ee 20 
Z 
PENG ——HAVESTA Lh sis Cele eh dal veka! 43 
COLOAStTADISM yb) h bis aie aieeeereea late ee 43, 162 


Princeton Theological Seminary-Speer Libra 


NCA es 


1 1012 0 


4 
Woe 
‘- 
é 


Ne % <tr> sr yeerita, 


tig = tee Janene 


, 


ae 


