BX  6333  .S772  1899 
Spurgeon,  C.  H.  1834-1892. 
Christ  in  the  Old  Testament 


JUL  16  193 
<2L0GlCALStV 


CHRIST  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT; 


SERMONS 


ON 


The  Foreshadowings  of  our  Lord 

IN    OLD    TESTAMENT    HISTORY, 
CEREMONY  &    PROPHECY. 


{^A  companion  volume  to  "The   Messiah:     Sermons  on  Our   Lord's 

Names,  Titles  and  Attributes";  uniform   with  "Sermons 

ON  Our  Lord's  Parables,"  "  Sermons  on  Our  Lord's 

Miracles,"  a;/^  "  The  Most  Holy  Place.") 


/     ^^ 


C.    H.   SPURGEON. 


Eonlian : 

PASSMORE      AND      ALABASTER, 

Paternoster  Buildings,  EC. 
1899. 

copyright. 


PREFACE. 


When  "  The  Messiah  :  Sermons  on  Our  Lord's  Names,  Titles 
AND  Attributes  "  was  issued,  a  promise  was  given  of  a  companion 
compilation  to  be  entitled  "  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament."  Here 
it  is ;  the  sixth  volume  of  a  series  which  includes  sermons  on  the 
Parables,  the  Miracles,  the  Canticles,  and  the  Titles  of  Christ. 

To  the  two  disciples  on  the  moonlit  road,  the  Master,  beginning  at 
Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  expounded  the  things  concerning  Himself. 
He  is  everywhere  in  Scripture  ;  patriarchs  and  kings  are  types  of  Him 
who  is  the  Ancient  of  Days  and  the  Prince  of  Peace  :  the  law  was  but  a 
shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit 
of  prophecy.  The  Old  Testament  was  Christ's  Bible,  and  it  is  a  Bible 
full  of  Christ.  He  is  as  surely  in  it  as  in  the  New  Testament,  albeit  the 
>fevelation  is  not  as  vivid  nor  as  full.  Of  course,  when  Spurgeon 
preached,  he  poured  the  content  of  the  New  Testament  revelation  into 
the  mould  of  the  Old  Testament  type  and  prophecy ;  expounding,  in 
the  blaze  of  gospel  light,  that  which  was  hidden  from  the  prophets 
when  they  enquired  and  searched  diligently  what  manner  of  time  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify,  when  it  testified  before- 
hand of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  of  the  glory  that  should  follow : 
interpreting,  perhaps,  more  than  the  prophet  or  lawgiver  understood,  but 
not  more  than  the  Spirit  intended  and  revealed. 

There  are  sixty  discourses  within  these  covers.  They  fall  naturally 
into  three  groups — Historical,  Ceremonial  and  Prophetical — each  merg- 
ing into  the  other.  Twenty  sermons  are  given  under  each  heading ; 
this  number  might  have  been  easily  doubled ;  on  many  of  the  subjects 
Mr.  Spurgeon  has  preached  several  times,  and  sermons  on  other  topics 
were  available ;  but  enough  has  been  chosen  to  set  forth  the  fair  and 
glorious  image  of  Him  who  is  fairer  than  the  children  of  men,  who 
fulfils  all  the  law  and  the  prophets,  who  is  the  theme  of  Scripture 
as  He  is  the  joy  of  heaven. 

May  the  glory  of  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament  lead  some  to  receive 
Christ  into  the  heart  as  the  hope  of  glory,  and  lend  a  new  value  to 
that  Scripture  which,  though  unsparingly  assailed,  is  ever  its  own  best 
vtitness ! 


INDEX. 


j  Gen,  iv.  lo.,  and  V     ^q 
(  Hebrews  xii.  24.    j 


I.      HISTORICAL. 

No.  Title.  Text.  Page. 

1  Adam  and  Christ. 

Honey  from  a  Lion  ...         ...     Romans  v.  15.  11 

2  Abel  and  Christ. 

The  Blood  of  Abel  and  the  Blood 
of  Jesus 

3  Noah  and  Christ. 

Shut  In  or  Shut  Out  '      ...         ...     Genesis  vii.  16.  36 

4  Abraham  and  Christ. 

The  Gospel  of  Abraham's  Sacrifice 

of  Isaac         ...         ...         ...     Romans  viii.  32.  47 

5  Abraham  and  Christ. 

J ehovah-Jireh        ...         ...         ...     Genesis  xxii.  14.  57 

6  Melchizedek  and  Christ. 

First  King  of  Righteousness,  and 

after  that  King  of  Peace      ...     Hebrews  vii.  2.  69 

7  Melchizedek  and  Christ. 

Jesus  Meeting  His  Warriors      ...     Gen.  xiv.  18 — ao.         81 

8  Joseph  and  Christ. 

Jesus  and  His  Brethren...         ...     Gen.  xlv.  i — 5.  93 

9  Moses  and  Christ. 

The  Prophet  like  unto  Moses     ...     Deut.  xviii.  15 — 19.    103 

10  Moses  and  Christ. 

The  Mediator. — The  Interpreter        Exod.  xx.  18 — 20.      115 

11  Aaron  and  Christ. 

The  High  Priest  Standing  between 

the  Dead  and  the  Living      ...     Num.  xvi.  47,  48.       127 

12  Joshua  and  Christ. 

Joshua's  Vision Joshua  v.  13 — 15.      135 

13  The  Ark  of  God  and  Christ.  I 

Dagon's  Ups  and  Downs i  Samuel  v.  2 — 4."      147 


INDEX. 

I.      HISTORICAL— ^^«//«2^^^- 


VII. 


'No.  Title. 

14    Jonathan  and  Christ. 

The   Love   of  Jonathan,  and   the 
Love  of  Jesus  

>15     David  and  Christ. 

Recruits  for  King  Jesus 

16  David  and  Christ. 

Loyal  to  the  Core  

17  David  and  Christ. 

"David's  Spoil" 

18  David  and  Christ. 

The  Threshing- Floor  of  Oman. 

19  Solomon  and  Christ. 

A  Greater  than  Solomon 

20  Solomon  and  Christ. 

The  Dromedaries 


Text.  Page 

2  Samuel  i.  26.  159 

iChron.xii.i6— 18.  169 

2  Samuel  xv.  21.  181 

I  Samuel  xxx.  20.  189 


(  I  Chron.  xxi.  28.  1    goi 
I         „        xxii.   I.  J 


Luke  xi.  31.  213 

I  Kings  iv.  20 — 28.     225 


II.      CEREMONIAL. 


1 

The  Passover  ...         ... 

Exodus  xii.  i,  2. 

239 

2 

The  Passover    ... 

„      xii.  21 — 27. 

251 

3 

The  Brazen  Serpent 

Num.  xxi.  9. 

263 

4 

The  Tabernacle           

John  i.  14  &  17. 

275 

5 

The  Silver  Sockets      

Ex.  xxx.  II — 16. 
„    xxxviii  26,  27 

287 

6 

The  Altar          ...  .n^j  ...  ^^^■' 

Matt,  xxiii.  19. 

299 

7 

"The  Ark  of  His  Covenant" 

Revelation  xi.  19. 

311 

■8 

The  Veil            

(Matt.xxvii.50,51  \ 
(Heb.  X.  19,  20.     ]' 

323 

•9 

The  Consecration  of  Priests  ... 

Exodus  xxix.  i. 

335 

10 

The  Sin-Offering           

.     Leviticus  iv.  3. 

347 

11 

The  Sin-Offering 

„    iv.  27— 31. 

359 

12 

Putting  the  Hand  upon  the  Head  of  the 
Sacrifice 

Leviticus  i.  4,  5. 

371 

VIU 


INDEX. 


II.      CEREMONIAL— f^;///;«/^^. 


No.  Title. 

13  Slaying  the  Sacrifice   ... 

14  The   Sprinkling  of  the  Blood   of  the 

Sacrifice     ... 

15  Eating  the  Sacrifice     ... 

16  The  Lamb  of  God  in  Scripture  ^"^ 

17  The  Annual  Atonement 

18  The  Red  Heifer  

19  The  Blood  of  Sprinkling        

20  The  Year  of  Jubilee    ...    \' 


Text. 

Page. 

Leviticus  i.  5. 

383- 

i>      iv.  6,  7. 

395 

Exodus  xxix.  33. 

407 

John  i.  35,  36. 

417 

Leviticus  xvi.  30. 

427 

Hebrews  ix.  13, 14. 

439 

„      xii.24, 25. 

451 

Isaiah  Ixi.  2. 

46a 

III.      PROPHETICAL.. 


1 

Footsteps  of  Mercy      ...         

Job  xxxiii.  23,  24, 

477 

-2  ' 

'  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  Liveth  "    ... 

„    xix.  25—27. 

489 

3' 

'Lo!  I  Come":    Exposition    ^ 

Psalm  xl.  6—8. 

501 

4' 

■'Lo!  I  Come":   Application 

>) 

XI.7. 

513 

5 

Brought  up  from  the  Horrible  Pit   ... 

)i 

xl.  1—3 

525 

6 

Our  Lord's  Triumphant  Ascension     ... 

)> 

Ixviii.  18. 

537 

7 

Christ's  Universal  Kingdom    ... 

Psalm  ii.  8,  9. 

549 

8 

Christ's  Work  no  Failure 

Isaiah  xlii.  4. 

561 

9 

The  Shame  and  Spitting 

>> 

1.  6. 

573 

10 

The  Sure  Triumph  of  the  Crucified  One 

>> 

Hi.  13—15. 

585 

11 

A  Simple  Remedy 

u 

hii.  5. 

597 

12 

Individual  Sin  Laid  on  Jesus... 

}) 

liii.  6. 

609 

13 

The  Sheep  before  the  Shearers 

n 

liii.  7. 

621 

14 

Our  Expectation 

n 

liii.  10. 

63a 

15 

Jesus  Interceding  for  Transgressors  ... 

n 

liii.  12. 

643 

16 

Who  is  this? 

Messiah's  Glorious  Work  " '    ... 

(  Isaiah  Ixii.  11,12.  ) 
\      „      Ixiii.  r.        j 

655 

17 

Daniel  ix.  24. 

667 

18 

The  King-Priest   \   ^( 

Zechariah  vi.  13. 

679 

19 

The  Lowly  King 

ix.  9. 

691 

20 

How  Hearts  are  Softened      

,,     xii.  10,  II 

703 

I.    HISTORICAL. 


HONEY   FROM  A  LION. 


%  1 1  niton 

Deltvehed  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  April  3rd,  1881,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"But  not  as  the  offence,  so  also  is  the  free  gift.  For  if  through  the  offence  of  onft 
many  be  dead,  much  more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  uiau, 
Jesus  Christ,  hath  abounded  unto  many." — Romans  v.  15. 

This  text  affords  many  openings  for  controversy.  It  can  be  made  to 
bristle  witli  dillicnlties.  For  instance, — there  might  be  a  long  dis- 
cussion as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  fall  of  Adam  can  justly  be  made 
to  affect  the  condition  of  his  posterity.  When  this  is  settled  there  miglit 
arise  a  question  as  to  the  exact  way  in  which  Adam's  fault  is  connected 
with  ourselves — whether  by  imputation  of  its  sin,  or  in  what  other  form ; 
and  then  there  might  be  further  dispute  as  to  the  limit  of  the  evil  resulting 
from  our  first  parents'  offence,  and  the  full  meaning  of  the  fall,  original 
sin,  natural  depravity,  and  so  fortli.  There  would  be  another  splendid 
opportunity  for  a  great  battle  over  the  question  of  the  extent  of  the 
redeeming  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  whether  it  covers,  as  to  per- 
sons, the  whole  area  of  the  ruin  of  the  Fall ;  whether,  in  fact,  full 
atonement  luis  been  made  for  all  mankind  or  only  for  the  elect.  It  would 
be  easy  in  this  way  to  set  np  a  thorn-hedge,  and  keep  the  sheep  out  of 
the  pasture ;  or,  to  use  another  metaphor,  to  take  up  so  much  time  in 
pelting  each  other  with  the  stones  as  to  leave  the  fruit  untasted,  I  have, 
at  this  time,  neither  the  inclination  nor  the  mental  strength  either  to 
suggest  or  to  remove  the  difficulties,  which  are  so  often  the  amusement 
of  unpractical  mimls.  I  feel  more  inclined  to  chime  in  with  that  ancient 
father  of  the  church  who  declined  controversy  in  a  wise  and  explicit 
manner.  He  had  been  speaking  concerning  the  things  of  God  and  found 
iiimself  at  length  confounded  by  a  certain  clamorous  disputant,  who 
shouted  again  and  again,  "  Hear  me !  Hear  me !  "  *'  No,"  said  the 
father,  *'  1  will  not  hear  you,  nor  shall  you  hear  me,-  but  we  will  both  be 
quiet  and  hear  what  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  to  say."  So  we  will  not 
at  this  time  listen  to  this  side  nor  to  that;  but  we  will  bow  our  ear  to 
hear  what  the  Scripture  itself  hath  to  say  apart  from  all  the  noise  of 
sect  and  party.  My  object  shall  be  to  find  out  in  the  text  that  which  is 
practically  of  use  to  us,  that  -which  may  save  the  unconverted,  that 
which  may  comfort  and  build  up  those  of  us  who  are  brought  into  a 
state  of  reconciliation  with  God ;  for  I  have  of  late  been  so  often  shut 
No.  1,591.  I 


12  METKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

up  in  my  sick  chamber  that  when  I  do  come  forth  I  must  be  more  than 
ever  eager  fur  fruit  to  the  glory  of  God.  We  shall  not,  therefore,  dive  into 
the  deeps  with  the  hope  of  finding  pearls,  for  tliese  could  not  feed  hungry 
men ;  but  we  will  navigate  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  hope  that  some 
faA'ouring  wind  will  bear  us  to  the  desired  haven  with  a  freight  of  corn 
wherewith  to  supply  the  famishing.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  bless  thc' 
teaching  of  this  hour  to  the  creation  and  nourishment  of  saving  faith. 

I.  The  first  observation  from  the  text  is  this — the  appointed  way 
OF  OUR  salvation  IS  BY  THE  FREE  GIFT  OF  GoD.  We  Were  rulued 
by  the  Fall,  but  we  are  saved  by  a  free  gift.  The  text  tells  us  that  "  the- 
grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  man,  Jesns  Christ,. 
hath  abounded  unto  many."  "  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much 
more  abound."  "  Grace  reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life- 
by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Although  this  doctrine  is  well  known,  and 
is  taught  in  our  synagogues  every  Sabbath  day,  yet  this  grand  essential 
truth  is  often  enough  forgotten  or  ignored,  so  that  it  had  need  be  repeated! 
again  and  again.  I  could  wish  that  every  time  the  clock  struck  it  said,. 
"  By  grace  are  ye  saved."  I  could  wish  that  there  were  a  trumpet 
voice  ringing  out  at  day-break  both  on  sea  and  land,  over  the  whole' 
round  globe  the  words,  "By  grace  are  ye  saved."  As  Martin  Luther 
said  of  a  certain  other  truth  so  say  I  of  this,  *'  You  so  constantly 
forget  it  that  I  feel  inclined  to  take  the  Bible  and  beat  it  about  your 
head,  that  you  may  feel  it  and  keep  it  in  remembrance."  Men  do  not 
naturally  love  the  doctrine  of  grace,  and  therefore  they  cast  it  out  of 
their  minds  as  much  as  possible.  The  larger  portion  of  mankind  da 
not  believe  that  salvation  is  of  grace  :  another  part  of  them  profess  ta 
believe  it,  but  do  not  understand  its  meaning  ;  and  many  who  do  under- 
stand it  have  never  yielded  to  it  or  embraced  it.  Happy  are  they  who 
belong  to  the  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace,  for  they  know 
right  well  the  joyful  sound,  and  they  walk  in  the  light  of  the  glory  of 
the  grace  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Observe,  that  salvation  is  a  free  gift,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  bestowed 
upon  men  by  God  tvithoiU  reqard  to  any  merit,  supposed  or  real.  Grace 
has  to  do  with  the  guilty.  Mercy  in  the  very  nature  of  things  is  not  a 
fit  gift  for  the  righteous  and  deserving,  but  for  the  undeserving  and 
sinful.  When  God  deals  out  to  men  his  gracious  salvation  they  are  re- 
garded by  him  as  lost  and  condemned,  and  he  treats  them  as  persons 
who  have  no  claim  upon  him  whatsoever,  to  whom  nothing  but  his  free 
favour  can  bring  deliverance.  He  saves  them,  not  because  he  perceives 
that  they  have  done  anything  that  is  good,  or  have  hopeful  traits  of 
character,  or  form  resolutions  to  aspire  to  something  better ;  but  simply 
because  he  is  merciful,  and  delights  to  exercise  his  grace,  and  manifest 
his  free  favour  and  infinite  love.  It  is  according  to  the  nature  of  God 
to  pity  the  misei-iible  and  forgive  the  guilty,  "  for  he  is  good,  and  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever."  God  has  a  reason  for  saving  men;  but  that 
reason  does  not  lie  in  man's  merit  in  any  degree  whatever.  This  is 
clear  from  the  fact  that  he  often  begins  his  work  of  grace  upon  those 
who  can  least  of  all  be  credited  with  goodness.  It  was  said  of  our 
Lord,  "This  man  receiveth  sinners,"  and  the  saying  was  most  emphati- 
cally true.  Sovereign  grace  selects  such  as  Eahab  the  harlot,  and 
Manasseh  the  persecutor,  and  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  mad  zealot  against 


HONEY   FllOai   A    LION.  18 

Christ :  such  as  these  have  been  seized  upon  by  efface,  and  arrested  in 
infinite  love,  that  in  them  the  Lord  might  manifest  the  power  and 
plenitude  of  his  mercy.  Salvation  is  a  work  which  is  begun  by  the  pure, 
unpurchased,  free  favour  of  God,  and  in  the  same  spirit  it  is  carried  on 
and  perfected.  Pure  grace,  which  lays  the  foundation,  also  brings  forth 
the  topstone. 

Sahation  is  also  brought  to  men  irresperUce  of  any  mnrlt  lohich  God 
foreseen  will  be  in  man.  Foresight  of  the  existence  of  gt-ace  cannot  be 
the  cause  of  grace.  God  himself  does  not  foresee  that  thei'e  will  be  any 
good  thing  in  any  man,  except  what  he  foresees  that  lie  will  put 
there.  Wiiat  is  the  reason,  then,  why  he  determines  that  he  will  put  it 
there?  That  reason,  so  far  as  we  are  informed,  is  this,  "  He  will  have 
mercy  on  wliom  he  will  have  mercy."  The  Lord  determines  to  display 
his  love,  and  set  on  active  work  his  attribute  of  grace,  therefn-e  doth  he 
save  men  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will.  If  there  be  salva- 
tion given  to  men  upon  the  foresight  of  what  they  are  yet  to  be,  it  is 
clear  it  is  a  matter  of  works  and  debt,  and  not  of  grace ;  but  the  Scrip- 
ture is  most  decided  that  it  is  not  of  works,  but  of  unmingled  grace, 
for  saith  the  apostle,  "  If  by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more  of  works :  other- 
wise grace  is  no  more  grace.  But  if  it  be  of  works,  then  is  it  no  more 
grace  :  otherwise  work  is  no  more  work."  Our  text  is  express  that  sal- 
vation is  "  the  free  gift,"  and  that  it  comes  to  us  by  "  the  grace  of  God, 
and  the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  man,  Jesus  Christ." 

I  go  a  little  further  in  trying  to  explain  how  salvation  is  a  free  gift,  by 
saying  that  it  is  given  ivitkoul  reference  to  conditions  ivMch  imply  any 
desert  But  I  hear  one  murmur,  "  God  will  not  give  grace  to  men  who 
do  not  repent."  I  answer,  God  gives  men  grace  to  repent,  and  no  man 
ever  repents  till  first  grace  is  given  him  by  which  he  is  led  to  repentance. 
*'  God  will  not  give  his  g'race  to  those  who  do  not  believe,"  says 
one.  I  reply,  God  gives  grace  to  men  by  which  they  are  moved  to 
believe,  and  it  is  through  the  grace  of  God  that  they  are  brought  into  the 
faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  You  may  say,  if  you  please,  that  repentance  and 
faith  are  conditions  of  salvation,  and  I  will  not  quarrel  with  you  ;  but 
please  remember  that  they  are  not  conditions  in  the  sense  of  deserving 
anything  of  God.  They  may  be  conditions  of  receiving,  but  they  are  not 
conditions  of  purchasing,  for  salvation  is  without  money  and  without 
price.  We  are  expressly  told  that  salvation  "  is  of  faith,  that  it  might 
bo  by  grace":  for  faith  is  not  to  be  numbered  with  works  of  the  law,  to 
which  the  idea  of  merit  may  be  attached.  Faith  is  far  as  the  poles 
asunder  from  claiming  anything  of  God  by  way  of  debt.  Faith  comes  as 
a  poor,  undeserving  thing,  and  simply  trusts  the  free  mercy  of  God.  It 
never  attempts  to  wear  the  crown,  or  grasp  a  particle  of  praise.  The 
•believer  never  can  be  a  boaster,  for  boasting  is  excluded  by  the  law,  of 
faith.  If  a  Christian  should  begin  to  boast,  it  would  be  because  his 
believing  is  faiUng,  and  his  evil  nature  is  coming  to  the  front ;  for  faith 
is  of  all  graces  most  self-denying;  her  song  is  always,  Noii  nobis  Domine, 
"  Not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give  praise."  While,  theref)re,  the 
word  of  God  assures  us  that  except  we  repent  we  shall  all  likewise  perish, 
and  that  if  we  believe  not  in  Jesus  Christ  we  shall  die  in  our  sins, 
it  would  have  us  at  the  same  time  know  that  there  is  no  merit  in 
repenting  or  believing,  but  grace  reigns  in  God's  acceptance  of  these 


14  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

graces._  "We  are  not  to  regard  the  requirement  of  faith,  repentance,  and 
confession  of  sin  as  at  all  militating  against  the  fulness  and  freeuess  of 
divine  grace,  since,  in  the  first  place,  both  repentance,  faith,  and  true 
confession  of  sin  are  all  gifts  of  grace,  and,  in  tlie  next  place,  they  hare 
no  merit  in  themselves,  being  only  such  things  as  honest  men  should 
render  when  they  know  that  they  have  erred  and  are  promised  forgive- 
ness. To  be  sorry  for  my  sin  is  no  recompense  for  having  sinned  ;  and 
to  believe  God  to  be  true  is  no  work  for  which  I  may  demand  a  reward  ; 
if,  then,  I  am  saved  through  faith,  it  is  of  the  pure  mercy  of  God,  and  of 
that  alone  that  pardon  comes  to  me. 

Beloved,  so  far  is  God  from  giving  salvation  to  men  as  a  matter  of 
reward  and  debt,  and  therefore  bestowing  it  only  upon  the  good  and 
excellent,  that  he  is  pleased  to  bestow  that  salvation  over  the  head  of  sin 
and  in  the  teeth  of  rebellion.  As  I  said  before,  mercy  and  grace  are  f  jr 
the  sinful,  for  none  others  need  them ;  and  God's  grace  comes  to  us  when 
we  are  far  off  by  wicked  works.  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us, 
in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  Free  grace  breaks 
forth  like  a  mighty  flood,  and  sweeps  in  torrents  over  the  hills  of  our 
transgressions,  rising  above  the  high  alps  of  our  presumptuous  sins. 
Twenty  cubits  upward  doth  this  sea  of  grace  prevail  till  the  tops  of  the 
mountains  of  iniquity  are  covered.  The  Lord  passeth  by  transgression, 
iniquity,  and  sin,  and  remembereth  not  the  iniquity  of  his  people, 
because  he  delighteth  in  mercy.  Almsgiving  needs  a  pauper,  and  grace 
needs  a  sinner.  There  is  no  opportunity  for  forgiveness  where  there  is 
no  offence.  If  men  are  meritorious  how  can  God  be  gracious  to  them  ? 
In  such  a  case  it  will  be  enough  for  him  to  be  just.  When  good  works 
can  put  in  a  valid  claim  peace  and  heaven  can  be  obtained  by  the  rules 
of  debt ;  but  since  it  is  clear  that  eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  pure  favour, 
you  need  not  marvel  when  I  say  that  grace  comes  to  men  leaping  over  the 
mountains  of  their  iniquities.  Abounding  mercy  delights  to  bloc  out 
abounding  sin,  and  it  will  never  lack  for  opportunity  to  do  its  pleasure. 
There  is  no  lack  of  occasions  for  grace  in  this  poor  fallen  world,  and  of 
all  the  places  where  there  is  most  room  I  know  of  one  spot  not  far  from 
here  where  there  is  a  grand  opf'ortunity  lor  infinite  mercy  and  super- 
abounding  grace  to  exercise  their  power.  Here  is  the  spot — it  is  this 
treacherous,  guilty  heart  of  mine.  1  think,  my  brother,  you  know  of 
another  spot  that  is  very  like  it ;  and  you,  my  sister,  too,  can  say, 
"Wondrous  mercy!  Sure  there  is  room  for  all  its  heights  and  depths  to 
be  shown  in  this  sinful  soul  of  mine."  Ay,  and  it  will  be  shown,  too,  if 
you  can  but  look  for  it  through  Christ  Jesus ;  fur  it  is  the  delight  of 
God's  grace  to  flow  into  unlikely  places :  mercy  is  the  glory  of  God,  and 
..he  loves  to  bestow  it  on  those  who  least  deserve  it. 

We  are  saved  by  grace,  free  grace,  pure  grace,  grace  without  regard  to 
merit  or  to  the  possirility  of  such  a  thing,  and  many  of  ics  have  been 
saved  by  grace  of  the  most  aboundinrj  and  extraordinary  sort.  Some  of 
us  will  be  prodigies  of  divine  love,  miracles  of  mercy,  to  be  wondered  at 
throughout  eternity :  we  shall  be  set  up  in  heaven  as  monuments  for 
angels  to  gaze  at,  in  which  they  shall  see  a  display  of  the  amazing  good- 
ness of  the  Lord.  Some  of  us,  I  said  ;  but  I  suppose  that  in  each  one  of 
the  redeemed  there  is  some  particular  development  of  grace  which  will 
make  him  specially  remarkable,  so  that  the  whole  body  of  us,  as  one 


HONEY   FROM  A   LION.  {^ 

glorified  church,  shall  be  made  known  unto  angels,  and  principalities, 
and  powers,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.  Oh,  what  a  revelation  of 
grace  and  mercy  will  be  seen  when  all  the  blood-washed  race  shall  gather 
safely  around  the  eternal  throne,  and  sing  their  hallelujahs  unto  him 
that  loved  them  and  washed  them  from  their  sins  in  his  own  blood.    ' 

Note  one  thing  more  concerning  this  plan  of  salvation,  that  all  this 
grace  comes  to  us  through  the  one  man  Jesus  Christ.  I  sometimes  hear 
people  talking  about  a  "one  man  ministry."  I  know  what  they  mean,, 
but  I  know  also  that  I  am  saved  by  a  one  man  ministry,  even  by  one 
who  trod  the  winepress  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with 
him.  I  was  lost  by  a  one  man  ministry,  when  father  Adam  fell  in  Eden  ;. 
but  I  was  saved  by  a  one  man  ministry,  when  the  blessed  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  bore  my  sin  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  0  matchless  ministry 
of  love,  when  the  Lord  from  heaven  came  into  the  world  and  took  upon 
himself  our  nature,  and  became  in  all  respects  human,  and  being  found 
in  fashion  as  a  man,  was  obedient  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross  !: 
It  is  through  the  one  man,  Christ  Jesus,  that  all  the  grace  of  God  comes 
streaming  down  to  all  the  chosen.  Mercy  flows  to  no  man  save  through 
the  one  appointed  channel,  Jesus  the  Son  of  man.  Get  away  from 
Christ,  and  you  leave  the  highway  of  God's  everlasting  love ;  pass  this- 
door,  and  you  shall  find  no  entrance  into  hfe.  You  must  drink  fi'om 
this  conduit-pipe,  or  you  must  thirst  for  ever,  and  ask  in  vain  for  a  drop- 
of  water  to  cool  your  parched  tongue.  **  In  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness- 
of  the  Godhead  bodily."  All  the  infinite  mercy  of  God  and  love  of  God 
— and  God  himself  is  love — is  concentrated  in  the  person  of  the  well- 
beloved  Son  of  the  Highest,  and  unto  him  be  glory  for  ever.  Sing  unto 
him,  ye  angels!  Chant  his  praise,  ye  redeemed !  For  by  the  one  man 
Christ  Jesus  the  whole  company  of  the  elect  have  been  delivered  from  the 
wrath  to  come,  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  ©f  the  grace  of  God. 

Thus  I  have  tried  to  set  before  you  God's  way  of  salvation. 

II.  Starttng  aside,  as  it  may  seem,  from  the  current  of  our  thoughts,. 
but  only  with  the  view  of  coming  back  to  it  with  a  forcible  argument, 
we  next  note  that  it  is  curtain  that  great  evils  have  come  to 
TJS  BY  THE  Fall.  Paul  speaks  in  this  text  of  ours  of  the  "offence," 
which  word  may  be  read  the  "  Fall,"  which  was  caused  by  the  stumbling 
of  our  father  Adam.  Our  fall  in  Adam  is  a  type  of  the  salvation 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  but  the  type  is  not  able  completely  to  set 
ftJrth  all  the  work  of  Christ :  hence  the  apostle  says,  "But  not  as  the 
offence,  so  also  is  the  free  gift.  For  if  through  the  olfence  of  one  many 
be  dead,  much  more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by 
one  man,  Jesus  Christ,  hath  abounded  unto  many."  It  is  certain,  then,. 
that  we  were  heavy  losers  by  the  offence  of  the  first  father  and  head  of 
our  race.  I  am  not  going  into  details  and  particulars,  but  it  is  clear  that 
we  have  lost  the  garden  ^  Eden  and  all  its  delights,  privileges,  and  im- 
munities, its  communion  with  God,  and  its  freedom  from  death.  We 
have  lost  our  first  honour  and  health,  and  we  have  become  the  subjects 
of  pain  and  weakness,  suffering  and  death  :  this  is  the  effect  of  the  Fall. 
A  desert  now  howls  where  otherwise  a  garden  would  have  smiled. 
Through  the  sin  of  Adam  we  have  been  born  under  conditions  which  are 
far  from  being  desirable,  heirs  to  a  heritage  of  sorrow.  Our  griefs  have 
been  alleviated  by  the  bounty  of  God,  but  still  we  are  not  burn  under 


1C  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

such  conditions  as  might  have  been  ours  had  Adam  remained  in  his 
integrity  and  kept  his  first  estate.  We  came  into  the  world  with  a  bias 
ioivards  evil.  Those  of  us  who  have  any  knowledge  of  our  own  nature 
must  confess  that  there  is  in  us  a  strong  tendency  towards  sin,  which  is 
mixed  up  with  our  very  being.  This  is  not  derived  solely  from  faults  of 
■education,  or  from  the  imitation  of  others  ;  but  there  is  a  bent  within 
us  in  the  wrong  direction,  and  this  has  been  there  from  our  birth. 
Alas !  that  it  should  be  so  ;  but  so  it  is.  In  addition  to  having 
this  tendency  to  sin,  we  are  made  liahh  to  death — nay,  not  liable 
alone,  but  we  are  sure  in  due  time  to  bow  our  heads  beneath  the 
fatal  stroke.  Two  only  of  the  human  race  have  escaped  death,  but  the 
rest  have  left  their  bodies  here  to  moulder  back  into  mother  earth,  and 
unless  the  Lord  cometh  speedily,  we  expect  that  the  same  thing  will 
happen  to  these  bodies  of  ours.  While  we  live  we  know  that  the 
sweat  of  our  hroiv  must  pay  the  price  of  our  bread  ;  we  know  that  our 
■children  must  be  born  with  pangs  and  travail ;  we  know  that  we  our- 
selves must  return  to  the  dust  from  whence  we  are  taken  ;  for  dust  we 
are,  and  unto  dust  must  we  return.  0  Adam,  thou  didst  a  sad  day's 
work  for  us  when  thou  didst  hearken  to  the  voice  of  thy  wife  and  eat 
•of  the  forbidden  tree.  The  world  has  no  more  a  Paradise  anywhera, 
but  everywhere  it  has  the  place  of  wailing  and  the  field  of  the  dead. 
Where  can  you  go  and  not  find  ti'aces  of  the  first  transgression  in 
'the  sepulchre  and  its  mouldering  bones?  Every  field  is  fattened  with 
the  dust  of  the  departed  :  every  wave  of  the  sea  is  tainted  with  atoms  of 
the  dead.  Scarcely  blows  a  ]\Iarch  wind  down  our  streets  but  it  sn^eeps 
aloft  the  dust  either  of  Caesar  or  his  slave,  of  ancient  Briton,  or  modern 
Saxon  ;  for  the  globe  is  worm-eaten  by  death.  Sin  has  scarred,  and 
marred,  and  spoiled  this  creation  by  making  it  subject  to  vanity 
;through  its  offence.  Thus  terrible  evils  have  come  to  us  by  an  act  in 
which  we  had  no  hand :  we  were  not  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  we  did 
not  incite  Adam  to  rebellion,  and  yet  we  have  become  sufferers  through 
no  deed  of  ours.  Say  what  you  will  about  it,  the  fact  remains,  and 
•cannot  be  escaped  from. 

This  sad  truth  leads  me  on  to  the  one  which  is  the  essence  of  the  text, 
.and  constitutes  my  third  observation. 

III.     Fiioii  THE  Fall  we  infer  the  more  abundant  certainty 

THAT   SALVATION    BY    GRACE    THROUGH    ChRIST    JeSUS     SHALL    COMB 

TO  BErJEVEKS.  If  all  this  mischief  has  happened  to  us  through  the  fall 
of  Adam  why  should  not  immense  blessing  flow  to  us  by  the  work  of 
■Christ  ?  Through  Adam's  transgression  we  lost  Paradise,  that  is  certain  ; 
but  if  anything  can  be  more  certain  we  may  with  greater  positiveness 
declare  that  the  second  Adam  will  restore  the  ruin  of  the  first.  If  through 
the  offence  of  one  man  many  be  dead,  much  more  the  grace  of  God  and 
the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  man,  Jesus  Christ,  shall  abound  and 
ihas  abounded  unto  many.  Settle  in  your  minds,  then,  that  the  fall  of 
Adam  has  wrought  us  great  damage,  and  then  be  as  much  assured  that 
the  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  in  which  we  had  no  hand 
whatever,  must  do  us  great  service.  Believing  in  Christ  Jesus,  it  becomes 
beyond  all  measure  sure  to  us  that  we  are  blessed  in  him,  seeing  that  it 
is  already  cei'taiu  that  through  the  fall  of  Adam  we  have  become  subject 
;to  sorrow  and  death. 


HONEY   FEOM   A   LION.  17 

For,  first,  this  appears  to  be  more  delightful  to  the  heart  of  God.  It 
must  be  fally  according  to  his  gracious  nature  that  salvation  should 
come  to  us  through  his  Son.  I  can  understand  that  God,  having  so 
arranged  it  that  the  human  race  should  be  regarded  as  one,  and  should 
stand  or  fall  before  him  in  one  man,  should  carry  out  the  arrangement  to 
its  righteous  end,  and  allow  the  consequences  of  sin  to  fall  upon  suc- 
ceeding generations  of  men :  but  yet  I  know  that  he  takes  no  pleasure 
in  the  death  of  any,  and  finds  no  delight  in  afflicting  mankind.  When 
the  first  Adam  transgressed  it  was  inevitable  that  the  consequences  of 
his  transgression  should  descend  to  his  posterity,  and  yet  I  can  imagine 
a  perfectly  holy  mind  questioning  whether  the  airangeraent  would  be 
carried  out.  I  can  conceive  of  angels  saying  one  to  another,  "  Will  all 
men  die  through  this  entrance  of  sin  into  the  world  ?  Can  it  be  that 
the  innumerable  sons  of  Adam  will  all  suffer  froui  his  disobedience?" 
But  I  cannot  imagine  any  question  being  raised  about  the  other  point, 
namely,  the  result  of  the  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  If  God  has  so 
arranged  it  that  iu  the  second  Adam  men  rise  and  live,  it  seems  to 
me  most  gloriously  consistent  with  his  gracious  nature  and  infinite 
love  that  it  should  come  to  pass  that  all  who  believe  in  Jesus  should 
be  saved  through  him.  I  cannot  imagine  angels  hesitating  and  saying, 
"  Christ  has  been  born ;  Christ  has  lived ;  Christ  has  died ;  these  men 
have  had  nothing  to  do  with  that:  will  God  save  them  for  the  sake 
of  his  Son?"  Oh,  no,  they  must  have  felt,  as  they  saw  the  babe  born 
at  Bethlehem,  as  they  saw  him  living  his  perfect  life  and  dying  his 
atoning  death,  "  God  will  bless  those  who  are  in  Christ ;  God  will  save 
Christ's  people  for  Christ's  sake."  As  for  ourselves,  we  are  sure  that  if 
the  Lord  executes  judgment,  which  is  his  strange  work,  he  will 
certainly  carry  out  mercy,  which  is  his  delight.  If  he  kept  to  the 
representative  principle  when  it  involved  consequences  which  gave  him 
no  pleasure,  we  may  be  abundantly  assured  that  he  will  keep  to  it  now 
that  it  will  involve  nothing  but  good  to  those  concerned  in  it.  Here, 
then,  is  the  argument, — "  For  if  through  the  offence  of  one  many  be 
dead,  much  more  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by 
one  man,  Jesus  Christ,  hath  abounded  unto  many." 

This  assurance  becomes  stronger  still  when  we  think  that  it  seems  more  ; 
inevitable  that  men  should  be  saved  by  the  death  of  Christ  than  that  men  - 
should  be  lost  by  the  sin  of  Adam.     It  might  seem  possible  that,  after 
Adam   had    sinned,    God    might   have   said,    "Notwithstanding   this 
covenant  of  works,  I  will  not  lay  this  burden  upon  the   child  i  en  of 
Adam";   but  it  is  not  possible  that  after  the  eternal  Son  of  God  has 
become  man,  and  has  bowed  his  head  to  death,  God  should  say,  "  Ye^  , 
after  all  I  will  not  save  men  for  Christ's  sake."     Stand  and  look  at  the 
Christ  upon  the  cross,  and  mark  those  wounds  of  his,  and  you  will 
become  absolutely  certain  that  sin  can  be  pardoned,  nay,   must  be 
pardoned  to  those  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus.     Those  flowing  dropf 
of  blood  demand  with  a  voice  that  cannot  be  gainsaid  that  iniquit} 
should  be  put  away.    If  the  voice  of  Abel  crying  from  the  ground 
was  prevalent,  how  much  more  the  blood  of  the  Only-begotten  Son 
of  God,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  spot  ? 
It  cannot  be,  0  God,  that  thou  shouldest  despise  or  forget  the  sacri- 
fice on   Calvary.     Grace  must  flow  to  sinners  through  the   bleeding 
B  


18  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Saviour,  seeing  that  death  came  to  men  through  their  transgressing 
progenitor. 

I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  get  into  the  very  soul  of  this  argument 
as  I  desire,  but  to  me  it  is  very  sweet  to  look  at  the  differeyice  as  to  the 
causes  of  the  two  effects.  Look  now  at  the  occasion  of  our  ruin, — "  the 
offence  of  one."  The  one  man  transgresses,  and  you  and  I  and  all  of  us 
come  under  sin,  sorrow,  and  death.  What  a^e  we  told  is  the  fountain  of 
these  streams  of  woe  ?  The  one  action  of  our  first  parents.  Far  be  it 
from  me  to  say  a  word  to  depreciate  the  greatness  of  their  crime,  or  to 
raise  a  question  as  to  the  justice  of  its  consequences.  I  think  no  one 
can  have  a  more  decided  opinion  upon  that  point  than  I  have  ;  for  the 
offence  was  very  great,  and  the  principle  which  led  to  our  participation 
in  its  results  is  a  just  one,  and,  what  is  more,  is  fraught  with  the  most 
blessed  after-consequences  to  fallen  men,  since  it  has  left  them  a  door  of 
hope  of  their  rising  by  the  same  method  which  led  to  their  fall.  Yet 
the  sin  which  destroyed  us  was  the  transgression  of  a  finite  being,  and 
cannot  be  compared  in  power  with  the  grace  of  the  infinite  (xod ;  it  was 
the  sin  of  a  moment,  and  therefore  cannot  be  compared  for  force  and 
energy  with  the  everliisting  purpose  of  divine  love.  If,  then,  the  com- 
paratively feeble  fount  of  Adam's  sin  sends  forth  a  flood  which  drowns  the 
world  in  sorrow  and  death,  what  must  be  the  boundless  blessing  poured 
■S^rth  from  the  infinite  source  of  divine  grace  ?  The  grace  of  God  is 
like  his  nature,  omnipotent  and  unlimited.  God  hath  not  a  measure  of 
love,  but  he  is  love  ;  love  to  the  uttermost  dwells  in  him.  God  is  not 
only  gracious  to  this  degree  or  to  that,  but  he  is  gracious  beyond 
measure ;  we  read  of  "  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace."  He  is  "  the 
God  of  all  gi'ace,"  and  his  mercy  is  great  above  the  heavens.  Our  largest 
conceptions  fall  far  short  of  the  lovingkindness  and  pity  of  God,  for  "  his 
merciful  kindness  is  great  towards  us."  As  high  as  the  heavens  are  above 
the  earth,  so  are  his  thoughts  above  our  thoughts  in  the  direction  of 
grace.  If,  then,  my  brethren,  the  narrow  fount  which  yielded  bitter  and 
poisonous  waters  has  sufficed  to  slay  the  myriads  of  the  human  race,  how 
much  more  shall  the  river  of  God  which  is  full  of  water,  even  the  river 
of  the  water  of  life,  which  proceedeth  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of 
the  Lamb,  supply  life  and  bliss  to  every  man  that  believeth  in  Christ 
Jesus  ?  Thus  saith  Paul,  "  For  if  by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned 
by  one ;  much  more  they  which  I'eceive  abundance  of  grace  and  of  the 
gift  of  righteousness  shall  reign  in  life  by  one,  Jesus  Christ."  That  is 
the  argument  of  the  text,  and  to  me  it  seems  to  be  a  very  powerful  one, 
sufficient  to  dash  out  the  very  life  of  unbelief  and  enable  every  penitent 
man  to  say,  "  I  see  what  I  have  lost  in  Adam,  but  I  also  see  how  much 
I  obtain  through  Christ  Jesus,  my  Lord,  when  I  humbly  yield  myself  to 
him." 

Furthermore,  I  would  have  yon  note  th£^  difference  of  the  channels  by 
which  the  evil  and  the  good  were  severally  communicated  to  us.  In  each 
case  it  was  "  by  one,"  but  what  a  difference  in  the  persons !  We  fell  through 
Adam,  a  name  not  to  be  pronounced  without  reverence,  seeing  he  is  the 
chief  patriarch  of  the  race,  and  the  children  should  honour  the  parent :  let 
us  not  think  too  little  of  the  head  of  the  human  family.  Yet  what  is  the 
first  Adam  as  compared  with  the  second  Adam?  He  is  but  of  the  earth 
earthy,  but  the  second  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.     He  was  at  best  a 


HONEY  FROM   A   LION.  19 

mere  man,  but  our  Eedeemer  counts  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God. 
I  Surely,  then,  if  Adam  with  that  puny  hand  of  his  could  pull  down  the 
house"  of  our  humanity,  and  hurl  this  ruin  on  our  first  estate,  thr.t 
[i  szreater  man,  who  is  also  the  Son  of  God,  can  fully  restore  us  and  brin:^- 
J  back  to  our  race  the  golden  age.  If  one  man  could  ruin  by  his  fauk, 
;  surely  an  infinitely  greater  man  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
I  Godhead  bodily  can  restore  us  by  the  abounding  grace  of  God. 

And  look,  my  brethren,  what  this  man  did.  Adam  commits  one  fault 
and  spoils  us ;  but  Christ's  works  and  achievements  are  not  one,  but 
many  as  the  stars  of  heaven.  Look  at  that  life  of  obedience :  it  is  like 
a  crown  set  with  all  manner  of  priceless  jewels  :  all  the  virtues  are  in  it, 
and  it  is  without  flaw  in  any  point.  If  one  sinful  action  of  our  first 
covenant  he.ad  destroys,  shall  not  a  whole  life  of  holiness,  on  the  part  of 
our  second  covenant  representative  be  accepted  for  us  ? 

But  what  is  more,  Adam  did  but  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  but  our 
Lord  Jesus  died,  pouring  out  his  soul  untq  death,  bearing  the  sin  of  his 
people  upon  himself.  Such  a  death  must  have  more  force  in  it  than  the 
sad  deed  of  Adam.  Shall  it  not  save  us?  Is  there  any  comparison 
between  the  one  act  of  rebellion  in  the  garden  and  the  matchless  deed 
of  superlative  obedience  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary  which  crowned  a 
lite  of  service  ?  Am  I  sure  that  the  act  of  disobedience  has  done  nie 
damage?  Then  I  am  much  more  certain  that  the  glorious  act  of  self- 
sacrifice  must  be  able  to  save  me,  and  I  cast  myself  upon  it  without 
question  or  misgiving.  The  passion  of  God's  Only-begotten  must  have 
in  it  infallible  virtue  for  the  remission  of  sin.  Upon  the  perfect  work 
of  Jesus  my  soul  hangs  at  this  moment,  without  a  suspicion  of  possible 
failure,  and  without  the  addition  of  the  shadow  of  a  confidence  any- 
where else.  The  good  which  may  be  supposed  to  be  in  man,  his  best 
words  and  holiest  actions,  are  all  to  me  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance 
as  to  any  title  to  the  favour  of  God.  My  sole  claim  for  salvation  lies  in 
that  one  man,  the  gift  of  God,  who  by  his  life  and  death  has  made 
atonement  for  my  sin,  but  that  one  man,  Christ  Jesus,  is  a  sure  founda- 
tion, and  a  nail  upon  which  we  may  hang  all  the  weight  of  our  eternal 
interests.  I  feel  the  more  confidence  in  the  certainty  of  salvation  by 
Christ  because  of  my  firm  persuasion  of  the  dreadful  efficacy  of  Adam's 
fail.  Think  awhile  and  it  will  seem  strange,  yet  strangely  true,  that  the 
hope  of  Paradise  regained  should  be  argued  and  justified  by  the  fact 
of  Paradise  lost,  that  the  absolute  certainty  that  one  man  ruined  us 
should  give  us  an  abounding  guarantee  that  one  glorious  man  has  in 
very  deed  effectually  saved  all  those  who  by  faith  accept  the  efficacy  of 
his  work. 

Now,  if  you  have  grasped  my  thought,  and  have  drunk  into  the  truth 
of  the  text,  you  may  derive  a  great  deal  of  comfort  from  it,  and  it  may 
suggest  to  you  many  painful  things  which  will  henceforth  yield  you 
pleasure.  A  babe  is  born  into  the  world  amid  great  anxiety  because  of 
its  mother's  pains,  but  while  these  go  to  prove  how  the  consequences  (>f 
the  Fall  are  still  with  us,  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  Eve,  "in 
sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth  children,"  they  also  assure  us  that  the 
second  Adam  can  abundantly  bring  us  bliss  through  a  second  birth,  by 
which  we  are  begotten  again  unto  a  lively  hope.  You  go  into  the  arab.e 
field  and  mark  the  thistle,  and  tear  your  garments  with  a  thorn  :  the^e 


20  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PUI.PIT. 

prove  the  curse,  but  also  preach  the  gospel.  Did  not  the  Lord  G-od  sa,j^ 
"  Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake ;  thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it 
bring  forth  to  thee."  Through  no  fault  of  ours,  for  we  were  not  present 
when  the  first  man  offended,  our  fiSlds  reluctantly  yield  their  harvests. 
AVell,  inasmuch  as  we  have  seen  the  thorn  and  the  thistle  produced  by 
the  ground  because  of  one  Adam,  we  may  expect  to  see  a  blessing  on  the 
earth  because  of  the  second  and  greater  Adam.  Therefore  with  un- 
bounded confidence  do  I  believe  the  promise — "  Ye  shall  go  out  with  joy, 
and  be  led  forth  with  peace :  the  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break 
forth  before  you  into  singing,  and  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap 
their  hands.  Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir  tree,  and  instead 
of  the  brier  shall  come  up  the  myrtle  tree :  and  it  shall  be  to  the  Lord 
for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting  sign  that  shall  not  be  cut  off." 

Do  you  wipe  the  sweat  from  your  brow  as  you  toil  for  your  liveli- 
hood ?  Did  not  the  Lord  say,  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat 
bread"?  Ought  not  your  labour  to  be  an  argument  by  which  your 
faith  shall  prove  that  in  Christ  Jesus  there  remaineth  a  rest  for  the 
people  of  God.  In  toiling  unto  w'eariness  you  feel  that  Adam's  fall  is  at 
work  upon  you ;  he  has  turned  you  into  a  tiller  of  the  ground,  or  a 
keeper  of  sheep,  or  a  \vorker  in  metals,  but  in  any  case  he  has  made  you 
wear  a  yoke ;  say  you  then  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  Blessed  second  Adam,. 
as  I  see  and  feel  what  the  first  man  did,  I  am  abundantly  certified  as 
to  what  thou  canst  accomplish.  I  will  therefore  rest  in  thee  with  all  my 
heart." 

When  you  observe  a  funeral  passing  slowly  along  the  street,  or  enter 
the  churchyard,  and  notice  hillock  after  hillock  above  the  lowly  beds  of  the 
departed,  you  see  set  forth  evidently  before  your  eyes  the  result  of  the  Fall. 
You  ask, — Who  slew  all  these  ?  and  at  what  gate  did  the  fell  destroyer 
eater  this  world?  Did  the  first  Adam  through  his  disobedience  lift  the 
latch  for  death  ?  It  is  surely  so.  Therefore  I  believe  with  the  greater 
assurance  that  the  second  Adam  can  give  life  to  these  dry  bones,  can 
awake  all  these  sleepers,  and  raise  them  in  newness  of  life.  If  so 
weak  a  man  as  Adam  by  one  sin  has  brought  in  death,  to  pile  the 
carcases  of  men  heaps  upon  heaps,  and  make  the  earth  reek  with  corrup- 
tion, much  more  shall  the  glorious  Son  of  God  at  his  coming  call  them 
again  to  life  and  immortality,  and  renew  them  in  the  image  of  God. 
How  blessed  are  those  words, — '*  Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and 
become  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept.  For  since  by  man  came  death,, 
by  man  came  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all 
die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive.  The  first  man  is  of  the 
earth,  earthy:  the  second  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  As  is  the 
earthy,  such  are  they  also  that  are  earthy :  and  as  is  the  heavenly,  such 
are  they  also  that  are  heavenly.  And  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of 
the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly."  Is  not  this 
kiUing  a  lion,  and  finding  honey  in  its  carcase?  "Out  of  the  eater 
cometh  forth  meat,  and  out  of  the  strong  cometh  forth  sweetness,"  when 
from  the  fact  of  the  Fall  we  derive  a  strong  assurance  of  our  restoration 
by  Christ  Jesus. 

Time  fails  me  ;  otherwise  I  meant  to  have  dwelt  somewhat  at  length 
upon  the  last  head  which  can  now  only  be  cursorily  noticed. 

IV.     It  seems  certain  that  if  from  the  fall  of  Adam  such  great  results 


HONEY   FROM   A   LION.  21 

flow,  GREATER  RESULTS  MUST  FLOW  FROM  THE  GRACE  OF  GOD,  AND 
THE   GIFT   BY   GRACE,  WHICH  IS  BY  ONE  MAN,  JESUS  ChRIST.     Brethren, 

suppose  that  Adam  had  never  sinned,  and  we  were  at  this  moment  un- 
fallen  beings,  yet  our  standing  would  have  remained  in  jeopardy,  seeing 
that  at  any  moment  he  might  have  transgressed  and  so  have  pulled  us 
down.  Thousands  of  years  of  obedience  might  not  have  ended  the  pro- 
bation, seeing  there  is  no  such  stipulation  in  the  original  covenant. 
You  and  I  therefore  would  be  holding  our  happiness  by  a  very  precarious 
tenure  ;  we  could  never  glory  in  absolute  security  and  eternal  life  as  we 
now  do  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  have  now  lost  everything  in  Adam,  and  so 
the  uncertain  tenure  has  come  to  an  end,  our  ler^e  of  Eden  and  its  joys 
has  altogether  expired ;  but  we  that  have  believed,  have  obtained  an 
inheritance  which  we  hold  by  an  indisputable  and  never-failing  title 
which  Satan  himself  cannot  dispute  ;  "All  things  are  yours,  and  ye  are 
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  finished  the 
work  by  which  his  people  are  saved,  and  that  work  has  been  certified  by 
ihis  resurrection  from  the  dead.  There  are  no  "  ifs  "  in  the  covenanc 
now;  there  is  not  a  "  peradventnre "  in  it  from  beginning  to  end  ;  no 
chances  of  failure  caused  by  unfinished  conditions  can  be  found  in  it.  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved.'"  Do  you  say  *'I  believe 
he  shall  be  saved  if  he —  "?  Do  not  dare  to  add  an  "  if"  where  God  has 
placed  none.  Eemember  what  will  happen  to  you  if  you  add  anything 
to  the  book  of  God's  testimony.  No,  it  is  written,  "  He  that  believeth 
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved : "  "  He  that  believeth  in  him  hath  ever- 
lasting life."  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that 
are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Thus  we  have  obtained  a  surer  standing  than  we 
could  have  had  under  the  first  Adam,  and  our  hymn  is  true  to  the  letter 
when  it  sings — 

"  He  raised  me  from  the  deeps  of  sin, 

The  t^ates  of  gaping  hell, 
And  fix'd  my  standing  more  secure 

Than  'twas  before  1  fell." 

Our  Lord  has  not  only  undone  the  mischief  of  the  Fall,  but  he  has  given 
us  more  than  we  have  lost  :  even  as  the  Psalmist  saith,  "  Then  I 
restored  that  which  I  took  not  away." 

By  the  great  transgression  of  Adam  we  lost  our  life  in  him,  for  so  ran 
the  threatening — "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely 
die  ";  but  in  Christ  Jesus  we  live  again  with  a  higher  and  nobler  life, 
for  the  new  life  being  the  direct  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  being  sustained 
by  feeding  upon  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  is  higher  than  the  life  of 
innocence  in  the  gardes  of  Eden.  It  is  of  a  higher  kind  in  many 
respects,  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak  particularly,  but  this  much  we 
may  say,  "  The  first  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul,  the  second  Adam  is 
a  quickening  Spirit." 

The  Lord  Jesus  has  also  brought  us  into  a  nearer  relationship  to  God 
than  we  could  have  possessed  by  any  other  means.  We  were  God's 
creatures  by  creation,  but  now  we  are  his  sons  by  adoption  ;  in  a  cer- 
tain narrow  sense  we  were  the  ofispring  of  God,  but  now  by  the  exalta- 
tion of  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  the  representative  of  us  all,  we  are 
brought  into  the  nearest  possible  relationship  to  God.  Jesus  sits  upon 
the  throne  of  God,  and  manhood  is  thus  uplifted  next  to  deity :  the 


22  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

nearest  akin  to  the  Eternal  is  a  man,  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  the 
Hij^hest.  We  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones, 
and  therefore  we  share  his  honours  and  participate  in  his  triumphs. 
In  Christ  Jesus  man  is  made  to  have  dominion  over  all  the  works  of 
God's  hands,  and  the  redeemed  are  raised  up  together  with  Christ  and 
made  to  sit  in  the  heavenly  places  with  him,  above  all  principalities  and 
powers,  and  all  things  else  that  be ;  for  these  are  the  favourites  of  heaven, 
the  beloved  of  the  great  King,  No  creatures  can  equal  perfected  men  ; 
they  rise  superior  even  to  the  angels  who  have  never  sinned ;  for  in  them 
the  riches  of  the  glory  of  God's  grace  is  more  fully  seen  than  in  pure, 
unfallen  spirits. 

0  beloved,  hath  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  done  much  for  us,  and  ought 
we  not  to  expect  that  it  should  be  so,  for  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by 
grace  by  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  are  infinitely  stronger  forces  than  Adam's 
sin.  There  must  be  much  more  sap  in  the  man,  the  Branch,  than  in  that 
poor  plant,  the  one  man  who  was  made  from  the  dust  of  the  earth.  Oh 
the  bliss  which  opens  up  before  us  now.  "We  have  lost  Paradise,  but  we 
shall  possess  that  of  which  the  earthly  garden  was  but  a  lowly  type  :  we 
might  have  eaten  of  the  luscious  fruits  of  Eden,  but  now  we  eat  of  the 
bread  which  came  down  from  heaven ;  we  might  have  heard  the  voice  of 
tlie  Lord  God  walking  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day,  but  now, 
like  Enoch,  we  may  walk  with  God  after  a  nobler  and  closer  fashion.  We 
are  now  capable  of  a  joy  which  unfallen  spirits  could  not  have  known  : 
the  bliss  of  pardoned  sin,  the  heaven  of  deep  conscious  obligation  to 
eternal  mercy.  The  bonds  which  bind  redeemed  ones  to  their  God  are  the 
strongest  which  exist.  What  a  joy  it  will  be  to  love  the  Lord  more  than 
any  other  of  his  creatures,  and  assuredly  we  shall  do  so.  Do  not  think 
that  this  is  an  unwarrantable  assertion,  for  I  feel  sure  that  it  is  the 
truth.  Do  you  not  read  in  the  gospels  of  a  woman  who  washed  the 
Saviour's  feet  with  tears  and  wiped  them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head,  and 
anointed  them  with  ointment  ?  Did  not  the  Saviour  say  that  she  loved 
much  because  she  had  much  forgiven.  I  take  it  that  the  same  general 
principle  will  apply  to  all  places,  to  eternity  as  well  as  to  time,  and 
therefore  I  believe  that  forgiven  sinners  will  have  a  love  to  God  and  to 
his  Christ  such  as  cherubim  and  seraphim  never  felt ;  Gabriel  cannot 
love  Jesus  as  a  forgiven  man  will  do.  Those  who  have  washed  their 
rubes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  will  be  nearer  and 
dearer  to  him,  and  he  will  be  nearer  and  dearer  to  them,  than  all  the 
ministering  spirits  before  the  throne,  for  he  took  upon  him  our  nature 
and  not  theirs.  Glory  be  unto  thee,  0  Christ !  As  I  look  into  the  awful 
deeps  of  Adam's  fall,  I  tremble,  but  when  I  lift  up  my  eyes  again  to  the 
eternal  heights  whither  thou  hast  raised  me 'by  thy  passion  and  thy 
resurrection  I  feel  strengthened  by  the  former  vision.  I  magnify  the 
infinite  grace  of  God,  and  believe  in  it  unstaggeringly.  Oh,  that  I  had 
power  to  magnify  it  with  fit  words  and  proper  speech,  but  these  are  not 
with  me.  Accept  the  feeling  of  the  heart  when  the  language  of  the  lip 
confesses  its  failure.   Accept  it,  Lord,  through  the  Well-beloved.   Amen. 

Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Romans  v. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 909,  233,  229. 


I 


THE  BLOOD  OF  ABEL  AND  THE  BLOOD  OF  JESUS. 


%  German 

Delivered  on  Sunday  Morning,  September  2nd,  1866,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGKON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"And  he  said,  What  hast  thou  done?  the  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto 
me  from  the  ground." — Genesis  iv.  10. 

"  And  to  Jesus  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling, 
that  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel." — Hebrews  xii.  24. 

The  first  sheddins^  of  human  blood  was  a  very  terrible  experiment. 
Whether  Cain's  murderous  blow  was  premeditated  or  not,  the  sight  of  a 
bleeding  human  corpse  must  have  been  a  terrible  novelty  to  him.  He  had 
not  been  hardened  by  reading  details  of  warfare,  or  listening  to  tales  of 
murder;  killing  and  slaying  were  new  terrors  to  mankind,  and  he  who 
was  the  ringleader  in  such  violence  must  have  been  filled  with  mingled 
astonishment  at  the  result  of  his  blow,  and  apprehension  as  to  its  con- 
sequences. I  think  I  see  him  standing  there  by  the  corpse,  for  a 
moment  stiff  with  affright,  awe-struck  at  the  sight  of  blood.  Will  the 
skies  dart  malignant  fires  upon  him?  Will  the  sodden  earth  produce 
speedy  avengers  from  her  astonished  soil?  What  questions  must 
have  flashed  through  the  murderer's  mind!  But  lo!  the  warm  life- 
blood  flows  in  a  crimson  stream  upon  the  earth,  and  some  ghastly 
comfort  arises  to  the  mind  of  the  guilty  wretch  as  he  observes  the  earth 
soak  in  the  blood.  It  stands  not  in  a  pool,  but  the  earth  opens  her 
mouth  to  receive  and  to  conceal  his  brother's  blood.  Sad  memorials 
bespatter  the  herbage  and  crimson  the  soil,  but  still  the  dreadful  flood 
is  drying  up,  and  the  murderer  feels  a  momentary  joy.  Perhaps  Cain 
went  his  way  dreaming  that  the  terrible  matter  was  all  over.  He  had 
done  the  deed,  and  it  could  not  be  undone;  he  had  smitten  the  blow, 
ridden  himself  of  the  presence  of  one  who  was  obnoxious  to  him ;  the 
blood  had  been  swallowed  up  by  the  earth,  and  there  was  an  end  to 
the  business  which  need  cause  no  further  thought.  There  was  no 
machinery  in  those  days  of  police,  and  law,  and  judges,  and  gallows,  and 
therefore  Cain  had  little  or  nothing  to  fear;  strong  and  hale  man,  with 
no  one  to  punish  him,  and  nobody  to  accuse  or  upbraid  him,  except  his 
father  and  his  mother,  and  those,  possibly,  too  bowed  with  grief  and  too 
mindful  of  their  own  offence  to  show  much  resentment  toward  their 
firstborn.  He  may  therefore  have  imagined  that  the  deed  was  speechless 
and  silent,  and  that  now  oblivion  would  cover  his  crime,  so  that  he 
No.  708. 


24  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

might  go  his  way  as  though  the  deed  were  never  done.  It  was  not  so, 
however,  for  though  that  blood  was  silent  in  the  seared  conscience  of 
Cain,  it  had  a  voice  elsewhere.  A  mysterious  voice  went  up  beyond  the 
skies;  it  reached  the  ear  of  the  Invisible,  and  moved  the  heart  of  Eternal 
Justice,  so  that  breaking  through  the  veil  which  conceals  the  Infinite 
from  man,  God  revealed  himself  and  spoke  to  Cain:  "What  hast  thou 
done  ?  The  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto  me  from  the 
ground."  Then  Cain  knew  that  blood  could  not  be  idly  spilt,  that 
murder  would  be  avenged,  for  there  was  a  tongue  in  every  drop  of  the 
vital  essence  which  flowed  from  murdered  manhood,  which  prevailed 
with  God,  so  that  he  would  interpose  and  hold  a  solemn  inquest  thereon. 

Brethren,  that  was  a  more  terrible  experiment  still  which  was  tried 
at  Calvary,  when  not  the  first  man  was  slaughtered  but  the  Son  of  God 
himself;  he  who  was  man  but  yet  was  more  than  man,  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh;  it  was  a  dread  experiment  when  having  dragged  him  before 
the  judgment  seat  and  falsely  condemned  him,  having  shouted,  "  Away 
with  hira,  away  with  him,"  they  actually  dared  to  take  the  nails  and 
fasten  the  Son  of  God  to  the  accursed  tree,  to  lift  up  his  body  between 
earth  and  heaven,  and  there  to  watch  its  griefs  till  they  ended  in  his 
death,  when  they  pierced  his  side,  and  forthwith  flowed  thereout  blood 
and  water.  No  doubt  Pilate,  who  had  washed  his  hands  in  water,  thought 
that  no  mischief  would  come  of  it.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  went 
their  way,  and  said,  "  We  have  silenced  the  accusing  voice.  There  will 
no  more  be  heard  in  our  streets  the  cry  of  him  who  said,  '  Woe  unto  you, 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites.'  We  shall  no  longer  be  disturbed  in 
our  hypocrisy  and  formality  by  the  presence  of  a  pure  and  holy  being, 
whose  simple  honesty  shall  be  a  stern  rebuke  to  us.  We  have  murdered 
him,  we  have  put  hira  to  death  without  just  reason,  but  there  is  an  end 
of  it.  There  will  be  no  voice  to  that  blood,"  Little  did  they  know 
that  up  to  heaven  the  cry  of  Jerusalem  had  already  gone,  "  His  blood  be 
on  us,  and  on  our  children,"  was  registered  in  the  tablets  of  justice,  and 
ere  long  Jerusalem  became  the  treasure  house  of  woe  and  a  den  of 
misery,  so  that  the  like  to  her  destruction  hath  not  been,  neither  ever 
shall  be,  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  Far  more  delightful  is  the  fact  that 
another  and  more  melodious  cry  went  up  to  heaven  from  the  cross  of 
Calvary.  "  Father,  forgive  them,"  resounded  from  the  wounds  of 
Immanuel.  Tiie  blood  of  Abel  was  not  voiceless,  and  the  blood  of 
Jesus  was  not  dumb;  it  cried  so  as  to  be  heard  amid  the  thrones  of 
heaven,  and  blessed  be  God,  it  spake /or  us  and  not  against  us;  it  spake 
not  worse  things,  as  it  might  well  have  done,  but  better  things  than  that 
of  Abel.  It  did  not  demand  fiercer  vengeance  than  that  which  fell  upon 
Cain,  it  did  not  ask  that  we  might  be  driven  vagabonds  and  fugitives 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  to  be  at  last  banished  from  God  into  hell 
for  ever,  but  it  cried,  "  Fathei-,  forgive  them,"  and  it  prevailed,  and  the 
curse  was  taken  away,  and  a  blessing  came  to  the  sons  of  men. 

This  morning  we  propose  to  keep  our  discourse  to  the  subject  of  the 
voice  of  the  blood  of  Abel  and  the  voice  of  the  blood  of  Jesus,  as  stand- 
ing in  comparison  the  one  with  the  other.  They  both  spake.  That  is 
evident.  Abel  being  dead  yet  speaketh,  saith  the  apostle,  and  we  know 
to  our  abiding  comfort  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  pleads  before  the  eternal 
throne.    All  blood  has  a  voice,  for  God  is  jealous  of  its  presetvation. 


THE  BLOOD  OF  ABEL  AND  THE  BLOOD  OF  JESUS.        25 

the  blood  of  excellent  and  just  men  has  a  more  heavenly  speech  still, 
but  the  voice  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  far  surpasses  all,  and  among  ten 
thousand  voices  it  bears  the  palm. 

I.    In  the  first  place,   Jesus'  blood  speaks  better  things  in 

GENERAL. 

What  did  the  blood  of  Abel  say?  Was  it  not  the  blood  of  testimony  f 
When  Abel  fell  to  the  ground  beneath  his  brother's  club,  he  bore  witness  ' 
t^  spiritual  religion.  Cain  was  the  lover  of  a  merely  outward  worship, 
in  which  faith  had  no  place.  He  loved  a  worship  of  show  and  pomp, 
he  garnished  the  altar  with  fruits  and  decked  it  with  flowers;  his  was 
a  religion  of  taste  and  elegance,  a  religion  of  his  own  devising;  but  it 
was  devoid  of  a  humble,  believing,  spiritual  reference  to  the  promised 
Deliverer.  Abel  stood  there  the  professor  of  an  ungarnished  religion  of 
faith  in  the  promised  sacrifice.  On  the  altar  was  a  lamb,  bleeding  from 
its  death  wound,  and  laid  in  order  for  burning;  a  ghastly  spectacle  not 
to  be  delighted  in  by  taste,  a  thing  from  which  the  lovers  of  the  beautiful 
would  turn  away.  Abel  had  chosen  such  an  offering  because  God  had 
chosen  it,  and  because  it  was  the  fit  means  for  leading  his  faith  to  its 
true  object,  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  saw  by  faith  in  the  bleeding  lamb  the 
memorial  of  the  Lord's  great  propitiation  for  sin,  which  could  not  be 
seen  in  Cain's  offering  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  however  tasteful  that 
oflFering  might  be.  Abel  stands  forth  before  us  as  the  first  in  a  cloud 
of  witnesses,  bearing  brave  testimony,  and  prepared  to  seal  it  with  their 
"Itves.'  He  died  a  martyr  for  the  truth,  tlie  grandly  God-like  truth  that 
God  accepteth  men  according  to  their  faith.  All  honour  to  the  martyr's 
blood  which  speaks  so  effectually  for  precious  truth.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  being  also  a  testifier  and  witness  for  the  faith  of  God,  spake 
better  things  than  Abel,  because  he  had  more  to  speak,  and  spake  from 
more  intimate  acquaintance  with  God.  He  was  a  fuller  witness  of 
divine  truth  than  Abel  could  be,  for  he  brought  life  and  immortality  to 
light,  and  told  his  people  clearly  of  the  Father.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
had  been  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and  knew  the  divine  secret;  this 
secret  he  revealed  to  the  sons  of  men  in  his  ministry,  and  then  he  sealed 
it  by  his  blood.  It  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  tliough  the  death  of 
Christ  was  in  chief  an  atonement  for  sin,  yet  it  was  also  a  testimony  to 
the  truth,  for  he  is  said  to  be  a  witness  to  the  people,  a  leader  and 
commander  to  the  people,  and  as  a  dying,  bleeding  martyr,  it  will  be 
clear  to  you  that  this  blood  testifies  to  fuller,  brighter,  and  more  glorious 
truth  than  did  the  blood  of  Abel. 

Moreover,  the  blood  of  Abel  spake  good  things  in  that  it  was  theinooj 
•of  faithfulness.  This  dear  servant  of  the  Great  Master  was  faithful 
under  his  brother's  opposition;  yea,  faithful  unto  death.  It  could  not 
be  said  of  him  as  the  apostle  said  of  certain  others,  "  Ye  have  not  yet 
resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin."  He  resisted  sin  even  unto 
blood;  he  was  faithful  in  all  his  house  as  a  servant;  he  turned  not  from 
his  integrity,  but  counted  not  his  life  dear  unto  him.  His  blood  as  it 
fell  to  the  ground  spake  this  good  thing; — it  said,  "  Great  God,  Abel  is 
faithful  to  thee."  But  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  testifies  to  yet  greater 
faithfulness  still,  for  it  was  the  sequel  of  a  spotlessly  perfect  life,  which 
no  act  of  sin  had  ever  defiled;  whereas  Abel's  death  furnished,  it  is  true, 
a  life  of  faith,  but  not  a  life  of  perfection.     The  faithfulness  of  Jesus 


,>, 


26  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

was  complete  from  the  day  of  his  birth  to  the  hour  of  his  death;  and 
inasmuch  as  he  needed  not  otherwise  to  die,  his  voluntary  yielding  up 
of  life  was  all  the  more  an  act  of  obedience,  and  the  better  proof  of  his 
fidelity  to  his  trust. 

Moreover,  we  must  never  forget  that  all  that  Abel's  blood  could  say 
as  it  fell  to  the  ground  was  but  the  shadow  of  that  more  glorious 
substance  of  which  Jesus'  death  assures  us.  Jesus  did  not  typify 
atonement,  but  offered  it;  he  was  not  the  representative  of  sacrifice;  he 
was  the  great  Sacrifice  itself  and  inasmuch  as  the  substance  must  ever 
excel  the  shadow,  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  speaketh  better  things  than 
that  of  Abel. 

It  is  well  to  add  that  our  Lord's  person  was  infinitely  more  worthy 
and  glorious  than  that  of  Abel,  and  consequently  his  death  must  yield 
to  us  a  more  golden-mouthed  discourse  than  the  death  of  a  mere  man 
like  Abel,  He  who  dies  at  the  hand  of  Cain  is  but  one  of  our  race, 
testifying  to  truth  and  righteousness,  testifying  by  faith  to  a 
sacrifice  to  come;  but  he  who  died  at  the  hand  of  Herod  and 
of  Pilate  was  divine,  and  came  upon  no  common  errand,  with  no 
ordinary  message  to  deliver.  When  the  glorious  Son  of  God 
bowed  his  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost,  the  voice  that  arose  from  his 
blond  must  necessarily  have  been  louder,  sweeter,  more  full,  and  more 
Godlike  than  the  voice  of  the  martyred  Abel's  gore.  We  understand 
then,  before  coming  to  details,  that  on  general  principles  we  may  be 
prettv  clear  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  would  speak  better  things  than  that 
of  Abel. 

II.  Now  we  will  enter  the  very  heart  of  our  text,  while  we  remember 

that    THE    BLOOD    OF  JESUS   SPEAKS   BETTER,   THINGS  TO   GOD   than    the 

blood  of  Abel  did.  The  blood  of  Abel  cried  in  the  ears  of  the  Lord, 
for  thus  he  said  to  Cain.  "The  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto 
me  from  the  ground."  That  cry  did  not  go  round  to  seek  a  mediator, 
but  went  directly  to  the  judgment-seat  of  God,  and  laid  an  accusation 
against  the  murderer.  Now  what  did  Abel's  blood  say  to  God?  Stand- 
ing by  the  spot  where  Abel  fell,  and  marking  the  ground  all  crimson  with 
clotted  gore,  what  would  the  blood  seem  to  you  to  say?  What  would 
be  your  own  reflection?  What  would  you  conceive  that  the  blood  said 
to  God?  It  said  just  this,  "0  God,  one  of  thine  own  creatures,  the 
product  of  thy  matchless  skill,  has  been  dashed  in  pieces,  and  barbarously 
destroyed.  A  living,  sensitive  body  formed  by  art  and  skill,  such  as 
only  thou  couldst  show,  has  been  wantonly  broken.  The  potter  will  not 
bear,  that  the  vessel  which  has  been  fashioned  upon  the  wheel  with 
much  cost  and  labour  should  be  wantonly  broken,  but  here  is  a  body 
far  more  costly,  far  more  wonderful  than  anything  which  human  art 
could  create,  and  this  has  been  destroyed.  Great  God,  the  Creator  of 
all  things,  wilt  thou  look  on  this  with  patience,  wilt  thou  bear  to  see  the 
work  of  thine  own  hands  most  cruelly  destroyed?"  Was  there  not  much 
in  this  cry?  Then  that  blood  would  plead  still  further,  "  0  God,  thy 
creature  has  been  destroyed  without  cause.  No  just  reason  of  provoca- 
tion has  been  given,  no  offence  has  been  committed  which  could  deserve 
so  terrible  a  stroke;  but  one  of  thy  feeble  creatures  who  has  a  claim 
upon  thy  kind  protection  has  been  wantonly  and  needlessly  slain: — his 
blood  appeals  to  thee!    Thuu  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  wilt  thou  let  the 


THE  BLOOD  OF  ABEL  AND  THE  BLOOD  OF  JESUS.        27 

weak  be  trodden  down  by  tlie  strong,  and  wilt  thou  suffer  the 
innocent  to  be  smitten  by  the  fierce  hand  of  the  wicked."  You 
see  the  cry  gathers  force.  At  first  it  is,  "0  God.  thy  creature  has 
been  destroyed;"  next  it  is.  ''0  G-od,  thy  subject  has  been  maltreated 
by  one  of  his  fellow-subjects,  by  one  who  has  become  thine  enemy: 
wilt  thou  not  interfere?"  Yet  the  .blood  of  Abel  said  more  than  this; 
it  said,  "  0  God,  the  blood  shed  here  was  shed  for  thee."  It  seemed  to 
say,  "  If  it  were  not  for  love  of  thee  this  blood  had  not  been  shed! 
If  these  drops  had  not  been  consecrated  by  devotion,  if  this  blood  had 
not  flowed  in  the  veins  of  a  man  who  loved  God  with  all  his  heart  it 
had  not  been  poured  out  upon  the  ground.  0  God,"  cries  every  drop, 
"  I  fell  upon  the  ground  for  thee — wilt  thou  endure  this?  Shall  a  crea- 
ture that  thou  hast  made  yield  n\)  its  life  with  pain  and  anguish  for  thee, 
and  wilt  thou  be  like  a  cold,  motionless,  unmoved,  immovable  statue, 
and  look  on  without  emotion  ?  Wilt  thou  not  bestir  thyself,  0  God? 
Shall  blood  be  shed  on  thine  own  behalf,  shed  unjustly  too,  the  blood  of 
thine  own  loving,  righteous  creature,  and  wilt  thou  not  interfere?" 
What  force  there  is  in  such  a  voice!  Yet  the  blood  added  to  this,  "  0 
God,  I  have  been  shed  in  defiance  of  thee,"  for  tlie  stroke  which  came 
from  Cain's  hand  was  not  merely  aimed  at  Abel,  it  was  in  spirit  aimed 
at  God,  for  if  Cain  could  have  done  the  same  to  God  as  he  did  to  his 
brother  Abel,  he  doubtless  would  have  done  it.  He  was  of  that  wicked 
one,  and  therefore  slew  his  brother,  and  the  wickedness  which  was  in 
him  was  Deicidal;  he  would  have  slam  God  himself  if  it  had  been  in  his 
power,  and  so  the  blood  cries,  "  0  God,  here  is  the  gauntlet  of  defiance 
thrown  down  to  thyself.  Cain  defies  thee.  He  has  struck  the  first  blow 
at  thyself,  he  has  smitten  down  the  vanguard  of  the  army  of  thine 
elect.  Wilt  thou  look  on  in  quiet?  Wilt  thou  take  no  vengeance?  Wilt 
thou  have  no  regard?  Shall  there  be  silence  in  heaven  when  there  are 
groans  and  cries  on  eartli?  Shall  heaven's  heart  be  cold  wlien  the  heart 
of  the  enemy  is  hot  with  rage  and  fierce  with  rebellion?  0  God,  wilt 
thou  not  interpose?  Surely  this  is  a  heaven-piercing  cry,  but  this  is 
not  all.  The  blood  of  the  proto-martyr  added  to  all  this  such  an  appeal 
as  the  following: — "  0  God,  this  is  the  first  of  human  blood  that  has 
been  murderously  shed,  and  shed  by  an  unnatural  brother's  hand. 
Wilt  thou  pass  this  by?  Then  how  canst  thou  be  just?  Did  not 
this  blood  challenge  the  very  existence  of  justice  in  God?  0  God, 
if  thou  do  not  punish  this  first  barbarous  man-slayer,  who  kills 
his  brother,  then  all  adown  the  ages  men  will  riot  in  blood  and 
wiinton  in  murder,  and  they  will  say,  '  How  doth  God  know  ?'  He 
that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  regardeth  not,  he  will  not  so  much  as 
speak?  It  were  as  though  God  should  issue  a  licence  for  man  to  shed 
each  other's  blood,  and  give  permission  for  red-handed  murder  to  lord  it 
over  the  whole  creation,  if  the  first  murder  should  pass  unnoticed  by  the 
great  Judge  of  all.  Do  you  hear,  my  brethren,  what  a  cry  the  blood  of 
Abel  must  have  had,  and  with  what  power  it  arose  to  heaven?  But  we 
are  not  left  to  conjecture  as  to  the  power  of  that  cry,  for  we  are  told 
that  God  heard,  and  when  he  heard  it  he  came  to  reckoning  with  Cain, 
and  he  said,  "What  hast  thou  done?  The  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood 
crieth  to  me  from  the  ground."  Then  came  the  withering  sentence  of 
it.    The  ground  which  had  drank  in  the  blood  became  accursed  to  Cain, 


28  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPJ'l. 

80  that  delve  it  as  he  might  it  could  not  yield  him  a  bounteous  harvest, 
plough  it  as  he  would,  with  all  his  skill  and  craft,  it  never  could  yield 
its  strength  to  him.  The  original  curse  of  the  thorn  and  the  thistle, 
which  had  fallen  upon  it  when  Adam  survived,  was  now  doubled  to  Cain, 
so  that  he  reaped  but  handfuls  and  gathered  scanty  sheaves.  This 
would  be  a  constant  bitter  mingled  with  his  daily  bread,  while  over  and 
above  that,  he  received  unto  his  heart  a  curse  which  made  him  the  slave 
of  his  own  dreads.  He  served  fear  and  trembling  as  his  gods,  and  went 
about  the  earth  with  darkness  within  him  and  darkness  round  about 
him,  never  more  rejoicing,  but  wearing  the  mark  of  reprobation  fixed 
upon  his  brow.  His  life  was  doubtless  hell  upon  earth,  and  at  last  he 
was  driven  for  ever  from  the  presence  of  the  Most  High  God.  Blood 
has  a  voice  in  it,  and  when  it  is  heard  against  a  man  it  brings  upon  him 
^  curse  untold. 

Well  now,  brethren,  it  is  a  very  sweet  task  to  ask  you  to  turn  your 
minds  away  from  the  blood  of  Abel  to  the  blood  of  Jesus.  I  feel  per- 
suaded that  you  did  just  now  recognise  the  voice  of  Abel's  blood,  and  I 
want  your  minds  to  hear  with  equal  distinctness  the  voice  of  Jesns 
■Christ's  blood,  for  there  are  the  same  reasons  for  its  loudness,  but  they 
are  all  far  more  emphatic.  Can  you  stand  at  Calvary  now  and  view  the 
flowing  of  the  Saviour's  blood  from  hands,  and  feet,  and  side?  What 
are  your  own  reflections  as  to  what  that  blood  says  to  God?  Think  now 
at  the  cross-foot.  That  blood  crieth  with  a  loud  voice  to  God,  and  what 
•doth  it  say?  Does  it  not  say  this?  "  0  God,  this  time  it  is  not  merely 
■a  creature  which  bleeds,  but  though  the  body  that  hangs  upon  the  cross 
is  the  creature  of  thy  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  thine  own  Son  who  now  pours  out 
his  soul  unto  death.  0  God,  it  is  thine  only-begotten  One,  dear  to  thyself, 
essentially  one  with  thee,  one  in  whom  thou  art  well  pleased,  whose 
obedience  is  perfect,  whose  love  to  thee  has  been  unwavering, — it  is  he  who 
dies.  0  God,  wilt  thou  despise  the  cries  and  the  tears,  the  groans,  the 
moans,  the  blood  of  thine  own  Son?  Most  tender  Father,  in  whose  bosom 
■Jesus  lay  from  before  the  foundations  of  the  earth,  he  dies,  and  wilt  thou 
not  regard  A/';» .?  Shall  his  blood  fall  to  the  ground  in  vain?  Then,' 
moreover,  the  voice  would  plead,  "  It  is  not  only  thy  Son,  but  thy  perfectly 
innocent  Son,  in  whom  was  no  necessity  for  dying,  because  he  had  no 
original  sin  which  would  have  brought  corruption  on  him,  who  had 
moreover  no  actual  sin,  who  throughout  life  had  done  nothing  worthy 
■of  death  or  of  bonds.  0  God,  it  is  thine  only  begotten,  who,  without  a 
fault,  is  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  stands  like,  a  sheep  before 
her  shearers.  Canst  thou  see  it,  thou  God  of  all,  canst  thou  see  the 
infinitely  holy  and  just  Son  of  thy  heart  led  here  to  die — canst  thou  see 
it,  and  not  feel  the  force  of  the  blood  as  it  cries  to  thee?  "  Was  there 
not  added  to  this  fact  that  our  Lord  died  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  his 
Father?  "For  thee,  0  God,  for  thee  he  dies!  He  who  hangs  on 
■Calvary  hangs  there  in  deference  to  thine  own  decree,  in  fulfilment  of 
thine  own  purpose,  in  vindication  of  the  honour  of  thy  law,  that  thou 
mayest  thyself  be  glorified,  that  thy  justice  may  have  full  scope,  and  thy 
mercy  may  have  illimitable  sway.  0  God,  the  sufferer,  pale  in  death, 
whose  wounds  are  torn  open  with  the  cruel  nails,  and  whose  soul  is 
racked  with  pain  unutterable,  dies  for  thee.  If  there  had  been  no  God 
he  need  not  die.     If  there  were  no  law  to  vindicate,  no  truth  to  defend, 


THE  BLOOD  OF  ABEL  AND  THE  BLOOD  OF  JESUS.        29 

no  honour,  and  majesty,  and  justice  to  which  to  pay  homage,  it  need' 
not  that  he  died.  If  thou  wert  content  to  stain  thine  honour  or  to 
restrain  thy  mercy,  there  were  no  need  that  he  should  give  himself. 
But  it  is  for  thee,  for  thee  each  pang,  for  thee  each  groan,  for  thee  each, 
drop  of  blood,  and  wilt  thou  not  be  moved  thereby?  "  Brethren,  is 
there  not  power  in  this  voice?  Yet  over  and  above  this  the  blood  must 
have  pleaded  thus  with  God: — "  0  God,  the  blood  wiiich  is  now  being 
shed,  thus  honourable  and  glorious  in  itself,  is  being  poured  out  with  a 
motive  which  is  divinely  gracious.  He  who  dies  on  this  cross  dies  for 
his  enemy,  groans  for  those  who  make  him  groan,  suflFers  for  those  who' 
thrust  the  dart  into  his  soul,  and  then  mocic  at  the  agony  which  they 
themselves  have  caused.  0  God,  it  is  a  chain  for  God  in  heaven  which  • 
binds  the  victim  to  the  horns  of  the  altar,  a  chain  of  everlasting  love, 
of  illimitable  goodness."  Now,  dear  friends,  you  and  I  could 
not  see  a  man  sufier  out  of  pure  benevolence  without  being  moved  by 
his  sufferings,  and  shall  God  be  unmoved?  the  perfectly  holy  and 
gracious  God,  shall  he  be  indifferent  where  you  and  I  are  stirred  ta 
deep  emotion?  The  sight  of  blood  makes  some  of  us  shudder;  the 
sight  of  blood  shed  from  an  innocent  person — shed  by  the  hand  of 
violence — would  make  our  very  souls  chill  within  us;  but  the  thought 
of  that  blood  being  shed  with  a  motive  so  marvellous,  because  of  a 
disinterested  affection  towards  undeserving  criminals — this  would  move 
us  indeed;  and  do  you  dream  that  it  did  not  move  tiie  heart  of  God? 
Blessed  be  his  name,  we  are  not  left  to  conjecture  here;  it  so  moved  our 
heavenly  Father  that  to  this  day  God  has  come  to  man,  and  speakingJO' 
us  through  that  blood  he  has  said,  "What  hast  thou  done?  Whatever} 
thou  hast  done,  however  black  and  filthy  thy  sin  may  have  been,  the' 
voice  of  my  Son's  blood  crieth  unto  me  from  the  ground,  and  now  from  \ 
this  day  forth  I  have  taken  off  the  curse  from  the  earth  for  his  sake,  \ 
neither  will  I  curse  it  any  more.  Ye  shall  be  blessed  in  your  basket 
and  in  your  store,  in  your  going  out  and  in  your  coming  in.  I 
have  forgiven  you  your  iniquities;  I  have  set  a  mark  upon  you,  and  no^ 
man  shall  hurt  you,  neither  shall  justice  smite  you,  for  in  the  person  of 
my  dear  Son  I  have  received  and  accepted  you,  guilty  as  you  are.  Go 
your  way,  and  live  happily  and  peaceably,  for  I  have  taken  away  your 
iniquities  and  cast  your  sins  behind  my  back,  and  the  day  has  come  in 
the  which  if  thy  sins  be  searched  for  they  shall  not  be  found,  yea,  if 
they  be  sought  out  they  shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord,  for  I  have  pardoned 
them  whom  I  have  reserved."  Abel's  blood  had  mighty  prevalence  to 
curse,  but  Jesu's  blood  has  prevalence  to  bless  the  sons  of  men. 

I  want  you  to  stay  a  little  over  this  thought  to  digest  it.  I  wish' 
I  had  the  power  to  send  it  home;  only  the  Holy  Ghost,  however, 
can  do  that.  I  want,  however,  just  to  dwell  on  it,  that  you  may  get 
into  the  soul  of  it.  ObseiTe  that  the  blood  of  Abel  spoke  to  God  long 
before  Cain  spoke.  Cain  was  deaf  to  the  voice  of  his  brother's  blood,, 
but  God  heard  it.  Sinner,  long  before  you  hear  the  blood  of  Jesus,  God 
hears  it,  and  spares  your  guilty  soul.  Long  before  that  blood  comes 
into  your  soul  to  melt  you  to  repentance,  it  pleads  for  you  with  God. 
It  was  not  the  voice  of  Cain  that  brought  down  vengeance,  but  the 
voice  of  Abel's  blood ;  and  it  is  not  the  cry  of  the  sinner  seeking  mercy 
that  is  the  cause  of  mercy,  it  is  the  cry  of  that  blood  of  Jesus.    I  knov^ 


80  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

you  will  tell  me  you  cannot  pray;  oh  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  the  blood 
can,  and  that  when  you  cannot  plead  so  as  to  prevail,  the  blood  pleads. 
If  you  are  to  win  mercy  from  God  and  get  forgiveness,  it  will  not  be  by 
the  efficacy  of  your  prayers  and  tears,  but  through  the  efficacy  of  that 
blood  of  God's  dear  Son.  Cain  did  not  ask  for  vengeance,  but  it  came 
unsought  through  the  blood;  and  you,  though  you  feel  as  if  you  hardly 
dare  look  for  mercy,  yet  shall  find  it  if  you  can  trust  the  blood  of  Jesus 
which  speaks  for  you.  The  blood  does  not  need  your  voice  to  increase 
its  power  with  God;  he  will  hear  your  voice,  but  it  is  because  he  hears 
the  blood  of  Jesus  first  of  all.  It  is  a  mercy  for  us  that  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  speaks  for  the  guilty,  even  as  the  blood  of  Abel  spoke 
■  against  the  guilty.  Jesus'  blood  pleads  not  for  the  innocent,  if  such 
there  be,  they  need  no  plea  from  an  atoning  sacrifice.  Jesus  pleads  for 
the  rebellious  that  the  Lord  God  may  dwell  among  them;  for  you  tliat 
have  broken  his  laws,  and  despised  his  love,  and  fought  against  his 
power;  the  blood  of  Jesus  pleads  for  such  as  you,  for  he  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners.  "  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save 
that  which  was  lost." 

The  precious  blood  speak>;  constantly.  Did  you  notice  that  word  in 
ihe  text?  "  which  speakeih,'"  not  '•  which  did  speak,"  but  "  which 
speaketh."  The  blood  of  Jesus  pleaded  for  the  thief  upon  the  cross, 
but  it 

"  Shall  never  lose  its  power, 

Till  all  the  ransonrd  church  of  God 

Be  saved  to  sia  no  more." 

Brother,  when  prevailing  sin  oppresses  the  conscience,  it  is  a  thousand 
mercies  to  know  that  we  have  even  now  a  prevailing  Saviour.  Years 
ago  some  of  us  came  to  Christ  and  we  found  pardon;  but  our  faith 
occasionally  faints,  and  our  doubts  grow  strong.  Come,  let  us  go  afresh 
to  the  fountain,  let  us  look  anew  to  the  cross,  for  the  blood  speaks  still. 
Still  in  effect  our  Lord  Jesus  bleeds  to-day  as  much  as  he  did  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago,  for  the  blood  is  just  as  certain  in  its  power  with 
God  at  the  present  moment  as  when  the  thief  said,  "  Lord,  remember 
me."  Let  us  think  of  this  and  rejoice  in  this.  My  soul,  when  thou 
canst  not  plead  with  God,  when  thou  darest  not,  when  thy  tongue  is 
silent,  and  despair  gags  thy  mouth,  even  then  Jesus  pleads.  Now  lay 
thou  hold  upon  the  intercession;  come  and  cast  thyself  upon  him;  rest 
wholly  in  him,  he  must  prevail  though  thou  canst  not,  he  must  succeed 
though  thou  hast  no  power  whatsoever.  Come  then,  and  link  thyself 
with  the  infallible  prevalent  plea  of  the  precious  blood,  and  it  is  all 
well  with  thee,  all  safe  with  thee,  and  safe  for  ever.  God  grant  us  grace 
to  do  this,  each  one  of  us,  and  his  be  the  praise! 

III.  Furthermore,  Jesus'  blood  speaks  better  things  to  us  in 
OUR  OWN  HEARTS  than  the  blood  of  Abel. 

I  suppose  most  of  you  read  the  account  written  by  the  newspaper 
correspondents  who  have  passed  over  the  battle-fields  of  Koniggratz  or 
Sadowa.  How  it  thrilled  one  to  read  of  ditches  filled  with  blood,  and 
of  the  smell  from  putrid  corpses  being  so  intolerable  that  the  travellers 
were  fain  to  leave  the  battle-field  in  haste.  I  would  not  like  to  be 
Bismarck,  nor  the  Crown  Prince  of  Prussia,  nor  the  King,  nor  any  one 
who  had  a  hand  in  a  war  so  sanguinary  and  so  unjustifiable.     I  suppose 


THE  BLOOD  OP  ABEL  AND  THE  BLOOD  OP  JESUS.        81 

that  wholesale  assassins  grow  used  to  such  things;  I  suppose  that  they 
can  read  of  thousands  mangled  by  shot  and  shell  without  emotion,  and 
even  see  the  heaps  of  corpses  without  a  shudder,  but  I  am  certain  of 
this,  that  it  would  drive  me  mad.  Ah!  to  have  the  blood  of  one  person 
knowingly  laid  at  my  door  would  be  enough  to  dash  all  comfort  from 
my  life;  but  to  have  the  blood  of  tens  of  thousands  poured  out  to  gratify 
my  ambition,  I  think  must  make  reason  reel  at  once.  It  must  be  an 
absence  of  conscience  which  makes  reason  to  keep  her  throne  when  men 
have  been  wading  through  their  fellows'  blood  for  mere  purposes  of  selfish 
gain.  Seeing  that  there  had  been  no  wars  in  Cain's  day,  and  that  the 
human  heart  had  not  been  brutalised  as  it  now  is,  so  as  to  speak  of 
war  as  we  now  do  in  such  gentle  terms,  surely  if  he  had  had  any  conscience 
at  all,  it  must  have  been  a  horrible  thought  to  him  that  he  had  killed 
his  brother.  "  I  have  killed  a  man,  I  have  shed  his  blood."  Surely  it 
made  him  start  in  his  sleep.  How  could  he  be  quiet  upon  his  lonely 
couch?  That  red-handed  man!  Guilt,  a  grim  chamberlain,  with  fingers 
bloody  red  would  surely  draw  the  curtains  of  his  bed.  Would  not  the 
spectacle  all  come  up  before  his  mind?  The  talk  in  the  field,  tiie  sudden 
impulse,  the  blow,  the  blood,  the  look  of  his  victim  as  he  cried  for  pity 
as  one  cruel  stroke  succeeded  another;  and  then  the  sight  of  the  ghastly 
body  and  the  streaming  blood,  and  the  crimson  marks  on  the  soddened 
earth.  Oh,  it  must  have  been  a  remembrance  clinging  like  a  viper 
around  the  murderer  wherever  he  might  be  !  He  might  well  build 
a  city,  as  we  are  told  he  did,  in  order  to  quench  these  fiery 
remembrances.  Then  would  the  thought  come  upon  him,  "You 
slew  him  though  he  was  your  brother."  "  Am  I  my  brother's 
keeper?"  said  he,  but  men  can  talk  sometimes  more  braggingly 
than  their  heart  talks  in  secret.  The  horror  of  brother-killing  must 
have  haunted  Cain:  "I  slew  my  brother,  I,  the  first  that  was  born  of 
woman  slew  the  second  born."  And  then  it  would  be  suggested,  "  And 
wherefore  did  I  slay  him?  What  evil  had  he  done  me?  What  if  he 
did  offer  a  different  sacrifice  from  mine,  and  what  if  God  did  accept 
him  and  not  me,  yet  what  hurt  had  he  done  me?"  The  innocence  of  his 
victim,  if  Cain  had  any  conscience,  must  have  increased  his  uneasiness, 
for  he  would  recollect  how  inoffensively  he  had  kept  those  sheep  of  his, 
and  had  been  like  one  among  them,  so  lamblike,  that  shepherd  man 
himself,  a  true  sheep  of  God's  pasture.  "  Yet,"  would  Cain  say,  "  I  slew 
him  because  I  hated  God,  the  God  before  whose  bar  I  am  soon  to  stand, 
the  God  who  set  this  mark  on  me."  Can  you  picture  the  man  who  had 
thus  to  be  daily  schooled  and  upbraided  by  a  brother's  blood?  It  needs 
a  poet's  mind  to  teach  him.  Think  how  you  would  feel  if  you  had 
killed  your  own  brother,  how  the  guilt  would  hang  over  you  like  a 
black  cloud,  and  drop  horror  into  your  very  soul. 

Now,  brethren,  there  is  more  than  equal  force  in  the  cry  of  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  only  it  acts  differently,  and  it  speaketh  better  things.  Let  it 
be  remembered,  however,  that  it  speaks  those  better  things  with  the 
same  force.  Comforts  arise  from  the  blood  of  Jesus  as  powerful  as  the 
horrors  which  arose  from  the  blood  of  Abel.  When  the  sinner  looks  to 
Jesus  slain,  he  may  well  say,  "  If  I  did  not  know  that  all  this  blood  was 
shed  for  me  as  well  as  by  me,  my  fears  would  multiply  a  thousand  fold; 
but  when  I  think  that  that  precious  blood  is  blood  shed  instead  of  mine, 


32 


METROPOLITAN   TABBRNACLE   PULPIT. 


that  it  is  blood  which  God  planned  and  ordained  should  be  shed  for  me 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  when  I  think  that  that  is  the 
blood  of  God's  own  dear  Son,  whom  he  has  smitten  instead  of  smiting 
me,  making  him  bear  the  whole  of  his  wrath  that  I  might  not  bear  it, 
0  my  God,  what  comforts  come  streaming  from  this  blessed  fountain! 
Just  in  proportion  as  thought  of  murder  would  make  Cain  wretched,  in 
the  same  proportion  ought  faith  to  make  you  happy  as  you  think  upon 
Jesus  Christ  slain;  for  the  blood  of  Christ,  as  I  said  at  the  beginning  of 
the  sermon,  cannot  have  a  less  powerful  voice;  it  must  have  a  more 
powerful  voice  than  that  of  Abel,  and  it  cries  therefore  more  powerfully 
for  you  than  the  blood  of  Abel  cried  against  his  brother  Cain.     Oh,  then, 
ray  clamouring  sins,  I  can  hear  you,  but  I  am  not  afraid  of  you,  for  the 
blood  of  Jesus  speaks  louder  than  you  all.     Oh,  then,  conscience,  I  can 
hear  thine  accusation,  but  I  am  not  alarmed,  for  my  Saviour  died.     I 
come  before  God  with  perfect  confidence,  because  sprinkled  with  the 
blood   of  my   Substitute.     If  the  horror  of  Cain  with  an  awakened 
conscience  might  be  unendurable,  so  the  peace    which  comes  to  me 
through  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  is  indescribable  and  unutterable,  a. 
peace  like  a  river,  a  righteousness  like  the  waves  of  the  sea.     Sweet 
peace  have  all  they  who  hear  the  blood  speaking  in  their  souls,  telling 
them  that  sin  is  forgiven,  that  God  is  reconciled,  that  we  are  accepted 
in  the  Beloved,  and  that  now  we  are  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus,   and 
shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck   us   out    of  his   hand.     I 
trust  you  know,  I  know  many  of  you  do,   the  sweet  power  of  this 
peace-speaking  blood.      Such   innocent  blood,   ordained  on  purpose  to 
give  peace,  is  precious  beyond  all  price.      0  my  soul!  never  look  for 
peace  elsewhere,  and  never  be  afraid  of  finding  peace  here.     If  to-day, 
rO  Christian,  you  have  lost  your  confidence,  if  to-day  you  are  conscious 
/  of  having  been  false  to  your  Lord,  and  of  having  done  despite  to  his 
''  Spirit,  if  to-day  you  feel  ashamed  of  the  very  name  of  a  Christian  be- 
cause you  have  dishonoured  it,  if  to-day  despair  is  ready  to  strangle  your 
hope,  and  you  are  tempted  to  give  all  up,  yet  come  now,  even  now,  to 
this  precious  blood.     Do  not  think  that  my  Saviour  can  save  merely  the 
little  sinners;  he  is  a  great  Saviour^mighty  to  save.    J.  know  your  sins 
speak  very  loudly— ah!  well  they  may;  I  hope  you  will  hear  tlieu-'voice- 
and  hate  them  in  the  fature — but  they  cannot  speak  so  loudly  as  the 
^blood  of  Jesus' does.     It  says,  "Father,  Father,  shall  I  die  in  vain? 
Father,  I  paid  my  blood  for  sinners,  shall  not  sinners  be  saved?     I  was 
smitten  for  the  guilty,  shall  the  guilty  be  smitten  too?"   The  blood  says, 
"  0  God,  I  have  vindicated  thy  law,  what  more  dost  thou  demand?     I 
have  honoured  thy  justice,  why  shouldst  thou  cast  the  sinner  into  hell? 
0  thou  Divine  Benignity!  canst  thou  take  two  exactions  for  one  offence,, 
and  punish  those  for  whom  Jesus  suffered?     0  Justice!  wilt  thou  herd 
avenge?   0  Mercy!  when  the  way  is  cleared,  wilt  thou  not  run  to  guilty 


THE  BLOOD  OF  ABEL  AKD   THE  BLOOD  OF  JESUS.        33 

ginners?  0  Love  Divine,  when  the  pathway  is  opened  for  thee,  wilt  thou 
not  show  thyself  to  the  rebellious  and  the  vile?  "  The  blood  shall  not 
plead  in  vain;  sinners  shall  be  saved,  and  you  and  I,  I  hope,  amonf 
them  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  his  grace. 

IV.  Two  or  three  words  to  close  with.    JesQ's'  blood,  even  in  my 

TEXT,    SPEAKS   BETTER   THINGS   THAN    THAT   OF   AbEL. 

It  speaks  the  same  things  but  in  a  better  sense.  Did  you  notice  the 
first  text?  God  said  unto  Cain,  "  What  hast  thou  done?"  Now  that  is 
what  Christ's  blood  says  to  you:  "  What  hast  thou  done?  "  My  dear 
hearer,  dost  thou  not  know  that  thy  sins  slew  the  Saviour?  If  we  have 
been  playing  with  sin,  and  fancied  it  to  be  a  very  little  thing,  a  trifle  to 
play  with  and  laugh  at,  let  us  correct  the  mistake.  Our  Saviour  hangs 
on  the  cross,  and  was  nailed  there  by  those  sins  of  ours;  shall  we  think 
little  of  them?  Looking  from  the  cross,  Jesus  says  to  us,  "  What  hust 
thou  dene?"  0  my  hearer,  what  hast  thou  done?  Thou  hast  slain 
thy  best  friend  and  ruined  thyself !  Let  me  come  home  personally  to 
every  ^one.  Make  an  inventory  now  of  your  sins.  Go  over  the  black 
list  from  your  childhood  till  now.  What  hast  thou  done?  Ah!  Lord, 
done  enough  to  make  me  weep  for  ever  if  it  were  not  that  thou  hast 
wept  for  me.  Drops  of  grief  can  never  repay  the  debt  which  is  due  to 
thy  blood.  Alas!  I  have  done  evil.  Lord,  but  thou  hast  done  good  to  me. 
What  hast  thou  done?  What  hast  thou  done?  was  a  dreadful  ac- 
-cusation  to  Cain,  it  might  have  gone  through  him  like  a  dart;  but  to 
you  and  to  me  it  is  the  soft  enquiring  voice  of  a  Father's  love  bringing 
us  to  repentance.     May  it  bring  us  now! 

What  I  want  mainly  to  indicate  is  this.  If  you  notice  in  the  second 
text,  this  blood  is  called  " //ie  blood  of  sprinklitij."  Whether  Abel's 
biood  sprinkled  Cain  or  not  I  cannot  say,  but  if  it  did  it  must  have 
added  to  his  horror  to  have  had  the  blood  actually  upon  him.  But  this 
adds  to  the  joy  in  our  case,  for  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  of  little  value  to  us 
until  it  is  sprinkled  upon  us.  Faith  dips  the  hyssop  in  the  atoning 
blood  and  sprinkles  it  upon  the  soul,  and  the  soul  is  clean.  The  appli- 
cation of  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  the  true  ground  of  joy,  and  the  sure 
source  of  Christian  comfort;  the  application  of  the  blood  of  Abel  must 
have  been  horror,  but  the  application  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  the  root 
and  ground  of  all  delight. 

\  There  is  another  matter  in  the  text  with  which  I  conclude.  The 
apostle  says,  "  We  are  come  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling."  He  mentions 
that  among  other  things  to  which  we  are  come.  Now,  from  the  blood  of 
Abel  every  reasonable  man  would  flee  away.  He  that  has  murdered  his 
fellow  desires  to  put  a  wide  distance  between  himself  and  the  accusing 
corpse.  But  we  come  to  the  blood  of  Jesus.  It  is  a  topic  in  which  we 
delight  as  our  contemplations  bring  us  nearer  and  nearer  to  it.  I  ask  you, 
dear  Christian  friends,  to  come  nearer  to  it  this  morning  than  ever  you 


84  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


have  been.  Think  over  the  great  truth  of  substitution.  Portray  to 
yourselves  the  sufferings  of  the  Saviour.  Dwell  in  his  sight,  sit  at  the 
foot  of  Calvary,  abide  in  the  presence  of  his  cross,  and  never  turn  away 
from  that  great  spectacle  of  mercy  and  of  misery.  Come  to  it;  be  not 
afraid.  Ho,  ye  sinners,  who  have  never  trusted  Jesus,  look  ye  hither 
and  live!     May  you  come  to  him  now! 

"  Come,  guiltj  souls,  and  flee  away, 
Like  doves  to  Jesus'  wounds." 

N'ay,  do  not  run  away  from  the  wounds  which  you  have  made,  but  find 
shelter  in  them;  forget  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  but  rest  in  them!  Your 
only  hope  lies  in  trusting  in  Jesus,  resting  wholly  upon  him.  Think 
much  of  the  griefs  of  your  Lord,  and  if  I  might  suggest  to  some  of  you 
who  will  not  be  coming  out  this  afternoon,  perhaps  if  you  could  spend 
an  hour  or  two  between  services  in  considering  the  sufferings  of  the 
Saviour,  those  considerations  might  be  the  means  of  bringing  faith  to 
you.  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  but  it  is  a  thoughtful  hearing;  and 
hearing  comes  by  the  word  of  God,  but  the  word  must  be  thought  over. 
Open  the  Word,  read  the  story  of  the  cross,  ask  the  Master  to  bless  it  to 
you,  and  who  knoweth  but  through  the  Divine  Spirit  some  of  you  may  yet 
hear  the  voice  of  that  blood  which  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of 
A-bel.    The  Lord  bless  every  one  of  you  for  his  name's  sake.     Amen. 


SHUT    IN    OR    SHUT    OUT. 


%.  pennon 

Deliveeed  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  August  14th,  1881.,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


*'  The  Lord  shut  him  in." — Genesis  vii.  16. 

NoAH  was  a  very  different  man  from  the  rest  of  those  who  lived  in  his 
time,  for  the  grace  of  God  had  set  a  division  between  him  and  them. 
Thet/  forgot  God,  and  he  feared  him  ;  they  lived  for  things  seen  and  tem- 
poral, and  he  lived  in  sight  of  the  invisible.  When  he  was  building  his 
ark  lie  was  in  a  miserable  minority,  as  men  count  heads:  and,  even 
after  one  hundred  and  twenty  years'  ministry,  when  his  ark  was  builded 
and  his  family  entered  it,  they  were  eight  against  many  millions,  an  in- 
significant few,  as  men  would  say  ;  a  pitiful  sect  among  mankind.  Who 
could  imagine  that  the  eight  would  be  right  and  all  the  millions  wrong? 
Where  God  is,  there  is  the  majority.  Bat  very  clearly  there  was  a  very 
marked  distinction  between  Noah  and  his  household,  and  all  the  rest  of 
mankind.  Yet,  great  as  that  distinction  was,  throughout  one  hundred 
and  twenty  years  there  was  no  impassable  gulf  between  the  two  parties. 
Although  Noah  could  not,  would  not  go  to  them,  yet  they  that  would 
might  pass  to  him  ;  if  they  would  hear,  believe,  and  obey,  they,  too, 
might  be  amongst  the  company  whom  God  had  blessed,  and  whom  he 
would  surely  preserve  from  destruction.  Yea,  when  the  one  hundred 
and  twenty  years  were  over,  and  God's  Spirit  would  no  longer  strive 
with  men,  there  stood  the  great  ark  with  its  vast  door  wide  open,  and 
still  Noah  continued  to  preach  and  to  declare  that  all  who  would  pass 
within  that  open  portal  into  the  ark  of  safety  should  be  preserved  from 
the  coming  destruction.  Outside  that  door  death  would  reign  uni- 
versally, but  all  would  be  peace  within. 

When  the  last  seven  days  of  grace  had  come  to  a  close  the  Lord 
began  his  work  of  justice  by  separating  Noah,  and  "the  Lord  shut  him 
in.  '  Then  there  was  a  more  marked  difference  between  Noah  and  the 
rcf-t  of  mankind.  He  that  openeth  and  no  man  shutteth,  he  that 
shutteth  and  no  man  openeth,  even  he  had  interposed  a  barrier  impass- 
able between  Noah  and  those  that  believed  not.  Mercy's  gate  was  shut, 
the  time  of  longsuffering  had  come  to  a  close. 

Brethren,  the  Church  of  God  stands  at  the  present  moment  in  the 
World  very  much  in  the  same  condition  as  Noah  and  his  family.  Still 
No.  1,613.  3 


36  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

is  the  door  of  the  ark  wide  open,  and  it  is  our  business  with  all  our 
might  to  persuade,  constrain,  compel  men  to  come  in.  Not  without 
success  have  our  entreaties  been ;  for  many  have  entered  the  ark  of 
salvation  which  is  found  in  the  person  of  our  divine  Lord  Jesus.  These 
make  up  with  us  the  chosen  family  of  God  who  shall  be  safe  when  the 
world  is  deluged  with  the  last  devouring  fire.  But  the  time  cometh,  it 
comes  to  each  man  in  death,  and  it  will  come  to  the  whole  company  of 
the  ungodly  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  descend  from  heaven 
with  a  shout,  that  the  door  shall  he  shut,  and  it  shall  be  said,  "  Between 
us  and  you  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed ;  so  that  they  which  would  pass 
from  hence  to  you  cannot ;  neither  can  they  pass  to  us,  that  would  come 
from  thence."  Character  will  become  unchangeable  ;  he  that  is  unjust 
will  be  unjust  still,  and  he  that  is  filthy  will  be  filthy  still. 

My  heart  trembles  as  I  think  of  this  matter.  There  is  a  joy  in 
being  shut  in  with  the  saints,  but  a  great  grief  in  knowing  that  many 
will  be  shut  out.  I  shall  labour  so  to  set  forth  this  truth  that,  mayhap, 
ere  the  door  closes  a  goodly  company  may  cry,  "  We  will  come  with  you, 
for  we  perceive  that  the  Lord  is  with  you."  Surely  in  the  floods  of  great 
waters  they  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  the  Lord ;  but  until  those  water- 
floods  break  forth  they  may  come,  and  they  shall  find  a  glad  welcome ; 
for  it  is  written  "him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out." 

Our  meditation  will  be  arranged  under  two  heads,  which  may  readily 
be  remembered :  shut  in  and  shut  out.  They  stand  in  very  distinct 
contrast,  and  admit  of  no  third  condition. 

I.  First,  let  us  think  of  truths  which  range  themselves  under  the 
head  of  shut  in.  This  is  a  blessed  text.  Oh  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
may  help  me  to  preach  from  it,  and  you  to  enjoy  it. 

Observe,  then,  that  Noah  was  shut  in — shut  in  the  ark.  Noah's  con- 
dition as  to  an  evil  world  was  now  one  of  permanent  separation.  He 
was  severed  from  the  world,  and  his  separation  was  beyond  recall. 
There  is  a  time  in  the  human  character  when  it  has  some  good  thing 
in  it  towards  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  yet  that  good  thing  may  be 
lost ;  but  there  is  another  and  happier  time  when  the  truly  converted 
have  stepped  over  the  boundary,  and  shall  never  go  back  again  unto 
corruption.  They  are  dead,  and  their  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God ; 
hidden  beyond  further  damage  or  death.  They  are  henceforth  kept  by 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  ;  crucified  unto  the  world  and  the 
world  unto  them.  There  was  a  time  when,  speaking  after  the  manner 
of  men,  Noah  might  have  given  up  his  testimony  and  sided  with  the 
ungodly  mass ;  but  that  possibility  is  all  over ;  for  the  door  is  shut,  the 
Lord  hath  shut  him  in.  There  was  no  wish  in  Noah's  heart  to  come 
out,  and  he  could  not  come  out.  The  deed  was  done,  and  could  not  be 
undone  :  the  bolt  was  turned  and  could  not  be  withdrawn.  Noah  was 
shut  in  by  a  hand  which  is  not  given  to  undo  its  own  work.  I  believe 
that  this  fixity  of  character  and  condition  has  happened  to  all  believers 
who  can  truly  say  that  they  are  dead  unto  the  world.  Dying  unto  the 
world  is  the  way  of  our  salvation ;  by  this  process  we  pass  into  newness 
of  life.  I  dare  say  when  that  door  was  shut  the  men  of  the  world  said, 
"  Look  at  old  Noah  !  he  has  gone  into  his  coffin.  He  is  as  good  as  dead 
and  buried."  Yes,  that  was  exactly  what  they  were  meant  to  see  and 
to  say  ;  and  Peter  says,  "  The  like  figure  whereunto  also  baptism  doth 


SHUT   IN   OR   SHUT   OUT.  37 

now  save  lis."  He  does  not  say  that  baptism  saves  us  ;  but  that  it  is  a 
"like  figure"  of  the  way  of  salvation.  The  ark  and  immersion  set 
forth  the  same  truth.  The  man  is  "  buried  in  baptism,"  to  signify  that 
he  is  dead  to  the  world ;  wherein  also  he  rises  again  to  show  his  fellow- 
ship with  Christ  in  resurrection,  and  the  fact  that  he  has  risen  to  new- 
ness of  life.  Baptism  is  a  picture  of  the  way  of  salvation,  just  aa 
Noah's  ark  was.  Entrance  into  the  ark  and  submergence  beneath  a 
forty  days'  deluge  of  rain,  was  a  fit  type  of  death  and  burial ;  and  the 
rising  of  the  ark  above  the  waters  fitly  sets  forth  resurrection  to  a  new 
life.  Noah  underwent  burial  to  all  the  old  things  that  he  might  come 
out  into  a  new  world,  and  even  so  we  die  in  Christ  that  we  may  live 
with  him  This  is  the  doctrine,  but  the  experience  is  grand.  Beloved, 
it  is  a  great  mercy  when  a  man  can  feel  in  his  own  soul  that  God 
has  fixed  for  ever  his  condition  towards  the  ungodly.  We  have  come 
out,  my  brethren,  from  among  men  just  as  Abraham  did  when  he  left 
his  fatherland  and  went  into  the  land  of  which  he  knew  nothing  but 
that  God  had  said  that  he  would  give  it  to  him  and  to  his  seed.  It 
is  written  concerning  Abraham  and  the  other  patriarchs  that  "doubtless 
if  they  had  been  mindful  of  the  place  whence  they  came  out,  they  had 
opportunity  to  return,"  but  they  did  not  return,  it  entered  not  into 
their  minds  and  hearts  to  do  so.  They  had  as  fully  left  Padanaram 
behind  them  as  if  they  had  been  dead  and  buried  to  it,  and  their 
life  showed  each  one  of  them  to  be  a  pilgrim  and  a  sojourner  with  God. 
Even  so  with  believers,  the  Lord  has  called  us  out  and  set  us  apart  unto 
himself.  Henceforth  a  door  is  shut  behind  us,  and  we  cannot  go  back. 
We  are  like  Bunyan's  Pilgrim,  we  must  go  forward,  for  we  have  no 
armour  for  our  backs.  There  is  no  inducement  to  go  back  if  we  fairly 
consider  the  matter.  The  City  of  Destruction  which  we  have  left  is  to 
be  burnt  with  fire — shall  we  go  back  to  that  ?  The  enemies  we  have 
fought  with  and  encountered  are  left  behind  ;  shall  we  seek  them  to 
fight  with  them  again,  or  to  become  their  friends  ?  Sin  is  bitter  to  us, 
it  hath  already  broken  our  teeth  as  with  gravel  stones, — shall  we  go 
back  to  it  again  ?  What  inducement  have  we  to  return  to  the  house 
of  bondage?  No;  by  God's  grace  "Forward"  is  our  motto  till  we 
come  to  "  the  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is 
God." 

Brethren,  I  am  always  glad  when  I  can  feel  concerning  any  of  you 
that  you  have  finally  done  with  the  world,  and  may  be  numbered  with 
the  irreconcileables :  for,  alas,  I  fear  there  are  too  many  who  have  so 
questionably  come  out  of  Sodom  that  their  hearts  are  there  still,  and 
they  are  apt  to  cast  lingering  looks  towards  the  accursed  city.  Ah  me ! 
what  if  any  of  you  should  become  pillars  of  salt !  "  Remember  Lot's 
wife  ! "  But  when,  like  Noah,  you  are  divided  from  the  world's  pur- 
suits by  God's  own  act,  then  is  it  vvell  with  you.  Noah  v/as  shut  in, 
and  could  not  follow  after  the  festivities  and  worldlinesses  of  men. 
They  were  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  given  in  marriage,  but 
to  Noah  the  dance  and  the  viol,  the  feast  and  the  revel,  called  in  vain. 
He  could  not  now  hoard  up  wealth,  nor  seek  for  fame  among  the  sons 
of  men.  He  was  utterly  exiled  and  excluded  from  all  those  things 
which  charmed  the  minds  of  his  cotemporaries ;  he  was  out  of  the 
fashion,  yea,  out  of  the  world.     He  was  shut  out,  too,  from  all  their 


88  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

possessions ;  even  from  his  own  farm  he  was  now  expatriated.  BIesf?ed 
is  that  man  who,  whatsoever  he  hath,  hath  it  as  though  he  had  it  not ; 
he  sets  no  store  by  earthly  things,  and  does  not  lock  up  his  soul  in 
his  iron  safe.  He  is  shut  out  from  the  things  which  rust  and  corrupt, 
80  that  they  are  not  his  God,  nor  his  treasure.  Noah  was  divided 
from  the  evil  generation  among  which  he  dwelt  by  the  act  of  God: 
here  was  his  safety.  Adam  was  put  in  Paradise  by  Go4,  but  he 
"was  never  shut  in  by  God,  and  therefore  very  soon  he  left  his  first 
estate  and  wandered  among  thorns  and  thistles.  But  Noah  was  both 
put  in  the  ark  and  shut  in  the  ark,  and  therefore  he  never  left  his  shelter 
until  the  Lord  bade  him  come  forth  to  possess  the  new  world.  Blessed 
are  the  men  of  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  can  say,  "  They  are  not  of  the 
world."  Such  have  passed  by  death  into  life,  and  are  members  of  a 
new  race,  who  shall  go  forth  with  joy,  and  be  led  forth  with  peace ;  for 
they  shall  inherit  the  earth.  Blessed  is  that  man  who  has  crossed  the 
Eubicon,  deciding  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side  whatever  others  may  do, 
Blessed  is  the  man  who  has  burnt  his  boats  behind  him,  having  landed 
in  a  country  from  which  he  will  never  retreat.  I  would  fain  be  one 
who  can  cease  to  be,  but  cannot  cease  to  be  a  Christian ;  who  can  die, 
but  cannot  deny  his  Lord ;  who  will,  if  needful,  go  with  him  to  prison 
and  to  death,  and  can  do  no  otherwise,  for  the  love  of  Christ  con- 
Btraineth  him.  Then  is  the  will  most  truly  free  when  it  is  under  the 
sweet  dominion  of  infinite  love ;  this  is  true  liberty, — to  be  led  about 
in  triumph  in  every  place,  bound  with  the  silken  cords  of  gratitude,  a 
captive  to  the  power  of  grace.  0  happy  man  who  can  truly  say  that 
henceforth  he  is  "  shut  in,"  because  he  is  born  again,  and  thus  entirely 
changed.  In  the  olden  time  a  newly-converted  man  who  became  an 
eminent  saint  was  met  in  the  street  by  a  woman  who  had  at  other 
times  tempted  him  to  sin.  He  took  no  notice  of  her,  and  at  last  she 
cried  out,  "Do  you  not  know  me?  It  is  I."  "Ah,"  said  the  new 
man,  "  but  it  is  not  I."  No,  he  was  not  the  man  who  could  take 
pleasure  in  uncleanness ;  he  could  no  longer  sin,  for  he  was  born  of 
God.  Our  inner  life  shuts  us  in  to  holiness,  and  the  wounds  of  Jesus 
seal  the  door.  The  goodness  of  God  interposes  a  barrier  between  us  and 
evil ;  for  we  say  with  Joseph,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness, 
and  sin  against  God?"  "  How  can  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  any 
longer  therein?"     Hence  our  prayer  is  that  of  Toplady, — 

"  Oh  nail  me  to  the  sacred  wood, 
There  tie  me  with  thy  Spirit's  chain  ; 
There  seal  me  with  thy  fastening  blood, 
Nor  ever  let  me  loose  atjain  : 
There  let  me  bow  my  siipj)iiant  knee, 
And  own  no  other  Lord  but  thee  ! '' 

We  must  now  remark,  secondly,  that  Noah  was  not  only  shut  in,  but 
he  was  shut  in  by  God.  There  was  the  excellence  of  it, — "  The  Lord 
shut  him  in."  No  man  can  shut  in  as  the  Lord  can.  I  cannot  shut  pro- 
fessors in  to  the  ways  of  godliness  as  I  could  wish ;  alas,  with  all  my 
preaching,  many  wander,  and  try  to  be  members  of  the  church  and  citizens 
of  the  world  too.  We  have  among  us  avowed  lovers  of  Christ,  who  act 
too  much  like  "  lovers  of  pleasure."  I  have  preached  no  liberty  to  siu, 
as  some  do,  but  I  have  declared  that  "  strait  is  the  gate  and  narrow  is 


BHUT   IX  OR   SHUT  OUT.  39 

the  way ; "  but  yet  these  men  make  excursions  into  the  broad  road.  [ 
would  still  hammer  at  the  door  of  the  ark,  in  hope  of  shutting  it  close 
and  keeping  it  so  ;  but  it  is  little  that  I  can  do.  If  Noah  had  shut  him- 
self in  he  might  have  come  out  again;  and  if  any  of  the  world  outside 
had  shut  him  in,  he  would,  probably,  have  burst  open  the  door  ;  but  "the 
Lord  shut  him  in,"  and  thus  sure  work  was  made  of  it.  Oh  to  be  en- 
closed by  Almighty  grace !  The  Lord  has  shut  his  people  in  unto  him- 
self by  his  choice  of  them  in  Christ  Jesus,  by  his  redemption  of  them 
from  among  men,  and  by  his  sanctifying  them  to  be  a  peculiar  people 
unto  himself.     Yes,  the  Lord  has  done  it — "The  Lord  shut  him  in." 

Take  notice  that  this  was  very  close  shutting,  so  as  to  keep  out  the 
water.  I  fancy  that  if  you  saw  a  huge  vessel  lying  upon  the  dry  land 
where  the  floods  would  come  to  float  it,  you  would  be  very  anxious  abouD 
that  great  opening  in  its  side.  It  was  evidently  a  huge  doorway,  for  a 
pair  of  elephants  had  passed  through  it ;  so  that  it  was  a  gaping  leak 
which  would  take  in  enough  water  in  an  hour  to  sink  the  ark  to  the 
bottom.  How  could  the  great  door  be  closed?  All  the  timbers  are 
stanch,  and  the  ship  is  well  calked,  and  pitched  within  and  without 
witii  pitch  ;  but  all  will  go  for  nothing  unless  we  can  secure  the  big  door. 
Merely  to  shut  the  door  will  be  of  no  use.  When  the  rain  begins  to  fall 
in  torrents  from  above,  and  the  waters  leap  up  from  below,  and  the  ship 
commences  to  rise,  she  will  take  in  any  quantity  of  water  at  the  points 
where  the  door  fits  into  the  wood.  Shipwrights  will  be  wanted,  and  the 
calkers  must  come,  and  the  men  with  the  pitch.  No  shipwright  could 
manage  to  shut  so  huge  a  door  close  enough  for  safety  unless  you  give 
him  time,  and  call  in  the  help  of  other  workers.  Hence  "  the  Lord  shut 
him  in  "  because  nobody  else  could  safely  be  trusted  to  shut  such  a  door, 
against  which  a  forty  days'  tempest  was  to  beat  most  furiously.  What 
a  mercy  it  is  that  when  we  get  into  Christ  by  faith,  and  are  shut  in  from 
the  world  with  him,  that  we  are  perfectly  safe,  because  the  Lord  himself 
has  shut  us  in.  We  are  not  only  brought  to  Christ  Jesus  by  divine 
power,  but  we  are  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  eternal  life  by  the 
same  divine  might. 

Beloved,  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  salvation  of  those  who  are  in 
Christ,  for  none  can  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord.  Never  has  a  soul  perished  trusting  in  Jesus,  and  never 
shall  a  soul  so  perish ;  for  though  salvation  be  so  difficult  that  the 
righteous  scarcely  are  saved,  yet  when  the  Lord  Jehovah  puts  his  hand 
to  the  work,  it  is  well  done,  and  dune  for  ever.  In  Noah's  case  the  huge 
chasm  that  would  have  let  in  the  water-floods  was  perfectly  closed  up. 
Even  so  all  the  yawning  leaks  and  openings  of  our  fall  and  sin  are  closed 
by  the  grace  of  God,  and  in  Christ  Jesus  we  are  secure  :  the  Lord  has 
shut  us  in. 

That  door  was  also  shut  very  fast,  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  enemies 
from  the  outside.  For  who  can  tell  ?  I  should  fancy  that  when  the 
waters  began  to  rise,  when  they  were  up  to  the  ankles,  or  knee  deep, 
those  who  had  hitherto  ridiculed  the  patriarch's  barge  would  assemble 
around  that  door  and  clamorously  demand  to  be  admitted,  resolved,  if 
refused,  to  force  their  way.  In  vain.  God  had  shut  the  door,  and  no 
violence  could  force  it  open,  by  push  of  crowd,  or  leverage  of  strength. 
Even  so  it  is  w.th  us,  we  are  protected  against  every  onslaught  of  the 


40  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

enemies  of  our  soul.  Come  life,  come  death,  things  present  or  things 
to  come,  salvation  hath  God  appointed  for  walls  and  bulwarks.  Come 
temptations  of  every  sort,  come  craft  or  assault  of  devils,  none  can  force 
the  doorway  and  come  at  us  for  our  destruction.  "  At  evening  let  them 
return ;  and  let  them  make  a  noise  like  a  dog,  and  go  round  about  the 
city.  But  I  will  sing  of  thy  power  ;  yea,  I  will  sing  aloud  of  thy  mercy 
in  the  morning  :  for  thou  hast  been  my  defence  and  refuge  in  the  day 
of  my  trouble.     Unto  thee,  0  my  strength,  will  I  sing." 

This  divine  shutting  in  of  Noah  was  verj/  necessary :  for  I  suppose 
that  no  one  else  could  have  moved  the  gigantic  door  upon  its  enormous 
hinges.  It  was  probably  too  massive  to  have  been  stirred  by  Noah,  or 
his  united  family.  It  must  have  been  a  moment  of  wonder  and  awe 
when  that  stupendous  door  began  silently  to  move  of  its  own  accord, 
as  though  an  invisible  hand  was  carefully  closing  it,  so  that  not  a  crevice 
should  be  made  through  w^hich  water  could  penetrate.  The  ark  was 
soon  as  entire  as  if  it  had  never  exhibited  an  opening  from  stem  to  stern. 
You  and  I  need  shutting  into  Christ  by  a  divine  hand,  or  it  never  will  be 
done  securely.  When  a  soul  is  brought  to  Christ  it  is  by  divine  grace, 
but  the  whole  is  not  done  then  ;  the  grand  difficulty  is  to  keep  us  in 
Christ ;  for  without  continued  grace  we  shall  still  perish  despite  all  the 
arrangements  of  redeeming  love.  How  many  have  ventured  to  sea  in  the 
galleys  of  their  own  resolve  and  have  perished  there  !  How  many  have 
hoped  to  shut  themselves  in  with  Christ  by  the  mere  force  of  personal 
determination,  and  the  leakage  of  their  own  depraved  heart  has  drowned 
them.  But,  oh,  when  God  has  brought  us  into  union  with  Jesus  he 
shuts  us  in,  and  we  are  saved  in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting  salvation. 
The  great  door  of  covenant  faithfulness  is  shut  behind  the  believer,  and 
he  is  surrounded  by  the  power  and  grace  of  God,  even  as  Noah  was 
housed  within  the  strong  timbers  of  the  ark.  There  is  no  crack  nor 
cranny  through  which  tlie  floods  of  wrath  can  penetrate  ;  omnipotent 
love  hath  shut  us  in. 

And  the  Lord  did  this  not  only  necessarily,  but  graciously.  I  call 
your  attention  to  the  change  of  the  names  in  the  text,  a  very  sig- 
nificant change  indeed : — "  They  that  went  in,  went  in  male  and  female 
of  all  flesh :  as  God  had  commanded  him :  and  the  LnrcV — -that  is,  Jehovah 
— "  shut  him  in."  Elohim,  as  the  Creator  and  Preserver,  takes  care  of 
living  things  to  preserve  them  ;  but  the  Lord,  even  Jehovah,  the  covenant- 
ing God,  interposes  in  great  mercy  to  protect  his  chosen  servant.  It  was 
Jehovah  who  entered  into  solemn  league  and  covenant  with  his  servant 
Noah  that  he  would  preserve  him  in  the  ark,  and  float  him  into  the  new 
world  in  it ;  and  as  Jehovah  the  covenanting  One  he  shut  him  in.  There 
is  no  security  like  that  which  is  given  us  by  the  covenant  of  grace.  The 
hand  which  was  lifted  to  swear  our  safety  has  also  been  outstretched  to 
effect  it.  The  everlasting  covenant  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure 
guarantees  salvation  to  all  who  are  represented  by  the  great  Head  and 
Surety  of  that  covenant,  even  our  Lord  Jesus.  Love  and  power  co- 
operate with  faithfulness  and  truth  to  keep  the  chosen  from  all  danger. 
Dwell  much  upon  the  covenant,  and  note  the  immutable  pledges  by 
which  it  is  secured  and  the  immortal  principles  upon  which  it  is  founded. 
Try  to  suck  out  the  delicious  sweetness  which  is  to  be  found  in  the 
hive  of  the  covenant ;  for  if  you  are  an  advanced  child  of  God  no  form 


SHUT   IN  OR   SHUT   OUT.  41 

of  truth  can  be  more  nourishing  or  refreshing  to  your  mind.  The 
doctrines  which  spring  out  of  the  covenant  are  peculiarly  comforting 
to  believing  minds.  The  promises  of  God  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  can  never  fail  nor  change,  since  the  covenant  standeth  fast 
for  ever  and  ever.  Its  tenure  is  free  and  sovereign  grace,  and  it  cannot 
be  disannulled.  Here  is  a  line  of  it,  "  I  will  put  my  fear  in  their  hearts, 
that  they  shall  not  depart  from  me."  With  such  a  promise  doth 
Jehovah  shut  us  in  with  Christ  Jesus  in  matchless  kindness  and  un- 
speakable love. 

Notice,  once  again,  that  this  deed  was  very  instructive  to  Noah,  it 
must  have  been  so.  Noah  had  ceased  to  live  according  to  the  mere 
senses  of  the  body,  and  had  come  to  perceive  his  absolute  dependence 
upon  God ;  but  he  was  made  by  the  opened  door  to  see  that  dependence 
most  clearly.  By  divine  orders  he  had  built  an  ark  on  dry  land,  and 
when  it  was  builded  Noah  might  have  said  "Now  I  feel  safe  ":  but  he 
could  not  say  so,  for  there  was  a  gaping  gash  in  the  side  of  the  ark,  a 
vast  aperture  which  he  could  not  close  up.  It  was  an  occasion  of  mercy 
to  mankind,  and  Noah  was  probably  glad  to  see  it  open  that  he  might 
still  preach  righteousness  and  warn  men  to  escape,  saying  "Tlie  door  is 
open  !  Come,  ye  great  sinners !  Enter,  ye  sons  of  Anak.  Come  and 
be  saved." 

"  Come  to  the  ark,  ere  yet  the  flood 
Your  lingering  steps  oppose  ; 
Come,  for  the  door  which  open  stood 
Is  now  about  to  close." 

Yet  when  he  had  done  his  sermon  and  went  home  perhaps  he  said  to» 
his  wife  *'  Beloved,  how  can  this  ark  save  us  ?  Thac  door,  if  ever  the 
floods  come,  will  be  a  dreadful  danger  to  us.  We  cannot  shut  it,  what 
is  to  be  done  ?  We  must  leave  it  with  God.  We  are  still  dependent 
upon  a  divine  interposition,  and  Jehovah  will  stretch  out  his  hand  and 
shut  the  door  efiectually  so  that  we  shall  float  above  the  deluge."  In 
this  condition  of  daily  dependence  the  Lord  would  have  his  people 
abide,  conscious  to  the  very  last  that  in  him  only  do  they  live. 
*'  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  We  are  entirely  dependent  upon  our 
faithful,  loving  God  for  everything.  If  I  were  to  get  up  to  heaven's 
wall  and  gaze  in  through  the  pearly  gateway,  I  know  that  if  God  did 
not  give  me  grace  to  take  the  last  step  I  should  die  upon  the  thres- 
hold of  the  celestial  city.  We  rest  upon  God  at  the  first  for  hope  and 
pardon,  and  the  like  is  the  case  to  the  last.  "  My  soul,  wait  thou  only 
upon  God,  for  my  expectation  is  from  him."  You  will  never  be  able 
to  throw  your  cap  up  and  say,  "  I  have  done  with  further  prayer  and 
watchfulness,  for  I  need  no  longer  depend  on  God."  Never  will  you 
cease  to  look  unto  the  Lord  for  your  salvation  till  you  shall  be  safely 
housed  in  heaven — 

"  Far  from  a  world  of  grief  and  sin, 
With  God  eternally  shut  in.'' 

Then  joyfully  will  you  confess  that  salvation  is  of  the  Lord,  and  glorify 
your  great  God  and  Saviour. 

Thus,  then,  the  text  tells  us  that  Noah  was  shut  in,  and  that  he 
was  shut  in   by  God ;    but  now  let  us  remember  that  he  was  shut 


42  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PTJLPIT. 

in  with  God;  for  in  the  first  verse  of  the  chapter  we  read  "The  Lonl 
said  unto  Noah,  Come  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark ; "  and 
this  clearly  shows  that  the  Lord  was  in  the  ark  already.  0  what  a  joy 
it  is  to  know  that  when  a  soul  is  buried  to  the  world  it  lives  with  Christ. 
"  For  if  we  have  been  planted  together  in  the  hkeness  of  his  death,  we 
shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection."  God  is  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  we  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  thus  we  have  fellowship  with  the 
Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesus.  The  tabernacle  of  God  among  men  is 
the  person  of  Christ,  and  when  we  are  joined  unto  the  Lord  and  become 
members  of  his  body,  we  are  alive  unto  God  and  have  fellowship  with 
him.  It  is  a  blissful  privilege  to  be  hidden  away  in  the  person  of 
Christ,  for  "  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  and 
ye  are  complete  in  him."  You  are  in  him,  that  is  true,  joined  unto  the 
Lord  in  one  spirit.  Oh  the  fellowship  the  saved  have  with  God  !  How- 
cheering  !  How  near  I  How  elevating !  How  strengthening  !  God  has 
left  all  the  world  to  its  own  destruction ;  but  in  the  ark,  Christ  Jesus, 
there  is  joy,  and  peace,  and  fellowship ;  for  God  is  there,  and  all  his 
redeemed  family  are  shut  in  with  him.  Happy  man,  to  be  enclosed  in 
the  secret  place  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Most  High,  he  shall  abide  under 
the  shadow  of  the  Almighty. 

Next,  notice  that  Noah's  happiness  was  all  the  greater  because  heivas 
shut  in  the  ark  ivith  all  his  family.  This  is  a  great  joy,  to  have  all  your 
household  brought  unto  the  faith  of  Christ.  Some  among  us  have  one 
or  two  of  their  family  still  without  Christ,  and  strangers  to  his  salvation. 
This  is  a  great  grief.  I  will  not  enlarge  upon  a  sutiject  so  painful,  but 
I  know  instances  in  which  godly  women  have  all  their  children  with  them 
in  Christ,  but  the  husband  is  still  a  stranger  to  the  covenant  of  promise. 

There  is  a  brother  among  us  who  joys  to  dwell  in  Christ,  but  his 
father  and  mother  are  still  without  God  and  without  Christ.  How  often 
have  we  heard  that  dear  brother's  prayer  for  his  relatives.  Perhaps  his 
parents  are  here,  and  if  so  I  would  tell  them  how  much  their  son'ei 
prayers  affect  me ;  he  cries  as  for  his  very  life  that  God  would  save  his 
father.  Some  among  us  never  pray  in  the  prayer-meeting  without 
strong  crying  and  tears  for  their  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh ;  they 
cannot  get  through  a  prayer  without  mentioning  tlieir  children,  or  their 
brothers,  or  others  of  their  house  ;  I  hope  they  never  will ;  I  hope  God 
will  lay  their  kindred  on  their  heart  as  a  heavy  burden  till  they  are  all 
saved  in  answer  to  prayer.  Noah  would  have  been  an  unhappy  man 
that  day  if  his  wife  had  been  outside  the  ark,  or  if  Shem  or  Ham  had 
been  outside,  or  if  Japhet's  wife,  or  any  other  had  been  left  to  perish. 
How  joyful  are  they  who  can  say  that  all  theirs  are  God's.  You  are 
very  pleased,  some  of  you,  to  see  your  sons  and  daughters  respectably 
settled  in  hfe ;  thank  God  for  his  gracious  providence  ;  but,  mark  you, 
if  they  were  all  poor,  and  you  saw  them  all  saved,  there  would  still  be 
the  highest  cause  for  gratitude.  Better  to  see  them  regenerate  than 
rich,  better  married  to  Christ  than  to  a  fortune.  Give  your  God  no  rest 
till  it  is  so  ;  and  if  there  is  one  who  seems  quite  outside  of  spiritual 
things,  pray  for  him  as  Abraham  prayed  for  Ishmael,  "  Oh  that  Ishmael 
might  live  before  thee ! "  It  is  better  you  should  pray  hard  for  them  whila 
they  live,  than  that  you  should  mourn  bitterly  over  them  when  dead,  as 
David  did  when  he  lamented  aloud,  "  0  Absalom,  my  son  ;  would  God 


SHUT   IN   OR   SHUT   OUT.  43 

I  had  died  for  thee,  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  !  "  May  the  Lord,  when 
he  blesses  us  as  he  did  Jacob,  extend  that  blessing  to  all  our  tribes,  and 
cause  all  that  are  born  unto  us  to  be  born  again  unto  himself. 

Noah  and  his  household  were  shtit  in,  dear  friends,  to  be  perfecihf  pre- 
served, and  then  to  come  forth  into  a  neiv  world.  The  rains  descended, 
the  water-springs  poured  forth  their  fountains,  the  waters  rose,  and  the 
huge  vessel  began  to  quit  the  ground,  and  to  walk  the  waters  like  a  thing 
of  life.  Methinks  the  little  company  might  well  have  sung  a  hymn  ;  but 
if  they  did,  it  is  probable  that  the  hymn  was  brought  to  a  pause  as  they 
heard  theories  of  drowning  men  and  women  outside.  I  cannot  attempt 
to  picture  the  scene  :  they  must  have  come  clustering  in  great  multitudes 
round  the  ark  when  they  saw  that  in  very  deed  the  flood  was  descending 
and  uprising.  As  the  fast-closed  ark  began  to  move  the  inmates  must  have 
heard  a  chorus  of  cries,  and  groans,  and  shrieks  of  men  and  women  as 
they  perished  in  the  insatiable  waters.  Down  poured  the  incessant 
showers,  beating  on  the  roof  with  perpetual  thunder.  The  hidden  eight 
were  in  solitude,  shut  in  from  the  all-enveloping  sheet  of  rain.  The 
waters  continued  to  gather,  and  still  up  rose  the  ark ;  though  they 
could  scarce  tell  where  they  were  amid  the  watery  solitude,  they  knew 
that  they  were  safe.  When  they  looked  out  and  saw  no  living  thing, 
not  even  the  top  of  a  mountain,  and  they  were  floating  on  a  sea  that 
knew  no  shore,  how  strange  must  have  been  their  sensations!  But 
the  Lord  had  shut  Noah  in,  so  he  was  perfectly  safe.  He  knew  that  the 
Lord  High  Admiral  of  the  seas  was  at  the  helm  to  steer  the  lonely 
barque  aright.  Then  came  a  strong  wind  to  assuage  the  waters ;  and 
liow  the  ark  must  have  sped  before  the  gale,  none  knew  whither:  it  was 
tossed  about,  doubtless,  for  it  is  the  nature  of  winds  to  raise  waves,  and 
where  there  was  no  shore  to  give  the  slightest  shelter  the  vessel  must 
liave  felt  all  their  force.     Yet  the  favoured  family  was  safe. 

•*  Without  deep  calletli  unto  deep, 
But  all  is  peace  within." 

The  waters  were  assuaged,  and  by-and-by  the  ark  owned  to  a  strange 
sensation,  for  its  keel  was  touching  the  earth,  the  ark  was  coming  to  its 
rest.  God  remembered  Noah,  and  brought  the  ark  to  rest  on  the  moun- 
taius  of  Ararat.  But  will  the  ark  ground  safely  ?  Perhaps  she  will  break 
her  back  on  a  rock,  or  slide  down  the  side  of  a  hill,  or  over  the  brink  of 
a  precipice.  No,  no.  He  who  was  her  Architect  will  be  her  Preserver. 
God  has  found  an  anchorage  for  the  stars,  and  he  can  surely  berth  a 
ship.  He  found  the  ark  a  safe  resting  place,  and  brought  out  all  her 
passengers  safe  and  sound.  He  is  berthing  many  a  vessel  now  in  the 
everlasting  harbours,  and  he  hath  such  skill  in  navigation  that  no 
vessel  which  belongs  to  him  shall  ever  come  to  an  ill  end.  So  far 
Noah  fared  well  and  felt  solid  ground  beneath  him  once  again.  Now 
tiie  waters  quickly  assuage ;  but  what  a  mass  of  mud — shall  the 
rescued  family  run  the  risk  of  fever  and  miasma  ?  they  shall  not  be 
let  out  till  the  land  is  dry,  and  then  when  the  earth  has  been  fertilised 
by  its  own  destruction  and  is  ready  to  receive  the  seed  from  the  sower's 
hand,  and  the  grass  has  begun  to  grow  for  the  cattle,  then  shall 
they  come  out  into  a  new  world.  How  fair  the  face  of  nature  so  newly 
waahed !     How  like  a  bride  decked  for  her  marriaoe  dav  I     God  seta 


44  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

open  wide  the  door,  and  out  they  come,  camels,  elephants,  stieep,  lions,. 
Noah  and  all  his  family,  rejoicing  to  range  at  liberty.  A  sacrifice  is- 
offered  and  God  smells  a  savour  of  rest.  So  shall  it  be  with  us :  shut 
in  with  Christ  away  from  this  world,  to  which  we  are  not  conformed, 
we  shall  ride  in  safety  as  exiled  beings  out  of  this  old  world  into 
another.  A  day  cometh  when  the  new  hearen  and  the  new  earth  shall 
be  seen,  and  then  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth  and  shall  delight 
themselves  in  the  abundance  of  peace  ;  then  shall  our  sacrifice  of  praise 
be  accepted  of  the  Lord.  Blessed  are  they  who  enter  into  the  ark  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  so  die  to  the  old  life  that  they  may  live  in  newness  of 
life,  rejoicing  in  him  who  sitteth  upon  the  throne  and  saith, "  Behold,  I 
make  all  things  new ! "     This  be  your  lot  and  mine  for  ever  and  ever. 

II.  I  have  purposely  reserved  a  very  few  minutes  only  for  the 
gecond  and  much  more  painful  point  of  my  discourse,  which  comes  out 
of  the  words,  shut  out. 

To  have  the  door  shut  is  well  enough  for  Xoah  and  those  who  are 
with  him,  but  as  for  all  the  rest,  that  big  door  when  it  closed  on  its 
hinges  shut  them  all  out!  Shut  them  all  out  to  perish  with  a  swift 
and  sure  destruction.  Who  tvere  they'?  I  wonder  if  any  of  the  sort  are 
here  ! 

Well,  they  were  a  people  that  had  been  preached  to.  Noah  was  a 
"preacher  of  righteousness,"  and  fulfilled  his  office  perseveringly.  The 
men  of  his  generation  were  not  left  to  perish  without  light ;  they  had 
been  warned,  they  had  been  instructed,  they  had  been  entreated.  They 
were  such  as  you  are  who  have  been  habitual  hearers  of  the  word,  but 
hearers  only.  Of  course,  you  have  none  of  you  heard  the  gospel  for 
one  hundred  and  twenty  years  fi'om  one  man  ;  but  many  of  you  have 
heard  it  quite  long  enough  to  have  incurred  great  guilt  in  having  re- 
jected it  so  often. 

They  were  a  people  who  had  been  prayed  for.  You  will  ask  me  how 
I  come  to  know  that.  I  answer  that  Ezekiel  speaks  of  three  men  notable 
as  intercessors,  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job ;  and  I  feel  sure  he  would  not 
have  mentioned  Noah  in  that  company  if  he  had  not  been  a  man  of 
great  prayer.  I  believe  that  he  prayed  much  for  his  generation,  and 
yet  they  were  not  saved.  Sure  I  am,  dear  hearers,  that  some  of  yon 
are  daily  the  objects  of  earnest  supplication.  On  Monday  nights  I  have 
had  notes  about  some  of  you,  and  hundreds,  and  even  thousands  of  us 
have  joined  together  in  praying  for  you.  Beside  that,  you  know  the 
dear  ones  at  home  are  earnestly  interceding  for  you,  and  some  who  are 
now  in  heaven  pleaded  hard  for  you  ere  they  departed :  yet  you  will  be 
shut  out  as  sure  as  you  are  alive  unless  you  fly  to  Christ,  and  enter 
into  his  salvation  very  soon. 

They  were  a  people  who  had  many  of  them  been  associated  with 
Noah  in  his  work.  It  is  hardly  likely  that  Noah  built  the  ark  with  his 
own  hands  all  alone ;  he  must  have  hired  fellers  of  trees,  and  carpenters, 
and  calkers,  and  shipwrights  of  various  kinds.  None  of  these  were 
saved.  It  is  a  sad  thing  that  those  who  helped  to  build  the  ark  were 
shut  out  of  it !  Remember,  however,  that  they  shut  themselves  out ! 
They  chose  their  own  destruction.  Do  I  speak  to  any  who  have  sub- 
ecribed  to  build  the  house  in  which  they  worship  ?  who  contribute  their 
share  to  the  expenses  of  the  church  and  to  the  help  of  the  poor,  and 


SHUT   IN"   OR   SHUT   OUT.  45 

to  the  education  of  the  young ;  and  yet  to  have  no  part  in  Christ  ?  I 
do  not  understand  those  of  you  who  are  zealous  in  promoting  rehgion, 
and  yet  have  no  share  in  the  great  salvation  ?  Why  will  you  resolve  to 
be  shut  out  ?  As  sure  as  ever  you  sit  on  that  seat,  you  will  be  shut  out 
of  heaven,  and  shut  out  of  Christ  for, ever,  unless  you  arise  and  go  unto 
your  Father  confessing  your  sins  and  seeking  his  mercy.  May  God 
arouse  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  ! 

These  people  had  seen  great  wonders.  Half  the  world  must  have 
gathered  to  see  the  camels  and  elephants,  eagles  and  peacocks,  snails 
and  worms,  all  come  running,  or  flying,  or  creeping  to  the  ark.  Such 
a  sight  never  could  have  been  seen  before.  There  they  come  in  pairs: 
four  wild  beasts,  two  and  two ;  and  clean  beasts  by  sevens  !  Volun- 
tarily entering  the  ark !  What  a  sight  it  must  have  been !  Many 
saw  it  and  confessed  that  God's  hand  was  in  it,  and  yet  they  did  not 
enter  the  ark  themselves.  Oh,  my  hearers,  some  of  you  have  been  here 
in  times  of  revival ;  you  have  seen  drunkards  saved,  you  have  seen  the 
most  unlikely  ones  converted,  and  yet  you  have  not  turned  unto  the  Lord. 
Be  ye  sure  of  this — you  will  be  shut  out  of  hope  for  ever !  May  God 
grant  it  may  never  be  so ;  but  except  you  repent  it  must  be  the  case. 
Let  me  reaa  you  a  passage  from  the  gospel  of  Luke,  and  as  I  read  it, 
think  of  it  and  tremble  :  *'  When  once  the  master  of  the  house  is  risen 
up,  and  hath  shut  to  the  door,  and  ye  begin  to  stand  without,  and  to 
knock  at  the  door,  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  us;  and  he  shall 
:answer  and  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not  whence  ye  are  :  then  shall  ye 
begin  to  say,  We  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  thy  presence,  and  thou  hast 
taught  in  our  streets.  But  he  shall  say,  I  tell  you,  I  know  you  not 
-whence  ye  are  ;  depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity.  There  shall 
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  when  ye  shall  see  Abraham,  and 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  all  the  prophets,  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  you 
yourselves  thrust  out."  Thrust  out — pushed  out,  not  permitted  to  enter 
■- — the  great  door  interposing  between  you  and  all  hope  of  mercy. 

Next,  notice  ivhat  they  did.  What  they  did  was  this :  they  were  a 
people  who  took  all  their  delight  in  worldly  things.  We  are  told  in  the 
New  Testament  that  they  "  ate  and  they  drank,  they  married  and  were 
given  in  marriage,  till  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into  the  ark."  They 
were  altogether  taken  up  with  this  world — like  some  of  you,  who  have 
no  regard  for  the  world  to  come,  but  live  as  if  this  life  would  be  every- 
thing. Prayer  and  praise,  and  looking  into  eternal  things  are  all  a 
■weariness  to  you ;  you  look  after  the  shop  and  the  farm  and  the  house, 
and  forget  God.  I  do  not  blame  you  for  diligence  in  business  any  more 
than  I  blame  these  people  fur  eating  and  drinking  and  marrying ;  but 
to  make  this  the  main  thing  in  life  is  to  despise  God  and  heaven  and 
eternity.  0  my  hearer,  remember  your  God!  your  Saviour !  your  soul  1 
death  !  heaven  !  hell !  How  little  do  you  think  of  these  things  !  Be 
not  like  these  ungodly  ones  who  gave  their  hearts  to  worldly  things. 

And  then  they  did  not  believe,  there  was  the  point.  Wliatever  Noah 
might  say  they  replied,  "Poor  old  man,  you  have  entered  on  a  second 
childhood.  Perhaps  when  we  are  five  hundred  years  old  we  shall  talk 
nonsense  too."  When  the  patriarch  came  to  be  six  hundred  years  old  they 
said,  "  That  greybeard  is  always  telling  us  these  stories,"  and  they 
jested  at  the  old  man's  fable.     Alas,  some  of  you  do  not  believe  the 


46  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

gospel,  and  therefore  do  not  seek  its  salvation ;  but  it  is  true,  and  you 
will  own  it  to  be  so  when  you  get  breast  deep  in  the  fire-flood,  as  you 
will  be  ere  long.  Oh  that  you  would  believe,  and  escape  from  the 
wrath  to  come!  They  despised  the  longsuffering  of  God.  They  said, 
*'  Here  has  Noah  been  telling  us  these  one  hundred  and  twenty  years 
that  a  flood  is  coming,  and  where  is  it  ?  "  Among  ourselves  it  is  a 
common  proverb,  "Christmas  is  coming,"  but  in  Noah's  days  there 
must  have  been  more  sting  in  the  proverb,  "The  deluge  is  coming." 
They  would  not  believe  that  such  a  thing  could  ever  be.  Some  say,  "  I 
have  gone  on  very  well,  I  have  had  no  religion  and  yet  I  have  always 
prospered.  I  have  seen  godly  people  getting  poor,  but  I  have  always 
added  field  to  field  and  house  to  house.  I  do  not  want  reliijion.  I  am 
comfortable  enough  without  it."  If  we  say  we  pity  them,  they  reply,  "  We 
do  not  want  your  pity."  Just  so !  but  the  tables  will  be  turned  ere 
long,  and  then  you  will  demand  our  pity,  though  it  will  avail  you 
nothing,  for  the  door  will  be  shut.  Once  let  God  shut  the  door,  and 
there  will  be  an  eternal  separation  between  the  ungodly  and  all  hope  and 
happiness. 

What  came  of  ii  then?  The  door  of  hope  was  shut,  and  the  mul- 
titude perished  without  hape. 

When  I  was  thinking  this  over  I  fancied  that  I  could  preach  about 
it ;  but  I  cannot.  When  I  realize  the  fact  that  any  one  of  my  dear 
hearers  should  be  shut  out  of  heaven  1  cannot  bear  myself.  I  want  to 
find  a  secret  place  wherein  to  weep.  If  an  angel  should  say  to  me  this 
morning,  "  All  your  hearers  shall  be  saved  but  one,  and  you  must  pick 
out  the  one  who  shall  be  shut  out  of  heaven,"  I  should  run  my  eye 
anxiously  up  and  down  these  lines  of  pews,  and  I  should  take  up  many 
an  hour,  and  at  last  cry,  "  No,  I  cannot  take  the  responsibility  of 
marking  out  the  doomed  man."  I  should  keep  you  here,  I  think,  till  I 
expired  before  I  could  make  the  horrible  death-choice.  I  would  say, 
"  Lord,  save  every  one."  And  as  for  the  marked  man,  I  would  cry, 
"  Spare  him  !  Do  spare  him !  "  Oh,  my  hearers,  will  you  do  for  your- 
selves what  I  could  not  dare  to  do  for  you  ?  Will  any  man  choose  for 
himself  to  be  lost  ?  Will  he  count  himself  unworthy  of  eternal  life, 
and  put  it  from  him  ?  Then  I  must  shake  off  the  dust  of  my  feet 
against  him.  1  will  have  none  of  the  responsibility.  If  you  will  be 
damned  you  must  do  it  yourselves.  I  will  not  be  a  partaker  in  the 
crime.  Your  blood  be  on  your  own  heads.  Go  down  to  the  pit  if  you 
will  deliberately  choose  to  do  so ;  but  this  know,  that  Christ  was  preached 
to  you,  and  you  would  not  have  him ;  you  were  invited  to  come  to  him, 
but  turned  your  backs  upon  him  ;  you  chose  for  yourselves  your  own 
eternal  destruction !  God  grant  you  may  repent  of  such  a  choice,  fo)- 
Jesus  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


J 


THE  GOSPEL  OF  ABEAHAM'S  SACRIFICE  OF  ISAAC. 


^ 


Delivered  on  Sunday  Evening  May  2nd,  1869,  by 

C.  H.   STURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  H'e  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all." — Romans  viii.  32. 

"We  have  selected  this  verse  as  our  theme,  but  our  true  text  you  will 
find  in  the  twenty-second  chapter  of  Genesis,  the  narrative  which  we 
read  to  you  this  morning  at  full  length,  and  upon  which  we  spoke  in 
detail  in  our  discourse.  I  thought  it  meet  to  keep  to  one  point  this 
morning,  on  the  ground  that  one  thing  at  a  time  is  best,  and  there- 
fore I  endeavoured  to  lead  your  undivided  contemplations  to  the  peer- 
less example  of  holy,  believing  obedience,  which  the  father  of  the  faithful 
presented  to  us  when  he  offered  up  his  son. 

But  it  would  be  a  very  unfair  way  of  handling  Holy  Scripture  to 
leave  such  a  subject  as  this,  so  full  of  Christ,  without  dwelling  upon 
the  typical  character  of  the  whole  narrative.  If  the  Messiah  be  any- 
where symbolised  in  the  Old  Testament,  he  is  certainly  to  be  seen  upo« 
Mount  Moriah,  where  the  beloved  Isaac,  willingly  bound  and  laid  upon 
the  altar,  is  a  lively  foreshadowing  of  the  Wellbeloved  of  heaven  yield- 
ing his  life  as  a  ransom.  We  doubt  not  that  one  great  intent  of  the 
whole  transaction  was  to  aflFord  Abraham  a  clearer  view  of  Christ's  day  ; 
the  trial  was  covertly  a  great  privilege,  unveiling  as  it  did,  to  the 
patriarch,  the  heart  of  the  great  Father,  in  his  great  deed  of  love  to 
men,  and  displaying  at  the  same  time,  the  willing  obedience  of  the 
great  Son,  who  cheerfully  became  a  burnt  offering  unto  God.  The 
gospel  of  Moriah,  which  is  but  another  name  for  Calvary,  was  far  clearer 
than  the  revelation  made  at  the  gate  of  Paradise,  or  to  Noah  in  the  ark, 
or  to  Abraham  himself  on  any  former  occasion.  Let  us  pray  for  a  share 
in  the  privilege  of  the  renowned  friend  of  God,  as  we  study  redemption 
in  the  light  which  made  Abraham  glad. 

Without  detaining  you  with  any  lengthened  preface,  for  which  we 
have  neither  time  nor  inclination,  we  shall  first,  draw  the  parallel  be- 
tween the  offering  of  Christ  and  the  offering  of  Isaac ;  and,  secondly,  we 
shall  show  wherein  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  goes  far  beyond  even  this  most 

No.  8fi9. 


48 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


edifying  type.     0  blessed  Spirit  of  God,  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  at 
this  hour,  and  show  them  unto  us. 

I.   First,  THE  PARALLEL. 

You  know  the  story  before  you ;  we  need  not  repeat  it,  except  as  we 
weave  it  into  our  meditation.  As  Abraham  offered  up  Isaac,  and  so  it 
mi^ht  be  said  of  him  that  he  "  spared  not  his  own  son,"  so  the  ever 
blessed  God  offered  up  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  spared  him  not. 

There  is  a  likeness  in  the  person  offered.  Isaac  was  Abraham's  son. 
and  in  that  emphatic  sense,  his  only  son ;  hence  the  anguish  of  resign- 
ing him  to  sacrifice.  There  is  a  depth  of  meaning  in  that  word  "  only  " 
when  it  is  applied  to  a  child.  Dear  as  life  to  a  parent's  heart  is  his  only 
■child ;  no  gold  of  Ophir  nor  sparkling  gems  of  Inde  can  be  compared 
therewith.  Those  of  you  blessed  with  the  full  quiver,  having  many  child- 
ren, would  yet  find  it  extremely  difficult,  if  one  had  to  be  taken  from 
you,  to  say  which  it  should  be.  A  thousand  pangs  would  rend  your  hearts 
in  making  choice  of  one  out  of  the  seven  or  the  ten,  upon  whose  clay- 
^old  brow  you  must  imprint  a  last  fond  kiss ;  but  what  would  be  your 
griefif  youhad  butone!  "What  agony  to  have  torn  from  you  the  only 
token  of  your  mutual  love,  the  only  representative  of  your  race !  Cruel 
is  the  wind  which  uproots  the  only  scion  of  the  ancient  tree ;  rude  is 
the  hand  which  dashes  the  only  blossom  from  the  rose.  Ruthless 
-spoiler,  to  deprive  you  of  your  sole  heir,  the  corner-stone  of  your  love, 
the  polished  pillar  of  your  hope.  Judge  you  then  the  sadness  which 
pierced  the  heart  of  Abraham  when  God  bade  him  take  his  son,  his 
•only  son,  and  offer  him  as  a  burnt  offering !  But  I  have  no  language 
with  which  to  speak  of  the  heart  of  God  when  he  gave  up  his  only 
begotten  Son.  Instead  of  attempting  the  impossible,  I  must  content  my- 
self with  repeating  the  words  of  Holy  Writ :  "  God  so  loved  the  world, 
that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  Nothing  but  infinite  love 
to  man  could  have  led  the  God  of  love  to  bruise  his  Son  and  put  him 
to  grief.  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  is,  in  his  divine  nature,  one 
with  God,  co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  him,  his  only  begotten  Son  in  a 
manner  mysterious  and  unknown  to  us.  As  the  divine  Son  the  Father 
gave  him  to  us  :  "  Unto  us  a  Son  is  given,  and  his  name  shall  be  called 
the  Mighty  God."  Our  Lord,  as  man,  is  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  ac- 
cording to  the  angel's  salutation  of  the  Virgin :  "  The  Holy  Ghost  shall 
come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee : 
therefore  also  that  holy  thing  which  shall  be  born  of  thee  shall  be  called 
the  Son  of  God."  In  his  human  nature  Jesus  was  not  spared,  but  was 
smade  to  suffer,  bleed,  and  die  for  us.  God  and  man  in  one  person,  two 
natures  being  wondrously  combined,  he  was  not  spared  but  delivered  up 
for  all  his  chosen.  Herein  is  love !  Behold  it  and  admire  !  Consider 
:it  and  wonder  I     The  beloved  Son  is  made  a  sacrifice  1     He,  the  Only- 


THE  GOSPEL  OF  ABRAHAM'S  SACRIFICE  OF  ISAAC.  49 

begotten  is  smitten  of  God  and  afflicted,  and  cries,  "  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

Remember  that  in  Abraham's  case  Isaac  was  the  child  of  his  heart. 
I  need  not  enlarge  on  that,  you  can  readily  imagine  how  Abraham  loved 
him;  but  in  the  case  of  our  Lord  what  mind  can  conceive  how  near  and 
dear  our  Redeemer  was  to  the  Father  ?  Remember  those  marvellous 
words  of  the  Incarnate  Wisdom,  "I  was  by  him  as  one  brought  up  with 
him :  and  I  was  daily  his  delight,  rejoicing  always  before  him."  Our 
glorious  Saviour  was  more  the  Son  of  God's  love  than  Isaac  could  be 
the  darling  of  Abraham.  Eternity  and  infinity  entered  into  the  love 
which  existed  between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Christ  in  human  nature 
was  matchlessly  pure  and  holy,  and  in  him  dwelt  the  fulness  of  the  God- 
head bodily ;  therefore  was  he  highly  delightful  to  the  Father,  and  that 
delight  was  publicly  attested  in  audible  declarations,  "  This  is  my 
beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  Yet  he  spared  him  not,  but 
made  him  to  be  the  substitute  for  us  sinners,  made  him  as  a  curse  for 
us,  and  to  be  hanged  on  a  tree.  Have  you  a  favourite  child?  Have 
you  one  who  nestles  in  your  bosom?  Have  you  one  dearer  than  all 
other  ?  Then  should  you  be  called  to  part  with  him,  you  will  be  able 
to  have  fellowship  with  the  great  Father  in  delivering  up  his  Son. 

Remember,  too,  that  Isaac  was  a  most  lovely  and  obedient  son.  "We 
have  proof  of  that  in  the  fact  that  he  was  willing  to  be  sacrificed,  for 
being  a  vigorous  young  man,  he  might  have  resisted  his  aged  father, 
but  he  willingly  surrendered  himself  to  be  bound,  and  submitted  to  be 
laid  on  the  altar.  How  few  there  are  of  such  sons  !  Could  Abraham 
give  him  up?  Few,  did  I  say,  of  such  sons?  I  cannot  apply  that  term 
to  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  for  there  was  never  another  such  as  he.  If 
I  speak  of  his  humanity,  who  ever  obeyed  his  father  as  Christ  obeyed 
his  God?  "  Though  he  were  a  Son  yet  learned  he  obedience."  It  was 
his  meat  and  his  drink  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  him.  "  Wist  ye 
not,"  said  he,  "  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business?"  And  yet 
this  obedient  Son,  this  Son  of  sons,  God  spared  not,  but  unsheathed  his 
sword  against  him,  and  gave  him  up  to  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat, 
the  cross  and  death  itself.  What  mighty  love  must  have  led  the  Father 
to  this  I    Impossible  is  it  to  measure  it. 

So  strange,  so  boundless  was  the  love 
Which  pitied  dying  men. 
The  Father  sent  his  equal  Son, 
To  give  them  life  again. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten,  too,  that  around  Isaac  there  clustered  mys- 
terious  prophecies.  Isaac  was  to  be  the  promised  seed  through  which 
Abraham  should  live  down  to  posterity  and  evermore  be  a  blessing  to  all 
nations.  But  what  prophecies  gathered  about  the  head  of  Christ  I 
What  glorious  things  were  spoken  of  him  before  his  coming !    He  was 


so 


METR0POLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


the  conquering  seed  destined  to  break  the  dragon's  head.     He  was  th»j 
messenger  of  the  covenant,  yea,  the  covenant  itself.     He  was  foretold  a» 
the  Prince  of  Peace,  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.     In  him 
was  more  of  God  revealed  than  in  all  the  works  of  creation  and  of  pro- 
vidence.    Yet  this  august  person,  this  heii'  of  all  things,  the  Wonderful, 
the  Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of 
Peace,  must  bow  his  head  to  the  stroke  of  sacred  vengeance,  being  given 
up  as  the  scapegoat  for  all  believers ;  the  Lamb  of  our  passover,  the 
victim  for  our  sin.     Brethren,  1  have  left  the  shallows,  and  am  far  out 
to  sea  to-night ;    I  am  swimming  in  a  great  deep,  I  find  no  bottom,  and 
I  see  no  shore ;  I  sink  in  deeps  of  wonder.     My  soul  would  rather  medi- 
tate than  attempt  to  utter  herself  by  word  of  mouth.      Indeed,   the 
theme  of  God's  unspeakable  gift,  if  we  would  comprehend  its  breadth 
and  length,  is  rather  for  the  closet  than  for  the  pulpit,  rather  to  be  medi- 
tated upon  when  you  muse  alone  at  eventide  than  to  be  spoken  of  in 
the  great  assembly.     Though  we  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of 
angels,  we  cannot  attain  to  the  height  of  this  great  argument.     God 
gave  such  a  one  to  us  that  the  world  could  not  find  his  fellow  nor 
heaven  reveal  his  equal.     He  gave  to  us  a  treasure  so  priceless  that  if 
heaven  and  earth  were  weighed  like  the  merchants'  golden  wedge,  they 
could  not  buy  the  like  thereof.     For  us  was  given  up  the  chiefest  among 
ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely.     For  us  the  head  of  most  fine 
gold  was  laid  in  the  dust,  and  the  raven  locks  bestained  with  gore.  For 
us  those  eyes  which  are  soft  as  the  eyes  of  doves,  were  red  with  weep- 
ing, and  washed  with  tears  instead  of  milk.     For  us  the  cheeks  which 
were  as  a  bed  of  spices  were  defiled  with  spittle,  and  the  countenance 
like  Lebanon,  excellent  as  the  cedars,  marred  more  than  the  sons  of 
men.     And  all  this  was  by  the  Father's  appointment  and  ordaining; 
according  to  the  eternal  purpose  written  in  the  volume  of  the  Book. 

The  parallel  is  very  clear  in  the  preface  of  the  sacrifice.  Let  us  show 
you  in  a  few  words.  Abraham  had  three  days  in  which  to  think  upon 
and  consider  the  death  of  his  son ;  three  days  in  which  to  look  into  that 
beloved  face  and  to  anticipate  the  hour  in  which  it  would  wear  the  icy 
pallor  of  death.  But  the  Eternal  Father  foreknew  and  foreordained  the 
sacrifice  of  his  only  begotten  Son,  not  three  days  nor  three  years,  nor 
three  thousand  years,  but  or  ever  the  earth  was  Jesus  was  to  his  Father 
*'  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Long  ere  his  birth 
at  Bethlehem  it  was  foretold,  "All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we 
have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him 
the  iniquity  of  us  all."  It  was  an  eternal  decree  that  from  the  travail 
of  the  Redeemer  there  should  arise  a  seed  that  should  serve  him,  being 
purchased  by  his  blood.  What  perseverance  of  disinterested  love  was 
here  !  Brethren,  suffer  me  to  pause  and  worship,  for  I  fail  to  preach. 
I  am  abashed  in  the  presence  of  such  wondrous  love.  I  cannot  understand 


THE  GOSPEL  OF  ABEAHAM'S  SACEIFICE  OF  ISAAC.  51 

thee,  0  great  God,  I  know  thou  art  not  moved  by  passions,  nor  afFected 
by  grief  as  men  are  ;  therefore  dare  I  not  say  that  thou  didst  sorrow 
over  the  death  of  thy  Son.  But  oh  !  I  know  that  thou  art  not  a  God  of 
stone,  impassible,  unmoved.  Thou  art  God,  and  therefore  we  cannot 
conceive  thee ;  but  yet  thou  dost  compare  thyself  to  a  father  having  com- 
passion on  a  prodigal ;  do  we  err,  then,  if  we  think  of  thee  as  yearning 
over  thy  Wellbeloved  when  he  was  given  up  to  the  pangs  of  death? 
Forgive  me  if  I  transgress  in  so  conceiving  of  thy  heart  of  love,  but 
surely  it  was  a  costly  sacrifice  which  thou  didst  make,  costly  even  to 
thee !  I  will  not  speak  of  thee  in  this  matter,  0  my  God,  for  I  cannot, 
but  I  will  reverently  think  of  thee,  and  wonder  how  thou  couldst  have 
looked  so  steadily  through  the  long  ages,  and  resolved  so  unwaveringly 
upon  the  mighty  sacrifice,  the  immeasurable  generosity  of  resigning  thy 
dear  Son  to  be  slaughtered  for  us. 

Remember,  that  Abraham  prepared  with  sacred  forethought  everything 
for  the  sacrifice.  As  I  showed  you  this  morning,  he  became  a  Gibeonite 
for  God,  acting  as  a  hewer  of  wood,  while  he  prepared  the  fuel  for  his 
Bon's  burning.  He  carried  the  fire,  and  built  the  altar,  providing 
everything  needful  for  the  painful  service.  But  what  shall  I  say  of 
the  great  God  who,  through  the  ages,  was  constantly  preparing  this 
world  for  the  grandest  event  in  its  history,  the  death  of  the  Incarnate 
God?  All  history  converged  to  this  point.  I  venture  to  say  it,  that 
every  transaction,  whether  great  or  small,  that  ever  disturbed  Assyria, 
or  aroused  Chaldea,  or  troubled  Egypt,  or  chastened  Jewry,  had  for  its 
ultimate  object  the  preparing  of  the  world  for  the  birth  and  the  sacri- 
fice of  Christ.  The  cross  is  the  centre  of  all  history.  To  it,  from 
ancient  ages,  everything  is  pointing;  forward  from  it  everything  in  this 
age  proceeds,  and  backward  to  it  everything  may  be  traced.  How 
deep  is  this  subject,  yet  how  true  1  God  was  always  preparing  for  the 
giving  up  of  the  Wellbeloved  for  the  salvation  of  the  sons  of  men  ! 

We  will  not  tarry,  however,  on  the  preface  of  the  sacrifice,  but  ad- 
vance in  lowly  worship  to  behold  the  act  itsef.  When  Abraham  came 
at  last  to  Mount  Moriah,  he  hade  his  servants  remain  at  the  foot  of  the 
hill.  Now,  gather  up  your  thoughts,  and  come  with  me  to  Calvary, 
to  the  true  Moriah.  At  the  foot  of  that  hill  God  bade  all  men  stop. 
The  twelve  have  been  with  Christ  in  his  life-journey,  but  they  must  not 
be  with  him  in  his  death  throes.  Eleven  go  with  him  to  Gethsemane: 
only  three  may  draw  near  to  him  in  his  passion  ;  but  when  it  comes  to 
the  climax  of  all,  they  forsake  him  and  flee ;  he  fights  the  battle  singly. 
*'  I  have  trodden  the  wine-press  alone,"  said  he,  "  and  of  the  people 
there  was  none  with  me."  Although  around  Calvary  there  gathered 
a  great  crowd  to  behold  the  Redeemer  die,  yet  spiritually  Jesus  was 
there  alone  with  the  avenging  God.  The  wonderful  transaction  of 
Calvary  as  to  its  real  essence  and  spirit,  was  performed  in  solemn 


52  MKTROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

secrecy  between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Abraham  and  Isaac  were  alone. 
The  Father  and  the  Son  were  equally  alone  when  his  soul  was  made  a 
sacrifice  for  sin. 

Do  you  observe  also  that  Isaac  carried  the  wood! — a  true  picture  of 
Jesus  carrying  his  cross.  It  was  not  every  malefactor  who  had  to  bear 
the  tree  which  was  afterwards  to  bear  him,  but,  in  our  Lord's  case, 
and  by  an  excess  of  cruelty,  wicked  men  made  him  carry  his  cross. 
With  a  felicity  of  exactness  to  the  prophetic  type,  God  had  so  ordered 
it,  that  as  Isaac  bore  the  wood  up  to  the  altar,  so  Christ  should 
carry  his  cross  up  to  the  place  of  doom. 

A  point  worthy  of  notice  is,  that  it  is  said,  as  you  will  find  if  you  read 
the  chapter  of  Abraham  and  Isaac,  "  that  they  went  both  of  them  to- 
gether." He  who  was  to  smite  with  the  knife,  and  the  other  who  was 
to  be  the  victim,  walked  in  peaceful  converse  to  the  altar.  "  They  went 
both  together,"  agreeing  in  heart.  It  is  to  me  delightful  to  reflect  that 
Christ  Jesus  and  his  Father  went  both  together  in  the  work  of  redeem- 
ing love.  In  that  great  work  by  which  we  are  saved,  the  Father  gave 
us  Christ,  but  Christ  equally  gave  us  himself.  The  Father  went  forth 
to  vengeance  dressed  in  robes  of  love  to  man,  and  the  Son  went  forth  to 
be  the  victim  of  that  vengeance  with  the  same  love  in  his  heart. 

They  proceeded  together,  and  at  last,  Isaac  ivas  hoimd,  bound  by  his 
father.  So  Christ  was  bound,  and  he  saith,  "  Ye  could  have  no  power 
against  me  unless  it  were  given  to  you  of  my  Father."  Christ  could 
not  have  been  bound  by  Judas,  nor  Pilate,  nor  Herod,  if  the  Eternal 
Father  had  not  virtually  bound  him  and  delivered  him  into  the  hands 
of  the  executioner.  My  soul,  stand  and  wonder !  The  Father  binds 
his  Son;  'tis  God  thy  Father  who  binds  thine  Elder  Brother,  and  gives 
him  up  to  cruel  men  that  he  may  he  reviled,  spit  upon,  and  nailed  to 
the  tree  to  die. 

The  parallel  goes  still  further,  for  while  the  ftither  binds  the  victim, 
the  Victim  is  willing  to  lie  hound.  As  we  have  already  said,  Isaac  might 
have  resisted,  but  he  did  not ;  there  are  no  traces  of  struggling;  no 
signs  of  so  much  as  a  murmur.  Even  so  with  Jesus ;  he  went  cheer- 
fully up  to  the  slaughter-place,  willing  to  give  himself  for  us.  Said  he, 
"  No  man  takeih  my  life  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  myself.  I  have 
power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again." 

You  see  how  the  parallel  holds,  and  as  you  behold  the  earthly 
parent,  with  anguish  in  his  face,  about  to  drive  the  knife  into  the 
heart  of  his  dear  child,  you  have  before  you,  as  nearly  as  earthly 
pictures  can  paint  heavenly  things,  the  mirror  of  the  divine  Father 
about  to  give  up  the  Wellbeloved,  the  just,  for  the  unjust,  that  he  may 
bring  us  to  God.  I  pause  there.  What  further  can  I  say  ?  It  is  not, 
as  I  have  said  before,  a  theme  for  words,  but  for  the  heart's  emotions, 
for  the  kisses  of  your  lips,  and  the  tears  of  your  soul. 


THE   GOSPEL   OF    ABRAHAM'S   SACRIFItJE   OF   ISAAC,  53 

Yet  the  parallel  runs  a  little  further,  after  having  been  suspended  for 
a  moment,  Is%ac  was  restored  again.  He  was  bound  and  laid  upon  the 
altar,  the  knife  was  drawn,  and  he  was  in  spirit  given  up  to  death,  but 
he  was  delivered.  Leaving  that  gap,  wherein  Christ  is  not  typified 
fully  by  Isaac,  but  by  the  ram,  yet  was  Jesus  also  delivered.  He  came 
again,  the  living  and  triumphant  Son,  after  he  had  been  dead.  Isaac 
was  for  three  days  looked  upon  by  Abraham  as  dead,  on  the  third  day 
the  father  rejoiced  to  descend  the  mountain  with  his  son.  Jesus  was 
dead,  but  on  the  third  day  he  rose  again.  Oh  !  the  joy  on  that 
mountain  summit,  the  joy  of  the  two  as  they  returned  to  the  waiting 
servants,  both  delivered  out  of  a  great  trial.  But,  ah !  I  cannot  tell  you 
what  joy  there  was  in  the  heart  of  Jesus  and  the  great  Father  when  the 
tremendous  sacrifice  was  finished,  and  Jesus  had  risen  from  the  dead; 
but,  brethren,  we  shall  know  some  day,  for  we  shall  enter  into  the  joy  of 
our  Lord. 

It  is  a  bold  thing  to  speak  of  God  as  moved  by  joy  or  affected  by  grief, 
but  still,  since  he  is  no  God  of  wood  and  stone,  no  insensible  block,  we 
may,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  declare  that  God  rejoiced  over 
his  risen  Son  with  exceeding  joy,  while  the  Son  rejoiced  also  because 
his  great  work  was  accomplished.  Eemembering  that  passage  in  the 
prophet,  where  God  speaks  of  his  saints,  and  declares  that  he  will 
rejoice  over  them  with  singing,  what  if  I  say  that  much  more  he  did 
this  with  his  Son,  and,  resting  in  his  love,  he  rejoiced  over  the  risen 
one,  even  with  joy  and  singing. 

What  followed  the  deliverance  of  Isaac  ?  You  heard,  this  morning, 
that  from  that  moment  the  covenant  ivas  ratified.  Just  at  the  base  of 
that  altar  the  angel  declared  the  oath  wherein  God  sware  by  himself. 
Brethren,  the  risen  Saviour,  once  slain,  has  confirmed  the  covenant  of 
grace,  which  now  stands  fast  for  ever  upon  the  two  immutable  things 
wherein  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie. 

Isaac,  also,  had  that  day  been  the  means  of  showing  to  Abraham  the 
great  "provision  of  God.  That  name,  Jehovah-Jireh,  was  new  to  the 
world;  it  was  given  forth  to  men  that  day  from  Mount  Moriah;  and  in 
the  death  of  Christ  men  see  what  they  never  could  have  seen  else,  and 
in  his  resurrection  they  behold  the  deepest  of  mysteries  solved. 
God  has  provided  what  men  wanted.  The  problem  was,  How  can 
sinners  be  forgiven?  How  can  the  mischief  of  sin  be  taken  away? 
How  can  sinners  become  saints,  and  those  who  were  only  fit  to 
burn  in  hell  be  made  to  sing  in  heaven  ?  The  answer  is  yonder, 
where  God  gives  up  his  Only-begotten  to  bleed  and  die  instead  of 
sinners,  and  then  bids  that  Only-begotten  return  in  glory  from  the 
grave.  "  Jehovah-Jireh,"  is  to  be  read  by  the  light  which  streams 
from  the  cross.  "  The  Lord  will  provide  "  is  beheld  on  the  Mount  of 
Calvary  as  nowhere  else  in  heaven  or  earth. 


54  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPlT. 

Thus  have  I  tried  to  show  the  parallel,  but  I  am  sadly  coijscious  of 
my  want  of  power.  I  feel  as  if  I  were  only  giving  you  mere  sketches, 
Buch  as  schoolboys  draw  with  chalk  or  charcoal.  You  must  fill  them 
in;  there  is  abundance  of  room — Abraham  and  Isaac,  the  Father 
and  Christ.  In  proportion  to  the  tenderness  and  love  with  which  you 
can  enter  into  the  human  wonder,  so,  methinks,  by  the  loving  and 
aflfectionate  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  you  may  enter  into  the  tran- 
scendent wonder  of  the  divine  sacrifice  for  men. 

II.  But  now,  in  the  second  place,  I  have  to  hint  at  some  points  in 

WHICH   the    PARALLEL   FALLS  SHORT. 

The  first  is  this,  that  Isaac  trould  have  died  in  the  course  of  nature. 
When  offered  up  by  his  father,  it  was  only  a  little  in  anticipation  of  the 
death  which  eventually  must  have  occurred.  But  Jesus  is  he  *'  who 
only  hath  immortality,"  and  who  never  needed  to  die.  Neither  as  God 
nor  man  had  he  anything  about  him  that  rendered  him  subject  to  the 
bands  of  death.  To  him  Hades  was  a  place  he  need  never  enter,  and 
the  sepulchre  and  the  grave  were  locked  and  barred  fast  to  him,  for 
there  were  no  seeds  of  corruption  within  his  sacred  frame.  Without 
the  taint  of  original  sin,  there  was  no  need  that  his  body  should  yield 
to  the  mortal  stroke.  Indeed,  though  he  died,  yet  did  not  his  body  see 
corruption;  God  had  shielded  him  from  that.  So  Isaac  must  die, 
but  Jesus  need  not.  His  death  was  purely  voluntary,  and  herein 
stands  by  itself,  not  to  be  numbered  with  the  deaths  of  other  men. 

Moreover,  there  ivas  a  constraint  upon  Abraham  to  give  Isaac.  I  admit 
the  cheerfulness  of  the  gift,  but  still  the  highest  law  to  which  his  spirit- 
ual nature  was  subject,  rendered  it  incumbent  upon  believing  Abraham 
to  do  as  God  commanded.  But  no  stress  could  be  laid  upon  the  Most 
High.  If  he  delivered  up  his  Son,  it  must  be  with  the  greatest  freeness. 
Who  could  deserve  that  Christ  should  die  for  him  ?  Had  we  been  per- 
fection itself,  and  like  the  sinless  angels,  we  could  not  have  deserved 
such  a  gift  as  this.  But,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  we  were  full  of 
€vil ;  we  hated  God ;  we  continued  to  transgress  against  him ;  and  yet 
out  of  pure  love  to  us  he  performed  this  miracle  of  grace — he  gave  his 
Son  to  die  for  us.  Oh  !  unconstrained  love — a  fountain  welling  up 
from  the  depth  of  the  divine  nature,  unasked  for  and  undeserved ! 
What  shall  I  say  of  it  ?  0  God,  be  thou  ever  blessed  1  Even  the  songs 
of  heaven  cannot  express  the  obligations  of  our  guilty  race  to  thy  free 
love  in  the  gift  of  thy  Son ! 

Furthermore,  remember  that  Isaac  did  not  die  after  alt,  hut  Jesus 
did.  The  pictures  were  as  nearly  exact  as  might  be,  for  the  ram  wai-. 
caught  in  the  thicket,  and  the  animal  was  slaughtered  instead  of  the 
man;  in  our  Lord's  case  he  was  the  substitute  for  us,  but  there  was 
mo  substitute  for  him.  He  took  our  sins  and  bare  them  in  his  own  body 
topon  the  tree.     He  was  personally  the  sufferer.     Not  by  proxy  did  ha 


THE  GOSPEL  OF   ABRAHAM'S  SACRIFICE  OF  ISAAC.  55 

redeem  us,  but  he  himself  suffered  for  us;  m  propria  persona  he  yielded 
up  his  life  for  us. 

And  here  comes  in  one  other  point  of  diflFerence,  namely  that  Isaac,  if 
hehaddied,  could  not  have  died  for  us.  He  might  have  died  for  us  as  an 
■example  of  how  we  should  resign  life,  but  that  would  have  been  a  small 
boon  ;  it  would  have  been  no  greater  blessing  than  the  Unitarian  gospel 
offers  ^vhen  it  sets  forth  Christ  as  dying  as  our  exemption.  Oh,  but 
beloved,  the  djath  of  Christ  stands  altogether  alone  and  apart,  because 
it  is  a  death  altogether  for  others,  and  endured  solely  and  only  from  dis- 
interested affection  to  the  fallen.  There  is  not  a  pang  that  rends  the 
Saviour's  heart  that  needed  to  have  been  there  if  not  for  love  to  us ;  not 
a  drop  of  blood  that  trickled  from  that  thorn-crowned  head  or  from 
those  pierced  hands  that  needed  to  be  spilled  if  it  were  not  for  affection  to 
such  undeserving  ones  as  we.  And  see  what  he  has  done  for  us  !  He 
has  procured  our  pardon ;  we  who  have  believed  in  him  are  forgiven. 
He  has  procured  our  adoption ;  we  are  sons  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 
He  has  shut  the  gates  of  hell  for  us  ;  we  cannot  perish,  nor  can  any  pluck 
«s  out  of  his  hands.  He  has  opened  the  gates  of  heaven  for  us ;  we 
shall  be  with  him  where  he  is.  Our  very  bodies  shall  feel  the  power  of 
liis  death,  for  they  shall  rise  again  at  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  at  the 
last  day.  He  was  delivered  for  us  his  people,  "  for  us  all ;"  he  endure! 
all  for  all  his  people,  for  all  who  trust  him,  for  every  son  of  Adam  that 
■casts  himself  upon  him ;  for  every  son  and  daughter  of  man  that  will 
rely  alone  upon  him  for  salvation.  VYas  he  delivered  for  you,  dear 
hearer?  Have  you  a  part  in  his  death?  If  so,  shall  I  need  to  press 
>upon  }ou  as  you  come  to  this  table  '"o  think  of  the  Father's 
gift  ami  of  the  Father  himself?  Do  I  need  to  urge  you  with 
tearful  eye  and  melting  heart  as  you  receive  the  emblems  of  our 
Redeemer's  passion,  to  look  to  his  Father  and  to  him,  and  with 
humble  adoration  to  admire  that  love  which  I  have  failed  to 
depict,  and  which  you  will  fail  to  measure  ?  I  never  felt,  I  think,  in 
all  my  life,  more  utterly  ashamed  of  words,  and  more  ready  to  abandon 
speech,  for  the  thoughts  of  God's  love  are  too  heavy  for  the  shoulders  of 
my  words  ;  they  burden  all  my  sentences,  and  crush  them  down ;  even 
thought  itself  cannot  bear  the  stupendous  load.  Here  is  a  deep,  a 
great  deep,  and  our  bark  knows  not  how  to  sail  thereon.  Here  deep 
■calleth  unto  deep,  and  our  mind  is  swallowed  up  in  the  vastness  and 
immensity  of  the  billows  of  love  that  roll  around  us.  But  what  reason 
cannot  measure  faith  can  grasp,  and  what  our  understanding  cannot 
comprehend  our  hearts  can  love,  and  what  we  cannot  tell  to  others  we 
will  whisper  out  in  the  silence  of  our  spirits  to  ourselves,  until  our 
souls  bow  with  lowliest  reverence  before  the  God  whose  name  is  Love. 

As  I  close,  I  feel  bound  to  say  that  there  may  be  some  here  to  whom 
this  is  but  an  idle  tale.     Ah !   my  heart  breaketh  as  I  think  of  you,  chafc 


56  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

you  should  continue  to  sin  against  your  Maker,  and  forget  him  from 
day  to  day  as  most  of  you  do.  Your  Maker  gives  his  own  Son  to  redeem 
his  enemies,  and  he  comes  to  you  to-night  and  tells  you  that  if  you  will 
repent  of  your  sins,  and  trust  yourselves  in  the  hands  of  his  dear  Son, 
who  died  for  sinners,  you  shall  be  saved,  but,  alas !  you  will  not  do  so ; 
80  evil  is  your  heart,  that  you  turn  against  your  God,  and  you  turn 
against  his  mercy.  Oh  I  do  you  say,  "  I  will  not  turn  against  him  any 
more  "?  Are  your  relentings  kindled  ?  Do  you  desire  to  be  reconciled 
to  the  God  you  have  oifended  ?  You  may  be  reconciled ;  you  shall  be 
reconciled  to-night,  if  you  do  now  but  give  yourselves  up  to  God  your 
Father,  and  to  Christ  your  Saviour.  Whosoever  believeth  in  him  shal) 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life,  for  this  is  his  gospel,  "  He  that 
believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned."  What  that  damnation  is  may  you  never  know,  but  may  hia 
grace  be  yours.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Hebrews  vu. 


JEHOVAH-JIREH. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  October  12th,  1884,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


*'  And  Abraham  called  the  name  of  that  place  Jehovah- jireh  :  as  it  is  said  to  this  day. 
In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen." — Genesis  xxii.  14. 

"Abraham  called  the  name  of  that  place  Jehovah-jireh,"  or  "Jehovah 
will  see  it,"  or  "  Jehovah  will  provide,"  or  "  Jehovah  will  be  seen."  We 
are  offered  a  variety  of  interpretations,  but  the  exact  idea  is  that  of 
seeing  and  being  seen.  For  God  to  see  is  to  provide.  Our  own  word 
"provide,"  is  only  Latin  for  "to  see."  You  know  how  we  say  that 
we  will  see  to  a  matter.  Possibly  this  expression  hits  the  nail  on  the 
head.  Our  heavenly  Father  sees  our  need,  and  with  divine  foresight 
of  love  prepares  the  supply.  He  sees  to  a  need  to  supply  it;  and  in  the- 
seeing  he  is  seen,  in  the  providing  he  manifests  himself. 

I  believe  that  the  truth  contained  in  the  expression  "  Jehovah-jireh  "" 
was  ruling  Abraham's  thought  long  before  he  uttered  it  and  appointed  it 
to  be  the  memorial  name  of  the  place  where  the  Lord  had  provided  a  sub- 
stitute for  Isaac.  It  was  this  thought,  I  think,  which  enabled  him 
to  act  as  promptly  as  he  did  under  the  trying  circumstances.  His  reason 
whispered  within  him,  "  If  you  slay  your  son,  how  can  God  keep  his. 
promise  to  you  that  your  seed  shall  be  as  many  as  the  stars  of  heaven  ?  " 
He  answered  that  suggestion  by  saying  to  himself,  "Jehovah  will  see  to- 
it !  ■'  As  he  went  upon  that  painful  journey,  with  his  dearly  beloved 
son  at  his  side,  the  suggestion  may  have  come  to  him,  "  How^  will  you 
meet  Sarah  when  you  return  home,  having  imbrued  your  hands  in  the 
blood  of  her  son  ?  How  will  you  meet  your  neighbours  when  they  hear 
that  Abraham,  who  professed  to  be  such  a  holy  man,  has  killed  hi& 
son?"  I'hat  answer  still  sustained  his  heart — "Jehovah  will  see  to 
it!  Jehovah  will  see  to  it!  He  will  not  fail  in  his  word.  Perhaps  he 
will  raise  my  son  from  the  dead ;  but  in  some  way  or  otiier  he  will  justify 
my  obedience  to  him,  and  vindicate  his  own  command.  Jehovah  will  see 
to  it."  This  was  a  quietus  to  every  mistrustful  thought.  I  pray  that 
we  may  drink  into  this  truth,  and  be  refreshed  by  it.  If  we  follow 
the  Lord's  bidding,  he  will  see  to  it  that  we  shall  not  be  ashamed 
or  confounded.  If  we  come  into  great  need  by  following  his  command, 
No.  1,803.  . 


58  METROPOLITAN  TABKRNACLE   PULPIT. 

he  will  see  to  it  that  the  loss  shall  be  recompensed.  If  our  difficulties 
multiply  and  increase  so  that  our  way  seems  completely  blocked  up, 
Jehovah  will  see  to  it  that  the  roid  shall  be  cleared.  The  Lord  will  see 
us  through  in  the  way  of  holiness  if  we  are  only  willing  to  be  thorough 
in  it,  and  dare  to  follow  wheresoever  he  leads  the  way.  We  need  not 
wonder  that  Abraham  should  utter  this  truth,  and  attach  it  to  the  spot 
which  was  to  be  for  ever  famous:  for  his  whole  heart  was  saturated 
with  it,  and  had  been  sustained  by  it.  AYisely  he  makes  an  altar  and 
a  mountain  to  be  memorials  of  the  truth  which  had  so  greatly  helped 
him.  His  trials  had  taught  him  more  of  God, — had,  in  fact,  given  him 
a  new  name  for  his  God ;  and  this  he  would  not  have  forgotten,  but  he 
would  keep  it  before  the  minds  of  the  generations  following  by  naming 
the  place  Jehovah-jireh. 

Observe  as  you  read  this  chapter  that  this  was  not  the  first  time  that 
Abraham  had  thus  spoken.  AVhen  he  called  the  name  of  the  place 
Jehovah-jireh  he  had  seen  it  to  be  true, — the  ram  caught  in  the 
thicket  had  been  provided  as  a  substitute  for  Isaac  :  Jehovah  had  pro- 
vided. But  he  had  before  declared  that  truth  when  as  yet  he  knew 
nothing  of  the  Divine  action,  when  he  could  not  even  guess  how  his 
extraordinary  trial  would  end.  His  son  Isaac  had  said  to  him,  "  Behold 
the  fire  and  the  wood,  but  where  is  the  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering  ?  "  and 
the  afflicted  father  had  bravely  answered,  "My  son,  God  will  provide." 
In  due  time  God  did  provide,  and  then  Abraham  honoured  him  by  sav- 
ing the  same  words,  only  instead  of  the  ordinary  name  for  God  he  used 
the  special  covenant  title — Jehovah.  That  is  the  only  alteration ;  othei'- 
wise  in  the  same  terms  he  repeats  the  assurance  that  '*  the  Lord  will 
provide." 

That  first  utterance  was  most  remarkable  :  it  was  simple  enough,  but 
how  prophetic  !  It  teaches  us  this  truth,  that  the  confident  speech  of 
a  believer  is  akin  to  the  language  of  a  prophet.  The  man  who  accepts 
the  promise  of  God  unstaggeringly,  and  is  sure  that  it  is  true,  will  speak 
like  the  seers  of  old:  he  will  see  that  God  sees,  and  will  declare  the  fact, 
and  the  holy  inference  which  comes  of  it.  The  believer's  childlike 
assurance  will  anticipate  the  future,  and  his  plain  statement — '*  God  will 
provide  " — will  turn  out  to  be  literal  truth.  If  you  want  to  come  near 
to  prophesying,  hold  you  hard  to  the  promise  of  God  and  you  shall 
*'  prophesy  according  to  the  measure  of  faith."  He  that  can  say,  "  I  know 
and  am  sure  that  God  will  not  fail  me  in  this  mine  hour  of  tribulation," 
will,  before  long,  drop  pearls  of  divine  confidence  and  diamonds  of  pre- 
diction from  his  lips.  Choice  sayings  which  become  proverbs  in  the 
church  of  God  are  not  the  offspring  of  mistrust,  but  of  firm  confidence 
in  the  living  God.  To  this  day  many  a  saying  of  a  man  of  God  is 
quoted  among  us,  even  as  Abraham's  word  was  quoted.  Moses  puts  it, 
"As  it  is  said  to  this  day,  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen ; " 
and  we  might  mention  many  a  sentence  which  is  said  unto  this  day 
which  first  fell  from  the  mouth  of  a  faithful  spirit  in  the  hour  of  the 
manifestation  of  the  Lord.  The  speech  of  the  father  of  the  faithful 
became  the  speech  of  his  spiritual  seed  for  many  a  year  afterwards,  and 
it  abides  in  the  family  of  faith  unto  this  day.  If  we  have  full  faith  in 
God,  we  shall  teach  succeeding  generations  to  expect  Jehovah's  hand  to 
he  stretched  out  still. 


1 


JEHOVAH-JIREH.  $9 

True  faith  not  only  speaks  the  language  of  prophecy,  but,  when  she 
MBS  her  prophecy  fulfilled,  faith  is  always  delighted  to  raise  memorials  to 
the  God  of  truth.  The  stones  which  were  set  up  of  old  were  not  to  the 
memory  of  dead  men,  but  they  were  memorials  of  the  deeds  of  the 
living  God  :  they  abundantly  uttered  the  memory  of  God's  great  good- 
ness. Abraham  on  this  occasion  did  not  choose  a  name  which  recorded 
what  he  had  done,  but  a  name  which  spake  of  what  Jehovah  had  done. 
It  is  true  Abraham's  faith  was  worthy  to  be  remembered  throughout  all 
generations,  for  there  he  believed  God  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for 
righteousness,  and  the  Lord  said  to  him,  "And  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed  ;  because  thou  hast  obeyed  my  voice." 
There  the  patriarch  had  endured  the  extreme  test :  no  gold  was  ever 
passed  through  a  hotter  furnace.  But  true  faith  is  always  modest ; 
from  her  gate  boasting  is  excluded  by  law.  Abraham  says  nothing  about 
himself  at  all,  but  the  praise  is  unto  God,  who  sees  and  is  seen  ;  the 
record  is,  "Jehovah  will  provide,"  I  like  that  self-ignoring;  I  pray 
that  we,  also,  may  have  so  much  strength  of  faith  that  self  may  go  to 
the  wall.  Little  faith  is  very  apt  to  grow  proud  when,  to  its  own 
astonishment,  it  has  wrought  righteousness ;  but  strong  faith  so  com- 
pletely empties  itself,  and  so  entirely  depends  upon  the  all-sufficiency  of 
God,  that  when  anything  is  achieved  it  remembers  nothing  but  the 
divine  hand,  and  lays  the  crown  where  it  ought  to  be  laid.  Growing 
in  experimental  acquaintance  with  the  God  of  the  covenant,  faith  has  a 
new  song  and  a  new  name  for  her  God,  and  takes  care  that  his  won- 
derful works  shall  be  remembered. 

Note  yet  further,  that  when  faith  has  uttered  a  prophecy,  and  has  set 
up  her  memorial,  the  record  of  mercy  received  becomes  itself  a  new 
prophecy.  Abraham  says,  "  Jehovah-jireh, — God  will  see  to  it";  what 
was  he  doing  then  but  prophesying  a  second  time  for  future  ages? 
He  bids  us  know  that,  as  God  had  provided  fur  him  in  the  time  of 
his  extremity,  so  he  will  provide  for  all  them  that  put  their  trust 
in  him.  The  God  of  Abraham  liveth,  and  let  his  name  be  praised, 
and  let  us  rest  assured  that,  as  certainly  as  in  the  patriarch's  distress, 
when  there  seemed  no  way  of  escape,  the  Lord  appeared  for  him  and 
was  seen  in  the  mount,  even  so  shall  it  be  with  all  the  believing  seed 
while  time  endureth.  "We  shall  all  be  tried  and  tested,  but  in  our 
utmost  need  God  will  see  us,  and  see  to  our  deliverance,  if  we  will  but  let 
faith  have  her  perfect  work,  and  will  hope  and  quietly  wait  the  moment 
when  the  Lord  shall  be  seen  working  salvation.  The  Lord  is  the  Pre- 
server of  men  and  the  Provider  for  men.  I  long  for  ail  of  us  to  get  this 
truth  firmly  fixed  in  our  hearts,  and  therefore  I  shall  try  to  show  that 
God's  provision  for  Abraham  and  Isaac  typified  the  far  greater  provision 
by  which  all  the  faithful  are  delivered  from  death  ;  and  that  God,  in 
providing  in  the  mount,  has  given  us  therein  a  sure  guarantee  that  all 
our  necessities  shall  be  provided  for  henceforth  even  for  ever. 

Consider,  then,  that  the  provision  which  God  made  for  Abraham  was 
symbolic  of  the  greater  provision  which  he  has  made  for  all  his  chosen 
in  Christ  Jesus.  '*  Jehovah-jireh"  is  a  text  from  which  to  preach  con- 
cerning providence,  and  many  have  been  the  sermons  which  have  been 
distilled  from  it ;  but  I  take  the  liberty  of  saying  that  providence,  in 
the  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  is  not  the  first  thought  of  the  passage, 


60  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

which  should  be  read  with  some  sort  of  reference  to  its  connection,! 
and  the  more  so  because  that  connection  is  exceedingly  remarkable. 

I.  When  Abraham  said  "  Jehovah  will  provide,"  he  meant  us,  first  of ' 
all,  to  learn  thit  thk  provision  will  come  in  the  time  of  our 
EXTREMITY".  The  provision  of  the  ram  instead  of  Isaac  was  the  sis:nifi- 
cant  type  which  was  before  Abraham's  mind ;  but  our  Lord  tells  us, 
"  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my  day;  and  he  saw  it,  and  was  glad;"  and 
surely  if  ever  Abraham  saw  the  day  of  Christ,  and  was  beyond  measure 
glad,  it  was  at  that  moment  when  he  beheld  the  Lord  providing  a  sub- 
stitute for  Isaac.  At  any  rate,  whether  Abraham  understood  the  full 
meaning  of  what  he  said  or  not,  he  spoke  not  for  himself,  but  for  us. 
Every  word  he  uttered  is  for  our  teaching,  and  the  teaching  is  this : 
that  God,  in  the  gift  of  his  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  made  the  fullest  provision 
for  our  greatest  needs;  and  from  that  we  may  infer  that  whatever  need 
shall  ever  occur  to  us,  God  will  certainly  provide  for  it ;  but  he  may 
delay  the  actual  manifestation  thereof  till  onr  darkest  hour  has  come. 

••  Just  in  the  last  distressing  hour 

The  Lord  displays  delivering  power; 
Ttie  mount  of  danger  is  the  place 

Where  we  shall  see  surprising  grace." 

The  Lord  gave  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  Substitute  for  men  in 
view  of  the  utmost  need  of  oar  race.  Isaac  was  hard  pressed  when  God 
interfered  in  his  belialf.  The  knife  was  lifted  up  by  a  resohite  hand  ; 
he  was  within  a  second  of  death  when  the  angelic  voice  said,  "  Lay  not 
thine  hand  upon  the  lad."  God  provided  instantly  when  the  need 
pressed  urgently.  Beloved,  was  Isaac  nearer  to  death  than  sinful  man 
was  near  to  hell?  Was  that  knife  closer  to  the  throat  of  the  beloved 
Isaac  than  the  axe  of  the  executioner  was  near  to  the  neck  of  every 
sinner,  aye,  to  the  neck  of  the  whole  race  of  man  ?  We  have  so  sinned 
and  gone  astray  that  it  was  not  possible  for  God  to  wink  at  our  trans- 
gressions ;  he  musD  visit  our  iniquities  with  the  just  punishment,  which 
is  nothing  less  than  death  eternal.  I  constantly  meet  with  persons  under 
the  convincing  puwer  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  I  always  find  that  in  their 
apprehension  the  punishment  of  sin  is  something  terrible  and  overwhelm- 
ing. When  God  deals  with  men  by  his  convincing  Spirit,  they  feel  that 
their  sin  deserves  nothing  less  than  the  wrath  of  God  in  hell.  So  it 
was  with  our  race  ;  we  r.ad  altogether  destioyed  v-urselves,  and  were 
shut  up  under  condemnation  by  the  law,  and  it  was  in  that  dread  hour 
that  God  interposed  and  proclaimed  a  Saviour  for  men.  "  While  we 
were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  I  would  to  God  we  all  felt  what  a 
dreadful  thing  it  is  to  be  lost ;  for  then  we  should  value  the  provision  of 
ihe  Saviour  much  more  than  we  do  now.  Oh,  sirs,  if  no  Redeemer  had 
been  provided,  we  might  have  gathered  here  this  morning,  and  if  you 
could  have  had  patience  to  hear  me,  all  I  should  have  been  able  to  say 
would  have  been, "  Brethren,  let  us  weep  together  and  sigh  in  chorus ;  for 
we  shall  all  die,  and,  dymg,  we  shall  sink  into  the  bottomless  pit,  and 
shall  abide  for  ever  under  the  righteous  anger  of  God,"  It  must  have 
been  so  with  us  all  if  a  substitute  had  not  been  found.  If  the  gift  of 
tae  loving  Father  had  not  been  bestowed,  if  Jesus  had  not  condescended 
to  die  in  our  place,  we  must  have  been  left  for  execution  by  that  law 


JEHOVAH-JIREH.  61 

which  will  by  no  means  spare  the  guilty.  We  talk  about  our  salvation 
as  if  it  were  nothing  very  particular  :  we  have  ^ard  of  the  plan  of  sub- 
stitution so  often  that  it  becomes  commonplace.  It  should  not  be  so  ; 
I  beheve  that  it  still  thrills  the  angels  with  astonishment  that  man, 
when  he  had  ftiUen  from  his  high  estate,  and  had  been  bauished  from 
Eden,  and  had  become  a  rebel  against  God,  should  be  redeemed  by  the 
blood  of  the  Heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  the  Divine  Father  made  the 
worlds.  When  death  and  iiell  opened  their  jaws  to  devour,  then  was 
this  miracle  completed,  and  Jesus  taken  among  the  thorns  was  offered 
up  a  sacrifice  for  us. 

God  not  only  interposed  when  the  death  of  Isaac  was  imminent, 
but  also  when  the  anguish  of  Abraham  had  reached  its  highest  pitch. 
The  patriarch's  faith  never  wavered ;  but  we  must  not  forget  that  he 
was  a  man  like  ourselves,  and  no  father  could  see  his  child  offered  up 
without  an  inward  agony  which  surpasses  all  description.  The  anguish 
of  so  perfect  a  man  as  Abraham,  a  man  who  felt  all  the  domestic  affec- 
tions intensely,  as  every  truly  gaily  father  must  feel  them,  and  who 
loved  his  son  as  much  as  he  loved  his  own  life,  must  have  been  un- 
speakably great.  What  must  have  been  the  force  of  faith  which  enabled 
the  man  of  God  to  master  himself,  to  go  contrary  to  the  current  of  human 
nature,  and  deliberately  to  stand  ready  to  sacrifice  his  Isaac  !  He  must  have 
been  wound  up  to  a  fearful  pitch  of  anguish  when  he  lifted  up  the  knife 
to  slay  his  son;  but  just  then  the  angel  arrested  his  hand,  and  God 
provided  the  ram  as  the  substitute  in  the  moaieiit  of  his  utmost  misery. 

Surely  the  w^orld  had  come  to  a  greaf.  state  of  misery  when  at  last  God 
sent  forth  his  Son,  born  of  a  woman,  that  he  might  become  the  sacrifice 
fur  sin.  At  any  rate,  this  I  knowt^hat  as  a  rule  men  do  not  see  Christ 
to  be  their  substitute  nor  accept  him  as  their  Redeemer  till  they  feel  that 
they  lie  at  hell's  door,  and  till  their  anguish  on  account  of  sin  has  become 
exceeding  great.  I  remember  well  when  I  first  beheld  the  lamb  of  God 
who  suffered  in  my  stead.  I  had  often  heard  the  story  of  his  death  ;  I 
could  have  told  it  out  to  others  very  correctly  ;  but  then  I  did  not  know 
my  own  pressing  need,  I  had  not  come  to  feel  the  knife  at  my  throat, 
nor  was  1  about  to  die ;  and  therefore  my  knowledge  was  a  cold,  inope- 
rative thing.  But  when  the  law  had  bound  me,  and  given  me  over  to 
death,  and  my  heart  within  nie  was  crushed  with  fear,  then  the  sight 
of  the  glorious  Substitute  was  as  bright  to  me  as  a  vision  of  heaven. 
Did  Jesus  suffer  in  my  stead  without  the  gate  ?  were  my  transgressions 
laid  on  him  ?  then  I  received  him  with  joy  unspeakable,  my  whole 
nature  accepting  the  good  news.  At  this  moment  I  accept  the  Lord 
Jesus  as  my  Substitute  with  a  deep,  peaceful  delight.  Blessed  be  the 
name  of  Jehovah-jireh  for  having  taken  thought  of  me,  a  beggar,  a 
wietch,  a  condemned  criminal,  and  for  having  provided  the  Lamb  of 
God  whose  precious  blood  was  shed  instead  of  mine. 

II.  Secondly,  upon  the  mount  the  provision  was  spontaneously 
MADE  for  Abraham,  and  so  was  the  provision  which  the  Lord  dis- 
played in  the  fulness  of  time  when  he  gave  up  his  Son  to  die.  The  ram 
caught  in  the  thicket  was  a  provision  which  on  Abraham's  part  was 
quite  unsought.  He  did  not  fall  down  and  pray,  "  0  Lord,  in  thy  ten- 
derness provide  another  victim  instead  of  my  son,  Isaac."  Probably 
it  never  entered  his  mind.     But  God  spontaneously,  from  the  free  grace 


62  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


of  his  own  heart,  put  the  ram  where  Abrriham  found  it.  You  and  I  did 
not  pray  for  Christ  to  die.  He  died  for  us  before  we  were  born,  and  if 
he  had  not  done  so  it  would  never  have  entered  into  our  ruind  to  ask 
for  so  great  a  gift.  Until  the  Lord  sought  us  we  did  not  even  seek 
to  be  saved  by  Christ,  of  the  fact  of  whose  death  we  had  been  made 
aware.  Oh,  no;  it  is  not  in  man  by  nature  to  seek  a  Saviour:  it  is 
in  God  to  give  a  Saviour,  and  then  the  Spirit  of  God  sweetly  inclines 
the  heart  to  seek  him ;  but  this  seeking  comes  not  of  man.  "  When 
we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  un- 
godly." It  is  ours  to  sin,  it  is  God's  to  save.  "  We  have  turned  every 
one  to  his  own  way,  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us 
all."  Ours  is  the  wandering,  but  the  laying  of  those  wanderings  upon 
Jesus  is  of  the  Lord  alone :  we  neither  bought  it,  nor  sought  it,  nor 
thought  it. 

In  Abraham's  case  I  believe  it  was  an  unexpected  thing.  He  did  not 
reckon  upon  any  substitute  for  his  son  ;  he  judged  that  he  would  have 
to  die,  and  viewed  him  a?  already  dead.  As  for  ourselves,  if  God  had 
not  revealed  *  the  plan  of  salvation  by  the  substitution  of  his  only- 
begotten  Son  we  should  never  have  dreamed  of  it.  Remember  that  the 
Son  of  God  is  one  with  the  Father  ;  and  if  the  Holy  Ghost  had  not 
revealed  the  fact  that  the  oifended  God  would  himself  bear  the 
penalty  due  for  the  offence,  it  would  never  have  occurred  to  the 
human  mind.  The  brightest  of  the  spirits  before  God's  throne  would 
never  have  devised  the  plan  of  salvation  by  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  It 
was  unexpected.  Let  us  bless  the  Lord,  who  has  done  for  us  exceeding 
ahun  lantly  above  what  we  asked  or  even  thought  in  giving  to  us  re- 
demption through  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I  may  say  of  Christ  what  I  could  not  have  said  of  Abraham's  ram, 
that  not  only  was  he  unsought  for  by  us  and  unexpected,  but  now  that 
he  is  given  he  is  not  perfectly  comprehended. 

"  Much  we  talk  of  Jesu's  blood, 
But  how  little's  understood! 
Of  his  sufferings,  s>o  intense, 
Angels  have  no  perfect  sense." 

I  am  often  ready  to  beat  upon  my  own  breast  as  I  study  the  wondrous 
mystery  of  atoning  love  ;  for  it  seems  to  me  so  mean  a  thing  to  be  so  little 
affected  by  such  boundless  grace.  If  we  fully  felt  what  God  has  done 
for  us  in  the  great  deed  of  Jesus'  death,  it  might  not  be  wonderful  if  we 
were  to  die  under  the  amazing  discovery.  "Such  knowledge  is  too 
wonderful  for  me  ;  it  is  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  The  immortal 
God  undertakes  to  bear  death  for  man !  The  immaculate  stands  in  the 
sinner's  place.  The  well-pleasing  Son  is  made  accursed  for  those  who 
else  had  been  accursed  for  ever.  He  who  was  above  all  shame  and 
sorrow  laid  aside  his  glory  and  became  the  "  Man  of  Sorrows,"  "  despised 
and  rejected  of  men."  "  Though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he 
became  poor."  It  is  more  extraordinary  than  romance !  Poets 
may  sing  their  loftiest  stanzas,  but  they  shall  never  reach  the  height 
of  this  great  argument.  "  Paradise  Lost  "  a  Milton  may  compose,  and 
fascinate  a  world  with  his  majestic  lines  ;  but  Paradise  Restored  by 
the  divine  substitution  is  not  to  be  fully  sung  by  mortal  mind.     God 


JEHOTAH-JIREH.  63 

only  knows  the  love  of  God.  All  the  harps  of  redeemed  men  and 
all  the  hymns  of  adorinf?  angels  can  never  set  forth  the  splendour 
of  the  love  of  Jehovah  in  providing  for  our  need,  providing  for  our 
salvation,  providing  his  only-begotten  Son,  and  providing  him  of  his 
own  free  love,  unsought,  and  undesired  of  men. 

III.  But,  thirdly,  we  ought  to  dwell  very  long  and  earnestly  upon 
the  fact  that  for  man's  need  the  provision  was  made  by  Goi> 
HIMSELF.  The  text  says,  "  Jehovah-jireh,"  the  Lord  will  see  to  it,  the 
Lord  will  provide.  None  else  could  have  provided  a  ransom.  Neither 
on  earth  nor  in  heaven  was  there  found  any  helper  for  lost  humanity. 
What  sacrifice  could  be  presented  to  God  if  a  sacrifice  could  be  accepted? 
Behold  Lebanon,  as  it  rises  majestically  toward  heaven,  white  with  its 
snows ;  see  the  forests  which  adorn  its  sides  !  Set  these  all  on  fire,  and 
see  them  blaze  as  the  wood  of  the  altar  of  God.  Yet  "  Lebanon  is  not 
sufficient  to  burn,  nor  the  beasts  thereof  sufficient  for  a  burnt  ofFering."^ 
Take  the  myriads  of  cattle  that  roam  the  hills,  and  shed  their  blood  till 
you  have  made  a  ssa  of  gore,  but  what  of  that?  "  It  is  not  possible  that 
the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins."  Men  may  them- 
selves die,  but  in  death  each  man  who  dies  only  pays  his  own  debt  to  nature ;. 
there  is  nothing  left  for  another.  "  None  can  by  any  means  redeem  his 
brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him."  Where  shall  a  re- 
demption be  found  by  which  it  shall  be  possible  that  the  multitude  of 
the  elect  shall  be  effectually  redeemed  from  death  and  hell  ?  Such  a 
ransom  could  only  be  found  by  God,  and  he  could  only  find  it  in 
himself, — in  him  who  was  one  with  himself,  who  lay  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father  from  old  eternity.  The  provision  was  made  by  God  himself, 
since  none  other  could  provide.  God  alone  could  say,  "  Deliver  him 
from  going  down  to  the  pit :  I  have  found  a  ransom." 

But  was  it  not  singular  that  the  Lord  Jehovali  should  provide  it  ? 
When  law  has  been  broken,  and  its  honour  has  to  be  retrieved,  it  would 
not  be  judged  likely  that  the  aggrieved  party  should  make  the  sacrifice. 
That  God,  against  whom  all  the  blasphemy  and  sin  and  wickedness  of  a 
ribald  world  was  aimed,  shall  he  himself  make  expiation?  Shall  the 
judge  bear  the  penally  due  to  the  criminal  ?  "  Lay  it  on  the  sinner  ; 
for  it  is  his  due  "  ;  so  justice  cries  aloud, — "  Lay  the  penalty  on  the 
transgressor  "  ;  but  if  a  substitute  can  be  permitted,  where  can  one  be 
found  able  and  willing  to  become  surety  for  the  guilty  ?  Found  upon 
the  throne  !  Found  in  the  majesty  that  is  offended  !  Brethren,  I 
am  beaten  down  by  my  subject ;  forgive  me  that  I  cannot  speak  of 
it  as  I  would  desire.  There  is  no  room  here  for  words ;  it  is  a  matter 
for  silent  thought.  We  want  the  fact  of  substitution  to  strike  us^ 
and  then  the  cross  will  grow  sublimely  great.  In  vision  I  behold  it ! 
Its  two  arms  are  extended  right  and  left  till  they  tout:h  the  east  and 
west  and  overshadow  all  races  of  men  ;  the  foot  of  it  descends  lower 
than  the  grave,  till  it  goes  down  even  to  the  gates  of  hell ;  while  up- 
ward the  cross  mounts  with  a  halo  round  about  it  of  unutterable  glory, 
till  it  rises  above  the  stars,  and  sheds  its  light  upon  the  throne  of  the 
Most  High.  Atonement  is  a  divine  business ;  its  sacrifice  is  infinite,, 
even  as  the  God  who  conceived  it.  Glory  be  to  his  name  for  ever  t 
It  is  all  that  I  can  say.  It  was  nothing  less  than  a  stretch  of  divine 
love  for  Jesus  to  give  himself  for  our  sins.     It  was  gracious  for  the 


64  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Infinite  to  conceive  of  such  a  thing ;  but  for  him  to  carry  it  out  wag 
glorious  beyond  all.     What  shall  I  say  of  it  ? 

I  will  only  interject  this  thought  here — let  none  of  us  ever  interfere 
with  the  provision  of  God.  If  in  our  dire  distress  he  alone  was  our 
Jehovah-jireh,  and  provided  for  us  a  Substitute,  let  us  not  think  that 
there  is  anything  left  for  us  to  provide.  0  sinner,  do  you  cry,  "  Lord,  I 
mast  have  a  broken  heart "?  He  will  provide  it  for  thee.  Do  you  cry, 
*'  Lord,  I  cannot  master  sin,  I  have  not  the  power  to  conquer  my  pas- 
sions "?  He  will  provide  strength  for  thee.  Do  you  mourn,  "  Lord,  I 
shall  never  hold  on  and  hold  out  to  the  end.  I  am  so  fickle"?  Then 
he  will  provide  perseverance  for  thee.  Dost  thou  think  that  after 
having  given  his  own  dear  Son  to  purchase  thee  he  will  let  that  work 
fail  because  thou  canst  not  provide  some  little  odds  and  ends  to  com- 
plete the  work  ?  Oh,  dream  not  so ;  dote  nob  on  such  a  folly.  Whatever 
thou  wantest,  poor  sinner,  if  thou  believest  in  Christ  the  Lord's  provi- 
sion of  a  Saviour  in  Christ  warrants  thy  believing  that  God  will  pro- 
vide it.  Salvation  begins  with  .Jehovah-jireh,  the  cross  and  the  bleeding 
Saviour ;  dost  thou  think  it  will  afterwards  drivel  down  into  thy  pro- 
viding this  and  that?  Oh,  thy  pride  !  Thy  insane  pride !  Thou  art  to 
do  something,  art  thou  ?  What !  and  yoke  thy  little  something  with  the 
Eternal  God?  Didst  thou  ever  hear  of  an  angel  failing  to  perform  a 
duty  until  he  was  assisted  by  an  emmet  ?  Hast  thou  ever  heard  of 
God's  great  laws  of  nature  breaking  down  till  some  child's  finger  could 
supplement  their  force  ?  Thou  to  help  thy  God  to  provide !  Get  thee 
out  of  the  way,  and  be  nothing;  then  shall  God  come  in  and  be 
everything.  Sink!  It  is  the  Lord  that  must  rise,  //e  shall  be  seen 
in  the  mount,  and  not  thyself  Hide  thyself,  and  let  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  be  manifested  in  thee.  I  wish  that  every  troubled  one  hese  could 
catch  this  idea,  and  hold  it  fast.  Whatever  you  want  to  put  away  your 
sin,  whatever  you  want  to  make  you  a  new  creature,  whatever  you  want 
to  carry  you  to  heaven,  Jehovah-jireh,  the  Lord  will  provide  it.  He 
will  see  to  it.  Trust  thou  in  him,  and  ere  long  thou  shalt  see  the  divine 
provision,  and  Jehovah  shall  be  glorious  in  thine  eyes. 

IV.  But  I  must  pass  on.  That  which  God  prepares  for  poor  sinners 
is  A  PROVISION  MOST  GLORIOUSLY  MADE.  God  provided  a  ram  instead  of 
Isaac.  This  was  sufficient  for  the  occasion  as  a  type  ;  but  that  which  was 
typified  by  the  ram  is  infinitely  more  glorious.  In  order  to  save  us  God 
provided  God.  I  cannot  put  it  more  simply.  He  did  not  provide  an 
angel,  nor  a  mere  man,  but  God  himself.  Come,  sinner,  w^ith  all  thy  load 
of  sin :  God  can  bear  it ;  the  shoulders  that  bear  up  the  universe  can  well 
sustain  thy  load  of  guilt.  God  gave  thee  his  Godhead  to  be  thy 
Saviour  when  he  gave  thee  his  Son. 

But  he  also  gave  in  the  person  of  Christ  perfect  manhood, — such  a 
man  as  never  lived  before,  eclipsing  even  the  perfection  of  the  first 
Adam  in  the  garden  by  the  majestic  innocence  of  his  nature.  When 
Jesus  has  been  viewed  as  man,  even  unconverted  men  have  so 
admired  his  excellence  that  they  have  almost  adored  him.  Jesus 
is  God  and  man,  and  the  Father  has  given  that  man,  that  God,  to  be 
thy  Eedeemer.  For  thy  redemption  the  Lord  God  has  given  thee  the 
death  of  Christ ;  and  what  a  death  it  was !  I  would  that  troubled 
hearts  would  oftener  study  the  story  of  the  Great  Sacrifice,  the  agony 


JEHOVAH-JIREH.  6&< 

and  bloody  sweat,  the  betrayal  in  the  garden,  the  binding  of  the  hands, 
the  accusation  of  the  innocent,  the  scourging,  the  thorn-crowning,  the 
spitting  in  the  face,  the  mockery,  the  naihng  to  the  tree,  the  hfting  up 
of  the  cross,  the  burning  fever,  the  parching  thirst,  and,  above  all,  the 
overpowering  anguish  of  being  forsaken  of  his  God.  Bethink  thee,  O 
soul,  that  to  save  thee  the  Son  of  God  must  cry,  "  Lama  SMbachthani  !  " 
Bethink  thee  that  to  save  thee  he  must  hang  naked  to  his  shame  between 
heaven  and  earth,  rejected  of  both ;  must  cry,  "  I  thirst,"  and  receive 
nothing  but  vinegar  wherewith  to  moisten  his  burning  lips.  Jesus  mnsfc 
•'  pour  out  his  soul  unto  death  "  that  we  might  live.  He  must  be  '•  num- 
bered with  the  transgressors,"  that  we  might  be  numbered  with  his 
saints  in  glory  everlasting.  Was  not  this  a  glorious  provision?  What 
greater  gift  could  be  bestowed  than  one  in  whom  God  und  man  are 
blended  in  one  ? 

When  Abraham  on  the  mount  offered  a  sacrifice  it  was  called  a  "  burnt 
offering";  but  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  on  Calvary  died  it  was  not 
only  a  burnt  offering,  but  a  sin  offering,  a  meat  offering,  and  a  peace 
off"ering,  and  every  ot  her  kind  of  sacrifice  in  one.  Under  the  oldest  of  all 
dispensations,  before  the  mosaic  economy,  God  had  not  taught  to  men 
the  distinctions  of  sacrifice,  but  an  offering  unto  the  Lord  meant  all 
that  was  afterwards  set  forth  by  many  types.  When  the  venerable 
patriarch  offered  a  sacrifice,  it  was  an  offering  for  sin,  and  a  sweet 
smelling  savour  besides.  So  was  it  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Wlien 
he  died  he  made  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  and  "put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  himself."  When  he  died,  he  also  offered  unto  G(xl  a  burnt 
offering,  for  we  I'ead,  "  And  walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  hath  loved  us, 
and  hath  given  himself  for  us  an  oflFering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a 
sweet  smelling  savour."  When  Jesus  died  he  gave  to  us  a  peace 
offering  ;  for  we  come  to  feast  upon  him  with  God,  and  to  us  "his  flesh- 
is  meat  indeed,  his  blood  is  arink  indeed."  One  would  need  many 
a  day  in  which  to  expatiate  upon  the  infinite  virtues  and  excellencies  of 
Christ,  in  whom  all  perfections  are  sweetly  hived.  Blessed  be  his  niime, 
God  has  most  gloriously  provided  for  us  in  the  day  of  our  need. 
Jehovah-jireh  ! 

V.  Fifthly,  THE  PROVISION  WAS  MADE  Ei<TKCTiVEr,Y.  Tsaac  did  not 
die;  the  laughter  in  Abraham's  house  was  not  stifled;  there  was  no 
grief  for  the  patriarch  ;  he  went  home  with  his  son  in  happy  ci>nipanion- 
ship,  because  Jehovah  had  provided  himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt  differing. 
The  ram  which  was  provided  did  not  bleed  in  vain  ;  Isaac  did  not  die 
as  well  as  the  ram ;  Abraham  did  not  have  to  slay  the  God-provided 
victim  and  his  own  son  also.  No,  the  one  sacrifice  sufficed.  Beloved,* 
this  is  my  comfort  in  the  death  of  Christ — I  hope  it  is  yours, — that  he 
did  not  die  in  vain.  I  have  heard  of  a  theology  which,  in  its  attempt  to 
extol  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  death,  virtually  deprives  it  of  any  certain 
efficiency ;  the  result  of  the  atonement  is  made  to  depend  entirely  upon 
the  will  of  man,  and  so  is  left  to  hap-hazard.  Our  Lord,  according  to 
certain  teachers,  might  or  might  not  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul.  I 
confess  that  I  do  not  believe  in  this  random  redemption,  and  I  wonder 
that  any  persons  can  derive  comfort  from  such  teaching.  I  believe  that 
the  Son  of  God  could  not  possibly  have  come  into  the  world  in  the 
circumstances  in  which  be  did  come,  and  could  not  have  died  as  he  did 


6(5  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLK   PQLPIT, 

die,  and  yet  be  defeated  and  disappointed.     He  died  for  those  who 
believe  in  him,  and  these  shall  live,  yea,  they  do  live  in  him. 

I  should  think  that  Isaac,  the  child  of  laughter,  was  solemnly  joyous 
as  he  descended  the  hill  and  went  home  with  his  father.  Methinks  both 
of  them  tripped  along  with  happy  step  towards  Sarah's  house  and  their 
own  loved  home  ;  and  you  and  I  this  day  may  go  home  with  like  joyous- 
ness.  We  shall  not  die,  for  the  Lamb  of  God  has  died  for  us.  We  shall 
never  perish,  for  he  has  suffered  in  our  stead.  We  were  bound  on  the 
altar,  we  were  laid  on  the  wood,  and  the  fire  was  ready  for  our  con- 
suming ;  but  no  knife  shall  touch  us  now,  for  the  sacrifice  is  offered 
once  for  all.  Xo  fire  shall  consume  us,  for  he  who  suffered  in  our  stead 
has  borne  the  heat  of  the  flame  on  our  behalf.  We  live,  and  we  shall 
live.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in 
Christ  Jesus."  This  is  an  effectual  and  precious  providing.  I  do  not 
believe  in  a  redemption  which  did  not  redeem,  nor  in  an  atonement 
which  did  not  atone ;  but  I  do  believe  in  him  who  died  in  vain  for 
none,  but  will  effectually  save  his  own  church  and  his  own  sheep  for 
whom  he  laid  down  his  life.  To  him  we  will  all  render  praise,  for  he 
was  slain,  and  he  has  redeemed  us  unto  God  by  his  blood  out  of  everj 
kindred  and  people  and  nation. 

VI.  Turn  we  then,  sixthly,  to  this  note,  that  we  may  well  glorify 
Jehovah-jireh  because  this  provision  was  made  for  every  be- 
liever. The  provision  on  the  Mounc  of  Moriah  was  made  on  behalf 
of  Abraham :  he  was  himself  a  man  of  faith,  aud  he  is  styled  the 
"father  of  the  faithful'';  and  now  every  faithful  or  believing  one  may 
stand  where  Abraham  stood,  and  say,  "Jehovah-jireh,  the  Lord  will 
provide."  Remember,  however,  that  our  faith  must  be  of  the  same 
nature  as  that  of  Abraham,  or  it  will  not  be  counted  to  us  for  righteous- 
ness. Abraham's  faith  worked  by  love ;  it  so  worked  in  him  that  he 
was  willing  to  do  all  that  the  Lord  bade  him,  even  to  the  sacrifice  of  his 
own  dear  son.  You  must  possess  a  living,  working,  self-sacrificing  faith 
if  you  would  be  saved.  If  you  have  it,  you  may  be  as  sure  that  you 
are  saved  as  you  are  sure  that  you  have  sinned.  "  He  that  believeth  o 
him  is  not  condemned,"  because  Christ  was  condemned  for  him.  "  He 
that  believeth  on  him  hath  everlasting  life : "  he  cannot  die,  for  Christ 
died  for  him.  The  great  principle  upon  which  our  security  is  based  is 
the  righteousness  of  God,  which  assures  us  that  he  will  not  punish  the 
substitute  and  then  punish  the  person  for  whom  the  substitute  endured 
the  penalty.  It  were  a  matter  of  gross  injustice  if  the  sinner,  having 
made  atonement  for  his  sin  in  the  person  of  his  covenant  Head,  the 
iiord  Jesus,  should  afterwards  himself  be  called  upon  to  account  for  the 
very  sin  which  was  atoned  for.  Sin,  like  anything  else,  cannot  be  in 
two  places  at  once :  if  the  great  God  took  my  sin,  and  laid  it  on  his 
Son,  then  it  is  not  on  me  any  more.  If  Jesus  bore  the  wrath  of  God 
for  me,  I  cannot  bear  that  wrath ;  it  were  contrary  to  every  principle  of 
a  just  moral  government  that  the  Judge  should  cast  our  Surety  into 
prison  and  exact  the  penalty  of  him,  and  then  come  upon  those  for  whom 
the  suretyship  was  undertaken.  By  this  gospel  I  am  prepared  to  stand 
or  fall ;  yea,  by  it  I  will  live  or  die :  I  know  no  other.  Because  I  be- 
lieve it,  I  this  day  cry  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  "Jehovah-jireh," 
the  Lord  has  provided  an  effectual  redemption  for  all  those  who  put 


JEHOVAH-JIREH.  67 

their  trust  in  him  whom  God  has  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation.  It  is 
true,  as  it  is  written,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved." 
It  is  true  that  the  faith  which  worketh  by  love  brings  justification  to 
fche  soul. 

VII.  But  now  I  close  with  a  remark  which  will  reveal  the  far-reaching 
character  of  my  text.  "  Jehovah-jireh  "  is  true  concerning  all  necessary 
things.  The  instance  given  of  Abraham  being  provided  for  shows 
us  that  the  Lord  will  ever  be  a  Provider  for  his  people.  As  to  the 
gift  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  this  is  a  provision  which  guarantees  all 
OTHER  PROVISION.  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered 
him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things?"  Abraham  learned  that;  for,  as  soon  as  he  had  slaughtered 
the  ram,  the  covenant  was  repeated  in  his  ears,  and  repeated  as  he  had 
never  heard  it  before, — acc-ompanied  with  an  oath.  God  cannot  swear 
by  any  greater  than  himself,  and  so  he  said,  "  By  myself  have  I  sworn." 
Thus  was  the  covenant  ratified  by  blood  and  by  the  oath  of  God.  Oh, 
that  bleeding  Sacrifice !  The  covenant  of  God  is  confirmed  by  it,  and 
our  faith  is  established.  If  you  have  seen  Jesus  die  for  you,  your  heart 
has  heard  God  swear,  "  Surely  in  blessing  I  will  bless  thee ! "  By  two 
immutable  things,  wherein  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  he  hath  given 
MS  strong  consolation  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  us 
in  the  gospel.  Let  us  fall  back  on  this  eternal  verity,  that  if  God  has 
provided  his  own  Well-beloved  Son  to  meet  the  most  awful  of  all  neces- 
sities, then  he  will  provide  for  us  in  everything  else. 

Where  will  he  provide  ?  He  will  provide  for  us  in  the  mount,  that  ia 
to  say,  in  the  place  of  our  trial.  When  we  reach  the  place  where  the 
fatal  deed  of  utmost  obedience  is  to  be  wrought,  then  God  will  interpose. 
You  desire  him  to  provide  for  you  when  you  lift  up  your  eyes  and  see 
the  mount  afar  off.  He  does  not  choose  so  to  do  ;  but  in  the  mount  it 
shall  be  seen,  in  the  place  of  the  trial,  in  the  heat  of  the  furnace,  in  the 
last  extremity  Jehovah  will  be  seen,  for  he  will  see  to  it,  and  it  shall 
become  a  proverb  with  you, — "In  the  mount  Jehovah  shall  be  seen." 
That  is  to  say,  when  you  cannot  see,  the  Lord  will  see  you  and  see  to 
your  need  ;  for  his  eyes  are  upon  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  are  open  to 
their  cry.  You  will  not  need  to  explain  to  God  your  difficulties  and 
the  intricacies  of  yoiu:  position,  he  will  see  it  all.  Joyfully  blng  that 
revival  ditty — 

"  This  my  Father  knows." 

As  soon  as  the  Lord  has  seen  our  need,  then  his  provision  shall  be 
seen.  You  need  not  cHmb  to  heaven  or  descend  into  the  deep  to  find  it: 
the  Lord's  provision  is  near  at  hand,— the  ram  in  the  thicket  is  behind 
you  though  you  see  it  not  as  yet.  When  you  have  heard  God  speak  to 
you,  you  shall  turn  and  see  it,  and  wonder  you  never  saw  it  before. 
You  will  heartily  bless  God  for  the  abundant  provision  which  he  reveals 
in  the  moment  of  trial.  Then  shall  the  Lord  himself  be  seen.  You 
will  soAji  die,  and  perhaps  in  dying  you  will  be  troubled  by  the  fear 
of  death ;  but  let  that  evil  be  removed  by  this  knowledge — that  the  Lord 
■will  yet  be  seen,  and  when  he  shall  appear  you  shall  be  manifested  in  his 
glory.  In  the  day  of  the  revelation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  your  body  shall 
be  raised  from  the  dead,  and  then  shall  the  divine  provision  yet  more 


68  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

fully  be  discovered,  "  In  the  mount  it  shall  be  seen,"  and  there  shall 
God  himself  be  manifested  to  you,  for  your  eyes  shall  behold  him  and 
not  another. 

There  is  a  rendering  given  to  my  text  which  we  cannot  quite  pass 
over.  Some  read  it  that  "  in  the  mount  the  people  shall  be  seen," — in 
that  mount  in  years  to  come  the  multitude  would  gather  to  worship  God. 
God's  presence  was  in  the  temple  which  was  built  upon  that  spot,  and 
thither  the  tribes  went  up,  the  tribes  of  the  Lord  to  worship  the  Most 
High.  I  dwell  in  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  but  piled  by  God  of 
solid  slabs  of  mercy.  He  is  building  for  me  a  palace  of  crystal,  pure  and 
shining,  transparent  as  the  day.  I  see  the  house  in  which  I  am  to  abide 
for  ever  gradually  growing  around  me.  Its  foundation  was  laid  of  old, 
in  eternal  love, — "  in  the  mount  it  shall  be  seen."  The  Lord  provided 
for  me  a  Covenant  Head,  a  Redeemer,  and  a  Friend,  and  in  him  I 
ubide.  Since  then,  course  upon  course  of  the  precious  stones  of  loving- 
Icindness  has  been  laid,  and  the  jewelled  walls  are  all  around  me.  Has 
it  not  been  so  with  you  ?  By-and-by  we  shall  be  roofed  in  with  glory 
everlasting,  and  then  as  we  shall  look  to  the  foundations,  and  the  walls, 
and  to  the  arch  above  our  head,  we  shall  shout,  "  Jehovah-jireh," — 
God  has  provided  all  this  for  me!  How  we  shall  rejoice  in  every 
stone  of  the  divine  building  !  How  will  our  memory  think  over  the 
method  of  the  building  !  On  such  a  day  was  that  stone  laid,  I  remember 
it  right  well :  "  I  was  sore  sick  and  the  Lord  comforted  me."  On  such 
a  day  was  that  other  stone  laid, — I  was  in  prison  spiritually,  and 
the  heavenly  visitor  came  unto  me.  On  such  another  day  was  that  be- 
jewelled course  completed,  for  my  heart  was  glad  in  the  Lord  and  my 
glory  rejoiced  in  the  God  of  my  salvation.  The  walls  of  love  are  still 
rising,  and  when  the  building  is  finished  and  the  topstone  is  brought  oat 
with  shoutings  of  "  Grace,  grace,  unto  it !  "  we  shall  then  sing  this  song 
unto  the  Lord — Jehovah-jireh  !  The  Lord  has  provided  it.  From 
the  beginning  to  the  end  there  is  nothing  of  man  and  nothing  of  merit, 
nothing  of  self,  but  all  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  hath  loved  us  with 
an  everlasting  love,  and  therefore  hath  abounded  towards  us  in  blessing 
according  to  the  fulness  of  his  infinite  heart.  To  him  be  praise  world 
without  end.     Amen,  and  Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Genesis  xxii.  1 — 19. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 426,  226,  19^. 


FIRST  KING  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS,   AND  AFTER  THAT 
KING  OF  PEACE. 


%  $^tnt0H 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Evening,  February  3rd,  1884,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   MKTKOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


*'  First  being  by  interpretation  King  of  righteousness,  and  after  that  also  King  of 
Salem,  which  is,  King  of  peace." — Hebrews  vii.  2. 

We  will  not  enlarge  upon  the  story  of  Melchisedec,  nor  discuss  the 
question  as  to  who  he  was.  It  is  near  enough  for  us  to  believe  that  he 
was  one  who  worshipped  God  after  the  primitive  fashion,  a  believer  in 
God  such  as  Job  was  in  the  land  of  Uz,  one  of  the  world's  grey  fathers 
who  had  kept  faithful  to  the  Most  High  God.  He  combined  in  his  own 
person  the  kingship  and  the  priesthood;  a  conjunction  by  no  means 
unusual  in  the  first  ages.  Of  this  man  we  know  very  little  ;  and  it  is 
partly  because  we  know  so  little  of  him  that  he  is  all  the  better  type  of 
our  Lord,  of  whom  we  may  enquire,  "  Who  shall  declare  his  generation  ?  " 
The  very  mystery  which  hangs  about  Melchisedec  serves  to  set  forth  the 
mystery  of  the  person  of  our  divine  Lord.  "  Without  father,  without 
mother,  without  descent,  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of 
life  ;  but  made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God ;  he  abideth  a  priest  continually. 
Now  consider  how  great  this  man  was,  unto  whom  even  the  patriarch 
Abraham  gave  the  tenth  of  the  spoils." 

Melchisedec  seems  to  have  been,  first  by  name,  and  then  by  place  of 
office,  duubly  designated  a  king.  First,  his  name  is  Melekzedek,  which 
signifies  by  interpretation, "  king  of  righteousness."  His  personal  name  is 
"  king  of  righteousness."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  was  also  the  monarch 
of  some  town  called  Salem ;  it  is  not  at  all  likely  to  have  been  Jeru- 
salem, although  that  may  have  been  the  case.  The  interpretation  of  his 
official  name  is  "  king  of  peace."  A  teaching  was  intended  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  names :  so  the  apostle  instructs  us  in  the  passage  before  us, 
I  believe  in  the  verbal  inspiration  of  Scripture ;  hence,  I  can  see  how 
there  can  be  instruction  for  us  even  in  the  proper  names  of  persons  and 
of  places.  Those  who  reject  verbal  inspiration  must  in  effect  condemn 
the  great  apustle  of  the  Gentiles,  whose  teaching  is  so  frequently  based 
upon  a  word.  He  makes  more  of  words  and  names  than  any  of  us 
should  have  thought  of  doing,  and  he  was  guided  therein  by  the  Spirit 
No.  1,768.  „ 


70  FIRST   KING   OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS, 

of  the  Lord,  and  therefore  he  was  right.  For  my  part,  I  am  far  more 
afraid  of  making  too  little  of  the  Word  than  of  seeing  too  much  in  it. 

This  man  is,  first,  named  ''  Melchi-zedek'' — "  king  of  rigiiteousness  "^ 
by  inlerpretaiion ;  and  herein  he  is  like  our  divine  Lord,  whose  name  and 
character  can  only  come  to  us  by  interpretation.  What  he  is  and  who 
he  is  and  all  his  character,  no  angel's  tongue  could  tell.  No  human 
language  can  ever  describe  to  the  full  what  Jesus  is.  He  is  King,  but 
that  is  a  poor  word  for  such  royalty  as  his.  He  reigns,  bub  that  word 
"  reigns  "  is  but  a  slender  description  of  that  supreme  empire  which  he 
continually  exercises.  He  is  said  to  be  King  of  righteousness,  but  that 
is  by  interpretation,  by  the  toning  down  of  his  character  to  our  com- 
prehension. Scripture  might  have  Cfdled  him  King  of  holiness,  for 
he  is  "glorious  in  holiness."  His  character,  better  known  to  spirits 
before  the  throne  than  to  us,  is  not  to  be  comprehended  in  that  one  word 
"righteousness:"  it  is  but  an  interpretation,  and  most  things  lose  by 
translation,  and  so  the  perfect  character  of  the  Son  of  God,  as  it  stands 
before  the  Eternal  Mind,  cannot  be  fully  expressed  in  human  language. 
In  fact,  when  our  faculties  are  enlarged,  and  our  spirits  raised  to  the 
highest  platform,  they  can  never  reach  the  eternity  of  our  Lord's  sonship, 
and  the  glory  of  his  kingdom  :  the  equity  of  his  character,  and  the  love- 
liness of  his  mind,  both  as  God  and  man,  must  still  be  far  beyond  us. 
But  this  much  is  translated  to  us  into  our  own  tongue — that  he  is  a 
King,  and  that  he  is  a  righteous  King — yea,  the  very  King  of  righteous- 
ness— the  Sovereign  of  the  realm  of  equity,  the  supreme  Lord  of  every- 
thing that  is  good  and  holy.  That,  you  see,  is  wrapped  up  in  his  name, 
and  nature.  Jesus  is  righteousness,  and  every  righteous  thing  gathers 
beneath  the  right  sceptre  of  his  kingdom. 

But  the  second  word,  Salem,  which,  brought  down  to  our  tongue,. 
signifies  "peace,"  is  in  reference  to  a  place  rather  than  a  person.  Yon 
see  our  Lord  Jesus  is  essentially  righteousness,  that  is  interwoven  with 
his  name  and  person ;  but  he  gives,  bestows,  deposits,  pours  forth  peace 
in  a  place  which  he  has  chosen,  and  upon  a  people  whom  he  has  ordained, 
and  whom  he  has  brought  near  unto  himself:  so  that  his  kingdom  of 
peace  links  him  with  his  redeemed,  to  whom  he  has  given  the  peace  of 
God. 

"First,  King  of  righteousness."  How  early  that  '^firsV  is  I  cannot. 
tell  you.  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,"  but  when  that  beginning 
was,  who  knows  ? — for  is  he  not,  indeed,  without  beginning  ?  First  and 
firstborn,  from  everlasting  thou  art  God,  0  mighty  Son  of  Jehovah  t 
First  King  of  righteousness,  and  then  afterwards  when,  men  fell,  when 
1  ebellion,  and  strife,  and  war  had  sprang  up — then  he  came  to  heal  the 
mischief  and  become  '  King  of  peace."  He  comes  himself  as  the  divine 
Ambassador,  our  Peacemaker  and  Peace ;  he  comes  here  into  this  place 
even  into  the  midst  of  his  Salem,  into  the  midst  of  his  people,  and  gives 
us  now,  as  he  has  long  given,  the  vision  of  peace ;  opening  up  before  the 
eye  of  faith  the  completeness,  the  sureness,  and  the  delight  of  perfect 
peace  in  himself 

The  one  matter  which  I  am  going  to  set  forth  at  this  time  is  just 
this — "  First  King  of  righteousness,  and  after  that  also  King  of  peace." 
Note  well  the  order  of  these  two,  and  the  dependence  of  the  one  upoa. 
the  other ;  for  there  could  be  no  true  peace  that  was  not  grounded  upoOj 


AND   AFTER   THAT   KING   OF   PEACE.  71 

righteousness;  and  out  of  righteousness  peace  is  sure  to  spring  up. 
Righteousness  is  essential  to  peace  ;  if  it  were  not  first,  peace  could 
not  be  second.  If  there  could  be  a  kind  of  peace  apart  from  righteous- 
ness, it  would  be  dank,  dark,  deadly,  a  horrible  peace,  ending  in  a  worse 
misery  than  war  itself  could  inflict.  It  is  needful  where  an  unrighteous 
peace  exists  that  it  should  be  broken  up,  that  a  better  peace  should 
be  established  upon  a  true  foundation  which  will  last  for  ever. 

I  shall  ask  you — and  may  the  Spirit  of  God  help  us  to  do  it — first,  to 
admire  the  King,  and,  secondly,  to  enjoy  him — to  enter  with  holy  delighfe 
into  the  full  meaning  of  his  name  and  character  as  King  of  Righteous- 
ness and  King  of  peace. 

I.     First,  I  ask  you  to  admirr  this  king. 

This  Melchisedec,  whom  we  exhibit  as  a  type,  is  such  a  king  as  God 
is.  He  is  according  to  divine  model.  He  is  priest  of  the  Most  High 
God,  and  he  is  like  the  Most  High  God,  for  the  Lord  Jehovah  himself 
is,  first,  King  of  righteousness,  and  after  that  also  King  of  peace.  The 
great  Creator  entered  the  garden  of  Eden  in  that  sorrowful  hour  when 
our  parents  had  rebelled,  and  were  hiding  among  the  trees  to  escape 
his  call ;  and  he  bade  them  answer  for  their  fault.  When  they  stood 
trembling  before  him  in  the  nakedness  of  their  conscious  guilt,  they 
knew  him  as  their  King  and  their  Judge.  At  that  moment  he  was 
not  first  the  King  of  peace  to  them,  but  first  the  King  of  righteous- 
ness. He  pronounced  sentence  upon  the  serpent,  upon  the  woman,  and 
upon  the  man,  gently  making  much  of  the  punishment  to  fall  aslant  upon 
the  ground;  but  yet  vindicating  justice  before  he  spake  a  word  of  peace. 
After  that  discourse,  yea,  in  the  midst  of  his  sentences,  he  spake  of  peace 
when  he  mentioned  the  woman's  seed  that  should  bruise  the  serpent's 
head.  Then  also  there  happened  the  slaying  of  a  victim,  for  the  Lord 
God  made  unto  them  coats  of  skins,  of  beasts  which  had,  no  doubt,  been 
slain  in  sacrifice,  and  with  these  they  were  covered.  In  beginning  to 
deal  with  an  apostate  race  the  Lord  observed  the  fitting  order  of  our 
text :  he  began  with  righteousness,  and  afterwards  went  on  to  peace.  At 
the  gate  of  the  garden  commenced  the  dispensation  of  mercy  and  peace, 
but  first  of  all  there  was  the  pronouncing  of  the  sentence  that  man 
should  eat  bread  in  the  sweat  of  his  face,  and  that  unto  dust  he  should 
return.  Substantial  righteousness  was  dealt  out  to  the  guilty,  and  then 
peace  was  provided  for  the  troubled.  At  the  fall  God  first  set  up  a 
Judgment-seat,  and  right  speedily  a  Mercy-seat.  Righteousness  must 
ever  lead  the  van. 

Well,  the  times  went  on,  and  men  began  to  sin  with  a  high  hand. 
There  were  giants  in  those  days,  and  the  people  of  God  were  mixed  up 
with  the  men  of  the  world.  This  is  the  worst  sign  of  the  world's  de- 
pravity when  there  ceases  to  be  a  division  between  the  people  of  God 
and  the  sons  of  men.  There  was  an  unholy  alliance  between  sin  and 
righteousness ;  and  then  the  King  came  forth  again,  and  displayed  hia 
countenance,  and  began  to  judge,  and  correct,  and  call  to  repentance. 
Men  perceived  that  the  countenance  of  God  towards  them  was  the  face 
of  one  who  is  first  King  of  righteousness.  Noah's  teaching  taught  men 
to  return  unto  the  Lord,  or  he  would  surely  deal  with  them  in  righteous- 
ness, and  make  a  full  end.  Space  most  ample  was  given  for  repentance, 
but  men  were  mad  upon  their  follies.     He  is  first  King  of  righteous- 


J2  ■    FIRST   KING   OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS, 

ness,  and  afterwards  King  of  peace ;  and  so  he  dealt  with  that  guilty 
world.  He  pulled  up  the  sluices  of  the  great  deep  which  lieth  under; 
he  let  loose  all  the  cataracts  of  heaven  from  above,  and  he  swept  men 
from  off  the  face  of  the  earth.  Then  afterwards  he  hung  the  rainbow 
in  the  sl<y,  and  he  smelled  a  sweet  savour  of  rest ;  and  there  was  peace 
once  more  between  God  and  a  race  that  had  to  begin  again  with  father 
Noah  instead  of  father  Adam.  Righteousness  ruled  first,  and  washed 
out  with  a  flood  the  traces  of  ungodliness,  and  then  peace  set  up  her 
gentle  reign  upon  a  new  world. 

All  along,  in  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  men,  he  kept  to  this 
unvarying  rule.  God  has  never  forsaken  righteousness,  not  even  for  the 
sake  of  love.  He  selected  a  people  for  himself;  he  called  his  son  out  of 
Egypt ;  he  brought  his  chosen  people  through  the  Red  Sea  into  the  wil- 
derness, and  there  he  communed  with  them.  But  they  went  astray  after 
graven  images  ;  they  defiled  themselves  with  the  vices  of  the  surrounding 
heathen.  They  became  degraded  and  polluted,  and  then  he  came  again 
among  them  as  the  King  of  righteousness,  setting  Sinai  on  a  blaze, 
making  even  Moses  to  fear  and  quake,  compelling  the  earth  to  open  and 
swallow  up  rebels,  causing  the  fire  to  break  out  among  them,  or  fiery 
serpents  to  inflame  their  veins  with  death :  for,  though  to  them  he  was 
a  King  of  peace,  and  walked  among  them  in  tenderness,  and  by  the  fiery 
cloudy  pillar  led  their  band,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  tabernacle  by  his 
Shekinah  unveiled  his  glory,  yet  it  was  then  true,  as  it  is  now  true,  "The 
Lord  thy  God  is  a  jealous  God."  He  would  not  bear  iniquity.  He  could 
not  look  upon  sin  without  indignation.  His  anger  smoked  against  it, 
for  he  is  and  ever  must  be  "first  King  of  rigliteoasness,  and  after  that 
also  King  of  peace."  That  wonderful  wilderness  journey  is  bright  witli 
mercy,  but  it  is  equally  dark  with  justice.  Rememl)er  the  graves  of 
lusting  and  the  burnings.  Israel's  God  was  ever  sternly  righteous  though 
glorious  in  grace.  It  is  a  high  but  terrible  privilege  to  dwell  near  to 
God,  fur  his  holiness  burns  like  a  consuming  fire,  and  wiJ  not  endure 
€vil. 

Ay,  and  when  he  had  brought  his  people  into  the  promised  land,  and 
had  given  them  their  heritage  by  lot,  we  must  remember  how  they 
sinned  against  him ;  and  it  was  not  long  ere  he  brought  upon  them  the 
Midianites,  or  the  Philistines,  or  foes  of  one  race  or  another,  so  that 
they  were  grievously  oppressed,  and  afflicted,  and  brought  low.  When 
they  cried  to  him,  then  he  delivered  them ;  but  he  took  vengeance  upon 
their  inventions.  He  would  not  bear  their  sin :  he  took  it  exceedingly 
ill  from  them  that  a  people  so  highly  favoured  should  so  constantly  rebel. 
He  said,  "  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earch : 
therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  He  was  to  his  own 
elect  nation,  first.  King  of  righteousness,  and  then  King  of  peace. 

And  so  it  went  on  until,  at  last,  Israel  provoked  the  Lord  beyond 
measure,  and  the  chosen  people  went  astray  to  their  own  confusion,  and 
then  with  the  besom  of  destruction  he  swept  them  off  from  the  face  of 
their  land.  He  scattered  them  as  a  man  scattereth  dung  upon  the  field. 
Are  they  not  divided  to  this  day  among  all  the  people,  a  by-word  and 
a  proverb  still,  for  men  everywhere  say,  "These  are  the  people  that 
foreot  their  God,  and  he  banished  them  fi"om  their  own  land,  and  will 
keep  tlicm  in  banishment  till  they  return  unto  their  God  in  spirit  and 


AND  AFTER  THAT  KING  OF  PEACE.  73 

in  truth"?  Every  Jew  whom  we  see  pacing  our  streets,  far  off  from 
the  city  of  his  fathers,  is  a  proof  that  the  Lord  of  heaven  is,  first,  King 
of  righteousness. 

All  over  the  world,  and  everywhere,  this  is  God's  way  of  dealing  with 
men.  Do  not  imagine  that  God  will  ever  lay  aside  his  righteousness  for 
the  sake  of  saving  a  sinner — that  he  will  ever  deal  with  men  un- 
righteously in  order  that  they  may  escape  the  penalty  due  to  their 
transgression.  He  has  never  done  so,  and  he  never  will.  Glorious  in 
holiness  is  he  for  ever  and  ever.  That  blazing  throne  must  consume 
iniquity ;  transgression  cannot  stand  before  it ;  there  can  be  no  excep- 
tion to  this  rule.  The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  must  do  right.  Whatever 
things  may  change,  the  law  of  God  cannot  alter,  and  the  character  of 
God  cannot  deteriorate.  High  as  the  great  mountains,  deep  as  the 
abyss,  eternal  as  his  being,  is  the  righteousness  of  the  Most  High. 
Peace  can  never  come  to  men  from  the  Lord  God  Almighty  except  by 
righteousness.  The  two  can  never  be  separated  without  the  most  fearful 
consequences.  Peace  without  righteousness  is  like  the  smooth  surface  of 
the  stream  ere  it  takes  its  awful  Niagara  plunge.  If  there  is  to  be  peace 
between  God  and  man,  God  must  still  be  a  righteous  God,  and  by  some 
means  or  other  the  transgression  of  man  must  be  justly  put  away ;  for 
God  cannot  wink  at  it,  or  permit  it  to  go  unpunished.  Salvation  must 
first  of  all  provide  for  righteousness,  or  peace  will  never  lodge  within  its 
chambers.  The  Lord  of  heaven  is  first  King  of  righteousness,  and  then 
King  of  peace,  so  that  Melchisedec  was  such  a  king  as  God  is. 

And  now,  next,  the  type  is  especially  meant  to  teach  us  that  he  was 
such  a  king  as  Christ  is ;  for  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the 
world,  he  came  with  this  everlasting  and  unchangeabie  rule  girt  about 
him — that,  though  he  should  be  a  King,  yet  he  would  be  first  King  of 
righteousness,  and  after  that  also  King  of  peace.  Why  did  he  not  set  up 
a  kingdom  here  below  among  the  Jews?  Many  spirits  would  have 
welcomed  him.  If  he  had  only  set  himself  up  to  be  a  king,  promising 
them  sure  conquest  and  abundant  plunder,  the  zealots  of  the  Jewish 
nation  would  have  fought  like  tigers  at  his  side.  But,  no;  he  came 
first  to  be  a  King  of  righteousness,  and  that  was  a  topic  for  which 
they  cared  nothing.  He  went  into  his  own  Father's  house  like  a 
king  into  his  palace ;  but  it  was  with  a  scourge  of  small  cords,  crying, 
"  Take  these  things  hence !  "  The  temple  was  no  abode  for  him  while 
greed,  and  self,  and  mammon  defiled  its  courts.  In  that  temple  he 
looked  round  about  him  with  indignation,  for  he  saw  no  trace  of 
righteousness  there,  but  every  indication  that  up  to  the  very  veil  of  the 
temple  all  was  given  over  to  human  unrighteousness. 

They  wanted  an  unrighteous  kingdom,  but  he  would  not  have  it.  His 
fan  was  in  his  hand,  and  he  would  thoroughly  purge  his  floor.  His 
laws  were  not  to  be  like  those  of  Csesar ;  his  soldiers  were  not  to  fight 
with  cainal  weapons.  He  came  not  to  set  up  a  kingdom  of  power  and 
force,  but  a  kingdom  of  love  and  truth  and  righteousness  ;  and  hence  his 
own  people  knew  him  not,  ani  rendered  him  no  homage.  His  holiness 
stood  in  the  way  of  such  a  kingdom  as  the  Jews  desired,  and  hence  they 
turned  upon  him  and  cried,  "Let  him  be  crucified."  Though  they 
would  not  acknowledge  his  sovereignty,  he  was  their  King  ;  and  at  his 
death  he  bore  above  his  head  the  superscription,  "  This  is  Jesus,  the 


74  FIEST   KING   OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS, 

King  of  the  Jews."  He  would  not  set  up  a  carnal  kingdom  of  their 
sort;  Church  and  State,  truth  and  force  united  in  some  form  or  other, 
must  have  l)een  suggested  to  him ;  but  no ;  he  must  be  first  King  of 
righteousness,  and  then  King  of  peace.  He  preached  no  peace  apart 
from  purity.  He  never  made  little  of  vice  or  error  ;  he  was  the  deadly 
foe  of  all  evil.  He  said,  "I  came  not  to  bring  peace,  but  a  sword."  Until 
there  is  righteousness  there  must  be  conflict,  and  peace  can  only  enter 
when  righteousness  has  won  the  field.  Oh,  my  brethren,  I  wish  I  had 
power  to  describe  to  you  how  our  divine  Master  in  all  his  lowliness  began 
to  be  the  King  of  righteousness  by  his  superlative,  unrivalled  character. 
Here  among  us  there  was  never  such  righteousness  as  his — such  royal 
righteousness  throughout  all  his  career  in  all  the  details  of  life.  I 
see  an  imperial  righteousness  in  the  character  of  my  divine  Lord — a 
righteousness  that  is  master  and  superior  of  all  other.  Even  those  that 
hate  Jesus  cannot  find  fault  with  him.  Books  written  to  disprove  hi& 
divine  mission  are  nevertheless  full  of  almost  fulsome  adulation  of 
him  :  I  call  it  by  no  better  word,  because  I  think  that  the  praises  which 
infidels  have  given  to  our  Lord  are  no  more  acceptable  to  him  than  were 
the  praises  of  devils  when  they  said,  "This  is  the  Son  of  God!"  Then 
he  bade  them  hold  their  peace,  and  I  think  he  has  the  same  wish  at 
this  moment  touching  his  Unitarian  and  Lifidel  admirers.  All  sorts  of 
men  have  been  compelled  to  do  homage  to  this  kingly  One  who  has 
passed  across  the  page  of  history,  the  very  sovereign  of  all  that  is  right 
and  good. 

But  ah,  methinks  he  was  most  King  of  righteousness  when  he  said 
unto  himself,  ''  My  Father's  law  has  been  broken :  I  will  restore  its 
honour.  Men  have  defied  it  and  trampled  on  it :  I  will  pay  to  it  the 
highest  homage."  With  this  strong  desire  upon  him  he  went  up  to  the 
cross,  and  gave  his  hands  and  feet  to  the  nails,  and  his  side  to  the  spear„ 
and  with  a  thorn  crown  upon  his  dying  brow  he  became  in  very  deed  th& 
King  of  righteousness.  As  the  Sun  of  God,  he  rendered  unto  the  divine 
majesty  all  the  honour  due  to  the  law  by  reason  of  the  many  insults 
which  sin  had  heaped  thereon.  The  transgressions  of  his  people  were 
laid  upon  their  Great  Shepherd,  they  were  made  to  meet  upon  him  in 
one  dreadful  storm,  and  that  hurricane  spent  itself  upon  him.  Our 
Great  Substitute  endured  the  consequences  of  human  guilt  on  our 
behalf,  and  thus  he  is  able  to  pacify  the  troubled  conscience.  He  is,  first,. 
King  of  righteousness.  He  knew  that  he  could  not  be  King  of  peace 
to  us  till,  first  of  all,  he  had  woven  a  perfect  righteousness  in  the  loom 
of  his  life,  and  dyed  it  in  his  own  heart's  blood  in  his  death :  bat 
when  he  had  achieved  this,  then  he  became  King  of  righteousness, 
demonstrated  to  be  so  before  the  eyes  of  all,  and  then  to  you  and  to  me 
he  became  henceforth  the  King  of  peace.  How  glorious  is  his  name  I 
Oh,  for  a  voice  of  thunder  with  which  to  praise  him ! 

To-day  our  Lord  and  Master  has  gone  his  way  up  to  the  eternal 
hills  where  he  reigns;  but  his  kingdom,  for  which  we  daily  pray,  is- 
coming ;  and,  mark  you,  it  will  come  by  righteousness.  I  say  no  word, 
against  those  who  endeavour  to  bring  peace  to  the  nations  by  the  exten- 
sion of  commerce,  facilities  for  travel,  and  so  forth ;  but  it  is  not  thus 
that  the  sword  of  war  shall  be  broken.  Would  God  the  sword  of  the 
Lord  were  quiet  in  its  scabbard  for  ever ;  but  I  never  anticipate  tha- 


AKD   AFTER   THAT   KING   OF    PEACE.  7^- 

reign  of  universal  peace  on  earth  till  first  the  King  of  righteousness  is 
acknowledged  in  every  place.  I  do  not  think  that  we  shall  ever  see  the 
fruits  without  the  tree,  or  the  stream  without  the  source,  or  peace 
without  the  enthronement  of  the  principle  of  righteousness  from  wliich 
it  springs.  There  shall  come  a  day  when  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like 
the  ox,  and  the  wolf  shall  lie  down  with  the  lamb — when  they  shall  hang; 
the  useless  helmet  in  the  hall,  and  study  war  no  more ;  but  that  reign 
of  the  joyous  King,  that  era  of  plenty,  love,  and  joy,  can  only  commence 
as  a  reign  of  righteousness.  It  cannot  be  anything  else  ;  and  until  sin. 
is  dethroned,  till  iniquity  is  banished,  we  shall  not  see  the  divine  fruit 
of  peace  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  Wherever  Jesus  is  King  he  must 
be  first  King  of  righteousness,  and  after  that  King  of  peace. 

So,  then,  Melchisedec  is  such  a  king  as  God  is,  and  such  a  king  aS' 
Jesus  is. 

Note,  next,  that  he  is  such  a  king  as  right-hearted  minds  desire.  I  say 
"  right-hearted  minds."  I  mean  not  only  those  who  are  saved,  but  those 
in  whom. there  is  some  good  thing  towards  the  Lord  God  of  Israel. 
There  is  an  honest  and  good  ground  not  yet  sown,  and  we  know  what 
that  soil  waiteth  for.  I  remember  what  my  thoughts  used  to  be  when  I 
was  seeking  the  Lord ;  I  longed  to  be  saved  ;  I  desired  to  escape  from 
my  sin ;  but  with  it  there  always  went  this  thought — *'  God  must  be- 
just."  I  had  ever  a  certain  trembling  sense  of  guilt,  but  at  the  same: 
time  a  deep  reverence  ibr  righteousness.  In  my  heart  of  hearts  I  said, 
"  Let  not  the  Lord  even  fur  my  sake  do  an  unrighteous  thing.  I  am 
nothing ;  but  God  and  his  ri^^hteousness  are  all  in  all.  It  were  a  greater 
calamity  fur  God  to  be  unjust  than  fur  me  to  be  lost.  It  were  a  dark 
day  for  all  the  aspirations  of  noble  minds  if  it  were  possible  for  Goc^ 
to  swerve  from  the  strict  rule  of  his  integrity.  Though  he  slay  me,  yet 
let  his  name  be  honoured,  and  let  his  righteousness  remain  untarnished." 
I  remember  distinctly  being  the  subject  of  that  feeling.  Sinner  as  I 
was  I  had  a  care  for  the  perfect  law  of  the  Lord,  and  would  by  no 
means  have  agreed  to  its  being  dishonoured  in  order  to  my  own  personal 
salvation.  I  wanted  this  question  answered — "  How  can  God  be  just  and 
yet  the  Justifier  of  him  that  believeth?"  I  did  not  know  at  that  time- 
the  sweet  secret  of  substitution;  but  when  I  did  know  it,  no  music  ever 
sounded  so  sweetly  in  the  human  ear  as  that  sounded  in  my  heart. 
When  I  saw  that,  by  the  interposition  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  his  bear- 
ing my  guilt,  God  could  be  sternly,  strictly,  severely  just,  to  the  letter,, 
in  every  jot  and  tittle,  and  yet  could  put  all  my  sin  away,  and  take  me- 
to  his  bosom,  and  let  me  be  his  child,  then  I  said,  "  This  must  be  of 
God.  This  divine  secret  bears  upon  its  own  face  its  own  warranty  of 
truthfulness,  for  no  man  could  have  invented  a  system  at  once  so 
just  to  God,  so  safe  to  man."  To  be  able  to  look  for  mercy  as  just, 
and  receive  pardon  on  the  ground  of  righteousness,  is  certainly  a  high 
ground  to  reach;  and  yet  every  believer  stands  there  before  God.  I  say 
that  every  right-minded  man  feels  a  deep  concern  for  the  righteousness, 
of  God,  when  he  is  soberly  in  his  senses,  and  thinking  the  matter  over.. 
He  longs  to  be  saved,  that  is  more  than  natural ;  but  he  does  not  wish 
to  be  saved  in  a  way  that  would  derogate  from  the  supreme  splendour- 
of  the  righteousness  of  God.  Let  the  Lord  God  be  glorious  in  justice,. 
and  then,  if  I  can  be  saved,  well  and  good.     Blessed  be  God,  we  can, 


76  FIRST  KING  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS, 

be  thus  saved.  Our  entraace  to  heaven  can  be  as  justly  secured  as  our 
banishment  to  hell  was  righteously  deserved.  How  justice  and  peace 
have  kissed  each  other  is  now  made  known.  That  secret  is  told  us  in 
tlie  Word  of  Grod.  Is  it  not  written  on  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ? 

And  I  am  sure,  again,  that  no  right-hearted  man  wants  Christ  to  come 
and  be  to  him  the  King  of  peace,  and  then  to  let  him  live  in  sin.  Brothers. 
I  want  no  peace  in  my  heart  concerning  any  fault.  If  I  know  myself 
before  God,  my  heart's  inmost  prayer  is  that  I  may  never  be  able  to  rest 
till  I  am  rid  of  every  relic  of  evil.  I  do  not  want  to  make  myself  happy 
and  yet  to  live  in  a  single  known  sin.  If  I  could  have  the  offer  of 
heaven,  and  be  a  drunkard,  I  wish  not  for  a  drunkard's  heaven.  What 
could  it  be  but  a  scene  of  riot,  strife,  and  obscenity  ?  If  I  could  have 
heaven  and  be  a  liar,  I  want  not  a  liar's  heaven.  What  could  the 
heaven  of  falsehood  be  but  hell  in  truth  ?  Nay,  I  would  not  wish  for 
a  heaven  in  which  I  might  freely  indulge  some  minor  sin,  or  be  jovial 
in  the  commission  of  some  unconsidered  transgression.  Nay.  there  can 
be  no  heaven  for  me  till  evil  in  every  form  is  expelled  from  my  nature. 
My  God,  my  longing  is  not  for  happiness  first,  but  for  purity  first,  and 
happiness  afterwards ;  and  hence  it  is  my  delight  to  read  that  my  King 
is  first  the  King  of  righteousness,  and  then  the  King  of  peace.  My 
heart  rejoices  in  a  sin-killing  King,  and  then  a  peace-bestowing  King, 
sweeping  out  the  buyers  and  the  sellers  from  the  temple,  and  then 
manifesting  himself  there  in  all  his  majesty  to  his  waiting  people. 

Melchisedec,  therefore,  sets  forth  such  a  king  as  all  right-minded 
people  desire. 

Again,  this  wonderful  Melchisedec  is  such  a  king  as  Jesus  must  he  io 
every  one  of  you  -who  have  not  yet  known  him,  if  you  are  ever  to  receive 
him  as  your  Saviour.  Let  me  not  sew  pillows  to  all  arm-holes  by 
preaching  salvation  to  those  who  do  not  repent  of  their  evil  ways.  I  do 
not  come  here  to  chant  in  dulcet  tones  sweet  lullabies  to  men  who  sleep  in 
unrighteousness.  If  you  would  have  peace  with  God,  you  must  repent  of 
sin.  If  you  love  evil  you  cannot  love  God.  There  must  be  a  divorce 
between  you  and  sin,  or  there  can  be  no  marriage  between  you  and 
Christ.  When  Jesus  comes  to  a  soul,  he  comes  as  King  of  righteous- 
ness first,  and  after  that  as  King  of  peace.  We  must  have  a  positive 
righteousness  of  life,  a  cleanness  of  heart  and  hand,  or  we  shall  not  be 
found  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Judge.  Let  no  man  deceive  himself. 
*•  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  He  that  comes  to 
VChrist,  and  takes  Ohrist  to  be  his  Saviour,  must  take  Christ  also  to  be 
his  Ruler ;  and,  Christ  ruling  him,  there  must  be  in  that  man's  heart  an 
active,  energetic  pursuit  of  everything  that  is  good  and  holy,  for 
^'  withuut  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  He  that  liveth  in  sin  is 
dead  while  he  liveth,  and  knows  nothing  of  the  life  of  God  in  his  soul. 
Highteoasness  must  hold  the  sceptre,  or  peace  will  not  attend  the  court. 

I  know  that  I  speak  to  many  who  long  to  be  saved;  but  will  you  give 
up  your  sin  ?  for  Christ  has  come  to  save  his  people  from  their  sins. 
If  you  do  not  wish  to  be  saved  from  sinning,  you  will  never  be  saved 
from  damning.  Do  you  hug  your  Delilah  ?  Then  shall  you  lose  your 
eyes  like  Samson.  Do  you  hold  to  the  viper,  and  press  the  asp  to  your 
bi>som  ?     Then  shall  the  poison  boil  within  your  veins.     Christ  cannot 


AND   AFTER  THAT   KING   OP   PEACE.  77 

gare  you  while  sin  is  loved  and  followed  after,  and  has  a  reigning  power 
in  you  ;  for  it  is  an  essential  of  his  salvation  that  he  should  deliver  you 
from  the  mastery  of  evil.  I  would  to  God  that  many  here  would  cry, 
"  That  is  the  very  thing  I  want.  I  long  for  it.  Can  I  be  helped  to 
renounce  sin?"  0  poor  heart,  if  thou  hungerest  after  righteousness, 
thou  shalt  be  filled  !  Thou  shalt  be  helped  to  conquer  evil :  thou  art 
being  helped  by  the  very  desire  which  has  been  breathed  into  thee.  "Oh," 
says  one,  "  can  I  break  off"  the  iron  yoke,  and  come  out  of  the  Egyptian 
bondage  of  my  lust  ?  "  Thou  canst ;  for  Christ  has  come  to  set  thee  free. 
Trust  thou  in  him,  the  great  Emancipator.  But  if  thou  sayest,  "  I  will 
live  in  sin,  and  yet  go  to  heaven,"  thou  shalt  never  do  so.  There  shall 
by  no  means  enter  into  the  celestial  city  anything  that  defileth.  He  that 
takes  men  to  heaven  is  first  King  of  righteousness,  and  after  that  he  is 
King  of  peace.  » 

I  have  closed  this  first  head  when  I  have  noticed  that  that  is  the  kind 
of  king  that  God  ivould  have  every  one  of  us  to  be.  We  ought  all  to  be, 
first,  kings  of  righteousness,  and  then  kings  of  peace.  Tiie  Lord  has 
appointed  each  man  his  kingdom  :  let  us  see  to  it  that  we  reign  for  good 
and  not  for  evil.  On  all  sides  we  hear  voices  inviting  us  to  peace  apart 
from  righteousness.  "  Oh,"  they  say  to  us,  "  a  confederacy,  a  con- 
federacy." What  mean  you?  You  are  to  preach  a  lie,  and  we  are  to 
preach  the  truth,  and  yet  we  are  to  call  each  other  brothers.  We  are 
no  brothers,  and  we  will  not  by  our  silence  aid  the  fraud.  "  Oh,  but," 
say  they,  "  be  charitable."  Charitable  with  what  ?  Charitable  with 
God's  truth,  flinging  it  down  into  the  mire  of  error  ?  Charitable  by 
deceiving  our  fellowmen?  That  we  cannot  be.  Brethren,  we  must 
so  hold  and  love  the  truth  as  to  hate  every  false  way ;  for  the  way  of 
error  is  ruinous  to  the  souls  of  men,  and  it  will  go  hard  with  us  if  even 
by  our  silence  we  lead  men  to  run  therein.  If  any  man  shall  say  to 
you, "  Come  and  let  us  sin  together,"  reply  to  him,  "  I  cannot  enter  into 
association  with  you,  for  I  must  first  be  pure  and  then  peaceable,  since  I 
serve  a  Lord  who  is  first  King  of  righteousness,  and  after  that  King  of 
peace."  "  Hold  your  tongue,"  says  the  world.  "Do  not  fight  against 
error.  Why  need  you  speak  so  loudly  against  a  wrong  thing  ?  "  We 
must  speak,  and  speak  sharply  too,  for  souls  are  in  danger.  We  must 
uplift  the  banner  of  truth,  or  we  shall  be  meanest  of  all  cowards.  God 
has  made  us  kings,  and  we  must  be  first  kings  of  righteousness,  and 
after  that  kings  of  peace. 

God's  people  are  tempted  sometimes  to  be  a  little  too  peaceable. 
Remember  that  our  Lord  Jesus  has  not  come  to  make  us  live  at  peace 
with  sin.  He  has  come  to  set  a  man  against  his  brother — to  divide 
a  household  where  iniquity  holds  sway.  There  can  be  no  peace  between 
the  child  of  God  and  wrong  doing  or  wrong  thinking  of  any  kind.  We 
must  have  "  war  to  the  knife  "'  with  that  which  would  rob  God  of  his 
glory  and  men  of  their  salvation.  Our  peace  is  on  the  footing  of 
righteousness,  and  on  no  other  ground.  We  are  for  all  that  is  good  and 
right ;  but  we  dare  not  cry  "  Peace,  peace,  where  there  is  no  peace." 

II.  Now  my  time  has  fled,  but  I  must  occupy  a  little  upon  the  best 
part  of  my  subject.     I  have  asked  you  to  admire  the  King.     I  now  beg 

you  to  ENJOY  HIM. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  first  King  of  righteousness.     You  know 


"78  FIEST    KING   OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS,  I 

what  it  means.  Shall  I  tell  you  what  it  includes  ?  All  who  are  in  hinj, 
and  one  with  him  in  his  kingdom,  are  righteous  in  his  righteousness. 
His  is  a  righteous  kingdom,  and  those  who  obey  it  will  be  found  to  have 
done  rightly.  If  we  follow  Christ's  rale  we  need  never  be  afraid  that 
it  will  mislead  us.  We  are  righteous,  certainly,  when  we  are  doing  his 
bidding.  If  any  cavil  and  say, "  Why  doest  thou  this  ?  "  quote  the  King's 
authority.  Do  not  thou  be  afraid  if  thou  doest  the  King's  bidding. 
He  is  a  King  of  righteousness,  and  thou  art  righteous  in  obeying  his 
righteous  ordinances.  He  who  religiously  obeys  Mahomet  may  yet  be 
doing  grievous  moral  wrong;  but  it  is  never  so  with  the  disciple  of  Jesus: 
obedience  to  Jesus  is  holiness. 

Notice,  next,  that  if  we  trust  this  King  of  righteousness  we  are 
righteous  in  his  merit.     I  w^ant  you  to  believe  this.     If  you  had  always 
kept  God's  law  and  had  never  sinned,  you  would  have  been  conscious  of 
righteousness.     Now,  by  faith,  as  many  of  you  as  believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  are  as  righteous  as  he  is  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God — as 
righteous  as  if  you  had  never  sinned.     Oh,  I  want  you  to  feel  this. 
''Being  justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God;"  but  there  must 
first  be  this  justifying  righteousness  before  there  can  be  peace.     What 
Christ  did  he  did  for  his  people.     I  say  not  that  what  Christ  did  is  im- 
puted to  his  people,  though  I  believe  that  it  is  so  ;  but  it  belongs  to 
his  people,  for  they  are  part  and  parcel  of  him,  and  so  are  partakers 
■with  him.     They  are  in  him  as  in  their  Federal  Head,  and  whatsoever 
•Christ  is,  or  has,  or  does,  belongs  in  itself,  in  the  very  nature  of  things, 
to  all  that  are  in  him  and  in  that  covenant  whereof  he  is  the  Head.    Stand 
up  straight,  then,  before  thy  God,  and  though  in  thyself  the  publican's 
humble  demeanour  suits  thee  well,  yet  in  thy  Lord  thou  mayest  take 
.  another  stand  and  say,  "Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's 
•  elect  ?     It  is  God  that  justifieth.     Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?     It  is 
'  Christ  that  died  ;  yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again."     The  Lord  Jesus  is 
•*'made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom  and  righteousness."     "This  is  his  name 
whereby  he  shall  be  called.  The  Lord  our  Righteousness ;  "  for  "  as  by 
-one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,"  as  you  and  I  know 
to  our  cost,  "  so  by  the  obedience  of  One  shall  many  be  made  righteous." 
*'  By  his  knowledge  " — by  the  knowledge  of  him — "shall  my  righteous 
Servant  justify  many,  for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities." 

Now,  then,  dost  thou  believe  in  Christ  ?  Then  thou  hast  no  sin. 
Thy  sin  was  laid  upon  Christ  of  old,  and  he  bore  the  punishment  of  it, 
and  thou  canst  not  be  punished  for  it.  Divine  righteousness  cannot 
exact  a  double  penalty  for  the  same  oflFence.  Dost  thou  believe  in 
Jesus  ?  Then  he  hath  made  an  end  of  all  the  sin  which  was  once 
written  against  thee.  He  has  buried  thy  transgressions  for  ever  in  his  own 
sepulchre.  If  thou  art  in  Christ,  his  perfect  righteousness  is  wrapped 
about  thy  loins,  and  thou  standest  this  day  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved." 
Oh,  it  is  a  glorious  standing,  Jesus  the  King  of  righteousness,  and  we  in 
our  King  made  righteous.  We  are  comely  through  the  comeliness  of 
'  Christ  which  is  put  upon  us. 

Now  this  I  want  you  to  think  of.  Whenever  you  are  enjoying  the 
salvation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  please  to  recollect  that  he  never  gives 
you  any  part  of  salvation  without  giving  it  to  you  righteously ;  and  if 
he  gives  it  to  you  righteously  you  are  possessed  of  it  righteously.   My  sins 


AND   AFTER   THAT   K[NG   OF   PEACE.  79 

are  pardoned.  Yes,  and  righteonsly  pardoned.  Oh,  is  not  this  a  wonder  i* 
Righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other.  If  I  pray,  I  hare 
naturally  no  r'ght  to  be  heard  as  a  sinner  ;  but,  using  the  name  of 
•Christ,  I  expect  to  be  heard  as  righteously  as  if  I  were  the  new-created 
Adam  fresh  from  the  hand  of  Deity.  When  I  come  before  God  and  ask 
his  protection,  I  look  for  it  as  righteously  as  Christ  looked  for  it  when 
he  was  here  below,  for  he  has  put  upon  me,  a  poor  unworthy  believer, 
all  his  regal  rights  ;  and  all  his  righteousness  is  mine,  so  that  I  may  use 
his  name  at  the  foot  of  my  prayers,  and  stamp  my  petitions  v>ith  his 
Christly  authority.  I  may  take  the  blessings  ol'  the  covenant  as  freely 
•as  he  may  take  them  who  bought  them  with  his  blood ;  for  he  bought 
them  for  all  his  people,  and  he  has  made  transfer  of  all  the  covenant 
<Bstate  to  all  who  are  in  him.  Oh,  brothers,  it  is  a  dreadful  thing  to 
be  under  a  sense  of  sin,  but  it  is  an  equally  blessed  thing  to  be  under  a 
sense  of  righteousness.  We  are  righteous  even  as  he  is  righteous.  Let 
ws  never  forget  this. 

And  then,  next,  he  is  after  that  King  ofpeac'>.  I  want  you  to  try  to- 
night— nay,  I  do  not  wantyou  to  try,  I  want  the  Holy  Spirit  to  do  it  for 
you — I  want  you  to  enjoy  the  King  of  Salem,  the  King  of  peace.  Do 
you  know  that  at  this  moment,  if  you  are  a  believer,  you  have  peace  with 
<7od  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ?  There  is  no  quarrel  between  you 
and  God  to-night.  You  are  one  with  him,  your  delight  is  in  him.  I 
know  not  now  in  my  own  soul  of  aught  that  I  could  say  against  the 
Lord's  dealings  with  me  throughoat  the  whole  of  my  life  ;  nor,  let  him 
deal  with  me  as  he  wills,  do  I  feel  any  repugnance  to  putting  myself 
•entirely  into  his  hands.  For  weal  or  woe,  for  wealth  or  poverty,  for 
life  or  death,  I  am  content  to  hand  myself  over  to  the  Lord  absolutely. 
And  now,  there  being  peace  on  the  poor  creature's  side,  it  is  such  a  joy 
to  think  that  there  is  peace  from  God's  side,  only  still  more  perfect  and 
enduring.  He  looks  at  you  through  his  dear  Son,  and  he  sees  no  sin  in 
you — no  iniquity  in  you.  He  loves  you  with  a  perfect  love  at  this 
moment,  and  he  knows  of  no  just  cause  or  impediment  why  he  should 
Slot  love  you.  "  Why,"  says  one,  "  I  have  not  been  a  believer  more 
than  a  week."  I  do  not  care  if  you  have  not  been  a  believer  more  than 
ten  minutes:  he  that  believeth  hath  everlasting  life  and  everlasting 
love.  As  soon  as  the  prodigal  son  was  home,  what  did  his  father  do  ? 
Upbraid  him  ?  No,  he  kissed  him.  Had  his  father  no  fault  to  find  ?  No, 
not  any.  He  said,  "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him.  Put 
a  ring  on  his  hand  and  shoes  on  his  feet.  Let  us  eat  and  be  merry." 
Why  did  he  not  say,  "  Come,  my  dear  son,  I  must  have  a  little  sharp 
talk  with  you,  for  your  good.  You  know  you  have  behaved  very  badly 
to  me.  I  must  chide  with  you  and  upbraid  you"  ?  No,  no.  Not  a 
word  of  the  sort.  Not  a  syllable  or  even  a  look  after  that  fashion. 
He  giveth  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not.  He  puts  his  dear  child  at 
perfect  ease  with  himself,  and  says,  "  Be  at  home.  Be  happy.  Eat, 
drink,  and  be  merry  with  me ;  for  you  are  my  child,  and  though  you 
"Were  lost,  you  are  found.  You  were  dead,  but  you  are  alive  again.  Let 
•us  rejoice  together  in  this  blessed  salvation  which  glorifies  my  Son." 

I  want  you  to  sit  in  those  pews — you  that  really  believe  in  Jesus,  and 
receive  this  bread  and  wine  in  perfect  contentment,  saying  within  your- 
selves, "  It  is  well.     It  is  all  well.     It  is  well  from  beginning  to  end — 


80  FIRST  KING   OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

from  Lop  to  bottom.  Beinsr  justified  by  faith,  I  have  peace  with  God. 
The  peace  of  God  that  passeth  all  understanding  doth  keep  my  heart 
and  soul  by  Jesus  Christ."  Come.  If  you  have  never  enjoyed  it  before, 
enjoy  it  to-night,  and  do  not  be  afraid.  If  you  go  to  the  devil's  feasts, 
put  a  knife  to  your  throat  if  you  are  a  man  given  to  appetite,  for  you 
may  soon  eat  and  drink  and  be  drunken.  Solomon  is  the  author  of 
this  prudent  advice.  But  when  you  come  to  the  feasts  of  love,  drink, 
yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved.  There  never  was  a  Christian  man 
that  was  too  happy  in  God.  There  never  was  a  believer  that  was  too 
peaceful,  too  serene,  too  confident,  too  hopeful.  You  cannot  drink  too 
much  of  this  heavenly  nectar.  Oh,  that  you  would  but  have  grace  to 
take  in  all  that  you  may  have!  I  know  what  you  will  do.  You  will 
come  to-night  into  my  Lord's  treasury,  and  he  will  say,  "  Take  what 
you  will."  There  will  be  mints  of  gold  and  silver  before  you,  and  you 
will  look  all  round  a.id  take  up  some  brass  farthing  or  other  and  say, 
"Bless  the  Lord  for  this!"  Such  gratitude  is  right  enough.  Bless 
the  Lord  for  anything.  At  the  same  time,  why  noc  take  something 
better?  "  Oh,  I  have  been  a  mourner,"  you  say,  "  all  my  days."  Whose 
fault  is  tliat  ?  "  Oh,  but  I  have  never  had  any  great  light  or  any  great 
joy."  Whose  fault  is  that  ?  Is  it  not  your  own  ?  The  Lord  seems  to 
me  to  say  to-night  even  to  the  elder  brothers  here,  "  Rejoice  and  be 
glad."  I  do  not  think  that  many  grumblers  come  Co  the  Tabernacle,  but 
there  are  certain  grumpy  elder  brothers  that  are  apt  to  say,  "  Neither 
at  any  time  transgressed  I  thy  commandments,  and  yet  thou  never 
gavest  me  a  kid  that  I  might  make  merry  with  my  friends.  I  never 
have  any  joy.  I  am  a  regular  seat-holder  and  a  member.  I  go  to  the 
communion ;  I  do  all  I  can ;  but  I  never  get  any  of  these  holy  raptures 
and  spiritual  delights.  These  reformed  thieves  and  converted  rascals 
when  they  are  converted  seem  to  monopolize  all  the  music  and  the 
dancing.  I  never  have  a  dance  to  myself  at  all."  Bat  the  father  was 
in  snch  a  blessed  humour  that  night  that  he  did  not  even  upbraid  the 
elder  brother;  but  he  said,  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I 
have  is  thine.  If  you  have  had  no  kid  wherewith  to  make  a  supper  for 
your  friends,  why  did  you  not  take  it  ?  All  that  I  have  is  thine."  Come 
in,  dear  elder  brother,  as  well  as  you  youuger  ones,  and  let  us  eat  and 
drink  and  be  merry  this  night  in  the  name  of  him  who,  having  been  the 
King  of  righteousness  upon  the  bloody  tree,  is  now  to-night  the  King 
of  peace  upon  his  glorious  throne ;  who  upon  this  table  shows  you 
how  he  wrought  out  perfect  righteousness,  breaking  his  body  and  pouring 
out  his  blood  for  you,  and  now  bids  you  come  and  see  how  all  this  is 
wrought  for  your  peace,  for  his  flesh  and  blood  are  now  your  bread  and 
wine  to  make  you  izlad.  Wherefore,  rejoice  in  the  Lord !  and  again  I 
gay,  Rejoice!     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read   before   Sermon — Hebrews  vii. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  " — 397,  393. 


JESUS  MEETING   HIS  WARRIORS. 

crmon 

Delivered  on  Sunday  Morning,  September  11th,  1864,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

A.T  THE  MBTROPOCilTAN  TABERNAOLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"And  Melchizedek  king  of  Salem  brought  forth  bread  and  wine  :  and  he  was  the 
priest  of  the  Most  High  God.  And  he  blessed  him,  and  said,  Blessed  be  Abram  of  th« 
Most  High  God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth :  and  blessed  be  the  Most  High  God, 
which  hath  delivered  thine  enemies  into  thy  hand.    And  he  gave  him  tithes  of  alL"— 

Genesis  xIt.  18 — 20. 

What  a  splendid  type  is  Abram,  in  the  narrative  before  us,  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ!  Let  us  read  this  story  of  Abram  in  oonnection  with  our 
Saviour,  and  see  how  full  of  meaning  it  is.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in 
the  abundance  of  his  love,  had  taken  us  to  be  his  brothers;  but  we, 
through  our  sin,  had  removed  into  the  land  of  Sodom,  and  Jesus  Christ 
dwelt  alone  in  his  safety  and  his  happiness,  enjoying  the  presence  of 
God.  The  hosts  of  our  enemies,  with  terrible  force  and  cruel  fury, 
carried  us  away  captives.  We  were  violently  borne  away  with  all  the 
goods  which  we  possessed,  into  a  land  of  forgetfulness  and  captivity  for 
ever.  Christ,  who  had  lost  nothing  by  this,  nevertheless  being  a 
"  brother  born  for  adversity,"  pursued  our  haughty  foes.  He  overtook 
them;  he  smote  them  with  his  mighty  hand — he  took  their  spoil,  and 
returned  with  crimsoned  vesture,  leading  captivity  captive.  He  restored 
that  which  he  took  not  away.  Methinks  as  I  see  Abram  returning  from 
the  slaughter  of  the  four  kings,  I  see  in  him  a  picture  of  a  greater  than 
Abram,  returning  "from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah, 
travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength."  Who  answers  to  my 
enquiry  who  he  is?  "  I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save.** 
Abram  was  that  righteous  man  raised  up  in  the  East,  to  whom  God 
gave  his  enemies  as  driven  stubble  to  his  bow;  and  so  the  Lord  Jesus 
has  driven  our  enemies  like  chaff  over  to  the  wind,  for  they  fled  at 
the  presence  of  Jehovah  Jesus;  and  by  the  valour  of  the  atoning  Lamb 
they  have  been  utterly  broken  in  pieces  for  ever.  Let  that  thought 
dwell  with  you,  it  may  furnish  you  with  matter  for  meditation  at  your 
leisure. 

We  shall  this  morning  rather  consider  Abram  as  the  type  and  picture 

No.  589. 


82  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

of  all  the  faithful.  He  was  the  father  of  the  faithful;  and  in  his  history 
you  have  condensed — as  I  think — the  history  of  all  faithful  men.  You 
will  scarcely  find  a  trial  which  will  befal  you,  which  has  not  in  some 
respect  happened  unto  Abraham.  I  will  not  say  that  he  was  tempted 
in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  but  he  was  tempted  in  so  many  points  that 
he  well  deserves  to  be  called  the  father  of  the  faithful,  being  partaker  of 
flesh  and  blood  even  as  all  the  children  are  who  belong  to  his  faithful 
family. 

Observe  then,  in  handling  our  subject  in  this  manner,  that  helievers 
are  frequently  ejigaged  in  warfare.  Notice,  secondly,  that  when  they  are 
thus  engaged,  they  may  expect  to  le  met  by  their  Lord,  the  great 
Melchizedeh;  and  remember,  thirdly,  that  ivhen  tliey  are  favoured  with  an 
interview  with  Mm,  and  are  refreshed  hy  him  as  with  bread  and  wine, 
then,  tike  A  hram,  they  consecrate  themselves  anew,  and,  as  A  hram  gave 
tithes  of  all,  even  so  do  they. 

I.  We  mention  then,  what  you  must  all  know  right  well  by 
experience — ^you  who  are  God's  people — that  the  believer  is  often 

ENGAGED  IN  WARFARE. 

This  warfare  will  be  both  within  and  without — within  with  the  in- 
numerable natural  corruptions  which  remain,  with  the  temptations  of 
Satan,  with  the  suggestions  of  his  own  wicked  heart;  and  without,  he 
will  frequently  be  engaged  in  warfare,  wrestling  "not  against  flesh 
and  blood,  but  against  principalities,  against  powers,  against  the  rulers 
of  the.,  darkness  of  this  world,  against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high 
places."  The  peculiar  case  of  Abram  leads  me  to  remark  that  some- 
times the  believer  will  be  engaged  in  warfare,  not  so  much  on  his 
own  account  as  on  the  account  of  erring  brethren,  who,  having  gone 
into  ill  company,  are  by-and-by  carried  away  captive.  It  was  no 
quarrel  of  Abram's,  it  was  Lot's  matter.  Lot  had  gone  to  Sodom. 
Instead  of  standing  in  the  separated  path  of  the  true  believer,  he 
had  joined  himself  unto  the  world,  and  when  evil  days  came,  Lot 
was  carried  away  captive  with  the  rest.  Abram  cared  little  enough 
for  the  king  of  Sodom :  I  do  not  suppose  he  would  have  taken  his  sword 
from  the  sheath  for  all  the  men  who  dwelt  in  Admah  or  Zeboiim ;  but  for 
Lot's  sake,  seeing  him  in  ill  company  and  in  danger,  he  draws  the 
sword.  And  sometimes,  brethren,  when  we  see  those  who  are  G-od's 
servants  putting  themselves  into  alliance  with  evil  systems,  we  find  them 
carried  away  captive,  and  taken  where  we  believe  their  hearts  would 
never  go,  and  we  feel  compelled  to  come  out  and  draw  the  sword 
against  the  common  enemy  of  Christ  and  of  all  his  people;  and 
though  they  may  heartily  wish  that  we  would  let  them  alone  in  their 
sin,  and  let  them  be  quiet  in  their  evil  union,  we  see  into  what  spiritual 
capacity  it  leadeth  them,  and  we  cannot  be  silent,  but  must  draw  the 
sword  when  conscience  and  when  God  demand  it,  and  never  sheath  it 
until  God's  work  is  done.  However,  this  rarely  occurs;  for  the  most 
part  the  Christian  spends  his  sword's  edge  upon  his  own  spiritual  foes: 
and  truly  we  have  enough  of  these.  What  with  pride,  sloth,  lus^t;  what 
with  the  arch  enemy  of  souls,  and  his  insinuations  and  blasphemies; 
what  with  the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  pleasures  of  this  world,  and  the  pride 
of  life;  what  with  enemies  who  come  upon  us  even  from  providence 
in  the  shape  of  temptations,  arising  out  of  our  trials  and  our  vocations^ 


JESUS  MEETING   HIS   WARKIORS.  83 

we  ought  to  carry  our  sword  always  drawn;  and,  above  all,  we  should  ever 
caiTy  the  shield  of  faith  and  take  the  weapon  of  all-prayer.  The 
Christian  is  never  to  feel  himself  at  ease  so  long  as  he  is  on  this  side 
Jordan.  This  is  an  enemy's  land.  Expect  a  foe  behind  every  bush,  look 
to  hear  the  shot  come  whistling  by,  and  each  night  adore  almighty  grace 
that  you  have  not  fallen  a  prey  to  your  cruel  and  remorseless  foes.  The 
Christian  is  engaged  throughout  his  whole  life  as  a  soldier — he  is  so 
called  in  Scripture — "  A  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ; "  and  if  any  of  you 
take  the  trouble  to  write  out  the  passages  of  Scripture  in  which  the 
Christian  is  described  as  a  soldier,  and  provision  is  made  for  his  being 
armed,  and  directions  given  for  his  warfare,  you  will  be  surprised  to 
find  there  are  more  of  this  character  than  concerning  any  other 
metaphor  by  which  the  Christian  is  described  in  the  Word  of  God. 
His  chief  and  main  business  seems  to  be,  like  his  Master,  to  bear 
witness  for  the  truth;  "For  this  pui-pose  was  I  born  and  sent  into 
the  world;"  and  though  in  himself  a  man  of  peace,  yet  he  can  say  with 
his  Master,  "  I  came  not  to  send  peace  but  a  sword ;"  for  wherever  he 
goes,  he  finds  that  his  presence  is  the  signal  for  war — war  within  him 
and  war  without  him :  he  is  a  man  of  peace,  and  yet  a  man  of  war 
because  a  man  of  peace.  The  Christian  is  engaged  in  warfare  with 
sin,  Satan,  error,  and  falsehood,  and  sometimes  he  is  called  to  fight  for 
erring  friends. 

Observe  that  this  war  is  one  against  poiverful  odds.  The  four  kings 
mentioned  in  this  chapter  were  all  great  sovereigns.  From  what  little 
we  can  glean  from  profane  history,  they  appear  to  have  been  very  mighty 
monarchs,  and  they  must  have  been  assisted  by  very  valiant  armies  to 
have  smitten  the  giants  whose  names  are  mentioned  in  the  opening  verses. 
They  appear  to  have  carried  away  the  five  kings  of  the  plain  with  the 
greatest  possible  ease ;  yet  here  is  Abram,  who  has  little  more  than 
three  hundred  of  his  own  armed  servants  at  his  call,  and  yet  he  ventures 
against  the  embattled  thousands  of  the  kings  of  nations.  Such  is  the 
warfare  of  the  Christian :  he  has  to  contend  against  foes  far  too  many 
for  him — he  is  like  the  worm  that  is  to  arise  and  thrash  the  mountain. 
He  is  little  and  despised,  and  if  he  measures  his  own  strength  he  will 
find  it  to  be  perfect  weakness;  and  yet,  for  all  this,  he  anticipates  a 
victory,  and  like  Abram,  hastens  to  the  holy  war. 

Carefully  notice,  that  as  it  is  a  battle  of  fearful  odds,  it  is  one  which 
is  carried  on  in  faith.  Abram  did  not  venture  to  this  fight  with 
confidence  in  his  own  strength,  or  reliance  upon  his  own  bow,  but  he 
went  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  Faith  was  Abram's  continual 
comfort.  Sometimes  his  faith  failed,  as  it  will  in  the  best,  but  still  the 
spirit  of  the  man's  life  was  a  simple  confidence  upon  God,  whom  he  had 
not  seen,  but  whose  voice  he  cheerfully  obeyed.  The  Christian  is  to 
carry  on  his  warfare  in  faith.  You  will  be  vanquished,  indeed,  if  you 
attempt  it  by  any  other  method.  Brethren,  there  is  not  a  sin  in  your 
heart  which  will  not  master  you  if  you  seek  to  fight  it  by  resolutions 
of  your  own ;  faith  in  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  must  win  you  the 
victory,  and  the  world  will  laugh  you  to  scorn  if  you  assail  it  with  any 
other  weapons  than  such  as  Calvary  will  furnish  you.  "  This  is  the 
victory  which  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith;"  and  if  you  ask 
faith  what  weapon  she  uses,  her  reply  is,  *'  They  overcame  through  the 


84  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

blood  of  the  Lamb."  Live  near  to  Jesus  Christ,  rest  upon  the  power  of 
his  atonement  and  the  prevalence  of  his  plea,  and  then  go  forward 
against  every  enemy  without  and  every  foe  within,  and  you  shall  be 
more  than  a  conqueror. 

In  this  great  battle,  carried  on  by  faith,  Abram  Md  a  right  given  him 
from  God,  and  the  promise  of  God's  presence  virtually  in  that  right. 
What  business  had  Chedorlaomer  to  come  unto  Canaan?  Had  not  Jehovah 
said  to  Abram,  "All  this  land  will  I  give  unto  thee?"  Therefore  he 
and  his  confederate  monarchs  were  neither  more  nor  less  than  intruders. 
For  thirteen  years  they  might  have  exercised  sovereignty  over  the  cities 
of  the  plain,  but  those  cities  and  everything  around  them  belonged 
virtually  to  Abram.  It  is  true  they  would  have  laughed  at  the  very  idea 
of  Abram's  claiming  the  whole  land  of  Canaan,  but  that  claim  was 
nevertheless  valid  in  the  court  of  heaven,  and  the  patriarch  by  right 
divine  was  heir  of  all  the  land.  Christian,  you  are,  by  virtue  of  a  covenant 
made  with  you  to  drive  out  every  sin,  as  an  intruder.  "  Sin  shall  not  have 
dominion  over  you:  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  You 
are  to  drive  out  every  error,  for  you  are  a  servant  of  the  truth  and  the 
truth  alone  has  a  right  to  live  and  a  right  to  exist ;  and  in  fighting  this 
lawful  warfare,  you  may  expect  that  the  right  arm  of  the  Most  High 
God,  the  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth  will  be  bared  that  he  may  show 
himself  strong  on  behalf  of  all  those  who  are  valiant  for  his  truth  and  for 
his  name.  Fear  not;  the  battle  is  not  yours,  but  God's.  You  go  not 
a  warfare  at  your  own  charges;  and  though  hell  may  roar  as  it  will,  and 
earth  be  all  in  arms,  and  your  own  heait  may  fail  you,  and  your  flesh 
when  you  take  counsel  with  it  may  make  you  feel  a  coward,  yet  say, 
"  In  the  name  of  God  will  I  destroy  them,"  go  forward  and  conquer. 
"  They  compass  me  about  like  bees,"  said  David,  "  yea,  like  bees  they 
compass  me  about:  but  in  the  name  of  God  will  I  destroy  them;"  and 
what  David  did  you  shall  do  through  David's  God. 

Yet  more,  the  Christian  is  engaged  in  a  conflict  in  which  he  walks  by 
faith  and  leans  upon  God ;  but  yet  it  is  a  conflict  in  which  he  uses  all 
means,  calls  in  all  lawful  assistance,  and  exerts  himself  with  all  vigour 
and  speed.  Abram  did  not  sit  still  and  say,  •'  Well,  God  will  deliver 
Lot;  he  has  promised  to  keep  his  servants  as  the  apple  of  his  eye" — 
Oh !  no,  that  is  not  faith ;  that  is  foolish  presumption.  Abram  did  not 
take  his  time  about  it,  and  go  marching  leisurely  after  the  foe,  nor  did 
he  go  without  the  assistance  of  his  friends,  Aner,  and  Eshcol,  and 
Mamre.  So  the  Christian,  if  he  sees  any  method  by  which  he  may  be 
assisted  in  overcoming  sin  or  promoting  truth,  uses  it  with  wisdom  and 
discretion.  He  trusts  in  God  as  though  he  did  nothing  himself,  and 
yet  he  does  everything  as  if  all  depended  upon  him.  He  knows  that 
good  works  cannot  save  him,  and  he  equally  knows  that  he  is  not  saved 
unless  there  be  some  fruits  of  good  works.  He  understands  that  the 
means  of  grace  cannot  of  themselves  convey  grace  to  him,  and  yet  at 
the  same  time  he  never  despises  them,  but  looks  to  find  a  blessing  in 
the  use  of  them.  He  understands  that  the  ministry,  and  private  prayer, 
and  the  searching  of  the  Scriptures  cannot  save  him,  but  he  also  under- 
stands that  thus  using  helps  which  God  has  given  him,  and  diligently 
pressing  forward  and  setting  a  bold  face  before  the  foe,  he  is  in  the  path 
of  God's  ordinances,  and  may  expect  to  have  God's  help. 


JESUS  MEETING  HIS  WARRIORS.  85 

And  do  observe,  dear  friends,  yet  again,  that  Abram  marching  on 
thus  with  activity,  and  using  discretion,  by  attacking  his  enemies  at 
night  rather  than  by  day,  did  not  cease  until  he  had  gained  a  complete 
victory  over  them.  It  was  not  enough  to  smite  them  at  one  corner  of 
their  host,  nor  merely  to  deliver  Lot,  but  now  he  is  come  out  against 
them  he  will  win  a  sure  and  decisive  victory.  0  beloved,  you  and  I 
are  never  to  sit  still  and  say,  "It  is  enough."  Have  I  smitten  my 
drunkenness?  Have  I  overcome  my  blaspheming  habits?  Am  I  delivered 
from  Sabbath  breaking?  Have  I  become  honest  and  chaste  ?  Yet  this  is 
not  where  I  should  stop.  Have  I  sought  to  bring  down  my  self-conceit, 
my  pride,  my  sloth  ?  It  is  well  and  good,  but  let  me  never  be  satisfied 
with  any  attainment  short  of  absolute  perfection.  We  do  not  believe 
we  shall  be  perfect  in  this  life,  but  we  will  never  be  satisfied  until  we 
are.  "  Onward,"  is  the  Christian's  motto.  As  long  as  there  is  one  sin 
which  is  not  removed  we  will  fight,  and  cry,  and  groan,  and  go  to  the 
cross  concerning  it.  As  long  as  there  is  one  soul  in  this  world  un- 
saved, we  will  wrestle  with  the  mighty  One  of  Jacob  to  stretch  out 
his  hand  to  save  it.  So  long  as  there  remains  one  error  upon  earth,  so 
long  as  we  have  a  tongue  to  speak  and  God  gives  us  grace,  we  will  bear 
our  witness  against  it.  In  this  battle  there  is  no  holding  our  hand 
till  the  victory  is  wholly  won;  we  must  bring  back  the  goods,  and  the 
men,  and  the  women,  and  Lot,  and  the  whole  company;  for  the  victory 
must  be  complete.  More  than  conquerors  must  we  be  thi-ough  him 
who  hath  loved  us.  Let  us  anticipate  the  time  when  it  shall  be  so. 
0  brethren,  methinks  I  see  the  victors  ascending  in  triumphal  state 
the  starry  steeps,  Christ  at  their  head  rides  gloriously;  he  who  loved 
them  leads  the  van;  the  gates  open  to  him  as  the  great  Conqueror  who 
has  led  their  captivity  captive.  Methinks  I  see  the  glad  faces  of  all 
those  soldiers  of  the  cross  as  they  enter  the  portals  of  eternal  peace. 

"  I  ask  them  whence  their  viet'ry  came — 
They  with  united  breath, 
Ascribe  their  conquest  to  the  Lamb, 
Their  triumph  to  his  death." 

See  then,  beloved,  here  you  are  this  morning  soldiers ;  you  are  to  fight 
by  faith  in  God.  However  tremendous  the  power  of  your  adversaries, 
you  are  not  to  fear  since  God  is  with  you.  You  are  to  fight,  using  dis- 
cretion as  your  armour-bearer,  but  you  are  also  to  couple  this  with 
perseverance,  continuing  faithful  to  the  end,  for  only  those  who  over- 
come shall  sit  upon  the  throne  of  God  for  ever. 

We  have  thus  perhaps  said  enough  concerning  this  first  point,  and 
now,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  bedew  with  his  holy  influences  while  we  talk 
of  the  second,  for  otherwise  it  will  be  only  talk. 

II.  While  engaged  in  such  earnest  spiritual  contention,  the  believer 
may  expect  to  see  his  Lord. 

When  Shadrach,  Meshech,  and  Abed-nego,  were  fighting  Christ's 
battles  in  the  fiery  furnace,  then  the  Son  of  Man  appeared  unto  them.  As 
in  the  building  of  Jerusalem  in  troublous  times,  they  had  the  sword  in 
one  hand  and  the  trowel  in  the  other;  so  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  while 
he  teaches  us  to  use  the  sword,  takes  care  to  edify  and  build  us  up  in  the 
faith  at  the  same  time.   He  understands  that  warriors  require  strengthen- 


86  METROPOLITAlf   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

ing  meat,  and  that  especially  when  they  are  under  stern  conflict  they  need 
extraordinary  comforts  that  their  souls  may  be  stayed  and  refreshed. 
Why  does  Jesus  Christ,  as  set  forth  here  under  the  type  of  MelcMzedeTc, 
appear  unto  his  children  in  times  of  conflict  ?  Answer — He  comes  to  them 
first,  because  they  are  weary.  In  every  conflict  which  the  child  of  God 
lias  to  wage,  it  is  not  the  private  person  who  goeth  to  the  warfare,  it 
virtually  is  Christ  fighting — Christ  contending.  It  is  a  member  of 
Christ's  body  labouring  against  Christ's  enemy  for  the  glory  of  the 
Head.  Christ  the  Head  has  an  intense  feeling  of  sympathy  with  every 
member,  no  matter  how  humble.  Since  there  is  a  vital  union  between 
Christ  and  every  member,  there  is  also  an  undying  sympathy;  and 
whenever,  brother,  thou  contendest  for  the  faith  till  thou  growest  weary, 
Jesus  Christ  will  be  sure  to  give  thee  some  proof  of  his  close  communion 
with  thee.  The  martyrs  protest  that  they  never  had  such  communion 
with  God  anywhere  as  among  the  caverns  of  the  hills,  or  the  swamps 
of  the  woods,  to  which  they  were  exiled  for  Christ;  and  that  even  on 
the  rack,  in  extremity  of  torture,  or  even  upon  the  gridiron  in  the 
heat  of  the  fire — even  there  the  sweet  presence  of  Christ  has  been  over- 
poweringly  delightful  to  them,  so  that  they  almost  lost  the  sense  of  pain. 
Thou,  Lord,  dost  send  a  plenteous  rain,  whereby  thou  dost  refresh 
thine  heritage  when  it  is  weary!  Spend  your  strength  for  God,  brother, 
for  when  fainting  seems  inevitable,  then  shall  come  such  a  sweet 
renewing  of  your  strength,  that,  like  an  eagle,  you  shall  stretch  your 
wings  and  mount  aloft  to  commune  with  God  in  solitary  joys.  Christ, 
your  Melchizedek,  will  meet  you  in  your  conflicts,  if  he  never  did  before. 
The  King  of  Peace  met  the  returning  warrior  for  another  reason. 
A  hram  was  prolahly  flushed  with  victory,  and  this  is  a  very  dangerous 
feeling  to  any  child  of  God.  When  tlie  seventy  disciples  returned  to  Christ 
they  said,  with  evident  exultation,  "  Lord,  even  the  devils  are  subject  unto 
US:"  but  Jesus  Christ  sweetly  and  gently  rebuked  them  by  saying,  "  Never- 
theless, rejoice  not  in  this,  but  rather  rejoice  because  your  names  are 
written  in  heaven."  The  true  secret  of  a  Christian's  joy  is  not  to  be  his 
conquest  over  sin  or  over  error,  but  the  person  of  his  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
The  Lord  knows  that  his  people,  if  they  are  successful,  even  in  spiritual 
warfare,  when  they  have  used  the  best  of  means  and  felt  the  best 
of  motives,  are  nevertheless  very  liable  to  the  intoxication  of  pride,  and 
therefore  he  either  sends  "  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,"  or  else,  what  is  better 
Btill,  he  comes  himself.  I  am  persuaded,  beloved,  that  the  best  cure  for 
pride  is  a  sight  of  Christ.  Oh!  when  your  eyes  see  him,  then  your  own 
loathsomeness,  blackness,  and  deformity,  are  clearly  revealed.  I  am 
fair  until  the  sun  ariseth — then  am  I  black  indeed.  I  think  myself  pure 
until  I  see  him  whiter  than  any  fuller  could  make  him,  and  then  I  fall 
down  and  cry,  "Unclean,  unclean,  unclean!"  "Now  mine  eye  seeth 
thee,"  said  Job,  "  wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
ashes."  Down  go  your  flaunting  pennons  and  your  lofty  plumes,  when 
you  have  a  sight  of  Christ.  No  humbler  man  than  George  Herbert — 
no  humbler  man  than  Samuel  Rutherford — and  these  were  men  who 
lived  close  to  Christ.  Christ's  presence  is  a  cure-all.  When  Melchizedek 
comes,  every  spiritual  disease  flies  before  him.  The  Church  at  Laodicea 
was  very  far  gone,  but  how  did  the  Master  propose  to  cure  it?  Here 
it  is — "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,  and  knock:  if  any  man  hear  my 


JESUS  MEETING  HIS  WARRIORS.  87 

voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  into  him,  and  will  sup  with 
him."  What,  Lord,  is  this  thy  delightful  treatment  of  thy  sick  Church? 
*'  Yes,  my  communion  with  thee,  poor  lukewarm  Laodicea,  will  revive 
thee."  Truly  that  is  a  most  suggestive  figure  by  which  John  describes 
the  countenance  of  Christ;  he  says  "His  countenance  was  as  the  sun 
shining  in  his  strength."  So,  Lord,  it  does  not  matter  how  dark  I  am, 
the  moment  thou  dost  show  thy  face,  all  must  be  light.  This,  I  think, 
was  the  reason  why  the  King  of  Righteousness  met  Abram,  to  turn  away 
his  thoughts  from  the  tempting  joys  of  victory,  to  his  sure  portion  in 
the  Most  High  God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth. 

Yet  again,  was  not  this  visit  bestowed  because  Abram  was  about 
to  he  tried  in  a  yet  more  subtle  manner  than  he  had  been  before  ?  It  is 
easier  to  fight  Chedorlaomer,  than  to  resist  the  King  of  Sodom. 
Joshua  down  in  the  plain  never  grew  weary  when  he  was  fighting  the 
Amalekites,  but  Moses  on  the  mountain  felt  his  hands  grow  heavy. 
Why?  Because  the  more  spiritual  the  exercise,  the  more  aptness 
is  there  in  us  to  grow  weary  in  it;  and  so  the  more  spiritual  the 
temptation  the  more  likelihood  of  our  becoming  a  prey  to  it,  and  the 
more  strength  do  we  need  to  overcome  it.  That  was  a  very  subtle 
temptation  to  Lot,  by  the  King  of  Sodom.  Why  it  looked  so  right — 
perfectly  right.  Abram  has  brought  back  these  captives:  he  has  a  right 
to  the  spoil;  he  ought,  therefore,  to  take  it.  If  he  had  done  so,  no  one 
could  blame  him  on  ordinary  rules,  but  then  there  is  a  higher  rule  for 
believers  than  for  other  men.  Brethren,  I  contend  that  the  common 
rules  of  morality  are  binding  upon  all,  but  that  a  supernatural ly  high 
rule  of  morality  should  regulate  the  Christian;  that  the  Christian  is 
not  allowed  to  wink  at  an  evil  because  he  has  educated  his  conscience 
not  to  think  it  so,  but  he  shall  so  act  that  there  shall  not  be  any  wrong 
in  the  action,  upon  the  common  judgment  of  any  unbiased  spectator. 
He  who  is  of  the  King's  Council,  must  walk  very  daintily,  lest 
he  offend  his  Master.  I  tell  you,  from  experience,  that  the  nearer 
you  come  to  Christ,  and  the  more  you  have  of  communion  with  him, 
the  more  jealous  you  must  be  of  yourself,  or  else,  if  other  men 
escape  the  rod,  you  will  not:  you  will  have  to  smart  for  it  behind 
the  door,  where  another  may  not  see  nor  understand  your  grief. 
Beloved,  it  is  well  to  have  communion  with  Christ,  to  prepare  us 
against  subtle  temptations,  for  to  feed  us  upon  Melchizedek's  bread 
and  wine,  is  to  make  us  more  than  a  match  for  the  King  of  Sodom. 
0  Jesus!  when  I  have  seen  thy  face,  my  soul  beholds  not  the  dazzling 
beauties  of  earthly  excellence.  Brother,  if  ever  thou  hast  seen  Christ's 
face,  that  painted  harlot,  the  world,  will  never  win  thy  love  again. 
Didst  thou  ever  eat  the  pure  white  bread  of  heaven?  Then  the  brown, 
gritty  bread  of  earth  will  never  suit  you,  but  wiU  break  your  teeth  with 
gravel  stones.  You  will  never  care  to  drink  earth's  sour  and  watery 
wine,  if  you  have  once  been  made  to  drink  of  the  wines  on  the  lees  well 
refined — the  spiced  wine  of  Christ's  pomegranate.  If  you  want  to  be 
strengthened  against  the  most  subtle  worldly  temptations,  cry,  "Let 
liim  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth:  for  thy  love  is  better  than 
wine;"  and  you  may  go  forth  to  conflicts  of  every  kind,  more  than 
a  conqueror,  through  him  that  hath  loved  you. 

Thus  we  have  spoken  upon  the  fact  that  Melchizedek  met  Abram, 


88  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

and  the  reasons.  Now,  let  us  look  a  little  more  closely  at  what  he 
did.  In  what  character  did  he,  meet  Abram?  The  reply  is  easy — he 
met  him  as  one  possessed  of  a  royal  priesthood. 

Christ  meets  us,  brethren,  as  a  priest  and  as  a  king  in  all  our  battles. 
What  a  mercy  it  is  that  Christ  visits  us  as  a  priest,  for  we  never  fight 
against  sin  without  being  in  some  measure  partakers  of  it.  I  do  not 
believe  there  ever  was  a  controversy  for  truth  upon  which  any  gracious 
man,  though  engaged  upon  the  right  side,  could  look  back  without  some 
regrets  and  some  tears.  I  much  believe  that  even  Martin  Luther  or 
John  Knox,  when  upon  their  dying  beds,  though  never  regretting  that 
they  contended  earnestly  for  the  faith,  yet  felt  that  while  they  were  in 
the  flesh,  something  of  flesh  mingled  with  all  that  they  did.  Thus  it 
will  be  to  the  end,  and  even,  when  contending  against  our  own  sins 
and  lusts,  yet,  beloved,  our  very  repentance  has  something  in  it  to 
be  repented  of,  and  our  very  flying  to  the  cross  has  something  in  it  of  a 
lingering  Jrom  the  cross,  and  therefore  something  of  evil.  Jesus,  all 
hail !  How  much  I  need  to  meet  thee  as  a  priest !  And  you,  beloved, 
do  you  not  feel  that  you  need  him  too?  Do  you  not,  as  you  look  upon 
Calvary  and  the  flowing  blood,  confess  that  you  need,  in  all  spiritual 
conflicts,  to  meet  Christ? 

But  Melchizedek  was  also  a  Mng,  and  truly  thus  we  want  to  view 
our  Lord  whenever  we  are  fighting  his  battles.  "  The  Lord  reigneth," 
is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  comforting  texts  in  the  compass  of  God's 
word  to  the  contending  Christian.  "  Ah  !"  says  the  poor  soul,  "  I  am 
trodden  under  foot  of  Satan,  but  rejoice  not  over  me,  0  mine  enemy: 
though  I  fall,  yet  shall  I  rise  again,  for  the  Lord  reigneth."  Oh!  that 
is  our  consolation  when  at  any  time  we  think  we  are  routed,  when 
we  see  our  Church  dismayed  and  our  banner  trailed  in  the  mire,  then 
we  remember  Jesus,  for  him  hath  God  the  Father  exalted,  "  and  given 
him  a  name  which  is  above  every  name:  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus 
every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and 
things  under  the  earth."  Hail!  King  of  Righteousness  and  Peace,  much 
do  we  need  to  meet  thee!  Come,  mount  thy  glorious  chariot,  ride 
forth  conquering  and  to  conquer  drawn  by  thy  three  white  horses, 
meekness,  truth  and  righteousness!  Heaven  adores  thee,  earth  obeys 
thee,  hell  trembles  at  thy  presence,  gates  of  brass  must  burst  at  thy 
touch,  and  bars  of  iron  snap  at  thy  word!  0  king  immortal,  ride 
gloriously  and  let  thy  people  behold  thee  and  rejoice  in  thee.  But  we 
must  see  Christ,  see  him,  by  close  communion  with  him.  You  cannot 
see  him  by  my  description.  Melchizedek  met  Abram,  and  Jesus  Christ 
must  meet  you  ;  he  must  stop  you  on  a  sudden,  when  you  least  expect 
it,  and  reveal  himself  unto  you  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world.  Jacob 
before  wrestling  was  met  by  hosts  of  angels  at  Mahanaim,  but  what  are 
these  when  compared  with  the  Lord  himself?  There  is  a  high  blessing 
in  being  met  by  angels — do  not  mistake  me  there — but  oh!  to  be  met 
by  the  angel  of  the  covenant,  the  Michael  the  archangel,  to  be  met  by 
him,  ah!  what  comfort  is  here!  And  will  he  meet  me?  Will  he  meet 
you?  Yes,  we  can  answer,  he  will,  for  we  have  met  with  him.  "  Mine 
eyes  have  seen  the  King  in  his  beauty,"  many  of  us  can  say,  and  our 
souls  are  exceedingly  comforted  and  full  of  holy  joy  because  we  have ' 
beheld  him  as  Priest  and  King. 


JESUS  MEETING   HIS   WARRIORS.  89 

The  next  enquiry  is,  wMt  did  he  do  for  Mm  ?  He  brought  him 
bread  and  wine,  precisely  setting  forth  what  Jesus  does,  who  brings  us 
his  flesh  and  his  blood.  Carnal  people  say,  in  order  to  understand 
Christ's  words,  that  when  you  eat  bread  and  drink  wine  at  the  Lord's 
table,  there  is  his  flesh  in  the  bread,  or  that  the  bread  is  transubstan- 
tiated into  flesh,  and  the  same  with  the  wine;  but  the  spiritual  mind 
understands  that  these  emblems  awaken  the  spiritual  powers,  and  that 
then  the  spiritual  powers — not  the  lips  and  the  stomach,  but  the  spiritual 
powers — do  really  and  spiritually  feed  upon  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  so  the  Word  is  fulfilled:  "  Except  ye  eat  my  flesh  and 
drink  my  blood,  there  is  no  life  in  you."  I  do  not  know  that  Christian 
people  feed  altogether  on  doctrine.  I  know  that  the  truth  of  God  is 
food,  but  believers  get  richer  nourishment  than  even  this  affords.  When 
I  am  very  gloomy,  I  like  to  take  down  some  work  upon  the  high 
doctrines,  God's  sovereignty,  election,  perseverance,  and  I  get  com- 
forted; but  there  are  other  times  when  I  am  brought  very  low,  and  that 
kind  of  food  will  not  suit  me.  I  am  obliged  then  to  turn  to  my  Lord 
himself.  There  is,  I  believe,  in  times  of  conflict  no  food  which  can  be 
the  stay  of  an  immortal  soul  except  the  Master  himself— communion 
with  him,  a  putting  of  the  fingers  into  the  print  of  the  nails,  and  a 
thrusting  of  the  hand  into  the  side — this  is  the  sovereign  remedy  for 
unbelief,  and  the  best  food  for  faith.  His  manifest  presence  is  our 
noblest  nutriment.  When  Christ  reveals  himself,  then  all  grows  calm 
and  peaceful;  but  until  we  can  get  him,  we  still  abide  in  darkness,  and 
we  see  no  light.  The  worshipper  who  came  up  to  the  temple  could  not 
live  upon  the  brazen  laver,  nor  the  golden  snuffers,  nor  even  upon  the 
cherubic  emblems,  he  must  needs  partake  with  the  priests  of  the  lamb 
offered  in  sacrifice;  and  so  the  true  food  of  the  child  of  God  is  Jesus 
Christ  himself — ^not  so  much  ordinances  and  doctrines,  which  are  only 
the  utensils  and  the  vestments,  but  Christ  himself,  the  very  Christ, 
made  flesh  for  us,  received  with  joy  into  our  soul,  and  fed  upon  until, 
like  Abram,  we  go  on  onr  way  rejoicing.  That  is  what  the  royal 
priest  did  for  the  patriarch. 

Bear  with  me  patiently  while  I  remark  what  Melchizedek  said  to  him. 
First  he  blessed  him,  and  then  he  blessed  God,  and  that  is  just 
what  we  need  our  Lord  to  do  for  us.  We  want  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
first  to  bless  us.  "  Blessed  be  Abram  of  the  Most  High  God,  possessor 
of  heaven  and  earth."  We  need  a  blessing  upon  our  own  persons  and 
especially  upon  our  own  works.  What  are  our  works  when  we  have 
done  them  all  but  futile  vanity,  until  God  comes  to  strengthen  us? 
Beloved,  you  and  I  may  contend  for  Christ  until  we  are  dumb,  but  not 
a  soul  that  will  see  the  light  or  know  the  truth  by  our  witness  of  itself; 
we  may  go  with  tender  hearts  and  seek  to  bring  sinners  to  the  cross  of 
Christ,  but  we  shall  never  bring  a  sinner  unless  God's  own  arm  is  re- 
vealed. We  shall  come  back  like  the  prophet,  saying,  *'  Who  hath 
believed  our  report,"  and  feeling  that  the  arm  of  God  hath  not  been 
revealed  unto  men.  But  when,  on  the  other  hand,  the  possessor  of 
heaven  and  earth  has  blessed  us,  then  our  earthly  substance  is  blessed 
and  our  earthly  words  are  Messed,  and  then  we  get  a  heavenly  blessing; 
heaven's  rest  and  peace,  heaven's  omnipotence  rests  upon  us,  and  in  the 
glory  of  a  heaven-given  strength  we  go  forth  confident  of  victory.    We 


<J0  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


I 


want  a  blessing  from  Christ.  Ask  it  now,  beloved,  ask  it  now  you  who 
are  weary  with  last  week's  fighting,  you  who  can  scarcely  endure  any 
longer  by  reason  of  your  trials  and  troubles,  say  to  him  now, 
*'  Melchizedek,  bless  me  !  0  Jesus,  bless  me  now."  Possessor  of  heaven 
and  earth,  forget  not  one  of  us,  thy  beloved  ones,  but  give  us  a  blessing. 

Beloved  brethren,  Melchizedek  did  not  stop  there,  but  he  fulfilled 
another  part  of  his  priestly  office — M  blessed  God.  Whenever  we  are 
singing  here,  when  I  am  in  right  order,  my  soul  takes  wing  and  wants 
to  fly  to  heaven;  when  we  all  sing  with  power  and  force  there  is  a 
sweetness  and  grandeur  about  the  song  which  we  do  not  often  meet 
with;  yet  I  am  always  conscious  that  we  cannot  praise  God  as  he  deserves 
to  be,  and  herein  I  bless  the  great  Melchizedek  that  though  we  cannot 
bless  God  as  he  should  be  blessed,  yet  he  can.  Jesus  Christ  presents 
the  praises  of  his  saints  before  God  as  well  as  their  prayers.  He  is  the 
Intercessor,  and  while  he  has  the  vials  full  of  odours  sweet  to  present, 
he  also  presents  the  music  of  our  harps;  both  our  offerings  come  up 
accepted  in  the  beloved.  Now  what  say  you,  brethren,  have  you  done 
anything  this  week  that  is  of  good  repute?  Has  God  given  you  any 
success?  Dear  sister,  have  you  won  any  souls  for  Christ?  I  know  you 
have.  Dear  brother,  has  God  blessed  you  in  any  witness-bearing?  Have 
you  felt  that  God  has  been  with  you?  Well  now,  come  and  lay  your 
honours  down  at  his  feet;  whatever  they  may  be,  put  them  there,  and 
pray  the  great  Melchizedek  to  take  out  of  your  heart  every  particle  of 
self-glory  and  every  atom  of  self-exaltation,  and  ask  him  to  say  for  you 
in  a  higher  sense  than  ever  you  can  say  it,  "  Blessed  be  the  Most  High 
God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth,  who  hath  delivered  mine  enemies 
into  mine  hand."  Thus  you  shall  be  glad  that  the  great  Melchizedek 
has  met  you. 

I  have  talked  thus,  but  truly  one  word  from  the  lip  of  Christ  will  be 
worth  ten  thousand  of  mine;  and  if  you  have  ever  seen  him,  you  will 
think  me  a  very  dauber  when  I  try  to  paint  him.  If  you  get  this  day 
BO  much  as  ten  minutes  real  fellowship  with  Jesus,  you  will  wonder  how 
it  is,  that  I,  if  I  know  anything  about  him,  could  talk  in  this  cold  way. 
Go  your  way,  brethren,  and  pray  Melchizedek  to  meet  you. 

III.    Lastly,  and  very  briefly  indeed,  since  our  time  is  gone,  when  a 

wrestling  believer  is  favoured  with  a  sight  of  the  great  Melchizedek, 

voluntarily  and  yet  necessarily  he  makes  a  new  dedication  of  himself 

to  God.    You  see  Abram  does  not  appear  to  delay  a  moment,  but  he 

gives  to  Melchizedek  a  tithe  of  all,  by  which  he  seemed  to  say,  "  I  own 

the  authority  of  my  superior  liege  lord,  to  all  that  I  am,  and  all  that  I 

have."    There  is  one  of  our  hymns  which  says — 

"  Hail,  Melchizedek  divine ; 
Thou,  great  High-Priest,  shaft  be  mine  ; 
All  my  powers  before  thee  fall — 
Take  not  tithe,  but  take  them  all." 


JESUS   MEETING   HIS   WARRIOES.  01 

And  truly  our  holy  faith  deserves  of  us  that  we  should  gire  all  to  Christ. 
I  would  that  some  Christians,  however,  practised  the  rule  of  giving  a 
tenth  of  their  substance  to  the  Lord's  cause.    The  Lord's  Church  need 
never  lack  if  you  had  a  bag  in  which  you  stored  up  for  Christ:  when 
you  gave  anything,  you  would  not  feel  it  was  giving  of  your  own;  your 
eft  hand  would  not  know  what  your  right  hand  did,  for  you  would  be 
jaking   out  of  the  Lord's  stock  which  you  had  already  consecrated 
30  the  Lord's  cause.     'N'ot  less  than  one-tenth  should  be  the  Lord's 
portion,  especially  T^ith  chose  who  have  a  competence;  and  more  than 
this,  methinks,  should  be  expected  of  those  who  have  wealth.    But 
there  is  no  rule  binding  with  iron  force  upon  you,  for  we  are  not  under 
law  in  Christ's  Church,  but  under  grace,  and  grace  will  prompt  you  to 
•do  more  than  law  might  suggest;  but  certainly  the  Christian  should 
reckon  himself  to  be  not  his  own,  and  that  he  has  nothing  to  retain  for 
his  own  private  account.     I  pray  God  if  I  have  a  drop  of  blood  in 
my  body  which  is  not  his,  to  let  it  bleed  away;  and  if  there  be  one  hair 
I  in  my  head  which  is  not  consecrated  to  him,  I  would  have  it  plucked 
out,  for  it  must  be  the  devil's  drop  of  blood  and  the  devil's  hair.     It 
belongs  to  either  one  or  the  other:  if  not  to  God,  then  to  Satan.    No,  we 
must,  brethren,  have  no  division  of  ourselves,  no  living  unto  this  world 
and  unto  God  too.     Mark  Anthony  yoked  two  lions  together,  and  drove 
them  through  the  streets  of  Rome :  they  do  strange  things  at  Eome, 
and  there  are  many  people  who  can  yoke  two  lions  together,  and  drive 
towards  Rome;  but  you  will  never  be  able  to  yoke  the  lion  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah  and  the  lion  of  the  pit  together — they  are  at  deadly   an- 
tagonism, and  Christ  will  not  have  you  for  his   servants  if  you  seek 
to  serve  two   masters.    I  know  that  any  talk  of  mine  here   will  be 
in  vain,  but  if,  beloved,  you  should  see  Christ,  and  have  communion 
with  him,  your  consecration  to  him  will  be  a  matter  of  course.    I 
will  suppose  that  this  afternoon  one  of  you  should  sit  down  in  your 
arm  chair,  and,  as  you  are  sitting  there,  you  will  be  thinking,  "  How 
little  I  have  been  giving  of  late  to  the  cause  of  Christ !     How  seldom 
I   have  opened  my  mouth   for  him!"     Perhaps  you  will  think,  "  I 
have  got  on  in  the  world  too,  but  I  really  cannot  afford  it!   My  expenses 
are  so  great ! "    Suppose  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should  come  into  the 
room  with  those  pierced  hands  and  bleeding  feet — suppose  he  were 
to  remind  you  of  what  he  has  done  for  you,  how  he  visited  you  in 
your  low  estate,  when  your  heart  was  breaking  under  a  sense  of  sin, 
you  would  not  then  tell  him  you  could  not  afford  to  give  to  his  cause. 
Suppose  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should  look  you  in  the  face  and  say  to 
you,  "  I  have  done  all  this  for  you.    What  wilt  thou  do  for  me?"    What 
would  be  your  answer?     Why  you  would  say,  '*  Take  it  all,  my  Master, 


92  METROPOLITAN   rABERNACLB  PULPIT. 

take  it  all,  all  that  I  am,  and  all  that  I  have  shall  be  for  ever  thine." 
Or,  if  you  felt  niggardly — supposing  he  should  say  to  you,  "  If  you  will 
never  ask  anything  of  me,  I  will  never  take  anything  from  you."  Would 
you  agree  to  that?  No,  but  as  you  still  will  have  immense  demands  to 
\nake  upon  his  liberality,  cease  not  still  to  give  your  whole  spirit,  soul 
and  body,  as  a  whole  burnt-offering  unto  God.  As  Abram  did  before 
Melchezidek  so  do  you  in  the  presence  of  Christ,  own  that  you  are  his, 
and  give  yourself  to  him. 

My  dear  brethren,  I  pray  God  that  this  may  stir  you  up  to  seek  a 
high  grade  of  piety  and  to  live  in  daily  communion  with  a  living  Saviour, 
and  he  will  bless  and  keep  you. 

But  there  are  some  of  you  who  are  not  like  Abram.  You  need  not 
hope  yet  to  see  Melchizedek.  There  are  some  of  you  strangers,  far  off. 
Ah!  I  may  rather  compare  you  to  the  men  of  Sodom.  Christ  has  done 
eomething  for  you  as  Abram  did  for  Sodom.  You  know  it  was  only  for 
the  sake  of  Lot  that  he  brought  them  back,  bat  he  did  bring  them  all 
back,  and  for  the  sake  of  Lot  gave  a  respite  to  them  all;  although  a 
few  years  after  they  had  grown  so  wicked  that  they  were  all  destroyed. 
My  Master  has  given  a  respite  to  free  you  all.  While  his  great  work  was 
the  salvation  of  his  own  chosen,  yet  he  has  spared  you  all  in  the  land 
of  the  living.  Take  heed  lest  you  do  as  did  the  men  of  Sodom,  for  then 
a  hail  more  fiery,  a  destruction  more  terrible  must  come  upon  you, 
seeing  that  you  turn  not  aside  from  your  evil  ways,  nor  seek  his  face. 
Trust  Christ,  and  you  are  saved;  believe  in  him,  and  your  sins  are 
forgiven;  but  if  you  refuse,  beware,  lest  that  come  upon  you  which  is 
written  in  the  prophets,  "  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and  perish ! " 
The  Master  now  send  us  away  with  his  benediction.    Amen. 


JESUS    AND    HIS    BRETHEEN. 


^m0it 


Intended  for  Reading  on  Lokd's-day,  May  9th,   1897, 
delivebed  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABEBNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  October  ith,  1885. 


"  Then  Joseph  could  not  refrain  himself  before  all  them  that  stood  by  him ;  and  ha 
cried,  Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me.  And  there  stood  no  man  with  him,  while 
Joseph  made  himself  known  unto  his  brethren.  And  he  wept  aloud  :  and  the  Egyptians 
and  the  house  of  Pharaoh  heard.  And  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren,  I  am  Joseph  ; 
doth  my  father  yet  live  ?  And  his  brethren  could  not  answer  him ;  for  they  were 
troubled  at  his  presence.  And  Joseph  said  unto  his  brethren.  Come  near  to  me,  I  pray 
you.  And  they  came  near.  And  he  said,  I  am  Joseph  your  brother,  whom  ye  sold 
into  Egypt.  Now  therefore  be  not  grieved,  nor  angry  with  yourselves,  that  ye  sold 
me  hither :  for  God  did  send  me  before  you  to  preserve  life." — Genesis  xlv.  1 — 5. 

I  NEED  not  say  to  you,  beloved,  who  are  conversant  with  Scripture, 
that  there  is  scarcely  any  personal  type  in  the  Old  Testament  which  ia 
more  clearly  and  fully  a  portrait  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  than  is  the 
type  of  Joseph.  You  may  run  the  parallel  between  Joseph  and  Jesus 
in  very  many  directions,  yet  you  need  never  strain  the  narrative 
even  so  much  as  once.  I  am  not  about  to  attempt  that  task  on  the 
present  occasion ;  but  I  am  going  to  take  this  memorable  portion  of 
the  biography  of  Joseph,  and  to  show  you  how,  in  making  himself 
known  to  his  brethren,  he  was  a  type  of  our  Lord  revealing  himself 
to  us. 

It  seems  that,  at  last,  Joseph  could  bear  the  suspense  no  longer. 
He  knew  who  his  brethren  were,  he  knew  which  was  Benjamin,  and 
which  was  Reuben,  Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  and  the  rest,  and  he 
recollected  all  the  story  of  their  early  days  together;  but  they 
did  not  know  him.  They  thought  him  some  mysterious  potentate, 
some  great  ruler  of  the  land  of  Egypt, — as  indeed  he  was,  but  they 
did  not  know  so  much  about  him  as  he  knew  about  them.  Con- 
sequently, there  was  a  distance  between  him  and  them,  and 
I  his  loving  heart  ached  to  bridge  that  gulf  by  manifesting  himself  to 
them.     It  is  the  way  of  love  to  desire  to  make  itself  known. 

Now,  in  a  still  higher  sense,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  knows  all  about 
i  those  in  this  place  whom  he  has  redeemed  with  his  precious  blood. 
The  Father  gave  them  to  him  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world, 
No.  2,516.  g 


94  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

and  lie  took  tliem  into  covenant  relationsliip  with  himself  or  ever  the 
earth  was.  Often  has  he  thought  of  these  his  beloved  ones  ;  hia 
delights  have  been  witii  the  sons  of  men,  and  he  has  looked  forward,  and 
foreseen  all  that  would  happen  to  them.  Ever  since  these  redeemed  and 
chosen  ones  have  been  born  into  the  world,  he  has  watched  them  so  care- 
fully that  he  has  counted  the  very  hairs  on  their  heads.  They  are  so 
precious  to  him,  as  the  purchase  of  his  heart's  blood,  that  they  have 
never  taken  a  single  wandering  step  but  his  eye  has  tracked  the  mazes 
of  their  life.  He  knows  them  altogether,  — knows  their  sins,  knows 
their  sorrows,  knows  their  ignorance  of  him,  knows  how  sometimes 
that  ignorance  has  been  wilful,  and  they  have  continued  in  the  dark 
when  they  might  have  walked  in  the  light ;  and  now,  at  this  moment, 
speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  the  heart  of  Christ  aches  to 
manifest  himself  to  some  of  them,  he  wants  to  be  known,  he  thirsts  to 
be  known,  he  can  only  be  loved  as  he  is  known,  and  he  pines  for  lovOj 
and  so  he  pines  to  manifest  himself  to  his  loved  ones.  Ay,  and  there 
are  some  of  them  who  do  know  hitn  already  in  a  measure,  but  their 
measure  is  a  very  little  one ;  it  is  but  as  a  drop  compared  with  the 
great  deep  sea.  I  have  been  praying,  and  am  praying  still,  and  I  am 
not  alone  in  the  prayer,  that  this  very  hour,  the  Lord  Jesus  may  be 
pleased  to  manifest  himself  to  his  own  blood-bought  ones.  To  all 
who  have  been  called  bj'  his  grace  already,  and  to  many  not  yet 
called  to  him,  may  he  come  in  the  fulness  of  his  own  glorious  revela- 
tion, and  make  himself  known  ;  for  know  ye  not  this, — that  the 
revelation  of  Christ  in  the  Word  will  not  save  you  unless  Christ  be 
revealed  in  you  and  to  you  personally  ?  Nay,  more  than  that  ;  the 
Christ  born  at  Bethlehem  will  not  save  you  unless  that  Christ  be  formed 
in  you  the  hope  of  glory,  he  must  himself  come  to  you,  and  make 
himself  kuown  to  ijou.  It  wiU  not  suffice  you  to  read  about  his  heal-  > 
ing  the  sick,  he  must  touch  you  with  his  hand,  or  you  must  touch  the  1 
hem  of  his  garment  with  your  hand ;  but  somehow  there 
must  be  personal  contact  between  yourself  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  or  else  all  that  he  did  will  avail  nothing  to  you.  Let  this  be 
our  prayer  now, — that  to  each  man  and  woman  and  child  here  the 
Lord  may  graciously  make  himself  known. 

I.     Notice,  first,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  like  Joseph,  reyeals 

HIMSELP    IN    private   FOR    THE   MOST    PART. 

Joseph  cried,  "Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me.      And   there  ;' 
stood  no  man  with  him,  while  Joseph  made  himself  known  unto  his 
brethren."     It  would  not  have  been  seemly  for  this  great  ruler  to  lose 
all  command  of  himself  in  the  presence  of  the  Egyptians.     His  heart  , 
was  carried  away  with  love  to  his  brothers,  and  the  cry  that  he  lifted 
up  was  so  loud  that  the  people  in  other  parts  of  the  palace  could  hear 
that  something  strange  was  going  on  ;  but  he  could  not  bear  that  they 
should  all  stand  around,  and  gaze  with  curious  eyes  upon  their  ruler  as 
he  unbosomed  himself  to  his  brothers.  They  would  not  have  understood  i 
it,  they  might  have  misrepresented  it ;  at  any  rate,  he  could  not  bear  | 
that  the  scene  of  affection  which  was  now  to  be  enacted  should    be  1 
witnessed  by  strangers,  so  he  cried,    "  Cause  every  man  to  go  out 
from  me."  i 

My  dear  friends,  do  you  really  want  savingly  to  see  and  know  th& 


\ 


JESUS   AND    HIS    BRETHREN.  95' 

Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Have  you  never  yet  beheld  him  by  the  eye  of 
faith  ?  Then,  permit  me  to  exhort  you  to  be  literally  much  alone, — 
much  alone  in  searching  the  Scriptures,  and  much  alone  in  private, 
Becret  prayer.  That  gracious  revelation  of  himself  to  you  as  bearing 
your  sins,  and  putting  away  your  guilt,  will  not  be  likely  to  come  to 
you  until  you  get  a  little  time  in  private,  where  you  can  quietly 
meditate  upon  your  Lord  and  his  great  atoning  work.  The  mis- 
chief of  this  busy  London  is  that  we  are  fretted  and  worn  with 
incessant  occupations ;  we  should  all  of  us  be  much  stronger  and 
better  if  we  saw  less  of  the  faces  of  men  and  more  of  the  face  of  Grod. 
But  for  a  penitent  sinner,  who  desires  to  behold  his  pardon  written  in 
the  smiling  countenance  of  Christ,  there  must  be  solitude.  You  must 
rise  earlier  in  the  morning,  and  get  a  half-hour  to  yourself  then,  or 
you  must  sit  up  later  at  night,  or  you  must  steal  out  of  bed  at  the 
dead  of  night,  or  you  must  even  resolve  that  you  will  not  go  to  your 
business  until  the  first  business  of  finding  Christ  is  ended  once  for  all. 
I  feel  persuaded  that,  with  some  of  you  at  least,  there  will  be  no  peace 
to  your  heart,  and  no  comfortable  sight  of  Christ,  until  you  have  gone 
upstairs,  and  said,  "  Here,  alone,  with  every  man  put  out  and  every 
wandering  thought  excluded,  will  I  bow  the  knee,  and  cry,  and  look, 
and  hope,  and  believe,  until  I  can  say,  '  I  have  seen  the  Lord ;  I  have 
looked  to  him  whom  I  have  pierced,  and  I  have  seen  my  sin  put  away  by 
hia  death  upon  the  tree.'  " 

Further,  I  want  you  to  notice,  not  only  the  excellence  of  solitude  in 
general,  but  the  henefit  of  a  kind  of  mental  solitude.  Brethren,  if  in  the 
house  of  Q-od,  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
ever  to  manifest  himself  personally  to  us,  it  must  be  in  a  kind  of 
mental  and  spiritual  solitude.  I  believe  that  the  preacher  will  never 
succeed  in  winning  a  soul  if  he  tries  to  make  himself  prominent  in  his 
own  preaching.  An  old  man,  who  was  accustomed  to  catch  trout  in  a 
certain  stream,  was  asked  by  one  who  had  been  fishing  in  vain,  "  Have 
you  caught  any  fish  to-day?  "  '*  Yes,  sir,"  he  said,  *'  I  have  a  little 
basketful."  "  Oh  !  "  said  the  other,  "■  I  have  been  fishing  all  day 
long,  and  I  have  taken  none."  "  No,"  said  the  man,  **  but  there  are 
three  rules  about  catching  trout,  which,  perhaps,  you  have  not  observed. 
The  first  is, — Get  quite  out  of  sight ;  and  the  second  is, — Get  still 
more  out  of  sight,  and  the  third  is, — Get  still  more  out  of  sight  than 
that ;  and  you  will  catch  them  so."  And  I  believe  that  it  is  just  so  in 
preaching.  If  the  preacher  can  get  quite  out  of  sight,  and  still  more 
out  of  sight,  and  yet  still  more  out  of  sight,  then  will  he  be  the  means 
of  bringing  souls  to  Christ.  And  you,  dear  friends,  will  only  see  him 
well  in  any  kind  of  preaching  when  you  try  to  forget  the  man.  I 
mean  that  remark  to  apply  in  two  ways.  Perhaps  the  preacher  is 
one  whom  you  dearly  love,  and  you  expect  much  from  him.  Well  then, 
forget  him,  expect  nothing  from  him,  but  look  away  from  him  to  your 
Lord.  Or  perhaps  the  preacher's  voice  has  no  particular  charm  for 
you,  the  man  is  not  very  bright  in  his  utterances ;  well,  forget  him, 
and  try  to  see  his  Master.  Forget  the  preacher  for  good  and  for 
bad,  for  better  and  for  worse,  and  get  to  the  Lord  himself. 

There  is  a  story  told  of  Mr.  Erskine  having  preached  on  one  occasion 
before  the  communion,  and  a  good  woman,  a  child  of  God,  heard  him 


96  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

with  such  delight,  and  was  so  much  fed  and  satisfied,  that  she  left 
her  own  pastor,  and  went  some  miles  on  the  next  Lord's-day  to  go 
and  hear  him  again.  That  morning,  he  was  dreadfully  dry  and 
barren,  or  at  least  she  thought  that  he  was.  There  was  no  food  for 
her  whatever ;  and  being  not  a  very  wise  woman,  she  went  in  to  tell 
him  so.  She  said,  "  Oh,  Mr.  Erskine,  I  heard  you  at  the  communion 
with  such  delight ;  you  seemed  to  take  me  to  the  very  gates  of  heaven, 
and  I  was  fed  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat ;  so  I  have  come  this 
morning  on  purpose  to  hear  you,  and  I  confess  that  I  have  got  nothing 
out  of  you  !  "  So  he  said,  "  My  good  woman,  what  did  you  go  for 
last  Sabbath-day?"  "I  went  to  the  communion,  sir."  "Yes,  you 
went  to  the  communion;  that  was  to  have  communion  with  the 
Lord?"  "Yes,"  she  said,  "I  did."  "  WeU,"  said  Mr.  Erskine, 
*'  that  is  what  you  went  for,  and  you  got  it ;  and  the  Lord  blessed  my 
word  to  you,  and  you  had  communion  with  him.  Now,  what  did  you 
come  here  for  this  morning?"  "I  came  to  hear  you,  sir."  "And 
you  have  got  what  you  came  for,  for  you  have  heard  me,  and  found  that 
I  am  a  poor,  dry,  sapless  thing,  there  is  nothing  in  me."  Think  of  this 
story  when  you  are  remembering  the  Lord's  servants,  and  forgetting 
their  Master  himself.  I  do  believe  that,  as  you  are  sitting  here,  you 
whose  eyes  have  already  been  opened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  if  you  will 
but  say,  "  Cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me  ;  shut  to  the  door,  I  have 
entered  into  my  closet  even  while  in  the  pew  ;  I  am  alone  now,  and  I 
desire  to  see  no  man  save  Jesus  only,"  you  shall  see  him,  for  he 
manifests  himself  to  his  people  all  alone.  Oh,  that  each  one  here 
would  say,  "  There  is  nothing  but  Christ  that  I  desire  to  see,  there  is 
nothing  else  I  wish  to  remember,  I  would  think  only  of  my  Lord 
Jesus  ;  may  he  be  pleased  to  reveal  himself  to  me  !  " 

II.  The  second  remark  I  have  to  make  is  this, — when  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  reveals  himself  to  any  man  tor  the  first  time,  it  is  usually 
in  the  midst  of  terror,  and  that  first  revelation  often  creates 

MUCH    SADNESS. 

When  Joseph  made  himself  known  to  his  brethren,  and  said  to 
them,  "  I  am  Joseph,"  "  they  were  troubled  at  his  presence."  Judah 
had  made  a  very  plaintive  speech  when  it  was  threatened  that 
Benjamin  should  be  detained  in  Egypt,  and  all  the  brothers  were  in 
deep  trouble;  so  that,  when  the  great  ruler  said  to  them,  "I  am 
Joseph,"  they  were  not  filled  with  joy  by  his  words,  so  we  read,  "  His 
brethren  could  not  answer  him ;  for  they  were  troubled  at  his 
presence."  He  was  Joseph,  their  brother,  and  he  loved  every  one  of 
them ;  yet  "  they  were  troubled  at  his  presence."  It  was  the  best  thing 
that  could  have  happened  to  them  to  be  in  the  presence  of  him  who  was 
sent  of  God  to  save  their  lives  with  a  great  deliverance ;  yet  "  they 
were  troubled  at  his  presence." 

And  you  and  I  recollect,  perhaps,  when,  under  a  deep  sense  of  sin 
and  sorrow,  we  had  our  first  perception  of  Christ's  salvation,  instead 
of  being  glad  at  it,  we  were  "  troubled  at  his  presence."  "  Why !  ''  we 
said  to  ourselves,  "this  Christ  is  he  whom  we  have  despised,  and 
rejected,  and  crucified."  There  did  not  seem,  at  first,  much  comfort 
for  us  in  the  manifestation  of  Christ.  One  said,  in  order  to  cheer  us, 
"He  died  for  sinners."     "But,"  we  answered,  "  surely  not  for  such 


JB8XJS   AND    HIS   BBETHREN.  97 

sinners  as  we  are."  Even  the  very  sound  of  that  blessed  word  "sal- 
vation "  grated  on  our  ears,  because  we  thought  we  should  be  like  the 
fabled  Tantalus,  up  to  our  neck  in  water  which  we  could  not  drink,  or 
surrounded  by  fruit  which  we  could  not  pluck.  "He  may  have  died 
for  others,"  we  seemed  to  say,  "but  scarcely  for  us."  We  "were 
troubled  at  his  presence."  Even  the  house  of  God,  to  which  we 
continued  to  go,  was  a  place  of  terror  to  us,  and  we  cried,  like  Jacob 
did  at  Bethel,  "  How  dreadful  is  this  place  !  "  In  the  worst  sense  of 
that  word,  it  really  was  "  dreadful "  to  us,  fuU  of  dread,  although  we 
believed  it  to  be  "  none  other  but  the  house  of  God,  and  the  gate  of 
heaven."  We  said,  "  What  right  have  we  to  be  in  the  house  of  God  ? 
How  can  we  expect  to  enter  heaven  even  though  its  gate  is  so  near 
to  us  ?  "  We  heard  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  passing  by,  but  we 
sorrowfully  eiclaimed,  "  Ah,  that  is  only  too  true !  He  will  pass  by, 
he  will  never  stop  to  look  at  us."  We  heard  that  precious  text,  "God 
so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life  ;  "  yet 
we  said,  "  What  is  it  to  believe  in  him?  How  can  we  believe  in 
him  ?  "  The  light  seemed  shining  all  around  us,  but  our  eyes  were 
blind  to  it ;  the  music  of  heaven  was  sounding  in  all  its  sweetness, 
but  our  ears  were  closed  to  its  melody  ;  everlasting  love  was  coming 
near  to  us,  yet  our  hearts  did  not  open  to  receive  it ;  and  therefore 
we  could  not  answer  Christ,  for  we  "  were  troubled  at  his  presence." 

Dear  friends,  if  any  of  you  are  in  this  sad  state,  do  not  therefore  be 
driven  away  from  our  Jesus,  our  greater  Joseph  ;  but  still  stand  in 
his  presence,  even  though  you  are  troubled  at  it,  for  that  experience, 
though  it  be  bitter,  is  a  bitter  sweet.  There  may  be  trouble  in 
Christ's  presence,  but  there  is  a  far  greater  trouble  in  being  driven 
from  his  presence  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power.  So  keep  standing 
just  where  you  are,  even  though  you  stand  trembling,  for  by-and-by, 
and  perhaps  this  very  hour,  he  will  graciously  reveal  himself  to  you, 
and  you  shall  no  longer  tremble  at  his  presence,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
you  shall  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,  as  you 
perceive  that  this  Joseph,  this  Jesus,  is  your  Brother,  your  Saviour, 
your  Friend,  your  all  in  all. 

III.  Now,  thirdly,  though  the  first  appearance  of  Jesus,  like  that 
of  Joseph,  may  cause  sadness,  the  further  revelation  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  his  brethren,  brings  them  the  greatest 
possiblb  joy. 

If  you  look  at  this  passage  when  you  are  at  home,  you  will  perhaps 
say  to  yourself,  * '  The  second  time  that  Joseph  spoke  to  his  brethren, 
he  had  not  much  more  to  say  than  he  said  the  first  time,"  for  then  he 
said,  "  I  am  Joseph  ;  doth  my  father  yet  live  ?  "  And  the  second 
time  there  was  much  the  same  burden  in  his  language:  "lam 
Joseph,  your  brother,  whom  ye  sold  into  Egypt."  So,  when  Christ 
reveals  himself  in  grace  to  any  poor  heart,  the  revelation,  for  substance, 
is  much  the  same  as  at  the  first,  yet  there  is  a  great  difference.  When,  for 
the  first  time,  I  heard  the  gospel  to  my  soul's  salvation,  I  thought 
that  I  had  never  reaUy  heard  the  gospel  before,  and  I  began  to  think 
that  the  preachers  to  whom  I  had  listened  had  not  truly  preached  it. 
But,  on  looking  back,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  I  had  heard  the 


98  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PXTLPIT. 

gospel  fully  preached  many  iiimdreds  of  times  before,  and  that  this 
was  the  difference, — that  I  then  heard  it  as  though  I  heard  it  not ; 
and  when  I  did  hear  it,  the  message  may  not  have  been  any  more 
clear  in  iteeK  than  it  had  been  at  former  times,  but  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  was  present  to  open  my  ear,  and  to  guide  the  message 
to  my  heart.  0  dear  friend,  if  you  have  heard  me  preach  Christ 
crucified,  and  you  have  not  yet  seen  Christ  to  your  soid's  salvation, 
I  pray  that  you  may  do  so  now !  I  do  not  suppose  that  there 
will  be  any  difference  in  the  sermon,  or  in  the  truth  proclaimed ; 
the  difference  will  be  that,  in  the  one  case,  it  has  not  reached 
your  heart,  and  in  the  other  case  it  will.  0  blessed  Master, 
speak  comfortably  to  the  hearts  of  sinners,  and  to  the  hearts  of  thy 
people,  too !  Make  the  old,  old  gospel  to  be  new  to  us  by  clothing  it 
with  a  new  power  within  our  hearts  and  consciences,  and  throughout 
our  lives  ! 

Yet,  there  were  some  differences  in  the  words  which  Joseph  uttered 
to  his  brethren.  If  you  turn  again  to  the  narrative,  you  will  see  that 
he  began  his  second  speech  by  saying  to  them,  "  Come  near  to  me,  I 
pray  you."  There  was  a  longing  for  nearness  to  those  he  loved,  and  that  is 
the  point  of  my  sermon  at  this  time.  I  want  you,  who  do  not  believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  who  are,  nevertheless,  his  elect,  his 
redeemed  ones,  to  come  near  to  him  now  by  an  act  of  faith,  and  trust 
him  with  yourselves,  your  soiils,  your  sins,  and  everything  else. 
Stand  not  back  through  shame  or  fear,  ye  chief  of  sinners,  for  he 
says,  "Come  near  to  me,  I  pray  you.  'Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.'  "  As  for  you 
who  are  his  brethren  already,  come  you  near  to  him,  for  to  you  also 
he  says,  "  Come  near  to  me,  I  pray  you."  Oh,  if  our  Lord  were 
actually  here  in  bodily  presence, —  and  I  can  almost  picture  him  in  the 
loveliness  and  glory  of  Divine  Majesty, — if  he  were  to  stand  here,  and 
say  to  us,  "  Come  near  to  me,  I  pray  you,"  we  would,  with  solemn 
reverence,  bow  before  him,  but  we  woiild  with  joyful  obedience  come 
near  to  him,  and  try  to  hold  him  by  the  feet  and  worship  him. 
Would  not  each  one  of  you  press  forward  to  come  near  unto  him  ?  I 
am  sure  that  you  would  ;  well,  that  is  what  you  have  to  do  in  a 
spiritual  fashion.  We  know  not  Christ  after  the  flesh,  but  we  do 
know  him  after  the  Spirit.  So,  come  near  to  him,  dear  brethren  in 
Christ ;  believe  in  him  again  as  you  did  at  the  first,  look  to  him  again 
as  if  you  have  never  looked  before.  Worship  him  as  your  Lord  and 
your  Eedeemer,  prostrate  yourselves  before  him,  and  adore  him  as  the 
Son  of  God  revealed  in  our  midst ;  come  near  to  him.  Then  talk  to 
him ;  tell  him  all  that  is  in  your  inmost  heart.  Unburden  to  him 
your  cares  and  your  doubts ;  ay,  and  come  near  to  him  with  your 
fondest  affection,  and  say  to  him  now,  in  the  silence  of  your  spirit, 
"Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee." 
Come  near  to  Christ  with  all  your  tears  of  penitence,  come  near  with 
your  alabaster  box  of  gratitude,  come  near  with  the  kisses  of  your 
lips  of  love,  come  near  with  your  whole  heart's  purest  affection,  and 
come  now,  for  that  is  what  he  invites  you  to  do.  It  is  a  part  of  his 
manifestation  of  himself  to  you  that  you  should  endeavour  to  come 
near  to  him.   Cry,  "  Stand  back,  0  self !    Stand  back,  0  devil !    Stand 


JESUS   AND    HI3   BRETHBBN.  99 

back,  all  care  for  the  -world  !  Stand  back,  even  care  for  the  church 
just  now  !  My  heart  must  come  near  unto  her  Lord,  and  sit  like  a 
dove  on  his  finger,  and  be  satisfied  to  look  with  her  gentle  eyes  at  the 
beauties  of  his  countenance."  God  help  us  so  to  do,  in  response  to 
our  Lord's  gracious  invitation,  "  Come  near  to  me,  I  pray  you." 

Then,  as  if  to  help  us  to  come  near,  our  Lord,  in  this  revelation,  declares 
his  relationship  to  us.  The  speaker  in  the  type  says,  "  I  am  Joseph 
your  brother  ;  "  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  though  he  is  Head  over 
all  things  to  his  Church,  and  King  and  Lord  of  death  and  hell,  yet 
says  to  everyone  who  believes  in  him,  "I  am  your  Brother ;  I  am  of  your 
kith  and  kin ;  Head  of  the  family,  but  still  of  the  family  ;  and  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  your  infirmities,  for  I  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  you  are."  Do  not  imagine,  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus,  that 
there  is  only  a  fanciful  or  sentimental  brotherhood  between  him  and 
you.  It  is  real  brotherhood ;  there  is  no  such  brotherhood  imder 
heaven,  so  complete  and  true,  as  that  which  exists  between  Christ  and 
every  blood-washed  soul,  for  it  is  not  a  brotherhood  according  to  the 
flesh,  but  an  everlasting,  spiritual  brotherhood.  An  eternal  union  of 
the  closest  and  most  vital  kind  is  established  between  Christ  and  every 
one  who  believes  in  him. 

"We  do  not  reckon  it  hard,  do  we,  to  win  a  brother's  heart  ?  If  we 
have  been  a  little  cold  towards  a  brother,  his  heart  soon  warms  to  us 
again ;  and,  as  for  our  Lord,  if  we  have  not  seen  him  of  late,  if  any  of 
us  have  not  loved  him  as  we  should,  if  we  are  saying,  "We  are 
troubled  at  his  presence,  we  hardly  dare  come  to  his  table,"  may  he 
say  to  us,  "  Come  near  to  me,  I  pray  you ;  I  am  your  Brother.  Come 
near,  come  nearer,  nearer  still.  I  am  pleased  when  you  are  near." 
Come  with  your  sin  and  your  lukewarmness  ;  come  just  as  you  are,  as 
you  came  to  him  at  the  first ;  and  he  will  receive  you,  and  will 
manifest  himself  unto  you  as  he  does  not  unto  the  world. 

In  addition  to  revealing  his  relationship,  which  was  a  great  motive 
for  inviting  his  brethren  to  come  near,  he  also  told  them  a  secret.  He 
said,  "  I  am  Joseph  your  brother,  whom  ye  sold  into  Egypt."  I  think 
he  mentioned  that  to  show  them  that  he  must  be  Joseph  their  brother, 
for  who  else  in  all  the  world  knew  of  that  shameful  action  on  their 
part  ?  I  do  not  suppose  that  the  Midianite  merchants,  who  bought 
Joseph,  knew  that  he  was  sold  by  his  own  brethren ;  or  if  they  did 
know,  there  were  none  of  them  in  Pharaoh's  palace,  for  they  were 
Ishmaelites,  and  they  had  gone  their  way  to  traffic  somewhere  else. 
All  who  knew  of  that  wicked  transaction  were  Joseph  and  his  brothers, 
so  by  this  password  he  lets  them  know  that  there  was  a  sort  of  free- 
masonry between  them.  This  was  the  sign,  "I  am  Joseph  your 
brother,  whom  ye  sold  into  Egypt."  It  made  them  blush,  I  dare  say ; 
and  it  must  have  made  them  mourn;  but  it  also  made  them  feel, 
"Yes,  that  is  our  brother;  nobody  but  Joseph  would  know  that  we 
sold  him  into  slavery."  And,  dear  friends,  have  you  never  seen  your 
Well-beloved  as  he  reads  your  heart  ?  I  have  known  him  read  mine 
from  the  first  thought  in  it  to  the  last,  and  I  have  thanked  him  as  he 
has  read  it,  for  I  have  said,  "  Lord,  thou  hast  read  that  book  right 
through,  and  now  thou  knowest  all  things,  thou  knowest  that  I  love 
thee.    Alas !  I  did  sell  thee  into  Egypt ;  there  was  a  day  when  I  chose 


100  METROPOLITAN  TABEKNAOLB   PULPIT. 

Egypt  and  its  pleasures  rather  than  thyself ;  and  there  have  been  days 
since  when  I  have  sold  thee  again  into  Egypt  by  treating  thee  with 
lukewarmness,  and  giving  myself  up  to  other  lovers.  Yes,  Lord,  I  have 
sold  thee  to  the  Ishmaelites  by  doubting  thee  and  mistrusting  thee  ; 
and  by  my  sins  I  have  stripped  thee  of  thy  many-coloured  garment, 
and  by  my  own  folly  I  have  let  thee  go  away  from  thy  Father's  house, 
and  from  the  chamber  of  her  that  bare  thee.  Thou  knowest  all  this, 
my  Lord,  but  I  know  thee,  too,  because  thou  knowest  me  so  well." 

Then  notice  that,  when  Joseph  thus  revealed  himself  to  his  brethren, 
he  did  not  say  more  till  he  had  sweetly  put  away  all  their  offences  against 
him.  They  had  been  troubled  because  they  knew  that  they  had  sold 
him  into  Egypt ;  but  he  said  to  them,  "  Now  therefore  be  not  grieved, 
nor  angry  with  yourselves,  that  ye  sold  me  hither."  That  was  a 
blessed  way  of  saying,  "  I  freely  and  fully  forgive  you."  So  Jesus 
says  to  his  loved  ones,  who  have  grieved  him  by  their  evil  deeds, 
"  Be  not  grieved,  for,  '  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy 
transgressions,  and,  as  a  cloud,  thy  sins.'  Be  not  angry  with  your- 
selves, for  I  will  receive  you  graciously,  and  love  you  freely.  Be  not 
angry  with  yourselves,  for  your  sins,  which  are  many,  are  all  forgiven  ; 
go,  and  sin  no  more.  For  my  name's  sake,  will  I  defer  mine  anger  ; 
wherefore,  '  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together :  though  your  sins 
be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red  like 
crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool.' "  Many  of  you  know  the  way  our  Saviour 
talks  ;  I  pray  that  he  may  just  now  make  every  believer  sure  that 
there  is  not  a  sin  against  him  in  God's  Book  of  remembrance.  May 
you,  dear  friends,  be  clear  in  your  conscience  from  all  dead  works  ! 
May  you  have  the  peace  of  Q-od,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  to 
keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus,  and  in  the  clear 
white  light  of  your  Saviour's  glorious  presence,  may  you  see  the 
wounds  he  endured  when  suffering  for  your  sins !  Then  will  you  sing 
with  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  "Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and 
washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father  ;  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion 
for  ever  and  ever.  Amen." 

Last  of  all,  Joseph  was  not  satisfied  with  thus  revealing  himself  to 
his  brethren,  and  assuring  them  of  his  free  forgiveness,  but  he  promised 
them  rich  supplies  for  the  future.  To  my  mind,  this  was  the  next  best 
news  to  his  message  of  forgiveness.  He  said  to  them,  in  effect,  "  Ton 
have  had  two  years  of  famine.  It  is  only  through  me  that  you  have 
been  preserved  alive ;  you  have  come  down  to  Egypt  with  your  asses 
and  your  sacks,  and  you  have  taken  home  provender  to  my  father  and 
to  your  households  ;  but  there  are  yet  five  more  years  in  which  there 
will  be  no  ploughing  and  no  harvest.  What  will  become  of  you  ? 
What  little  you  had  in  store,  is  already  all  consumed,  God  has  sent 
me  here  that,  through  those  five  years,  I  may  nourish  you.  You  shall 
come  down,  and  live  in  Goshen,  on  the  fat  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and 
you  shall  never  have  any  want,  for  all  the  treasures  of  the  land  of 
Egypt  are  mine,  and  I  will  take  care  of  you,  you  shall  never  know 
any  lack."  In  like  manner,  beloved,  your  Lord  stands,  and  says  to 
you,  "  You  will  have  many  more  troubles  yet."  Some  of  my  dear 
brothers  and  sisters  in  Christ,  who  are  here,  will  be  in  heaven  before 


JESUS  AKD  HIS  BRETHREN.  101 

five  more  years  have  expired ;  they  have  good  reason  to  be  very 
grateful  to  Q-od.  But  to  some  of  us  who  are  younger,  it  may  be  that 
God  has  appointed  many  a  year  to  abide  here ;  but  our  Saviour  lives, 

"  He  is  at  the  Father's  side, 
The  Man  of  love,  the  Crucified  ; " 

and  the  arrangements  of  providence  are  in  his  hand,  and  all  that 
providence  shall  be  over-ruled  for  us.  "  No  good  thing  will  he  with- 
hold from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  You  wiU  be  in  Egypt  for  a 
while  longer,  dear  friend,  but  you  will  be  in  the  Goshen  of  Egypt,  and 
the  good  of  all  tlie  land  is  yours.  Oh,  what  a  blessing  it  is  to  think 
that  we  have  a  Brother  who  reveals  himself  to  us  as  the  Universal 
Provider,  who  will  not  let  us  have  a  want,  but  will  take  care  that, 
before  our  need  comes,  the  supply  shall  be  ready,  and  we  shall  have 
nothing  to  do  but  to  rejoice  in  him  who  careth  for  us  ! 

Let  not  that  sweet  thought  take  away  from  your  minds  what  I 
want  to  be  the  centre  of  all  our  meditation,  namely,  that  you  should 
oome  near  to  your  Lord.  We  never  use  a  crucifix ;  we  should  think 
it  sinful  so  to  do.  Neither  do  I  want  to  have  an  imaginary  crucifix, 
by  trying  to  set  Christ  before  you  so  that  you  should  picture  him 
mentally  ;  but  I  want  your  faith  to  do  much  more  than  imagination 
can.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  spiritually  here  in  the  midst  of  us, 
according  to  his  gracious  promise,  *'  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even 
unto  the  end  of  the  world  ;  "  and  he  hears  me  speaking  these  words 
at  this  moment,  I  am  as  sure  of  it  as  if  I  saw  that  mystic  presence  with 
my  natural  eyes.  If  I  did  see  him,  I  know  that  I  should  fall  at  his 
feet  as  dead,  and  the  rest  of  this  service  would  have  to  be  spent  in  awe- 
struck silence  by  everyone  that  did  behold  him.  But,  0  thou  Son  of  God 
and  Son  of  Mary,  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  we  trust  thee  wholly  and 
alone  to  save  us,  and  we  love  thee  with  all  our  heart,  and  mind, 
and  soul,  and  strength;  and  as  we  live  hy  thee,  we  pray  thee  to  help 
us  to  live /or  thee,  to  live  to  thee,  to  live  like  thee,  and  by-and-by  to 
live  with  thee !  We  could  almost  wish  that  we  might  now  fall  down 
and  kiss  thy  dear  feet,  but  thou  art  not  here  in  visible  presence ;  for 
thou  hast  gone  up  into  the  glory ;  but  thou  art  here  spiritually,  and 
we  come  to  thee,  and  say,  "Lord,  thou  art  ours,  and  we  are  thine; 
we  will  hold  to  thee,  and  wiU  not  let  thee  go." 

"  Sun  of  my  soul,  thou  Saviour  dear, 
It  is  not  night  if  thou  be  near." 

Come,  stay  with  me  while  yet  the  evening  shade  shall  linger,  till 
death's  dark  night  comes  on,  and  then,  instead  of  night,  let  the 
morning  break  upon  my  gladdened  eyes  because  it  is  thyself  that  has 
come,  the  life,  the  resurrection,  and  not  death  at  aU !  Come,  beloved, 
can  you  not  get  nearer  to  your  Lord  ?  Can  you  not  speak  familiarly 
with  him  ?     Can  you  not  whisper  into  his  ear  the  story  of  your  love  ? 

"  Come,  Holy  Spirit,  heavenly  Dove," 

and  help  us  now  to  come  near  to  Jesus  !     Amen  and  Amen. 


THE   PROPHET  LIKE  UNTO   MOSES. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Dat  Morning,  August  3rd,  1879,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  Prophet  from  the  midst  of  thee,  of 
thy  brethren,  like  unto  me ;  unto  him  ye  shall  hearken ;  according  to  all  that  thou 
deeiredst  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  Horeb  in  the  day  of  the  aasembly,  saying,  Let  me 
not  hear  again  the  voice  of  the  Lord  my  God,  neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire  any 
more,  that  I  die  not.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  They  have  well  spoken  that 
which  they  have  spoken.  I  will  raise  them  up  a  Prophet  from  among  their  brethren, 
like  unto  thee,  and  will  put  my  words  in  his  mouth ;  and  he  shall  speak  unto  them 
all  that  I  shall  command  him.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  will  not 
hearken  unto  my  words  which  he  shall  speak  in  my  name,  I  will  require  it  of  him." 
— Deuteronomy  xviii.  15 — 19. 

Man,  the  creature,  may  well  desire  intercourse  with  his  Creator.  When 
we  are  right-minded  we  cannot  bear  to  be  like  fatherless  children,  born 
into  the  world  by  a  parent  of  whom  we  know  nothing  whatever.  We 
>ong  to  hear  our  father's  voice.  Of  old  time,  or  ever  sin  had  entered 
into  the  world,  the  Lord  God  was  on  the  most  intimate  terms  with  his 
creature  man.  He  communed  with  Adam  in  the  garden ;  in  the  cool  of 
the  day  he  made  the  evening  to  be  seven-fold  refreshing  by  the  shadow 
of  his  own  presence.  There  was  no  cloud  between  unfallen  man  and 
the  ever-blessed  One :  they  could  commune  together,  for  no  sin  had 
set  up  a  middle  wall  of  partition.  Alas,  man  being  in  honour  con- 
tinued not,  but  broke  the  law  of  his  God,  and  not  only  forfeited  hia 
own  inheritance,  but  entailed  upon  his  descendants  a  character  with 
which  the  holy  God  can  hold  no  converse.  By  nature  we  love  that 
which  is  evil,  and  within  us  there  is  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  de- 
parting from  the  living  God,  and  consequently  intercourse  between 
God  and  man  has  had  to  be  upon  quite  another  footing  from  that  which 
commenced  and  ended  in  the  glades  of  Eden.  It  was  condescension 
at  the  first  which  made  the  Lord  speak  with  man  the  creature ;  it  is 
mercy,  unutterable  mercy,  now  if  God  deigns  to  speak  with  man  the 
sinner. 

Through  his  divine  grace  the  Lord  did  not  leave  our  fathers  altogether 
without  a  word  from  himself  even  after  the  Fall,  for  between  the  dayfi  of 
Adam  and  Moses  there  were  occasional  voices  heard  as  of  God  speaJdng 
No.  1,487. 

9 


104  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

with  man.  "  Enoch  walked  with  God,"  which  impHes  that  God  walked 
with  him  and  had  communion  with  him,  and  we  may  rest  assured  it  was 
no  silent  walk  which  Enoch  had  with  the  Most  High.  The  Lord  also 
spake  to  Noah,  once  and  again,  and  made  a  covenant  with  him  :  and  then 
he,  at  still  greater  length  and  with  greater  frequency,  spake  with  Abraham, 
whom  he  graciously  called  his  friend.  Voices  also  came  to  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  and  Joseph,  and  celestial  beings  flitted  to  and  fro  between  earth 
and  heaven.  Then  there  was  a  long  pause  and  a  dreary  silence.  Nc 
prophet  spoke  in  Jehovah's  name,  no  voice  of  God  in  priestly  oracle  was 
heard,  but  all  was  silent  while  Israel  dwelt  in  Egypt,  and  sojourned  in  the 
land  of  Ham.  So  completely  hushed  was  the  spiritual  voice  among  men 
that  it  seemed  as  if  God  had  utterly  forsaken  liis  people  and  left  the 
world  without  a  witness  to  his  name ;  yet  there  was  a  prophecy  of  his 
return,  and  the  Lord  had  great  designs,  which  only  waited  till  the  full 
time  was  come.  He  purposed  to  try  man  in  a  very  special  manner,  to 
see  whether  he  could  bear  the  presence  of  the  Lord  or  no.  He 
resolved  to  take  a  family,  multiply  it  into  a  nation,  and  set  it  apart 
for  himself,  and  to  that  nation  he  would  make  a  revelation  of  himself 
of  the  most  extraordinary  character.  So  he  took  the  people  who  had 
slaved  amongst  the  brick  kilns  of  Egypt,  and  made  them  his  elect,  the 
nation  of  his  choice,  ordained  to  be  a  nation  of  priests,  a  people  near  unto 
him,  if  they  had  but  grace  to  bear  the  honour.  Though  they  had  lain  among 
the  pots,  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm  he  delivered  them, 
and  with  gracious  love  he  favoured  them,  so  that  they  became  for  beauty 
and  excellence  as  the  wings  of  a  dove  that  are  covered  with  silver  and 
her  feathers  with  yellow  gold.  He  divided  the  Eed  Sea  and  made  them 
a  way  of  escape,  and  afterwards  set  that  sea  as  a  barrier  between  them 
and  their  former  masters.  He  took  them  into  the  wilderness,  and  there 
fed  them  with  manna  which  dropped  from  heaven,  and  with  water  out  of 
the  rock  did  he  sustain  them.  After  a  while  he  began  to  speak  to  them, 
as  he  had  never  spoken  to  any  nation  before.  He  spake  with  them  from 
the  top  of  Sinai,  so  that  they  heard  his  voice  out  of  the  midst  of  the 
fire,  and  in  astonishment  they  cried,  "  We  have  seen  this  day  that  God 
doth  talk  with  man,  and  he  liveth."  But  the  experiment  failed.  Man 
was  not  in  a  condition  to  hear  the  direct  voice  of  God.  On  the  very 
first  day  the  people  were  in  such  terror  and  alarm  that  they  cried  out, 
"  This  great  fire  will  consume  us  :  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our 
God  any  more  we  shall  die."  As  they  stood  still  at  a  distance  to  hear 
the  words  of  God's  perfect  law  they  were  filled  with  great  fear,  and  so 
terrible  was  the  sight  that  even  Moses  said,  "  I  exceedingly  fear  and 
quake."  The  people  could  not  endure  that  which  was  commanded,  and 
entreated  that  the  word  should  not  be  spoken  to  them  any  more. 
They  felt  the  need  of  some  one  to  interpose — a  daysman,  an  interpreter, 
one  of  a  thousand  was  needed  to  come  between  them  and  God.  Even 
those  among  them  that  were  the  most  spiritual,  and  understood  and 
loved  God  better  than  the  rest,  yet  confessed  that  they  could  not 
endure  the  thunder  of  his  dreadful  voice,  and  their  elders  and  the 
heads  of  their  tribes  came  unto  Moses  and  said,  "  Go  thou  near,  and 
hear  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  say  :  and  speak  thou  unto  us  all 
that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  speak  unto  thee  ;  and  we  will  hear  it,  and 
do  it." 


THE    PEOPHET   LIKE   UNTO   MOSES.  105 

The  Lord  knew  that  man  would  always  be  unable  to  hear  his  Maker's 
voice,  and  he  therefore  determined  not  only  to  speak  by  Moses,  but,  ever 
and  anon,  to  speak  by  his  servants  the  prophets,  raising  up  here  one 
and  there  another;  and  then  he  determined,  as  the  consummation  ol 
his  condescending  mercy,  that  at  the  last  he  would  put  all  the  word  he 
had  to  say  to  man  into  one  heart,  and  that  word  should  be  spoken  by 
one  mouth  to  men,  furnishing  a  full,  complete,  and  unchangeable  revela- 
tion of  himself  to  the  human  race.  This  he  resolved  to  give  by  one  ot 
whom  Moses  had  learned  something  when  the  Lord  said  to  him  in  the 
words  of  our  text,  "  I  will  raise  them  up  a  Prophet  from  among  their 
brethi-en,  like  unto  thee,  and  will  put  my  words  in  his  mouth ;  and  he 
shall  speak  unto  them  all  that  I  shall  command  him."  We  know  as- 
suredly that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  that  prophet  Hke  unto  Moses  by 
whom  in  these  last  days  he  has  spoken,  unto  us.  See  Peter's  testimony 
in  the  third  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  Stephen's  in  the 
seventh  chapter  of  the  same  book.  "  This  man  was  counted  worthy  of 
more  glory  than  Moses,  inasmuch  as  he  who  hath  builded  the  house 
hath  more  honour  than  the  house,"  yet  did  he  bear  a  gracious  likeness 
to  Moses,  and  therein  his  apostles  found  a  sure  argument  of  his  being 
indeed  the  Messiah,  sent  of  God. 

The  subject  of  this  morning's  discourse  is  the  Lord's  speaking  to  us 
by  Jesus  Christ,  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  and  our  earnest 
aim  is  that  all  of  us  m?iy  reverently  hear  the  voice  of  God  by  this 
greatest  of  all  prophets.  Men  and  brethren,  this  is  the  word  of  God 
unto  you  this  morning,  that  very  word  which  he  spake  on  the  holy 
Mount,  when  the  Lord  was  transfigured  and  there  appeared  with  him 
Moses  and  Elias  speaking  to  him,  and  out  of  the  excellent  glory  there 
came  the  word,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear  ye  him."  This  is  my 
message  at  this  hour — "  Hear  ye  him."  He  saith  to  you  all  this  day, 
"  Incline  your  ear  and  come  unto  me :  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live. 
Hearken  diligently  unto  me,  and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your 
soul  delight  itself  in  flatness."  "See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh. 
For  if  they  escaped  not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth,  nmch 
more  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that  speaketh  from 
heaven." 

Our  meditation  will  run  in  this  line  :  first,  we  will  think  for  a 
moment  upon  tlie  necessity  for  a  Mediator;  secondly,  upon  the  person 
of  the  Prophet-Mediator  whom  God  hath  chosen;  and,  thirdly,  upon 
the  authority  with  which  this  Mediator  is  invested,  by  which  authority 
he  calleth  upon  ns  this  day  to  hearken  to  God's  voice  which  is  heard  in 
him. 

I.  We  begin  by  considering  how  urgently  there  existed  the  neces- 
sity for  a  Mediator.  I  need  but  very  short  time  to  set  this  forth. 
There  was  a  necessity  for  a  Mediator  in  the  case  of  the  Israelites,  first, 
because  of  the  umdterable  glory  of  God,  and  their  own  inability  to  endure 
that  glory,  eithei-  with  their  eye,  their  ear,  or  their  mind.  We  cannot 
suppose  that  the  revelation  of  God  upon  Sinai  was  the  display  of  all  his 
greatness :  nay,  we  know  that  it  could  not  be  such,  for  it  would  have  been 
impossible  for  man  to  have  lived  at  all  in  the  presence  of  the  infinite 
glory  Habakkuk,  speaking  of  this  manifestation,  says,  "  God  came 
frona  i.  man,  and  the  Holy  One  from  mount  Paran.     His  glory  covered 


106  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  heavens,  and  the  earth  was  full  of  his  praise.  And  his  brightness; 
was  as  the  light;  he  had  horns  coming  out  of  his  hand";  but  he  adds, 
"  there  was  the  hiding  of  his  power."  Despite  its  exceeding  glory,  the 
manifestatior  upon  the  mount  of  God  at  Horeb  was  a  subdued  mani- 
festation, and  yet,  though  it  was  thus  toned  down  to  human  weak- 
ness, it  could  not  be  borne.  The  unveilings  of  JehoYah's  face  no 
mortal  eye  could  bear.  The  voice  with  which  God  spake  at  Sinai 
is  by  Moses  compared  to  the  voice  of  a  trumpet  waxing  exceeding 
loud  and  long,  and  also  to  the  roll  of  thunder ;  and  we  all  know  the 
awe-inspiring  sound  of  thunder  when  it  is  heard  near  at  hand,  its  volleys 
rolling  overhead.  How  the  crash  of  peal  on  peal  makes  the  bravest 
heart,  if  not  to  quail,  yet  stjll  to  bow  in  reverent  awe  before  God !  Yet 
this  is  not  the  full  voice  of  God :  it  is  but  his  whisper.  Jehovah  hath 
hushed  his  voice  in  the  thunder,  for  were  that  voice  heard  in  its 
fulness  it  would  shake  not  only  eiirth,  but  also  heaven.  If  he  were  for 
once  to  unveil  his  face  the  lightning's  flame  would  pale  to  darkness  in 
comparison.  The  voice  of  the  Lord  Ood  is  inconceivably  majestic,  and 
it  is  not  possible  that  we,  poor  creatures,  worms  of  the  dust,  insects  of  a 
day,  should  ever  be  able  to  hear  it  and  live.  We  could  not  bear  the- 
full  revelation  of  God  apart  from  mediatorial  interposition.  Perhaps 
when  he  has  made  us  to  be  pure  spirit,  or  when  our  bodies  shall  ha-se 
been  "  raised  in  power,"  made  like  unto  the  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  we 
may  then  be  able  to  behold  the  glorious  Jehovah,  but  as  yet  we  must 
accept  the  kindly  warning  of  the  Lord  in  answer  to  the  request  of 
Moses,  "  thou  canst  not  see  my  face,  for  there  6?hall  no  man  see  me  and 
live."  The  strings  of  life  are  too  weak  for  the  strain  of  the  unveiled 
presence ;  it  is  not  possible  for  such  a  gossamer,  spider-like  thread  as  our 
existence  to  survive  the  breath  of  Deity,  if  he  should  actually  and  in  very 
deed  draw  nigh  to  us.  It  appeared  clearly  at  Sinai,  that  even  when  the 
Lord  did  accommodate  himself,  as  much  as  was  consistent  with  his- 
honour,  to  the  infirmity  of  human  nature,  man  was  so  alarmed  and  afraid 
at  his  presence  that  he  could  not  bear  it,  and  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
that  instead  of  si^ealdng  with  his  own  voice,  even  ;hough  he  whispered 
what  he  had  to  say,  he  should  speak  to  another  apart,  and  afterwards  that 
other  should  come  down  from  the  mount  and  repeat-  the  Lord's  words 
to  the  people. 

This  sufficient  reason  is  supported  by  another  most  weighty  fact, 
namely,  that  God  cannot  commune  tvith  men  because  of  their  sin.  God 
was  pleased  to  regard  his  people  Israel  at  the  foot  of  Sinai  as  pure. 
"  Moses  went  down  from  the  mount  unto  the  people,  £ind  sanctified  the 
people ;  and  they  washed  their  clothes."  They  had  al3si;ained  for  awhile 
from  defiling  actions,  and  as  they  stood  outside  the  bounds  they  were 
ceremonially  clean ;  but  it  was  only  a  ceremonial  purity.  Before  long 
they  were  really  unclean  before  the  Lord,  and  in  heart  defiled  and 
polluted.  The  Lord  said  of  them,  "0  that  there  were  such  a  heart  in 
them,  that  they  wouldfearme,  and  keep  all  my  commandments  always,  that 
it  might  be  well  with  them,  and  with  their  children  for  ever!"  He  knew 
that  their  heart  was  not  right  even  when  they  spoke  obediently.  Not 
many  days  after  the  people  had  trembled  at  Sinai  tlney  made  a  golden 
calf,  and  set  it  up  and  bowed  before  it,  and  provoked  the  Lord  to  jealousy 
so  that  he  sent  plagues  among  them.     It  is  quite  clear  that  after  such  a 


THE   PROPHET   LIKE   UNTO  MOSES.  107 

rebellion,  after  a  deliberate  breach  of  his  covenant,  and  daring  violation 
of  bis  commands,  it  would  have  been  quite  impossible  for  God  to  speak 
to  them,  or  for  them  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,  in  a  direct  manner. 
They  would  have  fled  before  him  because  of  his  holiness,  which  shamed 
their  unholiness ;  and  because  of  their  sin,  which  provoked  his  indigna- 
tion, because  of  the  wandering,  and  instability,  and  treachery  of  their 
hearts,  the  Lord  could  not  have  endured  them  in  his  presence.  The 
holy  angels  for  ever  adore  with  that  threefold  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy 
Lord  God  of  Sabaoth  " ;  and  he  could  not  permit  men  of  unclean  lips  tO' 
profane  his  throne  with  their  unholy  utterances.  Oh  no,  my  brethren^ 
with  such  a  sense  of  sin  as  some  of  us  have,  and  as  all  of  us  ought  to 
have,  we  should  have  to  cover  our  faces,  and  cower  down  in  terror,  if 
Jehovah  himself  were  to  appear.  He  cannot  look  upon  iniquity,  neither 
can  evil  dwell  with  him,  for  he  is  a  consuming  fire.  While  we  ai-e  com- 
passed with  infirmity  we  cannot  behold  him,  for  our  eyes  are  dimmed 
with  the  smoke  of  our  iniquities.  If  we  would  see  even  the  skirts  of  his 
garments  we  must  fii'st  be  pure  in  heart,  and  he  must  put  us  in  the  cleft 
of  the  rock,  and  cover  us  with  his  hand.  If  we  were  to  behold  his  stern 
justice,  his  awful  holiness,  and  his  boundless  power,  apart  from  our  ever- 
blessed  Mediator,  we  should  dissolve  at  the  sight,  and  utterly  melt  away,, 
for  we  have  sinned. 

This  double  reason  of  the  weakness  of  our  nature,  and  the  sinfulness  of 
our  character,  is  a  forcible  one,  for  I  close  this  part  of  the  discourse  by 
observing  that  the  argument  was  so  forcible  that  the  Lord  himself  allowed 
it.  He  said,  "  They  have  well  spoken,  that  which  they  have  spoken." 
It  was  no  morbid  apprehension  which  made  them  afraid,  it  was  no  foolish 
dread  which  made  them  start,  for  wisdom's  own  self  in  the  person  of 
Moses,  said,  "  I  do  exceedingly  fear  and  quake."  The  calmest  and, 
meekest  of  men  had  real  cause  for  fear. 

God's  face  is  not  to  be  seen.  An  occasional  glimpse  may  come  to- 
spirits  raised  above  their  own  natural  level,  so  that  they  can  for  awhile- 
behold  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts  ;  but  even  to  them  it  is  a  terrible 
strain  upon  all  their  powers,  the  wine  is  too  strong  for  the  bottles. 
What  said  John,  when  he  saw,  not  so  much  absolute  Deity,  but  the 
divine  side  of  the  Mediator  ?  "  When  I  saw  him  I  fell  at  his  feet  as 
dead."  Daniel,  the  man  greatly  beloved,  confesses  that  there  remained 
no  strength  in  him  and  his  comeliness  was  turned  into  corruption  when 
he  heard  the  voice  of  God  ;  and  Job  said,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the 
hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee  ;  therefore  I  abhor  my- 
self in  dust  and  ashes."  No,  God  knoweth  it  is  not  silly  fright  nor  un- 
believing fear  ;  it  is  a  most  seemly  awe  and  a  most  natural  dread  which 
takes  hold  of  finite  and  fallible  creatures  in  the  presence  of  the  Infinite 
and  Perfect  One.  These  frail  tabernacles,  like  the  tents  of  Cushan,  are 
in  affliction  when  the  Lord  marches  by  in  the  greatness  of  his  power. 
We  need  a  Mediator.  The  Lord  knows  right  well  that  our  sinfulness 
provokes  him,  and  that  there  is  in  us,  in  the  best  here  present,  that 
which  would  make  him  to  break  out  against  us  to  destroy  us  if  we  were 
to  come  to  him  without  a  covering  and  a  propitiation. 

We  must  approach  the  Lord  through  a  Mediator :  it  is  absolutely 
necessary.  God  himself  witnesses  it  is,  and  therefore  in  his  mercy  he 
ordains  a  Mediator,  that  by  him  we  may  be  able  to  approach  his  throne; 


1-08  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

of  grace.    May  the  Holy  Spirit  make  this  truth  very  plain  to  the  coa- 
aciousness  of  all  of  us,  and  cause  us  to  sing  with  the  poet : 

"  Till  God  in  human  flesh  I  see, 
My  thoughts  no  comfort  find  ; 
The  holy,  just,  and  sacred  Three 
Are  terrors  to  my  mind. 

'•  But  if  Immanuel's  face  appear, 
My  hope,  my  joy  begins  ; 
His  name  forbids  my  slavish  fear, 
His  grace  removes  my  sins." 

II.  This  brings  us  to  consider  THE  person  of  the  appointed  Mediator, 
and  in  my  text  we  obtain  a  liberal  measure  of  information  upon  this 
point.  Read  these  blessed  words,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto 
thee  a  Prophet  from  the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy  brethren."  Dwell  with 
sweetness  upon  this  fact,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  was  raised  up  from  the 
midst  of  us,  from  among  our  brethren.  In  him  is  fulfilled  that  glorious 
prophecy,  "  I  have  exalted  One  chosen  out  of  the  people."  He  is  one 
of  ourselves,  a  brother  born  for  adversity.  He  was  born  at  Bethlehem, 
not  in  fiction,  but  in  fact :  where  the  horned  oxen  fed  he  in  a  manger 
lay,  as  any  other  babe  might  do,  wrapped  in  swaddling  bands,  and  de- 
pendent on  a  woman's  loving  care  as  any  other  babe  might  be.  He 
was  like  ourselves  in  his  growth  from  infancy  to  manhood,  increasing  in 
stature  as  we  do  from  our  childhood  to  our  riper  age.  Though  the  holy 
child  Jesus  he  was  yet  a  child,  and  therefore  he  was  subject  to  his  parents. 
And  when  he  came  forth  as  a  man,  his  was  no  phantom  manhood,  but 
true  flesh  and  blood  ;  he  was  tempted  and  he  was  betrayed  :  he  hungered 
and  he  thirsted ;  he  was  weary  and  he  was  sore  amazed ;  he  took  our 
sicknesses,  and  he  carried  our  sorrows  ;  he  was  made  in  all  points  Uke 
unto  his  brethren.  He  did  not  set  himself  apart  as  though  he  were  of  an 
exclusive  caste  or  of  a  superior  rank,  but  he  dwelt  among  us ;  the  brother 
of  the  race,  eating  with  publicans  and  sinners,  mingling  ever  with  the 
■common  people.  He  was  not  one  who  boasted  his  descent,  or  gloried  in  the 
so-called  blue  blood,  or  placed  himself  among  the  Forphi/ro-geniti,  who  must 
not  see  the  light  except  in  marble  halls.  He  was  born  in  a  common  house  of 
entertainment  where  all  might  come  to  him,  and  he  died  with  his  arms  ex- 
tended as  a  pledge  that  he  continued  to  receive  all  who  came  to  him.  He 
never  spoke  of  men  as  the  common  multitude,  the  vulgar  herd,  but  he  made 
himself  at  home  among  them.  He  was  dressed  like  a  peasant,  in  the 
ordinary  smock  of  the  country,  a  garment  without  seam,  woven  from  the 
top  throughout ;  and  he  mixed  with  the  multitude,  went  to  their  mar- 
riage feasts,  attended  their  funerals,  and  was  so  much  among  them,  a 
man  among  men,  that  slander  called  him  a  gluttonous  man  and  a  wine- 
bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.  In  all  i-espects  our  Lord 
was  raised  up  from  the  midst  of  us,  one  of  our  own  kith  and  kin. 
"  For  this  cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren."  He  was  our 
brother  in  living,  our  brother  in  death,  and  our  brother  in  resurrection ; 
for  after  his  resurrection  he  said,  "  Go,  tell  my  brethren ;  "  and  he  also 
said,  "My  Father,  and  your  Father;  my  God,  and  your  God."  Though 
now  exalted  in  the  highest  heavens  he  pleads  for  us  and  acts  as  a  High 
Priest  who  can  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities.     God  has 


THE   PROPHET   LIKE   UNTO   MOSES.  109 

graciously  raised  up  such  a  Mediator,  and  now  he  speaks  to  us  through 
him.  0  sons  of  men,  will  ye  not  hearken  when  such  an  one  as  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  the  Son  of  man,  is  ordained  to  speak  of  the  eternal 
God  ?  Ye  might  be  unable  to  hear  if  he  should  speak  again  in  thun- 
der, but  now  he  speaketh  by  those  dear  lips  of  love,  now  he  speaketh 
by  that  gracious  tongue  which  has  wrought  such  miracles  of  grace 
by  its  words,  now  he  speaketh  out  of  that  great  heart  of  his,  which 
never  beats  except  with  love  to  the  sons  of  men — will  ye  not  hear 
him  ?  Surely  we  ought  to  give  the  most  earnest  heed  and  obey  his 
every  word. 

Moses  was  truly  one  of  the  people,  for  he  loved  them  intensely,  and 
all  his  sympathies  were  with  them.  They  provoked  him  terribly,  but 
still  he  loved  them.  We  can  never  admire  that  man  of  God  too  much 
when  we  think  of  his  disinterested  love  to  that  guilty  nation.  See  him 
on  the  mountain  there  as  Israel's  advocate.  The  Lord  said,  "  Let  me 
alone  that  I  may  destroy  them,  and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation." 
That  proposal  opened  up  before  Moses'  eye  a  glittering  destiny.  It  was 
within  his  grasp  that  he  himself  should  become  the  founder  of  a  race, 
in  whom  the  promises  made  to  Abraham  should  be  fulfilled.  Would 
not  the  most  of  men  have  greedily  snatched  at  it  ?  But  Moses  will  not 
have  it.  He  loves  Israel  too  well  to  see  the  people  die  if  he  can  save 
them.  He  has  not  an  atom  of  selfish  ambition  about  him ;  but  with 
cries  and  tears  he  exclaims, "  Wherefore  should  the  Egyptians  speak  and 
say,  For  mischief  did  he  bring  them  out,  to  slay  them  in  the  mountains, 
and  to  consume  them  from  the  face  of  the  earth  ?  Turn  from  thy  fierce 
wrath,  and  repent  of  this  evil  against  thy  people."  He  prevailed  with 
God  by  his  pleading,  for  he  identified  himself  with  Israel.  Moses  did, 
as  it  were,  gather  up  all  their  griefs  and  sorrows  into  himself,  even  as 
did  our  liord.  True  Israelite  was  he,  for  he  refused  to  be  called  the 
sou  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  people  of  God, 
This  is  just  what  our  blessed  Lord  has  done.  He  will  not  have  honour 
apart  from  his  people,  nor  even  life,  unless  they  live  also.  He  saved 
others,  himself  he  could  not  save.  He  would  not  be  in  heaven,  and 
leave  his  saints  behind.  He  loved  the  people  and  so  proved  himself  to 
be  one  chosen  out  of  their  midst,  a  brother  among  brethren. 

Mark  well  that,  while  thus  our  liord  is  our  brother,  the  great  God  has 
in  his  person  sent  us  one  who  is  lifted  up  above  us  aU  in  the  knowledge 
of  his  mind.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  (v.  18.),  *'  I  will  put  my  words  in  his 
mouth."  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes  to  us  inspired  by  God.  Not  alone 
Cometh  he,  nor  of  his  own  mind ;  but  saith  he,  "  The  Father  is  with  me  :  I 
do  always  the  things  which  please  him :  the  Father  that  dwelleth  in  me, 
he  doeth  the  works."  Both  in  word  and  work  he  acted  for  his  Father, 
and  under  his  Father's  inspiration.  Men  and  brethren,  I  beseech  you 
not  to  reject  the  message  which  Jesus  brings,  seeing  it  is  not  his  own, 
but  the  sure  message  of  God.  Trifle  not  with  a  single  word  which 
Jesus  speaks,  for  it  is  the  word  of  the  Eternal  One  :  despise  not  one 
single  deed  which  he  did,  or  precept  which  he  commanded,  or  blessing 
which  he  brought,  for  upon  all  these  there  is  the  stamp  of  deity.  God 
chose  one  who  is  our  brother  that  he  might  come  near  to  us ;  but  he  put 
his  own  royal  imprimatur  upon  him,  that  we  might  not  have  an  am- 
bassador of  second  rank,  but  one  who  counts  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal 


110  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

with  God,  who  nevertheless  for  our  sake  has  taken  upon  himself  the 
form  of  a  servant  that  he  might  speak  home  to  our  hearts.  For  all  these 
reasons,  I  beseech  you  despise  not  him  that  speaketh,  seeing  he  speaketh 
from  heaven. 

The  main  point,  however,  upon  which  I  want  to  dwell  is,  that  Jesus 
is  like  to  Moses.  There  had  been  no  better  mediator  found  than  Moses 
up  to  Moses'  day ;  the  Lord  God,  therefore,  determined  to  work  upon 
that  model  with  the  great  prophet  of  his  race,  and  he  has  done  so  in 
sendmg  forth  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  would  be  a  very  interesting  task  for 
the  young  people  to  work  out  all  the  points  in  which  Moses  is  a  personal 
type  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  points  of  resemblance  are  very  many,  for  there 
is  hardly  a  single  incident  in  the  life  of  the  great  Lawgiver  which  is  not 
symbolical  of  the  promised  Saviour.  You  may  begin  from  the  beginning 
at  the  waters  of  the  Nile,  and  go  to  the  close  upon  the  brow  of  Pisgah, 
and  you  will  see  Christ  in  Moses  as  a  man  sees  his  face  in  a  glass.  I  can 
only  mention  in  what  respects,  as  a  Mediator,  Jesus  is  like  to  Moses,  and 
surely  one  is  found  in  the  fact  that  Moses  beyond  all  that  went  before 
him  was  peculiarly  the  depository  of  the  mind  of  God.  Once  and  again 
we  find  him  closeted  with  God  for  forty  days  at  a  time.  He  went  right 
away  from  men  to  the  lone  mountain-top,  and  there  he  was  forty  days 
and  forty  nights,  and  did  neither  eat  nor  drink,  but  lived  in  high  com- 
munion with  his  God.  In  those  times  of  seclusion  he  received  the  pattern 
of  the  tabernacle,  the  laws  of  the  priesthood,  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  holy 
days,  and  of  the  civil  estate  of  Israel,  and  perhaps  the  early  records  which 
compose  the  book  of  Genesis.  To  whom  else  had  God  ever  spoken  for 
that  length  of  time,  as  a  man  speaketh  with  his  friend  ?  He  was  the 
pecuhar  favourite  of  God.  From  the  first  day  of  his  call,  when  he  was 
keeping  his  father's  flock  at  the  back  of  the  desert,  right  to  the  day  when 
God  kissed  away  his  soul  on  the  top  of  Nebo,  he  was  a  man  greatly 
beloved,  to  whom  God  manifested  himself  as  to  no  other.  Hear  the 
Lord's  own  words  to  Aaron  and  Miriam.  "  And  he  said,  Hear  now  my 
words  :  If  there  be  a  prophet  among  you,  I  the  Lord  will  make  myself 
known  unto  him  in  a  vision,  and  will  speak  unto  him  in  a  dream.  My 
■servant  Moses  is  not  so,  who  is  faithful  in  all  mine  house.  With  him 
will  I  speak  mouth  to  mouth,  even  apparently,  and  not  in  dark  speeches: 
and  the  similitude  of  the  Lord  shall  he  behold  :  wherefore  then  were  ye 
not  afraid  to  speak  against  my  servant  Moses  ?  "  In  this  our  Lord  Jesus 
is  Like  to  Moses,  only  he  far  surpasses  him,  for  the  intercourse  between 
'Christ  and  the  Father  was  very  much  more  intimate,  seeing  that  Jesus 
is  himself  essential  deity,  and  "  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  God- 
head bodily."  Cold  mountains  and  the  midnight  air  continually  witnessed 
to  his  communion  with  the  Father.  Nor  these  alone,  for  he  abode  with 
the  Father.  His  language  was  always  spoken  out  as  God  was  speaking 
within  him  ;  he  lived  in  God,  and  with  God.  "  I  know,"  said  he,  "  that 
thou  hearest  me  always."  Instead  of  having  to  point  out  when  Christ 
was  in  communion  with  the  Father,  we  have  rather,  with  astonishment,  to 
point  out  the  solitary  moment  when  he  was  left  of  the  Father,  even  that 
dread  hour  when  he  cried,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me  ?"  Only  for  that  once  the  Father  had  left  him,  and  even  then  it  waa 
inexplicable,  and  he  asked  the  reason  for  it ;  though  he  knew  himself  to 
be  then  suffering  as  the  Substitute  for  man,  yet  did  his  desertion  by  God 


THB   PROPHET    LIKE   UNTO   MOSES.  HI 

•€ome  upon  him  as  a  novelty  which  utterly  overwhelmed  him,  so  that  he 
«sked  in  agony  why  he  was  forsaken. 

Moses,  to  take  another  point,  is  the  first  of  the  prophets  ivith  tvhom 
God  kept  up  continuous  revelation.  To  other  men  he  spake  in  dreams 
and  visions,  but  to  Moses  by  plain  and  perpetual  testimony.  His  Spirit 
rested  on  him,  and  he  took  of  it  to  give  thereof  to  Joshua,  and  to  the 
seventy  elders,  even  as  Jesus  gave  of  his  Spirit  to  the  apostles.  Some- 
times God  spake  to  Noah,  or  to  Abraham  and  others ;  but  it  was  upon 
occasions  only ;  and  even  then,  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham  and  Jacob,  they 
must  fall  asleep  to  see  and  hear  him  best :  but  with  Moses  the  Lord  abode 
perpetually ;  whensoever  he  willed  he  consulted  the  Most  High,  and  at 
once  God  spake  with  him,  and  directed  his  way.  So  was  it  with  Christ 
•Jesus.  He  needed  not  to  behold  a  vision :  the  spirit  of  prophecy  did  not 
occasionally  come  upon  him,  and  bear  him  out  of  himself,  for  the  Spirit 
was  given  him  without  measure,  and  he  knew  the  very  mind  and  heart 
•of  God  perpetually.  He  was  always  a  prophet ;  not  sometimes  a  prophet, 
like  him  of  old,  of  whom  we  read,  "  The  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him 
in  the  camp  of  Dan";  or  hke  others  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  the  word  of 
the  Lord  came  to  them."  At  all  times  the  Spirit  rested  upon  him :  he 
spake  in  the  abiding  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  more  so  than 
did  Moses. 

Moses  is  described  as  a  prophet  mighty  in  ivord  and  deed,  and  it  is 
singular  that  there  never  was  another  prophet  mighty  in  word  and  deed 
till  Jesus  came.  Moses  not  only  spoke  with  matchless  power,  but 
wrought  miracles.  You  shall  find  no  other  prophet  who  did  both.  Other 
prophets  who  spake  well  wrought  no  miracles,  or  only  here  and  there  ; 
whilst  those  who  wrought  miracles,  such  as  Elijah  and  Elisha,  have  left 
us  but  few  words  that  they  spake  :  indeed,  their  prophecies  were  but 
lightning  flashes,  and  not  as  the  bright  shining  of  a  sun.  When 
you  come  to  our  Lord  Jesus  you  find  lip  and  heart  working  together, 
with  equal  perfectness  of  witness.  You  cannot  tell  in  which  he  is  the 
more  marvellous,  in  his  speech  or  in  his  act.  "  Never  man  spake  like 
this  man,"  but  certainly  never  man  wrought  such  marvels  of  mercy  as 
Jesus  did.  He  far  exceeds  Moses  and  all  the  prophets  put  together  in 
the  variety  and  the  multitude  and  the  wonderful  character  of  the  miracles 
which  he  did.  If  men  bow  before  prophets  who  can  cast  down  their  rods, 
and  they  become  serpents,  if  they  yield  homage  to  prophets  who  call  fire 
from  heaven,  how  much  more  should  they  accept  him  whose  words  are 
matchless  music,  and  whose  miracles  of  love  were  felt  even  beyond  the 
boundaries  of  this  visible  world ;  for  the  angels  of  God  flew  from  heaven 
to  minister  to  him,  the  devils  of  the  pit  fled  before  his  voice,  and  the 
caverns  of  death  heard  his  call  and  yielded  up  their  prey.  Who  would 
not  accept  this  prophet  like  unto  Moses,  to  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  bare 
witness  by  mighty  signs  and  wonders  ? 

Moses,  again,  was  the,  founder  of  a  great  system  of  religious  law,  and 
this  was  not  the  case  with  any  other  but  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  founded 
the  whole  system  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood  and  the  law  that  went  with 
it.  Moses  was  a  law-giver  :  he  gave  the  ten  commandments  in  the 
name  of  God,  and  all  the  other  statutes  of  the  Jewish  poHty  were 
ordained  through  him.  Now,  till  you  come  to  Christ  you  find  no  such 
Jaw-giver ;  but  Jesus  institutes  the  new  covenant  as  Moses  introduced 


112  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  old,  the  sermon  on  the  mount  was  an  utterance  from  a  happier  Sinai, 
and  whereas  Moses  gives  this  and  that  command,  Jesus  gives  the  like  in 
sweeter  form  and  in  diviner  fashion,  and  embodies  it  in  his  own  sacred 
person.  He  is  the  great  legislator  of  our  dispensation,  the  King  in  the 
midst  of  Jeshurun,  giving  forth  his  command  which  runneth  very 
swiftly,  and  they  that  fear  the  Lord  are  obedient  thereunto. 

Time  will  fail  us,  or  we  would  mention  to  you  that  Moses  was  faithful 
before  God  as  a  servant  over  all  his  house,  and  so  was  Jesus  as  a  Son  over 
his  own  house.  He  was  never  unfaithful  to  his  charge  in  any  respect, 
but  in  all  things  ruled  and  served  to  perfection  as  the  anointed  of  the 
Father.  He  is  the  faithful  and  true  Witness,  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of 
the  earth.  Moses,  too,  was  zealous  for  Ood  and  for  his  honour.  Re- 
member how  the  zeal  of  God's  house  did  eat  him  up.  When  he  saw 
grievous  sin  among  the  people,  he  said,  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ?" 
and  there  came  to  him  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  he  said,  "  Gro  in  and  out, 
and  slay  ye  every  one  his  men  that  were  joined  to  Baal-peor."  Herein 
he  was  the  stern  type  of  Jesus,  who  took  the  scourge  of  small  cords,  and 
drove  out  the  buyers  and  sellers,  and  said,  "  Take  these  things  hence : 
it  is  written.  My  Father's  house  shall  be  a  house  of  prayer,  but  ye  have 
made  it  a  den  of  thieves";  for  the  zeal  of  God's  house  had  eaten  him  up. 

Moses,  by  divine  grace,  was  very  meeJc,  and  perhaps  this  is  the  chief 
parallel  between  him  and  Jesus.  I  have  said,  "  by  divine  grace,"  for  I 
suppose  by  nature  he  was  strongly  passionate.  There  are  many  indica- 
tions that  Moses  was  not  meek,  but  very  for  from  it  until  the  Spirit  of 
God  rested  upon  him.  He  slew  the  Egyptian  hastily,  and  in  after 
years  he  went  out  from  the  presence  of  Pharaoh  "  in  great  anger." 
Once  and  again  you  find  him  very  wroth :  he  took  the  tables  of  stone 
and  dashed  them  in  pieces  in  his  indignation,  for  "  Moses'  anger  waxed 
hot";  and  that  unhappy  action  which  occasioned  his  being  shut  out 
of  Canaan  was  caused  by  his  "  being  provoked  in  spirit  so  that  he  spake 
unadvisedly  with  his  lips,"  and  said,  "  Hear  now,  ye  rebels;  must  I 
fetch  you  water  out  of  this  rock?"  Divine  grace  had  so  cooled  and 
calmed  him  that  in  general  he  was  the  gentlest  of  men,  and  when  his 
brother  and  sister  thrust  themselves  into  his  place  and  questioned  his 
authority,  it  is  written,  "  Now  the  man  Moses  was  very  meek,  above 
all  the  men  which  were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth."  In  his  own  quarrel 
he  has  never  anything  to  say :  it  is  only  for  the  people  and  for  God 
that  his  anger  waxeth  hot.  Even  about  his  last  act  of  hastiness  he  says, 
"  God  was  angry  with  me  for  your  sake,"  not  for  his  own  sake.  He 
was  so  meek  and  gentle  that  for  forty  years  he  bore  with  the  most 
rebellious  and  provoking  nation  that  ever  existed.  But  what  shall  I  say 
of  my  Master?  Let  him  speak  for  himself.  "Come  unto  me,  all  ye 
that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest :  take  my 
yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart : 
and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls."  Our  children  call  him  "  Gentle 
Jesus,  meek  and  mild."  The  man  Jesus  is  very  meek  above  all  men 
that  are  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.     He  has  his  indignation — 

"  Like  glowing  oven  is  his  wrath, 
As  flame  by  furious  blast  upblown," 

for  he  can  be  angry,  and  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  is  the  most  awful 


THE   PROPHET   LIKE   UNTO   MOSES.  113 

wrath  beneath  the  sun  ;  but  still  to  us,  in  this  gospel  day,  he  is  all  love 
and  tenderness ;  and  when  he  bids  us  come  to  him,  can  we  refuse  to 
hear  ?  So  meek  is  the  Mediator  that  he  is  love  itself,  incarnate  love  ;  so 
loving,  that  when  he  died  his  only  crime  w^as  that  he  was  "  found  guilty  of 
excess  of  love";  can  we  be  so  cruel  as  to  reject  him?  0  brothers  and 
sisters,  do  not  refuse  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  this  Tender  One  by  wdiom 
God  speaketh  to  you. 

Our  Lord  was  like  to  Moses  in  meekness,  and  then  to  sum  up  all, — 
Moses  was  the  Mediator  for  God  with  the  people,  and  so  is  our  blessed 
Lord.  Moses  came  in  God's  name  to  set  Israel  free  from  Pharaoh's  bond- 
age, and  he  did  it :  Jesus  came  to  set  us  free  fi'om  a  worse  bondage  still, 
and  he  has  achieved  our  freedom.  Moses  led  the  people  through  the 
Red  Sea,  and  Jesus  has  led  us  where  all  the  hosts  of  hell  were  over- 
thrown, and  sin  was  drowaied  in  his  own  most  precious  blood,  Moses  led 
the  tribes  through  the  wilderness,  and  Jesus  leads  us  through  the  weary 
ways  of  this  life  to  the  rest  which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God. 
Moses  spake  to  the  people  for  God,  and  Jesus  hath  done  the  same.  Moses 
spake  to  God  for  tlie  people,  and  Jesus  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us.  Moses  proposed  himself  as  a  sacrifice  when  he  said,  "  If  not,  blot 
my  name  out  of  the  book  of  life  ";  but  Jesus  was  an  actual  sacrifice,  and 
was  taken  away  from  the  land  of  the  Hving  for  our  sakes,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us.  Moses,  in  a  certain  sense,  died  for  the  people,  for  he  could 
not  enter  into  the  land,  but  must  needs  close  his  eyes  on  Nebo.  Those 
are  touching  w^ords,  "The  Lord  was  angry  with  me  for  your  sakes": 
words  which  in  a  diviner  sense  may  be  fitly  applied  to  Jesus,  for  God  w^as 
angry  with  him  for  our  sakes.  Right  through  to  the  very  end  our 
blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  Saviour,  is  a  prophet  hke  unto  Moses, 
raised  up  from  the  midst  of  his  brethren.  0  my  hearers,  hear  ye  him. 
Turn  not  your  ear  away  from  this  Prophet  of  prophets,  but  hear  and  live. 

III.  I  close  with  that  point,  and  ii"  my  words  are  very  few  let  them  be 
weighty.  Let  us  think  of  the  authohity  of  our  great  Mediator,  and 
let  this  be  the  practical  lesson — Hear  ye  him.  Men  and  brethren,  if  our 
hearts  were  right,  the  moment  it  was  announced  that  God  w-ould  speak  to 
us  through  Jesus  Christ  there  would  be  a  rush  to  hear  him.  If  sin  had 
not  maddened  men  they  would  listen  eagerly  to  every  word  of  God 
through  such  a  Mediator  as  Jesus  is  ;  they  would  write  each  golden  sen- 
tence on  their  tablets,  they  would  hoard  his  word  in  their  memories, 
they  would  wear  it  between  their  eyes,  they  would  yield  their  hearts  to  it. 
Alas,  it  is  not  so ;  and  the  saddest  thing  of  all  is  that  some  talk  of  Jesus 
for  gain,  and  others  hear  of  him  as  if  his  story  were  a  mere  tale  or  an 
old  Jewish  ballad  of  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  Yet,  remember,  God 
speaks  by  Jesus  still,  and  every  word  of  his  that  is  left  on  record  is  as 
solemnly  alive  to-day  as  when  it  first  leaped  from  his  blessed  lips,  I 
beseech  you  remember  Christ  cometh  not  as  an  amateur,  but  he  hath 
authority  with  him  :  this  ambassador  to  men  wears  the  authority  of  the 
King  of  kings.  If  ye  despise  him  ye  despise  him  that  sent  him  :  if  ye 
turn  away  from  him  that  speaketh  from  heaven  ye  turn  away  fi'om  the 
eternal  God,  and  ye  do  despite  to  his  love.     Oh,  do  not  so. 

Note  how  my  text  puts  it.  It  saith  here,  "Whosoever  shall  not 
hearken  unto  my  words  which  he  shall  speak  in  my  name,  /  will  require  it 
of  hvin,"     My  heart  trembles  while  I  repeat  to  you  the  words,  "  I  will 


114:  METEOrOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

require  it  of  him."  To-day  God  graciously  requires  it  of  some  of  you, 
and  asks  why  yon  have  not  listened  to  Christ's  voice.  Why  is  this  ? 
You  have  not  accepted  his  salvation.  Why  is  this  ?  Yon  know  all 
about  Jesus,  and  you  say  it  is  true,  but  yon  have  never  believed  in  him  : 
why  is  this?  God  requires  it  of  you.  Many  years  has  he  waited 
patiently,  and  he  has  sent  his  servant  again  and  again  to  invite  you. 
The  men  of  Nineveh  sought  mercy  in  their  day,  and  yet  yon  have  not 
repented.  God  requires  it  of  you.  Why  is  this  ?  Give  your  Maker 
a  reason  for  your  rejection  of  his  mercy  if  you  can  :  fashion  some  sort  of 
excuse,  0  ye  rebellious  one.  Do  you  despise  your  God  ?  Do  you  dare 
bis  wrath  ?     Do  you  defy  his  anger  ?     Are  you  so  mad  as  this  ? 

The  day  will  come  when  he  will  require  it  of  you  in  a  much  more  violent 
sense  than  he  does  to-day ;  when  you  shall  have  passed  beyond  the  region 
of  mercy  he  will  say,  "  I  called  yon  and  you  refused,  why  is  this  ?  I 
did  not  speak  to  you  in  thunder.  I  spoke  to  yon  with  the  gentle  voice 
of  the  Only  Begotten  who  bled  and  died  for  men  :  why  did  you  not  hear 
him  ?  Every  Sabbath  day  ray  servant  tried  to  repeat  the  language  of 
his  Master  to  you  :  why  did  you  refuse  it  ?  You  are  cast  into  hell,  but 
v/hy  did  not  you  accept  the  pardon  which  would  have  delivered  you  from 
it  ?  "  You  were  too  busy.  Too  busy  to  remember  your  God  ?  What 
could  you  have  been  busy  about  that  was  worth  a  thought  as  compared 
■with  him  ?  You  were  too  fond  of  pleasure.  And  do  you  dare  insnlt 
your  God  by  saying  that  trifling  amusements  which  were  not  worth  the 
]nentioning  could  stand  in  comparison  with  his  love  and  his  good  pleasure  ? 
Oh,  how  you  deserve  his  wrath.  I  pray  you  consider  what  this  meaneth, 
"  I  will  require  it  of  him."  You  who  still  harden  your  hearts,  and 
refuse  my  Master,  go  away  with  this  ringing  in  your  ears, "  I  will  require 
it  of  him !  I  will  require  it  of  him."  "  When  he  lieth  dying  alone  in  that 
sick  chamber  I  will  require  it  of  him :  when  he  hath  taken  the  last 
plunge,  and  left  this  world,  and  finds  himself  in  eternity,  I  will  require  it 
of  him :  and  when  the  thunder  wakes  the  dead,  and  the  great  Prophet 
like  unto  Moses  shall  sit  on  the  great  white  throne  to  judge  the  quick 
and  the  dead,  I  will  require  it  of  him,  I  will  require  it  of  him." 

My  Master  will  require  of  me  how  I  have  preached  to  you,  and  I  sincerely 
wish  it  were  in  my  po\^er  to  put  these  things  in  better  form,  and  jDlead 
with  you  more  earnestly ;  but,  after  all,  what  can  I  do  ?  If  you  have 
no  care  for  your  own  souls,  how  can  I  help  it  ?  If  you  will  rush  upon 
eternal  woe,  if  you  will  despise  the  altogether  lovely  One  through  whom 
God  speaks  to  you,  if  you  will  live  day  after  day  carelessly  and  wantonly, 
throwing  away  your  souls,  oh,  then  mine  eyes  shall  weep  in  secret  places 
for  you  ;  but  what  more  can  I  do  but  leave  you  to  God  ?  At  the  last  I 
shall  be  compelled  to  say  "Amen  "  to  the  verdict  which  condemns  you  for 
ever.  God  grant  that  such  a  reluctant  task  may  not  fall  to  my  lot  in 
reference  to  any  one  of  you,  but  may  you  now  hear  and  obey  the  Lord 
Jeeus,  and  find  eternal  salvation  at  once,  for  his  dear  name's  sake.    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  rkad  before  Sermon — Deuteronomy  v.; 

xviii.  15 — 22. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 240,  229,  21. 


THE  MEDIATOR— THE  INTERPEETER. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  July  28th,   1889,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWENGTON. 


"  And  all  the  people  saw  the  thunderiugs,  and  the  lightnings,  and  the  noise  of  the 
trumpet,  and  the  mountain  smoking :  aud  when  the  people  saw  it,  they  removed,  and 
stood  afar  off.  And  they  said  unto  Moses,  Speak  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  hear  :  but 
let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die.  And  Moses  said  unto  the  people,  Fear  not :  for 
God  is  come  to  prove  you,  and  that  his  fear  may  be  before  your  faces,  that  ye  sin 
not." — Exodus  xx.  18 — 20. 

The  giving'  of  the  law  was  glorious  with  pomp  of  power.  The  blaze 
of  splendour  was  intended  to  impress  the  people  with  a  sense  of  the 
authority  of  the  law,  by  letting  them  see  the  greatness  of  the  Law- 
giver. It  was  meet  that  with  great  solemnity  the  law  of  the  Most 
High  should  be  proclaimed,  that  Israel  might  have  a  holy  reverence 
for  its  commands.  This  terrible  grandeur  may  also  have  been  intended 
to  suggest  to  the  people  the  condemning  force  of  the  law.  Not  with 
sweet  sound  of  harp,  nor  with  the  song  of  angels,  was  the  law  given ; 
but  with  an  awful  voice  from  amid  a  terrible  burning.  Not  in  itself 
is  the  law  condemnatory ;  for  if  there  could  have  been  life  by  any  law, 
it  would  have  been  by  this  law :  but  by  reason  of  man's  sinfulness, 
the  law  worketh  wrath ;  and  to  indicate  this,  it  was  made  public  with 
accompaniments  of  fear  and  death :  the  battalions  of  Omnipotence 
marshalled  upon  the  scene ;  the  dread  artillery  of  God,  with  awful 
salvos,  adding  emphasis  to  every  syllable.  The  tremendous  scene  at 
Sinai  was  also  in  some  respects  a  prophecy,  if  not  a  rehearsal,  of  the 
Day  of  Judgment.  If  the  giving  of  the  law,  while  it  was  yet  un- 
broken, was  attended  with  such  a  display  of  awe-inspiring  power,  what 
will  that  day  be  when  the  Lord  shall,  with  flaming  fire,  take  vengeance 
on  those  who  have  wilfully  broken  his  law  ? 

To  us,  that  day  at  Horeb  is  a  type  of  the  action  of  the  law  in  our 
nature :  thus  doth  the  law  deal  with  our  consciences  and  hearts.  If 
you  have  ever  felt  the  law  spoken  home  to  you  by  the  Spirit  of  Grod, 
3'ou  have  heard  great  thunderings  within.  You  have  been  forced 
to  cry  with  Habakkuk,  ' '  When  I  heard,  my  belly  trembled ;  my  lips 
quivered  at  the  voice  :  rottenness  entered  into  my  bones."  And  God 
intended  it  to  be  so,  that  you  might  look  to  the  flames  which  Moses 
No.  2,097.  ^Q 


116  METROPOLITAN    TABEIl>\'VCLE    PULPIT. 

saw,  and  abandon  for  ever  all  hope  of  acceptance  by  the  works  of  the 
law. 

The  glorious  majesty  which  surrounded  the  institution  of  the  law  is 
not,  however,  our  subject  at  this  time.  I  shall  handle  the  text  in 
another  manner.  The  Lord  Grod,  in  this  instance,  came  as  near  to  man 
as  was  possible ;  yea,  he  came  nearer  than  man  could  bear.  Until  a 
Mediator  was  found,  the  approach  of  God  brought  to  man  nothing, 
but  terror.  Although  under  no  great  apprehension  of  guilt  at  the  time 
— for  they  had  only  then  heard  the  law  for  the  first  time — yet  the  people 
removed,  and  stood  afar  off,  and  cried  out,  "If  we  hear  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  our  God  anj'  more,  then  we  shall  die."  God  was  near  them  in 
special  condescension  ;  for  Moses  said,  ' '  Did  ever  people  hear  the  voice 
of  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,  as  thou  hast  heard,  and 
live  ?  "  Yet  this  memoi-able  manifestation  caused  them  alarm.  Does 
it  ever  happen  now  that  the  Lord  comes  to  his  people  in  a  way  which 
dismays  them  ?  I  think  so.  It  is  not  really  so,  that  God  will  fight 
against  his  people  ;  but,  to  our  apprehension,  so  it  seems  at  certain 
times.  Of  these  tempestuous  manifestations  of  the  Lord  to  our 
hearts  I  am  going  to  speak  at  this  time  ;  and  ma}'  the  heavenly 
Comforter  use  it  to  the  spiritual  profit  of  his  tried  family ! 

Our  first  head  is  this  :  the  Lord  has  ways  of  communing  with  his  people 
which  fill  them  with  fear ;  but,  secondly,  this  endears  the  Mediator  to 
them;  and,  thirdl}',  this  Mediator  teaches  them  to  interpret  ivisely  the 
Lord's  darker  dealings  with  them.  When  we  have  thought  upon  these 
things,  we  shall  close  by  saying  to  you  that  this  sacred  art  of  interpre- 
tation should  he  practised  h>j  us  now. 

I.     First,  let  me  remind  you  that  the  Lord  has  ways  or  coiimun- 

ING   WITH    HIS    PEOPLE    WHICH    FILL    THEM    WITH    FEAR.       YoU    mUst    liot 

think  that  the  Lord  always  appears  to  his  j)eople  in  robes  of  light : 
sometimes  he  enrobes  himself  in  clouds  and  darkness.  His  paths 
drop  fatness,  and  yet  he  often  hath  liis  way  in  the  whirlwind.  True, 
he  manifests  himself  to  us  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world ;  but  in  the 
brightest  of  those  manifestations  he  may  make  us  fear  as  we  enter 
into  the  cloud.  It  is  not  every  revelation  of  God  which  inspires  the 
saints  with  joy  ;  for  in  many  cases  it  is  far  otherwise,  even  as  with 
Daniel,  who  said,  "I  saw  this  great  vision,  and  there  remained  no 
strength  in  me  :  for  my  comeliness  was  turned  in  me  into  corruption, 
and  I  retained  no  strength."  This  experience  may  not  have  occurred 
to  some  of  you ;  it  is,  however,  known  to  many  of  the  people  of  God, 
who  have  had  long  dealings  with  him.  If  any  of  you  do  not  under- 
stand this  matter,  lay  the  sermon  by  till  you  do. 

Sometimes  the  near  approach  of  the  Lord  fills  his  people  with 
apprehension  and  alarm ;  and  this  is  sure  to  be  the  case  when  his 
coming  includes  a  close  application  of  the  law  to  their  hearts.  We 
used  to  talk  of  "law- work"  in  days  which  are  now  past,  and  are  by 
moderns  looked  upon  with  contempt ;  and,  my  brethren,  our  talk  was 
not  without  good  reason,  for  there  is  such  a  work,  and  it  ministers 
greatly  to  our  good.  Certain  servants  of  God,  who  had  experienced 
this  law-work  to  a  very  deep  degree,  fell  into  the  error  of  regarding  a 
marked  measure  of  it  as  absolutely  necessary  to  every  child  of  God.  We 
will  avoid  that  evil,  for  it  was  a  grievous  cause  of  uncharitablaness } 


THE    MEDIATOR — THE    INTERPRETER.  j,y 

but  we  will  not  conceal  the  fact  that  many  souls,  in  coming  to  God, 
and  in  God's  coming  to  them,  have  been  made  to  feel  a  hewing 
and  burning  work  from  the  law  of  God.  The  law  has  rent  them  in 
pieces,  because  they  themselves  have  rent  it  in  pieces.  The  law  has 
wrought  in  them  a  sense  of  bondage,  burden,  and  despair.  Even 
after  we  have  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  us  in  the  gospel, 
after  we  have  a  full  assurance  that  our  iniquities  are  put  away,  the 
Lord  sometimes  works  in  us  a  further  work  of  the  law,  in  which  he 
makes  us  to  see  its  exactness,  its  spirituality,  strictness,  and  infinite 
compass.  It  is  no  little  thing  to  see  how  the  law  judges  the  thoughts, 
desires,  and  imaginations  of  the  heart.  As  the  plummet  of  the  holy 
law  is  held  up,  we  see  how  out  of  the  perpendicular  we  are,  and  we 
are  therefore  distressed.  Brethren,  when  I  have  carefully  considered, 
and  inwardly  perceived,  the  holiness  of  God's  law,  I  have  felt  as 
though  the  sharp  edge  of  a  sabre  had  been  drawn  across  my  heart, 
and  I  have  shivered  and  trembled.  Though  the  law  did  not  actually 
cut  or  wound,  yet  its  very  presence,  in  all  the  keenness  of  its  two 
edges,  has  made  me  shudder.  So  pure,  so  just,  so  uncompromising 
is  the  law  of  God,  that  when  it  is  really  understood,  it  makes  us 
<|uail,  and  brings  us  to  our  knees.  The  law  searches  to  the  dividing 
asunder  of  joints  and  marrow,  and  it  is  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart.  Its  excessive  light  strikes  us,  like  Saul 
of  Tarsus,  to  the  earth,  and  makes  us  cry  for  mercy.  When  you 
begin  to  judge  yourself  and  estimate  your  actions  by  its  infallible 
I'ule,  you  cease  from  boasting,  and  are  filled  with  self-abhorrence.  I 
believe  it  to  be  one  of  the  best  means  to  growth  in  humility,  to  be 
well  instructed  in  the  law,  in  the  force  and  power  of  it.  No  man 
kr^ows  the  brightness  of  the  gospel  till  he  understands  the  blackness 
of  those  clouds  which  surround  the  law  of  the  Lord.  Much  of  the 
shallowness  of  current  religion  is  the  result  of  a  failure  to  apprehend 
the  demands  of  divine  justice,  and  a  want  of  clear  perception  of  the 
heinousness  of  disobedience.  Let  but  God  set  up  the  throne  of  his 
law  in  your  heart,  and  make  you  feel  the  power  of  that  law  in  any 
one  item  of  your  daily  conduct,  much  more  in  the  whole  circle  of  your 
life,  and  you  will  feel  as  the  Israelites  did  when  they  could  not  abide 
the  presenxie  of  the  Most  High. 

The  IjQrd  also  may  most  truly  and  profitably  come  to  a  man,  and  in 
his  coming  may  unveil  to  him  the  depravity  of  his  nature.  If  any  man 
could  see  his  own  heart  as  it  is  by  nature,  he  would  bo  driven  mad : 
the  sight  of  our  disease  is  not  to  be  borne  unless  we  also  see  the 
remedy.  When  the  Lord  permits  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  of 
our  depravity  to  be  broken  up,  then  are  the  tops  of  the  hills  of  our 
self-sufficiency  drowned  in  fear.  When  we  see  what  we  are  capable 
of  being,  apart  from  divine  grace,  our  spirit  sinks.  When  believers 
are  allowed  to  see  how  mTxch  there  is  still  about  them  that  is  akin  to 
hell,  when  sin  becomes  exceeding  sinful,  and  we  feel  that  the  taint  of  it 
lias  defiled  our  whole  nature,  then  it  is  that  we  are  hon-ified  and  appalled. 
What  an  abyss  of  evil  is  within  our  bosoms  !  Probably  some  of  you 
know  very  little  about  it.  I  pray  that  you  may  never  discover  it 
b}^  its  painful  results  ;  but  I  desire  that  you  may  believe  it,  so  as  to 
take  a  firmer  grip  upon  the  doctrines  of  grace,  and  exercise  greater 


118  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

watchfulness  over  your  hearts.  Sin  which  dwelleth  in  Tis  is  no  enemy 
that  we  can  safely  despise.  Even  in  one  single  member  of  our  fallen 
nature,  namely,  the  tongue,  there  dwells  a  world  of  iniquity'':  "It  defileth. 
the  whole  body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature  ;  and  it  is  set 
on  fire  of  hell."  What  poor  creatures  we  are  !  The  best  of  men 
are  men  at  the  best ;  and,  apart  from  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit^ 
and  the  power  of  divine  grace,  hell  itseK  does  not  contain  greater 
monsters  of  iniquity  than  you  and  I  might  become.  Within  the 
magazine  of  our  hearts  there  is  powder  enough  to  destroy  us  in  an 
instant,  if  omnipotent  grace  did  not  prevent.  When  this  is  distinctly 
perceived,  we  are  troubled  before  the  presence  of  the  thrice  holy  God 
Standing  before  the  Lord,  we  cry  with  the  prophet,  ' '  Woe  is  me  !  for  I 
am  undone  ;  because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips."  This  is  a  true 
manifestation  of  God  ;  but  it  is  by  no  means  a  cause  of  comfort  to  us. 

The  Lord  may  also  come  to  us,  and  lead  us,  by  his  light,  to  a  dis- 
covery of  actual  sin  in  our  life.  We  may  sit  here,  and  think  ourselves, 
very  good ;  but  if  so,  we  are  in  the  dark.  If  a  beam  of  divine  light 
is  now  entering  our  mind,  our  apprehension  of  our  own  character  will 
be  changed.  The  sins  of  a  single  day,  if  fully  known  in  all  their 
bearings,  would  drive  us  to  despair,  apart  from  the  infinite  grace  of 
God.  Apart  from  the  divine  plan  of  justifying  the  ungodly  in  Christ 
Jesus,  any  one  hour  would  shut  us  up  in  hell.  Beloved,  think  a 
minute  of  your  omissions  during  the  past  week,  how  much  you  might 
have  done,  and  ought  to  have  done,  which  you  have  not  done.  It  is  on 
the  side  of  omission  that  some  of  us  are  most  vulnerable.  Honestly 
looking  down  upon  our  lives,  we  may  be  able  to  say  that  we  do  not 
know  of  any  overt  offence  against  God,  and  for  this  we  bless  the  divine 
grace ;  but  when  we  come  to  think  of  what  we  have  left  undone,  we 
feel  like  a  traveller  who,  when  crossing  a  glacier,  suddenly  sees  an. 
unfathomable  crevasse  opening  just  before  him,  and  widening  fast  as 
he  looks  down  into  its  blue  depths  of  frozen  death.  Oh  the  sadness  of 
that  confession,  "We  have  left  undone  the  things  which  we  ought  to 
have  done"  !  There  is  as  much  of  lamentation  in  it  as  in  the  cry 
which  precedes  it — "  We  have  done  those  things  which  we  ought  not 
to  have  done."  When  we  think  of  all  our  omissions,  how  can  we 
stand  before  the  Lord  ? 

Think  again  of  your  failure  in  what  j^ou  have  done.  Brethren,  you 
have  prayed  this  week.  I  only  refer  to  this  week  ;  for  seven  days  are 
more  than  enough  for  my  purpose.  You  have  prayed  :  you  have  kept 
your  regular  times  for  devotion.  But  how  have  you  prayed  ?  With 
fervency  ?  With  careful  consideration  ?  With  concentrated  mind  ? 
Brethren,  have  you  prayed  with  faith  ?  With  importunity  ?  Surely, 
each  of  these  questions  must  cut  into  you  like  a  whip  of  wire.  If  you 
are  as  I  am,  you  cannot  answer  to  this  examination  without  wincing. 
Why,  even  in  the  one  matter  of  prayer,  the  sins  of  our  holy  things 
may  shrivel  us  up  before  the  burning  eye  of  the  Lord,  who  searcheth 
the  heart.  Your  Bible  also  :  you  have  read  your  Bible,  of  course  you 
have  ;  but  with  what  attention  ?  with  what  intention  ?  with  what  devout 
belief  ?  with  what  resolve  to  feel  its  force,  and  obey  its  commands  ? 
Have  we  not  sinned  against  this  Book  enough  to  cast  us  into  the  lowest 
kell  in  the  space  of  four-and-Lwenty  hours  ? 


THE  MEDIATOR — THE  INTERPEETEE.  119 

When  the  Lord  begins  to  take  a  man  to  pieces  b}^  coming  near  to 
him,  another  matter  will  often  trouble  him,  and  that  is  his  falseness, 
even  where,  in  a  measure,  he  is  sincere.  You  prayed  in  public,  and 
expressed  most  proper  emotions  and  d-esires ;  but  were  they  really 
your  own  emotions  and  desires,  or  did  you  steal  the  expressions  uf 
another  man  ?  You  preached  about  the  things  of  God  ;  did  your 
testimony  come  from  your  heart  ?  Do  you  act  in  accordance  there- 
with ?  You,  my  Christian  friend,  expressed  3'ourself  strongly,  but, 
in  your  heart  of  hearts,  can  you  justify  the  expression  ?  Do  we  not 
often  go  further  with  our  lips  than  we  go  with  our  hearts  ?  Is  not 
this,  to  some  degree,  hypocrisy  ?  Must  it  not  be  very  displeasing  to 
God  that  we  should  use  words  towards  him  which  we  have  not 
weighed,  and  which  are  not  fully  true,  as  we  use  them  ?  0  brethren, 
if  the  Lord  sets  our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  his  countenance,  w© 
too,  like  Israel,  shall  start  and  shrink  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 

If  we  add  to  these  apprehensions  of  our  own  unworthiness  a  sense 
of  the  divine  glory,  then  we  cower  down  and  hide  ourselves  in  the 
dust.  When  a  peal  of  thunder  rends  the  heavens,  and  is  followed 
up  by  a  crash,  as  if  the  house  would  fall  about  3'our  ears,  while 
flames  of  fire  blind  you  with  their  excessive  brilliance,  you  feel  that 
the  Lord  is  terrible  out  of  his  holy  places.  God's  nearness  has 
inspired  you  with  an  awe  which  has  been  shaded  with  dread.  The 
one  attribute  of  power  suffices  to  make  the  strongest  believer  feel  that 
Jehovah  is  to  be  feared  above  all  gods.  But,  my  brethren,  if  properly 
apprehended,  God's  omniscience  inspires  an  equal  awe,  while  his  good- 
ness, his  love,  and  his  holiness  are  even  more  overwhelming  when 
fully  realized.  One  might  possibly  stand  with  unblanched  cheek  in 
the  presence  of  divine  power ;  but  when  the  Lord  reveals  his  holiness, 
a  man  might  far  sooner  gaze  into  the  sun  than  look  into  the  face  of 
God.  Even  his  love  is  as  the  fire  of  a  furnace  to  our  unloveliness. 
At  the  sight  of  our  God  we  say  with  Job,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  by 
the  hearing  of  the  ear  :  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore  I 
abhor  mj-self,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  The  nearness  of  God 
to  sinful  man  is  a  killing  thing,  and  those  who  have  known  it  will 
confess  that  it  is  so. 

What,  my  brethren,  if,  in  addition  to  this,  there  should  come  ta 
you  a  succession  of  alarming  providences  ?  These  Israelites  not  only  knew 
that  God  was  near,  but  the}- heard  the  thunder,  they  saw  the  lightning, 
they  looked  into  the  thick  darkness,  they  marked  the  mountain  alto- 
gether on  a  smoke,  and  by  all  this  they  were  horror-stricken.  Has  it 
come  to  pass  that  the  Lord  has  laid  many  blows  upon  his  servant  ? 
Has  he  taken  away  the  desire  of  thine  eye  with  a  stroke  ?  What  if 
there  be  one,  two,  three  little  graves  in  yonder  cemetery  ?  What  if 
lover  and  friend  have  forsaken  thee  ?  What  if  thy  business  fail  thee, 
and  if  thy  health  fail  thee  also  ?  What  if  thj^  spirits  sink  ?  Oh,  then, 
indeed,  I  marvel  not  that  thou  art  scared  with  forebodings  of  still 
worse  calamities,  and  art  ready  to  give  up  the  ghost !  Now  art  thou 
afraid  because  of  the  nearness  of  the  great  God,  who  is  trying  thee. 

If  to  this  be  added  an  apprehension  of  speedy  death,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  Israelites,  who  cried,  "This  great  fire  will  consume  us";  then, 
indeed,  it  is  difficult  to  remain  calm  and  hopeful.    It  will  be  no  trifl.e 


120  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  stand  before  the  face  of  the  Eternal.  Since  heaven  and  earth  shall 
flee  from  thy  face,  and  rocks  shall  melt,  and  stars  shall  fall,  and  the 
moon  shall  be  turned  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair,  who  shall  stand 
before  thee,  thou  great  and  glorious  One ! 

Thus  have  I  sj^oken  to  you  upon  the  fact  that  our  Grod  does  some- 
times commune  with  his  people  in  a  way  that  fills  them  with  over- 
whelming dread ;  let  us  advance  to  our  next  theme. 

II.  Secondly,  all  this  endears  to  us  the  Mediator.  The  Is- 
raelites turned  at  once  to  Moses.  They  had  already  murmured  against 
him :  they  afterwards  said,  "  As  for  this  Moses,  the  man  that  brought 
us  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  we  wot  not  what  is  become  of  him  "  ; 
once  they  took  up  stones  to  stone  him ;  but  now  the}^  are  of  another 
mind.  Terrified  by  the  presence  of  Grod,  they  cry  to  Moses,  "  Gro 
thou  near,  and  hear  all  that  the  Lord  our  Grod  shall  say  :  and  speak 
thou  unto  us  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  speak  unto  thee."  The 
Mediator  is  everything  to  them  now.  They  had  found  out  by  expe- 
rience the  necessity  for  an  intorposer  ;  and  they  had  not  made  a 
mistake  either,  for  Grod  himself  said  they  had  well  spoken  what  they 
had  said.  There  is  in  God's  esteem  an  urgent  need  for  a  Mediator. 
When  we  sang  just  now — 

"  Till  God  in  human  flesh  I  see, 
My  thoughts  no  comfort  find  ; 
The  holy,  just,  and  sacred  Three 
Are  terrors  to  luy  uiind," 

we  did  not  give  utterance  to  morbid  or  ungrounded  fear.  It  is  so  in 
truth ;  and  the  next  verse  is  accurate  also  : 

"  But  if  Immanuel's  face  appear, 
My  hope,  my  joy  begins  ; 
His  name  forbids  my  slavish  fear, 
His  grace  removes  my  sins." 

It  is  a  matter  of  fact  that  we  need  a  Mediator  ;  and  these  people  were 
driven  to  see  it.  Brethren,  be  sensible  of  your  sin,  and  you  will  no 
more  attempt  to  approach  an  absolute  Deity  than  you  would  walk 
into  a  volcano's  mouth.  You  will  feel  that  you  need  a  sacrifice,  a 
propitiation,  a  Saviour,  a  Mediator.  Perceive  the  infinite  difference 
between  your  nothingness  and  the  divine  infinity,  and  you  will  feel  that 
there  is  no  drawing  nigh  to  the  Eternal  but  by  Jesus  Christ.  How 
can  we,  of  ourselves,  draw  nigh  unto  God  ?  It  is  wisdom  to  say  unto 
the  AVell-beloved,  "  We  pray  thee,  stand  between  the  Lord  and  us.'' 
When  your  trembling  is  upon  3'ou,  when  your  heart  faints  with  awe, 
then  3'ou  perceive  how  much  you  need  an  Advocate.  Bless  God  that 
he  has  appointed  one  to  be  High  Priest  for  you,  who  can  safely  go 
into  the  thick  darkness,  and  stand  in  the  presence  of  the  Thrice  Holy 
Majesty,  and  represent  you  without  fail. 

Moses  was  well  fitted  to  be  the  type  of  the  true  Mediator  of  the 
gospel  covenant.  He  was  himseK  in  great  favour  with  God,  so  that 
the  Lord  hearkened  to  his  voice.  Behold  his  dauntless  courage  in  the 
presence  of  God,  and,  at  the  same  time,  his  intense  tenderness  towards 
the  people.     Mark  his  faithfulness  Godward  as  a  servant  over  all  his 


THE    MEDIATOR THE    INTERPRETER. 


1£1 


Master's  house,  and  then  note  his  self-sacrifice  for  Israel,  so  that  he 
once  said,  ' '  Blot  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of  thy  book  which  thou  hast 
written."  He  offered  himself  to  be  a  sacrifice  for  them.  But,  0 
beloved,  consider  Jesus  Christ  our  Mediator.  Where  is  the  like  of 
him  ?  He  is  man,  like  ourselves  ;  in  all  respects  a  sufferer,  poor,  needy, 
knowing  even  the  pangs  of  death  ;  and  therefore  he  can  lay  his  hand 
upon  us  with  a  warm,  brotherly  love.  But  then  he  is  "  Grod  over  all, 
blessed  for  ever,"  equal  with  the  Most  High,  the  Well-beloved  of  the 
Father;  and  thus  he  can  give  Lis  hand  to  the  eternal  God,  and  so  link 
our  humanity  with  God.  I  feel  most  safe  in  trusting  all  my  concerns 
with  that  dear  Advocate,  that  Interpreter,  one  of  a  thousand.  0  Jesus, 
who  can  rival  thee  ? 

"  God,  and  yet  man,  thou  art. 

True  God,  true  man,  art  thou ; 
Of  man,  and  of  man's  earth  a  part, 
One  with  us  thou  art  now." 

Into  the  thick  darkness  our  Mediator  went.  Forth  from  it  he  came. 
He  interprets  to  us  the  language  of  the  Eternal,  and  he  takes  our 
petitions  up  to  heaven,  and  translates  them  into  the  tongue  of  the 
Holy  One,  so^that  God  hears  us  and  accepts  us  in  the  Well-beloved. 

I  know  that  some  of  you  imagine  that  you  would  believe  the  gospel 
if  God  were  to  speak  to  you  out  of  the  skies.  Do  not  wish  for  it.  The 
terror  of  his  voice  would  overwhelm  you,  but  it  would  not  convert 
jou.  The  Israelites  were  happy  with  a  Mediator,  and  so  will  you  be. 
If  you  hear  not  Jesus,  neither  would  you  hear  though  God  should 
thunder.  A  Mediator  is  provided.  Could  you,  with  all  your  wit, 
suggest  a  better  Mediator  than  Christ?  I  intreat  you,  accept  the 
gospel  in  Christ,  and  come  to  God  through  him.  As  there  is  no 
other  way,  so  assuredly  there  could  be  no  better  way.  If  you  had 
all  wisdom  and  all  j)ower  in  your  hands  with  which  to  make  a  way 
of  acceptance  with  God,  could  you  devise  one  more  pleasant,  more 
simple,  more  perfect,  more  adequate,  more  exactly  what  you  need  ? 
Come,  then,  dear  heart,  come  at  once  to  God  in  Christ ;  and  remember, 
Jesus  says,  "Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out;" 
"  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  me." 

III.  Now  I  come  to  my  third  point,  upon  which  I  would  lay  stress  : 
THE  Mediator  teaches  us  to  interpret  wisely  the  Lord's  DEAii- 
iNGs.  Moses  became  an  interpreter  of  the  Lord's  terrible  appearance 
to  the  trembling  people,  and  he  put  a  cheering  construction  upon  it. 
You,  to  whom  God  has  been  speaking  in  a  way  of  terror,  and  I  know 
there  are  such  here,  for  I  have  had  to  comfort  them ;  you  have  a 
Mediator  to  explain  to  you  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  Be  ready  to  learn 
the  lesson  which  he  teaches  you:  it  is  this — "Fear  not  :  for  God  is 
come  to  prove  you,  and  that  his  fear  may  be  before  youi-  faces,  that  ye 
sin  not."  These  rough  dealings  of  God  with  your  conscience,  with 
your  body,  with  your  family,  and  with  your  estate,  are  not  for  your 
destruction,  but  for  your  instruction :  not  for  your  killing,  but  for 
your  healing.  As  he  came  in  tempest  and  thunder  to  teach  the 
children  of  Israel,  so  has  he  come  to  you.  If  God  is  teaching  you,  he 
cannot  mean  to  destroy  you :  the  law  does  not  provide  a  schoolmaster 


122  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

for  a  convict  who  is  to  be  hanged  to-morrow.  The  discipline  in  God's 
house,  however  severe  it  may  be,  is  a  sure  proof  of  love.  AVe  educate 
sons,  and  not  enemies.  The  Lord  is  teaching  you  what  you  are,  and 
what  he  is.  If  he  had  meant  to  destroy  you,  he  would  not  have 
showed  you  such  things  as  these.  If  a  criminal  must  needs  die,  we 
do  not  put  him  through  a  rehearsal  of  the  pains  of  death.  No,  no, 
there  would  be  no  use  in  such  a  course — it  would  be  sheer  cruelty ; 
and  depend  upon  it,  the  Lord  will  not  show  you  his  own  greatness 
merely  to  make  you  miserable,  nor  reveal  to  you  your  own  ruiu 
merely  to  drive  you  to  despair.  He  does  not  afflict  willingly.  Infinite 
love  dictates  the  apparent  severity  with  which  he  afflicts  your  c  tu- 
science.  You  are  being  judged  here,  that  you  may  not  be  judged 
hereafter  with  the  ungodly ;  you  are  now  made  to  abhor  yourself, 
that  the  Lord  may  not  abhor  you  in  the  day  of  the  judgment  of  the 
wicked. 

The  Mediator  here  explains  to  trembling  Israel  that  God  had  come 
to  test  them.  We  all  need  testing,  do  we  not  ?  Would  you  hke  to 
cross  a  railway  bridge  if  it  was  reported  to  you  that  it  had  never  been 
tested  by  a  train '?  When  the  first  Exhibition  was  built,  I  remember 
how  they  marched  troops  along  the  galleries  to  test  them.  Do  you  not 
desire  to  have  your  hope  for  eternity  tested  ?  The  Lord  draws  near 
to  us  in  ways  which  inspire  our  fears  because  he  would  test  us.  What 
is  the  result  of  the  test '?  Do  you  not  feel  your  own  weakness  ?  Does 
not  this  drive  you  to  the  strong  for  strength  ?  You  feel  your  own 
sinfulness  ;  and  you  fly  to  the  Lord  Jesus  for  righteousness.  Testing 
has  a  practically  good  effect  in  slaying  self-confidence,  and  driving  you 
to  put  your  confidence  where  God  would  have  it  rest. 

When  God  came  to  these  people  in  cloud  and  storm,  it  was  to 
impress  them,  to  put  depth  into  their  thought  and  feeling.  We  are 
filled  with  fear  at  times  on  purpose  that  our  reUgion  may  not  be 
a  flimsy,  superficial  thing.  Our  tendency  is  to  slur  spiritual  work. 
We  easily  get  to  be  trifling  and  careless.  Levity  in  religion  is  an 
easily-besetting  sin  with  many  ;  but  when  we  are  made  to  see  the 
plague  of  our  heart,  and  the  awful  majesty  of  God,  that  fear  of 
the  Lord  which  endure th  for  ever  soon  drives  out  the  triflers  from  the 
temple.  Fear  ploughs  deep,  and  then  faith  sows,  and  love  reaps  ;  but 
godly  fear  must  lead  the  way.  Godly  fear  makes  prayer  to  be  fervent 
prayer ;  it  makes  the  hearing  of  the  word  to  be  quite  another  thing 
from  listening  to  the  chatter  of  the  world's  vanity.  Holy  awe  of  God 
makes  preaching  to  me  to  be  the  burden  of  the  Lord.  It  may  be 
light  work  to  your  men  of  genius  and  learning ;  but  to  me  it  is  life 
and  death  work.  Often  have  I  thought  that  I  would  rather  take  a 
whipping  with  a  cat-o' -nine-tails  than  preach  again.  How  can  I 
answer  for  it  at  the  last  great  day  unless  I  am  faithful  ?  "  Who  is 
sufficient  for  these  things?"  When  I  have  felt  the  dread  responsi- 
bility of  souls  which  may  be  lost  or  saved  by  the  word  they  hear,  the 
fact  that  God  is  so  near  has  made  my  flesh  creep,  and  made  me  wish 
that  I  had  never  ventured  on  so  bold  a  life-woi"k.  How  shall  I  give 
in  an  honourable  account  of  my  commission  at  last  ?  Beloved,  God, 
by  such  apprehensions  as  these,  is  deepening  in  us  the  \s'ork  of  his 
grace,  making  us  more  alive  to  our  position,  and  better  fitting  ua  for 


THE  MEDIATOR — THE  INTERPRETER.  123 

It.     It  is  all  in  love  that  he  allows  our  awe  of  him  to  darken  inta 
dread,  our  sense  of  weakness  to  deepen  into  faintness  of  heart. 

Above  all,  it  is  explained  to  us  that  the  dealings  of  the  Lord  are 
meant  to  keep  us  from  sin.  What  does  David  say?  "Before  I  was 
afflicted,  I  went  astray  :  but  now  have  I  kept  thy  word."  Does  not 
Hezekiah  tell  us  that  by  these  things  men  live,  and  in  all  these  things 
is  the  life  of  our  spirit  i'  We  are  so  worldly,  that  we  need  our  nest 
to  be  stirred  to  keep  us  on  the  wing.  Six  days  we  are  taken  up 
with  business,  mixing  with  those  who  despise  heavenly  things  ;  and  we 
should  come  to  think  lightly  of  them  too,  were  it  not  that  God  comes 
to  us  in  his  dread  majesty  and  makes  us  think,  consider,  and  fear. 
This  hol}^  trembling  drives  off  the  shams  which  else  would  grow  over 
us  like  mould  on  decajang  matter.  Our  inward  tempests  clear  the 
air,  and  keep  us  from  stagnation  and  the  pestilence  which  breeds  in  it. 
God's  love  will  not  suffer  us  to  settle  down  in  mere  pretences,  and  &o 
glide  into  gross  sins :  he  empties  us  from  vessel  to  vessel,  and  thus 
discovers  our  evil  sediment,  and  cleanses  us  from  it.  Many  people, 
when  they  hear  a  sermon,  say,  "How  did  you  enjoy  it?"  If  you 
always  enjoy  sermons,  the  minister  is  not  a  good  steward.  He  is  not 
acting  wisely  Avho  deals  out  nothing  but  sweets.  God's  people  need 
that  the  word  should  at  times  be  medicine  to  them,  and  we  do  not 
enjoy  medicine.  The  word  is  as  fire,  and  the  iron  does  not  like  the 
fire ;  yet  it  is  needful  to  its  melting.  It  is  as  a  hammer,  and  the  rock 
does  not  love  the  hammer ;  yet  it  is  needful  to  its  breaking.  Experi- 
ences which  are  painful  may  be  therefore  all  the  more  profitable. 
That  which  makes  us  hate  sin  is  a  thing  to  be  valued.  I  pray  you,, 
after  this  manner  read  the  dispensations  of  God  with  you.  When  he 
chides  he  loves ;  when  he  chastens  he  shows  fatherly  affection ;  and 
when  he  scourges  he  receives  into  peculiar  familiarity.  Do  not  there- 
fore run  away  from  a  chastening  God.  If  fear  drives  thee  away,  let 
faith  draw  thee  near.  He  means  thy  highest  good.  Never  doubt  it.. 
Steadfastly  believe  that  his  heart  loves  even  if  his  face  frowns. 

IV.  I  close  by  asking  you  to  practise  this  art  of  sacred 
INTERPRETATION.  Whensoever  thy  Lord  speaketh  with  thee  in. 
thunder  and  writeth  bitter  things  against  thee,  by  faith  read  between 
the  lines,  and  after  the  example  of  Moses,  the  mediator,  put  a 
comfortable  construction  upon  rough  words. 

Faith  sees  many  reasons  for  refusing  to  read  as  fear  would  suggest :. 
here  is  one  of  them.  When  the  Lord  ^loke  to  these  people  with  the 
voice  of  trumpet  and  thunder,  he  did  not  speak  in  anger  after  all,  but 
in  love  ;  for  his  first  words  set  the  key-note.  Here  they  are  :  "I  am 
the  Lord  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,. 
out  of  the  house  of  bondage."  What  gracious  words !  Wliat  hapjiy 
memories  they  arouse  !  What  loving-kindnesses  they  record  !  It  is 
true  that  your  Lord  has  taken  your  wife  or  your  child  away,  or  has 
made  you  sick,  or  has  tried  your  soul  by  the  hidings  of  his  face ;  but 
it  is  not  an  enemy  who  has  done  this.  It  is  your  God  who  has  done 
it,  even  the  same  God  that  delivered  you  from  the  power  of  sin, 
and  made  you  free  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  Lord  of  love  has 
chastened  you,  and  chastened  you  in  love.  Learn  Job's  philo- 
sophy, and   say  from   your  heart,   "The  Lord  gave,   and  the  Lord 


124  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

hatli  taken  away;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Think  of 
his  former  loving-kindness.  Consider  what  he  has  done  for  you 
through  the  Lord  Jesus  and  his  deatlx  on  your  behalf.  He  brought 
you  out  of  the  bondage  of  your  natural  depravity,  and  he  set  A'ou 
free  from  the  Pharaoh  of  your  evil  passions.  He  has  washed  you 
from  your  sins,  and  brought  you  through  the  Eed  Sea  of  your  fears 
by  his  own  right  hand.  Can  you  not  believe  that  he  means  well  to 
you  ?  What  if  he  does  speak  roughly ;  m.ay  he  not  do  so  without 
teing  distrusted?  He  is  the  same  God  :  he  changeth  not,  and  there- 
fore you  are  not  consumed :  can  you  not  rely  on  his  faithful  love  ? 
Will  you  take  good  from  his  hand,  and  will  you  not  also  take  evil  'i' 
He  who  humbles  us  is  our  covenant  God,  bound  to  us  by  his  promise 
and  his  oath.  He  gave  his  Son  to  redeem  us,  he  cannot  now  do  us  a 
displeasure :  let  him  do  as  seemeth  him  good.  We  give  him  carte 
llanche  to  do  what  he  wills,  for  his  love  is  beyond  dispute.  Ho  died 
that  I  might  live,  and  now  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  mean  anything 
other  than  good  towards  me.  I  sometimes  think  tliat  if  I  never  had 
a  gleam  of  love  from  his  face  again,  I  would  live  on  that  one  text : 
*'  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  thai 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life."  Salvation  from  sin  and  death  and  hell  should  make  us  inter- 
pret every  trjdng  revelation,  and  every  afflicting  providence,  and  every 
painful  experience,  by  the  key  of  his  ancient  love ;  and  so  interpreted, 
every  sorrowful  line  is  sweetened. 

Notice  next,  dear  friends,  in  your  process  of  interpretation,  that 
God  cannot  mean  to  destroy  us,  since  this  woidd  be  contrary  to  his 
word.  He  hath  said,  "  He  that  believeth  in  him  hath  everlasting 
life."  Can  "  everlasting  life  "  be  destroyed  or  die  ?  How,  then,  could 
it  be  "  everlasting  life"?  Can  God  declare  it  everlasting,  and  yet  end 
it?  Yes,  he  has  given  us  everlasting  life  in  his  dear  Sou  ;  and,  what 
is  more,  he  has  laid  up  that  life  in  Christ;  for  "your  life  is  hid  with 
Christ  in  God."  Can  he  destroy  the  life  which  he  has  hid  in  his  own 
immortal  Son?  Does  not  Jesus  say,  "Because  I  live  ye  shall  live 
also  "  ?  What  are  you  afraid  of,  then  ?  God  cannot  destroy  you. 
He  has  said,  "  I  Avill  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  What  if  he 
speaks  severely  to  thee,  it  is  that  he  may  deliver  thee  from  sinning. 
Wilt  thou  not  bless  him  ?  He  will  not  curse  thee,  for  he  hath  blessed 
thee  in  his  Son,  and  "there  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them 
which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Bow  thyseK,  and  take  from  thy  Father's 
hand  whatever  he  appoints. 

Eemember,  that  you  are  not,  after  aU,  in  the  same  condition  as 
Israel  at  the  foot  of  Horeb.  Though  I  have  drawn  a  sort  of  parallel 
this  morning,  yet  there  remains,  a  wonderful  difference.  "Ye  are  not 
come  unto  the  mount  that  burned  with  fire,  nor  unto  blackness,  and 
darkness,  and  tempest."  Ye  are  not  come  to  a  terrible  voice  which 
mortal  ears  could  not  endure.  "But  ye  are  come  unto  mount  Sion, 
and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to 
an  innumerable  company  of  angels.  And  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of 
the  new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better 
things  than  that  of  Abel."  You  are  come  to  the  land  of  pardon,  peace, 
and  promise:  you  are  in  the  home  of  life,  love,  and  liberty.     You 


THE   MEPIATOR THE    INTERPRETER.  125 

have  come  to  tlio  Lord  of  adoption,  acceptance,  and  glory.  Where- 
fore, do  not,  I  pray  you.  construe  tlie  acts  and  dealings  of  God  with 
your  soul  after  the  mean  and  slavish  manner  which  unbelief  suggests 
to  you,  but  believe  your  Grod  in  the  teeth  of  all  you  hear,  or  see,  or 
feel.  The  Lord  hath  come  to  prove  thee,  to  put  his  fear  before  thy 
face,  and  to  keep  thee  from  sin ;  wherefore  look  for  sweet  fruit  from 
the  bitter  tree  of  thy  present  grief,  and  flee  not  from  thy  God. 

Again,  dear  friend,  here  is  our  great  comfort :  loe  have  a  Ilcdintor. 
"When  God  deale^h  with  thee  by  the  law,  or  by  his  rod,  or  by  his 
searching  Spirit,  thou  art  apt  to  say,  "  How  can  I  endure  his  hand  ?" 
Hide  behind  the  Mediator.  Let  Jesus  be  thy  shield,  even  as  he  is 
the  Lord's  Anointed.  Beseech  the  Lord  God  not  to  look  on  thee  as 
thou  art  in  thyself,  but  to  see  thee  in  Christ  Jesus.     Say 

"  Him,  and  then  the  sinner  see, 
L  )!ik  through  Jesu's  wounds  on  me." 

Take  care  that  thou  lookest  through  Jesus'  wounds  on  God  ;  and  if 
thou  dost,  thou  wilt  see  in  him  infinite  love  and  boundless  kindness. 
The  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  is  unutterable  love. 
"Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them 
that  fear  him";  and  when  they  fear  him  most,  his  pity  goes  out 
to  them  in  streams  of  tenderness.  If  thy  God  use  the  knife  on 
thee,  it  is  to  cut  out  a  deadly  cancer.  If  thy  God  break  thee,  and 
grind  thee,  it  is  to  get  away  thy  bran,  and  make  thee  as  the  fine 
flour  of  the  meat-offering.  He  may  seem  to  slay  thee,  but  by  this 
he  makes  thee  live.  Though  he  slay  thee,  still  trust  thou  in  him. 
Never  believe  anything  which  would  militate  against  the  truth  of 
his  love,  or  the  wisdom  or  the  tenderness  of  it.  Cling  to  him  when 
he  frowns.  The  closer  thou  canst  cling,  the  less  thou  wilt  feel  the 
blows  of  his  hand  when  he  chastens.  A  faith  which  believes  when 
it  smarts  will  soon  have  done  with  the  rod.  If  thou  wilt  have  nothing 
but  good  to  say  of  God,  he  will  take  thee  out  of  the  fire,  for  it  is  evident 
that  thou  dost  not  need  more  of  it.  A  full  and  firm  belief  in  God  when 
he  seems  to  be  against  us,  is  a  grand  mark  of  sanctification.  To  b© 
able  to  spell  out  "love"  when  it  is  written  in  cruciform  characters, 
shows  a  high  state  of  spiritual  education. 

And  now,  beloved,  if  you  can  take  the  Lord  in  this  way,  henceforth 
and  for  ever  believing  in  his  love,  and  never  staggering  through  un- 
belief, thou  wilt  glorify  thy  God  and  get  good  to  thyself  in  every 
way.  If  thou  believest,  then  thou  wilt  be  strong;  for  faith  is  the 
backbone  of  the  spiritual  man.  If  thou  believest,  thou  wilt  love, 
and  love  is  the  very  heart  of  the  spiritual  man.  Believing  and 
loving,  thou  wilt  endure  with  patience,  and  thy  patience  shall  be  a 
crown  to  thee.  Believing,  loving,  and  enduring,  thou  shalt  become 
equipped  for  every  holy  service,  and  in  that  service  thou  shalt  acquire 
more  and  more  of  likeness  to  thy  Lord,  till  when  thou  hast  endured  to 
the  full,  thou  shalt  be  in  all  points  a  brother  of  him  who  is  the 
Firstborn.  Like  him,  thou  shalt  be  able  to  go  into  the  thick  darkness, 
and  have  that  communion  with  God  which  only  tliey  can  know  who 
have  felt  the  consuming  fire  passing  through  them  again  and  again, 
and  burning  up  that  corruption  of  the  flesh  which  makes  God  to  be  a 


126  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

terror  to  men.  Like  our  Mediator,  may  we  be  made  to  plead  with 
God  for  men,  and  with  men  for  God.  May  we  go  up  into  the  mount 
and  see  God  and  eat  and  drink  ;  and  then  come  down  with  faces  shining 
with  the  heavenly  light.  God  give  us  thus  to  have  a  Mediator,  to 
interpret  our  God  thi-ough  a  Mediator,  and  then  to  grow  like  our 
Mediator  by  the  work  of  his  own  Spirit. 

I  have  said  a  great  deal  that  must  be  very  terrible  to  ungodly  men, 
since  it  even  tries  the  holiest.  0  my  hearers,  if  you  are  unconverted, 
I  do  not  suppose  that  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  even  though  they  make 
you  fear,  Avill  work  any  lasting  good  in  you  ;  for  I  remember  that  those 
very  people  who  trembled  at  Sinai  were  found,  in  a  very  few  weeks, 
madly  dancing  before  a  golden  calf,  and  saying,  "  These  be  thy  gods,  0 
Israel,  that  brought  thee  up  out  of  Egypt."  Fear  alone  will  work  no 
saving  or  sanctifying  effect  on  the  heart.  It  ploughs,  but  it  does  not 
sow.  In  the  child  of  God,  mixed  with  faith,  fear  becomes  a  holy 
tonic,  a  salutary  medicine ;  but,  as  for  you  who  have  cause  for  fear, 
there  is  something  else  for  you.  Flee  to  the  Mediator,  trust  in  Christ 
Jesus,  who  stands  between  man  and  God,  look  unto  him  at  once, 
and  looking  you  shall  live.  To  our  adorable  Mediator  be  glory  for 
ever  and  ever.     Amen,  and  Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Exodus  xx.  18 — 21 ; 

Deuteronomy  v. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 92  (Part  L),  433,  281. 


THE    HIGH   PRIEST  STANDING    BETWEEN    THE    DEAD   AND 
THE    LIVING. 

DSLI7SB5D  ON   SaBBATH    MoRNING,    OCTOBER   2l8T,    1860,    BTf  TEB 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  BXETEB  HALL,  STRAND. 


"And  Aaron  took  as  Moses  commanded,  and  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  con^egation  ;  and  behold, 
the  plague  was  begun  among  the  people :  and  he  put  on  incense,  and  made  an  atonement  for  the 
people.    And  he  stood  between  the  dead  and  the  living ;  and  the  plague  was  stayed." 

Numbers  xvi.  47,  48. 

We  have  attentively  read  the  passage  which  contains  the  account  of  this  transaction. 
The  authority  of  Moses  and  Aaron  had  been  disputed  by  an  ambitious  man  belonging 
to  an  elder  branch  of  the  family  of  Levi,  who  had  craftily  joined  with  himself  certain 
factious  spirits  of  the  tribe  of  Reuben,  who  themselves  also  sought  to  attain  to  power 
by  their  supposed  rights  through  Reuben  the  first-born.  By  a  singular  judgment  from 
heaven,  God  had  proved  that  rebeUion  against  Moses  was  a  mortal  sin.  He  had 
bidden  the  earth  open  its  mouth  and  swallow  up  all  the  traitors,  and  both  Levites 
and  Reubenites  had  disapiteared,  covered  in  a  living  grave.  One  would  have  imagined 
that  from  this  time  the  murmurings  of  the  children  of  Israel  would  have  ceased,  or 
that  at  least  even  should  they  have  daring  enough  to  gather  in  little  mutinous  knots, 
yet  their  traitorous  spirit  never  would  have  come  to  so  great  a  height  as  to  develope 
itself  in  the  whole  body  openly  before  the  Lord's  tabernacle.  Yet  so  was  it.  On  the 
very  morrow  after  tbat  solemn  transaction,  the  whole  of  the  people  of  Israel  gathered 
themselves  together,  and  with  unholy  clamours  surrounded  Moses  and  Aaron,  charging 
them  with  having  put  to  death  the  people  of  the  Lord.  Doubtless  they  hinged  this 
accusation  upon  the  fact,  that  whenever  Moses  prayed  God  heard  him  ;  then  would 
they  say,  "  Had  he  prayed  upon  this  occasion  the  people  would  not  have  been  destroyed  ; 
the  earth  would  not  have  opened  her  mouth,  and  they  would  not  have  been  swallowed 
up."  They  would  thus  attempt  to  prove  the  charge  which  they  brought  against  these 
two  great  men  of  God.  Can  you  picture  the  scene  now  in  your  mind's  eye.  There 
is  the  infuriated  mass  of  people ;  the  spectacle  of  such  a  crowd  as  I  see  before  me 
in  this  hall  is  overpowering,  and  were  all  this  multitude  in  tumult  against  two  men, 
the  two  might  have  sufficient  cause  for  trembling ;  but  this  would  be  but  as  a  grain 
of  sand  compared  with  that  inconceivable  number  who  were  then  gathered.  A 
large  part  of  those  three  millions  would  come  up  in  one  vast  tumultuous  host ; 
whatever  was  proposed  by  any  leader  of  the  mob  would  no  doubt  have  instantly  been 
carried  into  effect,  and  had  it  not  been  for  the  awful  majesty  which  surrounded  the 
person  of  Moses,  no  doubt  they  would  have  torn  him  to  pieces  on  the  spot.  But  just 
as  they  are  rushing  up  like  the  waves  of  the  sea,  the  cloudy  piUar  which  hung  above 
the  tabernacle  descends,  and  envelopes  in  its  fold,  as  with  a  protecting  bajitism,  the 
whole  of  the  sacred  place.  Then  in  the  centre  of  this  cloud  there  blazed  out  that 
marvellous  light  called  the  Shekinah,  which  was  the  indication  of  the  presence  of 
Him  who  cannot  be  seen,  but  whose  glory  may  be  manifest.  The  people  stand  back 
a  little  ;  Moses  and  Aaron  fall  upon  their  faces  in  prayer ;  they  beg  of  Giod  that  he 
would  spare  the  people,  for  they  have  heard  a  voice  coming  out  of  the  excellent 
glory,  saying,  "  Get  thee  up  from  this  people,  that  I  may  destroy  them  in  a 
moment."  "This  time  God's  blow  goes  forth  with  his  word,  for  the  destroying  angel 
begins  to  mow  down  the  outer  ranks  of  the  vast  tumultuous  host,  there  they  fall  one 
open  another  ;  Moses  with  his  undinuned  vision,  looking  over  the  heads  of  the  people. 

Nos.  341-42.  -^i 


128 


THE   HIGH   PRIEST   STANDING    BETWEE5     THE   DEAD   AND   THE   LIYINS. 


zua  see  thera  begin  to  fall  beneath  the  scythe  of  death.  "Up,"  saith  he,  "  ap 
Aaron,  up,  and  take  with  thee  thy  censer  ;  snatch  fire  from  off  the  holy  altar,  and 
run  among  the  people,  for  the  plague  has  begun."  Aaron,  a  man  of  a  hundred 
years  of  age,  fills  his  censer,  runs  along  as  if  he  were  a  youth,  and  begins  to  swing 
it  towards  heaven  with  holy  energy,  feeling  that  in  his  hand  was  the  life  of  the  people  ; 
ind  when  the  incense  is  accepted  in  heaven,  death  stops  in  his  work.  On  this  side 
are  heaps  upon  heaps  of  corpses  slain  by  God's  avenging  angel  ;  and  there  stand  the 
crowd  of  living  people,  living  only  because  of  Aaron's  intercession;  living  simply 
because  he  had  waved  that  censer  and  burned  that  incense  for  them  ;  otherwise,  had 
Vhe  angel  smitten  them  all,  they  would  all  have  lain  together  as  the  leaves  of  the  forest 
lie  in  autumn — dead  aud  sear. 

I  think  you  can  now  in  your  imaginations  picture  the  scene.  I  desire  to  use  the 
picture  before  us  as  a  great  spiritual  type  of  what  the  Lord  .Jesus  Christ  has  done 
for  that  erring  multitude  of  the  sons  of  men,  who  "like  sheep  have  gone  astray,  and 
have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way."  We  shall  look  at  Aaron  this  morning  in  a 
five-fold  character.  Tlie  whole  scene  is  typical  of  Christ ;  and  Aaron,  as  he  appears 
before  us  in  each  character  is  a  most  magnificent  picture  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

I.  First,  let  us  look  at  Aaron  as  the  lover  of  the  people.  You  know  who  it  is  to 
whom  we  give  that  name  of, "  Lover  of  my  Soul."  You  will  be  able  to  see  in  Aaron  the 
Jover  of  Israel ;  in  Jesus  the  lover  of  his  people. 

Aaron  deserves  to  be  very  highly  praised  for  his  patriotic  affection  for  a  people  who 
wei-e  the  most  rebellious  and  stiffnecked  that  ever  grieved  the  heart  of  a  good  man. 
You  must  remember  that  in  this  case  he  was  the  aggrieved  party.  The  clamour  was 
(aade  against  Moses  and  against  Aaron,  yet  it  was  Moses  and  Aaron  who  interceded 
and  saved  the  people.  They  were  the  offended  ones,  yet  were  they  the  saving  ones. 
Aaron  had  a  special  part  in  the  matter,  for  no  doubt  the  conflict  of  Korah  especially 
was  rather  against  the  priesthood,  which  belonged  exclusively  to  Aaron,  than  against 
the  prophetical  dispensation  which  God  had  granted  to  Moses.  Aaron  must  havb  felt 
when  he  saw  Korah  there  and  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men,  all  of  them  with  their 
censers,  that  the  plot  was  against  him  ;  that  they  wished  to  strip  from  him  his  mitre, 
to  take  from  him  his  embroidered  vest,  and  the  glittering  stones  that  shone  upon  his 
breast ;  that  they  wished  to  reduce  him  to  the  position  of  a  common  Levite,  and  take 
to  themselves  his  office  and  his  dignity.  Yet,  forgetting  himself,  he  doth  not  say, 
"  Let  them  die  ;  I  will  wait  awhile  tiU  they  have  been  sufficiently  smitten."  But  the 
old  man  with  generous  Jove  hastened  into  the  midst  of  the  people,  though  he  was 
himself  the  aggrieved  person.  Is  not  this  the  very  picture  of  our  sweet  Lord  Jesus  ? 
Had  not  sin  dishonoured  him  ?  Was  he  not  the  Eternal  God,  and  did  not  sin  there- 
fore conspire  against  him  as  well  as  against  the  Eternal  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit  ? 
Was  he  not,  I  say,  the  one  against  whom  the  nations  of  the  earth  stood  up  and  said, 
"  Let  us  break  his  bands  asunder,  and  cast  his  cords  from  us."  Yet  he,  our  Jesus, 
laying  aside  all  thought  of  avenging  himself,  becomes  the  Saviour  of  his  people. 

*'  Down  from  the  shining  seats  above, 
With  joyful  haste  he  fled  ; 
Entered  the  grave  in  mortal  flesh. 
And  dwelt  among  the  dead." 

Oh  !  generous  Christ,  forgetting  the  offences  which  we  have  committed  against  thee, 
and  making  atonement  by  thine  own  blood  for  sins  which  were  perpetrated  against 
thine  own  glory ! 

Well,  you  note  again,  that  Aaron  in  thus  coming  forward  as  the  deliverer  and  lover 
of  his  people,  must  have  remembered  that  he  was  abhorred  by  this  very  people.  They 
were  seeking  his  blood  ;  they  were  desiring  to  put  him  and  Moses  to  death,  and  yet  all 
thoughtless  of  danger,  he  snatches  up  his  censer  aud  runs  into  their  midst  with  a  divine 
enthusiasm  in  his  heart.  He  might  have  stood  back,  and  said,  "  No,  they  will  slay  me 
if  I  go  into  their  ranks  ;  furious  as  they  are,  they  wiU  charge  this  new  death  upon  me 
"Vnd  lay  me  low."  But  he  never  considers  it.  Into  the  midst  of  their  crowd  he  boldly 
prings.  Most  blessed  Jesus,  thou  mightest  not  only  tliink  thus,  but  indeed  thou  didst 
£el  it  to  be  true.  Thou  didst  come  unto  thine  own,  and  thine  own  received  thee  not. 
Thou  didst  come  into  the  world  to  save  a  race  that  hated  thee,  and  oh,  how  they  proved 
Iheir  hatred  to  thee,  for  they  did  spit  upon  thy  cheeks  ;  they  did  cast  calumny  and 
slander  upon  thy  person  ;  they  did  take  the  heir,  and  said,  "  Come,  let  us  kill  him  that 
the  inheritance  may  be  ours."  Jesus,  thou  wast  wiUiug  to  die  a  martyr,  that  thou  mightest 
He  made  a  sacrifice  for  those  by  whom  thy  blood  was  spilt.     Jesus  transcends  Aarou  ; 


THE   HIGH    PRIKST   STANDING    BETWEE^f    THE    DEAD   AND   THE   LIVINO.  129^' 

Aaron  might  have  feared  death  at  the  hands  of  the  people  ;  Jesus  Christ  did  actually 
meet  it,  and  yet  there  he  stood  even  in  the  hour  of  death,  waving  his  censer,  staying 
the  plague,  and  dividing  the  living  from  the  dead. 

Again,  you  will  see  the  love  and  kindness  of  Aaron,  if  you  look  again  ;  Aaron  might 
have  said,  "  But  the  Lord  will  surely  destroy  me  also  with  the  people  ;  if  I  go  where  the 
shafts  of  death  are  flying  they  will  reach  me."  He  never  thinks  of  it ;  he  exposes  hi* 
own  person  in  the  very  forefront  of  the  destroying  one.  There  comes  the  angel  of 
death,  smiting  all  before  him,  and  here  stands  Aaron  in  his  very  path,  as  much  as  to  say, 
"Get  thee  back  !  get  thee  back  !  I  will  wave  my  incense  in  thy  face  ;  destroyer  of  men, 
thou  canst  not  pass  the  censer  of  God's  high  priest."'  Oh  thou  glorious  High  Priest 
of  our  profession,  thou  mightest  not  only  have  feared  this  which  Aaron  might  have 
dreaded,  but  thou  didst  actually  endure  the  plague  of  God  ;  for  when  thou  didst  conoe 
among  the  people  to  save  them  from  Jehovah's  wrath,  Jehovah's  wrath  fell  upon  thee. 
Thou  wast  forsaken  of  thy  Father.  The  plague  which  Jesus  kept  from  us  slew  him, 
"  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  The  sheep  escaped,  but,  "  his  life 
and  blood  the  Shepherd  pays,  a  ransom  for  the  flock." 

Oh,  thou  lover  of  thy  church,  immortal  honours  be  unto  thee !  Aaron  deserves  to  be 
beloved  by  the  tribes  of  Israel,  because  he  stood  in  the  gap  and  exposed  himself  for 
their  sins ;  but  thou,  most  mighty  Saviour,  thou  shalt  have  eternal  songs,  because, 
foi  getf ul  of  thyself,  thou  didst  bleed  and  die,  that  man  might  be  saved  ! 
^  1  would  again  for  one  moment,  draw  your  attention  to  that  other  thought  which  I 
have  already  hinted  at,  namely,  that  Aaron  as  a  lover  of  the  people  of  Israel  deserves 
much  commendation,  from  the  fact  that  it  is  expressly  said,  he  ran  into  the  host. 
1  am  not  just  now  sure  about  Aaron's  age,  but  being  older  than  Moses,  who  must 
have  been  at  this  time  about  ninety  years  of  age,  Aaron  must  have  been  more 
than  a  hundred,  and  probably,  a  hundred  and  twenty,  or  more.  It  is  no  little 
thing  to  say  that  such  a  man.  clad  no  doubt  in  his  priestly  robes,  ran,  and  that  for  a 
people  who  had  never  shown  any  activity  to  do  him  service,  but  much  zeal  in  opposing 
his  authority.  That  little  fact  of  his  running  is  highly  significant,  for  it  shows  the 
greatness  and  swiftness  of  the  divine  impulse  of  love  that  was  within.  Ah  !  and 
•was  it  not  so  with  Christ  ?  Did  he  not  haste  to  be  our  Saviour  ?  Were  not  hia 
dehghts  with  the  sons  of  men  ?  Did  lie  not  often  say,  "  I  have  a  baptism  to  be 
baptized  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished."  His  dying  for  us  was 
not  a  thing  which  he  dreaded.  "With  desire  have  I  desired  to  eat  this  passover." 
He  had  panted  for  the  moment  when  he  should  redeem  his  people.  He  hai' 
looked  forward  through  eternity  for  that  hour  when  he  should  glorify  his  Fathei 
and  his  Father  might  glorify  him.  He  came  voluntarily,  bound  by  no  constraint, 
except  his  own  covenant  engagements,  ;  and  he  cheerfully  and  joyfully  laid  down 
his  life — a  life  which  no  man  could  take  from  him,  but  which  he  laid  down  of 
himself.  While  I  look  with  admiration  upon  Aaron,  I  must  look  with  adoration  upon 
Christ.  While  I  write  Aaron  down  as  the  lover  of  his  race,  I  write  down  Jesus  Christ 
as  being  the  best  of  lovers — the  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother. 

II.  But  I  now  pass  on  to  take  a  second  view  of  Aaron  as  he  stands  in  another 
character.     Let  us  now  view  Aaron  as  the  great  pkopitiator. 

Wrath  had  gone  out  from  God  against  the  people  on  account  of  their  sin,  and  it  is 
God's  law  that  his  wrath  shall  never  stay  unless  a  propitiation  be  offered.  The  incense 
which  Aaron  carried  in  his  hand  was  the  propitiation  before  God,  from  the  fact  that 
God  sa.w  in  that  perfume  the  type  of  that  richer  offering  which  our  Great  High  Priest 
is  this  very  day  offering  before  the  throne. 

Aaron  as  the  propitiator,  is  to  be  looked  at  first  as  bearing  in  his  censer  that  wWch 
was  necessary  for  the  propitiation.  He  did  not  come  empty-handed.  Even  though 
God's  high  priest ;  he  must  take  the  censer  ;  he  must  fill  it  with  the  ordained  incense, 
made  with  the  ordained  materials ;  and  then  he  must  light  it  with  the  sacred  fir« 
from  off"  the  altar,  and  with  that  alone.  With  the  censer  in  his  hand  he  is  safe 
without  it  Aaron  might  have  died  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  people.  The  qualification 
of  Aaron  partly  lay  in  the  fact  that  he  had  the  censer,  and  that  that  censer  was  full  of 
«weet  odours  which  were  acceptable  to  God.  Behold,  then,  Christ  Jesus  as  the  pro- 
pitiator for  his  people.  He  stands  this  day  before  God  with  his  censer  smoking  up 
towards  heaven.  Behold  the  Great  High  Priest !  See  him  this  day  with  his  pierced 
hands,  and  head  that  once  was  crowned  with  thorns.  Mark  how  the  marvellous  smoke 
of  his  merits  goeth  up  for  ever  and  ever  before  the  eternal  throne.  'Tis  he,  'tis  ha 
alone  who  puts  away  the  sins  of  his  people.  His  incense,  as  we  know,  consists  first  of 
all  oi  hie  positive  obedience  to  the  divine  law.     He  kf  rt  his  Father's  commands ; 


130  THE   HIGH   PRIEST   STANDING    BBTWEEN   THE  DEAD  AND  THE  LIVINft. 

he  did  everything  that  man  should  have  done  ;  he  kept  to  the  full  the  whole  law  o| 
God,  and  made  it  honourable.  Then  mixed  with  this  is  his  blood — an  equally  rich 
and  precious  ingredient.  That  bloody  sweat — the  blood  from  his  head,  pierced  with 
the  crown  of  thorns  ;  the  blood  of  his  hands  as  they  were  nailed  to  the  tree  ;  the  blood 
of  his  feet  as  they  were  fixed  to  the  wood  ;  and  the  blood  of  his  very  heart — richest  of 
them  all — all  mixed  together  with  his  merits — these  make  up  the  incense — an  incense 
incomparable — an  incense  peerless  and  surpassing  all  others.  Not  all  the  odours  that 
ever  rose  from  tabernacle  or  temple  could  for  a  moment  stand  in  rivalry  with  these. 
The  blood  alone  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel,  and  if  Abel's  blood  prevailed 
to  bring  vengeance,  how  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ  prevail  to  bring  down 
pardon  and  mercy  !  Our  faith  is  fixed  on  perfect  righteousness  and  complete  atone- 
ment, which  are  as  sweet  frankincense  before  the  Father's  face. 

Besides  that,  it  was  not  enough  for  Aaron  to  have  the  proper  incense.  Korah  might 
have  that  too,  and  he  might  have  the  censer  also.  That  would  not  suffice — he 
must  be  the  ordained  priest  ;  for  mark,  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  fell  in  doing  the 
act  which  Aaron  did.  Aaron's  act  saved  others  ;  their  act  destroyed  themselves.  .So 
Jesus,  the  propitiator,  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  ordained  one— called  of  God  as  was 
Aaron.  Settled  in  eternity  as  being  the  predestinated  propitiation  for  sin,  he  came  into 
the  world  as  an  ordained  priest  of  God  ;  receiving  his  ordination  not  from  man,  neither 
by  man  ;  but  like  Melchisedec,  the  priest  of  the  Most  High  God,  without  father, 
without  mother,  without  descent,  having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  life, 
he  is  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec.  Stand  back,  sons  of  Korah,  all 
of  you  who  call  yourselves  priests.  I  can  scarce  imagine  that  any  man  in  this  world  who 
takes  to  himself  the  title  of  a  priest,  except  he  take  it  in  the  sense  in  which  all  God's 
people  are  priests, — I  cannot  imagine  that  a  priest  can  enter  heaven.  I  would  not  say  a 
thing  too  stern  or  too  severe  ;  but  I  do  most  thoroughly  believe  that  an  assumption  of 
the  office  of  priest  is  so  base  an  usurpation  of  the  priestly  office  of  Christ,  that  I  could  a» 
well  conceive  of  a  man  being  saved  who  called  himself  God,  as  conceive  of  a  man 
being  saved  who  called  himself  a  priest  ;  if  he  really  means  what  he  says,  he  has  so 
trenched  upon  the  priestly  prerogative  of  Christ,  that  it  seems  to  me  he  has  touched  the 
Tery  crown  jewels,  and  is  guilty  of  a  blasphemy,  which,  unless  it  be  repented  of,  shall 
xurely  bring  damnation  on  his  head.  Shake  your  garments,  ye  ministers  of  Christ,  from 
ill  priestly  assumption  ;  come  out  from  among  them  ;  touch  not  the  unclean  thing. 
There  are  no  priests  now  specially  to  minister  among  men.  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  only  is 
the  priest  of  his  Church,  and  he  hath  made  all  of  us  priests  and  kings  unto  our  God, 
and  we  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  If  I  should  have  any  person  here  so  weak  as  to 
depend  for  his  salvation  upon  the  offerings  of  another  man,  I  conjure  him  to  forego  his 
deception.  I  care  not  who  your  priest  may  be.  He  may  belong  to  the  Anglican  or  to 
the  Romish  church.  Ay,  and  to  any  church  under  heaven.  If  he  claimeth  to  be  any- 
thing of  a  priest  more  than  you  can  claim  yourself — away  with  him — he  imposes  upon 
you  ;  he  speaks  to  you  that  which  God  abhors,  and  that  which  the  Church  of  Christ 
should  abhor  and  would  detest,  were  she  truly  alive  to  her  Master's  glory.  None  but 
Jesus,  none  but  Jesus  ;  all  other  priests  and  offerings  we  disdain.  Cast  dirt  upon  their 
garments,  they  are  not  and  they  cannot  be  priests  ;  they  usurp  the  special  dignity  of 
Jesus. 

But  let  us  note  once  more  in  considering  Aaron  as  the  great  propitiator,  that  we 
must  look  upon  him  as  being  ready  for  his  work.  He  was  ready  with  his  incense, 
and  ran  to  the  work  at  the  moment  the  plague  broke  out.  We  do  not  find  that 
he  had  need  to  go  and  put  on  his  priestly  garments ;  we  do  not  find  that  he  had 
to  prepare  for  perfonning  the  propitiatory  work  ;  but  he  went  there  and  then  as 
Boon  as  the  plague  broke  out.  The  people  were  ready  to  perish  and  he  was  ready  to 
save.  Oh,  my  hearer,  listen  to  this,  Jesus  Christ  stands  ready  to  save  thee  now ; 
there  is  no  need  of  preparation  ;  he  hath  slain  the  victim  ;  he  hath  offered  the  sacrifice ; 
he  hath  fiUed  the  censer  ;  he  hath  put  to  it  the  glowing  coals.  His  breastplate  is  on 
his  breast ;  his  mitre  is  on  his  head  ;  he  is  ready  to  save  thee  now.  Trust  him,  and 
thou  shalt  not  find  need  for  delay.  Hely  upon  him,  and  thou  shalt  not  find  that  he 
hath  to  go  a  day's  journey  to  save  thee  ;  "He  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them 
that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  Ye 
who  know  not  Christ,  hear  this  !  Ye  are  lost  and  ruined  by  the  fall.  Wrath  is  gone 
out  from  God  against  you.  That  wrath  must  consume  you  to  the  lowest  hell,  unleaa 
some  one  can  propitiate  God  on  your  behalf.  You  cannot  do  it.  No  man  can  do  it ; 
no  prayers  of  yours  ;  no  sacraments,  nay,  though  you  could  sweat  a  bloody  sweat,  it 
would  not  avi^  ;  but  Christ  is  able  to  make  propitiation.     He  can  do  it,  and  he  ftlone  ; 


THE   HIGH   PRIEST    STANDING    BETWEEN    THE   DEAD    AND   THE    LITTSO.  131 

he  c»n  Btand  between  you  and  God,  and  turn  away  Jehovah's  wrath,  and  he  can  put 
into  your  heart  a  sense  of  his  love.  Oh,  I  pray  you,  trust  him,  trust  him.  You  may 
not  be  ready  for  him,  but  he  is  always  ready  to  save,  and  indeed  I  must  correct  myself 
in  that  last  sentence,  you  are  ready  for  him.  If  you  be  never  so  vile,  and  never  so 
ruined  by  your  sin,  their  needs  no  preparation  and  no  readiness.  It  was  not  the  merit 
of  the  peojile  that  saved  them,  nor  any  preparation  on  their  part ;  it  was  the  prepared- 
ness of  the  high  priest  that  saved  them.  He  is  prepared.  He  stands  on  the  behalf  ol 
those  who  beUeve  on  him.  Would  that  thou  wouldst  now  believe  on  him  and  trust 
thy  soul  in  his  hands  ;  and  oh,  believe  me,  thy  sins  which  are  many  shall  be  all  forgiven  ; 
the  plague  shall  be  stayed,  nor  shall  God's  wrath  go  out  against  thee,  but  thou  shalfc 
be  saved. 

III.     Let  me  now  view  Aaron  as  the  interposer. 

Let  me  explain  what  I  mean.  As  the  old  Westminster  Annotations  say  upon  this 
passage,  "  The  plague  was  moving  among  the  people  as  the  fire  moveth  along  a  field 
of  com."  There  it  came  ;  it  began  in  the  extremity  ;  the  faces  of  men  grew  pale,  and 
Bwiftly  on,  on  it  came,  and  in  vast  heaps  they  fell  till  some  fourteen  thousand  had 
been  destroyed.  Aaron  wisely  puts  himself  just  in  the  pathway  of  the  plague.  It 
came  on,  cutting  down  all  before  it,  and  there  stood  Aaron  the  interposer  with  arms 
outstretched  and  censer  swinging  towards  heaven,  interposing  himself  between  the 
darts  of  death  and  the  people.  "  If  there  be  darts  that  must  fly,"  he  seemed  to  say, 
"let  them  pierce  me;  or  let  the  incense  shield  bjth  me  and  the  people.  Death," 
Baith  he,  "art  thou  coming  on  thy  pah  horse?  I  arrest  thee,  I  throw  back 
thy  steed  upon  his  haunches.  Art  thou  coming,  thou  skeleton  king  ?  With 
my  censer  in  my  hand  I  stand  before  thee  ;  thou  must  march  over  my  body ; 
thou  must  empty  my  censer  ;  thou  must  destroy  God's  High  Priest,  ere  thou  canst 
destroy  this  peeple."  Just  so  was  it  with  Christ.  Wrath  had  gone  out  against 
us.  The  law  was  about  to  smite  us  ;  the  whole  human  race  must  be  destroyed, 
Christ  stands  in  the  fore-front  of  the  battle.  "The  stripes  must  fall  on  me,"  he  cries  ; 
"  the  aiTOWs  shall  find  a  target  in  my  breast.  On  me,  Jehovah,  let  thy  vengeance 
fall."  And  he  receives  that  vengeance,  and  afterwards  upspringing  from  the  grave 
he  waves  the  censer  full  of  the  merit  of  his  blood,  and  bids  this  wrath  and  fury 
stand  back.  On  which  side  are  you  to-day,  sinner  ?  Is  God  angry  with  thee, 
sinner  ?  Are  thy  sins  unforgiven  ?  Say,  art  thou  unpardoned  ?  Art  thou  abiding 
still  an  heir  of  wrath  and  an  inheritor  of  death  ?  Ah  !  then  would  that  thou  wert  on 
the  other  side  of  Christ.  If  thou  dost  believe  on  Christ,  then  let  me  ask  thee,  dost 
thou  know  that  thou  art  completely  saved  ?  No  wrath  can  ever  reach  thee,  no  spiritual 
death  can  ever  destroy  thee,  no  hell  can  ever  consume  thee,  and  why  ?  What  is  thy 
guard,  what  thy  protection  ?  I  see  the  tear  glistening  in  thine  eye  as  thou  sayest, 
"There  is  nothing  between  me  and  hell  save  Christ  ?  There  is  nothing  between  me 
and  Jehovah's  wrath  save  Christ  ?  There  is  nothing  between  me  and  instant  destruction 
save  Christ  ?  But  he  is  enough.  He  with  the  censer  in  his  hand — God's  great  ordained 
Priest— he  is  enough."  Ah,  'orothers  and  sisters,  if  you  have  put  between  you  and  God, 
baptisms  and  communions,  fastings,  prayers,  tears  and  vows,  Jehovah  shall  break 
through  your  refuges  as  the  fire  devours  the  stubble.  But  if,  my  soul,  Christ  stands 
between  thee  and  Jehovah,  Jehovah  cannot  smite  thee  ;  his  thunderbolt  must  first 
pierce  through  the  Divine  Redeemer  ere  it  can  reach  thee,  and  that  can  never  be. 

My  dear  hearers,  do  you  perceive  this  great  truth,  that  there  is  nothing  which  can 
save  the  soul  of  man,  save  Jesus  Christ  standing  between  that  soul  and  the  just 
judgment  of  God  ?  And  oh,  I  put  again  the  personal  enquiry  to  you,  are  you 
sheltered  behind  Christ  ?  Sinner,  are  you  standing  to-day  beneath  the  cross  ?  Is  that 
thy  shelter  ?     Is  the  purple  robe  of  Jesu's  atonement  covered  over  you  ? 

Are  jou  like  the  dove  which  hides  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock?  Have  you  hidden 
in  the  wounds  of  Christ  ?  Say,  have  you  crept  into  his  side,  and  do  you  feel  that 
be  must  be  your  shelter  till  the  tempest  be  overpast  ?  Oh,  be  of  good  cheer ; 
he  for  whom  Christ  is  the  intercessor,  is  a  rescued  man.  Oh,  soul,  if  thou  art  not 
in  Christ,  what  wilt  thou  do  when  the  destroying  angel  comes  ?  Careless  sinner, 
what  will  become  of  thee  when  death  arrests  thee  ?  Where  wilt  thou  be  when  the 
judgment  trumpet  rings  in  thine  ears,  and  sounds  an  alarm  that  shall  wake  the  dead  \ 
Sleepy  sinner,  sleeping  to-day  under  God's  Word,  will  you  sleep  then,  when  Jehovah's 
thunders  are  let  loose,  and  all  his  lightnings  set  the  heavens  in  a  blaze  ?  I  know  where 
then  you  shall  seek  a  shelter  !  You  shall  seek  it  where  you  cannot  find  it ;  you  shall 
bid  the  rocks  fall  upon  you,  and  ask  the  mountains  to  hide  you,  but  their  stony  bowels 
•hall  know  of  no  compassion,  their  hearts  of  adamant  shall  yield  you  no  pitv.  and  yo» 


132  THE  HIGH  PRIEST  STAMDINO    BETWEEN    THE  DEAD  AND  THE  LIVTNO. 

■hall  rrtand  exposed  to  the  blast  of  vengeance  and  the  shower  of  the  hot  hail  of  God'* 
fury,  and  nothing  shall  protect  you  ;  but  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  destroyed  from 
oflF  the  face  of  the  earth,  so  must  you  be  destroyed,  and  that  for  ever  and  ever,  because 
ye  believed  not  on  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 

IV.  But  we  cannot  tarry  longer  here  ;  we  must  again  pass  to  another  point.  We  have 
viewed  Aaron  in  three  characters — as  the  lover,  the  propitiator,  and  the  intercessor  ; 
now,  fourthly,  let  me  view  him  as  the  saviour. 

It  was  Aaron,  Aaron's  censer,  that  saved  the  lives  of  that  great  multitude.  If 
he  had  not  prayed  the  plague  had  not  stayed,  and  the  Lord  would  have  consumed 
the  whole  company  in  a  moment.  As  it  was,  you  perceive  there  were  some  fourteen 
thousand  and  seven  hundred  that  died  before  the  Lord.  The  plague  had  begun  its 
dreadful  work,  and  only  Aaron  could  stay  it.  And  now  I  want  you  to  notice  with 
regard  to  Aaron,  that  Aaron,  and  especially  the  Lord  Jesus,  must  be  looked  upon 
as  a  gracious  Saviour.  It  was  nothing  but  love  that  moved  Aaron  to  wave  his  censer. 
The  people  could  not  demand  it  of  him.  Had  they  not  brought  a  false  accusatior 
against  him?  And  yet  he  saves  them.  It  must  have  been  love  and  nothing  but  love. 
Say,  was  there  anything  in  the  voices  of  that  infuriated  multitude  which  could  have 
moved  Aaron  to  stay  the  plague  from  before  them  ?  Nothing !  nothing  in  their 
character !  nothing  in  their  looks  !  nothing  in  their  treatment  of  God's  High  Priest ! 
and  yet  he  graciously  stands  in  the  breach,  and  saves  them  from  the  devouring 
judgment  of  God  !  Oh !  brothers  and  sisters — if  Christ  hath  saved  us  he  is  a  gracious 
Saviour  indeed.  Often  as  we  think  of  the  fact  that  we  are  saved,  the  tear  faUs  down 
Dur  c)*aok  ;  for  we  never  can  tell  why  Jesus  hath  saved  us. 

*•  What  was  there  in  you  that  could  merit  esteem  ? 
Or  give  the  Creator  delight  ? 
'Twas  '  Even  so.  Father  I'  you  ever  must  sing, 
'Because  it  seem'd  good  in  thy  sight.'  " 

There  is  no  difference  between  the  glorified  in  heaven  and  the  doomed  in  hell,  except 
the  difference  that  God  made  of  his  own  sovereign  grace.  Whatever  difference  there 
may  be  between  Saul  the  apostle  and  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  has  been  made  by  infinite 
sovereignty  and  undeserved  love.  Paul  might  still  have  remained  Saul  of  Tarsus,  and 
might  have  become  a  damned  fiend  in  the  bottomless  pit,  bad  it  not  been  for  free 
sovereign  grace,  which  came  out  to  snatch  him  as  a  brand  from  the  burning.  Oh, 
sinner,  thou  sayest  "  There  is  no  reason  in  me  why  God  should  save  me  ;"  but  there  is 
no  reason  in  any  man.  Thou  hast  no  good  point,  nor  hath  any  man.  There  is  nothing 
in  any  man  to  commend  him  to  God.  We  are  all  such  sinners,  that  hell  is  <sai  deserved 
portion  ;  and  if  any  of  us  be  saved  from  going  down  into  the  pit,  it  is  God's  undeserved 
sovereign  bounty  that  doth  it,  and  not  any  merits  of  ours.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  most 
gracious  Saviour. 

And  then  again,  Aaron  was  an  unaided  Saviour.  Even  Moses  did  not  come  with 
Aaron  to  help  him.  He  stood  alone  in  the  gap  with  that  censer — that  one  solitary 
stream  of  smoke  dividing  between  the  living  and  the  dead.  Why  did  not  the  princes  of 
Israel  come  with  him  ?  Alas  !  they  could  have  done  nothing  ;  they  must  have  died 
themselves.  Why  did  not  all  the  Levites  come  with  him  ?  They  must  have  been 
smitten  if  they  had  dared  to  stand  in  the  place  of  God's  High  Priest.  He 
stands  alone,  alone,  alone !  and  herein  was  he  a  great  type  of  Christ,  who  could  say, 
"  I  have  trodden  the  winepress  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me."  Do 
not  think,  then,  that  when  Christ  prevails  with  God,  it  is  because  of  any  of 
your  prayers,  or  tears,  or  good  works.  He  never  puts  your  tears  and  prayers  into 
his  censer.  They  would  mar  the  incense.  There  is  nothing  but  his  own  prayers,  and 
his  own  tears,  and  his  own  merits  there.  Do  not  think  that  you  are  saved  because 
of  anything  that  you  have  ever  done  or  can  ever  do  for  Christ.  We  may  preach, 
and  we  may  be  made  in  God's  hand  the  spiritual  fathers  of  thousands  of  souls, 
but  our  preaching  doth  in  no  way  help  to  turn  away  the  wrath  of  God  from  us. 
Christ  doth  it  all,  entirely  and  alone,  and  no  man  must  dare  to  stand  as  his  helper. 
Sinner,  dost  thou  hear  this  ;  thou  ai-t  saying.  "I  cannot  do  this  or  that."  He  asks 
t'nee  not  to  do  anything  ;  thou  sayest,  "  I  have  no  merits."  Man,  he  does  not  want 
any,  if  thou  wouldst  help  Christ  thou  wilt  be  lost,  but  if  thou  wilt  leave  Christ  to  do 
it  all,  thou  shalt  be  saved.  Come  now,  the  very  plan  of  salvation  is  this,  to  take 
Christ  to  be  thine  all  in  all  ;  he  will  never  be  a  part-Saviour  ;  he  never  Came  to  patch 
our  ragged  garments  ;  he  will  give  us  a  new  robe,  but  he  wiU  never  mend  the  old  one. 
He  did  not  come  to  help  build  the  palace  of  God,  he  will  quarry  every  stone  and  lay  it 


THE   HIGH    PRIEST  STANDING   BETWEEN    THE  DEAD  AND  THE   LIVTN9.  133 

on  its  fellow  ;  he  will  have  no  sound  of  hammer,  or  any  mortal  help  in  that  great  work. 
Oh  that  this  voice  could  ring  through  the  world  while  I  jiroclaira  again  those  words, 
the  ileathblow  of  all  Popery,  legality,  and  carnal  merit,  "Jesus  only,  Jesus  only." 
"  There  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved." 
Nor  doth  he  need  a  helper  ;  "  He  came  not  to  call  the  righteous  but  sinners  to  repentance." 
"  He  is  able  to  sav«  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  him." 

He  was,  then,  you  will  perceive,  a  gracious  Saviour,  and  an  unaided  one  ;  and,  once 
more,  Aaron  as  a  Saviour  was  all-sufficient.  Death  came  up  to  the  very  feet  of  Aaron  ; 
there  lay  a  dead  man,  there  lay  a  mother,  a  child,  a  prince,  a  hewer  of  wood,  a  drawer 
of  water, — there  they  lay.  There  stood  a  strong  man  in  his  agony,  and  implored  that 
he  might  not  die,  but  he  fell  backward  a  corpse.  There  stood  up  a  prince  of  Israel 
and  must  he  die  ?  Yes,  he  must  fall.  All-devouring  death,  like  a  hungry  lion,  came 
howling  onward,  amidst  the  screams  and  shrieks  of  the  people,  but  there  he  stood  ; 
that  censer  seemed  to  say,  "Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further."  What  a 
miracle  that  the  censer  should  stop  the  reign  of  death.  Up  to  this  mark  the  waves  of 
that  shoreless  sea  are  flowing  ;  there  men  stand  on  the  terra  firma  of  life.  Aaron 
stands,  and  as  God's  High  Priest  with  that  censer  alone,  he  puts  back  grim  death  ;  the 
whole  host  of  Israel,  if  they  had  been  armed  and  had  carried  hows,  co.uld  not  have 
driven  back  the  pestilence  ;  nay,  all  the  hosts  of  armed  men  that  ever  stained  the  earth 
with  blood  could  not  have  driven  back  God's  plagues.  Death  would  have  laughed  at 
them,  yea,  he  would  have  trodden  in  among  their  ranks  and  cut  them  in  pieces,  but 
Aaron  alone  is  enough,  fully  sufficient,  and  that  through  the  burning  of  the  incense. 
Oh  sinner,  Christ  is  an  all-sufficient  Saviour,  able  to  save  ;  you  cannot  save  yourself, 
but  he  ca»i  sare  you.  Oh  sinner,  all  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men; 
it  mattereth  not  how  base  and  vile  you  may  have  been,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Though  the  remembrance  of  thy  sin 
bring  scarlet  into  thy  face  ;  dost  thou  blush  to  think  what  a  wietch  thou  hast  been, 
has  thy  life  been  foul  adultery,  has  it  been  blasphemy,  lying,  hatred  of  God's  people, 
and  whatnot  ; — I  add  to  this  another,  if  thou  wilt,- -or  lasciviousness,  debauchery, 
murder, — if  all  these  crimes  were  there,  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  would 
be  able  still  to  cleanse  thee  from  all  sin.  Though  thou  had  committed  every  crime  in 
the  catalogue  of  iniquity,  sins  which  we  cannot  mention,  yet  "Though  thy  sins 
be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  wool ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be 
as  white  as  snow."  And  thou  sayest,  "  How  can  I  partake  of  this  ?"  Simply  by 
trusting  Christ  with  thy  soul.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  ba 
saved,  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  This  was  Christ's  commission  to  the 
apostles,  he  bid  them  go  forth  and  preach  this  great  truth,  and  again  I  proclaim  it, 
"  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,  but  he  that  believeth  not  must  be 
damned."  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned,  be  his  sins  never  so  few,  he  that 
believeth  shall  never  be  lost,  though  his  sins  may  have  been  never  so  many.  Trust 
thou  thy  soul  with  Christ,  and  thy  sins  are  at  once  forgiven,  at  once  blotted  out. 

V.  And  now  I  come  to  my  last  point,  and  that  is,  Aaron  as  the  divider — the 
picture  of  Christ. 

Aaron  the  anointed  one  stands  here ;  on  that  side  is  death,  on  this  side  life ;  the  boundary 
between  life  and  death  is  that  one  man.  Where  his  incense  smokes  the  air  is  purified, 
where  it  smokes  not  the  plague  reigns  v;ith  unmitigated  fury.  There  are  two  sorts  of 
people  here  this  morning,  we  forget  the  distinction  of  rich  and  poor,  we  know  it  not  here  ; 
there  are  two  sorts  of  people,  we  forego  the  distinction  of  the  learned  and  unlearned, 
we  care  not  for  that  here  ;  there  are  two  sorts  here,  and  these  are  the  living  and  the 
dead,  the  ]3ardoned,  the  unpardoned,  the  saved,  and  the  lost.  What  divides  the  true 
Christian  from  the  unbeliever  1  Some  think  it  is  that  the  Christian  takes  the  Sacrament, 
the  other  not.  It  is  no  division  ;  there  be  men  who  have  gone  to  hell  with  sacramental 
bread  in  their  mouths  ;  others  may  imagine  that  Bajitism  makes  the  difference,  and  in- 
deed it  is  the  outward  token,  the  baptismal  pool  is  the  means  by  which  we  show  to  the 
world  that  we  are  buried  in  Christ's  grave,  in  type  that  we  are  dead  to  the  world  and 
buried  in  Christ ;  we  rise  up  from  it  in  testimony  that  we  desire  to  live  in  newness 
of  life  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  He  who  is  baptized  does  in 
that  way  cross  the  Rubicon,  he  draws  the  sword  and  throws  away  the  scabbard,  he  is 
the  baptized  one,  and  has  a  sign  that  can  never  be  eradicated  from  him.  He  is  dedi- 
cated through  that  baptism  to  Christ,  but  it  is  but  an  outward  sign,  for  many  have 
there  been  who  have  been  baptized  with  water,  who  not  having  the  baptism  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  have  afterwards  been  baptized  in  the  fiery  sufferings  of  eternal  torment. 
No !  no !  the  one  division,  the  one  great  division  between  those  who  are  God'a  people 


184 


THB   RTOH    FRTEgT    STANDTOQ    BETWEISIT    THE   DEAD   AND   THE   LIVINO. 


and  those  who  are  not,  is  Christ.  A  man  in  Christ  is  a  Christian  ;  a  man  out  of 
Christ  is  dead  in  trespasses  aud  sin?.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ  is 
saved,  he  that  believeth  not  is  lost."  Christ  is  the  only  divider  between  his  people  and 
the  world.  On  which  si(ie,  then,  art  thou  to-day,  my  hearer  ?  Come,  let  the  question 
go  individually  to  you.  Young  man,  on  which  side  are  you  ?  Are  you  Christ's  friend 
and  servant,  or  are  you  his  enemy  ?  Old  man,  thou  with  tlie  grey  head  yonder,  thou 
hast  but  a  little  while  to  live,  on  which  side  art  thou  ?  Art  thou  my  Master's  blood- 
bought  one,  or  art  thou  still  a  lost  sheep?  And  thou  matron,  thou  who  art  busied, 
perha])S,  even  now  in  thy  thoughts  upon  thy  children,  think  not  of  them  for  a  moment, 
on  which  side  art  thou  ?  Hast  thou  believed,  hast  thou  been  born  again,  or  art  thou 
etill  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bonds  of  iniquity  ?  Ye  that  stand  yonder,  let  the 
f[uestion  penetrate  your  thick  rank  now,  where  are  you  ?  Can  you  take  the  name  of 
Christ  upon  your  lips,  and  say.  "Jesus,  I  am  thine,  and  thou  art  mine,  thy  blood  and 
righteousness  are  my  hope  and  trust ; "  for  if  not,  my  hearer,  thou  art  among  the 
spiritually  dead,  and  thou  shalt  soon  be  among  the  damned  unless  divine  grace  prevent, 
and  change,  and  renew  thee. 

Please  remember,  brothers  and  sisters,  that  as  Christ  is  the  great  divider  now,  so 
will  he  be  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Do  you  never  think  of  that,  he  shall  divide  them 
the  one  from  the  other,  as  the  shepherd  divideth  the  sheep  from  the  goats.  It  is  the 
Shepherd's  person  that  divideth  the  sheep  from  the  goats.  He  stands  between  them, 
and  in  that  last  day  of  days  for  which  all  other  days  were  made,  Christ  shall  be  the 
great  divider.  There  the  righteous  clad  in  white,  in  songs  triumphant  glorified  with 
him ;  and  there  the  lost,  the  unbelieving,  the  fearful,  the  abominable.  What 
divides  them  from  yon  bright  host  ?  Nothing  but  the  person  of  the  Son  of  Man, 
on  whom  they  look,  and  weep,  and  mourn,  and  wail  because  of  him.  That  is  the  im- 
penetrable barrier  that  shall  shutout  the  damned  from  eternal  bliss.  The  gate  which 
may  let  you  in  now  will  be  the  fiery  gate  which  shall  shut  you  out  hereafter.  Ciirist 
is  the  door  of  heaven  ;  oh,  dreadful  day  when  that  door  shall  be  shut,  when  that  door 
shall  stand  before  you,  and  prevent  you  entering  into  the  felicity  which  you  shall  then 
long  for,  when  you  cannot  enter  into  it. 

Oh  !  on  which  side  shall  I  be,  when  all  these  transitory  things  are  done  away  with, 
when  the  dead  have  risen  from  their  graves,  when  the  great  congregation  shall  stand 
upon  the  land,  and  upon  the  sea,  when  every  valley,  and  every  mountain,  and  every 
river,  and  every  sea,  shall  be  crowded  with  multitudes  standing  in  thick  array  ?  Oh  ! 
when  he  shall  say,  "Separate  my  people,  thrust  in  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  of  the 
world  is  ripe  ; "  my  soul,  where  shalt  thou  be  ?  Shalt  thou  be  found  among  the  lost  ? 
Shall  the  dread  trumpet  send  thee  down  to  hell,  while  a  voice  that  rends  thine  ear, 
ehall  call  after  thee.  ' '  Depart  from  me,  depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity  into 
everlasting  fire  in  hell,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  Oh,  grant  that  I  may 
not  be  there,  but  among  thy  people  may  I  stand.  So  may  it  be  ;  may  we  be  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  Judge  to  all  eternity,  and  rememljer  that  for  ever  and  ever  Christ 
will  be  the  divider  ;  he  shall  stand  between  the  lost  and  the  saved,  he  shall  interpose 
for  ever  between  the  damned  and  the  glorified.  Again,  I  put  it  to  you,  give  me 
your  ears  just  for  one  moment  while  I  speak.  What  say  you,  sirs,  shall  this  congrega- 
tion be  rent  in  twain  ?  The  hour  is  coming  when  our  wills  and  wishes  shall  have  no 
force.  God  will  divide  the  righteous  from  the  wicked  then,  and  Christ  shall  be  the 
dread  division  ;  I  say,  are  we  prepared  to  be  separated  eternally  ?  Husband,  are  you 
prepared  to  renounce  to-day  your  wife  for  ever  ;  are  you  prepared  when  the  clammy 
sweat  gathers  on  her  brow  to  give  her  the  last  kiss,  and  say,  "Adieu,  adieu,  I  shall 
never  meet  with  thee  again."  Child,  son,  daughter,  are  you  ready  to  go  home  and 
sit  down  at  the  table  of  your  mother,  and  ere  you  eat,  say,  "  Mother,  I  now  forswear 
you  once  for  all,  I  am  determined  to  be  lo.^it,  and  as  thou  art  on  the  side  of  Christ, 
and  I  will  never  love  him,  I  will  part  with  you  for  ever."  Surely  the  ties  of  kinship 
make  us  long  to  meet  in  another  world,  and  do  we  wish  to  meet  in  hell  ?  Do  you 
wish  all  of  you  to  meet  there — a  grim  coiBpany  to  lie  in  the  midst  of  the  flames 
Will  you  abide  in  the  devouring  fire,  and  dwell  in  everlasting  burning  ?  No,  your 
wishes  are  that  you  may  meet  in  heaven,  but  you  cannot  unless  yon  meet  in  Christ, 
you  cannot  meet  in  Paradise  unless  you  meet  in  him.  Oh  thit  now  the  grace  of  God 
Were  poured  upon  you,  that  you  might  come  unto  Jesus. 


JOSHUA'S  VISION. 


^  German 

Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  February  16th,  1868,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    metropolitan  TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Joshua  was  by  Jerieho,  that  he  lifted  up  his  ayes  and 
looked,  and,  behold,  there  stood  a  man  over  against  him  with  his  sword  drawn  in  his 
hand :  and  Joshua  went  unto  him,  and  said  unto  him.  Art  thou  for  us,  or  for  our 
adversaries  ?  and  he  said.  Nay  ;  but  as  captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord  am  I  now  come. 
And  Joshua  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth,  and  did  worship,  and  said  unto  him.  What 
saith  my  lord  unto  his  servant?  and  the  captain  of  the  Lord's  host  said  unto  Joshua, 
Loose  thy  shoe  from  ofifthy  foot;  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy.  And 
Joshua  did  so," — Joshua,  v.  13 — 15. 

The  Lord  divided  the  Jordan  that  his  people  might  pass  through  dry- 
ghod.  This  miracle  greatly  disspirited  the  Canaanites,  and  so  prepared 
the  way  for  an  easy  trinmph  for  the  invading  Israelites.  You  would 
liave  naturally  expected  that  the  Lord  would  have  bidden  his  people  avail 
themselves  immediately  of  this  terror  to  strike  a  heav}'  blow  at  once, 
and  press  on  with  might  and  main  before  the  enemy  could  take  breath, 
and  so  sweep  the  land  clear  of  the  adversaries  in  a  single  campaign. 
But  it  was  not  so.  Instead  of  immediate  activity,  the  children  of  Israel 
pitched  their  tents  at  Gilgal,  and  there  tarried  for  a  considerable 
season.  For  God  is  in  no  hurry.  His  purposes  can  be  accomplished 
without  haste,  and  though  he  would  have  us  redeem  the  time  because 
our  days  are  evil,  yet  in  his  eternity  he  can  afford  to  wait,  and  by  his 
wisdom  he  so  orders  his  delays,  that  they  prove  to  be  far  better  than  our 
hurries.  Wherefore,  were  the  people  to  delay?  That  they  might  be 
obedient  to  commands  which  had  been  forgotten.  In  the  desert,  for 
divers  reasons,  circumcision  and  the  passover  had  been  neglected.  They 
were  not  visited  with  any  chastisement  on  account  of  this  neglect,  for 
the  Lord  considered  their  position  and  condition,  and  winked  at  their 
error,  but  before  he  would  use  them  he  would  have  them  fiilly  obedient 
to  his  will.  It  cannot  be  expected  that  God  should  tolerate  disobedient 
■servants,  and  therefore  they  must  stay  awhile,  till  they  had  been  atten- 
tive to  the  two  great  precepts  of  the  Mosaic  covenant.  Dear  friends, 
let  us  pause  and  ask  ourselves,  as  believers,  whether  we  have  been  in 
all  respects  conscientiously  attentive  to  our  Master's  commands  ?  If 
not,  we  may  not  expect  him  to  send  a  blessing  to  the  church  or  to  the 
world  through  us,  until  first  of  all  we  have  yielded  our  willing  obedience 
to  that  which  he  has  prescribed  for  us.  Are  any  of  you  living  in 
the  neglect  of  a  known  part  of  the  divine  will  ?  or  are  you  undesiroua 
Nos.  795-96.  12 


136  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

of  knowing  some  portions  of  God's  will,  and  therefore  wilfully  blind  to 
them  ?  My  dear  brother,  you  are  cutting  the  tendon  Achilles  of  your 
strength.  You  can  never  overthrow  your  enemies  like  Samson  while 
your  locks  are  thus  shorn.  You  cannot  expect  that  God  should  send 
.you  forth  to  conquer  and  to  bring  to  him  renown,  when  you  have  not  as 
yet  conquered  your  own  personal  indolence  and  disobedience.  He  that 
is  unfaithful  in  that  which  is  least  will  be  unfaithful  in  that  which  is 
greater ;  and  if  3'ou  have  not  kept  the  Master's  sayings  in  tjie  little  vine- 
yard of  your  personal  histoiw,  how  much  less  shall  you  be  able  to  do  it 
if  he  should  entrust  you  with  a  greater  field  of  service  !  Here  then  is 
the  reason  for  Israel's  delay,  and  it  is  a  reason  why  at  the  commence- 
ment of  our  special  services  we  should  make  diligent  search  for  neglected 
duties,  and  promptly  fulfil  them. 

The  two  precepts  which  had  been  overlooked  were  very  suggestive. 
The  one  was  circumcision.  Every  man  throughout  the  whole  camp  of 
Israel  must  be  circumcised  before  God  would  begin  to  speak  about 
Jericho.  Not  a  word  about  the  walls  falling  flat  to  the  ground ;  not  a 
syllable  concerning  compassing  the  accursed  city  seven  days,  until,  first 
of  all,  the  reproach  of  Egypt  had  been  put  away,  and  his  people  had 
received  the  token  of  the  covenant.  Now,  we  are  told  in  the  New 
Testament  that  Christians  must  partake  in  a  circumcision  without 
hands,  not  of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  spirit.  "  He  is  not  a  Jew  which  is  one 
outwardly  . .  .  but  he  is  a  Jew  which  is  one  inwardly."  In  theColossians 
the  apostle  tells  us  that  the  true  circumcision  is  the  putting  away  of  the 
body  of  death  by  the  circumcision  of  Christ,  by  which  I  understand  that 
the  Christian  must  purge  himself,  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  and  in  the 
name  of  Christ,  of  every  fleshly  defilement,  of  every  sinful  thought,  of 
every  wrong  ambition,  of  every  carnal  desire  :  if  he  is  to  be  used  by  his 
Master  it  is  imperative  that  this  be  done,  and  be  done  at  once,  in  the 
name  of  the  Most  High.  "  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord."  God  will  not  fight  his  battles  by  the  uncircumcised.  He  will 
have  his  people  clean  from  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset  them,  or 
else  he  will  not  "se  them.  Stop,  then,  my  brethren,  and  let  me  beseech 
you  to  search  j^our  own  hearts,  and  see  what  there  may  be  within  that 
might  render  you  unfit  to  be  blessed.  If  I,  as  God's  minister,  have  no 
conversions,  I  dare  not  attribute  the  fact  to  divine  sovereignty.  It  may 
be  so,  but  I  am  always  afraid  to  make  divine  sovereignty  the  scapegoat 
for  my  iniquities.  I  rather  think  that  if  God  withholds  the  blessing, 
there  is  a  cause ;  and  may  not  the  cause  be  in  myself,  that  I  do  not  live 
as  near  to  God  as  I  should,  or  am  indulging  in  something  which  hi& 
holy  eyes  cannot  look  upon  ?  I  speak  to  you  who  are  church  members,, 
if  in  the  Sabbath-school,  if  in  your  tract  distribution,  or  if  in  any  other 
work  you  are  doing,  you  do  not  win  souls  to  God,  cry  unto  him, 
"Search  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart:  try  me,  and  know  my 
thoughts :  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  led  me  in  the 
way  everlasting."  Sin  blocks  up  the  channel  of  mercy ;  the  stream  is 
strong  enough,  but  you  restrain  its  flow ;  your  sins  separate  between 
you  and  your  God;  and,  therefore,  I  conjure  each  one  of  you,  if  you  be 
the  Lord's,  now  shake  yourselves  from  the  dust,  sanctify  a  fast  unto  the 
Most  High,  and  come  before  him  with  supplication.  Sit  before  himj 
in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  in  the  silent  dejection  of  your  abashed  spiritSv 


JOSHUA'S  VISION.  137 

and  confess  before  him  all  your  sins.  Arise,  pour  out  your  hearts  like 
water  before  the  Lord,  acknowledge  your  sins  and  oifences,  and  then, 
being  purged  from  these  by  the  water  and  the  blood  which  flowed  from 
the  riven  side  of  Jesus,  you  may  arise  to  service  and  expect  to  be  made 
a  blessing. 

But  circumcision  was  not  enough,  they  must  also  keep  the  passoi'.er. 
This  it  appears  they  had  only  celebrated  twice,  once  in  Egypt,  and  onc-3 
at  the  foot  of  Sinai ;  but  they  were  now  to  begin  a  passover  which  was 
to  be  kept  every  year  without  cessation.  Brethren,  ye  know  the  meaning 
the  passover  has  to  us ;  it  represents  feeding  upon  Christ.  He  is  the 
Paschal  Lamb ;  we  must  put  away  the  old  leaven  of  sin,  and  we  must 
come  with  pure  hearts  to  feed  upon  our  Lord.  You  will  never  be  able 
to  fight  the  Canaanites  till  you  have  fed  on  Christ.  A  spiritual  man 
who  tries  to  live  without  feeding  upon  Jesus,  soon  becomes  weak ;  he 
who  has  but  slight  communion  with  Christ,  he  who  day  after  day  has 
no  sight  of  the  King  in  his  beauty,  who  is  never  taken  to  the  banquet- 
ing liouse,  and  sees  not  the  love  banner  waving  over  his  head,  is  not 
likely  to  be  a  hero.  If  you  do  not  eat  the  bread  of  heaven,  how  can  you 
do  the  work  of  heaven  ?  The  husbandman  that  laboureth  must  be  first 
partaker  of  the  fruits ;  and  if  we  would  labour  for  God  with  success,  we 
must  first  of  all  feed  upon  the  Christ  of  God,  and  gather  strength  from 
him.  "  Son  of  man,"  said  the  voice  from  heaven  to  the  prophet,  "  eat 
this  roll:"  he  must  first  eat  it,  and  then  speak  concerning  what  he  has 
handled  and  tasted.  We  must  enjoy  true  religion  in  our  own  souls 
before  we  can  be  fit  exponents  of  it  to  others.  How  shall  ye  be  heralds 
of  a  message  which  has  never  been  spoken  into  your  inward  year  by  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  ?  How  can  you  expect  to  bring  others  to  life  when 
your  own  soul  is  all  but  dead?  How  shall  you  scatter  the  live  coals  of 
eternal  grace  when  the  flame  upon  the  hearth  of  your  heart  has  almost 
expired?  Brethren,  let  us  keep  the  feast,  let  us  draw  nigh  unto  our 
Lord  Jesus  with  pure  hearts,  let  us  renew  our  first  faith  and  early  love, 
taking  the  great  Son  of  God  to  be  once  more  the  ground  of  our  hope, 
the  source  of  our  joy,  the  obiect  of  our  desires.  Let  us  come  near,  yea, 
nearer  and  nearer  still  to  him,  pressing  to  his  embrace ;  so  sliall  we 
be  prepared  to  brave  the  conflict,  and  earn  the  victory. 

After  the  ordinances  had  b(;en  kept,  you  will  suppose  that  at  once 
the  trumpet  sounded  for  an  assault,  and  the  valiant  men  of  Israel  with 
their  scaling  ladders,  and  their  battering  rams,  gathered  round  the 
devoted  city  to  attack  and  carry  it  by  storm.  Patience !  patience  I 
you  are  always  in  a  hurry,  but  God  is  not.  Joshua  himself,  that 
bold,  brave  spirit,  is  in  some  haste,  and  therefore,  he  goes  forth  by 
night,  meditating  and  patrolling ;  and  as  he  is  meditating  upon  God, 
and  gazing  every  now  and  then  at  that  huge  city,  and  wondering  where 
would  be  the  best  point  of  attack,  and  how  it  would  be  captured,  he  is 
astonished  by  the  appearance  of  a  statelj^  personage  who  bears  a  sword  in 
his  hand.  Brave  Joshua,  unconscious  of  anything  like  fear,  advances  at 
©nee  to  the  apparent  interloper  and  demands  of  him,  "  Art  thou  for  us,  or 
for  our  adversaries?"  He  little  guessed  in  what  august  presence  he  was 
standing  until  a  majestic  voice  said,  "  Nay,  but  as  captain  of  the  host 
of  the  Lord  am  I  now  come."  Then  Joshua  discerning  the  divinity  of 
the  celestial  warrior  bowed  and  worshipped,  and  humbly  enquired  what  he 


138  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

ehould  do ;  and  then  after  he  had  been  instructed,  he  rose  and  went  accord- 
iiior  to  the  Lord's  directions  to  the  capture  of  the  city  of  pahn-trees. 

The  children  of  Israel  may  be  likened  to  yonder  gallant  vessel,  pre- 
pared for  a  long  voyage.  All  the  cargo  is  on  board  that  is  needed,  all  the 
stores  are  there,  and  every  man  in  his  place.  In  all  respects,  the  good  ship 
is  fully  equipped,  but  why  does  she  linger?  Why  do  not  the  sailors 
weigh  the  anchor?  If  you  ask  the  man  at  the  helm,  he  will  tell  you, 
*'  We  are  waiting  for  the  captain."  A  good  and  sufficient  reason  indeed, 
for  till  the  captain  has  come  on  board,  it  is  idle  for  the  vessel  to  put 
out  to  sea.  So  here  Israel  had  been  circumcised,  and  the  blessed  feast 
of  the  paschal  lamb  had  been  celebrated,  but  still  they  must  not  go  to 
the  conflict  until  the  captain  himself  had  arrived;  and  here,  to  Joshua's 
joy,  the  angel  of  the  presence  of  the  Most  High  appeared  to  claim  the 
presidency  of  the  war,  and  lead  forth  the  hosts  of  God  to  certain  victory. 
Brethren,  this  is  precisely  the  condition  of  this  church  at  the  present 
moment ;  we  have  endeavoured,  I  thinJi,  to  draw  near  unto  God  and  to  abide 
in  his  love ;  we  have  sought  to  purge  ourselves  from  sin,  and  to  be 
holy  even  as  he  is  holy ;  but  still  this  will  not  suffice,  we  want 
the  divine  presence,  and  we  are  now  bidden  to  pause  awhile  and  to 
seek  it,  prayerfully,  that  in  its  matchless  power,  we  may  go  forward 
euccessfully. 

I.  I  shall  ask  your  earnest  attention,  this  morning,  to  two  or  three 
torief  rules  for  our  present  solemn  engagements.      First,  realise  the 

FACT  OF  THE  DIVINE  PRESENCE. 

Jesus  himself  comes  to  this  holy  war.  Joshua  saw  a  man  clad  in 
armour,  equipped  for  war.  Cannot  the  eyes  of  your  faith  see  the 
same?  There  he  stands,  Jesus,  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  yet  a  man. 
Most  surely  God,  but  with  equal  certainty  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of 
our  flesh.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  his  church ;  he  walketh  amongst  the 
golden  candlesticks.  His  promise  is,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even 
unto  the  end  of  the  world."  1  do  not  wish  to  talk,  but  I  desire  rather 
that  you  should  exercise  your  own  minds,  your  faith,  your  spiritual 
powers,  and  vividly  believe  that  Jesus  is  here ;  so  believe  it,  that  your 
inner  eye  beholds  what  you  believe.  The  Son  of  Man  is  here,  as  surely 
here  as  he  was  with  the  disciples  at  the  lake,  when  they  saw  coals  of 
fire,  and  fish  laid  thereon,  and  bread ;  he  is  here  to  talk  with  us  by 
his  Si)irit,  as  he  did  to  Peter  and  to  the  rest  of  the  disciples  on  that 
■memorable  day.  Not  carnally,  but  still  in  real  truth,  Jesus  is  where 
his  people  meet  together.  Joshua  saw  him  with  his  sword  in  his  hand. 
O  that  Christ  might  come  in  our  midst  with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  in  his 
band ;  come  to  effect  deeds  of  love  but  yet  deeds  of  power ;  come  with  his 
two-edged  sword  to  smite  our  sins,  to  cut  to  the  heart  his  adversaries, 
to  slay  their  unbelief,  to  lay  their  iniquities  dead  before  him.  The 
«word  is  drawn,  not  scabbarded,  as  alas!  it  has  been  so  long  in  many 
-churches,  but  made  bare  for  present  active  use.  It  is  in  his  hand^  not  in 
the  mmister's  hand,  not  even  in  an  angel's  hand,  but  the  sword  di-awn  is  in 
Ms  hand.  Oh,  what  power  there  is  in  the  gospel  when  Jesus  holds  the 
hilt,  and  what  gashes  it  makes  into  hearts  that  were  hard  as  adamant, 
when  Jesus  cuts  right  and  left  at  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men .' 
Brethren,  seek  this  presence,  and  seeking  it,  believe  it ;  and  when  you 
hear  the  gospel  preached,  or  when  you  meet  together  for  prayer,  think 


JO-HUA'S   VISION.  139 

you  see  in  the  centre  of  the  assembly  the  Champion  of  Israel,  with 
uplifted  sword,  prepared  to  do  great  exploits,  as  in  days  of  old. 

The  glorious  man  whom  Joshua  saw,  was  07i  his  side.  The  day  shall 
come  when  the  ungodly  shall  see  this  man  with  his  sword  drawn ;  but 
in  answer  to  their  question,  "Art  thou  for  us,  or  for  our  adversaries?" 
they  shall  find  him  to  be  the  fiercest  of  their  foes.  In  the  midst  of  his 
church,  Christ  carries  a  sword  only  for  the  purposes  of  love  to  them. 
Oh,  how  blessed  it  will  be  if  you  can  know  that  out  of  his  mouth  there 
goeth  a  two-edged  sword,  like  unto  a  flame  of  fire ;  and  if  you  dare  to 
bring  your  heart  near  to  that  sword,  that  it  may  cut  and  kill  in  you 
everything  obnoxious  to  the  divine  will,  and  then  can  bring  your 
children  and  kinsfolk,  and  those  that  sit  in  these  pews  side  by  side  with 
you,  and  say,  "  0  Master,  let  thy  sword  of  fire  go  through  them  accord- 
ing to  thy  word,  '  I  kill  and  I  make  alive,  I  wound  and  I  heal,'  0  kill, 
that  tliey  may  live ;  0  wound,  that  they  may  be  healed. 

"  Thine  arrows  sharply  pierce  the  heart 
Of  foemen  of  the  King  ; 
And  under  thy  dominion's  rule 
The  people  down  do  bring. 

O  thou  that  art  the  mighty  One, 

Thy  sword  gird  on  thy  thigh, 
Ev'n  with  thy  glory  excellent, 

And  with  thy  majesty." 

The  divine  presence  then  is  what  we  desire,  and  if  we  have  it,  brethren, 
faith  at  once  is  encouraged.  It  was  enough  for  the  army  of  Cromwell 
to  know  that  he  was  there,  the  ever  victorious,  the  irresistible,  to  lead  on 
his  Ironsides  to  the  fray.  Many  a  time  the  presence  of  an  old  Roman 
general  was  equal  to  another  legion ;  as  soon  as  the  cohorts  perceived 
that  he  was  come  whose  eagle  eye  watclied  every  motion  of  the  enemy, 
and  whose  practised  hand  led  his  battalions  upon  the  most  salient  points 
of  attack,  each  man's  blood  leaped  within  him,  and  he  grasped  his 
Bword  and  rushed  forward  secure  of  success.  My  brethren,  our  King  is 
in  the  midst  of  us,  and  our  faith  should  be  in  active  exercise.  "  The  shout 
of  a  King  is  in  the  midst  of  us,"  it  is  said,  for  where  the  King  is  there 
the  people  shout  for  joy,  and  because  of  confidence  of  victory.  The 
preacher  may  preach,  but  what  is  that  ?  but  if  the  King  be  there,  then 
it  is  preaching  in  very  deed.  The  congregations  may  have  met,  and 
they  may  have  gone  again.  "  The  panoramic  view  which  has  dissolved," 
you  say.  Ah,  so  it  may  seem  to  you,  but  if  the  Spirit  of  God  was  there, 
all  that  has  been  done  will  abide,  and  remain  even  to  that  day  of 
judgment,  when  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is. 
"  Nothing  but  a  simple  girl  sitting  down  to  talk  to  a  few  little  children 
about  their  souls."  Just  so,  but  if  the  Lord  be  there,  what  awe  gathers 
round  that  spot !  If  the  King  himself  sit  in  that  class,  what  deeds  are 
done  that  shall  make  the  angels  of  heaven  sing  anew  for  joy! 
"Nothing  but  a  humble  man,  unlettered,  earnest,  but  not  eloquent, 
standing  in  the  corner  of  a  street,  addressing  a  few  hundred  people.  His 
talk  will  soon  be  forgotten."  Precisely  so,  but  if  the  King  be  there  it  shall 
never  be  forgotten.  The  foot  prints  of  every  true  servant  of  the  Lord 
shall  not  be  in  the  sand,  but  in  the  enduring  brass,  the  record  of  which 


140  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

shall  outlast  the  wreck  of  matter.  When  the  King;  is  with  us,  faith  is 
confident,  because  God  girds  faith  as  with  a  golden  girdle,  and  from 
head  to  foot  clothes  her  with  a  panoply  of  armour,  and  puts  a  sword 
into  her  hand  which  is  all  destroying,  and  with  which  she  cuts  through 
coats  of  mail,  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us? " 

When  the  King  is  with  his  people,  then  hope  is  greatly  encouraged, 
for  saith  she,  "  Who  can  stand  against  the  Lord  of  Hosts?"  There  must 
be  conversions ;  it  is  no  longer  a  question  of  trust  and  expectation,  but 
of  absolute  certainty  when  Jesus  is  at  the  preaching.  My  brethren,  if 
by  earnest  prayer  we  shall  really  bring  the  King  into  our  midst  to-day, 
as  I  am  persuaded  we  shall,  and  if  we  keep  him  here,  holding  him  by 
our  entreaties,  and  by  our  tears,  which  are  the  golden  chains  that  bind 
Christ  to  his  people,  then  we  need  not  think  that  there  shall  be  good 
done,  nor  hope  so,  but  it  must  be  so,  it  shall  be  so,  for  where  Christ  is, 
there  is  the  manifestation  of  the  omnipotencs  of  deity,  and  the  hardest 
of  hearts  feel  the  influence  thereof 

Where  Jesus  is,  love  becomes  mflamed,  for  oh  !  of  all  the  things  in  the 
world  that  can  set  the  heart  burning,  there  is  nothing  like  the  presence 
of  Jesus.  A  glimpse  of  him  will  overcome  us,  so  that  we  shall  be  almost 
ready  to  say,  "  Turn  away  thine  eyes  from  me,  for  they  have  overcome 
me."  Oh,  but  a  smell  of  the  aloes,  and  the  myrrh,  and  the  cassia  which 
drop  from  his  perfumed  garments,  but  a  smell  of  these  I  say,  and  the 
sick  and  the  faint  among  us  shall  grow  strong.  Oh,  but  a  moment's 
leaning  of  the  head  upon  that  gracious  bosom,  and  a  reception  of  his 
divine  love  into  our  poor  cold  hearts,  and  we  shall  be  cold  no  longer, 
but  shall  glow  like  seraphs,  being  made  equal  to  every  labour,  and 
capable  of  every  suflering.  Then  shall  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  be  upon 
us,  and  our  old  men  shall  see  visions,  and  our  young  men  shall 
di'eam  di'eams,  and  upon  the  servants  and  the  handmaidens  will  God 
pour  out  his  Spirit.  If  we  do  but  know  that  Jesus  is  here,  every  power 
will  be  developed,  and  every  grace  will  be  strengthened,  and  we  shall 
cast  ourselves  into  the  Lord's  battle  with  heart,  and  soul,  and  strength. 
There  is  not  a  single  part  of  our  inner  man  which  will  not  be  bettered 
by  the  presence  of  Christ ;  therefore  is  this  to  be  desired  above  all  things. 

Brethren,  suppose  that  Christ  is  here,  this  morning,  Ms  presence  will 
be  most  clearly  ascertained  by  those  ivho  are  most  like  Mm.  Joshua  was 
favoured  with  this  sight  because  he  alone  had  eyes  that  could  bear  it. 
I  do  not  read  that  even  Caleb  saw  this  man  with  his  sword  drawn;  only 
Joshua  saw  him,  because  Joshua  was  the  most  spiritual  and  the  most 
active.  If  you  desire  to  see  Christ  you  must  grow  to  be  like  him,  and 
labour  to  serve  him  with  heart,  and  soul,  and  strength.  Christ  conies 
not  in  the  visions  of  the  night  to  those  who  toss  upon  the  bed  of  indo- 
lence, but  he  reveals  hhnself  in  the  night  watches  to  those  who  learn  to 
watch  and  war.  Bring  yourselves,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  into 
union  with  Christ's  desires,  and  motives,  and  plans  of  action,  and  you 
are  likely  to  see  him.  I  would  that  all  of  you  were  Joshuas ;  but  if  not, 
if  but  some  shall  perceive  him,  we  shall  still  receive  a  blessing. 

I  am  sure  this  presence  of  Christ  will  be  needed  by  us  all.  All  of  you 
who  love  Jesus  intend  to  do  him  service  during  this  next  month,  and, 
indeed,  I  hope  as  long  as  you  live.  Now,  there  is  nothing  good  which 
you  can  do  without  Christ.     "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,"  is  a 


JOSHUA'S   VISION.  14^1 

great  and  undoubted  fact.  If  you  meet  to  pray,  you  shall  not  pray 
acceptably  unless  he  be  with  you.  If  you  teach,  or  preach,  or  whatever 
you  do,  however  small  the  labour,  you  shall  accomplish  nothing  unle.>a 
it  be  through  his  power,  and  through  his  manifested  presence  with  you, 
Go  not  to  warfare  at  your  own  charges,  but  wait  upon  your  Master. 
taiTying  at  Jerusalem  until  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high. 

But,  brethren,  Jesus  Christ's  presence  r)imj  he  had.  Do  not  despond 
and  say  that  in  the  olden  times  the  Master  revealed  himself,  but  he  will 
not  do  so  now.  He  will,  he  will,  he  will.  His  promise  is  as  good  as 
ever.  He  delights  to  be  with  us  even  as  with  our  fathers.  If  he  doth 
not  come  it  is  because  we  hinder  him — we  are  not  straitened  in  him,  but 
straitened  in  our  own  bowels.  Let  me  persuade  you  that  all  the  great 
things  which  were  done  at  Pentecost  can  be  done  again  in  this  Taber- 
nacle. Let  me  persuade  you  that  all  the  wondrous  conversions  which 
were  wrought  in  any  of  the  ages  of  the  church  may  be  repeated  at  this 
hour. 

Do  not  say  that  Luther,  or  Calvin,  or  Whitfield,  or  Wesley  were  great 
men,  and  therefore  around  them  great  things  gathered ;  my  brethren, 
the  weakest  of  men  may  be  more  honoured  than  the  greatest,  if  God  so 
wills  it.  Our  weakness,  want  of  learning,  want  of  eloquence,  and  what 
not — I  look  upon  these  as  advantages  rather  than  not,  for  if  we  wers 
eminent,  we  might  perhaps  claim  some  of  the  glory,  but  if  we  be  "  less 
than  nothing  and  vanity,"  then  is  there  a  clear  stage  for  the  divine 
operations.  And  why  should  we  not  so  see  in  this  place  such  a  revival 
as  shall  shake  all  England,  and  stir  the  dry  bones  in  the  valley  of  vision 
at  this  day  as  they  never  were  stirred  since  apostolic  times.  We  have 
but  to  expect  it,  to  believe  it,  to  pray  for  it,  to  work  for  it,  and  we  shall 
have  it.  God's  clouds  still  pour  down  the  water  floods  as  plenteously  as 
when  Elisha  went  up  to  the  top  of  Carmel.  The  Lord  thundereth 
mightily  against  his  enemies  at  this  day,  as  when  he  went  forth  with  his 
people  in  the  days  of  yore.  Think  not  that  the  Almighty  has  ceased  to  do 
marvels — the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  still  the  king  eternal,  immortal,  and 
invisible,  with  an  arm  which  doeth  wonders.  You  have  still  only  to 
plead  the  power  of  the  precious  blood  and  the  meritorious  death  of 
Christ,  to  see  wonders  in  this  year  of  grace  which  shall  even  eclipse  any 
that  your  fathers  saw,  or  heard  of  in  the  old  time  before  them.  May 
God  grant  to  each  believer  among  us  the  vision  of  the  godlike  man  with 
the  sword  drawn  in  his  hand,  and  then  may  we  go  forth  in  the  strength 
which  he  alone  confers. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  understand  the  Lord's  position  in  the 
MIDST  OF  HIS  PEOPLE.  "  As  Captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord  am  I 
now  come." 

What  a  relief  this  must  have  been  for  Joshua.  Perhaps  he  thought 
himself  the  captain ;  but  now  the  responsibility  was  taken  from  him  ; 
he  was  to  be  the  lieutenant,  but  the  King  himself  would  marshal  his 
hosts.  I  feel  it  no  small  relief  to  my  own  mind  to  feel  that  though  I 
have  been  at  your  head  these  fourteen  years,  leading  you  on  in  God's 
name  to  Christian  service,  yet  I  am  not  your  captain,  but  there 
is  a  greater  one,  the  presence  angel  of  the  Most  High,  the  Lord  Jesus — 
ne  is  in  our  midst  as  Commander-in-chief.  Though  my  responsibilities 
are  heavy,  yet  the  leadership  is  not  with  me.     He  is  a  leader  and 


1J^2  METROPOLITA]^   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

commander  for  the  people.  Brethren,  wherever  Christ  is,  we  must  re- 
collect that  he  is  Commander -in-chwf  to  us  all.  We  must  never 
tolerate  in  the  church  any  great  man  to  domineer  over  us ;  we  must 
have  no  one  to  be  Lord  and  Master  save  Jesus.  Christ  is  the  Field- 
marshal,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation ;  and  if  you  are  a  member  of  the 
church  of  God,  you  must  own  this,  not  as  a  general  fact  only,  but  as  a 
fact  particularly  in  your  case.  Christ  is  your  Master.  You  are  not  to 
say,  "I  prefer  this  or  that  doctrine."  What  have  you  to  do  with  likes 
or  dislikes  ?  Believe  what  he  tells  you.  You  are  not  to  say,  "  I  prefer 
a  certain  form  of  worship."  What  have  you  to  do  with  preferences  ? 
Worship  as  the  Master  bids  you.  Alas  !  for  the  day  when  whims  and 
tastes  and  fancies  come  into  the  Christian  church  to  lead  the  people. 
All  this  Puseyism  which  we  hear  so  much  outcry  about,  is  simply  the 
putting  up  of  taste  into  the  place  of  simple  obedience  to  Christ.  If 
we  would  but  just  keep  close  to  Christ's  word,  we  should  be  right 
enough.  I  pray  each  believer  here  to  recollect  that  he  is  in  no  respect 
his  own  master  in  the  things  of  God,  but  tliat  Christ  is  Commander-in- 
chief.  "  Is  it  of  any  use  to  send  missionaries  to  India  ?"  said  some 
one  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  "  What  are  your  marching  orders  ?" 
said  the  Duke.  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to 
every  creature."  Those  are  our  marching  orders  We  have  nothing 
to  do  with  whether  they  are  prudent  orders  or  not;  they  are  sure  to  be 
good  if  they  come  from  Jwn  !  Our  duty  is  to  do  as  our  Commander 
bids  us  to  do.  Every  word  of  Christ,  if  we  would  see  him  do  wonders 
in  our  midst,  must  be  obeyed.  Not  the  great  precepts  only,  but  the 
little  ones  too.  It  behoves  Christians  to  have  done  with  that  cant 
about  non-essentials.  My  brethren,  every  command  of  Christ  is  essen- 
tial to  us  as  servants.  Not  essential  to  our  salvation — we  are  saved; 
that  is  not  the  question  for  us  to  raise ;  but  being  saved,  and  being 
servants  of  Christ,  every  command  wliich  comes  from  the  great  Captain 
it  is  essential  for  every  soldier  to  keep.  It  matters  not  though  it  be 
simply  a  ceremonial,  yet  still  we  have  no  right  to  alter  it.  What  would 
the  court-martial  say  to  any  of  the  private  soldiers,  who,  having  received 
an  order  from  a  captain,  should  say,  "  Well,  I  did  not  consider  it  to  be 
exceedingly  important "?  "  Drum  him  out  of  the  regiment,  sir,  there 
is  an  end  to  all  discipline  in  the  army  when  soldiers  criticise  their 
orders."  So  is  it  with  Christ's  law.  We  have  no  right  to  say,  for 
instance  about  believers'  baptism,  "Well,  it  is  a  non-essential."  Who 
told  you  so  ?  If  Jesus  commands  it.  obey  it,  and  if  it  be  the  Lord's 
law,  make  haste  and  delay  not  to  keep  the  Master's  statute.  I  single 
out  that  one  precept,  but  there  are  many  others  which  are  perhaps  of 
greater  unportance,  if  we  are  allowed  to  say  greater  or  less  about  any- 
thing which  Christ  has  bidden  us  do.  My  brethren,  do  let  us  seek  now 
to  put  our  minds  into  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  taught  what 
the  great  Captain's  will  is,  and  when  we  know  it,  let  our  sou.ls  bend 
under  it,  as  the  osier  bends  in  the  breath  of  the  wind,  and  as  the  boat 
upon  the  sea  is  driven  to  and  fro  in  the  gale.  Down  with  thee,  self, 
down  with  thee!  Carnal  judgment  and  foolish  reason,  lie  still !  Let 
the  word  of  God  be  paramount  within  the  soul,  all  opposition  being 
hushed. 

Brethren,  if  we  do  not  act  with  the  Captain,  disappointment  will  ha 


I 


JOSHUA'S   VISION.  143 

sure  tofolloiv.  The  Lord  had  issued  orders  that  none  of  the  tribes  should 
take  of  the  accursed  spoil  of  Jericho.  Achan  did  so.  I  have  often 
wondered  that  only  Achan  did  it,  but  that  one  Achan  brought  defeat 
upon  Israel  at  the  gates  of  Ai.  I  wonder  how  many  Achans  there  are 
here  this  morning.  I  should  feel  myself  very  much  at  ease  if  I  thought 
there  were  only  one,  but  I  am  afraid  that  there  are  many  who  have 
the  accursed  thing  hidden  within  them,  the  love  of  money,  or  wrong; 
ways  of  doing  business,  or  unforgiving  tempers,  or  an  envious  spirit  to- 
wards their  fellow  Christians.  Now,  if  the  possession  of  these  bad  things 
by  one  will  stop  the  blessing,  we  are  in  a  very  evil  plight,  but  he  is  in  a 
worse  plight  by  far  who  is  the  occasion  of  the  evil.  Where  are  you, 
Achan?  God  will  find  you  out  even  if  we  do  not.  He  will  bring  us  all 
by  our  tribes,  by  our  families,  by  our  households,  and  then  man  by  man,, 
and  woe  unto  the  son  of  Carmi  if  he  be  taken.  Brethren,  the  violation 
of  the  law  of  the  captain  may  bring  defeat  upon  the  whole  company. 

And  where  the  law  is  not  obstinately  and  wilfully  violated,  yet  its 
neglect  will  cause  much  trouble.  They  were  commanded  to  make  no 
covenant  with  the  Canaanites,  but  in  a  thoughtless  hour,  the  Gribeonites 
came  like  persons  from  a  far  country,  they  believed  their  deceitful  story, 
and  made  a  covenant  with  tliem ;  and  this  became  a  trouble  to  Israel 
long  afterwards.  If  as  a  church  we  forget  the  law  of  Christ,  even  thou^L'h 
we  do  not  contemptuously  break  it,  if  we  ignorantly  forget  it,  we  may 
expect  no  small  amount  of  evil  to  flow  from  it.  Do  not  tolerate  the  idea 
that  God  punishes  his  people  for  sin  in  the  sense  of  punitive  justice,  but 
always  hold  it  for  certain,  that  the  Lord  chastises  his  people  for  sin 
as  a  father  chastises  his  children,  and  that  the  great  Head  of  the  church 
will  not  suffer  his  laws  to  be  broken  with  impunity  by  his  own  people. 
I  wish  I  could  speak  to  you  with  the  earnestness  which  I  feel  boiling  up 
within  my  soul.  I  would,  my  brethren,  that  we  should  keep  our  Master's 
commands  in  every  jot  and  tittle,  depending  upon  his  presence,  feeling- 
it  to  be  here,  not  daring  in  his  presence  to  olfend,  but  yielding  up  to 
him  the  reins  of  government  in  all  respects,  that  we  might  then  have 
his  blessing.  I  want  that  we  should  all  keep  to  tlie  word  of  God,, 
minding  each  precept  as  far  as  we  understand  it.  I  want,  moreover,  that 
we  should  be  attentive  to  that  mind  of  Christ  which  is  often  expressed 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  divine  monitions  in  our  minds,  that  the  law  of 
the  book  may  be  with  us,  and  the  law  of  the  Spirit  within  us.  If  we 
are  obedient  to  both  these,  we  shall  be  prejiared  like  Joshua  to  advance 
to  the  war. 

III.  Thirdly,  and  very  briefly.     Our  third  rule  is  worship  him  who 

IS   PRESENT   W^ITH   US. 

Joshua,  it  is  said,  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth.  Worship  is  the  high- 
est elevation  of  the  spirit,  and  yet  the  lowliest  prostration  of  the  souL 
If  Christ  be  here,  brethren,  when  you  reach  your  homes  get  a  little  time 
of  quiet  and  worship,  and  when  you  come  up  again,  this  evening,  in 
your  songs  and  prayers  truly  worship  the  ever  present  God,  bow  down 
in  the  lowliest  reverence  of  your  subdued  spirit  as  though  you  actually 
were  in  heaven.  If  you  have  no  wings  with  which  to  veil  your  face, 
still  cover  it  with  shame  ;  if  you  have  no  crown  to  cast,  yet  sucli  talent 
as  you  have,  lay  it  all  down  reverentially  before  him.  Worship  the  Son 
of  God !    Then,  when  you  have  so  done,  give  up  yourself  to  his  command: 


144:  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

say  to  him,  "What  saith  my  Lord  unto  his  servant?"  I  wish  you 
oould  spend  this  afternoon,  those  of  you  who  are  not  actively  engaged, 
in  trying  to  get  an  answer  to  this  question :  "  What  saith  my  Lord 
unt©  his  servant  ?  What  is  there  for  me  to  learn,  for  me  to  feel,  for  me 
to  do  ?  and  as  I  would  help  my  brethren  during  this  month.  Lord, 
what  part  of  the  work  am  I  to  take  ?"  When  you  have  done  this,  dear 
friends,  I  want  you  to  imitate  Joshua  in  the  third  thing,  namely,  put 
off  your  shoes  from  off  your  feet.  Joshua,  perhaps,  had  not  felt  what  a 
solemn  thing  it  was  to  fight  for  God,  to  fight  as  God's  executioner 
against  condemned  men.  He  must  put  his  shoes  oflF,  therefore.  We 
never  can  expect  a  blessing  if  we  go  about  God's  work  fiippantly.  I 
shudder  when  I  see  any  sitting  at  the  Lord's  table  who  can  indulge  in 
light  remarks  or  in  wandering  thoughts,  on  so  solemn  an  occasion. 
What  hast  thou  to  do  here,  not  having  on  a  wedding  garment  ?  There 
are  some  of  us  whose  besetting  sin  is  levity  of  spirit.  Cheerfulness  we 
are  to  cultivate,  but  we  must  beware  lest  levity  become  a  cankerworm 
to  our  graces.  Brethren,  this  next  month  must  be  a  holy  month  unto 
us.  I  ask  our  young  and  our  old  friends  alike  to  seek  a  quiet  and  sober 
spirit.  To  seek  to  save  souls  from  going  down  to  the  pit  is  no  pastime : 
to  talk  of  Jesus  is  no  trifle.  We  do  not  meet  to  pray  in  sport ;  we  do 
not  gather  together  in  supplication  as  a  mere  matter  of  form.  Angels 
are  in  our  midst  observing  us,  the  King  himself  is  here.  How  would 
you  behave  if  you  actually  saw  Jesus  with  your  eyes  ?  If  I  were  to 
vacate  this  pulpit  and  the  crucified  One  stood  here,  stretching  out  his 
pierced  hands  and  looking  down  upon  you  with  the  mild  radiance  of  his 
sovereign  love,  how  would  you  feel?  Ask  to  feel  just  so,  tor  he  is  here. 
Faith  can  perceive  him.  Ask  to  feel  just  so  at  this  present  moment,  and 
so  to  go  out  to  your  work  this  afternoon  and  all  the  remaining  days  of 
your  life,  as  a  servant  of  God  who  is  standing  in  the  presence  of  his 
Lord  upon  holy  ground,  and  cannot  therefore  afford  to  trifle,  since  he 
has  solemn  work  to  do,  and  means  to  do  it  in  his  Master's  name. 

IV.  To  conclude,  let  us  now  even  before  we  separate,  advance  to 
ACTION,  according  to  the  Master's  command. 

Unconverted  men  and  women,  you  are  our  Jericho,  we  wish  to  conquer 
you  for  Christ.  Our  desire  is  to  win  you  to  Jesus  for  your  own  good 
and  for  his  glory.  Now,  what  are  we  to  do  with  you?  Joshua  was 
bidden  to  go  round  the  city  seven  times.  We  would  preach  to  you  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  not  seven  times,  but  seventy  times  seven.  They  were 
to  blow  the  rams'-horns.  The  rams'-horn  was  most  mean  as  to  matter, 
most  dull  as  to  sound,  and  the  least  showy  as  to  appearance.  So,  not 
with  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  sunplicity  do  we  warn  you 
with  the  rough  sound  of  our  ram's  horn,  that  unless  you  repent,  you 
must  perish.  Sin  must  be  punished.  Sin  is  upon  you,  and  God  must 
punish  you.  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  not  one  jot  or  tittle 
of  his  law  can  fail ;  and  this  is  one  part  of  his  law,  "  The  soul  that 
fiinneth,  it  shall  die."  You  have  sinned,  you  are  always  sinning,  and 
die  you  must.  Some  of  you  are  going  from  bad  to  worse.  If  you  do 
not  live  in  outward  sin,  yet  the  sins  of  thought  and  heart  will  condemn 
yon.  You  will  die  ere  long,  and  when  you  die  the  Lord  will  cast  you 
into  the  place  which  he  has  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  Be 
net  deceived,  there  may  be  but  a  step  between  you  and  death ;  or  if 


JOSHUA'S   VISION.  145 

your  life  be  prolonged  for  a  little  season,  yet  how  soon  will  it  b«  ever. 
Eternity !  eternity !  how  dread  to  you  if  you  plunge  into  it  unprepared, 
to  face  an  angiy  Judge,  no  righteousness  of  Christ  to  plead,  and  no 
blood  in  which  to  wash  your  guilty  soul.  You  are  standing,  some  of  you, 
between  the  jaws  of  perdition.  The  gospel  has  been  preached  to  you  and 
you  have  neglected  it.  You  have  been  brought  up  by  godly  parents,  and 
you  have  despised  their  admonitions.  Therefore  wrath  will  come  upon  you 
to  the  uttermost.  As  sure  as  you  live  you  shall  be  driven  from  Jehovah's 
presence  into  the  place  where  hope  cannot  follow  you,  and  where  mercy 
will  never  seek  you.  We  must  sound  this  ram's-horn ;  we  only  pray 
that  God  may  bless  our  warning  voice  to  you. 

After  the  rams'-horns  came  the  ark,  which  the  priests  carried  round 
and  round  the  city.  That  ark  was  the  type  of  Christ.  We  be§:  to 
bring  Christ  before  yon,  ye  unconverted  ones.  Jesus  Christ  came  mto 
this  world  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost,  God  smote 
him  instead  of  us.  He  took  the  sins  of  his  people,  and  God  punished 
him  for  our  sins  instead  of  punishing  us,  Clirist  is  the  great  Substitute 
for  sin.  If  you  trust  him  you  shall  ive.  If  you  will  take  him  this 
day  to  be  your  Saviour,  and  to  be  your  Master  and  your  Lord,  you 
shall  never  perish,  for  God  has  pledged  his  word  for  it,  that  if  you  be- 
lieve in  him  you  shall  be  saved,  0  that  you  wo  -Id  look  to  Christ,  and 
live!  Your  good  works  are  notliing,  your  tears  and  prayers  all  go  for 
nothing  as  to  merit,  but  if  you  look  to  Jesus  hanging  from  yonder  cross, 
you  siiall  live.  If  you  will  trust  yours  If  with  him  who  is  now  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  eternal  Father,  crowned  with  many  crowns,  sooner 
shall  heaven's  high  throne  be  shaken  than  your  soul  be  suflPired  to  perish. 
Only  believe  in  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  live;  for  this  is  the  gospel,  "  He  that 
believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved,  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned,"  We  seek  not  to  mince  matters  with  you — damned  you  will  be 
unless  you  trust  Christ,  damned  you  never  shall  be  if  you  will  come  and 
cast  yourself  before  him.  "  Kiss  the  Son  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish 
by  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little,"  Suppose  that  in  the 
visions  of  the  night,  this  night  when  you  are  on  your  bed  you  should  sud- 
denly see  in  your  chamber  the  man  with  a  sword  drawn  in  his  hand !  You 
would  not  need  to  ask  the  question,  "  Art  thou  for  us  or  for  our  ad- 
versaries ? "  for  your  own  consi  ience  would  soon  tell  you.  Suppose  you 
should  hear  a  solemn  voice  declare,  "  The  harvest  is  past,  and  the 
summer  is  ended,  and  you  are  not  ^aved."  "  Because  I  have  called 
and  ye  refused ;  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded 
....  I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity;  I  will  mock  when  your  fear 
Cometh."  Suppose  you  saw  that  sword  uplifted,  and  about  to  smite 
you,  would  yon  not  start  in  your  dream,  and  your  face  be  covered  with 
a  clammy  sweat,  feeling  horrors  indescribable?  Yet  such  is  your  case 
to-day;  except  you  repent,  such  will  be  your  case  eternally.  I  bless 
G.d  that  now  our  Lord  Jesus  has  no  sword  drawn  in  his  hand,  but 
he  comes  to  you  with  open  hands,  and  saith,  "  Come  unto  me  all  ye 
that  labour,  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  With  tears 
be  invites  you  to  come  to  him,  persuades  you  to  come.  0  wherefore  do 
ye  tarry,  wherefore  do  you  turn  your  backs  upon  your  own  mercy,  and 
seal  your  own  death  warrant  ?  God  grant  that  you  may  come  to  Jesus, 
and  ere  he  grasps  that  sharp  destroying  sword. 


146  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Lastly,  brethren,  we  are  not  only  to  sound  the  ram's-hom  of  warn- 
ing, and  to  bear  round  and  round  the  sinner's  conscience  the  ark  of 
Christ's  gi'ace,  but  all  the  host  must  engage  in  the  work.  Did  you  notice 
that  the  whole  of  the  people  were  to  compass  the  city!  it  wordd  not  fall 
else  ;  and  they  were  to  shout,  too,  at  the  last.  I  want  you,  my  fellow 
members,  to  unite  in  our  earnest  efforts  to  win  souls  for  Christ.  I  have 
a  right  to  claim  it,  and  I  now  entreat  you  to  fulfil  the  claim.  You  pro- 
fess to  have  been  bought  with  the  Lord's  blood,  and  to  be  his  disciples. 
I  ask  you  all,  if  you  be  sincere  in  your  professions,  come  with  us  round 
about  this  Jericho,  every  one  of  you.  If  ye  cannot  all  come  up  to 
the  public  prayer-meetings,  yet  send  us  your  hearts,  pray  for  sinners,  plead 
for  the  unconverted,  give  the  eternal  Leader  no  rest  till  he  be  pleased 
to  use  his  great  power  for  their^  conversion.  I  am  almost  inclined 
to  fall  on  my  knees  to  ask  you  church  members  to  rally  round 
us  at  this  hour.  If  you  owe  your  conversion  to  me  under  God, 
as  many  of  you  do,  I  charge  you  by  every  filial  tie  you  feel,  desert 
me  not  just  now.  If  you  have  ever  been  comforted,  as  I  know  some  of 
you  have,  if  I  have  ever  been  God's  voice  to  your  souls,  I  beseech  you 
return  to  me  this  kindness  by  drawing  very  near  to  God  in  prayer  for 
the  souls  of  others.  For  your  own  children's  souls  be  very  earnest ; 
for  the  souls  of  your  servants,  and  kinsfolk,  and  neighbours,  wrestle 
with  God  even  unto  tears ;  and  if  you  will  not  do  it,  I  had  almost  said 
I  had  sooner  you  were  not  with  us.  If  you  will  not  pray,  if  you  will 
not  join  in  the  common  supplication,  wherefore  do  ye  cumber  us  ?  0 
Meroz,  take  care  lest  thou  be  accused  if  thou  come  not  up  to  the  help 
of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty  !  But  you 
will  come,  God  will  be  with  us,  and  show  us  his  bare  right  hand 
resplendent  in  our  midst,  and  unto  Him  shall  be  the  praise  for  ever  and 
ever. 


1 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Joshua  vL  10  to  end. 


DAGON'S  UPS  AND   DOWNS. 


^^  ^^tm(rt( 


DELIVERED   BY 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  When  the  Philistines  took  the  ark  of  God,  they  brought  it  into  the  house  of 
Dagon,  and  set  it  by  Dagon.  And  when  they  of  Ashdod  arose  early  on  the  morrow, 
behold,  Dagon  was  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  earth  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord. 
And  tlxey  took  Dagon,  and  set  him  in  his  place  again.  And  when  they  arose  early 
on  the  morrow  morning,  behold,  Dagon  was  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  ground 
before  the  ark  of  the  Lord ;  and  the  head  of  Dagon  and  both  the  palms  of  his  hands 
were  cut  off  upon  the  threshold  ;  only  the  stump  of  Dagon  was  left  to  him." — 
1  Samuel  v.  2 — 4. 

The  ark  of  the  Lord  was  captured  by  the  Philistines  though  it  was 
guarded  by  all  the  men  of  arms  that  Israel  could  muster  for  the  battle. 
It  came  to  no  hurt  when  it  was  surrounded  by  unarmed  priests : 
although  the  times  were  exceedingly  disturbed  and  perilous  all  through 
the  dreary  period  of  the  Judges,  yet  never  was  the  ark  a  captive  till  it 
was  protected  by  the  carnal  weapon.  When  those  whom  God  had 
ordained  to  take  care  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  had  it  in  charge  it  was 
safe  enough  ;  but  when  the  proud  banners  of  the  State  and  the  warlike 
array  of  the  nation  formed  the  body-guard  of  the  sacred  shrine  the  ark 
of  God  was  taken.  When  the  civil  power  was  joined  with  the  spiritual, 
and  the  arm  of  flesh  came  in  to  patronise  and  to  take  into  connection 
with  itself  the  arm  of  God's  strength,  then  it  was  that  the  ark  was 
borne  away  in  triumph  by  its  foes.  All  through  human  history  you  will 
find  the  explanation  of  this  instructive  fact :  let  God's  truth  alone,  and 
it  will  take  care  of  itself  without  the  aid  of  kings  and  princes,  laws  or 
establishments,  endowments  or  privileges.  Only  state  the  pure  truth 
of  revelation  and  it  will  force  its  own  way,  but  garnish  and  adorn  it  by 
your  eloquent  language,  or  protect  and  guard  it  by  your  carnal  wisdom 
and  prudence,  and  the  truth  goes  into  captivity.  Leave  the  church 
alone,  0  ye  kings  and  princes,  or  persecute  it  if  ye  will,  for  it  will  laugh 
your  opposition  to  scorn ;  but  pretend  not  to  propagate  its  doctrines  by 
the  civil  power,  for  this  is  the  worst  curse  that  can  befall  it.  Take  it 
under  your  patronage,  and  the  mere  touch  of  your  royal  hands  will  create 
No.  1,342.  -j^g 


14:8  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

disease  within  it.  Almost  to  the  death  has  the  so-called  "  church  " 
come  down  when  her  ministers,  like  Hophni  and  Phineas,  have  allied 
themselves  with  the  temporal  power ;  for  God  will  do  his  work  by  his 
own  instruments,  and  in  his  own  way ;  he  will  not  be  indebted  to  the 
might  of  the  flesh,  but  will  defend  his  own  glory  by  his  own  mysterious 
power.  He  uses  for  his  instruments  his  consecrated  ones  who  wear  the 
white  linen,  which  is  the  righteousness  of  saints,  and  not  the  blood- 
stained men  of  war  arrayed  in  coat  of  mail  and  glittering  breastplate  of 
gteel. 

Another  lesson  may  be  learned  from  the  incident  before  us.  When 
the  Philistines  had  beaten  the  Israelites  in  battle,  and  captured  the 
sacred  chest  called  the  ark,  they  boasted  and  gloried  as  though  they 
had  defeated  God  himself.  They  evidently  regarded  the  golden  casket 
as  the  very  choicest  part  of  the  spoil,  and  they  placed  it  as  a  trophy  in 
the  chief  temple  of  their  god  Dagon,  to  show  that  he  was  mightier  than 
the  God  Jehovah,  who  was  unable,  as  they  thought,  to  protect  his  people. 
This  touched  at  once  the  honour  of  Jehovah,  and  because  he  is  a  jealous 
God  this  Doded  good  for  Israel.  The  fact  that  God  is  a  jealous  God  has 
often  a  terrible  side  to  us,  for  it  leads  to  our  chastisement  when  we 
grieve  him  :  this,  indeed,  led  to  the  defeat  of  Israel.  But  it  has  also 
a  bright  side  towards  us,  for  his  jealousy  flames  against  his  foes  even 
more  ten'ibly  than  against  his  friends ;  and  when  his  name  is  blasphemed, 
and  honours  that  are  due  to  him  are  ascribed  to  a  mere  idol,  or  he  is 
declared  to  have  been  defeated  by  a  false  god,  then  his  jealousy  burns  like 
coals  of  juniper,  and  he  makes  bare  his  right  arm  to  smite  his  adver- 
saries, as  he  did  on  this  occasion.  He  thinks  it  meet  to  punish  his 
offending  people,  but  when  Philistia  saith,  "  Dagon  has  defeated 
Jehovah,"  then  the  Lord  will  no  longer  suffer  Philistia  to  triumph. 
Jehovah's  answer  to  his  foes  was  Dagon  broken  to  shivers  before  his 
ark,  and  the  Phihstines  plagued  with  emerods  till,  in  their  desperate  pain 
and  dire  disgrace,  they  set  free  the  ark,  being  no  longer  able  to  endure 
its  presence  in  any  of  their  towns ;  so  that  the  Jews  ever  afterwards 
used  to  exasperate  the  Philistines  by  reminding  them  of  the  disease 
which  so  sorely  tried  them  ;  and  there  is  a  dash  of  this  in  the  psalm 
which  saith  of  the  Lord,  "  He  smote  his  enemies  in  the  hinder  part ;  he 
put  them  to  a  perpetual  reproach."  Never  did  a  boastful  nation  undergo 
a  deeper  dis^ionour  in  the  eyes  of  their  neighbours,  to  whom  they  be- 
came a  laughing-stock,  and  never  did  an  image  suffer  a  worse  disgrace 
than  that  which  befell  their  god  Dagon. 

Now,  then,  whenever  at  any  time  infidelity  or  superstition  shall  so 
prevail  as  to  discourage  your  minds,  take  you  comfort  out  of  this — that 
in  all  these  God's  honour  is  compromised.  Have  they  blasphemed  his 
name  ?  Then  he  will  protect  that  name.  Have  they  gone  further  than 
they  used  to  do  in  foul  utterances  against  him  ?  Then  they  will  provoke 
him,  and  he  will  make  bare  his  holy  arm.  I  pray  that  they  may  so 
provoke  him!  All  his  church  will  say  "Amen!"  to  that,  so  that  he 
may  arise  and  perform  the  glorious  works  of  his  strength  and  of  his  love 
among  the  sons  of  men,  and  put  the  adversary  to  confusion  by  proving 
that  he  is  still  with  his  people,  and  still  the  same  mighty  God  as  he 
was  in  the  days  of  yore.  Say  you  to  yourselves,  then,  "  Our  Lord  will 
not  always  endure  this  idolatrous  popery,  which  is  multiplying  its  priests 


DAGON'S   UPS   AND   DOWKS.  149 

■within  our  national  church.  His  people  cannot  bear  it ;  much  less  will 
he.  He  will  not  always  tolei'ate  these  blasphemous  theories,  by  which 
&elf-conceited,  learned  men  and  vainglorious  sceptics  seek  to  get  rid  of 
God  out  of  the  world.  They  will  provoke  him.  He  will  bestir  himself;  he 
will  show  himself  strong  on  the  behalf  of  his  truth,  he  will  roll  back  the 
waves  of  sin,  and  let  the  ages  know  that  he  is  still  the  great  I  AM,  the 
victorious  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever."  Those  two  truths  seem  to 
me  to  lie  upon  the  surface  of  this  passage. 

And  now,  though  it  would  be  very  wrong  to  make  out  the  word  of  God 
to  be  a  mere  set  of  allegories,  and  so  to  deny  that  it  records  facts — and 
this,  I  trust,  we  shall  never  do — yet,  as  the  apostle  Paul  has  shown  us 
tJiat  many  of  the  events  in  the  Old  Testament  are  an  allegory,  and  as, 
indeed,  these  things  are  evidently  types,  and  must  be  regarded  as 
emblems  and  patterns  of  things  that  still  occur — we  shall  use  this  pas- 
sage in  a  spiritual  way,  and  make  it  the  channel  of  experimental  teach- 
ing. Where  the  living  God  comes  into  the  soul,  Dagon,  or  the  idol  god 
of  sin  and  worldliness,  must  go  down.  This  is  the  one  thought  which 
we  shall  hammer  out  at  this  time. 

I.     To  begin,  then :    the   coming    of   the    ark    into   Dagon's 

TEMPLE  WAS  AN  APT  SIMILE  OF  THE  COMING  OF  ChRIST  INTO  THE 
SOUL. 

Dagon,  according  to  the  best  information,  was  the  fish-god  of  Phi- 
listia ;  perhaps  borrowed  from  the  Sidonians  and  men  of  Tyre,  whose 
main  business  was  upon  the  sea,  and  who  therefore  invented  a  marine 
deity.  The  upper  part  of  Dagon  was  a  man  or  woman,  and  the  lower 
part  of  the  idol  was  carved  like  a  fish.  We  get  a  very  good  idea  of  it 
from  the  common  notion  of  the  fictitious,  fabulous  creature"  called  a 
mermaid.  Dagon  was  just  a  merman  or  mermaid ;  only,  of  course, 
there  was  no  pretence  of  his  being  alive.  He  was  a  carved  image,  like 
that  which  the  papists  worship  and  call  the  Blessed  Virgin,  or  Saint 
Peter,  or  Saint  Remy.  The  temple  at  Ashdod  was,  perhaps,  the 
cathedral  of  Dagon,  the  chief  shrine  of  his  worship ;  and  there  he  sat 
erect  upon  the  high  altar  with  pompous  surroundings.  The  ark  of  the 
covenant  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  was  a  small  wooden  box  overlaid  with 
gold,  by  no  means  a  very  cumbersome  or  bulky  matter,  but  nevertheless 
very  sacred,  because  it  had  a  representative  character,  and  symbolized 
the  covenant  of  God  :  its  capture  was  grievous  indeed  to  pious  Israel- 
ites, for  they  felt  that  the  glory  was  departed  when  the  ark  was  taken. 
The  sacred  chest  was  carried  in  triumph  by  the  Philistines,  and 
brought  into  the  temple  where  Dagon  stood.  In  your  mind's  eye  you 
can  see  the  fish-god  high  upon  his  throne,  and  the  incense  burning  before 
him  as  the  priests  gather  around,  and  the  princes  of  Philistia  with 
triumphant  banners  bow  before  his  shrine.  We  hear  the  shouts  of  the 
Philistine  lords  as  they  bring  in  the  golden  coifer  with  the  golden 
staves,  and  set  it  down  at  the  foot  of  Dagon,  and  sing  their  exultant 
songs.  Hear  them  as  they  sound  their  trumpets  and  chant  their  blas- 
phemous hymns :  "  Glory  be  unto  thee,  0  Dagon !  thou  hast  triumphed 
this  day,  0  mighty  god  of  the  land  and  the  sea !  Glorious  fish-god, 
thou  hast  vanquished  those  who  vanquished  the  Canaanites ;  and  though 
their  God  slew  the  Egyptians  of  old,  thou  hast  smitten  them  by  their 
thousauds.     Glory  be  unto  thee,  thou  mighty  god ! "     Thus  would  they 


150  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

extol  their  deity  and  pour  contempt  npon  the  captured  ark,  which  they 
placed  at  the  foot  of  the  image.  Then,  when  the  service  Avas  over,  and 
they  had  worshipped  Dagon  to  their  heart's  content,  they  shut  up  the 
temple,  and  there  was  darkness  in  the  holy  place,  or  unholy  place — 
which  shall  I  call  it  ?  Not  long  did  tiie  ark  remain  where  it  was,  with 
Dagon  still  supreme,  but  the  mere  incoming  of  the  ark  info  ihe  idol  temple 
was  a  fair  picture  of  the  introduction  of  the  grace  of  Ood  into  ihe  human 
heaH.  The  Philistines  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  but  only  an  act 
of  divine  power  can  bring  the  grace  of  God  into  the  soul.  By  divers 
instrumentalities  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  is  read,  is  heard,  is  brought 
to  the  recollection,  is  seen  printed  in  the  lives  of  men,  and  so  enters  into 
the  temple  of  the  inner  manhood.  When  it  first  conies  into  the  heart 
it  finds  sin  enthroned  there ;  and  the  Prince  of  Darkness  reigning 
supreme.  The  first  grace  that  enters  into  the  soul  finds  it  in  darkness 
and  in  death,  under  the  dominion  of  sin.  Brethren,  we  have  not  to  de- 
liver ourselves  from  sin  and  death  and  darkness,  and  then  obtain  grace ; 
but,  while  we  are  yet  dead,  grace  visits  us  ;  while  we  are  yet  slaves  the 
liberator  comes  ;  on  our  blackest  midnight  the  sun  of  righteousness  arises. 
While  the  Dagon  of  sin  sits  firmly  on  his  throne,  as  if  he  never  could  be 
stirred,  and  his  horrid  form  is  alone  to  be  seen  lording  it  over  all  the 
thoughts  and  imaginations  of  the  heart,  even  then  it  is  that  "  God,  who  is 
rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even  when  we  were 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  sends  his  almighty  grace  to  dwell  within  us. 
When  that  grace  enters  the  soul  it  comes  not  with  observation,  and  sin  at 
the  first  does  not  know  any  more  about  the  incoming  of  grace  than  Dagon 
knew  about  the  ark.  The  grace,  the  light,  the  truth,  the  love  of  God 
come  into  the  soul,  and  the  man  does  not  know  as  yet  what  the  Lord  has 
dene  for  him.  He  is  only  conscious  of  some  impression,  of  a  thoughtful- 
ness  he  had  never  known  before,  of  a  calm  fi-ame  of  mind,  of  a  desire  to 
consider  eternal  things ;  and  that  is  all  that  he  perceives  of  the  Lord's 
"work  within  him.  His  Dagon  seems  to  be  there  in  as  supreme  a 
majesty  as  ever,  only  something  strange  is  also  within  the  mind,  the 
man  knows  not  what  it  is.  It  is  the  beginning  of  the  end — of  a  blessed 
and  glorious  end. 

We  have  now  Dagon  and  the  ark  in  the  i^ame  temple,  sin  and  grace 
in  the  same  heart,  hut  this  state  of  things  cannot  long  abide.  No  man 
can  serve  two  masters,  and  even  if  he  could  then  two  masters  would 
not  agree  to  be  so  served.  The  two  great  principles  of  sin  and  grace 
will  not  abide  in  peace  with  each  other,  they  are  as  opposite  as  fire  and 
water.  There  will  be  a  conflict  and  a  Tictory,  and  we  know  which  will 
conquer,  for  as  surely  as  ever  the  gi*ace  of  God  comes  into  the  soul  sin 
receives  notice  to  quit.  That  night,  when  the  Phihstines  had  finished 
their  exulting  ceremonies,  they  thought  they  had  left  Dagon  robed  in 
glory,  reigning  and  triumphing  over  the  ark  of  the  Lord.  They  had 
scarcely  shut  the  doors  and  gone  before  Dagon  fell  on  his  face  to  the 
ground  before  the  ark.  Down  he  went.  He  did  not  lean  over,  but  he 
fell,  nor  did  he  drop  upon  his  side,  but  he  was  made  to  do  obeisance 
before  the  ark,  for  he  fell  on  his  face;  and  he  did  not  fall  part  of  the 
way  merely,  but  fell  on  his  face  to  the  ground  before  the  ark  :  a  change 
of  positions  very  significant  to  his  worshippers  !  The  ark  was  set  at  the 
foot  of  Dagon,   and  now   Dagon  lies  before   the  ark  as  if  he   were 


DAGON  S   UPS   AND   DOWNS.  151 

prostrating  himself  in  worship  before  the  great  and  mighty  God.  Even 
thus  grace  in  the  soul  is  not  long  before  it  overthrows  sin.  What  a, 
turning  of  things  upside  down  grace  always  makes  !  The  watchword 
is,  "  Overturn,  overturn,  overturn."  The  Breaker  is  come  up,  and  the 
images  of  man's  invention  must  be  dashed  to  shivers. 

Very  likely  your  Dagon  is  in  the  shape  of  self-righieovsness.  I 
shall  call  it  Dagon,  for  it  is  nothing  better :  one  of  the  worst  idols 
in  the  whole  world  is  the  idol  of  self.  The  self-righteous  man  boasts 
that  he  is  as  good  as  other  people,  if  not  rather  better,  although 
he  is  not  a  Christian.  He  does  not  know  that  he  has  ever  done 
anything  very  wrong,  and  he  feels  that  in  him  there  is  a  great  deal 
that  is  very  good  and  excellent,  and  therefore  he  expects  that  things 
will  go  well  with  him  at  last.  He  has  a  very  fine  figure-head  for  his 
god,  and  though  there  may  be  a  rather  "  fishy  "  tail  to  his  character,  he 
keeps  that  as  much  out  of  sight  as  possible,  and  conceals  it  with 
excuses.  The  god  of  his  self-confidence  is  a  very  pretty  thing,  take  it 
for  all  in  all ;  it  is  beautiful  as  a  mermaid,  and  he  is  fascinated  with 
its  beauty.  He  bows  before  his  idol  and  sings  before  it  that  ancient 
canticle  of  the  Philistines — I  mean  the  Pharisees — which  begins,  "  God, 
I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are !"  When  grace  enters  the 
soul  the  dominion  of  self-confidence  comes  to  an  end,  down  goes  the  fish- 
god  on  its  face  to  the  ground  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  and  the  man 
discovers  that  he  has  no  such  righteousness  as  that  wherein  he  trusted. 
He  begins  to  bemoan  his  sins  and  to  lament  his  shortcomings.  A 
perfect  change  of  feeling  has  come  oyer  him.  He  loathes  himself  as 
much  as  he  once  admired  himself;  and  now,  instead  of  taking  the 
highest  seat  in  the  synagogue,  he  is  willing  to  be  a  door-keeper  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  "  Ah,  me  !"  says  he,  "  what  a  sinner  I  am  !  how 
vile  in  the  sight  of  God  !"  See  you  not  how  this  brave  Dagon  has 
gone  down  on  his  face  to  the  ground  before  the  ark. 

Perhaps  the  man  never  had  much  of  this  vainglorious  self-righteous- 
ness, but  be  served  the  Dagon  of  besetting  and  beloved  sin.  The  man  was 
a  drunkard,  Bacchus  ruled  him  :  but  as  soon  as  the  grace  of  God  is 
brought  into  his  soul  he  has  done  with  the  drink-god.  The  horrible 
Dagon  of  drunkenness  is  hurled  from  its  throne  by  grace.  The  man  can- 
not bear  to  think  that  he  should  have  so  disgraced  himself  as  to  be  fond 
of  wantonness,  and  chambering,  and  surfeiting,  and  drunkenness,  and 
such-hke  abominable  sins,  which  bring  manhood  below  the  level  of  the 
beast.  He  who  is  truly  penitent  hates  the  very  name  of  these  filthy  sins. 
If  a  man  has  been  guilty  of  using  bad  language  and  profane  swearing, 
the  grace  of  God  generally  cures  him  of  that  at  once.  I  have  heard  men 
who  had  lived  in  the  practice  of  swearing  for  many  years  say  that,  from 
the  time  they  were  converted,  they  never  had  a  temptation  to  it ;  that 
black  sin  went  off  bag  and  baggage  at  once.  Some  sins  are  slow  in 
dying,  but  profanity  generally  gives  up  the  ghost  without  a  struggle. 
John  Bunyan  says  that  a  stone  from  the  battering-ram  slew  Mr. 
Profane  by  cracking  his  skull,  so  that  he  died  early  in  the  siege  of 
Mansoul ;  it  were  well  if  more  deceptive  sins  did  the  like.  The  grosser 
outward  offences,  like  Dagon,  are  soon  down  before  the  ark. 

Sin  of  every  sort  is  bowed  low  before  triumphant  grace.  Yea,  and  the 
man  who  receives  the  grace  of  God  feels  that  the  love  of  any  and  every 


152  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

sin  is  cast  out  of  its  place  in  his  heart.  Now  he  desires  to  be  quit  of  it 
all,  and  anxiously  cries,  "  Lord,  what  wouldst  thou  have  me  to  do  ?"  He 
will  no  more  go  and  live  in  sin,  as  he  did  before,  than  Paul  will  continue 
to  be  a  persecutor  after  the  Lord,  even  Jesus,  has  appeared  to  him  by 
the  way.  What  a  Dagon-fall  there  was  in  the  apostle's  pride  just  out- 
side the  Damascus  gate  !  Such  a  fall  takes  place  in  the  heart  of  every 
man  to  whom  the  grace  of  God  comes  with  power. 

Now  the  parallel  may  be  run  a  little  further.  This  fall  of  Dagon 
very  soon  began  to  he  perceived,  for  "  When  they  of  Ashdod  arose  early 
on  the  morrow,  behold,  Dagon  was  fallen  on  his  face  to  the  earth." 
Very  soon  after  the  entrance  of  grace  this  sign  follows,  and  ere  long  it 
is  seen  and  known.  Let  no  man  conceive  that  there  is  grace  in  his 
soul  if  Dagon  sits  on  the  throne  still.  This  is  one  of  the  earliest  tokens 
of  the  entrance  of  the  life  of  God  into  the  soul — that  sin  falls  down 
from  its  high  place,  and  is  no  more  had  in  honom'. 

At  the  same  time,  observe  that  Dagon  was  not  broken.  He  had  fallen 
on  his  face,  but  that  was  all ;  so  that  the  next  day  his  foolish  worshippers 
could  set  him  up  again.  Sometimes  at  the  first  entrance  of  grace  there 
is  a  downfall  of  sin,  but  nothing  like  such  a  breaking  and  destroying  of 
sin  in  the  soul  as  there  will  be  afterwards.  When  the  divine  life  has 
entered  sin  is  dethroned,  it  no  longer  sits  up  there  in  the  place  of 
God ;  but  yet,  for  all  that,  there  is  an  awful  power  remaining  in  the 
corrupt  nature,  a  deadly  tendency  to  sin,  a  powerful  law  in  the  members 
bringing  the  soul  into  captivity.  Still,  down  the  idol  goes,  even  if  it  be 
not  broken :  it  cannot  reign,  though  it  may  remain  to  trouble  us. 

Now,  what  happened  on  the  night  mentioned  in  the  text  ?  Dagon 
fell  before  the  ark  ivhen  it  tvas  all  quiet  and  still  in  the  temple. 
While  the  worshippers  were  there,  during  the  day,  there  was  noise,  and 
shouting,  the  false  god  sat  aloft  and  you  could  not  tell  that  there  was 
any  mysterious  power  about  the  ark.  It  was  in  the  quiet  of  the  night 
that  this  deed  was  done,  and  thus  often  in  the  hearing  of  the  word 
grace  is  introduced  into  the  heart,  but  you  would  not  know  that  any 
change  was  wrought,  for  it  is  only  when  the  man  gets  away  from  the 
world's  business — gets  alone  and  begins  to  consider — that  a  divinely- 
mysterious  might  is  displayed  by  the  inward  grace,  so  as  to  sink  sin, 
and  lay  the  power  of  evil  low.  Would  to  God  our  hearers  took  more 
opportunities  for  quietly  considering  the  word  of  God  !  How  much 
more  blessing  might  often  be  gotten  out  of  sermons  and  books  if  there 
were  more  meditation  !  You  get  the  grapes,  but  you  do  not  tread  them 
in  the  wine-vat.  There  is  more  trouble  taken  to  collect  the  sheaves  of 
the  sermon  than  is  afterwards  expended  in  threshing  them  out.  The 
power  which  smote  Dagon  was  displayed  in  the  quiet  of  the  night ;  and 
when  the  grace  of  God  has  entered  into  your  souls  it  is  probable  that  the 
dOwncoming  of  sin  will  be  better  effected  in  times  of  quiet  thought  and 
searching  of  heart  than  at  any  other  period.  Thought  is  the  channel  of 
immense  benefit  to  the  soul.  Shut  the  temple  doors  and  let  all  be  still, 
and  then  will  the  Holy  Ghost  work  wonders  in  the  soul. 

IL    Now,  secondly,  the  setting  up  of  Dagon  the  second  time, 

AND  HIS  second  FALL,  VERY  WELL  REPRESENT  THE  BATTLE  GOING  ON 
IN  THE    SOUL  BETWEEN  SIN   AND   GRACE. 

What  fools  these  Philistines  were  to  continue  worshipping  a  god 


DAGON  S   UPS    ANT)   DOWNS.  153 

which  when  it  tumbled  down  could  not  get  up  again.  To  worship  a 
god  which  fell  on  its  face  was  bad  enough,  but  to  worship  one  that  could 
not  rise  when  he  fell,  but  needed  to  be  set  in  his  place  by  human  hands, 
was  certainly  vile  infatuation  :  but  they  took  up  their  precious  deity, 
and  they  put  him  in  his  place  again,  and  no  doubt  sang  a  special  "  high 
mass  "  to  him,  and  then  went  their  way  quietly  to  their  homes,  little 
dreaming  that  their  pretty  fish- god  would  want  their  help  again  so  soon. 
Even  thus  Satan  and  the  flesh  come  into  our  souls  and  try  to  set  our 
fallen  Dagon  up  again,  ivith  some  measure  of  success.  It  often  happens 
that  in  young  converts  there  comes  a  period  when  it  looks  as  if  they 
had  altogether  apostatized  and  gone  back  to  their  former  ways.  It  seems 
as  if  the  work  of  God  were  not  real  in  their  souls,  and  grace  was  not 
triumphant.  Do  you  wonder  at  it  ?  I  have  ceased  to  wonder.  The 
gospel  is  preached,  and  the  man  accepts  it,  and  there  is  a  marvellous 
difference  in  him  ;  but  when  he  goes  among  his  old  companions,  al- 
though he  is  resolved  not  to  fall  into  his  former  sins,  they  try  him  very 
severely.  He  is  assailed  in  a  thousand  ways !  Some  of  our  young 
people,  if  they  were  to  tell  their  story,  would  harrow  up  your  feelings  by 
mentioning  the  way  in  which  all  sorts  of  jests,  and  insinuations,  and 
taunts  are  hurled  at  them,  and  that  by  influential  persons — their  parents, 
their  elder  brothers  and  sisters,  and  those  who  oversee  their  work  ;  they 
are  beset  behind  and  before,  so  that  if  they  do  not  transgress  in  one 
way,  it  is  very  likely  that  the  devil  craftily  trips  them  up  in  another.  I 
have  known  a  man  when  he  has  been  tempted  to  go  into  evil  company 
refuse  again,  and  again,  and  again.  His  tempters  have  laughed  at  him, 
and  he  has  borne  it  all,  but  at  last  he  has  lost  his  temper  ;  and  as  soon 
as  the  enemies  have  seen  his  passion  boiling  up  they  have  cried  out, 
"  Ah,  there  you  are  !  We  have  got  you."  At  such  a  time  as  that  the 
poor  man  is  apt  to  cry,  "  Alas,  I  cannot  be  a  believer,  or  else  I  should 
not  have  done  this."  Now,  all  this  is  a  violent  attempt  of  Satan  and  the 
flesh  to  set  Dagon  up  again.  They  know  that  the  Lord  has  thrown  him 
down  and  they  cannot  bear  it,  but  would  fain  set  the  fish-god  again  orx 
his  throne.  Sometimes  they  do  for  a  time  set  Dagon  up  again  and 
cause  great  sorrow  in  the  soul.  I  have  known  a  poor  lost  lamb  to  be 
found  and  brought  into  the  fold ;  but  it  has  miserably  wandered  for  a 
time,  and  the  devil  has  thought  that,  surely,  he  had  got  that  lamb,  and 
would  tear  him  into  pieces,  and  yet  he  has  been  deceived  after  all. 
Dagon  was  only  set  up  for  a  time,  and  he  had  to  come  down  again  ;  and 
so  it  happens  wherever  grace  enters  the  heart.  The  wanderers  have  come 
back,  weeping  and  sighing,  to  own  that  they  have  dishonoured  their 
profession  :  and  what  has  been  the  result  in  the  long  run  ?  Why,  they 
have  had  more  humility,  more  tenderness  of  heart,  more  love  to  Christ, 
more  gratitude,  than  they  had  before ;  and  I  have  been  glad  (not  glad 
that  they  wandered,  but  glad)  that  the  grace  of  God,  when  he  has 
brought  them  back  again  more  fully,  has  given  them  a  deeper  conversion 
and  u  more  lasting  and  substantial  work  of  grace,  so  that  afterwards  they 
have  continued  by  the  grace  of  God  honourable,  useful  Christians  even  to 
the  end.  Often  and  often  is  that  the  case,  and  I  speak  at  this  time  to 
any  young  convert  who  can  say  in  his  heart,  "  0  sir,  I  do  love  the 
Lard,  but  I  have  been  such  a  backslider.  I  do  trust  Jesus.  I  wish  to 
be  a  Christian,  but  I  have  been  overthrown  by  enemies,  I  fear  I  must 


154  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

not  join  a  Christian  church,  because  if  I  could  not  resist  temptation  for 
BIX  weeks  how  could  I  expect  to  stand  fast  all  my  life  ?  I  am  such  a 
poor,  weak  creature,  so  apt  to  be  led  astray,  what  is  to  become  of  me  ?" 
Dear  friend,  gi'ieve  to  think  you  were  so  foolish,  but  do  not  doubt  the 
power  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  to  help  you,  and  to  break  in  pieces  the 
enemy,  who  seems  to  have  resumed  his  power  over  you. 

Now,  notice  that  although  they  again  set  Dagon  up,  he  had  to  go  down 
again  ivith  a  ivorse  fall.  I  have  no  doubt  it  took  them  a  long  pull  and 
a  great  heave  to  haul  the  uncomely  lump  of  marble  into  its  place  again. 
Many  strong  limbs  were  tired,  and  muscles  strained,  to  lift  up  the 
huge  god,  and  set  him  on  his  pedestal ;  but  it  was  no  trouble  to  the 
Lord  to  upset  the  ugly  stone.  No  rope  was  wanted,  and  no  straining  or 
pulling,  "  Bel  boweth  down  and  Nebo  stoopeth  "  when  Jehovah  uplifts 
himself.  Only  shut  the  temple  gates,  and  leave  the  ark  and  Dagon  to 
have  it  out  between  them,  and  Dagon  gets  the  worst  of  it.  Only,  mark 
this,  Dagon  has  not  gained  much  by  being  reinstated,  for  this  time,  when 
he  comes  down,  behold  he  was  fallen  on  his  face  to  the  ground  before 
the  ark  of  Jehovah,  "  and  the  head  of  Dagon  and  both  the  palms  of  his 
hands  were  cut  off  upon  the  threshold,"  The  idol's  head  was  gone,  and 
even  so  the  reigning  power  of  sin  is  utterly  broken  and  destroyed,  its 
beauty,  its  cunning,  its  glory  are  all  dashed  to  atoms.  This  is  the  result 
of  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  sure  result  of  it,  if  it  once  comes  into  the 
soul,  however  long  the  conflict  may  continue,  and  however  desperate  the 
efforts  of  Satan  to  regain  his  empire,  0  believer,  sin  may  trouble  thee, 
but  it  shall  not  tp'annize  over  thee.  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion 
over  you,"  saith  the  Holy  Spirit,  '*  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but 
under  grace."  If  the  power  of  evil  be  set  up  for  awhile  it  shall  only 
come  down  with  the  greater  force,  and  its  head  shall  be  cut  off. 

Then,  too,  the  hands  of  Dagon  were  broken  off,  and  even  thus  the 
active  power,  the  working  power  of  sin  is  taken  away.  Both  the  palms 
of  the  idol's  hands  were  cut  off  upon  the  threshold,  so  that  he  had  not 
a  hand  left.  Neither  right-handed  sin  nor  left-handed  sin  shall  re- 
main in  the  believer  when  God's  sanctifying  grace  fetches  Dagon  down. 
The  secret  reigning  power  is  broken,  and  so  is  the  manifest  working 
power.  The  Christian  is  kept  from  putting  forth  his  hand  into  iniquity. 
He  is  crucified  with  Christ,  and  so  both  hands  are  nailed  to  the  cross 
and  fastened  up  from  performing  those  deeds  of  ill  towards  which  the 
lustings  of  the  flesh  would  urge  him. 

This  happemd,  too,  if  you  notice,  very  speedily ;  for  we  are  told  a 
second  time  that,  when  they  arose  early  on  the  moiTOw,  behold,  Dagon 
was  fallen  upon  his  face.  It  does  not  take  grace  long,  when  it  is  once 
in  the  soul,  to  overturn  the  reigning  power  and  the  active  energy  of  sin, 
'when  these  for  a  while  appear  to  get  the  upper  hand.  Brothers  and 
sisters,  I  hope  you  know  this.  I  hope  that  the  Spirit  of  God  which  is 
in  you,  and  the  love  of  Christ  which  reigns  in  you,  have  destroyed  the 
power  which  sin  once  had  in  your  souls.  If  it  be  not  so,  then  question 
yourselves  whether  the  Spirit  of  God  be  in  you  at  all.  It  is  not  possible 
that  the  ark  should  be  in  the  temple  and  that  Dagon  should  be  standing 
there  unbroken.  Not  till  the  morrow  morning  shall  evil  remain  un- 
challenged and  unmoved  upon  the  throne.  It  is  not  possible  that  you, 
dear  friend,  could  live  and  dehght  in  sin,  and  yet  be  a  child  of  God, 


DAGON  .S   UPS  AND   DOWNS. 


155 


If  your  heart  is  set  upon  iniquity,  where  your  heart  is  there  your 
treasure  is,  and  if  sin  be  your  treasure  you  are  no  heir  of  heaven.  That 
which  governs  your  heart  is  your  lord  and  your  god  ;  what  your  heart 
loves,  by  that  you  shall  be  judged,  and  if  you  love  evil  you  shall  be 
condemned.  We  may  sin — ah,  would  God  we  did  not ! — but  to  love 
sin  is  not  in  the  believer.  There  is  a  deadly  antagonism  between  grace 
and  sin ;  and  where  the  gracious  life  comes  the  evil  life  must  fall. 
There  cannot  be  an  alliance  between  Dagon  and  the  ark,  between  God 
and  the  world,  or  between  Christ  and  sin. 

III.  And  now,  thirdly,  the  parallel  still  holds  good  in  one  more 
point,   namely,   that  though   the  fish-god  was  thus  maimed  and 

BROKEN,  YET  THE  STUMP  OF  DAGON  WAS  LEFT  TO  HIM. 

The  original  Hebrew  is,  "  Only  Dagon  was  left  to  him,"  or  "  onl^ 
the  fish":  only  the  fishy  part  remained.  The  head  and  the  upper 
portions  were  broken  away,  there  remained  only  the  fishy  tail  of 
Dagon,  and  that  was  all ;  but  that  was  not  broken.  Now,  this  is  the 
business  which  brings  us  so  much  sorroiv — that  the  stump  of  Dagon  is 
left  to  him.  I  wish  it  were  not.  I  have  heard  some  say  that  they  have 
no  sin  remaining  in  them.  Well,  dear  brother,  the  Lord  convert  you ! 
I  shall  say  no  more  than  that,  for  if  there  were  in  you  enough  light  for 
you  to  perceive  your  darkness,  it  were  better  than  to  talk  as  you  do. 
Every  child  of  God  who  knows  anything  about  himself  and  the  expe- 
rience of  a  real  believer,  knows  that  there  is  indwelling  sin  in  him,  and 
that  to  a  most  fearful  extent,  so  as  to  make  his  very  soul  cry  out  in 
agony, "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body 
of  this  death  ? "  I  could  not  go  the  length  of  singing,  with  Ralph 
Erskine,  as  a  description  of  myself,  the  lines  written  by  him  in  his 
"  Believer's  Sonnets" — 

"  To  good  and  evil  equal  bent, — 
And  both  a  devil  and  a  saint.'.' 

But  yet,  taken  with  a  large  lump  of  salt,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  truth 
even  in  that  unguarded  expression.  There  is  the  old  corruption  within 
us,  and  there  is  no  use  denying  it,  because  denying  it  will  put  us  off 
our  guard,  will  make  many  of  the  puzzles  of  life  to  be  quite  un- 
answerable, and  often  bring  upon  us  great  confusion  of  soul.  The  other 
law  is  within  us  as  Avell  as  the  law  of  grace.  Canst  thou  draw  near  to 
God,  my  brother,  and  not  see  that  he  can  justly  charge  thee  with  folly? 
Canst  thou  stand  in  his  presence,  as  Job  did,  and  behold  his  glory, 
and  not  say,  "I  abhor  myself  in  dust  and  ashes"?  Canst  thou  have 
deahngs  with  perfection,  and  not  perceive  thy  faultiness  ?  Canst  thou 
come  near  unto  the  innermost  court  of  the  temple,  and  stand  in  that 
excessive  light  of  fellowship  which  is  the  portion  of  the  Lord's  chosen, 
and  not  see  within  thyself  spots  and  wrinkles,  yea,  thousands  of  them,  so 
as  to  make  thee  cover  thy  face  for  shame,  and  adore  the  amazing  grace 
which  loves  thee  still  ?  Canst  thou  not  see  in  thy  daily  life  enough  to 
condemn  thee,  and  cast  thee  into  hell,  were  it  not  that  God  still  sees 
thee  in  Christ,  and  imputes  not  thy  iniquity  to  thee,  but  accepts  thee  in 
the  Beloved  ?  Oh,  it  is  so — it  is  so,  indeed  !  The  stump  of  Dagon  is 
Btill  left ;  and  because  it  is  left,  dear  friends,  it  is  a  thing  to  be  ivatched 
against,  for  though  that  stony  stump  of  Dagon  would  not  grow  in  the 


X56  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

Philistine  temple ;  yet  they  would  make  a  new  image,  and  exalt  i 
again,  and  bow  before  it  as  before.  Alas,  the  stump  of  sin  within  us  is 
not  a  slab  of  stone,  but  full  of  vitality,  like  the  tree  cut  down,  of  which 
Job  said,  "  At  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud."  Leave  the  sin  that  is  in 
you  to  itself,  and  let  temptation  come  in  the  way,  and  you  shall  see  that 
which  will  blind  your  eyes  with  weeping.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  look  at 
your  face  in  a  glass,  but  your  face  is  not  yourself;  no  mirror  can  show 
you  yourself.  There  is  a  certain  temptation  which  has  an  affinity  to  the 
evil  within  you  ;  and  should  Satan  bring  that  temptation  near  you  will 
see  yourself  to  your  horror  and  shame.  There  shall  then  look  out  of  the 
window  of  your  countenance  a  man  whom  you  did  not  see  when  you 
looked  in  the  glass,  for  you  only  saw  the  house  he  lived  in.  So  ugly 
is  he  that  he  makes  the  very  house  he  lives  in  look  horrible.  When 
the  angry  man  comes  up,  and  is  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  how  he 
deforms  the  countenance !  When  obstinate  old  Adam  comes  to 
the  window,  what  a  dark  forbidding  face  he  wears!  When  that 
envious  spirit  comes  up,  what  an  evil  glance  there  is  in  the  eye ! 
When  the  unbelieving  spirit  peers  through  the  lattice,  what  a  miser- 
able countenance  he  shows  compared  with  the  face  of  faith  and 
childlike  confidence  in  God  !  There  is  nobody  in  this  world,  dear 
brother,  that  you  have  so  much  cause  to  be  afraid  of  as  yourself. 
Augustine  used  to  pray,  "  Lord,  deliver  me  from  that  evil  man,  my- 
self." A  very  appropriate  prayer  for  a  woman,  too — "  Lord,  save  me 
from  myself."  If  you  are  saved  from  yourself  you  will  be  saved  fi-om 
the  devil ;  for  what  can  the  devil  do  unless  self  joins  hands  with  him 
in  unholy  league?  But,  oh,  what  watchfulness  it  will  need  !  Here  is 
room  for  faith  indeed  !  Faith  does  not  decline  the  conflict,  nor  puff 
us  up  witii  the  notion  that  the  fight  is  over;  on  the  contrary,  it  takes  to 
itself  the  whole  armour  of  God,  because  it  sees  the  battle  to  be  still 
raging.  Faith  is  wanted  to  be  the  shield  to  keep  off  the  fiery  darts,  and 
the  sword  with  which  to  smite  the  foe.  Here  is  the  sphere  in  which 
faith  is  to  work ;  it  does  not  talk  of  ended  warfare,  but  carries  on 
the  life-long  campaign  to  ultimate  victory.  Faith  does  not  say,  "  I 
have  ceased  the  conflict":  she  knows  better:  faith  says,  "  I  am  in  the 
midst  of  it,  warring  with  a  thousand  foes,  and  looking  for  the  victory 
through  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord."  0  brothers  and  sisters,  be  strong  in 
faith  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  you  have  ueed  to  be  so,  since 
the  stump  of  Dagon  still  remaineth.  The  lusting  of  the  flesh  abidcth 
still  in  the  regenerate. 

Look  at  this  matter  again.  That  stump  of  Dagon  which  remained 
was  a  vile  thing  :  it  was  a  piece  of  an  idol,  a  fragment  of  a  monstrous 
image  which  had  been  worshipped  instead  of  God.  Now,  the  sin  which 
dwelleth  in  you  is  never  to  be  regarded  by  you  as  anything  else  than 
a  horrible,  loathsome,  and  detestable  thing.  That  after  such  love  as 
you  and  I  have  known  there  should  be  in  us  even  the  power  to  be 
ungrateful  ought  to  shock  us ;  that  after  such  proof  of  his  truth 
as  God  has  shown  to  us,  after  such  faithfulness  and  such  abundant 
evidences  of  faithfulness,  we  should  still  be  capable  of  unbelief  ought 
to  be  a  sorrow  to  us.  Oh,  I  wish  I  could  never  sin  again  throughout 
time  or  eternity.  Oh,  that  every  particle  of  the  tinder  of  depra\ity  into 
which  the  devil  could  let  a  spark  fall  was  gone  from  my  nature.    It  is  a 


DAGON'S   UPS   AND    DOWNS.  157 

mercy  to  have  the  sparks  put  out,  but  it  is  a  pity  to  have  even  the  tinder 
left ;  and  there  is  plenty  of  this  tinder  about  us  all.  Tinder  ?  Ay, 
gunpowder,  so  quick  is  it  to  take  the  light  which  Satan  is  ever  ready 
to  bring.  We  carry  a  bomb-shell  heart  about  with  us,  and  we  had  better 
keep  clear  of  all  the  devil's  candles  lest  there  should  be  an  explosion  of 
actual  sin.  These  candles  are  common  enough  in  the  form  of  some 
plausible  but  sceptical  friend,  or  in  the  form  of  amusements  which  are 
questionable.  Keep  you  clear  of  Lucifer's  matches.  You  have  got 
enough  mischief  in  your  heart  without  going  where  you  will  get  more. 
If  anybody  here  feels  that  he  is  so  very  gracious  and  good  that  he  can 
safely  enter  into  temptation,  I  am  sure  that  he  is  labouring  under  a  very 
great  mistake.  I  would  say  to  him.  Brother,  there  is  devil  enough  in  you 
without  your  sending  out  invitation  cards  to  seven  more.  Go  you  to 
him  that  casteth  out  devils.  Go  you  into  company  where  the  powers  of 
evil  will  be  held  in  chains  and  bound  ;  but  do  not  go  where  other  devils 
as  wicked  as  himself  will  call  to  the  demon  who  now  besets  you,  and  stir 
him  up  to  work  mischief.  The  stump  of  Dagon  is  left.  Be  careful, 
watchful,  prayerful,  and  loathe  sin  with  all  your  sonl. 

IV.  But  now,  lastly,  here  is  mercy,  that  though  the  stump  of 
Dagon  was  not  taken  out  of  the  Philistine  temple,  we  may 
GO  beyond  the  history  and  rejoice  that  it  will  be  taken 
FROM  our  hearts.  The  day  is  coming,  brother,  sister,  in  which  there 
will  be  no  more  inclination  in  you  to  sin  than  there  is  in  an  angel.  The 
day  is  coming  in  which  your  nature  shall  be  so  established  in  truth 
and  righteousness  and  holiness  that  all  the  devils  in  hell  will  not  be 
able  to  make  you  think  a  wrong  thought.  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  I  wish 
that  time  would  come  soon."  It  will  come,  brother.  The  Lord  will 
keep  you  fighting  yet  and  warring  yet ;  but  there  will  come  a  day  when  a 
messenger  will  wait  at  your  door,  and  he  will  say, "  The  pitcher  is  broken 
at  the  fountain,  and  the  wheel  broken  at  the  cistern.  Thy  flesh  must 
return  to  the  dust,  and  thy  spirit  to  God  that  made  it,"  and  then  your 
spirit  shall  open  its  eyes  with  glad  surprise  and  find  itself  delivered  from 
the  body,  and  at  the  same  time  delivered  from  all  sin.  There  shall  also 
come  by-and-by  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  of  resurrection,  and  the  body 
shall  rise  ;  and  one  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  the  risen  body  will  be 
that  as  it  rises  it  will  be  free  from  the  bondage  of  coiTuption,  and  irwill 
have  no  tendency  to  lead  us  into  sin.  When  our  perfected  spirit 
shall  enter  into  our  perfect  body,  then  our  complete  manhood,  body, 
soul,  and  spirit  shall  have  no  stain,  or  spot,  or  flaw.  All  its  past  sin  will 
be  washed  away — nay,  is  washed  away — in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and 
all  its  propensities,  tendencies  and  inclinations  to  sin  shall  all  be  gone 
for  ever,  and  the  very  possibilities  of  sinning  shall  be  eternally  taken 
away, 

"No  cloud  those  blissful  regions  know, 
For  ever  bright  and  fair  ; 
For  sin,  the  source  of  mortal  woe, 
Can  never  enter  there." 

John  Bunyan  represents  Mercy  as  laughing  in  her  sleep.  She  had  a 
dream,  she  said  ;  and  she  laughed  because  of  the  great  favours  which 
were  yet  to  be  bestowed  upon  her.     Well,  if  some  of  you  were  to  dream 


158 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


to-night  that  the  great  thing  which  I  have  spoken  of  had  actually 
happened  to  you,  so  that  you  were  completely  free  from  all  tendency  to 
sin,  would  not  you  also  be  as  them  that  dream  and  laugh  for  very  joy. 
Think  of  it — no  more  cause  for  watchfulness,  no  more  need  of  weeping 
over  the  day's  sin  before  you  fall  asleep  at  night ;  no  more  sin  to  confess, 
no  devil  to  tempt  you,  no  worldly  care,  no  lusting,  no  envy,  no  depression 
of  spirit,  no  unbelief,  nothing  of  the  kind — will  not  this  be  a  very  large 
part  of  the  joy  of  heaven  ?  Why,  I  am  ready  to  cry  for  joy  to  think  that 
this  will  happen  to  me,  unworthy  though  I  be.  "  Bless  the  Lord, 
0  my  soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me  bless  his  holy  name."  It  will  be 
so,  brother,  both  to  you  and  to  me.  As  surely  as  we  have  trusted  Christ 
he  will  perfect  that  which  concerneth  us. 

"  The  feeblest  saint  shall  win  the  day, 
Though  death  and  hell  obstruct  the  way." 

The  Lord  has  undertaken  our  perfect  sanctification,  and  he  will  accom- 
plish it.  He  has  brought  old  Dagon  down,  and  broken  his  head  and  his 
hands,  and  he  will  break  him  to  shivers  ere  long.  Yea,  he  will  take  the 
ark  of  the  Lord  away  where  Dagon  shall  never  come  into  contact  with  it 
any  more.  He  will  take  you — the  gracious  part  of  you,  your  truest  and 
best  self — away  into  the  glory,  to  aliide  with  him  for  ever.  Think  of 
this  and  sing.  Yea,  brother,  sing  with  all  your  might,  for  all  this  may 
happen  within  a  week.  A  week  ?  It  may  happen  within  a  day.  It 
may  happen  before  you  reach  home  to-night.  We  are  so  near  to  heaven 
that  if  we  were  not  very  dull,  and  our  ears  very  heavy,  we  might  at  once 
hear  the  angels  chanting  their  ceaseless  hallelujahs.  Some  of  God's 
saints— some  here,  perhaps — have  almost  got  their  foot  upon  the 
threshold  of  the  eternal  city,  and  do  not  know  it.  They  are  closer  than 
they  think  to  the  harp  and  the  palm  branch.  They  would  not  fret 
about  what  they  will  do  next  year,  they  would  not  be  worrying  about 
next  quarter-day  if  they  knew  that  they  would  be  amongst  the  royalties 
of  heaven  by  then.  They  would  not  even  think  about  to-morrow  did 
they  know  how  soon  it  will  all  be  over,  and  how  soon  the  eternal  joy 
will  begin. 

God  bless  you,  dear  friends.  May  the  Lord's  grace  reign  over  all  in 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  even  to  sinners  in  whom  sin  is 
triumphant  may  Jesus  Christ  come,  and  his  grace  enter,  and  then  their 
beloved  sins  must  fall.  To  the  one  only  living  and  true  God  be  glory 
for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before   Sermon — Romans  vii. 
18 — 25  ;  and  Romans  viii.  1 — 14. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 377,  648,  631. 


if'. 


j  THE  LOYE  OF  JONATHAN,   AND  THE  LOVE  OF  JESUS. 


Intended  for  Eeadinq  on  Lobd's-day,  November  26th,  1893, 


DELITERED    BY 


C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord's-day  Evening,  September  22th,  1889. 


*'  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful,  passing  the  love  of  women." — 2  Samuel  i  26. 

Datid  was  a  poet ;  and  when  lie  found  that  his  best-beloved  friend 
had  fallen  by  the  arrows  of  the  Philistines,  he  wept  greatly,  and  then 
he  cheered  his  heart  by  writing  the  very  fine  elegy,  which  in  after 
years  was  called  "  The  Song  of  the  Bow."  Even  if  David's  lamenta- 
tion is  judged  according  to  the  canons-  of  literary  taste,  it  must  be 
placed  among  the  first  of  poetical  compositions.  Thus  David  tried  to 
keep  his  friend's  memory  green  ;  the  song  was  meant  to  be  a  memorial 
of  him.  Such  friends  as  Jonathan  are  not  common ;  and  when  we 
have  had  them,  we  must  not  forget  them. 

It  is  sad  that,  in  these  days,  friendship  is  proverbially  a  frail  thing. 
Friends  are  like  swallows,  that  are  with  us  in  our  summertime,  and 
gone  when  the  damps  of  autumn  begin  to  gather.  When  a  man  has 
a  faithful  friend,  let  him  grapple  him  to  his  side  with  hooks  of  steel ; 
and  when  he  loses  him,  let  him  know  that  he  has  lost  what  will  be  very 
hard  to  replace,  and  let  him  not  forget  his  friend  though  he  be  buried 
beneath  the  sod.  True  friendship  likes  to  fashion  memorials  of  the 
departed.  We  keep  mementoes  of  the  loved  ones  we  have  lost,  we  like 
to  think  of  the  happy  days  of  communion  we  have  had  together,  and 
we  will  not  allow  the  cherished  name  to  be  blotted  out  from  the 
memory  of  men. 

When  I  thought  of  this  subject,  I  said  to  myself,  "  I  shall  see  many 
to-night  who  are  lovers  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  I  shall  be  face  to  face 
with  thousands  who  love  him  as  they  love  their  own  soid."  I  believe 
that  is  my  happiness  now.  Well  then,  beloved  friends,  let  us  who  love 
Christ  keep  him  ever  in  memory.  If  you  can  speak  of  his  name,  be 
not  silent.  If  you  can  make  melody,  in  honour  of  Jesus,  in  the  great 
congregation,  take  down  the  minstrel's  harp,  and  lay  your  fingers 
among  the  strings,  and  bring  out  sweetest  music  to  his  dear  name  that 
thousands  may  hear ;  but  if  you  have  a  feebler  instrument,  sing  or  play 
to  the  two  or  three,  and  let  those  who  love  you  know  that  you  1ot« 
No.  2,336.  j^ 


160  METKOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PTTLPIT. 

your  Lord  best  of  all.  Or  if  thy  tongue  fail  thee,  use  thy  pen  to  let 
men  know  who  Jesus  is.  Say,  with  the  psalmist,  "My  heart  is 
inditing  a  good  matter :  I  speak  of  the  things  which  I  have  made 
touching  the  King." 

What  shall  we  do  to  keep  Christ's  name  before  the  sons  of  men  ? 
Let  us  be  inventive,  and  often  make  the  winds  and  waves  to  bear  the 
story  of  his  life  and  love  to  those  who  know  it  not.  I  would  whisper 
in  the  ear  of  someone,  "If  thou  lovest  Jesus,  how  is  it  that  thou  art 
never  at  his  table  ?  "  If  there  be  any  way  of  keeping  him  in  memory, 
which  is  better  than  every  other,  it  is  the  one  which  he  has  himself 
chosen,  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  How  do  you  excuse  your- 
selves, ye  lovers  of  Christ,  who  have  never  kept  up  this  feast  of  love  ? 
This  is  one  of  his  dying  requests,  "Meet  and  remember  me";  and 
yet,  though  you  say  that  you  love  him,  and  I  will  not  challenge  the 
truth  of  what  you  say,  you  have  never  yielded  obedience  to  his  loving 
request,  and  come  to  eat  the  bread  and  drink  of  the  cup  which  are  the 
memorials  of  his  broken  body  and  his  poured-out  blood.  David, 
thou  couldst  sing  of  Jonathan,  though  there  was  no  law  that  thou 
shouldst  do  so ;  what  wilt  thou  say  of  some  who  love  the  Christ  of 
God  better  than  thou  didst  love  Jonathan,  and  yet  have  never  remem- 
bered him  in  the  way  in  which  he  asked  to  be  remembered,  but 
have  cast  behind  their  back  the  sweet  forget-me-not  of  the  table  of 
communion  ? 

Let  that  stand  as  a  preface.  May  the  Lord  put  our  hearts  in  tune 
now  while  we  think  upon  two  things !  The  first  is  the  small  type, 
Jonathan's  love  to  David ;  the  second  is  the  infinite  anti-type,  Christ'' s 
love  to  men.  Perhaps  it  will  be  sweetest  to-night  if  we  can  each  one  say, 
"  Christ's  love  to  me.  He  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me.^^  That 
expression  will  be  in  harmony  with  the  words  of  the  text,  "  Thy  love 
to  me  was  wonderful." 

I.  First,  then,  we  have  to  think  a  little  about  Jonathan's  love  to 
David. 

Jonathan's  was  a  singular  love,  because  of  the  pureness  of  its  origin. 
Jonathan  loved  David  out  of  great  admiration  of  him.  When  he  saw 
him  come  back  with  the  head  of  Q-oliath  in  his  hand,  he  loved  him  as 
a  soldier  loves  a  soldier,  as  a  brave  man  loves  another  brave  man.  He 
felt  that  there  was  the  right  kind  of  metal  in  that  young  man  ;  and 
though  Jonathan  was  the  king's  son,  and  heir-apparent  to  the  throne, 
we  find  that  he  "  stripped  himself  of  the  robe  that  was  upon  him,  and 
gave  it  to  David,  and  his  garments,  even  to  his  sword,  and  to  his  bow, 
and  to  his  girdle."  He  felt  that  such  a  hero,  who  could  so  trust  his 
God,  and  so  expose  his  life,  and  come  off  so  victorious,  deserved  his 
utmost  love.  It  did  not  begin  in  self-interest,  it  did  not  begin  in  re- 
lationship ;  but  it  began  in  the  likeness  that  Jonathan  saw  between 
his  own  nature,  and  that  of  David.  It  was  one  brave  man  loving 
another  brave  man. 

Jonathan's  love  proved  also  to  be  most  intense.  It  is  said  that  "he 
loved  him  as  his  own  soul."  He  would  at  any  moment  have  sacri- 
ficed his  life  to  preserve  the  life  of  David  ;  in  fact,  I  do  not  doubt 
that  Jonathan  thought  David's  life  much  more  valuable  than  his  own, 
ftnd  that  he  was  quite  willing  to  expose  himself  to  peril  that  David 


THE   LOVE    OF   JONATHAlf,    AND    THE    LOVE    OF   JESXTS.  161 

might  be  preserved.  Jonathan's  was  a  very  intense  love.  May  we  see 
more  of  this  kind  of  love  among  Christian  men  !  May  they  love  each 
other  for  Christ's  sake,  and  because  of  the  love  of  God  which  they  see 
in  one  another,  and  may  they  be  intense  in  their  affection ! 

Jonathan's  love  was  very  disinterested;  because,  as  I  have  said, 
Jonathan  was  heir-apparent  to  the  throne,  but  David  had  been 
anointed  king  by  Samuel.  The  kingdom  was  to  be  taken  from  the 
house  of  Saul,  and  given  to  the  house  of  David.  Very  naturally,  the 
young  prince  Jonathan  might  have  felt  first  envy,  and  then  hatred  of 
David,  who  was  to  supplant  him ;  but  instead  of  that,  he  said  to  him 
one  day,  very  touchingly,  "  Thou  shalt  be  king  over  Israel,  and  I 
shall  be  next  unto  thee."  He  meant  to  be  his  friend,  and  his  helper, 
taking  joy  in  seeing  David  wear  the  crown  which  might  have  adorned 
his  own  brow.  Happy  Jonathan,  to  be  able  to  put  himself  in  the 
background  like  that,  and  to  feel  that,  if  David  was  first,  it  was  what 
lie  himself  desired.  That  friendship,  in  which  a  man  can  set  himself 
on  one  side  for  the  sake  of  another,  is  not  yet  so  common  that  we  can 
hawk  it  in  the  streets. 

Jonathan's  was  a  love  which  lore  up  under  all  opposition,  for  he  soon 
found  that  Saul,  his  father,  in  his  black  heart,  hated  David.  He  could 
not  bear  the  thought  that  another  man  should  take  the  place  which 
he  coveted  for  himseK,  though  he  did  not  himself  deserve  to  keep  it. 
He  wished  to  see  David  dead ;  and  because  Jonathan  took  David's 
part,  Said  was  exceedingly  angry,  and  made  Jonathan's  lot  hard  tf 
bear ;  yet  Jonathan  did  not  cast  off  his  friend,  he  clung  to  David 
through  good  report  and  through  evil  report.  Jonathan  was  faithful 
to  his  father,  and  very  obedient  to  him ;  but  still  he  would  not  give  up 
his  friend  David,  and  he  would  sooner  be  in  jeopardy  of  the  javelin  of 
Saul  than  end  the  friendship  that  existed  between  himself  and  God's 
chosen  servant. 

And  this  love  was  very  active,  for  you  know  how  he  pleaded  for 
David  with  his  father.  He  went  out  into  the  field,  and  took  counsel 
with  David.  He  arranged  plans  and  methods  for  David's  preserva- 
tion ;  and,  on  one  occasion,  we  find  that  he  "went  to  David  in  the 
wood,  and  strengthened  his  hand  in  God."  Yes,  his  love  was  not  a 
matter  of  mere  talk,  it  was  real,  practical,  active ;  it  was  a  love  which 
never  failed.  When  the  arrow  of  the  Philistine  went  through  the 
heart  of  Jonathan  on  Mount  Gilboa,  it  struck  the  name  of  David  that 
was  engraven  there. 

"  He  loved  him  long,  and  loved  him  well, 
And  loved  him  to  the  death ;  " 
80  that  David  could  truly  say,  "  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful,  pass- 
ing the  love  of  women." 

Now,  dear  friends,  do  you  not  think  that,  when  we  read  a  story  like 
that  of  Jonathan  and  David,  it  should  stir  up  in  us  the  desire,  not  so 
much  to  have  such  a  friend,  as  to  be  such  a  friend  as  Jonathan  was 
to  David  ?  Any  man  can  selfishly  desire  to  have  a  Jonathan ;  but  he 
is  on  the  right  tack  who  desires  to  find  out  a  David  to  whom  he  can  be 
a  Jonathan.  There  is  great  joy  in  Hfe  with  real  friendship  on  both 
sides.  Some  people  expect  friendship  to  be  always  heaping  its  trea- 
sures upon  them  j  but  true  friendship  has  two  hands,  and  two  feet,  and 


162  alETROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

two  eyes.  Tou  cannot  have  a  real  friendship  that  is  all  for  tating", 
and  never  for  giving.  David  loved  Jonathan  as  Jonathan  loved  David. 
May  that  blessed  Spirit  of  God,  who  teaches  us  to  love  even  our 
enemies,  help  us  to  cultivate  sanctified  friendships,  and  to  be  willing 
to  help  those  who  are  our  brethren  in  Christ  in  time  of  need  ! 

I  shall  say  no  more  upon  that  part  of  my  subject ;  but  I  hope  it  will 
rebuke  some  who  are  no  friends  at  all.  Oh,  how  often  have  we  met 
with  such !  They  are  very  friendly  when  their  legs  are  under  your 
mahogany ;  but  they  are  not  so  friendly  when  you  have  no  mahogany, 
and  have  hardly  a  deal  table  left.  They  think  all  the  world  of  you 
while  you  can  be  a  ladder  by  which  they  climb  the  wall  of  prosperity  ; 
but  when  they  are  on  the  top  of  the  wall,  they  too  often  say  that  they 
never  saw  that  ladder  in  all  their  lives,  and  you  may  take  it  away. 
We  continually  see  that  kind  of  thing  among  men  of  the  world.  May 
it  not  be  so  among  Christians  !  May  vre  be  true  to  all  v  ho  are  our 
friends,  as  we  would  be  generous  even  to  any  who  are  our  foes,  if  such 
persons  are  in  existence  ! 

II.  But  I  want  now  to  talk  of  something  more  sweet,  and  more 
sure.  The  love  of  Christ  to  me,  using  the  first  personal  pronoun, 
because  it  is  in  the  text :   "  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful." 

I  hope  that  many  here  will  be  helped  to  use  that  same  pronoun  each 
one  for  himself  or  for  herself.  I  do  not  wish  to  preach  to-night ;  I 
want  rather  to  be  a  sort  of  fugleman,  just  to  go  through  the  exercises 
that  others  may  do  the  same.  I  am  to  speak  of  love  which  I  trust 
many  feel,  which  I  hope  they  may  feel  even  more  than  the  speaker 
does ;  and  let  it  be  the  ambition  of  every  one  of  us  to  love  Christ  more 
and  more.  Let  us  think  of  Christ  as  present  here  to-night,  for  so  he 
is,  according  to  his  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world."  There  he  stands.  With  closed  eyes,  faith  per- 
ceives him,  and  she  cries,  "  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful." 

I  think  that  we  feel  this  most  when  we  see  our  Saviour  die.  Sit  down 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  look  up.  Behold  that  sacred  brow  with 
the  thorny  wreath  upon  it.  See  those  blessed  eyes,  red  with  weeping ; 
mark  those  nailed  hands,  that  once  scattered  benedictions ;  gaze  on 
those  bleeding  feet,  which  hurried  on  errands  of  mercy ;  watch  till  you 
can  peer  into  that  gaping  side,  how  deep  the  gash,  how  wide  the 
breach,  see  how  the  water  and  the  blood  come  streaming  forth  !  This 
is  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory,  who  thus  dies  amid  derision  and  scorn, 
sufEering  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  Q-od.  Oh,  if  you 
can  picture  Christ  on  the  cross,  and  believe  that  he  died  for  you,  you 
will  be  led  to  cry,  "  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful,  passing  the  love  of 
mothers  or  of  wives.  Thy  love  to  me  was — I  cannot  describe  what  it 
was — it  was  wonder-ful — as  full  of  wonders  as  the  heavens  are  full  of 
stars,  or  as  a  forest  is  full  of  leaves.  Thy  love,  as  I  see  it  in  thy  death, 
was  wonderful."  Do  you  picture  David  saying  this  as  he  thinks  of 
the  body  of  Jonathan  pierced  with  the  arrows  of  his  enemies,  "  Thy 
love  to  me  was  wonderful "  ?  Will  you  not  stand  so  to-night,  in 
imagination,  over  your  Saviour's  body,  as  you  see  it  wrapped  in  spices, 
and  laid  in  the  tomb  of  Joseph  of  Arimathaea  ?  Ere  yet  the  stone  is 
rolled  to  the  cave's  mouth,  will  you  not  look  on  that  mangled  form,  and 
say,  "  In  very  truth,  thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful"  ? 


THE    LOVE    OF    JONATHAN,    AND    THE    LOVE    OF    JESUS.  163 

Beloved  friends,  sometimes  we  feel  as  if  our  love  to  our  departed 
ones  would  know  another  great  flood-tide  if  they  could  come  back 
again.  You  have  lost — no,  I  will  not  harrow  up  your  feelings, — you 
have  all  lost  those  most  dear,  and  your  sorrow  was  great  as  you 
laid  them  in  the  grave  ;  but  if  to-night,  when  you  reached  your  home, 
you  should  find,  sitting  in  that  room  of  yours,  the  beloved  one  come 
back,  I  think  that  your  love  would  suddenly  leap  up  into  an  ecstacy, 
and  it  would  be  greater  than  ever  it  was  before.  "  Has  my  husband 
returned  to  me  ?  Has  my  spouse  come  back  to  me  ?  Has  my  mother, 
my  child,  been  restored  to  me  ?  "  Oh,  what  a  feast  of  love  our  souls 
would  have  if  there  could  be  such  a  reunion  in  our  bereaved  house- 
holds !     Well,  remember  that  he  who  died  for  us  rose  again. 

**  He  lives,  the  great  Eedeemer  lives," 

lives  with  our  love  still  within  his  heart,  lives  to  love  us  as  much  in 
his  eternal  glory  as  he  did  in  the  shame  and  spitting  while  he  was  on 
earth.  Come,  give  your  love  room  and  space  to-night,  as  you  remem- 
ber him  as  dead,  but  rejoice  in  him  as  living. 

I  think,  also,  that  we  sometimes  feel  the  greatest  love  to  dear  friends 
when  we  find  others  doing  them  despite.  When  David  found  that 
Jonathan's  body  had  been  dishonoured  by  the  Philistines,  that  they 
had  taken  away  the  bodies  of  King  Saul  and  his  sons  to  hang  them  on 
the  wall  of  Beth-shan,  then  was  he  sorely  troubled,  and  his  love  broke 
forth  again  in  sighs,  and  cries,  and  tears.  And  I  must  say  to-night 
that  /  love  my  Lord  all  the  more  because  of  the  insults  others  heap  upon 
him.  When  I  have  lately  seen  books  written  against  his  atoning  sacri- 
fice, when  I  meet  with  men,  calling  themselves  Christians,  who  speak 
Ughtlj'  of  the  sacred  expiation,  and  even  of  the  divine  Person  of  the 
great  sacrifice,  my  heart  first  burns  with  indignation  against  the 
traitors, — true  successors  of  Judas, — and  then  my  soul  cries,  "  My 
Saviour,  by  the  dishonour  that  they  put  on  thee,  I  love  thee  all  the 
more.  By  the  shame  that  they  again  cast  on  thee,  as  though  thou 
wert  a  hundred  times  crucified,  I  vow  to  serve  thee  with  a  hundredfold 
energy  and  force  of  concentrated  love,  for  thy  love  to  me  was  wonder- 
ful." Some  can  speak  lightly  of  Christ ;  mayhap  they  never  knew 
Buch  love  as  he  has  shown  to  me.  Some  can  despise  his  blood; 
possibly  they  were  never  washed  from  such  sins  as  mine.  Some  think 
lightly  of  his  faith  ;  perhaps  they  have  never  had  such  communion 
with  him  as  my  heart  has  known  ;  but  I  must  say  of  him,  "  Thy  love 
to  me  was,  is,  and  ever  shall  be,  wonderful,  passing  all  loves  supposable 
in  heaven  or  earth  besides." 

Now  let  me  briefly  tell  the  story  of  that  love, — it  is  a  long  story, — 
the  love  of  Christ  to  me.  Part  of  its  wonder  lies  in  the  ohject  of  this 
love,  that  it  should  be  bestowed  upon  me  :  "Thy  love  to  me."  Dear 
brother,  dear  sister,  will  you  only  talk  about  it  just  now  to  yourseK  ? 
*'  It  is  a  wonder  that  Christ  should  love  anybody ;  but  is  it  not  the 
greatest  wonder  of  all  that  he  should  love  me  ?  WTio  am  I,  and  what 
is  my  father's  house,  that  Christ  should  love  me  ?  " 

"  What  was  there  in  you  that  could  merit  esteem, 
Or  give  the  Creator  delight  ?  " 


164  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PtTLPIT. 

Thy  love  to  me  !  There  was  special  undesert ;  there  were  many  reasons 
why  love  should  have  passed  me  by ;  but  thy  love  to  me  was  wonder- 
ful that  thou  shouldst  single  out  me.  Tell  it  in  heaven  that  there  is 
no  greater  wonder  there  than  that  Christ  should  love  me ;  and  when 
you  get  there,  say  to  all  the  bright  spirits  before  the  throne,  "There  is 
no  greater  wonder  in  the  salvation  of  you  all  than  there  is  in  my 
salvation.  Thy  love  to  me,  my  Lord,"  and  you  will  bow  adoringly  at 
Chi-ist's  feet  as  you  say  it,  "  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful." 

Then  throw  the  emphasis  on  the  first  word,  "  Thy  love  to  me,"  and 
you  have  another  part  of  the  wonder,  that  is,  in  the  Oiver  of  this  love. 
For  a  man  to  love  me,  well,  should  not  men  love  their  kind  ?  But  for 
Q-od  to  love  me,  for  the  Infinite,  for  the  inconceivably  lovely  One, 
whose  ideal  of  that  which  is  loveable  must  be  far  beyond  human  con- 
ception, for  him  to  love  me,  this  is  a  miracle  indeed.  Can  you  imagine 
it,  that  God  who  is  greater  than  immensity,  whose  life  is  longer  than 
time,  that  God  the  aU-boundless  One,  should  love  you?  That  he 
should  think  of  you,  pity  you,  consider  you,  this  is  all  very  well ;  but 
that  he  should  love  you,  that  his  heart  should  go  out  to  you,  that  he 
should  choose  you,  that  he  should  have  graven  you  on  the  palms  of 
his  hands,  that  he  should  not  rest  in  heaven  without  you,  that  he 
should  not  think  heaven  complete  until  he  brings  you  there,  that  you 
should  be  the  bride,  and  Christ  the  Bridegroom,  that  there  should 
be  eternal  love  between  him  and  you,  oh,  as  you  think  of  it,  lift 
up  your  hands  with  adoring  wonder,  and  say,  "Thy  love  to  me  was 
wonderful." 

Now  begin,  if  you  can,  to  consider  the  commencement  of  this  love. 
When  did  God  begin  to  love  his  own  elect  ?  There  was  a  time  when  he 
began  to  make  the  worlds  ;  but  from  eternity  he  has  loved  his  chosen. 
Before  the  first  flash  of  light  illumined  the  primeval  darkness,  God 
loved  his  people.  Before  the  first  pulsation  of  life  came  into  human 
bodies,  long  ere  there  were  such  beings  as  men  and  women,  he 
loved  his  own.  He  saw  them  in  the  glass  of  predestination  and  fore- 
knowledge, and  he  loved  them  then ;  his  delights  even  then  were  with 
the  sons  of  men.  His  love  had  no  beginning,  it  was  like  himself, 
seK-existent,  starting  from  itself,  and  there  never  was  a  time  when  God 
did  not  love  his  own  people.  Think  of  that  wonder  of  grace,  that  such 
a  speck  of  dust  as  you  are  should  have  been  loved  from  eternity,  that 
such  a  handful  of  ashes  as  I  am  should  have  been  loved  from  before 
all  worlds !  Tell  it  as  with  voice  of  trumpet,  for  God  hath  said  it,  "  I 
have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love  :  therefore  with  lovingkind- 
ness  have  I  drawn  thee." 

Christ's  love,  then,  is  wonderful  in  its  beginning ;  and  when  it  began 
to  work  on  me,  it  was  still  wonderful,  for  what  did  I  do  ?  I  refused  it. 
When  Christ  came  in  robes  of  love  to  me,  and  presented  himself  as  a 
candidate  for  my  heart's  acceptance,  I  told  him  that  I  would  not  have 
him.  There  was  a  wanton  world  that  had  my  heart.  There  was  the 
devil  himself,  in  all  manner  of  sinful  shapes ;  and  he  had  my  hand, 
and  I  was  his.  Was  it  not  so  with  some  of  you,  that  Christ  wooed  you 
many  a  year,  and  you  would  not  have  him  ?  He  came  to  you  some- 
times threatening,  and  sometimes  inviting ;  he  came  to  you  by  pro- 
vidences, by  preachers,   by  books,   by  his  good  Spirit ;  yet  though 


THE  LOVE  OF  JONATHAJ^^,  AND  THE  XOVB  OF  JESUS.       165 

yon  turned  your  back  on  him,  he  never  turned  his  back  on  you ;  he 
■would  not  take  *'  No  "  for  an  answer. 

"  Determined  to  save,  he  watched  o'er  my  path 
When,  Satan's  Wind  slave,  I  sported  with  death." 

Think  of  a  man,  who  used  to  come  staggering  out  of  a  public-house 
late  at  tight,  yet  he  is  loved  of  Q-od  !  Or  of  a  thief,  whose  hair  was 
cut  short  in  the  prison,  yet  he  was  loved  of  God,  and  here  he  is 
to-night  sitting  at  Jesus'  feet,  rejoicing  in  that  love !  Oh,  wha,t  songs 
there  will  be  in  heaven  concerning  the  love  of  Christ  to  his  own, 
and  the  rebuffs  which  the  dear  Lover  of  our  souls  received  by  the 
sad,  sad  usage  of  ungodly,  wilful  men!  "Thy  love  to  me  was 
wonderful." 

And  when  Chrisfs  love  led  him  to  come  here,  and  taJce  our  nature,  was 
it  not  wonderful  ?  He  reigned  enthroned  in  heaven ;  seraphim  and 
cherubim  gladly  did  his  bidding.  He  was  God,  and  yet  he  came  down 
from  yonder  royal  palace  to  that  stable  at  Bethlehem,  and  to  the 
manger  where  the  horned  oxen  fed.  'Tis  he!  'Tis  he!  But  as 
George  Herbert  reminds  us,  he  hath  unrobed  himself,  and  hung  his 
azure  mantle  on  the  sky,  and  all  his  rings  upon  the  stars ;  and  there 
he  lies,  a  babe  in  swaddling  bands,  taking  human  nature  into  union 
with  his  divinity  because  he  loved  us.  Truly,  thou  blessed  Child, 
whom  I  would  take  into  mine  arms  as  Simeon  did,  and  say,  "  Lord, 
now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  thy  word  : 
for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation ; "  thy  love  to  me  was 
wonderful !  Behold  Christ  with  the  sceptre  of  heaven  in  his  hand, 
and  then  see  him  sitting  on  the  edge  of  a  well,  talking  to  an  adulterous 
woman.  Gaze  on  him  with  the  harps  of  angels  ringing  out  his  praise, 
and  then  see  him  with  all  the  riff-raff  of  Jerusalem  scofl&ng  at  him, 
and  bidding  him  come  down  from  the  cross.  If  he  stooped  to  become 
a  man  like  ourselves,  and  stooped  lower  still,  even  unto  death,  truly 
may  each  saved  one  cry  to  him,  "  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful." 

There  is  one  thing  that  makes  the  love  of  Christ  more  wonderful 
than  anything  else,  and  that  is,  that  he  not  only  took  our  nature,  but 
he  took  our  sin.  There,  scrape  it  up  together,  the  filthy  stuff  that  has 
made  God  himself  to  sicken  at  the  thought  of  man,  I  mean,  the  sin 
and  the  pollution  of  our  lives.  Behold,  the  Lord  hath  gathered  it  up 
together  in  one  foul  heap,  enough  to  putrefy  the  universe,  and  he 
hath  laid  it  all  on  Christ,  and  the  great  Sin-bearer  takes  it  upon 
himself  as  though  it  were  his  own,  though  it  was  not.  He  suffers  for 
it,  he  bears  the  sentence  of  justice  on  account  of  it,  and  then  he  hurls 
it  all  away  into  the  abyss  of  oblivion,  where  it  shall  never  be  found 
again.  My  Saviour,  didst  thou  bear  my  sin  in  thine  own  body  on  the 
tree  ?  Wast  thou  condemned  for  my  condemnation  ?  Then,  in  very 
deed,  thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful. 

I  do  not  know  how  to  break  my  text  up  so  as  to  bring  it  home  to 
each  believer ;  I  wish  that  everyone  here,  who  really  has  known 
Christ's  love,  would  help  me  by  a  personal  thought  upon  the  hrotherh/ 
tmd  condescending  cha/racter  of  this  love.  Times  have  been  when  we,  who 
love  Christ's  name,  have  been  in  trouble,  and  he  has  been  very  near 
to  US.     Times  have  been  when  we  have  been  misrepresented,  and 


,lg6  METEOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PITLPIT. 

abused,  and  he  has  smiled,  oh,  so  sweetly  on  us !  Times  have  heen 
when  bodily  pain  has  made  us  very  faint,  and  he  has  put  underneath 
us  the  everlasting  arms.  Speak  as  you  find,  beloved  ;  how  have  you 
found  the  Lord  Jesus  in  your  dark  days,  in  your  heavy  days,  in  your 
weary  days  ?  Have  you  not  found  him  a  matchless  Friend  ?  I  can 
bear  my  own  witness  that  there  is  no  comiort  like  his  comfort,  there 
is  no  smile  like  his  smile,  there  is  no  touch  of  help  like  his  delivering 
hand.  "Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful."  Sometimes,  when  I  have 
told  the  story  of  God's  goodness  to  me,  a  Christian  friend  has  said, 
"  Have  you  not  written  all  that  down  ?  ''  "  No,  I  have  not,"  I  have 
replied.  "  Will  you  not  take  care,  before  you  die,  that  it  is  all  written 
down?"  I  have  said,  "No,  I  do  not  know  that  I  shall."  Now 
perhaps  your  life's  story  will  die  out  with  yourself,  j'et  have  there  not 
been  very  marvellous  touches  of  Christ's  love  in  it  ?  Have  there  not 
been  windows  of  agates,  and  gates  of  carbuncle,  through  which  you 
have  seen  your  Lord's  face  ;  and  can  you  not  say  to-night,  looking 
over  your  pilgrim  path  from  the  first  day  until  now,  "  Lord,  thou  hast 
been  ever  with  me  ;  thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful  in  condescending, 
helpful  fellowship  in  the  time  of  my  need  "  ? 

Think,  also,  of  the  comforting  and  thoughtful  provisions  of  Christ'' s  love. 
Sometimes  you  have  been  well-nigh  slipping,  not  merely  as  to  trouble, 
but  as  to  sin.  Our  lives  are  not  all  to  our  credit ;  there  have  been  sad 
moments,  when  unbelief  has  crept  in  on  the  back  of  thoughtlessness, 
and  you  have  been  almost  a  sceptic.  There  have  been  evil  moments, 
when  sin  has  insinuated  itself  into  the  imagination,  and  you  have 
almost  done  that  which  would  have  been  your  ruin.  Have  there  not 
been  times  in  your  life  when  you  have  been  smitten,  and,  if  there 
had  not  been  some  One  to  uphold  you,  you  would  have  fallen,  almost 
unconsciously  fallen,  and  there  have  lain  down  to  die  ?  But  oh,  how 
Jesus  has  watched  over  you,  and  cared  for  you !  Never  mother 
nursed  her  babe  with  such  care  as  Christ  has  given  to  you.  When 
you  look  back,  sometimes,  and  see  the  pit  from  which  you  have  been 
preserved,  into  which  you  might  have  fallen ;  when  you  meet  with 
some  old  friend,  who  used,  years  ago,  to  be  singing  at  your  side,  but 
is  now  a  drunkard  or  profane,  and  you  say,  "  Why  should  he  be  like 
that  any  more  than  I  should  ?  Who  hath  made  me  to  differ  ?  What 
but  the  grace  of  God  has  kSpt  me  until  now  ?  "  ah,  then  you  see 
how  Christ's  love  to  you  has  been  wonderful,  passing  the  love  of 
women ! 

But  the  love  of  Christ  to  us  is  most  of  all  wonderful  in  its  plans  for 
the  future.  You  know  not,  and  you  cannot  conceive,  what  he  will  yet 
do  for  you.  You  are  in  trouble,  are  you  ?  Well,  joy  cometh  in  the 
morning.  Just  now,  you  have  to  drink  the  bitter  cup,  and  God  gives 
you  pills  that  you  do  not  like.  Take  them  at  his  hand,  for  they  are 
meant  for  your  good.  'Tis  but  a  little  while,  and  then  sorrow  and 
sighing  shall  for  ever  flee  away.  Has  any  redeemed  man  here  any 
notion  of  what  God  has  prepared  for  them  that  love  him  ?  You  shall 
stand  among  the  perfected,  and  go  in  and  out  amongst  the  holy.  You 
ahaU  be  where  no  trouble  shall  ever  reach  you,  or  even  the  noise  and 
dash  of  a  wave  of  sorrow  ever  reach  your  ears.  You  shall  be  where 
it  shall  be  your  felicity  to  serve  God  without  mistake^  without  trans- 


THE    LOVE    OF    JONATHAN,    AND    THE    LOYE    OS   JKSUS.  167 

gression,  and  without  omission.  You  shall  behold  the  face  of  the 
King  in  his  beauty,  not  now  and  then,  but  for  ever  without  a  cloud 
or  a  veil  between.  You  shall  find  it  your  delight  to  praise  him ;  and 
your  voice  shall  be  heard  amid  the  choirs  of  the  glorified  as  you  adore 
the  Lamb  whose  love  to  you  has  been  so  wonderful.  And  what  will 
be  your  employments  in  heaven  ?  Ah,  that  I  cannot  tell  you  ;  but 
they  shall  be  employments  that  shall  be  equally  honourable  and 
delightful! 

I  have  told  you  before  what  I  sometimes  dream  shall  be  my  lot  in 
glory,  to  stand  not  here,  and  preach  to  a  handful  of  people,  though  it  be 
verily  a  large  handful ;  but  to  stand  upon  some  starry  orb,  and  preach 
of  Christ  to  whole  constellations  at  once,  and  thunder  out  my  remem- 
brances of  his  sweet  love  to  myriads  of  beings  who  have  never  heard 
of  him  as  yet,  for  they  have  never  sinned,  but  who  will  drink  in  all  the 
tidings  of  what  Jesus  did  for  sinful  men.  And  each  of  you,  according 
to  your  training  for  it,  shall  make  known  to  angels,  and  principalities, 
and  powers,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.  There  is  plenty  of  room 
for  you  all,  for  God's  universe  will  need  millions  ujjon  millions  of 
messengers  to  go  through  it  all,  and  tell  out  the  story  of  redeeming 
love.  And  we,  I  believe,  are  here  in  training  for  that  eternal  work 
of  making  known  to  illimitable  regions  of  space,  and  countless  myriads 
of  intelligent  beings  whom  God  has  created,  but  who  have  never  fallen, 
the  story  of  this  little  planet,  and  of  the  God  who  loved  it  so  that  he 
came  here,  and  died  that  he  might  save  his  people  from  their  sins. 

Get  ready,  brethren,  for  the  eternity  which  is  so  near.  Within 
about  a  hand'sbreadth,  you  and  I  shall  be  in  eternity.  Even  if  we 
live  to  be  eighty  or  ninety,  or  fulfil  the  tale  of  a  hundred  years,  it  is 
but  a  little  while,  and  we  shall  have  quitted  these  dark  shores,  and 
landed  in  the  everlasting  brightness  of  endless  glory,  that  is,  if  we 
know  the  love  of  Christ  to-day,  and  trust  in  Christ  to-day.  We  shall 
go  on  and  on  for  ever  and  for  ever  experiencing  more  and  more  of 
this  great  truth,  '*  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful." 

Now  let  each  one  answer  this  question, — Can  you  say,  "  He  loved 
me,  and  gave  himself  for  me  "  ?  If  not,  you  are  an  unhappy  man. 
God  make  you  even  more  unhappy  until  you  come  and  look  to  Jesua 
Christ,  as  men  looked  to  the  brazen  serpent ;  and  as  by  their  looking 
they  were  healed,  so  by  your  looking  may  you  be  made  to  live 
to-night !     Remember  that — 

*'  There  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One  ; 
There  is  life  at  this  moment  for  thee ; 
Then  look,  sinner — look  unto  him,  and  be  saved— 
Unto  him  who  was  nail'd  to  the  tree." 


KECEUITS   FOR  KING  JESUS. 


Pbbached  on  Lord's-day  Evening,  February  17th,  1884,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  And  there  came  of  the  children  of  Benjamin  and  Judah  to  the  hold  unto  David. 
And  David  went  out  to  meet  them,  and  answered  and  said  unto  them,  If  ye  be  come 
peaceably  unto  me  to  help  me,  mine  heart  shall  be  knit  unto  you :  but  if  ye  be  come  to 
betray  me  to  mine  enemies,  seeing  there  is  no  wrong  in  mine  hands,  the  God  of  our 
fathers  look  thereon,  and  rebuke  it.  Then  the  spirit  came  upon  Amasai,  who  was  chief 
of  the  captains,  and  he  said,  Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy  side,  thou  son  of  Jesse  : 
peace,  peace  be  unto  thee,  and  peace  be  to  thine  helpers ;  for  thy  God  helpeth  thee. 
Then  David  received  them,  and  made  them  captains  of  the  band." — 1  Chronicles  xii. 
16—18. 

At  this  time  David  was  in  the  hold — I  suppose  in  the  stronghold  of 
Ziklag,  which  the  king  of  the  Philistines  had  given  to  him.  It  was  in 
that  fortress-town  that  he  received  a  welcome  addition  to  his  band. 
David  was  an  exile ;  and  it  is  not  every  man  who  cares  to  cast  in  his 
lot  with  a  banished  nobleman.  He  was  outlawed,  and  his  sovereign 
would  have  slain  him  with  his  own  hand  if  he  had  ibund  opportunity : 
few  care  to  stake  their  all  with  a  man  in  such  a  condition.  The  many 
who  were  on  Saul's  side  spoke  very  bitterly  of  David,  and,  wishing 
to  curry  favour  with  the  king,  they  slandered  him  to  the  blackest 
degree :  few  respectable  people  care  to  associate  themselves  with  a 
person  who  is  in  ill-repute.  Many  to  whom  he  had  done  no  ill  were 
eager  to  betray  David,  and  sell  him  into  the  hand  of  his  enemy ;  for 
men  sought  their  own  gain,  and  cared  not  whom  they  sold,  so  long  as 
they  clutched  the  price :  it  was  no  small  thing  for  a  band  of  men  to 
unite  with  a  man  upon  whose  head  a  price  was  set.  David  had  to  stand 
upon  his  guard,  for  traitors  were  all  around:  the  men  of  Keilah  would 
have  delivered  him  up  when  he  went  in  all  simplicity  of  heart  within 
their  gates.  The  fortunes  of  David  were  at  a  low  ebb,  and  hence  when 
these  men  came  to  David  they  did  a  valorous  action — an  action  which 
he  would  be  sure  to  remember  in  the  afcer-days  of  his  triumph. 

I  want  to  run  a  parallel  between  the  case  of  David  and  that  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  At  the  present  moment  our  Lord  Jesus,  the  Son  of 
David,  is  still  in  the  hold.  Among  the  men  of  this  world  he  is  not  yet 
enthroned :  their  hearts  go  after  another  prince,  and  as  yet  the  king- 
dom has  not  come  to  the  Son  of  David.  I  know  that  he  reigns  in 
heaven,  and  that  he  is  in  very  deed  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords ; 

No.  1,770.  -  - 

10 


170  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PU1.PIT. 

but  before  the  eyes  of  the  mass  of  men  he  is  still  despised  and  rejected. 
His  people,  as  yet,  are  but  a  feeble  folk,  and  often  hard  put  to  it ;  while 
his  kingdom  is  ridiculed,  his  claims  are  derided,  and  his  yoke  is  scorned. 
The  doctrines  which  he  preached  are  tossed  to  and  fro  like  a  ball ;  and 
men  at  the  present  time  are  glorying  in  science  or  tradition,  in  reason 
or  in  speculation ;  yea,  they  speak  as  if  human  wisdom  would  soon  wipe 
out  the  very  name  of  Christianity,  It  is  not  so  in  truth  before  God ; 
but  it  is  so  in  appearance  before  men.  This  is  an  age  of  blasphemy  and 
of  rebuke  for  our  Lord  the  King.  Brave  are  they  who  will  stand  to 
Christ  in  this,  the  day  of  his  exile.  They  shall  be  right  royally  re- 
warded who  will  now  take  up  his  cause,  and  will  go  forth  to  him  without 
the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach.  He  is  the  man  for  the  Lord  Jesus  who 
can  now  run  the  gauntlet  of  miles  of  scoffers,  and  be  willing  to  be 
called  a  fool,  a  madman,  or  an  idiot  for  his  name's  sake.  Blessed  are 
they  who  are  not  ashamed  this  day  to  bear  the  name  of  Christ  written 
out  large ;  and  to  confess  that,  after  the  way  which  men  call  "  orthodoxy," 
so  worship  they  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers.  The  philusophic  Christian 
may  escape  if  he  will  drown  the  Christian  in  the  philosopher ;  but  this  is 
not  to  stand  out  square  for  Christ.  It  does  our  heart  good  nowadays  to 
meet  with  a  few  brethren  who  are  not  ashamed  still  to  believe  in  the 
merit  of  the  Redeemer's  precious  blood,  and  in  the  power  of  his  Spirit  to 
regenerate.  We  feel  at  home  when  we  drop  in  with  a  few  who  believe 
in  prayer,  and  expect  the  Lord  to  interpose  on  the  behalf  of  his  people. 
I  say,  blessed  are  they  who,  like  these  men  of  Benjamin  and  Judah,  are 
willing  to  go  to  the  King  in  the  hold,  and  take  up  his  cause  though  it 
be  at  a  low  ebb,  and  stand  up  for  him  when  the  many  are  ready  to 
trample  him  down,  and  are  ridiculing  his  work  and  his  cause.  For  my 
own  part,  I  never  loved  my  Lord  better  than  now  that  he  is  defamed ; 
and  his  truth  is  all  the  dearer  to  me  because  it  is  flouted  by  the  worldly- 
wise. 

It  is  to  those  who  will  volunteer  for  Jesus  that  I  am  about  to  speak; 
and  our  first  head  is,  that  using  the  text  as  a  parable  we  have  here  a 
commendable  example.  It  is  a  commendable  example  for  men  to  join 
themselves  with  Christ  while  he  is  at  a  discount.  Secondly,  here  is 
a  cautious  inquiry.  When  David  sees  these  men  come  he  does  not 
at  once  receive  them  with  open  arms,  but  there  is  a  reserve  about  him 
till  he  has  asked  them  a  question  or  two.  He  wants  to  know  who 
they  are  before  he  writes  down  their  names  in  his  muster-roll.  And, 
thi'-dly,  here  is  a  very  cordial  enlistment  as  they  answer  to  his  question, 
and  say,  "  Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy  side,  thou  son  of  Jesse ;  for 
thy  God  helpeth  thee." 

I.  First,  then,  here  is  a  very  commendable  example.  May  the 
Holy  Spirit  lead  many  of  my  dear  hearers  to  follow  it. 

Many  of  these  men  of  Benjamin  and  Judah,  in  the  first  place,  went 
to  join  themselves  to  David  because  they  had  heard  that  he  was  the 
Lord's  anointed.  They  understood  that  Samuel  had  gone  down  to 
Ramah,  and,  in  the  days  of  David%  youth,  had  anointed  him  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  to  be  king  instead  of  Saul.  Therefore  they  said, 
"  Whom  God  anoints  we  will  follow,"  and  they  came  after  David. 
It  was  fit  that  they  should  be  loyal  to  David  if  they  would  be  obedient 
to  God. 


RECRUITS   FOR   KING   JESUS.  171 

Now,  it  is  within  the  belief,  I  trust,  of  all  assembled  here,  that  the 
Lord  God  Almighty  has  anointed  "one  chosen  out  of  the  people"  to  be 
his  King  in  Zion — the  King  of  his  church  for  ever  and  ever;  and  that 
one  chosen  out  of  the  people  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  of  the  house  of  David, 
who  is  himself,  as  man,  the  servant  of  God,  but  who  is  also  divine,  and 
counts  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God.  We  have,  1  trust,  all  of  us 
drunk  in  this  doctrine,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Anointed  of  God,  the 
very  Word  of  God,  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godliend 
bodily.  Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  if  it  be  so,  the  next  inevitable 
step  for  men  who  fear  God  is  to  go  forth  and  follow  the  Lord's  Anointed. 
If  Jesus  be  the  Messiah,  the  sent  One  of  God,  in  the  name  of  everything 
that  is  gracious  and  right  let  us  follow  him.  God  has  given  him  to  be 
a  leader  and  a  commander  to  the  people ;  let  us  rally  to  his  baimer 
without  delay.  If  the  Lord  has  anointed  Jesus  to  be  a  prince  and  a 
Saviour,  let  him  be  our  prince  and  our  Saviour  at  once.  Let  us  render 
him  obedience  and  confidence,  and  openly  avow  the  same.  Our  Lord 
puts  it  thus — "  If  I  tell  you  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  me  ?  " 
The  argument  is  irresistible  with  true-hearted  men.  If  any  of  you 
believe  that  Jesus  is  anointed  to  be  the  Saviour  of  men,  I  say  that  you 
are  unreasonable  if  you  do  not  practically  accept  him  as  such.  But  if 
you  are  willing  to  come  right  straight  out,  and  say,  "  Let  others  do  as 
they  will ;  as  for  me,  I  will  be  the  loving  servant  of  the  anointed  of  the 
Lord  " ;  then  you  act  rightly,  and  render  a  reasonable  service.  What  better 
argument  can  I  find  with  jusfand  reasonable  persons  than  this?  You 
believe  that  God  has  anointed  Jesus,  therefore  accept  him  for  yourself. 
If  these  men  followed  David  because  God  had  anointed  him,  infinitely 
more  binding  is  it  upon  you  and  upon  me,  believing  that  God  has 
anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  to  be  the  King,  for  us  to  follow  Mm,  that 
we  may  be  fomid  faithful  to  his  cause  and  kingdom.  Oh,  my  dear 
hearers,  I  am  perplexed  about  some  of  you :  you  call  Jesus  Lord,  and 
yet  you  do  not  obey  him;  you  owu  that  he  is  the  Saviour,  and  yet  you 
do  not  trust  in  him  for  salvation.  Do  think  this  over,  and  may  the 
Holy  Ghost  lead  you  to  a  sensible  decision.  If  Jesus  be  God's  anointed, 
led  him  be  your  beloved. 

Next,  these  men,  no  doubt  many  of  them,  followed  David  because  of 
his  personal  excellencies.  They  had  heard  of  him — of  what  he  was  ia 
his  youth,  what  he  had  been  at  home,  and  at  court,  and  in  the  army, 
and  in  the  day  of  battle.  He  had  behaved  admirably  everywhere,  and 
these  warriors  had  heard  of  it.  I  should  not  wonder  if  some  of  them 
remembered  that,  when  he  was  a  youth  and  ruddy,  he  came  forth  with 
his  sling  and  stone  and  smote  the  giant  foe  of  Israel  on  the  forehead. 
Perhaps  they  had  heard  of  all  his  mighty  acts  that  he  did  when, 
as  Saul's  captain,  he  went  in  and  out  before  the  host  and  did  valiantly 
in  the  name  of  the  Most  High.  And  when  they  heard  of  his  gentleness, 
and  of  his  courtesy,  and  of  all  the  many  virtues  which  adorned  him, 
making  him  so  greatly  difterent  from  those  leaders  of  freebooting  bands 
who  were  so  common  ia  that  land,  I  do  not  wonder  if  they  enthusi- 
astically gave  themselves  up  to  be  the  loyal  followers  of  this  David  the 
son  of  Jesse.  A  good  soldier  should  have  a  good  captain:  a  good 
captain  deserves  good  soldiers.  These  men  of  war  argued  well  when 
they  enlisted  under  David.     But  how  shall  I  commend  the  Lord  Jesua 


jyo  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Christ  to  you  that  are  of  a  noble  spirit  ?  Was  there  ever  any  like  unto 
him?  Who  among  the  good,  the  great,  the  brave,  the  beautiful,  can  be 
likened  unto  him  ?  He  left  the  courts  of  heaven  that  he  might  save 
men.  Love  brought  him  from  glory  to  be  the  Redeemer  of  his  enemies! 
Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  mnn,  he  gave  himself  up  to  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross  for  love  of  men.  All  his  life  long  he  did  valiantly 
for  the  Lord  his  God,  in  all  holiness  and  righteousness,  defeating  every 
temptation  and  overcoming  all  evil,  and  he  ended  his  labour  by  going 
up  to  the  cross  to  enter  into  personal  duel  with  death  and  hell,  therein 
overthrowing  all  the  powers  of  evil  on  the  behalf  of  his  people.  Oh, 
could  I  paint  his  face,  and  could  you  see  it  as  it  is  beheld  by  the  eyes  of 
God,  yon  would  all  be  enamoured  of  him !  Oh,  could  all  men  know 
how  good  he  is,  how  gracious  he  is,  as  some  of  us  do  know  ;  even  if 
they  only  went  to  that  partial  extent,  surely  no  men  would  stand  out, 
but  the  Prince  Immanuel  would  win  all  hearts !  All  these  young  men 
and  all  the  vast  multitude  who  gather  to  this  Tabernacle  would  gladly 
take  up  their  cross,  and  follow  after  Jesus  at  once,  if  they  had  any  idea 
of  his  surpassing  excellence.  0  my  soul,  how  wouldst  thou  rejoice  if 
men  would  come  at  once  to  Jesus  !  Oh  to  hear  you  all  say,  "  We  also 
will  be  with  Jesus  in  the  day  of  his  derision  and  his  scorn ;  for  we  see 
what  he  is,  and  there  is  none  like  him.  He  shall  be  our  King  and  our 
Captain,  for  he  is  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether 
lovely."  He,  being  such  a  One,  and  so  worthy  of  the  anointing  which 
he  has  received  of  God,  I  do  as  his  recruiting  sergeant  commend  him 
to  every  one  here.  Oh,  that  you  would  all  become  his  true  followers  at 
once  ;  for  he  deserves  the  love  and  loyalty  of  every  one  of  you.  If  ye 
would  be  safe  and  happy,  come  to  my  Lord,  and  be  henceforth  his  ser- 
vants. If  ye  would  fight  a  good  fight,  enlist  beneath  this  glorious 
"  Captain  of  our  salvation." 

There  was  a  third  reason  why  brave  spirits  resolved  to  enlist 
under  David,  and  that  was,  that  he  was  so  cruelly  persecuted  by 
Saul — so  misrepresented  and  abused  by  his  enemies.  There  are  some 
cringing,  fawning  spirits  in  this  world,  who  must  always  go  with  the 
majority.  What  everybody  says  they  say:  they  take  their  cue  from 
those  who  lead  the  fashion  of  the  hour.  They  ask  leave  of  common 
custom  to  breathe  or  eat.  They  dare  not  swallow  down  their  spittle  till 
they  have  obtained  permission  so  to  do.  Cringing,  fawning  sycophants 
of  all  that  is  great,  and  all  that  is  fashionable,  scarcely  could  a  soul 
be  found  in  them  if  they  were  searched  through  and  through  with  a 
microscope.  These  will  never  come  to  David  when  he  is  in  the  hold,  nor 
need  he  wish  that  they  would.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  brave 
spirits  who  rather  prefer  to  be  in  the  minority.  They  do  not  even  care 
if  they  have  to  stand  alone  for  truth  and  righteousness.  They  could 
have  ventured  to  say  with  Athanasius,  "  I,  Athanasius,  against  the 
world";  for  they  know  the  right  and  they  cling  to  it;  and  it  is  not  to 
them  a  question  whether  truth  walks  in  silver  slippers  or  whether  she 
plods  barefoot  through  the  mire.  It  is  the  truth  they  care  for,  and  not 
the  habiliments  with  which  she  may  be  adorned  or  disfigured.  Such  men 
took  up  David's  side  chivalrously  because  it  was  the  right  side,  and  the 
despisuil  side  ;  and  they  liked  it  none  the  less  because  so  many  spake  evil 
of  it.     feaJly  true  is  it  tliat  the  Lord  Jesas  Christ  is  still  of  so  little 


RECRUITS  FOR  KING  JESUS. 


173 


account  in  this  world.  His  name,  ah,  I  am  sick  of  the  way  in  which  they 
use  his  name  to-day  !  Shame  on  some  that  are  called  Christian  ministers ! 
They  believe  in  Christ,  but  it  is  a  Christ  without  his  crown,  his  atone- 
ment, his  judgment-seat,  or  even  his  Godhead.  They  mock  us  with 
orthodox  phrases,  from  which  the  essential  truth  is  gone.  They  pretend 
that  they  believe  in  the  atonement,  and  when  we  listen  to  their  atone- 
ment we  find  that  it  does  not  eflFectually  atone  for  any  one.  It  is  a  mere 
fiction,  and  not  a  fact.  It  saves  nobody,  but  is  a  mere  sham.  They  have 
eviscerated  the  gospel,  and  then  they  hold  up  the  empty  carcase,  and  claim 
that  they  are  Christians  still.  Christians  who  have  murdered  Christianity ! 
Believers  who  doubt  whether  there  is  anything  to  be  believed !  Yet  we 
are  entreated  in  our  charity  to  hug  such  traitors  to  our  bosom.  We  shall 
do  nothing  of  the  kind.  We  would  sooner  believe  in  infidels  outright  than 
in  those  who  pretend  to  be  Christians  and  are  infidels  at  heart.  "  Modern 
thought "  is  a  more  evil  thing  than  downright  atheism ;  even  as  a  wolf 
in  a  sheep's  skin  is  worse  than  a  wolf  in  his  natural  form.  There  are 
pretty  things  said  of  our  Lord  Jesus  by  those  who  deny  the  faith  which 
are  sickening  to  me.  I  loathe  to  hear  our  true  Lord  praised  by  false 
lips.  They  deny  the  doctrines  which  he  taught,  and  yet  prate  about 
believing  him.  It  is  a  shallow  trick,  but  yet  it  deceives  shallow  souls. 
Poor,  weak  minds  say,  "  The  man  speaks  so  beautifully  of  Jesus,  surely  he 
cannot  be  in  error."  I  tell  you  it  is  the  old  Judas  trick — the  Son  of  man 
is  betrayed  with  a  kiss.  How  nauseating  their  praises  must  be  to  him 
whom  they  are  betraying.  Think  not  that  they  are  honest ;  their  designs 
are  far  other  than  appear  upon  the  surface.  They  laud  him  as  man  iliat 
they  may  dishonour  him  as  God  :  they  cry  up  his  life,  and  his  example, 
that  they  may  cast  his  atoning  sacrifice  into  the  ditch.  They  lift  up 
one  part  of  the  divine  revelation  with  no  other  intention  than  that  they 
may  dasli  down  the  other :  they  crouch  at  his  feet  that  they  may  stab  at 
his  heart. 

I  avow  myself  at  this  hour  the  partisan  of  Christ,  and  of  the  whole 
truth  of  Christ,  in  its  old-fashioned  form:  the  more  old-fashioned  the 
better  for  me.  I  am  for  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  fur 
ever.  I  am  for  the  gospel  of  martyrs  and  confessors  who  gave  their  hearts' 
blood  as  the  seal  of  their  faith.  New  gospels  and  new  theologies  I  abhor. 
I  am  for  that  same  ancient  gospel  which  to-day  is  said  to  be  absolutely 
defunct.  Science  has  wiped  out  the  evangelicals :  we  are  dead :  we  are 
gone.  So  they  say  of  us.  Yet  in  our  graves  we  turn :  even  in  our  ashes 
live  our  wonted  fires :  we  expect  a  resurrection.  Truth  may  be  crushed 
down,  but  it  cannot  be  crushed  out.  If  there  survived  but  one  lover  of 
the  doctrines  of  grace  he  would  suffice  by  God's  Spirit  to  sow  the  world 
again  with  the  verities  of  our  holy  faith.  The  eternal  truth  which 
Christ  and  his  apostles  taught  is  not  dead  but  sleepeth ;  at  a  touch  of 
the  Lord's  hand  she  shall  rise  in  all  her  ancient  power  and  look  round 
for  her  adversaries,  and  they  shall  not  be :  yea,  she  shall  diligently  con- 
sider their  place  and  they  shall  not  be.  Blessed  are  they  who  at  this 
time  are  not  afraid  to  be  on  the  side  that  is  ridiculed  and  laughed  at. 
Truth  will  have  its  turn,  and  though  it  now  grind  the  dust  it  shall  be 
at  the  top  before  long,  and  they  who  are  loyal  to  it  shall  share  its 
fortunes.  Let  us  be  bold  enough  to  say,  "  Put  down  my  name  among 
the  fools  who  believe,  and  not  among  those  whose  wisdom  lies  in 


174  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

doubting  everything."  God  save  ns  from  the  wisdom  which  believes 
in  itself,  and  give  us  more  of  the  wisdom  which  believes  in  him! 

Once  more.  These  men  came  to  David  because  ihey  believed  that 
David  had  a  great  future  before  him.  He  was  very  poor  wlien  they  came 
to  him,  an  exile,  as  we  have  said,  an  outlaw,  one  who  could  not  return  to 
his  land  because  the  king  himself  had  a  personal  feud  with  him.  But 
they  said,  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  he  shall  be.  This  son  of  Jesse 
will  be  king  yet,  and  his  enemies  shall  beg  their  lives  of  him."  So,  looking 
to  the  great  future  that  awaited  him,  they  determined  to  take  shares  with 
him  in  his  present  low  estate  that  they  might  be  raised  with  him  in 
his  exaltation.  Now,  I  think  that  T  can  say  to  every  one  here,  "  I  would 
that  ye  would  come  over  to  David's  side — to  Jesus's  side — for  there  is 
a  future  awaiting  him,  a  glory,  a  triumph,  even  here  on  earth,  such  as 
shall  make  those  men  gnash  their  teeth  who  throw  away  this  oppor- 
tunity of  enlisting  in  his  host."  How  will  souls  lament  for  ever  their 
neglect  oi  joining  themselves  to  Jesus  !  It  shall  be  their  everlasting 
regret  that  they  lost  the  opportunity  of  standing  straight  out  for  truth, 
and  right,  and  love,  as  they  are  seen  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God. 
Oh,  it  will  be  an  endless  loss  to  have  refused  to  stand  upon  the  pillory  of 
scorn,  and  avow  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Saviour 
of  men.  "  Behold  he  cometh  with  clouds,  and  every  eye  shall  see  him." 
Woe  to  those  who  pierced  him  l)y  refusing  to  believe  in  him.  The  Lord 
shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever,  and  the  shout  of  "  Hallelujah,  hallelujah," 
shall  come  up  from  earth  and  descend  from  heaven.  He  shall  sit  upon 
the  throne  of  his  father  David,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end. 
Who  does  not  desire  to  be  with  him  and  to  behold  his  glory?  Cast  in 
your  lot  with  him,  then,  0  ye  undecided !  Let  his  cause  be  as  it  may 
in  the  eyes  of  worldlings,  espouse  it  at  once  right  heartily;  for  they 
that  are  with  him  in  his  humiliation  shall  be  with  him  in  his  triumph. 

Those  are  the  reasons  why,  at  this  time,  I  stand  here,  and  exhort, 
beg,  beseech,  entreat  every  one  among  you  to  be  on  the  side  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  Woe  unto  you  if  you  turn  your  backs  upon  him! 
Woe  unto  you  if  you  attempt  to  be  neutrals  !  Woe  unto  you  if  you  are 
lukewarm  followers !  Remember,  he  that  is  not  with  him  is  against 
him.  He  that  takes  not  up  his  cross  and  follows  not  after  him  is  not 
worthy  of  him,  and  shall  not  be  counted  among  his  disciples.  Oh,  that 
this  whole  company  here  to-night  were  distinctly  and  avowedly,  perfectly 
and  continuously,  on  the  side  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Prince  of  peace,  the 
coming  King !  0  my  friend,  yonder,  I  speak  to  you  personally,  I  would 
to  God  that  you  would  at  once  put  on  the  livery  of  my  Lord  Jesus,  and 
become  his  sworn  servant  for  ever ! 

IL     Now,  I  have  just  a  few  words  to  say  upon  the  second  head.     A 

CAUTIOUS  INQUIRY. 

These  men  of  Benjamin  and  of  Judah  came  to  David,  and  David 
met  them  as  a  warrior  standing  upon  his  guard.  The  times  were  not 
such  as  to  allow  of  a  negligent  confidence  in  all  who  professed  friendship. 
The  Benjamites  were  of  the  same  tribe  as  Saul,  and  it  was  singular 
that  they  should  come  and  join  with  David,  the  rival  of  their  own 
leader.  The  men  of  Judah  belonged  to  the  same  tribe  as  those  men  of 
Keilah  who  had  betrayed  David:  therefore  the  hero  was  cautious  and 
made  careful  inquiry.     My  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  never  so  eager  after 


I 


RECRUITS   FOR   KING   JKSUS,  I75 

disciples  as  to  enrol  those  who  cannot  bear  to  be  qnestioned.  He 
did  not  go  abroad  sweeping  up  a  heap  of  nominal  followers  who  would 
increase  his  apparent  strength  and  prove  a  real  weakness  to  him.  He 
said  to  those  who  offered  themselves,  "Count  the  cost."  **  Lord,  I  will 
follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest,"  says  one.  Jesus  does  not  there 
and  then  enlist  him,  but  calmly  replies,  "  Foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds 
of  the  air  have  nests ;  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  his 
head."  He  wants  followers,  but  he  wants  them  to  be  of  the  right  kind  ; 
therefore  he  does  not  delude  them  and  excite  them  to  enter  suddenly 
upon  a  course  which  they  will,  before  long,  renounce.  He  does  not  act 
as,  I  am  afraid,  the  recruiting  sergeant  does  when  he  tells  the  brave 
boys  of  all  the  glories  they  will  enjoy,  and  crosses  their  hands  with  a 
shilling,  so  that  they  may  take  Her  Majesty's  money  and  become  her 
servants.  The  sergeant  does  not  say  much  about  the  wounds  of  battle  and 
the  pains  of  hospital :  he  does  not  dwell  very  long  upon  wooden  legs, 
and  broken  arms,  and  lost  eyes,  and  all  that.  No ;  he  dwells  on  pleasure, 
victory,  pension,  glory.  Our  great  Captain  does  not  in  this  manner 
entrap  allies,  but  he  sets  the  worst  part  of  his  service  first,  and  bids 
men  consider  whether  they  will  be  able  to  carry  out  that  which  they 
propose  to  do.  I  would  in  this  matter  imitate  my  Lord :  I  have  pressed 
you  to  come  to  his  banner,  but  at  the  same  time  I  would  cautiously 
inquire  of  you. 

Now,  see  what  David  said  to  them :  he  set  before  them  fhe  right  ivay. 
He  said,  "  If  ye  be  come  peaceably  unto  me  to  help  me,  mine  heart  shall  be 
knit  unto  you."  If  you  wish  to  join  with  Christ's  people,  and  have  your 
name  numbered  with  them,  one  main  question  is — Do  you  come  unto 
him?  Do  you  first  give  yourselves  to  the  Lord  and  afterwards  unto  his 
people  ?  "  If  ye  be  come  unto  wje,"  says  David.  It  would  have  been 
useless  for  them  to  answer,  "  We  have  come  because  we  are  fond  of 
some  of  the  people  that  are  with  you."  "  No,"  he  says,  "if  ye  be  come 
to  me,  then  my  heart  shall  be  knit  to  you.  Not  else."  Do  you  come  to 
Christ,  dear  friend  ?  Are  you  sure  that  Jesus  is  your  Leader  ?  Do  not 
profess  to  be  a  Christian  if  you  have  not  come  to  Christ,  for  Christ 
is  the  soul  of  Christianity.  To  come  to  Christ  is  this  :  confessing  your 
sin,  look  to  him  as  the  sin-bearer,  trust  him  with  your  future,  trust  him 
with  your  soul  altogether.  By  a  sincere,  simple,  undivided  faith,  you 
do  really  come  to  Jesus:  have  you  such  a  faith?  Let  Jesus  Christ  be 
first  and  last  with  you.  Take  him  to  be  your  Saviour  altogether.  Do 
not  be  your  own  Saviour  even  in  part.  Let  him  save  you  from  begin- 
ning to  end,  from  top  to  bottom,  in  all  ways  and  respects.  If  it  be  so, 
come  along  with  you,  for  our  host  will  be  glad  to  have  its  number  in- 
creased by  your  coming.  If  you  do  not  thus  come  to  our  Lord,  pray  do 
not  come  to  us,  for  you  will  neither  do  good,  nor  get  good  thereby. 

Then  David  puts  the  question,  "If  ye  be  come  peaceably  unto  me,'* 
and  this  was  needful,  for  some  are  captious  and  quarrelsome.  Some 
profess  to  come  to  Christ,  but  they  quarrel  with  Christ  at  the  very  first. 
They  would  make  terms  with  him,  and  they  come  intending  to  dispute 
with  his  people.  From  the  first  they  are  discontented  and  fault-finding, 
rather  patronizing  Christ  and  his  cause  than  humbly  uniting  with  him 
and  his  people.  They  do  not  think  half  as  much  of  God's  people  as 
God  thinks  of  them.     When  I  hear  people  say,  "  Oh,  there  is  So-aud-So, 


176  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

who  is  not  what  he  ought  to  be,  and  he  is  a  member  of  the  church," 
and  then  they  begin  finding  fault  with  this  and  with  that,  I  say  to 
myself,  "  That  critic  is  no  true  friend."  The  church  is  not  perfect,  but  woe 
to  the  man  who  finds  pleasure  in  pointing  out  her  imperfections.  Christ 
loved  his  church,  and  let  us  do  the  same.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  Lord 
can  see  more  fault  in  his  church  than  I  can  ;  and  I  have  equal  confi- 
dence that  he  sees  no  fault  at  all,  because  he  covers  her  faults  with  his 
own  love— that  love  which  hides  a  multitude  of  sins;  and  he  removes 
all  her  defilement  with  that  precious  blood  which  washes  away  all  the 
transgressions  of  his  people.  I  dare  not  find  fault  with  those  whom 
the  Lord  has  loved  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world;  more 
especially  since  1  find  that  I  need  all  ray  time  to  find  out  my  own  faults 
and  to  get  rid  of  them.  If  you  are  a  faultless  man  I  do  not  ask  you 
to  join  the  Christian  Church,  because  I  am  sure  that  you  would  not 
find  anybody  else  there  like  yourself  It  is  true  that  if  you  do  not  join 
a  church  till  you  find  a  perfect  one  you  will  not  be  a  church-member 
this  side  heaven ;  but  I  may  add,  that  if  there  were  such  a  church,  the 
moment  your  name  was  written  in  the  list  it  would  leave  off  being  a 
perfect  church,  for  your  presence  would  have  destroyed  its  perfection. 
If  you  are  coming  to  pick  holes,  and  quiz,  and  question,  and  find  fault, 
and  talk  about  inconsistencies  and  so  forth,  then  you  may  pass  on  and 
join  some  other  army ;  but  if  you  be  come  peaceably  to  our  Lord  and  to 
us.  then  I  ofifer  you  a  hearty  welcome.  We  are  not  anxious  to  enlist 
men  who  love  to  have  the  pre-eminence,  nor  men  of  fierce  temper,  nor 
unforgiving  spirits,  nor  proud,  envious,  lovers  of  strife:  we  want  only 
those  who  have  the  mind  of  Christ.  Come  peaceably,  or  come  not  at 
all. 

Again  David  puts  the  question,  "  If  ye  be  come  peaceably  to  me  to 
help  me."  Mind  this  and  mark  it  well :  they  that  join  with  Christ  must 
join  in  his  battles,  join  in  his  labours,  joiu  in  his  self-sacrifice.  We 
must  come  to  his  church  not  only  to  be  helped,  but  to  help.  It  is  of  no 
use  your  entering  the  army  if  you  do  not  mean  to  fight ;  and  it  is  of  no 
use  your  uniting  with  the  host  of  God  unless  you  mean  to  take  your  share 
in  the  holy  warfare.  Many  forget  this,  and  look  upon  a  religious  life  as 
one  of  sanctified  selfishness.  A  great  many  stop  the  gospel  plough. 
"  Hi ! "  say  they ;  "  stop ! "  They  want  to  ride  on  one  of  the  horses. 
Yes,  but  the  ploughman  has  no  opinion  of  such  friends.  Let  them  lead 
the  horses  or  hold  the  plough-handles,  or  do  something,  or  else  let  them 
take  themselves  oflF.  Of  course,  I  do  not  mean  the  sick  and  faint ;  but 
all  fit  for  war  must  go  to  the  war.  There  is  something  for  every  church- 
member  to  do  as  well  as  to  receive.  They  that  join  the  Church 
of  Christ  must  come  to  pull  as  well  as  to  be  pulled — come  to  work  as 
well  as  to  eat ;  and  usually  the  rule  is  true  in  Christ's  house  as  it  ought 
to  be  in  everybody  else's,  "  He  that  will  not  work,  neither  shall  he 
eat."  They  that  do  not  labour  in  the  cause  of  Christ  will  very  soon 
find  that  they  are  not  fed  in  the  house  of  God.  Why  should  they  be  ?  I 
count  it  no  office  of  mine  to  carry  bread  and  meat  to  sluggards 
and  lie-a-beds :  I  would  sooner  feed  swine.  They  who  never  do  a  hand's 
turn  among  us  ought  to  be  turned  out  from  us.  If  ye  be  come  peace- 
ably to  help  us,  then  I  speak  for  my  Captain,  and  bid  you  welcome ; 
but  if  you  do  not  mean  real  service,  please  to  march  on. 


RECRUITS  FOR  KING  JESUS.  177 

There  are  the  three  questions,  then.  Do  you  come  to  Christ  and 
accept  him  ?  If  so,  come  along.  Do  you  come  with  a  desire  to  maintain 
peace  among  your  Christian  brethren  ?  If  so,  come !  Do  you  come  with 
the  intent  of  helping  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  spread  abroad  his 
truth  ?  Then  come,  and  welcome,  and  the  Lord  be  with  you  and  with 
Qs! 

Do  you  know  what  Jesus  says  to  you  who  come  to  him  aright? 
*•  My  heart  shall  be  knit  unto  you."  Oh,  I  think  that  if  I  had  been 
Amasai,  I  should  have  felt  the  spirit  come  upon  me  to  speak  just  as 
Amasai  did  when  he  so  heartily  declared  that  he  and  his  brethren  came 
to  join  heart  and  soul  with  David.  With  all  that  loving  warmth  which 
was  so  natural  to  him,  David  said,  "  My  heart  shall  be  knit  to  you." 
Now  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says,  "Will  you  espouse  my  cause? 
Will  you  accept  me  for  leader  ?  Will  you  come  and  join  with  my  people  ? 
Then  my  heart  shall  be  knit  unto  you  " — do  not  your  hearts  leap  within 
you?  What  a  charming  promise  it  is!  What  union  of  soul  it  sets 
forth !  I  do  not  know  much  about  knitting  ;  but  some  of  you  do. 
Things  knit  together  are  not  merely  joined  in  one,  but  they  are  one. 
They  are  not  merely  sewn  together  by  a  machine,  so  that  you  can  draw 
out  a  thread  and  the  pieces  divide  ;  but  they  are  knit  together  and  are  of 
one  piece,  one  fabric,  one  substance.  Come,  then,  ye  truly  faithful,  you 
shall  be  knit  together  with  Christ,  his  heart  with  your  heart ;  you  shall 
never  be  separated  from  him  any  more.  It  is  a  great  thing  when  the 
hearts  of  God's  people  are  knit  together ;  but  it  is  greatest  of  all  when 
their  hearts  are  knit  with  Christ's  heart,  and  his  heart  is  knit  with 
theirs.  Come  hither,  ye  true-hearted  :  cast  in  your  lot  with  your  Lord. 
Is  it  not  reward  enough  for  coming  into  his  host  that  his  heart  shall 
be  knit  to  you?  I  count  this  my  heaven  upon  earth,  to  have  my  Lord's 
love ;  do  you  not  agree  with  me  ? 

Notice  how  David  put  the  other  side  of  it,  and  set  before  them  the 
wrong  tvay ; — "  But  if  ye  be  come  to  betray  me  to  my  enemies,  seeing 
there  is  no  wrong  in  mine  hands,  the  God  of  our  fathers  look  thereon,  and 
rebuke  it."  WUl  persons  ever  join  the  church  to  betray  the  Lord  Christ 
to  his  enemies  ?  I  say  not  that  such  is  their  present  purpose ;  but  a  great 
many  have  acted  as  if  they  were  from  the  beginning  traitors  to  him  and 
to  his  truth.  They  have  come  into  the  church,  and  yet  they  have  be- 
trayed Christ  to  his  enemies ;  yea,  they  have  been  aided  in  their  treachery 
by  having  been  admitted  within  our  ranks.  Some  have  done  this  by 
giving  up  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  Falling  into  this  error  and  that, 
they  have  denied  the  gospel,  overthrown  the  weak,  and  shaken  the 
strong.  Some  have  proved  themselves  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of 
Christ  by  their  inconsistent  lives.  People  have  pointed  at  them,  and 
said,  '•  Those  are  followers  of  Christ,  you  see.  They  can  lie,  and  cheat, 
and  get  gain  as  the  basest  rogues  do."  They  say  that  they  are  Christians, 
and  yet  you  cannot  trust  them  in  trade.  They  are  just  as  gay,  and 
worldly,  and  false  as  if  they  were  not  Christians  at  all.  Why,  then  I 
suspect  that  they  are  not  Christians  at  all ;  but  like  Judas  Iscariot,  they 
are  children  of  perdition.  Then  there  are  some  in  all  ages  who  betray 
the  Lord  Jesus  by  apostasy.  They  run  well  for  a  time,  and  then  they 
are  hindered.  Being  armed  and  carrying  bows,  they  turn  back  in  the 
day  of  battle.     They  are  trees  twice  dead,  plucked  up  oj  the  roots.    Such 


178  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

sorrowful  heart-breaking  cases  do  occur  in  all  churches,  where  men  corao 
to  the  very  front,  and  appear  to  do  great  service  for  Christ,  and  yet 
forsake  him,  and  walk  no  more  with  his  people,  nor  in  his  ways;  even 
denying  that  they  ever  were  associated  with  him  and  with  his  cause. 
They  open  his  wounds  !  They  put  him  to  an  open  shame  !  Woe  unto 
them  !  Sorrowfully,  yet  sternly  would  I  say.  If  there  should  be  one  hero 
who  will  in  some  future  day  wilfully  betray  the  Saviour  on  any  account 
whatever,  the  Lord  have  mercy  upon  such,  and  prevent  his  joining 
with  our  church  lest  we  be  overwhelmed  with  shame  and  sorrow.  True- 
hearted  men,  we  invite  you !  Half-hearted,  fickle  men,  we  would  avoid 
you !  Yet  such  do  come,  and  will  come,  and  what  can  we  say  of  them  ? 
"  The  God  of  our  fathers  look  thereon  and  rebuke  it," — ay,  rebuke 
it  so  as  to  prevent  it,  that  they  may  not  be  as  thorns  in  our  side. 

III.  But  time  fails  me,  and  therefore  I  must  finish  up,  thirdly,  by 
describing  from  the  text  a  coiiDiAL  enlistment.  The  captain  of  these 
brave  men  felt  the  Spirit  come  up  ^n  him,  and  he  spoke  up  as  warm- 
heartedly as  David  had  spoken,  saying,  "  Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on 
thy  side,  thou  son  of  Jesse :  peace,  peace,  be  unto  thee,  and  peace  be  to 
thine  helpers ;  fur  thy  God  helpeth  thee." 

He  began  thus: — "Thine  are  we,  David."  Now,  that  is  the  first 
thing  I  want  of  those  who  are  going  to  join  the  church — "Thine  are  we, 
Jesus.  We  are  not  our  own ;  we  are  bought;  with  a  price."  Well  may 
that  man  avow  himself  to  belong  to  Christ  who  has  been  bought  with 
the  blood  of  Christ :  "For  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things, 
as  with  silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  Now, 
if  ye  be  indeed  redeemed  by  him,  I  pray  you  confess  that;  you  are  alto- 
gether and  absolutely  your  Lord's.  Sing  with  your  whole  heart — 
"  All  that  I  am,  and  all  I  have 
Shall  be  for  ever  thine." 

Do  not  sing  it  alone,  but  practise  it.  Let  your  lives  say — Thine  are 
we,  Jesus.  Neither  count  we  anything  that  we  possess  to  be  our  own ; 
but  all  is  dedicated  to  thy  royal  use. 

Then  Amasai  added,  "  and  on  thy  side,  thou  son  of  Jesse :  "  for,  if  we 
belong  to  Christ,  of  course  we  are  on  Christ's  side,  whatever  that  side 
may  be.  In  religion,  morals,  politics,  we  are  on  Christ's  side.  Here  is 
the  side  of  the  learned ;  there  is  the  side  of  the  ignorant :  we  are  on 
neither  the  one,  nor  the  other :  we  are  on  Christ's  side.  In  every  political 
question  we  desire  to  be  and  ought  to  be  on  Christ's  side:  we  are  neither 
uf  this  party  nor  of  that,  but  on  the  side  of  justice,  peace,  righteousness. 
In  every  moral  question  we  are  bound  to  be  on  Christ's  side.  In  every 
religious  question  we  are  not  on  the  side  of  predominant  thought,  nor  on 
the  side  of  fashionable  views,  nor  on  the  side  of  lucre,  but  on  the  side  of 
Christ.  Make  this  your  oracle—"  What  would  Jesus  do  ?"  Go  and  do 
that.  How  would  Jesus  think?  Go  and  think /Aa^.  What  would  Jesus 
have  you  to  be  ?  Ask  God  to  make  you  just  that.  "  Thine  are  we, 
David,  and  on  thy  side,  thou  son  of  Jesse." 

Then  he  added,  "  Peace  be  to  thee."  "  Peace,  peace,  be  to  thee." 
Double  peace  to  thee.  So  say  we  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  our  heart 
salutes  him  and  invokes  peace  upon  him.  Blessed  Master,  we  are  at 
peace  with  thee  so  completely  as  to  be  at  one  with  thee.  What  thou 
sayest  we  believe;  what  thou  doest  we  admire;  what  thou  commandest 


EECRUITS  FOR  KING  JESUS.  179 

we  obey ;  what  thou  claimest  we  resign  ;  what  thou  forbiddest  we  forego. 
We  yield  ourselves  up  to  thee  wholly,  and  are  at  perfect  peace  with  the« 
in  all  thy  purposes,  and  designs,  and  acts.     Peace,  peace,  to  thee. 

"  And  peace  be  to  thy  helpers."  We  desire  all  good  for  all  good  men. 
We  pray  for  the  peace  of  the  peaceful.  The  day  that  we  were  converted 
we  felt  that  we  loved  every  Christian.  I  used  to  say  of  the  little  village 
where  I  first  preached,  that  I  had  such  an  attachment  to  every  inhabitant 
in  it  that  if  I  had  seen  a  dog  that  came  from  Waterbeach  I  would  have 
given  him  a  bone.  Do  you  not  feel  the  same  towards  all  the  Lord's 
people  ?  The  proverb  hath  it,  "  Love  me,  love  my  dog ;  "  and  when 
you  love  Christ  you  love  the  very  lowest  of  his  people.  Ay,  if  Jesus 
had  a  dog,  you  would  love  that  dog  for  Christ's  sake.  I  am  sure  that 
it  is  so.  When  a  man  is  always  cavilling,  I  fear  he  has  not  the  spirit  of 
Christ,  and  is  none  of  his.  AVe  know  gome  people  who  might  he  com- 
pared to  hedgehogs,  they  cannot  be  touched  by  anybody,  they  are  all 
spines  and  prickles ;  such  people  may  think  well  of  themselves,  but  it 
is  to  be  feared  that  the  loving  Jesus  does  not  think  well  of  them. 
The  man  with  a  hot  head  and  a  bitter  heart,  is  he  a  friend  of  Jesus  ?  I 
cannot  imagine  that  such  a  head  as  that  will  lie  in  Jesus  Christ's  bosom. 
Oh,  no,  dear  friends ;  he  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  but  not  the  man  of 
hate  and  spite.  Give  me  the  eyes  of  the  dove,  and  not  those  of  a  carrion 
crow.  When  the  dove  soars  aloft  into  the  air,  what  does  she  look  for  ? 
Why,  for  hor  dovecote,  and  when  she  discovers  the  beloved  abode  she  uses 
her  wings  with  lightning  speed,  for  there  is  her  delight.  If  you  were  to 
throw  a  raven  or  a  carrion-crow  into  the  air,  it  would  be  looking  for 
something  foul  which  it  could  feed  upon ;  and  there  are  men  and 
women  in  every  Christian  church  who  are  always  trying  wi-th  far- 
reaching  and  greatly-magnifying  eyes  to  find  out  some  wretched  scandal 
or  another.  If  you  want  to  go  to  your  bed  uncomfortable,  and  to  lie 
awake  all  night,  if  you  are  a  pastor  of  a  church,  have  a  few  minutes' 
talk  with  a  friend  of  this  order.  These  are  the  folks  who  have  just 
sniffed  out  a  matter  that  ought  to  be  inquired  into.  When  it  is 
inquired  into  there  is  nothing  to  discover,  and  great  heart-burning  is 
caused  in  the  process  of  investigation.  These  same  scandal-mongera 
will  have  something  fresh  to-morrow  morning  wherewith  to  keep  their 
\  dear  tongues  going.  May  we  be  favoured  with  very  few  of  these 
irritating  beings.  May  those  that  come  among  us  always  be  those  that 
can  say,  "Peace  be  to  thy  helpers."  Whatever  helps  Christ  I  would 
help.  Wherever  I  see  anything  of  Christ  there  my  heart  shall  rest. 
Oh,  to  have  a  large  increase  to  this  church  and  all  the  churches  of  hearty^ 
loving,  peace-making  people  ! 

The  last  word  that  they  said  to  David  was,  "  For  thy  God  helpeth 
thee;"  and  I  shall  keep  that  last  sentence  very  much  to  myself:  I  want 
to  feed  upon  it  as  my  portion  of  meat :  you  must  not  muzzle  the  mouth 
of  the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn,  and  I  am  that  ox  at  this  time. 
"  Thy  God  helpeth  thee."  How  I  do  rejoice  to  think  that  God  is  helping 
the  Great  Son  of  David.  All  the  powers  of  the  God  of  nature  and 
providence  are  working  to  aid  the  Lord  of  grace.  The  stars  in  their 
courses  are  fighting  for  our  Immanuel.  Everything  is  being  overruled 
for  the  advance  of  Christ's  kingdom.  We  are  all  on  the  ti'emble  as  to 
the  Soudan  and  Egypt ;  but  could  we  see  all  things  we  should  rejoice. 


180  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

None  of  ns  know  what  is  coming.  I  am  no  prophet,  nor  the  son  of  a 
prophet,  but  I  venture  to  foretel  that  mountains  will  be  levelled  for  the 
comins:  of  our  Lord  even  by  calamities  and  disasters.  There  will  be  a 
speedier  dissolution  of  the  empire  of  the  false  prophet  and  of  the  false 
prophet's  imitator  because  of  all  this  mixing  up  of  the  west  and  the 
east  in  an  unwilling  conjunction.  I  say  not  how  or  when,  but  the 
Lord's  purpose  shall  stand,  and  he  will  do  all  his  pleasure.  When  the 
ocean  roars  at  its  utmost  fury,  the  Lord  puts  a  bit  into  the  mouth  of 
the  tempest  and  reins  up  the  storm.  Jehovah  maketh  a  way  for  himself 
amid  the  tumult  of  great  waters.  When  confusion  and  uproar  pre- 
dominate everywhere,  and  old  chaos  seems  to  be  coming  back  again, 
all  this  is  but  a  phase  of  unbroken  order.  How  swift  and  sure  are  the 
revolutions  of  the  wheels  which  are  bringing  nearer  the  chariot  of  the 
Son  of  God! 

Cast  in  your  lot  with  "  the  Leader  and  Commander  of  the  people,"  who 
has  God  with  him.  It  is  the  glory  of  Christ's  cause  that  the  Lord  God  is 
involved  in  it.  Mr.  Wesley's  dying  words  were,  "  The  best  of  all  is, 
God  is  with  us  !  "  As  I  repeat  the  truth  my  heart  cries,  "  Hallelujah  ! 
Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  ! "  The  Lord  thy  God  helpeth  thee, 
0  Christ  of  God !  The  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  thy  hand. 
Thou  must  reign :  thy  Father  swears  it  to  thee.  Thou  shalt  divide 
a  portion  with  the  great,  and  thou  shalt  share  the  spoil  with  the 
strong,  for  thou  hast  given  up  thy  soul  unto  death,  and  permitted  thy 
glory  to  be  rolled  in  the  dust;  and  thou  hast  risen  and  gone  into  the 
glory  ;  therefore  thou  must  reign.  0  Anointed  of  the  Lord,  thy  throne 
shall  endure  for  ever !  To-night  thy  servants  salute  thee  again,  thou 
Son  of  David.  Wounded  Christ,  we  lay  our  fingers  in  the  print  of  the 
nails,  and  say,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God."  Risen  Christ,  we  look  upward 
as  the  heavens  receive  thee,  and  we  adore.  Ascended  Christ,  we  fall  at 
thy  dear  feet,  and  say,  "  Thine  are  we,  0  Son  of  David,  anointed  to  be  a 
Prince  and  a  Saviour."  Coming  Christ,  we  wait  and  watch  for  thine 
appearing!     Come  quickly  to  thine  own !     Amen  and  amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  bekore  Sermon — John  i.  29 — 51. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 639,  670,  674, 


LOYAL    TO    THE     CORE. 


DELIVERED   BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  And  Ittai  answered  the  king,  and  said,  As  the  Lord  liveth,  and  as  my  lord  the 
king  liveth,  surely  in  what  place  my  lord  the  king  shall  be,  whether  in  death  or 
life,  even  there  also  will  thy  servant  be." — 2  Samuel  xv.  21. 

Although  the  courage  of  David  appears  to  have  failed  him  when  he 
fled  from  his  son  Absalom,  yet  certain  other  noble  characteristics  came 
out  in  brilliant  relief,  and,  among  the  rest,  his  large-heartedness  and 
his  thoughtfulness  for  others.  A  man  in  such  a  desperate  condition  as 
he  was  must  have  earnestly  coveted  many  friends  and  have  been  anxious 
to  retain  them  all,  but  yet  he  would  not  exact  their  services  if  they  were 
too  costly  to  themselves,  and  so  he  said  to  Ittai,  who  appears  to  have  been 
a  Philistine — a  proselyte  to  Israel,  who  had  lately  come  to  join  himself 
to  David — "  Wherefore  goest  thou  also  with  us  ?  Thou  hast  newly  come 
to  me,  and  should  I  make  thee  wander  with  me  in  my  sorrows  ?  Return 
to  thy  place  and  abide  with  the  new  king,  for  thou  art  a  stranger  and 
an  exile.  May  every  blessing  be  upon  thee.  May  mercy  and  truth  be 
with  thee."  He  did  not  send  him  away  because  he  doubted  him,  but 
because  he  felt  that  he  had  no  claim  to  the  great  sacrifices  which  Ittai 
might  have  to  make  in  attending  his  chequered  fortunes.  "  I  do  not 
know  what  may  become  of  me,"  he  seems  to  say, "  but  I  do  not  want  to 
drag  you  down  with  myself.  Should  my  cause  become  desperate,  I 
have  no  wish  to  involve  you  in  it,  and  therefore  with  the  best  of  motives 
I  wish  you  farewell."  I  admire  this  generosity  of  spirit.  Some  men 
have  great  expectations :  they  live  upon  their  friends,  and  yet  complain 
that  charity  is  cold.  These  people  expect  more  from  their  friends  than 
they  ought  to  give.  A  man's  best  friends  on  earth  ought  to  be  his  own 
strong  arms.  Loafers  are  parasitical  plants,  they  have  no  root  of  their 
own,  but  like  the  mistletoe  they  strike  root  into  some  other  tree,  and 
Buck  the  very  soul  out  of  it  for  their  own  nourishment.  Sad  that  men 
ghould  ever  degrade  themselves  to  such  despicable  meanness !  While 
you  can  help  yourselves,  do  so,  and  while  you  have  a  right  to  expect 
help  in  times  of  dire  necessity,  do  not  be  everlastingly  expecting  every- 
body else  to  be  waiting  upon  you.  Feel  as  David  did  towards  Ittai — • 
that  you  would  by  no  means  wish  for  services  to  which  you  have  no 

No.  1,512.  16 


182  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

cLiim.  Independence  of  spirit  used  to  be  characteristic  of  Englishmen. 
]  hope  it  will  always  continue  to  be  so;  and  especially  among  children 
of  God. 

On  the  other  hand,  look  at  Ittai,  perfectly  free  to  go,  but  in  order  to 
end  the  controversy  once  for  all,  and  to  make  David  know  that  he  does 
not  mean  to  leave  him,  he  takes  a  solemn  oath  before  Jehovah  his 
God,  and  he  doubles  it  by  swearing  by  the  life  of  David  that  he  will 
never  leave  him ;  in  life,  in  death,  he  will  be  with  him.  He  has  cast  in 
his  lot  with  him  for  better  and  for  worse,  and  he  means  to  be  faithful  to 
the  end.  Old  Master  Trapp  says,  "  All  faithful  friends  went  on  a  pil- 
grimage years  ago,  and  none  of  them  have  ever  come  back."  I  scarcely 
credit  that,  but  I  am  afraid  that  friends  quite  so  ftiithful  as  Ittai  are  as 
scarce  as  two  moons  in  the  sky  at  once,  and  you  might  travel  over  the 
edge  of  the  world  before  you  found  them.  I  think,  however,  that  one 
reason  why  faithful  Ittais  have  become  so  scarce  may  be  because  lai'ge- 
hearted  Davids  are  so  rare.  When  you  tell  a  man  that  you  expect  a 
good  deal  of  him,  he  does  not  see  it.  Why  should  you  look  for  so 
much  ?  He  is  not  your  debtor.  You  have  closed  at  once  the  valves  of 
his  generosity.  But  when  you  tell  him  honestly  that  you  do  not  expect 
more  than  is  right,  and  that  j'ou  do  not  wish  to  be  a  tax  upon  him, 
when  he  sees  that  you  consult  his  welfare  more  than  your  own,  that  is 
the  very  reason  why  he  feels  attached  to  you,  and  counts  it  a  pleasure 
to  serve  such  a  generous-hearted  man.  You  will  generally  find  that 
when  two  people  fall  out  there  are  faults  on  both  sides:  if  generous 
spirits  be  few,  it  may  be  because  faithful  friends  are  rare,  and  if  faithful 
fiiends  are  scarce  it  may  be  because  generous  spirits  are  scarce  too.  Be 
it  ours  as  Christians  to  live  to  serve  rather  than  to  be  served,  remem- 
bering that  we  are  the  followers  of  a  blaster  who  said,  "  The  Son  of 
man  came  not  to  be  ministfred  unto,  but  to  minister."  We  are  not  to 
exp.  ct  others  io  serve  us,  but  our  life  is  to  be  spent  in  endeavouring  to 
serve  them. 

I  am  going  to  use  Ittai's  language  for  a  further  purpose.  If  Ittai, 
charmed  with  David's  person  and  character,  though  a  foreigner  and  a 
stranger,  felt  that  he  could  enlist  beneath  his  banner  for  life  —yea,  and 
declared  that  he  would  do  so  there  and  then — how  much  more  may  you 
and  I,  if  we  know  what  Christ  has  done  for  us,  and  who  he  is  and  what 
he  deserves  at  our  hands,  at  this  good  hour  plight  our  troth  to  him  and 
vow,  "  As  the  Lord  liveth,  surely  in  whatsoever  place  my  Lord  and 
Saviour  shall  be,  whether  in  death  or  life,  even  there  also  shall  his 
servant  be." 

And  so  I  shall  begin  by  noticing  first  in  ivhat  form  this  declaration 
was  made,  that  we  may  learn  from  it  how  to  make  the  same  declaration. 

I.      In  WHAT  FORM  AND  MAlyNER  WAS  THIS  DECLARATION  MADE  ? 

It  was  made,  first,  at  a  time  ivhen  David' s  fortunes  ivere  at  their  lowest 
ebb,  and  consequently  it  was  made  unselfishly,  without  the  slightest 
idea  of  gain  fi-om  it.  David  was  now  forsaken  of  everybody.  His  faithful 
body-guard  was  all  that  he  had  on  earth  to  depend  upon,  and  then  it 
was  that  Ittai  cast  in  his  lot  with  David.  Now,  beloved,  it  is  very  easy 
to  follow  religion  when  she  goes  abroad  in  her  silver  slippers,  but  the 
true  man  follows  her  when  she  is  in  rags,  and  goes  through  the  mire 
and  the  slough.     To  take  up  with  Christ  when  everybody  cries  up  hia 


LOYAL   TO   THE   CORR.  1188 

name  is  what  a  hypocrite  would  do,  but  to  take  up  with  Christ  when 
they  are  shouting,  "  Away  with  him !  away  with  him !"  is  another 
matter.  There  are  times  in  which  the  simple  faith  of  Christ  is  at  a 
great  discount.  At  one  time  imposing  ceremonies  are  all  the  rage,  and 
everybody  loves  decorated  worship,  and  the  pure  simplicity  of  the  gospel 
is  overloaded  and  encumbered  with  meretricious  ornaments  ;  it  is  such 
a  season  that  we  must  stand  out  for  God's  more  simple  plan,  and  reject 
the  symbolism  which  verges  on  idolatry  and  hides  the  simplicity  of  the 
gospel. 

At  another  time  the  gospel  is  assailed  by  learned  criticisms  and  by 
insinuations  against  the  authenticity  and  inspiration  of  the  books  of 
Scripture,  while  fundamental  doctrines  are  undermined  one  by  one,  and 
he  who  keeps  to  the  old  faith  is  said  to  be  behind  the  age,  and  so  on. 
But  happy  is  that  man  who  takes  up  with  Christ,  and  with  the  gospel, 
and  with  the  truth  when  it  is  in  its  worst  estate,  crying,  "  If  this  he 
foolery,  I  am  a  fool,  for  where  Christ  is  there  will  I  be ;  I  love  him 
better  at  bis  worst  than  others  at  their  best,  and  even  if  he  be  dead  and 
buried  in  a  sepulchre  I  will  go  with  Mary  and  with  Magdalene  and  sit 
over  against  the  sepulchre  and  watch  until  he  rise  again,  for  rise  again 
he  Avill ;  but  whether  he  live  or  die,  where  he  is  there  shall  his  servant 
be."  Ho,  then,  brave  spirits,  will  ye  enlist  for  Christ  when  his  banner 
is  tattered?  Will  you  enlist  under  him  when  his  armour  is  stained 
with  blood?  Will  you  rally  to  him  even  when  they  report  him  shiin? 
Happy  shall  ye  be !  You''  loyalty  shall  be  proven  to  your  own  eternal 
glory.     Ye  are  soldiers  such  as  he  loves  to  honour. 

Ittai  gave  himself  up  wholly  to  David  ichen  he  was  hut  newly  come 
to  him.  David  says,  "  Whereas  thou  camest  but  yesterday,  should  I 
this  day  make  thee  go  up  and  down  with  us?"  But  Ittai  does  not  care 
whether  he  came  yesterday  or  twenty  yenrs  ago,  but  he  declares, "  Surely 
in  what  place  my  lord  the  king  shall  be,  whether  in  death  or  life,  even 
there  also  will  thy  servant  be."  It  is  best  to  begin  the  Christian  life 
with  thorough  consecration.  Have  any  of  you  professed  to  be  Christians, 
and  have  you  never  given  yourselves  entirely  to  Christ?  It  is  time 
that  you  began  again.  This  should  be  one  of  the  earliest  forms  of  our 
worship  of  our  Master — this  total  resignation  of  ourselves  to  him.  Ac- 
cording to  his  word,  the  first  announcement  of  our  faith  should  be  by 
ba]>tism,  and  the  meaning  of  baptism,  or  immersion  in  water,  is  death, 
biii'ial.  and  resurrection.  As  far  as  this  point  is  concerned,  the  avowal 
is  just  this:  "  I  am  henceforth  dead  to  all  but  Christ,  whose  servant  I 
now  am.  Henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me,  for  1  bear  in  my  body 
the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  watermark  is  on  me  from  head  to 
foot.  I  have  been  buried  with  him  in  baptism  unto  death  to  show  that 
henceforth  I  belong  to  him."  Now,  whether  you  have  been  baptized 
or  not  I  leave  to  yourselves,  but  in  any  case  this  must  be  true — that 
henceforth  you  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  Aa 
soon  as  ever  Christ  is  yours  you  ought  to  be  Christ's.  "  I  am  my  Be- 
loveds  "  should  be  linked  with  "  My  Beloved  is  mine,"  in  the  dawn  of 
the  day  in  which  you  yield  to  the  Lord. 

Again,  Ittai  surrendered  himself  to  David  in  fhe  most  voluntary 
manner.  No  one  persuaded  Ittai  to  do  this ;  in  fact,  David  seems  to 
have  persuaded  him  the  other  way.     David  tested  and  tried  him,  but  he 


184  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

voluntarily  out  of  the  fulness  of  his  heart  said,  "Where,  my  lord,  the 
king,  is,  there  also  shall  his  servant  be."  Now,  dear  young  people,  if 
you  believe  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  yours,  give  yourselves  up  to 
him  by  a  distinct  act  and  deed.  Feel  that  one  grand  impulse  without 
needing  pressure  or  argument, — *'  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  me": 
but  do  not  wait  to  have  your  duty  urged  upon  you,  for  the  more  free  the 
dedication  the  more  acceptable  it  will  be.  I  am  told  that  there  is  no 
wine  so  delicious  as  that  which  flows  from  the  grape  at  the  first  gentle 
pressure.  The  longer  you  squeeze  the  harsher  is  the  juice.  We  do  not 
like  that  service  which  is  pressed  out  of  a  man  :  and  certainly  the  Lord 
of  love  will  not  accept  forced  labour.  No  ;  let  your  willinghood  show 
itself.     Say — 

"  Take  myself,  and  I  will  be 
Ever,  only,  all  for  thee." 

My  heart  pants  after  the  service  of  her  Lord.  With  the  same  spontaneity 
which  Ittai  displayed  make  a  solemn  consecration  of  yourselves  to 
David's  Lord. 

I  used  a  word  then  which  suggests  another  point,  namely,  that  Ittai 
did  this  very  solemnly.  He  took  an  oath  which  we  Christians  may  not 
do,  and  may  not  wish  to  do,  but  still  we  should  make  the  surrender 
■with  quite  as  much  solemnity.  In  Dr.  Doddridge's  "  Rise  and  Progress 
of  Religion  in  the  Soul "  there  is  a  very  solemn  form  of  consecration, 
which  he  recommends  young  men  to  sign  when  they  give  themselves  to 
Christ.  I  cannot  say  that  I  can  recommend  it,  though  I  practised  it, 
for  I  fear  that  there  is  something  of  legality  about  it,  and  that  it  may 
bring  the  soul  into  bondage.  I  have  known  some  write  out  a  deed  of 
dedication  to  Christ  and  sign  it  Avith  their  blood.  I  will  neither  com- 
mend nor  censure,  but  I  will  say  that  a  complete  dedication  must  be 
made  in  some  manner,  and  that  it  should  be  done  deliberately  and  with 
grave  thought.  You  have  been  bought  with  a  price,  and  you  should, 
therefore,  in  a  distinct  manner  own  your  Lord's  property  in  you,  and 
transfer  to  him  the  title-deeds  of  your  body,  spirit,  and  soul. 

And  this,  I  think,  Ittai  did  publicly.  At  any  rate,  he  so  acted  that 
everybody  saw  him  when  David  said,  "  Go  over,"  and  he  marched  in 
front — the  first  man  to  pass  the  brook.  Oh  yes,  dear  friend,  you  must 
publicly  own  yourself  a  Christian.  If  you  are  a  Christian  you  must  not 
try  to  sneak  to  heaven  round  the  back  alleys,  but  march  up  the  narrow 
way  like  a  man  and  like  your  Master.  He  was  never  ashamed  of  you, 
though  he  might  have  been:  how  can  you  be  ashamed  of  him  when 
there  is  nothing  in  him  to  be  ashamed  of?  Some  Christians  seem  to 
think  that  they  shall  lead  an  easier  life  if  they  never  make  a  profession. 
Like  a  rat  behind  the  wainscot  they  come  out  after  candlelight  and  gQt 
a  crumb,  and  then  slip  back  again.  I  would  not  lead  such  a  life. 
Surely,  there  is  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of.  A  Christian — let  ns  glory 
in  the  name !  A  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — let  them  write  it 
on  our  door  plates,  if  they  will.  Why  should  we  blush  at  that  ?  "  But," 
says  one,  "  I  would  rather  be  a  very  quiet  one."  I  will  now  place  a 
torpedo  under  this  cowardly  quietness.  What  saith  the  Lord  Jesus  ? 
♦'  Whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my 
Father  which  is  in  heaven ;  but  he  that  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him 


LOYAL   TO   THE   CORE.  -g- 

wfll  I  confess  also  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Take  up  yonr 
cross  and  follow  him,  for  "  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteous- 
ness, and  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation,"  When 
our  Master  ascended  up  on  high  he  told  us  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature;  and  how  did  he  put  it?  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved."  There  must  be,  therefore,  the  believing  and  the  ac- 
knowledgment of  believing.  "  But  cannot  I  be  saved  as  a  believer  if  I 
do  not  openly  confess  Christ  ?"  Dear  friend,  you  have  no  business  to 
tamper  with  your  Master's  command,  and  then  say,  "Will  he  not 
graciously  forgive  this  omission  ?"  Do  not  neglect  one  of  the  two  com- 
mands, but  obey  all  his  will.  If  you  have  the  spirit  of  Ittai  you  will 
Bay,  '■  Wheresoever  my  lord  the  king  is,  there  also  shall  thy  servant  be." 

I  leave  the  matter  with  the  consciences  of  those  who  may  be  like 
Nicodemus,  coming  to  Jesus  by  night,  or  who  may  be  like  Joseph  of 
Arimathea,  who  was  a  disciple,  but  secretly,  for  fear  of  the  Jews.  May 
they  come  out  and  own  their  Master,  believing  that  then  he  will  own 
them. 

II.  Secondly,  what  did  this  declaration  involve  ?  As  to  Ittai, 
what  did  it  involve  ? 

First,  that  he  ivas  henceforth  to  be  David's  servant.  Of  course,  as  his 
soldier,  he  was  to  fight  for  him,  and  to  do  his  bidding.  What  sayest 
thou,  man  ?  Canst  thou  lift  thy  hand  to  Christ  and  say,  "  Henceforth 
I  will  live  as  thy  servant,  not  doing  my  own  will,  but  thy  will.  Thy 
command  is  henceforth  my  rule  "  ?  Canst  thou  say  that  ?  If  not,  do 
not  mock  him,  but  stand  back.  May  the  Holy  Ghost  give  thee  grace 
thus  to  begin,  thus  to  persevere,  and  thus  to  end. 

It  involved,  next,  for  Ittai  that  he  was  to  do  his  utmost  for  David's 
cause,  not  to  be  his  servant  in  name,  but  his  soldier,  ready  for  scars  and 
wounds  and  death,  if  need  be,  on  the  king's  behalf.  That  is  what  Ittai 
meant  as,  in  rough  soldier-tones,  he  took  the  solemn  oath  that  it 
should  be  so.  Now,  if  thou  wouldst  be  Christ's  disciple,  determine 
henceforth  by  his  grace  that  thou  wilt  defend  his  cause ;  that  if  there 
be  rough  fighting  thou  wilt  be  in  it ;  and  if  there  be  a  forlorn  hope 
needed  thou  wilt  lead  it,  and  go  through  floods  and  flames  if  thy 
Master's  cause  shall  call  thee.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  will  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth,  giving  himself  wholly  up  to  his  Lord  to 
serve  him  with  all  his  heart. 

But  Ittai  in  his  promise  declared  that  he  tvould  give  a  personal  attend' 
ance  upon  the  person  of  his  master.  That  was,  indeed,  the  pith  of  it. 
"  In  what  place  my  lord,  the  king,  shall  be,  even  there  also  will  thy 
servant  be."  Brethren,  let  us  make  the  same  resolve  in  our  hearts,  that 
wherever  Christ  is,  there  we  will  be.  Where  is  Christ  ?  In  heaven. 
We  will  be  there  by-and-by.  Where  is  he  here,  spiritually?  Answer: 
in  his  church.  The  church  is  a  body  of  faithful  men;  and  where  these 
are  met  together,  there  is  Jesus  in  the  midst  of  them.  Very  well,  then, 
we  will  join  the  church,  for  wherever  onr  Lord,  the  King,  is,  there  also 
shall  his  servants  be.  When  the  list  of  the  redeemed  is  read  we  will 
be  found  in  the  register,  for  our  Lord's  name  is  there. 

Where  else  did  Jesus  go  ?  In  the  commencement  of  his  ministry  he 
descended  into  the  waters  of  baptism.  Let  us  follow  the  Lamb  whither- 
soever he  goeth.     At  the  close  of  his  ministry  he  brake  bread,  and  said, 


1S6  MRTEOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PUTiPIT. 

♦'This  do  ye  in  remembrance  of  me."  Be  often  at  hxs  table,  for  if  there 
is  a  place  on  the  earth  where  he  manifests  himself  to  his  children  it  is 
where  bread  is  broken  in  his  name.  Let  me  now  tell  a  secret.  Some 
of  you  may  have  heard  it  before,  but  you  have  forgotten  it.  Here  it 
is — my  Lord  is  generally  here  at  prayer-meetings  on  Monday  nights, 
and,  indeed,  whenever  his  people  come  together  for  prayer,  there  he  is. 
So  I  will  read  you  my  text,  and  see  whether  you  will  come  up  to  it — 
"  Surely  in  what  place  my  Lord  the  King  shall  be,  whether  it  be  in  a 
prayer-meeting  or  at  a  sermon,  even  there  also  will  thy  servant  be." 
If  you  love  your  Lord,  you  know  where  his  haunts  are  ;  take  care  that 
you  follow  hard  after  him  there. 

Where  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Well,  brethren,  he  is  wherever  the 
truth  is,  and  I  pray  God  that  he  may  raise  up  a  race  of  men  and  women 
in  England  who  are  determined  to  be  wherever  the  truth  of  God  is. 
We  have  a  host  of  molluscous  creatures  about  who  will  always  be  where 
the  congregation  is  the  most  respectable  :  respectability  being  measured 
by  clothes  and  cash.  Time  was  in  the  church  of  God  when  they  most 
esteemed  the  most  pious  men ;  has  it  come  to  this  that  gold  takes 
precedence  of  grace?  Our  fathers  considered  whether  a  ministry  was 
sound,  but  now  the  question  is — Is  the  man  clever  ?  Words  are  pre- 
ferred to  truth,  and  oratory  takes  the  lead  of  the  gospel.  Shame  on 
such  an  age.  0  you  who  have  not  altogether  sold  your  birthrights,  I 
charge  you  keep  out  of  this  wretched  declension. 

The  man  who  loves  Christ  thoroughly  will  say,  "  Wheresoever  the 
Lord  the  King  is,  there  also  shall  his  servant  be,  if  it  be  with  half  a 
dozen  poor  Baptists  or  Methodists,  or  among  the  most  despised  people 
in  the  town."  I  charge  you,  beloved,  in  whatever  town  or  country  your 
lot  is  cast,  be  true  to  your  colours,  and  never  forsake  your  principles. 
Wherever  the  truth  is,  there  go,  and  where  there  is  anything  contrary 
to  truth,  do  not  go,  for  there  your  Master  is  not  to  be  found. 

What  next  ?  Well,  our  Master  is  to  be  found  wherever  there  is  any- 
thing to  be  done  for  the  good  of  our  fellow-men.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  to  be  found  wherever  there  is  work  to  be  done  in  seeking  after 
his  lost  sheep.  Some  people  say  that  they  have  very  little  communion 
with  Christ,  and  when  I  look  at  them,  I  do  not  wonder.  Two  persona 
cannot  walk  together  if  they  will  not  walk  at  the  same  pace.  Now, 
my  Lord  walks  an  earnest  pace  whenever  he  goes  through  the  world, 
for  the  King's  business  requires  haste ;  and  if  his  disciples  crawl 
after  a  snail's  fashion  they  will  lose  his  company.  If  some  of  our 
groaning  brethren  would  go  to  the  Sunday-school,  and  there  begin  to 
look  after  the  little  children,  they  would  meet  with  their  Lord  who  used 
to  say,  "  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto  me."  If  others  were 
to  get  together  a  little  meeting,  and  teach  the  ignorant,  they  would 
there  find  him  who  had  compassion  on  the  ignorant  and  on  those  that 
are  out  of  the  way.  Our  Master  is  where  there  are  fetters  to  be  broken, 
burdens  to  be  removed,  and  hearts  to  be  comforted,  and  if  you  wish  to 
keep  with  him  you  must  aid  in  such  service. 

Where  is  our  Master  ?  Well,  he  is  always  on  the  side  of  truth  and 
right.  And,  0,  you  Christian  people,  mind  that  in  everything— 
politics,  business,  and  everything — you  keep  to  that  which  is.  right, 
not  to  that  which  is  popular.     Do  not  bow  the  knee  to  that  which  for  9  i 


LOYAL   TO   THE   COEE. 


187 


little  day  may  be  cried  up,  but  stand  fast  ia  that  which  is  consistent 
with  rectitude,  with  humanity,  with  the  cause  and  honour  of  God,  and 
with  the  freedom  and  progress  of  men.  It  can  never  be  wise  to  do  wrong. 
It  can  never  be  fooHsh  to  be  right.  It  can  never  be  according  to  the 
mind  of  Christ  to  tyrannize  and  to  oppress.  Keep  you  ever  to  what- 
soever things  are  pure  and  lovely  and  of  good  report,  and  you  will  so 
far  keep  with  Christ.  Temperance,  purity,  justice — these  are  favourites 
with  liim ;  do  your  best  to  advance  them  for  his  sake. 

Above  all,  remember  how  Jesus  loved  secret  prayer,  and  if  you 
resolve  to  keep  with  him  you  must  be  much  at  the  throne  of  grace. 

I  will  not  detain  you  over  each  of  these  points,  but  simply  say  that 
Ittai's  declaration  meant  also  this — that  he  intended  to  share  David's 
condition.  If  David  was  great,  Ittai  would  rejoice.  If  David  was  exiled, 
Ittai  would  attend  his  wanderings.  Our  point  must  be  to  resolve  in 
God's  strength  to  keep  to  Christ  in  all  weathers  and  in  all  companies, 
and  that  whether  in  life  or  death.  Ah  that  word  "  death  "  makes  it 
sweet,  because  then  we  reap  the  blessed  result  of  having  lived  with 
Christ.  We  shall  go  upstairs  for  the  last  time  and  bid  good-bye  to  all, 
and  then  we  shall  feel  that  in  death  he  is  still  with  us  as  in  life  we 
have  been  with  him.  Though  our  good  works  can  never  be  a  ground 
of  confidence  when  we  are  dying,  yet  if  the  Lord  enables  us  to  follow 
the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth,  and  so  to  lead  a  decided,  positive, 
downright,  upright  Christian  life,  our  death  pillow  will  not  be  stuffed 
with  thorns  of  regret,  but  we  shall  have  to  bless  God  that  we  bore  a 
faithful  witness  as  far  as  we  were  able  to  do  so.  In  such  a  case  we 
shall  not  when  we  are  dying  wish  to  go  back  again  to  rectify  the  mis- 
takes and  insincerities  of  our  lives.  No,  beloved,  it  will  be  very,  very 
sweet  to  be  alone  with  Jesus  in  death.  He  will  make  all  our  bed  in  our 
sickness;  he  will  make  our  dying  pillow  soft,  and  our  soul  shall  vanish, 
kissed  away  by  his  dear  lips,  and  we  shall  be  with  him  for  ever  and  for 
e\er.  Of  those  that  are  nearest  to  him  it  is  said,  "  These  are  they  that 
follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth.  They  shall  walk  with  him  in 
white,  for  they  are  worthy." 

1  conclude  with  thi.e  observation.  Will  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  accept 
at  our  hands  to-night  such  a  consecrating  word  ?  If  Ave  are  trusting  in 
him  for  salvation  will  he  permit  us  to  say  that  we  wall  keep  with  him 
as  long  as  we  live  ? 

We  reply,  he  will  not  permit  us  to  say  it  in  our  own  strength.  There 
was  a  young  man  who  said,  "  Lord,  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever 
thou  goest,"  but  Christ  gave  him  a  cool  reception :  and  there  was  an 
older  man  who  said,  "  Though  all  men  shall  forsake  thee  yet  will  not 
I,"  and  in  reply  his  Master  prayed  for  him  that  his  faith  should  not  fail. 
Now,  you  must  not  promise  as  Peter  did,  or  you  will  make  a  greater 
failure.  But,  beloved,  this  self-devotion  is  what  Christ  expects  of  us  if 
we  are  his  disciples.  He  will  not  have  us  love  father  or  mother  more 
than  him ;  we  must  be  ready  to  give  up  all  for  his  sake.  This  is  not 
only  what  our  Master  expects  from  us,  but  what  he  deserves  from  us. 

"  Love  so  amazing,  so  divine, 
Demands  my  soul,  my  life,  my  all," 

This,  also,  is  what  the  Lord  will  help  us  to  do,  for  he  will  give  ua 


188  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

grace  if  we  will  but  seek  it  at  his  hands  :  and  this  it  is  which  he  will 
graciously  reward,  and  has  already  rewarded,  in  that  choice  word  of  his 
in  the  twelfth  of  John,  where  he  says  of  his  disciples  in  the  twenty- 
sixth  verse,  "  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me ;  and  where  I  am, 
there  shall  also  my  servant  be  :  if  any  man  serve  me,  him  will  my 
Father  honour."  Oh,  to  be  honoured  of  God  in  eternity  when  he  shall 
say,  "  Stand  back,  angels ;  make  Avay,  seraphim  and  cherubim ;  here 
comes  a  man  that  suffered  for  the  sake  of  my  dear  Son.  Here  comes 
one  that  was  not  ashamed  of  my  Only-begotten  when  his  face  was 
smeared  with  the  spittle.  Here  comes  one  that  stood  in  the  pillory  with 
Jesus,  and  was  called  ill  names  for  his  sake.  Stand  back,  ye  angels, 
these  have  greater  honour  than  you."  Surely  the  angels  of  heaven  as 
they  traverse  the  streets  of  gold  and  meet  the  martyrs  will  ask  them 
about  their  sufferings,  and  say,  "  You  are  more  favoured  than  we,  for 
you  have  had  the  privilege  of  suflPering  and  dying  for  the  Lord."  0 
brothers  and  sisters,  snatch  at  the  privilege  of  living  for  Jesus ;  conse-  , 
crate  yourselves  this  day  unto  him  ;  live  from  this  hour  forward,  not  to  j 
enrich  yourselves,  nor  to  gain  honour  and  esteem,  but  for  Jesus,  for  ' 
Jesus  alone.  Oh,  if  I  could  set  him  before  you  here  ;  if  I  could  cause 
him  to  stand  on  this  platform  just  as  he  came  from  Gethsemane  with 
his  bloody  sweat  about  him,  or  as  he  came  down  from  the  cross  with 
wounds  so  bright  with  glory  and  so  fresh  with  bleeding  out  our  re- 
demption, I  think  I  should  hear  you  say,  each  one  of  you,  "  Lord  Jesus, 
we  are  thine,  and  in  what  place  thou  shalt  be,  whether  in  death  or  life, 
even  there  also  will  thy  servants  be."  So  may  the  Lord  help  us  by  his 
most  gracious  Spirit  who  hath  wrought  all  our  works  in  us,  for  Jesus' 
sake.    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — 2  Samuel  xr. 
13—23  ;  Matthew  x.  24—33. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—670,  658,  666. 


"DAVID'S    SPOIL/* 


Intended  foe  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  April  15th,  1888, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"This  is  David's  spoil."— 1  Samuel  xxx.  20. 

"Wb  have  aforetime  gathered  spoil  for  ourselves  out  of  David's 
behaviour  in  the  hour  of  his  sorrow  at  Ziklag,  and  we  will  now  turn 
to  the  other  side  of  this  leaf  in  his  history,  and  receive  instruction  from 
the  time  of  his  victory.  But  we  must  not  do  this  till  we  have  re- 
freshed our  memories  with  the  story  of  his  conduct  under  distress. 
When  he  came  to  the  city  he  found  it  burned  with  fire,  the  propeity  of 
himself  and  his  comrades  carried  away,  and,  what  was  worse,  all  their 
wives,  and  their  sons,  and  their  daughters,  gone  into  captivity.  In  the 
madness  of  their  grief  the  people  turned  upon  their  leader,  as  if  he  had 
led  them  into  this  calamity.  He  was  the  only  calm  person  among 
them,  for  he  "encouraged  himself  in  the  Lord  his  God."  With  due  de- 
liberation he  waited  upon  the  Lord,  and  consulted  the  oracle  through 
the  appointed  priest,  and  then,  under  divine  guidance,  he  pursued  the 
banditti,  took  them  at  unawares,  recovered  all  his  people's  goods,  and 
captured  a  large  booty  which  the  Amalekites  had  collected  elsewhere. 
David,  who  had  been  the  chief  object  of  the  people's  mutiny,  and  the 
leader  of  the  successful  pursuit  of  the  robbers,  most  properly  received  a 
special  portion  of  the  spoil,  and  concerning  it  the  words  of  our  text  were 
spoken,  "  This  is  David's  spoil." 

We  shall  now  look  into  this  victorious  act  on  the  part  of  David  with  the 
view  of  finding  spiritual  teaching  in  it.  David  may  be  regarded  as  a 
very  special  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Among  the  personal  types 
David  holds  a  leading  place,  for  in  so  many  points  he  is  the  prophetic 
foreshadowing  of  the  great  and  glorious  Son  of  David.  Whenever 
David  acts  as  the  man  after  God's  own  heart,  he  is  the  picture  and 
emblem  of  the  One  who  is  still  more  after  God's  own  heart,  even  the 
Christ  of  God.  David,  under  divine  guidance,  pursued  the  Amale- 
kites, who  had  come  as  thieves  to  smite  and  to  burn,  and  carry 
away  captive.  The  marauders  were  overtaken  and  slaughtered,  and  a 
great  spoil  was  the  result.  David  recovered  all  that  the  Amalekites  had 
No.  2,017.  yj 


190  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

taten.  "And  there  was  nothing  lacking  to  them,  neither  small  nor 
great,  neither  sons  nor  daughters,  neither  spoil,  nor  anything  that  they 
had  taken  to  them  :  David  recovered  all."  We  are  told  several  times 
over  in  the  chapter  that  nothing  was  lacking:  "David  recovered  all." 
When  our  Lord  Jesus  wrought  out  our  redemption,  he  recovered  all, 
and  left  nothing  in  the  enemy's  hand.  All  glory  to  his  name  !  But  over 
and  above,  David  took  great  store  of  cattle,  and  jewels,  and  gold,  and 
silver,  and  so  forth,  which  belonged  to  the  Amalekites,  and  out  of  this 
a  bountiful  portion  was  taken  which  was  set  apart  as  David's  spoil. 
David's  men,  in  the  moment  of  their  despair,  had  spoken  of  stoning 
him;  but  now,  in  the  morning  of  their  victory,  with  general  acchima- 
tions,  they  determine  that  David  shall  have,  as  his  portion  of  the  spoil, 
all  the  cattle  which  belong  to  the  Amalekites  themselves ;  and  so, 
driving  these  in  front,  as  they  return  to  Ziklag,  they  say,  "This  is 
David's  spoil."  I  think  I  hear  them,  as  they  drive  the  bullocks  and 
the  sheep  before  them,  shouting  right  lustily,  "  This  is  David's  spoil." 

Now,  using  David  as  the  type  of  Christ,  I  want,  if  I  can,  to  set  all 
Daviii's  men — all  Christ's  men — shouting  with  all  their  hearts,  "  This 
is  Jesus'  spoil !  "  He  it  is  of  whom  Jehovah  saith,  "  I  will  divide  him  a 
portion  with  the  great,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong." 
He  has  a  grand  reward  as  the  result  of  the  great  battle  of  his  life  and 
death.  We  will  even  now  award  to  him  the  spoil,  and  cry,  "  This  is 
David's  spoil";  feeling,  all  the  while,  as  the  Psalmist  did,  when  he  said, 
"  Thou  art  more  glorious  and  excellent  than  the  mountains  of  prey." 

I.  We  begin  with  the  first  observation  that,  practically,  all  the  spoil 
of  that  day  was  David's  spoil,  and  in  truth,  all  the  good  that  we 
ENjoy  comes  to  us  through  our  Lord  Jesus.  He  has  been  given 
as  a  Leader  and  a  Commamler  to  the  people,  and  every  victory  they  win 
is  due  to  him,  and  to  him  alone.  Without  him  we  can  do  nothing,  and 
without  him  we  can  obtain  nothing.  All  that  we  once  posses-ed  by 
nature,  and  under  the  law,  the  spoiler  has  taken  away.  By  our  own 
efforts  we  can  never  regain  what  we  have  lost ;  only  through  our  great 
Leader  can  we  be  restored  and  made  happy.  We  ascribe  unto  Jesus  all 
our  gains,  even  as  David's  men  honoured  their  captain. 

For,  first.  David's  men  defeated  the  Amalekites,  and  took  their  spoil, 
\mt  it  was  for  David's  sake  that  God  gave  success  to  the  band.  God's 
eye  rested  upon  his  chosen  servant,  the  Lord's  anointed,  and  it  was  not 
for  the  warriors'  own  sakes,  but  for  David's  sake,  that  God  guided  them 
to  the  hosts  of  Amalek,  and  gave  them  like  driven  stubble  to  their  sword. 
How  much  more  true  it  is  to  us  that  every  blessing,  every  pardoning 
mercy,  every  delivering  mercy,  is  given  to  us  through  him  who  is  our 
shield  and  God's  anointed!  It  is  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  that  we  are 
pardoned,  justified,  accepted,  preserved,  sanctified.  Only  through  this 
channel  does  the  mercy  of  God  come  to  us.  The  Lord  God  saith,  "  Not 
for  your  sakes  do  I  this,  0  house  of  Israel!  Be  ashamed  and  con- 
founded for  your  own  ways";  and  we,  in  response  to  that,  can  answer, 
*'Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  the  name  of  the  Well-beloved  be 
praise,  and  honour,  and  glory,  for  ever  and  ever  1 "  Since  everything 
comes  to  us  because  of  Christ  Jesus,  we  may  say  of  every  covenant 
mercy,  "  This  is  David's  spoil."  On  this  blessing,  and  on  that  favour, 
jea,  on  them  all,  we  see  the  mark  of  the  cross.    These  are  all  fruits  of 


"  DAVID'S   SPOIL."  191 

our  Redeemer's  passion,  the  purchase  of  his  blood.  Again  we  say  with 
gratitude,  "  This  is  David's  spoil." 

Moreover,  David's  men  gained  the  victory  over  Amahk  because  of 
Dnvid^s  leadership.  If  he  had  not  been  there  to  lead  them  to  the  fight, 
in  the  moment  of  their  despair  they  would  have  lost  all  heart,  and  would 
have  remained  amidst  the  burning  walls  of  Ziklag  a  discomfited 
company.  But  David  encouraged  himself  in  the  Lord,  and  so  encouraged 
all  his  desponding  followers.  Drawing  his  sword,  and  marching  in 
front,  he  put  spirit  into  them :  they  all  followed  with  eager  step  because 
their  gallant  leader  so  courageously  led  the  way.  This  is  exactly  our 
case,  beloved,  only  we  are  even  more  indebted  to  our  Lord  Jesus  than  these 
men  were  to  David.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  been  here  among  us, 
and  has  fought  our  battle  for  us,  and  recovered  all  that  we  had  lost  by 
Adam's  fall  and  by  our  own  sin.  It  is  written  of  him,  "  He  shall  not 
fail  nor  be  discouraged."  You  know  how  he  set  his  face  like  a  flint, 
how  stout-hearted  he  was  to  accomplish  the  work  of  our  redemption, 
and  how  he  ceased  not  till  he  could  cry  victoriously,  "  It  is  finished." 

"  Our  glorious  Leader  claims  our  praise 
For  his  own  pattern  given." 

Following  at  his  feet  we,  too,  fight  with  sin.  Treading  in  his  foot- 
steps we,  too,  overcome  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  Have  you 
never  heard  him  say,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world  "  ? 
And  you,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  whatever  victories  you  win,  what- 
ever spoils  you  divide,  will  own  that  it  is  through  Jesus  that  you  have 
conquered.  They  said  of  Waterloo  that  it  was  a  soldiers'  battle,  and  the 
victory  was  due  to  the  men ;  but  ours  is  our  Commander's  battle,  and 
every  victory  won  by  us  is  due  to  the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation. 
Let  the  crown  be  set  upon  his  head,  even  on  the  battle-field,  and  let 
us  say  of  every  sin  that  we  have  overcome,  every  evil  habit  that  we 
have  destroyed,  "This  is  David's  spoil."  We  had  never  won  this  victory 
if  Jesus  had  not  led  us  :  we  have  it  for  his  sake.  We  have  it  under 
his  leadership.  Without  exception,  all  the  saints  on  earth  and  in  heaven 
confess  this  to  be  true. 

"  I  ask  them  whence  their  victory  came  ? 
They,  with  united  breath, 
Ascribe  their  conquest  to  the  Lamb, 
Their  triumph  to  his  death. 

They  mark'd  the  footsteps  that  he  trod, 
His  zeal  inspired  their  breast, 
'  And,  following  their  incarnate  God, 

Possess  the  promised  rest." 

ii 

'  I  will  not  eay  more  upon  this  point,  but  only  ask  you  to  remember 
that  by  nature  we  had  all  lost  everything.  We  lost  the  garden  with 
all  its  Paradisiacal  joys  ;  lost  this  world,  the  very  earth  bringing  forth 
thorns  and  thistles  to  us  ;  lost  life,  lost  hope,  lost  peace,  lost  the  favour 
of  God.  But  Jesus  has  recovered  all.  All  that  the  first  Adam  lost  the 
Becond  Adam  has  restored.  David  recovered  all,  and  Jesus  has  re- 
covered all.  We  ourselves  were  lost ;  but  Jesus  has  brought  us  back 
from  the  hand  of  the  enemy.     He  has  given  us  ourselves,  if  I  may 


192  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PLTLPIT.  ' 

use  such  an  expression,  and  now  we  who  were  dead  are  alive  again,  fche 
lost  are  found.  Once,  every  faculty  of  ours  was  being  used  for  our  own 
destruction,  but  now,  sanctified  by  the  grace  of  God,  all  is  being  used 
for  God's  glory,  and  for  our  own  ripening  and  perfecting.  Jesus  has 
recovered  us  for  ourselves  and  for  our  God :  the  prey  has  been  taken 
from  the  mighty,  and  the  lawful  captive  has  been  delivered. 

Yes,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  has  recovered  for  us  the  future  as  well  as 
the  past.  Our  outlook  was  grim  and  dark  indeed  till  Jesus  came  ;  but 
oh,  how  bright  it  is  now  that  he  has  completed  his  glorious  work! 
Death  is  no  more  the  dreaded  grave  of  all  our  hopes.  Hell  exists 
no  longer  for  believers.  Heaven,  whose  gates  were  closed,  is  now  set 
wide  open  to  every  soul  that  belie veth.  We  have  recovered  life  and 
immortal  bliss.  We  are  snatched  like  brands  from  the  burning,  and 
made  to  shine  like  lamps  of  the  palace  of  the  great  King.  We  are  set 
up  to  be  for  ever  trophies  of  the  conquering  power  of  Jesus,  our  glorious 
David.  Look  at  all  the  saints  in  heaven  in  their  serried  ranks,  and  say 
of  them  all,  "  This  is  David's  spoil,"  Look  at  the  blood-bought  church 
of  God  on  earth — the  ten  thousands  that  are  already  washed  in  his 
blood,  and  following  at  his  feet — we  may  say  of  all  this  ransomed  flouk, 
*'  This  is  David's  spoil."  Each  one  of  us,  looking  at  himself,  and  all 
his  past,  and  all  his  future,  may  say,  "  This,  too,  is  David's  spoil." 
Christ  has  done  it,  done  it  all,  and  unto  his  name  let  the  whole  host 
shout  the  victory. 

I  feel  as  if  I  could  stop  the  sermon,  and  ask  you  to  sing,  but  it  will  be 
better  if  I  content  myself  with  repeating  the  hymn — 

"  Rejoice,  ye  shining  worlds  on  high, 
Behold  the  King  of  glory  nigh ! 
He  comes  adorned  with  victory. 
He  made  our  foes  before  him  flee. 

♦*  Ye  heavenly  gates,  jour  leaves  display, 
To  make  the  Lord  the  Saviour  way  ! 
Laden  with  spoils  from  earth  and  hell, 
The  Conqueror  comes  with  God  to  dwell.  j 

"  Raised  from  the  dead,  he  goes  before  ; 
He  ofiens  heaven's  eternal  door  : 
To  give  his  saints  a  blest  abode, 
Near  their  Redeemer  and  their  God." 

II.  But  the  most  interesting  part  of  our  subject  is  this  :  all  the 
booty  was  practically  David's  spoil,  but  there  was  apart  of  it  which  was 
not  recovered,  but  was  a  clear  gain.  They  recovered  all  they  had  lost, 
and  over  and  above  there  was  a  surplus  of  spoil  from  the  defeated  foe. 
Now,  in  the  great  battle  of  Christ  on  our  behalf,  he  has  not  only  given 
us  back  what  we  lost,  but  he  has  given  us  what  Adam  in  his  perfection 
never  had.  And  I  want  you  to  dwell  upon  that,  because  this  part  of 
it  is  peculiarly  our  Lord's  spoil.     Those  good  things  which  wb  now 

POSSESS,  OVER   AND   ABOVE  WHAT  WE  LOST   BY    SIN,   COME  TO  US  BY  THE 

Lord  Jesus.  Now  that  the  Son  of  God  has  come  into  the  field,  he  ia 
not  content  with  restoration,  he  turns  the  loss  into  a  gain,  the  fall  into 
a  greater  rising. 

And  first,  dear  friends,  think  :  In  Christ  Jesus  human  nature  is  lifted 


"  DAVID'S   SPOIL.'*  193 

up  where  it  never  could  have  ieen  before.  Man  was  made  in  his  innocence 
to  occupy  a  very  lofty  place.  "  Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion 
over  all  the  works  of  thy  hands ;  thou  hast  put  all  things  under  hia 
feet."  Man  would  have  enjoyed  that  dominion  had  he  never  fallen, 
but  he  never  could  have  obtained  what  he  has  now  gained,  for  '*  we 
see  Jesus,  who  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels  for  the  suffering 
of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."  And  we  see  in  Jesus  human 
nature  joined  in  mysterious  union  with  the  Godhead.  I  never  know  how 
to  speak  about  this  miracle  of  the  divine  incarnation.  "We  are  men  and 
women,  poor  creatures  at  our  very  best ;  yet  in  Christ  Jesus  our  dignity 
is  perfectly  amazing.  Angels  excel  in  strength  and  beauty,  but  no 
angel  was  ever  joined  to  the  Godhead  as  manhood  is  now  united  to 
God.  The  nearest  being  to  God  is  a  man.  The  noblest  existence — how 
shall  I  word  it  ? — the  noblest  of  all  beings  is  God,  and  the  God-man 
Christ  Jesus,  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily, 
is  with  him  upon  his  throne.  It  is  a  wondrous  honour  this — that  man- 
hood should  be  taken  into  intimate  connection,  yea,  absolute  union 
with  God  1  For  listen  :  through  Jesus  Christ  we  are  this  day  made  the 
sons  of  God,  which  angels  never  were.  "  Unto  which  of  the  angels 
said  he  at  any  time,  Thou  art  my  Son  ?  "  But  he  has  said  this  to  us. 
Christ  took  not  up  angels,  but  he  took  up  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and 
he  has  made  the  believing  seed  of  Abraham  to  be  the  sons  of  God. 
Listen  again:  "And  if  children,  then  heirs;  heirs  of  God."  God's 
heirs  !  What  a  word  is  this  !  How  simple,  but  how  sublime  !  I  know 
how  to  say  it,  but  not  how  to  expound  it !  It  does  not  want  explanation, 
and  yet  its  depths  are  fathomless.  Every  believer  is  God's  heir — the 
heir  of  God.  Could  this  have  been,  had  there  been  no  fall  and  no 
redemption  ?  Children  and  heirs  are  more  than  was  ever  spoken  of  in 
Eden.  Ay,  listen  yet  again.  Now  we  are  one  with  God  in  Christ 
Jesus ;  for  it  is  written  concerning  our  Lord,  "We  are  members  of  his 
body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones."  Close  as  the  marriage-union  is, 
yet  Paul  declared,  when  he  spake  of  it,  "  This  is  a  great  mystery :  but 
I  speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  church."  Unfallen  manhood  was 
never  declared  to  be  one  with  the  Son  of  God,  and  yet  through  the 
covenant  of  grace  this  is  our  position.  We  are  joined  by  vital,  real, 
conjugal  union  to  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  very  God  of 
very  God ;  and  this  is  an  elevation  so  transcendent  that  I  feel  bowed 
down  beneath  the  weight  of  glory  which  is  revealed  in  us.  The  most 
glorious  being  next  to  God  is  man,  A  sinner  most  shameful  once, 
but  now  in  Christ  a  child  accepted  and  honoured  1  What  can  I  say  of 
this  but  "This  is  David's  spoil"?  This  is  what  Jesus  brought  us.  It 
came  to  us  by  no  other  way  or  method.  Neither  do  we  know  in  what 
way  or  method  it  could  have  been  given  to  us,  but  by  the  will  of  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  given  to  us  through  Jesus  Christ, 
our  elder  Brother  and  our  covenant  Head,  and  unto  him  let  the  glory  of  it 
be  ascribed  world  without  end. 

Another  blessing  which  was  not  ours  before  the  fall,  and  therefore 
never  was  lost,  but  comes  to  us  as  a  surplusage,  is  the  fact  that  we  ar» 
redeemed.    You  sang  just  now  that  verse, 

"  Never  did  angels  taste  above 
Kedeeming  grace  and  dying  love." 


194  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

It  is  clear  that  you  could  never  have  ktiowu  free  grace  and  dying  love  if 
Jesus  had  not  come  to  redeem  you.  Unfallen  intelligent  spirits  will  say  in 
eternity,  "  Do  you  see  those  beings  bowing  nearest  to  the  eternal  throne  ? 
Do  you  see  those  well-beloved  creatures  ?  Who  are  they  ?  "  Spirits 
that  have  lived  in  other  worlds  will  come  crowding  up  to  the  great 
metropolis,  and  will  say  one  to  another,  "  Who  are  those  courtiers — 
those  that  dwell  nearest  to  God  ?  Who  are  they  ?  "  And  one  spirit 
will  say  to  another,  "  They  are  beings  whom  God  not  only  made  as 
he  made  us,  but  whom  the  eternal  Son  of  God  redeemed  by  blood." 
And  one  shining  one  will  say  to  his  fellow,  "What  is  that  ?  Tell  me 
that  strange  story."  Then  will  his  companion  delight  to  say,  "  They 
were  saved  because  the  Son  of  God  took  their  nature,  and  in  that 
nature  died."  "  Wonderful !  Wonderful !  "  his  friend  will  answer, 
"  How  could  it  be  ?  Was  there  suffering  for  them,  and  pain  for  them, 
and  bloody  sweat  for  them,  and  death  for  them  on  the  part  of  the  ever- 
blessed  Son  of  God  ?  "  The  answer  "  It  was  even  so,"  will  be  news  full 
of  astonishment  even  to  the  best  instructed  celestial  mind.  Spirits 
will  look  at  us  with  wonder,  and  say,  *'  What  strange  beings  are  these  ? 
Others  are  the  work  of  God's  hands,  but  these  are  the  fruit  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul.  On  others  we  see  the  marks  of  divine  skill  and 
power,  but  here  we  see  the  tokens  of  a  divine  sacrifice — a  divine  blood- 
fchedding."  Truly,  we  may  say  of  our  redemption,  "  This  is  David's 
spoil."  That  you  and  I  should  be  such  wonders  as  we  must  be  in  being 
redeemed  beings,  is  indeed  something  given  to  us  by  Jesus  over  and 
above  what  Adam  lost;  and  througbuut  eternity  all  ttie  sacred  brother- 
hood of  the  redeemed  by  blood  will  be  princes  in  the  courts  of  God — 
the  aristocracy  of  heaven,  for  "  he  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests 
unto  God." 

We  shall  be  creatures  who  have  known  sin, and  have  been  recovered  from 
its  pollution.  There  will  be  no  fear  of  uur  being  exalted  with  pride,  or 
drawn  away  by  ambition  as  the  now-apostate  angels  were ;  for  we  shall 
constantly  remember  what  sin  did  for  us,  and  how  grievous  was  our 
fault.  We  shall  for  ever  remember  the  price  at  which  we  were  re- 
deemed ;  and  we  shall  have  ties  upon  us  that  will  bind  us  to  an  unde- 
viating  loyalty  to  him  who  exalted  us  to  so  glorious  a  condition.  It 
seems  to  me  wonderful  beyond  expression  :  the  more  I  consider,  the 
more  I  am  astonished.  A  spirit  that  has  never  fallen  cannot  be  trusted 
in  the  same  way  as  one  that  has  fallen  and  has  been  delivered,  and  has 
been  new-created,  and  blood-washed,  and  has  been  gifted  with  an  abiding 
and  eternal  character.  Such  a  being  shall  never  fall,  because  for  ever 
held  by  cords  of  love  eternal,  and  bonds  of  gratitude  infinitely  strong, 
which  will  never  let  it  waver  in  holy  service.  It  is  a  work  worthy  of 
a  God  to  create  such  beings  as  we  shall  be,  since  we  shall  be  securely 
bound  to  voluntary  holiness;  and  our  wills,  though  always  free,  shall  be 
immutably  luyal  to  our  Lord.  As  the  twice-born,  we  shall  be  the  noblest 
of  God's  works  ;  we  shall  be  the  first-fruits  of  his  creatures  ;  we  shall  be 
accounted  as  the  royal  treasure  of  Jehovah.  Then  shall  we  sit  with 
Christ  upon  his  throne,  and  reign  with  him  for  ever,  "  This  is  David's 
spoil." 

We  receive  blessings  wiknown  to  beings  who  have  never  fallen.  I 
sometimes   murmur  to   myself — and  sweet  music  it   has   been  aa  I 


"  David's  spoil."  195 

have  quietly  murmured  it — we  aie  the  elect  of  God.     Election  is  a 
privilege    most    high   and  precious,  what  can  exceed  it  in  delight  ? 
This  also  is  David's  spoil.     We  are  also  redeemed  from  amonj;  men  : 
the  redemption  of  the  soul  is  precious.     "  This  is  David's  spoil."     We 
are  covenanted  ones,  with  whom  God  has  entered  into  bonds  of  promise, 
swearing  by  an  oath  to  keep  his   word  :  this,  too,  is   David's  spoil. 
Where    had   you   ever   heard  of  redemption,  election,  covenant,  and 
such-like  words,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  blessed  Christ  of  God,  who 
hath  redeemed  us  by  his  blood  ?     Sing  ye,  then,   who  have  received 
back  your  lost  inheritance  :  and  sing  more  sweetly  still,  ye  who  have 
been  blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings,  in  the  heavenlies  according  as 
the  Father  hath  chosen  you  in  Christ  Jesus.     Sing  ye  aloud  unto   his 
1  holy  name  ;  and  say  of  your  special  privileges,  "  This  is  David's  spoil." 
Again,  to  my  mind  it  is  a  very  blessed  fact  tdat  you  and  I  will 
partake  of  a  privilege  which  would  have  been  certainly  unnecessary  to 
Adam,  and  could  not  by  Adam  have  been  known,  and  that  is,  the  privi- 
lege of  resurrection.     We  shall  die  unless  the   Lord  should  suddenly 
appear.     I  would  not  have  yon,  brothers  and  sisters,  look  upon  the 
prospect  of  death  with  any  sort  of  dread.      I  know  that  death  is  asso- 
ciated with  pain ;  but  nothing  can  be  more  absurd.     There  is  no  pain  in 
death  :    pain  belongs   to  life ;  death,  even  naturally,  puts  an  end  to 
pain.     But  death  to  the  believer  is  undressing  as  his  Lord  undressed- 
putting  off  garments  of  which,  I  trow,  we  need  not  be  so  very  fond, 
for  they  do  fit  us  ill  ;  and  oftentimes,  when  our  spirit  is  willing,  it  is 
hampered  by  these  garments  of  clay,  for  the  flesh  is  weak.     Some  look 
with  intense  delight  to  the  prospect  of  the  Saviour's  coming,  as  a  means 
of  escape  from  death.     1  confess  1  have  Imt  slender  sympathy  with  them. 
If  1  might  have  my  choice,  I  would  prefer,  of  tlie  two,  to  die.     Let  it  be 
as  the  Lord  wills  ;  but  there  is  a  point  ot  fellowship  with  Christ  in  death 
which  they  will  miss  who  shall  not  sleep  ;  and  it  seems  to  me  to  have  some 
sweetness  in  it  to  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth,  even  though 
he  descend  unto  the  sepulchre.     "  Where  should  the  dying  members 
rest  but  with  their  dying  Head  ?  "     That  grave  of  our  blessed  Lord,  if 
I  he  had  not  meant  us  to  enter  it,  would  have  been  left  an  empty  tene- 
1  ment  when  he  came  away ;  but  when  he  came  out  of  it,  he  left  it 
;  furnished  for  those  that  should  come  after  him.     See  there  the  grave- 
J  clothes  folded  up  for  us  to  use !     The  bed  is  prepared  for  our  slumber. 
The   napkin   is   laid   by  itself,    because   it  is   not   for  the   sleeper, 
but  for  those  who  have  lost  his  company.     Those   who  remain  behind 
may  dry  their  eyes  with  the  napkin,  but  the  grave-clothes  are  reserved 
for  others  who  will  occupy  the  royal  bed-cliamber.     When  great  men 
removed  in  the  olden  time,  their  servants  took  away  the  arras  or  hang- 
ings of  their  chambers  ;  but  if  those  hangings  remained,  it  was  for  the 
convenience  of  guests  who  were  invited  to  occupy  my  lord's  rooms.  See, 
tlien,  our  Lord  expects  us  to  lie  in  his  royal  bed-chamber,  for  he  has  left 
the  hangings  behind  him  !     To  the  retiring-room  of  the  tomb  we  shall 
go   in  due  time.     And  why  should  we   be  grieved  to  go  ?     For  we 
shall  come  forth  again:  we  shall  rise  from  the  dead.     "Thy  brother 
fihall  rise  again,"  was  Mary's  consolation  from  the  Master's  lips.     It  ia 
yours.     We  are  not  going  to  a  prison,  but  to  a  bath,  wherein  the  body, 
uke  Esther,  shall  be  purified  to  behold  the  King.    It  is  our  joy  to  be 


196  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

sure  that  "as  the  Lord  our  Saviour  rose,  so  all  his  followers  must.'-''  We 
do  not  know  much  about  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  therefore 
we  will  not  attempt  to  describe  it ;  but  surely  it  will  be  a  delightful 
thing  to  be  able  to  dwell  for  ever  in  a  body  that  has  been  in  the  grave, 
and  has  had  fulfilled  in  it  the  sentence,  "  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust 
shalt  thou  return,"  but  which  has  been  raised  again  by  that^  same  power 
which  raised  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  We  shall  inhabit 
a  body  which  shall  no  more  see  corruption,  nor  be  subject  to  weakness, 
or  pain,  or  decay,  but  shall  be  like  the  glorified  person  of  our  Lord. 
Oh,  there  is  sweetness  in  the  thought  that  we  shall  in  tliis  for  ever  have 
fellowship  with  our  risen  Lord !  Children  of  the  resurrection,  dread  not 
death  !  Your  faces  are  turned  to  the  sun.  Press  forward  to  the  light 
eternal,  and  fear  not  to  pass  through  the  death-shadow :  it  is  no  more 
than  a  shadow.  If  you  cannot  leap  over  the  grave,  you  can  pass 
through  it.  It  shall  be  your  joy  to  rise  when  the  morning  breaketh, 
and  to  be  satisfied ;  for  you  shall  wake  up  in  his  likeness.  As  for  the 
resurrection,  "  this  is  David's  spoil,"  this  is  Christ's  gift  and  boon.  The 
resurrection  from  the  dea-l  is  the  peculiar  glory  of  Christianity.  The 
immortality  of  the  soul  had  been  taught  and  known  before,  for  it  is  a 
truth  which  even  reason  itself  teaches  ;  but  the  resurrection  of  the 
body  comes  in  as  the  last  and  crowning  comfort  of  our  spirits :  and 
"  this  is  David's  spoil." 

Let  me  not  weary  you.  The  topic  might  well  interest  us  on  several 
occasions  ;  it  is  too  large  to  be  confined  to  one  discourse.  Our  siniiuUtr 
relatwn  to  God,  and  yet  to  materialism,  is  another  rare  gift  of  Jesus. 
God  intended,  by  the  salvation  of  man,  and  the  lifting  up  of  man  into 
union  with  himself,  to  link  together  in  one  the  lowest  and  the  highest — - 
his  creation  and  himself.  Shall  I  make  it  very  plain?  Tiiese  poor  sub- 
stances—earth, water,  and  the  like — thev  seem  far  down  in  the  scale. 
God  makes  a  being  that  shall  be,  as  an  old  Puritan  used  to  say,  half 
soul  and  half  soil ;  even  man  who  is  both  spirit  and  dust  of  the  earth. 
We  find  in  him  water,  salts,  acids,  all  sorts  of  substances  combined 
to  make  up  a  body,  and  married  to  this  is  a  soul,  which  is  brother  to 
the  angels,  and  akin  to  Deity.  Materialism  is  somewhat  exalted  in 
being  connected  with  spirit  at  all.  When  spirit  becomes  connected 
with  God,  and  refined  materialism  becomes  connected  with  a  purified 
spirit,  by  the  resurrection  Irom  tue  de^id,  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass 
the  uplifting  of  clay,  and  its  junction  with  the  celestial.  Do  you  not 
see  how  God,  in  the  perfecting  of  his  gracious  purpose  through  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  causes  his  glory  to  be  refiected  even  upon 
what  we  regard  as  poor  material  substances,  gross  and  mean  ? 

Try  and  get  at  my  meaning  again.  Quakers,  whom  I  greatly  respect, 
get  rid  of  the  two  ordinances,  by  denying  that  they  are  of  perpetual 
obligation.  They  banish  baptism :  they  put  away  the  Lord's  supper. 
I  have  sometimes  wished  that  I  were  able  to  agree  with  them,  because 
my  whole  spirit  and  tendency  are  towards  the  spiritual  rather  than 
the  ritual  ;  but  if  anything  be  plain  to  me  in  Scripture,  it  is  that  Jesus 
Christ  did  command  us  to  be  baptized  in  water  in  the  Triune  name,  and 
that  he  bade  his  disciples  remember  him  in  the  breaking  o^  Nread  and 
in  the  drinking  of  the  cup.  The  danger  of  men's  making  too  much  of 
outward  forms  was  eucouutered  for  some  wise  purpose.     It  was,  I  think, 


"DAVID'S    SPOIL."  197 

because  God  would  have  us  know  that  even  the  material,  though  it  can 
only  enter  the  outer  court,  is  still  to  be  sanctified  unto  himself.  Tiiere- 
fore,  water,  bread,  and  wine,  all  material  substances,  are  used  not  only 
as  syml:)ols,  hut  as  tokens  that  all  created  things  shall  be  ennobled  and 
sanctified.  Look  ye,  sirs,  "  Creation  was  made  subject  to  vanity,  not 
willingly,  hut  by  reason  of  him  who  hath  subjected  the  same  in  hope." 
Through  man's  sin  this  outward  world  became  blackened,  darkened, 
and  degraded  ;  but  God  intends,  through  man,  to  lift  up  the  nethermost 
extremities  of  his  creation  into  a  greater  nearness  to  himself  than  they 
ever  could  have  reached  by  any  other  means.  And  this  is  how  it  comes 
about.  We  are  taking  up  with  us,  as  it  were,  the  earth  which  makes  a 
part  of  ourselves.  We  are  drawing  up  with  ourselves  the  earth  in  those 
simple  symbols  with  which  we  worship  God.  We  are  ourselves  lifted 
up  as  spirits,  and  we  are  soon  to  be  lifted  up  as  spirits  enshrined  in 
purified  bodies,  and  thus  we  bring  the  whole  creation  of  God  into 
nearer  contact  with  himself.  Hence  it  is  that  we  are  called  '*  kings 
and  priests."  What  can  the  dead  earth  do  in  worship  till  there  comes 
one  who  worships  God  as  the  world's  priest  ?  What  can  the  fields  and 
woods  and  hills  say  in  the  worship  of  God  ?  They  are  dumb  till  a 
tongue  attempts  the  holy  task  of  uttering  their  praise.  You  and  I  are 
made  of  such  stuff  as  the  world  around  us,  and  yet  we  are  the  compeers 
of  angels.  We  are  brothers  to  the  worm  ;  and  this  body  of  ours  is  but 
a  child  of  mother  earth  on  which  it  lives  See  then  how  mother  earth 
^vursliips  God  through  us,  and  dull,  dead  matter  finds  life  and  song. 
Behold  the  mists  and  clouds  become  a  steaming  incense  of  praise  to 
God  through  men  like  ourselves,  who,  because  Christ  was  slain,  have 
been  made  kings  and  priesis  unto  God. 

I  wish  you  would,  rather  than  listen  to  me,  try  and  muse  upon  the 
wonderful  position  which  redeemed  men  do  now  occupy,  and  will  occupy 
for  ever  and  ever.  For  my  own  part,  I  would  not  change  places  with 
the  angel  Gabriel,  nay,  not  if  he  gave  me  his  swift  wing  to  boot,  for  I 
believe  that  an  infinitely  greater  honour  belongs  to  the  least  of  God's 
children  than  to  the  very  highest  of  God's  servants.  To  be  a  child  of 
God — oh,  bliss  ! — there  is  no  glory  that  can  excel  it.  But  all  this  is  a 
special  gift  to  our  humanity  through  our  Lord  Jesus.  "  This  is  David's 
spoil." 

Our  manifestation  of  the  full  glory  of  God  is  another  of  the  choice 
gifts  which  the  pierced  hands  of  Jesus  alone  bestow.  Principalities  and 
powers  shall  see  in  the  mystical  body  of  Christ  more  of  God  than  in  all 
the  universe  besides.  They  will  study  in  the  saints  the  eternal  purposes 
of  God,  and  see  therein  his  love,  his  wisdom,  his  power,  his  justice,  his 
mercy  blended  in  an  amazing  way.  They  will  admire  for  ever  those 
whom  God  loves  and  delights  in,  those  whom  he  keeps  as  the  apple  of 
his  eye,  those  whom  he  rejoices  over,  and  of  whom  he  hath  said  that 
he  will  rest  in  his  love,  and  he  will  rejoice  over  them  with  siuging. 
Truly  it  hath  not  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  guess  at  the  glory  of 
God  in  the  saints,  the  exceeding  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  "  This  is  David's  spoil."  Oh,  come, 
let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord,  let  us  magnify  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ ! 

IIL     I    close   with   the  most  practical  part  of  my  sermon  :  that 

WHICH  WE  WILLINGLY  GIVE  TO  JeSUS  MAY  BE  CALLED  HIS  SPOIL.    TheiB 


198 


METROPOLITAN   TABRRNACHjE   PULPIT. 


is  a  spoil  for  Christ  which  every  true-hearted  follower  of  hi's  rotes 
to  him  enthusiastically.  We  have  already  seen  that  all  things  which 
we  have  are  of  Christ,  and  that  there  are  certain  special  gifts  which  are 
peculiarly  of  Christ ;  and  now,  what  shall  be  David's  spoil  from  you  and 
from  me  ? 

First,  our  hearts  are  his  alone  for  ever. 

"  Here's  my  heart,  Lord,  take  and  seal  it. 
Seal  it  from  thy  courts  above." 

Of  every  believing  heart  it  may  be  said,  "  This  is  David's  spoil."  You 
and  I  must  give  ourselves  to-morrow  to  earning  our  daily  bread,  and 
our  thoughts  must  go,  to  a  large  extent,  after  earthly  things  in  the 
common  pursuits  of  every-day  life.  But  our  hearts,  our  hearts,  are 
as  fountains  sealed  for  our  Well-heloved.  0  mammon,  thou  shalt  not 
have  them  1  0  pleasure,  thou  shalt  not  have  them  !  These  are  David's 
spoil.  Our  hearts  belong  to  Jesus  only.  "  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart," 
is  an  Old  Testament  command,  but  under  the  New  Testament  mani- 
festation of  love  we  fulfil  it;  "for  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us; 
because  we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead:  and 
that  he  died  for  ail,  that  th^-y  which  live  should  not  henceforth  live  unto 
themselves,  but  unto  him  which  died  for  them,  and  ro^^e  again."  Let  it 
be  so  that  our  whole  heart  is  the  sole  possession  of  Jesus!  We  will 
neither  rend  it,  nor  i-ast  lots  whose  it  shall  be,  for  "  this  is  David's  spoil." 

Now  there  is  another  property  I  should  like  King  Jesus  to  have,  and. 
that  is,  oiir  special  gifts.  I  know  one  who,  before  his  conversion,  was 
wont  to  sing,  and  he  often  charmed  the  ears  of  men  with  the  sweet 
music  which  he  poured  forth ;  but  when  he  was  converted  he  said, 
•*  Henceforth  my  tongue  shall  sing  nothing  but  the  praises  of  God." 
He  devoted  himself  to  proclaiming  the  gospel  by  his  song,  for  he  said, 
"  This  is  David's  spoil."  Have  you  not  some  gift  or  other,  dear 
friend,  of  which  you  could  say,  "  Henceforth  this  shall  be  sacred  to 
my  bleeding  Lord"  ?  Some  peculiarfaculty  ?  Some  choice  piece  of  acquire- 
ment not  generally  possessed  ?  Something  in  which  you  excel  ?  I  would 
that  you  had  at  least  some  little  garden  of  flowers  or  herbs  which  you 
could  so  reserve  that  therein  only  Jesus  should  pluck  the  fruits.  Say  of 
the  best  gift  you  possess,  "  This  is  David's  spoil."  Is  it  not  well  to 
consecrate  some  part  of  the  day,  and  say,  "  This  hour  is  Christ's  ?  I 
have  my  work  to  do,  my  business  must  be  seen  to ;  all  is  Christ's.  But 
still  I  will  reserve  a  special  season,  and  wall  it  in,  like  a  private  garden, 
in  which,  with  prayer,  and  praise,  and  meditation,  T  will  commune 
with  my  Lord;  or  else  in  actual  service  I  will  honour  his  name." 
Say,  *'  Ttiis  is  David's  spoil."  Come,  dear  heart,  what  do  you  mean 
to  give  him  ?  Surely  you  have  some  natural  faculty  or  acquired  skill 
which  you  can  lay  at  his  feet 

Moreover,  while  our  whole  selves  must  be  yielded  to  the  Lord  Jesus, 
there  is  one  thing  that  must  always  be  Christ's,  and  that  is  our 
religious  homage  as  a  church.  Somebody  says  that  the  Queen  is  head 
of  the  church.  God  bless  her  ;  but  she  is  no  head  of  the  church  of 
Christ !  The  idea  is  blasphemous:  headship  "  is  David's  spoil."  Jesus 
Christ  is  Head  over  all  ihin>iS  to  his  church,  and  nobody  else  can  take 
that  position.     No  one  may  dare   to  take   the  title  of  '*  head  of  the 


"DAVID'S  SPOIL."  199 

church"  without  a  usurpation  of  our  Lord's  royal  ri^ht.  Certain 
teachers  of  the  church  claim  authority  over  consciences,  and  assert 
that  they  are  infallible.  I  have  heard  it  said  that  they  are  supreme 
guides,  but  I  do  not  believe  it,  because  "  This  is  David's  spoil."  We 
have  one  infallible  Teacher,  and  that  is  Je^us  Christ  our  Saviour. 
We  yield  obedience  to  his  every  v?ord,  and  demand  that  others  should 
do  the  same.  Whatsoever  he  says  to  us  by  his  Spirit  in  the  Word  of 
God  is  to  us  infallible  truth,  and  we  cease  to  dis^pute  when  Jesus 
speaks  ;  but  no  man  else  shall  dictate  doctrine  to  us,  for  "  This  is 
David's  spoil."  ,  He  must  be  sole  Rabbi  in  the  midst  of  his  church. 
We  call  him  Master  and  Lord,  for  so  he  is.  I  would  have  you  keep 
your  conscience  for  Christ  alone.  TaJ^e  care  that  no  book  ever  overlaps 
the  Bible ;  that  no  creed  ever  contradicts  the  form  of  sound  words  con- 
tained in  God's  own  Word  ;  that  no  influence  of  minister  or  writer 
supplants  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Your  soul's  obedience-^ 
and  faith  belong  to  Jesus  only  :  "This  is  David's  spoil." 

Lastly,  have  you  not  something  of  your  own  proper  substance  that 
shall  be  David's  spoil  just  now?  That  was  a  blessed  act  when  the 
woman  broke  the  most  precious  thing  she  had — her  box  of  alabaster, 
and  let  the  perfumed  nard  stream  down  the  Saviour,  anointing  him  for  ' 
his  burial.  She  felt  that  the  precious  perfume  was  "  David's  spoil."  There'^ 
was  no  waste;  in  fact,  no  other  gift  ever  went  so  completely  to  its  pur- 
pose without  being  taxed  on  the  road,  for  Jesus  had  it  alL  Kindly  did 
he  observe  the  loving  honour  which  she  paid  him.  What  if  the  oint-  ' 
ment  were  sold,  and  given  to  the  poor  ?  Yet  it  could  never  be  so  economi- 
cally used  as  when  it  was  all  devoted  to  him.  I  do  think  it  so  pleasant 
sometimes  to  give  Jesus  Christ  distinctly  a  gift  from  yourself  of  some  a  hat 
that  you  will  miss.  It  is  good  to  give  to  the  poor,  but  it  has  a  daintier 
sweetness  in  it  to  do  somewhat  distinctly  for  him,  for  the  spread  of  his 
own  glory,  and  the  making  known  of  his  own  fame.  "  The  poor  ye 
have  always  with  you":  abound  towards  them  in  your  charity  when- 
ever you  will  ;  but  to  your  Lord  at  special  seasons  dedicate  a  choice 
gift,  and  say,  "This  is  David's  spoil."  There  was  a  poor  woman  once, 
whose  little  fortune  could  be  carried  between  her  finger  and  her  thumb, 
— her  fortune  I  said,  for  it  was  all  that  she  had.  Two  mites,  I  am  told, 
was  all  it  came  to.  She  took  it,  it  was  her  all,  and  she  put  it  in  the 
treasury;  for  this  was  '*  David's  spoil."  It  belonged  to  the  Lord  her  God, 
and  she  gave  it  cheerfully.  I  do  not  know  wUether  since  the  days  of 
the  apostles  anybody  has  ever  given  so  much  as  that  woman.  I  iiave 
not.  Have  you  ?  She  gave  all  her  living.  Not  all  her  savings,  but  all 
her  living.  She  had  nothing  left  when  she  gave  her  farthing :  she  loved 
so  much  that  she  consecrated  all  her  living.    We  sometimes  sing — 

"  Yet  if  I  might  make  some  reserve, 
And  duly  did  not  call, 
I  love  mj  God  with  zeal  so  great 
That  1  would  give  him  all."' 

But  do  we  mean  it  ?  If  not,  why  do  we  sing  falsehoods  ?  There  was 
a  man  who,  in  the  provideuce  of  God,  had  been  enabled  to  lay  by  many 
thousands.  He  was  a  very  rich  and  respected  man.  I  have  heard  it 
eaid  that  he  owned  at  least  Lalf-a-miliiou ;  and  at  one  collection,  when 


200  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

he  felfc  specially  grateful  aad  generous,  he  found  a  well-worn  sixpence 
for  the  plate,  for  that  was  David's  spoil  1  That  was  David's  spoil  I 
Out  of  all  that  he  possessed,  that  sixpence  was  David's  spoil !  This 
was  the  measure  of  his  gratitude  I  Judge  by  this  how  much  he  owed, 
or  at  least  how  much  he  desired  to  pay.  Are  there  not  many  persons 
who,  on  that  despicable  scale,  reward  the  Saviour  for  the  travail  of  his 
soul  ?  I  shall  not  upbraid  them.  I  shall  not  urge  them  to  do  more, 
lest  I  spoil  the  voluntariness  of  the  large  gifts  they  mean  to  bring.  Let 
a  hint  suffice.  For  us,  who  are  deep  in  the  Redeemer's  debt,  who 
have  had  much  forgiven,  who  every  day  are  bankrupt  debtors  to  the 
measureless  mercy  of  infinite  love— for  us,  no  paltriness  will  suffice. 
We  must  give  something  which,  if  it  be  not  worthy  of  him,  shall,  at 
least,  express  the  truth  and  warmth  of  the  gratitude  we  feel.  God  help 
us  to  be  often  setting  aside  this,  and  that,  and  the  other  choice  thing, 
and  saying,  "  This  is  David's  spoil,  and  it  shall  be  a  joy  to  my  heart 
to  give  it! "  We  shall  find  much  sweetness  in  buying  our  sweet-cane 
with  money,  and  filling  our  Lord  with  the  fat  of  our  sacrifices.  It  is 
heaven  for  a  true  heart  to  give  largely  to  Jesus. 

God  bless  you,  dear  friends.  May  we  come  to  the  table  of  com- 
munion, and  meet  with  our  glorious  David  there,  and  feel  his  praises 
making  music  in  our  hearts !     Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Matt.  xxv.  31 — 46  j 

xxvi.  6—13. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 416,  802. 


THE  THRESHING-FLOOR  OF  OENAN. 


%  $ennot| 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  November  9th,  1884,  bt 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  At  that  time  when  David  saw  that  the  Lord  had  answered  him  in  the  threshingfloor 
of  Oman  the  Jebusite,  then  he  sacrificed  there." — 1  Chronicles  xxi.  28. 

"  Then  David  said,  This  is  the  house  of  the  Lord  God,  and  this  is  the  altar  of  the 
burnt  offering  for  Israel." — I  Chronicles  xxii.  1. 

David  was  for  many  years  searching  for  a  site  for  the  great  temple 
which  he  purposed  to  build  for  Jehovah  his  God.  It  had  been  ordained 
that  the  sacrifices  offered  to  the  one  God  should  be  offered  by  all  Israel  upon 
one  altar;  but  as  yet  the  ark  of  the  Lord  was  within  curtains,  near  to 
David's  palace,  and  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  was  situated  at  Gibeon. 
Where  should  the  one  altar  be  erected  ?  Where  should  the  ark  find 
its  permanent  dwelling-place?  David  said,  "Surely  I  will  not  come 
into  the  tabernacle  of  my  house,  nor  go  up  into  ray  bed ;  I  will  not  give 
sleep  to  mine  eyes,  or  slumber  to  mine  eyelids,  until  I  find  out  a  place 
for  the  Lord,  an  habitation  for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob."  Yet  for  a  long 
time  he  received  no  indication  as  to  the  exact  spot  whereon  the  Lord's  altar 
should  be  reared,  save  only  that  he  was  told  that  the  Lord  had  chosen 
Zion  and  desired  it  for  his  habitation. 

David  watched,  and  waited,  and  prayed,  and  in  due  time  he  received 
the  sign.  God  knew  the  spot,  and  had  consecrated  it  long  before  by 
his  appearance  unto  Abraham.  The  other  Sabbath-day,  you  remember, 
our  text  was  "  Jehovah-jireh,"  *  and  we  then  learned  that  in  the  mount 
the  Lord  would  be  seen.  Upon  Mount  Moriah,  on  or  near  that  parti- 
cular spot  which  had  been  named  Jehovah-jireh,  was  the  temple  to  be 
built.  Abraham  had  there  unsheathed  the  knife  to  slay  his  son. 
Wondrous  type  of  the  great  Father  offering  up  his  Only-begotten  for  the 
sins  of  men !  The  scene  of  that  grand  transaction  was  to  be  the  centre 
of  worship  for  the  chosen  people.  Where  Abraham  made  the  supreme 
sacrifice,  there  should  his  descendants  present  their  ofierings.  Or  if  we 
look  into  the  type  and  see  God  there  presenting  Jesus  as  a  sacrifice  for 
men,  it  was  most  suitable  that  man  should  for  ever  sacrifice  to  God 
where  God  made  a  sacrifice  for  him.     As  yet  it  was  not  known  to  David 

*  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  No.  1803, 

No.  1,808.  "  18 


202  METROPOLITAN  TABRUNACLR  PULPJT. 

that  this  was  the  chosen  place.  Now  it  is  indicafed  by  memorable  signs : 
the  angel  of  justice  stands  above  the  spot;  and  his  sword  is  sheathed 
there  in  answer  to  the  cries  of  the  afflicted  king,  according  to  the  long- 
suffering  mercy  of  God.  Then  David  clearly  saw  the  mind  of  the  Lord, 
and  said,  "  This  is  the  house  of  Jehovah  my  God,  and  this  is  the  altar 
of  the  burnt-offering  for  Israel."  Then  he  commenced  at  once  with 
double  speed  to  prepare  the  materials  for  the  temple.  Though  he 
knew  that  he  might  not  build  it,  since  his  hands  had  been  stained  with 
blood,  yet  he  would  do  all  that  he  could  to  help  his  son  Solomon  in  the 
great  enterprise. 

This  problem  which  David  hid  at  last  w  )rked  out  by  the  good  hand 
of  God  upon  him,  is  one  which  in  a  deep  spiritual  sense  exercises  onr 
hearts  full  often.  Where  is  it  that  man  may  meet  with  God  ?  How  is 
it  that  man  may  speak  with  his  offended  Lord  and  be  reconciled  to  him? 
Is  there  not  some  meeting-place  where  the  sinner  may  express  his  re- 
pentance, and  where  mercy  may  grant  full  absolution  ?  Many  are  saying, 
"  Oh,  that  I  knew  where  I  miglit  find  him  !"  Hearts  touched  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  are  still  seeking  after  God  if  haply  they  may  find  him.  In 
what  condition,  and  by  what  means  may  man  be  at  peace  with  God,  an-1 
dread  no  longer  the  sword  of  his  justice  ? 

For  the  heart  of  some  of  us  that  pr  )blem  takes  a  further  shape: 
we  know  where  man  may  meet  with  God  bat  we  want  to  know  how  the 
careless,  proud,  rebellious  heart  shall  be  induced  to  come  to  God  in  his 
appointed  way.  AVe  know  it  is  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through 
the  preacliing  of  the  word,  and  the  uplifting  of  the  all-attracting  cross  ; 
but  we  would  fain  know  the  state  of  mind  which  will  lead  up  to  recon- 
ciliation ;  for  now  we  often  have  to  go  ba'?k  to  him  that  seat  us,  and  to  cry, 
**  AVho  hath  believed  our  report?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
revealed?"  We  would  lead  men  to  God  by  Josus  Christ  if  we  could; 
we  s'retch  out  the  finger,  and  we  point  the  way,  but  they  will  not  see; 
we  stretch  out  both  liands,  and  intreat  them  to  come,  but  tliey  will  not 
yield  ;  our  heart  breaketh  for  the  longing  that  it  hath  to  present  every 
man  in  Christ  reconciled  unto  the  living  God;  but  how  shall  it  be? 
How  shall  the  sinner  come  unto  God  ? 

We  may  get  some  light  from  the  type  before  us  upon  that  question — 
Where  shall  God's  temple  be?  How  shall  men  be  brought  to  it?  We 
speak  not  at  this  time  upon  natural  things,  but  upon  the  things  of  the 
Spirit;  therefore  let  us  pray  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enlighten  and  instruct 
us,  for  only  by  his  aid  shall  spiritual  truth  enter  our  he  irts ! 

And,  first,  I  remark  that  exlernally  there  was,  and  there  is  nothing  in 
any  place  ivhy  it  should  he  the  peculiar  meeting-place  of  God  with  man; 
but,  secondly,  that  spiritually  tlie  place  ivhich  God  did  choose  ivas  most 
suitable;  for  in  it  we  read  the  true  ground  uj) m  which  God  does 
actually  meet  with  men  in  a  way  of  grace.  When  we  have  lingered  over 
these  two  subjects,  we  shall  then  have  to  exhort  you  after  this  fashion, 
— heartily  let  us  use  the  place  which  God  hath  set  apart  to  be  our  meeting- 
place  ivith  himself.  "  O  come,  let  us  worship  and  bow  down  :  let  us  kneel 
before  the  Lord  our  Maker." 

I.  First,  then,  this  truth  is  believed  by  you,  though,  alas !  not  by 
all  men,  that  externally  there  is  nothing  in  any  place  why  God 

SHOULD   there   MEET   WITH   MEN. 


THE   THRESHIVG-FLOOR    OF   ORNAN.  203 

The  Lord  chose  the  thre«hin(j-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebiisite  as  the  spot 
whereupon  for  many  a  day  his  holy  worshi|)  should  be  openly  celebrated 
according  to  the  ontward  ceremonies  of  a  typical  dispensation.  There 
the  Temple  was  built,  and  for  a  thousand  years  it  stood  as  the  centre 
of  Divine  worship,  so  far  as  it  was  visibly  presented  according  to  his 
ordinance.  What  that  mount  may  yet  become  we  will  not  at  this 
time  consider.  Prophets  give  us  bright  hints  of  what  shall  yet  be  even 
on  Mi)unt  Zion,  which  has  so  long  been  trodden  under  foot  of  the  adver- 
sary. But  why  was  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman  to  be  the  meeting- 
place  of  David  with  his  God,  and  the  spot  where  prayer  was  to  be 
heard  ? 

Certainly  it  was  a  very  simple,  unadorned,  unerclps^iastical  place.  The 
threshing-floor  of  Oman  boasted  no  magnificence  of  size,  or  beauty  of 
construction.  There  was  just  the  rock,  and  1  suppose  a  composition 
spread  upon  it  of  hard  clay  or  cement,  that  the  feet  of  the  oxen  might 
the  better  tread  out  the  corn.  That  was  all  it  was  ;  yet  when  the  Tem- 
ple with  all  its  glory  cro'vned  the  spot,  Grod  was  never  more  conspicuously 
present  than  on  that  bare,  ungarnished  threshing-floor.  "  Meet  God  in 
a  barn  !  "  saith  one.  Why  not?  D)es  that  astonish  you?  God  met 
Adam  in  a  garden,  Abraham  under  a  tree,  and  Xoah  in  an  ark.  There 
is  less  of  man  in  the  open  field  than  in  the  cathe  Iral,  and  where  there  is 
least  of  man  there  is  at  least  an  opportunity  to  find  most  of  God.  "  M^^et 
God  on  a  threshing-floor !"  Why  n(»t  ?  It  may  be  a  fhonsand  times 
more  sacred  than  many  a  chancel  ;  for  there  simple  minds  are  likely  to 
pay  their  homage  in  hearty  truthfulness,  while  in  the  other  the  artificial- 
ness  of  the  place  may  foster  f  irmality.  God  has  met  with  man  in  a 
duiigecm,  in  a  cave,  in  a  whale's  belly.  When  yon  have  displnyd  all 
your  skill  in  archi  ecture,  can  you  secure  any  more  of  tlie  Divine 
presence  than  the  disciples  had  in  the  upper  room  ?  Can  you  get  as 
much  of  it  ?  A  tasrel'ul  building  may  be  a  way  of  showing  your  pious 
regard  for  the  Lord,  and  so  far  it  may  be  justifiable  and  acceptable  ; 
but  take  care  that  you  do  not  regard  it  as  essential,  or  even  impvir  nnt, 
or  you  will  make  an  idol  of  it.  If  the  church  or  chapel  he  esteemed  for 
its  form  or  tastefalness,  it  will  become  a  mere  exhibition  of  skill  and 
industry,  and  so  be  no  more  sacred  than  the  house  of  a  greedy  mer- 
chant, or  the  palace  of  a  profligate  prince.  No  chisel  of  mason,  or 
hammer  of  carpenter  can  build  a  holy  place.  Without  either  of  these 
a  spot  may  be  none  other  than  the  house  of  God,  and  the  gate  of 
heaven.  God  chose  a  threshing-floor  for  his  audience  with  David,  just 
as  aforetime  he  had  chosen  to  reveal  himself  in  a  bush  to  Moses.  His 
presence  had  been  glorious  on  the  sandy  floor  of  the  wilderness,  in  the 
midst  of  the  curtains  of  goats'  hair  ;  and  now  it  was  gracious  among  the 
sheaves  and  the  oxen.  How  can  he  that  filleth  all  things  care  about  a 
house  which  is  made  with  hands  ?  You  know  how  curtly  Stephen  dis- 
misses even  Solomon's  Temple  with  a  word— "but  Solomon  built  him  a 
house.  Howbeit,  the  Most  High  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with 
hands."  AVliat  was  that  g  ilden  fane  to  the  Infinite  ^lujesty?  Is  not 
his  own  Creation  sublimer  far?  No  arch  can  compare  with  the  azure 
of  heaven,  no  lamps  can  rival  the  sun  and  moon,  no  masonry  can  equal 
that  city  whose  twelve  foundations  are  of  precious  stones.  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  by  the  prophet :  "  Heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the  earth  is  my 


204  METROPOLITAN  TABKRNACLE  PULPIT. 

footstool :  where  is  the  house  that  ye  build  unto  me  ?  and  where  is  the 
place  of  my  rest?  For  all  those  things  hath  mine  hand  ma-ie."  Where- 
fore, then,  should  he  not  choose  the  hill  whereon  Oman  had  made  a 
hardened  floor  whereon  to  thresh  his  corn  ?  At  any  rate  that  was  the 
Lord's  meeting-place  with  David,  his  audience  chamber  with  the  suppliant 
king  ;  as  if  to  show  that  he  carethnot  for  tabernacles  or  temples,  but  by 
his  own  presence  makes  that  place  glorious  wherein  he  reveals  himself. 

Moreover,  it  was  a  place  of  ordinary  foil, — not  merely  a  floor,  but  a 
threshing-floor  in  present  use,  with  oxen  present,  and  all  the  imple- 
ments of  husbandry  ready  to  hand.  It  was  so  ordinary,  and  so  every- 
day a  place,  that  none  could  have  been  more  so :  as  if  the  Lord  would 
say  to  us,  "  I  will  meet  you  anywhere ;  I  will  be  with  you  in  the  house 
and  in  the  field ;  I  will  speak  with  you  when  you  till  the  ground,  when 
you  thresh  your  corn,  when  you  eat  your  bread."  Every  place  is  holy 
where  a  holy  heart  is  found.  This  ought  to  gladden  the  solitude  of 
godly  men.  God  is  with  you,  therefore  be  of  good  cheer.  If  you  are 
on  board  ship,  or  if  you  are  wandering  in  the  woods,  or  are  banished  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth,  or  are  shut  out  from  the  Sabbath  assemblies  of 
God's  house,  yet 

"  Where'er  you  seek  him  he  is  found, 
An<l  every  place  is  hallowed  ground.*' 

On  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite  did  God  meet  with  David, 
and  in  your  workroom,  at  your  bench,  or  upon  your  bed,  or  behind  the 
hedge,  or  in  the  corner  of  a  railway  carriage,  the  Lord  will  hear  you,  and 
commune  with  you. 

My  heart  rejoices  when  I  think  that  this  was  not  only  a  very  un- 
adorned place,  and  one  that  was  given  up  to  common  uses,  but  it  was 
also  in  the  possession  of  a  Jebusite.  The  Jebusites  were  among  the  nations 
doomed  for  their  iniquities  ;  they  were  aliens  from  the  commonwealth 
of  Israel,  and  strangers  to  the  covenants  of  promise;  and  this  vast 
rock  on  which  the  Temple  is  to  stand,  beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy 
of  the  whole  earth,  belongs  at  first  to  one  of  the  accursed  seed  of 
Canaan.  Herein  the  Lord  showeth  that  he  is  no  respecter  of  persons  ; 
he  would  meet  the  king,  not  on  the  land  of  an  Israelite,  but  on  the 
threshing-floor  of  a  Jebusite.  The  Jews  wrapped  themselves  up  within 
themselves,  and  said,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord ;  the  temple  of  the 
Lord  are  we":  but  the  Lord  seemed  to  rebuke  their  national  pride  by 
saying,  ''And  your  Temple  is  built  upon  the  threshing-floor  of  a  Jebusite." 
Ifthey  would  but  have  remembered  this,  the  Jews  might  in  our  Lord's  day 
have  been  more  tolerant  of  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  to  God.  More- 
over, Gentile  blood  flowed  in  the  veins  of  that  very  king  who  established 
their  empire,  and  who  was  now  prostrate  before  his  God,  interceding  tor 
Jerusalem.  Remember  Ruth,  and  whence  she  came.  She  put  her  trust 
under  the  wings  of  Jehovah,  God  of  Israel,  and  became  the  gieat- 
grandmother  of  David.  David  never  seemed  to  forget  that  fact,  for 
his  psalms  are  full  of  far-reaching  desires  and  good  wishes  for  all  the 
peoples  of  the  earth.  Remember  his  words  :  "  Let  the  whole  earth 
be  filled  with  his  glory ;  Amen,  and  Amen.  The  prayers  of  David 
the  son  of  Jesse  are  ended."  He  looks  back  upon  his  birth,  as  the 
sou   of  Jesse   and   the  great-grandson  of    Ruth,   and   a   large   heart 


THE  THRESHING-FLOOR  OF  ORNAN.  205 

beats  within  his  breast,  desiring  that  Jehovah  may  be  the  God  of 
the  whole  earth.  Let  us,  therefore,  not  consider  our  own  peculiar 
nationality  or  condition,  or  rank  among  men,  as  if  salvation  came 
by  natural  descent.  The  blood  of  fallen  Adam  is  in  the  veins  of  every 
man,  and  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile  in  Christ  Jesus.  If  you 
happen  to  have  been  born  of  parents  who  did  not  train  you  in  the  fear 
of  God,  yet  do  not  despond ;  for  as  the  Temple  was  built  upon  the 
threshing-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite,  so  shall  the  great  God  dwell  in 
your  heart  though  your  fathers  knew  him  not.  Say  thou  in  thy  soul, 
*'  The  Lord  shall  have  a  dwelling  within  my  heart,  Jebusite  though  I  be." 
Once  more,  there  was  one  matter  in  reference  to  Oman's  threshing- 
floor  which  it  would  be  well  to  mention :  before  it  could  be  used  it  had 
to  be  bought  with  money.  I  frequently  meet  with  impossibly  spiritual 
people  who  hate  the  mention  of  money  in  connection  with  the  worship  of 
God.  The  clatter  of  a  collection  jars  upon  their  sublime  feelings.  The 
mention  of  money  in  connection  with  the  worship  of  God  is  more  dread- 
ful to  them  than  it  is  to  God  himself;  for  hesaith,  "Thou  hast  bought 
me  no  sweet  cane  with  money"  ;  and  again,  *'  None  shall  appear  before 
me  empty."  To  these  pious  persons  money  saved  and  hoarded  is 
abundantly  pleasant ;  their  only  objection  is  to  giving  it.  In  this  they 
somewhat  diifer  from  David,  who  paid  to  Oman  for  the  place  six  hundred 
shekels  of  gold  by  weight.  Before  he  would  otfer  a  sacrifice  he  paid 
down  fifty  sheliels  of  earnest  money ;  for  he  said,  "  I  will  not  offer  burnt 
offerings  unto  Jehovah  my  God  of  that  which  doth  cost  me  nothing." 
It  is  a  very  curious  thing,  is  it  not  ?  that  one  man  should  show  his 
spirituality  by  his  liberality,  and  another  should  pretend  to  do  it  by  the 
reverse  method.  In  connection  with  all  true  worsliip  of  God  in  the  olden 
times  there  was  always  the  offertory,  and  frequently  the  sound  of  gold  or 
silver.  Beneath  the  drawn  sword  of  the  avenging  angel  money  is  given, 
and  land  is  bought.  The  solemnity  of  the  transaction  is  not  marred 
thereby.  Yet  there  was  no  absolute  need  for  money,  since  Oman  said, 
**Take  it  to  thee,  and  let  my  lord  the  king  do  that  which  is  good  in  his 
eyes :  lo,  I  give  thee  the  oxen  also  for  burnt  offerings,  and  the  threshing 
instruments  for  wood,  and  the  wheat  for  the  meat  offering  ;  I  give  it  all." 
David  cannot  endure  to  worship  at  another  man's  expense,  and  he 
answers  "Nay;  but  I  will  verily  buy  it  for  the  full  price."  That  re- 
hgion  which  costs  a  man  nothing  is  usually  worth  nothing.  Under  the 
old  dispensation,  when  men  went  up  to  worship  God,  it  was  with  a  bullock 
or  with  a  lamb  ;  even  the  poorest  brought  at  least  a  pair  of  turtle  doves, 
or  two  young  pigeons.  Do  you  think  that  this  bringing  of  cattle  and  birds 
into  the  sanctuary  would  spoil  your  spirituality  ?  It  would  do  so  if  you 
have  no  spirituality ;  but  if  you  have  grace  in  your  heart,  your  spirituality 
will  choose  just  such  a  practical  way  in  which  to  show  itself.  Some 
men's  godliness  is  a  thin,  misty,  gh(_.stly,  ghastly  nothing :  true  adora- 
tion is  a  thing  of  substance,  and  of  truth.  The  highest  act  of  adoration 
that  was  ever  paid  on  earth  was  when  that  woman,  whose  name  is  to  be 
mentioned  wherever  this  gospel  is  preached,  emptied  upon  the  head  of 
our  blessed  Lord  an  alabaster  box  of  precious  nard.  That  gift  was 
known  to  have  cost  her  at  least  five  hundred  pence.  It  might  have  been 
sold  for  much,  but  the  costliness  of  the  perfume  entered  into  the  very 
essence  of  the  act  in  the  mind  of  the  holy  and  grateful  woman.     Tha 


206  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Lord  Jesus  Christ  when  he  sat  over  agaiast  the  treasury  not  only  rend 
the  hearts  of  the  givers,  but  lie  noticed  the  actual  offering  of  the  woman 
who  dropped  into  the  box  two  mites  that  made  a  farthing,  which  were 
all  her  living.  Some  people  would  sneeringly  allude  to  tlie  two  dirty 
half- farthings,  and  condemn  the  collection  as  spoiled  by  Alexander  the 
coppersmith ;  but  the  Lord  is  not  so  dainty  as  his  servants,  for  he 
accepts  the  poor  gifts  of  his  people.  The  rattle  of  the  coins  did  not  take 
away  from  the  heavenliness  and  the  spirituality  of  that  woman's  worship. 
Far  otherwise.  The  top  of  Moriah,  where  God  appoints  that  his  Temple 
should  be  builded,  saw  the  weighing  out  of  gold  and  silver,  and  was  all 
the  fitter  for  Divine  communion  because  thereof. 

From  the  whole  learn  that  it  is  not  needful  for  meeting  with  God 
that  you  should  be  aided  by  persons  arrayed  in  special  robes,  oxen  will 
do  as  well;  neither  do  you  require  a  holy  pavement,  a  threshing-floor 
may  be  holiness  unto  the  Lord  ;  neither  do  you  need  stained  glass  and 
vaulted  roof's,  the  open  air  is  better  still.  Do  not  believe  for  a  moment 
that  visible  grandeur  is  necessary  to  the  place  where  God  will  meet  with 
you.  Go  to  your  threshing-floor  and  pray ;  ay,  while  the  unmuzzled 
oxen  take  their  rest,  bow  your  knee  and  cry  to  the  Lord  of  the  hars-est, 
and  you  shall  meet  with  God  there  amongst  the  straw  and  the  grain. 
Fear  not  to  draw  nigh  to  God  in  these  streets,  but  consecrate  all  space 
to  the  Lord  your  God.  Study  simplicity  and  plainness  of  worship. 
Remember  how  the  Lord  hated  altars  of  brick,  and  how  he  would  ha\e 
his  people  build  an  altar  of  earth  or  of  unhewn  stone,  to  keep  his 
Worship  simple  and  natural.  "  If  thou  lift  up  thy  tool  upon  it,  thou  hast 
polluted  it." 

IL  But  now,  secondly,  spiritually  this  threshing-floor  of 
Ornan  was  an  admirable  type  of  how  God  meets  with  men. 

I  think,  first,  its  extreme  simplicity  enters  into  the  essence  of  the  type. 
So  far  from  thinking  that  a  threshing-floor  was  a  bad  place  to  pray  in, 
if  I  look  a  little  beneath  the  surface  I  think  lean  see  the  reason  for  it. 
Golden  grain  is  being  separated  from  the  straw  by  the  corn  drag — whence 
came  this  corn?  From  him  who  openeth  his  hand  and  supplieth  ttie 
want  of  every  living  thing.  Here,  then,  God  meets  me  in  the  kindest  way. 
Where  can  I  meet  him  better  than  where  he  gives  me  food  ?  Where 
can  we  better  adore  than  in  the  midst  of  his  rich  gifts  by  which  he  doth 
sustain  my  life  ?  Why,  1  think  if  I  had  gone  out  to  gather  manna  every 
morning  with  my  omer,  I  should  have  kept  on  praising  God  every 
moment  as  I  collected  the  heavenly  bread.  Never  could  spot  be  more 
propitious  than  where  the  gracious  Preserver  of  men  spread  out  needful 
food  for  his  children.  We  cannot  do  better  than  praise  God  when  we  are 
in  our  daily  service  earning  our  daily  bread,  or  gathered  at  our  meals 
refreshing  our  bodies.  At  the  gate  of  God's  almonry  let  us  wait  with 
worship.  Where  better  a  temple  out  of  which  the  bread  of  eternal  life 
shall  come,  than  on  a  threshing-floor  where  the  bread  of  the  first  life 
is  to  be  gathered  ?  The  two  things  seem  to  meet  right  well  together. 
The  temporal  and  the  eternal  join  hands  in  common  consecration.  That 
same  prayer  which  teaches  us  to  say,  "  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven, 
hallowed  be  thy  name,  thy  kingdom  come,  thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as 
it  is  in  heaven,"  leads  us  on  to  cry,  "  Give  us  day  by  day  our  daily 
bread."    There  is  a  spiritual  significance  in  the  type. 


THE    THRESHING-FLOOR   OF   ORNAN. 


207 


"Would  it  be  fanciful  if  with  a  glance  I  indicated  that  the  threshing- 
floor  is  the  exact  type  of  afflictionf  Tribulation  signifies  threshing  in  the 
Latin,  and  the  saints  through  much  tribulation  enter  the  kingdom. 
One  of  the  titles  of  the  people  of  God  is  "  my  threshing  and  the  corn  t>f 
r.iy  floor."  Now  it  is  well  known  that  the  Lord  is  with  his  people  in 
their  trials.  When  he  smites  with  one  hand  he  holds  with  the  other. 
In  the  lion  of  trial  we  find  the  honey  of  communion.  The  temple  of 
glory  is  built  on  the  threshing-floor  of  affliction.  I  do  not  thrust  forward 
this  observation  as  though  it  were  of  great  weight ;  but  even  if  it  be  a 
fancy  so  far  as  the  type  is  concerned,  the  thought  conveys  a  truth  in  a 
pleasing  manner. 

But  much  more,  this  ivas  the  place  where  justice  was  most  clearly 
manifest.  Above  Oman's  threshing  floor,  in  mid-air,  stood  a  dre  idful 
apparition.  A  bright  and  terrible  figure,  a  mysterious  servant  of  God, 
was  beheld  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  which  he  brandished  over 
the  guilty  city  of  Jerusalem.  Deaths  were  constant.  The  people  fell  as 
forest  leaves  in  autumn.  Then  was  it  that  David  went  out  to  meet  with 
his  God,  and  make  confession  before  him.  Oh,  sirs,  the  lack  of  many 
of  you  is  that  you  have  never  yet  beheld  sin  in  its  cousequences,  sin  in 
its  guilt,  sin  in  its  doom.  God  is  angry  with  the  sinner  every  day. 
Men  do  not  fly  to  God  till  fear  puts  wings  upon  their  feet.  Take  away 
the  dread  of  the  wrath  to  come,  and  you  have  removed  the  great  impulse 
which  makes  men  seek  for  mercy.  Men  will  not  meet  God  till  they  see 
the  angel  with  the  drawn  sword.  They  will  trifle  and  play  with  sin,  and 
neglect  the  invitation  of  God,  and  even  doubt  his  existence,  till  conviction 
comes  home  to  them,  and  they  are  made  to  feel  tliat  sin  is  an  exceeding 
evil  and  bitter  thing.  Conviction  of  sin  wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
is  more  powerful  than  argument.  I  had  religiousness,  but  1  never  drew 
near  to  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth  till  I  had  seen  and  almost  felt  that  drawn 
sword.  To  feel  that  God  must  punish  sin,  that  God  will  by  no  means 
clear  the  guilty,  is  the  best  thing  to  drive  a  man  Godward.  To  feel  that 
sword  as  it  were  with  its  point  at  your  own  breast,  its  edge  ready  to 
descend  upon  your  own  being,  this  it  is  that  makes  the  guilty  plead  for 
pardon  in  real  earnest.  Men  cry  nob  "Lord  save "  till  they  are  forced  to 
add  "  or  I  perish."  I  could  wish  for  certain  preachers  that  I  hear  of, 
that  they  were  made  more  vividly  to  realize  the  terror  of  the  Lord  in  their 
own  souls.  He  who  has  felt  the  hot  drops  of  despair  scald  his  throat,  has 
had  it  cleared  for  the  utterance  of  free  grace  doctrine.  If  some  men  had 
more  fully  felt  that  they  were  sinners,  they  would  have  made  better 
saints.  David  meets  with  God  at  the  place  where  he  sees  that  sin 
necessitates  condign  punishment,  and  I  do  not  believe  that  any  man  can 
be  in  fellowship  with  God  and  be  blind  to  that  truth.  David  saw  the 
result  of  his  own  sin,  and  dreaded  what  would  further  come  if,  day  after 
day,  the  Lord  should  visit  him  and  his  people  with  judgment.  He  had 
grown  proud  of  the  number  of  his  subjects,  and  had  begun  to  act  the 
independent  potentate,  instead  of  loyally  remaining  the  viceroy  of 
Jeho\ah  ;  but  now  he  sees  that  he  has  been  guilty  of  high  treason,  and 
beholds  the  sword  at  his  necL  There  he  bows  himself,  and  there  the 
God  of  all  grace  meets  with  him. 

Perhaps  the  point  which  brought  David  out  into  complete  brokenness 
of  heart  was  a  clear  view  of  the  deadly  effect  of  his  sin  upon  others. 


208  METROPOLITAN  TABRRNACLK   PULPIT. 

Seventy  thousand  people  had  died  of  the  black  death  already  through 
his  sin,  and  still  the  pestilence  raged :  this  brought  the  matter  home  to 
his  heart.  Every  ungodly  man  ought  to  reflect  upon  the  mischief  which 
he  has  caused  to  others  by  his  evil  life :  his  wife  has  been  hindered  from 
good  things,  his  children  have  grown  up  without  the  fear  of  Grod,  his 
companions  with  whom  he  has  worked  and  traded  are  hardened  in  their 
■wickedness  by  a  sight  of  his  wickedness:  youthful  minds  have  been 
seduced  from  virtue  by  his  vice,  simple  hearts  have  been  led  into  infi- 
delity by  his  unbelief.  0  men,  you  know  not  what  you  do.  You  let 
fly  sparks,  but  what  the  conflagration  may  have  already  been  none  of 
you  can  telL  Carelessly,  0  man,  hast  thou  cast  the  thistledown  to  the 
wind  ;  but  what  harvests  of  the  ill  weed  have  come,  and  may  yet  come, 
from  thy  single  handful,  who  can  tell  ?  Are  there  not  some  in  hell 
through  thine  influence  ?  Are  not  others  going  there  through  thine  un- 
hallowed teaching  ?  0  thou  whose  hair  is  snow-white  with  sixty  or 
seventy  winters,  how  much  of  ruin  hast  thou  wrought  already  !  How 
much  more  is  still  to  come !  This  came  home  to  David,  and  he  stood 
aghast  at  it,  crying  to  God  about  it,  and  pleading  as  for  his  life  that  the 
evil  might  be  stayed. 

Thus,  you  see,  when  the  deadly  fruit  of  sin  is  clearly  perceived, 
then  the  soul  turns  to  God,  and  the  Lord  meets  that  soul.  The  cross 
is  the  place  of  doom:  under  its  shadow  we  admit  our  guilt,  aad 
vividly  see  it,  and  thus  put  ourselves  into  a  truthful  position,  where 
the  God  of  truth  will  meet  with  us.  God  will  meet  with  sinners  when 
they  come  to  him  as  sinners ;  but  he  will  not  hearken  to  them  while 
they  refuse  to  see  their  sin,  and  will  not  believe  in  the  vengeance  due 
to  it. 

Furthermore,  that  place  where  God  met  with  David  and  made  it  to 
be  his  temple  for  ever,  was  the  place  where  sin  was  confessed.  David's 
confession  is  very  frank  and  full.  David  says,  "  Is  it  not  I  ?  Even  I  it 
is  that  have  sinned."  Go  thou,  sinner,  to  the  Lord  with  thine  own  per- 
sonal confession.  Shut  thine  eye  to  thy  fellow-man,  and  say,  *'  Father, 
I  have  sinned."  Cry  with  the  publican,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner."  Make  private  personal  confession,  without  comparing  thyself 
with  thy  fellow-men,  and  the  Lord  has  promised  to  forgive  thee,  and 
all  those  who  confess  their  transgressions. 

Set  forth  in  thy  confession  the  aggravated  nature  of  thy  sin.  David 
said,  "  I  it  is  that  have  sinned  and  done  evil  indeed."  He  emphasizes 
the  evil,  "  I  have  done  evil  indeed. "  You  will  not  find  God  in  a  way  of 
grace  till  you  begin  to  put  an  "indeed"  at  the  end  of  the  evil  which 
you  confess.  Have  you  not  sinned  against  light,  sinned  against  know- 
ledge, sinned  against  love,  sinned  against  warnings,  sinned  against  en- 
treaties ?  Then,  go  and  tell  the  Lord  that  you  have  sinned  with  griev  jus 
aggravations.  "  Father,"  snid  the  prodigal,  "  I  have  sinned  against 
heaven,  and  before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy 
son."  Where  such  a  confession  as  this  is  offered,  God  will  meet  the 
sinner. 

That  confession  also  had  within  itself  an  admission  of  the  justice  of 
the  punishment ;  for  he  says,  "  Let  thine  hand  be  on  me,  and  on  my 
father's  house."  He  does  not  cavil  against  the  sword  of  the  Lord  and 
its  deadly  blows.     That  sinner  truly  repents  who  feels — 


THE  THRESHING-FLOOR   OF   ORNAN,  J09 

**My  lips,  with  shame,  my  sins  confess 
Against  thy  law,  against  thy  grace  : 
Lord,  shonld  thy  judgment  grow  severe, 
I  am  condemn'd,  but  thou  art  clear. 

**  Should  sudden  vengeance  seize  my  breath, 
I  must  pronounce  thee  just  in  death  ; 
And,  if  my  soul  were  sent  to  hell, 
Thy  righteous  law  approves  it  well." 

That  repentance  which  questions  the  justice  of  God  in  the  punishment 
of  sin  is  a  repentance  that  needs  to  be  repented  of;  but  when  the  peni- 
tent doth,  as  it  were,  lay  his  head  upon  the  block,  yield  his  neck  to  the 
rope,  and  give  himself  up  to  God,  saying,  "  I  have  sinned,"  then  mercy 
feels  free  to  display  itself.  As  long  as  a  man  quarrels  with  justice  he 
cannot  be  at  peace  with  mercy.  We  must  accept  God  as  king,  even 
thouy;h  he  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain,  or  else  he  will  never  put  up 
that  sword  into  its  shejith.  Condemn  thyself,  and  God  will  acquit  thee. 
Come  penitently  and  submissively,  and  the  just  God  will  be  a  Saviour 
unto  thee. 

But  this  is  only  the  beginning  of  it ;  for  Oman's  threshingr-floor  was 
then  the  place  tvhere  sacrifice  ivas  offered'  and  accepted.  Hastily  they 
piled  the  altar  of  unhewn  stones  ;  they  brought  up  to  it  ox  after  ox  that 
had  been  lately  threshing  out  the  corn :  the  blood  flowed  in  plentiful 
streams,  and  the  sacrifice  was  laid  upon  the  wood.  God  meets  with  men 
not  where  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  flows  in  rivers,  but  where  the 
glorious  person  of  his  own  dear  incarnate  Son  is  offered  up  once  for  all 
for  guilty  men.  Calvary  is  the  trysting-place  between  God  and  penitents. 
Now  we  have  reached  it.  This  is  the  site  of  the  temple :  this  is  the 
temple  "not  made  with  hands,"  once  destroyed,  butbuilded  up  in  three 
days.  The  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  crucified  and  raised  from  the 
dead,  is  that  place  where  God  meeteth  guilty,  confessing  man,  and 
striketh  hands  with  him  ;  ay,  eats  and  drinks  with  him  in  peace,  as 
was  indicated  by  the  peace  offering  which  David  presented,  and  the  Lord 
accepted.  Oh,  souls,  you  need  to  see  this,  for  if  you  do  not  see  it  you 
will  never  see  God.  A  reconciled  God  is  only  to  be  seen  through  the 
smoke  of  the  great  sacrifice.  The  wounds  of  Christ  are  the  windows  of 
the  heart  of  God.  If  thou  canst  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  by  faith  pre- 
senting him  again  to  God  as  thy  sacrifice,  then  God  will  meet  with 
thee. 

But  what  did  David  see  ere  long  when  he  had  laid  his  bullock  on  the 
altar?  A  flame  descended  from  the  Lord.  Like  a  flash  of  lightning  it 
came,  and  the  sacrifice  was  consumed  ;  sure  token  that  the  Lord  had 
accepted  it,  and  was  well  pleased  because  of  it.  Even  thus  has  the  Lord 
accepted  the  one  great  sacrifice  for  sin.  When  our  Lord  Jesus  offered 
himself  he  came  under  the  judicial  sentence,  and  cried,  "  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "  He  was  consumed  with  sorrow. 
*'  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him."  The  Lord  himself  put  him  to 
grief,  and  made  his  soul  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  "  He  was  made  a  curse  for 
us,  as  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  overy  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  And 
now  the  Lord  has  placed  his  mercy-seat  where  the  blood  is  sprinkled. 
He  accepts  us  in  the  Beloved  whose  sacrifice  he  accepted  long  ago  when 
he  raised  him  from  the  dead.     We  have  access  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 


210  METROPOLITAN  TaBERNACLR  PULPIT, 

Come,  poor  trembling  sinner ;    come  with  thine  eye  on  Jesus  crucified 
and  thou  shalt  be  welcomed  of  the  Lord. 

As  soon  as  David  had  seen  the  sacrifice  he  had  only  one  more  sight  to 
see,  and  that  n;iade  the  threshing-floor  of  Ornan  more  glorious  than  ever. 
He  belield  the  sign  of  peace.  Above  the  threshing-floor  stood  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  ;  but  what  a  change !  The  drawn  sword,  which 
threatened  death  to  the  city  and  to  the  nation,  was  suddenly  thrust 
into  its  scabbard,  and  all  was  still.  Not  a  soul  more  in  Jerusalem 
should  die  of  the  pestilence.  The  sword  of  the  Lord  resed  and  wa'^ 
quiet.  Oh,  the  joy  of  David's  spirit  when  he  saw  this  !  Wlint  a 
solemn  but  joyous  melting  of  heart  he  felt  as  his  soul  gushed  forth 
in  streams  of  gratitude.  Learn  from  this  that  the  point  of  full  com- 
munion with  God  ro-day  is  the  place  where  we  see  the  angel  with  the 
sheathed  sword.  Oh,  how  sweet  to  know  that  God  hath  nothing  against 
us!  He  hath  blotted  out  our  transgressions,  and  will  never  reme  uber 
them.  He  cannot  smite  us,  for  he  has  justified  us  inhisSni.  How  shall 
he  destroy  those  for  whom  Christ  hath  shed  his  blood  ?  He  hath  a  sword,, 
but  it  is  for  those  who  are  the  adversaries  of  our  souls,  even  for  the  arch- 
fiend who  would  destroy  us.  Its  edge  is  not  for  us  who  are  sprinkled  with 
the  blood  of  Jesus.  Many  of  you  cannot  draw  near  to  God,  and  I  do  not 
wonder  at  it,  because  you  have  not  yet  seen  that  sin  was  in  very  deecJ 
put  away  by  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  You  have  seen  the  drawn  swurd, 
and  that  is  something ;  but  you  have  not  yet  beheld  that  sword  sheathed, 
nor  heard  the  voice  of  Jehovah  saying,  "  It  is  enough."  The  place 
where  love  meets  love,  where  your  little  tiny  stream  melts  into  the  great 
river  of  God's  love,  is  where  we  sing,  "  0  Lord,  I  will  praise  thee;  for 
though  thou  wast  angry  with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  thou 
comfortedst  me."  Henceforth  our  life  flows  with  the  life  of  Jesus  in 
one  deep,  peaceful  stream,  onward  and  onward  for  ever.  You  cannot 
rest  in  the  Lord  and  live  in  him  till  you  have  seen  the  Sacrifice  and 
its  eternal  results  in  peace  with  God.  May  God  bring  you  there  t 
Atonement  is  the  basis  of  worship.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  and  his 
righteousness,  these  are  the  Jachin  and  the  Boaz,  the  two  sublime  pillars 
of  the  temple  gate.  God  communes  with  men  where  Jesus  becomes  man's 
rest.  You  cannot  pass  to  the  mercy-seat  to  speak  with  God  except 
through  the  veil  of  the  Saviour's  body  which  was  rent  on  our  behalf. 

Thus  I  think  I  have  made  you  familiar  with  the  threshing-floor  of 
Oman  the  Jebusite,  and  stiowed  you  wherein  it  was  felt  to  be  a  ^^lace  of 
divine  manifestation  and  a  fit  site  for  the  permanent  temple  of  God. 

III.  And  now  I  am  going  to  close  by  heartily  exhorting  yod" 
TO  use  this  place.  Brethren  and  sisters,  if  we  have  found  out  wliere 
to  meet  with  God,  then  let  us  meet  with  him  continually.  Do  you  feel 
guilty  this  morning  ?  Is  your  sin  heavy  upon  you  ?  Do  you  see  the 
sworded  angel?  Well,  you  have  to  meet  God  even  there!  There- 
fore, gird  up  your  loins  !  "  What  garments  shall  I  put  on  ?"  Put  on 
sackcloth.  I  mean  not  literally  ;  but  while  there  is  any  guilt  upon  you 
come  to  God  with  lowliest  penitence,  mourning  for  sin,  as  David  did, 
and  the  elders  that  were  with  him.  You  may  not  come  now  ia  the 
silken  garments  of  your  luxury,  nor  in  the  purple  robes  of  your  pride,  nor 
in  the  mail  of  your  hate.  Put  these  away  from  you,  and  come  uitb 
Backcloth  and  ashes,  weeping  for  your  transgressions,  and  God  will  meet 


THE   THRESHING-FLOOR   OF   ORNAN.  211 

with  yon ;  for  he  will  meet  with  sinners  who  come  to  him  mourning 
because  of  their  sin. 

When  you  thus  come,  I  want  you  to  be  quiet  a  while.  Stand  still! 
Listen  I  Suppose  you  had  been  with  those  elders  of  Israel ;  what 
would  you  have  heard?  You  would  have  heard  your  shepherd-king 
pleading  for  his  flock:  "These  sheep,  what  have  they  done?  Let 
thine  hand  be  on  me,  and  on  my  father's  house."  But  now  David  is 
dead  and  buried,  and  his  sepulchre  is  in  his  own  land;  but  another  King 
of  the  house  of  David,  one  Jesus,  is  standing  before  the  Lord  pleading 
for  mercy.  While  you  are  clothed  in  the  sackcloth  of  your  repentance, 
you  may  hear  him  cry,  "As  for  these  sheep,  let  them  live.  Thou  hast 
awakened  the  sword  against  me,  their  shepherd,  therefore  let  my  sheep  be 
spared !  Thine  hand  has  been  on  me,  therefore  let  these  go  their  way  !  " 
Do  you  hear  that  intercession?  Jesus  is  pleading  in  that  fashion  now. 
He  is  "able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by 
him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them.''  Oh  it  is 
blessed  to  come  to  God  that  way — with  the  sackcloth  on  your  loins,  but 
with  the  prevalent  intercession  in  your  ears ;  confidently  believinij  that 
Jesus  maketh  intercession  for  the  transgressors,  aud  that  he  must  and 
will  so  prevail  that  by  his  kntjwledge  he  shall  justify  many. 

Further,  when  you  are  coming  to  God,  dear  hearts,  always  take  care 
that  you  come  to  the  sacrifice.  We  frequently  miss  communion  with  God, 
I  am  persuaded,  because  we  do  not  remember  enough  that  precious  blood 
which  gives  us  access  to  God.  When  you  go  up-stairs  to  pray,  and  you 
cannot  get  near  to  God,  then  do  nut  speak,  but  sit  in  silence,  and  muse 
upon  the  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  the  cross  and  passion  of  the  Lord,  and 
all  the  circumstances  of  his  wondrous  death,  and  say,  "  He  loved  me 
and  gave  himself  for  me."  There  is  a  matchless  power  in  the  Lord's 
sacrifice  to  remove  the  stone  out  of  the  heart,  and  pluck  away  selfish- 
ness from  the  affections.  Come,  come,  come,  come  to  the  sacrifice! 
There  shall  you  dwell  with  God  in  sweet  delight. 

If  you  would  come  still  nearer  to  God,  do  not  forget  the  effect  of  the 
sacrifice  and  intercession  in  the  sheathing  of  the  sword  of  justice.  I 
have  already  set  forth  this  truth  ;  now  I  entreat  you  to  turn  it  to  prac- 
tical use  by  enjoying  it. 

"  Ob  how  sweet  to  view  tlie  flowing 
Of  my  Saviour's  precious  blood, 
With  divine  assurance  knowing 

He  has  m.ide  my  peace  with  God.'' 

Do  not  say,  **  I  hope  that  the  sword  is  sheathed  "  ;  it  either  is  so,  or  it 
is  not  so.  Do  not  be  content  with  questionable  hopes,  but  aim  at  cer- 
tainties. Rest  not  till  you  obtain  a  solid  assurance  of  your  peace  with 
God.  If  Jesus  Christ  was  punished  for  your  sin  you  cannot  be  punished 
for  it;  if  he  did  bear  your  sin  he  did  bear  it,  and  there  is  an  end  of  it ; 
and  if  you  have  believed  on  him  you  have  the  full  proof  in  the  word 
of  God  that  you  are  justified  before  God.  What  more  do  you  want  than 
God's  own  word  for  it  ?  and  that  word  declares  that  you,  as  a  believer, 
have  eternal  life  and  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  you  come  iuto 
condemnation.  Do  not  continue  to  mutter,  "  Well,  I  hope  I  may  yet 
realise  it."    Why  these  debates  ?    It  is  so  :  "  he  that  believeth  in  him  is 


212  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

justified  from  aU  things,  ft'orn  which  we  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law 
of  Moses  "  :  God  has  turned  away  his  wrath  from  the  believer,  and  the 
sword  is  sheathed;  therefore,  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace 
with  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

And  lastly,  if  this  be  so,  and  you  realise  it,  go  away  and  begin  to 
build  a  temple.  You  say,  "  Do  you  want  us  to  build  a  new  place  of 
worsliip  ?  "  No,  I  speak  only  of  a  spiritual  house.  Of  course,  build  as 
many  meeting-places  as  you  can  where  people  may  come  together  to  hear 
the  word,  for  many  are  needed  in  this  growing  city,  but  the  peculiar  sort 
of  building  which  I  urge  upon  you  is  of  the  heart  and  spirit.  Make  your 
entire  being  a  living  temple  for  the  living  God.  Begin  now  :  the 
foundations  are  laid,  you  would  not  dream  of  building  on  any  other  ; 
for  *' other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  which  is  laid."  The 
Divine  Moriah  of  Christ's  person,  the  sacred  place  of  his  sacrifice  is  the 
mount  wherein  God  shall  be  seen.  Jesus  Christ  has  himself  become  the 
foundation  of  your  hope ;  go  and  build  on  him.  Set  up  the  pillars  of 
earnest  supplication,  and  arch  them  over  with  lofty  praises.  Remember, 
your  God  "  inhabiteth  the  praises  of  Israel."  Build  him  a  house  of 
praise,  that  he  may  dwell  in  you,  make  your  bodies  to  be  the  temples  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  your  spirits  the  priests  that  sacrifice  therein.  In 
acts  of  holiness,  piety,  charity,  and  love  spend  all  your  days.  Let  your 
houses  be  churches  dedicated  to  his  fear  and  love ;  and  let  their  chambers 
be  holy  as  the  courts  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness.  Let  each 
morning  and  evening  have  its  sacrifice.  Be  yourself  a  priest  at  the 
altar.  Let  the  garments  of  your  daily  toil  be  as  vestments,  your  meals 
as  sacraments ;  let  your  thoughts  be  psalms,  your  prayers  incense,  and 
your  breath  praise.  Let  every  action  be  a  priestly  function,  bringing 
glory  unto  the  Lord  from  this  day  forth  and  for  ever.  He  that  died 
for  you  reckons  you  to  be  dead  to  all  things  but  himself  ;  and  so  it 
becometh  you  to  be.  "Ye  are  not  your  own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a 
price,"  and  from  this  day  forward  your  motto  should  be, — "  Thine 
entirely.  Thine  entirely,  0  my  God,  I  am."  Begin  to  build  this 
living  temple,  and  the  Lord  help  you  to  complete  it  to  his  praise.  A 
poor  edifice  it  will  be  when  you  have  finished  it,  compared  with  the  Lord 
your  God  ;  but  yet  if  you  have  laboured  sincerely  and  earnestly  it  will 
turn  out  to  be  compacted  of  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,  and  it 
will  be  found  in  the  day  of  Christ  to  honour  and  glory.  So  may  the 
Lord  bless  you,  beloved,  now  and  for  ever.     Amen,  and  amen. 


Portion   of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — 1  Chronicles  xxi. ; 

xxii.  1 — 5. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 302,  553,  551. 


A  GEEATER  THAN  SOLOMON. 


c- 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Evening,  February  6th,  1881,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  Behold,  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here." — Luke  xi.  31. 

Our  first  thought  is  that  no  mere  man  would  have  said  this  concerning 
himself  unless  he  had  been  altogether  eaten  up  with  vanity  ;  for  Solomon 
was  among  the  Jews  the  very  ideal  of  greatness  and  wisdom.  It  would 
be  an  instance  of  the  utmost  self-conceit  if  any  mere  man  were  to  say  of 
himself — "A  greater  than  Solomon  is  here,"  Any  person  who  was  really 
greater  and  wiser  than  Solomon  would  be  the  last  man  to  claim  such 
pre-eminence.  A  wise  man  would  never  think  it ;  a  prudent  man  would 
never  say  it.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  if  we  re.^ard  him  as  a  mere  man, 
would  never  have  uttered  such  an  expression,  for  a  more  modest,  self- 
forgetting  man  was  never  found  in  all  our  race.  View  it  on  the  supposi- 
tion that  the  Christ  of  Nazareth  was  a  mere  man,  and  I  say  that  his  whole 
conduct  was  totally  different  from  the  spirit  which  would  have  suggested 
an  utterance  like  this — "  A  greater  than  Solomon  is  here."  For  men  tO' 
compare  themselves  with  one  another  is  not  wise,  and  Christ  was  wise  ;  it 
Ib  not  humble,  and  Christ  was  humble.  He  would  not  have  thus  spoken 
if  there  had  not  been  cause  and  reason  in  his  infinitely  glorious  nature. 
It  was  because  the  divinity  within  him  must  speak  out.  For  God  to  say 
that  he  is  greater  than  all  his  creatures  is  no  boasting;  for  what  are  they 
in  his  sight?  All  worlds  are  but  sparks  from  the  anvil  of  his  omnipo- 
tence. Space,  time,  eternity,  all  these  are  as  nothing  before  him ;  and 
for  him  to  compare  or  even  to  contrast  himself  with  one  of  his  own 
creatures  is  supreme  condescension,  let  him  word  the  comparison  how  he 
may.  It  was  the  divine  within  our  Lord  which  made  him  say — and  not 
even  then  with  a  view  to  exalt  himself,  but  with  a  view  to  point  the  moral 
that  he  was  trying  to  bring  before  the  people — "  A  greater  than  Solomon 
is  here."  He  did  as  good  as  say,  "  The  queen  of  the  south  came  from  a 
distance  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  but  you  refuse  to  hear  me.  She 
gave  attention  to  a  man,  but  you  will  not  regard  your  God.  You 
will  not  listen  to  the  incarnate  Deity  who  tells  }ou  words  of  infinite, 
infallible  wisdom."  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  aiming  at  his  hearers'  good, 
and  where  the  motive   is    so  disinterested  there  remains  no   room 

19 


214  METROPOLITAN  TaBERNACLE  PULPIT. 

for  criticism.  He  tells  them  that  he  is  greater  than  Solomon,  to 
convince  them  of  the  greatness  of  their  crime  in  I'efusing  to  listen  to  the 
messages  of  love  with  which  his  lips  were  loaded.  Foreigners  came 
from  afer  to  Solomon ;  but  I,  says  he,  have  come  to  your  door,  and 
brought  infinite  wisdom  into  your  very  gates,  and  yet  you  refuse  me. 
Therefore  the  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  judgment  against  you, 
for,  in  rejecting  me,  you  reject  a  greater  than  Solomon, 

The  second  thought  that  comes  to  one's  mind  is  this :  notice  the  self- 
consciousness  of  the  Lord  .Jesus  Christ, 

He  knows  who  he  is,  and  what  he  is,  and  he  is  not  lowly  in  spirit 
because  he  is  ignorant  of  his  own  greatness.  He  was  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart — "  Servus  servorum,"  as  the  Latins  were  wont  to  call  him, 
"Servant  of  servants,"  but  all  the  while  he  knew  that  he  was  Rex 
regum,  or  King  of  kings.  He  takes  a  towel  and  he  washes  his 
disciples'  feet ;  but  all  the  while  he  knows  that  he  is  their  Master 
and  their  Lord.  He  associates  with  publicans  and  harlots,  and  dwells 
with  the  common  people ;  but  all  the  while  he  knows  that  he  is 
the  only  begotten  of  the  Father.  He  sits  as  a  child  in  the  temple 
hearing  and  asking  questions  of  the  rabbis ;  he  stands  among  hia 
disciples  as  though  he  were  one  of  themselves,  conversing  with  the 
ignorant  and  foolish  of  the  day,  seeking  their  good ;  but  he  knows  that 
he  is  not  one  of  them ;  he  knows  that  he  has  nothing  to  learn  from 
them :  he  knows  that  he  is  able  to  teach  senates  and  to  instruct  kings 
and  philosophers,  for  he  is  greater  than  Solomon,  He  wears  a  peasant's 
garb,  and  has  not  where  to  lay  his  head ;  but  he  knows  that,  whatever 
the  lowliness  of  his  condition,  he  is  greater  than  Solomon;  he  lets  us 
perceive  that  he  knows  it,  that  all  may  understand  the  love  which 
brought  him  down  so  low.  It  is  grand  humility  on  Christ's  part  that  he 
condescends  to  be  our  servant,  our  Saviour,  when  he  is  so  great  that  the 
greatest  of  men  are  as  nothing  before  him.  "  He  counted  it  not  robbery  to 
be  equal  with  God":  mark  that ;  and  yet  "  he  made  himself  of  no  reputa- 
tion." Some  people  do  not  know  their  own  worth,  and  so,  when  they 
stoop  to  a  lowly  office  it  is  no  stoop  to  their  minds,  for  they  do  nob 
know  their  own  abilities.  They  do  not  know  to  what  they  are  equal ; 
but  Christ  did  know :  he  knew  all  about  his  own  Deity,  and  his  own 
wisdom  and  greatness  as  man.  I  admire,  therefore,  the  clear  under- 
standing which  sparkles  in  his  deep  humiliation,  like  a  gem  in  a  dark 
mine.     He  is  not  one  who  stoops  down  according  to  the  old  rhyme — 

"  As  needs  he  must  who  cannot  sit  upright " ; 

but  he  is  one  who  comes  down  wittingly  from  his  throne  of  glory, 
marking  each  step  and  fully  estimating  the  descent  which  he  is  making. 
The  cost  of  our  redemption  was  known  to  him,  and  he  endured  the  cross, 
despising  the  shame.     Watts  well  sings — 

•*  This  was  compassion  like  a  God, 
That  when  the  Saviour  knew 
The  price  of  pardon  was  his  blood, 
His  pity  ne'er  withdrew." 

Brethren,  if  our  Saviour  himself  said    that  he   was  greater  than 
Solomon,  you  and  I  must  fully  believe  it,  enthusiastically -ow^n  it,  and 


A   GRRATRR   THAN   SOLOMON.  215 

prepare  to  proclaim  it.  If  others  will  not  own  it,  let  us  be  the  more 
prompt  to  confess  it.  If  he  himself  had  to  say,  before  they  would  own 
it,  "  A  ,2;roater  than  Solomon  is  here,"  let  it  not  be  necessary  that  the 
encomium  should  be  repeated,  but  let  us  all  confess  that  he  is  indeed 
greater  than  Solomon.  Let  us  go  home  with  this  resolve  in  our  minds, 
that  we  will  speak  greater  things  of  Christ  than  we  have  done,  that  we 
will  try  to  love  him  more  and  serve  him  better,  and  make  him  in_oivr 
own  estimation  and  in  the  world's  greater  than  he  has  ever  been.  Oh! 
for  a  glorious  high  throne  to  set  him  on,  and  a  crown  of  stars  to  place, 
upon  his  head!  Oh  to  bring  nations  to  his  feet!  I  know  my  words 
cannot  honour  him  according  to  his  merits  :  I  wish  they  could.  I  am 
quite  sure  to  fail  in  my  own  judgment  when  telling  out  his  excellence  ;, 
indeed,  T  grow  less  and  less  satisfied  with  my  thoughts  and  language | 
concerning  him.  He  is  too  glorious  for  my  feeble  language  to  describe  I 
him.  If  I  could  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  I  could  i 
not  speak  worthily  of  him.  If  I  could  borrow  all  the  harmonies  of 
heaven,  and  enlist  every  harp  and  song  of  the  glorified,  yet  were  not  { 
the  music  sweet  enough  for  his  praises.  Our  glorious  Redeemer  is  j 
ever  l)lcsscd  :  let  us  bless  him.  He  is  to  be  extolled  above  the  highest 
heavens  :  let  us  sound  forth  his  praises.  Oh  for  a  well-tuned  harp  I) 
May  tlie  Spirit  of  God  help  both  heart  and  lip  to  extol  him  at  this  hour. 

First,  then,  we  shall  try  to  draw  a  parallel  between  Jesus  and  Solomon ; 
and,  secondly,  we  will  break  away  from  all  comparisons,  and  show 
where  there  cannot  be  any  parallel  between  Christ  and  Solomon  at  all. 

I.  First,  then,  betwken  Christ  and  Solomon  there  are  some 
points  of  likeness. 

When  the  Saviour  himself  gives  us  a  comparison  it  is  a  clear 
proof  that  a  likeness  was  originally  intended  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
therefore  we  may  say  without  hesitation  that  Solomon  was  meant  to 
be  a  type  of  Christ.  I  am  not  going  into  detail,  nor  am  I  about  to 
refine  upon  smaM  matters ;  but  I  shall  give  you  five  points  in  which 
Solomon  was  conspicuously  like  to  Christ,  and  in  which  our  Loro  waa 
greater  than  Solomon.     0  for  help  in  the  great  task  before  me. 

And,  first,  in  wisdom.  Whenever  you  talked  about  Solomon  to  a  Jew 
his  eyes  he^^an  to  flash  with  exultation  ;  his  blood  leaped  in  his  veins 
with  national  pride.  Solomon — that  name  brought  to  mind  the 
proudest  time  of  David's  dynasty,  the  age  of  gold.  Solomon,  the 
magnificent,  why,  surely,  his  name  crowns  Jewish  history  with  glory, 
and  the  brightest  beam  of  that  glory  is  his  wisdom.  In  the  east, 
and  I  think  I  uiay  say  in  the  west,  it  still  remains  a  proverb,  "  To  be 
as  wise  as  Solomon."  No  modern  philosopher  or  learned  monarch  has 
ever  divided  the  fame  of  the  son  of  David,  whose  name  abides  as  the 
synonym  of  wisdom.  Of  no  man  since  could  it  be  said  as  of  him, 
"  And  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  sought  the  presence  of  Solomon,  to 
hear  his  wisdom,  that  God  had  put  in  his  heart."  He  intermeddled 
vntii  all  knowledge,  and  was  a  master  in  all  sciences.  He  was  a 
naturalist :  "  and  be  spake  of  trees,  from  the  cedar  trees  that  are  in 
Lebanon  even  unto  the  hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  the  wall:  he  spake 
also  of  l)easts,  and  of  fowl,  and  of  creeping  things,  and  of  fishes." 
He  was  an  engineer  and  architect,  for  he  wrote  :  "I  made  me  great 
works;  I  builded  me  houses;  I  planted  me  vineyards:  I  made  me 


216  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLK   PULPIT. 

gardens  and  orchards,  and  I  planted  trees  in  them  of  all  kind  of  fruits : 
I  made  me  pools  of  water,  to  water  therewith  the  wood  that  bringeth 
forth  trees."  He  was  one  who  understood  the  science  of  government — • 
a  politician  of  the  highest  order.  He  was  everything,  in  fact,  God 
gave  him  wisdom  and  largeness  of  heart,  says  the  Scripture,  like  the 
sand  of  the  sea  :  ''  and  Solomon's  wisdom  excelled  the  wisdom  of  all 
the  children  of  the  east  country,  and  all  the  wisdom  of  Egypt.  For  he 
was  wiser  than  all  men  ;  than  Ethan  the  Ezrahite,  and  Heman,  and 
Chalcol,  and  Darda,  the  sons  of  Mahol :  and  his  fame  was  iu  all  nations 
round  about."  Yes ;  but  our  Saviour  knows  infinitely  more  than 
Solomon.  I  want  you  to-night  to  come  to  him  just  as  the  Queeni  of 
Sheba  came  to  Solomon,  only  for  weightier  reasons.  You  do  not  want  to 
learn  anything  concerning  architecture  or  navigation,  agriculture  or 
anatomy.  You  want  to  know  only  how  you  shall  be  built  up  a  spiritual 
house,  and  how  you  shall  cross  those  dangerous  seas  which  lie  between 
this  land  and  the  celestial  city.  Well,  you  may  come  to  Jesus  and  he 
will  teach  you  all  that  you  need  to  know,  for  all  wisdom  is  in  Christ,  Our 
divine  Saviour  knows  things  past  and  present  and  future  :  the  secrets 
of  God  are  with  him.  He  knows  the  inmost  heart  of  God,  for  no  one 
knoweth  the  Father  save  the  Son  and  he  to  whom  the  Son  shall  reveal 
him.  To  him  it  is  given  to  take  the  book  of  prophetic  decree  and  loose 
the  seven  seals  thereof.  Come,  then,  to  Christ  Jesus  if  you  want  to 
know  the  mind  of  God,  for  it  is  written  that  he  "is  made  unto  us 
wisdom,"  Solomon  might  have  wisdom,  bat  he  could  not  he  wisdom 
to  others  ;  Christ  Jesus  is  that  to  the  full.  In  the  multifarious  know- 
ledge which  he  possesses — the  universal  knowledge  which  is  stored 
up  in  him — there  is  enough  lor  your  guidance  and  instruction  even  to 
the  end  of  life,  however  intricate  and  overshadowed  your  path  may  be. 

Solomon  proved  his  wisdom  in  part  by  his  remarkable  mvenfions. 
We  cannot  tell  what  Solomon  did  not  know.  At  any  rate,  no  man 
knows  at  this  present  moment  how  those  huge  stones,  which  have  lately 
been  discovered,  which  were  the  basis  of  the  ascent  by  which  Solomon 
went  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  were  ever  put  into  their  places. 
Many  of  the  stones  of  Solomon's  masonry  are  so  enormous  that  scarcely 
could  any  modern  machinery  move  them;  and  without  the  slightest 
cement  they  are  put  together  so  exactly  that  the  blade  of  a  knife  could 
not  be  inserted  between  them.  It  is  marvellous  how  the  thing  was  done. 
How  such  great  stones  were  brought  from  their  original  bed  in  the  quarry 
— how  the  whole  building  of  the  temple  was  executed— nobody  knows. 
The  castings  in  brass  and  silver  are  scarcely  less  remarkable.  No  doubt 
many  inventions  have  passed  away  from  the  knowledge  of  modern  times, 
inventions  as  remarkable  as  those  of  our  own  age.  We  are  a  set  of  savages 
that  are  beginning  to  learn  something,  but  Solomon  knew  and  invented 
things  which  we  shall,  perhaps,  rediscover  in  five  hundred  years  time.  By 
vehement  exertion  this  boastful  nineteenth  century,  wretched  century 
as  it  is,  will  crawl  towards  the  wisdom  which  Solomon  possessed  ages  ai^o. 
Yet  is  Jesus  greater  than  Solomon,  As  for  inventions,  Solomon 
is  no  inventor  at  all  compared  with  him  who  said,  "Deliver  him 
from  going  down  into  the  pit,  for  I  have  found  a  ransom,"  0  Saviour, 
didst  thou  find  out  the  way  of  our  salvation  ?  Didst  thou  bring  into 
the  world  and  carry  out  and  execute  the  way  by  which  hell-gate  should 


A   GREATER   THAN   SOTX)MON.  217 

be  closed,  and  heaven-gate,  once  barred,  should  be  set  wide  open  ?  Then, 
indeed,  art  thou  wiser  than  Solomon.  Thou  art  the  deviser  of  salvation, 
the  architect  of  the  church,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith. 

Solomon  has  left  us  some  very  valuable  hooks — the  Proverbs,  Eccle- 
siastes,  and  the  matchless  Song.  But,  oh,  the  words  of  Solomon 
fall  far  short  of  the  words  of  Jesus  Christ,  fox  they  are  spirit  and  life. 
The  power  of  the  word  of  Jesus  is  infinitely  greater  than  all  the  deep 
sayings  of  the  sage.  Proverbial  wisdom  cannot  match  his  sayings,  nor  can 
"The  Preacher  "  rival  his  sermons,  and  even  the  divine  Song  itself  would 
remain  without  a  meaning — an  allegory  never  to  be  explained — if  it  were 
not  that  Christ  himself  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  it.  Solomon  may 
sing  of  Christ,  but  Christ  is  the  substance  of  the  song.  He  is  greater 
than  Solomon  in  his  teachings,  for  his  wisdom  is  from  above,  and  leads 
men  up  to  heaven.     Blessed  are  they  that  sit  at  his  feet. 

Again,  Solomon  showed  his  wisdom  in  difficult  judgments.  You  know 
how  he  settled  the  question  between  the  two  women  concerning  the 
child  ;  many  other  puzzles  Solomon  solved,  and  many  other  knots  Solo- 
mon was  able  to  untie.  He  was  a  great  ruler  and  governor — a  man 
wise  in  politics,  in  social  economy,  and  in  commerce — wise  in  all  human 
respects.  But  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  present  where  Christ  is.  There 
is  no  difficulty  which  Christ  cannot  remove,  no  knot  which  he  cannot 
untie,  no  question  which  he  cannot  answer.  You  may  bring  your  hard 
questions  to  him,  and  he  will  answer  them  ;  and  if  yon  have  any  difficulty 
on  your  heart  to-night,  do  but  resort  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  prayer, 
and  search  his  word,  and  you  shall  hear  a  voice  as  from  the  sacred  oracle, 
which  shall  lead  you  in  the  path  of  safety. 

My  point  at  this  time,  especially  as  we  are  coming  to  the  Communion 
table,  IS  this.  I  want  you  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  believe  in 
his  infinite  wisdom,  and  come  to  him  for  direction.  I  fear  that  when 
you  are  in  trouble,  you  half  suppose  that  the  great  keeper  of  Israel  must 
have  made  a  mistake.  You  get  into  such  an  intricate  path  that  you 
say,  "  Surely,  my  Shepherd  has  not  guided  me  aright."  Never  think 
so.  When  you  are  poor  and  needy  still  say,  "  This  my  poverty  was 
ordained  by  a  greater  than  Solomon."  What  if  you  seem  to  be  deprived 
of  every  comfort,  and  you  are  brought  into  fi  strange  and  solitary  way, 
where  you  find  no  city  to  dwell  in  ?  Yet  a  guide  is  near,  and  that 
guide  is  not  foolish  ;  but  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here.  I  think  I 
look  to-night  into  a  great  furnace.  It  is  so  fierce  that  I  cannot  bear  to 
gaze  into  its  terrible  blaze.  For  fear  my  eyeballs  should  utterly  fail  me 
and  lose  the  power  of  sight  through  the  glare  of  that  tremendous  flame, 
,  I  turn  aside,  for  the  fury  of  its  flame  overpowers  me.  But  when  I  am 
strengthened  to  look  again  I  see  ingots  of  silver  refining  in  the  white 
heat,  und  I  note  that  the  heat  is  tempered  to  the  last  degree  of  nicety. 
I  watch  the  process  to  the  end,  and  I  say,  as  I  behold  those  ingots 
brought  out  all  clear  and  pure,  refined  from  all  dross,  and  ready  for 
the  heavenly  treasury,  "  Behold,  a  greater  than  Solomon  was  in  that 
furnace  work."  So  you  will  find  it,  0  sufferer.  Infinite  wisdom  is  in 
your  lot.  Come,  poor  child,  do  not  begin  to  interfere  with  your 
Saviour's  better  judgment,  but  let  it  order  all  things.  Do  not  let 
your  little  "  Know "  ever  rise  up  against  the  great  knowledge  oi 
your  dear  Redeemer.    Think  of  this  when  you  wade  in  deep  waters, 


2l8  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT, 

and  comfortably  whisper  to  yourself, — "  A  greater  than  Solomon  is 
here." 

I  have  not  time  to  enlarge,  and  therefore  I  would  have  you  notice, 
next,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  greater  than  Solomon  in  ivealth. 
This  was  one  of  the  things  for  which  Solomon  was  noted.  He  had  great 
treasures:  he  "made  gold  to  be  as  stones,  and  as  for  silver  it  was  little 
accounted  of,"  so  rich  did  he  become.  He  had  multitudes  of  servants. 
I  think  he  had  sixty  thousand  hewers  in  the  mountains  hewing  out 
stones  and  wood,  so  numerous  were  the  workmen  he  employed.  His  court 
was  magnificent  to  the  last  degree.  When  you  read  of  the  victuals  that 
were  prepared  to  feed  the  court,  and  of  the  stately  way  in  which  every- 
thing was  arranged  from  the  stables  of  the  horses  upwards  to  the  ivory 
throne,  you  feel,  like  the  queen  of  Sheba,  utterly  astonished,  and  say, 
*'  The  half  was  not  told  me."  But,  oh,  when  you  consider  all  the  wealth 
of  Solomon,  what  poor  stuff  it  is  compared  with  the  riches  that  are 
treasured  up  in  Christ  Jesus.  Beloved,  he  who  died  upon  the  cross,  and 
was  indebted  to  a  friend  for  a  grave  ;  he  who  was  stripped  even  to  the 
last  rag  ere  he  died ;  he  who  possessed  no  wealth  but  that  of  sorrow 
and  sympathy,  yet  had  about  him  the  power  to  make  many  rich,  and  he 
has  made  multitudes  rich — rich  to  all  the  intents  of  everlasting  bliss; 
and  therefore  he  must  be  rich  himself.  Is  he  not  rich  who  enriches 
millions  ?  Why,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  even  by  a  word,  comforted  those 
that  were  bowed  down.  When  he  stretched  out  his  hand  he  healed  the 
sick  with  a  touch.  There  was  a  wealth  about  his  every  movemenr.  He 
was  a  full  man,  full  of  all  that  man  could  desire  to  be  full  of;  and  now, 
seeing  that  he  has  died  and  risen  again,  there  is  in  him  a  wealth  of  par- 
doning love,  a  wealth  of  saving  power,  a  wealth  of  intercessory  might 
before  the  Father's  throne,  a  wealth  of  all  things  by  which  he  enriches 
the  sons  of  men,  and  shall  enrich  them  to  all  eternity. 

I  want  this  truth  to  come  home  to  you:  I  want  you  to  recognise  the 
riches  of  Christ,  you  that  are  his  people ;  and,  in  addition,  to  remember 
the  truth  of  our  hymn — 

[i  )V  "  Since  Christ  is  rich  can  I  be  poor  ? 

What  can  I  want  besides  ?'' 

I  wish  we  could  learn  to  reckon  what  jkveare_bywJiat  Christ-  is.  An 
old  man  said,  "  I  am  very  old ;  I  have  lost  my  only  son ;  I  am  penniless; 
and,  worst  of  all,  I  am  blind.  But,"  added  he,  *'  this  does  not  matter, 
for  Christ  is  not  infirm  ;  Christ  is  not  aged-;  Christ  has  all  riches;  and 
Christ  is  not  blind  ;  and  Christ  is  mine ;  and  I  have  all  things  in  liim." 
Could  you  not  get  hold  of  that  somehow,  brothers  and  sisters?  Will 
not  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  you  the  art  of  appropriating  the  Lord  Jesus 
and  all  that  he  is  and  has.  If  Christ  be  your  representative,  why,  then 
you  are  rich  in  him.  Go  to  him  to  be  enriched.  Suppose  I  were  to 
meet  a  woman,  and  I  knew  her  husband  to  be  a  very  wealthy  man,  and 
that  he  loved  her  very  much,  and  she  were  to  say  to  me,  "  I  am  dread- 
fully poor ;  I  do  not  know  where  to  get  raiment  and  food."  "Oh," 
I  should  say,  "That  woman  is  out  of  her  mind."  If  she  has  such  a 
husband,  surely  she  has  only  to  go  to  him  for  all  that  she  needs.  And 
what  if  nothing  is  invested  in  her  name,  yet  it  is  in  his  name,  and  they 
are  oncj  and  he  will  deny  her  nothing."     I  should  say,  "  My  good  woman, 


A   GREATER   THAN   SOI.OIMON.  210 

-you  must  not  talk  in  that  fashion,  or  I  will  tell  your  husband  of  you." 
Well,  I  think  that  I  shall  have  to  say  the  same  of  you  who  are  so  very 
poor  and  cast  down,  and  yet  are  married  to  Jesus  Clirist.  I  shall  have 
to  tell  your  Husband  of  you,  that  you  bring  such  complaints  against  him, 
for  all  things  are  yours,  for  ye  are  Christ's  and  Christ  is  God's  ;  where- 
fore, *'  lift  up  the  hands  that  hang  down,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees  "  ; 
use  the  knees  of  prayer  and  the  hand  of  faith,  and  your  estate  will  well 
content  you.  Do  not  think  that  you  are  married  to  Rehoboam,  who  will 
beat  you  with  scorpions,  for  you  are  joined  to  a  greater  than  Solomon,. 
Do  not  fancy  that  your  heavenly  Bridegroom  is  a  beggar.  All  the  wealth 
of  eternity  and  infinity  is  his ;  how  can  you  say  that  you  are  poor  while 
all  that  he  has  is  yours  ? 

Now,  thirdly,  and  very  briefly  indeed.  There  was  one  point  about 
Solomon  in  which  every  Israelite  rejoiced,  namely,  that  he  was  the 
prince  of  feace.  His  name  signifies  peace.  His  father,  David,  was 
a  great  warrior,  but  Solomon  had  not  to  carry  on  war.  His  power  was 
such  that  no  one  dared  to  venture  upon  a  conflict  with  so  great  and 
potent  a  monarch.  Every  man  throughout  Israel  sat  under  his  vine 
and  figtree,  and  no  man  was  afraid.  No  trumpet  of  invader  was  heard  in 
the  laud.  Those  were  halcyon  days  for  Israel  when  Solomon  reigned. 
Ah,  but  in  that  matter  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here ;  for  Solomon 
could  not  give  his  subjects  peace  of  mind,  he  could  not  bestow  upon 
them  rest  of  heart,  he  could  not  ease  them  of  their  burden  of  guilt, 
01  draw  the  arrow  of  conviction  from  their  breast  and  heal  its  smart. 
But  I  preach  to  you  to-night  that  blessed  divine  Man  of  Sorrows  who 
has  wrought  out  our  redemption,  and  who  is  greater  than  Solomon  in 
his  peace-giving  power.  Oh,  come  and  trust  him.  Then  shall  your 
"  peace  be  as  a  river,  and  your  righteousness  like  the  waves  of  the 
sea."  Am  I  addressing  one  of  God's  people  who  is  sorely  troubled, 
tumbled  up  and  down  in  his  thoughts?  Brother  or  sister,  do  not  think 
that  you  must  wait  a  week  or  two  before  you  can  reco\er  your  peace. 
You  can  become  restful  in  a  moment,  for  "  He  is  our  peace," — even  he 
himself,  and  he  alone.  And,  oh,  if  you  will  bat  take  him  at  once,  laying 
hold  upon  him  by  the  hand  of  faith  as  your  Saviour,  this  man  shall  be  the 
peace  even  when  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  the  land.  There  is  no  peace 
like  the  peaoe  which  Jesus  gives;  it  is  like  a  river,  deep,  profound,  renewed, 
ever  flowing,  overflowing,  increasing  and  widening  into  an  ocean  of  bliss. 
"  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall  keep  your  heart 
and  mind,  through  Jesus  Christ."  Oh,  come  to  him.  Come  to  him  at 
this  moment.  Do  not  remain  an  hour  away  from  your  Noah,  or  rest, 
for  with  him  in  the  ark  your  weary  wing  shall  be  tired  no  longer.  You 
shall  be  safe  and  restful  the  moment  you  return  to  him.  The  fruit  of  the 
Spirit  is  joy.  I  want  you  to  get  that  joy  and  to  enter  int(?  this  peace. 
Blessed  combination,  joy  and  peace !  Peace,  peace,  there  is  music  in 
the  very  word :  get  it  from  him  who  is  the  Word,  and  whose  voice  can 
still  a  storm  into  a  calm.  A  greater  than  Solomon  is  here  to  give  you 
that  peace ;  beat  the  sword  of  your  inward  warfare  into  the  plough- 
share of  holy  service ;  no  longer  sound  an  alarm,  but  blow  up  the 
trumpet  of  peace  in  this  the  day  of  peace. 

A  fourth  thing  for  which  Solomon  was  noted  was  his  great  ivorhs. 
Solomon  built  the  temple,  which  was  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of  the 


220  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

world  in  its  time.  A  very  marvellous  building  it  must  have  been,  but 
I  will  not  stay  to  describe  it,  for  time  fails  u^j.  In  addition  to  this  he 
erected  for  himself  palaces,  constructed  fortifications,  and  made  aqueducts 
and  great  pools  to  bring  streams  from  the  mountains  to  the  various 
towns.  He  also  founded  Palmyra  and  Baalbec — those  cities  of  the 
desert — to  facilitate  his  commerce  with  India,  Arabia,  and  other  remote 
regions.  He  was  a  marvellous  man.  Earth  has  not  seen  his  like.  And 
yet  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here,  for  Christ  has  brought  the  living 
water  from  the  throne  of  God  right  down  to  thirsty  men,  being  him- 
self the  eternal  aqueduct  through  which  the  heavenly  current  streams. 
Christ  has  built  fortresses  and  munitions  of  defence,  behind  which 
his  children  stand  secure  against  the  wrath  of  hell ;  and  he  has 
founded  and  is  daily  finishing  a  wondrous  temple,  his  church,  of  which 
his  people  are  the  living  stones,  fashioned,  polished,  rendered  beautiful 
— a  temple  which  God  himself  shall  inhabit,  for  he  "  dwelleth  not  in 
temples  made  with  hands,  that  is  to  say,  of  this  building";  but  he 
dwells  in  a  temple  which  he  himself  doth  pile,  of  which  Christ  is 
architect  and  builder,  foundation,  and  chief  corner-stone.  But  Jesus 
builds  for  eternity,  an  everlasting  temple,  and,  when  all  visible  things  pass 
away,  and  the  very  ruins  of  Solomon's  temple  and  Solomon's  aqueduct 
are  scarcely  to  be  discerned,  what  a  sight  will  be  seen  in  that  New 
Jerusalem!  The  twelve  courses  of  its  foundations  are  of  precious 
stones,  its  walls  bedight  with  diamonds  rare,  its  streets  are  paved 
with  gold,  and  its  glory  surpasses  that  of  the  sun.  I  am  but  talking 
figures,  poor  figures,  too;  for  the  glory  of  the  city  of  God  is  spiritual, 
and  where  shall  I  find  words  with  which  to  depict  it  ?  There,  where 
the  Lamb  himself  is  the  light,  and  the  Lord  God  himself  doth  dwell — 
there  the  whole  edifice,  the  entire  New  Jerusalem — shall  be  to  the 
praise  and  the  glory  of  his  grace  who  gave  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  builder 
of  the  house  of  his  glory,  of  which  I  hope  we  shall  form  a  part  for  ever 
and  ever. 

Now,  if  Christ  does  such  great  works,  I  want  you  to  come  to  him, 
that  he  may  work  in  you  the  work  of  God.  That  is  the  point.  Come 
and  trust  him  at  once.  Trust  him  to  build  you  up.  Come  and  trust 
him  to  bring  the  living  water  to  your  lips.  Come  and  trust  him  to  make 
you  a  temple  of  the  living  God.  Come,  dear  child  of  God,  if  you  have 
great  works  to  do,  come  and  ask  for  the  power  of  Christ  with  which  to 
perform  them.  Come,  you  that  would  leave  some  memorial  to  the 
honour  of  the  divine  name,  come  to  him  to  teach  and  strengthen  you. 
He  is  the  wise  master-builder;  come  and  be  workers  together  Avith 
Christ.  Baptize  your  weakness  into  his  infinite  strength,  and  you 
shall  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might.  God  help 
you  so  to  do. 

Once  more.  I  draw  the  parallel  upon  the  fifth  point,  and  I  have 
done  with  it.  Solomon  was  great  as  to  dominion.  The  kingdom  of 
the  Jews  was  never  anything  like  the  size  before  or  after  that  Solomon 
made  it.  It  appears  to  have  extended  from  the  river  of  Egypt  right 
across  the  wilderness  far  up  to  the  Persian  Gulf.  We  can  scarcely 
tell  how  far  Solomon's  dominions  reached ;  they  are  said  to  have 
been  "  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  even  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth."  By  one  mode  or  another  he  managed  to  bring  various  kings  into 


A  GREATER  THAN  SOLOMON.  221 

subjection  to  him,  and  he  was  the  greatest  monarch  that  ever  swayed 
the  sceptre  of  Judah.  It  has  all  gone  now.  Poor,  feeble  Rehoboam 
dropped  from  his  foolish  hands  the  reins  his  father  held.  The  kingdom 
was  rent  in  pieces,  the  tributary  princes  found  their  liberty,  and  the 
palmy  days  of  Israel  were  over.  On  the  contrary,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  at  tliis  moment  has  dominion  over  all  things.  God  has  set  him 
over  all  the  works  of  his  hands.  Ay,  tell  it  out  among  the  heathen 
that  the  Lord  reigneth.  The  feet  that  were  nailed  to  the  tree  are  set 
upon  the  necks  of  his  enemies  The  hands  that  bore  the  nails  sway 
at  this  moment  the  sceptre  of  all  worlds  :  Jesus  is  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords !  Hallelujah !  Let  universal  sovereignty  be  ascribed  to 
the  Son  of  man :  to  him  \\ho  was  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  man 
of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief"  Tell  it  out,  ye  saints,  for  your 
own  comfort.  The  Lord  reigneth.  let  the  earth  rejoice,  let  the  multitude 
of  the  isles  be  glad  thereof.  Everything  Luac  nappens  m  provi- 
dence is  under  his  sway  still,  and  the  time  is  coming  when  a  moral  and 
spiritual  kingdom  will  be  set  up  by  him  which  shall  encompass  the 
whole  world.  It  does  not  look  like  it,  does  it  ?  All  these  centuries 
have  passed  away,  and  little  progress  has  been  made.  Ah,  but  he 
Cometh ;  and  when  he  cometh,  or  ere  he  cometh,  he  shall  overturn, 
overturn,  overturn,  for  his  right  it  is,  and  God  will  give  it  him.  And, 
as  surely  as  God  lives,  unto  him  shall  every  man  bow  the  knee,  "  and 
e\ery  tongue  shall  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father."  Do  not  be  afraid  about  it.  Do  not  measure 
difficulties,  much  less  tremble  at  them.  What  is  faith  made  for  but  to 
believe  that  which  seems  impossible  ?  To  expect  universal  dominiou  for 
Christ  when  everything  goes  well  is  but  the  expectation  of  reason  ;  but 
to  cxijgct  it  when  everything  goes  ill,  is  the  triumph  ot  Abrahamic  con- 
fidence. Look  upon  the  great  mountain  and  say,  *' Who  art  thou,  0 
great  mountain  ?  Before  the  true  Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain." 
In  the  blackest  midnight,  when  the  ebon  darkness  stands  thick  and  hard 
as  granite  before  you,  believe  that,  at  the  mystic  touch  of  Christ,  the 
whole  of  it  shall  pass  away,  and  at  the  brightness  of  his  rising  the 
eternal  light  shall  dawn,  never  to  be  quenched.  This  is  to  act  the 
part  of  a  believer ;  and  I  ask  you  to  act  that  part,  and  believe  to  the 
full  in  Christ  the  Omnipotent.  What  means  this  stinted  faith  in  an 
almighty  arm?  What  a  fidget  we  are  in  and  what  a  worry  seizes 
us  if  a  little  delay  arises!  Everything  has  to  be  done  in  the  next 
ten  minutes,  or  we  count  our  Lord  to  be  slack.  Is  this  the  part  of 
wisdom  ?  The  Eternal  has  infinite  leisure,  who  are  we  that  we  should 
hasten  him  ? 

*'His  purposes  will  ripen  fast, 
Unfolding  every  hour.'' 

A  day  is  long  to  us :  but  a  thousand  years  to  him  are  but  as  the 
twinkling  of  a  star.  Oh,  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for 
him,  for  the  time  shall  come  when  the  God  of  Israel  shall  put  to  rout 
his  adversaries,  and  the  Christ  of  the  cross  shall  be  the  Christ  of  the 
crown.  We  shall  one  day  hear  it  said, — The  great  Shepherd  reigns  ; 
and  his  unsuffering  kingdom  now  hath  come.  Then  rocks  and  hills, 
and  vales  and  islands  of  the  sea  shall  all  be  vocal  with  the  one  song. 


222  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

''"Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  honour  and  glory  and 
power  and  dominion  and  might  for  ever  and  ever ! " 

Thus  I  have  tried  to  draw  the  parallel,  but  I  pray  you  to  see  the  Lord 
Jesus  for  yourself,  and  know  whether  I  have  spoken  the  truth  about 
him.  You  have  heard  the  report ;  now,  like  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  go  and 
see  for  yourself.  Get  to  Christ,  as  to  his  dominion,  come  under  his 
sway  and  own  his  sceptre.  Go  and  trust  your  King  ;  love  your  King; 
j.-aise  your  King;  delight  in  your  King.  How  courtiers  delight  to  be 
summoned  to  court !  How  glad  they  are  to  see  the  queen's  face.  How 
pleased  they  are  if  she  gives  them  but  a  kindly  word !  Surely,  their 
fortune  is  made,  or  at  least  their  hopes  are  raised  and  their  spirits  lifted 
up.  Shall  we  not  sun  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate  ?  Let  us  come  into  the  presence  of  our  King  to-night,  or  else 
let  us  sit  here  and  weep.  Let  us  come  to  his  table  to  feed  upon  him- 
self. Let  us  live  on  his  word.  Let  us  delight  in  his  love;  and  we 
shall  surely  say,  "  A  greater  than  Solomon  is  here." 

IL  I  shall  not  detain  you  longer  than  a  minute  or  two  while  I 
remark  that  we  must  rise  beyond  all  parallels,  if  we  would  reach  the 
height  of  this  great  argument,  for  between  Christ  and  Sor.OMON 
THERE  IS  MUCH  MORE  CONTRAST  THAN  COMPARISON— much  more  dif- 
ference than  likeness. 

In  his  ?iature  the  Lord  Jesus  is  greater  than  Solomon.  Alas,  poor 
Solomon!  The  strongest  man  that  ever  lived,  namely,  Samson,  was  the 
weakest  of  men ;  and  the  wisest  man  that  ever  lived  was,  perhaps,  the 
greatest,  certainly  the  most  conspicuous,  fool.  How  different  is  our 
Lord !  There  is  no  infirmity  in  Christ,  no  folly  in  the  incarnate  God. 
The  backsliding  of  Solomon  finds  no  parallel  in  Jesus,  in  whom  the 
prince  of  this  world  found  nothing  though  he  searched  him  through  and 
through. 

Our  Lord  is  greater  than  Solomon  because  he  is  not  mere  man.  He 
is  man,  perfect  man,  man  to  the  utmost  of  manhood,  sin  excepted ;  but 
still  he  is  more,  and  infinitely  more,  than  man.  "  Li  him  dwelleth  all 
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  He  is  God  himself.  "  The  Word 
was  God."     God  dwells  in  him,  and  he  himself  is  God. 

As  in  nature  he  was  infinitely  superior  to  Solomon,  and  not  to  be 
compared  with  him  for  a  moment,  so  was  he  in  character.  Look  at 
Christ  and  Solomon  for  a  minute  as  to  real  greatness  of  character,  and 
you  can  hardly  see  Solomon  with  a  microscope,  while  Christ  rises 
grandly  before  you,  growing  every  moment  till  he  fills  the  whole 
horizon  of  your  admiration.  Principally  let  me  note  the  point  of  self- 
sacrifice.  Jesus  lived  entirely  for  other  people  ;  he  had  never  a  thought 
about  himself.  Solomon  was,  to  a  great  extent,  wise  unto  himself,  rich 
unto  himself,  strong  unto  himself;  and  you  see  in  those  great  palaces, 
and  in  all  their  arrangements,  that  he  seeks  his  own  pleasure,  honour, 
and  emolument ;  and,  alas  !  that  seeking  of  pleasure  leads  him  into  sin, 
that  sin  into  a  still  greater  one.  Solomon,  wonderful  as  he  is,  only 
compels  you  to  admire  him  for  his  greatness,  but  you  do  not  admire 
him  for  his  goodness.  You  see  nothing  that  makes  you  love  him,  you. 
rather  tremble  before  him  than  feel  gladdened  by  him.  Oh,  but  look 
at  Christ.  He  does  not  have  a  thought  for  himself.  He  lives  for 
otl;je;rs. ,    .How  grandly  magnificent  he  is  in  disinterested  love.      He 


A  GREATER  THAN  SOLOMON.  -» 23 

"loved  his  church  and  gave  himself  for  it."  He  pours  out  even  his 
heart's  blood  for  the  good  of  men :  and  hence,  dear  friends,  at  this 
moment  our  blessed  Lord  is  infinitely  superior  to  Solomon  in  his 
influence.  Solomon  has  little  or  no  influence  to-day.  Even  in  his  own 
time  he  never  commanded  the  influence  that  Christ  had  in  his  deejaest 
humiliation.  I  do  not  hear  of  any  that  were  willing  to  die  for  Solomon  ; 
certainly  nobody  would  do  so  now.  But  how  perpetually  is  enthusiasm 
kindled  in  ten  thousand  breasts  for  Christ !  They  say  that  if  again  there 
were  stakes  in  Smithfield  we  should  not  find  men  to  burn  at  them  for 
Christ.  I  tell  you,  it  is  not  so.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  at  this  moment 
a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  his  grace  who  would  fling  them- 
selves into  a  pit  of  fire  for  him,  and  joy  to  do  it.  *'  Who  shall  separate  iis" 
— even  us  poor  pigmies — "  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord  ?"  "  Oh,"  says  one, "  I  do  not  think  I  could  sufier  martyrdom." 
You  are  not  yet  called  to  do  so,  my  brother,  and  God  has  not  given  you 
the  strength  to  do  it  before  the  need  arises ;  but  you  will  have  strength 
enough  if  ever  it  comes  to  your  lot  to  die  for  Jesus.  Did  you  never 
hear  of  the  martyr  who,  the  night  before  he  was  to  be  burnt,  sat 
opposite  the  fire,  and,  taking  his  shoe  off,  he  held  his  foot  close  to  the 
flame  till  he  began  to  feel  the  burning  of  it  ?  He  drew  it  back  and 
said,  "I  see  God  does  not  give  me  power  to  bear  such  suffering  as  I  pub 
upon  myself,!  but  I  make  none  the  less  doubt,"  said  he,  "  that  I  shall 
very  well  stand  the  stake  to-morrow  morning,  and  burn  quick  to  the 
death  for  Christ  without  starting  back."  And  so  he  did,  for  he  was 
noticed  never  to  stir  at  all  while  the  flames  were  consuming  him.  There 
is  a  great  deal  of  difference  between  your  strength  to-day  and  what  your 
strength  would  be  if  you  were  called  to  some  tremendous  work  or 
suffering.  My  Lord  and  Master,  let  me  tell  you,  wakes  more  enthusiasm 
in  human  breasts  at  this  moment  than  any  other  name  in  the  universe. 
Napoleon  once  said,  "  I  founded  a  kingdom  upon  force,  and  it  will  pass 
away ;"  but  "  Christ  founded  a  kingdom  upon  love,  and  it  will  last  for 
ever  and  ever."  And  so  it  will.  Blot  out  the  name  of  Christ  from  the 
hearts  of  his  people  ?  Strike  yon  sun  from  the  firmament,  and  quench 
the  stars;  and  when  you  have  achieved  that  easy  task,  yet  have  you  not 
begun  to  remove  the  glory  of  the  indwelling  Christ  from  the  hearts  of  his 
people.  Some  of  us  delight  to  think  that  we  bear  in  our  body  the  marks 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  Where  ?"  says  one.  I  answer,  it  is  all  over  us. 
We  have  been  buried  into  his  name,  and  we  belong  to  him,  in  spirit, 
soul,  and  body.  That  water-mark,  which  denotes  that  we  are  his,  can 
never  be  taken  out  of  us.  We  are  dead  with  him,  wherein  also 
we  were  buried  with  him  and  are  risen  again  with  him  ;  and  there  is 
nothing  at  this  moment  that  stirs  our  soul  like  the  name  of  Jesus.  Speak 
for  yourselves.  Is  it  not  so  ?  Have  you  never  heard  of  one  who  lay 
dying,  his  mind  wandering,  and  his  wife  said  to  him,  "My  dear,  do  you 
not  know  me  ?"  He  shook  his  head ;  and  they  brought  near  his 
favourite  child.  "  Do  you  not  know  me  ?"  He  shook  his  head.  One 
"Whispered,  "  Do  you  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?"  and  he  said,  "  He 
is  all  my  salvation  and  all  my  desire."  Oh,  blessed  name !  Blessed 
name  I  Some  years  ago  I  was  away  from  this  place  for  a  little  rest, 
and  I  was  thinking  to  myself,  "  Now,  I  wonder  whether  I  really  respond 
to  the  power  of  the  gospel  as  I  should  like  to  do  ?     I  will  go  and  hear 


224  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

a  sermon  and  see."  I  would  like  to  sit  down  with  you  in  the  pews 
sometimes  and  hear  somebody  else  preach, — not  everybody,  mark  you,  for 
when  I  hear  a  good  many  I  want  to  be  doing  it  myself.  I  get  tired  of 
them  if  they  do  not  glow  and  burn.  But  that  morning  I  thought  I 
would  drop  into  a  place  of  worship  such  as  there  might  be  in  the  little 
town.  A  poor,  plain  man,  a  countryman,  began  preaching  about  Jesus 
Christ.  He  praised  my  Master  in  very  humble  language,  but  he  praised 
him  most  sincerely.  Oh,  but  the  tears  began  to  flow.  I  soon  laid  the 
dust  all  round  me  where  I  sat,  and  I  thought,  "  Bless  the  Lord  !  I  do 
love  him,"  It  only  wants  somebody  else  to  p\ay  the  harp  instead  of 
me,  and  my  soul  is  ready  to  dance  to  the  heavenly  tune.  Only  let  the 
music  be  Christ's  sweet,  dear,  precious  name,  and  my  heart  leaps  at  the 
sound.  Oh,  my  brethren,  sound  out  the  praises  of  Jesus  Christ !  Sound 
out  that  precious  name !  There  is  none  like  it  under  heaven  to  stir  my 
heart.  I  hope  you  can  all  say  the  same.  I  know  you  can  if  you  love 
him ;  for  all  renewed  hearts  are  enamoured  of  the  sweet  Lord  Jesus.  "  A 
greater  than  Solomon  is  here."  Solomon  has  no  power  over  your  hearts, 
but  Jesus  has.  His  influence  is  infinitely  greater ;  his  power  to  bless  is 
infinitely  greater ;  and  so  let  us  magnify  and  adore  him  with  all  our 
hearts. 

Oh,  that  all  loved  him !  Alas  that  so  many  do  not !  What  strange 
monsters  !  Why,  if  you  do  not  love  Christ,  what  are  you  at  ?  You 
hearts  of  stone,  will  you  not  break  ?  If  his  dying  love  do  not  break 
them,  what  will  ?  If  you  cannot  see  the  beauties  of  Jesus,  what  can 
you  see  ?  You  blind  bats !  0  you  that  know  not  the  music  of  his 
name,  you  are  deaf.  0  you  that  do  not  rejoice  in  him,  you  are  dead. 
What  are  you  at,  that  you  are  spared  through  the  pleadings  of  his  love, 
and  yet  do  not  love  him  ?  God  have  mercy  upon  you,  and  bring  you 
to  delight  yourselves  in  Christ,  and  trust  him !  As  for  us  who  do  trust 
him,  we  mean  to  love  him  and  delight  in  him  more  and  more,  world 
without  end.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Colossians  L 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 390,  389,  41& 


THE    DROMEDARIES. 


DELIVERED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


We  will  read  a  few  verses  first,  and  at  the  close  of  them  you  will  find 
the  text. 

"  Judah  and  Israel  were  many,  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  in  multitude, 
eating  and  drinking,  and  making  merry.  And  Solomon  reigned  over  all  kingdoms 
from  the  river  unto  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  and  unto  the  border  of  Egypt :  they 
brought  presents,  and  served  Solomon  all  the  days  of  his  life.  And  Solomon's  pro- 
vision for  one  day  was  thirty  measures  of  fine  flour,  and  threescore  measures  of  meal, 
Ten  fat  oxen,  and  twenty  oxen  out  of  the  pastures,  and  an  hundred  sheep,  beside 
harts,  and  roebucks,  and  fallowdeer,  and  fatted  fowl.  For  he  had  dominion  over  uU 
the  region  on  this  side  the  river,  from  Tiphsah  even  to  Azzah,  over  all  the  kint<8  on 
this  side  the  river:  and  he  had  peace  on  all  sides  round  about  him.  And  Judah  and 
Israel  dwelt  safely,  every  man  under  his  vine  and  under  his  fig  tree,  from  Dan  even 
to  Beer-sheba,  all  the  dajs  of  Solomon.  And  Solomon  had  forty  thousand  stalls  of 
horses  for  his  chariots,  an^  ywelve  thousand  horsemen.  And  those  officers  provided 
victual  for  King  Solomon,  and  for  all  that  came  unto  King  Solomon's  table,  every 
man  in  his  month:  they  lacked  nothing.  Barley  also  and  straw  for  the  horses  and 
dromedaries  brought  they  unto  the  place  where  the  officers  were,  eyery  man  according 
to  his  charge." — 1  Kings  iv.  20 — 28. 

The  last  words  are  the  text  for  this  occasion. 

From  the  whole  passage  you  will  see  that  the  kingdom  of  Israel  under 
the  sway  of  Solomon  was  a  fair  type  of  the  reign  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Perhaps  it  most  exactly  describes  his  fiiture  dominion,  in  the 
long-expected  glory  of  the  latter  days.  The  present  state  of  the  church 
may  be  compared  to  the  reign  of  David,  splendid  with  victories,  but  dis- 
turbed with  battles ;  but  there  are  better  days  to  come,  days  in  which  the 
kingdom  shall  be  extended  and  become  more  manifest;  and  then  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  even  more  conspicuously  seen  as  the  Solomon 
of  the  kingdom,  "  who  shall  have  dominion  from  sea  to  sea."  Yet  even 
now,  as  "  we  that  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,"  so  do  we  also  enter 
into  the  richest  provision  which  is  made  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  even 
at  this  present ;  and  I  may  say  of  all  who  have  come  under  the  sway  of 
Christ,  that  we  dwell  in  a  region  of  peace,  seated  every  man  under  his 
vine  and  figtree,  and  none  making  us  afraid.  "  There  is,  therefore,  now 
no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus,"  and,  "  therefore, 
being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord 
,    No.  1,504.  2(j 


226  MKTROPOLIlAN   TABKRNACLB   PULPIT. 

Jesus  Christ."  "The  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understaniling " 
doth  keep  our  heart  and  mind  bj  Jesns  Christ.  Israel  under  Solomon 
had  abimdance  as  well  as  peace.  What  says  the  historian  ?  They  were 
•'  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  in  multitude,  eating  and  drinking,  and 
making  merry."  It  is  said  that  there  was  such  plenty  in  the  land  in 
Solomon's  time  that  gold  was  of  no  more  value  than  silver,  and  silver 
became  of  little  more  value  than  iron ;  and  as  for  the  other  metals,  they 
were  little  accounted  of.  So  common  had  precious  metals  become  that 
they  were  scarcely  precious  any  longer,  they  were  so  plentiful.  The 
whole  land  flowed  with  milk  and  honey,  and  the  people  rejoiced  and 
were  glad.  Certainly  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  brought  his  people  into 
a  state  of  the  greatest  plenty,  for  "all  things  are  yours;  whether  things 
present,  or  things  to  come;  or  life,  or  death  ;  all  are  yours;  and  ye  are 
Chrisfs ;  and  Christ  is  God's."  What  plenty  must  that  man  have  to 
whom  the  Lord  has  said,  "  No  good  thing  will  I, withhold  from  them 
that  walk  uprightly"!  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing, 
ye  shall  receive."  He  has  given  us  carte  blanche  in  prayer.  He  has 
put  into  our  hands  the  keys  of  his  treasury,  and  has  bidden  us  take 
what  we  will.  He  has  said,  "  Delight  thyself  also  in  the  Lord,  and  he 
shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart " ;  and  he  has  added,  "  Open 
thy  mouth  wide  and  I  w  ill  fill  it."  If  we  have  not,  it  is  "  because  we 
ask  not,  or  because  we  ask  amiss." 

So,  too,  we  dwell  in  a  kingdom  which  is  ruled  with  wisdom.  It  is  said 
of  Solomon  in  this  chapter  that  he  had  wisdom  and  understanding  ex- 
ceeding much,  and  largeness  of  heart,  even  as  the  sand  on  the  sea  shore ; 
and  Solomon's  wisdom  excelled  tlie  wisdom  of  all  the  children  of  the  east 
country,  and  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians.  Is  not  this  also  our 
honour  and  privilege  ?  Behold,  this  day  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  "  made 
unto  us  wisdom."  '"  We  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  know 
all  things"  while  we  dwell  in  him;  for  "the  secretof  the  Lord  is  with 
them  that  fear  him,  and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant."  "  If  any 
man  will  do.  his  will  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  "  All  thy  children 
shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord,  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  chil- 
dren," Hence  we  dwell  under  a  rule  of  wisdom,  which  wisdom  imparts 
itself  to  each  one  of  us  according  to  his  capacity  to  receive  it,  yea,  even 
^o  those  whose  experience  is  but  shallow :  "  to  teach  the  young  men 
xyisdom,  and  the  babes  knowledge  and  discretion."  "  If  any  man  lack 
\visdom,  let  him  ask,  of  God  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  up- 
hraideth  not."        .  .iy,  j.:  , 

.•  Israel  had  a  king  who  was  full  of  power.  Solomon  had  squadrons  of 
horse  and  chariots  of  war,  and  he  was  so  strong  that  the  kings  of  the 
earth  dared  not  come  into  conflict  with  him,  but  paid  him  tribute.  As 
for  our  King,  he  has  better  forces  than  horses  and  chariots  of  war,  for  he 
has  but  to  speak  to  his  Father,  and  he  will  presently  send  him  twenty 
legions  of  angels.  All  power  is  delivered  unto  him  in  heaven  and  in 
earth.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  in  him  for  the  defence  and 
help  of  his  people,  and  if  you  will  but  open  your  eyes  you  shall  see 
horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  your  Lord.  Hosts  of 
angels  are  ascending  and  descending  upon  the  Son  of  man,  and  all  heaven 
is  in  motion  for  the  purposes  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  Not  an  angel 
stands  still  beneath  the  sway  of  Christ,  but  each  one  eitlier  ascends  or 


THE   DROMEDAB.IES.  'ZB? 

descends  to  do  his  Master's  bidding.  Talk  of  mighty  princes— he  is  the 
Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the  "  blessed  and  only  Potentate,"  to 
whom  belongeth  rule  over  all  principalities  and  powers.  I  might  go  on 
with  the  parallel,  but  that  is  not  the  object  of  my  discourse. 

The  great  kingdom  of  Solomon  was  managed  by  a  well-appointed 
body  of  officers,  and  certain  persons  were  set  over  each  province,  who, 
amongst  other  duties,  had  to  provide  for  king  Solomon's  table  and  stable. 
The  table  was  very  sumptuously  furnished,  as  you  saw  in  the  reading ; 
and  in  the  stable  stood  horses  of  war,  and  also  swift  dromedaries,  which 
were  used  in  the  same  manner  as  our  modern  post-horses,  to  carry  mes- 
sages rapidly  from  one  station  to  another.  These  swift  horses  and 
dromedaries  were  made  to  run  from  town  to  town  with  the  royal  mandates, 
and  thus  the  whole  country  was  kept  in  speedy  communication  with  the 
capital.  Appointed  officers  were  bound  to  provide  for  these  horses  and 
dromedaries,  and  all  else  that  concerned  the  king's  business  ;  and  my  sub- 
ject at  this  time  will  illustrate  the  likeness  between  this  arrangement  and 
the  methods  of  our  Lord's  kingdom. 

I.  First  we  shall  note  that  each  of  Solomon's  officers  had  a 
CHARGE.  The  text  says,  "Every  man  according  to  his  charge."  We 
have  officers  about  modern  courts  who  may  be  highly  ornamental,  but 
when  you  have  said  that,  there  is  very  little  else  to  add.  On  high  days 
and  holidays  they  wear  many  decorations,  and  glitter  in  their  stars  and 
garters,,  and  sumptuous  garments,  but  what  particular  charge  they  fulfil 
it  is  beyond  my  power  to  say.  Iti  Solomon  s  court  all  his  officers  had  a 
service  to  carry  out,  "every  man  according  to  his  charge."  It  is  exactly 
so  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  CluMst.  If  we  are  truly  his,  he  has 
called  us  to  some  work  and  office,  and  he  wills  us  to  discharge  that  office 
diligently.  We  are  not  to  be  gentleuien-at-ease,  bat  men-at-arms ;  not 
loiterers,  but  labourers ;  not  glittering  spangles,  but  burning  and  sliining 
hglits. 

It  is  an  exceeding  glory  to  be  the  lowest  servant  of  King  Jesus.  It 
is  more  honour  to  be  a  scullion  in  Christ's  kitchen  than  to  be  a  peer  of 
the  realm.  The  meanest  i^osition  that  can  be  occupied  in  the  kingdom 
of  Jesus  Christ,  if  any  can  be  mean  in  such  a  service,  has  a  touch  of 
divine  glory  about  it;  and  if  we  rightfully  discharge  it,  though  it  be 
only  to  wash  the  saints'  feet,  we  partake  in  the  honour  of  our  Master, 
who  himself  did  not  disdain  to  do  the  like.  But  no  man  is  put  in  any 
office  in  the  church  that  he  may  be  merely  ornamental.  We  are  set  in 
our  places  with  an  end  and  design,  every  man  according  to  his  charge — 
every  woman  according  to  her  charge.  My  dear  brother,  you  do  nut 
occupy  the  post  of  a  minister  or  a  pastor  that  you  may  be  respected, 
but  that  you  may  "adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  your  Saviour  in  all 
things."  You  are  not,  my  dear  brother,  ordained  to  be  an  elder  or  a 
deacon  in  a  church  that  our  Lord  may  put  honour  upon  you,  though  he 
does  put  honour  upon  you  in  it,  but  that  you  may  bring  glory  to  God 
— that  the  people  may  see  the  grace  of  God  in  you,  and  may  magnify 
God  in  you.  Churches  were  not  made  for  ministers,  but  ministers  for 
churches.  We  who  are  officers  in  the  church  are  not  ordained  for  our 
own  sakes,  but  for  the  people's  sake,  and  we  should  always  recollect  that 
£act,  and  live  with  it  in  our  eye.  Dear  friend,  if  you  are  called  to  teach  in 
the  school,  if  you  are  called  to  visit  from  house  to  house,  or  to  act  as  a 


228  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT, 

City  Missionary,  or  a  Bible  woman,  you  have  work  to  do,  and  you  must 
do  it  well,  or  render  a  sorrowful  account  at  the  last.  Office  is  not 
given  to  you  that  you  may  get  credit  by  it.  and  have  the  honour  of 
filling  it,  but  that  you  may  do  real  service  to  your  Lord  and  Master  Jesus 
Christ.  No  servant  of  Christ  can  be  faithful  if  he  regards  that  title  as 
one  of  barren  honour  involving  no  responsibility.  If  we  would  be  servants 
and  officers  under  our  great  King  we  must  bow  our  necks  to  the  yoke, 
and  not  imagine  that  it  will  suffice  to  bind  burdens  upon  other  men's 
shoulders,  and  act  as  lookers-on  ourselves.  It  is  said  of  Job's  cattle,  that 
"the  oxen  were  ploughing,  and  the  asses  were  feeding  beside  them"; 
but  in  our  Lord's  field  we  must  all  be  oxen,  and  steadily  keep  to  the 
furrow. 

Those  ivho  served  Solomon  were  officers  under  a  skid  king,  for  such 
was  his  wisdom  that  he  would  not  tolerate  unfaithfulness  in  any  office. 
He  chose  the  best  men,  and  so  long  as  he  retained  them  he  meant  busi- 
ness and  expected  prompt  attention.  If  they  did  not  do  their  duty,  he 
did  his,  and  sent  them  packing.  It  is  very  much  so  in  the  church  of 
Jesus  Christ.  I  am  not  speaking  as  if  the  children  of  God  could  perish  ; 
but  I  do  say  this,  that  in  the  service  of  Christ  if  you  are  not  a  faitliful 
servant  you  will  soon  have  to  make  room  for  another.  You  may  be 
laid  aside  by  sickness,  and  then  you  will  have  suffering  instead  of  serving. 
or  you  may  be  made  to  drop  into  the  rear  rank  and  go  behind  and  weep 
in  sorrow  because  you  did  not  faithfully  do  your  duty  in  the  front. 
Recollect  that  text,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  a  jealous  God,"  and  icst 
assured  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  like  his  Father,  he  will  have  the 
diligent  obedience  of  his  ^servants,  and  their  faithful  zeal,  or  else  he  \\\\\ 
cashier  them,  and  take  away  their  commissions.  **  Be  ye  clean,"  saith 
he,  "  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,"  for  he  will  be  had  in  reverence 
of  them  that  are  about  him,  and  unholy  servants  and  unfaithful  servants 
shall  soon  find  that  their  Master  can  do  without  them.  Many  a  minister 
has  had  to  come  away  from  a  place  of  vantage  because  he  has  not 
zealously  used  it  to  win  souls  and  lead  on  the  people  to  the  holy  war.  I 
do  not  doubt  that  many  rising  officers  have  been  sent  back  to  the  ranks 
because  the  Commander-in-Chief  could  not  have  patience  with  them 
any  longer  in  their  positions.  They  were  removed  because  they  dis- 
couraged their  fellow-soldiers  and  checked  the  progress  of  the  campaign. 
Do  not  suppose  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  any  less  strict  in  his  disci- 
pline than  Moses,  for  love  is  always  severe  towards  those  it  highly 
favours.  I  greatly  question  the  love  of  that  man  who  can  tolerate  un- 
chastity  in  his  wife ;  certainly  the  husband  of  the  church  will  not  do 
so.  The  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus  is  of  so  fervent  a  character  that 
he  cannot  bear  a  divided  heart,  or  a  negligent  walk  in  any  one  of  us. 
There  is  a  text  which  some  Christian  people  do  not  like,  and  so  they 
cut  the  heart  out  of  it :  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  They  say, 
"  God,  out  of  Christ,  is  a  consuming  fire."  The  text  does  not  say  so ;  it 
speaks  of  "  Our  God,"  and  that  means  our  covenant  God,  our  God  in 
Christ,  and  it  is  God  in  Christ  Jesus  who  is  a  consuming  fire.  Beware 
how  you  deal  with  him  ;  for  while  his  love  is  strong  as  death,  his  jealousy 
is  cruel  as  the  grave  ;  and  if  our  hearts  and  motives  and  aims  in  his  ser- 
vice once  become  divided,  it  will  be  as  great  a  crime  as  if  one  of  Solomon's 
servants  should  have  been  playing  into  the  hands  of  Pharaoh,  the  king  ©f 


THE   DROMEDAPvIES.  229 

Egypt.  Solomon  would  have  taken  care  that  a  man  who  had  two 
lords  should  not  have  him  for  one  of  them.  None  of  us  can  serve 
two  masters :  certainly,  if  Christ  be  one  of  them  he  will  be  the  only  one. 
A  divided  heart  is  an  abhorrence  to  the  loving  Saviour,  and  we  must  not 
insult  him  with  it. 

The  officers  of  Solomon  were  also  obliged  to  recollect  that  the  orderly 
working  of  the  whole  system  depended  upon  each  one  of  them.  That  is 
to  say,  Solomon  had  so  arranged  it  that  there  was  a  certain  troop  of 
horses  in  a  certain  town,  and  the  appointed  officer  must  see  to  their 
fodder :  barley  and  straw  were  to  be  on  the  spot  in  full  quantity  for  the 
horses  at  that  particular  depot.  It  would  not  have  done  to  send  it  any- 
where else ;  and  if  an  officer  had  failed  to  supply  his  department,  the  horses 
must  have  starved  and  the  system  been  thrown  out  of  gear.  Now,  in  any 
well  arranged  Christian  church  a  Christian  who  is  not  faithful  to  his  charge 
little  knows  what  mischief  he  dues ;  but,  as  far  as  he  can,  he  puts  the 
whole  machine  out  of  gear,  and,  apart  from  the  interposing  mercy  and 
supreme  wisdom  of  Christ,  he  would  throw  the  whole  economy  of  the 
liord's  house  into  disorder.  Brethren  and  sisters,  we  think  when  we 
neglect  a  part  of  our  service  that  it  ends  there,  but  it  does  not.  A 
father  neglects  his  duty  to  his  children  :  there  is  mischief  to  the  child, 
but  it  goes  farther ;  that  child  in  after  life  spreads  the  evil  by  his  example, 
and  transmits  it  to  his  descendants ;  ay,  to  his  children's  children  after 
him.  A  Christian  man  in  a  church  keeps  in  the  background  when  he 
should  be  in  the  front,  or  he  comes  to  the  front  when  he  should  be  in  the 
rear,  and  this  is  just  the  upsetting  of  the  whole  business,  so  that  affairs 
cannot  move  smoothly.  The  little  church  cannot  prosper  because  an  in- 
fluential member  is  where  he  ought  not  to  be.  In  a  great  house  the  servants 
must  keep  their  places,  and  if  the  cook  will  persist  in  doing  the  chamber- 
maid's duties,  and  does  not  prepare  the  meals,  everything  is  in  a  muddle ; 
and  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  maid  who  has  to  clean  the  rooms  neglects 
that  duty,  but  must  needs  be  in  the  kitchen,  there  will  be  no  comfort 
either  by  day  or  by  night.  You  can  all  see  the  bearing  of  this  upon  a 
Cliristian  church. 

To  change  the  figure,  a  church  is  like  a  house,  and  if  the  windows 
are  put  where  the  doors  should  be  ;  or  if  what  should  make  the  roof  is 
laid  on  the  floor,  the  house  is  out  of  order.  To  be  "  fitly  framed  together  " 
is  the  true  condition  of  the  Lord's  house.  The  church  is  also  compared 
to  the  body.  If  the  eye  should  transfer  itself  to  the  foot,  or  if  the  ear 
should  move  to  the  hand,  or  if  the  hand  should  take  the  place  of  the  foot, 
or  the  foot  should  attempt  to  do  the  work  of  the  mouth,  our  comely 
frames  would  become  monstrosities.  So  it  must  be  in  the  system  of  the 
church  of  Jesus  Christ  if  his  arrangements  are  broken  through.  Under 
God  everything  depends  upon  each  child  of  Grod  having  his  "  charge," 
and  looking  well  to  it.  If  he  does  not  look  well  to  his  own  department 
the  Christian  man  does  damage  to  others  as  well  as  to  himself. 

In  Solomon's  kingdom  it  came  to  pass  that  the  spirit  of  the  king  in- 
fused itself  into  all  his  officers,  and  therefore  the  country  was  well 
governed.  Beloved,  I  pray  that  it  may  be  so  with  this  church,  and  with 
all  the  churches  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  the  Spirit  of  our  great  King  may 
infuse  itself  into  us  all.  Nothing  makes  men  fig  it  like  having  a  hero 
for  a  leader.     When  Cromwell  came  to   the  front  nobody  was  afraid. 


230  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Away  went  the  cavaliers  like  chaff  before  the  wind,  when  once  he  waa 
present.  And,  surely,  when  onr  glorious  Master,  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation,  the  standard  bearer  among  ten  thousand,  is  seen  to  be  in  the 
midst  of  a  church,  then  everything  goes  well,  and  we  all  fight  with  con- 
fidence and  daring.  One  man  sometimes  seems  to  have  the  power  of 
pervading  thousands  of  other  men  ;  his  spirit  appears  to  govern,  to 
move,  to  stir  the  hearts  of  his  fellow  men  till  the  man  lives  in  them  all ; 
and  so  is  it  supremely  with  the  Lord  Christ.  We  live  in  him,  and  he 
lives  in  us.  If  we  are  all  moved  by  the  spirit  which  dwells  in  Jesus 
— the  spirit  of  love,  of  self-denial,  of  consuming  zeal,  and  of  ardour, 
then  all  will  be  done  gloriously.  If  we  copy  his  consecration,  his  prayer- 
fulness,  his  boldness  and  his  gentleness,  what  a  troop  shall  we  make,  and 
how  well  will  our  Solomon's  kingdom  be  administered  ! 

Only  one  more  thought  here.  When  Solomon'' s  kingdom  came  fo  mis- 
chief it  was  through  one  of  his  officers.  You  recollect  that,  when  Solomon 
died,  Jeroboam  split  the  kingdom  in  twain,  and  he  was  a  runaway  servant. 
Whenever  a  church  comes  to  ruin,  we  grieve  to  confess  that  it  is  generally 
through  its  own  officers.  I  fear  it  is  oftener  the  ministers  than  any  other 
persons.  The  great  heresies  which  have  infested  the  church  have  not 
sprung  from  the  mass  of  the  people,  but  from  certain  famous  leaders ;  and 
at  this  day  the  heart  of  our  churches,  I  believe,  is  infinitely  more  sound  than 
the  ministry.  I  wish  it  were  not  so,  but  I  cannot  conceal  my  fears. 
When  our  Lord  was  betrayed  it  was  not  by  private  followers,  such  as 
Mary  Magdalene,  Zaccheus,  or  Joseph  of  Arimathsa,  but  by  Judas,  the 
treasurer  of  the  College  of  Apostles.  It  was  an  apostle  who  sold  his 
Master  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  Still  the  fault  is  equally  grievous  if 
it  be  committed  by  the  lowest  officer.  As  I  have  already  said,  we  are 
all  servants :  we  are  all  clothed  with  responsibilities,  and  we  can,  if  the 
Holy  Spirit  shall  leave  us  to  it,  do  grievous  damage — more  damage  than 
the  outside  world- can  ever  accomplish.  Let  the  raging  crowd  surround 
Zion's  wall,  let  them  cast  up  their  banks  and  seek  to  shoot  their  arrows 
there ;  but  lo,  the  virgin  daughter  of  Zion  hath  shaken  her  head  at  her 
foes  and  laughed  them  to  scorn.  But  when  the  traitor  comes  within— 
when  it  is  written  that  "Judas  also  which  betrayed  him  knew  the  place" 
— then  is  the  Master  betrayed  in  the  garden  where  he  resorted  for  prayer. 
When  from  the  bowels  of  the  church  there  springs  a  serpent,  e?en  her 
head  must  be  stung  thereby.  Let  the  question  go  round,  "  Lord,  is  it 
I  ?  "  and  may  God  of  his  grace  grant  that  none  of  us  may  ever  betray 
our  charge,  and  so  bring  damage  to  the  glorious  cause  and  kingdom  of 
our  blessed  King. 

II.  Our  second  head  is  somewhat  like  the  first.  We  now  note  that 
:each  man  was  bound  to  act  according  to  his  charge — "Every 
man  according  to  his  charge."  The  officers  were  bound  to  obey  their 
orders ;  first,  as  to  matter.  Certain  of  them  had  to  provide  fat  oxen  for 
Solomon's  table,  and  others  had  to  see  that  the  roebucks  were  hunted 
and  that  the  fowls  were  fatted  for  the  same  purpose ;  while  others  were 
commissioned  to  provide  the  barley  and  the  straw  for  the  horses  and  the 
di-omedaries.  As  I  have  already  said,  if  they  had  gone  out  of  place— if 
the  man  who  had  to  provide  the  barley  for  the  horses  had  fed  the  chickens 
with  it,  and  if  the  officer  who  was  bound  to  hunt  the  roebucks  had 
occupied  himself  with  carting  the  straw,  there  would  have  been  great 


THE   DROMEDARIES.  231: 

confusion.  And  so,  dear  brother,  when  you  will  not  do  whnt  you  were 
evidently  meant  to  do,  and  are  quite  able  to  do,  but  must  needs  attempt 
something  quite  out  of  your  range,  all  goes  amiss.  Observe  your  own 
body :  if  your  ear  were  to  have  a  feeling  that  it  ought  to  eat  instead  of 
hearing,  the  mouth  would  be  interfered  with,  and  the  feeding  of  the 
frame  would  be  very  badly  done.  The  eye  is  a  very  serviceable  member, 
but  if  it  persisted  in  refusing  to  see,  and  must  needs  take  to  hearing,  we 
should  be  run  over  in  the  streets.  Each  member  has  its  own  office  in 
the  body,  and  must  attend  to  its  own  work,  and  not  to  the  office  of 
another.  Dear  friend,  have  you  found  out  what  you  can  do — what  the' 
Lord  has  fitted  you  to  do,  and  what  he  has  blessed  you  in  doing  ?  Then 
keep  to  it,  and  do  it  better  and  better,  and  by  no  means  complain  of  your 
vocation.  Do  not  find  fault  with  others  whose  work  differs  from  your 
own.  The  eye  would  be  very  foolish  if  it  should  say,  '•'  Do  not  tell  me 
about  that  frivolous  member  the  ear ;  it  is  of  no  use,  for  it  only  knows 
what  it  is  told,  and  it  is  so  blind  that  it  could  not  see  a  house  if  it  were 
within  a  yard  of  it,  nor  even  a  mountain  a  mile  high."  Equally  idle 
would  it  be  if  the  ear  should  say,  "  Do  not  tell  me  about  the  mouth ; 
it  is  a  selfish  organ,  always  wanting  to  be  fed.  It  is  good  for  nothing, 
for  it  cannot  hear,  and  if  a  cannon  were  fired  off  close  to  it,  it  would 
not  perceive' it."  Neither  may  the  mouth  say,  "That  roving  foot  is 
always  running  about.  Why  does  it  not  work  like  the  hand  ?"  Nor 
may  the  hand  find  fault  with  the  tongue  because  it  boasts  great  things, 
and  does  nothing.  There  would  be  sad  confusion  in  the  body  if  such  a 
spirit  prevailed :  but  the  hand  keeps  to  its  work,  and  even  there  there  is 
a  subdivision  of  service.  The  little  finger  plays  a  part  which  the  thumb 
cannot  fulfil,  and  there  is  something  for  the  thumb  which  the  forefinger 
cannot  do.  So  should  it  be  in  the  church  of  God :  you  should  each  find 
out  what  you  can  do,  and  then  seek,  God  the  Holy  Spirit  helping  you, 
to  do  that,  to  the  very  best  of  your  ability,  out  of  love  to  Jesus, 

Observe  that  with  Solomon  it  was  "every  man  according  to  his 
charge  "  as  to  measure-,  for  if  a  man  had  charge  of  a  barrack  where 
there  were  two  thousand  horses,  he  had  to  send  in  more  barley  and  straw 
than  the  officer  who  superintended  a  smaller  barrack  of  only  five  hundred 
horse.  The  purveyor  who  was  ordered  to  supply  Solomon's  table  with  fat: 
bullocks  had  to  send  more  than  he  who  fed  the  tables  of  the  inferior  officers. 
Note  this  well,  for  certain  of  us  are  bound  to  do  much  more  than  others. 
Some  of  us  bear  heavy  responsibilities,  and  if  we  were  to  say,  "  I  shall 
do  no  more  than  anybody  else,  I  need  not  overburden  myself,"  we  should 
be  unfit  to  occupy  the  position  to  which  God  has  called  us.  Dear  Iriends, 
I  am  not  afraid  that  any  of  you  will  do  too  much  for  Jesus  Christ,  but 
I  would  like  you  to  try.  Just  see  now  whether  you  can  be  too  ardent, 
too  self-sacrificing,  too  zealous,  or  too  consecrated.  It  were  a  pity  that 
such  a  thing  should  not  be  attempted.  I  have  never  known  anybody 
who  could  accuse  himself  of  so  rare  a  crime.  Oh,  no ;  we  all  feel  that 
all  we  can  do,  and  more,  is  well  deserved  by- our  blessed  Master  who  has 
given  us  our  charge.  Do  not  forget  that  you  who  are  fathers  ought  to  be 
better  men  than  those  single  men  who  have  no  children  to  look  up 
to  them,  and  to  copy  their  example.  You  who  are  large  employers 
ought  to  be  better  men,  because  your  workmen  will  watch  how  you  live. 
You  who  have  talents  and  abilities  ought  to  be  more  active  than  those 


232  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

who  have  none,  for  five  talents  call  for  more  interest  than  one.  Do 
remember  the  rule  of  proportion.  If  you  have  five  talents,  and  your 
brother  has  only  one,  you  may  do  twice  as  much  as  he  does  and  yet  fall 
short.  He  is  faithful  with  his  small  capital,  but  your  proportion  is  five 
times  as  much,  and  therefore  twice  as  much  falls  short  of  what  is  expected 
from  you.  Many  a  servant  girl  gives  her  fourpenny-piece  to  the  offering, 
and  if  the  same  proportion  were  carried  out  among  those  who  are  wealthy, 
gold  would  not  be  so  rare  a  metal  in  the  Lord's  treasury.  A  tithe  may 
be  too  much  for  some,  but  a  half  might  not  be  enough  for  another.  Let 
it  be,  "  Every  man  according  to  his  charge,"  as  to  measure  as  well  as  t® 
matter. 

"Every  man  according  to  his  charge,"  applied  to  place;  for  if  the 
servant  who  had  to  send  in  barley  for  the  dromedaries  to  Jerusalem  had 
sent  it  off  to  Joppa,  or  if  the  Joppa  man  had  sent  all  his  fodder  to 
Jericho,  there  would  have  been  considerable  trouble  and  outcry  in  the 
stables ,  and  if  the  fatted  beef  and  the  venison  for  Solomon's  table  when 
he  stopped  in  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  had  been  sent  over  to 
his  other  house  on  Mount  Zion,  the  king  would  have  had  his  table  ill 
supplied.  Some  men  are  not  satisfied  to  serve  God  in  their  proper  place ; 
they  must  run  fifty  miles  off,  or  a  hundred,  before  they  can  work.  Is 
this  right?  I  remember  a  little  text  in  the  Proverbs, — "As  a  bird  that 
wandereth  irom  her  nest,  so  is  a  man  that  wandereth  from  his  place." 
There  is  a  sphere  for  every  star  which  decks  the  sky,  and  a  blade  of  grass 
for  every  drop  of  dew  which  spangles  the  mead.  Oh  that  every  one  would 
keep  his  place.  Very  much  depends  on  position.  Statues  upon  a  build- 
ing may  look  magnificent,  and  seem  to  be  in  fine  proportion,  but  it  those 
statues  were  one  night  to  say,  "  We  do  not  like  standing  up  here  in  this 
exposed  place ;  we  will  walk  down  and  stand  in  the  public  square,"  you 
would  see  at  once  that  the  artist  never  meant  them  to  be  there,  for  they 
would  be  out  of  proportion  in  their  new  position.  So  a  man  is  a  man  when 
he  keeps  his  niche,  but  he  may  be  a  nobody  if  he  leaves  it.  Many  a  man 
have  I  known  who  has  done  nothing  till  he  has  found  his  place,  and  then 
he  has  astonished  his  friends.  I  find  it  so  with  young  men  entering  the 
ministry :  a  brother  has  not  succeeded,  in  fact,  he  has  been  an  utter 
failure  in  his  first  position,  and  yet,  when  God  has  opened  the  proper 
door  for  him,  he  has  done  marvels.  Why  did  he  not  succeed  before  ? 
Because  he  was  out  of  his  place.  The  best  thing  applied  to  the  purpose 
for  which  it  is  not  suited  is  a  mere  waste,  and  the  best  man  in  an  un- 
suitable position  may  unwittingly  be  a  hindrance  to  the  cause  he  loves. 
Solomon's  officer  would  have  been  very  foolish  ix  he  had  sent  his  barley 
down  to  Dan  when  it  was  his  duty  to  supply  Beersheba,  Find  your 
place,  good  brother,  and  do  not  be  in  a  hurry  to  move.  He  who  keeps 
a  shop  in  a  dozen  towns  in  a  dozen  years  will  at  the  end  look  in  vain  for 
a  shop  which  will  keep  him.  The  spirit  of  roving  tends  to  poverty. 
Those  who  are  eager  to  move  because  they  imagine  that  they  will  leave 
their  troubles  behind  them  are  much  deceived,  for  these  are  found  every- 
where. You  may  soon  get  into  some  such  predicament  as  Jonah,  who 
thought  that  all  would  be  well  if  he  could  avoid  Nineveh  trials,  but  he 
had  forgotten  the  troubles  of  being  aboard  ship  in  a  storm.  I  do  not 
suppose  he  ever  ran  away  to  Tarshish  again.  That  one  experiment  satis- 
fied him,  and  I  hope  you  will  profit  by  his  experience.     Do  not  try  running 


THE   DROMEDARIES.  233 

away  on  your  own  account,  for  if  you  do  endeavour  to  escape  your  Lord's 
hard  work,  I  would  have  you  remember  that  the  sea  is  quite  as  tempes- 
tuous now  as  ever,  and  whales  are  fewer  now  than  in  Jonah's  day,  and 
not  at  all  so  Hkely  to  carry  a  live  man  to  shore.  Keep  your  place : 
"every  man  according  to  his  charge." 

Once  more,  every  man  was  to  act  according  to  his  chai'ge  as  to  time, 
because  the  passage  speaks  of  each  one  "  in  his  month."  If  the  January 
man  had  taken  care  to  provide  for  Solomon's  table  in  February,  what 
would  have  happened  ?  There  was  a  man  for  February,  and  there  would 
have  been  two  supplies  for  one  month,  but  none  for  the  first  weeks  of  the 
year.  If  the  August  officer  had  kept  back  till  September  the  corn  which 
was  wanted  by  the  horses  and  the  dromedaries  in  August,  what  would  the 
poor  creatures  have  done  during  that  month  ?  While  the  barley  waa 
coming  the  steeds  would  have  been  starving.  In  serving  Christ  there  is  a 
great  deal  in  being  up  to  time,  punctual  in  everything.  Not  to-morrow, 
brother  :  not  to-morrow,  that  is  somebody  else's  day :  to-day  is  the  day 
for  you.  Up  and  do  the  day's  work.  Some  soul  is  to  be  won  for  Christ, 
some  truth  to  be  vindicated,  some  deed  of  kindly  charity  to  be  wrought, 
some  holy  prevalent  prayer  to  be  offered,  and  it  is  to  be  done  at  once.  Or 
ever  to-morrow's  sun  has  risen,  see  that  thou  hast  carried  out  thy  charge, 
for  time  in  reference  to  these  solemn  matters  is  life.  Promptness  we  always 
admire  in  responsible  persons.  If  they  have  any  public  duty  to  do,  we 
cannot  endure  to  see  men  leaving  matters  in  arrears,  to  be  done  by-and-by, 
or  never  done  at  all.  If  Jesus  Christ  "  straightway  "  did  this  and  that, 
as  Mark  always  takes  care  to  tell  us  he  did,  let  us  imitate  his  prompti- 
tude, and  serve  G-od  without  the  sluggard's  delays. 

III.  I  close  with  the  third  point,  that  each  man  would  receive 
SUPPLIES  "  according  TO  HIS  CHARGE."  I  do  not  quite  understand  the 
precise  and  definite  bearing  of  my  text.  Surely  it  means,  not  only  that 
one  set  of  officers  was  to  send  in  the  barley,  but  that  another  set  of  officers 
was  to  receive  the  barley  and  the  straw  in  proportion  to  the  number  of 
horses  and  dromedaries.  "  Barley  also  and  straw  for  the  horses  and  drome- 
daries brought  they  unto  the  place  where  the  officers  were,  everyone  ac- 
cording to  his  charge  ";  that  is  to  say,  according  to  the  number  of  horses 
to  be  provided  for,  such  was  the  amount  of  corn  and  of  straw  that  was  sent 
in  for  their  food. 

So  I  gather,  first,  that  concerning  the  servants  of  our  Lord  Jesua 
Christ  a  great  charge  from  him  is  a  guarantee  of  great  supplies.  There  is 
something  very  comfortable  about  this  as  to  temporals.  Some  declare 
that  God  sends  mouths  and  does  not  send  bread ;  or  at  least  they  say  he 
sends  the  mouths  to  one  house  and  the  bread  to  another.  If  it  be  so, 
those  who  get  too  much  bread  should  send  it  round  to  their  neighbours. 
Yet  I  note  that  somehow  where  there  are  mouths  bread  does  come.  It 
often  amazes  me,  I  must  confess,  and  it  brings  tears  to  my  eyes  when  I 
gee  it,  and  indeed  it  isperfectly  wonderful,  that  poor  widows  with  a  swarm 
of  little  children  do  feed  them  in  some  fashion.  The  poor  woman  comes  to 
the  Orphanage  about  a  little  boy,  and  she  does  not  Hke  to  part  with  him, 
but  want  compels ;  and  when  we  have  said,  "  My  good  woman,  how  many 
children  had  you  when  your  husband  died  ?  "  she  has  replied,  "  Seven, 
sir,  and  none  of  them  able  to  earn  a  penny."  "  You  have  been  fighting 
your  way  alone  these  three  or  four  years,  how  have  you  done  it  ?  "     "  Ah, 


234  METROPOLITAN   TABRRNACLR   PULPIT. 

sir,"  she  answers,  "  God  only  knows.  I  cannot  tell  you."  No,  no;  and 
there  are  many  of  God's  dear  children  who  could  not  tell  you  how  thej; 
lived,  but  they  have  lived,  and  their  children  too.  The  Lord  leaves  thera, 
a  great  charge,  and  in  his  own  way  he  sends  a  supply.  Most  of  us  have 
found  that  if  our  King  sends  us  the  dromedaries  he  sends  us  the  barleyv 
It  has  been  so  in  my  case  in  tlie  matter  of  our  two  hundred  and  fifty 
orphan  children  at  Stockwell ;  our  gracious  God  has  always  sent  us 
enough,  and  the  boys  have  known  no  lack ;  and  when  we  receive  another- 
two  hundred  and  fifty  children,  and  have  girls  as  well  as  boys,  I  feel 
sure  our  heavenly  Father  will  provide  for  them  all.  I  hope  you  will  all; 
recollect  that  the  provision  must  come  instrumentally  through  the  Lord's 
own  people,  and  much  of  it  through  the  readers  and  hearers  of  th© 
sermons,  but  come  it  will.  If  my  Lord  puts  more  dromedaries  into  my 
stable  I  shall  look  for  the  corresponding  increase  in  the  barley  and  the> 
straw,  for  I  am  quite  sure  he  will  send  it.  When  I  think  of  my  dear 
friend,  Mr.  George  Miiller,  with  2050  orphan  children,  and  nothing  Ijq 
depend  upon,  as  they  say,  but  just  prayer  and  faith,  I  rejoice  greatly.; 
He  never  has  a  fear  or  a  want,  and  is  as  restful  as  if  he  were  an  incar-^ 
nate  Sabbath.  If  we  had  twenty  thousand  orphans  to  feed,  our  ]\Iaster  is; 
quite  able  to  supply  them  all.  He  feeds  the  universe,  and  we  may  well, 
trust  him.  If  we  have  a  simple,  childlike  faith,  we  shall  find  that  a 
great  charge  is  a  guarantee  of  a  great  supply :  "  Every  man  according 
to  his  charge." 

As  it  is  in  temporals,  so  is  it  in  grace.  When  God  gives  a  man  a  few. 
people  to  look  after,  he  gives  him  grace  enough ;  and  when  he  gives  him- 
ten  times  that  number,  he  gives  him  more  of  his  Holy  Spirit;  and  whei^: 
he  gives  him  a  hundred  times  that  number,  he  increases  the  divine 
anointing.  If  the  Lord  sends  you  a  little  trial,  dear  brother,  you  shall 
have  grace  enough,  and  if  he  sends  you  a  huge  trial  you  shall  still  have 
grace  enough.  If  he  gives  you  some  little  work  to  do  in  the  back, 
settlements,  your  strength  shall  be  as  your  day,  and  if  he  allots  you  a 
great  charge  in  the  front  of  the  enemy's  fire  you  shall  not  come  short 
"  Every  man  according  to  his  charge."  You  will  not  have  a  farthing's 
worth  of  grace  over.  You  shall  never  have  so  much  that  you  can  boast 
about  it,  and  talk  of  having  lived  for  months  without  sinning,  and  the 
like  kind  of  nonsense.  You  shall  be  forced  to  feel  that,  when  you  have 
done  all,, you  are  an  unprofitable  servant.  Never  in  my  life  have  I  had 
in  the  morning,  left  from  yesterday's  manna,  as  much  as  would  cover  a» 
threepenny-piece.  I  have  always  been  so  hungry  that  I  have  had  to.; 
devour  all  I  could  get  there  and  then.  I  have  lived  from  hand  to. 
mouth ;  the  hand  has  been  that  of  my  Lord,  which  is  ever  full,  and  the 
mouth  has  been  mine,  and  it  has  been  always  gaping  for  more.  When; 
in  my  ministry  I  have  had  a  double  quantity  of  food,  I  have  had  a 
double  number  to  feed  upon  it.  The  Lord's  grace  has  been  sufficient  for, 
my  necessities,  but  it  has  never  left  me  room  for  glorying  in  self.  Still, 
take  it  as  a  sure  fact  that  a  great  charge  is  a  guarantee  of  a  great  supply. 

Now  we  will  turn  the  truth  over,  and  say  that  a  great  supply  indicates^ 
a  great  charge.  0  that  some  would  think  of  this!  A  man  has  grown 
richer  than  he  used  to  be.  Brother,  with  more  barley  and  more  straw, 
you  ought  to  keep  more  dromedaries ;  I  mean,  that  God  did  not  send 
that  com  for,  the  mice  to  destroy,  but  he  means  it  to  be  eaten.     When 


THK    DROMEDARIES.    .  235 

God  gives  men  money  or  means  of  any  sort,  they  ought  to  feel  that 
they  are  his  stewards,  and  must  use  all  they  have  for  their  Master. 
If  you  do  not  use  it,  but  hoard  it,  it  will  happen  to  you  as  once  befell  a 
httle  brook.  It  had  always  been  running,  rippling  along,  rolling  its 
gladsome  stream  down  to  the  river,  and  thus  ever  emptying  itself,  but 
remaining  ever  full.  This  httle  brook  became  greedy,  and  said,  "  I  have 
been  too  extravagant.  I  have  made  no  provision  for  the  hot  summer 
weather.  I  always  give  all  I  get ;  it  keeps  running  through  me  in  one 
perpetual  stream,  and  none  of  it  stays.  This  must  be  altered.  I  will 
make  a  great  store,  and  become  fall."  So  there  came  a  bank  across  it: 
it  was  dammed  up,  and  the  waters  kept  on  swelling  and  rising.  After  a 
little  time  the  water  turned  green  and  foul.  It  became  encumbered 
with  all  sorts  of  weeds,  was  the  haunt  of  all  manner  of  creeping  things,, 
and  gave  forth  an  offensive  smell.  It  became  a  very  great  nuisance  to 
the  villagers,  and  they  called  in  the  sanitary  commissioners  to  get  rid 
of  it,  for  it  was  breeding  fever.  How  now,  thou  once  sparkling  brook ! 
What  an  end  has  come  to  thy  bright  and  cheerful  life.  Do  you  see  the 
drift  of  the  parable  ?  Recollect  that  in  Palestine  there  is  one  sea  which 
always  receives  and  never  gives  out.  What  is  its  name  ?  The  Dead  Sea. 
It  must  always  be  the  Dead  Sea  while  this  is  its  character.  If  they 
were  to  cut  a  channel  into  the  great  ocean,  to  let  its  waters  run  away,  it 
might  grow  sweet,  but  otherwise  it  never  can  do  so.  The  man  who  much 
receives  but  nothing  gives  is  dead  while  he  lives.  He  who  has  great 
receipts  should  reckon  that  he  has  a  great  charge,  and  act  accordingly. 
When  a  brother  has  great  talents,  great  possessions,  great  inflnence — 
when  he  is  great  at  anything — by  God's  grace  let  him  say,  "  God  re- 
quireth  great  things  of  me ;  for  to  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  shall 
much  be  required."  It  is  a  law  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ- — a  law  which 
he  will  take  care  is  always  carried  out. 

So  I  finish  up  with  this  :  somebody  will  say,  "  I  could  almost  wish 
that  I  could  escape  from  the  responsibility  of  being  a  servant  of  Christ." 
Dear  brother,  take  note  of  these  two  or  three  facts. 

You  cannot  better  your  circumstances  as  a  servant  of  Christ  by  di- 
minishing your  charge.  If  you  say,  "  I  shall  not  attempt  quite  so 
much,"  you  will  not  improve  your  circumstances  by  that  course ;  for  if 
you  diminish  work,  the  Lord  will  diminish  the  strength.  Our  great 
Solomon  will  stop  some  of  the  supplies  if  you  have  fewer  dromedaries 
to  feed,  and  so  you  will  be  no  better  oflF.  If  you  have  to  keep  six  he 
will  give  you  provision  for  six;  if  you  take  to  keeping  three  he  will  only 
give  you  supplies  for  three,  and  you  will  be  poorer  rather  than  richer. 

Neither  can  you  improve  your  circumstances  by  entirely  and  only 
increasing  the  supply ;  for,  if  you  receive  raoi'e  straw  and  barley,  cer- 
tainly our  Solomon  will  send  you  more  dromedaries.  When  you  have 
more  strength  you  will  have  more  trials.  When  God's  children  do  not 
discharge  their  service  with  the  means  which  he  entrusts  to  them,  he 
frequently  lets  them  take  shares  in  a  "  limited  liability  company,"  which 
is  the  same  thing  as  throwing  your  money  into  the  river;  or  he  leaves 
them  to  bei:ome  shareholders  in  a  breaking  bank,  with  unlimited 
catastrophe  as  its  capital,  and  this  is  more  teriible  still.  It  often  hap- 
pens to  a  man  who  has  scraped  and  saved,  and  stinted  the  cause  of 
Christ,  that  in  his  later  years  he  is  in  straits,  and  he  cries  to  himself, 


286  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

"  It  is  all  gone,  and  I  wish  I  had  used  it  better  before  it  went.  Ik 
would  have  been  far  better  to  give  it  to  the  Lord  than  to  see  the  lawyers 
devour  it."  Ah,  your  sin  has  found  you  out.  Your  Master  could  not 
trust  you,  and  so  he  has  taken  away  his  goods  from  you,  and  now  you 
wish  that  you  had  behaved  yourself  Let  us  take  warning  from  such 
bad  managers ;  and  let  us  see  that,  as  our  charge  is  so  we  cry  for  sup- 
plies, and  that  as  the  supplies  come  we  use  them  wisely. 

Everything  for  Jesus,  the  glorious  Solomon  of  our  hearts,  the  Beloved 
of  our  souls  !  Life  for  Jesus !  Death  for  Jesus  !  Time  for  Jesus ! 
Eternity  for  Jesus !  Hand  and  heart  for  Jesus !  Brain  and  tongue  for 
Jesus!  Night  and  day  for  Jesus!  Sickness  or  health  for  Jesus! 
Honour  or  dishonour  for  Jesus !  Shame  or  glory  for  Jesus !  Everything 
for  Jesus,  "  every  man  according  to  his  charge."    So  may  it  be  I    Amen. 


II.    CEREMONIAL. 


.v.li- 


JM 


■*"  '"v.  TV  f  ""T  •«'"?'  '"!'  ''^ 


T  "V 


THE   BEGINNING  OF  MONTHS. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  January  1st,  1882,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  Aaron  iu  the  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  this  month 
Viall  be  unto  you  the  beginning  of  months  :  it  shall  be  the  first  month  of  the  year  to 
you." — Exodus  xii.  1,  2. 

In  all  probability  up  to  that  time  the  year  had  been  supposed  to  besfin 
iu  the  autumn.  The  question  has  been  raised  at  what  season  of  the  year 
did  God  create  man,  and  it  has  been  decided  by  many  that  it  must 
have  been  in  autumn,  so  that  when  Adam  was  placed  in  the  garden  he 
might  at  once  find  fruits  ripe  and  ready  for  his  use.  It  has  nut  seemed 
probable  that  he  would  have  begun  his  career  while  as  yet  all  fruits  were 
raw  and  green ;  therefore  many  have  concluded  that  the  first  year  of 
human  history  began  in  the  time  of  harvest,  when  fruits  were  mellowed 
for  man's  food.  For  this  reason,  perhaps,  in  the  old  time  the  new  year 
^Se^an  when  the  feast  of  harvest  had  been  celebrated.  Here  at  the 
point  of  the  Exodus,  by  a  decree  of  God,  the  commencement  of  the  year 
was  altered,  and  so  far  as  Israel  was  concerned  the  opening  of  the  year 
was  fixed  for  the  time  of  our  spring — in  the  month  called  Abib,  or  Nisan. 
We  know  that  a  little  before  the  barley  was  iu  the  ear  (see  Exodus  ix.  31), 
and  on  th^e  Sabbath  after  the  passover,  the  produce  of  the  earth  was  so 
tar  advanced  that  the  firstfruits  were  offered,  and  a  sheaf  of  new  barley 
was  waved  before  the  Lord.  Of  course,  when  I  speak  of  spring,  and 
then  of  ears  of  barley,  you  must  remember  the  difference  of  climate,  for 
in  that  warm  region  the  seasons  are  far  in  advance  of  ours.  You  musf, 
pardon  me  if  my  ideas  should  become  a  little  mixed  ;  you  can  correct 
them  easily  at  your  leisure.  From  the  time  when  the  Lord  saved  hi< 
people  from  destruction  by  passing  them  over  the  ecclesiastical  yeai 
began  in  tlie  month  Abib,  in  which  the  passover  was  celebrated.  The 
jubilee  year  was  not  altered,  but  began  in  the  autumnal  equinox.  The 
Jews  seem  to  have  had  two  or  three  beginnings  of  the  year  in  relation 
to  different  purposes  ;  but  the  ecclesiastical  year,  the  great  year  by  which 
Israel  reckoned  its  existence,  commenced  henceforth  in  the  month  Abib, 
when  the  Lord  brought  his  people  out  with  a  high  hand  and  an  out- 
stretched arm. 

It  is  with  God  to  change  times  and  seasons  as  he  pleases,  and  he  has 
done  so  for  great  commemorative  purposes.     The  change  of  the  Sabbath 
No.  l,6o7,  .. 


240  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

is  on  the  same  manner,  for  whereas  the  day  of  rest  was  formerly  the 
seventh,  it  is  now  merged  in  the  Lord's-day,  which  is  the  first  day  of 
the  week.  As  Herbert  says,  "  He  did  unhinge  the  day,"  and  he  set  the 
Sabbath  on  golden  hinges  by  consecrating  the  day  of  his  resurrection. 
To  every  man  God  makes  such  a  change  of  times  and  seasons  when  he 
deals  with  him  in  a  way  of  grace  ;  for  all  things  are  become  new  within 
him,  and  therefore  he  begins  a  new  chronology.  Some  of  us  used  to 
think  our  birthday  fell  at  a  certain  time  of  the  year  ;  but  now  we  regard 
with  much  more  delight  another  day  as  our  true  birthday,  since  on  that 
second  natal  day  we  Ijegan  truly  to  live.  Our  calendar  has  been  altered 
and  amended  by  a  deed  of  divine  grace. 

This  morning  I  want  to  bring  to  your  mind  this  fact,  that,  just  as  the 
people  of  Israel  when  God  gave  them  the  passover  had  a  complete 
Bhifting  and  changing  of  all  their  dates,  and  began  their  year  on  quite  a 
different  day,  so  when  God  gives  to  his  people  to  eat  the  spiritual 
passover  there  takes  place  in  their  chronology  a  very  wonderful 
change.  Saved  men  and  women  date  from  the  dawn  of  their  true  life ; 
not  from  their  first  birthday,  but  from  the  day  wherein  they  were  born 
again  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  entered  into  the  knowledge  and  enjoy- 
ment of  spiritual  things.  The  passover  is,  as  we  all  know,  a  type  of 
the  great  work  of  our  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  it  repre- 
sents the  personal  application  of  it  to  each  believer.  When  we  perceive 
the  Lord's  act  of  passing  us  over  because  of  Christ's  atoning  sacrifice, 
then  it  is  that  we  begin  to  live,  and  from  that  day  we  date  all  future 
events. 

So  this  morning  we  shall  first  describe  the  event;  secondly,  mention 
varieties  of  its  recurrence ;  and  thirdly,  consider  in  ivhat  light  the  date  of 
this  grand  event  is  to  be  regarded  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord. 

L  First,  then,  let  us  describe  this  remarkable  event,  which 
was  henceforth  to  stand  at  the  head  of  the  Jewish  year,  and,  indeed,  at 
the  commencement  of  all  Israelitish  chronology. 

First,  this  event  was  an  act  of  salvation  by  blood.  You  know  how  the 
elders  and  heads  of  families  each  one  took  the  lamb  and  shut  it  up,  that 
they  might  examine  it  carefully.  Having  chosen  a  lamb  without  blemish, 
in  the  prime  of  its  life,  they  kept  it  by  itself  as  a  separated  and  conse- 
crated creature,  and  after  four  days  they  slew  it,  and  caught  its  blood  in 
a  basin.  When  this  was  done  they  took  hyssop  and  dipped  it  in  the 
blood,  and  therewith  sprinkled  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts  of  their 
houses.  By  this  means  the  houses  of  Israel  were  preserved  on  that 
dark  and  dreadful  night,  when  with  unsheathed  sword  the  angel  of  ven- 
geance sped  through  every  street  of  Pharaoh's  domain  and  slew  the 
firstborn  of  all  the  land,  both  of  men  and  of  cattle.  You  will  remember, 
dear  friends,  the  time  when  you  yourselves  perceived  that  God's 
vengeance  was  out  against  sin ;  you  can  even  now  recollect  your  terror 
and  your  trembling.  Many  of  us  can  never  forget  the  memorable  time 
when  we  first  discovered  that  there  was  a  way  of  deliverance  from  the 
wrath  ot  God.  Memory  may  drop  all  else  from  her  enfeebled  grasp,  but 
this  is  graven  on  the  palms  of  her  hands.  The  mode  of  our  deliverance 
is  before  us  in  the  type  as  Moses  describes  it.  The  angel  could  not  be 
restrained,  his  wing  could  not  be  bound,  and  his  sword  could  not  be 
sheatheu:   he  must  go  forth,  and  he  must  smite.     He  must  smite  t»o 


THE   BEGINNIXG  OF  MONTHS.  24L1 

among  the  rest,  for  sin  was  upon  us,  and  there  must  be  no  partiality: 
*'  the  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  But  do  you  remember  when  you 
discovered  God's  new  way,  his  blessed  ordinance  by  which,  without 
abrogating  the  destroying  law,  he  brought  in  a  glorious  saving  clause 
by  which  we  were  delivered  ? 

The  clause  was  this, — that  if  another  could  be  found  who  could  and 
would  suffer  instead  of  us,  and  if  there  could  be  clear  evidence  that  this 
surety  did  so  suffer,  then  the  sight  of  that  evidence  should  be  enough 
for  our  deliverance.  Do  you  remember  your  joy  at  that  discovery?  for, 
if  so,  you  can  enter  into  the  feelings  of  the  Israelites  when  they  under- 
stood that  God  would  accept  an  unblemished  lamb  in  the  place  of  their 
firstborn ;  and  if  the  blood  was  displayed  upon  the  doorpost  as  the  clear 
evidence  that  a  sacrifice  had  died,  and  a  substitute  had  suffered,  then 
the  angel  should  know  that  in  that  house  his  work  was  done,  and  he 
might  therefore  pass  over  that  habitation.  The  avenger  was  to  demand 
a  fife  ;  but  the  life  was  already  paid,  for  there  was  the  blood-mark 
which  proved  it,  and  the  exactor  might  go  on  his  way.  It  was  the 
night  of  God's  passover,  not  because  the  execution  of  vengeance  was 
left  undone  in  the  houses  passed  over,  but  for  a  reason  of  the  opposite 
kind, — because  in  those  houses  the  death-l3low  had  been  struck,  and 
the  victim  had  died,  and,  as  the  penalty  could  not  be  exacted  twice, 
that  family  was  clear. 

I  do  not  know  whether  there  is  any  truth  in  the  statement  of  a 
correspondent  that  whatever  part  of  the  earth  the  lightning  once  strikes 
it  never  strikes  it  again  :  but  whether  it  be  so  or  not,  it  is  certain  that 
wherever  the  lightning  of  God's  vengeance  has  once  struck  the  sinner's 
substitute  it  will  not  strike  the  sinner.  The  best  preservative  for  the 
Israelite's  house  was  this, — vengeance  had  struck  there  and  could  not 
strike  again.  There  was  the  insurance  mark,  the  blood-streak  ;  death 
had  been  there,  no  matter  though  it  had  fallen  on  a  harmless  iamb,  it 
had  fallen  on  a  victim  of  God's  own  appointment,  and  in  his  esteem  it 
had  fallen  upon  his  Christ,  the  Lamb  slain  from  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world.  Because  the  claims  of  retribution  had  been  fully  met 
there  Avas  no  further  demand,  and  Israel  was  secure.  This  is  my  eternal 
confidence,  and  here  is  my  soul's  sweet  hymn : — 

**  If  ihoii  hast  my  discharge  procured, 
And  freely  in  my  room  endured 

The  wliole  of  wrath  divine  : 
Payment  God  cannot  twice  demand, 
!First  at  my  bleeding  Surety's  hand, 

And  then  again  at  mine. 

"  Turn  then,  my  soul,  unto  thy  rest  ; 
The  merits  of  thy  great  High  Priest 

Have  bought  thy  liberty  : 
Trust  in  his  efficacious  blood, 
Nor  fear  thy  banisLment  from  God, 

Since  Jesus  died  for  thee." 

It  was  to  me  the  beginning  of  my  life,  that  day  in  which  I  discovered 
that  judgment  was  passed  upon  me  in  the  person  of  my  Lord,  and  that 
there  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  me.  The  law  demands  death, 
—"The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."     Lo,  there  is  the  death  it  asks, 


^42  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  more.  Christ,  my  Lord,  has  died,  died  in  my  stead:  as  it  ie 
written,  "  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.'" 
Such  a  sacrifice  is  more  than  even  the  most  rigorous  law  could  demand. 
*'  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us."  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us."  Therefore  do  we 
sit  securely  within  doors,  desiring  no  guard  without  to  drive  away  the 
destroyer  ;  for,  when  God  sees  the  blood  of  Jesus  he  will  pass  over  us. 
"  In  his  days  Judah  shall  be  saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell  safely :  and  this 
is  his  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called,  the  Lord  our  righteousness" 
(Jer.  xxiii.  6).  I  say  again,  it  was  the  beginning  of  life  to  me  when  I 
saw  Jesus  as  dying  in  my  stead.  I  beheld  the  first  sight  that  was  worth 
beholding,  let  all  the  rest  be  darkness  and  as  the  shadow  of  death. 
Then  did  my  soul  rejoice  when  I  understood  and  accepted  the  substi- 
tutionary sacrifice  of  the  appointed  Redeemer.  That  is  the  first  view  of 
this  event, — the  blood  of  sprinkling  made  Israel  secure. 

Secondly,  that  night  they  received  refreshment  from  the  lamb.  Being 
saved  by  its  blood,  the  believing  households  sat  down  and  fed  upon  the 
lamb.  They  never  ate  as  they  ate  that  night.  Those  who  spiritually 
understood  the  symbol  must  have  partaken  of  every  morsel  with  a 
mysterious  awe  mingled  with  an  unfathomable  delight.  1  am  sure 
there  must  have  been  a  singular  seriousness  about  the  table  as  they 
stood  there  eating  in  haste ;  and  especially  if  ever  and  anon  they  were 
startled  with  the  shrieks  that  rose  from  every  house  in  the  laud  of 
Egypt,  because  of  the  slain  of  the  Lord.  It  was  a  solemn  feast,  a 
meal  of  mingled  hope  and  mystery.  Do  you  remember,  brothers  and 
sisters,  when  first  you  fed  upon  Christ,  when  your  hungry  spirit  enjoyed 
the  first  morsel  of  that  food  of  the  soul  ?  It  was  dainty  fare,  was  it  not  ? 
It  was  better  than  angels'  bread,  for 

"  Never  did  angels  taste  above 
Redeeming  grace  and  dying  love." 

I  hope  you  have  never  risen  from  that  table,  but  are  daily  feeding 
tipon  Jesus.  It  is  a  very  instructive  fact  that  we  do  not  go  to  our 
Lord's  table,  like  Israel,  to  eat  in  haste,  with  a  staff  in  our  hand,  but  we 
come  there  to  recline  at  ease  with  our  heads  in  his  bosom,  reposing  in 
his  love.     Christ  Jesus  is  the  daily  bread  of  our  spirits. 

Observe  that  the  refreshment  which  Israel  ate  that  night  was  the 
Lamb  "roast  with  fire."  The  best  refreshment  to  a  troubled  heart  is 
the  suffering  Saviour  ;  the  Lamb  roast  with  fire.  A  poor  sinner  under 
a  sense  of  sin  goes  to  a  place  of  worship,  and  he  hears  Christ  preached 
as  an  example.  This  may  be  useful  to  the  saint,  but  it  is  scant  help 
to  the  poor  sinner.  He  cries,  "  That  is  true  ;  but  it  rather  condemns 
than  comforts  me."  It  is  not  food  for  him :  he  wants  the  lamb  roast  with 
fire,  Christ  his  substitute,  Christ  suffering  in  his  place  and  stead.  We 
hear  a  great  deal  about  the  beauty  of  Christ's  moral  character,  and 
assuredly  our  blessed  Lord  deserves  to  be  highly  exalted  on  that  score  ; 
but  that  is  not  the  aspect  under  which  he  is  food  to  a  soul  conscious  of 
sin.  The  chief  relish  about  our  Lord  Jesus  to  a  penitent  sinner  is  his 
sin-bearing,  and  his  agonies  in  that  capacity.  We  need  the  suffering 
Saviour,  the  Christ  of  Gethsemane,  the  Christ  of  Golgotha  and  Calvary, 
Christ  shedding  his  blood  in  the  sinner's  stead,  and  bearing  for  us  the 


THE   BEGINNING   OF   MONTHS.  243 

fire  of  God's  wrath.     Nothing  short  of  this  will  suffice  to  be  meat  for  a 
hungry  heart.     Keep  this  back  and  you  starve  the  child  of  God. 

We  are  told  in  the  chapter  that  they  were  not  to  eat  of  the  lamb  raw. 
Alas  !  there  are  some  who  try  to  do  this  with  Christ,  for  they  preach  a 
half-atoning  sacrifice.  They  would  make  him  in  his  Person  and  in  his 
character  to  be  meat  for  their  souls,  but  they  have  small  liking  for  his 
Passion,  and  they  cast  his  Atonement  into  the  background,  or  represent  it 
to  be  an  ineffectual  expiation  which  does  not  secure  any  soul  from  ven- 
geance. What  is  this  but  to  devour  a  raw  Christ  ?  I  will  not  touch 
their  half-roasted  lamb ;  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  their  half 
substitution,  their  half-complete  redemption.  No,  no ;  give  me  a 
Saviour  who  has  borne  all  my  sins  in  his  own  body,  and  so  has  been 
roast  with  fire  to  the  full.  "  It  is  finished,"  is  the  most  charming  note 
in  all  Calvary's  music.  "  It  is  finished,"  the  fire  has  passed  upon  the 
Lamb,  he  has  borne  the  whole  of  the  wrath  that  was  due  to  his  people : 
this  is  the  royal  dish  of  the  feast  of  love. 

What  a  multitude  of  teachers  there  are  who  must  needs  have  the 
Lamb  sodden  with  water,  though  the  Scripture  saith,  "  Eat  not  of  it  raw, 
nor  sodden  at  all  with  water."  I  have  heard  it  said  that  a  great 
number  of  sermons  are  about  Christ  and  about  the  gospel,  but  yet 
neither  Christ  nor  his  gospel  are  preached  in  them.  If  so,  the  preachers 
present  the  lamb  sodden  in  the  water  of  their  own  thoughts  and  specula- 
tions and  notions.  Now,  the  mischief  of  this  boiling  process  is  that  the 
water  takes  away  a  good  deal  from  the  meat.  Philosophical  discoars- 
ings  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  take  away  much  of  the  essence  and  virtue  of  his 
person,  offices,  work,  and  glory.  The  real  juice  and  vital  nutriment  of 
his  glorious  Word  is  carried  off  by  interpretations  which  do  not  explain, 
but  explain  away.  How  many  boil  out  the  soul  of  the  gospel  by  their 
carnal  wisdom  !  What  is  worse  still,  when  meat  is  sodden,  it  is  not 
only  that  the  meat  gets  into  the  water,  but  the  water  gets  into  the. 
meat ;  and  so,  what  truth  these  gospel-boilers  do  hand  out  to  us  is  sodden 
with  error,  and  you  receive  from  them  dishes  made  up  partly  of  God's 
truth  and  partly  of  men's  imaginings.  We  hear  in  some  measure 
solid  gospel  and  in  larger  measure  mere  watery  reasoning.  When 
certain  divines  preach  atonement,  it  is  not  substitution  pure  and 
simple  ;  one  hardly  knows  what  it  is.  Their  atonement  is  not  the 
vicarious  sacrifice,  but  a  performance  of  something  they  are  long  in 
defining.  They  have  a  theory  which  is  like  the  relics  of  meat  after 
months  of  boiling,  all  strings  and  fibres.  All  manner  of  schemes 
are  tried  to  extract  the  marrow  and  fatness  from  the  grand  soul- 
satisfying  doctrine  of  substitution,  which  to  my  mind  is  the  choicest 
truth  that  can  ever  be  brought  forth  for  the  food  of  souls.  I 
cannot  make  out  why  so  many  divines  are  afraid  of  the  shedding  of 
blood  for  the  remission  of  sin,  and  must  needs  stew  down  the  most  im- 
portant of  all  the  truths  of  revelation.  No,  no  ;  as  the  type  could  only 
be  correct  when  the  lamb  was  roast  with  fire,  so  the  gospel  is  not  truly 
set  forth  unless  we  describe  our  Lord  Jesus  in  his  sufferings  for  his 
people,  and  those  sufferings  in  the  room,  place,  and  stead  of  sinners, 
presenting  absolutely  and  literally  a  substitution  for  them.  I  will  have 
no  dilution :  it  is  substitution  : — "  be  bore  our  sins."  He  was  made  sin 
for  us.   "  The  chastisement  of  our  neace  was  upon  him,  and  by  his  stripes 


244  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

we  are  healed."  "We  must  have  no  mystifying  of  this  plain  truth,  it 
must  not  be  "  sodden  at  all  with  water,"  but  we  must  have  Christ  in  his 
suiferings  fresh  fi'om  the  fire. 

Now,  this  lamb  they  were  to  eat,  and  the  whole  of  it.  Not  a  morsel 
must  be  left.  Oh  that  you  and  I  would  never  cut  and  divide  Christ  so 
as  to  choose  one  part  of  him  and  leave  another.  Let  not  a  bone  of  him 
be  broken,  but  let  us  take  in  a  whole  Christ  up  to  the  full  measure  of 
our  capacity.  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  Christ  divine  and  Christ  human, 
Christ  loving  and  living,  Christ  dying,  Christ  risen,  Christ  ascended, 
Christ  coming  again,  Christ  triumphant  over  all  his  foes — the  whole 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  ours.  We  must  not  reject  a  single  particle  of  what 
is  revealed  concerning  him,  but  must  feed  upon  it  all  as  we  are  able. 

That  night  Israel  had  to  feed  upon  the  lamb  there  and  then.  They 
might  not  put  by  a  portion  for  to-morrow :  they  must  consume  the 
whole  in  some  way  or  other.  Oh,  my  brother,  we  need  a  whole  Christ 
at  this  very  moment.  Let  us  receive  him  in  his  entirety.  Oh  for  a 
splendid  appetite  and  fine  powers  of  digestion,  so  as  to  receive  into  my 
inmost  soul  the  Lord's  Christ  just  as  I  find  him.  May  you  and  I  never 
think  lightly  of  our  Lord  under  any  light  or  in  any  one  of  his 
offices.  A.11  that  you  now  know  and  all  that  you  can  find  out 
concerning  Christ  you  should  now  believe,  appreciate,  feed  upon, 
and  rejoice  in.  Make  the  most  of  all  that  is  in  the  word  concern- 
ing your  Lord.  Let  him  enter  into  your  being  to  become  part  and 
[uircel  of  yourself.  If  you  do  this  the  day  in  which  you  feed  on  Jesus 
will  be  the  first  day  of  your  life,  its  day  of  days,  the  day  from  which 
yuu  date  all  that  follows.  If  once  you  have  fed  upon  Christ  Jesus  you 
will  never  forget  it  in  time  or  in  eternity.  That  was  the  second  event 
which  was  celebrated  in  each  succeeding  Passover. 

The  third  event  was  the  pur i/ical ion  of  their  houses  from  leaven,  for  that 
was  to  go  in  a  most  important  way  side  by  side  with  the  sprinkling  of 
the  blood  and  the  eating  of  the  lamb.  They  were  told  that  they  must 
not  eat  leaven  for  seven  days,  for  whosoever  did  partake  of  leaven  should 
be  cut  off  from  Israel.  It  shows  the  deep  importance  of  this  purifica- 
tion that  it  is  put  in  equal  position  with  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood ; 
at  any  rate  it  might  not  be  separated  from  it  upon  pain  and  penalty 
that  he  who  divided  the  two  should  himself  be  divided  from  the 
congregation  of  Israel.  Now,  it  is  always  a  pity  when  we  are 
preaching  justification  by  faith  so  to  bring  in  sanctification  as  to  make 
it  a  part  of  justification ;  but  it  is  also  a  horrible  eiTor  when  you  are 
preaching  justification  so  to  preach  it  as  to  deny  the  absolute  necessity 
of  sanctification,  for  the  two  are  joined  together  of  the  Lord.  There 
must  be  the  eating  of  the  lamb  as  well  as  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  • 
and  there  must  be  the  purging  out  of  the  old  leaven,  as  well  as  the 
sprinkling  of  the  blood  and  the  eating  of  the  lamb.  Very  carefully  the 
Jewish  householder  looked  into  every  closet,  corner,  drawer,  and  cup- 
board to  sweep  out  every  crumb  of  stale  bread ;  and  if  they  had  any 
bread  in  store,  even  if  it  was  new  and  they  intended  to  eat  it,  they  must 

Eut  it  all  away,  for  there  must  not  be  a  particle  of  leaven  in  the  same 
ouse  with  the  lamb.  When  you  and  I  first  came  to  Christ  what  a 
sweep  there  was  of  the  leaven.  I  know  I  was  clean  delivered  from  the 
leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  for  all  trust  in  ray  own  good  works  went,  even 


THE  BEGINNING  OF  MONTHS.  245 

the  last  crumb  of  it.  All  confidence  in  rites  and  ceremonies  must  !,'o 
too.  I  have  not  a  crust  left  of  either  of  these  two  sour  and  corrupt 
confidences  at  the  present  moment,  and  I  wish  never  to  taste  that  old 
leaven  any  more.  Some  are  always  chewing  at  that  leaven,  glorying  in 
their  own  prayers,  and  alms,  and  ceremonies ;  but  when  Christ  comes  m, 
this  leaven  all  goes  out.  Moreover,  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  which 
is  hypocrisy,  must  be  cleared  out.  "  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression 
is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered.  Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the 
Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity,  and  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile." 
Guile  must  go,  or  guilt  will  not  go.  The  Lord  sweeps  the  cunning  out 
of  his  people,  the  craftiness,  the  deceit :  he  makes  them  true  before  his 
face.  They  wish  that  they  were  as  clear  of  every  sin  as  they  are  clear 
from  insincerity.  They  once  tried  to  dwell  before  the  Lord  with  double 
dealing,  pretending  to  be  what  they  were  not ;  but  as  soon  as  ever  they 
ate  of  Christ,  and  the  blood  Avas  sprinkled,  then  they  humbled  them- 
selves in  truth,  and  laid  bare  their  sinnership,  and  stood  before  God 
as  they  were,  with  their  hypocrisy  rent  away.  Christ  lias  not  saved 
the  man  who  still  trusts  in  falsehood.  You  cannot  feed  on  Christ 
and  at  the  same  time  hold  a  lie  in  your  right  hand  by  vain  confidence 
in  yourself,  or  by  love  of  sin.  Self  and  sin  must  go.  But  oh  what 
a  day  it  is  when  the  old  leaven  is  put  out, — we  shall  never  forget  it ! 
This  month  is  the  beginning  of  months,  the  first  month  of  the  year 
to  us,  when  the  Spirit  of  truth  purges  out  the  spirit  of  falsehood. 

A  fourth  point  in  the  passover  is  not  to  be  forgotten.  On  the  passover 
night  there  came,  as  the  result  of  the  former  things,  a  ivonderful, 
glorious,  and  migliUj  deliverance.  That  night  every  Israelite  received 
promise  of  immediate  emancipation,  and  as  soon  as  the  morning  dawned 
he  quitted  the  house  in  wliich  he  had  sheltered  during  the  nigiit,  and 
quitting  his  home  he  quitted  Egypt  too.  He  left  for  ever  the  brick- 
kilns, washed  the  brick-earth  for  the  last  time  from  his  hands,  looked 
down  on  the  yoke  he  used  to  carry  when  he  worked  amid  the  clay,  and 
said,  "  I  have  done  with  you."  He  looked  at  every  Egyptian  taskmaster, 
remembered  how  often  he  had  struck  him  with  the  stick,  and  he  re- 
joiced that  he  would  never  strike  him  again,  for  there  he  was  at 
his  feet  begging  him  to  be  gone  lest  all  Egypt  should  die.  Oh  what 
joy  !  They  marched  out  with  their  unleavened  bread  still  on  their 
backs,  for  they  had  some  days  in  which  they  were  still  to  eat  it,  and  I 
think  before  the  seventh  day  of  unleavened  bread  was  over  they  had 
reached  the  Red  Sea.  Still  eating  unleavened  bread  they  went  down 
into  the  depths  of  the  Eed  Sea,  and  still  with  no  flavour  of  leaven  in 
their  mouths  they  stood  on  its  shore  to  sing  unto  the  Lord  the  great 
Hallelujah,  because  he  had  triumphed  gloriously,  and  the  horse  and  his 
rider  had  been  cast  into  the  sea.  Do  you  recollect  when  the  Lord 
purged  you  from  the  love  of  sin,  and  from  trust  in  self,  and  when  he 
brought  you  clean  out  and  set  you  free,  and  said,  "  Go  on  to  the  promised 
rest,  go  Oil  to  Canaan  "  ?  Do  you  remember  when  you  saw  your  sins 
drowned  for  ever,  never  to  rise  in  judgment  against  you, — not  merely  your 
destruction  prevented,  not  merely  your  soul  fed  with  the  finest  food,  not 
merely  your  heart  and  your  house  cleansed  of  hypocrisy,  but  yourself 
delivered  and  emancipated,  the  Lord's  free  man  ?  Oh,  if  so,  I  am  sure 
you  will  grant  the  wisdom  of  the  ordinance  by  which  the  Lord  decreed. 


246  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

— "this  month  shall  be  unto  you  the  beginning  of  months,  it  shall  be  the 
first  month  of  the  year  to  you."  Thus  much,  then,  on  desci'ibiiig  the 
event. 

II.  Now,  secondly,  I  want  to  mention  the  varieties  of  its 
EECURRENCE  among  us  at  this  day. 

The  first  recurrence  is  of  course  on  the  personal  salvation  of  each 
one  of  us.  The  whole  of  this  chapter  was  transacted  in  your  heart 
and  mine  when  first  we  knew  the  Lord.  Our  venerable  Brother  and 
Elder  White,  when  I  saw  him  the  other  night,  said  to  me,  "  Oh,  sir, 
it  is  very  precious  to  read  the  Bible,  but  it  is  infinitely  more  delightful 
to  have  it  here  in  your  own  heart."  Now  I  find  it  very  profitable  to 
read  about  the  passover  ;  but  oh,  how  sweet  to  have  a  passover  transacted 
in  your  own  soul  by  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit !  Moses  wrote  of 
something  that  happened  thousands  of  years  ago,  but  the  substance  of 
it  all  has  happened  to  me  in  all  its  details,  and  to  thousands  who  are 
trusting  in  the  Lord.  Can  we  not  read  this  story  in  Exodus,  and  say, 
"  Yes,  it  is  even  so  "  ?  Every  word  of  it  is  true,  for  it  has  all  occurred 
to  me,  every  atom  of  it,  even  to  the  eating  of  the  bitter  herbs  ;  for  I 
recollect  right  well  that,  at  the  very  moment  when  I  had  the  sweet 
flavour  of  my  Lord's  atonement  in  my  mouth,  I  felt  the  bitterness  of 
repentance  on  account  of  sin,  and  the  bitterness  of  struggling  against 
the  temptation  to  sin  again.  Even  the  minute  touches  of  that  typical 
festival  are  all  correct,  as  thousands  know  who  have  participated  in  its 
antitype.  This  passover  record  is  not  a  story  of  olden  times  alone,  it 
is  the  record  of  your  life  and  mine, — I  hope  it  is.  Thus  by  each  separate 
saved  man  the  paschal  feast  is  kept. 

But  then  it  happens  again  in  a  certain  sense  tvhen  the  man's  house 
is  saved.  Remember,  this  was  a  family  business.  The  father  and 
mother  were  present  when  the  lamb  was  slain.  I  dare  say  the  eldest 
son  helped  to  bring  the  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  another  held  the  knife, 
a  third  held  the  basin,  and  the  little  boy  fetched  the  bunch  of  hyssop, 
and  they  all  united  in  the  sacrifice.  They  all  saw  father  strike  the 
lintel  and  the  side-posts,  and  they  all  ate  of  the  lamb  that  night. 
Everyone  that  was  in  the  house,  all  that  were  really  part  of  the  family, 
partook  of  the  meal :  they  were  all  protected  by  the  blood,  they  were 
all  refreshed  by  the  feast,  and  they  all  started  the  next  morning  to  go 
to  Canaan.  Did  you  ever  hold  a  family  supper  of  that  kind?  "  Oh," 
some  fathers  might  say,  "it  would  be  the  beginning  of  family  life 
to  me  if  ever  I  might  eat  bread  in  the  kingdom  of  God  with  all  my  sons 
and  daughters.  Oh  that  every  chick  and  child  around  my  table  truly 
belonged  to  Christ."  A  family  begins  to  live  in  the  highest  sense 
when  as  a  family,  without  exception,  it  has  all  been  redeemed,  all 
sprinkled  with  the  blood,  all  made  to  feed  on  Jesus,  all  purged  from  sin, 
and  all  set  at  liberty  to  go  out  of  the  douiains  of  sin,  bound  for  the 
Kingdom.  Joy !  joy !  joy  1  '*  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that 
my  children  walk  in  truth."  If  any  of  you  enjoy  the  privilege  of 
family  salvation,  you  may  well  set  up  a  monument  of  praise,  and  make 
a  generous  off'ering  to  God,  by  whom  you  are  thus  favoured.  Engrave 
it  upon  marble,  and  set  it  up  for  ever — This  household  is  saved,  and 
the  day  of  its  salvation  is  the  beginning  of  its  history  in  connection 
with  the  Lord's  Israel. 


THE  BEGINNING  OF  MONTHS, 


247 


Extend  the  thought — it  was  not  only  a  family  ordinance  but  it  waa 
for  all  the  tribes  of  Israel.  There  were  many  families,  but  in  every  house 
the  passover  was  sacrificed.  Would  it  not  be  a  grand  thing  if  you  that 
•employ  large  numbers  of  men  should  ever  be  able  to  gather  all 
together  and  hopefully  say,  *'I  trust  that  all  these  understand  the 
sprinkling  of  the  blood,  and  all  feed  upon  Christ."  Dear  men  and 
women  that  are  placed  in  such  responsible  positions,  you  might  indeed 
say,  "  This  shall  be  the  beginning  of  months  to  us."  Labour  for  it, 
therefore,  and  make  it  your  heart's  desire.  If  you  live  to  see  a  dis- 
trict in  which  you  labour  permeated  with  the  gospel,  what  a  joy! 
If  we  shall  live  to  see  London  with  every  house  sprinkled  with  the 
redeeming  blood !  If  we  should  live  to  see  all  England  feeding,  not 
•as  many  do  at  Christmas  to  excess  on  the  delicacies  of  earth,  but 
feasting  spiritually,  where  there  can  be  no  excess,  upon  Christ.  Oh, 
what  a  beginning  of  years  it  would  be  to  our  happy  island  !  What  a 
paradise  it  would  be  !  If  it  should  be  so  with  France,  if  it  should  be 
so  in  any  country,  what  a  day  to  be  remembered.  Commence  a  nation's 
annals  from  its  evangelization.  Begin  the  chronicle  of  a  people  from  the 
clay  when  they  bow  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  There  will  come  a  day  to  this 
poor  earth  when  all  over  it  Jesus  shall  reign.  It  may  be  long  yet,  but 
the  day  shall  come  when  Christ  shall  have  dominion  from  sea  to  sea. 
The  nations  which  are  called  Christians,  although  they  so  little  deserve 
the  title,  do  already  date  their  chronology  from  the  birth  of  Christ,  and 
this  is  a  sort  of  faint  foreshadowing  of  the  way  in  which  men  shall  one 
day  date  all  things  from  the  reign  of  Jesus  ;  for  his  unsufifering  kingdom 
yet  shall  come.  God  hath  decreed  his  triumph,  and  on  all  the  wings  of 
time  it  hastens.  When  he  cometh  that  month  shall  be  the  beginning 
of  months  unto  us.     I  say  no  more. 

III.  And  now,  in  the  last  place,  I  come  to  show  in  what  light 
THIS  DATE  IS  TO  BE  REGARDED,  if  It  has  occurred  to  us  in  the  senses 
I  have  mentioned. 

Primarily,  if  it  has  occurred  in  the  first  sense  to  us  personally:  what 
about  it  then  ?  AVhy,  first,  the  day  in  which  we  first  knew  the  Saviour 
as  the  Paschal  Lamb  should  always  be  the  most  honourable  day  that 
has  ever  dawned  upon  us.  The  Israelites  placed  the  month  Abib  in  the 
fii'st  rank  because  it  was  the  month  of  the passo\er  :  put  down  the  date  at 
which  you  knew  the  Lord  as  the  premier  day,  the  noblest  hour  you  have 
e^er  known.  It  eclipses  your  natural  birthday,  for  then  you  were  born  in 
sin,  then  you  were  "born  to  trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upward;  "  but 
now  you  are  born  into  spiritual  life,  born  unto  eternal  bliss.  It 
eclipses  your  marriage  day,  for  union  to  Christ  shall  bring  you  greater 
felicity  than  the  happpiest  of  conjugal  bonds.  If  you  have  ever  known 
a  day  in  which  you  received  the  honours  of  the  State,  or  gained 
distinction  in  learning,  or  attained  to  a  position  in  society,  or  arri\ed 
at  a  larger  wealth,  all  these  were  but  dim,  cloudy,  foggy  days  com- 
pared with  this  "morning  without  clouds."  On  that  day  your  sun  rose 
never  to  go  down  again :  the  die  was  cast,  your  destiny  for  glory  was 
openly  declared.  I  pray  you  never  in  your  thoughts  degrade  that 
blessed  day  by  thinking  more  of  any  pleasure,  honour,  or  advancement 
than  you  do  of  the  blessing  of  salvation  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  I  am 
afraid  that  some  are  striving  and  struggling  after  other  distinctions,  and 


•2^8  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

if  they  could  once  reach  a  certain  event  then  they  would  be  satisfied  :  ia 
not  your  salvation  worth  vastly  more  than  this?  They  would  feel  that 
they  were  made  for  life  if  a  certain  matter  turned  out  right.  Brother,  you 
were  made  for  life  when  you  were  made  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  You  cam& 
to  your  estate  when  you  came  to  Christ :  you  were  promoted  when  he  re- 
ceived you  to  his  friendship.  You  gained  all  that  you  need  desire  when 
you  found  Christ,  ^or  a  saint  of  old  said,  "He  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all 
my  desire."  Do  not,  therefore,  if  the  Queen  should  knight  you  or  the 
people  should  send  you  to  Parliament,  think  that  the  event  would  over- 
shadow your  conversion  and  salvation.  Think  of  that  act  of  grace  as 
the  Lord  thinks  of  it,  for  he  says,  "  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  my 
sight  thou  hast  been  honourable,  and  I  have  loved  thee."  Unto  you 
that  believe  Jesus  is  honour ;  in  him  you  boast  and  glory,  and  well  you 
may.  The  blood-mark  is  a  believer's  chief  adornment  and  decoration, 
and  his  being  cleansed  and  set  free  by  grace  is  his  noblest  distinction. 
Glory  in  grace  and  in  nothing  else.  Prize  the  work  ot  grace  beyond  all 
the  treasures  of  Egypt. 

This  date  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  life.  The  Israelites 
reckoned  that  all  their  former  existence  as  a  nation  had  been  death. 
The  brick-kilns  of  Egypt,  the  lying  among  the  pots,  the  mixing  up 
with  idolaters,  the  hearing  of  a  language  which  they  understood  not — 
they  looked  on  all  Egyptian  experience  as  death,  and  the  month  which 
ended  it  was  to  them  the  beginning  of  montlis.  On  the  other  hand, 
they  looked  upon  all  that  followed  after  as  being  life.  The  passover 
was  the  beginning,  and  only  the  beginning  :  a  beginning  implies  some- 
thing to  follow  it.  Now  then.  Christian  m«n,  whenever  you  speak 
about  your  existence  before  conversion  always  do  it  with  shamefacedness,. 
as  one  risen  from  the  dead  might  speak  ot  the  charnel-house  and  the 
worm  of  corruption.  I  feel  grieved  when  I  hear  or  read  of  people  who 
can  stand  up  and  talk  about  what  they  used  to  do  before  they  were 
converted  very  much  in  the  way  in  wliich  an  old  seafaring  man  talks 
of  his  voyages  and  storms.  No.  no,  be  ashamed  of  your  former  lusts 
in  your  ignorance ;  and  if  you  must  speak  of  them  to  the  praise  and 
glory  of  Christ,  speak  with  bated  breath  and  tears  and  sighs.  Death, 
rottenness,  corruption  are  all  most  fitly  left  in  silence,  or,  if  they  demand 
a  voice,  let  it  be  as  solemn  and  mournful  as  a  knell.  Let  your  sin- 
story  be  told  in  a  way  which  shall  show  that  you  wish  it  had  never 
been  true.  Let  your  conversion  be  the  burial  of  the  old  existence,. 
and  as  for  that  which  follows  after,  take  care  that  you  make  it  real  life, 
worthy  of  the  grace  which  has  quickened  you. 

Suppose  these  Israelites  had  loitered  about  in  Egypt :  suppose  one  of 
them  had  said,  "  Well,  I  did  not  finish  that  batch  of  bricks.  I  cannot  go 
out  just  yet.  I  should  like  to  see  them  thoroughly  well  baked  and  pre- 
pared for  the  pyramid  " — what  a  foolish  fellow  he  would  have  been  !  No, 
but  they  left  the  bricks,  and  the  clay,  and  the  stutf  behind,  and  went 
straight  away,  and  let  Egypt  take  care  of  itself.  Now,  child  of  God,  quit 
the  ways  of  sin  with  determination,  leave  the  world,  leave  its  pleasures, 
leave  its  cares,  and  get  right  away  to  Jesus  and  his  leadership.  You  are 
now  the  Lord's  free  man;  shall  the  blood  be  sprinkled  for  nothing t 
Shall  the  lamb  be  eaten  and  mean  nothing !  Shall  the  leavened  bread  be 
purged  out  in  vain  I     Shall  the  Red  Sea  be  crossed,  and  the  Eg-yptiaus 


THE  BEGINNING  OP  MONTHS.  241^ 

drowned,  and  you  remain  a  slare  ?  The  thought  is  abhorrent.  That 
was  the  mischief  about  the  Israelites,  that  thej  had  still  a  hankering 
after  the  leeks  and  garlick  of  Egypt :  these  strong-smelling  things 
had  scented  their  garments,  and  it  is  hard  to  get  such  vile  odours 
out  of  one's  clothes.  Alas,  that  Egyptian  garlick  clings  to  us,  and 
the  smell  of  it  is  not  always  so  abominable  to  us  as  it  ought  to  be. 
Besides,  they  pined  for  fish  which  they  did  eat  in  Egypt  in  plenty, 
muddy  fish  though  it  was.  There  were  better  fisheries  for  them 
in  Jordan,  and  Gennesaret,  and  the  Great  Sea,  if  they  had  gone 
ahead;  and  sweeter  herbs  were  on  Canaan's  hills  than  ever  grew  in 
Egypt's  mire.  Because  of  this  eyil  lusting  they  were  kept  dodging  about 
for  forty  years  in  the  wilderness.  They  might  have  marched  into 
Canaan  in  forty  days  if  it  had  not  been  for  that  stinking  garlick  of 
theirs,  and  their  Egyptian  habits  and  memories.  Oh,  that  God  would 
cut  us  quite  free,  and  enable  us  to  forget  those  things  whereof  we  ara 
now  ashamed. 

I  have  nearly  concluded  when  I  have  added  this,  that  inasmuch  a» 
the  passover  was  now  the  beginning  of  the  year  to  tliem  it  was  thepultmg 
of  all  things  right.  I  told  you  that  the  year  had  formerly  begun  in 
autumn,  according  to  most  traditions :  was  this  really  the  best  season  to 
pitch  upon  ?  Upon  second  thoughts,  was  autumn  the  best  season  in 
which  to  begin  life,  with  winter  all  before  you  and  everythiug  declining? 
By  the  institution  of  the  passover  the  year  was  made  to  begin  in  what 
is  our  spring.  If  I  judge  from  the  condition  of  our  land  I  should  ask, — 
When  could  the  year  begin  more  fitly  than  in  the  springtide  of  early  May  ? 
It  seems  to  me  that  it  actually  does  begin  in  spring.  I  do  not  see  that 
the  year  naturally  begins  to-day,  though  it  does  so  arbitrarily.  We  are 
in  about  the  middle  of  winter,  and  the  year  as  yet  lies  dead.  When, 
the  birds  sing  and  the  flowers  rise  from  their  beds  of  earth,  then  the 
year  begins.  It  seems  to  me  a  strange  supposition  that  our  first  parents- 
commenced  life  in  autumn,  amid  lengthening  nights  and  declining 
forces.  No,  we  say,  by  all  means  let  the  date  be  fixed  in  spring,  so^ 
that  the  salutations  of  the  new  year  shall  be  sweet  with  fragrant  flowers 
and  rich  with  joyous  songs.  Nor  would  the  time  of  our  spring  in  the 
East  be  a  season  without  supplies,  for  in  April  and  May  the  first  ears  of 
corn  are  ready,  and  many  other  fruits  are  fit  for  food.  It  was  good 
for  the  Israelites  to  have  the  feast  of  the  firstfruits  in  the  month  Abib, 
to  bring  the  first  ears  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  wait  till  they  were  ripe 
before  they  blessed  the  Giver  of  all  good.  We  ought  to  be  grateful  for 
green  mercies,  and  not  tarry  till  everything  come  to  ripeness.  In  some 
parts  of  the  East  there  is  fruit  all  the  year  round,  and  why  not  in  Eden  ? 
In  the  delightful  country  where  I  have  sojourned,  which  bears  a  very 
close  resemblance  to  the  East,  there  are  fruits  still  ripening  upon  the 
trees,  and  one  tree  or  another  will  be  found  to  bear  fruit  every  month 
all  the  year  round,  so  that  if  Adam  had  been  created  in  the  month  of 
April  there  would  have  been  food  for  him,  followed  by  a  succession  of 
fruits  which  would  have  supplied  all  his  wants.  Then  he  would  have 
had  summer  before  him  with  all  its  ripening  beauties,  and  this  is  a 
more  paradisaical  outlook  than  winter.  It  is  right  that  the  year 
should  begin  with  the  firstfruits,  and  I  am  sure  it  is  quite  right 
that  the  year  should  begin  with  you  and  vvith  me  when  we  come  to 


250 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


Christ  and  receive  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit.  Everything  is  out  of 
joint  till  a  man  knows  Christ:  everything  is  disorderly  and  bottom 
upwards  till  the  gospel  comes  and  turns  him  upside  down,  and  then 
the  right  side  is  up  again.  Man  is  all  wrong  till  the  gospel  puts  him  all 
right.  Though  grace  is  above  nature  it  is  not  contrary  to  nature, 
but  restores  true  nature.  Our  nature  is  never  so  truly  the  nature  of  a 
man  as  when  it  is  no  longer  man's  sinful  nature.  We  become  truly 
men,  such  as  God  meant  men  to  be,  when  we  cease  to  be  men  such  as 
sin  has  made  men  to  be. 

Our  life,  beginning  as  it  does  at  our  spiritual  passover,  and  at  our  feed- 
ing upon  Christ,  we  ought  always  to  regard  our  conversion  as  a  festival 
and  remember  it  with  praise.  Whenever  we  look  back  upon  it  the 
memory  of  it  should  excite  delight  in  our  hearts.  I  wonder  how  long 
a  man  ought  to  thank  God  for  forgiving  his  sins  ?  Is  life  long  enough  ? 
Is  time  long  enough  ?  Is  eternity  too  long  ?  How  long  ought  a  man 
to  thank  God  for  saving  him  from  going  down  to  hell  ?  Would  fifty 
years  suffice  ?  Oh  no,  that  would  never  do,  the  blessing  is  too  great  to 
be  all  sung  of  in  a  millennium.  Suppose  you  and  I  never  had  a  single 
mercy  except  this  one,  that  we  were  made  the  children  of  God 
and  co-heirs  with  Christ  Jesus,— suppose  we  had  nothing  else  to 
enjoy !  We  ought  to  sing  about  that  alone  for  ever  and  ever.  Ay, 
if  we  were  sick,  cast  on  the  bed  of  paia  with  a  hundred  diseases,  Avitb 
the  bone  wearing  through  the  skin,  yet  since  God's  everlasting  mercy 
will  sanctify  every  pain  and  every  affliction,  should  we  not  still  con- 
tinue to  lift  up  happy  psalms  to  God  and  praise  him  for  ever  and  ever  ? 
Therefore,  be  that  your  watchword  all  through  the  year — "  Hallelujah, 
praise  ye  the  Lord!  "  The  Israelite  always  closed  the  passover  with  a 
hymn  of  praise,  and  therefore  let  us  close  our  sermon  this  morning  with 
holy  joy,  and  continue  our  happy  music  till  this  year  ends,  ay,  till  time 
fihall  be  no  more.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon — Exodus  xii. 


THE   BLOOD  OF  SPRINKLING  AND  THE  OHILDEEN. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  October  23rd,  1887,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"Then  Moses  called  for  all  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  said  unto  them,  Draw  out  and 
take  you  a  lamb  according  to  your  families,  and  kill  the  passover.  And  ye  shall  take 
a  hunch  of  hyssop,  and  dip  it  in  the  blood  that  is  in  the  bason,  and  strike  the  lintel 
and  the  two  side  posts  with  the  blood  that  is  in  the  bason ;  and  none  of 
you  shall  go  out  at  the  door  of  his  house  until  the  morning.  For  the  Lord  will  pass 
through  to  smite  the  Egyptians;  and  when  he  seeth  the  blood  upon  the  lintel,  and  on 
the  two  side  posts,  the  Lord  will  pass  over  the  door,  and  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer 
to  come  in  unto  your  houses  to  smite  you.  And  ye  shall  observe  this  thing  for  an  ordiaance 
to  thee  and  to  thy  sons  for  ever.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  ye  be  come  to  the 
land  which  the  Lord  will  give  you,  according  as  he  hath  promised,  that  ye  shall  keep 
this  service.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  your  children  shall  say  unto  you.  What 
mean  ye  by  this  service  ?  that  ye  shall  say,  It  is  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord's  passover,  who 
passed  over  the  houses  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  when  he  smote  the  Egyptians, 
and  delivered  our  houses." — Exodus  xii.  21 — 27. 

I  WANTED,  dear  friends,  earnestly  wanted,  to  continue  the  subject  of  last 
Lord's-day  morning  ;  for  I  felt  it  important  that  we  should  bear  again 
and  again  our  witness  to  the  doctrine  of  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  But, at  the  same  time,  I  promised  that  I  wouldendeavour 
to  keep  "  the  feasf.  of  the  children,"  and  have  a  sermon  which  should  be 
specially  addressed  to  Sunday-school  leachers.  I  could  not  preach  a 
school  sermon  at  the  appointed  time,  so  as  to  open  your  children's 
week,  but  thought  a  discourse  might  come  in  none  the  less  suitably  if  I 
brought  up  the  rear  by  closing  your  meetings.  How  am  I  to  fulfil  both 
my  purposes  ?  I  think  the  subject  before  us  will  enable  me  to  do  so. 
We  shall  preach  of  the  sprinkled  blood,  and  of  Jesus  the  great  sacrifice 
for  sin;  and  then  we  shall  press  upon  all  who  know  the  value  of  the 
great  redemption  that  they  teach  the  young  in  their  earliest  days  what 
is  meant  by  the  death  of  Jesus  and  salvation  through  his  blood. 

The  Paschal  lamb  was  a  special  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We 
are  not  left  to  gather  this  from  the  general  fact  that  all  the  ancient 
sacrifices  were  shadows  of  the  one  true  and  real  substance  ;  but  we  are 
assured  in  the  New  Testament  that  "  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed 
for  us  "  (1  Cor.  v.  7).  As  the  Paschal  lamb  must  be  without  blemish, 
so  was  our  Lord,  and  its  kiliiftg  and  roasting  with  fire  were  typical  of 
his  death  and  suflFerings.  Eveii  as  to  time,  our  Lord  fulfilled  the  type,  for 
the  time  of  his  crucifixion  Wits  the  passover.  As  the  im[.ression  answers 
to  the  seal,  so  dues  the  saerifice  of  our  Lord  correspond  with  all  the  items 
No.  1.988  « 


252  METROPOTJTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


I 


of  the  passover  ceremonial.  We  see  him  "drawn  out"  from  among  men, 
and  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter ;  we  see  his  blood  shed  and  sprinkled; 
we  see  him  roasted  in  the  fire  of  anguish  ;  by  faith  we  eat  of  him,  and 
flavour  the  feast  with  the  bitter  herbs  of  penitence.  We  see  Jesus  and 
salvation  where  the  carnal  eye  sees  only  a  slaughtered  lamb,  and  a 
people  saved  from  death. 

The  Spirit  of  God  in  the  passover  ceremonial  lays  special  emphasis 
upon  the  sprijiMmg  of  the  hlood.  That  which  men  so  greatly  oppose, 
he  as  diligently  sets  forth  as  the  head  and  front  of  revelation.  The 
blood  of  the  chosen  lamb  was  caught  in  a  basin,  and  not  spilled  upon 
the  ground  in  wastefulness ;  for  the  blood  of  Christ  is  most  precious. 
Into  this  bowl  of  blood  a  bunch  of  hyssop  was  dipped.  The  sprays  of 
that  little  shrub  would  hold  the  crimson  drops,  so  that  they  could  be 
easily  sprinkled.  Then  the  father  of  the  family  went  outside,  and 
struck  with  this  hyssop  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts  of  the 
door ;  and  so  the  house  was  marked  with  three  crimson  streaks.  No 
blood  was  put  upon  the  threshold.  Woe  unto  the  man  that  tramples 
upon  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  treats  it  as  an  unholy  thing !  Alas !  I  fear 
that  many  are  doing  so  at  this  hour,  not  only  among  the  outside  world, 
but  among  those  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians. 

I  shall  endeavour  to  bring  forward  two  thing?!.  First,  tlie  importance 
attadied  to  the  sprinkled  hlood;  and,  secondly,  the  institution  connected 
with  it,  namely,  that  the  children  should  be  instructed  in  the  meaning 
of  sacrifice,  so  that  they  also  may  teach  their  children,  and  keep  alive 
the  memory  of  the  Lord's  great  deliverance. 

T.  First :  the  importance  attached  to  the  blood  of  sacrifice 
is  here  made  very  plain.  Pains  are  taken  to  make  the  sacrifice  observ- 
able, yea,  to  force  it  upon  the  notice  of  all  the  people. 

I  note,  first,  that  it  became  and  remained  the  national  marh  If  you 
had  traversed  the  streets  of  Memphis  or  Rameses  on  the  night  of  the 
Passover,  you  could  have  told  who  were  Israelites  and  who  were  Egyptians 
by  one  conspicuous  token.  There  was  no  need  to  listen  under  the 
window  to  hear  the  speech  of  the  people  within  the  house,  nor  to  wait 
till  any  came  into  the  street  so  that  you  could  observe  their  attire.  This 
one  thing  alone  would  be  a  sufficient  guide — the  Israelite  had  the  blood- 
mark  upon  his  doorway,  the  Egyptian  had  it  not.  Mark  you,  this  is 
still  the  great  point  of  diflFerence  between  the  children  of  God  and  the 
children  of  the  wicked  one.  There  are,  in  truth,  but  two  denomina- 
tions upon  this  earth — the  church  and  the  world  ;  those  who  are 
justified  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  those  who  are  condemned  in  their  sins. 
This  shall  stand  for  a  never-failing  sign  of  the  '*  Israelite  indeed  "  :  he 
has  come  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  which  speaketh  better  things 
than  that  of  Abel.  He  that  believeth  in  the  Son  of  God,  as  the  one 
accepted  sacrifice  for  sin,  bath  salvation,  and  he  that  believeth  not  in 
him  will  die  in  his  sins.  The  true  Israel  are  trusting  in  the  sacrifice 
once  offered  for  sin  ;  it  is  their  rest,  their  comfort,  their  hope.  As  for 
those  who  are  not  trusting  in  the  atoning  sacrifice,  they  have  rejected  the 
counsel  of  God  against  themselves,  and  thus  have  declared  their  true 
character  and  condition.  Jesus  said,  "Ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are 
not  of  ray  sheep,  as  I  said  unto  you  "  ;  and  want  of  faith  in  that  shedding 
of  blood,  without  which  there  is  no  remission  of  sin,  is  the  damning  mark 


THE   BLOOD   OF   SPRINKLING   AND  THE  CHILDREN.  263 

of  one  who  is  a  stranger  to  the  commonwealth  of  Israel.  Let  ns  make 
no  question  about  it :  "  Whosoever  goeth  onward  and  abideth  not  in 
the  teaching  of  Christ,  hath  not  God."  (See  2  John  9,  in  the  Revised 
Version.)  He  that  will  not  accept  the  propitiation  which  God  hath 
set  forth  must  bear  his  own  iniquity.  Nothing  more  just,  and  yet 
nothing  more  terrible,  can  happen  to  such  a  man  than  that  \m 
iniquity  should  not  be  purged  by  sacrifice  nor  oflFering  for  ever.  ] 
care  not  what  your  supposed  righteousness  may  be,  nor  how  you  think 
to  commend  yourselves  to  God,  if  you  reject  his  Son,  he  will  reject  t/ou 
If  you  come  before  Gud  without  the  atoning  blood,  you  have  neither 
'part  nor  lot  in  the  matter  of  the  covenant  inheritance,  and  you  are  not 
numbered  among  the  people  of  God.  The  sacrifice  is  the  national  mark 
of  the  spiritual  Israel,  and  he  that  hath  it  not  is  an  alien ;  he  shall  have 
no  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctified,  neither  shall  he  behold 
the  Lord  in  glory. 

Secondly,  as  this  was  the  national  mark,  it  ivas  also  the  saving  token. 
That  night  the  Angel  of  Death  spread  his  wings  on  the  blast,  and  as 
he  flew  down  the  streets  of  Egypt  he  smote  high  and  low,  the  first- 
born of  princes  and  the  first-born  of  beasts,  so  that  in  every  house 
and  in  every  stall  there  was  one  dead.  Where  he  saw  the  blood-mark  he 
entered  not  to  smite  ;  but  everywhere  else  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord  fell 
on  the  rebellious.  The  words  are  very  remarkable:  "The  Lord  will 
pass  over  the  door,  and  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  in  unto 
your  houses  to  smite  you."  What  holds  back  the  sword?  Nothing  but 
the  blood-stain  on  the  door.  The  lamb  has  been  slain,  and  they  have 
sprinkled  their  hou&es  with  the  blood,  and  therefore  are  they  secure. 
The  sons  of  Jacob  were  not  richer,  nor  wiser,  nor  stronger,  nor  more 
skilled  than  the  sons  of  Ham  ;  but  they  were  redeemed  by  the  blood, 
and  therefore  they  lived,  while  those  who  knew  not  the  redeeming  token 
died.  When  Jericho  fell  down,  the  one  house  that  stood  was  that  which 
had  the  scarlet  line  in  the  window ;  and  when  the  Lord  visits  for  sin, 
the  man  that  shall  escape  is  he  who  knows  Jesus,  "  in  whom  we  have 
i  redemption  through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sin  according  to  the 
riches  of  his  grace." 

I  call  your  very  special  attention,  however,  to  the  words  that  are 
used  in  the  twenty-third  verse  :  "  The  Lord  will  pass  through  to  smite 
the  Egyptians ;  and  when  he  seeth  the  blood  upon  the  lintel,  and  on  the 
two  side  posts,  the  Lord  will  pass  over  the  door."  What  an  instructive 
expression  !  "  When  he  seeth  the  blood."  It  is  a  very  comforting  thing 
for  you  and  for  me  to  behold  the  atonement  ;  for  thus  we  gain  peace 
and  enter  into  rest ;  but,  after  all,  the  grand  reason  of  our  salvation  is 
that  the  Lord  himself  looks  upon  the  atonement,  and  is  well  pleased  for 
his  righteousness'  sake.  In  the  thirteenth  verse  we  hear  the  Lord 
himself  say  :  "  When  I  see  the  blood  I  will  pass  over  you."  Think  of 
the  holy  eye  of  God  being  turned  to  him  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world,  and  so  fixed  on  him  that  he  passes  over  us.  He  is  of  purer 
eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity,  but  he  looks  upon  the  face  of  his  anointed 
and  forgives  the  sin.  He  accepts  us  with  our  sacrifice.  Well  does  our 
hjmn-writer  pray — 

**  Him  and  then  the  sinner  see  ; 
Look  through  Jesu's  wounds  on  me." 


254  METROPOLITAN   TABKRNACLE   PULPIT. 

It  is  not  our  sight  of  the  sprinkled  blood  which  is  the  basis  of 
salvation,  but  God's  sight  of  it.  God's  acceptance  of  Christ  is  the  sure 
guarantee  of  the  salvation  of  those  who  accept  his  sacrifice.  Beloved, 
when  thine  eye  of  faith  is  dim,  when  thine  eye-balls  swim  in  a  flood  of 
tears,  when  the  darkness  of  sorrow  hides  much  from  thy  vision,  then 
Jehovah  sees  the  blood  of  his  Son,  and  spares  thee.  In  the  thick  dark- 
ness, when  thou  canst  not  see  at  all,  the  Lord  God  never  fails  to  see  in 
Jesus  that  with  which  he  is  well  pleased,  and  with  which  his  law  is 
honoured.  He  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  near  thee  to  harm 
thee,  because  he  sees  in  Christ  that  which  vindicates  his  justice  and 
establishes  the  needful  rule  of  law.  The  blood  is  the  saving  mark.  At 
this  moment  this  is  the  pressing  question  for  each  one  in  the  company 
gathered  in  this  house:  Do  you  trust  the  divine  propitiation  or  do  you 
not  ?  Bring  to  me  what  you  will  to  prove  your  own  personal  excellence. 
I  believe  in  no  virtue  which  insults  the  Saviour's  blood,  which  alone 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  Rather  confess  your  multiplied  transgressions 
and  shortcomings,  and  then  take  heart  and  hope ;  for  there  is  forgive- 
ness large  and  free  for  the  very  chief  of  sinners,  through  him  who  has 
made  peace  by  the  blood  of  his  cross. 

0  my  hearer,  guilty  and  self-condemned,  if  thou  wilt  now  come  and 
trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  thy  sins,  which  are  many,  shall  be  all  forgiven 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  love  so  much  m  return,  that  the  whole  bent  and 
bias  of  thy  mind  shall  be  turned  from  sin  to  gracious  obedience.  The 
atonement  applied  to  the  conscience  saves  from  despair,  and  then  acting 
upon  the  heart  it  saves  from  the  love  of  evil.  But  the  atonement  is  the 
saving  sign.  The  blood  on  the  lintel  and  on  the  two  side  posts  secured 
the  house  of  the  poorest  Israelite  ;  but  the  pr.iudest  Egyptian,  yea,  even 
Pharaoh  on  the  throne,  could  not  escape  the  destroyer's  sword.  Believe 
and  live.     Reject  the  atonement  and  perish  ! 

Note,  next,  that  the  marTc  of  the  blood  tvas  rendered  as  conspicuous  as 
possible.  The  Israelites,  though  they  ate  the  Paschal  lamb  in  the  quiet 
of  their  own  families,  yet  ma  le  no  secret  of  the  sacrifice.  They  did 
not  make  the  distinctive  mark  upon  the  wall  of  some  inner  chamber,  or 
in  some  place  where  they  could  cover  it  with  hangings,  that  no  man 
might  perceive  it ;  but  they  smote  the  upper  part  of  the  doorway  and 
the  two  side  posts  of  the  door,  so  that  all  who  passed  by  the  house 
must  see  that  it  was  marked  in  a  peculiar  manner,  and  marked 
with  blood.  The  Lord's  people  were  not  ashamed  to  h  ive  the  blood 
thus  put  in  the  forefront  of  every  dwelling:  and  those  that  are  saved 
by  the  great  sacrifice  are  not  to  treat  the  doctrine  of  substitution 
as  a  hole-and-corner  creed,  to  be  secretly  held,  but  not  openly  avowed. 
The  death  of  Jesus  in  our  room  and  place  and  stead  is  not  a  redemp- 
tion of  which  we  are  ashamed  to  speak  in  any  place.  Call  it  old- 
fashioned  and  out  of  date,  our  critics  may  ;  but  we  are  not  ashamed 
to  publish  it  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  and  to  avow  our  confidence 
in  it.  He  that  is  ashamed  of  Christ  in  this  generation,  of  him  will  Christ 
be  ashamed  when  he  comes  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  and  all  his  holy 
angels  with  him.  There  is  a  theology  abroad  in  the  world  which 
admits  the  death  of  Christ  to  a  certain  indefinable  place  in  its  system, 
but  that  place  is  very  much  in  the  rear :  I  claim  for  the  atonement  the 
front  and  the  centre.     The  Latub  must  be  in  the  midst  of  the  throne. 


THE  BLCOD  OF  SPRINKLING  AND  THE  CHILDREN.       255 

Atonement  is  not  a  mystery  scarcely  to  be  spoken  of,  or  if  spoken  of  at 
all,  to  be  whispered.  No,  no,  it  is  a  sublime  simplicity,  a  fact 
for  a  child  to  know,  a  truth  for  the  common  people  to  rejoice  in  I 
We  must  preach  Christ  crucified  whatev^er  else  we  do  not  preach. 
Brethren,  I  do  not  think  a  man  ought  to  hear  a  minister  preach 
three  sermons  without  learning;  the  doctrine  of  atonement.  I  give 
wide  latitude  when  I  say  this,  for  I  would  desire  never  to  preach  at  all 
without  setting  forth  salvation  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Across 
ray  pulpit  and  my  tabernacle  shall  be  the  mark  of  the  blood  ;  it  will 
disgust  the  enemy,  but  it  will  delight  the  faithful.  Substitution  seems  to 
me  to  be  the  soul  of  the  gospel,  the  life  of  the  gospel,  the  essence  of  the 
gospel  ;  therefore  must  it  be  ever  in  the  front.  Jesns,  as  the  Lamb  of 
God,  is  the  Alpha,  and  we  must  keep  him  first  and  before  all  others. 
I  charge  you.  Christian  people,  do  not  make  this  a  secondary  doctrine. 
Keep  your  perspective  right,  and  have  this  always  in  the  foreground. 
Other  truths  are  valuable,  and  may  most  worthily  be  placed  in  the 
distance  ;  but  this  is  always  to  be  in  the  foreground.  The  centre  of 
Christianity  is  the  cross,  and  the  meaning  of  the  cross  is  substitution. 

"  We  may  not  know,  we  cannot  tell, 
What  pains  our  Jesus  bare, 
But  we  believe  it  was  for  us 
He  hung  and  suffered  there." 

TJie  great  sacrifice  is  the  place  of  gathering  for  the  chosen  seed :  we 
meet  at  the  cross,  even  as  every  family  in  Israel  met  around  the  table 
whereon  was  placed  the  lamb,  and  met  within  a  house  which  was 
marked  with  blood.  Instead  of  looking  upon  the  vicarious  sacrifice  as 
p'aced  somewhere  in  the  remote  distance,  we  find  in  it  the  centre  of  the 
church.  Nay,  more  ;  it  is  so  much  the  vital,  all-essential  centre, 
that  to  remove  it  is  to  tear  out  the  heart  of  the  church.  A  con- 
gregation which  has  rejected  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  not  a  church, 
but  an  assembly  of  unbelievers.  Of  the  church  I  may  truly  say,  "  The 
blood  is  the  life  thereof."  Like  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith, 
the  doctrine  of  a  vicarious  sacrifice  is  the  article  of  standing  or  falling 
to  each  church  :  atonement  by  the  substitutionary  sacrifice  of  Christ 
means  spiritual  life,  and  the  rejection  of  it  is  the  reverse.  Wherefore, 
we  must  never  be  ashamed  of  this  all-important  truth,  but  make  it  as 
conspicuous  as  possible.  "  For  the  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them 
that  perish  foolishness  ;  but  unto  us  which  are  saved  it  is  the  power  of 
God.'» 

Further,  the  sprinkled  blood  was  not  only  most  conspicuous,  but  it 
was  made  very  dear  to  the  people  themselves  by  the  fact  that  they  trusted 
in  it  in  the  most  implicit  manner.  After  the  door-posts  had  been  smeared 
the  people  went  inside  into  their  houses,  and  they  shut  to  the  door, 
never  to  open  it  again  till  the  morning.  They  were  busy  inside  :  there 
was  the  roasting  of  the  lamb,  the  preparing  of  the  bitter  herbs,  the 
girding  of  their  loins,  the  getting  ready  for  their  march,  and  so  forth  ; 
but  this  was  done  without  fear  of  danger,  though  they  knew  that  the 
destroyer  was  abroad.  The  command  of  the  Lord  was,  "  None  of  you 
shall  go  out  at  the  door  of  his  house  until  the  morning."  What  is  going 
on  in  the  street  ?    You  must  not  go  to  see.     The  midnight  hour  has 


?5  6  METROPOLITAN   TABEHNACLE   PULPIT. 

come.     Did  you  not  hear  it  ?      Hark,  that  dreadful  cry  !      Again  a 
piercing  shriek  !     What  is  it  ?     The  anxious  mother  asks,  "What  can 
it  be  ?  "     "  There  was  a  great  cry  in  Egypt."     The  Israeh'tes  must  not 
heed  that  cry  so  as  to  break  the  divine  word  ■which  shut  them  in  for 
a  little  moment,  till  the  tempest  was  ovei-past.     Perhaps  persons  of 
doubtful  mind,  during  that  dread  night,  may  have  said,  "Something 
awful  is  happening.     Hear  those  cries  !     Listen  to  the  tramping  of  the 
people  in  the  streets,  as  they  hurry  to  and  fro  !     It  may  be  there  is 
a  conspiracy  to  slay  us  at  dead  of  night."     "  None  of  you  shall  go  out 
at  the  door  of  his  house  until  the  morning  "  was  sufficient  for  all 
who   truly  believed.      They   were    safe,   and   they   knew   it,   and   so, 
like  the  chicks  beneath  the  wings  of  the  hen,  they  rested  in  safety. 
Beloved,  let  us  do  the  same.     Let  us  honour  the  precious  blood  ot 
Christ  not  only  by  speaking  of  it  boldly  to  others,  but  by  a  calm 
and  happy  trust  in  it  for  ourselves.      In  full  assurance  let  us  rest. 
Do  you  believe  that  Jesus  died  for   you  ?     Then  be  at  peace.      Let 
no  man's  heart  fail  him  now  that  he  knows  that  Jesus  died  for  our 
sins  according  to  the  Scriptures.     Let  the  cross  be  the  pillar  of  our 
confidence,    unmoved    and    immovable.      Do   not    be   agitated   about 
what  has  been  or  what  is  to  be :  we  are  housed  in  safety  in  Christ 
Jesus  both  from  the  sins  of  the  past  and  the  dangers  of  the  future.     All 
is  well,  since  love's  atoning  work  is  done.    In  holy  peacefulness  let  us 
proceed  with  our  household  work,  purging  out  the  old  leaven  and  keep- 
ing the  feast  ;  but  let  no  fear  or  doubt  disturb  us  for  an  instant.     We 
pity   those  who   die  without  Christ,   but  we  cannot  quit  our  Lord 
under  the  pretence  of  saving  them  :  that  would  be  folly.     I  know  there 
are  terrible  cries  outside  in  the  streets — who  has  not  heard  them  ?    Oh, 
that  the  people  would  but  shelter  beneath  the  blood-mark  !     It  pierces 
our  heart  to  think  of  the  doom  of  the  ungodly  when  they  perish  in  their 
sins  ;  but,  as  Noah  did  not  quit  the  ark,  nor  Israel  leave  her  abode,  so 
■our  hope  is  not  larger  than  the  cross  will  warrant.     All  who  shelter 
beneath  the  blood  of  the  atonement  are  secure,  and  as  for  those  who 
reject  this  great  salvation,  how  shall  they  escape  ?     There  are  great  and 
sad  mysteries  in  this  long  night,  but  in  the  morning  we  shall  know  as 
much  of  God's  dealings  with  men  as  it  will  be  good  for  us  to  know. 
Meanwhile,  let  us  labour  to  bring  our  fellows  within  the  pale  of  safety, 
but  yet  let  us   be   ourselves  peaceful,  composed,   restful,  and  joyful. 
"There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ 
Jesus."     "Therefore  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."     "  And  not  only  so,  but  we  also  joy 
in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  we  have  now  received 
the  atonement."  Possess  ye  your  souls  in  patience.   Oh,  rest  in  the  Lord, 
and  wait  patiently  for  him.      Feed  upon  the  Lamb,  for  his  flesh  is  meat 
indeed.    That  same  Jesus  who  has  preserved  your  life  from  destruction 
will  be  the  sustenance  of  that  life  evermore.     Be  happy  beneath  the 
saving  blood-mark.     Make  a  feast  of  your  passover.     Though  there  be 
death  outside,  let  your  joy  within  be  undisturbed. 

I  cannot  stay  long  on  any  one  point,  and  therefore  notice,  next,  that 
the  Paschal  hloodshedding  ivas  to  be  had  in  perpetual  rememlrance.  "  Ye 
:shall  observe  this  thing  for  an  ordinance  to  thee  and  to  thy  sons  for 
-ever."     As  long  as  Israel  remained  a  people,  they  were  to  keep  the 


THE  BLOOD  OF  SPRINKLING  AND  THE  CHILDREN.  257 

passover:  so  long  as  there  is  a  Christian  upon  earth  the  sacri- 
ficial death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be  kept  in  memory.  No  progress 
of  years  or  advance  of  thought  could  take  away  the  memory  of  the 
Paschal  sacrifice  from  Israel.  Truly  it  was  a  night  to  be  remembered 
when  the  Lord  brought  out  his  people  from  under  the  iron  yoke  ot 
Egypt.  It  was  such  a  wonderful  deliverance,  as  to  the  plagues  which 
preceded  it,  and  the  miracle  at  the  Eed  Sea  which  followed  it,  that  no 
event  could  possibly  excel  it  in  interest  and  glory.  It  was  such  a 
triumph  of  God's  power  over  the  pride  of  Pharaoh,  and  such  a  mani- 
festation of  God's  love  to  his  own  people,  that  they  were  not  merely  to 
be  glad  for  one  night,  nor  for  one  year,  nor  even  for  a  century ;  but 
they  were  to  remember  it  for  ever.  Might  there  not  come  a  time 
when  Israel  would  have  achieved  further  history?  Might  not  some 
grander  event  eclipse  the  glory  of  Egypt's  overthrow  ?  Never  !  The 
death  of  Egypt's  firstborn,  and  the  song  of  Moses  at  the  Red  Sea 
must  remain  for  ever  woven  into  the  tapestry  of  Hebrew  history. 
Evermore  did  Jehovah  say,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  have  brought 
thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage."  Beloved, 
the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  declared  and  showed  by  us 
until  he  come.  No  truth  can  ever  be  discovered  which  can  put  his 
sacrificial  death  into  the  shade.  Whatever  shall  occur,  even  though 
he  cometh  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  yet  our  song  shall  be  for  ever, 
"  Unto  him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood."  Amid  the  splendour  of  his  endless  reign  he  shall  be  "the 
Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne."  Christ  as  the  sacrifice  for  sin 
shall  ever  be  the  subject  of  our  hallelujahs  :  "  For  thou  wast  slain." 
Certain  vainglorious  minds  are  advancing — advancing  from  the  rock 
to  the  abyss.  They  are  making  progress  from  truth  to  falsehood. 
They  are  thinking,  but  their  thoughts  are  not  God's  thoughts,  neither 
are  their  ways  his  ways.  They  are  leaving  the  gospel,  they  are  going 
away  from  Christ,  and  they  know  not  whither.  In  quitting  the  sub- 
stitutionary sacrifico  they  are  quitting  the  sole  hope  of  man.  As  for 
us,  we  hear  the  Lord  saying  to  us,  "  Ye  shall  observe  this  thing  for  an 
ordinance  to  thee  and  to  thy  sons  for  ever,"  and  so  will  we  do. 
"Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  is  our  boast 
and  glory.  Let  others  wander  where  they  will,  we  abide  with  him 
who  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree. 

Notice  next,  dear  friends,  that  when  the  people  came  into  the  land 
where  no  Egyptian  ever  entered  they  were  still  to  remember  the  pass- 
over.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass,  when  ye  be  come  to  the  land  which  the 
Lord  will  give  you,  according  as  he  hath  promised,  that  ye  shall  keep 
this  service."  In  the  land  that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey  there  was 
still  to  be  the  memorial  of  the  sprinkled  blood.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  not  for 
the  first  day  of  our  repentance  only,  but  for  all  the  days  of  our  lives :  we 
remember  him  as  well  amid  our  highest  spiritual  joys  as  in  our  deepest 
spiritual  griefs.  The  Paschal  lamb  is  for  Canaan,  as  well  as  for  Egypt,  and 
the  sacrifice  for  sin  is  for  our  full  assurance  as  well  as  for  our  tremblmg 
hope.  You  and  I  will  never  attain  to  such  a  state  of  grace  that  we  can 
do  without  the  blood  which  cleanseth  from  sin.  If  we  should  ever 
reach  perfection,  then  would  Christ  be  even  more  precious  than  he  is 
to-day  ;  or,  if  we  did  not  find  him  so,  we  might  be  sure   that  our 


•358  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

pretended  attainment  was  a  wretched  delusion.  If  we  walk  in  the  light 
as  God  is  in  the  light,  and  have  constant  fellowship  with  him,  yet 
still  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin. 

Moreover,  brethren,  I  want  you  to  notice  carefully  that  this  sprinhling 
of  the  Hood  ivas  to  he  an  all-pervading  memory.  Catch  this  thought : 
the  children  of  Israel  could  not  go  out  of  their  houses,  and  they  could 
not  come  in,  without  the  remembrance  of  the  spriakled  blood.  It  was 
over  their  heads ;  they  must  come  under  it.  It  was  on  the  right  hand 
and  on  the  left :  they  must  be  surrounded  by  it.  They  might  almost 
say  of  it,  "  Whither  shall  we  go  from  thy  presence  ?  "  Whethei 
they  looked  on  their  own  doors,  or  on  those  of  their  neighbours,  there 
"was  the  same  threefold  streak,  and  it  was  there  both  by  day  and  by 
night.  Nor  was  this  all ;  when  two  of  Israel  married,  and  the  founda- 
tion of  a  family  was  laid,  there  was  another  memorial.  The  young 
husband  and  wife  had  the  joy  of  looking  upon  their  firstborn  child, 
and  then  they  called  to  mind  that  the  Lord  had  said,  "  Sanctify 
to  me  all  the  firstborn."  As  an  Israelite  he  explained  this  to  his 
son,  and  said,  "  By  strength  of  hand  the  Lord  brought  us  out  from  Egypt, 
from  the  house  of  bondage  :  and  it  came  to  pass,  when  Pharaoh 
would  hardly  let  us  go,  that  the  Lord  slew  all  the  firstborn  in 
the  land  of  Egypt,  both  the  firstborn  of  man,  and  the  firstborn  of 
beast :  therefore  i  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  all  that  openeth  the  matrix, 
being  males  ;  but  all  the  firstborn  of  my  children  I  redeem."  The 
commencement  of  every  family  that  made  up  the  Israelitish  nation  was 
thus  a  time  of  special  remembrance  of  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood ;  for 
then  the  redemption  money  must  be  paid,  and  thus  an  acknowledgment 
made  that  they  were  the  Lord's,  having  been  bought  with  a  price.  In 
ways  many,  and  everywhere  present,  the  people  were  reminded  of  the 
need  of  sacrifice.  To  the  thoughtful,  every  going  down  of  the  sun  re- 
minded him  of  the  night  to  be  remembered ;  while  the  beginning  of 
each  year  in  the  month  Abib  brought  home  to  him  the  fact  that  the 
beginning  of  his  nation  dated  from  the  time  of  the  killing  of  the 
lamb.  The  Lord  took  means  to  keep  this  matter  before  the  people ; 
for  they  were  wayward,  and  seemed  bent  upon  forgetting,  even  like 
this  present  age. 

In  the  thirteenth  chapter,  in  verse  9,  we  read :  "  It  shall  be  for  a 
sign  unto  thee  upon  thine  hand,  and  for  a  memorial  between  thint 
eyes."  And  again,  in  verse  16,  we  read:  "And  it  shall  be  for  a  token 
upon  thine  hand,  and  for  frontlets  between  thine  eyes :  for  by  strength 
of  hand  the  Lord  brought  us  forth  out  of  Egypt."  By  this  is  meant 
that  they  were  henceforth  to  do  everything  with  regard  to  redemption; 
and  they  were  henceforth  to  see  everything  in  connection  with  redemp- 
tion. Redemption  by  blood  was  to  consecrate  each  man's  hand,  so  that 
he  could  not  use  it  for  evil,  but  must  employ  it  for  the  Lord.  He 
could  not  take  his  food,  or  his  tool,  in  his  hand,  without  remembrance 
of  the  sprinkled  blood  which  had  made  his  food  aod  his  labour  a  blessing. 
All  his  acts  were  to  be  under  the  influence  of  atoning  blood.  Oh,  what 
service  you  and  I  would  render  if  it  was  always  redeemed  labour 
that  we  gave !  If  we  went  to  our  Sunday-school  class,  for  instance, 
feeling,  "  I  am  bought  with  a  price,"  and  if  we  preached  with  redeemed 
lips  the  gospel  of  our  own  salvation,  how  livingly  and  lovinglv  wa 


THE  BLOOD  OF  SPRINKLING  AND  THE  CHILDREN.       259 

ehonld  speak  !  What  an  effect  this  would  have  on  our  lives !  You 
would  not  dare,  some  of  you,  to  do  what  you  now  do,  if  you  remembered 
that  Jesus  died  for  you.  Many  a  thing  which  you  have  left  undone 
would  at  once  be  minded  if  you  had  a  clearer  consciousness  of  redeeming 
love.  The  Jews  became  superstitious,  and  were  content  with  the  letter 
of  their  law,  and  so  they  wrote  out  certain  verses  upon  little  strips  of 
parchment  called  "  tephillin,"  which  they  enclosed  in  a  box,  and  then 
strapped  upon  their  wrists.  The  true  meaning  of  the  passage  did 
not  lie  in  any  such  childish  action  ;  but  it  taught  them  that  they  were 
to  labour  and  to  act  with  holy  hands,  as  men  under  overwhelming 
^obligations  to  the  Lord's  redeeming  grace.  Redemption  is  to  be  our 
impulse  for  holy  service,  our  check  when  we  are  tempted  to  sin.  They 
were  also  to  wear  the  memory  of  the  passover  as  frontlets  between  their 
>eyes,  and  you  know  how  certain  Jews  actually  wore  phylacteries  upon 
their  foreheads.  That  could  be  no  more  than  the  mere  shell  of  the 
thing:  the  essence  of  the  command  was  that  they  were  to  look  on 
everything  in  reference  to  redemption  by  blood.  Brethren,  we 
should  view  everything  in  this  world  by  the  light  of  redemption,  and 
then  we  shall  view  it  aright.  It  makes  a  wonderful  change  whether 
jou  view  providence  from  the  standpoint  of  human  merit  or  from  the 
foot  of  the  cross.  "We  see  nothing  truly  till  Jesus  is  our  light.  Every- 
thing is  seen  in  its  reality  when  you  look  through  the  glass,  the  ruby 
^lass  of  the  atoning  sacrifice.  Use  this  telescope  of  the  cross,  and  you 
:shall  see  far  and  clear  ;  look  at  sinners  through  the  cross ;  look  at  saints 
through  the  cross ;  look  at  sin  through  the  cross  ;  look  at  the  world's 
joys  and  sorrows  through  the  cross  ;  look  at  heaven  and  hell  through 
the  cross.  See  how  conspicuous  the  blood  of  the  passover  was  meant 
•'to  be,  and  then  learn  from  all  this  to  make  much  of  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus, 
yea,  to  make  everything  of  it,  for  Christ  is  all. 

One  thing  more  :  we  read  in  Deuteronomy,  in  the  sixth  chapter,  and 
the  eighth  verse,  concerning  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  as  follows: 
""  And  thou  shalt  bind  them  for  a  sijin  upon  thine  hand,  and  they  shall  be 
as  frontlets  between  thine  eyes.  And  thou  shalt  write  them  upon  the  posts 
-of  thy  house,  and  on  thy  gates."  See,  then,  that  the  law  is  to  be  written 
liard  by  the  memorials  of  the  blood.  In  Switzerland,  in  the  Protestant 
villages,  you  have  seen  texts  of  Scripture  upon  the  doorposts.  I  half 
wish  we  had  that  custom  in  England.  How  much  of  gospel  might 
be  preached  to  wayfarers  if  texts  of  Scripture  were  over  Christian 
people's  doors  !  It  might  be  ridiculed  as  Pharisaical,  but  we  could  get 
over  that.  Few  are  liable  to  that  charge  in  these  days  through  being 
religious  overmuch.  I  like  to  see  texts  of  Scripture  in  our  houses,  in 
all  the  rooms,  on  the  cornices,  and  on  the  walls  ;  but  outside  on  the 
door — what  a  capital  advertisement  the  gospel  might  get  at  a  cheap 
rate  !  But  note,  that  when  the  Jew  wrote  upon  his  door-posts 
a  promise,  or  a  precept,  or  a  doctrine,  he  had  to  write  upon  a 
surface  stained  with  blood,  and  when  the  next  year's  passover  came 
round  he  had  to  sprinkle  the  blood  with  the  hyssop  right  over  the 
writing.  It  seems  to  me  so  delightful  to  think  of  the  law  of  God  in  con- 
nection with  that  atoning  sacrifice  which  has  magnified  it  and  made  it 
honourable.  God's  commands  come  to  me  as  a  redeemed  man;  his 
promises  are  to  me  as  a  blood-bought  man ;  his  teaching  instructs  me  as 


2G0  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

one  for  whom  atonement  has  been  made.  The  law  in  the  hand  of 
Christ  is  not  a  sword  to  slay  us,  but  a  jewel  to  enrich  us.  All  truth 
taken  in  connection  with  the  cross  is  greatly  enhanced  in  value.  Holy 
Scripture  itself  becomes  dear  to  a  sevenfold  degree  when  we  see  that  it 
comes  to  us  as  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  and  bears  upon  its  every  page 
marks  of  those  dear  hands  which  were  nailed  to  the  tree  for  us. 

Beloved,  you  now  see  how  everything  was  done  that  could  well  be 
thought  of  to  bring  the  blood  of  the  Paschal  lamb  into  a  high  position 
in  the  esteem  of  the  people  whom  the  Lord  brought  oat  of  Egypt ;  and 
you  and  I  must  do  everything  we  can  think  of  to  bring  forward,  and  keep 
before  men  for  ever  the  precious  doctrine  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of 
Christ.  He  was  made  sin  for  us  though  he  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might 
be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him. 

IL     And  now  I  will  spend  a  short  time  in  reminding  you  of  the 

INSTITUTION   THAT   WAS    CONNECTED  WITH   THE   REUEJIBRANCE   OP   THE 

PASSOVER.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass,  when  your  children  shall  say  unto 
you,  What  mean  ye  by  this  service  ?  that  ye  shall  say,  It  is  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Lord's  passover." 

Inquiry  should  be  excited  in  the  minds  of  our  children.  Oh,  that  we 
could  get  them  to  ask  questions  about  the  things  of  God  !  Some  of  them 
enquire  very  early,  others  of  them  seem  diseased  with  much  the  same  in- 
diflerence  as  older  folks.  With  both  orders  of  mind  we  have  to  deal.  It 
is  well  to  explain  to  children  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  for 
this  shows  forth  the  death  of  Christ  in  symbol.  I  regret  that  children 
do  not  oftener  see  this  ordinance.  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper 
should  both  be  placed  in  view  of  the  rising  generation,  that  tliey  may 
then  ask  us,  "  What  mean  ye  by  this  ?  "  Now,  the  Lord's  Sapper  is  a. 
perennial  gospel  sermon,  and  it  turns  mainly  upon  the  sacrifice  for  sin. 
You  may  banish  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement  froni  the  pulpit,  but  it 
will  always  live  in  the  church  through  the  Lord's  Supper.  You  cannot 
explain  that  broken  bread  and  that  cup  filled  with  the  fruit  of  the  vine, 
without  reference  to  our  Lord's  atoning  death.  You  cannot  explain 
"the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ"  without  bringing  in,  in 
some  form  or  other,  the  death  of  Jesus  in  our  place  and  stead.  Let 
your  little  ones,  then,  see  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  let  them  be  told  most 
clearly  what  it  sets  forth.  And  if  not  the  Lord's  Supper — for  that  is 
not  the  thing  itself,  but  only  the  shadow  of  the  glorious  fact — dwell 
much  and  often  in  their  presence  upon  the  sufferings  and  death  of  our 
Redeemer.  Let  them  think  of  Gethsemane,  and  Gabbatha,  and 
Golgotha,  and  let  them  learn  to  sing  in  plaintive  tones  of  him  who 
laid  down  his  Ufe  for  us.  Tell  them  who  it  was  that  suffered,  and  why. 
Yes,  though  the  hymn  is  hardly  to  my  taste  in  some  of  its  expressions, 
I  would  have  the  children  sing — 

"  There  is  a  green  hill  far  away, 
Without  a  city  wall." 

And  I  would  have  them  learn  such  lines  as  these  : 

"  He  knew  how  wicked  we  had  been, 
And  knew  that  God  must  punish  sin; 
So  out  of  pity  Jesus  said, 

He'd  bear  the  punishment  instead." 


THE  BLOOD  OF  SPEINKLING  AND  THE  CHILDREN.       261 

And  when  attention  is  excited  upon  the  best  of  themes,  let  us  be 
ready  to  explain  the  great  transaction  by  which  God  is  just,  and  yet 
sinners  are  justified.  Children  can  well  understand  the  doctrine  of  the 
expiatory  sacrifice;  it  was  meant  to  be  a  gospel  for  the  youngest. 
The  gospel  of  substitution  is  a  simplicity,  though  it  is  a  mystery. 
We  ought  not  to  be  content  until  our  little  ones  know  and  trust  in 
their  finished  sacrifice.  This  is  essential  knowledge,  and  the  key  to 
all  other  spiritual  teaching.  May  our  dear  children  know  the  cross, 
and  they  will  have  begun  well.  With  all  their  gettings  may  they  get 
an  understanding  of  this,  and  they  will  have  the  foundation  rightly 
laid. 

This  will  necessitate  your  teaching  the  child  his  need  of  a  Saviour. 
You  must  not  hold  back  from  this  needful  task.  Do  not  flatter 
the  child  with  delusive  rubbish  about  his  nature  being  good  and 
needing  to  be  developed.  Tell  him  he  must  be  born  again.  Don't 
bolster  him  up  with  the  fancy  of  his  own  innocence,  but  show  him 
his  sin.  Mention  the  childish  sins  to  which  he  is  prone,  and  pray 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  conviction  in  his  heart  and  conscience.  Deal 
with  the  young  in  much  the  same  way  as  you  would  with  the  old.  Be 
thorough  and  honest  with  them.  Flimsy  religion  is  neither  good  for 
joung  nor  old.  These  boys  and  girls  need  pardon  through  the  precious 
blood  as  surely  as  any  of  us.  Do  not  hesitate  to  tell  the  child  his  ruin; 
he  will  not  else  desire  the  remedy.  "Tell  him  also  of  the  punishment  of 
sin,  and  warn  him  of  its  terror.  Be  tender,  but  be  true.  Do  not  hide 
from  the  youthful  sinner  the  truth,  however  terrible  it  may  be.  Now 
that  he  has  come  to  years  of  responsibility,  if  he  believes  not  in  Christ, 
it  will  go  ill  with  him  at  the  last  great  day.  Set  before  him  the  judg- 
ment-seat, and  remind  him  that  he  will  have  to  give  an  account  of 
things  done  in  the  body.  Labour  to  arouse  the  conscience;  and  pray 
<3}od  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  by  you  till  the  heart  becomes  tender  and 
the  mind  perceives  the  need  of  the  great  salvation. 

Children  need  to  learn  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  that  they  may  find 
immediate  salvation.  1  thank  God  that  in  our  SaWbath-school  we 
believe  in  the  salvation  of  children  as  children.  How  very  many  has 
it  been  my  joy  to  see  of  boys  and  girls  who  have  come  forward  to  con- 
fess their  faith  in  Christ!  and  I  again  wish  to  say  that  the  best 
converts,  the  clearest  converts,  the  most  intelligent  converts  we  have 
eVer  had  have  been  the  young  ones  ;  and,  instead  of  there  being  any 
•deficiency  in  their  knowledge  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  we  have  uj^ually  found  them  to  have  a  very  delightful  acquaintance 
with  the  great  cardinal  truths  of  Christ.  Many  of  these  dear  children 
have  been  able  to  speak  of  the  things  of  God  with  great  pleasure  of 
heart,  and  force  of  understanding.  Go  on,  dear  teachers,  and  believe 
that  God  will  save  your  children.  Be  not  content  to  sow  principles  in 
their  minds  which  may  possibly  develop  in  after  years  ;  but  be  working 
for  immediate  conversion.  Expect  fruit  in  your  children  while  they 
are  children.  Pray  fur  them  that  they  may  not  run  into  the  world  and 
fall  into  the  evils  of  outward  sin,  and  then  come  back  with  broken 
bones  to  the  Good  Shepherd  ;  but  that  they  may  by  God's  rich  grace 
be  kept  from  the  paths  of  the  destroyer,  and  grow  up  in  the  fold  of 
Christ,  first  as  lambs  of  his  flock,  and  then  as  sheep  of  his  hand. 


262  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PUf-PIT. 

One  thing  I  am  sure  of,  and  that  is,  that  if  we  teach  the  children  the- 
doctrine  of  the  atonement  in  the  most  unmistakable  terras,  we  shall  be 
doing  ourselves  good.  1  sometimes  hope  that  God  will  revive  his 
church  and  restore  her  to  her  ancient  faith  by  a  gracious  work  among 
children.  If  he  would  bring  into  our  churches  a  large  influx  of  yomiij 
people,  how  it  would  tend  to  quicken  the  sluggish  blood  of  the  supine 
and  sleepy  !  Child  Christians  tend  to  keep  the  house  alive.  Oh,  for  more 
of  them !  If  the  Lord  will  but  help  us  to  teach  the  children  we  shall  be 
teaching  ourselves.  There  is  no  way  of  learning  like  teaching,  and  yoa 
do  not  know  a  thing  till  you  can  teach  it  to  another.  You  do  not 
thoroughly  know  any  truth  till  you  can  put  it  before  a  child  so  that  he 
can  see  it.  In  trying  to  make  a  little  child  understand  the  doctrine  of 
the  atonement  you  will  get  clearer  views  of  it  yourselves,  and  there- 
fore I  commend  the  holy  exercise  to  you. 

What  a  mercy  it  will  be  if  our  children  are  thoroughly  grounded  in 
the  doctrine  of  redemption  by  Christ  !  If  they  are  warned  against  the 
false  gospels  of  this  evil  age,  and  if  they  are  taught  to  rest  on  the 
eternal  rock  of  Christ's  finished  work,  we  may  hope  to  have  a  genera- 
tion following  us  which  will  maintain  the  faith,  and  will  be  better  than 
their  fathers.  Your  Sunday-schools  are  admirable  ;  but  what  is 
their  purpose  if  you  do  not  teach  the  gospel  in  them  ?  You  get 
children  together  and  keep  them  quiet  for  an  hour-and-a-half,  and 
then  send  them  home  ;  but  what  is  the  good  of  it  ?  It  may  bring 
some  quiet  to  their  fathers  and  mothers,  and  that  is,  perhaps,  why^ 
they  send  them  to  the  school  ;  but  all  the  real  good  lies  in  what  is 
taught  the  children.  The  most  fundamental  truth  should  be  made 
most  prominent  J  and  what  is  this  but  the  cross?  Some  talk  to  chil- 
dren about  being  good  boys  and  girls,  and  so  on ;  that  is  to  say,  they 
preach  the  law  to  the  children,  though  they  would  preach  the  gospel- 
to  grown-up  people!  Is  this  honest?  Is  this  wise?  Children 
need  the  gospel,  the  whole  gospel,  the  unadulterated  gospel ;  they 
ought  to  have  it,  and  if  they  are  taught  of  the  Spirit  of  God  they  are 
as  capable  of  receiving  it  as  persons  of  ripe  years.  Teach  the  little  ones- 
that  Jesus  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  Very,  very 
confidently  do  I  leave  this  work  in  the  hands  of  the  teachers  of  this 
school.  I  never  knew  a  nobler  body  of  Christian  men  and  women  ;  for 
they  are  as  earnest  in  their  attachment  to  the  old  gospel  as  they  are 
eager  for  the  winning  of  souls.  Be  encouraged,  my  brothers  and  sisters :. 
the  God  who  has  saved  so  many  of  your  children  is  going  to  save  very 
many  more  of  them,  and  we  shall  have  great  joy  in  this  Tabernacle  as 
we  see  hundreds  brought  to  Christ.  God  grant  it,  for  bis  name's  sake  I 
Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Exodus  xii.  21 — 36 : 
xiii.  1—10  ;  14—16. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 414,  370,  281. 


NUMBER  1,500,  OR  LIFTING  UP  THE  BRAZEN  SERPENT. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  October  19th,  1879,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  And  MoHes  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  put  it  upon  a  pole,  and  it  came  to  pass, 
that  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived." 
— Numbers  xii.  9. 

This  discourse  when  it  shall  be  printed  will  make  fifteen  hundred 
of  my  sermons  which  have  been  published  regularly  week  by  week.  This 
IS  certainly  a  remarkable  fiact.  I  do  not  know  of  any  instance  in  raodein 
times  in  which  fifteen  hundred  sermons  have  thus  followed  each  other 
from  the  press  from  one  person,  and  have  continued  to  comman<l  a  large 
circle  of  readers.  I  desire  to  utter  most  hearty  thanksgivings  to  God 
for  divine  help  in  thinking  out  and  uttering  these  sermons, — sermons 
which  have  not  merely  been  printed,  but  have  been  read  with  eagerness, 
and  have  also  been  translated  into  foreign  tongues ;  sermons  which  are 
publicly  read  on  this  very  Sabbath  day  in  hundreds  of  places  where  a 
nrimster  cannot  be  found  ;  sermons  which  God  has  blessed  to  the  con- 
version of  multitudes  of  souls.  I  may  and  I  must  joy  and  rejoice  in  this 
great  blessing  which  I  most  heartily  ascribe  to  the  undeserved  favour  of 
the  Lord. 

I  Ihought  the  best  way  in  which  I  could  express  my  thankfulness 
would  be  to  preach  Jesus  Christ  again,  and  set  him  forth  in  a  sermon  in 
which  the  simple  gospel  should  be  made  as  clear  as  a  child's  alphabet. 
I  hope  that  in  closing  the  list  of  fifteen  hundred  discourses  the  Lord  will 
give  me  a  word  which  will  be  blessed  more  than  any  which  have  preceded 
it,  to  the  conversion  of  those  who  hear  it  or  read  it.  May  those  who  sit 
in  darkness  because  they  do  not  understand  the  freeness  of  salvation  and 
the  easy  method  by  which  it  may  be  obtained,  be  brought  into  the  liglit 
by  discovering  the  way  of  peace  through  believing  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Forgive  this  prelude ;  my  thankfulness  would  not  permit  me  to  with- 
hold it. 

Concerning  our  text  and  the  serpent  of  brass.  If  you  turn  to  John'i 
gospel  yon  v\  ill  notice  that  its  commencement  contains  a  sort  of  orderly 
tist  of  types  taken  from  Iloly  Scripti-re      It  begins  with  the  creation. 

No.  1,500.  3 


264  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

God  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  and  John  begins  by  declaring  ih&4  Jema, 
the  eternal  Word,  is  "the  true  Kght,  which  lighteth  every  man  that 
Cometh  into  the  world."  Before  he  closes  his  first  chapter  John  has  in- 
troduced a  type  supplied  by  Abel,  for  when  the  Baptist  saw  Jesus  coming 
to  him  he  said,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world."  Nor  is  the  first  chapter  finished  before  we  are  reminded  of 
Jacob's  ladder,  for  we  find  our  Lord  declaring  to  Nathanael,  "  Here- 
after ye  shall  see  heaven  open,  and  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and  de- 
scending upon  the  Son  of  man."  By  the  time  we  have  reached  the  third 
chapter  we  have  come  as  far  as  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  and  we  read  the 
joyful  words,  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so 
must  the  Son  of  man  be  lift^ed  up,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  jWe  are  going  to  speak  of 
this  act  of  Moses  this  morning,  that  we  may  aJl  of  uslaehold  the  brazen 
serpent  and  find  the  promise  true,  "  every  one  that  is  bitten,  when  he 
looketh  upon  the  brazen  serpent,  shall  live."'|  It  may~be~that  you  who 
have  looked  before  will  derive  fresh  benefirfrom  looking  again,  while 
some  who  have  never  turned  their  eyes  in  that  5irectibn  may  gaze  upon 
the  uplifted  Saviour,  and  this  morning  be  saved  frpnuthe  burning  venom 
of  the  serpent,  that  deadly  poison  of  sin  which  now  lurks  in  their  nature, 
and  breeds  death  to  their  souls.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  make  the  word 
efi'ectual  to  that  gracious  end.  ~" 

I.     I  shall  invite  you  to  consider  the  subject  first  by  noticing  the 

PERSON  IN  MORTAL  PERIL  foF  whom  the  brazen  serpent  was  made  and 

lifted  up.     Our  text  saith,  "It  came  to  pass  that  if  a  serpent  had  bitten 

any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived." 

p  ''Let  us  notice  that  the  fiery  serpents  first  of  all  came  among  the  people 

\Jbeeause  they  had  despised  God's  way  and  God's  breadA  "The  soul  of  the 

Eeople  was  much  discouraged  because  of  the  way."  H  was  God's  way,  he 
ad  chosen  it  for  them,  and  he  had  chosen  it  in  wisdom  aiid_mercy,  but 
they  murmured  at  it.  As  an  old  divine  says,  "It  was  lonesome  and 
longsome,"  but  still  it  was  God's  way,  and  therefore  it  ought  not  to  have 
been  loathsome :  his  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  went  before  them,  and  his 
servants  Moses  and  Aaron  led  them  like  a  flock,  and  they  ought  to  have 
followed  cheerfully.  Every  step  of  their  previous  journey  had  been 
rightly  ordered,  and  they  ought  to  have  been  quite  sure  that  this  com- 
passing of  the  land  of  Edom  was  rightly  ordered,  too.  Bujtj_no ;  they 
quarrelled  with  God's  way,  and  wanted  to  have  their  own  way.  [This  is 
one  of  the  great  standing  follies  of  men  ;  they  cannot  be  content  to  wait 
on  the  Lord  and  keep  his  way,  but  they  prefer  a  will  and  way  of  their 
ownT^ 

The  people,  also,  quarrelled  with  God's  fogd.  He  gave  them  the  best 
of  the  best,  for  "  men  did  eat  angels'  food  ; "  but  they  called  the  manna 
by  an  opprobrious  title,  whictTln"  the  Hebrew  has  a  sound  of  ridicule 
about  it,  and  even  in  our  translation  conveys  the  idea  of  contempt. 
They  said  "  Our  soul  loatheth  this  light  l^ead,"  as  if  they  thought  it 
unsubstantial,  and  only  fitted  to  'punTEem  out,  because  it  was  easy  of 
digestion,  and  did  not  breed  in  them  that  heat  of  blood  and  tendency  to 
disease  which  a  heavier  diet  would  have  brought  with  it.  Being  dis- 
contented with  their  God  they  quarrelled  with  the  bread  which  he 
set  upon  their  table,  though  it  surpassed  any  that  mortal  man  has  ev^- 


NUMBER   1,500,   OB   LIFTmQ   UP  THE   BRAZEN   SEBPBNT.  265 

eaten  before  or  since.  This  ig  another  of  man's  follies ;  his  heart  refasei 
to  feed  upon  God's  word  or  bdieve  God's  truth.  He  craves  for  the 
flesh-meat  of  carnal  reason,  the  leeks  and  the  garlic  of  superstitious 
tradition,  and  the  cucumbers  of  speculation  ;  he  cannot  bring  his  mind 
down  to  belieye  the  Word  of  God,  or  to  accept  truth  so  simple,  so  fitted 
to  the  capacity  of  a  child.  Many  demand  something  deeper  than  the 
divine,  more  profound  than  the  infinite,  more  liberal  than  ft-ee  grace. 
They  quarrel  with  God's  way,  and  with  God's  bread,  and  hence  there 
comes  among  them  the  fiery  serpents  of  evil  lusting,  pride,  and  sLu.  I 
may  be  speaking  to  some  who  have  up  to  this  ruoment  quarrelled  with 
the  precepts  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Lord,  and  I  would  affectionately 
warn  them  that  their  disobedience  and  presumption  will  lead  to  sin 
and  misery.  Rebels  against  God  are  apt  to  wax  worse  and  worse.  The 
world's  fashions  and  modes  of  thought  lead  on  to  the  world's  vices  and 
crimes.  If  we  long  for  the  fruits  of  Egypt  we  shall  soon  feel  the  ser- 
pents of  Egypt.  Tne~hatural  consequence  of  turning  against  God  like 
eei-pents  is  to  find  serpents  waylaying  our  path.  If  we  forsake  the  Lord 
in  spirit,  or  in  doctrine,  temptation  will  lurk  in  our  path  and  sin  will 
sting  our  feet. 

I  beg  you  carefully  to  observe  concerning  those  persons  for  whom  the 
brazen  serpent  was  specially  lifted  up  that  they  had  been  actually  bitt.en  by 
(he  serpents.  The  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents  among  them,  but  it  was  not  the 
serpents  being  among  them  that  involved  the  lifting  up  of  a  brazen  ser- 
pent, it  was  the  serpents  having  actually  poisoned  them  which  led  to 
the  provision  of  a  remedy.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  everyone  that 
■is  bitten,  when  he  looketh  upon  it,  shall  live."  The  only  people  who  did 
look  and  derive  benefit  from  the  wonderful  cure  uplifted  m  the  midst  of 
the  camp,  were  those  who  had  been  stung  by  the  vipers.  The  conmion 
notion  is  that  salvation  is  for  good  people,  salvation  is  for  those  who 
fight  against  temptation,  salvation  is  for  the  spiritually  healthy :  but 
how  different  is  God's  word.  God's  jnedicine  is  for  the  sick,  and  his 
healing  is  for  the  diseased.  The  gfa^ce_9ijGod  through  the  atonement  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  for  men  who  are  actually  and  really  guilty.  We 
do  not  preach  a  sentimental  salvation  ^om  fancied  guilt,  but  real  and 
true  pardon  for  actual  offences.  I  care  nothing  for  sham  sinners :  you 
who  never  did  anything  wrong,  you  who  are  so  good  in  youreelves  that  you 
are  all  right — I  leave  you,  for  I  am  sent  to  preach  Christ  to  those  who 
are  full  of  sin,  and  worthy  of  eternal  wrath.  Thejerpent  of  brass  was  a 
remedy  for  those  who  had  been  bitten. 

What  an  awful  tEmg~it  is~to  be  bitten  by  a  serpent !  I  dare  say 
some  of  you  recollect  the  case~ofTrurling,  one  of  the  keepers  of  the 
reptiles  in  the  Zoological  Gardens.  It  happened  in  October,  1852,  and 
therefore  some  of  you  will  remember  it.  This  unhappy  man  was 
about  to  part  with  a  friend  who  was  going  to  Australia,  and  according 
to  the  wont  of  many  he  must  needs  drink  with  him.  He  drank 
considerable  quantities  of  gin,  and  though  he  would  probably  have 
been  in  a  great  passion  if  any  one  had  called  him  drunk,  yet  reascn  and 
common-sense  had  evidently  become  overpowered.  He  went  ba^k  to 
his  post  at  the  gardens  in  an  excited  state.  He  had  some  m^ths 
before  seen  an  exhibition  of  snake- charming,  and  this  was  on  hia 
poor   muddled   brain.      He  must   emulate  the   Egyptians,  and    pla;? 


266  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PUI^PIT. 

mth  serpents.  First  he  took  out  of  its  cage  a  Morocco  venom -stiake. 
put  it  round  his  neck,  twisted  it  about,  and  whirled  it  round  about 
him.  Happily  for  him  it  did  not  arouse  itself  so  as  to  bite.  The  assistant- 
keeper  cried  out,  "  For  God's  sake  put  back  the^snake,"  but  the_foolisb 
man  replied,  "  I  am  inspired."  Putting  back  the  venom-snake,  he  ex- 
claimed, "Now^for  The  cobra."  This  deadly  serpent  was  somewhat 
torpid  with  the  cold  of  the  previous  night,  and  therefore  the  rash  man 
placed  it  in  his  bosom  tiUJt  revived,  and  glided  downward  till  its  head 
appeared  below  the  backof  his  waistcoat.  He  took  it  by  the  body, 
about  a  foot  from  the  head,  and  then  seized  it  lower  down  by  the  other 
hand,  intending  to  hold  it  by  the  tail  and  swing  it  round  his  head.  He 
held  it  for  an  instant  opposite  to  his  face,~ana  like  j|  flash  of  lightning 
the  serpent  struck  him  between  the  eyes.  The  blood  streamed  down  his 
face,  and  he  called  for  help,  but  his  companion  fled  in  horror ;  and,  as  he 
told  the  jury,  he  did  not  know  how  long  he  was  gone,  for  he  was  "  in  a 
maze."  When  assistance  arrived  Gurlj.ng__wa8  sitting  on  a  chair,  having 
restored  the  cobra  to  its  place.  He  said.  "  I  am_a  dead  man."  They 
put  him  in  a  cab,  and  took  him  to  the  hospital.  First  his  speech  went, 
he  could  only  point  to  his  poor  throat^and  moan  ;  then  his  vision  failed 
him,  and  lastly  his  headng.  His  p^uTse  gradually  sank,  and  in  one  liour 
from  the  time  at  which  he  had  been^strnck  hejwas  a  corpse.  There  was 
only  a  little  mark  upon  the^ fridge  of  liis  nose,  Ijufc  the  poison  spread 
over  the  body,  and  he  was  a  dead  "man;  I  tell  you  that  story  that  you 
may  use  it  as  a  parable  and  learn  never  to  play  \^ith  sin,  and  also  in  order 
to  bring  vividly  before  you  what  it  is  to  be  biCT5rfn5y  a  serpent.  Sup- 
pose that  Gurling  could  have  been  cured  by~Tooking  at  a  piece  of  brass, 
would  it  not  have  been  good  news  for  him  ?  There  was  no  remedy  for 
that  poor  infatuated  creature,  but  there  is  a  remedy  for  you.  For  men 
who  have  been  bitten  by  the  fiery  serpents  of  sin  Jesus  Christ  is  lifted 
up :  not  for  you  only  who  are  as  yet  playing  with  the  serpent,  not  for  you 
only  who  have  warmed  it  in  your  bosom,  and  felt  it  creeping  over  your 
flesh,  but  for  you  who  are  actually  bitten,  and  are  mortally  wounded. 
If  any  man  be  bitten  so  that  he  has  become  diseased  with  sin,  and  feels  the 
deadly  venom  in  his  blood,  it  is  for  him  that  Jeaus  is  set  forth  to-day. 
Though  he  may  think  himself  to  be  an  extreme  case,  it  is  for  such  that 
sovereign  grace  provides  a  remedy. 

The  bite  of  the  serpent  tvas  painful  We  are  told  in  the  text  that  these 
serpents  were  "fiery"  serpents,  which  may  perhaps  refer  to  their  colour, 
but  more  probably  has  reference  to  the  burning  efl'ects  of  their  venom. 
It  heated  and  inflamed  the  blood  so  that  every  vein  became  a  boiling 
river,  swollen  with  anguish.  In  some  men  that  poison  of  asps  which 
we  call  sin  has  inflamed  their  minds.  They  are  restless,  discontented, 
and  full  of  fear  and  anguish.  They  write  their  own  damnation,  they  are 
sure  that  they  are  lost,  they  refuse  all  tidings  of  hope.  You  cannot  get 
tiiem  to  give  a  cool  and  sober  hearing  to  the  message  of  grace.  Sin 
works  in  them  such  terror  that  they  give  themselves  over  as  dead  men. 
They  are  in  their  own  apprehension,  as  David  says,  "  free  among  the 
dead,  like  the  slain  that  lie  in  the  grave,  whom  Goa  remembers  no 
more."*5?It  was  for  men  bitten  by  the  fiery  serpents  that  the  brazen 
serpent  was  lifted  up,  and  it  is  for  men  actually  envenomed  by  sin  that 
Jesus  IS  preached.     Jesus  died  for  such  as  are  at  their  wits'  end  :  for 


imCBEB   1,500,  OR  LIFTINO  UP  THE   BRAZEN   SERPENT.         267 

snch  as  cannot  think  straight,  for  those  who  are  tumbled  up  and  dowB 
in  their  minds,  for  those  who  are  condemned  already — for  such  was 
the  Son  of  man  lifted  up  upon  the  cross.  What  a  comfortable  thing 
that  we  are  able  to  tell  you  this.  z:^"" 

The  hite  of  these  serpents  tvas,  as  I  ^ave  told  ijou,  mortal.  The 
Israelites  could  have  no  question  about  that,  because  in  their  own 
presence  "  much  people  of  Israel  died."  They  saw  their  own  fiiends  die 
of  the  snake-bite,  and  they  helped  to  bury  them.  They  knew  why  they 
died,  and  were  sure  that  it  was  because  the  venom  of  the  fiery  sei'pents 
was  in  their  veins.  They  were  left  without  an  excuse  for  imagining  that 
they  could  be  bitten  and  yet  live.  Now,  we  Icnow  that  many  have 
perished  as  the  result  of  sin.  "We  are  not  in  doubt  as  to  what  sin  will 
do,  for  we  are  told  by  the  infallible  word,  that  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death, " 
and,  yet  again,  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  biingeth  forth  death."  We  know,, 
also,  that  this  death  is  endless  misery,  for  the  Scnplure  describes  the  losfc 
as  being  cast  into  outer  darkness,  "  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and 
their  fire  is  not  quenched.''  Dur  Lord  Jesus  speaks  of  the  condemned 
going  away  into  everlasting  punishment,  where  there  shall  be  weeping, 
and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  We  ought  to  have  no  doubt  about 
this,  and  the  most  of  those  who  profess  to  doubt  it  are  those  who  feai"  that 
it  will  be  their  own  portion,  who  know  that  they  are  going  down  to  eternal 
woe  themselves,  and  therefore  try  to  shut  their  eyes  to  their  inevitable 
doom.  Alas,  that  they  should  find  flatterers  in  the  pulpit  who  pauder  ta 
their  love  of  sin  by  piping  to  the  same  tune.  We  are  not  of  their  order. 
We  believe  in  what  the  Lord  has  said  in  ali  its  solemnity  of  dread,  and,^ 
knowing  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men  to  escape  therefrom. 
But  it  was  for  men  who  had  endured  the  mortal  bite,  for  men  upon  whose 
palUd  faces  death  began  to  set  his  seal,  for  men  whose  veins  were  burning 
with  the  awful  poiso^  of  the  serpent  within  them — for  them  it  was  that 
God  said  to  Moses,^"  Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  upon  a  pole  : 
and  it  shall  come  to  paBs,  that  every  one  that  is  bitten,  when  he  looketh 
upon  it,  shall  live."    ^ 

There  is  no  limil  set.  to  the  stage  of  poisoning:  however  far  gone,  the 
remedy  still  had  power.  If  a  person  had  been  bitten  a  moment  bef^rSy 
though  he  only  saw  a  few  drops  of  blood  oozing  forth,  and  only  felt  a 
little  smart,  he  might  look  and  live,  and  if  he  had  waited,  unhaj>pily 
waited,  even  for  half  an  hour,  and  speech  _fiiiladIEiIm7 and  the  pulse- 
grew  feeble,  yet  if  he  could  but  look  he  would  live  at  once.  No  bound 
was  set  to  the  virtue  of  this  divinely  ordained  renaedy,  or  to  the  freedon> 
of  its  appHcation  to  those  who  needed  it.  The  promise  had  no  quahfying 
dause, — "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  everyone  that  is  bitten,  when  he 
looketh  upon  it,  shall  live,"  and  our  text  tells  us  that  God's  promise 
came  to  pass  in  every  case,  without  exception,  for  we  read — "  It  came  to 
pass,  that  if  a  serpent  had  !>ittcn  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of 
brass,  he  lived."  Thus,  then,  I  have  described  the  person  who  was  in, 
mortal  peril.  /T; 

II.  Secondly,  let  vk  consider  the  remedy  provided  for  him. 
This  was  as  singular  as  it  was  effectual.  It  teas  purelgjipdivine  origin, 
and  it  is  clear  that  the  invention  of  it,  and  the  putting  of  power  into  i^ 
was  entirely  of  God.  Men  have4Jr£Scribed  several  fomentations,  decoc- 
tionB,  and  operations  for  serpent  Mies.:  I  do  aot  know  how  far  any  ol 


168  METROPOLITAN  TABEENAOLB  PULPIT. 

them  may  be  depended  upon,  but  this  I  know — I  would  rather  not  be 
bitten  in  order  to  try  any  of  them,  even  those  that  are  most  in  vogue. 
For  the  bites  of  the  fiery  serpents  in  the  wUdemess  there  was  no  remedy 
whatever,  except  this  which  God  had  provided,  and  at  first  sight  thafc 
remedy  must  have  seemed  to  be  a  very  unlikely  one.  A  simple  look  to 
the  figm-e  of  a  serpent  on  a  pole — how  unlike^To  avail !  How  and  by 
what  means  could  a  cure  be  wrought  through  merely,  looking  at  twisted 
brass  ?  It  seemed,  indeed,  to  be  almost  a  mockery  to  bid  menjook  at  the 
very  thing  which  had  caused  their  misery.  Shall  the  bite  of  a  serpent  be 
cured  by  looking  at  a  serpent  ?  Shairihat  which  brings  death  also  bring 
life  ?  But  herein  lay  the  excellency  of  the  remedy,  that  it  was  of  divine 
origin ;  for  when  God  ordains  a  cure  he  is  by  that  very  fact  bound  to 

fut  potency  into  it.  He  will  not  devise  a  failure,  nor  prescribe  a  mockery, 
t  should  alwuys  be  enough  for  us  to  know  that  God  ordains  a  way  of 
blessing  us,  for  if  he  ordains,  it  must  accomplish  the  promised  result. 
We  need  not  know  hoio  it  wiU  work,  it  is  quite  sufficient  for  us  that 
God's  mighty  grace  is  pledged  to  make  it  bring  forth  good  to  our  souls. 
This  particular  remedy  of  a  serpent  lifted  on  a  pole  was  exceedingly 
instructive,  though  I  do  not  suppose  that  Israel  understood  it.  We  have 
been  taught  by  our  Lord  and  know  the  meaning.  It  was  a  serpent  im- 
paled upon  a  pole.  As  you  would  take  a  shaip  pole  and  drive  it 
through  a  serpent's  head  to  kill  it,  so  this  brazen  serpent  was  exhibited 
as  killed,  and  hung  up  as  dead  before  all  eyes.  •  It  was  the  image  of  a 
dead  snake.  Wonder  of  wonders  that  our  Lord  Jesus  should  conde- 
scend to  be  symbolised  by  a  dead  serpent.  The  instruction  to  us  after 
reading  John's  gospel  is  this :  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  infinite  humilia- 
tion, deigned  to  come  into  the  world,  and  to  be  made  a  curse  for  us. 
The  brazen  serpentjiad  no  venoiu  of  itself,  but  it  took  the  form  of  a  fiery 
serpent.  Christ  is  no  smner,  and  in  him  is  no  sin.  But  the  brazen  ser- 
pent was  in  the  form  of  a  serpeut ;  and  so  was  Jesus  sent  forth  by  God 
^  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  He  came  under  the  law,  and  sin  was 
imputed  to  him,  and  therefore  he  came  under  the  wrath  and  curse  of 
God  for  our  sakes.  In  Christ  Jesus,  if  you  will  look  at  him  upon  the 
oroBS,  you  will  see  that  sin  is  slaiiL-and  hung  up  as  a  dead  ser- 
pent :  there  too  is  death  put  to  death,  for  "  he  hath  abolished  death  and 
iarought  life  and  immortality  to  light : "  and  there  also  is  the  curse  for 
■ever  ended  because  he  has  endured  it,  being  "  made  a  curse  for  us,  as  it  is 
written,  cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  Thus  are  these 
«erpent8  hung  up  upon  the  cross  as  a  spectacle  to  all  beholders,  all  slain 
by  our  dying  Lord.  Sin,  death,  and  the  curse  are  as  dead  serpents 
now.  Oh,  what  a  sight!  If  you  can  see  it  what  joy  it  will  give 
you.  Had  the  Hebrews  understood  it,  that  dead  serpent,  danghng  fi-om 
a  pole,  would  have  prophesied  to  them  the  glorious  sight  which  this  day 
our  faith  gazes  upon — Jesus  slain,  and  sin,  death,  and  hell  slain  in  him. 
The  remedy,  then,  to  be  looked  to  was  exceedingly  instructive,  and  we 
know  the  instruction  it  was  intended  to  convey  to  us. 

Please  to  recollect  that  in  all  the  camp  of  Israel  there  was  but  one 
remedy  for  serpent-bite,  and  that  was  the  brazen  serpent ;  and  there  was 
but  one  brazen  serpent,  not  two. 'Msrael  might  not  make  another.  If 
they  had  made  a  second  it  would  have  had  no  eiTect :  there  was  one,  and 
©uiy  cue,  and  that  was  lifted  high  in  the  centre  of  the  camp,  that  if  any 


HTTMBER   1,500,  OB  LIFTING  UP  THE  BRAZEN  SERPENT.         269 

man  was  bitten  by  a  serpent  he  might  look  to  it  and  live.  Thera  is  oiw 
Saviour,  and  only  one.  There  is  none  other  name  given  under  heaven 
among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved.  All  grace  is  concentrated  in 
Jesus,  of  whom  we  read,  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all 
fulness  dwell."  Christ's  bearing  the  curse  and  ending  the  curse,  Christ's 
being  slain  by  sin  and  destroying  sin,  Christ  bruised  as  to  his  heel  by  the 
old  serpent,  but  breaking  the  serpent's  head, — it  is  Christ  alone  that  we 
must  look  to  if  we  would  live.  0  sinner,  look  to  Jesus  on  the  cross,  for 
he  is  the  one  remedy  for  all  forms  of  sin's  poisoned  wounds. 

There  was  but  one  healing  serpent,  and  that  one  was  bright  and 
lustrous.  It  was  a  serpent  of  brass,  and^brass  is  a  shining  metal.  This 
was  newly-made  brass,  and  therefore  not  dimmed,  and  whenever  the  sun 
shone,  there  flashed  forth  a  brightness  from  this  brazen  serpent.  It  might 
have  been  a  serpent  of  wood  or  of  any  other  metal,  if  God  had  so 
ordained  ;  but  he  commanded  that  it  must  be  of  brass,  that  it  might 
have  a  brightness  about  it.  What  a  brightness  there  is  about  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ !  if^e  do  but  exhibit  him  in  his  own  true  metal  he  is 
lustrous  in  the  eyes  of  men.  If  we  will  but  preach  the  gospel  simply, 
and  never  think  to  adorn  it  with  our  philosophical  thought,  there  is 
enough  brightness  in  Christ  to  catch  a  sinner's  eye,  aye,  and  it  does 
catch  the  eyes  of  thousands.  From  afar  the  everlasting  gospel  gleams 
in  the  person  of  Christ.  As  the  brazen  standard  reflected  the  beams  of 
the  sun,  so  Jesus  reflects  the  love  of  God  to  sinners,  and  seeing  it  they 
look  by  faith  and  live. 

Once  more,  this  remedy  was  an  enduring  one.  It  was  a  serpent  of 
brass,  and  I  suppose  it  remained  in  the  midst  of  the  camp  from  that  day 
forward.  There  was  no  use  for  it  after  ISrael  entered  Canaan,  but,  as 
long  as  they  were  in  the  wilderness,  it  was  probably  exhibited  in  the 
centre  of  the  camp,  hard  by  the  tabernacle  door,  upon  a  lofty  standard. 
Aloft  and  open  to  the  gaze  of  all  hung  this  image  of  a  dead  snake — - 
the  perpetual  cure  for  serpent  venom.  'fHad  it  been  made  of  othei 
materials  it  might  have  been  broken,  or  have  decayed,  but  a  serpent  of 
brass  would  last  as  long  as  fiery  serpents  pestered  the  desert  camp.  As 
long  as  there  was  a  man  bitten  there  was  the  serpent  of  brass  to  heal  him. 
What  a  comfort  is  this,  that  Jesus  is  still  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost 
ail  that  come  to  God  by  him,  seeing^  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  them.  The  dying  thief  beheld  the  brightness  of  that  serpent  of  brass 
as  he  saw  Jesus  hanging  at  his  side,  and  it  saved  him  ;  and  so  may  you 
and  I  look  and  live,  for  he  is  "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever." 

"  Faint  my  head,  and  sick  my  heart, 
Wounded,  bruis'd,  in  every  part, 
Satan's  fiery  sting  I  feel 
Poison'd  with  the  pride  of  hell : 
But  if  at  the  point  to  die, 
Upward  I  direct  mine  eye, 
Jesus  lifted  up  I  see, 
Live  by  him  who  died  for  me." 

I  hope  I  do  not  overlay  my  subject  by  these  figures.  I  wish  not  to  do 
BO,  but  to  make  it  very  plain  to  you.  All  you  that  are  really  guilty,  all 
you  who  are  bitten  by  the  serpent,  the  sure  remedy  for  you  is  to  look  te 


270  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Jesns  Christ,  who  took  our  sin  upon  himself,  and  died  iQ_the  sinner's 
itoad,  "being  made  sin  for  us  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteoiiSDess  of 
God  in  him."  Your  only  remedy  lie^jn  Christ,  and  nowhere  else.  Look 
unto  him  and  be  ye  saved. 

III.  This  brings  us,  in  the  third  place,  to  consider  the  application 
OF  THE  REMEDY,  or  the  link  between  the  serpentckitten  man  and  the 
brass  serpent  which  was  to  heal  him.  What  was  the  link?  It  was  of 
the  most  simple  kind  imaginable.  The  brazen  serpent  might  have  been, 
if  God  had  so  ordered  it,  carried  into  the  house  where  the  sick  man 
was,  but  it  was  not  so.  It  might  have  been  applied  to  him  by  rubbing : 
he  might  have  been  expected  to  repeat  a  certain  form  of  prayer,  or  to 
have  a  priest  present  to  perform  a  ceremony,  but  there  was  nothing  of 
the  kind;  he  had  only  to  look.  It  Y^as  well  that  the  cure  was  so 
simple  for  the  danger  was  so  frequentiij^  Bites  of  the  serpent  came  in 
many  ways ;  a  man  might  be  gathering  sticlcs,  or  merely  walking  along, 
and  be  bitten.  Even  now  in  the  desert  serpents  are  a  danger.  Mr.  Sibree 
says  that  on  one  occasion  he  saw  what  he  thought  to  be  a  round  stone, 
beautifully  marked.  He  put  forth  his  hand  to  take  it  up,  when  to  his 
horror  he  discovered  that  it  was  a  coiled- up  living  serp^.  All  the  day 
long  when  fiery  serpents  were  sent  among  them  the  Israelites  must  have 
been  in  danger.  In  their  beds  and  at  their  meals,  in  their  houses  and 
when  they  went  abroad,  they  were  in  danger.  These  serpents  are 
called  by  Isaiah  "  flying^rpents,"  not  because  they  do  fly,  but  be- 
cause they  contract  themselves  _and  then  suddenjy  spring  up,  so  as  to 
reach  to  a  considerable  height,  and  a  man  might  be  well  buskined  and 
yet  not  be  beyond  the  reach  of  one  of  these  malignant  reptiles.  'What 
was  a  man  to  do  ?  He  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  stand  outside  his  tent 
door,  and  look  to  the  place  where  gleamed  afar  the  brightness  of  the 
serpent  of  brass,  and  the  moment  he  looked  he  was'healed.  He  had 
nothing  to  do  but  to  look,^uo  priest  was  wanted,  no  holy  water,  no 
hocus-pocus,  no  mass^^B5uk,  nothingbut  a  look.  A  Romish  bishop  said 
to  one  of  the  early  ReformersTwnen  he  preached  salvation  by  simple 
faith,  "  0  Mr.  Doctor,  open  that  gap  to  the  people  and  we  are  undone." 
And  so  indeed  they  are,  for  the  business  and  trade  of  priestcraft  are  ended 
for  ever  if  men  may  simply  trust  Jesus  and  live.  Yet  it  is  even  so. 
Believe  in  him,  ye  sinners,  for  this  is  the  spiritual  meaning  of  looking, 
and  at  once  your  sin  is  forgiven,  and  what  perhaps  is  more,  its  deadly 
power  ceases  to  operate  within  your  spirit.  There  is  life  in  a  look  at 
Jesus ;  is  not  this  simple  enough  ?    '>{  -^  -{.■_.  j 

But  please  to  notice  how  very  persmial  it  was.  A  man  could  not  be 
cured  by  anything  anybody  else  could  do  for  him.  If  he  had  been  bitten 
by  the  serpent  and  had  refused  to  look  to  the  serpent  of  brass,  and  had 
gone  to  his  bed,  no  physician  could  help  him.  A  pious  mother  might 
kneel  down  and  pray  for  him,  but  it  would  be  of  no  use.  Sisters  might 
come  in  and  plead,  ministers  might  be  called  in  to  pray  that  the  man 
might  live ;  but  he  must  die  despite  their  prayers  if  he  did  not  look. 
There  was  only  one  hope  for  his  life — he  must  look  to  that  serpent  of  brass. 
It  is  just  so  with  you.  Some  of  you  have  written  to  me  begging 
me  to  pray  for  you :  so  I  have,  but  it  avails  nothing  unless  you 
yourselves  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  There  is  not  beneath  the  copes 
of  heaven,  nor  in  heaven,  any  hope  for  any  one  of  you  unless  you  will 


NUMBER    1,500,   Oa   LIFTING    UP   THE   BRAZEN   SERPENT.  271 

believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  Whoever  you  may  be,  however  much  bitten 
of  the  seipenL,  and  however  near  to  die,  if  you  will  look  to  the 
.Saviour  you  shall  liv;e;  but  if  you  will  not  do  this  you  must  be 
damned,  as  surely  as  youTive.  At  the  last  great  day  I  must  bear  wit- 
ness against  you  that  I  have  told  you  this  straight  out  and  plainly.  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved :  he  that  believeth  not  shall 
be  damned."  There  is  no  help-for  it;  you  may  do  what  you  will, 
join  what  church  you  please,  tajje  the  Lord's  Supper,  be  baptized,  go 
through  severe  penances,  or  give  al^your  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  but  you 
are  a  lost  man  unless  you  look  to  jlesus,  for  this  is  the  one  remedy  ;  and 
even  Jesus  Christ  himself  cannot,  will  not,  save  you  unless  you  look  to 
Lim.  There  is  nothing  in  his  death  to  save  you,  there  is  nothing  in  his 
life  to  save  you,  unless  you  will  trust  him.  U  has  come  to  this,  you 
must  look,  and  look  for  yourself.  y' 

And  then,  again,  it  is  venj  instructhe.  This  looking,  what  did  it 
mean?  It  meant  this — self-heTp  must  be  abandoned,  and  God  must  be 
trnsted.  The  wounded  man  would  say,  "  I  must  not  sit  here  and  look 
at  my  wound,  for  that  m\\  not  save  me.  See  there  where  the  serpent 
struck  me,  the  blood  is  oozing  forth,  black  with  the  venom !  How  it 
burns  and  swells !  My  very  heart  is  !^ing.  But  all  these  reflections 
will  not  ease  me.  I  must  look  away  from  this  to  the  uplifted  serpent  of 
brass."  It  is  idle  to  look  anywhere  except  to  God's  one  ordained  remedy. 
The  Israelites  must  have  understood  as  much  as  this,  that  God  require.- 
us  to  trust  him,  and  to  use  his  means  of  salvation.  We  must  do  as  he 
bids  us,  and  trust  in  him  to  work  our  cure ;  and  if  we  will  not  do  this 
we  shall  die  eternally. 

This  way  of  curing  was  intended  that  they  might  magnify  the  love  of 
God,  and  attribute  their  healing  entirely  to  divine  grace.  The  brazen  ser- 
pent was  not  merely  a  picture,  as  I  ha£fi_shown  you,  of  God's  putting 
away  sin  by  spending  his  wrath  upon  his  Son,  but  it  was  a  display  of  divine 
lOve.  And  this  I  know  because  Jesus  himself  said,  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the 
serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up.  For 
God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son":  plainly 
saying  that  the  death  of  Christ  upon  the  cross  was  an  exhibition  of  God's 
love  to  men ;  and  whosoever  looks  to  that  grandest  display  of  God's  love 
to  man,  namely,  his  giving  his  only-begotten  Son  to  become  a  curse  for 
us,  shall  surely  live.  Now,  when  a  man  was  healed  by  looking  at  the  ser- 
pent he  could  not  say  that  he  healed  himself;  for  he  only  looked,  and 
there  is  no  virtue  in  a  look.  A  believer  never  claims  merit  or  honour  on 
account  of  his  faith.  Faith  is  a  self-denying  grace,  and  never  dares  to 
boast.  Where  is  the  great  credit  of  simply  believing  the  truth,  and 
humbly  trusting  Christ  to  save  you?  Faith  glorifies  God,  and  so  our 
Lord  has  chosen  it  as  the  means  of  our  salvation.  If  a  priest  had  come 
and  touched  the  bitten  man  he  might  have  ascribed  some  honour  to  the 
priest ;  but  when  there  was  no  priest  in  the  case,  when  there  was  nothing 
except  looking  to  that  brazen  serpent,  the  man  was  driven  to  the 
conclusion  that  God's  love  and  power  had  he2ed  him.  I  am  not  saved 
by  anything  that  I  have  done,  but  by  what  the  Lord  has  done.  To  that 
conclusion  God  will  have  us  all  come ;  we  must  aTTconfess  that  if  saved 
it  is  by  his  free,  rich,  sovereign,  undeserved  grace  displayed  in  the  person 
df  his  dear  Son. 


-272  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

IV.  AUow  me  one  moment  upon  the  fourth  head,  which  is  tub  cubi 
EFFECTED.  We  are  told  in  the  text  that  "  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any 
man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived ; "  that  is  to  say,  he  was 
healed  at  once.  He  had  not  to  wait  five  minutes,  nor  five  seconds.  Dear 
.  hearer,  did  you  ever  hear  this  before  ?  If  you  have  not,  it  may  startle  you, 
^  but  it  is  true.  If  you  have  lived  in  the  blackest  sin  that  is  possible  up 
to  this  very  moment,  yet  if  you  will  now  believe  in  Jeeus^Christ  you  shall 
be  saved  before  the  clock  ticks  another  time.  It  is  done  like  a  flash  of 
lightning  ;  pardon  is  not  a  work  of  time.  Sanctification  needs  a  life- 
time, but  justification  needs  no  more  than  a  moment.  Thou  believest, 
thou  livest.  Thou  dost  trust  to  Christ,  thy~aHB  are  gone,  thou  art  a 
saved  man  the  irstant  thou  believest.  "Oh,"  saith  one,  "that  is  a 
wonder."  It  is  a  wonder,  and  will  remain  a  wonder  to  aU  eternity.  Our 
Lord's  miracles  when  he  was  on  earth  were  mostly  instantaneous.  He 
touched  them  and  the  fevered  ones  were  able  to  sit  up  and  minister  to 
him.  No  doctor  can  cure  a  fever  in  that  fashion,  for  there  is  a  resultant 
weakness  left  after  the  heat  of  the  fever  is  abated.  Jesus  works  perfect 
cures,  and  whosoever  believeth  in  him,  though  he  hath  only  beUeved  one 
minute,  is  justified  from  all  his  sins.  Oh  the  matchless  grace  of  God  1 
;^_,  This  remedy  healed  again  and  again,^  Very  possibly  after  a  man  had 
been  healed  he  might  go  back  to  his  work,  and  be  attacked  by  a  second 
serpent,  for  there  were  broods  of  them  about.  What  had  he  to  do  ? 
Why,  to  look  again,  and  if  he  was  wounded  a  thousand  times  he  must 
look  a  thousand  times.  You,  dear  child  oPGod,  if  you  have  sin  on  your 
conscience,  look  to  Jesus.  The  healthiest  way  of  living  where  serpents 
Bwarm  is  never  to  take  your  eye  off  the  brazen  serpent J.t  all.  Ah,  ye 
vipers,  ye  may  bite  if  ye  will ;  as  long  as  my  eye  is  upon  the  braaen  ser- 
pent I  defy  your  fangs  and  poison-bags,  for  I  have  a  continual  remedy 
at  work  within  me.  Temptation  is  overcome  by  the  blood  of  Jesus. 
"  This  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  worl37^en  our  faith." 
2  This  cure  was  of  universal  efficacy  to  all  who  usidU.  There  was  not 
one  case  in  all  the  camp  of  a  man  that  looked  to  the  serpent  of  brass  and 
yet  died,  and  there  never  will  be  a  case  of  a  man  that  looks  to  Jeaus  who 
remains  under  condemnation.  The  beUever  must  be  saved.  Some  of 
the  people  had  to  look  from  a  long  distance.  The  pole  could  not  be 
equally  near  to  everybody,  but  so  long  as  tEey  could  see  the  serpent  it 
healed  those  that  were  afar  off  as  well  as  those  who  were  nigh.  Nor  did 
it  matter  if  their  eyes  were  feeble.  All  eyes  were  not  alike  keen  ;  and 
some  may  have  had  a  squint,  or  a  dimness  of  vision,  or  only  one  eye,  but 
if  they  did  but  look  they  lived.  Perhaps  the  man  could  hardly  make  out 
the  shape  of  the  serpent  as  he  looked.  *'  Ah,"  he  said  to  himself,  "  I 
cannot  discern  the  coils  of  the  brazen  snake,  but  I  can  see  the  shining 
of  the  brass  ; "  and  he  lived.  Oh,  poor  soul,  if  thou  canst  not  see  the 
whole  of  Chi'ist  nor  all  his  beauties,  nor  all  the  rifihes  of  his  grace,  yet  if 
thou  canst  but  see  him  who  was  made  sin  for  us  thou  shalt  live.  If  thou 
sayest,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief,"  thy  faith  will  save 
thee ;  a  httle  faith  will  give  thee  a  great  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  find 
eternal  life  in  him. 

Thus  I  have  tried  to  describe  the  cure.    Oh  that  the  Lord  would 

work  that  cure  in  every  sinner  here  at  this  moment.     I  do  pray  he  may. 

It  is  a  pleasant  thought  that  if  they  looked  to  that  brazen  serpent  by 


HUMBER    1,600,   Oa   LIFTING    UP   THE   BHAZEiJ    SERPENT.         £73 

»ny  kind  of  light  they  lived.  Many  beheld  it  in  the  glare  of  noon,  and 
saw  its  shining  coils,  and  lived ;  but  I  should  not  wonder  that  some  were 
bitten  at  night,  and  by  the  moonlight  they  drew  near  and  looked  up  and 
lived.  Perhaps  it  was  a  dark  and  stormy  night,  and  not  a  star  was 
visible.  The  tempest  crashed  overhead,  and  from  the  murky  cloud  out 
flashed  the  lightning,  cleaving  the  rocks  asunder.  By  the  glare  of  that 
sudden  flame  the  dying  man  made  out  the  brazen  serpent,  and  though  he 
saw  but  for  a  moment  yet  he  lived.  So,  sinner,  if  your  soul  is  wrapped 
in  tempest,  and  if  from  out  the  cloud  there  comes  but  one  single  flash 
of  light,  look  to  Jesus  Christ  by  it  and  you  shall  live.  ,-14.]  l.;-^^^  '^  "^^ 
V.  I  close  with  this  last  matter  of  consideration  :  hefe  is  a  lesson 
FOR  THOSE  WHO  LOVE  THEIR  LoRD.  What  ought  wc  to  do  ?  We 
should  imitate  Moses,  whose  business  it  was  to  set  the  brazen  serpent 
upon  a  pole.  It  is  your  business  and  mine  to  lift  up  the  gospel  of  Christ 
Jesus,  so  that  all  may  see  it.  All  Moses  had  to  do  was  to  hang  up  the 
brazen  serpent  in  the  sight  of  all.  He  did  not  say,  "  Aaron,  bring  your 
censer,  and  bring  with  you  a  score  of  priests,  and  makraT)erfuraed  cloud." 
Nor  did  he  say,  "  I  myself  will  go  forth  in  my  robes  as  lawgiver,  and 
stand  there."  No,  he  had  nothing  to  do  that  was  pompous  or  ceremonial, 
he  had  but  to  exhibit  the  brass  serpent  and  leave  it  naked  and  open  to 
the  gaze  of  all.  He  did  not  say,  "  Aaron,  bring  hither  a  cloth  of  gold, 
wrap  up  the  serpent  in  blue  and  scarlet  and  fine  linen."  Such  an  act 
would  have  been  clean  contrary  to  his  orders.  He  was  to  keep  the  ser- 
pent unveiled.  Its  power  lay  in  itself,  and  not  in  its  surroundings. 
The  Lord  did  not  tell  him  to  pailit  the  pole,  or  to  deck  it  with  the 
colours  of  the  rainbow.  Oh,  no.  Any  pole  would  do.  The  dying  one» 
did  not  want  to  see  the  pole,  they  only  needed  to  behold  the  serpent.  I 
dare  say  he  would  make  a  neat  pole,  for  God's  work  should  be  done 
decently,  but  still  the  serpent  was  the  sole  thing  to  look  at.  This  is 
what  we  have  to  do  with  our  Lord.  We  must  preach  him,  teach  him, 
and  make  him  visible  to  all.  We  must  not  conceal  him  by  our  attempts 
at  eloquence  and  learning.  We  must  have  done  with  the  polished  lance- 
wood  pole  of  fine  speech,  and  those  bits  of  scarlet  and  blue,  in  the  form 
of  grand  sentences  and  poetic  periods.  Everything  must  be  done  that 
Christ  may  be  seen,  and  nothing  must  be  allowed  which  hides  him. 
Moses  may  go  home  and  go  to  bed  when  the  serpent  is  once  uplifted. 
All  that  is  wanted  is  that  the  brazen  serpent  should  be  within  view  both 
by  day  and  night.  The  preacher  mayjudejiimself,  so  that  nobody  may 
know  who  he  is,  for  if  he  has  set  forth  Christ  he  is  best  out  of  the  way. 

Now,  you  teachers,  teach  your  children  Jesus.  Show  them  Christ 
crucified.  Keep  Christ  before  them.  You  young  men  that  try  to  preach, 
do  not  attempt  to  do  it  grandly.  The  true  grandeur  of  preaching  is  for 
Christ  to  be  grandly  displayed  in  it.  No  other  grandeur  is  wanted. 
Keep  self  in  the  background^,  but  set  forth  Jesus  Christ  among  the 
peoplo,  evidently  crucified  among  them.  None  but  Jesus,  none  but 
Jesus.     Let  him  be  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  your  teaching. 

Some  of  you  have  looked  to  the  brazen  serpent,  I  know,  and  you  have 
been  healed,  but  what  have  you  done  with  the  brazen  serpent  since  ? 
You  have  not  come  forward  to  confess  your  faith  and  join  the  church. 
You  have  not  spoken  to  any  one  about  his  soul.  You  put  the  brazen 
serpent  into  a  chest  and  hide  it  away.     Is  this  right  ?     Bring  it  out,  and 


274  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT.  V/i 

■et  it  on  a  pole.     Publish  Christ  and  his  salvation.  \^e  was  never  meant 

to  be  treated  as  a  curiosity  in  a  museum^  he  is  intended  to  be  ex- 

i   hibited  in  the  highways  that  those  who  arr"sin-bitten  may  look  at  him.  / 

.()  "But,  I  have  no  proper  pole,"  says  one.    The'^Best  sort  of  pole  To 

^^  -^exhibit  Christ  upon  is  a  high  one,  so  that  he  may  be  seen  the  further. 

Exalt  Jesus.     Speak  well  of  his  name.     I  do  noTfeiow  any  other  virtue 

'  I U    that  there  can  be  iiTthe  pote  but  its  Tieight.    The  more  you  can  speak  in 

Ti/v^  your  Lord's  praise,  the  higher  you  can  lift  him  up  the  better,  but  for 

^  ,j  all  other  styles  of  speech  there  is  nothing  to  be  said.     Do  lift  Christ  up. 

'^^  "  Oh,"  says  one,  *'  but  I  have  not  a  long  standard."    Then  lift  him  up 

on  such   as  you  have,  for  there  are  short  people  about  who  will   be 

able  to  see  by  your  means.     I   think  I  told  you  once  of  a  picture 

which  I  saw  of  the  brazen  serpent.     I  want  the  Sunday-school  teachers 

to  listen  to  this.     The  artist  represented  all  sorts  of  people  clustering 

round  the  pole,  and  as  they  looked  the  horrible  snakes  dropped  off  their 

arms,  and  they  lived.     There  was  such  a  crowd  around  the  pole  that 

a  mother  could  not  get  near  it.     She  carried  a  little  babe,  which  a 

serpent  had  bitten.     You   could  see   the  blue  marks  of  the  venom 

As  she  could  get  no  nearer,  the  mother  held  her  child  aloft,  and  turned 

its  little  head  that  it  might  gaze  with  its  infant  eye  upon  the  brazen 

serpent  and  live.     Do  this  with  your  Httle  children,  you  Sunday-school 

teachers.     Even  while  they  are  yet  little,  pray  that  they  may  look  to 

Jesus  Christ  and  live ;  for  there  is  no  bound  set  to~Eheir  age.    Old  men 

snake-bitten  came  hobbling  on  their  crutches.    "  Eighty  years  old  am 

I,"  saith  one,  "but  I  have  looked  to  the  brazen  serpent,  and  I  am 

healed."      Little  boys  were  brought  out  by  their  mothers,  though  as 

yet  they  could  hardly  speak  plainly ,*~and  they  cried  in  child  language, 

"I   look   at   the    great   snake  and  it  bless    me."      All    ranks,    and 

sexes,  and  characters,  and  dispositions  looked  and  lived.     Who  will 

look  to  Jesus  at  this  good  hour  ?    0  dear  souls,  will  you  have  life  or 

no  ?     Will  you  despise  Christ  and  perish  ?     If  so,  your  blood  be  on  your 

own  skirts.     I  have  told  you  God's  way  of  salvation,  lay  hold  on  it. 

Look  to  Jesus  at  once.    May  his  Spirit  gently  lead  you  so  to  do.  Amen. 


THE  TRUE  TABERNACLE,  AND  ITS  GLORY 
OF  GRACE  AND  PEACE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  September  27th,  1885,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


•*  And  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  (and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the 
glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,)  full  of  grace  and  truth." — John  i.  14. 

"  For  the  law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ,"— 
John  i.  17. 

There  was  a  time  when  God  freely  communed  with  men.     The  voice  of 
the  Lord  God  was  heard  walking  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day. 
With  unfallen  Adam  the  great  God  dwelt  in  sweet  and  intimate  fellow- 
ship ;  but  sin  came  and  not  only  destroyed  the  garden,  but  destroyed  the 
intercourse  of  God  with  his  creature,  man.    A  great  gulf  opened  between 
man  as  evil,  and  God  as  infinitely  pure ;  and  had  it   not  been  for  the 
amazing  goodness  of  the  most  High,  we  must  all  of  us  for  ever  have 
been  banished  from  his  presence,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power.     The 
Lord  God  in  infinite  love  resolved  that  he  himself  would  bridge  the 
distance,  and  would  again  dwell  with  man  ;  and  in  token  of  this  he 
made  himself  manifest  to  his  chosen  nation  Israel  when  they  were  in  the 
wilderness.     He  was  pleased  to  dwell  in  type  and  symbol  among  his 
people,  in  the  very  centre  and  heart  of  their  camp.     Do  you  see  yonder 
tent  with  its  curtains  of  goats'  hair  in  the  centre  of  the  canvas  city  ? 
You  cannot  see  within  it ;  but  it  was  all  glorious  within  with  precious 
wood,  and  pure  gold,  and  tapestry  of  many  colours.     Within  its  most 
Bacred  shrine  shone  forth  a  bright  light  between  the  wings  of  cherubim, 
which  light  was  the  symbol  of  the  presence  of  the  Lord.     But  if  you 
cannot  see  within,  yet  you  can  see  above  the  sacred  tent  a  cloud,  which 
arises  from  the  top  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  then  expands  like  a  vast 
tree  so  as  to  cover  all  the  host,  and  protect  the  chosen  of  God  from  the 
intense  heat  of  the  sun,  so  apt  to  make  the  traveller  faint  when  passing 
over  the  burning  sand.    If  you  will  wait  till  the  sun  is  down,  that  same 
cloud  will  become  luminous,  and  light  up  the  whole  camp.    Thus  ifc 
was  both  shade  and  light ;  and  by  its  means  was  enjoyed  that  safety 
which  was  afterwards  set  forth  in  the  promise,  "The  sun  shall  not 
gmite  thee  by  day,  nor  the  moon  by  night."     Over  all  the  glory  was  a 
defence  and  a  comfort.     The  Lord  dealt  not  so  with  any  nation,  save 
No.  1.862.  . 


276  THR    TRUE   TABKRNAOLE, 

only  his  people  Israel,  of  wiio;ii  he  said,  -  f  will  dwell  in  them,  and  walk 
m  them  ;  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people.  ' 

The  day  of  the  type  is  over  ;  we  see  no  more  a  nation  secluded  from 
all  others  and  made  to  be  as  "the  church  in  the  wilderness."  God 
doth  not  now  confine  his  abode  to  one  people  ;  for  "  The  God  of  the 
whole  earth  shall  he  be  called."  There  is  now  no  spot  un  earth  where 
God  dwells  in  preference  to  another.  Did  not  our  Lord  say,  at  the  well 
of  Sychar,  "  Woman,  believe  me,  the  hour  cometh,  when  ye  shall  neither 
in  this  mountain,  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father."  "But  .  .  . 
the  true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth  "? 
Wherever  true  hearts  seek  the  Lord,  he  is  found  of  them.  He  is  as  much 
present  on  the  lone  mountain's  side  as  in  the  aisles  of  yonder  abbey,  or  iu 
the  galleries  of  this  tabernacle.  "  Howbeit  the  most  High  dwelleth  not 
in  temples  made  with  hands;  as  saith  the  prophet,  Heaven  is  my  throne, 
and  earth  is  my  footstool  :  what  house  will  ye  build  me  ?  saith  the  Lord : 
or  what  is  the  place  of  my  rest  ?  " 

Yet  there  is  a  true  house  of  God,  a  real  temple  of  the  Infinite,  a  living- 
abode  of  the  Godhead.  The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  speaks  of  "  the  true- 
tabernacle,  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not  man."  There  is  still  a 
trysting-place  where  God  doth  still  meet  with  man,  and  hold  fellowship 
•with  him.  That  place  is  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "in  whom 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  The  manhood  of 
Christ  is  become  to  us  the  anti-type  of  that  tent  in  the  centre  of  the 
camp.  God  is  in  Christ  Jesus ;  Christ  Jesus  is  God ;  and  in  his  blessed 
person  God  dwells  in  the  midst  of  us  as  in  a  tent ;  for  such  is  the  force 
of  the  original  in  our  text.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  tabernacled, 
or  tented,  among  us."  That  is  to  say,  in  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  dwelt 
among  men,  as  God  of  old  dwelt  in  his  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  the 
tribes  of  Israel.  This  is  very  delightful  and  hopeful  for  us  :  the  Lord 
God  doth  dwell  among  us  through  the  incarnation  of  his  Son. 

But  the  substance  far  excels  the  shadow  ;  for  in  the  wilderness  the 
Lord  only  dwelt  in  the  abode  of  man,  but  now  his  approach  to  us  is 
closer,  for  he  dwells  in  the  flesh  of  man.  "The  Word  was  made  flesh, 
and  dwelt  among  us."  Note  that  word  "flesh."  It  doth  not  say,  "The 
Word  was  made  man":  it  means  that,  but  the  use  of  the  word  "flesh" 
brings  the  Lord  Jesus  still  closer  to  us,  and  shows  that  he  took  on  him 
the  very  nature  and  substance  of  manhood  :  he  did  not  merely  assume 
the  name  and  notion,  and  appearance,  of  manhood,  but  the  reality :  the 
weakness,  the  suffering,  the  mortality  of  our  manhood  he  actually  took 
into  union  with  himself.  He  was  no  phantom,  or  apparition,  but  he 
had  a  human  body  and  a  human  soul.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh." 
When  the  Lord  became  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  his 
incarnation  in  a  human  body  brought  him  far  nearer  to  man  than  when 
he  only  abode  within  curtains,  and  occupied  a  tent  in  the  midst  ol 
Israel. 

Moreover,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  God  does  in  the  person  of  Jesus  not 
merely  dwell  among  men  ;  but  he  hath  joined  himself  unto  men — the 
Word  not  only  dwelt  in  flesh,  but  "  was  made  flesh."  It  is  impossible 
to  use  words  which  are  exactly  accurate  to  describe  the  wonderful  incar- 
nation of  the  Son  of  God  in  human  flesh  ;  but  these  words  are  used  to 
show  that  our  Lord  is  as  truly  and  as  really  man  as.  he  is  God.    Noi 


AND    TTS   OTjORY   OF   GRACR    AND    PRACR.  277 

only  does  (4od  dwell  in  the  body  of  man  ;  but  our  Lord  Jesus  is  God  and 
man  in  on-^  pf^rsim.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  speak  of  men  as  his  brethren. 
•*'  Forasmuch  then  as  tlie  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also 
^himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same."  So  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  one 
with  us.  This  approach  to  us  is  exceeding  close.  God  was  never  one  with 
the  tabernacle,  but  in  Christ  Jesus  he  is  one  with  us.  This  union  hath  ia 
it  a  sweetness  of  sympathy,  a  tenderness  of  relationship,  and  a  condescen- 
sion of  fellowship  greatly  to  be  admired.  Now  we  listen  to  the  music 
of  that  blessed  name  Emanuel,  "  God  with  us."  In  the  person  of  the 
only  begotten,  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  we  see  God 
reconciling  the  world  unto  himself.  Let  us  rejoice  and  be  glad  that  we 
have  in  Jesus  more  than  Israel  had  in  the  holy  place  of  the  tabernacles 
of  the  most  High.  The  ancient  believer  gazed  upon  the  sacred  tent, 
he  thought  of  the  holy  place  of  sacrifice,  and  the  Holy  of  Holies,  the 
inner  shrine  of  the  Lord's  indwelling  ;  but  we  have  infinitely  more,  we 
h^ve  God  in  our  nature,  and  in  him  "  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ." 

In  and  around  the  tent  wherein  the  Lord  dwelt  in  the  centre  of  the 
camp  there  was  a  manifestation  of  the  presence  of  God.  This  was  the 
glory  of  that  house  :  but  how  scanty  was  the  revelation  !  A  bright  hght 
which  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  Shekinah,  is  said  to  have  shone 
over  the  mercy-seat  ;  but  the  high  priest  only  could  see  it,  and  he 
only  saw  it  once  in  the  year  when  he  entered  with  blood  within  the 
vail.  Outside,  above  the  holy  place,  there  was  the  manifest  glory  of  the 
pillar  of  cloud  by  day,  and  of  fire  by  night.*  This  sufficed  to  bear 
witness  that  God  was  there  ;  but  still,  cloud  and  fire  are  but  physical 
appearances,  and  cannot  convey  a  true  appearance  of  God,  who  is  a 
spirit.  God  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  senses  ;  and  yet  the  fiery,  cloudy 
pillar  could  appeal  to  the  eyes  only.  The  excellence  of  the  indwelling  of 
God  in  Christ  is  this — that  there  is  in  him  a  glory  as  of  the  only 
begotten  of  the  Father,  the  moral  and  spiritual  glory  of  Godhead.  This  is 
to  be  seen,  but  not  with  the  eyes ;  this  is  to  be  perceived,  but  not  by  the 
carnal  senses  :  this  is  seen,  and  heard,  and  known,  by  spiritu'il  men, 
whose  mental  perceptions  are  keener  than  those  of  sight  and  hearing. 
In  the  person  of  the  Lord  there  is  a  glory  which  is  seen  by  our  faith, 
which  is  discerned  of  our  renewed  spirits,  and  is  made  to  operate  upon 
our  hearts.  The  glory  of  God  in  the  sanctuary  was  seen  only  by  the 
priest  of  the  house  of  Aaron  ;  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Christ  is 
seen  by  all  believers,  who  are  all  priests  unto  God.  That  glory 
the  priest  beheld  but  once  in  the  year  ;  but  we  steadily  behold  that 
glory  at  all  times,  and  are  transformed  by  the  sight.  The  glory  of  God 
in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  is  not  a  thing  of  outward  appearance,  to  be 
beheld  with  the  eyes,  like  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire ;  but  there  is  an 
abiding,  steady  lustre  of  holy,  gracious,  truthful  character  about  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  best  seen  by  those  who  by  reason  of  sanctifi- 
cation  are  made  fit  to  discern  it.  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they 
shall  see  God;  yea,  they  do  see  him  in  Christ  Jesus.  "No  man  hath 
seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him."  Many  of  us  besides  the  apostles  can 
say,  "  We  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father, 
full  of  grace  and  truth."  We  have  not  seen  Jesus  raise  the  dead ;  we  have 


278  ''"'■^   TRUE  TABKRNACLE, 

not  seen  him  cast  out  devils ;  we  have  not  seen  him  hnsh  the  winds  and 
calm  the  waves ;  but  we  do  see,  with  our  mind's  eye,  his  spotless  holiness, 
his  boundless  love,  his  superlative  truth,  his  wondrous  heavenliness ;  in 
a  word,  we  have  seen,  and  do  see,  his  fulness  of  grace  and  truth;  and 
we  rejoice  in  the  fact  that  the  tabernacling  of  God  among  men  in 
Christ  Jesus  is  attended  with  a  more  real  glory  than  the  mere  brilliance 
of  light  and  the  glow  of  fiame.  The  condescension  of  Christ's  love  is 
to  us  more  glorious  than  the  pillar  of  cloud,  and  the  zeal  of  our  Lord's 
self-sacrifice  is  more  excellent  than  the  pillar  of  fire.  As  we  think  of 
the  divine  mysteries  which  meet  in  the  person  of  our  Lord,  we  do  not 
envy  Israel  the  gracious  manifestations  vouchsafed  her  when  "a  cloud 
covered  the  tent  of  the  congregation,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  covered 
the  tabernacle";  for  we  have  all  this  and  more  in  our  incarnate  God, 
who  is  with  us  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

As  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  help  me,  I  shall  at  this  time  say,  first  of  all. 
Let  us  behold  this  tabernacling  of  God;  and,  secondly,  Let  us  avail  our' 
selves  of  this  tabernacling  of  God  in  all  the  wags  for  which  it  ivas 
intended. 

I.  First,  then,  Let  US  behold  this  tabernacling  of  God  with 
us.  "  W"e  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the 
Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  In  Jesus  Christ  all  the  attributes  of 
God  are  to  be  seen ;  veiled,  but  yet  verily  there.  You  have  only  to  read 
the  gospels,  and  to  look  with  willing  eyes,  and  you  shall  behold  in  Christ 
all  that  can  possibly  be  seen  of  God.  It  is  veiled  in  human  flesh,  as  it 
must  be  ;  for  the  glory  of  God  is  not  to  be  seen  by  us  absolutely ;  it  is 
tuned  down  to  these  dim  eyes  of  ours ;  but  the  Godhead  is  there,  the 
perfect  Godhead  in  union  with  the  perfect  manhood  of  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 

Two  divine  things  are  more  clearly  seen  in  Jesus  than  aught  else. 
Upon  these  I  would  speak  at  this  time,  considering  the  two  together, 
and  then  each  one  separately — "  Full  of  grace  and  truth." 

Observe  the  two  glorious  qualities,  joined  inseparably — grace  and 
truth — and  observe  that  they  are  spoken  of  in  the  concrete.  The  apostle 
says  that  the  only  begotten  is  "  full  of  grace  and  truth."  He  did  not 
come  to  tell  us  about  grace,  but  actually  to  bring  us  grace.  He  is  not 
full  of  the  news  of  grace  and  truth,  but  of  grace  and  truth  themselves. 
Others  had  been  messengers  of  gracious  tidings,  but  he  came  to  bring 
grace.  Others  teach  us  truth,  but  Jesus  is  the  truth.  He  is  that  grace 
and  truth  whereof  others  spake.  Jesus  is  not  merely  a  teacher,  an 
exhorter,  a  worker  of  grace  and  truth ;  but  these  heavenly  things  are  in 
him :  he  is  full  of  them.  I  want  you  to  note  this.  It  raises  such  a 
ditfereuce  between  Christ  and  others  :  you  go  to  others  to  hear  of  grace 
and  truth,  but  you  must  go  to  Christ  to  see  them.  There  may  be,  there 
is,  grace  in  other  men ;  but  not  as  it  is  in  Christ :  they  have  it  as 
water  flowing  through  a  pipe,  but  he  has  it  as  water  in  its  fountain  and 
source.  He  has  grace  to  communicate  to  the  sons  of  men,  grace  without 
measure,  grace  essential  and  abiding.  There  is  truth  in  others  where 
God  has  wrought  it,  by  his  Spirit ;  but  it  is  not  in  them  as  it  is  in 
Christ.  In  him  dwell  the  depth,  the  substance,  the  essence  of  the  tact. 
Grace  and  truth  come  to  us  by  him,  and  yet  they  evermore  abide  in 
'  him.     I  say  again,  our  Lord  did  not  merely  come  to  teach  grace  and 


AND  ITS  GLORY  OF  GRACE  AND  PEACE.  279 

truth,  or  to  impress  them  upon  ns  ;  but  he  came  to  exhibit  in  his  own 
person,  life,  and  work,  all  the  g-race  and  truth  which  we  need.     He  has 
brought  us  grace  in  rivers  and  truth  in  streams  :  of  these  he  has  an , 
infinite  fulness  ;  of  that  fulness  all  his  saints  receive,  ' 

This  grace  and  truth  are  blended.  The  "and"  between  the  two  words  I 
would  treat  as  more  than  a  common  conjunction.  The  two  rivers  unite  in 
one  fulness — "Full  of  grace  and  truth":  that  is  to  say,  the  grace  is  truthful 
grace,  grace  not  in  fiction  nor  in  fancy,  grace  not  to  be  hoped  for  and  to 
be  dreamed  of,  but  grace  every  atom  of  which  is  fact  ;  redemption 
which  does  redeem,  pardon  which  does  blot  out  sin,  renewal  which 
actually  regenerates,  salvation  which  completely  saves.  We  have  not 
here  blessings  which  charm  the  ear  and  cheat  the  soul ;  but  real,  sub- 
Btantial  favours  from  God  that  cannot  lie.  Then  blend  these  things  the 
other  way.  "  Grace  and  truth  ":  the  Lord  has  come  to  bring  us  truth, 
but  it  is  not  the  kind  of  truth  which  censures,  condemns,  and  punishes  ; 
it  is  gracious  truth,  truth  steeped  in  love,  truth  saturated  with 
mercy.  The  truth  which  Jesus  brings  to  his  people  comes  not  from  the 
judgment-seat,  but  from  the  mercy-sear  ;  it  hath  a  gracious  drift  and  aim 
about  it,  and  ever  tends  unto  salvation.  His  light  is  the  life  of  men. 
If  thou  art  overshadowod  with  a  dark  truth  which  seems  to  deepen  thy 
despair,  look  thou  to  it  again  and  thou  wilt  perceive  within  it  a  hidden 
light  which  is  sown  for  the  righteous.  The  darkness  of  convincing 
and  humbling  truth  maketh  for  light :  by  engendering  despair  of  self, 
heart-searching  truth  is  meant  to  drive  thee  to  the  true  hope.  There  is 
grace  to  God's  people  in  everything  that  falls  from  the  lips  of  Jesus 
Christ.  His  li[is  are  like  lilies  dropping  sweet  smelling  myrrh  ;  myrrh 
in  itself  is  l)ittei',  but  such  is  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  that  his  lips 
impai't  sweetness  to  it.  See  how  grace  and  truth  thus  blend,  and 
qualify  each  other !  The  grace  is  all  true,  and  the  truth  is  all  gracious. 
This  is  a  wondrous  compound  made  according  to  the  art  of  the  divine 
Apothecary.     Where  else  is  grace  so  true,  or  truth  so  gracious  ? 

Furthermore,  it  is  grace  and  truth  balanced.  I  wish  I  were  able  to 
communicate  my  thoughts  this  morning  as  they  came  to  me  when  I 
was  meditating  upon  this  passage  ;  but  this  thought  almost  speaks  for 
itseltl  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  lull  of  grace ;  but  then  he  has  not 
neglected  the  other  quality  which  is  somewhat  sterner,  namely,  that  of 
truth.  I  have  known  many  in  this  world  very  loving  and  affectionate, 
but  they  have  not  been  faithful :  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  known 
men  to  be  sternly  honest  and  truthful,  but  they  have  not  been  gentle  and 
kind  :  but  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  there  is  no  defect  either  way.  He  is 
full  of  grace  which  doth  invite  the  publican  and  the  sinner  to  himself ;  but 
he  is  full  of  truth  which  doth  repel  the  hypocrite  and  Pharisee.  He  does 
not  hide  from  man  a  truth  however  terrible  it  may  be,  but  he  plainly  de- 
clares the  wrath  of  God  against  all  unrighteousness.  But  when  he  has 
spoken  terrible  truth,  he  has  uttered  it  in  such  a  gracious  and  tender 
manner,  with  so  many  tears  of  compassion  for  the  ignorant  and  those  that 
are  out  of  the  way,  that  you  are  as  much  won  by  his  grace  as  convinced 
by  his  truth.  Our  Lord's  ministry  is  not  truth  alone,  nor  grace  alone ; 
but  it  is  a  balanced,  well-ordered  system  of  grace  and  truth.  The  Lord 
himself  is  in  his  character  "just  and  having  salvation."  He  is  both  King 
of  righteousness  and  King  of  peace.     He  does  not  even  save  unjustly, 


i 


2gQ  THE   TRUE   TABERNACLE, 

nor  does  he  proclaim  truth  uulovingly.  Grace  and  tr.ith  are  equally 
conspicuous  in  him. 

Beloved,  notice  here  that  both  tliese  qualities  in  our  Lord  are  at  fh» 
fill/.  He  is  "  full  of  grace."  Wiio  could  be  more  80  ?  In  the  person  of 
/  Je^ns  Christ  the  immeasurable  "-race  of  God  is  treasured  up.  God  has 
done  for  us  by  Christ  Jesus  exceeding  abundantly  al)0ve  all  that  we  ask, 
or  even  think.  It  is  not  possible  even  for  imagination  to  conceive  of 
any  person  more  gracious  than  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  You  cannot  desire, 
certainly  you  cannot  require,  anything  that  should  exceed  what  is  found 
of  grace  in  the  person,  offices,  work,  and  death  of  the  only  begotten. 
Come,  ye  that  have  large  minds,  and  intellects  that  are  creative,  and 
see  if  ye  can  devise  anything  that  should  be  mentioned  in  the  same  day 
with  what  God,  in  the  infinite  glory  of  his  grace,  has  given  us  in  the 
person  of  his  Son.  And  there  is  an  equal  fulness  of  truth  about  our 
Lord.  He  himself,  as  he  comes  to  us  as  the  revelation  and  manifesta- 
tion of  God,  declares  to  us,  not  some  truth,  but  all  troth.  All  of  God  is 
in  Christ ;  and  all  of  God  means  all  that  is  true,  and  all  that  is  right, 
and  all  that  is  faithful,  and  all  that  is  just,  all  that  is  according  to 
righteousness  and  holiness  Christ  Jesus  has  brought  to  us  the 
justice,  truth,  and  righteousness  of  God  to  the  full :  he  is  the  Lord  our 
righteousness.  There  are  no  reserves  of  disagreeable  fact  in  Christ. 
There  is  nothing  hidden  from  us  of  truth  that  might  alarm  us,  nor  any- 
thing that  might  have  shaken  our  confidence  ;  nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
is  any  truth  kept  back  which  might  have  increased  onr  steadfastness. 
He  says,  "  If  it  were  not  so  I  would  have  told  you."  Admire  the  full- 
orbed  splendour  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  Ask  not  with  Pilate, 
"  What  is  truth  ?  "  but  behold  it  in  God's  dear  Son.  Oh,  I  know  not 
|,how  to  speak  to  you  upon  themes  so  full  and  deep !  How  shall  I,  that  am 
but  as  a  twinkling  dewdrop  on  a  l)lade  of  grass,  reflect  the  full  glory  of 
this  Sun  of  Rigliteousness  ?  But  all  truth  and  all  grace  dwell  in  Christ 
in  all  their  fulness  beyond  conceptioM,  and  the  two  lie  in  each  other's 
bosoms  for  ever,  to  bless  us  with  boundless,  endless  joy  and  glory. 

'I'hus  have  I  taken  the  two  together.  Now  I  want  to  dwell  briefly 
on  each  one  by  itself. 

Grace  is  put  first.  "  We  beheld  his  glory  the  glory  as  of  the  only 
begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace."  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  ; 
he  is  his  only  begotten  Son.  Others  are  begotten  of  God,  but  no  other 
was  ever  begotten  of  God  as  Christ  was ;  consequently,  when  he  came 
into  this  world  the  glory  that  was  about  him  was  a  glory  as  of  the  only 
begotten,  A  very  singular,  and  very  special,  and  incommunicable 
glory  abides  in  the  person  of  our  Lord.  Part  of  this  was  the  glory  of 
his  grace.  Now,  in  the  Old  Testament,  in  that  thirty-fourth  chapter  of 
Exodus,  which  we  read  in  part  this  morning,  you  notice  that  the  glory 
of  God  lay  in  his  being  "the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  long- 
sutiering,  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth."  The  glory  of  the  only 
begotten  of  the  Father  must  lie  in  the  same  things  as  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  namely,  in  longsuffering,  goodness,  and  truth.  In  Clirist  there 
is  a  wonderful  display  of  the  gentleness,  patience,  pity,  mercy,  and  love 
of  God.  Not  merely  did  he  teach  the  grace  of  God,  and  invite  us  to  the 
grace  of  God,  but  in  himself  he  displayed  the  grace  of  God. 

This  is  to  be  seen,  first,  in  his  incarnation.   It  is  a  wonderful  instance 


AND    ITS  GLORY   OF    GRACE   A.-TD    PKACE.  281 

of  divine  grace  that  tlie  Word  should  be  made  flesh  and  dwell  among 
us,  and  reveal  his  glory  to  us.  Apnrt  from  anything  that  springs  out 
of  the  incarnation  of  Clirist,  that  incarnation  itself  is  a  wondrous  act 
of  grace.  There  must  be  hope  for  men  now  that  man  is  next  aiiin 
to  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  The  angels  were  not  mistaken  when 
they  not  only  sang,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  but  also,  "  on  earth 
peace,  goodwill  towards  men,"  because  in  Bethlehem  the  Son  of  God  wa3 
born  of  a  virgin.  God  in  our  nature  must  mean  God  with  gracious 
thoughts  towards  us.  If  the  Lord  had  meant  to  destroy  the  race,  he 
never  would  have  espoused  it  and  taken  it  into  union  with  himself 
There  is  fulness  of  grace  in  the  fkct  of  the  Word  made  flesh  tabernacling 
among  us. 

More  than  this,  there  is  fulness  of  grace  in  the  life  of  Christ  when  we 
consider  that  he  lived  here  in  order  to  perfect  himself  as  our  High 
Priest.  Was  he  not  made  perfect  through  his  sufferings,  that  he  might 
sympathize  with  us  in  all  our  woes  ?  He  was  compassed  with  in- 
firmities, and  bare  our  sorrows,  and  endured  those  crosses  of  the  humaa 
life  which  press  so  heavily  on  our  own  shoulders  ;  and  all  this  to  make 
himself  able  to  deal  graciously  with  us  in  a  tender  and  brotherly  way. 
Apart  from  chat  which  comes  out  of  this  wonderful  brotherhood,  there 
is  a  bottomless  depth  of  grace  about  the  fellowship  itself.  The  Lord 
Jesus  cannot  curse  me,  for  he  has  borne  my  curse :  he  cannot  be  unkind 
to  me,  for  he  has  shared  my  sorrows.  If  every  pang  that  rends  my 
heart  has  also  rent  his  heart,  and  if  into  all  my  woes  he  has  descended 
even  deeper  than  I  have  gone,  it  must  mean  hj\e  to  me,  it  cannot  mean 
anything  else  ;  and  it  must  mean  truth,  for  Jesus  did  not  play  at 
fellowship,  his  griefs  were  real.  I  say  then  that  this  manifestation  of 
God  in  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus  is  seen  in  his  sorrowing  life  to  be  full 
of  grace  and  truth. 

Then  think  for  a  minute  of  what  he  did.  He  was  so  full  of  grace 
that  when  he  spake  his  words  dropped  a  fatness  of  grace,  the  dew  of 
his  own  love  was  upon  all  his  discourses ;  and  when  he  moved  about 
and  touched  men  here  and  there,  virtue  went  out  of  him,  because  he 
was  so  full  of  it.  At  one  time  he  spake  and  pardoned  a  sinner,  saying, 
'*  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee  ":  at  another  moment  he  battled  with  the 
consequences  of  sin,  raising  men  from  sickness  and  from  death  :  again 
he  turned  himself  and  fought  with  the  prince  of  darkness  himself,  and 
cast  him  out  from  those  whom  he  tormented.  He  went  about  like  a 
cloud  which  is  big  with  rain,  and  therefore  plentifully  waters  waste 
places.  His  life  was  boundless  compassion.  There  was  a  power  of  grace 
about  his  garments,  his  voice,  his  look  ;  and  in  all  he  was  so  true  that 
none  ever  thought  him  capable  of  subterfuge.  Everywhere  he  wont  he 
scattered  grace  among  the  children  of  men;  and  he  is  just  the  same 
now  ;  fulness  of  grace  abides  in  him  still. 

When  it  came  to  his  death,  which  was  the  pouring  out  of  his  soul, 
then  his  fulness  of  grace  was  seen.  He  was  full  of  grace  indeed,  foras- 
much as  he  emptied  himself  to  save  men.  He  was  himself  not  only 
man's  Saviour,  but  his  salvation.  He  gave  himself  for  us.  He  was 
indeed  full  of  grace  wiien  he  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree. 
His  was  love  at  its  height,  since  he  died  on  the  cross,  *'  the  just  for  the 
unjust,  to  bring  us  to  Uod."     Pronounce  the  word  "substitution,"  and 


282  THE   TRUE   TABERNACLE, 

you  cannot  help  feelin^  that  the  Substitute  for  ,2:uilty  man  was  full  of  grace ; 
or  use  that  other  word,  "representative,"  and  remember  that  whatever 
Jesus  did,  he  did  as  the  covenant  head  of  his  people.  If  he  died,  they 
died  in  him ;  if  he  rose  again,  they  rose  in  him ;  if  he  ascended  up  on 
high,  they  ascended  in  him ;  and  if  he  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  they 
also  sit  in  the  heavenly  places  in  him.  When  he  shall  come  a  second  time 
it  sliall  be  to  claim  the  kingdom  for  his  chosen  as  well  as  for  himself;  and 
all  the  glory  of  the  future  ages  is  for  them,  and  not  for  himself  alone. 
He  saith,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  Oh,  the  richness  of  the 
grace  and  truth  that  dwell  in  our  Lord  as  the  representative  of  his 
^people  !  he  will  enjoy  nothing  unless  his  people  enjoy  it  with  him. 
"  Where  I  am,  there  also  shall  my  servant  be."  To  him  that  uver- 
cometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame, 
and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne." 

There  is  yet  another  word  higher  than  "  substitution,"  higher  than 
"representation,"  and  that  is  "  union."  We  are  one  with  Christ,  joined 
to  him  by  a  union  that  never  can  be  broken.  Not  only  does  he  do 
what  he  does,  representing  us,  but  we  are  joined  unto  him  in  one  spirit, 
members  of  his  body,  and  partakers  of  his  glory.  Is  not  this  grace, 
grace  unspeakable?  Is  it  not  a  miracle  of  love  that  worms  of  earth 
should  ever  be  one  with  incarnate  Deity,  and  so  one  that  they  never  can 
be  separated  throughout  the  ages  ? 

Thus  I  have  shown  you  that  there  is  in  our  Lord  a  fulness  of  grace. 
Your  own  thoughts  will  dig  deeper  than  mine. 

But  then  it  is  said  there  is  in  him  also  a  fulness  of  truth,  by  which  I 
understand  that  in  Christ  himself,  not  merely  in  what  he  said,  and  did, 
and  promised,  there  is  a  fulness  of  truth.  And  this  is  true,  first,  in  the 
fact  that  he  is  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  promises  that  went  before  con- 
cerning him.  God  had  promised  great  things  by  his  prophets  concerning 
the  coming  Messiah,  but  all  those  predictions  are  absolutely  matters  of 
fact  in  the  person  of  the  Well-beloved.  "  All  the  promises  of  God  are 
yea  and  Amen  in  Christ  Jesus."  Verily  he  hath  bruised  the  serpent's 
head.  Verily  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows.  Verily 
he  hath  proclaimed  liberty  to  the  captives.  Verily  he  hath  proved  him- 
self a  prophet  like  unto  Moses. 

According  to  my  second  text,  in  verse  seventeen,  I  understand  our 
Lord  Jesus  to  be  "  truth  "  in  the  sense  of  being  the  substance  of  all  the 
types.  The  law  that  was  given  by  Moses  was  but  symbolical  and 
emblematical ;  but  Jesus  is  the  truth.  He  is  really  that  blood  of  sprink- 
ling which  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel ;  he  is  in  very  deed  the 
paschal  lamb  of  God's  passover :  he  is  the  burnt-otfering,  the  sin-offering, 
and  the  peace-offering — all  in  one  !  He  is  the  true  scapegoat,  the  true 
morning  and  evening  lamb  ;  in  fact,  he  is  in  truth  what  all  the  types 
and  figures  were  in  pattern.  Blessed  be  God,  brethren,  whenever  you 
Bee  great  things  in  the  Old  Testament  in  the  type,  you  see  the  real 
truth  of  those  things  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  Jew 
had  nothing  that  we  have  not :  he  had  nothing  even  in  outline  and 
shadow  which  we  have  not  obtained  in  substance.  The  covenant 
in  its  fulness  is  in  Christ  :  the  prophecy  is  in  Moses,  the  fulfilment  is 
in  Jesus :  the  foreshadowing  is  in  the  law,  the  truth  is  in  the  Word 
made  flesh. 


AND   ITS   GL(»RY   OF   GRACE   AND   PKACE.  283 

Further  than  that,  our  T^ord  Jesns  Christ  is  said  to  be  i^race  and 
truth  in  this  sense,  tliat  he  truthfully  deals  with  matters  of  fact  in  the 
case  of  our  salvation.  I  know  the  notion  of  the  world  is  that  the 
salvation  of  Christ  is  a  pretty  dream,  a  handsome  piece  of  sentiment.  But 
there  is  nothing  dreamy  about  it :  it  is  no  fiction  ;  it  is  fact  upon  fact. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  does  not  gloss  over  or  conceal  the  condition  of 
man  in  his  salvation  ;  he  finds  man  condemned,  and  takes  him  as  con- 
demned in  the  very  worst  sense,  condemned  of  a  capital  offence  ;  and  as 
man's  substitute  he  endures  the  capital  penalty,  and  dies  in  the  sinner's 
stead.  The  Lord  Jesus  views  the  sinner  as  depraved,  yea,  as  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  and  he  quickens  him  by  his  resurrection  life.  He 
does  not  wink  at  the  result  of  the  ftill  and  of  actual  sin ;  but  he  comes 
to  the  dead  sinner  and  quickens  him  ;  he  comes  to  the  diseased  heart 
and  heals  it.  To  me  the  gospel  is  a  wonderful  embodiment  of  omnipo- 
tent wisdom  and  truth.  If  the  gospel  had  said  to  men,  '*  The  law  of 
God  is  certainly  righteous,  but  it  is  too  stern,  too  exacting,  and  there- 
fore God  will  wink  at  many  sins,  and  make  provision  for  salvation  by 
omitting  to  punish  much  of  human  guilt,  why,  my  brethren,  we  should 
always  have  been  in  jeopardy.  If  God  could  be  unjust  to  save  us,  he 
could  also  be  changeable,  and  cast  us  away.  If  there  was  anything 
rotten  in  the  state  of  our  salvation,  we  should  fear  that  it  would  fail  us 
at  last.  But  our  foundation  is  sure,  for  the  Lord  has  excavated  down 
to  the  rock  ;  he  has  taken  away  every  bit  of  mere  sentiment  and  sham, 
and  his  salvation  is  real  throughout.  It  is  a  glorious  salvation  of  grace 
and  truth,  in  which  God  takes  the  sinner  as  he  is,  and  deals  with  him 
as  he  is ;  yea,  and  deals  with  the  sinner  as  God  is,  on  the  principles  of 
true  righteousness ;  and  yet  saves  him. 

But  it  means  more  than  that.  The  Lord  deals  with  us  in  the  way  of 
grace,  and  that  grace  encourages  a  great  many  hopes,  but  those  hopes 
a  e  all  realized,  for  he  deals  with  us  in  truth.  Our  necessities  demand 
great  things,  and  grace  actually  supplies  those  great  things.  The  old 
law  could  never  make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect  as  pertaining  to  the 
conscience,  but  the  grace  of  God  makes  believers  perfect  as  pertaining 
to  the  conscience.  If  I  were  to  sit  down  and  try  to  imagine  a  flaw 
in  the  ground  of  my  salvation  by  Christ,  I  could  not  do  it.  Believing 
as  I  do  in  him  who  liore  my  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  I  feel  that  by 
no  possibility  can  his  atonement  fail  me.  I  have  not  imagination  strong 
enough  to  feign  a  reason  for  distrust :  I  do  not  see  hole  or  corner  in  which 
any  charge  could  lurk  against  the  man  that  believes  in  Jesus  Christ.  My 
conscience  is  satisfied,  and  more  than  satisfied.  Sometimes  it  even 
seems  to  me  that  my  sins  could  not  have  deserved  that  the  Son  of  God 
should  die.  The  atonement  is  greater  than  the  sin.  Speak  of  the 
vindication  of  the  law ! — is  not  the  vindication  even  greater  than  the 
dishonour  ?  Does  not  the  law  of  God  shine  out  more  lustrous  in 
its  indescribable  glory  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  as  the  penalty 
for  sin,  than  it  would  have  done  had  it  never  been  broken,  or  had  all  the 
race  of  law-breakers  been  swept  into  endless  destruction  ?  0  brothers, 
in  the  salvation  of  Jesus  there  is  a  truth  of  grace  unrivalled !  There  is 
a  deep  verity,  a  substantiality,  an  inward  soul-satisfaction  in  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ,  which  makes  us  feel  that  it  is  a  full  atonement — a  fountain  of 
*'  grace  and  truth." 


284  THE   TRUE   TAB..RNACLE,  jm\ 

I  Nor  have  I  yet  quite  bvonp^ht  onfc  all  the  meanin<^,  even  if  I  have 
|succeeded  an  far.  Christ  has  brought  to  us  "  grace  and  truth  ";  that  ia 
to  say,  he  works  in  believers  both  grace  and  truth.  We  want  grace  to 
rescue  us  from  sin  ;  he  has  brouglit  it :  we  need  truth  in  the  inward 
parts  ;  he  has  wrought  it.  The  system  of  salvation  by  atonement  is 
calculated  to  produce  truthful  men.  The  habit  of  looking  for  salvation 
through  the  great  sacrifice  fosters  the  spirit  of  justice,  begets  in  us  a 
deep  abhorrence  of  evil,  and  a  love  for  that  which  is  right  and  true. 
By  nature  we  are  all  liars,  and  either  love  or  make  a  lie  :  for  this  cause 
we  are  content  with  refuges  of  lies,  and  we  compass  ourselves  with 
[deceit.  In  our  carnal  stnte  we  are  as  full  of  guile  as  an  egg  is  full  of 
Imeat ;  but  when  the  Lord  comics  to  us  in  Christ,  no  longer  imputing 
ourtrespasses  to  us,  then  he  takes  out  of  our  heart  thatdeceit  and  desperate 
wickedness  which  had  else  remained  there.  I  say  it,  and  dare  avow  it, 
that  the  system  of  salvation  by  the  indwelling  of  Grod  in  Christ  and  the 
atonement  offered  by  him  for  men,  has  a  tendency  in  it  to  infuse  grace 
into  the  soul  and  to  produce  truth  in  the  life.  The  Holy  Ghost  employs 
it  to  that  end.  I  pray  that  you  and  I  may  prove  it  so  by  the  grace 
which  causes  us  to  love  both  God  and  man,  and  the  truth  fa  hiess  with 
which  we  deal  in  all  the  affairs  of  life. 

Thus  has  our  Lord  displayed  the  glory  of  God  in  the  grace  and  truth 
with  which  he  is  filled.  I  am  sorry  I  have  spoken  so  feebly  on  a  theme 
so  grand.  May  the  Spirit  bless  you  even  through  the  infirmities  of  my 
speech ! 

IL     Now  I  want  a  few  minutes  to  say  to  you.  Come  brothers  and 

sisters,  let  us  avail  ourselves  of  this  TASEKNACLlNa  OF  GOD 
AMONG   us. 

First,  then,  if  God  has  come  to  dwell  among  men  by  the  Word  made 
flesh  let  us  pitch  our  tents  aroimi  this  cenlrul  tabernacle;  do  not  let  us 
live  as  if  God  were  a  long  way  off.  To  the  Israelites  God  was  equally 
near  from  every  quarter  of  the  camp.  The  tabernacle  was  in  the  centre, 
and  the  centre  is  equally  near  to  every  point  of  the  circumference.  No 
true  Israelite  could  say,  "  I  must  go  across  the  st-a,  or  soar  up  into  the 
air,  or  dive  into  the  depths  to  find  ray  God."  Every  Israelite  could  say 
**Hedwelleth  between  the  cherubim  :  I  have  bub  to  go  to  his  taber- 
nacle to  be  in  his  presence  and  speak  with  him."  Our  God  is  not  far 
from  any  one  of  his  people  this  day.  We  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood 
of  Christ.  God  is  everywhere  present,  but  there  is  a  higher  presence  of 
effectual  grace  in  the  person  of  the  only  begotten.  Do  not  let  us  live 
as  if  we  worshipped  a  far-off  God.  Let  us  not  repine  as  if  we  were 
deserted.     Let  us  not  feel  alone,  for  the  Father  is  with  us. 

"  God  is  near  thee ;  therefore  cheer  thee,  sad  soul." 

Open  thy  window  towards  Jerusalem,  a."  Daniel  did ;  pray  with 
thine  eye  upon  Christ,  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily  in  the  greatest  nearness  to  us.  God  is  never  far  away  since 
Christ  has  come  to  dwell  among  men. 

Next,  let  us  resort  to  this  central  tabernacle  to  obtain  grace  to  help 
in  time  of  need.  Let  us  come  to  Christ  without  fear,  for  he  hath 
grace  to  give,  and  he  will  give  it  to  us  abundantly,  whenever  we 
need  it.     I  like  to  think  of  the  wording  of  my  text.     Lea>e  out  the 


AND   ITS   GLORY   OF   GUACF   AND   PEACE.  285 

pnrenthesis,  and  it  runs,  "  He  dwelt  among  us  full  of  grace."  He  could 
not  liave  dwelt  among  such  provoking  ones  if  he  had  not  been  full  of 
grace  But  if  he  dwells  among  us  full  of  grace,  we  need  not  fea.  that 
he  will  cast  us  away  because  of  our  sins  an  1  faih'ngs.  I  invite  you,^ 
therefore,  to  come  boldly  to  him  who  is  full  of  forgiving  love.  I  beg 
you  to  come  and  receive  of  his  fulness,  for  grace  is  truly  grace  when  it 
is  communicated  :  grace  which  is  not  distributed  is  grace  in  name 
only.  "  Alas !  "  you  say,  **  T  want  so  much  grace."  Brother,  it  is  trea- 
sured up  in  Christ  for  yon  without  measure.  It  is  placed  in  him  that 
you  may  have  it.  Do  we  not  try  to  persuade  the  sinner  that  there  is 
life  in  a  look  ?  Shall  I  need  to  persuade  saints  that  grace  is  equally 
free  to  them  ?  Do  we  not  tell  the  sinner  that  God  is  not  to  be  sought 
for  as  far  away,  but  that  he  is  waiting  to  be  gracious  ?  Must  I  tell  the 
beh'ever  the  same  ?  You  may  at  this  moment  obtain  all  the  grace  you 
need.  The  door  is  open  ;  enter  and  take  what  you  will.  Do  jiut  stop 
till  you  reach  home  and  go  through  a  set  o*  ."eligious  exercises ;  but  here, 
and  now,  believe  in  Jesus  to  the  full.  In  the  centre  of  the  cnmp  is  the 
incarnate  God  ;  Israel  had  but  to  go  to  the  central  tent  to  find  present 
help  in  time  of  trouble.  In  the  perrfon  of  Christ,  who  hath  said,  "  I  am 
with  you  alvvay,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,"  there  is,  in  truth,  all  the 
grace  you  can  possibly  need.  Come  to  this  well  and  drink.  Receive  of 
his  fulness,  and  go  on  your  way  rejoicing. 

What  next  shall  we  do  ?  Brethren,  since  God  in  Christ  is  in  the 
midst  of  us,  let  us  abide  in  joyful,  peaceful  confidence  m  him  ivlio  is  grace 
and  truth  to  us.  Do  not  let  us  wander  to  other  sources.  To  whom 
should  we  go  ?  Shall  we  leave  our  God  ?  Shall  we  le.ive  his  gr.ice, 
his  truth  ?  Do  not  let  us  dream  that  he  is  changed,  for  he  is  God. 
Do  not  imagine  that  he  has  removed,  for  he  hath  said,  "  This  is  my 
rest  for  ever:  here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it."  Do  not  let  us 
conceive  that  his  grace  and  truth  are  exhausted;  for  his  fulness  is 
eternal.  Let  us  receive  strong  consolation,  and  remain  steadfast,  un- 
movable.  Let  us  quietly  rest  in  the  firm  belief  that  all  we  can  want 
between  here  and  heaven,  all  that  we  need  this  moment  and  in  all 
moments  yet  to  come,  is  treasured  up  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  abidingly 
the  centre  of  his  church  and  the  manifestation  of  God. 

Once  mor«  :  if  this  be  so,  and  God  does  really  in  Christ  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  his  people  "full  of  grace  and  truth,"  let  us  tell  everybody  of 
it.  I  am  sure  if  I  had  been  an  Israelite  in  the  wilderness,  and  had  met 
an  Amalekite  or  an  Edomite,  I  should  have  gloried  in  my  God,  and  in 
the  privileges  which  his  presence  secured  me.  We  know  that  Amalekites 
and  Edumites  could  not  have  come  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  ;  but 
nowadays,  if  we  meet  with  one  who  is  a  stranger,  we  can  tell  him  of  our 
privilege,  with  sweet  persuasion  that  the  stranger  can  be  brought  nigh 
through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Therefore  let  us  abundantly  speak  of 
the  dwelling  of  God  with  men.  Let  us  tell  to  all  that  the  Lord  ha* 
come  to  man,  not  in  wrath,  not  in  judgment,  but  "  full  of  grace  and 
truth."  0  my  unconverted  hearer,  come  to  Jesus  !  He  is  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost  those  that  come  unto  God  by  him.  Draw  nigh  to  the 
meek  and  lowly  Jesus,  and  you  draw  nigh  to  God.  He  saith,  "  He  that 
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Publish  the  invitation  of  grace 
to  the  four  winds.     Ring  out  your  silver  trumpets,  or  if  yuu  have  them 


2S6  THE   TRUE   TABERNACLE. 

not,  sound  your  rams'  horns  ;  but  somehow  let  all  people  know  that  the 
tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  doth  dwell  among  them.  Tell 
out  this  news  in  the  far  country,  tliat  the  wandering  prodigal  son  may 
hear  it,  and  cry,  "  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  Father."  God  has  come 
to  men ;  will  not  men  come  to  God  ?  In  Christ  Jesus  God  invites 
men  to  come  to  him  ;  will  you  not  come  to  receive  grace  and  truth  ? 

One  more  lesson  remains,  and  that  is — what  manner  of  people  ought  we  to 
he  among  ivhom  Jehovah  dwells  ?  It  must  have  been  a  very  solemn  thing 
to  be  a  member  of  that  great  camp  of  two  millions  in  the  wilderness  of 
Sinai.  God's  presence  in  the  midst  of  the  camp  must  have  made  every 
tent  sacred.  As  we  walked  through  the  streets  of  that  canvas  city,  if  we 
had  been  Israelites,  and  in  our  riglit  minds,  we  should  have  said,  "  These 
tents  are  none  other  than  the  house  of  God  and  the  very  gate  of  heaven  ; 
for  see,  Jehovah  is  in  the  midst  of  us.  Mark  you  not  the  bright  light  that 
shines  above  his  sanctuary  ? "  We  should  have  felt  that  in  such  a  camp 
all  should  be  holy.  The  pollution  of  sin  should  be  unknown  there.  In 
such  a  camp  constant  prayer  and  praise  should  be  presented  to  him  whose 
presence  was  its  glory  and  defence.  To-day  let  our  congregation  be  a  holy 
convocation  ;  and  as  for  ourselves,  let  us  be  holiness  unto  the  Lord.  We 
are  consecrated  men  and  women,  seeing  the  Lord  has  come  so  very  near 
to  us.  I  spoke  of  solemnity  ;  I  meant  not  dread  and  sorrow,  but  a 
solemnity  full  of  joy.  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  have  God  so  near,  but 
the  joy  is  equal  to  the  solemnity.  Glory  be  unto  God  most  high,  for 
he  is  here  !  Let  us  spend  our  days  and  nights  in  gladness  and  delight, 
God  is  reconciled  to  us  in  the  person  of  his  dear  Sun,  and  we  have 
fellowship  with  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  wherefore  let  us  rejoice  evermore. 
Amen  and  amen. 


PoETiONS  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Exodus  xxxiv.  1— 8j 
xl.  34—38  ;  John  i.  1—18. 


Hyms  from  "  Our  Owm  Hymn  Book  " — 249,  256,  250. 


SILVER  SOCKETS:    OR,   REDEMPTION  THE  FOUNDATION. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  January  30th,  1881,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  When  thou  takest  the  sum  of  the  children 
of  Israel  after  their  number,  then  shall  they  give  every  man  a  ransom  for  hia  soul  unto 
the  Lord,  when  thou  numberest  them  ;  that  there  be  no  plague  among  them,  when  thou 
numberest  them.  This  they  shall  give,  every  one  that  passeth  among  them  tliat  are 
numbered,  half  a  shekel  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary :  (a  shekel  is  twenty  gerahs :) 
an  half  shekel  shall  bo  the  offering  of  the  Lord.  Every  one  Mat  passeth  among  them 
that  are  numbered,  from  twenty  years  old  and  above,  shall  give  an  offering  unto  the 
Lord.  The  rich  shall  not  give  more,  and  the  poor  shall  not  give  less  than  half  a  shekel, 
when  they  give  an  offering  unto  the  Lord,  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls.  And 
thou  shalt  take  the  atonement  money  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  shalt  appoint  it  for 
the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  ;  that  it  may  be  a  memorial  unto  the 
children  of  Israel  before  the  Lord,  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls." — Exodus 
XXX.  11—16. 

"  A  bekah  for  every  man,  that  is,  half  a  shekel,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary,  for 
every  one  that  went  to  be  numbered,  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  for  six  hundred 
thousand  and  three  thousand  and  live  hundred  and  fifty  men.  And  of  the  hundred 
talents  of  silver  were  cast  the  sockets  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the  sockets  of  the  vail ;  an 
hundred  sockets  of  the  hundred  talents,  a  talent  for  a  socket." — Exodus  xxxviii.  26 — 27. 

Will  you  kindly  first  open  your  Bibles  at  Exodus  xxx.;  for  I  must 
commence  my  discourse  by  expounding  that  passage.  When  the  account 
was  taken  of  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  the  Lord  commanded 
that  every  male  over  twenty  years  of  age  should  pay  half  a  shekel  as 
redemption  money,  confessing  that  he  deserved  to  die,  owning  that  he 
was  in  debt  to  God,  and  bringing  the  sum  demanded  as  a  type  of  a  great 
redemption  which  would  by-and-by  be  paid  for  the  souls  of  the  sons  of  men. 
The  truth  was  thus  taught  that  God's  people  are  a  redeemed  people: 
they  are  elsewhere  called  "  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,"  If  men  reject 
the  redemption  which  he  ordains,  then  are  they  not  his  people ;  for  of 
all  his  chosen  it  may  be  said — "  The  Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and 
ransomed  him  from  the  hand  of  him  that  was  stronger  than  he." 
Whenever  we  attempt  to  number  up  the  people  of  God  it  is  absolutely 
needful  that  we  count  only  tliose  who  at  least  profess  to  have  brought 
the  redemption  price  in  their  hands,  and  so  to  have  taken  part  in  the 
atonement  of  Christ  Jesus.  David,  when  he  numbered  the  people,  did 
not  gather  from  them  the  redemption  money,  and  hence  a  plague  broke 
out  amongst  them.  He  had  failed  in  obedience  to  the  Lord's  ordinance, 
and  counted  his  subjects,  not  as  redeemed  people,  but  merely  as  so  many 
heads.  Let  us  always  beware  of  estimating  the  number  of  Christiang 
by  the  number  of  the  population  of  the  countries  called  Christian ; 
for  the  only  true  Christians  in  the  world  are  those  who  are  redwjued 
No.  1,581  Ij 


288  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACI-E   PULPIT. 

from  iniquity  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  have  personally  accepted 
the  ransom  which  the  Lord  has  provided,  personally  brought  their 
redemption  money  in  their  hands  by  taking  Christ  to  be  theirs  and  pre- 
senting him  by  an  act  of  faith  to  the  great  Father.  God  has  upon 
earth  as  many  people  as  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  we  dare  not  count 
any  others  to  be  his  but  those  who  can  say,  "  In  whom  we  have  redemp- 
tion through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  "We  must  not  count 
heads  which  know  about  Christ,  but  hands  which  have  received 
the  redemption  money  and  are  presenting  it  unto  God;  not  so 
much  persons  who  are  called  Christians  by  courtesy  as  souls  that  are 
Christly  in  very  fact,  because  they  have  accepted  the  atoning  sacrifice, 
and  live  before  God  as  "  redeemed  from  among  men." 

Observe  that  this  redemption,  without  which  no  man  might  rightly  be 
numbered  among  the  children  of  Israel  lest  a  plague  should  break  out 
among  them,  must  be  perso7ial  and  individual.  There  was  not  a  lump 
sum  to  be  paid  for  the  nation,  or  twelve  amounts  for  the  twelve  tribes; 
but  each  man  must  bring  his  own  half  shekel  for  himself  So  there  is 
no  redemption  that  will  be  of  any  use  to  any  of  you  unless  it  is  per- 
sonally accepted  and  brought  before  God  by  faith.  You  must  each  oue  be 
able  to  say  for  yourself  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  He  loved  me,  and 
gave  himself  for  me."  The  doctrine  of  general  redemption,  which  teaches 
men  to  say,  "  Oh,  yes  ;  we  are  all  sinners,  you  know ;  Christ  died  for  us, 
for  he  died  for  us  all,"  lays  a  very  poor  foundation  for  comfort.  W» 
need  not  so  much  a  general  as  a  personal  redemption,  a  redemption 
which  actually  redeems,  and  redeems  us  as  individuals.  The  great 
sacrifice  for  the  sin  of  man  must  become  to  us  a  personal  atonement, 
for  only  so  can  we  realise  its  efficacy.  You  must  each  one  bring  Christ 
nnto  the  Father,  taking  him  into  your  hands  by  simple  faith.  No  other 
price  must  be  there;  but  that  price  must  be  brought  by  every  individual, 
or  else  there  is  no  acceptable  coming  to  God. 

It  was  absolutely  essential  that  each  one  should  bring  the  half  shekel 
of  redemption  money  ;  for  redemption  is  the  only  way  in  which  you 
and  I  can  be  accepted  of  God.  If  birth  could  have  done  it,  they  had  the 
privilege  beyond  all  doubt;  for  they  had  Abraham  to  their  father: 
they  were  lineally  descended  from  the  three  great  patriarchs,  and  they 
?2iight  have  said,  "  We  be  Abraham's  seed,  and  were  never  in  bondage  to 
any  man."  Nay,  but  salvation  is  not  of  blood,  nor  of  birth,  nor  of  the 
will  of  the  flesh  :  salvation  is  by  redemption,  and  even  the  true  child 
of  Abraham  must  bring  his  redemption  money.  So  must  you,  you 
child  of  godly  parents,  find  salvation  by  the  redemption  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus,  or  be  lost  for  ever.  Do  not  believe  the  falsehood  of  certain 
modern  divines,  that  you  children  of  godly  parents  do  not  need  to  be  con- 
Terted  because  you  are  born  so  nobly  and  brought  up  so  tenderly  by  your 
parents.  You  are  by  nature  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others.  "  Ye  must 
be  born  again,"  and  ye  must  be  personally  redeemed  as  well  as  heathen 
children,  or  else  you  will  perish,  though  the  blood  of  ministers,  martyrs, 
and  apostles  should  be  running  in  your  veins.  Redemption  is  the  only 
ground  of  acceptance  before  God,  and  not  godly  birth,  or  pious  education. 

There  were  many,  no  doubt,  in  the  camp  of  Israel  who  were  men  oi 
station  and  substance  ;  but  they  must  bring  the  ransom  money,  or  die 
amid  their  wealth.     Others  were  wise-hearted  and  skilful  in  the  arts,  jefc 


SILVER   kSOCKETS.  23^ 

must  they  be  redeemed  or  die.  Rank  could  not  save  the  princes,  nor 
office  spare  the  elders  :  every  man  of  Israel  must  be  redeemed  ;  and  no 
man  could  pass  the  muster-roll  without  his  half  shekel,  whatever  he 
might  say,  or  do,  or  be.  God  was  their  God  because  he  had  redeemed 
them  out  of  the  house  of  bondage,  and  they  were  his  people  because 
he  had  "  put  a  redemption  between  his  people  and  the  Egyptians."  Well 
did  David  ask,  "  What  one  nation  in  the  earth  is  like  thy  people,  even 
like  Israel,  whom  God  went  to  redeem  for  a  people  to  himself?" 

Note  well  that  every  Israelitish  man  must  be  alike  redeemed,  and  re- 
deemed with  the  like,  nay,  with  the  same  redemption.  *'  The  rich  shall 
not  give  more,  and  the  poor  shall  not  give  less  than  half  a  shekel." 
Every  man  requires  redemption,  the  one  as  well  as  the  other.  Kings  on 
their  thrones  must  be  redeemed  as  ^Yell  as  prisoners  in  their  dungeons  ; 
the  philosopher  must  be  redeemed  as  well  as  the  peasant ;  the  preacher 
as  much  as  the  profligate,  and  the  moralist  as  certainly  as  the  prostitute 
or  the  thief.  The  redemption  money  for  every  person  must  be  the  same, 
for  all  ha\e  sinned  and  are  in  like  condemnation. 

And  it  must  be  a  redumption  that  meets  the  divine  demand,  because, 
you  see,  the  Lord  not  only  says  that  they  must  each  bring  half  a  shekel,  no 
more,  no  less,  but  it  must  be  "the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary," — not  the  shekel 
of  commerce,  which  might  be  debased  in  quality  or  diminished  by  wear 
and  tear,  but  the  coin  must  be  according  to  the  standard  shekel  laid  up 
in  the  holy  place.  To  make  sure  of  it  Moses  defines  exactly  how  much  a 
shekel  was  worth,  and  what  its  weight  was, — "  A  shekel  is  twenty 
gerahs,"  So  you  must  bring  to  God  the  redemption  which  he  has 
appointed, — the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ, — nothing  more, 
nothing  less.  The  ransom  of  Christ  is  perfection,  and  from  it  there  must 
be  no  varying.  The  price  must  satisfy  the  Divine  demand,  and  that  to 
the  fall. 

Note  that  the  price  appointed  did  effectually  redeem  so  far  as  the 
type  could  go.  Some  rejcnce  in  a  redemption  which  does  not  redeem  , 
for  the  general  redemption  by  which  all  men  are  supposed  to  be  redeemed 
leaves  multitudes  in  bondage,  and  they  go  to  hell  despite  this  kind  of 
redemption.  Therefore  do  we  preach  a  particular  and  special  redemp- 
tion of  God's  own  chosen  and  believing  people  :  these  are  effectually  and 
really  ransomed,  and  the  precious  price  once  paid  for  them  has  set  them 
free,  neither  shall  any  plague  of  vengeance  smite  them,  for  the  redemption 
money  has  procured  them  eternal  deliverance. 

This  type  is  full  of  instruction :  the  more  it  is  studied  the  richer  will 
it  appear.  Every  man  that  is  numbered  among  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  permitted  to  serve  God  by  going  out  to  war,  or  to  take  upon  him 
the  duties  of  citizenship,  must,  as  he  is  numbered,  be  redeemed.  So 
must  every  one  of  us,  if  we  are  truly  God's  people  and  God's  servants, 
find  our  right  to  be  so  in  the  fact  of  our  redemption  by  Christ  Jesns 
our  Lord.  This  is  the  joy  and  glory  of  each  one  of  us :  "  Thou  hast 
redeemed  me,  0  Lord  God  of  truth." 

Now  we  turn  to  the  second  of  our  texts,  and  there  we  learn  a  very 
remarkable  fact.  In  the  thirty-eighth  chapter,  verse  twenty-five,  we  find 
that  this  mass  of  silver  which  was  paid,  whereby  six  hundred  and  three 
thousand  five  hundred  and  fifty  men  were  redeemed,  each  one  paying 
his  half  shekel,  came  to  a  great  weight  of  silver.     It  must  have  weighed 


290  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

•Mnethinn;  over  four  tons,  and  this  was  dedicated  to  the  use  of  the  taher* 
nacle :  the  special  application  of  the  precious  metal  was  to  make  sockets 
into  which  the  boards  which  made  the  walls  of  the  tabernacle  should 
be  placed.  The  mass  of  silver  made  up  one  hundred  talents,  and  these 
upheld  the  fifty  boards  of  the  holy  place.  They  were  in  a  wilderness, 
constantly  moving,  and  continually  shifting  the  tabernacle.  Now,  they 
might  have  dng  out  a  foundation  in  the  sand,  or  on  coming  to  a  piece 
of  rock  where  they  could  not  dig,  they  might  have  cut  out  foundations 
with  great  toil;  but  the  Lord  appointed  that  they  should  carry  the 
foundation  of  the  tabernacle  with  them.  A  talent  of  silver,  weigliing, 
I  suppose,  close  upon  one  hundred  pounds,  was  either  formed  into  the 
shape  of  a  wedge,  so  as  to  be  driven  into  the  soil,  or  else  made  into  a 
solid  square  plate  to  lie  upon  it.  In  the  wedge  or  plate  were  made 
mortises,  into  which  the  tenons  of  the  boards  could  be  readily  fitted. 
These  plates  of  silver  fitted  the  one  into  the  other,  tenon  and  mortise 
wise,  and  thus  they  made  a  compact  parallelogram,  strengthened  at 
the  corners  with  double  plates,  and  formed  one  foundation,  moveable 
when  taken  to  pieces,  yet  very  secure  as  a  whole.  This  foundation 
was  made  of  the  redemption  moneij.  See  the  instructive  emblem  !  The 
foundation  of  the  worship  of  Israel  was  redemption.  The  dwelHng- 
place  of  the  Lord  their  God  was  founded  on  atonement.  All  the 
Doards  of  incorruptible  wood  and  precious  gold  stood  upon  the  redemp- 
tion price,  and  the  curtains  of  fine  linen,  and  the  veil  of  mate) i  less 
workmanship,  and  the  whole  structure  rested  on  nothing  else  but  the 
solid  mass  of  silver  which  had  been  paid  as  the  redemption  money  of 
the  people.  There  was  only  one  exception,  and  that  was  at  the 
door  where  was  the  entrance  to  the  holy  place.  There  the  pillars  were 
set  upon  sockets  of  brass,  perhaps  because,  as  there  was  much  going  in 
and  out  of  the  priests,  it  was  not  meet  that  they  should  tread  upon  the 
token  of  redemption.  The  blood  of  the  paschal  Lamb,  when  Israel 
came  out  of  Egypt,  was  sprinkled  on  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts ;  but 
out  of  reverence  to  that  blood  it  was  not'  to  be  sprinkled  on  the 
threshold.  Everything  was  done  to  show  that  atonement  is  to  be  the 
precious  foundation  of  all  holy  things,  and  everything  to  prevent  a 
Blighting  or  disregard  of  it.  Woe  unto  that  man  of  whom  it  shall  ever 
be  said,  "  He  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath  counted 
the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was  sanctified,  an  unholy 
thing." 

I  do  not  for  a  moment  bring  before  you  the  type  of  the  text  as  a 
proof  of  doctrine  ;  but  I  intend  to  use  it  simply  as  an  illustration.  It 
Beems  to  me  to  be  a  very  striking,  full,  and  suggestive  emblem,  setting 
forth  most  clearly  certain  precious  truths.  I  feel  I  am  quite  safe  in 
using  this  illustration,  because  it  is  one  among  a  group  of  acknowledged 
types,  and  could  not  have  been  given  without  a  reason.  I  do  not  see 
why  they  could  not  have  made  the  foundation  sockets  of  iron,  or  why 
they  could  not  have  been  content  with  tent  pins  and  cords  as  in  other 
cases  of  tent  building  :  I  see  no  reason  in  the  necessity  of  the  case  why 
they  must  be  sockets  of  silver  ;  there  must  have  been  another  reason. 
Why  was  that  particular  silver  prescribed  ?  Why  must  the  redemption 
money  be  used,  and  nothing  else  ?  Surely  there  is  teaching  here  if  we 
will  but  see  it. 


SILVER   SOCKETS.  291 

MoreoYer,  this  d  )es  not  stand  alone  ;  for  when  the  Tabernacle  was 
Bucceeded  by  the  Temple  redemption  was  still  conspicuous  in  the 
foundation.  What  was  the  foundation  of  the  Temple  ?  It  was  the 
rock  of  Mount  Moriah.  And  what  was  the  hill  of  Moriah  but  the 
place  where  in  many  lights  redemption  and  atonement  had  been  set 
forth.  It  was  there  that  Abraham  drew  the  knife  to  slay  Isaac :  a 
fair  picture  of  the  Father  offering  up  his  Son.  It  was  there  the  ram 
was  caught  in  the  thicket  and  was  killed  instead  of  Isaac  :  fit  emblem 
of  the  Substitute  accepted  instead  of  man.  Later  still,  it  was  on  Mount 
Moriah  that  the  angel,  when  David  attempted  to  number  the  people 
without  redemption  money,  stood  with  his  sword  drawn.  There  David 
offered  sacrifices  and  burnt  offerings.  The  offering  was  accepted  and 
the  angel  sheathed  his  sword — another  picture  of  that  power  of  redemp- 
tion by  which  mercy  rejoices  against  judgment.  And  there  the  Lord 
uttered  the  memorable  sentence,  "  It  is  enough,  stay  now  thine  hand." 
This  "enough"  is  the  crown  of  redemption.  Even  as  the  Great 
Sacrifice  himself  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  so  does  the  Great  Accepter 
of  the  sacrifice  say,  *'  enough."  What  a  place  of  redemption  was  the 
hill  of  Zion  !  Now,  if  the  temple  was  built  on  a  mount  which  must 
have  been  specially  selected  because  there  the  types  of  redemption  were 
most  plentiful,  I  feel  that  without  an  apology  I  may  boldly  take  this 
first  fact  that  the  building  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  was  based 
and  grounded  upon  redemption  money,  and  use  it  for  our  instruction. 
With  this  much  of  preface  we  will  now  fall  to  and  feed  upon  the 
spiritual  meal  which  is  set  before  us.  0  for  grace  to  feast  upon  the 
heavenly  bread  that  we  may  grow  thereby.  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  be 
pleased  to  help  us  in  this  matter. 

I.  First,  I  want  you  to  view  this  illustration  as  teaching  us  something 
about  God  in  relation  to  man.  Tlie  tent  in  the  wilderness  was  typical 
of  God's  coming  down  to  man  to  hold  intercourse  with  him :  the  fiery 
cloudy  pillar  visible  outside,  and  the  bright  light  of  the  shekinah,  visible 
to  him  who  was  called  to  enter  once  a  year  into  the  innermost  sanctuary, 
shining  over  the  mercy-seat, — these  were  the  tokens  of  the  special 
presence  of  the  Deity  in  the  centre  of  the  camp  of  Israel.  The  Lord 
eeems  to  teach  us,  in  relation  to  his  dealing  with  men,  that  he  will  meet 
man  in  the  way  of  grace  only  on  the  footing  of  redemption.  He  treats 
with  man  concerning  love  and  grace  within  his  holy  shrine ;  but  the 
basis  of  that  shrine  must  be  atonement.  Eest  assured,  dear  friends, 
that  there  is  no  meeting  with  God  on  our  part  except  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Redeemer.  I  am  of  Luther's  mind  when  he  said,  "I  will  have 
nothing  to  do  with  an  absolute  God,"  God  out  of  Christ  is  a  terror  to 
lis.  Even  in  Christ,  remember,  he  is  a  consuming  fire,  for  even  "  our  God 
26  a  consuming  fire";  but  what  he  must  be  out  of  Christ  may  none  of 
us  ever  know. 

**  Till  God  in  human  flesh  I  see, 
My  thoughts  no  comfort  find  ; 
The  holy,  just,  and  sacred  Three 
Are  terrors  to  my  mind. 
♦'  But  if  Immanuel's  face  appear, 
My  hope,  my  joy  bcoins  ; 
His  name  forbids  my  slavish  fear. 
His  grace  removes  my  sins." 


292 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


You  must  not  attempt  to  have  audience  with  God  at  first  upon  tlie 
footing  of  election.  It  were  presumptuous  to  attempt  to  come  to  the 
electing  Father  except  through  the  atoning  Son.  "  No  man,"  saith 
Christ,  "  Cometh  to  the  Father  but  my  me."  Never  attempt  to  speak  with 
God  on  the  footing  of  your  own  sanctification  ;  for  very  soon  you  will 
come  to  bringing  your  legal  righteousness  before  him,  and  that  will 
provoke  him.  Always  enter  the  holy  place  with  the  thought,  "  I  know 
that  my  Redeemer  liveth."  "  Not  without  blood":  recollect  that !  Into 
the  holy  place  went  the  high  priest  once  every  year,  "not  without  blood." 
There  can  be  no  coming  of  God  to  man  on  terms  of  peace  except  through 
the  one  great  sacrifice  :  that  must  be  the  foundation  of  it  all. 

Nay,  and  not  only  God's  coming  to  us,  but  God's  abiding  ivith  us  is 
upon  the  same  foundation ;  for  the  tabernacle  was,  so  to  speak,  the  house 
of  God, — the  place  where  God  especially  dwelt  among  his  people,  as  he 
said  :  "I  will  dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them."  But  he  never  dwelt 
among  them  in  anything  but  in  a  tent  that  was  based  upon  the  silver  of 
the  redemption  money  ;  and  you,  dear  friend,  if  you  have  ever  walked 
with  God,  can  only  maintain  your  fellowship  by  resting  where  you  did  at 
first,  as  a  poor  sinner  redeemed  by  your  Saviour.  They  have  asked  me 
to  rise  sometimes  to  a  higher  platform,  and  come  to  God  as  a  sanctified 
person.  Yes,  but  a  rock,  though  it  may  be  lower  than  the  little 
wooden  stage  which  some  erect  upon  it,  is  safer  to  stand  upon  ;  and  I 
do  believe  that  those  who  walk  with  God,  according  to  their  attain- 
ments, and  imaginary  perfections,  have  climbed  up  to  a  rotten  stage, 
which  will  fall  under  them  ere  long.  I  know  no  mode  of  standing 
before  God  to  day  but  that  which  I  had  at  first.  I  am  unworthy 
still  in  myself,  but  accepted  in  the  Beloved !  Guilty  in  myself,  and 
lost  and  ruined  ;  but  still  received,  blessed,  and  loved,  because  of  the 
person  and  work  of  Christ.  The  Lord  cannot  dwell  with  yon,  my  dear 
friend,  you  will  soon  have  broken  fellowship  and  be  in  the  dark,  if  you 
attempt  to  walk  with  him  because  you  feel  sanctified,  or  because  you 
have  been  active  in  his  service,  or  because  you  know  much,  or  because 
you  are  an  experienced  believer.  No  !  no  !  no  !  The  Lord  will  only 
abide  with  us  in  that  tabernacle  whose  every  board  is  resting  upon 
the  silver  foundation  of  redemption  by  his  own  dear  Son. 

There  can,  beloved,  be  no  sort  of  communion  between  God  and  us  ex- 
cept through  the  atonement.  Do  you  want  to  pray?  You  cannot  speak 
with  God  except  through  Jesus  Christ.  Do  you  wish  to  praise?  You 
cannot  bring  the  censer  full  of  smoking  incense  except  through  Christ. 
It  is  only  within  those  foundations  of  silver  that  you  can  speak  to  God, 
or  hear  him  speak  comfortably  with  you.  Would  you  hear  a  voice  out 
of  the  excellent  glory  ?  Do  you  pray  that  the  great  Father  would  speak 
with  you  as  with  his  dear  children  ?  Expect  it  through  Jesus  Christ,  for 
"  through  him  we  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father."  Even 
unto  the  Father,  though  we  be  children,  we  have  not  access  except 
through  Jesus.  The  tabernacle  of  communion  even  to  him  that  lives 
nearest  to  God  must  be  built  upon  the  redemption  price.  Free  grace 
and  dying  love  must  be  the  golden  bells  which  ring  upon  our  garments 
when  we  go  into  the  holy  place  to  speak  with  the  Most  High. 

The  tabernacle  was  the  place  of  holy  service,  where  the  priests  all 
day  long  offered  sacrifices  of  one  kind  and  another  unto  the  Most  High. 


SILVER   SOCKETS.  ggg 

And  you  and  I  serve  God  as  priests,  foi'  he  has  niade  us  a  I'oyal  priest- 
hood. But  how  and  where  can  we  exercise  our  priesthood  ?  Every- 
where as  to  this  world ;  but  before  God,  the  foundation  of  the  temple 
wlierein  we  stand,  and  the  ground  of  the  acceptance  of  our  priesthood,  ia 
redemption.  The  priests  offered  their  sacrifice  not  in  groves  of  man'a 
planting,  or  on  high  hills,  which  were  the  natural  strength  of  the  bind, 
but  within  the  space  marked  out  by  the  silver  slabs  of  atonement  money , 
and  so  must  we  worship  and  serve  within  redemption  lines.  If  we  come 
under  the  idea  of  legal  merit,  and  suppose  that  there  is  a  natural  good- 
ness in  our  prayers,  or  in  our  praises,  in  our  observances  of  Christian 
ceremonies,  or  in  almsgiving,  or  in  zealous  testimony,  we  make  a  great 
mistake,  and  we  shall  never  be  so  accepted.  We  must  bring  our  offerings 
unto  that  court  which  is  fenced  about  by  the  foundation  most  precious 
«\hich  God  has  laid  of  old,  even  the  merit  of  his  dear  Son.  We  are 
accepted  in  the  Beloved,  and  in  no  other  manner  ;  we  are  shut  in  within 
the  foundation  which  Christ  has  laid  of  old,  not  with  corruptible  things 
as  with  silver  and  gold,  but  with  his  own  most  precious  blood. 

Thus  much,  dear  brethren,  upon  one  view  of  this  subject.  May  you 
learn  much  of  God  in  his  relation  to  man  while  you  meditate  thereon  at 
your  leisure  and  are  taught  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  I  think  we  may,  in  the  second  place,  apply  this  illustration  to 
Christ  in  his  divine  Person.  The  Tabernacle  was  the  type  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  God  dwells  among  men  in  Christ.  "  He  taber- 
nacled among  us,  and  we  beheld  his  glory,"  says  the  apostle.  Gud  dwelleth 
not  in  temples  made  with  hands,  that  is  to  say,  of  this  building  ;  but  the 
Temple  of  God  is  Christ  Jesus,  "  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily." 

Our  Lord  is  thus  the  Tabernacle  which  the  Lord  hath  pitched  and  not 
man  ;  and  our  first  and  fundamental  idea  of  him  must  be  in  his  cha- 
racter as  Redeemer.  Our  Lord  does  come  to  us  in  other  characters,  and 
in  them  all  he  is  right  glorious  ;  but  unless  we  receive  him  as  Redeemer 
we  have  missed  the  essence  of  his  character,  the  fuundation  idea  of  him. 
As  the  tent  in  the  wilderness  was  founded  upon  the  redemption  money, 
go  our  idea  and  conception  of  Christ  must  be  first  of  all  that  *'  he  is  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins  ;"  and  I  say  this,  though  it  may  seem  unnecessary 
u>  s;iy  it,  because  Satan  is  very  crafty,  and  he  leads  many  from  plain  truth 
by  subtle  means.  I  remember  a  sister,  who  had  been  a  member  of  a 
certain  denomination,  who  was  converted  to  God  in  this  place,  tholigh  she 
had  been  a  professed  Christian  for  years.  She  said  to  ine  "  I  have  hitherto 
believed  only  in  Christ  crucified  :  I  worshipped  him  as  about  to  come 
in  the  second  Advent  to  reign  with  his  people,  but  I  never  had  a  sense 
of  guilt,  neither  did  I  go  to  him  as  putting  away  my  sin  ;  and  hence  I 
was  not  saved."  When  she  began  to  see  herself  as  a  sinner  she  found 
her  need  of  a  Redeemer.  Atonement  must  enter  into  our  first  and  chief 
idea  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  We  preach  Christ  crucified'':  we  preach  him 
glorified,  and  delight  to  do  so ;  but  still  the  main  point  upon  which  the 
eye  of  a  sinner  must  rest,  if  he  would  have  peace  with  God,  must  be 
Christ  crucified  for  sin.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the 
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Do,  then,  my  dear  hearer,  let  the 
veiy  foundation  of  your  faith  in  Christ  be  your  view  of  him  as 
rausoming  you  from  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan.     Some  say  chey  adjjiire 


an*  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Cliiist  as  an  example,  and  well  they  may ;  they  can  never  find  a  better: 
but  Jesns  Christ  will  never  be  truly  known  and  followed  if  he  be  viewed 
only  as  an  example,  for  he  is  infinitely  more  than  that.  Neither  can  any 
man  carry  out  the  project  of  being  like  Christ,  unless  he  first  knows 
him  as  making  atonement  for  sin,  and  as  giving  power  to  overcome  sin 
through  his  blood.  Some  writers  have  looked  upon  Christ  from  one  point 
of  view  and  some  from  another,  and  there  is  no  book  that  is  more  likely 
to  sell  than  a  Life  of  Christ,  but  the  most  essential  view  of  him  is  to  be 
had  from  the  cross  foot.  No  complete  life  of  Christ  has  been  written  yet. 
All  the  lives  of  Christ  that  have  yet  been  written  amount  to  about 
one  drop  of  broth,  while  the  four  Evangelists  are  as  a  whole  bullock. 
The  pen  of  inspiration  has  accomplished  what  all  the  quills  in  the 
world  will  never  be  able  to  do  again,  and  there  is  no  need  they  should. 
However  much  we  dwell  upon  the  holiness  of  our  Lord,  we  cannot 
complete  his  picture  unless  we  describe  him  as  the  sinner's  ransom. 
He  is  white,  but  he  is  ruddy  too.  Rutherford  said,  *'  0  then,  come  and 
gee  if  he  be  not  a  red  man.  In  his  sufiering  for  us  he  was  wet  with  his 
own  blood.  Is  he  not  well  worthy  of  your  love  ?  "  "When  he  cometh 
forth  in  the  vesture  dipped  in  blood  many  shun  him,  they  cannot  bear  the 
atoning  sacrifice ;  but  he  is  never  in  our  eyes  so  matchlessly  lovely  as 
when  we  see  hira  bearing  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  and 
{)utting  away  transgression  by  making  himself  the  Substitute  for  his 
people. 

Let  this  then  be  your  basis  idea  of  Christ — "he  has  redeemed  us  fiom 
the  curse  of  the  law."  Indeed,  m  retereuce  to  Christ,  we  must  regard 
his  redemption  as  the  basis  of  his  triumphs  and  his  glory — "the  sulFer- 
iugs  of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  shall  follow."  We  cannot  understand 
any  work  that  he  has  performed  unless  we  understand  his  vicarious 
sacrifice.  Christ  is  a  lock  without  a  key,  he  is  a  labyrinth  without  a 
clue,  until  you  know  him  as  the  Redeemer.  You  have  spilt  the  letters 
on  the  floor,  and  you  cannot  make  out  the  character  of  the  Wonderful 
till  first  you  liave  learned  to  spell  the  words — atonement  by  blood.  This 
is  the  deepest  joy  of  earth  and  the  grandest  song  in  heaven.  "  For  thou 
wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  unto  God  by  thy  blood." 

I  beg  you  to  observe,  in  connection  with  our  text,  that  as  the  foundation 
of  the  Tabernacle  was  very  valuable,  so  our  Lord  Jesus  as  our  Redeemer  is 
exceedingly  precious  to  us.  His  redemption  is  made  with  his  precious  blood. 
The  redemption  money  was  of  pure  and  precious  metal,  a  metal  that  does 
not  lose  weight  in  the  fire.  "  The  redemption  of  the  soul  is  precious." 
What  a  redemption  price  hath  Christ  given  for  us ;  yea,  what  a  redemp- 
tion price  he  is !  Well  did  Peter  say,  "  Unto  you  that  beheve  he  is 
precious"  :  silver  and  gold  are  not  to  be  mentioned  in  comparison  with 
him.  To  me  it  is  very  instructive  that  the  Israelites  should  have  been 
redeemed  with  silver  in  the  form  of  half-shekels,  because  there  are  many 
who  say,  "These  old-fashioned  divines  believe  in  the  mercantile  idea 
of  the  atonement."  Exactly  so  :  we  always  did  and  always  shall  use  a 
metaphor  which  is  so  expressive  as  to  be  abhorred  by  the  enemies  of  the 
truth.  The  mercantile  idea  of  the  atonement  is  the  Biblical  idea  of  the 
atonement.  These  people  were  redeemed,  not  with  lumps  of  uncoined 
silver,  but  with  money  used  in  commerce.  Paul  saifch  "Ye  are  not  your 
own  :  ye  are  bought " — listen — "  with  a  p'ke  " — to  give  us  the  mercantile 


SILVER   SOCKETS.  295 

idea  beyond  all  question.  "  Bought  with  a  price "  is  doubly  mer- 
cantile. What  say  you  to  this,  ye  wise  refiners,  who  would  refina 
the  meaning  out  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  ?  Such  persons  merely  use 
this  expression  about  the  "  mercantile  idea  "  as  a  cheap  piece  of  mockery, 
because  in  their  hearts  they  hate  atonement  altogether,  and  the  idea  of 
substitution  and  expiation  by  vicarious  sacrifice  is  abhorrent  to  them. 
Therefore  hath  the  Lord  made  it  so  plain,  so  manifest  that  they  may 
stumble  at  this  stumbling-stone,  "  whereunto  also,"  methinks,  as  Peter 
saith,  "  they  were  appointed."  To  us,  at  any  rate,  the  redemption  price 
which  is  the  foundation  of  all  is  exceedingly  precious. 

But  there  is  one  other  thing  to  recollect  in  reference  to  Christ,  namely, 
that  we  must  each  one  view  him  as  our  own,  for  out  of  all  the  grown  up 
males  that  were  in  the  camp  of  Israel,  when  they  set  up  the  tabernacle, 
there  was  not  one  but  had  a  share  in  its  foundation.  We  read  in 
Exodus  XXXV.  25  and  26,  "  And  all  the  women  that  were  wise  hearted 
did  spin  with  their  hands,  and  brought  that  which  they  had  spun,  both 
of  blue,  and  of  purple,  and  of  scarlet,  and  of  fine  linen.  And  all  the 
women  whose  heart  stii-red  them  up  in  wisdom  spun  goats'  hair."  The 
men  could  not  spin,  perliaps ;  fchey  did  not  nnderstand  that  art ;  but 
every  man  had  his  half  a  shekel  in  the  fonndation.  I  want  you  to  think 
of  that.  Each  believer  has  a  share  in  Christ  as  his  redemption :  nay, 
I  dai-e  not  say  a  share  in  him,  for  he  is  all  mine,  and  he  is  all  yours. 
BiHitlier  and  sister,  have  yun  by  faith  laid  hold  upon  a  whole  Christ 
and  said,  "  He  has  paid  the  price  for  me  "?  Then  you  have  an  interest  in 
the  very  fundamental  idea  of  Christ.  Perhaps  you  are  not  learned  enough 
to  have  enjoyed  your  portion  in  certain  other  aspects  of  our  Lord ;  but 
if  you  are  a  believer,  however  weak  you  are,  though  you  are  like  the  poor 
among  the  people  of  Israel,  you  have  your  half  shekel  in  the  foundation. 
I  delight  to  think  of  that.  1  have  my  treasure  in  Christ ;  "  my  Beloved 
is  mine."  Do  you  say  he  is  yours  ?  I  do  not  deny  it.  80  he  is,  but  "  he 
is  mine."  If  you  deny  that  fact  we  will  quarrel  at  once,  for  I  do  aver 
that  "  my  Beloved  is  mine."  Moreover,  by  his  purchase  "  I  am  his." 
"  So  am  I,"  say  you.  Quite  right :  I  am  glad  you  are ;  but  I  know  that 
"  I  am  his,"  There  is  notliing  like  getting  a  firm,  personal  hold  and 
grip  of  Christ:  my  half  shekel  is  in  the  basis  of  the  tabernacle;  my 
redemption  money  is  in  the  divinely  glorious  building  of  grace ;  my 
redemption  is  in  the  death  of  Christ,  which  is  the  foundation  of  all. 

III.  Time  fails  me,  and  yet  I  have  now  a  third  thought  to  lay  before 
you  very  briefly.  The  tabernacle  was  a  type  of  thk  Chuuch  of  God 
as  the  place  of  divine  indwelling.  What  and  where  is  the  church  of  God  ? 
The  true  church  is  founded  upon  redemption.  Every  board  of  shittim 
wood  was  tenoned  and  mortised  into  the  sockets  of  silver  made  of  the 
redemption  money,  and  every  man  that  is  in  the  church  of  God  is  united 
to  Christ,  rests  upon  Christ,  and  cannot  be  separated  from  him. 
If  that  is  not  true  of  you,  my  dear  hearer,  you  are  not  in  the  church  of 
God.  You  may  be  in  the  church  of  England  or  of  Rome,  you  may  be  in 
this  church  or  some  other  ;  but  unless  you  are  joined  to  Christ,  and  he 
is  the  sole  foundation  upon  which  you  rest,  you  are  not  in  the  church  of 
God.  You  may  be  in  no  visible  church  whatever,  and  yet,  if  you  are 
resting  upon  Christ,  you  are  a  part  of  the  true  house  of  God  on  earth. 

Christ  is  a  sure   foundation  for  the  church ;    for  the  tabernacle  wm 


296  METROl'OLITAN   TABERNACLE   PUl.PIT. 

never  blown  down.  It  had  no  foundation  but  the  talents  of  silver;  and 
jet  it  braved  every  desert  storm.  The  wilderness  is  a  place  of  rough 
winds — it  is  called  a  howling  wilderness;  but  the  sockets  of  silver  held 
the  boards  upright,  and  the  holy  tent  defied  the  ra-e  of  the  elements. 
To  be  united  to  Christ  by  faith  is  to  be  built  on  a  sure  foundation.  Hia 
church  will  never  be  overthrown  let  the  devil  send  what  hurricanes  he  may. 

And  it  was  an  invariable  foundation,  for  the  tabernacle  always  had  the 
same  basis  wherever  it  was  placed.  One  day  it  was  pitched  on  the  sand, 
another  on  a  good  piece  of  arable  ground,  a  third  time  on  a  grass  plot, 
and  to-morrow  on  a  bare  rock ;  but  it  always  had  the  same  foundation. 
The  bearers  of  the  holy  furniture  never  left  the  silver  sockets  behind. 
Those  four  tons  of  silver  were  carried  in  their  waggons,  and  put  out 
first  as  the  one  and  only  foundation  of  the  holy  place.  Now,  the  learned 
tell  us  that  the  nineteenth  century  requires  "advanced  thought."  I 
wish  the  nineteenth  century  was  over;  I  have  heard  it  bragged  about 
so  much  that  I  am  sick  of  the  nineteenth  century.  We  are  told 
that  this  is  too  sensible  a  century  to  need  or  accept  the  same  gospel 
as  the  first,  second,  and  thii-d  centuries.  Yet  these  were  the  centuries 
of  martyrs,  the  centuries  of  heroes,  the  centuries  that  conquered  all 
the  gods  of  Greece  and  R  »me,  the  centuries  of  holy  glory,  and  all  this 
because  they  were  the  centuries  of  the  gospel ;  but  now  we  are  so 
enlightened  that  our  ears  ache  for  sometliing  fresh,  and  under  the  in- 
fluence of  another  gospel,  which  is  not  another,  our  behefs  are  dwindling 
down  from  alps  to  anthills,  and  we  ourselves  from  giants  to  pigmies. 
You  will  want  a  microscope  soon  to  see  Christian  fai^h  in  the  land,  it  is 
getting  to  be  so  small  and  scarce.  By  God's  grace  some  of  us  abide  by 
the  ark  of  che  covenant,  and  mean  to  preach  the  same  gospel  which  the 
saints  received  at  tlie  first.  We  shall  imitate  those  who,  having  had  a 
.silver  fonndntion  at  the  first,  had  a  silver  foundation  for  the  tabernacle, 
even  till  the>  came  to  the  promised  land.  It  is  a  foundation  that  we 
dare  not  change.  It  must  be  the  same,  world  without  end,  for  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever. 

IV.  Fouithly,  and  lastly,  I  think  this  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness 
may  be  viewed  as  a  type  of  the  gospel,  for  the  guspel  is  the  revelation 
of  God  to  man.  The  tent  in  the  wilderness  was  the  gospel  according  to 
Moses.  Now,  as  that  old  gospel  in  the  wilderness  was,  such  must  ours 
be,  and  I  want  to  say  just  two  or  three  things  very  plainly,  and  ha?e 
done. 

Redemption,  atonement  in  the  mercantile  idea,  must  be  the  foundation  oj 
our  theologij — doctrinal,  ^radical,  a'nd  experimental.  As  to  doctrine,  they 
say  a  fish  stinks  first  at  the  head,  and  men  fiist  go  astray  in  their  brains. 
When  once  there  is  anything  wrong  in  your  belief  as  to  redemption  you 
axe  wrong  all  through.     I  believe  in  the  old  rhyme — 

"  What  think  you  of  Christ  ?  is  the  test 

To  try  both  your  state  and  your  scheme. 
You  cannot  be  right  in  the  rest 
Unless  you  think  rightly  of  him." 

If  you  get  wrong  on  atonement  you  have  turned  a  switch  which  will 
run  the  whole  train  of  your  thoughts  upon  the  wrong  line.  You  musi 
kuo'.y  Christ  as  the  Redeemer  of  his  people,  and  their  substitute,  or  yoor 


SILVER   SOCKETS  297 

fceaching  will  give  an  uncertain  sound.  As  redemption  mnst  be  the 
foundation  of  doctrinal  divinity,  so  it  must  of  practical  divinity.  "  Ye 
are  not  your  own :  ye  are  bought  with  a  price,"  must  be  the  source  of 
holiness,  and  the  reason  for  consecration.  The  man  that  does  not  feel 
himself  to  be  specially  "  redeemed  from  among  men  "  will  see  no  reason 
for  being  different  from  other  men.  "  Christ  loved  his  Church  and  gave 
himself /(?r  /'/;"  he  who  sees  no  special  giving  of  Christ  for  his  Church 
will  see  no  special  reason  why  the  Church  should  give  herself  to  Christ. 

Certainly  redemption  must  be  the  foundation  of  experimental  theology ; 
for  what  is  an  experience  worth  that  does  not  make  us  every  day  prize 
n\ore  and  more  the  redeeming  blood?  Oh,  my  dear  friends,  I  never 
knew,  though  I  had  some  idea  of  it,  what  a  fool  I  was  till  of  late  years. 
I  tell  you  that  those  dreadful  pains,  which  may  even  make  you  long  for 
death,  will  empty  you  right  out,  and  not  only  empty  you,  but  make  you 
judge  yourself  to  be  a  hollow  sham,  and  cause  you  to  loathe  yourself,  and 
then  it  is  that  you  cling  to  Christ.  Nothing  but  the  atoning  sacrifice 
will  satisfy  me.  I  have  read  plenty  of  books  of  modern  theology,  bat 
none  of  them  can  heal  so  much  as  a  pin's  prick  in  the  conscience.  When 
a  man  gets  sick  in  body  and  heavy  in  spirit  he  wants  the  old-fashioned 
puritanical  theology,  the  gospel  of  Calvin,  the  gospel  of  Augustine,  the 
gospel  of  Paul,  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  and  8a\  i<inr  Jesus  Christ.  Our 
theology  as  a  matter  of  experience  must  be  based  upon  redemption. 

Ah,,  brethren,  and  not  only  our  theology  but  our  personal  hope.  The 
only  gospel  that  1  have  to  preach  is  that  which  I  rest  upon  myself: — 
"  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  "  For  the 
chastisement  of  our  pence  was  upon  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are 
healed  ":  "  He  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors."  Oh,  dear  hearers,  build  on  that  and  you  will  never  fail ; 
but  if  yon  do  net  take  Christ's  redemption  as  the  foundation  of  your 
hope — I  do  not  care  who  you  are — you  may  be  very  leai'ned,  but  you 
know  nothing  at  all.  The  Lord  make  you  to  know  that  you  know 
nothing,  and  then  you  will  know  something :  and  when  you  have  learned 
as  much  as  that,  may  he  teach  you  the  redemption  of  his  Son,  and  reveal 
Christ  in  you. 

This,  beloved,  is  henceforth  the  burden  of  our  service,  and  Ike  glory 
of  our  life.  Those  silver  sockets  were  very  precious,  but  very  weighty. 
I  dare  say  the  men  who  had  to  move  them  sometimes  thought  so. 
Four  tons  and  more  of  silver  make  up  a  great  load.  0  blessed,  blissful 
draught,  to  have  to  put  the  shoulder  to  the  collar  to  draw  the  burden  of 
the  Lord — the  glorious  weight  of  redemption.  My  soul,  blessed  art 
thou  to  be  made  a  labouring  ox  for  Christ;  ever  to  be  bearing  among 
this  people  the  divinely  precious  load  of  the  foundation  which  Christ 
has  laid  for  his  people.  You,  young  brethren,  that  preach,  mind  you 
always  carry  your  four  tons  of  silver  :  preach  a  full  and  rich  redemption 
all  of  you.  You  who  go  to  the  Sunday  School,  do  not  let  the  children 
have  a  place  to  live  in  that  has  no  foundation  :  the  first  wind  will  blow  it 
over,  and  where  will  they  be  ?  Left  naked  under  the  ruins  of  that 
in  which  they  had  hoped.  Lay  Christ  for  a  foundation.  You  cannot 
do  better,  for  God  himself  has  said,  "  Behold,  J  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner 
stone,  elect,  precious."     Lay  this  silver  foundation  wherever  you  are. 

Aye,  but  though  the  ingots  were  heavy  to  carry,  every  Israelite  felt 


298  MKTROPOLITAN  TAllKKNACLE  I'ULVIT. 

proud  to  think  that  that  tabernacle  had  a  foundation  of  silver.  Yon 
Amalekites  out  there  cannot  see  the  silver  footing  of  it  all  ;  you  IMoabitea 
Oftunot  peieeive  it.  All  you  can  see  is  the  badger  skins  outside, — the 
rough  exterior  of  the  tent.  You  say,  "  That  tent  is  a  poor  place  to  be  a 
temple  :  that  gospel  is  a  very  simple  affair."  No  doubt  it  is  to  you, 
but  you  never  saw  the  silver  sockets,  you  never  saw  the  golden  boards, 
vou  never  saw  the  glory  of  the  inside  of  the  place  lit  up  by  the  seven- 
branched  candlesticks,  and  glorious  with  the  presence  of  God.  Brethren, 
redemption  is  our  honour  and  delight. 

"  In  the  cross  of  Christ  I  glory 

Towering  o'er  the  wrecks  of  time  : 
All  the  light  of  sacred  story 
Gathers  round  its  head  sublime." 

This  the  first  and  this  the  last ;  the  bleeding  Lamb  slain  from  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  yet  living  and  reigning  when  earth's 
foundations  shall  dissolve.  That  blessed  Lamb  of  God  is  in  the  midst 
of  the  throne,  and  his  people  shall  all  be  with  him,  for  ever  triumphant.  He 
is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  ending,  the  foundation 
and  the  headstone.  0  Saviour  of  sinners,  glory  be  to  thy  name.  Amen 
and  amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — 1  Peter  ii.,  1 — 10 1 
Exodus  xxvi.  15 — 25;  xxx.  11 — 16;  xxxviii.  25 — 28. 


Hymns  feom  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 84,  440,  54f. 


THE   ALTAR. 


Delivered  on  Lord's  Day  Morning,  September  20th,  1868,  bt 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  The  altar  that  sanctifieth  the  gift." — Matthew  xxiii.  19. 

Had  man  remained  perfect,  his  communion  with  God  would  have  been 
as  unrestricted  as  that  of  an  obedient  child  with  an  affectionate  Either. 
Adam  might  have  worshipped  his  God  acceptably  an^^where,  at  any  time, 
and  in  any  mode  he  chose.  Had  there  been  literal  offerings  as  well  as 
sacrifices  of  praise,  he  might  have  brought  before  his  God  the  delicious 
fruits  of  the  garden,  or  poured  forth  libations  from  Eden's  golden- 
sanded  river;  and  these  might  have  been  presented  on  the  high  places 
of  the  earth,  or  in  the  shady  groves,  or  amid  the  verdm-e  of  the  plains — 
anywhere  the  Lord  would  have  received  the  grateful  offerings  of  men 
whose  hearts  were  perfect  towards  himself.  But  the  fall  intervened. 
Man  became  a  rebel  to  his  King.  Man  by  his  depravity  of  nature  was 
placed  far  off  from  God,  and  his  once  unrestricted  fellowship  with 
heaven  was  brought  to  an  end.  Mercy  gave  tidings  of  renewed  com- 
munion, but  the  good  news  came  by  slow  degrees,  and  meanwhile  if  man 
would  approach  his  God  it  must  be  under  rules  and  regulations  which 
should  remind  him  of  his  changed"  estate.  If  he  be  permitted  to  draw 
near  to  his  offended  God  at  all  it  is  a  great  favour,  and  he  shall  be  made 
to  learn  by  the  way  of  coming  how  great  that  favour  is.  He  shall, 
ere  a  fuller  ceremonial  is  revealed,  only  be  allowed  to  offer  a  bleeding 
sacrifice.  He  shall  not  present  to  God  that  which  costeth  him  nothing — 
the  growth  of  the  soil — but  he  must  bring  a  victim  from  his  flock  or 
herd,  and  by  his  own  hand  he  must  cause  the  victim  to  suffer  and  die, 
for  God  will  accept  only  a  life  poured  forth  in  blood  as  a  sacrifice  from 
man,  whose  own  life  was  forfeited  to  justice.  And  while  rules  and  regu- 
lations were  laid  down  as  to  sacrifices,  altars  were  also  under  command- 
ment— they  must  be  built  of  earth  or  unhewn  stone;  and  at  the  last  all 
altars  of  burnt-offering  were  suppressed  save  one  only,  the  consecrated 
brazen  altar  of  the  tabernacle.  All  the  rest  of  the  world  was  left 
altarless.  One  spot  was  selected,  and  only  one.  First  in  the  place  where 
the  tabernacle  was  pitched,  and  afterwards  the  temple  of  Jerusalem, 
the  altar  for  bloody  sacrifice  was  set  up;  and  everywhere  else  when 
men  offered  to  God  on  their  high  places,  they  did  so  in  defiance  of  his 
commands:  prophets  might  make  exceptions  to  the  rule,  but  fosr  the 
Nos.  831—32.  g 


800  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PUTJ'ir. 

many  the  unbending  rule  was  that  all  sacrifice  must  be  made  at  the  one 
holy  altar. 

Brethren,  the  outward  truth  clearly  reveals  to  us  its  inner  meaning. 
We  must,  had  we  remained  innocent,  have  brought  before  God  every 
day  the  thank-offerings  of  our  hearts  without  a  mediator,  but  we  are 
guilty,  and  our  holiest  acts  are  the  deeds  of  imperfect  men,  and  our 
purest  worship  is  the  worship  of  fallen  beings.  Who  can  bring  a  clean 
thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  Not  one.  And  ere  we  can  be  accepted  in  our 
best  things,  there  must  be  the  shedding  of  the  blood  which  taketh  away 
sin.  There  is  no  door  of  acceptance  for  us  except  through  the  merit  of 
the  great  Surety  who  solemnly  laid  down  his  life  for  his  people  ;  there 
is  but  one  way  by  which  we  who  have  been  washed  in  the  blood  of 
Jesus  can  offer  unto  God  our  humble  service  and  our  loving  hearts, 
namely,  through  Jesus  Christ  who  stands  as  the  type  of  that  one  and 
only  permitted  altar;  to  him  we  must  bring  ourselves  as  a  living 
sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God;  for  it  is  only  by  Jesus  Christ 
that  this  reasonable  service  can  be  accepted  of  the  Most  High.  In  the 
one  altar  of  the  tabernacle  or  the  temple  we  see  a  type  of  the  person  and 
merit  of  our  glorious  Lord  Jesus,  and  learn  that  apart  from  him  there 
is  no  acceptable  worship — for  this  is  the  truth  which  we  desire  this 
morning  to  teach. 

Many  mistakes  have  been  made  through  applying  the  emblem  of  an 
altar  to  matters  to  which  it  hns  no  correct  reference.  There  was  but 
one  authorised  altar  of  Jehovah,  as  we  have  already  noted  :  that  one 
altar  finds  its  fulfilment  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  but 
through  loose  talking,  if  not  tlirough  doctrinal  error,  other  things  have 
come  to  be  called  altars  which  are  not  so,  certainly  not  such  altars  as 
meet  the  requirements  of  my  text,  for  they  do  not  sanctify  the  gift,  and 
are  not  greater  than  the  gift.  Frequently  have  we  seen  the  cross 
spoken  of  as  an  altar.  Up  m  the  cross  as  upon  an  altar,  our  Lord  is 
said  to  have  been  offered  as  the  great  sacrifice  for  sin ;  but  the  expres- 
sion is  mere  poetic  flourish,  and  no  more.  As  a  man,  Jesus  died  on  the 
tree,  and  the  wood  to  which  he  was  nailed  was  a  gibbet,  and  not  an 
altar ;  it  was  never  appointed  as  such  by  God,  nor  is  it  ever  so  called  in  his 
word.  The  cross  of  wood  was  simply  the  instrument  of  our  Saviour's 
torture  and  death,  and  is  no  more  to  be  reverenced  than  the  whips  of 
Pilate  or  the  spittle  of  the  scoffers.  The  cross  used  at  Calvary,  and  all 
other  crosses,  whether  of  wood,  or  stone,  or  gold,  are  no  more  to  be 
esteemed  than  the  same  material  shaped  in  circles  or  squares.  Indeed, 
if  we  are  to  attach  any  kind  of  moral  quality  to  the  material  and 
visible  form  of  the  cross,  it  is  rather  a  thing  accursed  than  a  thing  to 
be  l)lessed,  for  the  divine  curse  fell  on  every  one  that  was  hanged  on  a 
tree.  Certainly  this  fancied  altar  of  the  cross  in  no  way  sanctified  the 
victim.  What  honour  did  our  Lord  Jesus  derive  from  the  tree  on  which 
he  hung  ?  What  virtue  came  from  this  so-called  altar  to  make  God's  un- 
speakable gift  acceptable  ?  A  piece  of  wood  and  nothing  more  was  that 
cross.  It  could  give  no  sanctity  to  Christ,  and  we  ought  never  to  use 
words  concerning  that  piece  of  timber  which  would  in  any  way  lead 
men  to  associate  its  material  substance  with  the  meritorious  work  of 
Christ.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  constant  use  of  the  emblem  of  the 
ci-oss,  iu  itself  as  innocent  as  an  oval  or  a  square,  often  leads  men  into 


THE   ALTAR.  gQJ 

a  species  of  idolatry.  When  I  see  a  cross  embossed  on  Bibles,  wrought 
out  in  jewelry  or  fashioned  gold,  I  cannot  but  think  how  contradictory 
it  all  seems:  the  cross,  a  thing  of  shame,  the  instrument  of  our  Lord's 
execution  by  those  who  abhorred  him,  and  yet  worn  as  an  ornament  I 
surely  men  might  as  well  wear  at  their  girdles  the  dagger  with  which 
their  friend  was  stabbed !  Why  do  not  the  ladies  wear  a  gibbet  from 
their  necks  ?  For  what  more  or  less  is  a  cross  ?  Such  was  not  the  cross 
which  Paul  gloried  in  ;  he  would  have  despised  such  idolatry.  He 
gloried  in  the  gospel,  which  is  a  spiritual  cross,  and  he  says  of  it  *'  By 
which  the  world  is  crucified  to  me,  and  I  unto  the  world."  Which  of 
those  cross  wearers  was  ever  crucified  to  the  world  by  the  cross  \^•!.ich 
dangles  on  their  bosoms  ?  The  sign  of  the  cross  when  reverenced  is 
much  the  same  as  the  brazen  serpent  when  Tsrae]  fell  to  adoring  it :  it 
must  be  broken,  and  Christian  people  should  discountenance  its  use. 
Clearly  it  is  no  altar. 

We  occasionally  read,  and  especially  in  poetry,  of  the  "  altar  of  the 
heart,"  but  is  not  that  also  a  misnomer,  and  may  it  not  one  day  lead 
to  doctrinal  error?  Tlie  heart  an  altar!  It  certainly  does  not  sanctify 
the  gift.  If  there  be  anything  in  the  gift  that  is  acceptable  to  God  its 
sanctity  must  come  from  its  being  offered  on  a  very  dilFe rent  altar  than 
that  of  our  poor,  corrupt,  and  depraved  heart.  I  know  the  meanincr  is, 
tiiat  sincerity  makes  our  service  acceptable,  but  I  doubt  the  truth  of 
til  at  assei'tion,  for  however  sincere  our  devotions  may  be,  apart  from 
the  atonement  of  Jesus  God  accepteth  them  not.  Sincerity  there  must  be 
or  there  can  be  no  offering  made  to  God  at  all;  but  still  all  the  sincerity 
that  ever  dwelt  in  human  bosom  could  not  make  an  offering  to  be  re- 
ceived of  God,  unless  faith  found  an  altar  in  Jesus,  and  relied  for 
acceptance  upon  the  grand  sacrifice  and  finished  atonement  of  the 
Mediator.     Talk  not  quite  so  loosely  lest  mischief  come  of  it. 

A  more  common  and  dangerous  mistake,  however,  is  to  call  the  table 
which  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  the  Lord's  Supper  an  altar.  If  it  had 
been  called  a  house,  or  a  horse,  or  an  angel,  either  title  would  have 
been  quite  as  correct  a  name,  for  there  is  no  likeness  whatever  between 
the  table  of  communion  and  an  altar.  The  mistaJie  is  egregious,  and 
the  m;schief  flowing  from  it  is  most  terrible.  All  through  Scripture  we 
read  of  the  communion  table,  but  never  find  it  either  plainly,  obscurely, 
directly,  or  indirectly  called  an  altar.  Jesus  said,  *'  The  hand  of  him  that 
betrayeth  me  is  with  me  on  the  table ; "  he  did  not  say,  *'  The  traitor  is 
ofiiciating  with  me  at  this  altar,"  and  yet  surely  that  first  celebration 
was  quite  as  complete  as  any  which  have  succeeded  it !  Paul  saith, 
'•  Ye  cannot  be  partakers  of  the  Lord's  table  and  of  the  table  of  the 
devil,"  and  that  too  in  a  connection  in  which  he  would  surely  have  said 
the  Lord's  altar  had  the  term  been  allowable.  Neither,  except  by  the 
most  violent  straining,  can  there  be  found  any  passage  of  Scripture 
which  represents  this  table,  used  to  celebrate  a  feast,  as  an  altar  for 
the  consumption  of  a  sacrifice.  Indeed,  what  sacrifice  do  the  modern 
priests  place  upon  their  so-called  altar  ?  See,  they  bring  forth  bread 
and  wine,  fit  furniture  for  a  table,  but  where  are  the  fire  and  the  wood 
for  a  burnt-offering?  If  the  table  be  an  altar,  then  according  to  our 
Lord,  it  is  better  and  holier  than  the  bread  and  wine  placed  upon  it, 
for  the  "  altar  sanctifieth  the  gittj"  and  yet  our  modern  ritualists  will 


802  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

hardly  venture  to  say  that  their  altars  of  wood  and  stone  are  really 
more  holy  than  the  body  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  they  profess  to 
offer  thereon.  I  know  not  to  what  length  folly  may  go,  but  one  thing 
I  marvel  at,  if  these  gentlemen  must  needs  have  a  material  altar,  why 
do  they  not  follow  the  scriptural  form  thereof?  Why  do  they  make 
a  kind  of  sideboard  or  dresser  of  it,  by  setting  it  against  a  wall  ? 
a  thing  that  was  never  heard  of  in  all  the  world  before,  for 
everywhere  altars  are  so  placed  as  to  be  compassed  about.  David  said, 
"  So  will  I  compass  thine  altar,  0  Lord."  Elijah  digged  a  trench 
about  the  altar.  The  altar  of  the  Old  Testament  could  be  surrounded, 
but  whence  came  these  new-fashioned  erections,  which  are  not  even 
according  to  the  fashion  of  Judaism  ?  From  what  heathenism  did  they 
borrow  their  steps  to  the  altar,  such  things  being  forbidden  of  the 
Lord?  Whence  came  their  high  altar  ?  What  mean  tho«e  ornaments 
on  an  altar  ?  Strange  intrusions  these  for  an  altar !  Surely  they  must 
have  taken  their  models  from  those  altars  of  Baal,  of  which  we  read 
that  there  were  images  on  high  above  them ;  for  how  commonly  do  we 
gee  either  their  pieces  of  plate  with  superstitious  symbols,  or  their 
sumptuous  common  prayer  books,  adorned  with  silver  crucifixes,  or 
what  is  worse,  pictures  and  images,  and  candles,  and  I  know  not  what 
of  trumpery  besides  I  Let  us  never  therefore  use  the  term  altar  as 
synonymous  with  communion  table,  lest  we  countenance  deadly  error. 
Of  ail  delusions  that  have  ever  happened  to  the  human  race,  surely  that 
of  transubstantiation  has  been  at  once  the  most  absurd  and  the  most 
profane,  and  both  that  doctrine  and  all  growing  out  of  it  should  be 
protested  against  by  every  sincere  Christian,  especially  at  this  dreary 
time  when  superstition  is  daily  increasing.  If  ever  we  shall  have 
Popery  back  in  this  land,  it  will  owe  much  of  its  advance  to  the  misuse 
of  terms.  Call  not  you  table  an  altar,  lest  ye  come  to  bow  before  it  as 
the  Popish  heathen  do.  Use  it  as  a  table  of  fellowship  and  communion, 
but  never  dream  of  it  as  an  altar.  The  one  altar  which  sanctifieth  the 
gift  is  the  person  and  merit  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  nothing  else. 

Come  we  then  to  the  consideration  of  this  subject.  I  shall  first  refer 
you  to  the  passage  in  the  book  of  Exodus,  in  which  the  great  brazen 
altar  of  the  tabernacle  was  described,  and  try  to  ivork  out  the  type  as 
it  reveals  our  Lord ;  and  then,  secondly,  I  shall  ask  a  few  practical 
questions. 

L  In  the  twenty -seventh  chapter  of  the  book  of  Exodus  you  have  the 
Lord's  command  :  "  And  thou  shal]  make  an  altar  of  shittim  wood,  five 
cubits  long,  and  five  cubits  broad ;  the  aliar  shall  be  four-square  :  and 
the  height  thereof  shall  be  three  cubits.  And  thou  shalt  make  the 
horns  of  it  upon  the  four  corners  thereof:  his  horns  shall  be  of  the 
same :  and  thou  shalt  overlay  it  with  brass."  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
ANTITYPE  OF  THIS  BRAZEN  ALTAR.  All  that  it  signified  typically  we 
have  in  him. 

And  first  the  altar  typifies  our  Lord,  if  we  consider  the  use  of  it. 
The  altar  had  at  least  two  uses.  First,  to  sanctify  that  which  was  put 
upon  it,  and  then,  secondly,  to  sustain  it  or  bear  it  up,  while  the  fire 
was  consuming  it.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  himself  the  sacrifice  as  well  as 
the  altar.  Whatever  is  oifered  to  God  by  him  or  by  us  is  accepted, 
because  of  the  excellence  of  his  pei  son.     As  God  and  perfect  man  in 


THE  ALTAR.  303 

one  person,  all  that  he  does  and  all  that  he  presents  becomes  acceptable 
because  of  the  excellence  that  dwelleth  in  him;  and  so,  also,  he  bears 
and  sustains  all  the  violent  heat  both  of  the  fire  of  divine  wrath  and 
the  fire  of  divine  presence,  which  consumeth  the  sacrifice  put  upon  the 
altar.  How  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lifts  up  our  gifts  towards  heaven  I 
How  of  old  did  he  lift  up  our  sins  !  and  when  the  holy  flame  descended 
and  consumed  him,  as  the  great  victim  for  human  guilt,  what  strength 
and  power  there  was  in  him,  fitting  him  like  an  altar  of  brass  to  endure 
all  those  furious  flames  !  And  how  to-day  does  he  sweetly  lift  up  before 
God  all  the  offerings  of  his  people,  and  renders  them  acceptable  in  himself  I 
The  old  Puritans  were  wont  to  say  that  the  altar  represented  the  deity  of 
Christ,  because  the  deity  of  Christ  lent  power  as  well  as  virtue  to  the 
manhood  of  Christ;  but  may  we  not  consider  his  entire  person  to  be  the 
sustaining  and  sanctifying  altar  of  mediation?  As  the  one  appointed 
Mediator  for  mankind,  he  puts  a  value  into  the  gifts  of  his  people,  and 
his  own  sacrifice  derives  efficacy  from  his  person  and  character.  In  him 
we  are  able  to  bear  the  presence  of  God  when  he  accepts  us,  for  our  God 
is  a  consuming  fire,  and  we  can  only  meet  him  in  Jesus  ;  it  is  only  on  the 
brazen  altar  that  the  heavenly  fire  can  consume  our  sacrifice.  The  wrath 
which  consumes  Jesus  has  endured  once  for  all  ;  that  glory  of  con- 
suming love  we  are  able  to  learn  through  our  union  with  the  incarnate 
God.  Let  it  never  then  be  forgotten  by  us  all  that  if  our  souls  and 
bodies,  which  we  offer  to  God,  are  to  be  presented  before  the  Lord,  it 
must  be  by  Christ  us  an  altar;  and  if  we  arc  to  be  sanctified  and 
rendered  acce[)table,  it  must  still  be  by  Christ  as  an  altar.  There  never 
could  be  but  this  one  altar  for  Israel — for  all  Israel,  according  to  divine 
appointment,  this  was  the  alone  altar ;  every  victim  must  be  slaughtered 
here ;  every  acceptable  burnt-offering  must  be  brought  here ;  and  so 
with  us.  We  cannot  offer  a  prayer,  much  less  ourselves,  except  by  him. 
There  is  one  Christ  for  all  the  saints,  one  Jesus  for  you  who  are  grown 
in  grace,  one  Jesus  for  those  who  are  but  beginners  in  spiritual  things, 
one  Lord  Jesus  for  the  black  and  filthy  sinner  when  he  first  seeks  for 
mercy,  one  Lord  Jesus  for  the  Christian  made  perfect  when  he  enters 
into  his  rest.  One  altar  for  all  Israel,  and  that  one  altar  for  all  times: 
for  Israel  in  the  days  of  Moses,  for  Israel  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  for 
Israel  until  the  end  of  the  dispensation.  You  and  I  come  to  God  by 
the  selfsame  road  which  was  travelled  by  David,  and  afterwards  by  the 
Lord's  apostles.  Xever  a  believer  accepted  except  in  Jesus,  in  any  age, 
never  a  work  done  that  was  acceptable  to  God  in  any  period  except 
through  Jesus  Christ.  One  altar,  and  only  one  for  all  ages,  for  the 
whole  chosen  seed.  We  hold  this  as  a  truth;  let  us  prize  it  and 
defend  it. 

The  place  of  the  altar  next  deserves  your  consideration.  You  will 
remember  that  the  moment  you  entered  into  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
you  saw  this  altar  of  burnt-offering,  and  before  you  could  reach  the  veil 
which  separated  the  holy  from  the  most  holy  place,  you  must  pass  hard 
by  the  altar.  So  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  Christian  life,  the  first 
thing  we  have  to  learn  is  that  we  approach  God  through  Jesus  Christ. 
Thou  knowest  nothing  of  Christianity  unless  the  most  prominent 
thought  of  thy  soul  is  Jesus  as  the  Mediator  between  thee  and  God. 
Talk  not  of  Christian  example  or  of  Christian  holy  teaching,  these 


804  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

fchiiip^s  are  but  secondary;  ye  must  know  Jesus  Christ  as  suflfering  and 
pourinff  out  his  soul  unto  death  as  a  propitiation  for  sin,  or  you  do  not 
know  the  inner  sense  of  the  divine  religion  of  the  cross.  Nobody 
could  help  seeing  that  brazen  altar.  Walking  with  his  eyes  open  through 
tluit  court,  every  observer  must  see  it.  There  was  its  perpetual  smoke 
and  smell — and  this  even  one  would  perceive — ^while  in  itself  it  was 
so  large  and  important,  that  it  could  not  be  overlooked.  Even  so,  my 
hearer,  thou  canst  not  abide  in  the  religion  of  Jesus,  even  for  an  hour, 
without  beholding  him  and  without  resting  in  him.  Thou  knowest 
nought  unless  thou  knowest  him  as  the  altar  of  God.  The  way  to  the 
most  holy  place  was  by  this  altar.  "  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but 
by  me."  We  cannot  enter  into  fellowship  with  God,  nor  understand 
the  deep  things  of  God,  nor  penetrate  into  the  divine  arcana  oi 
the  highest  of  the  doctrines  of  the  truth,  except  by  fii'st  passing 
where  the  atonement  is  ottered  and  where  Jesus  stands,  the  only 
Mediator  between  God  and  man.  How  many  have  tried  to  learn  the 
doctrines  apart  from  Christ,  and  how  many  try  to  preach  them !  but 
they  are  unedifying,  and  even  lead  to  mischief.  The  best  of  all 
preaching  of  doctrines  is  such  as  that  which  we  had  in  Dr.  Hawker's 
'day,  when  he  preached  election,  but  it  was  always  election  in  Christ ; 
when  the  doctrine  of  predestination  was  clearly  enough  stated,  but 
its  sweet  relationship  to  the  Lamb  of  God  was  always  dwelt  upon.  Let 
it  be  our  desire  when  we  enter  into  the  deep  things  of  God  to  view 
them  in  relation  to  Jesus,  and  pass  by  the  altar  to  reach  the  veil. 

The  form  of  the  altar  deserves  our  attention,  as  it  helps  to  bring  out 
something  more  of  Christ.  The  altar  was  tbur-square.  Where  shall 
we  learn  to  measure  the  heights  and  deprhs,  the  lengths  and  breadths 
of  the  love  of  Christ  that  passeth  knowledge?  If  we  may  not  so 
measure  them  just  yet,  it  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  everything  about 
Christ  is  well  ordered  and  arranged  by  infinite  wisdom;  the  altar  is  not 
made  at  haphazard,  it  is  four-square.  There  is  no  excess  in  him,  there 
is  no  lack  in  liim;  all  that  we  can  need  to  render  our  sacrifice  acceptable 
to  God  we  have  in  him.  Ainsworth  saith  that  the  foim  of  four-square 
represents  stability  and  endurance;  and  truly  our  Lord  is  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Other  altars  have  been  overturned,  but 
this  never.  The  saints  came  to  him  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  there 
he  stood  between  the  porch  and  the  veil :  we  come  to  him  to-day,  and 
he  stands  there  still  ;  and  when  the  ages  shall  have  passed  by,  and 
things  that  men  have  dreamed  to  be  everlasting  shall  have  melted  like  the 
morning's  hoar  frost,  there  shall  still  be  the  selfsame  Saviour  fixed  in 
his  place  to  otter  still  the  prayers  and  the  praises  of  his  people. 

At  each  corner  of  the  altar  was  a  horn.  The  horn  is  always  the 
emblem  of  power;  and  these  horns  indicated  doubtless  the  power  which 
lies  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ — the  power  with  God  on  our  behalf. 
We  never  need  be  afraid  of  acceptance  in  the  Beloved  when  we  see 
what  might,  what  virtue,  what  sacred  merit  dwells  in  him.  God  reject 
his  Son  I  Impossible  I  The  adored  of  angels,  the  eternally  beloved, 
must  be  accepted  of  God.  Having  given  his  hands  to  the  nails,  and 
his  heart  to  the  spear,  having  suffered  even  unto  death,  it  cannot  be 
that  the  Lord  should  deny  him  and  disrespect  his  sacrifice.  He  must 
be  for  ever  prevalent  with  the  Most  High.     Put  thyself  on  the  altar, 


THE   ALTAR.  3O5 

Christian,  God  must  accept  thee,  for  he  accepts  the  victim  because  of 
the  altar  which  sanctifieth  the  gift;  he  must  accept  thee,  feeble  as  thou 
art,  for  Jesus  infuses  merit  into  thee  as  the  altar  into  the  gift.  Come 
with  thy  tears,  come  with  thy  sighs  and  thy  groans,  poor  treuibliug  one, 
there  is  no  fear  but  what  thou  shalt  speed ;  those  four  horns  indicate 
how  meritorious  Jesus  is,  and  he  will  render  thee  as  acceptable  as  he 
is  himself. 

The  altar,  too,  while  we  are  describing  its  form,  we  must  remember, 
was  built  originally  so  low  that  it  was  reached  by  the  priests  without 
the  use  of  steps,  and,  inleed,  steps  were  expressly  forbidden,  the  reason 
being  given  that,  in  going  up  to  the  altar,  it  might  not  be  possible  that 
the  nakedness  of  the  priest  should  be  discovered.  God  would  have 
nothing  indecorous  in  his  service.  The  spiritual  meaning  being,  I 
suppose,  that  Jesus  Christ,  when  we  go  to  him,  is  most  accessible.  We 
are  not  to  climb  to  him  by  steps  of  creature  effort,  merit,  and  prepar- 
ation. Those  preparations  for  Christ,  of  which  so  much  is  made  by 
certain  preachers,  are  all  mischievous.  Divines  will  tell  you  you  must 
feel  tills  and  feel  the  other,  you  must  pass  through  that  experience  and 
the  other,  but,  truly — 

"  All  the  fitness  he  requireth, 
Is  to  feel  your  need  of  him." 

And  this  he  gives  you.  Tliere  are  no  steps  up  to  the  altar,  there  are 
no  human  preparations  for  Christ.  You  may  come  to  him  just  as  you 
are,  for  he  is  waiting  to  be  gracious.  Solomon's  altar  in  the  temple 
was  on  a  large  scale,  to  show  the  greatness  of  our  Lord's  power  and 
grace;  and  in  order  to  maintain  proportions,  it  was  made  much  too 
high  to  be  reached  withoar  some  mode  of  ascent — and  it  is  supposed, 
therefore,  that  the  priests  reached  it  by  a  gradual  incline,  since  steps 
must  not  be  made  to  it.  And  hei-e  we  should  be  taught  how,  in  coming 
to  Christ,  we  ascend  towards  God.  When  we  draw  near  unto  him 
with  true  hearts,  we  are  elevated  thereby.  Man  is  never  more  truly 
exalted  in  spirit  than  when  he  bows  lowest  at  the  cross  foot.  Calvary, 
though  it  was  no  mountain,  nor  scarce  a  hill,  outsoars  the  Hermous  and 
Pisgahs ;  its  top  is  nearer  heaven  than  Carmel  or  Bashan. 


"  Here  it  is  I  find  my  heaven, 
While  upon  the  cross  I  gaze." 


Let  me  but  tarry  there,  and  if  I  am  not  in  paradise,  I  should  be,  at 
least,  in  the  suburbs  of  the  New  Jerusalem.  No  truth  so  dear  as  Jesus 
crucified :  the  altar  of  his  atonement  is  so  low,  that  a  child  may  reach 
it,  and  yet  it  is  so  high,  that  by  it  we  ascend  to  heaven. 

It  is  notable,  and  you  will  kindly  look  this  afternoon  into  your 
Bibles,  and  investigate  the  matter,  that  this  altar  was  increased  in  size 
in  the  temple.  It  was  far  smaller  in  the  tabernacle  than  in  the  temple  ; 
RO  may  our  conceptions  of  Christ  be  ever  growing :  if  we  know  him 
well  enough  to  find  that  he  is  sufficient  for  our  present  needs,  may  we 
yet  understand  his  all  sufficiency;  if  we  have  discovered  something  of 
his  excellence,  and  of  the  admirable  way  in  which  he  secures  our 
acceptance  with  God,  may  we  know  this  more  and  more.  May  Jesus 
grow  upon  us,  until  unable  to  comprehend  him,  we  shall  rejoice  in  his 
wceeding  greatness  and  be  filled  with  his  fuhirss. 


806  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

I  must  not  forget,  in  speaking  of  the  form  of  the  altar,  also  that  as 
the  observer  passed  round  it,  he  would  be  constantly  struok  with  its 
bespattered  appearance.  Entertain  not  the  notion  the  tabernacle  and  the 
temple  must  have  been  very  pleasant  places — we  can  scarcely  imagine 
anything  that  must  have  been  more  awe  inspiring,  and  even  revolting  to 
the  mind  of  the  observer,  than  the  court  of  priests,  when  sacrificing  was 
being  carried  on.  It  must  on  great  occasions  have  resembled  a  butcher's 
shambles,  with  the  addition  of  smoke  and  fire.  And  this  brazen  altar 
was  so  frequently  besmeared  with  blood,  and  so  constantly  were  bowl- 
fulls  of  warm  gore  thrown  at  its  base,  that  it  must  have  presented  a 
very  ghastly  appearance.  This  was  all  to  teach  the  observer  what  a 
dreadful  thing  sin  is,  and  how  it  can  only  be  put  away  through  suffering 
and  death.  The  Lord  did  not  study  attractive  aesthetics,  he  did  not 
prepare  a  tabernacle  that  should  delight  men's  tastes ;  it  was  rich  indeed, 
but  so  blood-stained  as  to  be  by  no  means  beautiful.  No  staining 
of  glass  to  charm  the  eye,  but  instead  thereof  the  inwards  of  slauglitered 
bullocks.  Such  sights  would  disgust  the  delicate  tastes  of  the  fops  of  this 
present  age.  Blood,  blood  on  every  side ;  death,  fire,  smoke  and  ashes, 
varied  with  the  bellowing  of  dying  beasts,  and  the  active  exertions  of 
men  whose  white  garments  were  all  crimson  with  the  blood  of  victims. 
How  clearly  did  the  worshippers  see  the  sternness  and  severity  of  the 
justice  of  God  against  human  sin,  and  the  intensity  of  the  agony  of  the 
great  Son  of  God  who  was  in  the  fulness  of  time  by  his  own  death  to 
put  away  all  the  sins  and  transgressions  of  his  people  I  By  faith  come 
ye,  my  brethren,  and  walk  round  that  blood-stained  altar,  and  as  you 
mark  its  four-square  form  and  its  horns  of  strength,  and  see  the  sacrifices 
smoking  thereon  acceptable  to  God,  look  down  and  mark  the  blood  with 
which  its  foundations  are  so  completely  saturated,  and  understand  how 
all  salvation  and  all  acceptance  rests  on  the  atonement  of  the  dying 
Son  of  God. 

We  will  pass  on  to  observe,  next,  the  materiuls  of  which  the  altar  was 
made,  for  these  also  were  instructive.  It  was  made  of  shittim  wood, 
overlaid  with  brass.  The  shittim  wood  is  always  understood  to  repre- 
sent the  incorruptible  human  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  for  this  which 
was  probably  the  acacia,  was  a  wood  which  would  not  rot,  even  as  Jesus 
when  tempted,  even  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  yet  remained  without 
sin.  The  brass,  of  course,  was  necessary  as  an  outer  covering,  lest  the 
altar  should  be  consumed  by  the  flames.  It  had  to  bear  perpetually 
the  blazing  and  the  burning  fire;  and  so  we  in  the  brass  see  the 
endurance  of  Christ,  how  his  loins  were  girt  about  with  power,  and 
how  tlie  divinity  within  sustained  the  perfect  man  while  he  bore 
"  All  that  incarnate  God  could  bear. 
With  strength  enough  and  none  to  spare." 
Look  on  that  brass.  Christian,  with  admiring  eye.  Think  how  often- 
times it  was  heated  by  the  fire,  and  then  look  upon  your  Lord,  and 
think  how  in  soul  and  body  he  was  tortured  and  tormented  for  your 
sins,  and  reflect  how  strong  he  must  have  been  to  suffer  so  as  to  be 
able  to  bear  the  whole  of  wrath  divine,  and  make  a  complete  atone- 
ment for  the  transgressions  of  his  elect ! 

The  fire  which  burnt  upon  the  altar  also  deserves  to  be  noticed.  It 
was  doubtless  no  common  fire  of  ordinary  culinary  use.     It  fell  from 


THE   ALTAR.  307 

heaven,  and  there  may  have  been  qualities  about  it  which  rendered  it 
different  from  any  other.  For  instance,  it  may  have  left  none  of  that 
residuum  of  ash,  and  smoke,  and  filth,  that  would  be  found  in  the  use 
of  ordinary  fire;  it  may  have  been  like  lightning  in  its  force  and  pure- 
ness.  Complaints  were  always  made  of  the  old  heathen  temples  of  the 
abundance  of  flies  and  filth  found  there.  Hence  the  Jews  were  ac- 
customed in  derision  to  call  the  idol  god  Baal,  Baal-zebub,  or  the  god 
of  flies,  because  of  the  abundance  of  such  noxious  creatures  found  in 
his  temples.  Probably  there  were  none  such  in  God's  temple,  for  the 
Lord's  fire  slew  every  unclean  thing.  This  fire  had  noble  and  distinct 
qualities,  consuming  and  blazing  after  a  nobler  and  diviner  sort  than 
ordinary  flames;  and  certainly  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  burning 
upon  his  altar  no  impure  flames  ;  love  burns  there  which  sprang  only 
from  his  own  bosom ;  a  holy  zeal  burns  there  without  the  slightest  ad- 
mixture ot  self  love;  the  Holy  Ghost  burns  there,  that  purest  and  best 
of  flames  that  can  rest  on  mortal  men,  and  there  too  burned  the  fire 
of  divine  wrath,  which  was  a  holy  jealousy  against  sin :  and  when  God 
himself  comes  upon  that  altar  to  accept  his  people,  it  is  a  divine 
acceptance  unutterably  glorious. 

But  I  must  not  detain  you  longer.  If  you  will  read  the  passage  at 
home  you  will  find  abundance  of  matter  suggestive  of  the  person  and 
the  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  To  him  must  we  always  come  in  heart  and 
soul.  We  know  of  no  holy  place  now,  nor  holy  days,  nor  holy  imple- 
ments. Our  soul  serves  God  in  spirit,  for  he  is  a  Spirit  and  seeketh 
those  to  worship  him  who  do  so  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  Our  soul  gives 
to  Jesus  Christ  pre-eminence  in  all  her  trusting,  coming  only  to  God 
through  him,  and  never  thinking  that  she  can  either  serve,  or  worship, 
or  lire  aright,  except  as  she  dwells  in  Christ,  and  the  merit  of  Christ 
commends  her  to  the  Father.  That  is  the  thought,  the  one  thought  I 
wish  to  bring  forward ;  and  though  I  cannot  speak  this  morning  as  I 
would,  yet  if  that  abide  with  you,  this  hour  shall  not  have  been  lost 
time. 

II.    ^OW  A   QUESTION   OR  TWO. 

My  first  enquiry  is.  Have  you  and  I  always  taken  care  to  keep  to 
the  one  spiritual  altar  ?  The  sin  of  this  age  is  idolatry.  The  whole 
tendency  of  this  generation  is  towards  the  setting  up  of  other  than 
spiritual  altars.  The  only  way  to  come  to  God  is  spiritually  through 
Jesus  Christ,  but  you  will  find  yourself,  dear  friend,  frequently 
tempted  to  make  something  else  the  vehicle  of  access  to  God,  and 
to  render  homage  to  him  through  some  other  vehicle.  You  may 
depend  upon  it,  that  the  belief  that  this  building  or  that  any  other 
building  is  a  house  of  God,  a  place  peculiarly  suitable  for  worship, 
is  idolatry  ;  you  are  giving  to  bricks  and  mortar  some  little  of  the 
honour  which  is  due  only  to  Christ  as  an  altar.  If  you  suppose  tliat 
there  is  any  more  acceptableness  to  God  in  a  church  or  a  cathedral 
than  in  any  public  hall  or  in  the  open  air,  you  have  made  a  material 
building  into  an  altar,  you  have  gone  back  to  the  types  and  have 
missed  the  Antitype,  and  so  far  iiave  robbed  Christ  of  a  portion 
of  his  glory.  If  you  look  upon  any  material  substances  as  being 
holy,  or,  I  will  add,  upon  any  postures,  whether  kneeling,  stand 
ing,  or  sitting,  as  having  in  them  any  kind  of  holiness,  or  ilj  in  fact, 


2(j3  metropolitan  tabernacle  pulpit. 

you  get  away  from  the  spiritual  in  any  manner — begin  in  any  sort,  or 
mode,  or  degree,  to  attach  reverence  to  the  physical  and  to  the  material — 
you  have  so  far  wandered  away  from  the  simplicity  of  Christ,  you  have 
set  up  an  Antichrist,  and  you  have  robbed  the  Lord  Jesus.  God  will 
never  put  away  the  sin  of  this  land  until  the  belief  in  material  conse- 
cration is  given  up.  Thus  spake  Isaiah  of  old  :  "  By  this  therefore  shall 
the  iniquity  of  Jacob  be  purged;  and  this  is  all  ihe  fruit  to  take  awaj 
his  sin  ;  when  he  maketh  all  the  stones  of  the  altar  as  chalkstones  that 
are  beaten  in  sunder,  the  groves  and  images  shall  not  stand  up."  We 
must  down  with  idols,  and  learn  that  there  is  no  more  holiness  in  our 
parish  steeple-houses,  called  churches,  or  in  our  chapels  or  cathedrals, 
than  in  barns  and  hovels.  God  abhors  our  idolatry,  and  will  visit  us 
for  it  unless  we  repent  and  turn  from  it.  We  cannot  hope,  in  this 
England  of  ours,  to  see  restored  to  us  the  purity  of  the  gospel  until 
Protestants  cleanse  themselves  of  this  Antichristian,  Popish  belief  and 
reverence  for  postures,  and  places,  and  men,  and  days,  and  books,  and 
I  know  not  what  beside.  Worship  God,  men!  Demean  not  yourselves- 
by  paying  reverence  to  anything  else.  Worship  God  in  Jesus  Christ. 
That  is  the  one  only  canon  of  worship;  in  the  power  of  the  eternal 
Spirit  approach  God  through  the  merits  of  the  Redeemer:  and  as  for 
your  so-called  priests,  and  your  churches,  and  your  holy  things,  away 
with  them  !  They  are  not  to  be  borne  by  reason,  much  less  by  men  of 
spiritual  minds.  Worship  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  give  the  glory  due 
unto  hi§  name  wholly  to  him,  but  give  none  of  it  to  things  of  human 
devidng. 

The  next  question  is,  Are  there  not  some  among  you  tvho  have  been 
offering  to  God  ivithoid  an  altar  at  all?  I  mean  this:  you  have  been 
striving,  you  sav,  to,  do  your  duty;  you  are  au  honourable  member  (^f 
the  state.  You  have  sought  to  be  religious  too,  and  you  liave  come  up 
with  the  assembly  of  God's  people.  You  never  forget  the  Sabbath,  nor 
the  oifering  of  your  morning  and  evening  prayer,  and  you  believe 
yourself,  therefore,  to  be  among  the  good  and  the  righteous,  and  you 
hope  to  be  accepted  at  the  bar  of  God.  Yes,  1  see  your  sacrifice,  but 
where  is  your  altar  ?  For  be  assured,  God  will  not  receive  your  sacri- 
fice \uthout  an  altar,  and  for  altars  there  is  but  one.  You  have 
forgotten,  my  dear  friend,  the  one  great  essential  thing.  According  to 
our  text,  the  altar  sanctifies  the  gift :  your  gift  is  not  sanctified  at  all 
then;  it  is  an  uusanctified,  unacceptable  gift.  The  whole  of  your  life, 
though  commendable  in  itself,  and  to  be  imitated  by  others  m  its  out- 
ward' development,  is  not  accepted  of  God  because  you  have  never 
placed  that  life  upon  the  appointed  altar  of  Christ  Jesus ;  you  have  not 
ottered  it  to  God,  having  first  trusted  in  Christ  and  looked  to  his  merit 
for  its  acceptance.  You  have  been  depending  upon  yourself,  and 
therefore  you  are  no  more  likely  to  be  saved  than  Cain  was  when 
he  went  about  to  offer  a  sacrifice  of  his  own,  and  could  not  sub- 
mit to  brmg  the  lamb  according  to  divine  appointment.  Oh,  I  could 
weep  over  some  of  you  who  have  so  much  that  is  good  about  you,  because 
you  forget  the  Lord  Jesus.  Why,  you  have  forgotten  the  one,  the  mam, 
the  essential  thing.  Those  morning  and  evening  prayers  of  yours,  what 
are  they  ?  If  you  have  not  seen  Jesus  on  the  cross,  if  you  have  not 
looked  to  his  wounds,  you  have  not  prayed  at  all.     That  helping  of  the 


THE   ALTAH.  309 

poor  which  is  so  kind  of  you — ay,  but  if  you  have  not  done  it  for 
his  sake,  trusting  in  him,  who,  though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sake 
became  poor,  you  have  not  done  it  unto  God  at  all.  And  if  you  have 
been  working  and  going  about  to  establish  your  own  righteousness,  and 
have  not  submitted  yourself  to  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  it  will  all 
be  a  failure.  You  gentlemen  who  have  brought  up  your  families  so 
well,  you  honest  working  men  who  fight  the  battle  of  life  so  valiantly, 
oh  1  it  is  grievous  to  think  that  you  should  labour  in  vain,  and  spend 
your  strength  for  nought,  and  bring  your  bullocks  and  your  rams 
and  sacrifice  to  God,  and  they  should  all  be  an  offence  and  an  abomi- 
nation, because  you  do  not  bring  them  to  the  one  appointed  altar. 
God  help  you  to  think  of  this  and  to  repent  of  the  folly,  and  henceforth 
live  in  consistency  of  character  as  you  have  done,  but  make  not  that 
your  trust :  come  to  Jesus  first,  and  let  the  rest  follow. 

Next,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  another  enquiry,  for  those  of  us  who 
have  brought  our  offerings  and  ourselves  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ. 
Let  me  ask  whether  we  have  not  often  forgotten  to  attach  the  im- 
portance to  the  attar  which  ive  shouid  have  done.  I  mean  this.  I  pray, 
and  when  my  prayer  is  done  I  think  within  myself,  will  it  prevail  ? 
And  I  remember  that  I  did  not  plead  the  blood  of  Jesus  as  I  ought  to 
have  done.  I  said,  "for  Jesus'  sake" — I  should  be  ashamed  to  pray 
except  in  his  name— but  did  I  realise  that  I  could  not  be  acceptable 
with  God  in  myself?  that  it  must  be  because  of  the  Redeemer's  per- 
fections, sufferings,  bloody  sweat,  passion,  and  resurrection,  that  I 
must  be  heard  ?  Now  my  prayer  has  lost  much  power  if  I  liave  not 
pleaded  Christ's  work,  and  Christ's  merit,  with  all  my  heart,  and  soul, 
and  strength.  To  plead  the  merit  of  Jesus  is  the  marrow  of  prayer; 
good  words  are  but  the  bone.  This  is  the  soul  of  prayer ;  this  it  is 
that  takes  heaven  by  storm ;  this  moves  the  heart  of  God — the  bringing 
before  God  the  sacrifice  of  his  dear  Son,  the  making  Gethsemane  to  ring 
aG:ain  in  the  paternal  ears,  making  the  cross  to  shine  again  before  the 
Father's  face,  pleading  earnestly  because  Jesus  deserves  abundantly. 
Have  we  not  often  missed  this  ?  and  if  we  have  in  our  prayers,  I  am  sure 
we  have  much  more  in  our  other  engagements.  I  am  afraid  we  preach 
without  putting  the  sermon  on  the  brazen  altar,  and  that  we  distribute 
our  tracts  or  teach  in  the  Sabbath-school,  or  talk  of  Christ  with  tha 
sick,  and  do  it  without  presenting  the  service  through  the  meritorious 
person  of  our  Lord.  Oh  !  it  is  blessed  when  one  has  preached,  and 
felt,  "  Well,  I  have  not  succeeded  as  I  could  desire  ;  I  have  felt  heavy 
in  my  Master's  service,  shut  up  so  that  I  could  not  come  forth ;  but 
still  I  meant  to  honour  him,  and  now,  my  God,  accept  my  poor  service 
for  my  Redeemer's  sake."  This  is  the  way  to  put  our  service  right  on 
the  altar,  and  there  it  is  sure  to  speed.  Oh,  then  it  is  so  blessed  to  know 
that  Jesus  sanctifies  the  gift !  The  gift  was  nothing — a'  po(tr  speech  for 
his  name,  a  scanty  gift  to  his  poor  saints,  but  still  God  receives  it  as 
he  accepted  the  bullocks,  not  for  the  bullocks'  sake,  but  for  the  altar's 
sake ;  and  so  will  he  receive  our  faulty  services  for  the  sake  of  Jesus, 
when  we  offer  them  through  him.  Let  your  souls  anchor  themselves 
to  the  atonement  of  Jesus.  Cast  more  cords  about  yourself,  and  bind 
your  spirits  fast  to  him.  You  are  never  healthy,  you  are  never  strong, 
you  are  never  happy,  you  are  never  lifted  up  towards  heaven  except 


810  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

when  you  abide  close  to  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God  made  flesh  for 
you.  Never  journey  away  from  the  cross.  Seek  other  truths,  and 
delight  in  other  beauties  if  you  will,  but  the  first  truth  and  the  first 
beauty  in  heaven  and  earth  is  the  crucified  Redeemer :  keep  you  to  him, 
and  rejoice  in  him. 

I  shall  not  detain  you  longer  except  to  say  this.  Have  we,  dear 
friends,  as  believers,  ever  fed  at  this  altar?  for  we  have  an  altar  of  which 
they  have  no  right  to  eat  that  serve  the  tabernacle.  That  is  to  say, 
those  who  trust  in  ceremonies  have  no  right  to  Christ;  those  who  think 
themselves  priests  above  their  fellow  Christians  cannot  taste  Christ; 
they  are  shut  out  by  their  own  act  and  deed,  they  have  no  right  there; 
but  we  who  do  not  serve  the  outward  tabernacle,  but  have  come  to 
spiritual  worship,  we  have  a  right  to  eat  at  the  altar  of  Christ.  Here 
is  a  choice  morsel  for  us,  God  has  accepted  us  in  Christ.  Feed  on 
that.  Christian;  you  have  condemned  yourself  but  God  has  accepted  you. 
Men  have  criticised  and  censured  you,  but  in  Christ  God  has  accepted 
those  imperfect  works  of  yours.  Why,  it  is  enough  for  a  courtier  if  his 
king  smiles;  is  it  not  enough  for  you?  Nay,  lie  not  down  and  groan, 
and  cry,  because  you  have  not  acted  perfectly,  but  having  repented  of 
every  omission  and  transgression,  rise  up  with  courage  to  do  better 
things,  because  even  your  worst  things  have  been  accepted.  Peed  on 
Christ  who  makes  you  accepted ;  feed  on  the  acceptance  itself,  and  so 
like  the  priest,  commune  with  God  at  his  table. 

And  if  you  have  already  laid  yourself  upon  the  altar  of  Christ  as  a 
reasonat»le  sacrifice,  come  ami  do  it  again.  It  is  very  desirable  fre- 
quently to  renew  our  consecration  to  Jesus.  "  Thine  are  we,  thou  Son 
of  David,  and  all  that  we  have."  You  who  have  been  bought  with  his 
blood,  draw  nigh  to  him,  and  yield  yourselves  anew  to  him  this  morn- 
ing. You  own  the  soft  impeachment  that  you  are  his  in  blessed  mar- 
riage bonds,  come,  then,  and  anew  declare,  "  My  Lord,  take  me  wholly! 
Use  me,  use  me  to  the  last  ounce !  Use  me  up !  Grant  that  there  may 
not  be  a  hair  of  my  head,  nor  a  drop  of  my  blood,  nor  a  beating  of  my 
pulse,  which  is  not  thine !  Lord,  1  make  no  reserve.  I  give  thee  my 
ohildren,  my  house,  my  property,  my  time,  my  body,  my  soul,  and  I  do 
not  ask  thee  to  spare  me  and  give  me  an  easy  life.  Do  as  thou  wilt 
with  me,  only  glorify  thyself  in  me  !"  When  the  bullock  was  on  the 
altar,  the  flesh-hook  was  used  to  aid  in  burning  it  completely — the  priest 
desired  that  there  should  be  nothing  of  the  oftering  left.  "  So,  Lord, 
if  thou  usest  the  flesh-hook  of  affliction  to  drag  me  into  the  fire,  so 
let  it  be.  I  would  that  thou  shouldst  win  as  much  glory  out  of  me  as 
thou  canst  extract  from  a  mortal  man  by  suff'ering  or  by  service  ;  ap- 
point me  what  thou  wilt,  only,  Father,  glorify  thyself,  and  enable  me  to 
glorify  thee!"  ^ If  we  shall  thus  consecrate  ourselves,  there  will  be 
better  days  in  store  for  us  than  we  have  as  yet  known,  and  the  church 
and  the  world  will  know  that  God  has  wrought  wonders  for  us.  May 
God  give  you  a  blessing,  for  his  name's  sake.     Amen. 


Portion  or  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon. — Hebrews 


"THE    AEK    OF     HIS    COVENANT." 


Intended  fob  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  August  25th,  1895, 
delitered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Thursday  Evening,  August  18<A,  1887. 

"  And  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,  and  there  was  seen  in  his  temple 
the  ark  of  his  testament  (covenant — e.v.)  :  and  there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and 
thunderings,  and  an  earthquake,  and  great  haii." — Revelation  xi.  19. 

I  8HAXL  take  the  passage  quite  by  itself.  I  do  not  fully  understand 
its  connection,  whether  it  relates  to  that  which  goes  before  or  to  that 
which  comes  afterwards  ;  and,  happily,  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to 
know  this,  for  the  passage  stands  complete  in  itself,  and  is  full  of 
valuable  instruction. 

Dear  friends,  even  we  who  believe  have  as  yet  failed  to  see  much  of 
the  truth  of  Grod.  We  know  enough  to  save  us,  to  comfort  us,  and  to 
help  U3  on  our  way  to  heaven  ;  but  oh,  how  much  of  the  glory  of 
divine  truth  has  never  yet  been  revealed  to  our  eyes !  Some  of  God's 
children  do  not  fully  know  even  the  common  truths  as  yet,  and  those 
who  do  know  them  realize  but  little  of  their  depth  and  height.  Erom 
our  text,  it  appears  that  there  are  certain  things  of  God  which  as  yet 
we  have  not  seen  ;  there  is  need  that  they  should  be  opened  up  to  us : 
**  The  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven."  When  our  Lord  Jesus 
died,  he  rent  the  veil  of  the  temple,  and  so  he  laid  open  the  holy  of 
holies ;  but  such  is  our  dimness  of  sight,  that  we  need  to  have  the 
temple  opened,  and  we  need  to  have  the  holy  of  holies  opened,  so  that 
we  may  see  what  is  not  really  concealed,  but  what  we  are  not  ready 
to  perceive  by  reason  of  the  slowness  of  our  understandings.  The 
two  words  for  "  temple  "  here  may  relate  not  only  to  the  temple  itself, 
but  also  to  the  holy  of  holies,  the  innermost  shrine.  Both  of  these,  it 
seems,  need  to  be  opened,  or  else  we  shall  not  see  what  there  is  in 
them.  Blessed  be  the  Holy  Spirit  that  he  does  open  up  one  truth 
after  another  to  us.  Our  Saviour's  promise  to  his  disciples  was, 
**  When  he  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all 
truth."  If  we  were  more  teachable,  if  we  were  more  anxious  to  be 
taught,  and  waited  upon  him  more,  he  woiild,  doubtless,  lead  us  into 
No.  2,427.  7 


812  METROPOLITAJV    TABEKNACLE    PULPIT. 

manj'  a  truth  which  at  the  present  moment  we  have  not  fully  enjoyed. 
It  is  a  happy  thing  for  you  and  for  me  when  at  any  time  we  can  say, 
"The  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,  so  that  we  saw  oven 
that  which  was  in  the  innermost  shrine  of  the  holy  temple." 

The  saints  in  heaven  doubtless  behold  all  the  glory  of  God  so  far 
as  it  can  be  perceived  by  created  beings  ;  but  we  who  are  on  the  right 
way  thither  behold,  as  in  a  glass  darkly,  the  glory  of  the  Lord. 
We  know  only  in  part,  but  the  part  we  do  know  is  not  so  great  as  it 
might  be,  we  might  know  far  more  than  we  do  even  here.  Some 
suppose  that  they  can  know  but  little,  because  they  say  that  it  is 
written,  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into 
the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that 
love  him."  Yes,  but  why  do  you  stop  there  ?  Half  a  text  is  often 
not  true  ;  go  on  to  the  end  of  the  passage  :  "  But  God  hath  revealed 
them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit :  for  the  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  yea, 
the  deep  things  of  God ;  "  and  that  which  your  eye  cannot  see,  and 
your  ear  cannot  hear,  and  the  heart  of  man  cannot  imagine,  can  be 
revealed  to  you  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  Oh,  that  we  were  more 
conscious  of  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  and  that  we  waited  upon  him  for  yet 
fuller  instruction  !  Then  I  am  persuaded  that,  in  our  measure  and 
degree,  it  would  be  true  to  us,  even  as  to  the  perfected  ones  above, 
'*  The  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,"  and  they  saw  that  which 
was  in  the  holiest  place. 

What  did  they  see  when  the  temple  was  opened  ?  When  the  secret 
place  was  laid  bare  to  them,  what  did  they  see  ?  That  is  to  be  my 
subject  now.  "  There  was  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of  his  covenant." 
If  we  could  look  into  heaven  at  this  moment,  this  's  what  we  should 
see,  "the  ark  of  his  covenant."  0  sinner,  thou  thinkest  that  thou 
wouldst  see  an  angry  God,  but  thou  wouldst  see  the  ark  of  his 
covenant !  0  child  of  God,  perhaps  thou  dreamest  of  many  things 
that  miglit  distress  thee  in  the  glory  of  that  sight ;  but  rest  thou 
content,  this  would  be  the  main  sight  that  thou  wouldst  see,  Jesus, 
the  incarnate  God,  the  great  covenant  Surety !  Thou  wouldst  see 
there,  where  the  Godhead  shines  resplendent,  the  ark  of  his  covenant. 

I.     I  shall  begin  by  noticing,  first,  that  the  ark  of  his  covenant  " 
18  ALWAYS  NEAR  TO  GoD :  "  There  was  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of 
his  covenant." 

Of  course,  the  outward  symbol  is  gone  ;  we  are  not  now  speaking 
of  a  temple  made  with  hands,  that  is  to  say,  of  this  building.  We 
speak  of  the  spiritual  temple  above ;  we  speak  of  the  spiritual  holy  of 
holies.  If  we  could  look  in  there,  we  should  see  the  ark  of  the 
covenant ;  and  we  should  see  the  covenant  itself  always  near  to  God. 
The  covenant  is  alwajs  there.  God  never  forgets  it ;  it  is  ever  before 
him  :  "  There  was  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of  his  covenant." 

Why  is  this  ?  Is  it  not  because  the  covenant  is  always  standing  ? 
The  Lord  said  concerning  his  people  of  old,  "  I  will  make  with  them 
an  everlasting  covenant,"  of  which  David  said,  "Yet  hath  he  made  with 
me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure."  If  God  has 
made  a  covenant  with  you,  it  is  not  simply  for  to-day  and  to-morrow, 
nor  merely  for  this  life,  but  for  the  ages  of  ages,  even  for  ever  and 
ever.     If  he  has  struck  hands  with  you  through  the  great  Surety, 


"THE    ARK    OF    HIS    OOVENAJS^T.  313 

Rnd  lie  has  pledged  himself  to  you,  remember,  "  If  we  believe  not,  yet 
he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself."  Jehovah  hath  said, 
"  The  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed ;  but  my 
kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my 
peace  be  removed.''  *  What  he  hath  said  he  will  stand  to  for  ever. 
He  will  keep  his  word.  He  said  to  his  Son,  **  I  will  preserve  thee,  and 
give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people ;  "  and  he  will  never  revoke  the 
gift.  This  covenant  stands  secure.  Though  earth's  old  columns  bow, 
and  though  my  spirits  sink,  and  flesh  and  heart  fail  me,  yet  this 
covenant  shall  bear  me  up  even  to  the  end. 

The  covenant  of  grace  is  for  ever  the  same,  because,  first,  tht  God  who 
made  it  changes  not.  There  can  be  no  change  in  God.  The  supposition 
is  inconsistent  with  a  belief  in  his  deity.  Hear  what  he  says  :  "  I  am 
the  Lord,  I  change  not ;  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed." 
The  sun  hath  his  chanjjes,  but  the  Father  of  lights  is  without  variable- 
ness, or  shadow  of  turning.  **  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie ; 
neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent :  hath  he  said,  and 
shall  he  not  do  it  ?  or  hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  make  it 
good  ?  "  God  has  never  to  alter  his  purposes  ;  why  should  he  ?  Those 
purposes  are  always  infinitely  wise.  He  knoweth  the  end  from  the 
beginning  ;  so  his  covenant,  which  he  made  with  such  deliberation  in 
the  councils  of  eternity,  that  covenant  which  is  sealed  with  the  most 
precious  thing  he  ever  had,  even  with  the  blood  of  his  only-begotten 
Son,  that  covenant  upon  which  he  stakes  his  eternal  honour,  for 
his  glory  and  honour  are  wrapped  up  with  the  covenant  of  grace,—; 
that  covenant  cannot  be  changed  because  God  himself  changeth  not. 

Then,  next,  the  Christ  who  is  its  Surety  and  Substance  changes 
not.  Christ,  the  great  Sacrifice  by  whose  death  the  covenant  was 
ratified,  Christ,  the  Surety,  who  has  sworn  to  carry  out  our  part  of  the 
covenant,  Christ,  who  is  the  very  sum  and  substance  of  the  covenant, 
never  alters.  "  All  the  promises  of  God  in  him  are  yea,  and  in  him 
Amen,  unto  the  glory  of  God  by  us."  If  we  had  a  variable  Saviour, 
brethren,  we  should  have  a  changeable  covenant.  Look  at  Adam ; 
he  could  change,  and  therefore  he  was  a  poor  representative  of  the 
human  race.  Our  first  federal  head  soon  fell  because  he  was  a  mere 
man  ;  but  the  Surety  of  the  new  covenant  is  the  Son  of  God,  who,  like 
his  Father,  faileth  not,  and  changeth  not.  Though  he  is  of  the  substance 
of  his  mother,  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  and  therefore 
can  stand  as  man's  Representative,  yet  is  he  Light  of  Light,  very  God 
of  very  God,  and  so  he  standeth  fast  and  firm,  like  the  unchanging 
God  himself.  In  this  great  truth  we  do  and  we  will  rejoice.  The 
covenant  is  always  before  God,  for  Christ  is  always  there.  He,  the 
Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  makes  the  covenant  always  to  be 
close  to  the  heart  of  God. 

And,  beloved,  note  you  this.  The  covenant  must  always  be  near  to 
God  because  the  love  which  suggested  it  changes  not.  The  Lord  loves  his 
people  with  a  love  which  has  no  beginning,  no  end,  no  boundary,  no 
change.  He  says,  "  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love : 
therefore  with  lovingkindness  have  I  drawn  thee."  When  the  love 
of  God's  heart  goeth  forth  toward  the  believer,  it  is  not  changeful 
like  the  love  of  man,  sometimes  high  and  sometimes  low,  sometimes 


814  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

strong  and  sometimes  weak ;  but,  as  it  is  said  of  our  Saviour, 
"  having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them 
unto  the  end,"  so  can  it  be  said  of  the  great  Father  that  his  love 
is  evermore  the  same ;  and  if  the  love  which  dictated  the  covenant 
is  always  in  the  heart  of  God,  depend  upon  it  that  the  covenant 
which  comes  of  that  love  is  always  there  in.  the  secret  place  of  the 
Most  High. 

Reflect  also,  beloved  brethren,  that  the  promises  contained  in  th$ 
covenant  change  not.  I  quoted  to  you,  just  now,  one  passage  about  the 
promises,  and  that  is  enough  :  "All  the  promises  of  God  in  him  are 
yea,  and  in  him  Amen."  Not  one  single  promise  of  God  shall  ever 
fall  to  the  ground  unfulfilled.  His  word  in  the  form  of  promises, 
as  well  as  in  the  form  of  the  gospel,  shall  not  return  unto  him  void. 
0  souls,  you  may  hang  your  whole  weight  upon  any  promise  of  God ! 
You  need  not  fear  that  it  will  break.  Though  all  the  vessels  of  the 
King's  house  were  hung  on  one  nail  made  by  him,  that  nail  would 
bear  them  all  up,  as  well  the  flagons  as  the  vessels  of  smaller  measure. 
Heaven  and  earth  may  hang  upon  a  single  promise  of  God.  The 
voice  that  rolls  the  stars  along,  and  keeps  them  all  in  their  orbits,  is 
that  voice  which  spake  even  the  least  of  the  promises,  and  therefore 
every  promise  of  God  stands  secure  for  ever. 

And  once  more,  not  only  the  promises,  but  the  fore$  and  binding 
power  of  the  covenant  change  not.  All  God's  acts  are  done  with  a  r*^fer- 
ence  to  his  covenant,  and  all  his  covenant  has  a  reference  to  his 
covenanted  ones.  Remember  what  Moses  said  of  old,  "  "When  the 
Most  High  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance,  when  he  separated 
the  sons  of  Adam,  he  set  the  bounds  of  the  people  according  to  the 
number  of  the  children  of  Israel."  Everything  that  he  does  follows 
the  line  and  rule  of  his  covenant.  If  he  chastens  and  afilicts,  it  is 
not  in  anger,  but  in  his  dear  covenant  love.  When  first  that  covenant 
came  into  fuU  action  with  the  redeemed,  it  was  all  powerful ;  but 
it  is  just  as  powerful  still.  AU  that  God  doeth  is  still  guided  and 
directed  by  his  eternal  purpose  and  his  covenant  pledges  to  his 
people.  Stand  still,  then,  and  when  thou  lookest  up,  if  thou  canst  not 
see  that  temple  because  thine  eye  of  faith  is  dim,  if  thou  scarcely 
darest  to  look  within  into  the  secret  place  which  is  the  holiest  of  all, 
yet  know  thou  of  a  surety  that  the  covenant  is  still  there,  and  always 
there,  whether  thou  seest  it  or  seest  it  not. 

I  will  tell  thee  when,  perhaps,  thou  wilt  best  know  that  the 
covenant  is  there ;  that  is,  when  the  storm-clouds  gather  the  most 
thickly.  When  thou  shalt  see  the  black  masses  come  rolling  up, 
then  remember  that  the  Lord  said  to  Noah,  "  I  do  set  my  bow  in  the 
cloud,  and  it  shall  be  for  a  token  of  a  covenant  between  me  and  the 
earth."  Then  shalt  thou  know  that  Jehovah  remembereth  his  covenant ; 
thou  may  est  even  be  half  glad  of  a  black  cloud,  that  the  sun  of  the  divine 
love  may  paint  upon  it  the  many-coloured  bow,  that  God  may  look 
on  it,  and  remember  his  covenant.  It  is  good  for  thee  to  look  on  it ; 
but  what  must  it  be  for  him  to  look  on  it,  and  to  remember  his 
covenant  ?  Be  thou  glad  that  the  covenant  is  always  near  to  God,  as 
our  text  declares,  "  And  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven, 
and  there  was  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of  his  covenant." 


"  THE   ARK   OF   HIS   COVENAIfT."  315 

H.  Now,  secondly,  the  coyenant  is  seen  of  sauh's  :  "  There  was 
seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of  his  covenant." 

First,  we  see  it  when,  by  faith,  we  believe  in  Jesus  as  our  Covenant-head. 

By  faith  we  know  that  God  has  entered  into  covenant  with  us. 
He  that  believeth  in  Christ  Jesus  is  in  covenant  with  God.  "  He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life."  "  He  that  believeth 
on  him  is  not  condemned."  He  that  believeth  in  him  is  at  peace  with 
God,  he  has  passed  from  death  unto  life,  and  shall  never  come  into 
condemnation.  Thou  art  in  covenant  with  God,  believer.  Wipe  thy 
weeping  eyes,  ask  God  to  take  the  dust  out  of  them,  that  thou  mayest 
Bee  that  there  is  an  unchanging  covenant  made  with  thee  to-night 
and  for  ever. 

Next,  we  see  this  covenant  when,  by  faith,  tee  perceive  it  in  God'8 
actions  towards  us.  Faith  may  see  the  covenant  of  God  in  all  his 
actions.  Do  you  not  remember  how  the  old  Scotchwoman  blessed 
God  for  her  porridge,  but  she  blessed  him  most  of  all  because  the 
porridge  was  in  the  covenant  ?  God  had  promised  bread  and  water, 
and  therefore  it  was  sure  to  come  to  her.  God  sent  her  bread  to  her 
in  the  form  of  porridge,  and  she  blessed  the  Lord  that  it  was  in  the 
covenant.  Now,  I  thank  God  that  food  is  in  the  covenant,  and  that 
raiment  is  in  the  covenant.  It  is  written,  "  Thy  shoes  shall  be  iron 
and  brass,"  so  they  are  in  the  covenant.  Life  is  in  the  covenant,  and 
death  is  in  the  covenant :  "To  die  is  gain."  Everything  that  is  to 
happen  to  us  is  in  the  covenant ;  and  when  faith  sees  it  so,  it  makes 
life  a  happy  one.  Am  I  chastened  ?  I  say  to  myself,  "Well,  the  rod 
was  in  the  covenant,  for  the  Lord  said  that,  if  his  children  disobeyed 
him,  he  would  chasten  them^  with  the  rod  of  men.  Ji  I  never  had 
the  rod,  I  should  be  afraid  I  was  not  in  the  covenant."  Is  it  not 
written,  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  "  ?  That  is  a  part  of 
the  covenant,  you  see;  so  that,  when  you  get  it,  say  to  yourself, 
"  The  God  who  is  evidently  keeping  this  part  of  his  covenant  will 
keep  the  rest  of  it  to  me,  his  child." 

Brethren,  we  get,  perhaps,  the  best  sight  of  the  covenant  when  hy 
prayer  we  plead  it.  In  that  hour  of  our  wrestling,  in  the  time  of  our 
inward  craving  of  mercies  from  the  hand  of  God,  we  come  at  last  to 
this,  "Lord,  thou  hast  promised;  do  as  thou  hast  said."  I  love  to 
put  my  finger  on  a  promise,  and  then  to  plead  it  with  the  Lord,  saying, 
**  This  is  thy  word,  my  Father ;  and  I  know  that  thou  wilt  not  run 
back  from  it.  0  God,  I  believe  in  the  inspiration  of  this  Book,  and  I 
take  every  word  of  it  as  coming  from  thy  lips.  Wilt  thou  not  seal  it 
to  my  conscience,  my  heart,  my  experience,  by  proving  it  to  be  true  ?  " 
Have  you  ever  found  the  Lord's  promises  fail  you  ?  I  remember  one 
who  had  put  in  the  margin  of  her  Bible  in  several  places,  "  T  and  P  "  ; 
and  when  she  was  asked  what  those  letters  meant,  she  said,  "They 
mean,  '  Tried  and  Proved.'  As  I  go  through  life,  I  keep  trying  and 
proving  the  promises  of  God,  and  then  I  put  a  mark  in  the  margin  of 
my  Bible  against  every  one  I  have  tested,  that  I  may  not  forget  it 
the  next  time  I  have  to  plead  it."  That  is  the  way  to  see  the  covenant 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  when  you  plead  it  in  prayer. 

And  there  are  some  of  us,  I  think,  who  can  say  that  our  experience 
w^  till  now  proves  that  God  does  not  forget  his  covenant.     We  have 


816 


METBOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


wandered,  but  we  have  been  able  to  say,  "  He  restoreth  my  soul,"  for 
he  has  restored  us.  We  have  needed  many  things,  and  we  have  gono 
to  him  in  prayer,  and  pleaded  that  word,  "No  good  thing  will  he 
withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly,"  and  he  has  listened  to  the 
cries  of  his  servants.  He  said  he  would  do  so  :  "  Call  upon  me  in  the 
day  of  trouble  :  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me."  He 
has  remembered  us  in  our  low  estate,  for  his  mercy  endureth  for 
ever ;  and  some  of  us  who  are  no  longer  young  can  set  to  our  seal 
that  God  is  true  because  of  many  experiences  of  his  faithfulness.  If 
they  tell  us  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  Bible,  and  nothing  in  Grod,  and 
nothing  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,  we  laugh  them  to  scorn.  We  have 
now  for  many  a  year  lived  upon  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  we 
cannot  be  driven  into  a  distrust  of  him.  He  is  faithful,  and  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 

Do  you  not  also  think  that,  when  we  arrive  in  heaven,  we  shall  have  a 
wonderful  retrospect,  and  that  retrospect  will  all  come  to  this  :  "  The 
temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,  and  there  was  seen  in  his  temple 
the  ark  of  his  covenant "  ?  Miss  Hannah  More  very  prettily  puts  it  that, 
often,  we  do  not  see  the  right  side  of  things  here.  She  went  into  a 
carpet  manufactory,  and  she  looked  at  what  the  workmen  were  doing, 
and  she  could  see  nothing  that  looked  like  beauty  of  design.  There 
were  tags  and  ends  hanging  out,  and  she  said  to  the  men,  "  I  cannot 
perceive  any  design  here,"  and  they  answered,  "  No,  madam,  for  you 
are  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  carpet ; "  but  when  she  went  round 
to  the  other  side,  she  saw  the  beauty  of  the  workmanship.  Alas  ! 
we  are  at  present  on  the  wrong  side  of  God's  work ;  we  must  get  to 
heaven  to  see  it  perfectly,  and  when  we  get  there,  we  shall — 

*'  Sing,  with  wonder  and  surprise, 
His  lovingkiudness  in  the  skies." 

and  we  shall  say,  "  It  was  all  right ;  it  could  not  have  been  better. 

"  •  Every  dark  and  bent^ing  line 
Meets  in  the  centre  of  his  love.'  " 

God  hath  not  erred.  He  has  not  gone  about  the  longest  way  to  do 
his  work,  but  he  has  done  in  the  wisest  and  most  prudent  manner  all 
that  was  for  the  best  and  highest  interests  of  his  dear  covenanted  ones. 

Thus,  I  have  shown  you  that  sometimes,  and  it  should  be  always, 
God's  people  do  see  that  glorious  covenant  of  grace  which  is  in  the 
temple  above. 

III.  Now  I  want  to  have  your  attention  while  I  say  briefly,  in 
the  third  place,  that  the  covexant  contains  much  that  is  worth 

SEEING. 

Let  us  think  of  what  was  in  the  ancient  ark  of  the  covenant,  for  aU 
that  was  in  that  ark  as  a  type  is  to  be  seen  in  Christ  our  heavenly 
covenant  ark  above. 

In  that  ark,  if  you  and  I  could  have  gone  into  the  holy  place,  and 
havu  had  our  eyes  strengthened  to  look,  we  should  have  seen,  first, 
God  dwelling  among  men.  What  a  wonderful  thing  !  Over  the  top  of 
the  lid  of  that  sacred  coffer  which  was  called  the  ark,  there  shone  an 
amazing  light  which  was  the  index  of  the  presence  of  God.     He  was 


"  THE   ARK    OP  HIS    COVENANT.'  ."    7 

in  the  midst  of  the  camp  of  Israel,  He  that  filleth  heaven  and  earth,  the 
infinite  Jehovah,  deigned  to  make  that  place  his  special  dwelling-place, 
80  that  he  is  addressed  as,  "  Thou  that  dwellest  between  the  cherubims,'* 
Here  is  a  part  of  the  new  covenant :  "  I  will  dwell  in  them,  and  walk 
in  them."  It  is  marvellous  that  God  does  speak  witli  men.  He  whom 
you  heard  thundering,  last  night,  as  he  drove  his  chariot  through  the 
sky,  that  God  in  infinite  condescension  speaks  with  us,  and  has  come 
down  to  us,  and  taken  us  into  relationship  with  himself  in  the  person 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  at  once  the  fellow  of  the  Almighty, 
and  the  brother  of  the  sons  cfi  men.  0  beloved,  rejoice  in  the 
covenant,  that  God  is  no  longer  divided  from  men  !  The  chasm  made 
by  sin  is  filled,  the  gulf  is  bridged,  and  God  now  dwells  with  men, 
and  manifests  himself  to  them;  and  **  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with 
them  that  fear  him," 

Next,  in  that  ark  you  would  have  noticed,  if  you  could  have  seen 
into  it,  God  reconciled  and  communing  with  men  upo7i  the  mercy-seat. 
Over  the  top  of  that  ark,  as  I  have  told  you,  was  a  golden  lid,  which 
fitted  it,  and  covered  it  exactly,  and  that  golden  lid  was  called  the  mercy- 
seat,  the  throne  of  grace.  There  God  spoke  with  men.  He  sat  there, 
as  it  were,  enthroned  as  the  Friend  of  men.  Now,  it  is  a  part  of  the 
covenant  that  God  hears  prayer,  that  God  answers  our  petitions,  that 
he  meets  us  in  a  way  of  reconciled  love,  that  he  speaks  to  us  in  tones 
which  the  spirit  can  hear  though  the  ear  cannot.  Thank  God  for  a 
blood-besprinkled  mercy-seat.  What  should  we  do  if  we  had  not 
that  as  our  meeting-place  with  the  thrice-holy  Jehovah  ? 

Then,  within  the  ark,  underneath  the  lid,  if  we  could  have  looked 
in,  we  should  have  seen  the  law,  the  two  tables  of  stone,  which 
represent  law  fulfilled  in  Christ,  and  henceforth  laid  up  in  his  heart, 
and  laid  up  in  our  hearts,  too,  if  we  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after 
the  inward  man.  Now,  this  is  our  joy,  that  the  law  of  God  has 
nothing  against  the  believer.  It  is  fulfilled  in  Christ,  and  we  see  it 
laid  up  in  Christ,  not  to  be  a  stone  to  fall  upon  us  to  grind  us  to 
powder,  but  beautiful  and  fair  to  look  upon  as  it  is  in  the  heart  of 
Christ,  and  fulfilled  in  the  life  of  Christ.  I  rejoice  in  the  covenant 
which  contains  in  it  stipulations  all  fulfilled,  and  commands  all 
executed,  by  our  great  Eepresentative. 

Together  with  those  tables  of  the  law  there  was  laid  up  a  rod,  a 
rod  which  had  originally  been  a  dry  stick  in  the  hands  of  Aaron,  but 
when  it  was  laid  up  before  the  Lord  it  budded,  and  blossomed,  and 
brought  forth  almonds.  So,  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  we  see  the 
hingdom  established  and  flourishing  in  Christ,  and  we  rejoice  in  it.  Oh, 
how  pleased  we  are  to  bow  before  his  fruitful  sceptre !  What 
wonderful  fruit  we  gather  from  that  blessed  rod!  Eeign,  reign, 
Jesus,  reign !  The  more  thou  dost  rule  us,  the  more  thou  art 
absolute  Sovereign  of  our  hearts,  the  happier  shall  we  be,  and  the 
more  shall  we  delight  ourselves  in  thee.  There  is  no  liberty  like 
complete  subjection  beneath  the  sway  of  Jesus  who  is  our  Prophet, 
priest,  and  King. 

Then,  by  the  side  of  that  rod  there  was  laid  up  the  golden  pot  full  of 
manna,  tht  provision  made  for  the  wilderness.  Let  us  rejoice  that  there 
is  in  the  covenant  all  the  provision  that  we  need.     God  has  laid  up 


318 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


for  us  in  Christ  all  our  spiritual  meat,  all  the  food  that  we  shall  ever 
need  between  here  and  heaven.  "Feed  me  till  I  want  no  more," 
we  cry  to  our  blessed  covenant  Eepreseiitative,  and  he  will  do  so. 

Then,  over  the  top  of  the  ark,  sat  the  cherubim  with  outstretched  wing», 
as,  I  think,  representing  how  the  angels  are  in  league  with  us,  and  with  the 
angels  all  the  forces  and  powem  of  the  universe.  This  day,  the  beasts  of 
the  field  are  our  friends,  and  the  stones  of  the  field  have  ceased  to  be 
our  foes.  Child  of  God,  you  may  travel  by  land  or  sea ;  you  may  go 
where  you  will ;  for  everywhere  j-ou  are  in  your  Father's  house.  All 
that  you  see  about  you  is  a  friend  tb  you,  since  you  are  a  friend  to 
God.  I  often  wonder  that  the  earth  bears  up  ungodly  men.  It  must 
groan  beneath  the  weight  of  a  swearer  ;  it  must  want  to  open  and 
swallow  him  up.  But  with  the  gracious  man,  the  man  who  fears  God, 
all  things  are  at  peace,  and  we  may  know  it  to  be  so.  "  Ye  shall  go 
out  with  joy,  and  be  led  forth  with  peace  ;  the  mountains  and  the  hills 
shall  break  forth  before  you  into  singing,  and  all  the  trees  of  the  field 
shall  clap  their  hands."  We  do  not  often  enough  realize,  I  think,  the 
friendship  of  all  God's  creatures  to  those  who  are  his  children.  St. 
Francis,  thougli  he  was  a  Romish  monk,  yet  had  a  true  idea  when  he 
used  to  regard  the  sparrows  and  other  birds  of  the  air,  and  even  the 
dogs  in  the  street,  as  his  friends  and  his  brothers,  and  talked  to  them 
as  such.  And  Luther  was  much  of  the  same  mind  when  he  opened 
his  window,  and  listened  to  the  chirpings  of  the  robins  in  the  early 
spring,  and  felt  that  they  had  come  to  teach  the  theological  doctor 
some  lesson  which  he  had  not  learned.  Oh  yes,  oh  yes,  we  are  quite 
at  home  anywhere,  now  that  God  is  our  God !  True,  the  earth 
travaileth,  and  is  in  pain,  and  the  creation  suffers  and  will  suffer 
till  Christ  comes  again  ;  but  still  her  travail  is  our  travail,  and  we  are 
in  sympathy  with  her,  and  when  she  doth  reflect  the  glory  of  her  God 
she  is  our  looking-glass  in  which  we  see  our  Father's  face. 

Thus,  I  think,  I  have  shown  you  that  there  is  much  to  be  seen  in 
the  ark  of  the  covenant.  God  give  us  grace,  like  the  angels,  to  fix 
our  eyes  upon  it !  "Which  things  the  angels  desire  tu  look  into." 
We  have  more  to  do  with  the  ark  of  his  covenant  than  they  hare ;  let 
U8  be  more  desirous  even  than  they  are  to  look  therein. 

IV.  I  close  with  this  fourth  point.  The  covenant  has  solemn 
SURROUNDINGS.  Listen:  "There  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and 
thunderings,  and  an  earthquake,  and  great  hail." 

When  the  people  entered  into  covenant  with  God  on  Sinai,  the  Lord 
came  down  upon  the  top  of  the  mount,  and  there  were  thunderings, 
and  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  an  earthquake.  There  were  all  these 
tokens  of  his  presence,  and  God  will  not  leave  the  covenant  of  tns  grace 
without  the  sanctions  of  his  power;  that  thimder,  that  lightning,  that 
storm,—  all  these  are  engaged  to  keep  his  covenant.  When  they  are 
wanted,  the  God  who  smote  Egypt  with  great  hailstones,  the  God  who 
made  the  Kishon  to  sweep  his  enemies  away,  the  God  who  madc^  the 
stars  in  heaven  to  fight  against  Sisera,  will  bring  all  the  overwhelming 
forces  that  are  at  his  command  to  the  help  of  his  people,  and  the 
fulfilling  of  the  covenant  which  he  has  made  with  them.  0  you  who 
are  his  people,  fall  back  in  confidence  upon  the  God  who  has  treasure* 
of  snow,   and  hail,  and  the  dread  artillery  of  storm  and  tempest! 


"the    ark    or    HIS    COVENANT.''  819 

Most  of  you,  my  hearers,  have  never  seen  a  great  storm  yet,  nor  heard 
in  its  majesty  the  thunder  of  Grod's  power.  You  must  be  in  the 
tropics  to  know  what  these  can  be,  and  even  then  you  would  have  to 
say,  "  These  are  but  parts  of  his  ways."  Oh,  how  the  Lord  can  shake 
the  earth,  and  make  it  tremble  even  to  its  deep  foundations  when  he 
pleases  !  He  can  make  what  we  call  ' '  the  solid  earth  "  to  be  as  weak 
as  water  when  he  doth  but  lift  up  his  finger.  But  all  the  power  that 
God  hath, — and  it  is  boundless, — is  all  in  that  right  hand  which  has 
been  lifted  high  to  heaven  in  the  solemn  oath  that  he  will  save  his 
people.  Wherefore,  lean  upon  God  without  the  shadow  of  a  doubt.  He 
may  well  put  all  your  fears  to  rest  even  by  the  thunder  of  his  power. 

Then  reflect  that  there  is  another  side  to  this  truth.  You  who  are  not 
in  covenant  with  God,  you  who  have  not  believed  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  you  who  have  never  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  of  the  hope  set 
before  you,  you  who  refuse  the  divine  mercy  which  comes  to  you 
through  the  bleeding  person  of  the  suffering  Christ,  do  remember 
that  there  will  be  for  you  the  thunderings,  and  the  lightnings,  and  the 
voices,  and  the  earthquake,  and  the  great  hail,  for  these  set  forth 
the  terrors  of  eternal  law,  overthrowing  God^s  adversaries.  You  have  no 
conception  of  what  God  will  do  with  the  ungodly.  False  teachers 
may  smooth  it  down  as  much  as  they  like,  but  that  Book  is  full 
of  thunderbolts  to  you  who  refuse  God's  mercy.  Listen  to  this  one 
text :  "Consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces, 
and  there  be  none  to  deliver."  Can  you  sport  with  that  ?  Listen  to 
another  :  "  Ah,  I  will  ease  me  of  mine  adversaries,  and  avenge  me  of 
mine  enemies !  "  What  will  you  say  to  that,  or  to  this  ?  "  And  again 
they  said  Alleluia.  And  her  smoke  rose  up  for  ever  and  ever."  "The 
same  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  which  is  poured  out 
without  mixture  into  the  cup  of  his  indignation ;  and  he  shall  be 
tormented  with  fire  and  brimstone  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  angels, 
and  in  the  presence  of  the  Lamb.  And  the  smoke  of  their  torment 
ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever  :  and  they  have  no  rest  day  nor 
night,  who  worship  the  beast  and  his  image,  and  whosoever  receiveth 
the  mark  of  his  name."  They  talk  as  if  we  invented  these  terrible 
words,  but  we  do  not ;  we  merely  quote  the  Scriptures  of  truth,  and 
they  are  terrible  indeed  to  the  wicked.  They  should  make  men 
start  in  their  sleep,  and  never  rest  until  they  find  a  Saviour.  A 
Universalist  once  said  to  a  Christian  man  that,  whatever  he  did,  God 
would  not  punish  him,  and  the  other  replied,  "  If  I  spit  on  your  god, 
I  suppose  he  will  not  punish  me.  If  I  curse  him,  if  I  defy  him,  it 
wiU  all  come  right  at  last  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  the  Universalist.  "  WeU," 
answered  the  other,  "that  may  be  the  character  of  your  god;  but 
don't  you  try  that  kind  of  thing  with  my  God,  the  God  of  the 
Scriptures,  or  else  you  will  find  that  because  he  is  love  he  cannot,  and 
he  will  not,  suffer  this  world  to  be  in  anarchy,  but  he  will  rule  it, 
and  govern  it,  and  he  will  punish  those  that  refuse  his  infinite 
compassion."  So  I  beseech  you,  my  hearers,  fly  to  Jesus  at  once; 
weary,  and  heavy-laden,  look  to  him,  for  he  saith  specially  to  you, 
*'Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  The  Lord  add  his 
blessing  to  the  truth  I  have  tried  to  preach  to  you,  the  sweet  and  th« 
terrible  alike,  for  Jesus'  sake !    Amen. 


820  METBOPOLITAJf   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Exposition  tg  €.  ^.  .Spurgeom 

HEBREWS  IX. 

Verse  1.  Then  verily  the  first  covenant  had  also  ordinances  of  divine 
service,  and  a  worldly  sanctuary. 

That  is  to  say,  a  material  sanctuary,  a  sanctuary  made  out  of  such  things 
as  this  world  contains.  Under  the  old  covenant,  there  were  certain  outward 
symbols.  Under  the  new  covenant,  we  have  not  the  symbols,  but  we  have 
the  substance  itself.  The  old  law  dealt  with  types  and  shadows,  but  the 
gospel  deals  with  the  spiritual  realities  themselves. 

2,  3.  For  there  was  a  tabernacle  made;  the  first,  wherein  was  the  amdlestick, 
and  the  table,  and  the  shewbreadj  which  is  called  the  sanctuary.  And  after  the 
second  veil,  the  tabernacle  which  is  called  the  Holiest  of  all; 

All  this  was  by  divine  appointment ;  the  form  of  the  rooms,  the  style  of 
the  furniture,  everything  was  ordained  of  God ;  and  that  not  merely  for 
ornament,  but  for  purposes  of  instruction.  As  we  shall  see  farther  on,  the 
Holy  Ghost  intended  a  significance,  a  teaching,  a  meaning,  about  every- 
thing in  the  old  tabernacle,  whether  it  was  a  candlestick,  or  a  table,  or  the 
shewbread. 

4,  5.  Which  had  the  golden  censer,  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant  overlaid  round 
about  with  gold,  wherein  was  the  golden  pot  that  had  manna,  and  Aaron's  rod 
that  budded,  and  the  tables  of  the  covenant  j  and  over  it  the  cheruhims  of  glory 
shadowing  the  mercyseatj  of  which  we  cannot  now  speak  particularly. 

It  would  not  have  been  to  the  point  which  the  apostle  had  in  hand,  so  he 
waived  the  explanation  of  those  things  for  another  time. 

6 — 8.  Now  when  these  things  were  thus  ordained,  the  priests  went  always 
into  the  first  tabernacle,  accomplishing  the  service  of  Ood.  But  into  the  second 
went  the  high  priest  alone  once  every  year,  not  without  blood,  which  he 
offi-red  for  himself,  and  for  the  errors  of  the  people ;  the  Holy  Ghost  this 
signifying, 

It  is  from  this  sentence  that  I  am  sure  that  the  Holy  Ghost  had  a 
signification,  a  meaning,  a  teaching,  for  every  item  of  the  ancient  taber- 
nacle and  temple  ;  and  we  are  not  spinning  fancies  out  of  idle  brains  when 
we  interpret  these  types,  and  learn  from  them  important  gospel  lessons. 
•'  The  Holy  Ghost  this  signifying," — 

8.  That  the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was  not  yet  made  manifest,  while 
as  the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  standing : 

It  was  necessary  that  you  should  take  away  the  sacred  tent,  the  taber- 
nacle, ay,  and  take  away  the  temple,  too,  before  you  could  learn  the 
spiritual  meaning  of  them.  You  must  break  the  shell  to  get  at  the  kernel. 
So  God  had  ordained.  Hence,  there  is  now  no  tabernacle,  no  temple,  no 
holy  court,  no  inner  shrine,  the  holy  of  holies.  The  material  worship  is 
done  away  with,  in  order  that  we  may  render  the  spiritual  worship  of 
which  the  material  was  but  the  type. 

9.  Which  was  a  figure  for  the  time  then  present. 

Only  a  figure,  and  only  meant  for  "  the  time  then  present."  It  was  the 
childhood  of  the  Lord's  people ;  it  was  a  time  when,  as  yet,  the  light  had 
not  fully  broken  in  upon  spiritual  eyes,  so  they  must  be  taught  by  picture- 
books.  They  must  have  a  kind  of  Kindergarten  for  the  little  children,  that 
they  might  learn  the  elements  of  the  faith  by  the  symbols,  types,  and  repre- 
'"Bentations  of  a  material  worship.  When  we  come  into  the  true  gospel 
light,  all  that  is  done  away  with ;  it  was  only  **  a  figure  for  the  time  then 
present." 


EXPOSITION. 


821 


9.  In  which  were  offered  both  gifts  and  sacrifices,  that  could  not  make  him 
that  did  the  service  perfect,  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience ; 

All  those  rites  could  only  give  a  fleshly  purity,  but  they  could  not  touch 
the  conscience.  If  men  saw  what  was  meant  by  the  outward  type,  then  the 
conscience  was  a,ppeased ;  but  by  the  outward  sign  itself  the  conscience 
was  never  comforted,  if  it  was  a  living  and  lowly  conscience. 

10.  Which  stood  only  in  meats  and  drinks,  and  divers  washings,  and  carnal 
ordinances,  imposed  on  them  until  the  time  of  reformation. 

These  ordinances  were  only  laid  upon  the  Jews, — not  upon  any  other 
people, — and  only  laid  upon  them  until  the  better  and  brighter  days  of 
reformation  and  fuller  illumination. 

11.  But  Christ— 

Oh,  how  we  seem  to  rise  when  we  begin  to  get  near  to  him,  away  from 
the  high  priests  of  the  Jews  !     "  But  Christ " — 

11.     Being  come  an  high  priest  of  good  things  to  come, 

Not  of  the  shadows,  but  of  the  good  things  themselves  :  •*  an  high  priest 
of  good  things  to  come," — 

11.  By  a  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands,  that  is 
to  say,  not  of  this  building  ; 

That  tabernacle  was  his  body,  which  was  not  made  with  hands,  nor  yet 
formed  by  carnal  generation  as  our  human  tabernacle  is.  This  greater 
and  more  perfect  tabernacle  was  made  according  to  the  power  of  an 
endless  life. 

12.  Neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but  by  his  own  blood  he  entered 
in  once  into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us. 

The  Jewish  high  priests  went  once  a  year  into  the  holy  of  holies.  Each 
year  as  it  came  round  demanded  that  they  should  go  again.  Their  work 
was  never  done ;  but  "  he  entered  in  once,"  and  only  once,  "  into  the  holy 
place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us."  Hove  that  expression, 
"  eternal  redemption " — a  redemption  which  really  does  redeem,  and 
redeems  for  ever  and  ever.  If  you  are  redeemed  by  it,  you  cannot  be  lost ; 
if  this  redemption  be  yours,  it  is  not  for  a  time,  or  for  a  season,  but  it  is 
'*  eternal  redemption."  Oh,  how  you  ought  to  rejoice  in  the  one  entrance 
within  the  veil  by  our  great  High  Priest  who  has  obtained  eternal 
redemption  for  us ! 

13 — 15.  For  if  the  blood,  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer 
eprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh  :  hotv  much  more 
shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without 
spot  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  Oodf 
And  for  this  cause  he  is  the  m,ediator  of  the  new  testament,  that  by  means 
of  death,  for  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the 
first  testament,  they  which  are  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal 
inheritance. 

When  you  come  to  deal  with  Christ,  you  have  to  do  with  eternal  things.. 
There  is  nothing  temporary  about  him,  or  about  his  work.  It  is  "  eternal 
redemption"  that  he  has  obtained  for  us,  it  is  an  "eternal  inheritance* 
that  he  has  purchased  for  us.  > 

16,  17.  For  where  a  testament  is,  there  must  also  of  necessity  be  the  death  of 
the  testator.  For  a  testament  is  offeree  after  men  are  dead  :  otherwise  it  is  of 
no  strength  at  all  while  the  testator  liveth. 

Or,  "  Where  a  covenant  is,  there  must  also  be  the  death  of  him  who 
covenants,  or  of  that  by  which  the  covenant  is  established."  Or  read  it  as 
we  have  it  in  our  version,  for  it  seems  as  if  it  must  be  so,  although  we 
are  loth  to  give  the  meaning  of  •*  testament "  to  the  word,  since  its  natural 


822  METROPOLITAIf   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

meaning  is  evidently  covenant :  "  Where  a  testament  is,  there  must  also  of 
necessity  be  the  death  of  the  testator.  For  a  testament  is  of  force  after 
men  are  dead ;  otherwise  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  while  the  testator 
liveth  ;  "  or,  if  you  wiU,  while  the  victim  that  was  to  confirm  the  covenant 
lived,  the  covenant  was  not  ratified ;  it  must  be  slain  before  it  could  be 
thus  effective. 

18 — 22.  Whereupon  neither  the  first  testament  was  dedicated  without  blood. 
For  when  Moses  had  spoken  every  precept  to  all  the  people  according  to  the  law, 
he  took  the  blood  of  calves  and  of  goats,  with  water,  and  scarlet  wool,  and  hyssop, 
and  sprinkled  both  the  book,  and  all  the  people,  saying,  This  is  the  blood  of  the 
testament  which  God  hath  enjoined  unto  you.  Moreover  he  sprinkled  with  blood 
both  the  tabernacle,  and  all  the  vessels  of  the  ministry.  And  almost  all  things 
are  by  the  law  purged  with  blood;  and  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no 
remission. 

There  is  no  truth  more  plain  than  this  in  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament ; 
and  it  must  have  within  it  a  very  weighty  lesson  to  our  souls.  There  are 
some  who  cannot  endure  the  doctrine  of  a  substitutionary  atonement.  Let 
them  beware  lest  they  be  casting  away  the  very  soul  and  essence  of  the 
gospel.  It  is  evident  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  intended  to  give  ease 
to  the  conscience,  for  we  read  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  could 
not  do  that.  I  fail  to  see  how  any  doctrine  of  atonement  except  the  doctrine 
of  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Christ  can  give  ease  to  the  guilty  conscience. 
Christ  in  my  stead  suffering  the  penalty  of  my  sin, — that  pacifies  my 
conscience,  but  nothing  else  does :  * '  Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no 
remission." 

23.  It  was  therefore  necestary  that  the  patterns  of  things  in  the  heavens  should 
be  purified  with  these ; 

These  things  down  below  are  only  the  patterns,  the  models,  the  symbols 
of  the  heavenly  things  ;  they  could  therefore  be  ceremonially  purified  with 
the  blood  which  is  the  symbol  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ. 

23,  24.  But  the  heavenly  things  themselves  with  better  sacrifices  than  these. 
For  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands,  ivhich  are  the 
figures  of  the  truej  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  Ood 
for  us  : 

He  never  went  within  the  veil  in  the  Jewish  temple ;  that  was  but  the 
symbol  of  the  true  holy  of  holies.  He  has  gone  "into  heaven  itself,  now 
to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us." 

25 — 28.  Nor  yet  that  he  should  offer  himself  often,  as  the  high  priest 
entereth  into  the  holy  place  every  year  with  blood  of  others  ;  for  then  must  he 
often  have  suffered  since  the  foundation  of  the  world  :  but  now  once  in  the  end 
of  the  world  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself.  A  nd 
as  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment:  so  Christ 
was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many  ; 

There  is  no  need  that  he  should  die  again,  his  one  offering  has  for  ever 
perfected  all  his  people.  There  remains  nothing  but  his  final  coming  for 
the  judgment  of  the  ungodly,  and  the  acquittal  of  his  redeemed. 

28.  And  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  appear  the  second  time  without 
tin  unto  salvation. 

Christ's  second  coming  will  be  "  without  sin,"  and  without  a  sin  offering, 
too,  wholly  apart  from  sin,  unto  the  salvation  of  all  his  chosen.  May  we 
all  be  amongst  those  who  are  looking  for  him  !     Amen. 


THE     EENT     VEIL. 


Deliteeed  on  Lord's-dat  Morning,  March  25th,  1888,  by 

C.   H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"Jesus,  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice,  yielded  up  the  ghost.  And, 
behold,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom." — Matt, 
xxvii.  50,  61. 

*'  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
by  a  new  and  Uving  way,  which  he  hath  consecrated  for  us,  through  the  veil,  that  is  to 
Bay,  his  flesh." — Hebrews  x.  19,  20. 

The  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  fitly  surrounded  by  miracles ; 
yet  it  is  itself  so  much  greater  a  wonder  than  all  besides,  that  it  as  far 
exceeds  them  as  the  sun  outshines  the  planets  which  surround  it.  It 
seems  natural  enough  that  the  earth  should  quake,  that  tombs  should 
be  opened,  and  that  the  veil  of  the  temple  should  be  rent,  when  he 
who  only  hath  immortality  gives  up  the  ghost.  The  more  you  think 
of  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  more  will  you  be  amazed  at  it. 
As  much  as  a  miracle  excels  a  common  fact,  so  doth  this  wonder  of 
wonders  rise  above  aU  miracles  of  power.  That  the  divine  Lord,  even 
though  veiled  in  mortal  flesh,  should  condescend  to  be  subject  to  the 
power  of  death,  so  as  to  bow  his  head  on  the  cross,  and  submit  to  be 
laid  in  the  tomb,  is  among  mysteries  the  greatest.  The  death  of  Jesus 
is  the  marvel  of  time  and  eternity,  which,  as  Aaron's  rod  swallowed 
up  all  the  rest,  takes  up  into  itseK  all  lesser  marvels. 

Yet  the  rending  of  the  veil  of  the  temple  is  not  a  miracle  to  be  lightly 
passed  over.  It  was  made  of  "  fine  twined  linen,  with  cherubims  of 
cunning  work."  This  gives  the  idea  of  a  substantial  fabric,  a  piece  of 
lasting  tapestry,  which  would  have  endured  the  severest  strain.  No 
human  hands  could  have  torn  that  sacred  covering  ;  and  it  could  not 
have  been  divided  in  the  midst  by  any  accidental  cause ;  yet,  strange 
to  say,  on  the  instant  when  the  holy  person  of  Jesus  was  rent  by 
death,  the  great  veil  which  concealed  the  holiest  of  aU  was  "rent 
in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom."  What  did  it  mean  ?  It  meant 
much  more  than  I  can  tell  you  now. 

It  is  not  fanciful  to  regard  it  as  a  solemn  act  of  mourning  on 

the  part  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.     In  the  East  men  express  their 

sorrow  by  rending  their  garments  ;  and  the  temple,  when  it  beheld  its 

Master  die,  seemed  struck  with  horror,  and  rent  its  veil.     Shocked  at 

No.  2,015.  g 


R24  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

the  sin  of  man,  indignant  at  the  murder  of  its  Lord,  in  its  sympathy 
with  him  who  is  the  true  temple  of  Grod,  the  outward  symbol  tore 
its  holy  vestment  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  Did  not  the  miracle 
also  mean  that  fi-om  that  hour  the  whole  system  of  tj^pes,  and  shadows, 
and  ceremonies  had  come  to  an  end  ?  The  ordinances  of  an  earthly 
priesthood  were  rent  with  that  veil.  In  token  of  the  death  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  the  soul  of  it  quitted  its  sacred  shrine,  and  left  its 
bodily  tabernacle  as  a  dead  thing.  The  legal  dispensation  is  over. 
The  rent  of  the  veil  seemed  to  say — "  Henceforth  Grod  dwells  no  longer 
in  the  thick  darkness  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  shines  forth  no  longer 
from  between  the  cherubim.  The  special  enclosure  is  broken  up,  and 
there  is  no  inner  sanctuary  for  the  earthly  high  priest  to  enter  :  typical 
atonements  and  sacrifices  are  at  an  end." 

According  to  the  explanation  given  in  our  second  text,  the  rending 
of  the  veil  chiefly  meant  that  the  way  into  the  holiest,  which  was  not 
before  made  manifest,  was  now  laid  open  to  all  believers.  Once  in  the 
year  the  high  priest  solemnly  lifted  a  corner  of  this  veil  with  fear  and 
trembling,  and  with  blood  and  holy  incense  he  passed  into  the  imme- 
diate presence  of  Jehovah ;  but  the  tearing  of  the  veil  laid  open  the 
secret  place.  The  rent  from  top  to  bottom  gives  ample  space  for  all 
to  enter  who  are  called  of  G-od's  grace,  to  approach  the  throne,  and 
to  commune  with  the  Eternal  One.  Upon  that  subject  I  shall  try  to 
speak  this  morning,  praying  in  my  inmost  soul  that  you  and  I,  with 
all  other  believers,  may  have  boldness  actually  to  enter  into  that  which 
is  within  the  veil  at  this  time  of  our  assembling  for  worship.  Oh,  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  would  lead  us  into  the  nearest  fellowship  which 
mortal  men  can  have  with  the  Infinite  Jehovah ! 

First,  this  morning,  I  shall  ask  you  to  consider  what  has  been  dwie. 
The  veil  has  been  rent.  Secondly,  we  will  remember  ivhat  we  there- 
fore have :  we  have  "  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus."  Then,  thirdly,  we  will  consider  how  we  exercise  this  grace  :  we 
"  enter  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he 
hath  consecrated  for  us,  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh." 

I.  First,  think  of  what  has  been  done.  In  actual  historical  fact 
the  glorious  veil  of  the  temple  has  been  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom  :  as  a  matter  of  spiritual  fact,  which  is  far  more  important 
to  us,  the  separating  legal  ordinance  is  abolished.  There  was  under  the 
law  this  ordinance — that  no  man  should  ever  go  into  the  holiest  of 
all,  with  the  one  exception  of  the  high  priest,  and  he  but  once  in  the 
year,  and  not  without  blood.  If  any  man  had  attempted  to  enter  there 
he  must  have  died,  as  guilty  of  great  presumption  and  of  profane  intru- 
sion into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High.  Who  could  stand  in  the  pre- 
sence of  him  who  is  a  consuming  fire  ?  This  ordinance  of  distance  runs 
all  through  the  law  ;  for  even  the  hoty  place,  which  was  the  vestibule 
of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  was  for  the  priests  alone.  The  place  of  the 
people  was  one  of  distance.  At  the  very  first  institution  of  the  law 
when  Q-od  descended  upon  Sinai,  the  ordinance  was,  "  Thou  shalt  set 
bounds  unto  the  people  round  about."  There  was  no  invitation  to 
draw  near.  Not  that  they  desired  to  do  so,  for  the  mountain  was 
altogether  on  a  smoke,  and  "  even  Moses  said,  I  exceedingly  fear  and 
quake."     "  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Go  down,  charge  the  people, 


THE    RENT   VEIL.  325 

lest  tliey  break  througli  unto  the  Lord  to  gaze,  and  many  of  them 
perish."  If  so  much  as  a  beast  touch  the  mountain  it  must  be  stoned,  or 
thrust  through  with  a  dart.  The  spirit  of  the  old  law  was  reverent 
distance.  Moses,  and  here  and  there  a  man  chosen  by  God,  might 
come  near  to  Jehovah ;  but  as  for  the  bulk  of  the  people,  the  com- 
mand was,  "  Draw  not  nigh  hither."  When  the  Lord  revealed  his 
glory  at  the  giving  of  the  law,  we  read, — "  When  the  people  saw  it, 
the}'  removed,  and  stood  afar  off."  All  this  is  ended.  The  precept 
to  keep  back  is  abrogated,  and  the  invitation  is,  "  Come  unto  me,  all 
ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden."  "Let  us  draw  near"  is  now  the 
filial  spirit  of  the  gospel.  How  thankful  I  am  for  this !  what  a  joy  it 
is  to  my  soul !  Some  of  God's  people  have  not  yet  realized  this 
gracious  fact,  for  still  they  worship  afar  off.  Very  much  of  prayer 
is  to  be  highly  commended  for  its  reverence ;  but  it  has  in  it  a  lack 
of  childlike  confidence.  I  can  admire  the  solemn  and  stately  language 
of  worship  which  recognizes  the  greatness  of  God ;  but  it  will 
not  warm  my  heart  nor  express  my  soul  until  it  has  also  blended 
therewith  the  joyful  nearness  of  that  perfect  love  which  casteth  out 
fear,  and  ventures  to  speak  with  our  Father  in  heaven  as  a  child 
speaketh  with  its  father  on  earth.  My  brother,  no  veil  remains.  Why 
dost  thou  stand  afar  off,  and  tremble  like  a  slave  ?  Draw  near  with 
full  assurance  of  faith.  The  veil  is  rent :  access  is  free.  Come  boldly 
to  the  throne  of  grace.  Jesus  has  made  thee  nigh,  as  nigh  to  God  as 
even  he  himself  is.  Though  we  speak  of  the  holiest  of  all,  even  the 
secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  yet  it  is  of  this  place  of  awe,  even  of 
this  sanctuary  of  Jehovah,  that  the  veil  is  rent ;  therefore,  let  nothing 
hinder  thine  entrance.  Assuredly  no  law  forbids  thee  ;  but  infinite  love 
invites  thee  to  draw  nigh  to  God. 

This  rending  of  the  veil  signified,  also,  the  removal  of  the  separating 
sin.  Sin  is,  after  all,  the  great  divider  between  God  and  man.  That 
veil  of  blue  and  purple  and  fine  twined  linen  could  not  really  separate 
man  from  God :  for  he  is,  as  to  his  omnipresence,  not  far  from  any  one 
of  us.  Sin  is  a  far  more  effectual  wall  of  separation :  it  opens  an 
abj'ss  between  the  sinner  and  his  Judge.  Sin  shuts  out  prayer,  and 
praise,  and  every  form  of  religious  exercise.  Sin  makes  God  walk 
contrary  to  us,  because  we  walk  contrary  to  him.  Sin,  by  separating 
the  soul  from  God,  causes  spiritual  death,  which  is  both  the  effect  and 
the  penalty  of  transgression.  How  can  two  walk  together  except 
they  be  agreed  ?  How  can  a  holy  God  have  fellowship  with  unholy 
creatures  ?  Shall  justice  dwell  with  injustice  ?  Shall  perfect  purity 
abide  with  the  abominations  of  evil  ?  No,  it  cannot  be.  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself.  He  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  so  the  veil  is  rent.  By  the  shedding 
of  his  most  precious  blood  we  are  cleansed  from  all  sin,  and  that 
most  gracious  promise  of  the  new  covenant  is  fulfilled — "  Their  sins 
and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  When  sin  is  gone,  the 
barrier  is  broken  down,  the  unfathomable  gulf  is  filled.  Pardon,  which 
removes  sin,  and  justification,  which  brings  righteousness,  make  up  a 
deed  of  clearance  so  real  and  so  complete  that  nothing  now  divides 
the  sinner  from  his  reconciled  God.  The  Judge  is  now  the  Father  :  he, 
who  once  must  necessarily  have  condemned,  is  foimd  justly  absolving 


826 


METROPOLITAN   TABERXAOLE    PTTLPTT. 


and  accepting.     In  this  double  sense  the  veil  is  rent :   the  separating 
ordinance  is  abrogated,  and  the  separating  sin  is  forgiven. 

Next,  be  it  remembered  that  the  separating  sinfulness  is  also  taken 
away  through  our  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  not  only  what  we  have  done,  but 
what  we  are  that  keeps  us  apart  from  God.  "We  have  sin  engrained  in 
us :  even  those  who  have  grace  dwellinr:  in  them  have  to  complain, 
*'  When  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me."  How  can  we 
commune  with  God  with  our  eyes  blinded,  our  ears  stopped,  our 
hearts  hardened,  and  our  senses  deadened  by  sin  ?  Our  whole  nature 
is  tainted,  poisoned,  perverted  by  evil ;  how  can  we  know  the  Lord  ? 
Beloved,  through  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  covenant  of  grace  is 
established  with  us,  and  its  gracious  provisions  are  on  this  wise : 
"  This  is  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with  them  after  those  days, 
saith  the  Lord ;  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind,  and  write 
them  in  their  hearts."  When  this  is  the  case,  when  the  will  of 
God  is  inscribed  on  the  heart,  and  the  nature  is  entirely  changed, 
then  is  the  dividing  veil  which  hides  us  from  God  taken  away : 
"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall  see  God."  Blessed  are 
all  they  that  love  righteousness  and  follow  after  it,  for  they  are  in  a 
way  in  which  the  Righteous  One  can  walk  in  fellowship  with  them. 
%)irits  that  are  like  God  are  not  divided  from  God.  Difference  of 
nature  hangs  up  a  veil ;  but  the  new  birth,  and  the  sanctification 
which  follows  upon  it,  through  the  precious  death  of  Jesus,  remove 
that  veil.  He  that  hates  sin,  strives  after  holiness,  and  labours  to 
perfect  it  in  the  fear  of  God,  is  in  fellowship  with  God.  It  is  a  blessed 
thing  when  we  love  what  God  loves,  when  we  seek  what  God  seeks, 
when  we  are  in  sympathy  with  divine  aims,  and  are  obedient  to  divine 
commands :  for  with  such  persons  will  the  Lord  dwell.  When  grace 
makes  us  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,  then  axe  we  at  one  with  the 
Lord,  and  the  veil  is  taken  away. 

"Yes,"  saith  one,  "  I  see  now  how  the  veil  is  taken  away  in  three 
different  fashions ;  but  still  God  is  God,  and  we  are  but  poor  puny 
men  :  between  God  and  man  there  must  of  necessity  be  a  separating 
veil,  caused  by  the  great  disparity  between  the  Creator  and  the  crea- 
ture. How  can  the  finite  and  the  infinite  commune  ?  God  is  all  in 
all,  and  more  than  all ;  we  are  nothing,  and  less  than  nothing ;  how 
can  we  meet  ?  "  When  the  Lord  does  come  near  to  his  favoured  ones, 
ih.ej  own  how  incapable  they  are  of  enduring  the  excessive  glory. 
Even  the  beloved  John  said,  "  When  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as 
dead."  When  we  have  been  specially  conscious  of  the  presence  and 
working  of  our  Lord,  we  have  felt  our  flesh  creep,  and  our  blood  chill ; 
and  then  have  we  understood  what  Jacob  meant  when  he  said,  "  How 
dreadful  is  this  place !  this  is  none  other  but  the  house  of  God,  and 
this  is  the  gate  of  heaven."  AU  this  is  true ;  for  the  Lord  saith, 
"  Thou  canst  not  see  my  face  and  live."  Although  this  is  a  much 
thinner  veil  than  those  I  have  already  mentioned,  yet  it  is  a  veil ;  and 
it  is  hard  for  man  to  be  at  home  with  God.  But  the  Lord  Jesus 
bridges  the  separating  distance.  Behold,  the  blessed  Son  of  God  has 
come  into  the  world,  and  taken  upon  himself  our  nature  !  "  Foras- 
much then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also 
himself  Hkewise  took  part  of  the  same."     Though  he  is  God  as  God 


THE    RENT    VEIL.  327 

is  God,  yet  is  lie  as  surely  man  as  man  is  man.  Mark  well  how  in 
the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  we  see  Grod  and  man  in  the  closest  con- 
ceivable alliance ;  for  they  are  united  in  one  person  for  ever.  The 
gulf  is  completely  filled  by  the  fact  that  Jesus  has  gone  through  with 
us  even  to  the  bitter  end,  to  death,  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross. 
He  has  followed  out  the  career  of  manhood  even  to  the  tomb ;  and 
thus  we  see  that  the  veil,  which  hung  between  the  nature  of  God  and 
the  nature  of  man,  is  rent  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We 
enter  into  the  holiest  of  all  through  his  flesh,  which  Knks  manhood 
to  Godhead. 

Now,  you  see  what  it  •  is  to  have  the  veil  taken  away.  Solemnly 
note  that  this  avails  only  for  believers :  those  who  refuse  Jesus  refuse 
the  only  way  of  access  to  God.  God  is  not  approachable,  except 
through  the  rending  of  the  veil  by  the  death  of  Jesus.  There  was  one 
typical  way  to  the  mercy-seat  of  old,  and  that  was  through  the  turn- 
ing aside  of  the  veil ;  there  was  no  other.  And  there  is  now  no  other 
way  for  any  of  you  to  come  into  fellowship  with  God,  except 
through  the  rent  veil,  even  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  whom  God  has 
aet  forth  to  be  the  propitiation  for  sin.  Come  this  way,  and  you 
may  come  freely.  Refuse  to  come  this  way,  and  there  hangs  between 
you  and  God  an  impassable  veil.  Without  Christ  you  are  without  God, 
and  without  hope.  Jesus  himself  assures  you,  *'  If  ye  believe  not  that  I 
am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  God  grant  that  this  may  not  happen 
to  any  of  you  ! 

For  believers  the  veil  is  not  rolled  up,  but  rent.  The  veil  was  not 
unhooked,  and  carefully  folded  up,  and  put  away,  so  that  it  might 
be  put  in  its  place  at  some  future  time.  Oh,  no  !  but  the  divine 
hand  took  it  and  rent  it  from  top  to  bottom.  It  can  never  be 
hung  up  again  ;  that  is  impossible.  Between  those  who  are  in  Christ' 
Jesus  and  the  great  God,  there  will  never  be  another  separation. 
"  Who.  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  ?  "  Only  one  veil  waa 
made,  and  as  that  is  rent,  the  one  and  only  separator  is  destroyed. 
I  delight  to  think  of  this.  The  devil  himself  can  never  divide  me 
from  God  now.  He  may  and  will  attempt  to  shut  me  out  from  God  ; 
but  the  worst  he  could  do  would  be  to  hang  up  a  rent  veil.  What  would 
that  avail  but  to  exhibit  his  impotence  ?  God  has  rent  the  veil,  and 
the  devil  cannot  mend  it.  There  is  access  between  a  believer  and  his 
God  ;  and  there  must  be  such  free  access  for  ever,  since  the  veil  is  not 
rolled  up,  and  put  on  one  side  to  be  hung  up  again  in  days  to  come ; 
but  it  is  rent,  and  rendered  useless. 

The  rent  is  not  in  one  corner,  but  in  the  midst,  as  Luke  tells  us. 
It  is  not  a  slight  rent  through  which  we  may  see  a  little ;  but  it  ia 
rent  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  There  is  an  entrance  made  for  the 
greatest  sinners.  If  there  had  only  been  a  small  hole  cut  through  it, 
the  lesser  offenders  might  have  crept  through ;  but  what  an  act  of 
abounding  mercy  is  this,  that  the  veil  is  rent  in  the  midst,  and  rent 
from  top  to  bottom,  so  that  the  chief  of  sinners  may  find  ample 
passage  !  This  also  shows  that  for  believers  there  is  no  hindrance 
to  the  fullest  and  freest  access  to  God.  Oh,  for  much  boldness,  this 
morning,  to  come  where  God  has  not  only  set  open  the  door,  but  has 
lifted  the  door  from  its  hinges ;  yea,  removed  it,  post,  and  bar,  and  all ! 


328 


METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


I  want  you  to  notice  that  this  veil,  when  it  was  rent,  was  rent  by 
God,  not  by  man.  It  was  not  the  act  of  an  irreverent  mob  ;  it  was  not 
the  midnight  outrage  of  a  set  of  profane  priests  :  it  was  the  act  of  God 
alone.  Nobody  stood  within  the  veil ;  and  on  the  outer  side  of  it  stood 
the  priests  only  fulfilling  their  ordinary  vocation  of  offering  sacrifice. 
It  must  have  astounded  them  when  they  saw  that  holy  place  laid  bare 
in  a  moment.  How  they  fled,  as  they  saw  that  massive  veil  divided 
without  human  hand  in  a  second  of  time !  Who  rent  it  ?  Who  but 
God  himself?  If  another  had  done  it,  there  might  have  been  a 
mistake  about  it,  and  the  mistake  might  need  to  be  remedied  by 
replacing  the  curtain ;  but  if  the  Lord  has  done  it,  it  is  done  rightly, 
it  is  done  finally,  it  is  done  irreversibly.  It  is  God  himself  who  has 
laid  sin  on  Christ,  and  in  Christ  has  put  that  sin  away.  God  himseli 
has  opened  the  gate  of  heaven  to  believers,  and  cast  up  a  highway 
along  which  the  souls  of  men  may  travel  to  himself.  God  himself 
has  set  the  ladder  between  earth  and  heaven.  Come  to  him  now,  ye 
humble  ones.      Behold,  he  sets  before  you  an  open  door  ! 

II.  And  now  I  ask  you  to  follow  me,  dear  friends,  in  the  second 
place,  to  an  experimental  realization  of  my  subject.  We  now  notice 
WHAT  WE  HAVE  :  "  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into 
the  holiest."  Observe  the  threefold  "having"  in  the  paragraph  now 
before  us,  and  be  not  content  without  the  whole  three.  JFe  have 
*^  boldness  to  enter  m.'^  There  are  degrees  in  boldness;  but  this  is  one 
of  the  highest.  When  the  veil  was  rent  it  required  some  boldness  to 
look  within.  I  wonder  whether  the  priests  at  the  altar  did  have  the 
courage  to  gaze  upon  the  mercy-seat.  I  suspect  that  they  were  so 
struck  with  amazement  that  they  fled  from  the  altar,  fearing  sudden 
death.  It  requires  a  measure  of  boldness  steadily  to  look  upon  the 
mystery  of  God  :  "  Which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into."  It 
is  well  not  to  look  with  a  merely  curious  eye  into  the  deep  things  of 
God.  I  question  whether  any  man  is  able  to  pry  into  the  mystery  of 
the  Trinity  without  great  risk.  Some,  thinking  to  look  there  with 
the  eyes  of  their  natural  intellect,  have  been  blinded  by  the  light 
of  that  sun,  and  have  henceforth  wandered  in  darkness.  It  needs 
boldness  to  look  into  the  splendours  of  redeeming  and  electing  love. 
If  any  did  look  into  the  holiest  when  the  veil  was  rent,  they  were 
among  the  boldest  of  men  ;  for  others  must  have  feared  lest  the  fate 
of  the  men  of  Bethshemesh  would  be  theirs.  Beloved,  the  Holy  Spirit 
invites  you  to  look  into  the  holy  place,  and  view  it  all  with  reverent  eye  ; 
for  it  is  full  of  teaching  to  yon.  Understand  the  mystery  of  the  mercy- 
seat,  and  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  overlaid  with  gold,  and  of  the 
pot  of  manna,  and  of  the  tables  of  stone,  and  of  Aaron's  rod  that 
budded.  Look,  look  boldly  through  Jesus  Christ :  but  do  not  content 
yourself  with  looking !  Hear  what  the  text  says  :  "  Having  boldness 
to  enter  in.'"  Blessed  be  God  if  he  has  taught  us  this  sweet  way 
of  no  longer  looking  from  afar,  but  of  entering  into  the  inmost  shrine 
with  confidence  !      "  Boldness  to  enter  in  "  is  what  we  ought  to  have. 

Let  us  follow  the  example  of  the  high  priest,  and,  having  entered, 
lei  us  perform  the  functions  of  one  who  enters  in.  "  Boldness  to  enter  in  " 
suggests  that  we  act  as  men  who  are  in  their  proper  places.  To 
stand  within  the  veil  filled  the  servant  of  God  with  an  overpowering 


THE    RENT    VEIL.  329 

sense  of  the  divine  presence.  If  ever  in  his  life  he  was  near  to  God 
he  was  certainly  near  to  God  then,  when  quite  alone,  shut  in,  and 
excluded  from  all  the  world,  he  had  no  one  with  him,  except  the 
glorious  Jehovah.  0  my  beloved,  may  we  this  morning-  enter  into  the 
holiest  in  this  sense !  Shut  out  from  the  world,  both  wicked  and 
Christian,  let  us  know  that  the  Lord  is  here,  most  near  and  manifest. 
Oh  that  we  may  now  cry  out  with  Hagar,  "  Have  I  also  here  looked  after 
him  that  seeth  me  ?  "  Oh,  how  sweet  to  realize  by  personal  enjoyment 
the  presence  of  Jehovah !  How  cheering  to  feel  that  the  Lord  of  hosts 
is  with  us  !  We  know  our  God  to  be  a  very  present  help  in  trouble. 
It  is  one  of  the  greatest  joys  out  of  heaven  to  be  able  to  sing — Jehovah 
Shammah — the  Lord  is  here.  At  first  we  tremble  in  the  divine 
presence  ;  but  as  we  feel  more  of  the  spirit  of  adoption  we  draw  near 
with  sacred  delight,  and  feel  so  fully  at  home  with  our  God  that  we 
sing  with  Moses,  "  Lord,  thou  hast  been  our  dwelling  place  in  all 
generations."  Do  not  live  as  if  God  were  as  far  off  from  you  as  the 
east  is  from  the  west.  Live  not  far  below  on  the  earth  ;  but  live  on 
high,  as  if  you  were  in  heaven.  In  heaven  you  will  be  with  God ;  but 
on  earth  he  will  be  with  you  :  is  there  much  difference  ?  He  hath 
raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Jesus  hath  made  us  nigh  by  Jiis  precious  blood.  Try 
da}'  by  day  to  live  in  as  great  nearness  to  God,  as  the  high  priest  felt 
when  he  stood  for  a  while  within  the  secret  of  Jehovah's  tabernacle. 

The  high  priest  had  a  sense  of  cowinmiion  with  God ;  he  was  not 
only  near,  but  he  spake  with  God.  I  cannot  tell  what  he  said,  but  I 
should  think  that  on  the  sjieeial  day  the  high  priest  unburdened  him- 
self of  the  load  of  Israel's  sin  and  sorrow,  and  made  known  hia 
requests  unto  the  Lord.  Aaron,  standing  there  alone,  must  have  been 
filled  with  memories  of  his  own  faultiness,  and  of  the  idolatries  and 
backslidings  of  the  people.  God  shone  upon  him,  and  he  bowed 
before  God.  He  may  have  heard  things  which  it  was  not  lawful  for 
him  to  utter,  and  other  things  which  he  could  not  have  uttered  if  they 
had  been  lawful.  Beloved,  do  you  know  what  it  is  to  commune  with 
God  ?  Words  are  poor  vehicles  for  this  fellowship ;  but  what  a  blessed 
thing  it  is !  Proofs  of  the  existence  of  God  are  altogether  superfluous 
to  those  of  us  who  are  in  the  habit  of  conversing  with  the  Eternal  One. 
If  anybody  were  to  write  an  essay  to  prove  the  existence  of  my  wife, 
or  m}'  son,  I  certainly  should  not  read  it,  except  for  the  amusement  of 
the  thing ;  and  proofs  of  the  existence  of  God  to  the  man  who  com- 
munes with  God  are  much  the  same.  Many  of  you  walk  with  God : 
what  bliss !  Fellowship  with  the  Most  High  is  elevating,  purifying, 
strengthening.  Enter  into  it  boldly.  Enter  into  his  revealed  thoughts, 
even  as  he  graciously  enters  into  yours :  rise  to  his  plans,  as  he  con- 
descends to  yovirs ;  ask  to  be  uplifted  to  him,  even  as  he  deigns  to 
dwell  with  you. 

This  is  what  the  rent  of  the  veil  brings  us  when  we  have  boldness 
to  enter  in ;  but,  mark  you,  the  rent  veil  brings  us  nothing  until  we 
have  boldness  to  enter  in.  Why  stand  we  without  ?  Jesus  brings  us 
near,  and  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Eather,  and  with  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  not  be  slow  to  take  up  our  freedom,  and  come 
boldly  to  the  throne.     The  high  priest  entered  within  the  veil  of  blue, 


230  METROPOLITAIf   TABERNACLE   PULPIT 

and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen,  with  blood,  and  with 
incense,  that  he  might  pray  for  Israel ;  and  there  he  stood  before  the 
Most  iligh,  pleading  with  him  to  bless  the  people.  0  beloved, 
prayer  is  a  divine  institution,  and  it  belongs  to  us.  But  there  are 
many  sorts  of  prayers.  There  is  the  prayer  of  one  who  seems  shut 
out  from  God's  holy  temple  ;  there  is  the  prayer  of  another  who  stands 
in  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  afar  off,  locking  towards  the  Temple  ;  there 
is  the  prayer  of  one  who  gets  where  Israel  stands  and  pleads  with  the 
God  of  the  chosen ;  there  is  the  prayer  in  the  court  of  the  priests, 
when  the  sanctified  man  of  God  makes  intercession  ;  but  the  best 
prayer  of  all  is  offered  in  the  holiest  of  all.  There  is  no  fear  about 
prayer  being  heard  when  it  is  offered  in  the  holiest.  The  very 
position  of  the  man  proves  that  he  is  accepted  with  God.  He  is 
standing  on  the  surest  ground  of  acceptance,  and  he  is  so  near  to  God 
that  his  every  desire  is  heard.  There  the  man  is  seen  through  and 
through  ;  for  he  is  very  near  to  God.  His  thoughts  are  read,  his 
tears  are  seen,  his  sighs  are  heard ;  for  he  has  boldness  to  enter  in. 
He  may  ask  what  he  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  him.  As  the 
altar  sanctifieth  the  gift,  so  the  most  holy  place,  entered  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  secures  a  certain  answer  to  the  prayer  that  is  offered 
therein.  God  give  us  such  power  in  prayer !  It  is  a  wonderful 
thing  that  the  Lord  should  hearken  to  the  voice  of  a  man  ;  yet  are  there 
such  men.  Luther  came  out  of  his  closet,  and  cried,  Vici — "  I  have 
conquered."  He  had  not  yet  met  his  adversaries  ;  but  as  he  had  pre- 
vailed with  God  for  men,  he  felt  that  he  should  prevail  with  men  for 
God. 

But  the  high  priest,  if  you  recollect,  after  he  had  communed  and 
prayed  with  God,  came  out  and  blessed  the  people.  He  put  on  his 
garments  of  glory  and  beauty,  which  he  had  laid  aside  when  he  went 
into  the  holy  place,  for  there  he  stood  in  simple  white,  and  nothing 
else  ;  and  now  he  came  out  wearing  the  breast-plate  and  all  his  precious 
ornaments,  and  he  blessed  the  people.  That  is  what  you  will  do  if 
you  have  the  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  ; 
you  will  bless  the  people  that  surround  you.  The  Lord  has  blessed 
you,  and  he  will  make  you  a  blessing.  Your  ordinary  conduct  and 
conversation  wiU  be  a  blessed  example  ;  the  words  you  speak  for  Jesus 
will  be  like  a  dew  from  the  Lord  :  the  sick  will  be  comforted  by  your 
words  ;  the  despondent  wiU  be  encouraged  by  your  faith  ;  the  lukewarm 
wlU.  be  recovered  by  your  love.  You  will  be,  practically,  saying  to 
each  one  who  knows  you,  "  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee  :  the 
Lord  make  his  face  shine  upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace."  You 
wiR  become  a  channel  of  blessing :  "  Out  of  your  belly  shall  flow 
rivers  of  living  water."  May  we  each  one  have  boldness  to  enter  in, 
that  we  may  come  forth  laden  with  benedictions ' 

If  you  will  kindly  look  at  the  text,  you  will  notice,  what  I  shall 
m.erely  hint  at,  that  this  boldness  is  well  grounded.  I  always  like  to  see 
the  apostle  using  a  "  therefore  " :  "  Having  therefore  boldness."  Paul  is 
often  a  true  poet,  but  he  is  always  a  correct  logician ;  he  is  as  logical 
as  if  he  were  dealing  with  mathematics  rather  than  theology.  Here  he 
writes  one  of  his  therefores. 

Why   is   it   that  we   have   boldness?     Is   it  not   because  of  our 


THE    RENT    VEIL. 


331 


relationship  to  Christ  which  makes  us  "  brethren  "  ?  **  Having  there- 
fore, brethren,  boldness."  The  feeblest  believer  has  as  much  right  to 
enter  into  the  holy  place  as  Paul  had  ;  because  he  is  one  of  the  brother- 
hood. I  remember  a  rhyme  by  John  Eyland,  in  which  he  says  of 
heaven — 

*•  They  all  shall  be  there,  the  great  and  the  small ; 
Poor  I  shall  shake  hands  with  the  blessed  St.  Paul.'* 

I  have  no  doubt  we  shall  have  such  a  position,  and  such  fellowship. 
Meanwhile,  we  do  shake  hands  with  him  this  morning  as  he  calls  us 
brethren.  We  are  brethren  to  one  another,  because  we  are  brethren 
to  Jesus.  Where  we  see  the  apostle  go,  we  will  go  ;  yea,  rather, 
where  we  see  the  Great  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession 
enter,  we  will  follow.     "  Having,  therefore,  boldness." 

Beloved,  we  have  now  no  fear  of  death  in  the  most  holy  place.  The 
high  priest,  whoever  he  might  be,  must  always  have  di-eaded  that 
solemn  day  of  atonement,  when  he  had  to  pass  into  the  silent  and 
secluded  place.  I  cannot  tell  whether  it  is  true,  but  I  have  read  that 
there  is  a  tradition  among  the  Jews,  that  a  rope  was  fastened  to  the 
high  priest's  foot  that  they  might  draw  out  his  corpse  in  case  he  died 
before  the  Lord.  I  should  not  wonder  if  their  superstition  devised 
such  a  thing,  for  it  is  an  awful  position  for  a  man  to  enter  into  the 
secret  dwelling  of  Jehovah.  But  we  cannot  die  in  the  holy  place  now, 
since  Jesus  has  died  for  us.  The  death  of  Jesus  is  the  guarantee  of 
the  eternal  life  of  all  for  whom  he  died.  We  have  boldness  to  enter, 
for  we  shall  not  perish. 

Our  boldness  arises  from  the  perfection  of  his  sacrifice.  Read  the 
fourteenth  verse  :  "  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified." 
We  rely  upon  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  believing  that  he  was  such  a 
perfect  substitute  for  us,  that  it  is  not  possible  for  us  to  die  after  our 
substitute  has  died ;  and  we  must  be  accepted,  because  he  is  accepted. 
We  believe  that  the  precious  blood  has  so  effectually  and  eternally 
put  away  sin  from  us,  that  we  are  no  longer  obnoxious  to  the  wrath 
of  God.  We  may  safely  stand  where  sin  must  be  smitten,  if  there  be 
any  sin  upon  us  ;  for  we  are  so  washed,  so  cleansed,  and  so  fully 
justified  that  we  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Sin  is  so  completely 
lifted  from  us  by  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Christ,  that  we  have  bold- 
ness to  enter  where  Jehovah  himself  dwells. 

Moreover,  we  have  this  for  certain,  that  as  a  priest  had  a  right  to 
dwell  near  to  God,  we  have  that  privilege ;  for  Jesus  hath  made  U8 
kings  and  priests  unto  God,  and  all  the  privileges  of  the  office  come  to 
us  with  the  office  itself.  AVe  have  a  mission  "within  the  holy  place  ;  we 
are  called  to  enter  there  upon  holy  business,  and  so  we  have  no  fear 
of  being  intruders.  A  burglar  may  enter  a  house,  but  he  does  not 
enter  with  boldness ;  he  is  always  afraid  lest  he  should  be  sui-prised. 
You  might  enter  a  stranger's  house,  without  an  invitation,  but  you 
would  feel  no  boldness  there.  We  do  not  enter  the  holiest  as  house- 
breakers, nor  as  strangers  ;  we  come  in  obedience  to  a  call,  to  fulfil  our 
ofiice.  When  once  we  accept  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  we  are  at  home 
with  God.  Where  should  a  child  be  bold  buc  in  his  father's  house? 
Where  stiould  a  priest  stand  but  in  the  temple  of  his  God,  for  whose 


332  METROPOLITAN  TABERXACLE  PULPIT. 

service  lie  is  set  apart  ?  "WTiere  should  a  blood- washed  sinnei  lire  hut 
with  his  God,  to  whom  he  is  reconciled  ? 

It  is  a  heavenly  joy  to  feel  this  boldness  !  We  have  now  such  a 
love  for  God,  and  such  a  delight  in  him,  that  it  never  crosses  our 
minds  that  we  are  trespassers  when  we  di-aw  near  to  him.  "VVe  never 
say,  "  God,  my  dread,"  but  "  God,  my  exceeding  joy."  His  name 
is  the  music  to  which  our  lives  are  set :  though  God  be  a  consuming 
fire  we  love  him  as  such,  for  he  will  onl}'  consume  our  dross,  and 
that  we  desire  to  lose.  Under  no  aspect  is  God  now  distasteful  to  us. 
We  delight  in  him,  be  he  what  he  may.  So  you  see,  beloved,  we 
have  good  grounds  for  boldness  when  we  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus. 

I  cannot  leave  this  point  until  I  have  reminded  you  that  tve  may 
have  this  boldness  of  entering  in  at  all  times,  because  the  veil  is  always 
rent,  and  is  never  restored  to  its  old  place.  "  The  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  Speak  unto  Aaron  thy  brother,  that  he  come  not  at  all  times 
into  the  holy  place  within  the  veil  before  the  mercy-seat,  which  is 
upon  the  ark  ;  that  he  die  not ; "  but  the  Lord  saith  not  so  to  us. 
Dear  child  of  God,  you  may  at  all  times  have  "  boldness  to  enter  in." 
The  veil  is  rent  both  day  and  night.  Yea,  let  me  say  it,  even  when 
thine  eye  of  faith  is  dim,  still  enter  in  ;  when  evidences  are  dark, 
Btill  have  "  boldness  to  enter  in  "  ;  and  even  if  thou  hast  unhappily 
sinned,  remember  that  access  is  open  to  thy  penitent  prayer.  Come  still 
through  the  rent  veil,  sinner  as  thou  art.  What  though  thou  hast 
backslidden,  what  though  thou  art  grieved  with  the  sense  of  thy 
wanderings,  come  even  now!  "To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden 
not  your  hearts,"  but  enter  at  once  ;  for  the  veil  is  not  there  to  exclude 
thee,  though  doubt  and  unbelief  may  make  you  think  it  is  so.  The 
veil  cannot  be  there,  for  it  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom. 

III.  My  time  has  fled,  and  I  shall  not  have  space  to  speak  as  I 
meant  to  do  upon  the  last  point — how  we  exercise  this  grace.  Let 
me  give  you  the  notes  of  what  I  would  have  said. 

Let  us  at  this  hour  enter  into  the  holiest.  Buhold  the  way !  We  come 
hi/  the  icay  of  atonement :  "Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to 
enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus."  I  have  been  made  to 
feel  really  ill  through  the  fierce  and  blasphemous  words  that  have  been 
used  of  late  by  gentlemen  of  the  modern  school  concerning  the  precious 
blood.  I  will  not  defile  my  lips  by  a  repetition  of  the  thrice-accursed 
things  which  they  have  dared  to  utter  while  trampling  on  the  blood  of 
Jesus.  Everywhere  throughout  this  divine  Book  you  meet  with  the 
precious  blood.  How  can  he  call  himself  a  Christian  who  speaks  in 
flippant  and  profane  language  of  the  blood  of  atonement  ?  My  brothers, 
there  is  no  way  into  the  hoKest,  even  though  the  veil  be  rent,  without 
blood.  You  might  suppose  that  the  high  priest  of  old  brought  the 
blood  because  the  veil  was  there  ;  but  you  have  to  bring  it  with  you 
though  the  veil  is  gone.  The  way  is  open,  and  you  have  boldutss  to 
enter ;  but  not  without  the  blood  of  Jesus.  It  would  be  an  unholy 
boldness  which  would  think  of  di-awing  near  to  God  without  the  blood 
of  the  great  Sacrifice.  We  have  always  to  plead  the  atonement.  As 
without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin,  so  without 
that  blood  there  is  no  access  to  God. 


THE    RENT    VEIL. 


333 


Next,  the  way  by  which  we  come  is  an  unfailing  way.  Please  notice 
that  word — "  by  a  neiv  way  "  ;  this  means  by  a  way  which  is  always 
fresh.  The  original  Greek  suggests  the  idea  of  "  newly  slain."  Jesus 
died  long  ago,  but  his  death  is  the  same  now  as  at  the  moment  of  its 
Oficurrence.  We  come  to  God,  dear  friends,  by  a  way  which  is  always 
f'ifectual  with  God.  It  never,  never  loses  one  whit  of  its  power  and 
f  rashness. 

"  Dear  dying  Lamb,  thy  precious  blood 
Shall  never  lose  its  power." 

The  waj'  is  not  worn  away  by  long  traffic  :  it  is  always  new.  If  Jesus 
Christ  had  died  yesterday,  would  you  not  feel  that  you  could  plead 
his  merit  to-day  ?  Very  well,  you  can  plead  that  merit  after  these 
nineteen  centuries  with  as  much  confidence  as  at  the  first  hour.  The 
way  to  God  is  always  newly  laid.  In  effect,  the  wounds  of  Jesus 
incessantly  bleed  our  expiation.  The  cross  is  as  glorious  as  though 
he  were  still  upon  it.  So  far  as  the  fi-eshness,  vigour,  and  force  of  the 
atoning  death  is  concerned,  we  come  by  a  new  way.  Let  it  be  always 
new  to  our  hearts.  Let  the  doctrine  of  atonement  never  grow  stale, 
but  let  it  have  dew  upon  it  for  our  souls. 

Then  the  apostle  adds,  it  is  a  ^^  living  way.''^  A  wonderful  word! 
The  way  by  which  the  high  j)riest  went  into  the  holy  place  was  of 
course  a  material  way,  and  so  a  dead  way.  We  come  by  a  spiritual 
way,  suitable  to  our  spirits.  The  way  could  not  help  the  high  priest, 
but  our  way  helps  us  abundantly.  Jesus  says,  "I  am  the  way,  the 
truth,  and  the  life.^''  When  we  come  to  God  by  this  way,  the  way 
itself  leads,  guides,  bears,  brings  us  near.  This  way  gives  us  life 
with  which  to  come 

It  is  a  dedicated  way :  "  which  he  hath  consecrated  for  us."  When 
a  new  road  is  opened,  it  is  set  apart  and  dedicated  for  the  public  use. 
Sometimes  a  public  building  is  opened  by  a  king  or  a  prince,  and  so 
is  dedicated  to  its  pm-pose.  Beloved,  the  way  to  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  is  dedicated  by  Christ,  and  ordained  by  Christ  for  the  use  of 
poor  believing  sinners,  such  as  we  are.  He  has  consecrated  the  way 
towards  God,  and  dedicated  it  for  us,  that  we  may  freely  use  it.  Surely, 
if  there  is  a  road  set  apart  for  me,  I  may  use  it  without  fear  ;  and  the 
way  to  God  and  heaven  through  Jesus  Christ  is  dedicated  by  the 
Saviour  for  sinners  ;  it  is  the  King's  highway  for  wayfaring  men,  who 
are  bound  for  the  City  of  God ;  therefore,  let  us  use  it.  "  Consecrated 
for  us  "  !     Blessed  word  ! 

Lastly,  it  is  a  Christly  way ;  for  when  we  come  to  God,  we  still  come 
through  his  flesh.  There  is  no  coming  to  Jehovah,  except  by  the 
incarnate  God.  God  in  human  flesh  is  our  way  to  God ;  the  substi- 
tutionary death  of  the  Word  made  flesh  is  also  the  way  to  the  Father, 
There  is  no  coming  to  God,  except  by  representation.  Jesus  represents 
us  before  God,  and  we  come  to  God  through  him  who  is  our  covenant 
head,  our  representative  and  forerunner  before  the  throne  of  the 
Most  High.  Let  us  never  try  to  pray  without  Christ ;  never  try  to  sing 
without  Christ ;  never  try  to  preach  without  Christ.  Let  us  perform 
no  holy  function,  nor  attempt  to  have  fellowship  with  God  in  any  shape 
or  way,  except  through  that  rent  which  he  has  made  in  the  veil  by  his 
flesh,  sanctified  for  us,  and  offered  upon  ti^e  cross  on  our  behalf. 


834  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Beloved,  I  have  done  when  I  have  just  remarked  upon  the  next 
two  verses,  which  are  necessary  to  complete  the  sense,  but  which  I 
was  obliged  to  omit  this  morning,  since  there  would  be  no  time  to 
handle  them.  We  are  called  to  take  holy  freedoms  with  Grod.  "  Let 
us  draw  near,"  at  once,  "  with  a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith.'* 
Let  us  do  so  boldly,  for  we  have  a  great  high  priest.  The  twenty- 
first  verse  reminds  us  of  this.  Jesus  is  the  great  Priest,  and  we  are 
the  sub-priests  under  him,  and  since  he  bids  us  come  near  to  God,  and 
himself  leads  the  way,  let  us  foUow  him  into  the  inner  sanctuary. 
Because  he  lives,  we  shall  live  also.  We  shall  not  die  in  the  holy  place, 
unless  he  dies.  God  will  not  smite  us  unless  he  smites  him.  So, 
"having  a  high  priest  over  the  house  of  God,  let  us  draw  near  with 
a  true  heart  in  f uU  assurance  of  faith." 

And  then  the  apostle  teUs  us  that  we  may  not  only  come  with 
boldness,  because  our  high  priest  leads  the  way,  but  because  we  our- 
selves are  prepared  for  entrance.  Two  things  the  high  priest  had  to 
do  before  he  might  enter :  one  was,  to  be  sprinkled  with  blood,  and 
this  we  have ;  for  "  our  hearts  are  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience." 
The  other  requisite  for  the  priests  was  to  have  their  "  bodies  washed 
with  pure  water."  This  we  have  received  in  symbol  in  our  baptism, 
and  in  reality  in  the  spiritual  cleansing  of  regeneration.  To  us  has 
been  fulfilled  the  prayer — 

"  Let  the  water  and  the  blood 
From  thy  riven  side  which  flowed, 
Be  of  sin  the  double  cure, 
Cleanse  me  from  its  guilt  and  power." 

We  have  known  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word,  and  we  have  been 
sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  his  grace ;  therefore  let  us  enter  into  the 
holiest.  Why  should  we  stay  away  ?  Hearts  sprinkled  with  blood, 
bodies  washed  with  pure  water — these  are  the  ordained  preparations 
for  acceptable  entrance.  Come  near,  beloved !  May  the  Holy  Spirit 
be  the  spirit  of  access  to  you  now.  Come  to  your  God,  and  then  abide 
with  him !  He  is  your  Father,  your  all  in  all.  Sit  down  and  rejoice 
in  him ;  take  your  fill  of  love ;  and  let  not  your  communion  be 
broken  between  here  and  heaven.  Why  should  it  be  ?  Why  not 
begin  to-day  that  sweet  enjoyment  of  perfect  reconciliation  and  delight 
in  God  which  shall  go  on  increasing  in  intensity  until  you  behold 
the  Lord  in  open  vision,  and  go  no  more  out  ?  Heaven  will  bring  a 
great  change  in  condition,  but  not  in  our  standing,  if  even  now  we 
stand  within  the  veil.  It  will  be  only  such  a  change  as  there  is 
between  the  perfect  day  and  the  daybreak ;  for  we  have  the  same  sun, 
and  the  same  light  from  the  sun,  and  the  same  privilege  of  walking 
in  the  light.  "  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away,  turn, 
my  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart  upon  the  moun- 
tains of  Division."     Amen,  and  Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Hebrews  z. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  " — 318,  296,  895, 


THE   CONSECRATION  OF  PRIESTS, 


Delivered   on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  November   15th,  1874,  B¥ 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  This  is  the  thing  that  thou  shalt  do  unto  them  to  hallow  them,  to  minister  nnto 
me  in  the  priest's  office." — Exodus  xxix.  1. 

Under  the  law,  only  one  family  could  serve  God  in  the  priest's  office, 
but  under  the  gospel  all  the  saints  are  "  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal 
priesthood  "  (I.  Peter  ii.  9).  In  the  Christian  church  no  persons 
whatsoever  are  set  apart  to  the  priesthood  above  the  rest  of  their 
brethren,  for  in  us  is  fulfilled  the  promise  which  Israel  by  reason  of  her 
sin  failed  to  obtain — "  Ye  shall  be  a  kingdom  of  priests  unto  me." 
Paul,  in  addressing  all  the  saints,  bids  them  present  their  bodies  a 
living  sacrifice,  holy  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is  their  reasonable 
service.  It  is  the  grand  design  of  all  the  works  of  divine  grace,  both 
for  us  and  in  us,  to  fit  us  for  the  office  of  the  spiritual  priesthood,  and 
it  will  be  the  crown  of  our  perfection  when  with  all  our  brethren  we 
shall  sing  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  the  new  song, "  Unto  him  that  loved  us, 
and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father;  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion 
for  ever  and  ever."  This  honour  have  all  the  saints :  according  to 
Peter,  in  the  second  chapter  of  his  First  Epistle,  it  belongs  even  to  new- 
born babes  in  grace,  for  even  such  are  spoken  of  as  forming  part  of  an 
holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices.  Nor  is  this  confined  to 
men  as  was  the  Aaronic  priesthood,  for  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither 
male  nor  female.  My  subject  to-day  is  the  consecration  of  priests,  but 
it  does  not  refer  exclusively  or  even  specially  to  persons  called  clergy- 
men, or  ministers,  but  to  all  of  you  who  believe  in  Jesus,  for  ye  are 
God's  clergy,  his  cleros,  that  is,  his  inheritance,  and  ye  should  be  all 
ministers,  ministering  according  to  the  grace  given  to  you. 

The  family  of  Aaron  was  chosen  unto  the  priesthood,  "  for  no  man 

taketh  this  honour  upon  himself,  but  he  that  was  called  thereunto  as 

was  Aaron,"  and  even  thus  all  the   Lord's  people  are  chosen  from 

before  the  foundation  of  the  world.     Being  chosen,  Aaron  and  his  sons 

Nos.  1,203-4. 


336  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULl'IT. 

were  at  God's  command  hroiu/ht  nigh  unto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle. 
None  ever  come  to  God  except  they  are  brought  to  him  ;  even  the  spouse 
sings,  "he  brought  me  into  the  banquetting  house."  Jesus  said,  "  No 
man  can  come  unto  me  except  the  Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw 
him."  We  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  and  brought  nigh  by 
the  drawings  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Assuming  that  you  and  1  have  made  our  calling  and  election  sure, 
let  us  further  see  what  is  needed  to  qualify  us  to  serve  as  priests  at  the 
altar  of  the  living  God.  Follow  me  carefully  as  I  mention  the 
ceremonies  prescribed  in  the  chapter  before  us,  for  they  teach  us 
necessary  things  :  the  outward  ceremonies  are  abolished,  but  their 
inner  meaning  remains. 

I.  First,  THE  PRIESTS  WERE  WASHED.  We  read  in  the  fourth  verse, 
*'  Aaron  and  his  sons  thou  shalt  bring  unto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation,  and  shalt  wash  them  with  water."  The  pure  and 
holy  God  cannot  be  served  by  men  of  unclean  hands  and  impure  hearts  ; 
he  would  not  endure  it  under  the  law,  nor  will  he  tolerate  it  under  the 
gospel.  "  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,"  and,  "  Be  ye 
holy  for  I  am  holy,"  are  standing  precepts  of  our  priesthood.  It 
was  well  said  by  the  psalmist,  "  I  will  wash  my  hands  in  innocency,  so 
will  I  compass  thine  altar,  0  Lord." 

This  washing  is  afforded  us  in  two  ways,  answering  to  our  double 
need.  First,  it  is  given  to  us  in  regenerotion,  wherein  we  are  born  of 
water  and  of  the  Spirit.  By  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  are  made 
new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  in  us  is  fulfilled  the  type  set  forth  in 
Naaman,  who  washed  in  Jordan,  and  his  flesh  came  again  unto  him, 
even  as  a  little  child.  Not  in  the  waters  of  baptism,  but  in  the  living 
water  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  we  cleansed  from  nature's  original  defile- 
ment ;  he  it  is  who  causes  old  things  to  pass  away,  and  makes  all  things 
new.  Through  his  sanctifying  operations  we  are  cleansed  from  all 
filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit,  and  made  vessels  fit  for  the 
Master's  use.  This  washiug  is  in  every  case  essential.  You  may  say,  "I 
desire  to  serve  God,"  but  you  cannot  do  it  till  first  you  are  born  again. 
Your  whole  nature  must  be  cleansed,  or  you  will  never  be  qualified  to 
stand  as  a  priest  before  the  thrice  holy  God.  T  marvel  how  some  who 
know  nothing  about  regeneration  can  dare  to  call  themselves  priests. 
They  are  strangers  to  the  renewing  influences  of  the  Spirit,  and  yet 
they  style  themselves  God's  ministers.  Has  God  set  blind  men  to  be 
guides,  and  dead  men  to  quicken  souls  ?  Unto  such  as  these  God 
saith,  "  What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes  ?  " 

The  need  of  another  form  of  washing  was  indicated  by  the  double 
stream  which  flowed  from  the  pierced  breast  of  Christ,  for  "  forthwith 
came  there  out  blood  and  water."  We  must  be  washed  by  remission 
of  siti,  of  which  David  sang,  "  Purge  me  with  hyssop  and  I  shall  be 
clean  ;  wash  me  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  In  the  first  moment 
of  our  faith  in  Jesus  there  is  given  to  us  a  washing  which  makes  us 
clean  every  whit  in  the  sight  of  God,  once  for  all.  It  is  that  washing 
to  which  the  Lord  Jesus  referred  when  he  said,  "  He  that  is  washed 
needeth  not  save  to  wash  his  feet,  for  he  is  clean."  The  priests  were 
washed  once  from  head  to  foot,  to  make  them  ceremonially  clean,  and 
after  that  they  needed  only  to  wash  their  feet  when  they  came  into  the 


THE   CONSECRATION    OF    PRIESTS.  837 

holy  place  ;  and  even  thus  our  Ijord  told  his  disciples  when  he  washed 
theii'  feet  that  they  had  no  need  of  another  complete  bathing,  for  they 
were  clean  every  whit.  Believers  should  not  pray  to  their  heavenly 
"Father  as  if  their  sins  still  rested  upon  them  and  had  never  been  for- 
given, for  the  Lord  has  put  away  their  sin,  and  as  far  as  the  east  is 
from  the  west  so  far  hath  he  removed  their  transgressions  from  them  : 
yet  as  they  continually  accumulate  some  evil  and  stain  by  being  in  this 
body,  and  in  this  world,  they  have  need  to  come  each  day  with,  *'  For- 
give us  our  trespasses  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us." 
Our  first  washing  has  removed  all  sin  as  before  God  the  Judge ;  our 
daily  washing  cleanses  us  from  offences  towards  God  as  our  Father.  Even 
when  we  walk  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  light,  and  have  fellowship 
one  with  another,  we  yet  need  daily  cleansing  from  all  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son,  and  blessed  be  God  we  have  it. 

Now,  my  dear  hearers,  have  you  thus  been  cleansed  from  all  sin  ? 
Do  ye  know  to-day  the  power  of  that  word,  "  Being  made  free  from 
sin,  ye  became  the  servants  of  righteousness"  ?  Have  you  the  blessed- 
ness of  that  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity,  and  in 
whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile  ?  Do  not  try  to  stand  as  a  priest  before 
God  till  you  have  received  this  double  washing.  Remember  the  great 
aim  of  the  gospel  is  to  make  us  priests  unto  God,  but  the  consecrating 
process  must  begin  by  our  being  cleansed  as  sinners  from  the  guilt  of 
sin  and  the  defilement  of  our  nature.  He  who  would  serve  the  Lord 
must  first  confess  his  iniquities  and  obtain  remission,  or  he  can  no 
more  approach  the  living  God  than  a  leper  could  enter  into  the  holy 
place. 

II.  After  being  washed  the  priests  were  clothed.  They  might 
not  wear  one  of  the  garments  which  belonged  to  themselves  or  to  their 
former  calling.  Under  garments  were  provided  for  them,  and  outer 
garments  too,  within  and  without  their  raiment  was  new  and  appropriate. 
They  put  on  what  was  given  them,  nothing  more  and  nothing  less. 
No  man  can  serve  God  acceptably  in  his  own  righteousness,  it  is  but 
filthy  rags.  We  must  have  the  fine  linen  of  an  inward  sanctification, 
and  the  outer  garment,  for  glory  and  for  beauty,  of  the  imputed 
righteousness  of  our  I^ord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  We  must,  in  a 
word,  sing  with  the  hymn, 

•*  Jesus,  thy  blood  and  righteousness. 
My  beauty  are,  my  glorious  dress." 

We  cannot  stand  to  worship  God  unless  it  be  so ;  he  will  drive  us  from 
his  presence. 

Note,  that  these  garments  were  provided  for  them.  They  were  at  no 
expense  in  buying  them,  nor  labour  in  weaving  them,  nor  skill  in  making 
them  ;  they  had  simply  to  put  them  on.  And  you,  dear  child  of  God, 
are  to  put  on  the  garments  which  Jesus  Christ  has  provided  for  you,  at 
his  own  cost,  and  Ireely  bestows  upon  you  out  of  boundless  love.  Thes* 
garments  formed  a  complete  apparel.  They  had  no  shoes  upon  their 
feet,  it  is  true,  but  they  would  have  been  superfluous,  for  the  place 
whereon  they  stood  was  holy  ground.  They  were  sandalled  with  rever- 
ence. The  child  of  God  when  he  is  bedecked  in  the  righteousness  of 
Christ  still  feels  a  solemn  awe  of  the  Lord,  and  comes  into  the  presence 

Y 


i838  ^ry.'iKoi'OMTAN  tabernacle  i'ULI'IT. 

of  the  Most  High  with  lowliest  adoration,  for  he  remembers  that  he  is 
but  a  creature  at  his  best. 

These  garments  ivere  very  comely  to  look  upon.  Though  the  common 
priests  did  not  wear  the  breastplate  of  jewels,  nor  the  bells  and  pome- 
granates, nor  the  girdle  of  blue  and  fine  twined  linen,  yet,  in  their  ordi- 
nary dress  of  pure  white,  they  must  have  been  very  comely  to  look  upon. 
Fine  white  linen  is  the  emblem  of  the  righteousness  of  the  saints,  and 

,    truly  in  God's  eye,  with  the  exception  of  his  dear  Son,  there  are  no 

/  lovelier  objects  in  the  world  than  his  own  people  when  they  are  di-essed 
in  the  garments  of  salvation. 

The  dress  provided  tvas  ahsohitely  necessary  to  he  ivorn.  No  priest 
might  offer  sacrifice  without  the  appointed  garments,  for  we  read  itt 
the  forty-third  verse  of  the  twenty-eighth  chapter,  "  They  shall  be 
upon  Aaron,  and  upon  his  sons,  when  they  come  in  unto  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  congregation,  or  when  they  come  near  unto  the  altar  to 
minister  in  the  holy  place  ;  that  they  bear  not  iniquity,  and  die."" 
They  would  have  died  had  they  attempted  to  sacrifice  without  being- 
clothed  according  to  the  law.  A  man  pretending  to  serve  God  without 
the  divine  righteousness  upon  him,  puts  himself  in  a  most  perilous 
position  ;  he  is  where  the  flaming  wrath  of  God  burns  terribly.  Better 
for  him  to  keep  his  own  place  in  the  distance,  than  to  draw  near  unto 
the  service  of  God,  unless  he  is  adorned  with  the  glorious  array  which 
Christ  has  woven  in  the  loom  of  his  life  and  dyed  in  his  own  blood. 
Dear  brethren,  if  you  desire  to  worship  God  aright  in  holy  lal)Our,  or 
prayer,  or  praise,  you  must  go  to  your  engagements  dressed  in  the 
righteousness  of  Jesus,  for  you  can  only  be  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved. "^ 
III.  Then,  thirdly,  these  priests  were  anointed.  It  does  not 
appear  that  they  were  each  one  personally  anointed  so  early  in  the 
ceremony,  but  they  saw  the  fragrant  oil  poured  upon  Aaron  on  their 
behalf.  So  you  find  it  written  in  the  seventh  verse,  "  Then  shalt  thou 
,  take  the  anointing  oil,  and  pour  it  upon  his  head,  and  anoint  him." 
So  that  in  order  to  serve  God  aright,  it  is  needful  for  us  to  see  the 
anointing  which  has  been  given  to  our  covenant  Head,  without 
measure.  But  you  say  to  me,  "  Of  what  benefit  can  that  be  to  us  ?  We 
require  the  unction  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  ourselves."  True,  but  the 
oil  which  was  poured  upon  Aaron's  head  went  down  his  beard,  and  ita 
copious  flow  descended  even  to  the  skirts  of  his  garments  ;  and  what  you 
need  to  know  if  you  are  to  be  a  true  priest  to  God  is,  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  comes  to  you  through  Christ  and  from  Christ,  and  that  it  is  be- 
cause your  Head  is  anointed,  that  you  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy 

"*  One.  You  could  not  have  been  Christians  if  he  had  not  first  been  the 
Christ.  Be  of  good  cheer  concerning  this,  for  though  you  may  be  one 
of  the  lowest  members  of  the  mystical  body  of  Jesus  Christ,  you  have 

'  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One,  because  Jesus  has  that  anointing,  and 
in  the  power  of  that  anointing  you  may  minister  before  the  Lord. 
Further  on  in  the  discourse  we  shall  have  to  show  you  the  personal 
anointing  which  you  must  individually  receive,  but  it  is  highly  impor- 
tant for  every  worker  to  see  where  his  fragrance  before  God  must  lie, — 
never  in  himself,  but  always  in  his  covenant  Head.  Be  ye  filled  with 
the  Spirit,  but  do  not  dream  that  the  Spirit  of  God  comes  to  you  apart 

(   from  your  Lord.  You  are  the  branch,  and  the  sap  can  only  come  to  you 


THE   CONSECRATION   OF    PRIESTS.  £39 

through  the  stem.  You  are  the  member,  and  your  life  dwells  in  your 
head ;  divided  from  Jesus  you  are  dead.  Never  forget  this,  for  any 
attempt  at  independence  will  be  fatal.  A  man  in  Christ  is  fragrant  with 
a  holy  peri'ume  before  the  Lord,  but  out  of  Christ  he  is  an  unclean 
thing,  and  cannot  approach  the  altar. 

IV.  Fourthly,  having  been  washed,  clothed,  and  representatively 
anointed,  they  had  next  to  share  in  the  sin  offering.  They  were 
sinful  men,  how  could  they  approach  a  thrice  holy  God  ?  You  and  1 
are  sinful,  as  we  know  by  bitter  experience  ;  how  can  we  hope  to  stand 
before  the  mercy-seat,  and  present  acceptable  sacrifices  unto  such  an 
one  as  God  is  ?  There  is  no  way  of  approaching  him  while  our  sin  is 
seen,  it  must  be  covered,  covered  by  a  sin-offering.  We  are  told  that 
the  sin-offering  selected  was  a  bullock  without  blemish,  of  the  first 
year,  strong,  and  vigorous,  a  perfect  being  as  far  as  it  could  be.  Lift 
your  eyes  to  Jesus,  in  whom  is  no  spot  of  sin,  being  undefiled  in  nature 
and  immaculate  in  life.  He  it  is  who  stands  for  you,  even  he  who 
knew  no  sin,  and  yet  was  made  sin  for  you  that  you  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  He,  in  the  fulness  of  his  strength, 
and  in  the  perfection  of  his  manhood,  gave  himself  a  ransom  and  a 
substitute  for  you.     View  him  with  wondering  gratitude. 

The  l)ullock  of  the  sin-offering  being  brought  to  the  altar,  Aarou 
and  his  sons  were  to  lay  their  hands  upon  it.  Read  the  tenth  verse  : — 
They  "  shall  put  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  bullof-k."  The 
Hebrew  word  means  more  than  lightly  placing  the  hand,  it  gives  the 
idea  of  pressing  hard  upon  the  bullock's  head.  They  came  each 
one  and  leaned  upon  the  victim,  loading  him  with  their  burden,  signify- 
ing their  acceptance  of  its  substitution,  their  joy  that  the  Lord  would 
accept  that  victim  in  their  stead.  When  they  put  their  hands  on  the 
bullock,  they  made  a  confession  of  sin,  and  the  Rabbis  have  preserved 
for  us  the  form  in  which  that  confession  was  made,  but  time  forbids 
our  reading  it  to  you.  The  act  was  evidently  understood  by  all  con- 
cerned as  a  typical  transfer  of  guilt,  and  the  placing  of  the  bullock  of 
the  sin  offering  in  the  place  of  the  sinner.  Come,  brethren  and  sisters, 
though  washed,  though  clothed,  though  anointed,  come  as  penitents, 
and  rejoice  in  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  Draw  nigh  unto  the 
liord  with  sincere  hearts  and  acknowledge  your  transgressions,  and 
again  accept  your  Saviour  as  your  sin-bearer;  for  a  sin-bearer  who 
is  not  accepted  by  you  can  be  of  no  service  to  you.  The  hands  of 
faith  must  be  laid  upon  the  sacrifice  :  for  my  part,  I  like  to  lay  them 
there  every  day,  nay,  I  desire  to  keep  them  there  always^  believing 
without  ceasing  that  ray  sin  is  imputed  no  more  to  me,  but  by  a  sacred 
act  of  God  was  laid  upon  Jesus,  according  to  that  sentence,  "  He  hath, 
laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 

The  bullock  was  killed  as  a  token  that  just  as  the  poor  beast  was 
slain  so  they  deserved  to  die  for  their  sins,  and  that  done,  the  blood 
was  caught  in  bowls  and  taken  to  the  altar,  and  there  it  was  poured  out, 
at  the  bottom  of  the  altar,  round  al>out.  Read  the  1 7th  verse.  There 
must  have  been  a  pool  of  blood  all  round  the  altar,  or  at  any  rate  a 
crimsoned  line.  What  did  it  signify  ?  Did  it  not  show  that  our  only 
access  to  God  is  by  the  blood  ?  They  were  washed  and  robed  and 
anointed,  and  yet  they  could  not  reach  the  altar  till  tlie  way  to  it  had 


340  HETHOPOLITANT   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

been  pav^ed  with  atoning  blood.  Oh,  my  brother,  there  is  no  way  for 
thee  to  God  as  his  priest  except  through  the  precious  blood.  "We 
cannot  draw  near  to  God,  or  serve  him  aright,  if  we  forget  the  blood 
of  atonement.  Our  standing  is  upon  and  within  the  blood  of  sprinkling  ; 
we  must  bring  our  prayers,  praises,  preachings,  almsgivings,  and  all 
other  offerings,  to  the  altar,  around  which  the  blood  is  poured.  In 
vain  are  all  good  works  which  are  not  so  presented.  See  ye  well  to 
this,  my  brethren.     It  is  essential  beyond  all  else. 

This  done,  the  choicer  and  more  vital  parts  of  the  bullock  were 
taken,  and  burned  upon  the  altar,  to  show  that  even  when  our  Lord 
Jesus  is  viewed  as  a  sin  ottering,  he  is  still  a  sweet  savour  unto  God, 
and  however  he  might  hide  his  face  from  his  Son  because  of  our  sin, 
yet  he  was  always  in  himself  well  pleasing  unto  the  Father.  Hence  the 
inwards  of  the  bullock  were  burned  on  the  altar,  where  nothing  could 
be  presented  but  that  which  was  a  sweet  savour  to  God.  0  thou  Lamb 
ol  God,  under  whatever  aspect  we  behold  thee,  thou  art  still  precious  to 
thy  Father !  Thou  wert  beloved  by  him  even  when  thou  hadst  to  cry, 
"  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  !  " 

But  because  the  bullock  was  a  sin-ottering,  and  therefore  obnoxious 
to  God,  its  flesh,  and  its  skin,  and  all  that  remained  were  carried  out- 
side the  camp,  and  burned  with  a  quick,  consuming  fire,  as  a  thing 
ivorthy  to  be  destroyed,  for  sin  was  upon  it,  and  it  must  be  burned  up. 
Believer,  have  you  seen  Jesus  as  the  great  oflFering  for  sin,  made  a 
curse  for  us  ?  You  will  never  serve  God  in  the  priestly  office  aright 
unless  you  see  that  sin  is  a  hateful  thing  to  God,  so  hateful  that,  even 
when  it  only  lay  upon  his  dear  Son  by  imputation,  he  could  not  look 
upon  him,  but  bruised  and  smote  him  until  he  cried  in  anguish, "  Eloi, 
Eloi,  lama  sabachthani."  "Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify  the 
people  with  his  own  blood,  suffered  without  the  camp,"  to  show  that 
not  witliout  his  being  treated  as  a  transgressor  could  we  be  treated  as 
righteous,  and  also  that  sin  is  in  itself  a  deadly  pest,  which  must  not 
be  endured  in  the  camp  of  the  chosen.  Never  let  your  joy  concerning 
the  atonement  lessen  your  horror  of  transgression : — 

"  With  your  joy  for  pardoned  guilt, 
Mourn  that  you  pierced  the  Lord." 

I  am  persuaded  that  no  one  will  ever  serve  the  Lord  humbly  and 
devotedly  unless  he  obtains  a  clear  view  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  sin- 
oflfering,  and  substitute.  Some  preachers  either  do  not  know  that 
truth,  or  else  they  think  too  little  ot  it  to  make  it  prominent  in  their 
sermons,  hence  their  ministry  does  not  save  souls.  The  great  saving 
truth  is  the  doctrine  of  atonement  by  substitution.  Without  it 
ministers  will  keep  souls  in  bondage  year  after  year,  because  they  do 
not  proclaim  the  finished  redemption,  nor  let  men  know  that  sin  was 
laid  on  Jesus  that  it  might  be  for  ever  removed  from  the  believer. 
**H6  was  made  sin  for  us  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  him  ; "  brethren,  get  that  truth  clearly  into  your  heads,  and 
intensely  into  your  hearts,  and  you  will  become  devoted  to  the  Lord. 
Do  not  only  believe  that  grand  truth,  but  in  the  spirit  of  it  serve  ye 
the  Lord  without  weariness,  seeing  ye  have  been  redeemed  with  a  price 
far  more  precious  than  silver  and  gold 


THE  CONSECRATION  OF  PRIESTS.  341 

V.  After  the   sin-offering  the  consecrated  ones  went  on  to  take 
THEIR  SHARE  IN  THE  BURNT-OFFERING.     The  burnt-offerlng  differed 
widely  from   the   sin-offering.     The   sin-offering   indicated  Christ  as 
bearing  our  sin,  but  the  burnt-offering  sets  him  forth  as  presenting  an 
acceptable   offering   unto   the    Lord.       God   required   of   us   perfect 
obedience,  he  demanded  from  us  a  pure  and  holy  life,  and  the  require- 
ment was  a  just  one :  but  among  us  all  there  is  none  righteous,  no, 
not  one ;   how  then  could  we  stand  before  the  thrice    Holy   Lord  ? 
Beloved,  Jesus  stands  in  the  gap.     Before  God  his  righteousness  was    i 
perfect,  acceptable,  and  delightful,  and  for  us  it  is  presented.     He  is  '^ 
made  of  God  unto   us   righteousness.     The  burnt-offering  does  not 
bring  to  light  the  remembrance  of  sin  except  so  far  as  it  reminds  ns  that 
we  were  in  need  of  a  perfect  righteousness  ;  it  brings  before  us  only  the 
thought  of  Jesus  offering  himself  as  a  sweet  savour  unto   God,  and 
making  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved.     The  priests  were  to  bring  a  ram 
without  blemish,  and  when  killed,  before  it  was  laid  on  the  altar,  its 
inwards  were  to  be  washed,  for  otherwise  the  natural  foulness  of  its  \ 
body  would  prevent  its  being  a  fit  type  of  that  Saviour  who  is  pure 
within,  in  whom  there  is  no  taint  of  original  sin.    When  this  ram  was  I 
brought  the  priests  were  to  lay  their  hands  upon  it,  as  much   as  to 
say,  "We  accept  this  ram,  that  it   may  represent  us  as  acceptable 
before  God."     Oh,  beloved,  lay  your  hands  on  Jesus  now  by  faith,  and  f 
say,  "Jesus,  I  accept  thee  as  my  righteousness  before  the  Lord,  and  j 
believe  that  as  God  sees  in  thee  all  that  is  delightful,  and  smells  a  sweet 
savour  of  rest,  so  he  will  be  well  pleased  with  me  for  thy  sake." 

This  offering  when  placed  upon  the  altar  was  wholly  burnt ;  not  a. 
fragment  of  it  was  put  outside  the  camp,  not  a  morsel  of  it  was  eaten  by 
man,  but  the  whole  ram  was  utterly  consumed  with  fire,  for  it  was  a 
burnt-offering  unto  the  Lord.  And  thus,  dear  friends,  it  is  very  delight- 
ful to  us  to  see  that  God  received  Jesus,  the  whole  of  Jesus  ;  there  was 
nothing  in  him  to  reject,  and  nothing  that  could  be  done  without.  He 
satisfied  the  Lord  ;  he  asked  no  more,  he  would  have  no  less.  Jesus 
has  rendered  to  the  Father  all  that  he  could  desire  from  men,  and  the 
Lord  is  Well  pleased  for  his  righteousness'  sake.  A  sense  of  accept- 
ance is  a  very  necessary  thing  to  those  who  would  worship  God 
aright,  for  if  you  do  not  enjoy  it  the  legal  spirit  will  begin  to  work 
to  win  acceptance  by  merit,  and  that  will  spoil  all.  If  men  dream  that 
they  are  to  pray  or  preach  their  way  to  heaven,  or  to  do  this,  and  to  do 
that,  to  be  acceptable  with  God,  they  will  offer  strange  fire  on  the  Lord's 
altar  and  bring  sacrifices  with  which  he  can  never  be  pleased.  Vain 
oblations  he  will  call  them,  and  frown  on  the  offerers.  How  delightful 
it  is  to  serve  God  with  a  sense  that  we  are  pleasant  in  the  sight  of 
God;  for  this  fills  us  with  gratitude,  inspires  us  with  zeal,  creates 
boldness,  and  fosters  every  grace.  With  what  joy  will  you  stand 
to  minister  daily  whatever  your  calling  may  be,  whether  it  be  as  a 
mother  in  the  family,  a  servant  in  the  house,  a  minister  in  the 
pulpit,  or  a  teacher  in  the  class.  You  will  not  need  driving  like  a 
slave  to  his  toil,  but  like  a  dearly  beloved  child  you  will  rejoice  to 
please  your  Father  in  all  things.  Work  in  the  prison-house  of  the 
law  under  the  lash  of  conscience  is  a  very  different  thing  from 
holy  work  in  the  sunlight  of  the  Lord's  countenance  and  the  liherty 


342  METROPOLITAN   TABRKNACLE    PULl'IT. 

Df  full  acceptance.  He  who  knows  that  he  is  not  now  to  be  judged 
and  condemned  by  the  law,  but  stands  for  ever  justified  because  of 
<rhat  Christ  has  done  for  him,  serves  his  God  with  a  holy  alacrity  un- 
known to  others. 

VI.  After  the  priests  had  seen  for  themselves  the  sin-oflFering  and  the 
burnt-offering,  it  was  needful  that  they  should  partake  of  a  third 
sacrifice,  which  was  A  peace  offering.  Another  ram  was  brought  as 
unblemished  and  vigorous  as  the  former,  for  Jesus  is  never  to  be 
typified  by  anything  but  the  best  of  its  kind.  We  are  told  in  the 
nineteenth  verse  that  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  to  put  their  hands  upon 
it,  for,  whatever  view  of  the  great  sacrifice  they  might  gaze  upon,  it  was 
imperatively  necessary  that  they  should  have  a  personal  interest  in  it ; 
mere  theory  will  never  do,  we  must  have  personal  acquaintance  with 
the  Lord,  and  we  must  have  him  to  be  our  own.  So  long  as  we  have 
no  part  or  lot  in  Jesus  we  are  as  much  excluded  from  the  service  of 
the  Lord  as  were  the  uncircumcised  and  the  unclean.  No  man  can 
run  the  heavenly  race  unless  he  is  looking  unto  Jesus,  he  cannot  be  a 
soldier  of  the  Lord  unless  he  has  Christ  for  his  Captain,  he  cannot  feed 
others  until  he  has  himself  fed  on  Jesus,  nor  bring  others  to  Jesus  till 
he  has  come  himself.  "  The  husbandman  that  laboureth  must  first  be 
partaker  of  the  fruits"  ;  this  is  one  of  the  laws  of  spiritual  husbandry, 
and  cannot  be  set  aside.  Lay  your  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  substi- 
tute, before  you  venture  to  lay  it  upon  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

"When  this  was  done,  the  peace-offering  was  slain.  A  sin-offering 
was  a  thing  obnoxious  to  God,  and  represented  expiation  made  for  sin, 
a  burnt-offering  was  a  sweet-savour  offering  unto  God,  and  it  was  all 
burned  on  the  altar,  all  being  for  the  Lord  alone, — thus  representing 
the  Lord  Jesus  as  rendering  to  the  Lord  a  complete  obedience,  which 
mngnificd  the  law  and  made  it  honourable ;  but  the  peace  offering  was 
shared  between  the  Lord  and  the  priest  or  offerer.  The  Lord's  part 
was  consumed  with  fire  upon  the  altar,  and  another  portion  was  eaten 
by  man  in  the  holy  place.  The  peace  offering  was  thus  an  open  decla- 
ration of  the  communion  which  had  been  established  between  God  and^ 
man,  so  that  they  ate  together,  rejoicing  in  the  same  offering.  Be- 
loved brethren,  when  you  have  felt  the  sweets  of  seeing  the  Lord  as  a 
sin-offering,  and  then  have  tasted  the  high  joys  of  acceptance  as  you 
have  gazed  upon  him  as  the  burnt-offering,  satisfying  Jehovah's  heart, 
it  is  surpassingly  delightful  to  behold  the  Lamb  of  God  as  our  peace- 
offering,  making  glad  the  heart  of  God  and  man,  and  bringing  both  in 
bonds  of  friendship  to  a  common  meeting-place.  The  eternal  Father 
sayS;  "'Ihis  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased,"  and  we 
cry,  "  This  is  our  beloved  Lord,  in  whom  our  inmost  soul  rejoices." 

In  the  peace-offering  the  communion  between  the  priests  and  the 
Lord  commenced  outwardly  by  their  being  consecrated  by  the  blood  of 
the  peace-offering.  Moses  dipped  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and  smeared 
first  the  priest's  right  ear,  then  his  thumb,  and  then  his  toe ;  as 
Matthew  Henry  says,  asif  they  marked  the  boundaries  and  extremities 
of  man's  being,  to  show  that  all  that  was  enclosed  within  the  crim- 
son lines  was  consecrated  unto  the  Lord.  We  go  not  too  far  when 
we  add  that  it  signified  the  dedication  of  each  faculty.  The  ear  was 
henceforth  to  hear  God's  commands,  to  listen  to  divine  teaching,  and 


THE    CONSECRATION   OF    PRIESTS.  "15 

to  drink  in  divine  promises,  and  no  more  to  regard  falsehood,  vanity, 
and  vice.  The  hand  was  now  henceforth  to  be  engaged  in  the  divino 
service  with  diligence  and  intelligence,  for  the  right  hand  was  thna 
marked,  and  the  thumb,  the  most  useful  part  of  it :  for  holy  work  the 
hand  must  be  reserved.  The  feet  were  to  be  equally  holy,  the  priest, 
wherever  he  stood,  or  walked,  or  ran,  was  to  be  "  holiness  unto  the 
Lord."  He  had  no  right  to  go  anywhere  if  that  blood-marked  foot  would 
be  out  of  place.  The  whole  man  was  thus  consecrated  by  the  blood  of 
the  everlasting  covenant :  a  solemn  seal  indeed  !  Our  personal  share 
of  the  blood  of  Jesus  has  already  done  this  for  us,  it  has  constrained 
us  to  yield  unto  God  our  whole  manhood,  spirit,  soul,  and  body. 
My  brother,  you  can  never  serve  God  as  his  priest  unless  you  are 
wholly  given  up  to  God  through  the  blood  of  Jesus.  You  must  have 
this  verse  in  your  very  soul,  and  must  masticate  it,  digest  it,  assimilate 
it  into  your  nature — "  Ye  are  not  your  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price, 
therefore  glorify  God  in  your  bodies  and  your  spirits,  which  are  his." 
This  surrender  of  yourself  unto  the  Lord  commences  your  communion 
with  the  Lord  ;   the  peace-offering  has  begun. 

The  next  thing  was  to  sprinkle  the  priests  all  over  with  a  mixture  of 
oil  and  blood,  and  this  is  that  anointing  which  I  said  we  should  see 
by-and-bye.  "  Thou  shalt  take  of  the  blood  that  is  upon  the  altar,  and 
of  the  anointing  oil,  and  sprinkle  it  upon  Aaron,  and  upon  his  garments, 
and  upon  his  sons,  and  upon  the  garments  of  his  sons  with  him  :  and 
he  shall  be  hallowed,  and  his  garments,  and  his  sons,  and  his  sons' 
garments  with  him."  Yes,  brethren,  we  need  to  know  that  double 
anointing,  the  blood  of  Jesus  which  cleanses,  and  the  oil  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  which  perfumes  us.  It  is  well  to  see  how  these  two  blend  in 
one,  Jesus  and  his  atonement,  the  Spirit  and  his  sanctification ;  the 
work  for  us  and  the  work  in  us.  Read  the  third  of  John,  and 
there  you  find,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again  ;"  but  side  by  side  with  it  you 
get,  "  Whosoever  believeth  in  him  is  not  condemned."  It  is  not  so 
easy  for  the  preacher  always  to  give  these  two  doctrines  with  equal 
clearness  and  distinctness ;  he  is  very  apt,  when  he  is  preaching  up 
simple  faith,  and  saying,  "  Only  believe,"  to  forget  that  equally  impor- 
tant statement,  *'  Ye  must  be  born  again."  It  is  a  terrible  blunder  to 
set  the  blood  and  the  oil  in  opposition,  they  must  always  go  together. 
Yet  there  are  some  who  have  even  spoken  depreciatingly  of  repentance, 
which  is  an  essential  part  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  their  zeal 
for  holding  up  the  righteousness  of  Christ  by  faith  has  driven  them 
beyond  the  bounds  of  truth.  Brethren,  do  not  err  in  this  matter,  but 
abide  in  equal  loyalty  to  these  equally  sure  and  important  verities.  If 
you  would  serve  the  Lord  aright,  you  must  have  the  blood  and  the 
oil  sprinkled  upon  you,  that  is  to  say,  you  must  know  personally  the 
influence  of  them  both.  What  a  strange  sight  these  men  in  white 
garments  must  have  presented,  bespattered  all  over  with  blood  and 
oil.  Did  that  stain  their  garments  ?  No,  it  adorned  and  perfumed 
them.  Eemember  that  saying,  "  They  have  washed  their  robes  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  No  purity  is  comparable 
to  that  which  comes  by  the  Spirit  and  by  the  atouing  blood :  in 
God's  sight  these  priests  thus  distained  were  more  beautiful  by  far 
than  they  had  been  before.     Oh,  my  soul,  prize  Jesus  and  his  blood. 


S44:  HIETROPOTilTAN    TABEIINACLK    PULPIT. 

and  never  forget  that  thou  needcst  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Bless  God  for  justification,  but  seek  after  sanctification. 
Praise  him  for  perfection  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  go  on  to  obtain  the  per- 
fect work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  have  a  cleansing  and  we  also  have 
an  unction  from  the  Holy  One  :  as  our  experience  is,  so  let  our  teach- 
ing be,  for  the  priests'  garments  taught  the  people.  We  are  to  go 
forth  as  priests,  and  declare  the  virtue  of  the  atoning  sacrifice,  but  we 
must  also  manifest  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our 
daily  lives. 

The  next  part  of  the  ceremony  was  yery  singular.  The  priests  had 
their  hands  filled.  Certain  parts  of  the  ram  were  taken,  and  "one 
loaf  of  bread,  and  one  cake  of  oiled  bread,  and  one  wafer  out  of  the 
basket  of  unleavened  bread,  which  is  before  the  Lord,"  and  all  these 
were  put  into  the  hands  of  Aaron  and  his  sons,  so  that  they  stood  with 
their  hands  full  before  the  Loi'd.  See  the  beauty  of  this,  and  pray  for 
a  complete  realization  of  it  yourself.  The  Lord  intends  to  make  you  a 
priest,  but  your  hands  are  full  of  sin.  What  have  you  to  do  ?  You 
must  lay  those  guilty  hands  on  the  sin-offering,  and  make  confession, 
and  exercise  faith  :  then  the  sin  is  gone,  being  transferred  to  another, 
and  your  hands  are  empty.  What  next?  Will  the  Lord  leave  you 
empty-handed  ?  No,  he  gives  you  somewhat  to  offer.  He  allows  you 
a  part  of  the  peace-offering  to  fill  your  hands  withal,  and  this  you 
present  before  him  as  a  wave-off'ering.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  stand 
before  God  with  your  hands  full  of  Christ.  The  service  which 
consists  in  holding  forth  Jesus  is  most  blessed.  I  love  preaching  when 
I  have  to  pi'each  Jesus  only.  Then  I  come  before  you,  not  empty- 
handed,  but  loaded  with  meat  and  bread  for  you.  How  idle  it 
is  for  us  to  stand  before  God  with  nothing  to  offer,  and  if  we  have 
not  Jesus  we  have  nothing,  or  worse  than  nothing.  We  may  also 
interpret  the  full  hands  of  the  priests  as  representing  our  being 
enriched  with  the  truth.  I  believe  it  used  to  be  a  ceremony  in 
the  English  church  that,  when  the  bishop  ordained  a  minister, 
he  always  placed  the  Bible  in  his  hands,  to  set  forth  what  he  was 
expected  to  deal  out  to  the  people.  When  the  Lord  ordains  his 
people  to  be  priests  unto  him  he  puts  the  Bible  into  their  hands,  and 
fills  their  heads  and  hearts  with  the  truth  thereof.  When  you  have 
the  inspired  word  in  your  hands,  you  have  both  meat  for  strong  men 
and  bread  for  children  ;  you  have  all  sorts  of  spiritual  food  for  all  sorts 
of  persons,  and  you  need  not  fear  that  they  will  turn  away  dissatisfied, 
they  cannot  need  more  to  feed  upon  than  the  bread  of  God's  altar  and 
the  flesh  of  God's  peace-oflPering. 

When  their  hands  were  full,  and  they  stood  at  the  altar,  it  indicated 
the  way  in  which  they  brought  to  the  Lord  all  that  they  had.  We 
cannot  act  as  priests  before  God  with  empty  hands.  "  None  of  you 
shall  appear  before  me  empty,"  is  his  command.  Has  he  given  us 
wealth  ?  Let  us  give  without  grudging,  devising  liberal  things. 
Never  neglect  weekly  storing  and  weekly  offering,  these  are  fit  parta 
of  Sabbath  worship.  Have  we  time,  talent,  influence,  let  us  consecrate 
them  all,  and  come  with  those  possessions  which  Jesus  has  lent  us,  and 
present  them  with  the  flesh  of  the  peace-offering,  and  the  sacred  oil. 

Holding  this  in  their  hands,  the  priests  had  to  wave  their  pleasant 


iHE   CONSECRATION   OF   PRIESTS.  M5 

burden  to  and  fro.  I  scarcely  know  why,  except  that  you  who  are 
God's  priests  have  not  had  your  hands  filled  that  you  may  stand  still ; 
but  that  you  may  move  them  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  that  east,  west, 
north,  and  south  may  know  the  benefit  thereof,  and  that  your  brethren 
on  either  hand  may  commune  with  you  in  your  ministering.  Every 
now  and  then  the  priests  stopped  the  horizontal  motion,  and  heaved  or 
lifted  up  their  offering,  as  if  to  say,  "  It  is  all  for  thee,  0  Jehovah. 
We  lift  it  up  into  the  presence  cf  thine  august  Majesty,  for  it  is  thine, 
and  we  are  about  to  lay  it  on  thine  altar."  Believers,  if  you  have  had 
your  hands  filled  by  God,  you  must  not  be  idle.  Your  fulness  is  meant 
for  distribution  to  God's  glory.  If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain  they 
empty  themselves  upon  the  earth ;  if  the  rivers  be  full  of  water  they 
run  into  the  sea,  and  if  God  gives  you  a  fulness,  it  is  that  you  may 
communicate  it  to  others  and  devote  it  to  himself.  Jesus  Christ 
breaks  the  bread  and  multiplies  it,  and  gives  it  to  the  disciples  to  divide 
among  the  multitude.  Many  a  man  becomes  empty  handed  because 
he  does  not  know  the  art  of  distribution.  He  has  his  hands  full  and 
cries  out,  "■  Where  shall  I  bestow  my  goods  ?  my  hands  are  full  and  I 
would  keep  it  for  myself  and  my  family."  My  brother,  wave  it  among 
your  neighbours,  lift  it  up  to  God  in  solemn  consecration,  and  then  let 
it  be  laid  upon  God's  altar,  since  for  this  purpose  you  were  called  to  be  a 
priest  unto  the  Most  High. 

Last  of  all  there  followed  a  very  pleasant  part  of  the  matter — they 
sat  down  and  feasted.  God  had  received  his  part  in  the  burning  of 
the  victim  on  the  altar,  and  now  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  to  "  eat 
those  things  wherewith  the  atonement  was  made."  You  cannot  serve 
God  without  strength;  you  cannot  have  strength  except  you  eat,  and 
you  must  be  careful  what  you  take  into  your  soul,  for  according  to  what 
your  food  is  will  your  strength  be.  The  Lord  would  have  his  people 
fed  daily  upon  Christ,  and  fed  in  the  holy  place  where  they  serve.  Christ 
is  delightful  to  God  and  is  delightful  to  you,  and  you  must  feed  on  him 
in  communion  with  God,  in  the  place  of  holy  fellowship.  There  is  no 
sustenance  for  our  inner  nature  anywhere  but  in  Jesus,  but,  blessed 
be  his  name,  no  other  sustenance  can  be  desired,  for  he  fills  us  to  the 
full,  and  gives  us  a  strength  which  is  equal  to  our  day. 

I  know  some  good  people  who  are  very  busy  indeed  in  the  services 
of  God,  and  I  am  very  delighted  that  they  should  ue,  but  1  would  cau- 
tion them  against  working  and  never  eating.  They  give  up  attending 
the  means  of  grace  as  hearers,  because  they  have  so  much  to  do  as 
workers.  That  is  very  well,  and  some  strong  men  may  be  able  to 
do  it  safely,  but  I  do  not  think  many  of  us  can  afford  to  do  with- 
out the  regular  hearing  of  the  word.  Whatever  may  be  our  zeal  to 
work  like  Martha,  we  must  also  sit  at  Jesus'  feet  like  Mary,  or  we  shall 
become  "  cumbered  with  much  serving."  The  priest  is  to  offer  sacrifice, 
but  he  must  have  time,  also,  to  feed  on  the  portion  allotted  to  him. 
How  sweet  it  is  to  enjoy  the  food  of  God,  the  flesh  of  Jesus,  the  bread 
of  heaven.  Aaron  and  his  sons  had  the  breast  and  the  shoulder  for 
their  part — the  love  of  Christ's  heart  and  the  power  of  Christ's  arm.  I 
am  thankful,  as  one  of  God's  priests,  to  have  the  shoulder  and  breast,  for 
power  and  love  are  needful  for  my  comfort  and  support.  Eli's  vile  sons 
were  wont  to  drive  a  three-pronged  hook  into  the  cauldron,  and  bring 


346  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

up  what  they  thought  the  choicer  portions,  but  my  soul  is  luore  than 
content  with  what  the  rule  of  the  house  allots  me,  in  fact,  these  are 
the  best  parts  of  the  sacrifice. 

In  closing,  I  would  call  the  attention  o'  believers  for  a  moment  to 
the  fact,  that  Aaron  and  his  sons  received  this  consecration  for  life. 
You  will  find  in  the  ninth  verse  the  words,  "  The  priests'  office  shall 
be  theirs  for  a  perpetual  statute."  "  Once  a  priest,  always  a  priest," 
is  the  rule  in  the  priesthood  to  which  we  belong.  We  abide  in  Christ, 
and  we  also  have  an  anointing  which  abideth  in  us,  for  we  have  been 
sealed  with  "that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise."  Do  not  act  at  any  time  as  if 
you  were  not  priests.  If  you  profess  to  be  the  Lord's  do  not  lie  about 
it,  let  it  be  truly  so,  and  that  every  day,  and  all  the  day,  and  in  all 
things,  for  he  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  for  ever.  Do 
not,  I  beseech  you,  dishonour  your  sacred  character. 

I  shall  ask  two  questions  inclosing.  Do  you  and  I  offer  sacrifice 
continually  ?  Unto  this  we  are  called,  according  to  the  apostle,  that 
we  should  offer  the  sacrifice  of  prayer  and  praise  continually.  To  him 
the  cherubim  continually  cry  "  Holy,  holy,  holy."  Do  we  every  day 
feel  that  our  whole  being  is  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  ? "  In  the  work- 
shop, in  the  home,  at  the  fireside,  in  the  field,  as  well  as  in  the  prayer 
meeting,  the  vows  of  God  are  upon  us  ;  we  are  a  separated  people,  and 
belong  unto  God  alone  ?     0  see  ye  to  this  ! 

What  have  you  to  offer  now  ?  Have  you  brought  an  offering  now  ? 
What  will  you  render  unto  God  for  all  his  benefits  towards  you  ? 
Is  there  nothing  to  be  done  for  Christ  this  afternoon  ?  no  sick 
one  to  be  visited,  no  poor  child  to  be  instructed,  no  backslider  to  be 
reclaimed  ?  Shall  a  single  hour  go  by  without  a  sacrifice  ?  I  charge 
you,  brethren,  continually  bring  of  your  substance,  continually  bring  of 
your  talent,  continually  bring  of  your  influence.  If  God  be  God,  and 
if  you  be  his  priests,  serve  him.  If  you  be  not  his  ordained  ones,  then 
you  live  unto  yourselves,  and  it  will  be  well  to  know  it :  anything  is 
better  than  to  be  hypocrites :  but  if  you  be  true  men  I  beseech  you  by 
the  mercies  of  God  that  ye  present  your  bodies,  your  souls,  your 
spirits  unto  God,  which  is  but  a  reasonable  service.  When  you  have 
once  for  all  made  the  consecration,  may  God  grant  you  grace  continually 
to  stand  to  it,  and  he  shall  have  the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Exodus  xxix.  1 — 37. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 411,663,878. 


THE  SIN  OFFERING. 


i 


sermon 

Delivered  on  Sunday  Morning,  March  10th,  1867,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin  according  to  the  sin  of  the  people ;  then  let 
him  bring  for  his  sin,  which  he  hath  sinned,  a  young  bullock  without  blemish,  unto 
the  Lord  for  a  sin  offering."     Leviticus  iv.  3. 

In  the  previous  chapters  of  the  book  of  Leviticus  you  read  of  the 
burnt  offering,  the  peace  offering,  and  the  meat  offering— all  types  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  seen  from  different  points  of  view.  Those 
three  sacrifices  were  sweet  savour  offerings,  and  represent  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  his  glorious  person  and  perfect  righteousness  as  an  offering  of 
a  sweet  smell  unto  God.  The  chapter  before  us,  the  whole  of  which 
we  shall  require  as  a  text,  describes  the  sin  offering,  which,  although 
quite  distinct  from  the  sweet  savour  offerings,  is  not  altogether  to  be 
separated  from  them,  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  viewed  in  any  light  is 
very  dear  unto  his  Fathc  ;  and  even  when  beheld  as  a  sin  offering  is 
elect  and  precious  unto  God,  as  we  shall  have  to  show  you  in  the 
type  before  us ;  still,  the  sin  offering  does  not  set  forth  the  acceptance 
of  the  substitute  before  the  Lord,  but  rather  brings  out  the  abhorence 
which  God  has  towards  sin,  the  putting  away  from  his  holy  presence  of 
everything  upon  which  sin  is  laid.  This  morning,  if  God  shall  enable 
us,  we  hope  to  impress  upon  your  minds,  first  of  all,  the  great  evil 
of  sin;  and  secondly,  the  great  and  wonderful  power  of  the  blood  of 
atonement  by  which  sin  is  put  away. 

Without  any  further  preface  we  shall  invite  you,  in  meditating  upon 
the  type  before  us,  first,  to  consider  our  Lord  Jesvs  as  made  sin  for  us; 
secondly,  we  shall  ask  you  to  observe,  carefully  and  prayerfully,  his  blood 
in  its  efficacy  before  the  Lord ;  and  thirdly,  we  shall  bid  you  look  at  his 
substitution  in  the  shame  which  it  involved. 

I.  First,  brethren,  let  us,  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  view  our 
BLESSED  Lord  as  made  sin  for  us,  as  he  is  here  typified  in  the 
bullock. 

1 .  His  personal  character  is  set  forth  before  us  in  the  victim  chosen, 
namely,  a  young  bullock  without  blemish.  It  was  a  bullock,  the  most 
valuable  of  the  sacrifices,  an  animal  laborious  in  life  and  costly  ia 

No.  739.  ^Q  ' 


848  METROPOLTTAN   TABRRNACI.E   PULPIT. 

death;  it  was  a  young  bullock  in  the  fulness  of  its  stren2;th  and  vigour; 
it  was  without  blemish-  and  the  slightest  fault  disqualitied  it  from  being 
laid  upon  the  altar  of  God.  Behold,  0  believer,  your  Lord  Jesus,  more 
precious  far  than  ten  thousands  of  the  fat  of  fed  beasts:  a  sacrifice 
not  to  be  purchased  with  gold,  or  estimated  in  silver.  Full  of  vigour,  in 
the  very  prime  of  manhood,  he  offered  up  himself  for  us.  Even  when  he 
died,  he  died  not  thi'ough  weakness;  for  that  ciy  of  his  at  his  death, 
"  with  a  loud  voice,"  proved  that  his  life  was  still  firm  within  liim,  aud 
that  when  he  gave  up  the  ghost,  his  death  was  not  one  of  compulsion, 
but  a  voluntary  expiring  of  the  soul.  His  glory  is  as  the  firstling  of 
the  bullock,  full  of  vigour  and  of  strength.  How  distinctly  was  our 
Lord  proved  to  be  without  blemish!  Naturally  born  without  sin, 
practically  he  lived  without  fault.  In  him  there  was  neither  defi- 
ciency nor  excess.  In  no  virtue  did  he  come  behind,  and  no  fault 
could  be  found  in  him.  The  prying  eyes  of  the  prince  of  this  world 
could  find  nothing  in  him,  and  the  still  more  accurate  search  of 
the  all-seeing  God  found  no  fault  in  him.  This  spotlessness  wa« 
necessary,  for  how  could  he  have  been  made  an  offering  for  our  sin,  if  it 
had  not  been  true  that  personally  "  he  knew  no  sin "  ?  Shall  one 
bankrupt  stand  in  the  debtors'  court  as  a  substitute  for  another? 
How  shall  one  penniless  wretch  pay  the  debt  of  another  who  is  about 
to  be  cast  into  prison  ?  If  the  king  require  service  of  any  man, 
how  shaU  another  from  whom  service  is  equally  due,  offer  himself 
as  a  substitute  for  him?  No,  the  saviour  of  others  must  have  no 
obligations  of  his  own;  he  must  owe  no  personal  debts;  there  must  be 
no  claims  on  the  part  of  justice  against  him,  on  his  own  account,  or 
he  cannot  stand  "  the  just  for  the  unjust,"  to  expiate  the  sins  of  men. 
Ye  holy  souls,  feast  your  eyes  upon  the  spotless  Son  of  God.  Ye  pure 
in  heart,  delight  your  purified  vision  with  a  sight  of  his  perfections. 
You  shall  one  day  be  like  him — this  will  be  your  heaven  ;  meanwhile, 
make  it  your  rapture,  your  paradise  on  earth,  to  gaze  upon  the  un- 
rivalled beauties  of  the  altogether  lovely.  "  In  him  was  no  sin."  In 
him  was  all  excellence.  His  body  and  soul  are  alike :  white  as  the  lily 
for  holiness,  though  made  by  suffering  red  as  the  rose.  Alabaster,  and 
bright  ivory  overlaid  with  sapphires,  are  but  dull  and  soiled  types  of  his 
purity.  Come,  ye  virgin  souls,  and  let  the  eyes  of  your  holy  love  survey 
him,  that  ye  may  see  how  fit  he  was  to  suffer  as  "  the  just  for  the  un- 
just, to  bring  us  to  God." 

The  act  of  the  transference  of  sin  to  the  victim  next  calls  for  our  atten- 
tion. You  will  have  noticed,  in  reading  the  chapter,  that  our  Lord's 
being  made  sin  is  set  forth  to  us  by  the  very  significant  transfer  of  iin 
to  the  bullock,  which  was  made  by  the  priest,  or  by  the  elders  of  the 
people,  as  the  case  might  be.  We  are  expressly  told,  "  He  shall  lay  his 
hand  upon  the  bullock's  head,"  which  act,  our  good  Dr.  Watts  has 
interpreted  in  his  well-known  verse — 

"  My  faith  would  lay  her  hand 

On  that  dear  head  of  thine, 
While  like  a  penitent  I  stand; 

And  there  confess  my  sin." 
This  laying  of  the  hand  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  mere  touch  of 
coota/^t,  but  in  some  other  places  of  Scripture  has  the  meaning  of  lean- 


THE   SIN  OFFERING.  849 

ing  heavily,  as  in  the  expression,  "  Thy  wrath  lieth  hard  upon  ine.* 
(Psalm  Ixxxviii.  7.) 

Surely  this  is  the  very  essence  and  nature  of  faith,  which  doth  nofc 
only  bring  us  into  contact  with  the  great  Substitute,  but  teaches  us  to 
lean  upon  him  with  all  the  burden  of  our  guilt ;  so  that  if  our  sins  bo 
very  weighty,  yet  we  see  him  as  able  to  bear  them  all;  and  mark,  the 
whole  weight  of  our  iniquity  taken  oflF  from  us,  who  must  have  been 
crushed  to  the  lowest  hell  thereby,  and  laid  on  him  who  took  the  weight 
and  bore  it  all,  and  then  buried  it  in  his  sepulchre  for  ever.  From  uf 
old  it  was  decreed,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 
Jehovah  made  to  meet  upon  the  head  of  the  Substitute  all  the  otfences 
of  his  covenant  people;  but  each  one  of  the  chosen  is  brought  personally 
to  ratify  this  solemn  covenant  act  of  the  great  God,  when  by  grace  he 
is  enabled  by  faith  to  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  "  Lamb  slain 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  My  fellow  believers,  do  you 
remember  that  rapturous  day?  My  soul  recalls  her  day  of  deliverance 
with  delight;  laden  with  guilt  and  full  of  fears,  I  saw  my  Saviour 
willing  to  be  my  Substitute,  and  I  laid  my  hand,  ohl  how  timidly  at 
first,  but  courage  grew  and  confidence  was  confirmed,  I  leaned  my  soul 
entirely  upon  him;  and  now  it  is  my  unceasing  joy  to  know  that  my 
sins  are  no  longer  imputed  to  me,  but  laid  on  him,  and  like  the  debts 
of  the  poor  wounded  traveller,  Jesus,  like  the  good  San^iritan,  has  said 
of  all  my  future  sinfalness,  "  Set  that  to  my  account."  Oh  1  blessed 
discovery,  sweet  solace  of  a  repenting  heart. 

"  My  numerous  sins  transferr'd  to  him, 

Shall  never  more  be  found, 
Lost  in  his  blood's  atoning  stream 

Where  every  crime  is  drown'd  !" 

"We  must  now  beg  your  notice  of  the  sins  transferred.  In  the  case  of 
the  type,  they  were  sins  of  ignorance.  Alas  I  the  Jew  knew  nothing 
about  a  sin  otfering  for  sins  of  presumption,  but  there  is  such  a  sin  offer- 
ing for  us.  Our  presumptuous  sins  were  laid  on  Christ ;  our  wilful  sins ; 
our  sins  of  light  and  knowledge,  are  pardoned  by  his  blood.  The 
mention  of  sins  of  ignorance,  suggests  a  very  comfortable  reflection,  that 
if  there  are  any  sins  which  I  know  not,  they  were,  notwithstanding  my 
ignorance,  laid  on  my  Substitute  and  put  away  by  his  atonement.  It  is 
not  sin  as  we  see  it  which  was  laid  on  Christ,  but  sin  as  God  sees  it; 
not  sin  as  our  conscience  feebly  reveals  it  to  us,  but  sin  as  God  beholds 
it,  in  all  its  unmitigated  malignity,  and  unconcealed  loathsomeness. 
Sin  in  its  exceeding  sinfulness  Jesus  has  put  away.  Not  sham  sin,  but 
real  sin;  sin  as  before  the  Lord;  sin  as  sin,  Jesus  has  made  an  end  of. 
Child  of  God,  you  will  not  misuse  this  truth  and  deny  the  need  of  repent- 
ance, for  you  well  know  that  you  cannot  practically  feel  the  power  of  this 
blood,  except  as  your  sin  is  known  to  you;  this,  indeed,  is  intimated  in  the 
type,  for,  according  to  verse  fourteen,  the  bullock  was  only  offered  when 
the  sin  was  known.  It  was  to  be  laid  by  the  elders  upon  the  head  of  the 
bullock,  when  the  sin  was  no  longer  hidden  ft-om  the  eyes  of  the  con- 
gregation. Sin  unknown,  the  sacrifice  is  unheeded.  It  is  only  as  you 
know  and  perceive  sin  that  you  can  consciously  know  and  prize  the 
atonement  by  which  it  is  taken  away.  Mark,  it  is  when  you  perceive 
sin  that  then  you  are  to  trust  the  blood;  not  when  you  perceive  holiness 


350  METROPOLITAlf   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

in  yourself,  and  goodness  and  virtue,  but  when  you  perceive  sin,  and 
iniquity,  and  defilement — it  is  then  you  are  to  lay  your  hand  upon  the 
head  of  the  great  Atoning  Sacrifice.  Jesus  is  a  sinner's  Saviour.  "  If 
any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous."  It  is  not  written,  "  If  any  man  be  holy,  he  has  an  advocate," 
but  "  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate ;"  so  that  in  all  our  sin  and 
iniquity,  blackness,  and  defilement,  when  overwhelmed  with  our  own 
vileness,  we  may  still  come  to  Christ,  and  believe  that  our  most  horible 
and  detestable  sins  were  laid  upon  him,  and  over  and  above  that  those 
sins  which  we  do  not  feel,  which  may  be  even  more  detestable,  even 
these,  and  what  is  more,  the  sinfulness  of  our  nature  itself — that  black 
and  polluted  fount  from  which  the  streams  of  our  trespasses  take 
their  rise ;  the  guilt  of  all  actual  and  original  sin  was  laid  upon  Jesus, 
and  by  him  for  ever  put  away. 

Passing  on,  still  keeping  to  the  same  point,  we  would  remark  that 
the  sin  was  laid  upon  the  bullock  most  conspicuously  "  before  the  Lord." 
Did  you  notice  the  frequent  expressions :  "  shall  bring  him  to  the  door 
of  the  congregation  before  the  Lord;"  "kill  the  bullock  before  the 
Lord;"  "  shall  sprinkle  the  blood  seven  times  before  the  Lord,  and  shall 
put  some  of  it  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense  before  the 
Lord"  ?  Clearly  the  most  important  part  of  the  sacrifice  was  not  before 
the  people,  but  before  the  Lord.  All  that  the  onlookers  outside  could 
have  seen  was  the  bullock,  when  dead,  carried  by  the  priests  without 
tlie  camp.  Some  of  them  who  came  nearer  might  have  seen  the  pouring 
of  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the  brazen  altar,  but  they  certainly  never 
did  and  never  could  see  the  priest  sprinkle  the  blood  towards  the  veil, 
nor  yet  see  him  put  it  upon  the  horns  of  the  golden  altar,  for  the  court 
of  the  priest  was  concealed  from  their  view.  We  very  much  mistake 
if  we  think  that  the  ceremonies  of  the  Jews  were  much  seen  by  the 
people.  They  were  mainly  unseen  except  by  the  priests.  The  ritual 
of  the  old  covenant  must  have  been  very  little  a  matter  of  sight ;  for  the 
Israelite,  pure  and  simple,  never  penetrated  beyond  the  first  court ;  he 
stood  before  the  brazen  altar,  but  he  never  went  further;  and  all  that 
was  done  in  the  next  cornet  of  the  priests,  and  especially  all  that  was 
done  in  the  most  holy  place,  must  have  been  entirely  a  matter  of  faith 
to  all  the  people.  The  fact  was,  the  sacrifices  were  not  so  much  for  men 
to  look  at  as  for  God  himself  to  gaze  upon,  and  though  this  may  seem 
to  you  a  strange  observation,  there  is  no  little  value  in  it.  You  wiU 
hear  men  nowadays  say  that  the  purpose  of  atonement  has  reference 
to  men,  and  not  to  God.  Depend  upon  it  there  is  a  fatal  error  in  this 
doctrine,  and  we  must  denounce  it.  Although  its  advocates  take  some 
few  expressions  of  certain  of  our  hymns,  and  pretend  to  believe  that 
we  teach  that  the  blood  placated  an  angry  God,  we  never  taught  any- 
thing of  the  kind,  and  they  know  we  never  did ;  yet  we  are  not  to  be 
frightened  into  denying  or  qualifying  our  assertion  that  the  action  of  God 
towards  man  has  been  wondrously  affected  by  the  atonement  of  Christ. 
God  the  judge  would  have  condemned  us  to  punishment  had  not  Jesus 
Buffered  in  our  stead,  so  that,  in  justice,  we  might  be  permitted  to  go 
free.  Not  only  is  man  made  willing  to  love  God  by  the  manifestation 
of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  but  it  has  become  possible  for 
"God  to  extend  the  hand  of  amity  towards  sinful  man  through  the 


THE   SIN   OFFERING.  35-1 

fttonement;  and  this  would  not  have  been  possible,  consistently  with 
the  divine  attributes,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  atoning  sacrifice. 
We  must  still  stand  to  it,  that  the  blood  is  not  merely  a  comfort  to 
the  wounded  conscience,  but  is  really  a  satisfaction  to  divine  justice ; 
a  covering,  a  propitiation,  a  mercy-seat  for  the  Most  Holy  God.  That 
is  a  striking  passage  concerning  the  Passover  and  the  destroying  angel 
in  Egypt.  Thus  spake  Jehovah,  "  When  /  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass 
over  you  ;"  not,  "  When  you  see  the  blood."  The  spared  ones  did  not 
see  the  blood  at  that  moment ;  for,  you  will  remember,  that  they  were 
all  inside  the  house  feasting  upon  the  lamb.  The  father  of  the  family 
had  put  the  blood  outside  upon  the^  lintel  and  the  side-posts,  not  for 
the  inmates  to  see,  but  for  God  to  see ;  and  so,  though  a  sight  of  the 
precious  blood,  thanks  be  to  God,  does  bring  us  faith,  and  joy,  and 
peace,  yet  the  real  work  of  our  salvation  is  not  the  effect  of  the  blood 
upon  us,  but  the  effect  of  the  blood  upon  God  himself:  not,  it  is  true, 
a  change  produced  in  God,  but  a  change  which  is  thus  produced  in  the 
action  of  divine  justice.  Apart  from  the  blood,  we  are  guilty,  con- 
demned :  washed  in  blood,  we  are  accepted  and  beloved.  Without  the 
atonement,  we  are  aliens  and  strangers,  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others ; 
but,  as  seen  in  the  eternal  covenant  purpose,  through  the  precious 
blood  of  Jesus,  we  are  accepted  in  the  beloved.  The  great  stress  of 
the  transaction  lies  in  its  being  done  "  before  the  Lord." 

Still,  further,  carefully  observe  that  as  soon  as  ever  the  sin  was  thus 
"  before  the  Lord,"  laid  upon  the  bullock,  the  hullock  was  slam.  "  He 
shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head,  and  kill  the  bullock  before 
the  Lord."  So,  in  the  fifteenth  verse,  "  The  elders  of  the  congregation 
shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  bullock  before  the  Lord, 
and  the  bullock  shall  be  killed  before  the  Lord."  Ahl  yes;  as  soon 
as  the  sin  is  transferred,  the  penalty  is  transferred  too.  Down  fell 
the  pole-axe  the  minute  that  tne  priestly  hand  had  been  laid  on  the 
bullock.  Unsheathed  was  the  bloody  knife  of  sacrifice  the  moment 
that  the  elders  had  begun  to  lean  upon  the  sacrificial  head.  So  was  it 
with  our  Saviour;  he  must  smart,  he  must  die,  for  only  as  dying 
could  he  become  our  sin  offering.  Ah!  brethren,  those  who  would 
preach  Christ,  but  not  Christ  crucified,  miss  the  very  soul  and  essence 
of  our  holy  faith.  "  Let  him  come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will 
believe  in  him,"  is  the  Unitarian  cry.  Anything  but  a  crucified  God. 
But  there,  indeed,  lies  the  secret  of  that  mystery,  and  the  very  core  and 
kernel  of  our  confidence.  A  reigning  Saviour  I  do  rejoice  in :  the 
thought  of  the  splendour  yet  to  come  makes  glad  our  eyes;  but  after 
all,  it  is  a  bleeding  Saviour  that  is  the  sinner's  hope.  It  is  to  the  cross, 
the  centre  of  misery,  that  the  sinner  turns  his  eyes  for  comfort  rather 
than  to  the  stars  of  Bethlehem,  or  to  the  blazing  sun  of  the  millennial 
kingdom.  I  remember  one  joining  this  church,  who  said,  "  Sir,  I  had 
faith  once  in  Christ  glorified,  but  it  never  gave  me  comfort:  I  have 
now  come  to  a  faith  in  Christ  crucified,  and  I  have  peace."  At  Calvary 
there  is  the  comfort,  and  there  only.  That  Jesus  lives  is  delightful ; 
but  the  basis  of  the  delight  is,  "  He  lives  who  once  was  slain."  That  he 
will  reign  for  ever  is  a  most  precious  doctrine  of  our  faith,  but  that  the 
hand  that  wields  the  silver  sceptre,  once  was  pierced,  is  the  great  secret 
of  the  joy.    0  beloved,  abide  not  in  any  place  from  which  your  eye  cannot 


352  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

behold  the  cross  of  Clirist.  Wheu  you  are  thinking  of  the  doctrines 
of  the  gospel,  or  the  precepts  of  the  Word,  or  studying  the  prophecies 
of  Scripture,  never  let  your  mind  relinquish  the  study  of  the  cross. 
The  cross  was  the  place  of  your  spiritual  birth ;  it  must  ever  be  the 
spot  for  renewing  your  health,  for  it  is  the  sanatorium  of  every  sin- 
sick  soul.  The  blood  is  the  true  balm  of  Gilead ;  it  is  the  only  catho- 
licon  which  heals  every  spiritual  disease.  Come,  sin-sick  soul,  and 
breathe  the  air  which  was  purified  when  the  blood  of  the  heart  of  Jesus 
fell  from  his  wounds  to  the  ground,  for  no  spiritual  disease  can  abide 
the  presence  of  the  healing  blood.  Hasten,  ye  weak  ones,  to  Calvary, 
and  partake  in  God-given  strength  and  vigour.  It  is  from  Calvaiy 
that  you  shall  see  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arising  with  healing  beneath 
his  wings.  The  beloved  Physician  meets  his  patients  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross,  and  relieves  them  from  all  their  ills. 

I  shall  not  ask  you  to  dwell  on  any  further  details  of  the  type,  as  they 
refer  to  the  substitution,  but  I  cannot  leave  the  topic  till  I  have  asked 
each  one  this  all-important  question :  Is  the  Lord  Jesus  made  a  sin 
offering  for  you  ?  It  is  written,  "  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us;" 
and  from  this  it  appears  that  sin  was  laid  upon  Jesus  by  God  himself; 
but  still  it  is  true  that  each  believer  by  faith  lays  his  own  sins  there, 
and  the  hymn,  "  I  lay  my  sins  on  Jesus,"  is  quite  scriptural.  Have 
yi  >u,  dear  friend,  seen  your  sins  laid  on  Jesus  ?  Has  your  faith  laid  its 
hand  upon  his  head?  My  dear  hearers,  we  shall  soon,  each  one  of  us, 
have  to  pass  through  the  vale  of  death ;  it  may  be  but  a  very  short  time 
before  some  of  us  will  know  what  are  the  solemnities  of  our  last,  depart- 
ing hour.  Are  you  ready  ? — quite  ready  ?  You  have  been  a  professor 
for  years — are  you  ready  now  to  die?  Can  you  hope  that  if  at  this 
moment  the  summons  were  given,  sitting  where  you  are,  you  are  so 
really  and  truly  resting  in  the  precious  blood,  that  sin  would  not  distu.b 
your  dying  peace,  because  it  is  forgiven  and  put  away  ?  Search  the 
ground  of  your  hope,  I  pray  you,  and  be  not  satisfied  unless  your  faith 
be  surely  built  upon  the  Rock  of  Ages.  Get  as  much  assurance  as  you 
can,  my  brethren,  but  beware  of  presumption.  I  have  seen  some  of 
those  fine  Christians  who  will  not  say — 

"  Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  thee !" 

And  I  think  very  little  of  them.  It  is  their  boast  that  no  hymns  will 
SKit  them  but  those  which  are  full  of  assurance  and  conscious  enjoy- 
ment, I  admire  their  confidence,  if  it  be  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit;  but 
I  fear,  in  many  cases,  it  is  the  offspring  of  proud,  unhumbled  self- 
conceiL.  I  know  that  when  shaking  times,  when  I  am  sore  vexed 
with  bodily  pain  and  mental  distractions,  I  am  glad  enough  to  say — 
"  Let  me  hide  myself  in  thee  ! 

Let  the  water  and  the  blood, 

From  thy  riven  side  which  flowed. 

Be  of  sin  the  double  cui-e. 

Cleanse  me  from  its  guilt  and  power !" 

Without  boasting,  I  can  declare  as  much  about  strong  faith  in  God  as 
most  men  ;  and  I  can  usually  rejoice  in  the  fullest  confidence  of  my 
acceptance  in  the  Beloved ;  but  there  are  times  with  me  of  deeply  awful 
depression  of  spirit,  and  horror  of  great  darkness ;  and  at  such  periods 


THE   SIN   OFFERING, 


353 


my  joyous  confidence  takes  the  form  of  humbly  pleading  the  blood 
once  shed  for  sinners,  and  saying,  with  a  broken  heart — 
"  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring : 
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  cling." 
It  seems  to  me,  that  humbly  resting  upon  Jesus  is  the  best  position 
for  us ;  and  I  ask  each  of  you,  very  affectionately,  whether  that  is  your 
position   at  this   present  moment  ?     Does  your  heart  rejoice  in   the 
Substitute?     Do  you  rejoice  in   the  language  of  these  two  precious 
verses  ? — 

"  When  Satan  tempts  me  to  despair, 
And  tells  me  of  the  guilt  within, 
Upward  I  look,  and  see  him  tliere 
AVho  made  an  end  of  all  my  sin. 

Because  the  sinless  Saviour  died, 
My  sinful  soul  is  counted  free : 
P"or  God,  the  Just,  is  satisfied 
To  look  on  Him,  and  pardon  me." 

II.  Let  us  turn  to  the  second  part  of  the  subject.  The  chapter  sets 
forth  before  us  the  efficacy  of  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus. 

As  soon  as  the  bullock  was  slain,  the  priest  carefully  collected  the  blood. 
The  bullock  was  slain  in  the  court  of  the  Israelites ;  see,  there  it  lies 
at  the  foot  of  the  brazen  altar,  with  the  blood  in  a  basin.  The  priest 
passes  into  the  court  of  the  priests,  passes  by  the  golden  altar  of  in- 
cense, which  stood  in  the  holy  place,  and  proceeds  to  dip  his  finger  in 
the  basin,  and  to  sprinkle  the  blood  seven  times  towards  the  veil  which 
concealed  the  holy  of  holies.  Whether  the  blood  fell  on  the  veil  or  not 
we  are  not  certain ;  but  we  have  good  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  cast 
upon  the  veil  itself.  The  veil,  of  costliest  tapestry,  would  thus  become  by 
degrees  more  and  more  like  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood.  Seven  times 
towards  the  veil  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering  was  sprinkled  by  the 
priest.  Why  did  he  begin  there  ?  It  was  to  show  that  our  communion 
with  God  is  by  blood.  The  veil  was  not  then,  of  course,  rent.  It 
showed  that  the  way  of  access  to  God  was  not  then  revealed.  The 
sprinkling  of  the  blood  showed  that  the  only  thing  that  could  open  the 
way  of  access  to  God  was  the  blood;  that  the  blood,  when  it  should  be 
perfectly  offered,  seven  times  sprinkled,  would  rend  the  veil.  The 
blood  of  Jesus  has  to  the  letter  fulfilled  the  type.  When  our  Lord  had 
sprinkled,  if  I  may  so  say,  seven  times  his  own  heart's  blood  upon  the 
veil,  he  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  "  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in 
twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom."  Beloved,  through  the  perfect 
offering  of  the  precious  blood,  we  have  access  with  boldness  into  this 
grace  wherein  we  stand ;  and  we  who  have  faith  in  that  blood  have 
intimate  communion  with  the  living  God,  and  come  near  to  his  mercy- 
seat  to  talk  with  him,  who  dwelleth  between  the  cherubim,  as  a  man 
talketh  with  his  friend.  The  priest  began  at  the  innermost  point, 
because  the  first  thing  which  a  Christian  loses  through  sin  is  communion 
with  God,  and  free  access  to  him,  and  consequently  the  first  thing  to  be 
restored  to  him  must  be  this  communion  with  his  God.  Suppose,  my 
brother,  you  backslide,  there  are  some  things  which  you  will  not  lose 
at  once.  You  will  still  be  able  to  pray  in  a  feeble  style ;  you  will  still 
have  some  sense  of  acceptance,  but  certainly  yom-  enjoyment  and 
z 


854  METROPOLIT^iX   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

fellowBhip  with  God  will  be  suspended  so  soon  as  jou  have  fallen  from 
yoiu'  first  estate.  Therefore  the  blood  is  sprinkled  upon  the  veil  to 
show  you  that  through  the  blood,  and  through  the  blood  only,  you  can 
renew  your  access.  You  advanced  Christians,  you  who  have  lived  in 
the  very  heart  of  God,  and  have  stood  hke  Milton's  angel  in  the  sun ; 
you  who  have  been  made  to  sit  at  the  banqueting  table,  and  to  drink  of 
the  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined;  you  who  have  been  the  King's 
favourites,  and,  like  Mephibosheth,  have  always  been  made  to  sit  at  the 
King's  own  table,  and  to  eat  of  the  choice  portions  of  his  dainties,  if 
you  have  lost  your  heavenly  fellowship,  it  is  through  the  blood,  and 
through  the  blood  alone,  that  you  can  again  have  access  unto  the 
heart  of  God. 

The  next  act  of  the  priest  was  to  retire  a  little  from  the  veil  to  the 
place  where  stood  the  golden  altar  of  incense,  adorned  with  four  horns 
of  gold,  probably  of  a  pyramidal  shape,  or  fashioned  like  rams'  horns, 
and  the  priest,  dipping  his  finger  in  the  basin,  smeared  this  horn  and 
the  other,  until  the  four  horns  glowed  with  crimson  in  the  liglit  of  the 
golden  candlestick.  The  horn  is  always,  in  the  oriental  usage,  indicative 
of  strength.  What  was  the  blood  put  upon  the  altar  for,  then?  That 
incense  altar  was  typical  of  prayer,  and  especially  of  the  intercession 
of  Christ ;  and  the  blood  on  the  horn  showed  that  the  force  and  power 
of  aJl-p-evailing  intercession  lies  in  the  blood.  Why  was  this  the  second 
thing  done?  It  seems  to  me  that  the  second  thing  which  a  Christian 
loses  is  his  prevalence  in  prayer.  Wliereas,  first  he  loses  communion 
with  God  when  he  backslides ;  the  next  thing  he  loses  is  his  power  in 
supplication.  He  begins  to  be  feeble  upon  his  knees ;  he  cannot  win  of 
ihe  Lord  that  which  he  desireth.  How  is  he  to  get  back  his  strength? 
Here  the  great  Anointed  Priest  teaches  us  to  look  to  the  blood  for  re- 
newed power,  for  see,  he  applies  the  blood  to  the  horns  of  the  altar,  and 
the  sweet  perfume  of  frankincense  ascends  to  heaven,  and  God  accepts 
it.  0  beloved,  think  of  this,  Christ's  intercessory  power  with  God 
lies  in  his  precious  blood,  and  your  power  and  mine  with  God  in  prayer 
must  lie  in  that  blood  too.  Oh  1  to  see  the  horns  of  that  altar  smeared  with 
blood !  How  can  you  ever  prevail  with  God  unless  you  plead  the  blood 
of  Jesus?  Believer,  if  thou  wouldst  overcome  in  prayer,  tell  the  Lord 
of  all  the  groans  of  his  dear  Son ;  never  dream  of  arguing  except  with 
arguments  fetched  from  Jesus'  wounds:  these  are  potent  pleas  with 
God — the  bloody  sweat,  the  flagellation,  the  nails,  the  spear,  the  vinegar, 
the  cross — these  must  be  the  mighty  reasons  with  which  to  overcome 
the  Infinite  One.     Let  the  altar  of  your  incense  be  smeared  with  blood. 

This  being  finished,  the  priest  goes  backwards  still  further  and  enters 
the  court  of  the  Israelites.  There  stood  the  great  altar  of  brass, 
whereon  was  consumed  the  burnt  oflTerings ;  and  now  the  priest,  having 
his  basin  full  of  the  blood  of  which  only  a  small  quantity  had  been 
used  in  sprinkling  the  veil  and  touching  the  horns  of  the  golden  altar, 
pours  the  whole  of  the  remaining  blood  in  a  great  stream  at  the  foot  of 
the  altar  of  burnt  offering.  What  does  that  typify  ?  Did  he  not  thus 
teach  us  that  the  only  ground  and  basis  (for  mark,  it  is  put  at  the  foot 
of  the  altar),  of  the  acceptance  of  our  persons  and  of  our  thank  offer- 
ings is  found  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  ?  Did  it  never  strike  you  how  the 
whole  tabernacle   must  have   been   smeared  with  blood  everywhere? 


THE   SIN   OFFERING.  355 

Blood  was  on  every  side.  The  priest  himself,  when  at  his  work,  with 
garments  on  which  showed  every  stain,  must  have  looked  as  though 
all  besmeared  with  gore.  You  could  not  look  at  his  hands  or  at  hia 
vestments  without  seeing  everywhere  blood:  indeed,  when  conse- 
crated, he  had  blood  on  his  ear,  blood  on  his  foot,  blood  on  his  hand- 
he  could  not  be  made  a  priest  without  it.  The  apostle  says,  "  Almo'st 
everything  under  the  law  was  sprinkled  with  blood."  It  was  bood, 
blood  everywhere.  Now,  this  could  have  been  very  far  from  a  plea- 
sai  t  sight,  except  to  the  spiritual  man  who,  as  he  looked  at  it,  said, 
"  What  a  holy  God  is  the  God  of  Israel  !  How  he  hates  sin  I  See,  he 
will  only  permit  sinners  to  approach  him  by  the  way  of  blood ! "  and 
then  the  enquiring  mind  would  ask,  "  What  blood  is  this  which  is  here 
intended?"  We  know  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  was  but 
the  visible  symbol  of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  the  great  Sacrifice,  whom 
God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  for  our  sins.  All  the  blood- 
marks  pointed  to  the  "  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world."  Let  us  rejoice  in  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  the  Lamb  with- 
out blemish  and  without  spot,  who  was  foreordained  from  the  founda- 
tions of  the  world,  but  was  manifest  in  these  last  days  for  us. 

Will  you  now  make  a  summary  of  what  has  been  spoken  ?  Come 
with  me  outside  the  Tabernacle.  Let  us  begin  at  the  opening  in  its 
curtains  leading  to  the  outer  court.  We  have  sinned,  and  desire  accept- 
ance with  God ;  that  must  be  the  first  blessing.  The  brazen  altar  of 
burnt  offerings  is  standing  before  us,  and  we  wish  to  offer  out  thank 
offering,  may  we  do  so?  How  can  we  be  accepted?  Look  at  the 
bottom  of  the  altar !  What  see  you  there  ?  A  pool  of  blood  all  around 
it,  as  though  the  altar  stood  in  blood  !  What  means  this  ?  Surely  the 
blood  of  Jesus  is  the  basis  of  our  acceptance  before  God,  and  here  we 
stand  as  citizens  of  heaven,  not  accursed,  but  beloved ;  not  rejected  and 
abhorred,  but  elect  and  blessed  through  the  blood  which  is  the  ground 
of  our  acceptance  as  believers  and  citizens  of  Zion.  Now  we  have  come 
so  far,  we  remember  that  we  are  not  only  citizens  of  the  new  Jerusalem, 
but  priests  unto  God,  and  as  priests  we  desire  to  enter  the  court 
of  the  priests,  and  offer  the  incense  of  praise  and  prayer.  Here  we 
stand  as  priests,  and  there  is  the  golden  altar,  but  where  is  our  power  to 
minister  before  the  Lord?  How  shall  we  approach  with  the  love  of  our 
hearts,  our  joyful  thanks,  and  our  fervent  intercessions?  Behold  the 
answer  to  our  enquiries!  Observe  with  joy  the  blood-marks  on  the  four 
horns!  It  is  not  our  prayers  that  will  be  in  themselves  prevalent,  nor 
our  praises,  nor  our  love;  but  the  blood  gives  prevalence,  acceptance, 
and  power  to  all.  Come  hither,  then,  and  let  us  lay  our  heart  itself, 
all  bleeding  upon  that  altar,  and  let  our  prayers  and  praises  rise  to 
heaven,  like  pillars  of  smoke,  accepted  through  the  blood.  But,  be- 
loved, this  is  not  all,  we  are  something  more  than  priests,  we  are 
children  of  God,  dear  to  his  heart ;  let  us,  then,  seek  fellowship  with 
our  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  How  can  we  enter  into  the  most  holy 
place  and  commune  with  the  God  who  hideth  himself?  What  is  the 
mode  of  entrance  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil  ?  We  look,  and 
lo,  the  veil  is  rent,  but  on  the  floor,  right  across  where  the  veil  was 
wont  to  hang,  we  see  a  line  of  blood,  where,  times  without  number,  the 
blood  had  been  sprinkled;  and  on  the  two  pieces  of  the  veil  through 


856  METROPOLri-AN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


II 


which  we  pass,  we  can  see  many  distinct  traces  of  blood;  yes,  and  when 
we  come  right  up  to  the  mercy-seat  we  can  see  the  blood  there  too. 
What  means  this  but  that  blood  is  the  means  of  access  to  God,  and  by 
no  other  means  is  he  to  be  approached  ?  When  we  shall  be  nearest  to 
God,  and  see  him  face  to  face,  and  dwell  with  him  in  heaven  f  )r  ever,  it 
will  be  because  Jesus  Christ  loved  us  and  died  for  us,  and  sprinkled  his 
blood  for  us,  that  we  are  permitted  to  have  this  close  and  wonderful 
communion  with  God,  which  even  angels  never  had,  for  even  they  can 
only  veil  their  faces  with  their  wings,  but  must  not  dare  to  look  upon 
God  as  we  shall  do,  when  our  eyes  shall  see  him  as  our  Father  and  our 
Friend. 

Thus  I  have  tried  to  set  forth  the  threefold  prevalence  of  the  precious 
blood,  but  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  the  blood  also  put  away  sin ;  for 
you  find  at  the  end  of  the  chapter,  "  His  sin  shall  be  forgiven."  First 
forgiven,  then  accepted,  then  prevalent  in  prayer,  and  then  admitted 
into  access  with  boldness  to  God;  what  a  chain  of  blessings  !  All,  all 
through  the  blood  of  Jesus! 

III.  Thirdly,  the  most  painful  part  of  our  sermon  remains,  while  I 
beg  you  to  view  the  shame  which  our  Lord  endured. 

While  it  is  all  so  well  for  us,  so  sweet  for  us,  I  want  you  now  to  reflect 
how  bitter,  how  shameful  it  was  for  our  Lord!  The  offerer  who  brought 
the  sin  offering  has  been  forgiven;  he  has  been  accepted  at  the  brazen 
altar ;  his  prayers  have  been  heard  at  the  golden  altar;  and  the  veil  has 
been  sprinkled  on  his  behalf:  but  what  of  the  Victim  itself?  Draw 
nigh  and  learn  with  holy  wonder.  In  the  first  place,  albeit  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  made  sin  for  us,  it  is  noteworthy  that,  though 
nearly  all  the  bullock  was  burned  without  the  camp,  there  was  one 
portion  left  and  reserved  to  be  burnt  upon  the  altar  ot  burnt  offering, 
that  was  the  fat.  Certain  descriptions  are  given  as  to  the  fat  which 
was  to  be  consumed  upon  the  altar,  by  which  we  believe  it  was  intended  to 
ensure  that  the  richest  part  of  the  fat  should  be  there  consumed.  As  much 
as  if  God  would  say,  "  Though  my  dear  Son  must  be  made  sin  for  this 
people,  and  consequently  I  must  forsake  him,  and  he  must  die  without 
the  camp,  yet  still  he  is  most  dear  and  jirecious  in  my  sight,  and  even 
while  he  is  a  sin  offering,  yet  he  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  in  himself 
I  am  stUl  well  pleased.  Brethren,  whenever  we  speak  about  our  Lord 
as  bearing  our  sins,  we  must  carefully  speak  concerning  him — not  as 
though  God  ever  did  despise  or  abhor  the  prayer  of  his  afi&icted  Son,  but 
only  seemed  to  do  so  while  he  stood  for  us,  representatively  made  sin 
for  us,  though  he  knew  no  sin.  Oh  !  I  delight  to  think  that  the  Lord 
smelled  a  sweet  savour  even  in  the  cross,  and  that  Jesus  Christ  is  tliis 
day  a  sweet  savour  unto  God,  even  as  a  sin  offering ;  the  fat,  the  ex- 
cellence of  his  heart,  the  consecration  of  his  soul,  were  acceptable  to 
God,  and  sweet  in  his  esteem,  even  when  he  laid  upon  him  the  iniquity 
of  his  people.  Still,  here  is  the  shameful  part  of  it :  the  priest  then 
took  the  bullock,  and  gathering  up  all  the  inwards,  every  part  of  it, 
the  skin^  the  dung — all  mentioned  to  teach  us  what  a  horrible  thing 
sin  is,  and  what  the  Surety  was  looked  upon  as  being  when  he 
took  our  sin — he  took  it  all  up,  and  either  himself  personally,  or 
assisted  by  others,  took  it  away  out  of  the  camp.  We  are  told  that  in 
the  wilderness,  so  large  was  the  camp,  that  it  may  have  been  the  distance 


THE   Sr:i  OFFBIUNG.  357 

i)t'  four  miles  that  this  bullock  had  to  be  carried.  I  think  I  see  the  sad 
procession :  the  priest  all  smeared  with  blood,  carrying  the  carcase  of 
the  bullock,  taking  it  right  away  down  the  long  line  of  tents,  first 
through  the  abodes  of  one  tribe  and  then  of  another,  through  the  long 
streets  of  tents,  while  the  people  stood  at  their  doors  and  saw  the 
ghastly  sight.  It  was  killed  at  the  altar  of  burnt  offering.  Why  was 
it  not  burnt  there  ?  That  altar  was  holy,  and  as  soon  as  ever  sin  was 
laid  upon  the  bullock,  it  ceased  to  be  any  longer  looked  upon  as  a  holy 
thing ;  it  could  not,  therefore,  be  burnt  in  the  holy  place,  it  must  be 
taken  right  away.  So  the  priest  carried  it  away — a  terrible  load — 
till  he  reached  the  usual  place  where  the  ashes  were  kindled,  and  he 
put  the  bullock  there,  and  heaped  the  hot  ashes  upon  it  till  the  whole 
smoked  up  to  heaven,  and  was  utterly  consumed  as  a  sin  offering.  My 
beloved,  try  if  you  can  to  grasp  the  idea  of  Jesus  being  put  away  from 
God.  I  cannot  give  you  the  thoughts,  but  if  you  could  hear  the  air 
pierced  with  the  dreadful  cry,  ^' Eloi,  Eloi,  Imna  Sabackthani?"  "  My 
Ood,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  you  would  see  Christ  put 
away  because  he  was  made  sin.  It  was  not  possible  for  God  to  look  upon 
sin,  even  when  it  was  in  Christ,  with  anything  like  complacency.  "  It 
pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  him;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief"  If  you- 
have  read  the  order  of  tlie  burnt  offering,  you  will  have  noticed  that 
when  the  bullock  of  the  burnt  offering  was  offered,  it  was  washed,  to 
show  the  perfection  of  <  hrist  as  he  is  a  sweet  savour,  all  pure  and 
clean ;  but  in  this  case  there  is  added  that  humiliating  word,  "  with 
the  dung."  What  a  humiliating  type  of  Christ !  Ah!  but  what  are 
your  sins  and  mine  that  were  laid  upon  Jesus?  How  could  our  iniqui- 
ties and  transgressions  be  better  set  forth  than  by  that  bleeding, 
mangled  mass,  which  the  high  priest  had  to  carry  out  away  from  the 
camp,  as  though  it  were  a  thing  abhorred,  which  could  not  be  endured 
in  the  camp  any  longer.  It  is  your  Saviour  made  sin  for  you  and  put 
away  on  your  behalf. 

Alter  the  removal,  they  gathered  the  hot  ashes,  they  kindled  the  fire, 
and  burnt  it  all.  See  here  a  faint  image  of  the  fire  which  consumed  the 
Saviour  upon  Calvary  !  His  bodily  pains  ought  never  to  be  forgotten, 
because  there  is  so  intimate  an  intercourse  between  physical  suffering 
and  mental  grief,  that  it  were  hard  to  draw  the  line;  but  still  the 
suffermgs  of  his  soul  must  have  been  the  very  soul  of  his  suffer- 
ings ;  and  can  you  tell  what  they  were  ?  Have  you  ever  suffered 
from  a  raging  fever  ?  Have  you  felt  at  the  same  time  the  panga 
of  some  painful  disease  ?  Has  your  mind  refused  to  rest  ?  Has 
your  brain  been  tossed  like  the  waves  of  a  sea  of  fire  within  your 
head?  Have  you  questioned  whether  you  should  lose  yom-  reason 
or  not  ?  Have  you  ever  been  near  unto  distraction  ?  Have  you 
ever  been  near  unto  the  breaking  of  the  cords  of  life?  If  so,  you 
may  guess  feebly  what  he  suffered  when  he  said,  "  My  soul  is  exceeding 
sorrowful,  even  unto  death  ;"  and  when  he  "  began  to  be  sorrowful  and 
to  Le  very  heavy."  Those  were  the  coals  of  juniper  which  were  being 
heaped  over  the  sin  offering.  As  you  see  Jesus  scourged  by  Herod  and 
by  Pilate,  and  afterwards  bleeding  on  the  accursed  tree,  you  see  the 
fire  or  divine  wrath  consuming  the  sin  ottering  because  our  sin  had 
been  laid  upon  him.    I  will  not  dwell  longer  on  this,  only  ask  the 


3f)S 


METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


Holy  Spirit  to  make  you  feel  the  shame  that  Christ  suffered  for  you. 
Sometimes  I  caunot  grasp  the  thought,  when  I  have  tried  to  think  that 
he  who  made  the  heavens,  to  whom  the  whole  blue  arch  is  but  as  a 
span,  and  the  depths  of  the  seas  as  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  should  be 
made  flesh  !  and  suffer  for  such  an  insignificant  worm  as  I  am.  That 
he  should  suffer,  however,  never  amazes  me  so  much  as  that  he  should 
bear  my  siu.  Oh  !  marvellous!  The  angels  say,  "  Holy !  Holy !  Holy  ! 
Lord  God  of  Sabaoth!"  What  could  they  have  said  when  he,  whom  they 
hymned  as  "  glorious  in  holiness,"  bowed  his  head  and  gave  up  the 
ghost,  because  "made  sin  for  us"?  Blessed  Son  of  God!  where  we 
cannot  understand  we  will  adore. 

The  apostle  Paul  suggests  to  us  the  most  practical  conclusion  of  our 
sermon.  He  tells  us  that  as  our  Saviour,  having  given  his  blood  to  be 
sprinkled  within  the  Tabernacle  for  us,  was  then  taken  without  the 
camp,  so  it  is  our  duty,  ay,  and  our  privilege,  to  go  forth  unto  him 
without  the  camp  also,  bearing  his  reproach.  You  hare  heard  how  he 
was  reproached  for  you :  are  you  unwilling  to  be  reproached  for  him  ? 
You  have  heard  how  he  went  without  the  camp  in  that  shameful 
manner :  are  you  unwilling  to  go  without  the  camp  for  him  ?  Too 
many  Christians  try  to  be  Christians  in  the  camp,  and  it  cannot  be 
done.  "  Be  not  cooformed  to  this  world,  but  be  ye  transformed  by 
the  renewing  of  your  minds."  There  is  so  much  of  worldly  con- 
formity among  us;  but  the  promise  is  not  to  worldly-minded 
Christians,  but,  "Come  ye  out  from  among  them;  be  ye  separate; 
touch  not  the  unclean  thing;  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  will  be  a 
Father  unto  you."  How  much  we  lose  by  affinities  with  the  world ! 
How  much  of  distance  there  is  between  us  and  God,  because  of  the 
nearness  there  is  between  us  and  the  world !  Come  out,  ye  lovers  of 
the  Saviour,  and  tread  the  separated  way  which  your  Saviour  trod 
before  you  ! 

And  now,  should  there  be  any  here  who  are  unsaved,  I  should  not 
wonder  but  what  some  of  them  will  make  the  remark,  the  almost,  nay, 
the  quite  profane  remark,  ""UHiy,  he  spoke  so  much  of  blood!"  Ah! 
sinner,  and  we  had  need  to  speak  much  of  it  to  you,  for  it  is  your  only 
hope.  God  will  either  have  your  blood  or  Chrisfs  blood,  one  of  the 
two.  If  you  reject  Christ,  you  shall  perish  in  your  sin.  "  The  blood  is 
the  life  thereof,"  says  the  Word  of  God;  and  your  life  must  be  taken 
unless  Christ's  life  shall  avail  for  you.  The  very  heart  of  Christ  was 
broken  to  find  out  the  way  to  save  a  sinner ;  and,  sinner,  there  is  no 
other ;  if  you  refuse  the  purple  road,  you  shall  never  reach  the  pearly 
gate.  Trust  in  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Dost  thou  doubt?  How  canst 
thou?  Is  there  not  efficacy  enough  in  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  to 
take  away  sin?  Dost  thou  contradict  God's  declared  truth?  "  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Oh !  believe 
it,  and  cast  thy  soul  upon  it,  and  we  will  meet  within  the  veil,  one  of 
these  days,  to  sing,  "  To  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our 
Bins  in  his  own  blood  ...  to  him  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever."     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scrlpture  read  before  Sermon — Lev.  iv.  1 — 21; 
Heb.  xiii.  10—15. 


THE  SIN-OFFERING  FOR  THE  COMMON  PEOPLE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's  Day  Morning,  April  28th,  1872,  by 

C.   H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THK   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NBWINGTON. 


*  And  if  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin  through  ignorance,  while  he  doeth  some- 
what against  any  of  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  concerning  things  which  ought 
not  to  be  done,  and  be  guilty  ;  or  if  his  sin,  which  he  hath  sinned,  come  to  his  know- 
ledge :  then  he  shall  bring  his  oflFering,  a  kid  of  the  goats,  a  female  without  blemish, 
for  his  sin  which  he  hath  sinned.  And  he  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  sin 
ofieri;)g,  and  slay  the  sin  offering  in  the  place  of  the  burnt  ofi'ering.  And  the  priest 
shall  take  of  the  blood  thereof  with  his  finger,  and  put  it  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar 
of  burnt  offeiing,  and  shall  pour  out  all  the  blood  thereof  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar. 
And  he  shall  take  away  all  the  fat  thereof,  as  the  fat  is  taken  awaj'  from  off  the 
sacrifice  of  peace  offerings  ;  and  the  priest  shall  burn  it  upon  the  altar  for  a  sweet 
savour  unto  the  Loid;  and  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  him,  and  it  shall 
be  forgiven  him." — Leviticus  iv.  27 — 31. 

Very  much  of  interesting  truth  dusters  around  the  sin-oiFering.  The 
type  is  well  worthy  of  the  most  careful  consideration,  and  I  regret  that 
we  shall  not  have  time  this  morning  to  enter  into  all  its  details.  The 
reader  of  the  chapter  will  perceive  that  it  gives  us  four  forms  of  the  same 
sacrifice.  Tliese  may  be  regarded  as  four  views  of  the  same  thing,  pro- 
bably views  taken  by  four  classes  of  believers,  according  to  their  standing 
in  th.e  divine  life;  for,  although  all  men  who  are  saved  have  the  same 
Saviour,  they  have  not  the  same  apprehensions  of  him.  We  are  all 
cleansed,  if  cleansed  at  all,  by  the  same  blood,  but  we  have  not  all  the 
same  knowledge  of  the  manner  in  which  it  is  effectual  for  cleansing. 
The  devout  Hebrew  had  but  one  sin-offering,  but  that  was  set  forth  to 
him  under  varying  symbols. 

The  following  remarks  may  aid  you  in  understanding  the  type  before 
us.  The  chapter  begins  with  the  sin-offering  for  the  anointed  priest, 
and  describes  it  with  the  fullest  detail.  It  then  proceeds,  in  the 
thirteenth  verse  and  onwards,  to  give  the  sin-offering  for  the  whole 
congregation,  and  it  is  most  notable  that  the  sin-ofiFering  for  the  anointed 
priest  is  almost  in  every  circumstance  identical  with  the  sin-offViring  for 
the  whole  congregation.  Is  not  this  designed  to  show  to  us  that  when 
Christ,  our  anointed  priest,  took  upon  him  the  sin  of  all  the  congrega- 
tion of  God's  chosen  as  his  own,  there  was  demanded  of  him  the  same 
expiation  and  atonement  as  would  have  been  demanded  of  hi*  peoplft 
No.  1,048.  -, 


360  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

had  ihey  been  reckoned  with  in  their  own  persons  ?  His  atonement  for 
sins  which  were  not  his  own,  but  which  were  laid  upon  iiim  by  the  Lerd 
on  our  behalf,  is  equivalent  to  the  penalty  which  would  have  been 
required  of  all  the  congregation  of  believers  for  whom  his  blood  was 
es|>ecially  shed.  This  is  a  memorable  lesson,  which  ought  not  to  be 
forgotten.  We  ought  to  see  herein  the  inestimable  value  of  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ,  by  which  the  many  offences  of  a  number  that  no  man  can 
number  are  for  ever  put  away.  There  was  given,  in  the  death  of  our 
Lord,  as  full  a  recompense  to  justice  as  if  all  the  redeemed  had  been  sent 
into  hell ;  nay,  the  truth  goes  far  further  than  that,  they  could  not  have 
made  a  complete  expiation,  for  even  had  they  suffered  for  sin  for 
thousands  of  years,  the  debt  would  "still  be  paying,  never  paid." 
Glory  be  to  the  name  of  our  great  Substitute,  he  by  his  sin  offering 
hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  set  ai)art. 

In  the  case  of  the  sin-offering  for  the  priest  we  have  a  fuller  picture 
of  the  atonement  than  is  offered  by  the  two  latter  instances,  and  you 
will  please  to  note  that  the  sin-offering  was  a  victim  without  blemish. 
In  the  first  two  cases  a  bullock  was  to  be  slain.  Thus  the  most  precious 
animal  the  Hebrew  owned,  the  noblest,  the  strongest,  the  image  of 
docility  and  labour,  was  to  be  presented  to  make  atonement.  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  like  the  firstling  of  the  bullock,  the  most  precious 
thing  in  heaven,  strong  for  service,  docile  in  obedience,  one  who  was 
willing  and  able  to  labour  for  our  sakes ;  and  he  Wiis  brought  as  a  perft^ct 
victim,  without  spot  or  blemish,  to  suffer  in  our  stead.  The  priest 
slew  the  bullock,  and  its  blood  was  poured  forth  ;  for  withoat 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission.  The  vital  point  of  the 
atonement  of  Christ  lies  in  his  death.  However  much  his  life  may  have 
contributed  to  it,  and  we  are  not  among  those  who,  in  the  matter  of 
salvation,  separate  his  life  from  his  death  by  a  hai'd  and  fast  line,  yet 
tlie  great  point  of  the  putting  away  of  human  guilt  was  the  Lord's 
obedience  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  The  victim  was 
slain,  and  so  the  atonement  was  made.  Returning  to  the  passage 
before  us,  we  find  that  the  blood  of  this  victim  was  taken  into  the  holy 
place,  which  was  immediately  outside  the  sacred  vail  of  the  sanctuary ; 
and  there  the  priest  dipped  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and  sprinkled 
of  the  blood  seven  times  before  the  Lord,  before  the  vail  of  the 
sanctuary.  So  in  making  atonement  for  sin  there  is  a  perfect  exhibi- 
tion of  the  blood  of  Jesus  before  the  Lord.  That  life  has  been  given 
for  life  is  openly  proved  where  alone  the  proof  is  available.  Before 
the  offended  Lord  the  vicarious  deatli  is  thoroughly  exhibited;  for  was 
it  not  written  of  old  in  the  book  of  Exodus,  "  When  I  see  the  blood  I 
will  pass  over  you."  Our  sight  of  the  blood  Christ  gives  us  peace,  but 
it  does  not  make  the  satisfaction  ;  it  is  God's  sight  of  the  blood  which 
makes  the  atonement  ;  and,  therefore,  seven  times  before  the  vail 
was  this  blood  exhibited  before  the  Lord,  that  a  perfect  atonement 
might  be  made. 

The  next  thing  the  priest  did  was  to  go  up  to  the  golden  altar  of 
incense,  which  stood  hard  by  the  vail,  and  to  put  some  of  the  blood 
upon  each  one  of  the  horns,  indicating  that  it  is  the  blood  of  the 
atonement  which  gives  power  (for  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  horns)  to 
intei-cession.    The  sweet  perfume  of  the  altar  of  incense  stands  for  the 


THE   SIN-OFFERING    FOR  THE  COMMON   PEOPLE.  361 

prayers  and  praises  of  the  saints,  and  especially  for  the  intercession  of 
Christ  Jesus  ;  and,  because  the  blood  is  there,  therefore,  Christ's  inter- 
cession is  heard;  and,  therefore,  our  prayers  and  praises  come  up  with 
acceptance  before  the  Lord. 

Then  the  priest  removed  to  the  brazen  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice,  and 
all  the  blood  which  remained  he  poured  out  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar 
of  the  burnt  offering  which  stood  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the 
conoregation.  Full  bowls  of  blood  encrimsoned  the  base  of  the  altar. 
Blood  was  seen  on  every  side,  on  the  vail,  on  the  golden  altar,  and  now 
upon  the  altar  of  brass.  Within  and  without  the  holy  place  but  one 
voice  was  heard,  the  voice  of  the  blood  of  atonement  crying  to  God  for 
peace.  The  whole  tabernacle  must  have  been  almost  at  all  times  so 
smeared  with  blood  as  to  have  been  far  from  pleasant  to  the  eye,  and 
this  was  intended  to  teach  to  Israel,  tliat  God's  anger  against  sin  is 
terrible,  and  that  the  dishonoured  law  will  be  satisfied  with  nothing 
less  than  the  giving  of  life  for  life,  if  sinners  are  to  be  saved.  The  altar 
of  burnt  ofl'erings  was  the  altar  of  acceptance,  it  was  the  place  where 
those  sacrifices  were  presented  in  which  there  was  no  mention  of  sin, 
but  which  were  brought  as  thanksgivings  to  God.  Therefore,  as  much 
as  to  teach  us  that  the  very  ground  and  foundation  of  the  acceptance 
of  the  Christian,  and  his  offering,  lies  in  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  ; 
full  bowls  of  blood  were  poured  upon  the  base  of  the  altar.  See  what 
wonders  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  can  do,  it  is  the  strength  of 
intercession  and  the  foundation  of  acceptance. 

From  the  bullock  which  had  been  slain  certain  choice  pieces  were 
taken,  and  especially  the  inward  fat,  and  these  were  laid  upon  the  altar 
and  consumed,  to  show  us  that  even  while  the  Lord  Jesus  was  a  sin- 
offerinjj  he  was  still  accepted  of  God,  and  though  his  Father  forsook 
him  so  that  he  cried  out,  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  he  was  still 
a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord  in  the  obedience  which  he  rendered. 

But,  the  most  significant  part  of  the  wiiole  sacrifice  remains  to  be 
described,  and  you  will  notice  that  it  is  only  described  in  the  first  two 
forms  of  the  sin-oflFering.  The  priest  was  not  allowed  to  burn  the 
bullock  itself  upon  the  altar,  hut  he  was  commanded  to  take  up  the 
whole  carcase,  its  skin,  flesh,  head,  and  everything,  and  carry  the  whole 
forth  without  the  camp.  It  was  a  sin-off'ering,  and  therefore  it  was 
loathsome  in  God's  sight,  and  the  priest  went  right  away  from  the  door 
of  the  tabernacle,  past  all  the  tents  of  the  children  of  Israel,  bearing 
this  ghastly  burden  upon  him ;  went,  I  say,  right  away,  till  he  came  to 
the  place  where  the  ashes  of  the  camp  were  poured  out,  and  there,  not 
upon  an  altar,  but  on  wood  which  had  been  prepared,  upon  the  bare 
ground ;  every  single  particle  of  the  bullock  was  burned  with  fire.  The 
distance  the  bullock  was  carried  from  camp  is  said  to  have  been  four  miles. 
The  teaching  of  which  is  just  this,  that  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
took  the  sin  of  his  people  upon  liiniself,  he  could  not,  as  a  substitute, 
dwell  any  longer  in  the  place  of  the  divine  favour,  but  had  to  be  put 
into  the  place  of  separation,  and  made  to  cry,  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama 
sabachthani  ? "  Paul  in  his  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  puts  the  matter 
clearly,  "  For  the  bodies  of  those  beasts,  whose  blood  is  brought  into 
the  sanctuary  by  the  high  priest  for  sin,  are  burned  without  the  camp. 
Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify  the  people  with  his  own 


362  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

blood,  suffered  without  the  pale.''  Outside  Jerusalem  our  Lord  was 
led  to  the  common  place  of  dooni  for  malefactors,  for  it  is  written  (and 
oh,  the  power  of  those  words  I  dare  not  liave  uttered  them  if  they  had 
not  been  inspired),  "He  was  male  a  curse  for  us.  for  it  is  written, 
cursed  is  every  one  that  hmigeth  on  a  tree."  The  blessed  Son  of  God 
was  made  a  curse  for  us  and  put  lo  an  accursed  death,  by  beinfj  gibbeted 
upon  the  cross,  and  all  because  sin  anywhere  is  hateful  to  God,  and  he 
must  treat  it  with  indignation.  The  fire  of  divine  justice  fell  upon  our 
blessed  sin  offering  until  he  was  utterly  consurae<l  with  anguish,  and  he 
said,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  Now,  this  is  the  only 
way  of  the  putting  away  of  sin :  it  is  laid  upon  another,  that  other  is 
made  to  suffer  as  if  the  sin  belonged  to  him,  and  then,  since  sin  cannot 
be  in  two  places  at  once,  and  cannot  be  laid  upon  another  and  rest  upon 
the  offerer  too,  the  offerer  becomes  clear  from  all  sin,  he  is  pardoned  and 
he  is  accepted  because  his  substitute  has  been  slain  without  the  camp 
instead  of  him.  I  have  thus  introduced  to  you  the  first  two  forms  of 
the  sin-offering.     It  seemed  necessary  to  begin  there. 

The  third  form  of  the  sin-offering  was  for  a  ruler,  a  person  of  consider- 
able standing  in  the  camp.  There  is  nothing  very  remarkable  about  that 
third  form  which  need  now  detain  us  ;  we,  therefore,  come  to  the  subject 
in  hand.     The  sin  offering  for  a  common  person. 

I.  And,  here,  we  will  begin  our  discourse  upon  the  text  itself  by 
speaking  of  the  person,  a  common  person.  It  gives  me  unspeakable  joy 
to  read  these  words,  "  If  anv  one  of  the  common  people  sin,"  for  which 
one  of  the  common  people  does  not  sin  ?  The  text  reminds  me  that  if 
a  common  person  sin  his  sins  will  ruin  him  ;  he  may  not  be  able  to  do  so 
much  mischief  by  his  sin  as  the  ruler  or  a  public  officer,  but  his  sin 
has  all  the  essence  of  evil  in  it,  and  God  will  reckon  with  him  for  it. 
No  matter  how  obscurely  you  may  live,  however  poor  and  unlettered 
you  maj  be,  your  sin  will  ruin  you,  if  not  pardoned  and  put  away.  If 
one  of  the  common  people  sin  through  ignorance,  his  sin  is  a  damning 
sin,  he  must  have  it  put  away,  or  it  will  pat  him  away  for  ever  from 
the  face  of  God.  A  common  person'' s  sin  can  only  be  removed  by  an  atone- 
ment of  blood.  In  this  case  you  see  the  victim  was  not  a  bullock,  it 
was  a  female  of  the  goats  or  of  the  sheep,  but  still  it  had  to  be  an 
oflfering  of  blood,  for  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission. 
However  common-place  your  offences  may  have  been,  however  insignifi- 
cant you  may  be  yourself,  nothing  will  cleanse  you  but  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ.     That  verse  is  quite  correct — 

"  Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know, 
Could  my  tears  for  ever  flow, 
All  for  sin  could  not  atone : 
Christ  must  save,  and  Christ  alone." 

It  is  true  the  sins  of  great  men  cover  a  larger  space,  but  yet  there 
must  be  a  bloody  sacrifice  for  the  smallest  offences.  For  the  sins  of  a 
housewife  or  of  a  servant,  of  a  peasant,  or  of  a  crossing-sweeper,  there 
must  be  the  same  sacrifice  as  for  the  sins  of  the  greatest  and  most 
influential.  No  other  atonement  will  suffice,  the  sins  of  tlie  common 
people  will  destroy  them  unless  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  shall  cleanse 
them.     But  here  is  the  point  of  joy,  that  for  the  common  people  there 


THE    SIN-OFFERING    FOR    THE   COMMON   fHOPLE.  868 

iras  an  atonement  ordained  of  God.  Glory  be  to  God  I  may  be  unknown 
to  men,  but  I  am  not  unthought  of  by  him.  I  may  be  merely  one  of 
the  many,  but  still  he  has  thought  of  me.  As  each  blade  ol  grass 
has  its  own  drop  of  dew,  so  each  guilty  soul  coming  to  Christ  shall 
find  an  atonement  for  itself  in  Christ.  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  it  is  not  written  that  there  is  a  sacrifice  for  the  great  ones  of  the 
earth  alone,  but  for  the  common  people  there  is  a  sin-offering,  so  that  each 
man  coming  to  the  Saviour  finds  cleansing  througli  his  precious  blood. 

Observe  with  thankfulness  that  the  sacrifice  appoinled  lor  the  common 
people  was  as  much  accepted  as  that  appointed  for  the  ruler.  Of  the 
ruler,  it  is  said,  "  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  him  as  con- 
cerning his  sin,  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him."  Tiie  same  thing  is  said 
of  the  common  person.  Christ  is  as  much  accepted  for  the  poorest 
of  his  people  as  for  the  richest  of  them.  He  as  much  saves  the  un- 
known as  lie  does  the  apostolic  names  of  high  renown.  They  need  the 
sacrifice  of  blood,  but  they  need  nothing  more,  and  the  blood  which 
pleads  before  the  thione  of  God  speaks  as  well  for  the  least  as  it  does 
for  the  chief  of  the  flock. 

Come  hither,  then,  ye  who  belong  to  the  common  people,  if  any  of 
you  have  sinned,  come  at  once  to  Jesus  the  great  sin-offering.  Though 
ye  are  common  in  rank,  know  ye  not  that  the  common  people  heard 
him  gladly.  Publicans  and  sinners  pressed  artiund  him  to  hear  him. 
Though  ye  are  but  commoners  in  your  wealth,  possc^smg  little  of  this 
world's  goods,  yet,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money  and  with- 
out price.  Common  in  your  talents  and  in  your  gifts,  yet  he  bids  you 
come,  for  these  things  are  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent.  It  is  not  for 
those  who  think  iheniselves  distinguished  that  he  has  especially  laid 
down  his  li'e,  but  "  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them,"  and  in 
their  salvation  he  will  be  glorified. 

Mark,  it  says,  "  If  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin  through  ignor- 
ance, or  if  his  sin  which  he  hath  sinied  con  e  to  his  kiiowkdge,  then 
he  shall  bring  his  offering."  Has  it  suddenly  come  to  the  knowledge  of 
any  person  here  that  he  has  sinned  as  he  thought  he  had  not  sinned  ? 
Has  some  fresh  light  broken  in  upon  you  and  revealed  to  you  your 
darkness  ?  Did  you  come  to  this  house  depressed  in  spirit  because 
you  have  discovered  that  you  are  guilty  and  must  perish,  unless  the 
mercy  of  God  prevent  you  ?  Then,  come  ye  common  people  who  have 
discovered  your  sin,  and  bring  your  sacrifice.  Nay,  it  is  here  already 
for  you.  Come  and  accept  the  sacrifice  which  God  provides,  and  let  your 
sin  be  for  ever  put  away. 

I  wish  the  words  of  the  text  could  provoke  the  same  feelings 
in  every  heart  that  they  do  in  mine,  (<>r  I  could  fain  stand  here  and 
weep  my  soul  away  in  joy  that  for  the  common  people's  sin  there 
should  be  a  sacrifice,  for  I  can  put  my  name  down  amongst  them.  I 
have  sinned,  I  have  come  to  the  knowledge  of  my  sin,  and  I  thank 
God  I  need  not  ask  myself  any  other  question,  be  I  who  I  may  or  what 
I  am,  though  but  one  of  the  common  people,  there  is  a  sin-offering  for 
me. 

II.  Now,  pass  on  from  the  person  to  the  sacrifice  "  He  shall  bring 
his  offering,  a  kid  of  the  goats,  a  female  without  blemish,  for  his  sin 
which  he  hath  sinned." 


361  METROPi'LITAN   TABP^RXACLT^    PUT.PIT. 

Observe  first,  rav  breLhren,  that  Lliei-e  is  a  discrppancy  between  the 
type  and  the  reality,  foi-  first  the  dii-nffcring  under  the  law  was  only 
for  sins  of  ignorance.  But,  we  have  a  far  better  sacrifice  for  sin  than 
that,  for  have  we  not  read  in  your  hearint^  this  morning  those  precious 
words,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin,"  not  from  sins  of  ignorance  only,  but  from  all  sin.  Oh,  that 
blessed  word  "  all."  It  includes  sins  of  knowledge,  sins  against  the 
light  and  love  of  God,  sins  wantonly  perpetrated,  sins  against  man  and 
against  God,  sins  of  body  and  of  soul,  sins  of  thought  and  word  and 
deed,  sins  of  every  rank  and  character,  "  sins  immense  as  is  the  sea" — 
all,  all  are  removed  ;  no  matter  what  they  be,  "  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Yet  do  I  bless  God  that  the 
type  deals  with  sins  of  ignorance,  because  we  may  get  a  gospel  out  of 
it.  We  have  committed  many  sins  which  we  know  not  of.  They  have 
never  burdened  our  conscience  because  we  have  not  yet  discovered  them ; 
and,  besides,  we  do  not  know  them  to  be  sins;  but  Clirist  takes  those 
sins  too,  and  prays,  '  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do."  "Cleanse  thou  me,"  said  David,  " from  secret  foults,"  and 
that  is  just  what  Jesus  does.  It  used  to  be  a  doctrine  of  the  church  of 
Rome  that  no  man  could  have  a  sin  forgiven  which  he  did  not  confess. 
Truly,  if  it  were  so,  there  would  be  no  salvation  for  any  of  us,  since  it 
is  not  possible  for  the  memory  to  charge  itself  with  the  recollection  of 
every  sin,  nor  for  the  conscience  to  become  so  perfect  as  to  take  cog- 
nizance of  every  form  of  transgression.  But,  while  we  ought  to  contests 
to  God  all  sins  which  we  know;  and,  while  we  should  confess  them  as 
much  as  can  be  in  detail,  yet,  if  through  ignorance  they  remain  unacknow- 
ledged, except  in  the  gross  and  the  bulk,  Jesus  Christ,  the  sin-oflering, 
bears  our  sins  of  ignorance,  sins  which  we  knew  not  to  be  sins  when  we 
committed  them,  or  which  we  still  know  not  to  l)e  sins.  He  takes  them 
away ;  it  must  be  so,  for  he  "  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  " — sins  of 
ignorance,  as  well  as  sins  against  light  and  knowledge.  Now,  whut 
comfort  there  is  here  for  all  \ou  of  the  common  people;  be  your  sins 
what  they  may,  there  is  a  sin-offering  which  takes  away  all  sin  from  you. 
However  ye  may  have  defiled  yourselves,  though  ye  be  black  as  night 
and  hideous  as  hell,  yet  is  there  power  in  the  atoning  blood  of  the 
incarnate  God  to  make  you  white  as  newly-fallen  snow.  Washed  once 
in  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness,  there  shall  remain 
ujon  you  no  trace  of  guilt. 

Note  another  discre]  ancy,  that  the  sinner  of  the  common  people  in  this 
case  had  to  bring  his  sacrijice — "  he  shall  bring  his  offering,"  But  our 
sin-offering  has  been  provided  for  us.  You  remember  the  question 
of  Isaac  to  his  father  Abraham,  as  they  went  up  Moriah  ;  he  said 
to  him,  "  My  father,  behold  the  fire  ajid  the  wood,  but  where  is  the 
lamb  for  the  burnt-offering  ?  "  and  Abraham  said,  "  My  son,  God  will 
provide  himself  a  lamb."  Isaac's  enquiry  might  have  been  the  eternal 
question  of  every  troubled  heart.  "  0  God,  where  is  the  lamb  for  the 
burnt-offering?"  Who  will  bear  human  sin?  But  Jehovah  Jikeh. 
God  hath  provided  himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering  and  a  sin-offering 
too,  and  now  we  have  not  to  bring  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  but  have  simply 
to  take  what  God  provided  from  before  the  foundations  of  the  world. 

Now,  let  us  notice  that  in  the  type  the  victim   chosen  for  a  sin- 


THE   SIN-OFFERING   FOR   THE   COMMON   PEOPLE.  865 

offering  vmfi  unhlemished ;  whether  it  was  a  gjoat  or  a  sheep,  it  must  be 
unlilemished.  How  could  Christ  make  an  atonement  for  sins  if  he  had 
had  sins  of  his  own.  Had  he  been  guilty,  it  would  have  required  that 
he  should  snflFer  for  his  own  guilt.  But,  being  under  no  obligation 
whatever  to  the  law  of  God,  except  such  as  he  voluntarily  undertook, 
when  he  had  rendered  obedience  he  bad  an  obedience  to  give  away,  and 
he  has  graciously  bestowed  it  upon  us.  When  he  suffered,  his  suffering 
not  being  due  to  God  on  account  of  anything  that  he  had  personally 
done,  he  had  so  much  of  suffering  to  spare,  and  he  has  transferred  it  to 
us.  The  immaculate  Christ  has  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he 
might  bring  us  to  God.  This  is  full  of  comfort,  for  if  you  will  study, 
0  seeking  soul,  the  perfect  character  of  your  blessed  Lord  as  God  and 
as  man,  and  see  how  fairer  than  the  lilies  is  he  in  matchless  purity,  you 
will  feel  that  if  he  suffered,  there  must  be  in  such  suffering  a  merit  un- 
speakable, which  being  transferred  to  you,  can  save  you  from  the  wrath 
to  come.     In  the  dear  Eedeemer  we  have  an  unblemished  sacrifice. 

But,  I  do  not  understand,  and,  therefore,  cannot  explain  why  the 
victim  was  a  female  in  this  case,  for  most  of  the  sacrifices  were  males  of 
the  first  year,  but  this  is  peculiar  in  being  a  female.  Is  it  because  there 
is  neither  male  nor  female,  bond  nor  free,  but  all  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus  ? 
Or,  am  I  wrong  if  I  conjecture  that  this  was  intended  to  typify  a  view  of 
Christ  taken  by  one  of  the  common  people,  and  therefore  it  is  purposely 
made  incomplete  ?  It  is  an  incomplete  view  of  Christ  to  have  before 
you  the  fema'!'  as  the  type,  and  tli,!  type  is  pi  r|!Osely  m.-ide  incomplete 
in  order  that  tiiis  truth  may  be  belore  us, — th  it  while  a  complete  view 
of  Christ  is  very  comforting,  instructive,  and  strengthening,  yet  even 
an  imperfect  view  of  him  will  save  us  if  accompanied  by  real  faith.  If 
we  should  make  a  mistake  upon  some  point,  yet,  if  we  are  clear  upon 
the  main  truth  of  his  substitution,  it  is  well  with  us.  On  pur[)ose, 
then,  it  seems  to  me,  that  a  victim  was  introduced  which  did  not  with  ' 
exactness  set  forth  Christ,  that  the  Lord  might  say  to  his  people  and  to 
us,  "  You  have  not  reached  the  perfect  conception  of  my  dear  Son, 
but  even  an  imperfect  apprehension  of  him  will  save  you,  it'  you  believe 
in  him."  Who  among  us  knows  much  of  Clirist  ?  Oh,  brethren,  we 
know  enough  to  make  our  hearts  love  liira ;  we  know  enough  of  him  to 
make  us  feel  that  we  owe  all  to  him,  and  we  desire  to  live  for  his 
glory;  but,  he  is  far  greater  than  our  greatest  thoughts.  We  have 
only  skirted  the  shores  and  navigated  the  little  bays  and  creeks  of 
Clirist ;  we  have  not  sailed  out  into  the  main  ocean,  nor  fathomed  the 
great  deeps  as  yet.  Yet  what  little  we  know  of  him  has  saved  us,  and 
for  his  dear  sake  we  are  forgiven  and  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Does- 
not  the  Lord  seem  to  say  to  us,  "Poor  souls,  you  have  misconceived 
my  Son,  and  made  many  mistakes  about  him,  but  you  do  trust  him, 
and  I  save  you."  A  certain  woman  thought  ihat  there  was  power  in 
the  hem  of  Jesus'  garment  to  make  her  whole.  She  was  mistaken  in 
imagining  that  there  was  a  healing  efficacy  in  his  dress,  but  since  it 
was  a  mistake  of  faith,  and  reflected  honour  upon  Christ,  the  Lord 
made  it  true  to  her ;  he  made  virtue  go  out  of  nimself  even  into  the 
skirts  of  his  garments  for  her  sake.  And  so,  though  we  may  err  here 
and  err  there  in  I'eference  to  our  Lord,  yet,  if  our  soul  does  but  cling  to 
him  like  a  child  to  its  mother,  knowing  little  of  its  mother  except  that 


866  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

its  mother  loves  it,  and  that  it  is  dependent  upon  her,  that  clinging 
will  be  saving. 

But,  the  main  point  about  the  sacrifice  was,  it  was  slain  as  a  subsfifufe. 
There  is  nothing  said  about  its  being  taken  outside  the  camp — I  do  not 
think  it  was  in  this  case  :  all  that  the  offerer  knew  was,  it  wa^  sliin  as  a 
substitute.  And,  dear  hearers,  all  and  everything  that  is  essential  to 
know  in  order  to  be  saved  is  to  know  that  you  are  a  sinner  and  that 
Christ  is  your  subscitute.  I  beseech  the  Lord  to  teach  every  one  of  us 
this,  for  though  we  should  go  to  the  University  and  learn  all  knowlelge, 
though  we  should  ransack  all  the  stores  of  learning,  unless  we  know 
this, — "  He  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me,"  we  have  not  learned 
the  very  first  principles  of  a  true  education  for  eternity.  God  gives  us 
to  know  this  tliis  very  day. 

III.  But,  now  thirdly,  we  pass  on  from  the  sacrifice  to  the  after 
CEREMONIES;  upon  wMch  only  a  word.  In  the  case  of  one  of  the 
common  people  after  the  victim  was  slain,  the  blood  was  taken  to  the 
brazen  altar,  and  the  four  horns  of  it  were  smeared,  to  show  that  the 
power  of  fellowship  with  God  Mes  in  the  blood  of  substitution.  There 
is  no  fellowship  with  God  except  tlirough  the  blood,  there  is  no  accept- 
aiice  with  God  for  anyone  of  us  except  through  him  who  suffered  in 
our  stead. 

But,  then  secondly,  the  blood  was  thrown  at  the  feet  of  this  same 
brazen  altar,  as  if  to  show  that  the  atonement  is  the  foundation  as  well 
as  the  power  of  fellowship.  We  get  nearest  to  God  when  we  feel  most 
the  power  of  the  blood,  ay,  and  we  could  not  come  to  God  at  all  except 
it  were  through  that  encrimsoned  way. 

After  this,  a  part  of  the  offering  was  put  upon  the  altar,  and  it  is  said 
concerning  it,  what  is  not  said  in  any  other  of  the  cases,  "  the  priest 
shall  burn  it  upon  the  altar  for  a  sweet  savour  to  the  Lord."  This 
common  person  had,  in  most  re&pects,  a  dim  view  of  Christ,  compared 
with  the  others,  but  yet  there  were  some  points  in  which  he  had  more 
light  than  others,  for  it  does  not  say  of  the  priest  that  what  he  offered 
was  a  sweet  savour ;  but,  for  the  comfort  of  this  common  person,  that 
he  might  go  his  way  having  sweet  consolation  in  his  soul,  he  is  told  that 
the  sin-offering  he  has  brought  is  a  sweet  savour  unto  God.  And  oh, 
what  a  joy  it  is  to  think  not  only  has  Christ  put  away  my  sin  if  I  believe 
in  him ;  but  now  for  me  he  is  a  sweet  savour  to  God,  and  I  am  for 
his  sake  accepted,  for  his  sake  beloved,  for  his  sake  delighted  in,  for 
his  sake  precious  unto  God,  When  God  had  destroyed  the  earth  by  a 
flood,  and  Noah  came  out  of  the  ark,  you  will  remember  that  he  offered 
a  sacrifice  unto  God,  and  it  is  said,  *'  The  Lord  sraelled  a  sweet  savour," 
or  a  savour  of  rest,  and  then  he  said  I  will  no  more  destroy  the 
earth  with  a  flood,  and  he  entered  into  a  covenant  with  Noah." 
Oh,  happy  is  that  soul  that  can  see  Christ  his  sin-offering,  as  being 
a  savour  of  rest  unto  the  Lord  Most  High,  so  that  a  covenant  of 
grace  is  made  with  him,  a  covenant  of  sure  mercies  that  shall  never 
be  removed. 

But,  I  must  pass  on  again. 

IV.  The  fourth  point  is  one  to  which  I  ask  all  your  heart's  attention. 
I  have  purposely  omitted  an  essential  act  in  the  sacrifice,  in  order  to 
enlarge  upon  it  now. 


THE   SIN-OFFERING   FOR   THE   COMMON   PEOPLE.  367 

Please  observe,  that  in  all  four  cases  there  was  one  thing  whieh  was 
never  left  out,  "  He  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  sin-offering." 
It  was  no  use  killing  the  bullock,  it  was  no  use  slaying  the  heifer,  no 
use  pouring  out  the  blood,  no  use  smearing  the  horns  of  the  altar 
unless  this  was  done.  The  guilty  person  must  come,  and  must  himself 
lay  his  hands  upon  the  victim.  Oh,  that  while  I  speak  of  this,  some  of 
you  may  lay  your  hands  upon  Christ  Jesus,  according  to  the  verse  of  the 
poet — 

"  My  faith  doth  lay  her  hand 

On  that  dear  head  of  thine, 
While  like  a  penitent  I  stand, 

And  there  confess  my  sin." 

Now  that  act  of  laying  on  the  hand  signified  cojifession.  It  meant 
just  this  :  "  Here  1  stand  as  a  sinner,  and  confess  that  I  deserve  to  die. 
This  goat  which  is  now  to  be  slain  represents  in  its  sufferings  what  I 
deserve  of  God."  0  sinner,  confess  your  sin  now  unto  your  grent  God, 
acknowledge  that  he  would  be  just  if  he  condemned  you.  Confession 
of  sin  is  a  part  of  the  me;ining  of  laying  on  of  the  hand. 

The  next  thing  that  was  meant  by  it  was  acceptance.  The  pe»son 
laying  his  hand  said,  "  I  accept  this  goat  as  standing  for  me.  I 
{igree  that  this  victim  shall  stand  instead  of  me."  That  is  what  f  u'tli 
does  with  Christ,  it  puts  its  hand  upon  the  ever  blessed  Son  of  God, 
and  says,  "  He  stands  for  me,  I  take  him  as  my  substitute." 

The  next  meaning  of  it  was  transference.  The  sinner  standing  there 
confessing,  putting  his  hand  on  the  victim  and  accepting  it,  did  by  that 
act,  say,  "  I  transfer,  according  to  God's  ordinance,  all  my  sin  which 
I  here  confess,  from  myself  to  this  victim."  By  that  act  the  transference 
was  made.  You  know  there  is  a  blessed  pa-sage,  which  says,  that  "  the 
Lord  hath  laid  on  Christ  the  iniquity  of  us  all,"  from  this  expression 
an  objection  has  been  laised  to  that  bles  ed  hymn. 

"  I  lay  my  sins  on  Jesua." 

Yet,  I  think,  the  expression  is  quite  correct.  Cannot  both  utter- 
ances be  true?  God  did  lay  sin  in  bulk  upon  Christ  when  he  laid 
upon  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all,  but  by  an  act  of  faith  every  individual  in 
another  sense  lays  his  sins  on  Jesus,  and  it  is  absolutely  needful  that 
each  man  should  so  do,  if  he  would  participate  in  the  substitution. 

Now,  do  observe,  I  pray  you,  that  this  v^di^  a  personal  act.  Nobody 
could  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock,  or  upon  the  goat,  for  another; 
each  one  had  to  put  his  own  hand  there.  A  godly  mother  could  not  say, 
"  My  graceless  boy  will  not  lay  his  hand  upon  the  victim,  but  I  will  put 
my  hand  there  for  him."  It  could  not  be.  He  who  laid  his  hand  there 
had  the  blessing,  but  no  one  else,  and  had  the  godliest  saint  with  holy 
but  mistaken  zeal  said,  "  Rebellious  man,  wilt  thou  not  put  thy  liand 
there,  I  will  act  as  sponsor  for  thee,"  it  had  been  of  no  avail ;  the  offender 
must  personally  come.  And  so,  dear  hearer,  must  you  have  a  personal 
faith  in  Christ  for  yourself.  The  word  is  sometimes  interpreted  to 
lean,  and  some  give  it  the  meaning  of  leaning  hard.  What  a  blessed 
view  of  faith  that  gives  us.  Sometimes,  according  to  the  Babbis,  those 
who  brought  the  victim  leaned  with  all  their  might,  and  pressed  upon 


3g3  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

it  as  if  they  seemed  to  say  by  the  act,  "  I  put  the  whole  burden,  weight, 
and  force  of  my  sin  upon  this  unblemished  victim."  0  ray  soul,  lenn 
hard  on  Christ,  throw  all  the  weight  of  thy  sin  upon  him,  for  he  is  able 
to  bear  it,  and  came  on  purpose  to  bear  it,  and  he  will  be  honoured  if 
thou  wilt  lean  heavily  on  him. 

And,  beloved,  what  a  simple  act  it  was  The  man  who  would  not 
be  absolved  from  sin  in  this  way  deserved  to  perish — there  was 
nothing  l)ut  to  lay  his  hand,  nothing  but  to  lean,  how  could  he  refuse. 
Faith  in  Christ  is  no  mystery,  no  proMem  needino  to  be  explained  in 
long  treatises, — it  is  simply,  trust  him,  trust  him,  trust  him,  and  you 
are  saved.  *'  There  is  life  in  a  look  at  the  crucified  One."  *'  Look  unto 
him,  and  be  ye  save  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  Nothing  can  Ije 
plainer, — nothing  can  be  simpler — why  is  it  that  so  many  puzzle 
themselves  where  God  has  given  us  siraj)licities.  It  must  be  that  God 
made  man  upright,  but  he  hath  found  out  many  inventions  with  which 
to  bewilder  himself. 

The  laying  on  of  the  hand  was  the  act  of  a  sinner.  He  came  there 
because  he  had  sinned,  and  because  his  sin  had  come  to  his  knowledge. 
Had  he  been  sinless  there  would  have  been  no  meaning  in  his  bringing 
a  sin-offering.  Innocence  needs  not  a  substitute  or  sacrifice  for  sin. 
The  sin-ofFering  is  evidently  for  the  man  who  has  sin,  and  what  if  I  say 
there  is  no  soul  here  to  whom  Christ  is  so  suitable  as  the  soul  that  is 
most  full  of  sin.  Thou  that  art  a  great,  big,  black  sinner,  a  thorough- 
lanced  sinner,  a  damnable  sinner,  thou  art  the  very  sinner  to  come  to 
Clirist  and  glorify  his  grace.  He  is  a  physician  who  did  not  come  into 
tliis  world  to  cure  finger-aches,  and  pin-pricks,  but  to  heal  great 
diseases,  loathsome  leprosies,  and  burning  fevers.  Come,  thou  sinner 
of  the  common  people,  come  thou  and  rest  alone  on  Jesus !  I  wish 
I  knew  how  to  speak  of  this  theme  so  as  to  move  your  souls. 
Within  a  few  months  or  years  at  the  longest,  we  shall  all  be  before 
the  bar  of  God;  and  what  if  some  of  us  should  be  there  with  our 
sins  upon  us?      I   am  afraid  some  of  you  will  be  there  unforgiven. 

0  you  to  whom  I  have  so  often  spoken,  will  you  be  there  unpardoned  ! 

1  shall  not  be  able  to  make  excuse  for  you  there,  and  say  you  did  not 
know  the  way  of  salvation,  for  I  have  preached  it  with  great  plainness 
of  speech.  I  have  often  cast  aside  language  which  commended  itself  to 
my  taste,  to  use  instead  thereof  more  homely  words,  lest  one  of  you 
should  miss  my  meaning.  God  knoweth  I  have  often  forsaken  tracks 
of  thought  which  opened  before  me,  and  which  might  have  interested 
many  of  my  hearers,  because  I  have  felt  while  so  many  of  you  are 
unsaved,  I  must  keep  on  ploughing  with  simplicities,  and  sowing 
elementary  truths,  I  am  evermore  telling  over  and  over  again  the 
story  of  the  substitutionary  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  What,  do  ye  hate 
your  souls  so  much  that  you  will  damn  them  to  spite  Christ?  Is  there 
such  a  hatred  between  you  and  yourself  that  you  will  reject  God's  own 
sacrifice  for  sin?  You  cannot  say  it  is  difficult  for  you  to  avail  yourself 
of  the  death  of  Jesus.  It  is  but  to  lay  your  hand  of  faith  on  that  dear 
head.  What  enmity  must  there  be  in  your  hearts  that  you  will  not  be 
reconciled  to  God  even  when  he  makes  the  reconciliation  by  the  death 
of  his  own  dear  Son.  To  what  a  pitch  hath  man's  rebellion  against 
his  Maker   gone,    when,   sooner  than   be  at  peace  with  him,  he  will 


THE   SIN-OFFERING   FOR   THE   COMMON   PEOPLE.  369 

reject  eternal  love,  and  will  for  ever  ruin  his  own  soul.  Oh,  may  God 
grant  that  some  this  morning  may  say,  "I  will  stretch  out  my  hand,  I 
will  trust  in  Jesus."  You  see  that  the  hand  to  be  stretched  out  is 
an  empty  one,  and  the  heart  which  leans  may  be  a  fainting  one. 
Weakness  and  sinfulness  find  strength  and  pardon  by  taking  Jesus  to 
be  their  All-in-all. 

V.  The  last  word  I  have  to  speak  to  you  makes  the  fifth  head,  namely, 
THE  ASSURED  BLESSING.  Tum  to  your  Bib'es,  at  the  31st  verse;  let 
every  soul  here  that  is  conscious  of  sin  read  those  last  lines:  "and  it 
shall  he  forgiven  him."  There  is  the  sacrifice.  The  man  must  put  his 
hand  upon  it.  The  sacrifice  is  slain,  and  "  his  sin  shall  be  forgiven  him." 
Wasnotthat  plain  speaking  ?  There  werenoifs,nobuts,no  peradventures; 
but  "  it  shall  be  forgiven  him."  Now,  in  those  days  it  was  only  one  sin, 
the  sin  confessed,  that  was  forgiven,  but  now  "  all  manner  of  sin  and 
blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men."  In  those  days  the  forgiveness 
did  not  give  the  conscience  abiding  peace,  for  the  oit'erer  had  to  come 
with  another  sacrifice  by-and-by  ;  but  now  the  blood  of  Christ  blots 
out  all  the  sins  of  believers  at  ouce  and  for  ever,  so  that  there  is  no  need 
to  bring  a  new  sacrifice,  or  to  come  a  second  time  with  the  blood  of 
atonement  in  our  hands.  The  sacrifice  of  the  Jew  had  no  intrinsic 
value.  How  could  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  take  away  sin  ?  It 
could  only  be  useful  as  a  type  of  the  true  sacrifice,  the  sin-oflFering  of 
Christ.  But  in  our  Lord  Jesus  there  is  real  efficacy,  there  is  true  atone- 
ment, there  is  real  cleansing,  and  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  find 
actual  pardon  and  complete  forgiveness  at  this  very  moment.  What  a 
joy  it  is  to  know  that — 

"  The  moment  a  sinner  believes, 
And  trusts  in  his  crucified  God, 
His  pardon  at  once  he  receives, 

Salvation  in  full  through  his  blood." 

I  delight  to  believe  that  of  Christ  Jesus  Kent's  verse  is  true — 

"  Here's  pardon  for  transgressions  past, 
It  matters  not  how  black  their  cast, 
And  oh,  my  soul^  ^vith  wonder  view, 
For  sins  to  come  Lere's  pardon  too." 

Our  sins  were  all  laid  on  Christ  in  one  bulk,  and  were  all  put  away  at 
one  time.  Woe  unto  any  man  who  should  have  to  take  his  sins  upon 
himself  as  they  come,  the  blessing  is  that  as  our  sins  are  committed 
they  are  still  laid  on  Jesus,  according  to  the  words  of  the  psalmist, 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is 
covered.  Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  in- 
iquity, and  in  whom  there  is  no  i^uile."  The  believer  sins,  but  the  Lord 
imputes  not  his  sin  to  him,  he  lays  it  still  upon  the  scapegoat's  head 
who  bore  our  sins  of  old,  even  Christ  Jesus  our  Saviour. 

The  pith  of  all  my  discourse  is  this,  if  there  be  a  child  of  God  here 
who  is  in  the  dark  and  burdened  with  sin,  dear  brother,  dear  sister,  do 
not  stand  controverting  with  the  devil  as  to  whether  you  are  a  child  of 
God  or  not.  Do  not  be  going  over  your  experience  and  sajing,  "  I  am 
afraid  I  am  a  hvprocrite  and  I  have  been  deceived."  But,  for  the 
2  a  " 


370  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

moment,  suppose  the  worst.  Let  the  devil  take  for  s^ranted  all  his 
accusations,  and  then  reply  to  him  in  words  like  those  of  Martin  Luther, 
"  Thou  sayest  I  am  a  great  sinner  and  a  law-breaker,  and  all  this ;  to 
which  I  reply  I  will  cut  thy  head  off"  with  thine  own  sword,  for  what  if 
I  be  a  sinner  ?  it  is  written  Jesus  Christ  came  to  save  sinners,  and  I 
rest  my  soul  as  a  sinner  simply  upon  him."  I  like  beginning  again. 
The  best  way  to  get  back  lost  evidences  is  to  leave  the  evidences  alone, 
and  go  again  to  Jesus.  Evidences  are  very  like  a  sun-dial, — you  can 
tell  what  o'clock  it  is  if  the  sun  is  shining,  but  not  without  ;  and  truly 
a  man  of  experience  can  tell  the  time  of  day  without  the  sun-dial  if  he 
can  but  see  the  sun  itself.  Evidences  are  clearest  when  Jesus  is  near, 
and  that  is  just  the  time  when  we  do  not  need  them.  Here  is  God's 
direction  for  acting  when  under  a  cloud.  "  If  any  walk  in  darkness  and 
see  no  light,  let  him  " — what  ?  Fret  about  his  evidences  ?  No,  "  let  him 
trust,"  there  is  the  end  of  it ;  "  let  him  trust  in  the  Lord  and  obey  the 
voice  of  his  servant,"  and  the  light  will  soon  come  to  him.  Come  away, 
0  burdened  believer,  to  the  sin-oflFering.  "  If  any  man  sin  we  have  an 
advocate  with  the  Father."  The  fountain  that  was  opened  for  sin  and 
for  uncleanness  was  not  opened  for  the  unregenerate  only,  but  for  the 
people  of  God,  for  it  was  opened  "  in  the  house  of  David,"  for  the 
"inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,"  that  is,  for  those  who  are  God's  people. 

If  there  be  a  poor  soul  here  who  has  never  believed  in  Jesus,  but  is 
burdened  with  sin,  I  invite  him,  and  I  pray  God  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make 
the  invitation  eifectual,  to  come  now  to  Jesus  Christ.  I  seem  to  think  that 
when  I  was  seeking  the  Saviour  if  I  had  been  in  this  congregation,  and 
had  heard  Christ  set  forth  as  bearing  sin  as  a  substitute,  and  heard  the 
plain  talk  you  have  listened  to  this  morning,  I  should  have  found  peace 
directly;  instead  of  which  I  was  months  and  months  hunting  after 
peace,  because  I  did  not  know  this,  that  I  had  nothing  to  do,  for 
Christ  had  done  it  all ;  and  all  I  had  to  do  was  to  take  wha't  Christ  had 
done,  and  simply  trust  in  him.  Now,  you  know  it,  oh,  may  God  add 
something  to  your  knowledge  !  May  he  give  you  power  to  lay  your 
hand  on  Jesus  !  Lean  on  him,  soul ;  lean  on  him.  If  you  cannot  lean, 
fall  back  into  his  arms.  Faint  away  upon  the  bosom  of  the  Saviour. 
Trust  him,  rest  in  him,  it  is  all  he  asks  you,  and  then  faith  shall  justify 
you  and  cleanse  you,  and  shall  give  you  sanctification,  and  by-and-by 
perfection,  and  shall  bring  you  into  his  eternal  kingdom  and  glory. 
The  Lord  bless  you,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scrjpture  read  before  Sermon.— l  John  i  and  11, 


PUTTING  THE  HAND  UPON  THE  HEAD 
OF  THE  SACRIFICE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morxing,  March  16th,  1884,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


' '  And  he  shall  put  his  haud  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt  offering ;  and  it  shall  bo 
accepted  for  him  to  make  atonement  for  him.  And  he  shall  kill  the  bullock  before  the 
Lord."' — Leviticus  i.  4,  5. 

No  doubt  there  are  clear  distinctions  in  the  teaching  of  the  burnt  offering, 
the  meat  offering,  the  peace  offering,  and  the  sin  offering.  In  those  various 
sacrifices  we  have  views  of  our  Lord's  atoning  work  taken  from  different 
stand-points.  On  another  occasion  it  will  be  profitable  to  note  these 
delightful  lessons  and  lay  them  to  heart ;  but  at  this  time  I  am  not  about 
to  enter  into  such  matters.  These  instructive  distinctions  are  the  special 
property  of  those  who  by  reason  of  years  have  had  their  senses  exercised, 
and  therefore  can  discern  not  only  the  great  work  of  our  Lord,  but  the 
details  of  it.  I  am  not  sufficiently  strong  in  mind  at  this  time  to  bring 
forth  "  butter  in  a  lordly  dish"  for  men  of  robust  constitution,  but  I  must 
be  content  to  serve  the  little  ones  with  a  cup  of  milk.  I  cannot  carry  the 
great  cluster  from  Eshcol,  and  therefore  I  will  bring  you  a  few  grapes 
in  my  trembling  hand.  I  desire  to  preach  this  morning  so  that  I  may 
fulfil  the  prayer  of  a  little  boy  who,  one  Saturday  evening  before  he  went 
to  bed,  said  in  his  prayer,  "  Lord,  grant  that  our  minister  may  say 
something  to-morrow  that  I  may  understand."  I  am  very  sorry  that 
Buch  a  prayer  should  ever  be  necessary,  but  I  am  afraid  it  is  not  only 
needful  for  children,  but  sometimes  for  grown-up  people  to  pray,  "  Lord, 
help  our  minister  to  say  something  that  we  can  understand,  and  that  is 
worth  understanding."  Some  of  my  brethren  appear  to  dwell  on  high 
Olympus  among  the  clouds :  it  were  better  if  they  lived  on  Calvary. 
Little  dew  comes  from  the  dark  mountains  of  intellectual  dreaminess; 
far  more  refreshing  drops  are  found  upon  the  Hermon  of  the  gospel.  I 
feel  like  Dr.  Guthrie  when  he  desired  those  around  him  to  sing  him  a 
bairn's  hymn ;  I  would  be  a  little  child  in  preaching  to  you.  Simple 
things  are  the  most  sublime,  and  to  a  sick  man  the  most  sweet.  I  wish 
to  be  plain  as  a  pikestaff  in  setting  forth  the  way  of  expiation  by  the 
death  of  Jesus. 

I  have  a  reason  also  for  preaching  foundation  truth  to-day  which  to 
No.  1,771.  ^2 


372  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

myself  is  powerful,  though  you  may  smile  at  it.  It  is  this :  If  I  have- 
but  few  shots  to  fire,  I  should  like  each  time  to  hit  the  centre  of  the 
target ;  that  is  to  say,  if  I  may  only  speak  to  you  once  to-day,  after 
having  been  laid  aside  for  three  weeks,  I  desire  to  speak  only  upon 
topics  which  touch  the  vitals  of  godliness.  I  would  plunge  into  the 
heart  of  the  matter,  and  deal  with  the  essence  and  soul  of  true 
religion.  There  are  some  things  that  may  be  or  may  not  be,  and  yet  no 
great  evil  will  come  either  way ;  but  there  are  other  things  that  must 
be,  or  all  goes  wrong  ;  of  these  must-be's  I  would  now  speak.  Some  things 
are  important  for  the  laeU-heing  of  Christians,  but  certain  other  things 
are  absolutely  essential  to  the  very  being  of  Christians  ;  and  it  is  upon 
these  urgent  necessaries  that  I  shall  now  speak — namely,  concerning  the 
precious  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  our  faith  in  it ;  for  these 
two  things  are  of  the  highest  importance,  and  they  cannot  too  often  be 
brought  before  our  minds. 

Two  matters  were  essential  in  the  sacrifices  of  the  ceremonial  law  ^ 
and  you  have  them  both  in  our  text :  "  He  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the 
head  of  the  burnt  offering,"  and  "  He  shall  kill  the  bullock  before  the 
Lord."  The  appropriation  by  the  offerer  and  the  death  of  the  ofiering 
are  most  fitly  joined  together,  and  must  neither  of  them  be  overlooked. 

For  our  immediate  object  there  was  no  need  to  have  taken  our  present 
text,  for  there  are  many  others  of  like  effect.  Look  at  Leviticus  iii.  2  : 
"And  he  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  his  oflTering,  and  kill  it  at 
the  door  of  the  tabernacle."  Glance  at  the  eighth  verse  :  "  And  he  shall 
lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  his  offering,  and  kill  it  before  the  taber- 
nacle." Turn  to  chapter  iv.  verse  4,  the  second  c'ause  of  the  verse; 
"  He  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head,  and  kill  the  bullock 
before  the  Lord."  As  also  at  the  fifteenth  verse:  "And  the  elders  of 
the  congregation  shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  bullock 
before  the  Lord :  and  the  bullock  shall  be  killed  before  the  Lord."  To 
the  same  effect  is  the  twenty-fourth  verse:  "And  he  shall  lay  his  hand 
upon  the  head  of  the  goat,  and  kill  it  in  the  place  where  they  kill  the 
burnt  offering."  All  through  the  book  of  Leviticus  the  laying  on  of 
the  hand  and  the  killing  of  the  victim  are  mentioned  in  immediate 
connection.  These  are  each  of  them  so  important,  and  so  full  of 
meaning,  that  we  must  have  a  sermon  upon  each  of  them. 

Let  us  on  the  present  occasion  look  at  the  leading  act  of  the 
OFEERER :  "  Re  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt  offering.'' 
All  that  goes  before  is  important,  but  this  is  the  real  sacrificial  ace  so 
far  as  the  offerer  is  concerned.  Before  he  reached  this  point,  the  person 
who  presented  the  offering  had  to  make  a  selection  of  the  animal  to  be 
brought  before  the  Lord.  It  must  be  of  a  certain  age,  and  it  must  be 
M'ithout  blemish ;  and  for  this  latter  reason  a  carefal  examination  had 
to  be  made ;  for  the  Lord  would  not  accept  a  sacrifice  that  was  lame, 
or  broken,  or  bruised,  or  deficient  in  any  of  its  parts  or  in  any  way 
blemished.  He  required  an  offering  "  without  spot."  Now  I  invite  all 
those  who  seek  reconciliation  with  God  to  look  about  them,  and  con- 
sider whether  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  such  an  atoning  sacrifice  as  they 
need  and  as  God  will  accept.  If  you  know  of  any  other  atonement  for 
ein,  examine  it  well,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  you  will  find  many  a 
fault  and  fiaw  in  it ;   but  concerning  the  Lamb  of  God,  I  have  no 


PUTTING   THE   HAND    UPON   THE    HKAD   OF   THE   SACRIFICE.      .'^73 

question ;  you  may  search,  and  test,  and  try,  but  you  shall  find  no  blemish 
in  him.  I'f  there  were  any  fault  in  him,  either  of  excess  or  dsficienc^s 
you  might  well  refuse  him  ;  but  since  there  is  nothing  of  the  kind,  I 
pray  you  joyfully  to  accept  him  at  once.  Come  now  and  look  at  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  both  at  his  Godhead  and  his  manhood,  at  his  life  and 
his  death,  his  acts  and  his  suiferings,  and  see  if  there  be  any  iniquity  in 
him.  He  knew  no  sin :  he  had  no  acquaintance  or  dealing  with  it ;  "  he 
was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled."  After  you  have  well  examined  his  blessed 
person  and  his  spotless  character,  if  you  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  he 
is  a  fit  and  acceptable  sacrifice  for  you  to  present  before  the  Lord,  then  I 
long  that  you  may  take  the  much  more  practical  step,  and  accept  the  Lord 
Jesus  to  be  your  representative,  your  sin  offering,  your  burnt  offering, 
your  substitute,  and  your  sacrifice.  I  long  that  every  unsaved  person 
here  may  at  once  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  atonement,  for  this  is  the 
main  part  of  that  which  the  sinner  must  do  in  order  to  be  cleansed  from 
sin  and  accepted  of  God.  Happily  you  have  not  to  find  a  sacrifice  as  the 
Jew  had  to  supply  a  bullock  ;  God  has  provided  himself  with  a  perfect 
sacrifice ;  that  which  you  have  to  bring  to  God,  God  first  brings  to  you. 
Happily,  there  is  no  need  for  you  to  repeat  the  examination  through 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  passed  both  at  the  hands  of  men,  and  of  devils, 
and  of  God,  when  he  was  tested  and  tried  and  examined,  and  even  the 
prince  of  this  world  found  nothing  of  his  own  in  him.  You  have  to 
attend  to  this  one  thing,  namely,  the  laying  of  your  hands  upon  the 
sacrifice  provided  for  you.  To  the  Jew  it  was  a  sacrifice  to  be  slain,  to 
you  it  is  a  sacrifice  already  offered ;  and  this  you  are  to  accept  and 
recognize  as  your  own.    It  is  not  a  hard  duty  :  you  sang  of  it  just  now — 

"  My  faith  dotli  lay  her  hand 

On  that  dear  head  of  thine  ; 
While  like  a  penitent  I  stand, 

And  there  confess  my  sin." 

If  you  have  attended  to  this  already,  do  so  again  this  morning ;  if  you 
have  never  done  so,  I  pray  from  my  inmost  soul  that  you  may  imme- 
diately do  that  which  was  meant  by  laying  tlie  hand  upon  the  victim's  head, 
I.  To  our  work,  then,  at  once.  What  did  that  mean  ?  It  meant  four 
things,  and  the  first  was,  confessiox.  He  that  laid  his  hand  upon  the 
head  of  the  offering  made  confession  of  sin.  I  do  not  care  what  offering 
it  was  that  was  brought  by  a  believing  Israelite,  there  was  always  a 
mention  of  sin  in  it,  either  implied  or  expressed.  "  But,"  says  one, 
"*  the  burnt  offering  was  a  sweet-savour  offering,  and  how  could  there 
be  any  reference  to  iniquity  therein."  I  know  tliat  the  burnt  offering 
was  a  sacrifice  of  sweet  smell,  and  that  it  sets  forth  our  Lord  as  accepted 
of  the  Father.  But  let  me  ask  you,  Why  did  the  Israelite  bring  a 
sweet-savour  offering  ?  It  was  because  he  felt  that  in  and  of  himself 
he  was  not  a  sweet  savour  unto  God,  for  if  he  had  been  so  he  would  not 
have  needed  to  have  brought  another  sweet  savour.  When  I  accept  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  be  my  righteousness  it  is  a  confession  of  sin,  for  I  should 
not  need  his  righteousness  if  I  had  one  of  my  own.  The  very  fact  of 
presenting  a  sacrifice  at  all  contains  within  it  a  confession  of  the  need  of  a 
sacrifice,  which  is  the  confession  of  personal  shortcomings,  and  a  want  of 
personal  acceptableness.     This  is  true  of  the  burnt  offering,  but  in  other 


37-1  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

sacrifices,  especially  in  the  trespass  offering,  where  the  hands  were  laid 
upon  the  victim's  head,  the  offerer  was  charged  to  "  confess  that  he  hath 
sinned  in  that  thing  "  wherein  he  had  trespassed.  There  was  a  detailed 
confession  of  sin  joined  with  the  laying  on  of  hands  in  the  case  of  the 
scapegoat.  Let  us  read  the  passage  in  Leviticus  xvi.  21 — "And  Aaron 
shall  lay  both  his  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  live  goat,  and  confess  over 
him  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  all  their  transgres- 
sions in  all  their  sins,  putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat,  and  shall 
send  him  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man  into  the  wilderness." 

See  then  that  if  you  would  have  him  to  be  your  atonement  whom  God 
has  appointed  to  be  his  sacrifice,  you  must  come  to  him  confessing  your 
sin.  Your  touch  of  Jesus  must  be  the  touch  of  one  who  is  consciously 
guilty.     He  belongs  not  to  you  unless  you  are  a  sinner. 

Ah,  Lord,  confession  of  sin  is  no  hard  duty  to  some  of  us,  for  we 
can  do  no  other  than  acknowledge  and  bemoan  our  guilt !  Here  we 
stand  before  thee  self-condemned,  and  with  aching  hearts  we  each 
one  cry,  "  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  Grod,  according  to  thy  loving- 
kindness."  Do  any  of  you  refuse  to  make  confession  of  guilt?  Then, 
do  not  think  it  hard  if,  since  according  to  your  own  proud  notions  you  are 
not  sinners,  the  Lord  should  provide  for  you  no  Saviour  !  Should  medi- 
cine be  prepared  for  those  who  are  not  sick?  Wherefore  should  the 
righteous  be  invited  to  partake  of  pardon  ?  Why  should  a  righteousness 
be  provided  for  the  innocent  ?  You  are  the  rich  and  you  are  sent  empty 
away ;  the  hungry  shall  be  filled  with  good  things.  Go  to ;  you  that 
say,  "  I  am  clean ;  I  am  not  defiled  ;"  I  tell  you  that  you  have  no  part 
in  the  great  sacrifice  for  sin.  For  the  blackest  sinner  out  of  hell  that 
will  confess  his  sin  there  is  mercy ;  but  there  is  none  for  you ;  your  pride 
excludes  you  from  pity :  it  bars  the  gate  of  hope  against  you.  You 
sprinkle  the  blood  of  the  lamb  upon  the  threshold  and  trample  on  it  in 
your  arrogant  self-conceit,  by  making  yourself  out  to  have  no  need  of 
its  cleansing  power.  0  self-righteous  man,  you  make  out  God  to  be  a 
fool,  since  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son  to  die,  when  according  to  you 
there  was  no  necessity  for  his  death.  In  your  case  at  any  rate  there  is 
no  need  of  a  sacrifice  by  blood,  no  need  of  an  atonement  through  the 
Son  of  God  laying  down  his  life  for  men.  By  your  refusal  to  trust  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  you  charge  God  with  folly ;  and  therefore  into  his  holy  place, 
where  his  glory  shines  forth  in  its  excellence,  you  can  never  come.  Many 
of  us  come  most  readily  at  this  time  and  lay  our  hand  upon  the  head 
of  the  appointed  sacrifice,  even  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  because  we  have 
sin  to  confess,  and  we  feel  that  we  need  a  Saviour,  even  a  Saviour 
for  the  guilty.  We  are  unworthy  and  undeserving.  We  dare  say  no 
otherwise.  The  stones  of  the  street  would  cry  out  against  us  if  we 
should  say  that  we  have  no  sin ;  the  beams  of  every  chamber  in  our 
house  would  upbraid  us  if  we  dared  to  assert  that  we  are  without  trans- 
gression. Our  true  place  is  that  of  sinners :  we  plead  guilty  to  the  dread 
indictment  of  God's  holy  law,  and  there  fu re  we  are  glad  to  lay  our  hand 
upon  the  head  of  the  sinner's  Saviour  and  sacrifice. 

In  this  act  there  was  also  a  confession  of  self- impotence.  The  believer 
who  brought  the  bullock  did  as  good  as  say,  "  I  cannot  of  myself  keep 
the  law  of  God,  or  make  atonement  for  my  past  breaches  of  the  command- 
ments, neither  can  I  hope  through  future  obedience  to  become  acceptable 


PUTTING   THE    HAND    UPON   THE   HEAD   OF   THE   SACRIFICE.       375 

with  God ;  therefore  I  bring  this  sacrifice  because  I  myself  cannot  become 
acceptable  without  it."  This  is  a  truth  which  you  and  I  must  also  confess 
if  we  would  be  partakers  of  Christ,  and  become  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved." 
Oh,  brethren,  what  can  we  do  without  Christ  ?  I  like  what  was  said  by 
a  child  in  the  Sunday-school,  when  the  teacher  said,  "  You  have  been 
reading  that  Christ  is  precious  :  what  does  that  mean  ? "  The  children 
stayed  a  little  while,  till  at  last  one  boy  replied,  "  Father  said  the  other 
day  that  mother  was  precious,  for  'whatever  should  we  do  without 
her  ? ' "  This  is  a  capital  explanation  of  the  word  "  precious."  You  aud  I 
can  truly  say  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  he  is  precious  to  us,  for 
what  should  we  do,  what  could  we  do  without  him  ?  We  come  and 
take  him  now  to  be  ours  because  if  he  be  not  ours  we  are  utterly  undone. 
I  for  one  am  lost  for  ever  if  Jesus  cannot  save.  There  is  in  us  no 
merit  and  no  strength :  but  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  find  both 
righteousness  and  strength,  and  we  accept  him  this  day  for  that  reason. 
Because  we  are  so  deeply  conscious  of  our  own  self-impotence  we  lean 
hard  upon  his  all-sufficiency. 

If  you  could  read  the  text  in  the  Hebrew  you  would  find  it  runs  thus : 
*'  He  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  liead  of  the  burnt  offering,  and  it  shall 
be  accepted  for  him  to  make  a  cover  for  him  " — to  make  atonement  for 
him.  The  word  is  copher  in  the  Hebrew — a  cover.  Why,  then,  do  we 
hide  behind  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Because  we  feel  our  need  of  something  to 
cover  us,  and  to  act  as  an  interposition  between  us  and  the  righteous 
Judge  of  all  the  earth.  If  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  shall  look  upon  us  as  we 
are  he  must  be  displeased ;  but  when  he  sees  us  in  Christ  Jesus  he  is 
well  pleased  for  his  righteousness  sake.  When  the  Lord  looks  this  way 
we  hide  beliind  the  veil,  and  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  behold  the  exceeding 
glories  of  the  veil,  to  wit  the  person  of  his  own  dear  Son,  and  he  is  so 
pleased  with  the  cover  that  he  forbears  to  remember  the  defilement  and 
deformity  of  those  whom  it  covers.  God  will  never  strike  a  soul 
through  the  veil  of  his  Son's  sacrifice.  He  accepts  us  because  he  cannot 
but  accept  his  Son,  who  has  become  our  covering.  With  regard  to  God, 
when  I  am  a  conscious  sinner  I  long  to  liide  away  from  him,  and  lo !  the 
Lord  Jesus  is  our  shield  and  hiding-place,  the  cover,  the  sacred  atone- 
ment within  which  we  conceal  ourselves  from  justice.  Even  the  all- 
seeing  eye  of  God  sees  no  sin  in  a  sinner  that  is  hidden  in  Christ.  Oh, 
what  a  blessing  it  is,  dear  friends,  when  our  sense  of  self-impotence  is 
so  great  that  we  have  no  desire  to  make  a  show  of  ourselves,  but  on  the 
contrary  long  to  be  out  of  sight,  and  therefore  we  enter  into  Christ  to  be 
hidden  in  him,  covered  in  the  sacrifice  which  God  has  prepared.  That 
is  the  second  confession,  and  thus  we  have  a  confession  of  sin  and  of  need 
of  covering. 

There  was  a  further  confession  of  the  desert  of  pimishnent.  AVhen  a 
man  brought  his  bullock,  or  his  goat,  or  his  lamb,  he  put  his  hand  on  it, 
and  as  he  knew  that  the  poor  creature  must  die  he  thus  acknowledged 
that  he  himself  deserved  death.  The  victim  fell  in  the  dust,  struggling, 
bleeding,  dying.  The  offerer  confessed  that  this  was  what  he  deserved. 
He  owned  that  death  from  the  Almighty  hand  was  due  to  him.  And  oh, 
when  a  man  comes  to  that,  when  he  owns  that  God  will  be  justified 
when  he  speaks  in  anger,  and  clear  when  he  judges  and  pronounces  sen- 
tence in  justice ;  when  he  confesses  that  he  cannot  deliver  himself,  but  has 


37b  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

SO  sinned  as  to  deserve  to  be  accursed  of  Grod,  and  adjndi^ed  to  feel  the 
horrors  of  the  second  death,  then  is  he  brought  into  a  condition  in  which 
the  great  sacrifice  will  be  precious  to  him.  Then  will  he  lean  hard  upon 
Christ,  and  with  broken  heart  acknowledge  that  the  chastisement  which 
fell  upon  Jesus  was  such  as  he  deserved,  and  he  will  wonder  that  he  has 
not  been  called  upon  to  bear  it.  For  my  own  part  I  deserve  eternal  damna- 
tion ;  but  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  believe  that  he  was  punished  in  my 
stead.  "  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  with  his  stripes 
we  are  healed."  If  you  can  thus  confess  sin,  and  bare  your  neck  to 
punishment,  and  then  lay  hold  upon  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  are  a  saved 
man.  Can  your  heart  truly  confess, "  I  am  guilty ;  I  cannot  save  myself; 
I  deserve  to  be  cast  into  the  lowest  hell ;  but  I  do  now  take  Jesus  to 
stand  in  my  stead "  ?  Then  be  of  good  cheer,  "  Thy  faith  hath  saved 
thee  :  go  in  peace."     May  the  Spirit  of  God  bless  this  first  point ! 

II.  Secondly,  the  laying  on  of  hands  meant  acceptance.  The  offerer 
by  laying  his  hand  upon  the  victim's  head  signified  that  he  acknowledged 
the  offering  to  be  for  himself. 

He  accepted,  first  of  all,  the  principle  and  the  2^twi.  Far  too  many 
kick  against  the  idea  of  our  being  saved  by  substitution  or  representa- 
tion. Why  do  they  rebel  against  it?  For  my  part,  if  God  will  but 
graciously  save  me  in  any  way  I  will  be  far  enough  from  raising  any 
objection.  Why  should  I  complain  of  that  which  is  to  deliver  me  from 
destruction  ?  If  the  Lord  does  not  object  to  the  way,  why  should  I  ? 
Moreover,  as  to  this  salvation  by  the  merit  of  another,  I  do  remember 
that  my  first  ruin  did  not  come  by  myself.  I  am  not  speaking  to  excuse 
my  personal  sin,  but  yet  it  is  true  that  I  was  ruined  before  I  committed 
any  actual  sin  by  the  disobedience  of  the  first  father  of  the  race  who  was 
my  representative.  How  this  was  just  I  do  not  know,  but  I  am  sure  it 
must  be  right,  or  God  would  not  so  reveal  it.  In  Adam  we  fell  :  "  by 
one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners  "  (Rom.  v.  19).  If,  then, 
the  fall  began  by  the  sin  of  another,  why  should  not  our  rising  be  caused 
by  the  righteousness  and  the  atonement  of  another  ?  What  saith  the 
Apostle  ?  "  For  if  through  the  offence  of  one  many  be  dead,  much  more 
the  grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  man,  Jesu^ 
Christ,  hath  abounded  unto  many."  At  any  rate,  it  is  not  for  you  and 
for  me  to  raise  objections  against  ourselves,  but  to  feel  that  if  God  sees 
that  this  is  a  proper  way  of  salvation,  he  knows  best  and  we  cheerfully 
accept  what  he  approves.  Who  is  there  among  you  that  will  not  do 
so  ?  God  grant  that  no  one  may  hold  out  against  a  method  of  grace  so 
simple,  so  sure,  so  available  ! 

But,  then,  mind.  After  you  have  accepted  the  plan  aad  the  way,  yoa 
must  not  stop  there,  but  you  must  go  on  to  accept  the  sacred  person  whom 
God  provides.  It  would  have  been  a  very  foolish  thing  if  the  offerer 
bad  stood  at  the  altar  and  said,  "  Good  Lord,  I  accept  the  plan  of 
.sacrifice;  be  it  burnt  offering  or  sin  offering,  I  agree  thereto."  He  did 
much  more  than  that ;  he  accepted  that  very  bullock  as  his  ottering,  and 
in  token  thereof  placed  his  hand  upon  it.  I  pray  you  beware  of  resting 
satisfied  with  understanding  and  approving  the  plan  of  salvation.  I 
heard  of  one  who  anxiously  desired  to  be  the  means  of  the  conversion  of 
a  young  man,  and  one  said  to  him,  "  You  may  go  to  him,  and  talk  to 
him,  but  you   will   get   him  no   further,  for   he   is  exceedingly   well 


PUTTING   THE    HAND    UPON    THE   HEAD   OF   THE    SACRIFICE.        377 

acquainted  with  the  plan  of  salvation."  When  the  friend  began  to 
speak  with  the  young  man,  he  received  for  an  answer,  "  I  am  much 
obh'ged  to  you,  but  I  do  not  know  that  you  can  tell  me  much,  for  I  have 
long  l^nown  and  admired  the  plan  of  salvation  by  the  substitutionary 
sacrifice  of  Christ."  Alas,  he  was  resting  in  the  plan,  but  he  had  not 
believed  in  the  person.  The  plan  of  salvation  is  most  blessed,  but  it 
can  avail  us  nothing  unless  we  believe.  What  is  the  comfort  of  a  plan 
of  a  house  if  you  do  not  enter  the  house  itself?  What  is  the  good  of  a 
plan  of  clothing  if  you  have  not  a  rag  to  cover  you  ?  Have  you  never 
heard  of  the  Arab  chief  at  Cairo  who  was  very  ill  and  went  to  the 
missionary,  and  the  missionary  said  he  could  give  him  a  prescription  ? 
He  did  so  ;  and  a  week  after  he  found  the  Arab  none  the  better.  "  Did 
you  take  my  prescription  ?  "  he  asked.  "  Yes  ;  I  ate  every  morsel  of 
the  paper."  He  dreamed  that  he  was  going  to  be  cured  by  the  plan  of 
the  medicine.  He  should  have  gone  to  the  chemist's  and  had  the 
prescription  made  up,  and  then  it  might  have  wrought  him  some 
good.  So  is  it  with  salvation  :  it  is  not  the  plan,  it  is  the  carrying 
out  of  that  plan  by  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  death  on  our  behalf.  The 
offerer  laid  his  hands  literally  upon  the  bullock  :  he  found  something 
substantial  there,  something  which  he  could  handle  and  touch ;  even  so 
do  we  lean  upon  the  real  and  true  work  of  Jesus,  the  most  substantial 
thing  under  heaven.  Brethren,  we  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  by  faith,  and 
say,  "  God  has  provided  an  atonement  here,  and  I  accept  it ;  I  believe 
it  to  be  a  fact  accomphshed  on  the  cross  that  sin  was  put  away  by 
Christ,  and  I  rest  on  him."  Yes ;  you  must  get  beyond  the  acceptance 
of  plans  and  doctrines  to  a  resting  in  the  divine  person  and  finished 
work  of  the  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  a  casting  of  yourself  entirely 
upon  him. 

III.  But  thirdly,  this  laying  of  the  hand  upon  the  sacrifice  meant  not 
only  acceptance,  but  also  transference.  The  offerer  had  confessed  his 
hiin,  and  had  accepted  the  victim  then  presented  to  be  his  sacrifice,  and  now 
he  mentally  realizes  that  his  guilt  is  by  divine  appointment  to  pass  over 
from  himself  to  the  sacrifice.  Of  course  this  was  only  done  in  type  and 
figure  at  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  ;  but  in  our  case  the  Lord  Jesu3 
Christ  as  a  matter  of  literal  fact  has  borne  the  sin  of  his  people.  "  The 
Lord  hath  made  to  meet  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  "  Who  his  own 
self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."  *'  Christ  was  once 
offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many." 

But  do  we  by  faith  pass  our  sins  from  ourselves  to  Christ  ?  I  answer, 
STo  :  in  some  senses,  no.  But  by  faith  he  that  accepts  Christ  as  his 
Saviour  agrees  with  what  the  Lord  did  ages  ago,  for  we  read  in  the 
book  of  Isaiah  the  prophet,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of 
us  all."  That  was  Jehovah's  own  act  in  the  ages  past ;  and  it  was 
complete  when  Jesus  stood  as  the  great  sin-bearer,  and  redeemed  us  from 
the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us.  All  the  transgressions 
of  his  people  were  laid  on  him  when  he  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death, 
and  "was  numbered  with  the  transgressors,  and  bare  the  sin  of  many." 
Then  and  there  he  expiated  all  the  guilt  of  all  his  people ;  for  he 
"  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in  everlasting 
righteousness."  By  his  death  he  cast  the  whole  tremendous  load  of 
human  guilt,  which  was  laid  upon  him,  into  the  depth  of  the  sea,  never 


378  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

to  be  fonnfi  again.  "When  we  believe  in  him  we  agree  to  what  the  Lord 
has  done,  and  so  far  we  may  sing — 

"Hay  my  sins  on  Jesus, 

The  spotless  Lamb  of  God  ; 
He  bears  them  all  and  frees  ua 
From  the  accursed  load." 

There  are  two  ruling  religions  around  us  at  this  day,  and  they  mainly 
differ  in  tense.  Tlie  general  religion  of  mankind  is  "  Do^'  but  the 
religion  of  a  true  Christian  is  "Doney  "It  is  finished"  is  the  believer's 
conquering  word.  Christ  has  made  atonement,  and  we  accept  it  as  done. 
So  in  that  respect  we  do  lay  our  sins  on  Jesus,  the  holy  Lamb  of  G-od, 
because  we  set  our  humble  seal  to  that  grand  transaction  which  was 
the  confirming  of  the  covenant  of  old. 

The  laying  of  the  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  sacrifice  meant  a  trans- 
ference of  guilt  to  the  victim,  and,  furthermore,  a  confidence  in  the  effi- 
cacy of  the  sacrifice  there  and  then  presented.  The  believing  Jew 
said,  "  This  bullock  represents  to  me  the  sacrifice  which  God  has  pro- 
vided, and  I  rejoice  in  it  because  it  is  the  symbol  of  a  sacrifice  which 
does  in  very  deed  take  away  sin."  Brethren,  there  are  a  great  number 
of  people  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  after  a  fashion,  but 
it  is  not  in  deed  and  in  truth,  for  they  do  not  believe  in  the  actual 
I3ardon  of  their  own  sin  :  they  hope  that  it  may  one  day  be  for- 
given, but  they  have  no  confidence  that  the  Lord  Jesus  has  already  put 
away  their  sin  by  his  death.  "  I  am  a  great  sinner,"  says  one,  "  there- 
fore, I  cannot  be  saved."  Man  alive,  did  Christ  die  for  those  who  are 
not  sinners  ?  What  was  the  need  of  a  Saviour  except  for  sinners  ?  Has 
Jesus  actually  borne  sin,  or  has  he  not  ?  If  he  has  borne  our  sin,  it  is 
gone  ;  if  he  has  not  borne  it,  our  sin  will  never  depart.  What  does  the 
Scripture  say  ?  "  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin  ; 
that  we  might  be  made  the  rigliteousness  of  G-od  in  him."  If,  then. 
Christ  did  take  the  sinner's  sin,  it  remains  not  upon  the  sinner  that 
believeth.  Assuredly,  you  my  hearer,  if  you  be  a  believer,  cannot  have 
sin  if  Jesus  has  taken  it  away.  You  are  made  clean  in  the  sight  of  God 
because  your  uncleanuess  has  been  washed  away  in  the  blood  of  the  great 
sacrifice.  See  you  not  this  way  of  salvation  ?  If  you  do  see  it,  will  you 
not  accept  it  now  ?  Do  you  not  feel  already  a  joy  springing  up  within 
your  soul  that  there  should  be  such  a  blessed  way  of  deliverance  ? 
At  any  rate,  I  tell  you  where  I  stand  to-day :  I  stand  guilty,  and 
without  a  hope  in  anything  I  have  ever  done  or  ever  hope  to  do  ; 
but  I  believe  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  bore  my  sin  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree,  and  I  am  at  this  moment  putting  my  hands  on  him  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  Hebrew  has  it,  leaning  with  all  my  weight  upon  him 
If  Jesus  cannot  save  me  I  must  be  damned,  for  I  cannot  help  him, 
neither  can  I  see  any  one  else  who  can  do  so  much  as  a  hand's  turn  in 
that  direction.  If  there  be  not  virtue  enough  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  to 
cleanse  me  from  all  sin,  then  I  must  die  in  my  sins :  and  if  there  be  not 
sufficient  merit  in  his  righteousness  to  save  me  apart  from  any  righteous- 
ness of  my  own,  then  I  am  a  cast-away,  a  spirit  shipwrecked  on  the  iron- 
bound  coast  of  despair.  But  I  have  no  fears,  for  I  know  whom  I  have 
believed,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  wliich  I  have 


PUTTING   THE   HAND   UPON   THE   HEAD   OF   THE   SACRIFICE.        379 

committed  unto  him  until  that  day.  Now  I  pray  you,  dear  people  of 
God,  to  lean  on  Jesus,  and  keep  on  leaning  there.  Oh,  that  you  who  as 
yet  do  not  know  Jesus  may  be  brought  to  touch  him  by  faith  and  to 
lean  upon  him  by  full  reliance.  In  times  of  sharp  pain,  or  great 
depression  of  spirit,  or  in  seasons  when  death  is  near,  you  are  forced 
to  look  about  you  to  see  where  your  foundation  is,  and  what  it  is ;  and, 
believe  me,  there  is  no  groundwork  that  can  bear  the  weight  of  a  guilty 
conscience  and  a  trembling,  tortured  body,  except  this  foundation — 
"  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Jesus  is  the 
atonement :  he  is  the  covering  :  he  is  the  refuge  :  in  fine,  he  is  our  all 
and  in  all. 

IV.  Once  more,  this  laying  of  the  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  victim 
meant  identification.  The  worshipper  who  laid  his  hand  on  the  bullock 
said,  "  Be  pleased,  0  great  Lord,  to  identify  me  with  this  bullock,  and 
this  bullock  with  me.  There  has  been  a  transferring  of  my  sin,  now  I 
beseech  thee  let  me  be  judged  as  being  in  the  victim,  and  represented 
thereby."  Now  consider  that  which  happened  to  the  sacrifice  ?  The  knife 
was  unsheathed,  and  the  victim  was  slain.  He  was  not  merely  bound,  but 
killed ;  and  the  man  stood  there  and  said,  "  That  is  me ;  that  is  the  fate 
which  I  deserve."  The  poor  creature  straggled,  it  wallowed  in  the  sand 
in  its  dying  agonies,  and  if  the  worshipper  was  a  right-minded  person,  and 
not  a  mere  formalist,  he  stood  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  felt  in  his  heart, 
"  That  death  is  mine."  I  beseech  you  when  you  think  of  our  blessed 
Lord  to  identify  yourselves  with  him.  See  the  bloody  sweat  is  trickling 
down  his  face ;  that  is  for  you.  He  groans,  he  cries,  for  you.  Your 
sins  deserved  that  you  should  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  and  Jesus 
sweats  instead.  The  Lord  is  taken  prisoner  and  scourged ;  see  how 
the  red  streams  of  gore  flow  down  those  blessed  shoulders !  He  bears 
the  chastisement  of  our  peace.  He  is  nailed  to  the  cross ;  and  we  are 
crucified  with  him.  By-and-by  he  dies ,  and  we  die  in  him  :  "  we  thus 
judge  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  all  died."  Believer,  you  died  there  in 
Christ,  When  your  substitute  rendered  to  the  law  of  God  the  penalty 
which  it  demanded,  you  virtually  rendered  it.  "  The  soul  that  siuneth, 
it  shall  die,"  and  you  have  died,  believer ;  you  have  paid  the  debt  in 
the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  whom  by  the  laying  on  of  your 
hands  yon  have  accepted  to  be  your  substitute.  You  know  that  story — 
it  is  a  capital  one,  well  worth  telling  a  thousand  times.  In  the  great 
French  war  a  person  was  drawn  for  a  conscript,  but  as  he  could  not 
leave  his  family,  he  paid  a  very  heavy  sum  for  a  substitute.  That  sub- 
stitute went  to  the  war  and  was  killed.  After  a  time  Napoleon  called 
out  the  rest  of  the  conscription  and  the  man  was  summoned  because 
he  had  been  formerly  drawn ;  but  he  refused  to  serve.  He  said,  "  No, 
by  my  substitute  I  have  served,  and  I  am  dead  and  buried :  I  cannot 
be  made  to  serve  again."  It  is  said  that  the  question  was  carried 
up  to  the  highest  court,  and  laid  before  the  Emperor  himself,  and 
the  Emperor  decided  that  the  man's  claim  of  exemption  was  a  just  one. 
He  had  fulfilled  the  conscription  by  a  substitute ;  that  substitute  had 
served  for  life,  and  could  not  be  called  upon  to  do  more ;  and  therefore 
the  person  for  whom  he  was  the  substitute  could  not  further  be  sum- 
moned under  that  conscription.  This  sets  forth  our  joy  and  glory;  we 
are  identified  with  Christ,  we  are  crucified  with  him,  buried  with  him. 


330  METEOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

and  in  liim  raised  to  newness  of  life.  "  I  am  crucified  with  CThrist, 
nevertheless  I  live."  "  Ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God." 

It  ought  to  be  remembered  that  we  were  identified  with  Christ  in  his 
passing  under  the  wrath  of  Grod  as  a  sin  offering.  If  you  read  in  this 
book  you  will  find  that  the  sin  offering  was  burnt  without  the  camp  as 
an  unclean  thing ;  and  so  you  and  I  were  pat  without  the  camp  long 
years  ago  as  an  unclean  thing.  That  is  over  now,  and  we  are  at  this 
hour  no  more  cast  out  from  the  sight  of  God  than  Jesus  is. 

The  burnt  offering  was  consumed  upon  the  altar  as  a  sweet  savour 
unto  God ;  and  in  this  also  we  are  identified  with  Christ.  We  are  aow 
a  sweet  savour  unto  God  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  We  are  accepted 
in  the  Beloved.  We  are  joined  unto  the  Lord,  and  there  is  no  separating 
our  interests  from  his,  nor  his  from  ours.  Who  shall  separate  us  from 
the  Christ  of  God  for  ever  and  ever  ?  That  is  what  the  laying  on  of 
hands  upon  the  beast  meant.  I  trust,  dear  friends,  you  have  known  all 
this  for  years,  and,  if  not,  may  you  know  it  now. 

If  the  Lord  will  enable  me,  I  intend  to  enter  into  the  second  part  of 
my  text  next  Lord's-day  morning ;  and  for  this  time  it  will  suffice  for 
me  to  drive  this  one  nail  home.  Oh,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  would  fasten 
it  in  a  sure  place  in  your  hearts !  My  soul's  yearning  desire  is  that  each 
one  of  you  may  come  at  once  and  lay  your  hands  on  Christ  by  con- 
fession, acceptance,  transference,  and  identification.  Nothing  short  of 
such  an  act  will  suffice  to  give  you  salvation. 

Now,  suppose  that  the  Jew,  who  went  up  to  the  tabernacle  and  to  the 
altar,  when  he  came  there  had  been  content  to  talk  about  the  sacrifice 
without  personally  placing  his  hand  on  it.  To  talk  of  it  would  be  a 
very  proper  thing  to  do ;  but  suppose  that  he  had  spent  all  his  time  in 
merely  discoursing  about  the  plan  of  a  sacrifice,  the  providing  of  a  sub- 
stitute, the  shedding  of  blood,  the  clearance  of  the  sinner  through 
sacrificial  death  ;  it  would  have  been  a  delightful  theme,  but  what  would 
have  come  of  it  ?  Suppose  he  had  talked  on  and  on,  and  had  gone  away 
home  without  joining  in  the  offering,  he  would  have  found  no  ease  to  his 
conscience ;  he  would,  in  fact,  have  done  nothing  by  going  to  the  house 
of  the  Lord.  I  am  afraid  that  this  is  what  many  of  you  have  done 
hitherto.  You  are  pleased  to  hear  the  gospel,  you  take  pleasure  in  the 
doctrine  of  substitution,  and  you  know  true  doctrine  from  the  current 
falsehoods  of  the  hour :  for  all  which  I  am  very  glad ;  but  yet  you  are 
not  saved  because  you  have  not  taken  Christ  to  be  your  own  Saviour. 
You  are  like  persons  who  should  say,  "  We  are  hungry ;  but  we  admit 
that  bread  is  a  ^  ery  proper  food  for  men,  besides  which  we  know  what 
sort  of  food  makes  bone,  and  what  makes  muscle,  and  what  makes 
flesh."  They  keep  on  talking  all  day  long  about  the  various  quaUties 
of  food :  do  tliey  feel  refreshed  ?  No.  Is  their  hunger  gone  ?  No.  I 
should  suppose  that,  if  they  are  at  all  healthy,  their  appetite  is  increased, 
and  the  more  they  talk  about  food  the  more  sharp  set  they  become. 
Why,  some  of  you  here  have  been  talking  about  the  bread  of  heaven  for 
years,  and  yet  I  am  afraid  you  are  no  more  hungry  than  you  used  to  bo. 
Do  go  beyond  talking  about  Christ,  and  learn  to  feed  upon  Christ- 
Come,  now,  let  us  have  done  with  talk,  and  come  to  deeds  of  faith. 


PUTTING   THK    HAND    UPON   THE   HEAD   OF   THE    SACRIFICE.        381 

Lay  hold  on  Jesus,  who  is  set  before  you  in  the  gospel :  otherwise,  dear 
friend,  I  fear  you  will  perish  in  the  midst  of  plenty,  and  die  unpar- 
doned, with  mercy  at  your  gate. 

Suppose,  again,  that  the  Israelite  instead  of  talking  with  his  friends, 
had  thought  it  wise  to  consult  ivith  one  of  the  priests.  "  Might  I  speak 
with  you,  sir,  a  little  ?  Have  you  a  little  room  somewhere  at  the  back 
where  you  could  talk  with  me,  and  pray  with  me?"  "Yes,"  says  the 
priest,  " what  ails  you?"  "My  sin  lies  heavy  upon  me."  The  priest 
replies,  "  You  know  that  there  is  a  sacrifice  for  sin  ;  a  sin  offering  lieth  at 
the  door,  and  God  will  accept  it  at  your  hands."  But  you  say,  "  I  beg 
you  to  explain  this  matter  more  fully  to  me."  The  priest  answers,  "I 
will  explain  it  as  well  as  I  can ;  but  the  whole  of  my  explanation  will 
end  in  this  one  thing — bring  a  sacrifice,  and  over  its  head  confess  your 
sin,  and  let  an  atonement  be  made.  The  sin  offering  is  what  God  has 
ordained,  and  therefore  God  will  receive  it.  Attend  to  his  ordinance 
and  live  :  there  is  no  other  way.  Fetch  your  offering  ;  I  will  kill  it  for 
you,  and  lay  it  on  the  altar  and  present  it  to  G(»d."  Do  you  say 
to  him,  "I  will  call  again  to-morrow,  and  have  a  little  more  talk  with 
you"?  Do  you  again  and  again  cry,  "To-morrow"?  Do  you  go 
again  and  again  into  the  inquiry -room  ?  0  sir,  what  will  become 
of  you  ?  You  will  perish  in  your  sin ;  for  God  has  not  appointed 
salvation  by  inquiry-rooms  and  talks  with  ministers,  but  by  your  laying 
your  own  hand  upon  the  sacrifice  which  he  has  appointed.  If  you 
will  have  Christ,  you  shall  be  saved ;  if  you  will  not  have  him,  you  must 
perish ;  all  the  talking  to  you  in  the  world  cannot  help  you  one  jot  if 
you  refuse  your  Saviour.  Sitting  in  your  pew  this  morning,  without 
speaking  to  me  or  any  living  man  or  woman,  I  exhort  you  to  believe  in 
Jesas.  Stretch  out  your  withered  hand,  God  helping  you,  and  lay  it  on 
the  head  of  Ohrist,  and  say,  "  I  believe  in  the  merit  of  his  precious 
blood.  I  look  to  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world."  Why,  man,  you  are  saved  as  sure  as  you  are  alive ;  for  he  that 
layefch  the  hand  of  faith  upon  this  sacrifice  is  saved  thereby. 

But  I  see  another  Israelite,  and  he  stands  by  his  offering,  and  begins- 
to  weep  and  groan,  and  bewail  himself.  I  am  not  sorry  to  see  him 
weep,  for  I  trust  he  is  sincerely  confessing  his  guilt ;  but  why  does  he 
not  place  his  hand  on  the  sacrifice?  He  cries  and  he  sighs,  for  he  is 
such  a  sinner ;  but  he  does  not  touch  the  offering.  The  victim  is  pre- 
sented, and  in  order  that  it  may  avail  for  him,  he  must  lay  his  hand  upon 
it ;  but  this  vital  act  he  neglects  and  even  refuses  to  perform.  "  Ah,"  he 
says,  "  I  am  in  such  trouble,  I  am  in  such  deep  distress,"  and  he  begins 
starting  a  ditliculty.  You  hunt  that  difliculty  down,  but  there  he  stands, 
still  groaning  and  moaning,  and  producing  another  difficulty,  and  yet 
another,  world  without  end.  The  sacrifice  is  slain,  but  he  has  no  part 
in  it,  for  he  has  not  laid  his  hand  upon  it,  and  he  goes  away  with  all  the 
burden  of  his  guilt  upon  him,  though  the  sacrificial  blood  has  reddened 
the  ground  on  which  he  stood.  That  is  what  some  of  you  do.  You  go 
about  lamenting  your  sin,  when  your  chief  lament  should  be  that  you 
have  not  believed  on  the  Sou  of  God.  If  you  looked  to  Jesus  you  might 
dry  your  eyes  and  bid  all  hopeless  sorrows  cease ;  for  he  gives  remission 
of  sins  to  all  penitents,  iour  tears  can  never  remove  your  sins;  tears, 
though  flowing  like  a  river,  can  never  wash  away  the  stain  of  guilt. 


382  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Your  faith  must  lay  her  hand  on  the  head  of  the  Lord's  sacrifice,  for 
t^ere  and  there  only  is  there  hope  for  the  guilty. 

"  But  surely,"  says  one,  "  that  cannot  be  everything."  I  tell  you  it 
is  so  much  everything  that 

"Could  your  tears  for  ever  flow, 
Could  your  zeal  no  respite  know, 
AH  for  sin  could  not  atone, 
Christ  must  save,  and  Christ  alone." 

Jesus  will  only  save  those  who  accept  him  and  desire  to  be  identified  with 
him.  I  would  to  God  that  you  would  delay  no  longer,  but  come  at  once 
and  freely  accept  what  G-od  has  provided !  I  know  the  devil  will  tempt 
you  to  look  for  this  and  to  look  for  that ;  but  I  pray  you  look  at 
nothing  but  the  sacrifice  that  is  before  you.  Lean  on  Jesus  with  all 
yonr  weight. 

Observe  that  the  Israelite  had  to  put  his  hand  upon  a  victim  which 
was  not  slain  as  yet,  but  was  killed  afterwards.  This  was  to  remind 
him  that  the  Messiah  was  not  yet  come ;  but  you,  beloved,  have  to  trust 
in  a  Christ  who  has  come,  who  has  lived,  who  has  died,  who  has  finished 
the  work  of  salvation,  who  has  gone  up  into  the  glory,  and  who  ever 
hveth  to  make  intercession  for  transgressors.  "Will  you  trust  him  or 
will  you  not  ?  I  cannot  waste  words ;  I  must  come  to  the  point.  John 
Bunyan  says  that  one  Sunday  when  he  was  playing  the  game  of  tip-cat 
on  Elstow  Green,  as  he  was  about  to  strike  the  cat  with  the  stick,  he 
seemed  to  hear  a  voice  saying  to  him,  "  "Wilt  thou  leave  thy  sins  and  go 
to  heaven,  or  wilt  thou  keep  thy  sins  and  go  to  hell  ?  "  This  morning 
the  voice  from  heaven  sounds  forth  this  question,  Will  you  trust  in 
Christ  and  go  to  heaven,  or  will  you  keep  apart  from  him  and  go  to 
hell  ?  for  thither  you  must  go  unless  Jesus  becomes  your  Mediator  and 
your  atoning  sacrifice.  Will  you  have  Christ  or  no  ?  I  hear  you  say, 
"  But " — 0  that  I  could  thrust  your  "  buts  "  aside.  Will  you  have  Christ 
or  not  ?  "  Oh,  hut " — N"ay,  your  "  buts  "  ought  to  be  thrown  into  limbo ; 
I  fear  they  will  be  your  ruin.  Will  you  trust  Christ  or  not  ?  If  your 
answer  is,  "  I  trust  him  with  all  my  heart,"  then  you  are  a  saved  man. 
I  say  not  you  shall  he  saved  ;  but  you  are  saved.  "  He  that  believeth 
in  him  hath  everlasting  life."  You  know  how  our  dear  friend,  Mr.  Hill, 
put  it  the  other  night  at  the  prayer-meeting.  "  He  that  believeth 
in  him  hath  everlasting  life."  "  H-A-T-H,"— that  spells—"  Got  it:' 
Very  good  spelling  too.  If  you  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  you 
have  eternal  life  in  present  possession ;  go  your  way  and  sing  for  joy  of 
heart,  because  the  Lord  has  loved  you.  Mind  you  keep  on  singing  until 
you  join  the  choristers  before  the  eternal  throne.  The  Lord  save  every 
person  that  shall  hear  or  read  this  sermon,  for  Jesus  sake.    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  li. 
Leviticus  i.  1 — 9. 


ifYMNS  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 395,  555,  51  (Part  II) 


SLAYING  THE   SACRIFICE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  March  23rd,  1884,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  And  he  shall  kill  the  bullock  before  the  Loed." — Leviticus  i.  5. 

You  remember  that  last  Sabbath  day  we  spoke  of  two  things  vitally 
essential  to  a  true  sacrifice,  and  the  first  upon  which  we  then  enlarged 
was  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  oflFerer  upon  the  victim,  by  which 
he  accepted  it  as  his  sacrifice,  and  made  a  typical  transfer  of  his  sin  from 
himself  to  the  victim.*  Now,  the  second  essential  thing,  of  which  we  are 
to  speak  this  morning,  was  this, — that  the  victim  thus  bearing  the  guilt 
of  the  offerer  must  be  killed :  its  blood  must  be  shed  before  the  Lord ; 
nothing  short  of  its  death  by  violence  would  render  it  an  atonement 
for  the  offerer :  "  He  shall  kill  the  bullock."  You  will  find  this  order 
continually  repeated  whenever  a  sacrifice  is  spoken  of. 

As  I  said  on  the  last  occasion,  I  feel  great  satisfaction  in  this  time  of 
my  weakness  in  being  permitted  to  speak  to  you  about  essential  things. 
It  was  always  a  stigma  upon  the  character  of  Caligula  that  he  gathered 
his  warriors,  and  fitted  out  his  ships ;  and,  when  the  people  of  Eome 
looked  for  some  great  addition  to  the  empire  by  the  vast  naval  ex- 
pedition, he  simply  anchored  his  vessels  near  the  sea-beach,  and  bade 
his  legions  advance  upon  the  shore  and  gather  shells  and  pebbles,  and 
carry  them  home  as  trophies  of  their  undisputed  conquest.  He  trifled 
where  he  should  have  struggled ;  spent  time  and  labour  upon  matters  of 
no  importance,  and  neglected  the  weighty  business  of  his  kingdom. 
We  shall  not  do  so  to-day :  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  shells  and 
stones,  we  have  to  do  with  matters  worth  more  than  gold  or  pearls, 
things  essential  to  eternal  life,  and  vital  to  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of 
meii. 

Neither  have  I  this  morning  a  controversial  topic  upon  which  to 
debate  before  you.  However  important  controversy  may  sometimes  be, 
we  are  glad  to  be  away  from  its  strife,  and  to  consider  a  doctrine 
around  which  true  believers  gather  in  hearty  unity, — a  doctrine  which 
must  be  taken  for  granted  in  the  Christian  church,  which  lies  at  the 
very  root  of  truth,  and  in  the  very  heart  of  true  religion.     Without 

*  "Putting  the  Hand  upon  the  Head  of  the  Sacrifice,"  No.  1771. 
No.  1,772.  j3 


384  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

controversy,  great  is  this  mystery  of  godliness,  that  Christ  manifest  in 
the  flesh  must  die  for  sin,  or  otherwise  sin  cannot  be  pat  away.  You 
remember  what  the  Greek  said  when  he  heard  an  old  philosopher  with 
lioary  head  and  grey  beard  disputing  upon  how  to  Hve.  "  Goodness  !  " 
said  he,  "  if  at  his  age  he  is  disputing  upon  that  subject,  when  will  he 
be  able  to  practise  his  conclusions  should  he  arrive  at  any  ?  "  Truly, 
I  may  say  to  you  to  whom  I  have  so  long  ministered,  if  we  are  for  ever 
to  be  learning  and  never  coming  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  what  will 
become  of  us  ?  If  we  are  to  have  nothmg  but  questionable  matters  laid 
before  us,  when  shall  the  time  come  for  the  actual  possession  and  enjoy- 
ment of  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  ?  At  this  hour  my  theme  is  such 
that  I  speak  to  yoa  without  diffidence  or  hesitation.  In  this  case 
"  we  believe  and  are  sure."  Concerning  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
great  sacrifice  for  sin,  it  was  essential  that  he  should  die ;  for  only 
through  the  blood  which  he  shed  on  Calvary  for  human  guilt  can  there 
be  preached  among  men  the  remission  of  sins. 

"  What  can  wash  away  my  staiu  ? 
Nothiny  but  the  blood  of  Jesus ! 
What  can  make  me  whole  again  ? 
Nothing  but  the  blood  of  Jesus  ! 

"  This  is  all  my  hopa  and  peace — 
Nothing  but  the  blood  of  Jesus  ! 
This  is  all  my  righteousness — 

Nothing  but  the  blood  of  Jesus ! '' 

May  the  Holy  Spirit  lay  home  the  blood  of  atonement  to  our  consciences 
at  this  time  to  the  glory  of  God  and  our  own  peace ! 

I.  Concerning  the  killing  and  slaying  of  the  offering,  our  first  point 
is  that  it  was  absolutely  essential.  The  pouring  out  of  the  blood 
of  the  victim  was  of  the  very  essence  of  the  type.  The  death  of 
Christ  by  blood-shedding  was  absolutely  necessary  to  make  him  an 
acceptable  sacrifice  for  sin.  "  It  behoved  Christ  to  suffer."  He  could 
only  enter  into  the  presence  of  God  with  his  own  blood.  He  could  not 
be  the  grain  of  wheat  which  bringeth  forth  much  fruit  unless  he  should 
die. 

Eemember  that  although  there  were  important  matters  about  the 
victim,  yet  nothing  would  have  availed  if  it  had  not  been  slain.  The 
Israelite  brought  an  unblemished  bullock,  but  the  fact  of  its  being 
unblemished  did  not  make  it  an  atonement  for  sin ;  no  doubt,  many 
faultless  bullocks  and  lambs  still  fed  in  the  plains  of  Sharon.  If  the  most 
perfect  animal  had  gone  away  from  the  altar  alive  it  would  have  effected 
nothing  whatever  by  way  of  atonement.  It  must  be  unblemished  in 
order  to  be  an  offering  at  all ;  still,  its  perfections  did  not  make  it  a 
sacrifice  until  it  was  killed.  No  matter  what  could  be  said  of  that 
bullock ;  it  may  have  been  the  most  laborious  animal  throughout  all 
Israel ;  it  may  have  dragged  the  plough  to  and  fro,  or  even  drawn  the 
waggon  loaded  with  the  harvest;  but  that  w\^s  nothing  to  make  it  a 
sacrifice  for  sin.  It  must  die,  and  its  blood  must  be  sprinkled  upon  the 
aitar,  or  else  the  offerer  has  brought  no  acceptable  oblation.  All  its  life 
and  ite  labour  would  not  satisfy. 

Nor  would  it  be  enough  to  brins;  the  bullock  there  and  dedicate  it  to 


''LAYING   THE   SACRIFICE.  385 

Gud.  Some  animals  which  had  been  dedicfited  to  the  divine  service  were 
used  in  the  drawing  of  the  waggons  which  carried  the  sacred  furniture 
through  the  wilderness ;  but  they  were  not  sacrifices  for  all  tliat,  neither 
did  they  avail  for  the  bearing  away  of  sin.  It  was  indispensably  necessary 
that  the  bullock  should  be  without  blemish  ;  it  was  necessary  that  it  should 
be  voluntarily  dedicated  to  God  ;  but  if  it  had  not  been  killed,  there  would 
have  been  no  presentation  of  an  offering  according  to  the  divine  law,  nor 
any  easing  of  the  conscience  of  the  Israelite.  Even  so,  Jesus  must  die: 
his  perfect  nature,  his  arduous  labour,  his  blameless  life,  his  perfect  con- 
secration, could  avail  us  nothing  without  the  shedding  of  his  blood  for 
many,  for  the  remission  of  sin.  So  far  from  his  death  being  a  mere  adjunct 
and  conclusion  of  his  life,  it  is  the  most  important  matter  connected  with 
him  ;  it  stands  in  the  foreground,  it  is  the  head  and  front  of  his  redeeming 
work.  We  justly  value  him  for  his  example,  and  for  his  living  inter- 
cession ;  but  in  the  business  of  atonement  it  is  beyond  all  things  needful 
that  we  view  him  as  the  Lamb  slain. 

Now  notice  that  this  ivas  expressly  declared  ly  God  in  the  Jewish 
law-hook  in  express  words.  Kindly  turn  in  this  book  of  Leviticus 
to  the  seventeenth  chapter,  and  there  read  in  the  eleventh  verse,  "  For 
the  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood  :  and  I  have  given  it  to  you  upon 
the  altar  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls;  for  it  is  the  blood  that 
maketh  an  atonement  for  the  soul."  It  is  not  the  burning  of  the  victim, 
it  is  not  the  flaying  of  it,  nor  the  washing  of  it,  it  is  the  shedding  of  its 
blood, — that  is  to  say,  the  taking  of  its  life,  which  makes  it  an  atonement 
ibr  sin.  I  need  not  quote  another  Old  Testament  text,  because  this  is 
S(i  completely  to  the  point,  and  so  fully  covers  the  whole  of  the  ground. 
The  atonement  is  not  the  animal  itself,  but  the  blood  of  the  animal, 
which  blood  represents  its  life. 

As  to  the  entire  Scriptures,  they  teem  ivith  statements  of  this  truth. 
I  will  only  call  to  your  recollection  a.  few  prominent  passages;  to  collect 
them  all  would  be  impossible.  When  a  child  doth  gather  flowers  in  the 
spring  meadows  when  they  are  all  golden  with  the  kingcups,  he  fills 
his  hand  once,  but  he  is  almost  persuaded  to  throw  away  what  he  has 
gathered  that  he  may  pluck  yet  more  from  the  inexhaustible  store  around 
hini;  so  do  I  feel  that  what  I  now  bring  before  you  might  fitly  be 
exchanged  for  another  selection,  ay,  for  many  such,  if  time  did  not  fail 
us. 

In  the  Old  Testament,  one  of  the  most  instructive  types  of  redemption 
ever  given  is  that  of  the  Passover  lamb.  When  God  was  about  to  smite 
Egypt  he  promised  to  spare  his  people ;  and  in  order  to  their  safety  he 
bade  each  family  take  a  lamb,  and  kill  it,  and  sprinkle  the  blood  upon 
the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts  of  their  door.  Then  they  were  to  keep 
within  the  house  till  the  morning,  and  the  destroying  angel  should  not 
touch  so  much  as  one  of  them.  What  is  expressly  said  by  God  himself 
about  this  passing-over  ?  Hear  the  words,  and  wonderingly  drink  in 
their  teaching!  "And  when  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you." 
There  was  never  a  fuller  type  of  the  redemption  of  Christ,  I  hai'dly 
think  one  so  full,  as  that  of  the  passing-over  of  Israel  through  the  blood 
of  the  paschal  lamb ;  but  the  essence  of  that  passing-over  is  displayed 
to  us  in  this  sentence — "When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you." 
God's  eye  resting  upon  the  evidence  of  a  tife  having  been  taken  instead 

2T3 


386  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  the  sinner's  life,  is  the  reason  why  he  passes  over  the  sinner,  so  that 
he  does  not  die. 

When  Isaiah,  the  great  evangelical  prophet,  spake  concerning  him 
upon  whom  the  Lord  laid  our  iniquity,  he  mentions  his  death  as  the  main 
cause  of  his  glorious  reward.  The  last  verse  of  the  fifty-third  chapter 
of  Isaiah  is  the  culminating  point  of  the  whole,  and  it  runs  thus: 
"  Therefore  will  I  divide  him  a  portion  with  the  great,  and  he  shall 
divide  the  spoil  witli  the  strong ;  because  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul 
unto  death."  It  is  a  wonderful  expression :  it  shows  that  Christ  must 
die,  or  else  he  could  not  achieve  the  victory  for  us,  nor  share  the  spoil 
thereof.  He  must  pour  out  his  soul,  he  must  relinquish  life,  must  pour 
it  out  lavishly,  as  though  he  possessed  much  of  it :  he  must  make  it 
to  flow  like  water  gashing  in  a  river  from  the  smitten  rock.  This 
he  must  do  voluntarily  and  without  stint — "pouring  out  his  soul 
unto  death "  till  none  remained,  and  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  was 
reached  in  death.  It  is  clear  that  if  he  had  not  done  this,  he  had  done 
nothing;  for  the  victory  comes  to  him  because  of  this  ;  not  because  he 
kept  his  soul  fi-ee  from  spot,  not  because  he  preached  righteousness  in 
the  great  congregation,  not  because  of  anything  else  which  he  did  was  lie 
rewarded ;  but  the  victorious  deed  was  that  "  he  poured  out  his  soul 
unto  death."  This  is  the  verdict,  not  only  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the 
inspired  prophecy,  but  also  of  all  that  dwell  with  Grod  above,  for  they 
sing  with  sweet  accord  before  the  throne, — "  A  new  song,  saying.  Thou 
art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof:  for  thou 
wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  G-od  by  thy  blood  out  of  every 
kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation." 

In  the  New  Testament  the  passages  abound  which  set  forth  the  doctrine 
upon  which  we  are  now  speaking.  Look  at  that  passage  in  Hebrew.s 
ix.  12.  There  we  are  told  expressly,  "  Without  shedding  of  blood 
there  is  no  remission."  There  is  no  remission  by  the  life  of  Christ,  no 
remission  by  the  teaching  of  Christ,  no  remission  by  our  repentance,  no 
remission  by  our  faith,  apart  from  the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  Christ, 
by  whom  alone  sin  is  put  away.  This  is  negative ;  but  in  this  case 
the  negative  is  as  strong  as  the  most  positive  statement  could  be ;  for  if 
without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission,  then  we  see  how  all- 
important  that  blood-shedding  becomes.  If  you  desire  a  positive  state- 
ment, a  sentence  rises  to  our  lips  at  once — "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Observe,  not  the  life,  not  the 
incarnation,  not  the  resurrection,  not  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  but  his  blood,  his  death,  the  giving  up  of  his  life,  is  that  which 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  This  is  that  purging  with  hyssop  whereof 
David  speaks  when  he  laments  his  sin,  and  yet  looks  to  be  made  whiter 
than  snow  by  the  free  pardon  of  his  God. 

This  trath  is  the  subject  of  all  true  gospel  preaching.  Do  you  not 
know  how  Paul  puts  it, — "The  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to  them 
that  perish  foolishness ;  but  unto  us  which  are  saved  it  is  the  power 
of  God;"  "for,"  he  says,  "the  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks 
seek  after  wisdom :  but  we  preach  Christ  crucified."  It  is  not  Christ 
in  any  other  position,  but  Christ  as  crucified,  Christ  as  made  a  curse 
for  us  upon  the  tree,  that  is  the  first  and  most  prominent  fact  that 
we  are  called  to  preach  among  the  sons  of  men.     "  In  whom  we  have 


SLAYING   THE    SACRIFICE.  387 

redemption  through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the 
riches  of  his  grace."  Take  away  this  substitutionary  death  of  our  Lord, 
and  you  have  taken  all  away :  without  the  death  of  Jesus  there  remaiueth 
nothing  for  us  but  death ;  forget  the  Crucified  One,  and  you  have  for- 
gotten the  only  name  by  which  we  can  be  saved.  Oh,  that  all  of  you 
would  trust  in  him  "  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  remission 
of  sins  that  are  past,  through  the  forbearance  of  God." 

My  brethren,  this  is  the  cause  of  the  saints  being  in  heaven.  In  the 
first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  verse  5,  we  have  the 
doxology,  which  begins,  "  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from 
our  sins  in  his  own  blood."  Thus  say  all  the  glorified.  Further  on  we 
are  told  concerning  the  saints,  "  They  have  washed  their  robes,  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Therefore  are  they  before 
the  throne  of  God,  and  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple :  and  he 
that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them."  This  is  the  true 
reading  of  the  fourteenth  verse  of  the  last  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Reve- 
lation :  "  Blessed  are  they  that  wash  their  robes,  that  they  may  have  the 
right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  by  the  gates  into  the  city." 
Thus  the  passport  to  glory  is  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus.  Access  to 
God  either  on  earth  or  in  heaven  is  only  by  the  blood  of  the  Son  of 
God. 

Now  and  then  we  meet  with  some  squeamish  person  who  says,  "  I 
cannot  bear  the  mention  of  the  word  Mood."  Such  individuals  will  be 
horrified  this  morning :  and  it  is  intended  that  they  should  be.  Sin  is 
such  a  horrible  thing  that  God  has  appointed  blood  to  wash  it  away,  that 
the  very  horror  which  the  thought  of  it  causes  may  give  you  some  notion 
of  the  terrible  nature  of  sin  as  God  judges  it.  It  is  not  without  a 
dreadful  blood-shedding  that  your  dreadful  guilt  could  by  any  possibiUty 
be  cleansed.  Sin-bearing,  and  suffering  for  sin,  can  never  be  pleasant 
things;  neither  should  the  type  which  sets  it  forth  be  pleasing  to  the 
observer.  On  great  days  of  sacrifice  the  courts  of  the  tabernacle  must 
have  seemed  like  a  shambles,  and  fitly  so,  that  all  might  be  struck  with 
the  deadly  nature  of  sin. 

If  it  be  so,  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  mentioned  in  the  songs  of  heaven, 
let  it  not  be  forgotten  in  the  hymns  of  earth. 

"  To  him  that  loved  the  souls  of  men, 
And  wash'd  us  in  his  blood, 
To  royal  honours  raised  our  head, 
And  made  us  pi'iests  to  God ; 

"  To  him  let  every  tongue  be  praise, 
And  every  heart  be  love  ! 
All  grateful  honours  jjaid  on  earth. 
And  nobler  songs  above  !  " 

The  church  militant  is  called  upon  continually  to  commemorate  the 
blood-shedding.  So  often  as  we  gather  to  the  Communion  Table  we  may 
ask  the  question,  "  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the 
communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  "  At  the  sacred  table  we  show  the 
death  of  our  Lord  until  he  come.  He  says  to  us  in  express  words, 
*  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the 


388  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

remission  of  sins."  He  bids  you  remember  the  blood  as  you  drink  of 
the  fruit  of  the  vine,  saying,  "  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my 
blood."  Take  the  blood  away,  and  the  communion  of  the  Lord's  Sapper 
has  gone ;  there  remains  nothing  but  the  Popish  mass  which  is  so 
blasphemously  called  an  unbloody  sacrifice  lor  the  quick  and  dead. 

Forget  not  that  every  person  gathering  to  that  table  of  communion 
is,  if  he  be  what  he  professes  to  be,  a  consecrated  man,  and  how  comes  he 
to  be  so  but  for  this  reason — '''  Ye  are  not  your  own,  for  ye  are  bought 
with  a  price"  ?  We  are  redeemed  unto  God  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  "  Ye 
were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold  ;  but  with 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without 
sp'it."  It  is  the  blood  that  makes  you  what  you  are,  and  the  blood  that 
permits  yon  to  enjoy  what  God  has  prepared  for  you ;  so  that  every  way 
you  see  the  absolute  essentiality  of  the  death  of  the  great  Sacrifice. 

Here  let  us  further  consider  that  death  is  the  result  and  pe7ialty  oj 
sin — "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished, 
bringeth  forth  death."  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  It  was  meet 
that  the  Substitute  should  bear  a  similar  chastisement  to  that  which 
should  have  fallen  upon  the  sinner.  Our  Saviour  did  not  endure  anni- 
hilation, for  that  is  not  the  meaning  of  death  :  neither  the  first  nor  the 
second  death  should  be  so  explained.  Jesus  was  not  annihilated,  but  he 
bore  the  pain,  the  loss,  the  ruin,  the  separation,  the  overwhelming  which 
is  intended  by  death.  He  was  even  forsaken  of  God,  so  that  he  cried 
out,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  The  penalty 
was  death,  and  therefore  Jesus  was  exceeding  sorrowful  even  unto  death ; 
he  laid  down  his  life  for  us,  and  became  obedient  to  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross.  The  law  demanded  death,  and  death  has  fallen  upon 
our  great  Covenant  Head.     "  In  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly." 

There  is  great  comfort  to  my  soul  in  this;  for  if  the  Lord  Jesus  has 
paid  the  capital  sentence  nothing  remains  unpaid.  "  He  that  is  dead 
is  freed  from  sin  ;  "  that  is  to  say,  if  the  law  has  killed  the  man  it  can 
ask  no  more  of  him,  he  must  be  free  from  further  charge  of  guilt. 
When  the  criminal  has  died  he  has  suffered  the  last  sentence  of  the  law, 
and  is  now  beyond  its  jurisdiction.  Our  Lord  Jesus  has  died  the  just 
for  the  unjust,  and  as  that  which  he  has  borne  is  nothing  less  than 
death,  it  must  cover  all  that  is  due  to  sin. 

"  He  bore  on  the  tree  the  sentence  for  me, 
And  now  both  the  Surety  and  sinner  are  free." 

Since  Jesus  has  died  unto  sin  once,  he  dieth  no  more,  death  hath  no  more 
dominion  over  him  ;  he  has  borne  the  last  and  most  far-reaching  penalty 
of  the  law,  and  there  can  be  nothing  left  upon  the  score.  His  atonement 
was  a  complete  redemption.  If  you  were  in  debt,  and  were  bound  to 
pay  so  much  every  month,  you  would  be  very  grateful  to  a  friend  who 
should  step  in  and  pay  several  instalments  for  you  ;  but  if  one  of  more 
liberal  spirit  discharged  the  whole  amount  your  gratitude  would  be  deep 
and  overflowing.  Let  us  rejoice  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  evi- 
dently by  his  substitutionary  sacrifice  put  away,  not  a  part  and  a  portion 
of  our  sin,  but  the  whole  of  it.  By  bearing  death  itself  he  has  removed 
all  our  legal  obligations,  and  has  placed  us  beyond  the  reach  of  further 
demands.     "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being 


SLAYING    THE    SACRIFICE.  389 

made  a  curse  for  us."  Now  we  may  sing  unto  him  who  has  removed 
our  transgressions  from  us  as  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west. 

This  death  of  Christ  ivas  absohdely  necessary  also  for  the  clearing  of 
the  troubled  conscience.  An  awakened  conscience  will  never  be  quieted 
with  anything  less  than  the  blood  of  the  Lamb:  it  rests  at  the  sight  of 
the  great  Sacrifice,  but  nowhere  else.  A  conscience  smarting  under  a 
sense  of  sin  is  an  unequalled  fountain  of  misery.  Let  conscience  once 
begin  to  scourge  the  sinner,  and  he  will  find  it  to  be  the  most  terrible 
tormentor  out  of  hell.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  prophet  Isaiah  was 
really  sawn  asunder  by  Manasseh,  but  we  know  that  some  of  the  saints 
suffered  that  torture ;  yet  surely  a  saw  that  should  gradually  cut  a  man 
in  halves  from  head  to  foot  is  a  faint  picture  of  what  conscience  can 
do  when  it  begins  to  operate  upon  the  mind  with  all  its  cutting  force. 
What  a  divine  atonement  that  must  be  which  calms  the  storms  of  an 
accusing  conscience  and  gives  the  soul  a  lasting  peace.  Some  may  trifle 
with  their  consciences,  but  where  God  is  at  work  men  dare  not  attempt 
it.  The  most  important  thing  in  the  world  to  a  sensible  man  is  the 
condition  of  his  own  conscience :  if  that  be  restless  he  is  in  an  evil  case. 
Thomas  Fuller  in  his  quaint  way  tells  us  that  he  one  day  asked  a 
neighbouring  minister  to  preach  for  him,  when  he  called  upon  a  short 
visit.  "  No,"  said  the  other,  "  I  cannot,  for  I  am  not  prepared. "^ 
"  But,"  said  Fuller,  "  though  you  are  unprepared,  I  am  sure  you  will 
preach  well  enough  to  satisfy  my  people."  His  friend  answered,  "  That 
may  be  true,  but  I  could  not  preach  well  enough  to  satisfy  my  own 
conscience."  There's  the  rub  with  a  true  man.  We  cannot  live  well 
enough  to  satisfy  our  conscience,  and  we  cannot  pray  well  enough  to 
satisfy  our  conscience.  A  really  tender  conscience  is  as  greedy  as  the 
horse-leech  which  crieth  "  Give!  Give!" — perfection  it  asks,  and  as  we 
cannot  render  it  by  i-eason  of  sin,  conscience  will  never  cease  its  outcries 
till  it  is  quieted  with  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  Once  let 
us  see  Jesus  offered  up  upon  the  cross  for  sin,  and  our  heart  feels  that  it 
is  enough.  When  God  is  well  pleased  we  may  well  be  satisfied,  and  go 
our  way  enjoying  peace  with  God  henceforth  and  for  ever. 

Thus  much,  then,  upon  our  first  point :  for  many  reasons  it  was 
absolutely  essential  that  our  great  Sacrifice  should  die. 

IL  Secondly,  we  will  with  great  delight  meditate  upon  the  fact  that 
the  death  of  Christ  is  effectually  prevalent.  Other  offerings, 
though  duly  slain,  did  nothing  thoroughly,  did  nothing  lastingly,  did 
nothing  really,  by  way  of  expiation  ;  for  the  Scripture  saith,  "  It  is  not 
possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins": 
the  true  purification  is  alone  found  in  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God. 
When  our  Lord  was  fastened  to  the  tree,  and  cried,  "  It  is  finished," 
and  gave  up  the  ghost,  he  had  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of 
sin,  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness.  By  offering  one  sacrifice 
for  sins  for  ever  the  work  was  done,  the  accusing  record  was  altogether 
blotted  out.  Why  was  there  such  cleansing  power  in  the  Eedeemcr's 
blood  ?     I  answer,  for  several  reasons. 

First,  because  of  the  glory  of  his  person.  Only  think  who  he  was !  He 
•was  none  other  than  the  "  Light  of  light,  very  God  of  very  God,"  He 
counted  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  yet  he  took  upon  himself 
our  nature,  and  was  born  of  a  virgin.     His  holy  soul  dwelt  in  a  per- 


390  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PTTLPIT. 

fectly  pure  body,  and  to  this  the  Godhead  was  united :  "  For  in  him 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  Now  for  this  glorious, 
this  sinless,  this  divine  person,  to  die  is  an  amazing  thing.  For  the 
Lord  of  angels.  Creator  of  all  things,  sustaining  all  things  by  the  power 
of  his  word — for  him,  I  say,  to  bow  his  head  to  death  as  a  vindication 
of  the  law  is  an  inconceivably  majestic  recompense  to  the  honour  of 
eternal  justice.  Never  could  justice  be  more  gloriously  exalted  in  the 
presence  of  intelligent  beings  than  by  the  Lord  of  all  submitting  himself 
to  its  requirements.  There  must  be  an  infinite  merit  about  his  death : 
a  desert  unutterable,  immeasurable.  Methinks  if  there  had  been  a 
million  worlds  to  redeem,  their  redemption  could  not  have  needed  more 
than  this  "sacrifice  of  himself."  If  the  whole  universe,  teeming  with 
worlds  as  many  as  the  sands  on  the  seashore,  had  required  to  be  ran- 
somed, that  one  giving  up  of  the  ghost  might  have  sufficed  as  a  full 
price  for  them  all.  However  gross  the  insults  which  sin  may  have  ren- 
dered to  the  law,  they  must  be  all  forgotten,  since  Jesus  magnified  the 
law  so  abundantly,  and  made  it  so  honourable  by  his  death.  I  believe 
in  the  special  design  of  our  Lord's  atoning  death,  but  I  will  yield  to  no 
one  in  my  belief  in  the  absolutely  infinite  value  of  the  offering  which 
our  Lord  Jesus  has  presented ;  the  glory  of  his  person  renders  the  idea 
of  limitation  an  insult. 

Next,  consider  the  perfection  of  our  Lords  character.  In  him  was  no 
sin,  nor  tendency  to  sin.  He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and 
separate  from  sinners."  In  his  character  we  see  every  virtue  at  its  best ; 
he  is  incomparable.  If  he  therefore  died,  "the  just  for  the  unjust," 
what  must  be  the  merit  of  such  a  death?  His  righteousness  has  such 
sweetness  in  it  that  all  the  ill-savour  of  our  transgression  is  put  away 
thereby :  it  is  no  wonder  that  by  the  obedience  of  such  an  one  as  this 
second  Adam  many  are  made  righteous. 

Think  next,  dear  friends,  of  the  nature  of  the  death  of  Christ,  and 
you  will  be  helped  to  see  how  effectual  it  must  be.  It  was  not  a  death 
by  disease,  or  old  age,  but  a  death  of  violence,  well  symbolized  by  the 
killing  of  the  victim  at  the  altar.  He  did  not  die  in  his  bed,  sleeping 
himself  out  of  the  world;  but  he  was  taken  by  wicked  hands,  and 
scourged,  and  spit  upon,  and  then  fastened  up  to  die  a  felon's  death. 
His  was  a  cruel  doom ;  human  malice  could  scarcely  have  invented  any 
method  of  execution  more  sure  to  create  pain  and  anguish  than  death 
by  hanging  on  a  tree,  fastened  by  nails  driven  through  hands  and  feet. 
In  addition  to  his  physical  pain,  our  Lord  was  sore  vexed  in  spirit.  His 
soul  sufferings  were  the  soul  of  his  sufferings:  "He  was  exceeding  sor- 
rowful even  unto  death."  Heaven  refused  its  smile :  his  mind  was  left 
in  darkness.  To  be  frowned  upon  of  God  was  a  part  of  the  punish- 
ment of  our  sin,  and  he  was  not  spared  that  direst  and  bitterest  woe. 
God  himself  turned  away  his  face  from  him,  and  left  him  in  the  dark. 
He  died  a  dishonourable  death,  yea,  a  cursed  death — "  As  it  is  written, 
cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  Now,  for  the  Son  of  God 
to  die,  and  die  in  such  a  manner,  was  a  marvel.  Never  martyr  died 
crying  that  he  was  forsaken  of  his  God :  that  desertion  was  the  lowest 
depth  of  the  Saviour's  grief,  and  since  he  died  thus  I  can  well  under- 
stand that  he  has  thereiay  made  an  ample  atonement  for  the  sins  of  all 
who  believe  in  him.     Oh,  great  atonement  of  my  blessed  Lord,  my  sins 


SLAYING   THE    SACRIFICK.  391 

•ure  swallowed  up  in  thee  !  Looking  to  the  cross  and  to  the  pierced 
heart  of  Jesiis  my  Lord,  I  am  assured  that  if  I  am  washed  in  his  blood 
I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow. 

And  then  think  of  the  spirit  in  ivhich  our  Lord  and  Saviour  bore  all 
this.  Martyrs  who  have  died  for  the  faith  have  only  paid  the  debt  of 
nature  a  little  before  its  time,  for  they  must  have  died  sooner  or  later  ; 
but  our  Lord  needed  not  to  have  died  at  all.  He  said  of  his  life,  "  No 
man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  myself"  The  pouring  out 
of  his  soul  unto  death  was  not  in  the  power  of  man  until  the  Lord  was 
pleased  to  yield  himself  a  sacrifice.  ''  He  gave  himself  for  ni3."  He 
laid  down  his  life  for  his  sheep.  Out  of  love  to  God  and  man  Ito 
willingly  drank  of  the  appointed  cup:  the  only  compulsion  which  he 
knew  was  his  own  desire  to  bless  his  chosen.  "  For  the  joy  that  was 
set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame."  Oh,  it  was 
splendidly  lived,  that  life  of  our  Lord;  the  spirit  which  guided  it  lights 
it  up  with  an  unrivalled  brightness!  Oh,  it  was  splendidly  died,  that 
death  of  our  Lord,  for  he  went  up  to  the  cross  with  such  willing  sub- 
mission that  it  became  his  throne !  The  thorn  crown  was  such  a  diadem 
as  emperor  never  wore,  it  was  made  of  the  ended  sorrows  of  his  people 
— sorrows  ended  by  their  encircling  his  own  majestic  head.  On  the 
cross  he  routed  his  enemies  and  made  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing 
over  them  in  it.  In  the  act  of  death  he  nailed  the  handwriting  of 
ordinances  that  was  against  us  to  his  cross,  and  so  destroyed  the  con- 
demning power  of  the  law.  0  glorious  Christ,  there  must  be  infinite 
merit  in  such  a  death  as  thine,  endured  in  such  a  style  ! 

And  then  I  bid  you  to  remember  once  more  the  covenant  character  which 
Christ  sustained:  for  when  he  was  crucified  we  thus  judge  that  one  died 
for  all,  and  in  him  all  died.  He  was  not  slain  as  a  private  individual, 
but  he  was  put  to  death  as  a  representative  man.  God  had  entered  into 
covenant  with  Christ,  and  he  was  the  surety  of  that  covenant;  therefore 
his  blood  is  called  "  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant."  Eemember 
the  expression  of  the  apostle  where  he  speaks  of  "  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  wherewith  we  are  sanctified."  Neither  the  first  nor  the 
second  covenant  was  dedicated  without  blood;  but  the  new  covenant 
was  established  by  no  blood  of  beasts,  but  by  the  blood  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  that  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep.  When  he  offered  him- 
self he  was  accepted  in  that  character  and  capacity  in  which  God  had 
regarded  him  from  before  the  foundations  of  the  world ;  so  that  what  he 
did  he  did  as  the  Covenant-head  of  his  people.  It  was  meet  that  he 
should  die  for  us,  seeing  he  had  assumed  the  position  of  the  second 
Adam,  being  constituted  our  federal  Head  and  Representative.  The 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him  because  he  condescended  to  be 
one  flesh  with  us ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed  because  there  is  a 
covenant  union  between  ua  Thus  much  upon  the  effectual  prevalence 
of  that  great  Sacrifice :  a  theme  so  vast  that  one  might  enlarge  upon  it 
throughout  all  time. 

III.  Beloved  friends,  it  seems  to  me  that  no  one  will  now  forbid  my 
saying,  thirdly,  that  the  fact  of  the  necessity  for  the  death  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  INTENSELY  INSTRUCTIVE.  Listen  while  I  repeat  the  lessons 
very  briefly  :  you  can  enlarge  upon  them  when  you  go  hence  to  meditate 
in  solitude. 


g92  MRTROPOLI  lAX    TABKKNACI.E    PULPI  '  . 

Must  the  victims  die?  muafc  Jesus  bleed?  theu  let  us  see  what  i» 
claimed  by  our  righieous  God.  He  claims  our  life:  he  claimed  of  the 
offering  its  blood,  which  is  the  life  thereof:  he  justly  requires  of  each 
of  us  our  whole  life.  We  must  not  dream  of  satisfying  God  with 
formal  prayers,  or  occasional  alms-deeds,  or  outward  ceremonies,  or  a 
half-hearted  reverence.  He  must  have  our  heart,  aad  soul,  and  mind 
and  strength— all  that  makes  our  true  self,  the  life  of  our  being.  Dead 
works  are  worthless  before  the  living  God.  He  claims  our  life,  and  he 
will  have  it  one  way  or  another;  either  by  its  being  perfectly  spent  in 
his  service,  or  else  by  its  being  smitten  down  in  death  as  the  righteous 
punishment  of  rebellion.  Nor  is  the  demand  unjust.  Did  he  not  make 
us,  and  does  he  not  preserve  us  ?  Should  he  not  receive  homage  from 
the  creatures  of  his  hand? 

Next,  must  the  sacrifice  die  ?  then  see  the  evil  of  sin.  It  is  not  such 
a  trifle  as  certain  men  imagine.  It  is  a  deadly  evil,  a  killing  poison. 
God  himself  in  human  form  took  human  guilt  upon  him :  the  sin  was 
none  of  his,  it  was  only  imputed  to  him,  but  when  he  was  made  sin  for 
us,  and  bare  our  iniquities,  there  was  no  help  for  it,  he  must  die !  Even 
he  must  die !  It  was  not  possible  that  the  cup  should  pass  from  him. 
A  voice  was  heard  from  the  throne — "  Awake,  0  Sword,  against  my  Shep- 
herd, and  against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts : 
smite  the  Shepherd!"  So  unflinching  is  divine  justice  that  it  will  not,, 
cannot  spare  sin,  let  it  be  where  it  may ;  hay,  not  even  when  that  guilt 
is  not  the  person's  own,  but  is  only  taken  up  by  him  as  a  substitute. 
Sin  wherever  it  is  must  be  smitten  with  the  sword  of  death  :  this  is  a  law 
fixed  and  unalterable.  Who,  then,  will  take  pleasure  in  transgression? 
Will  not  every  man  who  loves  his  own  life  arouse  himself  to  fight 
against  iniquity?  Sinner,  shake  off  your  sin,  as  Paul  shook  off  the 
viper  into  ttie  fire.  Do  not  dally  with  it.  Pray  God  that  you  may  have 
done  with  it.  It  is  a  horrible  and  a  grievous  thing,  and  God  saith  to 
you  "  Oh,  do  not  this  abominable  thing  which  I  hate."  God  help  you  to 
flee  from  all  iniquity. 

Next  learn  the  love  of  God.  Behold  how  he  loved  you  and  me !  He 
must  punish  sin,  but  he  must  save  us,  and  so  he  gives  his  Son  to  die  in 
our  stead.  I  shall  not  go  too  far  if  I  say  that  in  giving  his  Son  the 
Lord  God  gave  himself,  for  Jesus  is  one  with  the  Father.  We  cannot 
divide  the  Substance  though  we  distinguish  the  Persons  :  thus  God 
himself  made  atonement  for  sin  committed  against  himself.  The  church 
is  "the  flock  of  God  which  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood." 
Wonder  of  wonders !  Truly  love  is  strong  as  death  as  we  see  it  in  the 
heart  of  God  !  "  Scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die :  yet  perad- 
venture  for  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare  to  die.  But  God  com- 
mendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ 
died  for  us."  This  is  a  heaped-up  marvel.  Behold  what  manner  of 
love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us ! 

Next  lear?i  hoiv  Christ  has  made  an  end  of  sin.  Sin  is  laid  on  him  and 
he  dies ;  then  sin  is  dead  and  buried ;  if  it  be  sought  for  it  cannot  be 
found.  Speak  of  finality,  this  is  the  truest  and  surest  finality  that  ever 
was,  or  shall  be.  "  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ?  "  Not  as  before. 
If  Christ  died,  what  is  there  after  death  ?  Nothing  but  the  judgment, 
and  lo,  he  comes  to  that  judgment :  "  being  raised  from  the  dead  he  dieth; 


SLAYING   THE    SACRIFICE.  393 

no  more,  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him."  This  is  our  joy 
because  neither  sin  nor  death  can  have  dominion  over  us  for  whom 
Christ  died,  and  who  died  in  him.  Christ  has  made  an  end  of  sin.  His 
one  oSering-  has  perfected  for  ever  the  set-apart  ones. 

These  are  but  a  few  of  the  great  lessons  which  we  may  learn  from  the 
necessity  that  the  Sacrifice  should  be  slain.  T  pray  you  learn  them  well. 
May  they  be  engraven  on  your  hearts  by  the  H<j!y  Ghost. 

IV.  And  so  I  shall  close  by  saying  that  this  blessed  subject  is  not 
only  full  of  instruction,  but  it  is  enkrgktically  inspiring. 

First,  this  inspires  us  with  ihe  spirit  of  consecration.  When  I  think 
that  I  could  not  be  saved  except  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  then  I  feel  that 
I  am  not  my  own,  but  bought  with  a  price.  I  remember  reading  of 
Charles  Simeon,  the  famous  evangelical  clergyman  of  Cambridge,  that 
he  was  one  day  thrown  from  his  horse,  and  was  fearful  that  he  had  sus- 
tained serious  injury.  When  he  had  recovered  from  the  force  of  the 
fall,  he  stretched  out  his  right  arm,  felt  it,  and  finding  that  there  was 
not  a  bone  broken,  he  consecrated  that  arm  anew  to  the  living  God,  wha 
had  so  graciously  preserved  it.  Then  he  examined  his  left  arm  and 
found  it  all  right,  and  so  held  that  up,  and  dedicated  it  anew  unto 
the  divine  service.  He  did  the  same  with  his  head,  his  legs,  and  his  whole 
body.  As  I  was  thinking  over  this  subject  I  felt  as  if  I  must  go  over 
my  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  and  dedicate  all  to  that  dear  Saviour  by 
whose  blood  I  am  altogether  redeemed  from  death  and  hell.  "  Bless 
the  Lord,  0  my  soul :  and  all  that  is  within  me,  bless  his  holy  name." 
As  I  am  not  cast  away  from  God,  as  I  am  not  destroyed,  as  I  am  not  in 
torment,  not  in  hell,  I  dedicate  to  God  my  blood-bought  spirit,  soul, 
and  body  from  henceforth  to  be  the  Lord's  as  long  as  ever  I  live. 
Brothers  and  sisters,  do  you  not  feel  the  same  ?  I  pray  God  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  make  you  do  so  in  a  very  practical  manner.  This  doctrine  of 
the  death  of  Christ  ought  to  inspire  you  till  you  sing — 

"  Jesus,  spotless  Lamb  of  God, 
Thou  hast  bought  me  with  thy  blood, 
I  would  value  nought  beside 
Je.«us — Jesus  crucified. 

*'  I  am  thine,  and  thine  alone, 
This  I  gladly,  tuUy  own  ; 
And,  in  all  my  works  and  ways. 
Only  now  would  seek  thy  praise." 

N"ext,  this  ti-uth  should  create  in  us  a  longing  after  the  greatest  holiness^ 
for  we  should  say,  "  Did  sin  kill  my  Saviour  ?  Then  I  will  kill  sin  ! 
Could  I  not  be  saved  from  sin  except  by  his  precious  blood  ?  Then,  0 
sin,  1  will  be  revenged  upon  thee !  I  will  drive  thee  out  by  the  help 
of  God's  Spirit.  I  will  not  endure  thee,  nor  harbour  thee.  I  will  make 
no  provision  for  the  flesh.  As  sin  was  the  death  of  Christ  for  me,  so 
Christ  shall  be  the  death  of  sin  in  me." 

Does  not  this  inspire  you  with  great  love  for  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Can 
you  look  at  his  dear  wounds,  and  not  be  wounded  with  love  for  him  ? 
Are  not  his  wounds  as  mouths  which  plead  with  you  to  yield  him  all 
your  hearts  ?  Can  you  gaze  upon  his  face  bedewed  with  bloody  sweat, 
and  then  go  away  and  be  ensnared  with  the  world's  painted  beauties  ? 


.^4  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Heard  you  ever  of  a  wooer  dressed  in  such  robes  of  love  as  those  which 
Jesus  wore  ?  Did  ever  love  use  such  sacred  means  to  win  the  beloved 
heart  as  Christ  hath  done  ?  What  can  any  one  of  us.  do  but  answer  him 
thus— 

"  Here,  Lord,  I  give  myself  away, 
Tis  all  that  I  can  do  "  ? 

Do  you  not  think  that  this  solemn  truth  should  inspire  us  with  great 
zeal  for  the  salvatmi  of  others?  As  Christ  laid  down  his  life  for  us, 
should  we  not  lay  ourselves  out  for  perishing  souls,  and,  if  necessary,  lay 
down  our  lives  for  the  brethren  ?  Should  we  not  practise  self-denial 
in  our  labours  to  bring  men  to  Jesus?  Should  we  not  joyfully  toil,  and 
cheerfully  bear  reproach,  if  by  any  means  we  may  save  some  ? 

Methinks  if  this  subject  should  go  home  to  our  hearts  it  would  be 
beneficial  to  us  in  a  thousand  ways,  and  make  us  better  soldiers  of  the 
cross,  closer  followers  of  the  Lamb.  I  pray  that  God  the  Holy  Ghost  may 
place  it  in  the  centre  of  our  souls,  and  keep  it  there.  It  will  bring  with  it 
peace  and  rest.  Why  should  we  be  troubled,  since  Jesus  died  ?  It  will  fill 
our  mouths  with  praises.  Hallelujah  to  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  who 
has  redeemed  us  by  his  blood!  It  will  draw  us  into  closer  communion 
with  him.  If  he  loved  us  and  died  for  us,  we  must  live  with  him,  and  in 
him,  and  to  him.  Snrely  it  will  also  make  us  long  to  behold  him !  Oh, 
for  the  vision  of  the  Crucified !  When  shall  we  see  the  face  that  was  so 
marred  for  us  ?  When  shall  we  behold  the  hands  and  feet  which  bear  the 
nail-marks  still,  and  look  into  the  wounded  side  bejewelled  with  the 
spear-wound  ?  Oh,  when  shall  we  up  and  away  from  all  our  sins  and 
griefs,  for  ever  to  behold  him  shine  and  see  him  still  before  us  ?  Oh,  when 
shall  we  be — 

"  Far  from  a  world  of  grief  and  sin, 
With  God  eternally  shut  in"  ? 

Till  then  our  hope,  our  solace,  our  glory,  our  victory,  are  all  found  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read   before    Sermon — Hebrews  ix. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  " — 427,  291,  428. 


THE  SPRINKLING  OF  THE  BLOOD  OF  THE  SACEIFICE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  May  11th,  1884,  bt 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  And  the  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and  sprinkle  of  the  blood  seven  times 
before  the  Lord,  before  the  vail  of  the  sanctuary.  And  the  priest  shall  put  some  of  the 
blood  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense  before  the  Lord,  which  is  in  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation;  and  shall  pour  all  the  blood  of  the  bullock  at  the  bottom 
of  the  altar  of  the  burnt  offering,  which  is  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation."— Leviticus  iv.  6,  7. 

I  HAVE  aforetime  preached  to  you  upon  the  types  of  our  Lord's  sacrifice: 
the  subject  is  as  large  as  it  is  important.  We  began  with  the  laying  of 
the  hands  upon  the  offering,  and  we  went  on  to  the  all-important  matter 
of  the  slaying  of  the  victim.*  Now  we  come  to  the  use  which  was  made 
of  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  after  it  had  been  slain.  In  thinking  upon 
this  subject,  I  seem  to  hear  a  voice  saying  to  me,  '"  Put  oft'  thy  shoes 
from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thon  standest  is  holy  ground." 
This  is  the  central  mystery  of  our  religion,  it  becomes  us  to  be  reverent 
in  heart  as  we  approach  it.  The  doctrine  of  substitution  is  the  heart 
of  the  whole  matter,  our  whole  heart  needs  to  be  aroused  while  we  speak 
upon  it.  The  Son  of  God  himself,  assuming  human  nature,  and  in  that 
nature  bleeding  and  dying  in  our  place  and  stead,  is  the  revelation 
of  revelation,  the  wonder  of  wonders,  the  glory  of  the  glorious  God. 
Solemnity  and  awe  may  well  fill  us  while  we  meditate  on  such  a  theme. 
Oh,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  rest  upon  us  now !  May  his  melting 
power  be  over  this  vast  assembly !  May  the  speaker  feel  it,  may  the 
hearers  experience  it,  so  that  we  may  with  one  consent,  in  spirit  and  in 
truth,  look  to  him  who,  by  the  Eternal  Spirit,  offered  up  himself  without 
spot  unto  God  ! 

The  sacrifices  under  the  law  were  varied  according  to  the  uppermost 
ihoughts  in  the  offerers'  minds  and  their  peculiar  conditions  before  God. 
A  burnt-offering,  a  peace-offering,  or  a  sin-offering  might  be  brought, 
according  as  men  wished  to  give  unto  the  Lord,  to  have  fellowship  with 
him,  or  to  confess  their  sin  to  him.  There  was  a  sacrifice  specially 
arranged  for  the  anointed  priest,  another  for  all  the  congregation, 
another  for  a  ruler,  and  yet  another  for  one  of  the  common  people : 

*  See  "  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,"  Nos.  1771  and  1772. 
No.  1,780.  U 


396  METROPOIilTAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

in  truth  the  typical  sacrifices  all  pointed  to  the  one  great  sacrifice,  but 
they  indicated  varicras  marks  and  characteristics  of  the  undivided  Lamb 
of  Grod.  The  victims  varied  from  a  bullock  or  a  lamb  down  to  a  pair 
of  turtle  doves  or  Myo  young  pigeons.  We  take  different  views  of 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  according  to  our  capacity  to  see  it;  and  yet 
all  these  views  may  be  quite  in  accordance  with  truth,  for  the  atone- 
ment is  many-sided,  and  operates  in  many  directions.  The  Levitical 
types  represent  the  different  views  which  believing  minds  take  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  tliey  set  forth  but  one  Christ,  but  that  oae 
Christ  from  various  stand-points.  The  mercy  is  that  the  sacrifice  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  is  suitable  to  you,  and  equally  suitable  to  me,  and  to  all  that 
come  to  him  by  faith.  The  rich,  the  poor,  the  brave,  the  timid,  the 
amiable,  and  the  immoral,  all  find  in  Jesus  that  which  fits  the 
individual  case.  You  may  be  a  person  of  great  mind  and  profound 
thought,  but  you  shall  find  in  Jesus  all  that  your  high  inteUigeuce 
can  desire.  I  may  be  a  person  of  slender  education  and  of  narrow 
powers  of  thought,  but  I  shall  find  the  Lord  Jesus  humbling  himself 
to  my  limited  capacity.  The  manna  is  said  by  the  rabbis  to  have 
pleased  every  man's  taste,  and  even  so  the  Christ  of  God  is  every  man's 
Christ,  so  that  no  man  who  comes  to  him  shall  be  disappointed,  but 
each  shall  find  his  need  supplied.  Each  man  shall  find  his  case 
perfectly  met  by  the  Saviour's  atonement,  as  much  so  as  if  Jesus  were 
prepared  for  that  man  only,  as  if  that  man  were  the  only  sinner  under 
heaven,  or  Jesus  a  Eedeemer  sent  to  him  alone  of  all  the  family  of 
man.  Oh,  the  depth  of  the  wisdom  and  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the 
person  and  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ! 

Note  particularly,  with  great  interest,  that  there  were  sacrifices  pro- 
vided for  sins  of  ignorance  under  the  law :  therefore  we  safely  conclude 
that  a  sin  of  ignorance  is  a  sin.  There  is  not  that  intensity  of  evil  in  a 
sin  of  ignorance  which  is  to  be  seen  in  wilful,  deliberate  transgression ; 
but  stiil  there  is  sin  in  it :  fur  no  law  can  allow  ignorance  to  be  an  excuse 
for  trespass,  since  it  is  the  duty  of  the  subject  to  know  the  law.  Even 
if  I  do  that  which  is  wrong  with  a  sincere  wish  to  do  right,  still  my 
wrong  act  has  a  measure  of  sin  in  it.  No  amount  of  sincerity  can 
turn  injustice  into  righteousness,  or  transform  falsehood  into  truth. 
You  can  illustrate  this  by  the  stern  facts  of  nature.  Certain  inventors 
have  thought  that  they  could  fly,  and  they  have  in  perfectly  honest  faith 
leaped  from  a  lofty  crag  ;  but  their  honest  belief  has  not  saved  them 
from  the  result  of  violating  the  law  of  gravitation  :  they  have  fallen  to 
the  ground,  and  have  been  dashed  in  pieces  just  as  surely  and  terribly 
as  if  they  had  felt  no  real  belief  in  their  powers  of  flight.  If  a  man 
partakes  of  a  deadly  poison  believing  it  to  be  a  health-giving  medicine, 
his  sincerity  will  not  hinder  the  natural  course  of  nature  :  he  will  die  in 
his  error.  It  is  precisely  so  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  world.  Sins 
committed  in  ignorance  must  be  still  sins  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  or 
else  no  expiation  would  have  been  provided  for  them.  Without  shedding 
of  blood  there  is  no  remission  even  for  sins  of  ignorance.  Paul  per- 
secuted the  saints  ignorantly,  but  he  thereby  incurred  sins  which 
required  to  be  washed  away;  so  Ananias  told  him,  and  so  he  felt,  for  he 
called  himself  the  chief  of  sinners  because  he  persecuted  the  church  of 
God.     AYhen  the  people  sinned  through  ignorance,  and  the  thing  was 


THE   SPRINKLING   OF   THE   BLOOD   OF  THE    SACRIFICE.  397 

hid  from  the  eyes  of  the  assembly,  they  were  to  bring  an  offering  as 
soon  as  the  sin  was  known.  If  yon  have  transgressed  ignorantly,  my 
brother,  the  time  may  come  when  you  will  find  out  that  you  were 
sinning,  and  it  will  then  rejoice  your  heart  to  find  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
has  made  atonement  for  your  sins  before  you  knew  them  to  be  sins. 

I  am  greatly  rejoiced  to  think  there  should  be  such  a  sacrifice  pro- 
vided, since  it  may  yet  turn  out  that  the  larger  number  of  our  sins 
are  sins  of  which  we  have  not  been  aware,  because  the  hardness  of  our 
heart  has  prevented  our  discovering  our  error.  You  may  have  sinned 
and  have  no  conscience  of  that  sin  at  this  present,  ay,  and  you  never 
may  have  a  conscience  of  that  particular  offence,  in  this  world,  yet  will 
it  be  sin  all  the  same.  Many  good  men  have  lived  in  an  evil  habit,  and 
remained  in  it  unto  death,  and  yet  have  not  known  it  to  be  evil.  Now, 
if  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  only  put  away  the  sin  which  we  perceived 
in  detail,  its  efficacy  would  be  limited  by  the  enlightenment  of  our 
conscience,  and  therefore  some  grievous  sin  might  be  overlooked  and 
prove  our  ruin :  but  inasmuch  as  this  blood  puts  away  all  sins,  it  removes 
those  which  we  do  not  discover  as  well  as  those  over  which  we  mourn. 
*'  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults  "  is  a  prayer  to  which  the  expiation 
of  Christ  is  a  full  answer.  The  atonement  acts  according  to  God's  sight 
of  sin  and  not  according  to  our  sight  of  it,  for  we  only  see  it  in  part, 
but  God  sees  it  all  and  blots  it  all  out.  When  we  discover  our  iniquity 
it  is  ours  to  weep  over  it  with  true  and  deep  repentance ;  but  if  there  be 
some  sins  which  in  detail  we  have  not  discerned,  and  consequentl/ 
have  not  by  a  specific  act  of  repentance  confessed  them  separately,  yet, 
for  all  that,  the  Lord  doth  put  away  our  sin ;  for  it  is  written,  "  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  rt//sin."  Those  unknown 
sufferings  of  Christ  which  the  Greek  Liturgy  mentions  so  wisely,  have 
put  away  from  us  those  unknown  sins  which  we  cannot  confess  iu  detail 
because  we  have  not  yet  perceived  them.  Blessed  be  God  for  a  sacrifice 
which  cleanses  away  for  ever  not  only  our  glaring  faults,  but  those 
offences  which  the  most  minute  self-examination  has  not  yet  uncovered. 

After  the  blood  had  been  spilt  by  the  killing  of  the  sacrifice,  and  thus 
atonement  had  been  made,  three  several  acts  were  to  be  performed  by 
the  priest :  we  have  them  described  in  our  text ;  and  if  you  will  kindly 
look  you  will  see  that  very  much  the  same  words  follow  in  the  seven- 
teenth and  eighteenth  verses,  so  also  in  the  twenty-fifth  verse,  and  in 
the  thirty-fourth  verse,  where  with  somewhat  less  of  detail  much  the 
same  act  is  set  forth.  "  And  the  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood, 
and  sprinkle  of  the  blood  seven  times  befure  the  Lord,  before  the  vail 
■of  the  sanctuary.  And  the  priest  shall  put  some  of  the  blood  upon  the 
horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense  before  the  Lord,  which  is  in  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation ;  and  shall  pour  all  the  blood  of  the 
bullock  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of  the  burnt  off'ering,  which  is  at  the 
door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  All  this  is  symbolic  of  the 
work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  the  manifold  effects  of  his  blood. 

There  were  three  things :  first,  "  the  priest  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the 
blood,  and  sprinkle  of  the  blood  seven  times  before  the  Lord,  before 
the  vail  of  the  sanctuary  " :  this  represents  the  atoning  sacrifice  in  its 
reference  to  God.  Next,  "  The  priest  shall  put  some  of  the  blood  upon  the 
horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense  before  the  Lord :  "  this  sets  fortb 


398  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT, 

the  influence  of  the  Mood  npo?i  the  offering  of  intercessory  prayer.  Thirdly, 
we  read,  "  he  shall  pour  all  (the  rest)  of  the  blood  of  the  bullock 
at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of  the  burnt  oflFering "  :  this  displays  the 
influence  of  tin  Mood  of  Christ  on  all  our  service  for  the  Lord.  Oh,  for  the 
Spirit's  power  to  us  to  show  the  things  of  Christ ! 

I.  We  begin  with  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  in  its  relation  to 
THE  Lord  God  of  Israel. 

In  the  type  before  us  the  prominent  thing  before  God  is  the  Moodof  atone-^ 
mejit.  No  mention  is  made  of  a  meat-oflfering,  or  a  drink-offering,  or  even 
of  sweet  spices  upon  the  golden  altar;  the  one  conspicuous  object  is 
blood.  This  was  sprinkled  before  the  Lord  before  the  vail  of  the  Most 
Holy  place.  I  am  well  aware  that  some  persons  cry  out,  "  The  preacher 
continually  talks  about  blood,  and  this  morning  from  the  first  hymn  to 
the  last  he  has  brought  before  us  constant  allusions  to  blood.  We  are 
horrified  by  it !  "  I  wish  you  to  be  horrified ;  for,  indeed,  sin  is  a  thing 
to  shudder  at,  and  the  death  of  Jesus  is  not  a  matter  to  be  treated 
lightly.  It  was  God's  intent  to  awaken  in  man  a  great  disgust  of  sin, 
by  making  him  see  that  it  could  only  be  put  away  by  suffering  and 
death.  In  the  Tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  almost  everything  was 
sanctified  by  blood.  The  purple  drops  fell  even  on  the  book,  and  all  the 
people.  The  blood  was  to  be  seen  everywhere.  As  soon  as  you  entered 
the  outer  court  you  saw  the  great  brazen  altar;  and  at  the  base  of  it 
bowls  of  blood  were  constantly  being  poured  out.  When  you  passed  the 
first  vail  and  entered  the  holy  place,  if  you  saw  a  priest  he  was 
bespattered  from  head  to  foot  with  blood,  his  snow-white  robes  bringing 
the  crimson  spots  most  vividly  before  the  eye.  If  you  looked  around,  you 
saw  the  horns  of  the  golden  altar  of  incense  smeared  with  blood,  and 
the  gorgeous  vail  which  hid  the  innermost  sanctuary  was  bedewed  with 
a  frequent  sprinkling  of  the  same.  The  holy  tent  was  by  no  means  a 
place  for  sentimentalists ;  its  emblematic  teachings  dealt  with  terrible 
realities,  in  a  boldly  impressive  manner ;  its  ritual  was  not  constructed 
to  gratify  the  taste,  but  to  impress  the  mind.  It  was  not  a  place  for 
dainty  gentlemen,  but  for  broken-hearted  sinners.  Everywhere  the 
ignorant  eye  would  see  somewhat  to  displease ;  but  the  troubled  con- 
science would  read  lessons  of  peace  and  pardon.  Oh,  that  any  words  of 
mine  could  cause  triflers  with  sin  to  be  shocked  at  the  abominable 
thing !  I  would  have  them  filled  with  horror  of  that  detestable  thing 
which  cannot  be  put  away  except  by  that  which  is  infinitely  more 
calculated  to  shock  the  instructed  mind  than  rivers  of  the  blood  of  bulls 
and  of  goats — I  mean  the  sacrifice  of  God's  own  Son,  whose  soul  was 
made  an  offering  for  sin. 

The  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  sprinkled  before  the  vail  seven  times,  sig- 
nifying this — first,  that  the  atonement  made  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  perfect 
in  its  reference  to  God.  All  through  the  Scriptures,  as  you  well  know, 
seven  is  the  number  of  perfection,  and  in  this  place  it  is  doubtless  used 
with  that  intent.  The  seven  times  is  the  same  as  once  for  all :  it  conveys 
the  same  meaning  as  when  we  read,  "  For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered 
for  sins,"  and  again,  "  We  are  sanctified  through  the  offering  of  the  body 
of  Jesus  Christ  once."  It  is  a  complete  act.  In  this  text  we  understand 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  offered  unto  the  justice  of  God  an  absolutely  com- 
plete and  satisfactory  atonement  by  his  vicarious  suffering  and  death  for 


THE   SPRINKLING  OF  THE   BLOOD   OF  THE    SACRIFICE,  399 

^ilty  men.  There  is  no  need  of  further  offering  for  sin.  "  It  is  finished." 
He  hath  by  himself  purged  our  sins.  In  old  time,  before  the  coming 
of  our  Lord,  the  vail  hung  darkly  between  the  place  of  God's  glorious 
presence  and  his  worshipping  people :  it  was  only  lifted  for  a  moment 
once  a  year,  and  then  that  one  only  of  all  living  men  might  enter  into 
the  Holy  of  HoHes  for  a  brief  space,  the  way  into  the  Holiest  not  being 
yet  made  manifest;  but  still  the  blood  was  sprinkled  towards  the  place 
where  the  glory  of  God  was  pleased  to  dwell ;  indicating  that  access  to 
him  could  only  be  by  the  way  of  the  blood.  Albeit  that  modern  though/' 
will  contradict  me,  I  shall  not  cease  to  assert  perpetually  that  the 
greatest  result  of  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  God-ward.  Not  only 
does  he  reconcile  us  unto  God  by  his  death,  and  turn  our  enmity  into 
love,  but  he  has  borne  the  chastisement  of  our  peace,  and  thus  magnified 
the  law  and  made  it  honourable.  God,  the  Judge  of  all,  is  enabled 
without  the  violation  of  his  justice  to  pass  by  transgression,  iniquity, 
and  sin.  The  blood  of  the  sin-offering  was  sprinkled  before  the  Lord 
because  the  sin  was  before  the  Lord.  David  says — "Against  thee,  thee 
only,  have  I  sinned,"  and  the  prodigal  cries,  "  I  have  sinned  against 
heaven  and  before  thee."  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  so  mainly  a 
propitiation  before  God,  so  thoroughly  a  vindication  of  divine  righteous- 
ness,  that  this  one  view  of  the  atonement  is  sufficient  for  any  man,  even 
if  he  obtains  no  other ;  but  let  him  beware  of  trusting  to  a  faith  which 
does  not  look  to  the  great  propitiation.  This  is  the  soul-saving  view ; 
the  idea  which  pacifies  conscience  and  wins  the  heart :  we  believe  in 
Jesus  as  the  propitiation  for  sin.  The  lights  which  stream  from  the 
cross  are  very  varied ;  but  as  all  the  coloured  rays  are  found  in  the  white 
light  of  day,  so  all  the  varied  teachings  of  Calvary  meet  in  the  fact 
that  Jesus  suffered  for  sin,  the  just  for  the  unjust.  Do  not  your  hearts, 
feel  glad  to  think  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  offered  a  perfect 
atonement,  covering  all,  removing  every  obstacle  to  the  mercy  of  God^ 
making  a  clear  way  for  the  Lord  most  justly  to  justify  the  guilty  ? 
No  man  need  bring  anything  more,  or  anything  of  his  own,  wherewith 
to  turn  away  the  anger  of  God ;  but  he  may  come  just  as  he  is,  guilty 
and  defiled,  and  plead  this  precious  blood  which  has  made  effectual 
atonement  for  him.  0  my  soul,  endorse  the  doctrine,  feel  the  sweet 
experiences  that  flow  from  it,  and  stand  thoa  now  in  the  presence  of 
God  without  fear :  for  seven  times  has  the  blood  spoken  for  thee  unto 
God. 

Note  next,  that  not  only  is  the  atonement  itself  perfect,  but  that  the 
presentation  of  that  atonement  is  perfect,  too.  The  sevenfold  sprinkling 
was  typical  of  Christ  as  a  Priest  presenting  unto  the  Father  himself  as 
a  sacrifice  for  sin.  This  has  been  fully  done.  Jesus  has  in  due  order 
carried  the  propitiation  into  the  sanctuary,  and  appeared  in  the  presence 
of  God  on  our  behalf.  Here  are  the  apostle's  own  words,  "  by  his  own 
blood  he  entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal 
redemption  for  us."  It  is  not  our  presenting  of  the  blood,  but  Christ's 
presenting  of  the  blood,  which  has  made  the  atonement ;  even  as  it  is 
not  our  sight  of  the  blood,  but  Jehovah's  sight  of  it  which  causes  us  to 
escape;  as  it  was  written  concerning  the  Passover,  "When  I  see  the 
blood,  I  will  pass  over  you."  Jesus  at  this  moment  sets  his  atonement 
within  view  of  a  righteous  God,  and  therefore  is  the  Judge  oi  all  the 


400  ^TRTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

earth,  able  to  look  on  the  guilty  with  eyes  of  mercy.  Let  ns  rest  perfectly 
satisfied  that  all  we  require  to  bring  us  near  to  God  has  been  done  for 
us,  and  we  may  now  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace. 

"  No  longer  far  from  God  :  but  now 
By  precious  blood  made  nigh, 
Accepted  in  the  well-beloved 
Near  to  his  heart  we  lie." 

TVe  now  pass  on  to  a  few  thoughts  about  ourseWes  in  relation  to  this 
type.  This  sevenfold  sprinkling  of  the  blood  upon  the  vail  maant  that 
the.  ivay  of  our  access  to  God  is  only  hy  virtue  of  the  precious  Hood  of 
Christ.  i)o  you  ever  feel  a  vail  hanging  between  you  and  Grod  ?  In 
very  truth,  there  is  none  ;  for  Jesus  has  taken  it  away  through  his 
•flesh.  In  the  day  when  his  blessed  body  was  offered  up,  the  vail  of  the 
temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  showing  tliat  there 
is  nothing  now  to  divide  the  believer  from  his  God;  but  still,  if  you 
think  there  is  such  a  separating  vail,  if  you  feel  as  if  the  Lord  had 
hidden  himself,  if  you  are  so  despondent  that  you  are  afraid  you  never 
can  draw  near  to  the  mercy-seat,  then  spriniile  the  blood  towards  the 
throne  of  grace,  cast  it  on  the  very  vail  which  appears  to  conceal  your 
God  from  you.  Let  your  heart  go  towards  God  even  if  you  cannot 
reach  him,  and  let  this  blood  go  before  you  ;  for  rest  assured  nothing 
can  dissolve  obstacles  and  furnish  you  with  an  open  access  to  God  save 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God.  Rest  assured  that  you  are 
already  come  unto  God  if  boldly,  ay,  even  if  timidly  with  trembling 
finger,  you  do  but  sprinkle  the  blood  in  the  direction  which  your  faith 
longs  to  take.  If  you  cannot  present  the  atonement  of  Christ  yourself 
by  the  firm  hand  of  an  undaunted  faith  ;  yet,  remember,  Christ's  own 
hand  has  presented  the  propitiation  long  before,  and  therefore  the  work 
will  not  fail  because  of  your  feebleness.  0  that  by  a  simple  confidence 
in  the  Lord,  your  Redeemer,  you  may  this  day  imitate  the  example  of  the 
priest  under  the  law,  for  Jesus  makes  you  a  priest  by  the  gospel.  You 
may  now  look  towards  the  Lord  and  plead  that  all-prevailing  blood 
which  makes  us  near  who  were  once  afar  off.  I  have  often  admired 
that  blessed  gospel  precept,  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth  ;  "  for  suppose  I  cannot  see,  yet  if  I  look  I  have  the 
promise  of  being  saved.  If  there  should  be  a  mist  and  a  cloud  between 
me  and  the  brazen  serpent,  yet  if  I  look  that  way  I  shall  be  healed. 
If  I  cannot  clearly  discern  all  the  glories  of  my  Lord  and  Saviour,  yet 
if  I  look  with  the  glance  of  trust  he  saveth  me.  Turn,  then,  your  half- 
opened  eyes,  which  only  at  one  corner  admit  light,  turn  them  I  say, 
God-ward  and  Christ- ward,  and  know  that  by  reason  of  the  atoning 
blood  you  are  saved.  The  blood-bespattered  way  is  the  only  one  which 
a  sinner's  feet  can  traverse  if  he  would  come  to  God.  It  is  easy,  plain 
and  open.  See,  the  priest  had  the  gospel  at  his  fingers'  ends ;  at  every 
motion  of  his  hand  he  preached  it,  and  the  effect  of  such  preaching 
remained  wherever  the  drops  found  a  resting-place. 

I  further  think  that  the  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  vail  seven  times 
to  show  that  a  delil>erate  contemplation  of  the  death  of  Christ  is  yreatly 
for  our  benefit.  Whatever  else  you  treat  slightly,  let  the  sacrifice  of 
Calvary  be  seriously  considered  again  and  again ;  even  unto.seven  times 


THE    SPRINKLING   OF   THE   BLOOD   OF   THE   SACRIFICE.  401 

■  let  it  be  meditated  on !  Read  the  story  of  our  Lord's  death  m  the  four 
Evangelists  and  ponder  every  detail  till  you  are  familiar  with  his  griefs. 
I  would  have  you  know  the  story  by  heart,  for  nothing  will  do  your 
heart  so  much  good.  Read  over  the  twenty-second  Psalm  and  the 
fifty-third  of  Isaiah  every  day  if  you  are  in  any  kind  of  trouble  of  heart 
about  sin,  and  pray  to  God  for  enlightenment  that  you  may  see  the  ex- 
ceeding greatness  of  his  grace  to  us  in  Christ  Jesus.  Oh,  that  you  may 
with  all  your  heart  believe  in  the  Lamb  of  God  !  Angels  desire  to  look 
into  these  things,  therefore,  I  pray  you,  do  not  neglect  so  great  salva- 
tion. Think  lovingly  of  the  atoning  sacrifice ;  earnestly  consider  it  a 
second  time,  do  it  a  third  time,  do  it  a  fourth  time,  do  it  a  fifth  time, 
do  it  a  sixth  time,  do  it  a  seventh  time ! 

Remember,  too,  that  this  sets  out  how  great  our  guilt  has  been,  since 
the  blood  must  be  sprinkled  seven  times  ere  the  work  of  atonement 
is  fully  seen  by  you.  Our  guilt  has  a  sevenfold  blackness  about  it,  and 
there  must  be  a  sevenfold  cleansing.  If  you  plead  the  blood  of  Jesus 
once  and  you  do  not  obtain  peace  thereby,  plead  it  again ;  and  if  still  the 
burden  lies  upon  your  heart,  still  go  on  pleading  with  the  Lord  the  one 
prevailing  argument  that  Jesus  bled.  If  for  the  present  you  do  not 
gain  peace  through  the  blood  of  the  cross,  do  not  conclude  that  your  sin 
is  too  great  for  pardon,  for  that  is  not  the  fact,  since  "  all  manner  of  sin 
and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men."  A  fuller  acquaintance 
with  him  who  has  made  peace  by  his  blood  will  calm  the  tempest  of 
your  mind.  Christ  is  a  great  Saviour  for  great  sinners,  and  his  precious 
blood  can  remove  the  blackest  spots  of  iniquity.  See  it  sprinkled  seven 
times  for  a  seven  times  polluted  sinner,  and  rest  your  soul  on  him 
though  seven  devils  should  have  entered  into  you.  God,  who  bids  us 
forgive  unto  seventy  times  seven,  sets  no  bound  to  his  own  forgiveness. 

Do  reflect  that  if  your  case  seems  to  yourself  to  he  very  difficult,  it  is 
provided  for  by  this  sevenfold  sprbiJding  of  the  blood.  If  you  say, 
"  My  heart  is  so  hard  !  I  cannot  make  it  feel "  ;  or  if  you  say,  "  I  am 
so  frivolous  and  foolish  I  seem  to  forget  what  once  I  knew  "  ;  then  con- 
tinue still  to  look  to  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  draw  hope  from  it  even  to 
seven  times.  Do  not  go  away  from  that,  I  charge  you — where  else  can 
you  go  ?  The  devil's  desire  will  be  to  keep  you  from  thinking  upon  Christ ; 
but  do  remember  that  thoughts  about  anything  else  will  do  you  very  little 
good.  Your  hope  lies  in  thinking  upon  Jesus,  not  upon  yourself. 
Masticate  and  digest  such  a  text  as  this  every  morning — "  He  is  able  to 
save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him."  Go  to  bed  at 
night  with  this  verse  upon  your  tongue,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Or  this,  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  me  I  will 
in  no  wise  cast  out."  That  dear  man  of  God,  Mr.  Moody  Stuart,  some- 
where tells  us  that  he  once  talked  with  a  woman  who  was  in  great 
trouble  about  her  sins.  She  was  a  well-instructed  person,  and  knew 
the  Bible  thoroughly,  so  that  he  was  in  a  little  difficulty  what  to  say  to 
her,  as  she  was  so  accustomed  to  all- saving  truth.  At  last  he  urged 
upon  her  very  strongly  that  passage,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners,"  and  he  noticed  that  she  seemed  to  find  a  quiet  relief  in  a  gentle 
flow  of  tears.  He  prayed  with  her,  and  when  she  rose  from  her  knees 
she  seemed  much  comforted.     Meeting  her  the  next  day,  and  seeing  her 

2c 


402  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

smiling  face,  and  finding  her  full  of  rest  in  the  Lord,  he  asked,  "  What 
was  it  wrought  your  deliverance  ?  "  "  Oh,"  she  said,  "it  was  that  text, 
*  Jesus  Christ  came  to  save  sinners.' "  "  Did  you  not  know  that  before  ? " 
said  Mr.  Stuart.  Yes,  she  knew  the  words  before,  but  she  found  that 
in  her  heart  of  hearts  she  had  believed  that  Jesus  came  to  save  saints, 
and  not  sinners.  Do  not  many  awakened  persons  abide  in  the  same 
error  ?  Well,  I  want  you,  poor  troubled  heart,  ay,  and  you  also  who 
are  of  a  joyful  spirit,  to  keep  on  with  this  sevenfold  presentation  of  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ  unto  God ;  and  even  if  a  vail  should  hang  between 
you  and  the  Lord,  I  beg  you  to  continue  to  sprinkle  the  vail  with 
blood  until  before  the  eyes  of  your  faith  the  vail  rends  in  twain,  and 
you  stand  in  the  presence  of  your  reconciled  God,  rejoicing  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

IL  Our  second  head  is  this, — thr  blood  in  its  influence  upon 
PRAYER.  "  The  priest  shall  put  some  of  the  blood  upon  the  horns  of 
the  altar  of  sweet  incense  before  the  Lord."  The  priest  in  this  case  goes 
from  the  inside  of  the  holy  place  towards  the  outer  court;  having  dealt 
with  the  vail  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  he  turns  round  and  finds  close  at 
his  side  the  altar  of  incense  made  of  gold,  and  surmounted  with  a  golden 
crown;  to  this  he  goes  deliberately,  and  places  a  portion  of  the  blood 
upon  each  of  its  horns.  Horns  signify  power,  and  the  explanation  of 
the  symbol  is  that  there  is  no  power  in  intercessory  prayer  apart  from 
the  blood  of  expiation. 

Remember,  first,  that  the  intercession  of  Christ  himself  is  based  upon 
his  atonement.  He  is  daily  pleading  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  his 
great  argument  is  that  he  offered  himself  without  spot  unto  God.  It 
seems  to  me  most  clear  and  blessed  that  our  Lord  Jesus  makes  this  the 
main  plea  with  the  Father  on  our  behalf — "  I  have  finished  the  work 
which  thou  gavest  me  to  do."  He  has  suffered  in  our  stead,  and  every 
day  he  pleads  these  sufferings  for  us:  his  blood  speaketh  better  things 
than  that  of  Abel.  He  seeks  no  new  plea,  but  always  urges  this  old 
one — his  blood  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins.  "  It  pleased  the 
Father  to  bruise  him,"  and  now  it  pleases  the  Father  to  hear  him.  The 
bruised  spices  of  his  passion  are  an  incense  of  sweet  smell,  and  derive  a 
double  acceptance  from  the  blood-smeared  altar  upon  which  they  are 
presented. 

And  now  take  the  type  to  yourselves.  You  and  I  are  to  offer 
incense  upon  this  golden  altar  by  our  daily  intercession  for  others,  but 
our  plea  must  alwatjs  be  the  atoning  blood  of  Jesus.  I  pray  you,  dear 
friends,  to  urge  this  much  more  than  you  have  been  accustomed  to  do  in 
your  prayers.  We  are  to  cry  to  God  for  sinners,  and  we  are  to  cry  to 
God  for  saints,  but  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  must  be  our  strength  in 
petitioning.  Intercession  is  one  of  the  most  excellent  duties  in  which  a 
Christian  man  can  be  engaged :  it  has  about  it  the  honour  both  of  priest- 
hood and  kingship.  The  incense-altar  ought  to  be  continually  smoking 
before  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  not  only  in  our  public  prayer-meetings, 
but  in  our  private  supplications.  We  should  be  continually  pleading  for 
our  children,  for  our  friends,  for  our  neighbours,  for  those  who  are 
hopeful,  and  those  who  seem  hopeless ;  but  the  great  plea  must 
always  be,  "  By  thine  agony  and  bloody  sweat ;  by  thy  cross  and 
passion."    Offer  sweet  spices  of  love,  and  faith,  and  hope,  and  lay  on 


THE   SPRINKLING   OF   THE   BLOOD   OF   THE    SACIUFICF,.  403 

the  burning  coals  of  strong  desire,  but  on  the  horn  of  your  altar  smear 
the  blood. 

*'  Bl(  od  has  a  voice  to  pierce  the  skies, 

*  Revenge '  the  blood  of  Abel  cries ; 
But  the  rich  blood  of  Jesus  ^slain 
Speaks  'peace''  as  loud  from  every  vein." 

Take  care  you  never  advance  another  plea,  or  if  another  let  it  be  very 
subsidiary  to  this  master  reason.  We  may  say,  "  0  Lord,  save  men ; 
because  their  immortal  souls  are  precious  ;  save  them  that  they  may  escape 
from  endless  misery,  and  that  they  may  display  the  power  of  thy  grace; 
save  them  also  that  thy  word  may  not  return  unto  thee  void,  and  that  thy 
church  may  be  built  up  by  their  means";  but  we  must  never  be  content 
with  these  pleas ;  we  must  go  on  to  plead  the  name  of  Jesus,  for  what- 
soever we  ask  in  that  name  we  shall  receive.  He  who  once  poured  out 
his  soul  unto  death,  and  now  maketh  intercession  for  the  transgressors, 
will  see  to  it  that  our  pleadings  sliall  not  be  rejected.  In  all  our  inter- 
cessions we  must  remember  Calvary ;  the  incense  altar  for  us  must  on 
the  horn  of  its  strength  be  always  sprinkled  with  the  blood. 

And,  dearly  beloved,  as  this  must  be  the  plea  of  our  intercession,  so 
it  must  be  our  impulse  in  making  intercession.  When  we  pray  we  come, 
as  it  were,  to  this  golden  altar,  and  we  look  thereon :  what  is  that  we 
see?  Stains  of  blood!  We  look  again,  and  again  see  crimson  spots, 
while  all  the  four  horns  are  red  with  blood.  Did  my  Lord  pour  out  his 
smil  unto  death  for  men,  and  shall  not  I  pour  out  my  soul  in  living 
eariHSt  when  I  pray  ?  Can  yon  now  bow  your  knee  to  plead  with  God 
and  not  feel  your  heart  set  upon  the  good  of  men,  when  you  see  that 
your  Lord  has  laid  down  his  life  that  they  may  be  saved?  Cold  prayers 
and  dull  pleadings  would  vanish  if  we  would  but  remember  how  Jesua 
loved  ;  how  being  in  an  agony  he  sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood. 
Brethren,  we  are  sadly  blameworthy  for  neglect  of  intercessory  prayer. 
I  cannot  tell  how  much  of  blessing  is  being  withheld,  because  we  do 
not  pray  importunately  for  our  fellow-men.  May  the  Lord  arouse  us  I 
May  he  never  permit  us  to  neglect  the  precious  use  of  the  mercy-seat ! 
When  the  late  Dr.  Bacchus  was  ill,  and  near  to  die,  a  surgeon  visited  him, 
and  as  he  went  out  of  the  door,  he  was  observed  to  speak  to  the  servant. 
The  good  old  divine  begged  the  attendant  to  tell  him  what  the  surgeon 
said.  Alter  some  pause  he  said,  "  Dear  Sir,  he  told  me  not  to  leave  you, 
for  you  could  not  live  nioie  than  another  half-hour."  "  Then,"  said  the 
saint,  "  help  me  out  of  bed,  let  me  get  upon  my  knees  and  spend  my  last 
half  hour  on  earth  in  praying  for  the  church  of  God,  and  for  the 
salvation  of  men."  What  a  blessed  way  of  spending  one's  last  half-hour; 
let  me  rather  say — what  a  blessed  way  of  spending  half-an-hour  at  any 
time!  Try  it  this  afternoon!  I  do  not  know  any  method  of  benefiting 
our  friends  which  is  more  constantly  open  to  us  all  than  that  of  in- 
tercessory prayer;  and  I  cannot  give  you  a  better  argument  why  you 
should  use  it  than  this,  that  your  Lord  has  sprinkled  the  golden  altar  of 
intercession  with  his  own  blood.  Where  he  poured  out  his  blood,  will 
not  you  pour  out  your  tears  ?  He  has  given  his  bleeding  heart  for  men, 
will  not  you  give  your  pleading  lips  ? 

I  think,  too,  I  must  say  that  this  smearing  of  the  horns  of  the  altar 
with  blood  is  meant  to  give  us  very  great  encouragement  and  assurance 


404  MRTROPOTJTAN   TABKRNACLR   PTJLPIT. 

whenever  we  come  t/"  God  in  prayer.  Never  give  anybody  up,  however 
bad  he  may  be.  If  you  know  a  man  that  is  as  much  hke  the  devil  as 
two  peas  are  like  each  other,  still  have  hope  for  him,  because  when  you 
come  to  the  golden  altar  to  oflFer  your  prayers  on  his  behalf  what  do  you 
see  ?  Why,  there  is  the  blood  of  Christ.  What  sin  is  there  which  it 
cannot  remove?  "  Oh,"  you  say,  "  did  Jesus  die  for  sinners  like  this 
man,  and  shall  I  despair  of  him,  and  therefore  refuse  to  pray  for  him  ?" 
This  is  logical  argument.  We  are  alow  to  labour  for  men  because  we 
are  slow  of  heart  in  expecting  their  salvation,  and  this  arises  out  of  our 
narrow  views  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  I  pray  you  enlarge  your  ideas  of 
God's  niiprcy  and  of  Christ's  power  to  cleanse.  Pray  not  with  a  phantom 
hope,  but  with  solid  confidence,  and  say, "  Lord,  I  do  but  follow  with 
my  tears  where  thou  hast  been  with  thy  blood.  I  am  pleading  for 
this  man's  pardon,  and  thou  art  also  making  intercession  for  trans- 
gressors. I  am  pleading  for  those  whom  thou  hast  bought  with  thy 
blood,  and  therefore  I  am  confident  that  my  desire  is  in  consonance 
with  thy  will,  and  that  I  shall  be  heard  in  heaven,  thy  dwelling-place." 
When  we  pray,  let  us  with  vehement  desire  plead  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Perhaps  fewer  petitions,  and  more  urging  of  the  merit  of  Christ, 
would  make  better  prayers.  If  we  were  shorter  in  what  we  ask  for, 
but  longer  in  pleading  the  reason  why  we  should  obtain,  we  might 
prevail  more  easily.  I  suggest  that  we  use  fewer  nails ;  but  take 
care  that  those  nails  are  driven  in  with  Calvary's  blood-stained  hammer, 
and  clenched  with  this  argument,  "  For  Jesus'  sake."  May  this  sort  of 
prayer  be  used  by  us  all  in  private  and  in  public,  and  then  we  must  and 
shall  prevail. 

III.  Time  flies  too  quickly  this  morning,  and  therefore  I  must  pass 
over  many  things  I  had  thought  to  dwell  upon.  The  last  point  is,  the 
BLOOD  IN  ITS  INFLUENCE  UPON  ALL  OUR  SERVICE.  You  See  we  have 
been  coming  outwards  from  the  vail  to  the  golden  altar,  and  now  we 
pass  outside  the  holy  place  into  the  outer  court,  and  there  in  the  open 
air  stands  the  great  brazen  altar, — the  first  object  that  the  Israelite  saw 
when  he  entered  the  sacred  precincts.  As  soon  as  ever  he  entered  into 
the  first  enclosure  his  eye  lighted  upon  the  great  altar  of  brass  upon 
M'hich  burnt-oflFerings  were  burned,  and  oblations  were  presented  unto 
the  Lord.  It  was  at  the  foot  of  this  brazen  altar  that  the  bowls  of  blood 
were  poured  out  continually,  so  that  the  altar  was  encrimsoned  with  it, 
and  the  soil  around  was  soaked  with  the  sanguine  flood. 

That  altar  represents  a  great  many  things,  and  among  the  rest  our 
Lord  Jesus  presenting  himself  to  God  as  an  acceptable  sacrifice.  When- 
ever you  think  of  our  Lord  as  being  an  offering  of  a  sweet  smell  unto 
God,  never  dissociate  that  fact  in  your  mind  from  his  being  slain  for  sin, 
for  all  our  Lord's  service  is  tinged  by  his  atoning  death.  It  is  a  great 
mistake  when  you  are  trying  to  explain  any  one  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices 
to  run  entirely  upon  one  line,  for  there  is  a  blessed  union  of  all  of 
them  in  Christ.  The  offerings  of  a  sweet  savour  were  all  of  them  in 
a  sense  sin-offerings :  there  are  clear  indications  of  this.  At  the  same 
time  the  sin-offering  was  not  altogether  an  abomination,  but  in  part 
a  sweet  savour  offering,  for  the  fat,  as  we  have  seen  in  our  reading, 
was  presented  upon  the  altar.  What  God  hath  joined  together  let  no 
man  put  asunder.     You  may  look  at  your  Lord  under  various  headings. 


THE   SPRINKLING  OF  THE  BLOOD  OF  THE   SACRIFICE.  405 

and  separately  think  of  his  life  and  of  his  death ;  but  never  stereotype 
even  that  division,  for  his  death  was  the  climax  of  his  life,  and  his 
life  was  necessary  to  his  death.  Always  think  of  Jesus  in  all  your 
meditations  upon  him  as  presenting  himself  to  God  and  pouring 
out  his  soul  unto  death  by  way  of  atonement.  When  I  see  that  great 
brazen  altar  I  do  not  forget  how  our  Lord  was  accepted  of  God,  but 
when  I  see  the  floods  of  blood  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  I  am  reminded  of 
the  fact  that  "  He  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the 
tree." 

Viewing  the  type  in  reference  to  ourselves,  let  us  learn  that  ivhenever 
tve  come  to  offer  any  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  we  must  take  care  that  tve 
present  it  by  virtue  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  The  worship  of  this 
morning — God  knows  our  hearts,  he  knows  how  many  have  really  adored 
him,  and  he  knows  out  of  those  who  do  worship,  how  many  of  us  have 
presented  our  sacrifice,  thinking  only  of  the  merit  of  Jesus  as  the  reason 
why  it  should  be  received.  When  you  rise  from  your  knees  after  your 
morning  prayer,  have  you  really  pleaded  the  precious  blood  ?  Your 
petitions  will  not  else  be  acceptable  to  God.  When  you  are  praying  at 
eventide,  and  speaking  with  your  heavenly  Father,  have  you  your  eye 
upon  Christ  ?  If  not,  your  devotion  will  be  rejected.  As  it  is  with 
worship  in  the  form  of  prayer,  so  is  it  with  worship  in  the  form  of  praise. 
Sweet  sounds  are  very  delightful  when  we  sing  the  praises  of  God,  bnt 
unless  the  altar  be  blood-stained  upon  which  we  lay  our  psalms  and 
hymns,  they  will  not  be  accepted  for  all  their  music.  We  also  bring 
to  God  our  gifts  as  he  prospers  us ;  I  trust  we  are  all  ready  to 
give  him  a  portion  of  our  substance;  but  do  we  present  it  upon 
the  altar  which  sanctifieth  the  giver  and  the  gift?  Do  we  see  the 
blood  of  Christ  upon  it,  and  present  our  gold  and  silver  through 
that  which  is  more  precious  far  ?  If  not,  we  might  as  well  retain 
our  money  in  our  purse.  When  you  go  this  afternoon  to  your 
Sunday-school  classes,  or  go  out  into  the  streets  to  preach,  or  go  round 
with  }our  tracts,  will  you  present  your  holy  labour  to  God  through  the 
precious  blood?  There  is  but  one  altar  on  which  he  will  accept  your 
services,  that  altar  is  the  person  of  his  dear  Son,  and  in  this 
matter  Jesus  must  be  viewed  as  pouring  out  his  blood  for  us. 
We  must  view  the  atonement  as  connected  with  every  holy  thing.  I 
believe  that  our  testimonies  for  God  will  be  blessed  of  God  in  proportion 
as  we  keep  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  to  the  forefront.  Somebody  asked  our 
brother,  Mr.  Moody,  how  it  was  that  he  was  so  successful,  and  he  is  said 
to  have  replied,  "  Well,  if  I  must  tell  you,  it  is  I  believe  because  we 
come  out  fair  and  square  upon  the  doctrine  of  substitution."  In  that 
remark  he  hit  the  nail  on  the  head.  That  is  the  saving  doctrine ;  keep 
that  before  your  own  mind,  keep  it  before  the  minds  of  those  whom  you 
would  benefit.  Let  the  Lord  see  that  you  are  always  thinking  of  his 
dear  Son. 

And,  beloved,  do  you  not  think  that  this  pouring  of  the  blood  at  the 
foot  of  this  brazen  altar  indicates  to  us  hoiv  much  we  ought  to  bring  there  .^ 
If  Jesus  has  brought  his  life  there,  and  laid  himself  thereon,  ought  we 
not  to  bring  all  that  we  are  and  all  that  we  have,  and  consecrate  all  to 
God  ?  Let  us  not  offer  a  lean,  scraggy  sacrifice,  or  one  that  is  half 
dead,  or  broken,  or  diseased ;  but  let  us  bring  our  best  at  its  best,  and 


406  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACIiE   PULPIT. 

cheerfully  present  it  unto  the  Most  High  through  the  precious  blood. 
One  said  of  a  young  man  who  had  lately  joined  the  church,  "  Is  he  0 
and  0?"  and  another  answered,  "  Wliat  do  you  mean  by  that?" 
•'  Why,"  said  the  first,  "  I  mean,— Is  he  out  and  out  for  Christ?  Doea 
he  give  himself  spirit,  soul,  and  body  to  Jesus  ?"  Surely,  when  we 
see  the  altar  with  Christ  himself  upon  it,  and  his  blood  poured  out 
there,  we  must  acknowledge  that  if  we  could  spend  our  whole  life  in 
zealous  labour,  and  then  die  a  martyr's  death,  we  should  not  have 
rendered  even  half  what  such  amazing  love  deserves.  Let  us  be 
stimulated  and  quickened  by  the  sight  of  the  blood  upon  the  brazen 
altar  I 

Lastly,  you  notice  the  blood  was  poured  out  at  the  hotfom  of  the  altar. 
What  could  that  mean  but  this — that  the  altar  of  thank-offering  stood 
tipon  and  grew  out  of  a  basis  of  blood.  So  all  our  deeds  for  God,  our 
eacrifices  for  his  cause,  must  spring  out  of  the  love  which  he  has  mani- 
fested in  the  death  of  his  dear  Son.  We  love  him  because — you  know 
the  "because" — because  he  first  loved  us.  And  how  do  we  know  that 
he  loves  us  ?  Behold  the  death  of  Jesus  as  the  surest  proof.  I  long  to 
put  my  whole  being  upon  that  altar,  and  I  should  feel  as  I  did  so  that 
I  was  not  giving  my  God  anything,  but  only  rendering  to  him  what  his 
dear  Sou  has  bought  a  million  times  over  by  once  shedding  his  life-blood. 
When  we  have  done  all,  we  shall  be  unprofitable  servants,  and  we  shall 
say  so.  All  that  we  have  given  to  God  has  been  presented  out  of  grati- 
tude for  the  fact  that  God  so  loved  us  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten 
Son  to  die  for  us  that  we  might  live  through  him.  Load  the  altar! 
Heap  it  high  !  Let  hecatombs  smoke  thereon, for  it  is  built  upon  God's 
unspeakable  gift.  When  sin  is  removed,  service  is  accepted  ; — "  then 
shall  they  ofter  bullocks  upon  thine  altar."  Attempt  no  offering  of  your 
own  works  till  then,  for  unpardoned  sinners  bring  unaccepted  offerings. 
First,  let  the  blood  be  recognized,  and  let  the  full  atonement  be  rejoiced 
in.  Service  rendered  to  God  with  a  desire  for  personal  merit  is 
abominable  in  his  sight ;  but  when  our  merit  is  all  found  in  the  divine 
persou  of  his  Son,  then  will  he  accept  us  and  our  offering  too  in  Christ 
Jesus.  God  grant  unto  you,  dear  hearers,  to  be  accepted  in  the  Beloved. 
Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Leviticus  iv.  1 — 21; 

Isaiah  liii. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 429,  285,  282. 


EATING    THE    SACRIFICE. 


Intended  for  Heading  on  Lord's-day,  August  1st,   1897, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

A.T    THE    METROPODITAJi    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord' s-day  Evening,  March  30<A,  188*. 


"  Aud  they  shall  eat  those  things  wherewith  the  atonement  was  made,  to  consecratfl 
and  to  sanctify  them;  but  a  stranger  shall  not  eat  thereof,  because  they  are  holy." — 
Exodus  xiix.  33. 

On  two  following  Sabbath  mornings,  I  have  spoken  concerning  the 
sacrifices  under  the  law.  Our  first  subject  was,  "  Putting  the  hand 
upon  the  head  of  the  sacrifice  "  (Sermon  No.  1,771),  and  the  next 
was,  "Slaying  the  sacrifice  "  (No.  1,772).  Now  we  are  to  make  an 
advance,  and  to  speak  about  the  eating  of  the  sacrifice,  for  in  certain 
cases  the  offerer  ate  a  portion  of  that  which  had  been  presented  to 
God.  It  lias  been  said  by  some  people,  who  are  very  particular 
in  drawing  nice  distinctions,  that  there  was  no  eating  of  a  sacrifice  in 
which  there  was  any  connection  with  sin.  I  beg  to  differ  from  that 
oj anion,  and  I  have  showed  you  that  every  sacrifice  had  something  to 
do  with  sin,  since  no  sacrifice  would  have  been  needed  if  the  man 
bringing  it  had  not  been  a  sinner ;  and  here,  in  this  case,  I  might 
have  selected  many  texts  to  teach  the  truth  I  want  to  bring  out  just 
now,  but  I  have  specially  chosen  this  one  because  it  says,  "  They 
shall  eat  those  things  wherewith  the  atonement  was  made."  You  all 
know  that  a  covering  is  only  needed  for  those  who  are  naked,  or  who 
have  something  that  requires  to  be  hidden ;  so,  the  atonement,  or  the 
covering,  is  evidently  intended  for  the  guilty,  and  has  something  to  do 
with  sin  ;  yet  of  the  things  wherewith  the  atonement  was  made 
Aaron's  sons  wore  to  eat,  so  that  there  is  to  be  an  eating,  a  joyous 
reception  into  ourselves  even  of  those  things  which  have  a  connection 
with  the  putting  away  of  sin. 

The  first  thing  that  an  offerer  did  with  his  victim  when  he  brought  it, 
was  to  appropriate  it  to  himself  by  laying  his  hands  upon  it.  So, 
when  a  sinner  comes  to  Christ,  his  first  act  is  to  lay  his  hands  upon 
Christ,  that  Christ  may  be  shown  to  belong  to  the  sinner,  and  that 
the  sinner's  guilt  may  be  transferred  to  Christ,  and  borne  by  him  as 
the  sinner's  Substitute.  In  after  life,  we  are  continually  to  look  to 
Christ,  and  by  faith  to  lay  our  hand  upon  him  ;  but  we  are  to  advance 
No.  2,528.  15 


408  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACL£  PULPIT. 

to  a  yet  more  lively  aud  more  intensely  spiritual  way  of  appropriat- 
ing him  to  ourselves.     This  is  indicated  in  the  text  by  eating. 

"  There  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One  ;  " 

but,  after  you  have  begun  to  live,  the  substance  of  that  life  comes 
through  feeding  upon  the  sacrifice.  The  first  appropriation — the 
laying  on  of  the  hands, — is  an  outward  act ;  but  the  after  appropriation 
— feeding  upon  the  sacrifice,  taking  it  into  yourself, — is  altogether 
an  inward  matter.  You  who  are  not  yet  saved  have  not  at  present 
anything  to  do  with  this  eating  of  the  sacrifice  ;  your  first  business  is 
to  look  to  Jesus, — not  so  much  spiritually  to  enjoy  him  as,  by  faith,  to 
look  to  him  as  outside  of  you,  to  be  regarded  by  the  eye  of  faith  while 
you,  a  poor  guilty  sinner,  simply  look  to  him,  and  find  salvation  in  him. 
It  is  afterwards,  when  you  shall  have  made  some  advance  in  the 
divine  life,  wheu  you  shall  have  clearly  seen  the  Victim  sacrificed,  and 
his  blood  making  an  atonement  for  your  sins,  that  you  shall  come  and 
feed  upon  Jesus  Christ.  At  the  time  of  the  passover,  the  Jew  must 
first  take  the  lamb,  and  kill  it,  and  sprinkle  the  blood  on  the  lintel 
and  the  two  side  posts  of  his  house ;  and  alter  that  he  must  go  inside, 
and  when  the  door  is  shut,  feed  upon  that  lamb  whose  blood  is 
sprinkled  outside.  He  must  eat  the  passover  supper  that  he  may  be 
refreshed  before  starting  on  his  journey  through  the  wilderness.  Let 
not  this  distinction  be  forgotten  ;  the  eating  of  the  sacrifice  is  not 
intended  to  give  life,  for  no  dead  man  can  eat,  but  to  sustain  the  life 
■which  is  there  already.  A  believing  look  at  Christ  makes  you  live, 
but  spiritual  life  must  be  fed  and  sustained,  and  the  feeding  of  that 
life  is  explained  by  our  Saviour  in  the  words  I  read  to  you  just  now, 
"Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye 
have  no  life  in  you.  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood, 
hath  eternal  life ;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day.  For  my 
flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed,"  spiritual  meat 
and  spiritual  drink  to  support  the  spiritual  life  which  God  has  given. 
Hence  it  was  ordained,  even  under  the  law,  that  after  the  atonement 
was  made,  to  consecrate  and  to  sanctify  the  priests,  they  were  to  come, 
and  sit  down,  and  "  eat  those  things  wherewith  the  atonement  was 
made." 

I.  The  first  thing  about  which  I  have  to  speak  to  you  at  this  time 
is,  THE  PARTICIPATION, — the  eating  of  the  sacrifice. 

So,  first,  I  will  describe  it.  We  are  to  "  eat  those  things  wherewith 
the  atonement  was  made,''  to  participate  in  Christ,  to  take  him  into 
ourselves.  The  act  of  eating  is  a  very  common  but  a  very  expressive 
method  of  setting  forth  participation,  for  it  is  entirely  personal.  No- 
body can  eat  for  you,  or  drink  for  you ;  it  is  personally  for  yourself 
that  you  partake  of  bread,  and  the  bread  goes  into  yourself,  to  build  up 
yourself,  to  be  assimilated  by  yourself  into  yourself  so  as  to  become 
part  of  yourself  ;  and,  dear  friend,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  must  thus  be 
received  into  your  heart  and  soul  by  yourself,  for  yourself,  and  must 
remain  within  yourself,  you  exercising  upon  him  continually  a  blessed 
act  of  faith  by  which  you  have  communion  and  fellowship  with  him. 
This  cannot  be  done  by  any  sponsor,  or  any  proxy,  or  through  any 
means ;  it  must  be  done  personally,  directly,  and  distinctly,  by  yourself. 


EATING    THE    SACRIFICE. 


409 


God  help  you  to  receive  Christ  into  yourself!  That  point,  surely, 
is  plain  enough  ;  as  a  man  himself  receives  food  into  himself,  to  become 
part  of  himself,  so  must  you  and  I  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  into  ourselves, 
for  ourselves,  to  be  interwoven  with  ourselves,  so  that  we  twain  shall 
be  one. 

This  participation  is  not  only  personal,  but  it  is  distinctly  inward. 
There  is  no  receiving  Christ  by  any  exercise  of  the  flesh,  by  aught 
that  we  can  do  externally  ;  it  is  within  that  we  are  to  receive  Christ, 
with  our  heart,  with  our  spirit.  We  are  not  to  regard  him  alone  as 
yonder  on  the  cross,  but  as  formed  in  us  the  hope  of  glory,  as  coming 
into  us  to  sit  as  King  upon  his  throne,  and  to  reign  within  us  ;  for  it 
is  into  our  innermost  nature  that  we  are  to  receive  the  blessed  truth 
concerning  Christ  and  his  atonement. 

And  it  is  an  active  reception,  too.  A  man  can  receive  some  things 
into  himself  passively.  Oil  may  penetrate  into  his  flesh  ;  certain  drugs 
may  be  injected  beneath  the  skin,  and  so  may  permeate  the  blood ; 
but  eating  is  an  active  exercise,  a  thing  done  by  a  man,  not  in  his 
sleep,  but  with  the  full  intent  that  he  may  receive  into  himself  that 
which  he  eats.  So  must  you  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  feeding 
upon  him  willingly,  actively  taking  him  into  yourself  with  the  full 
consent  and  power  of  your  whole  being. 

You  know,  also,  that  eating  arises  from  a  sense  of  need,  and  it 
leads  to  a  sense  of  satisfaction.  The  most  of  people  eat  because  they 
are  hungry,  though  I  suppose  there  are  some  who  eat  simply  because 
the  time  has  come,  whether  they  need  food  or  not.  I  have  heard  that 
the  best  time  for  a  poor  man  to  have  his  dinner  is  when  he  can  get  it, 
and  that  the  best  time  for  a  rich  man  to  have  his  dinner  is  when  he 
wants  it ;  and  I  think  there  is  something  in  the  saying.  In  this 
spiritual  feeding,  if  you  will  feed  on  Christ  when  you  can  get  him, 
you  may  begin  at  once.  What  is  wanted  in  most  cases  is  an  appetite  ; 
but  when  a  man  has  an  appetite  for  Christ,  when  he  says,  "  I  must 
have  pardon,  for  I  am  a  sinner ;  I  must  have  a  renewed  heart,  for  I 
have  an  evil  one ;  I  must  have  spiritual  life,  for  I  am  in  a  state  of 
spiritual  death,"  then  he  has  the  appetite  which  only  Christ  can 
satisfy.  Then,  when  he  receives  Christ  into  his  heart,  there  follows  a 
sense  of  satisfaction,  as  you  have  sometimes  seen  in  the  case  of 
a  person  who  has  enjoyed  a  good  meal.  He  wants  no  more  ;  he 
lies  down,  and  is  perfectly  content.  Oh,  but  what  a  satisfaction 
Christ  brings  to  the  soul  that  feeds  upon  him!  When  you 
have  fed  on  him,  dear  friends,  how  full  you  have  become, — 
not  to  repletion,  for  the  more  you  receive  of  him  the  more  he 
will  enlarge  your  capacity, — but  you  have  received  him  to  the 
fulness  of  satisfaction.  Mind  you  not  that  Psalm  where  David  says, 
"  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness;  and  my 
mouth  shall  praise  thee  with  joyful  lips  "  ?  Oh,  yes !  and  it  is  so  with 
us  when  we  receive  Christ  into  our  heart,  then  are  we  filled  to  the 
full ;  and  this  is  the  kind  of  participation  wliich  is  meant  in  our  text. 
We  are  to  "eat  those  things  wherewith  the  atonement  was  made,"  we 
are  to  receive  Christ  personally,  inwardly,  actively,  because  of  our 
soul's  hunger,  and  that  our  feeding  upon  him  may  lead  to  an  intense 
satisfaction  with  him.     Do  you  want  another  Saviour,  you  who  have 


410 


METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


received  Christ  Jesus  into  your  souls  ?  I  know  that  you  do  not.  Is 
there  something,  after  all,  that  you  desire  to  add  to  the  blessed  Lord 
and  his  divine  work  ?  I  know  that  there  is  not,  for,  "  ye  are  complete 
in  him," — perfectly  satisfied  with  Christ  Jesus,  filled  up  to  the  brim 
with  all  spiritual  blessings. 

Thus  I  have  tried  to  describe  this  participation,  now  I  want  you  to 
practise  it.  Notice  thai  the  text  says,  "  They  shall  eat  those  things 
wherewith  the  atonement  was  made."  Among  "those  things  "  there 
was  flesh,  there  was  bread  in  the  basket,  and  so  forth ;  and  they 
were  to  eat  of  all  those  things.  I  gather  from  this  injunction  that 
you  and  I  must  endeavour  to  feed  upon  all  that  makes  up  the  atone- 
ment, and  all  that  is  connected  with  the  atonement.  For  instance, 
let  us  feed  upon  the  Father's  love  that  gave  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to 
bleed  and  die.  Then  let  us  feed  on  the  fact  of  the  divine  person  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  Oh,  what  a  blessed  loaf  that  is !  What  is  the  use 
of  a  Saviour  to  me  if  he  is  not  divine  ?  I  am  sure  that  nothing  short 
of  Deity  can  ever  save  such  a  soul  as  mine  from  the  sin  in  which  it  is 
found;  but  Christ  is  "very  God  of  very  God,"  so  I  feed  upon  that 
glorious  truth.  Will  not  you  do  the  same,  dear  friends  ?  Then 
feed  upon  the  fact  of  his  perfect  humanity,  bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh 
of  our  flesh,  of  a  human  mother  born,  as  certainly  man  as  we  are. 
Oh,  there  is  many  a  satisfying  meal  in  the  blessed  doctrine  of  the 
true  and  indisputable  humaaity  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ! 

Then,  when  you  have  fed  upon  Christ's  deity  and  humanity,  feed 
upon  the  willingness  with  which  he  came  to  save  us.  Long  before  he 
was  born  into  this  world,  his  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men,  and 
he  looked  forward  with  joy  to  the  time  of  his  appearing.  **  Lo  1 
come  :  "  said  he,  "  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me,  1 
delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God."  In  the  fulness  of  time  he  came, 
leaping  over  the  mountains,  skipping  over  the  hills,  that  he  might 
save  his  people.  It  is  no  unwilling  Saviour  who  has  come  to  save 
you  and  me,  beloved.  Feed  on  that  sweet  truth.  Think  of  the  love 
that  did  lie  at  the  back  of  it  all,  the  love  he  had  to  his  Church  and 
people,  which  moved  him  to  lay  aside  all  his  glory,  and  take  upon 
himself  all  our  shame,  to  surrender  the  ineffable  splendour  of  his 
throne  to  be  nailed  up  to  the  shameful  cross.  0  brethren,  there  is  a 
great  feast  for  the  soul  in  the  love  of  Christ !  This  is  "  butter  in  a 
lordly  dish."  There  was  never  such  wine,  even  at  a  king's  marriage, 
as  that  which  Christ  himself  made,  and  we  can  truly  say  to  him, 
"  Thou  hast  kept  the  best  wine  until  now." 

A}',  but  I  believe  that  there  is  food  for  us  at  every  stage  of  the 
Redeemer's  passion.  There  are  sweet  fruits  to  be  gathered  even  in 
dark  Gethsemane ;  there  are  precious  clusters  of  the  vine  to  be 
found  at  Gabbatha,  the  pavement  where  the  cruel  scourges  made  the 
sacred  drops  to  roll.  What  food  there  is  for  our  souls  upon  Calvary  ! 
Every  item  of  our  Lord's  death  is  sacred ;  we  would  not  omit  any  of 
the  details  of  his  suffering,  for  some  strike  one  mind,  and  some  strike 
another;  but  could  we  go  through  the  whole  history  of  our  Saviour, 
from  the  agony  in  Gethsemane  till  he  said,  *'  It  is  finished,"  we  should 
find  all  the  way  full  of  food  for  our  souls.  Where  are  there  such 
pastures  as  those  that  grow  on  Calvary  ?     Sharon,  thou  art  altogether 


EATING   THE    SACRIFICE.  ill 

outdone !  0  plains  that  fed  the  flocks  of  old,  ye  are  barren  compared 
with  this  little  hOl  whereon  the  Saviour  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death  I 
Try,  dear  Christian  frieads,  to  feed  on  all  these  things.  I  cannot  keep 
you  to  do  it  now,  but  at  such  times  as  you  can  get  an  hour,  or  even  a  few 
minutes,  say  to  yourself,  "  This  is  all  spiritual  food  for  me.  I  am  to 
feed  on  '  those  things  wherewith  the  atonement  was  made.' " 

Before  I  pass  to  the  second  division,  I  want  to  tell  you  one  thing 
more  about  this  participation  which,  I  think,  ennobles  it,  and  lifts  it 
altogether  out  of  the  com.inonp!ac3,  namely,  that  this  feeding  of  the 
priests — or,  if  you  turn  to  the  peace  offering,  the  feeding  of  the  offerer 
himself — upon  the  sacrifice,  was  in  fellowship  with  God.  When  the 
sacrifice  was  offered,  a  part  of  it  was  burnt  on  the  altar ;  that  was 
God's  portion.  The  altar  represented  God,  and  the  Lord  received  the 
portion  that  was  consumed  by  the  fire.  In  the  text  before  us,  we  see 
that  the  priest  was  also  to  take  his  share  ;  it  was  a  part  of  the  same 
sacrifice,  so  both  God  and  the  priest  fed  upon  it.  You  and  I, 
beloved,  are  to  feed  with  God  on  Cnrist.  That  is  a  blessed  sentence 
in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son  where  the  father  said,  "  Let  us  eat, 
and  be  merry."  The  father  feeds,  and  the  family  feed  with  him : 
•*  Let  us  eat,  and  be  merry."  Oh,  it  is  indeed  joyful  for  us  to  remember 
that  the  Father  fiads  satisfaction  in  the  work  and  merit,  the  life  and 
death  of  the  Only-begotten  !  God  is  well  pleased  with  Jesus,  for  he 
has  magnified  the  law,  and  made  it  honourable ;  and  that  which 
satisfies  the  heart  of  God  is  passed  on  to  satisfy  you  and  me.  Oh,  to 
think  of  our  being  entertained  in  such  a  fashion  as  this  !  You  remember 
that  it  is  said  of  the  elders,  who  went  up  with  Moses  and  Aaron  into 
the  mount,  that  "  they  saw  God,  and  did  eat  and  drink  ;  "  and  surely,  we 
are  as  favoured  as  they  were,  for  now  in  Christ  Jesus  we  behold  the 
reconciled  God,  and  we  do  eat  and  drink  with  him ;  and  while  the 
Father  smiles  because  the  work  of  atonement  is  finished,  we  sit  down, 
aad  we  rejoice,  too.  Even  we  poor  weeping  sinners  wipe  our  tears 
away,  and  sing, — 

"  Bless'd  be  the  Father,  and  his  love, 
To  whose  celestial  source  we  owe 
Rivers  of  endless  joy  above, 

And  rills  of  comfort  here  below." 

If  God  is  content,  so  are  we.  If  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  says, 
"It  is  enough,"  we  also  say,  "It  is  enough."  Oar  conscience  echoes 
to  the  verdict  of  the  E'^ernal.  Christ  has  finished  the  transgression, 
and  made  an  end  of  sins,  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness, 
and  therefore  we  enjoy  the  sweetest  imaginable  rest  in  him.  The 
Father's  delight  is  in  him,  and  so  is  ours.  Oh,  who  among  us  that 
knows  the  Lord  Jesus,  will  stand  back  for  a  moment  from  this 
blessed  eating  with  God  ?  '•  They  shall  eat  those  things  wherewith  the 
atonement  was  made,  to  consecrate  and  to  sanctify  them." 

II.  This  brings  me  to  my  second  point,  which  is  an  advance  upon 
the  former  one,  namely,  the  official  character  of  this  partici- 
pation. In  this  particular  form,  the  participation  was  for  the  priests 
only. 

Now,  mark  this.     The  child  of  God,  when  he  is  first  converted, 


412  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

does  not  know  much  about  being  a  priest,  he  does  not  know  much 
about  doing  anything  for  Christ.  I  heard  of  a  good  Scotch  woman, 
whose  style  of  speech  I  cannot  imitate,  but  I  like  the  sense  of  it. 
Someone  said  to  her,  "  How  long  have  you  been  a  servant  of  the 
Lord?  "  She  said,  "  Nay,  nay,  but  he  has  been  a  servant  to  me,  for 
does  he  not  say,  '  I  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth  '  ?  "  "  Ah  !  " 
replied  the  other,  "  that  is  true  ;  but,  still,  you  have  served  the  Lord." 
"Yes,"  answered  she,  "but  it  is  such  poor  work  I  have  ever  done 
that  I  do  not  like  to  think  of  having  done  anything  at  all  for  him ; 
and  I  would  rather  talk  of  how  long  he  has  been  doing  something  for 
me,  than  how  long  I  have  been  doing  anything  for  him."  That  is 
quite  true ;  yet,  inasmuch  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  died  for  us,  we 
reckon  that  we  all  died,  and  that  he  died  for  us  that  we  henceforth 
should  live,  not  unto  ourselves,  but  unto  him ;  and  so  we  do.  If  the 
Lord  has  really  blessed  us  with  his  love,  we  have  begun  to  be  priests, 
and  we  have  begun  to  serve  him. 

Now  the  priest,  because  he  is  a  priest,  is  the  man  who  must  take 
care  that  he  feeds  upon  the  sacrifice.  But  how  are  we  priests  ?  I 
am  not  now  talking  about  ministers,  I  am  talking  about  all  of  you 
who  love  the  Lord.  Christ  has  made  all  of  us,  who  believe  in  him, 
to  be  kings  and  priests  unto  Grod ;  there  is  no  priesthood  in  the  world 
that  is  of  God  save  the  high- priesthood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and, 
next  to  that,  the  priesthood  which  is  common  to  all  believers  ;  and 
the  idea  of  there  being  any  priesthood  on  earth  above  and  beyond  the 
priesthood  of  all  believers,  is  a  false  one,  and  there  is  no  Scripture 
whatever  to  vindicate  it,  to  justify  it,  or  even  to  apologize  for  it,  it  is 
one  of  the  lies  of  old  Eome.  All  believers  are  priests,  but  they  do 
not  all  fully  recognize  that  great  truth.  It  is  a  pity  they  do  not 
realize  that  glorious  fact,  and  so  join  in  the  apostle  John's  doxology, 
"  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father ; 
to  him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen." 

Being  priests,  they  are,  first  of  all,  to  offer  themselves.  What  says 
the  apostle  ?  "I  beseech  you,  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of 
God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable 
unto  God,  which  is  your  reasonable  service."  Now,  you  will  never  do 
this  unless  you  feed  upon  Christ.  I  shall  never  be  myself  a  sacrifice 
to  God  unless  my  soul  is  nourished  upon  the  true  and  living  sacrifice, 
Christ  Jesus  my  Lord.  To  attempt  sanctification  apart  from  justifi- 
cation, is  to  attempt  an  impossibility ;  and  to  endeavour  to  lead  a 
holy  life  apart  from  the  work  of  Christ,  is  an  idle  dream.  You 
priests  who  offer  yourselves  unto  God  must  take  care  that  it  is  all 
done  through  Christ  who  is  in  you. 

Next,  as  priests,  we  are  to  intercede  for  others.  A  priest  was  chosen 
to  offer  prayer  for  others,  and  every  Christian  ought  to  pray  for  those 
who  are  round  about  him  ;  but  you  will  never  be  men  of  prayer  unless 
you  feed  on  Christ,  I  am  sure  of  that.  If  Christ  be  not  in  your  heart, 
intercessory  prayer  will  not  be  in  your  mouths.  You  will  never  be 
true  pleaders  with  God  for  men  unless  you  are  yourselves  true  feeders 
upon  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ. 

A  true  priest  is,  next,  to  be  a  teacher.     The  prophet  Micah  said, 


EATING    THB    SACKIPIOE.  413 

"  The  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge  ;  "  and  so  should  it  be  with 
all  Christians.  They  are  to  teach  others.  But  you  cannot  teach 
others  what  you  do  not  know  yourselves  ;  and  unless  you  are  first 
partakers  of  the  fruits,  you  will  never  be  able  to  sow  the  seed.  You 
must  feed  upon  Christ  in  your  inmost  soul,  or  else  you  will  never  speak 
of  him  with  any  power  to  others. 

Priests,  again,  were  chosen  from  among  men  to  have  compassion  oh 
the  ignorant,  and  on  such  as  were  out  of  the  way.  That  is  your  duty, 
too,  as  Christians,  to  look  after  the  weak  ones  and  the  wandering  ones, 
and  to  have  compassion  upon  them  ;  but,  unless  you  live  by  faith  upon 
the  compassionate  Saviour,  you  will  never  keep  up  the  life  of  com- 
passion in  your  own  soul.  If  Christ  be  not  in  you,  neither  will  you 
be  in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  full  of  love  to  such  as  need  your  help ;  but, 
coming  fresh  from  communion  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  your  words  of  consolation  will  sweetly  drop  into  afflicted 
hearts,  and  will  comfort  them.  You  will  have  the  tongue  of  an 
instructed  one,  and  be  able  to  speak  words  seasonable  and  sweet  to 
such  as  are  weary.     Take  care,  then,  that  you  do  feed  upon  Christ. 

I  believe,  also,  that  a  Christian  man  is  to  act  as  a  priest  for  a  dumb 
world,  and  to  express  the  worship  of  creation.  It  is  he  who  is  to  chant 
creation's  hymn ;  it  is  his  voice  that  must  lift  up  the  hallelujahs  of 
the  universe.  The  world  lacks  a  tongue.  Yon  sea,  with  all  its  rolling 
billows,  yet  speaks  not  a  word  articulately  ;  and  yonder  stars,  with  all 
their  brilliance,  cannot  tell  out  the  glory  of  God  in  human  language, 
or,  indeed,  in  any  language  at  all.  "  There  is  no  speech,  nor  language  ; 
their  voice  is  not  heard."  Nor  can  the  sweet  flowers,  nor  even  the 
birds,  in  actual  language  tell  of  him  who  made  them,  and  express 
their  gratitude  to  him  ;  but  you  and  I  have  a  tongue,  which  is  the 
glory  of  our  frame,  and  with  that  tongue  we  are  to  open  our  mouths 
for  the  dumb,  and  speak  the  praises  of  Q-od  for  all  creation.  Take 
care  that  you  do  it ;  before  you  lies  the  world,  like  a  great  organ,  all 
ready  to  sound  forth  the  sweetest  music,  but  it  cannot  play  itself. 
Those  little  hands  of  yours,  if  they  are  instinct  with  heavenly  life,  are 
to  be  laid  among  the  keys,  and  you  are  to  fetch  forth  strains  of  mighty 
hallelujahs  unto  him  who  has  made  all  things,  and  sustains  all  things 
by  the  power  of  his  hand.  Feed  on  Christ,  and  you  will  be  able  to 
do  this,  for  he  speaks  to  reveal  God,  and  he  becomes  the  tongue  of 
men  unto  the  Father.  Live  on  him,  and  you  shall  learn  the  art  of 
speaking  for  creation  unto  the  Creator. 

III.  Now  I  have  done  when  I  have  very  solemnly  noticed,  in  the 
third  place,  the  absolute  prohibition  :  "  They  shall  eat  those  things 
wherewith  the  atonement  was  made;  .  .  .  but" — ^^hut  a  stranger 
shall  not  eat  thereof,  because  they  are  holy." 

Who  was  "  a  stranger"  in  such  a  case  as  this?  Everybody  was  a 
stranger,  in  the  matter  of  the  priests,  but  such  as  belonged  to  the 
priests ;  and  strangers  might  not  partake  of  the  sacrifices  with 
the  priests.  The  prohibition  is  clearly  given  in  the  22nd  chapter  of 
Leviticus,  at  the  10th  verse:  "There  shall  no  stranger  eat  of  the 
holy  thing  :  a  sojourner  of  the  priest," — that  is,  a  mere  guest, — "  or 
an  hired  servant,  shall  not  eat  of  the  holy  thing."  Listen :  you  who 
only  come  into  the  house  of  God  just  to  look  on,  you  who  do  not 


414  METROPOLITAN  TABERNAOLE  PULPIT. 

belong  to  the  family,  but  are  only  sojourners,  —  "welcome  as 
sojourners, — you  may  not  eat  of  the  holy  thing.  You  cannot  enjoy 
Christ,  you  cannot  feed  upon  the  precious  truth  connected  with  him, 
for  you  are  only  a  sojourner.  I  am  very  sorry,  on  the  first  Sabbath 
night  in  the  month,  and  I  think  that  some  of  you  must  feel  very  sorry 
and  sad,  too.  There  is  to  be  the  communion,  the  Lord's  supper  ;  you 
have  been  hearing  the  sermon,  but  you  have  to  go  away  from  the 
table,  or  else  to  take  your  place  among  the  spectators.  You  are  only 
sojourners,  you  do  not  belong  to  the  family,  and  dare  not  profess  that 
you  do  ;  you  are  only  a  sojourner,  or  a  stranger. 

And  it  was  the  same  in  the  case  of  a  hired  servant,  he  might  not 
eat  of  the  holy  thing ;  and  he  who  only  follows  Christ  for  what  he 
can  get  out  of  him,  he  who  works  for  Christ  with  the  idea  of  meriting 
salvation,  hoping  that  he  may  earn  enough  to  save  himself  by  his 
works,  is  only  like  a  priest's  hired  servant.  He  says,  "  I  do  my  best, 
and  I  believe  that  I  shall  go  to  heaven."  Yes,  just  so  ;  you  are  a 
hired  servant,  even  though  heaven  seems  to  be  the  wage  you  are 
expecting ;  and  you  may  not  eat  of  the  holy  thing. 

Now  notice  what  is  written  in  Lev.  xxii.  11  :  "But  if  the  priest 
buy  any  soul  with  his  money,  he  shall  eat  of  it."  Is  not  that  a 
blessing  ?  If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  bought  you  with  his  precious 
blood,  and  you  by  faith  recognize  yourself  as  not  your  own,  but 
bought  with  a  price,  then  you  may  eat  of  the  sacrifice.  **  If  the 
priest  buy  any  soul  with  his  money," — it  may  be  a  very  queer  person, 
somebody  for  whom  you  and  I  would  not  give  twopence, — but  if  the 
great  High  Priest  has  bought  any  soul  with  his  money,  "  he  shall 
eat  of  it." 

"  And  he  that  is  horn  in  his  house,  shall  eat  of  his  meat."  There 
is  the  doctrine  of  regeneration,  as  the  former  part  of  the  verse  spoke 
of  redemption.  If  you  have  been  born  again,  and  are  no  more  in  the 
house  of  Satan,  but  in  the  house  of  the  great  High  Priest,  you  may 
come  and  eat  of  this  spiritual  meat.  If  you  have  the  blood-mark, 
having  been  bought  by  Christ,  and  if  you  have  the  life-mark,  having 
been  quickened  by  the  Spirit,  and  born  into  the  family  of  Christ,  then 
come  along  with  you.  Though  least  and  weakest  of  them  all,  come 
and  welcome. 

Listen  to  this  next  verse :  "If  the  priest's  daughter  also  be  married 
unto  a  stranger,  she  may  not  eat  of  an  offering  of  the  holy  things." 
She  is  the  priest's  daughter,  mark  you  ;  nobody  denies  that,  and  shall 
not  the  child  partake  with  the  father  ?  No,  not  if  she  is  married  to  a 
stranger ;  she  bears  her  husband's  characteristics  now,  she  has  given 
herself  up  to  him ;  she  is  no  longer  her  father's,  she  belongs  to  her 
husband.  Oh,  is  there  anybody  here  who  once  made  a  profession  of 
religion,  but  who  has  gone  aside  ?  Have  you  got  married  to  the 
,  world  ?  Have  you  got  married  to  amusements  and  Sabbath-breaking  ? 
Have  you  got  married  right  away  from  the  Priest,  your  Father, — 
right  away  from  the  Church  of  Christ, — right  away  from  the  people 
of  God  ?     Then  you  cannot  eat  of  the  holy  thing. 

Yet  listen  to  one  other  verse  :  "  But  if  the  priest's  daughter  be  a 
widow,  or  divorced,  and  have  no  child,  and  is  returned  unto  her  father's 
house,  as  in  her  youth,  she  shall  eat  of  her  father's  meat ;  but  there 


EVTIAG    THE    8ACKIFICE. 


415 


shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof."  Perhaps  there  is  someouo  nere  who 
says,  '*  I  am  a  widow."  I  do  not  mean  that  your  natural  husband  is 
dead,  but  that  the  world  has  become  dead  to  you.  You  went  and 
married  into  the  world  for  wealth,  and  you  have  lost  it ;  you  are  poor 
now,  riches  are  dead  to  you.  You  used  to  be  such  a  fine  woman,  but 
now  your  face  has  lost  its  comeliness,  your  beauty  is  dead.  Every- 
body used  to  admire  your  talent ;  but  you  have  not  any  talent  now, 
and"  they  all  give  you  the  cold  shoulder.  Ah,  well,  I  am  not  sorry 
that  the  world  has  cast  you  out,  and  cast  you  ofi  !  Perhaps  the  men 
of  the  world  have  said  concerning  you,  "  We  will  have  no  more  to  do 
with  him."  You  are  divorced,  you  see.  Long  ago,  I  was  divorced 
from  the  world ;  I  got  a  bill  of  divorcement  pretty  quickly  when  I 
began  to  preach  the  gospel  in  London.  If  it  were  worth  while,  I  could 
publish  some  of  the  cruel  and  false  things  that  men  said  ;  according 
to  them,  I  was  the  biggest  charlatan  and  the  greatest  hypocrite  and 
deceiver  who  ever  lived.  That  was  my  bill  of  divorcement ;  the  world 
said,  "  We  have  done  with  you;  "  and  I  replied,  "  I  have  done  with 
you  ;  "  and  so  we  parted.  There  were  not  many  words  on  my  part, 
but  there  were  a  great  many  on  theirs.  Well,  if  it  is  so  with  you,^  if 
you  feel  that  the  world  has  done  with  you,  and  you  have  done  with 
the  world,  and  you  are  willing  to  come  back  to  your  Father's  house, 
just  as  in  the  days  of  your  youth,  come  along  with  you  ;  come  in,  and 
eat  of  his  dainties,  feed  upon  Christ  on  earth  by  faith,  and  then  go  up 
and  feed  on  him  even  to  the  full  in  glory  everlasting.  But  you  must 
get  away  from  your  stranger-husband,  for  if  you  cleave  to  him,  you 
will  have  to  be  counted  with  that  which  your  heart  lusts  after.  What 
you  love  shall  label  you.  Where  your  delight  is,  where  your  treasure 
is,  there  your  heart  is,  and  there  your  portion  is  ;  but  if  the  Lord  will 
help  you  now  to  escape  right  away  from  the  clutches  of  error  and  siu, 
then  it  shall  be  with  you  as  it  was  with  the  priest's  daughter  :  "If  she 
is  returned  unto  her  father's  house,  as  in  her  youth,  she  shall  eat  of 
her  father's  meat." 

"  But  there  shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof."  If  you  will  not  believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  are  a  stranger  to  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel ;  and  there  is  no  way  of  your  being  made  nigh  but  by  the  blood 
of  the  cross.  If  you  believe  in  him,  you  are  "  no  more  strangers  and 
foreigners,  but  fellow -citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of 
God."  But  if  you  are  not  bought  with  his  money,  or  born  in  his  house, 
then  you  must  remain  strangers,  and  there  is  no  blessing  for  you,  no 
comfort  for  you.  The  other  day,  one  who  had  been  attending  a 
religious  service,  and  mocking  and  jesting  at  everything  sacred,  said, 
when  he  was  talked  to  about  it,  "  Oh,  but  I  am  a  Christian !  Jesus 
died  for  me."  It  was  a  lie  ;  he  had  neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter, 
or  else  he  could  not  have  acted  profanely  as  he  did ;  and  there  are 
others  who  talk  as  he  did,  but  I  tell  you,  sirs,  whatever  you  say,  this 
is  what  God  says,  "A  stranger  shall  not  eat  thereof."  If  you  have 
not  been  born  again,  you  cannot  feed  upon  Christ ;  but,  oh,  if  you  will 
look  to  him  who  died  for  the  sinner,  then  you  shall  feed  upon  him  who 
lives  for  the  saint.  God  bless  you  in  both  these  respects,  for  Jesus 
Christ's  sake !     Amen. 


THE  LAMB  OF  GOD  IN  SCEIPTUEE. 


tmtft\ 

Inteitded  for  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  Ootobeb,  8th,  1893, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON, 
On  Lord^a-day  Evening,  August  25th,  1889. 


I 


"Again  the  next  day  after  John  stood,  and  two  of  his  disciples ;  and  lookiug  upon 
Jesus  as  he  walked,  he  saith,  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !  " — John  i.  35,  36. 

You  all  know  the  old,  old  story.  The  world  was  lost;  God  must 
punish  sin ;  he  sent  his  Son  to  take  our  sin  upon  him  that  he  might 
honour  the  law  of  God,  and  establish  God's  government  by  being 
obedient  to  the  law,  and  yielding  himself  up  to  the  death-penalty. 
He  whom  Jehovah  loves  beyond  all  else  came  to  earth,  became  a  man, 
and,  as  a  man,  was  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross. 
It  is  he  who  is  called  in  our  text  "the  Lamb  of  God",  the  one 
Sacrifice  for  man's  sin.  There  is  no  putting  away  of  sin  without 
sacrifice  ;  there  is  only  one  Sacrifice  that  can  put  away  sin,  and  that  is, 
Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.  He  is  divine,  yet  human ;  Son  of  God, 
yet  Son  of  Mary.  He  yielded  up  his  life,  "the  Just  for  the  unjust," 
the  Sinless  for  the  sinful,  "that  he  might  bring  us  to  God,"  and 
reconcile  us  to  the  great  Father.  That  is  the  story,  and  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  shall  live.  Any  man,  the  world  over,  who  will  trust 
himself  to  Christ,  God's  great  Sacrifice,  shall  be  saved,  for  this  is  our 
continual  witness,  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting 
life."  "  For  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten 
Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish  but  have 
everlasting  life." 

To-night  I  do  not  intend  so  much  to  preach  a  sermon  as  to  urge 
those  who  have  seen  the  Lamb  of  God  to  look  at  him  more  intently, 
to  study  him  more,  and  especiall}^  to  plead  for  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  reveal  him  to  them.  I  want  to  entreat  men,  who  have  looked 
elsewhere,  now  to  turn  their  eyes  away  from  the  fruitless  search  after 
peace  and  life,  and  to  come  and  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  May  the  Spirit  of  God  open  their 
eyes,  and  incline  their  hearts,  that  to-night,  even  to-night,  they  may 
look  unto  him  and  live ! 

No.  2,329.  -^ 

2D  1<5 


418  VETROPOLITAJS'^    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

When  John  saw  Jesus  Christ  on  that  memorable  day,  he,  first  of 
all,  beheld  him  himself,  and  then  he  said  to  others,  "  Behold  the  Lamb 
of  G-od."  "  Looking  upon  Jesus  as  he  walked,"  steadfastly  beholding 
him,  watching  him,  gazing  with  humble  admiration  at  him,  he  said, 
**  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !  "  Brethren,  we  cannot  preach  what  we 
have  not  practised.  If  these  eyes  have  never  looked  to  Jesus,  how  can 
I  bid  your  eyes  look  at  him  ?  Beholding  him,  I  found  peace  to  my 
Boul ;  I,  who  was  disposed  even  to  despair,  rose  from  the  depths  of 
anguish  to  the  heights  of  joy  by  looking  unto  him ;  and  I  therefore 
dare  to  say  to  you,  "  Behold- the  Lamb  of  God!'  Oh,  that  each 
one  of  you  might  believe  our  testimony  concerning  Jesus,  and  look  to 
him  and  live  ! 

What  did  John  mean  by  saying,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  "  ? 
Behold,  in  the  Latin,  ecce,  is  a  note  of  admiration,  of  wonderment,  of 
exclamation.  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God!"  There  was  nothing  of 
greater  wonder  ever  seen  than  that  God  himself  should  provide  the 
Lamb  for  the  burnt  offering,  that  he  should  provide  his  only  Son  out 
of  his  very  bosom,  that  he  should  give  the  delight  of  his  heart  to  die 
for  us.  Well  may  we  behold  this  great  wonder.  Angels  admire  and 
marvel  at  this  mj-stery  of  godliness,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  they 
have  never  left  off  wondering  and  adoring  the  grace  of  God  that 
gave  Jesus  to  be  the  Sacrifice  for  guilty  men.  Behold  and  wonder, 
never  leave  off  wondering ;  tell  it  as  a  wonder,  think  of  it  as  a  wonder, 
sing  of  it  as  a  wonder ;  even  in  heaven  you  will  not  cease  to  wonder 
at  this  glorious  Lamb  of  God. 

I  think  that  John  also  meant  his  disciples  to  consider  when  he  said 
to  them,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !  "  So  we  say  to  you,  "  Think  of 
him,  stud}'  him,  know  all  that  you  can  about  him,  look  him  up  and 
down.  He  is  God ;  do  you  understand  that  he  stood  in  the  sinner's 
stead  ?  He  is  man  ;  do  you  know  how  near  akin  he  is  to  you,  how 
sympathetic  he  is,  a  brother  born  for  your  adversity  ?  "  The  person  of 
Christ  is  a  great  marvel ;  how  God  and  man  can  be  in  one  person,  it 
is  impossible  for  us  to  tell.  We  believe  what  we  cannot  comprehend ; 
and  we  rejoice  in  what  we  cannot  understand.  He  whom  God  has 
provided  to  be  your  Saviour  is  both  God  and  man ;  he  can  lay  his 
hand  upon  both  parties,  he  can  touch  your  manhood  in  its  weakness, 
and  touch  the  Godhead  in  its  all-sufficiency.  Study  Christ ;  the  most 
excellent  of  all  the  sciences  is  the  knowledge  of  a  crucified  Saviour. 
He  is  most,  learned  in  the  university  of  heaven  who  knows  most  of 
Christ.  He  who  hath  known  most  of  him  still  says  that  his  love  sur- 
passeth  knowledge.  Behold  him,  then,  with  wonder,  and  behold  him 
with  thankfulness. 

But  when  John  says,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !  "  he  means  more 
than  wondering  or  considering.  "  Looking"  is  used  in  Scripture  for 
faith  :   "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved."    Therefore  we  sing —    ' 

"  There  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  crucified  One, 
There  is  life  at  this  moment  for  thee !  " 

Beholding  is  a  steady  kind  of  looking.  Believe  then,  in  CJhrist  with 
a  solid,  abiding  confidence.     Come,  ye  sinners,  come,  and  trust  your 


THE    LAMB    OF   GOD    IN    SuftlPTUKV  419 

-Saviour,  not  for  to-night  only,  but  for  ever.     Believe  that  lie  is  able 
and  willing  to  save  you,  and  trust  him  to  do  so. 

"  Venture  on  him,  venture  wholly, 
Let  no  other  trust  intrude." 

Take  your  eyes  off  everything  else,  and  behold  the  Lamb  of  God! 
You  need  not  see  anything  else,  nothing  else  is  worth  seeing  ;  but 
behold  him.  See  how  he  takes  your  guilt,  see  how  he  bears  it,  see 
how  he  sinks  under  it,  and  yet  rises  from  it,  crying,  "  It  is  finished." 
He  gives  up  the  ghost,  he  is  buried,  he  rises  again  from  the  dead 
because  he  is  accepted  of  God,  and  his  redeeming  work  is  done.  Trust 
him,  trust  him,  trust  him.  "  Look  and  live,"  is  now  our  message;  not 
"  do  and  live,"  but  "live  and  do."  If  you  ask  how  you  are  to  live, 
our  answer  is  look,  trust,  believe,  confide,  rest  in  Christ,  and  the 
moment  you  do  so,  you  are  saved. 

But,  once  more,  when  John  said  to  his  disciples,  "  Behold  the  Lamb 
of  God  !  "  it  was  a  hint  that  they  should  leave  off  looking  at  John,  and 
turn  their  attention  wholly  to  Jesus,  and  follow  him.  Hence  we  find 
that  John's  two  disciples  left  him,  and  became  the  disciples  of  Christ. 
Beloved,  we  who  preach  long  to  have  your  attention,  but  when  you 
give  your  attention  to  us,  our  longing  then  is  to  pass  it  on  to  Christ 
our  Lord.  Look  on  him,  and  follow  him,  not  us.  What  can  we  do, 
poor  creatures  that  we  are  ?  Look  unto  him,  mark  his  footsteps,  tread 
in  them.  Do  as  he  bids  you,  take  him  for  your  Lord,  become  his  dis- 
ciples, his  servants.  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  always  behold  him. 
Look  to  him,  look  up  to  him,  and  follow  where  he  leads  the  way. 

Thus  I  have  put  the  text  iDofore  you  pretty  simply.  Now,  I  want 
to  talk  to  you  a  little  about  beholding  this  Lamb  of  God,  taking  a 
hasty  run  through  various  Scripture  references  to  the  lamb  ;  and  I  will 
ask  you,  first,  to  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  in  his  cojinections  toith  men,  and 
secondly,  to  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  in  his  benedictions  to  men. 

I.     Let  us,  first,   behold  the  Lamb   of  God  in  his  connections 

WITH    MEN. 

How  was  the  Lamb  of  God  first  seen  in  the  woi*ld  ?  It  was  the  case 
of  the  lamb  for  one  man,  brought  by  one  man  for  himself,  and  on  his 
own  behalf.  You  all  know  that  I  refer  to  Abel,  who  was  a  shepherd, 
and  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock,  that  is,  a  lamb,  and  he 
brought  this  lamb  for  himself,  and  on  his  own  account,  that  he  might 
be  accepted  of  God,  and  that  he  might  present  to  God  an  offering  well- 
pleasing  in  his  sight.  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground  as  an 
offering  to  God.  I  think  that  there  was  a  difference  in  the  sacrifice,  as 
well  as  in  the  man  bringing  it,  for  the  Holy  Ghost  says  little  about  the 
difference  of  the  man,  but  he  says,  "  By  faith  Abel  offered  unto  God  a 
more  excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain,"  and  he  was  accepted  because  he 
brought  a  more  excellent  sacrifice.  The  one  sacrifice  was  bloodless, 
the  fruit  of  ihe  ground,  the  other  was  typical  of  Christ,  the  Lamb  of 
God,  and  was  therefore  accepted:  "and  the  Lord  had  respect  unto 
Abel,  and  to  his  offering." 

Now,  beloved,  our  first  view  of  Christ  usually  is  here,  to  know  him 
for  ourselves.  I  am  a  sinner,  and  I  want  to  have  communion  with 
my  God ;  how  shall  I  obtain  it  ?     I  am  guilty,  I  am  sinful ;  how  shall 


420  JTETEOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

I  dyaw  near  to  the  holy  God  ?     Here  is  the  answer.     Take  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  be  yours  by  faith,  and  bring  him  to  God  ;  you  must  be 
accepted  if  you  bring  Christ  with  you.     The  Father  never  repelled  the 
Son,  nor  one  who  was  clothed  with  the  Son's  righteousness,  or  who 
pleaded  the  Son's  merit.     Come  you,  as  Abel  came,  not  with  fruits  of  J 
your  own  growing,  but  with  the  sacrifice  of  blood,  with  Christ  the  i 
holy  Victim,  the  spotless  Lamb  of  God,  and  so  coming,  whoever  you/ 
may  be,  you  shall  be  acceptable  before  God  by  faith.     Now,  behold' 
him,  each  one  of  you  for  yourself ! 

I  know  what  someone  will  say,  "  I  hope  to  do  that  by-and-by."  I 
hope  you  do  not  so  deceive  3'ourself .  I  have  heard  that  there  was 
once  a  great  meeting  in  the  den  of  the  arch-enemy,  and  he  was  stirring 
up  his  myrmidons  to  seek  the  destruction  of  men.  One  of  them  said, 
**  I  have  gone  forth,  and  I  have  told  men  that  there  is  no  God,  and 
no  hereafter,  and  no  difference  between  sin  and  righteousness,  and  that 
they  may  live  as  they  like ; "  and  there  was  considerable  approba- 
tion among  the  evil  spirits.  But  Satan  himself  said,  "  Thou  hast  done 
small  service,  for  man  has  a  conscience,  and  his  conscience  teaches 
him  better  ;  he  knows  that  there  is  a  God,  he  knows  that  there  is  a 
difference  between  sin  and  righteousness,  he  knows  that  there  must  be 
future  punishment ;  you  have  done  but  little."  Then  another  stood 
up,  and  said,  ' '  I  have  done  better,  I  think,  most  mighty  chieftain,  for 
I  have  told  them  that  the  Bible  is  a  worn-out  book,  that  it  was  a 
fable  at  the  first,  and  that  they  need  not  believe  it."  There  was  a 
round  of  cheers,  for  they  said  that  he  had  done  splendid  service  for 
the  cause  of  darkness  ;  but  Satan  said,  "  It  is  in  vain  that  jon  meddle 
with  the  old  Book,  it  has  taken  care  of  itself,  and  it  can  still  do  so. 
There  is  no  shaking  it,  it  is  like  a  rock.  Thou  hast  done  service  for 
a  time,  but  it  will  soon  pass  away."  And  scarcely  did  anyone  of  the 
fallen  spirits  venture  to  bring  forward  his  boasting  in  the  presence  of 
the  terrible  master  who  sat  in  the  midst  of  them  ;  but,  at  last,  one  said, 
"  I  have  told  men  that  they  have  souls,  and  that  there  is  a  God,  and 
that  the  Bible  is  true.  I  have  left  them  to  believe  as  they  will,  but  I 
have  whispered  in  their  ear  that  there  is  plenty  of  time  to  consider 
all  this."  Then  there  was  a  hush,  and  the  great  master  of  demons 
said,  "  Thou  hast  done  best  of  all.  This  is  my  great  net  in  which  I 
take  more  souls  than  with  any  other,  this  net  of  procrastination  or 
delay."  Therefore  say  I  to  you,  my  hearers,  disappoint  the  fiend. 
Fly  to  Jesus.  Fly  to  Jesus  at  once.  Behold,  not  to-morrow,  but  to- 
night, behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  each  man  for  himself. 

Now  turn  over  the  pages  of  this  grand  old  Book,  and  you  will  find 
the  Lamb  next  in  another  connection.  Israel  was  in  Egypt,  and  there 
they  had  the  lamb  for  the  family ;  "In  the  tenth  day  of  this  month 
they  shall  take  to  them  every  man  a  lamb,  according  to  the  house  of 
their  fathers,  a  lamb  for  an  house."  Oh,  I  wish  that  you  would  all 
go  on  to  behold  the  Lamb  of  God  for  your  households  !  "  Believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Why  do  you  stop 
before  you  finish  the  v»rse  ?  What  said  the  apostle  to  the  trembling 
jailor?  Not  merely  all  that  I  have  quoted,  but  more:  "Believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy  house.''^  Are 
there  not  many  believers  who  do  not  believe  for  their  house  ?     Come, 


THE   LAMB    OF    GOD    IN    SORIPTUKE.  421 

now,  and  believe  in  tliis  provision  of  tlie  Lamb  for  the  house.  Trust 
the  grace  of  God  for  that  little  girl,  the  last  born,  and  for  that  boy  who 
is  still  at  school,  who  does  not  think  much  of  these  things  as  yet ;  and 
for  that  son  of  yours  who  has  left  home,  and  gone  out  as  an  apprentice. 
Oh,  that  the  Lamb  of  God  might  be  for  him  !  Pray  for  him,  to-night ; 
and  you  older  parents,  pray  for  your  sons  who  are  married,  and  your 
daughters  who  have  taken  to  themselves  husbands,  and  are  away  from 
you.  The  Lamb  is  for  the  house,  pray  for  the  whole  household  to- 
night ;  take  in  your  grandchildren,  all  you  old  folks,  all  of  them  who 
are  in  your  house.  Pray  that  the  Lamb  may  be  for  the  house.  I  do 
bless  God  that  I  can  look  upon  all  my  household,  and  rejoice  that  they 
are  converted  to  Christ.  My  father  has  this  joy,  too  ;  and  my  grand- 
father also  had  that  joy.  Oh,  it  is  a  great  bliss  to  have  families, 
generation  after  generation,  all  brought  to  Christ  without  exception  ! 
Why  should  it  not  be  so  ?  Let  us  cry  for  it ;  surely  we  may  expect 
the  same  blessing  that  God  gave  to  his  chosen  people  under  the  law, 
and  expect  it  more  largely.  Grace  does  not  run  in  the  blood,  but 
grace  often  runs  side  by  side  with  it,  so  that  Abraham  is  loved,  and 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  Joseph,  and  Ephraim,  and  Manasseh.  Thus  the 
covenant  blessing  goes  on  from  one  to  another.  Plead  with  God,  to- 
night, that  all  in  your  house  may  be  beneath  the  sprinkled  blood  of 
the  Lamb,  and  be  saved  from  the  destroying  angel,  and  that  all  with 
you  may  go  out  of  Egypt  to  have  a  possession  in  the  land  of  the 
promise. 

A  little  further  on,  following  the  Scripture,  and  asking  you  still  to 
behold  the  Lamb,  in  the  twenty-ninth  chapter  of  that  famous  Book  of 
Exodus,  at  the  thirty-eighth  and  thirty-ninth  verses,  we  come  across 
God's  command  for  the  lamb  for  the  people :  "  Now  this  is  that  which 
thou  shalt  offer  upon  the  altar  ;  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  day  by  day 
continually.  The  one  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  in  the  morning ;  and  the 
other  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  at  even."  Here  is  the  lamb  for  all  the 
chosen  people,  the  lamb  for  Israel.  It  began  with  the  unit,  it  went 
on  to  the  family ;  and  here  the  Lord,  who  "  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion 
more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob,"  makes  his  tabernacle  to  be  the 
central  place  where  a  lamb  shall  be  offered  for  the  whole  nation. 
Think  of  it  with  delight,  to-night,  that  Christ  died  for  all  his  chosen 
people.  He  hath  redeemed  them  from  among  men.  Though  they  be 
as  many  as  the  stars  for  number,  or  as  the  sand  on  the  sea-shore  in- 
numerable, yet  that  one  Sacrifice  has  redeemed  them  all.  Glory  be 
to  God  for  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  by  which  the  whole  of  Christ's 
people  are  redeemed ! 

Then  let  your  mind  take  wing  right  out  of  the  Old  Testament  into 
the  New,  for  I  have  not  time  to  trace  all  the  successive  steps. 
Come  now  to  John,  saying,  in  the  twenty-ninth  verse  of  this  chapter, 
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 
Now  you  have  gone  beyond  the  bounds  of  Israel,  and  have  come  to 
the  Lamb  for  the  world.  You  have  come  to  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  dies 
for  Gentiles  as  well  as  for  Jews,  for  men  in  the  isles  of  the  sea,  for 
men  in  the  wilds  of  Africa,  for  men  of  every  colour,  and  every  race, 
and  every  time,  and  every  clime.  Oh,  glory  be  to  God,  wherever 
there  are  men,  we  may  go  and  tell  them  of  Christ !     Wherever  there 


422  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

are  men  born  of  Adam's  race,  we  may  tell  them  of  the  second  Adam, 
to  whom  looking,  they  who  look  shall  live,  and  in  him  they  shall  find 
eternal  life.  I  love  to  think  of  the  breaking  down  of  the  bounds  that 
shut  in  the  flow  of  grace  to  one  nation.  Behold,  it  flows  over  all  Asia 
Minor,  at  first,  and  then  over  all  Greece,  and  then  to  Rome,  and  Paul 
talks  of  going  to  Spain,  and  the  gospel  is  borne  across  the  sea  to 
England,  and  from  this  country  it  has  gone  out  unto  the  utmost  ends 
of  the  earth. 

Well  now,  take  your  flight,  if  you  can  get  beyond  that,  away  to 
heaven  itself,  and  there  you  will  see  the  Lamh  for  all  heaven.  Look  at 
the  Revelation,  the  seventh  chapter,  and  the  fourteenth  verse ;  no, 
you  need  not  look  it  out,  for  you  know  it.  All  the  saints  in  heaven 
are  standing  in  their  glittering  ranks,  white-robed,  pure  as  the  driven 
snow.  They  sing  and  praise  one  glorious  name  ;  when  one  of  the 
elders  first  asked  the  question,  "  What  are  these  which  are  arrayed  in 
white  robes,  and  whence  came  they  ?  "  he  himself  gave  the  answer, 
'*  These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  have  washed 
their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb." 

"  Round  the  altar  priests  confess, 
If  their  robes  are  white  as  snow, 
'Twas  the  Saviour's  righteousness, 
And  his  blood  that  made  them  so." 

The  blood  of  the  Lamb  has  whitened  all  the  saints  who  are  in 
heaven ;  they  sing  of  him  who  loved  them,  and  laved  them  from  their 
Bins  in  his  own  blood.  I  have  often  wondered  why  that  second  word 
was  not  brought  into  our  translation,  for  it  so  beautifully  fits  the  lan- 
guage of  the  beloved  apostle  John :  "Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and 
laved  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  God  and  his  Father ;  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion  for 
ever  and  ever.  Amen."  There  is  no  whiteness  in  heaven  but  what 
the  Lamb  has  wrought,  no  brightness  there  but  what  the  Lamb  has 
bought ;  everything  there  shows  the  wondrous  power  and  surpassing 
merit  of  the  Lamb  of  God. 

If  it  be  possible  to  think  of  something  more  glorious  than  I  have 
already  described,  I  think  you  will  find  it  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  the 
Revelation,  at  the  thirteenth  verse  :  "  And  every  creature  which  is  in 
heaven,  and  on  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the 
Bea,  and  all  that  are  in  them,  heard  I  saying.  Blessing,  and  honour, 
and  glory,  and  power,  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and 
unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever."  The  day  shall  come  wlien,  from 
every  place  that  God  has  made,  there  shall  be  heard  the  voice  of 
praise  unto  the  Lamb ;  there  shall  be  found  everywhere  men  and 
women  redeemed  by  blood,  angels  and  glorious  spirits,  rejoicing  to 
adore  him  who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come,  the  Almighty  Lamb  of 
God. 

I  think  I  have  given  you  something  to  consider  if  you  turn  over 
the  pages  of  Scripture,  and  follow  the  track  of  the  bleeding  Lamb. 

II.  But  now,  taking  you  again  over  the  same  road  a  little,  I  want 
,you,  in  the  second  place,  to  behold  the  Lamb  of  God  rx  his  benedio 

TI0N8    TO   men. 


THE    LAMB    OF   GOD    IN    SCRTPTUKE. 


423 


The  first  blessing  of  all  is  that  of  Abel.  He  icas  accepted  of  God; 
he  ofPered  a  more  acceptable  sacrifice  than  Cain.  Well  now,  let  any- 
body here,  who  does  not  know  it,  try  to  learn  this  lesson  to-night. 
You  can  only  be  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  God  loves  his  Son  with 
such  an  overflowing  love  that  he  has  love  enough  for  you,  love 
enough  for  me,  if  we  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  is  the  great  conduit 
or  channel  of  God's  love,  and  that  love  flows  through  all  the  pipes 
to  every  soul  that  believes  in  Jesus.  Hide  behind  your  Lord,  and 
you  are  safe.  Trust  his  name,  living  and  dying,  and  nothing  can 
harm  you.  How  many  dear  hearts,  when  passing  through  the  valley 
of  death-shade,  when  grim  thoughts  have  clustered  about  them,  have 
been  cheered  and  comforted  by  the  thought  of  Christ !  Remember 
the  monk  who,  as  he  died,  put  away  the  priest,  and  the  crucifix,  and 
everything  else,  and  cried,  "  Tua  vulnera,  Jesu  !  Tua  vulnera,  Jesu .'  *^ 
**  Thy  wounds,  Jesus !  Thy  wounds,  Jesus !  "  I  am  not  saved  by 
what  I  can  do,  but  by  what  he  has  done  ;  not  by  what  I  have  suffered, 
but  by  what  he  has  endured.  There  hangs  our  everlasting  hope  ;  we 
trust  to  Christ  in  life  and  in  death,  and  we  are  accepted  for  his  sake. 
Come,  every  sinner,  bring  the  Lamb  of  God ;  put  him  on  the  altar, 
and  you  shall  be  accepted  at  once,  and  you  may  at  once  begin  to 
praise  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

But  then,  as  we  go  on,  we  find  this  Lamb  of  God  useful,  not  only 
for  acceptance,  but  also  for  rescue  and  deliverance.  It  is  a  dark  and 
dreadful  night ;  Egypt  shivers,  and  stands  aghast;  and  just  at  twelve 
at  night  forth  flies  an  angel,  armed  with  the  sword  of  death.  In 
every  house  of  Egypt  there  is  heard  a  wail,  for  the  firstborn  is  dead, 
from  the  firstborn  of  Pharaoh  to  the  firstborn  of  the  woman  who  turn* 
the  mill  to  grind  the  daily  corn.  Death  is  in  every  house ;  nay,  stay; 
there  are  houses  wherein  there  is  no  death.  What  has  secured  those 
habitations  ?  The  father  took  a  lamb,  shed  its  blood,  dipped  the 
bunch  of  hyssop  in  it,  and  smeared  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts ; 
and  then  all  sat  down  and  feasted  on  the  lamb  undisturbed,  and 
calm,  and  happy.  They  rejoiced  to  have  for  food  that  lamb  whose 
blood  was  the  ensign  of  their  safety.  There  was  no  crying  there,  no 
dying  there  ;  death  could  not  touch  the  inhabitants  of  the  house  that 
was  marked  with  the  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb.  Beloved,  you  and  I 
are  perfectly  safe  if  we  are  sheltered  beneath  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 
of  God ;  nothing  can  harm  us,  everything  must  bless  us ;  and  w© 
may  go  to  our  beds  to-night  singing — 

"  Sprinkled  afresh  with  pardoning  blood, 
I  lay  me  down  to  rest, 
As  in  the  embraces  of  my  God, 
Or  on  my  Saviour's  breast.'' 

We  may  rise  to-morrow  morning,  if  we  are  spared,  and  go  into  this 
busy  world  without  any  fear.  The  broad  arrow  of  the  King  is  set 
upon  us  in  the  blood-mark  of  the  atoning  sacrifice,  and  we  are  safe, 
and  safe  for  ever.     Glory  be  to  the  name  of  the  Lord  for  this ! 

Nor  was  that  all.  As  I  have  told  you,  the  blood  of  the  paschal 
lamb  was  not  onlj'  sprinkled  for  the  protection  of  the  house,  but  its 
flesh  was  the  food  of  the  inmates.     Oh,  brethren,  we  do  not  at  first 


424  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

know  what  it  is  to  feed  on  Christ !  We  are  satisfied  to  be  sprinkled 
with  liis  blood  ;  but  the  believer  afterwards  finds  that  Christ  is  the 
food  of  his  soul.  His  blood  is  drink  indeed,  and  his  flesh  is  meat 
indeed.  Oh,  what  a  festival  have  we  kept  over  the  person  of  our 
Lord  !  Sometimes,  when  faint  and  hungry,  we  have  begun  to  think 
of  the  Incarnate  God,  the  bleeding  Lamb,  the  full  atoneAuent  paid,  and 
we  have  said,  "  My  soul  is  full,  satisfied  with  favouf-,  full  of  the 
blessing  of  the  Lord."  I  do  not  know  what  there  is  in  the  gospel  if 
you  take  away  the  atoning  sacrifice  ;  it  seems  to  me  that  there  would 
be  nothing  left  but  chafi,  which  might  suit  asses  and  horses,  but  would 
not  be  fit  for  men.  Look  to  Jesus  Christ  dying  in  our  stead,  and  here 
is  something  for  the  soul  to  feed  upon,  ay,  and  to  be  satisfied  with,  as 
with  marrow  and  fatness  ! 

I  pointed  you,  a  little  further  on,  to  the  lamb  in  the  wilderness,  the 
lamb  offered  up  every  day  ;  that  brings  us  to  another  point  in  our 
Lord's  work.  We  have  had  Christ  for  acceptance,  Christ  for  safety, 
and  Christ  for  food,  now  we  have  Christ  for  perpetual  resort.  The 
Lamb  of  God  in  the  morning !  Oh,  blessed  be  God  for  a  Saviour  in 
the  morning !  If  the  night  has  gathered  aught  of  evil,  he  doth  then 
disperse  it,  as  the  sun  dispels  the  darkness.  But  oh,  what  a  precious 
thing  also  to  have  the  Lamb  of  God  in  the  evening  !  If  in  the  day  we 
have  soiled  our  feet  in  traversing  this  busy  world,  here  we  come  to 
the  fountain,  and  we  are  made  clean  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 
Perpetual  merit,  perpetual  intercession,  perpetual  life-giving,  per- 
petual salvation,  flow  from  Jesus  Christ  the  Lamb  of  God.  He  is  not 
slain  twice  ;  his  one  wondei'f ul  off ering  has  finished  transgression,  and 
made  an  end  of  sin  ;  but  its  efficacy  continues  as  though  he  were 
sacrificed  often,  ever  supplying  us  with  merit,  so  that,  in  effect,  hia 
wounds  continually  do  bleed.  He  is  always  a  new  Saviour  for  me 
every  niorning,  always  a  new  Saviour  every  night,  and  yet  always  the 
same  Saviour,  the  same  Christ.  There  is  no  getting  weary  of  him, 
there  is  nothing  "  stale  "  in  him.  They  may  talk  about  "  a  new  view 
of  the  atonement."  I  have  no  view  of  the  atonement  but  this,  "  Who 
loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me;  "  "Who  his  own  self  bare  our 
sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree  ;  "  and  that  old  view  of  the  atonement 
is  ever  fresh  and  ever  new  to  the  heart  and  conscience. 

Well  now,  beloved,  when  we  come  to  John  again,  following  our 
former  run  of  thought,  we  find  the  Lamb  of  God  useful  for  guulanoe, 
for  when  John  said,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  the  two  disciples 
followed  Jesus;  and  we  read  of  some,  "  These  are  they  which  follow 
the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth."  The  Lamb  is  our  Guide.  The 
Lord  is  a  Shepherd  as  well  as  a  Lamb,  and  the  flock  following  in  his 
footsteps  is  safely  led.  My  soul,  when  thou  wantest  to  know  which 
way  to  go,  behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !  Ask,  "  Wliat  would  Jesus  do  ?  " 
Then  do  thou  what  Jesus  would  have  done  in  such  a  case,  and  thou 
canst  not  do  amiss. 

Further  on  we  find  such  a  passage  as  this,  telling  us  of  victory 
through  the  Lamb  of  God  :  "  They  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb."  The  Lamb  is  a  great  Warrior  ;  there  is  none  like  him.  Is 
he  not  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  ?  Though  he  be  gentle  as  a 
lamb,  yet  against  sin  and  iniquity  he  is  fiercer  than  a  joung  liou 


THE    LAMB    OF    GOD    IN    SCRIPTURE.  425 

■when  it  roareth  on  its  prey.  If  we  follow  him,  hold  fast  his  truth, 
believe  in  his  atonement,  and  perpetually  proclaim  his  gospel,  we 
shall  overcome  all  error,  and  all  sin,  and  all  evil. 

Well  now,  this  blessed  Lamb — it  is  not  easy  to  leave  off  talking 
about  him  when  one  once  begins — is  so  blessed  that  you  may  well 
behold  him,  for  all  happiness  comes  through  him.  In  heaven  you  will 
see  nothing  without  him.  "Nothing,"  say  you?  No,  nothing;  here 
is  a  proof  of  my  words.  "  The  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of 
the  moon,  to  shine  in  it :  for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the 
Lamb  is  the  light  thereof."  All  the  light,  the  knowledge,  the  joy,  the 
bliss  of  heaven,  come  through  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Not 
Jesus  only,  but  Jesus  slain,  Jesus  the  Lamb  of  God,  is  the  very  light 
of  heaven. 

And  what,  think  you,  is  the  joy-day  of  heaven,  the  time  for  the  high- 
est exultation  ?  Why,  the  joyous  day  when  all  the  golden  bells  shall 
peal  out  their  glorious  melodies,  and  all  the  silver  trumpets  shall  ring 
out  their  jubilant  notes,  will  be  the  day  of  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb. 
It  is  the  heaven  of  heaven,  the  climax  of  ineffable  delight ;  and  the 
voice  of  the  great  multitude,  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the 
voice  of  mighty  thunderings,  sings,  "  Alleluia :  for  the  Lord  God 
omnipotent  reigneth.  Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice,  and  give  honour  to 
him :  for  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made 
herself  ready."  So  that,  at  the  topmost  round  of  the  ladder  of  eternal 
bliss,  there  do  you  find  the  Lamb.  You  cannot  get  beyond  him.  He 
gives  you  aU  he  has,  even  himself.  Behold  him,  then,  and  go  on 
beholding  him  throughout  the  countless  ages  of  eternity. 

I  would  to  God  that  you  had  all  beheld  him,  and  I  pray  you  to 
behold  him  to-night.  It  is  but  a  little  while,  and  the  death-film  will 
gather  about  j'our  eyes  ;  and  if  you  have  not  seen  the  Lamb  while 
yet  you  have  mortal  eyes,  you  will  see  him,  you  will  certainly  see  him, 
but  your  vision  will  be  like  that  of  Balaam,  "I  shall  see  him,  but 
not  now  :  I  shall  behold  him,  but  not  nigh."  If  it  is  with  you  "  not 
now",  it  may  be  "  not  nigh."  It  will  be  an  awful  thing  to  see  the 
Lamb  with  a  gulf  between  yourself  and  him,  for  there  is  a  great, 
impassable  gulf  fixed  in  the  next  world  ;  and  when  you  see  him  across 
that  gulf,  how  will  you  feel  ?  Then  shall  you  cry  to  the  mountains 
and  rocks,  "  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth 
on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb !  "  Jesus  will  stiU 
be  a  Lamb,  even  to  the  lost ;  it  is  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  that  they 
wiU  dread.  The  Lamb  is  always  conspicuous  ;  he  may  be  neglected, 
rejected,  refused  to-night,  but  he  will  be  beheld  in  eternity,  and 
beheld  to  your  everlasting  confusion  and  unutterable  dismay  if  you 
refuse  to  behold  him  now.     Let  it  not  be  so  with  any  of  you. 

"  Ye  sinners,  seek  his  face, 

Whose  wrath  ye  cannot  bear ; 
Fly  to  the  shelter  of  his  cross, 
And  find  salvation  there." 
Amen. 


THE   ANNUAL   ATONEMENT. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  OcrocER  3rd,  1886,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABEaNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  For  on  that  day  shall  the  priest  make  an  atonement  for  you,  to  cleanse  you,  that  ye 
may  be  clean  from  all  your  sins  before  the  Lord." — Leviticus  xvi.  30. 

Before  Adam  transgressed  he  lived  in  communion  with  God;  but  after 
he  had  broken  the  covenant,  and  grieved  God's  Spirit,  he  could  have  no 
more  familiar  fellowship  with  God.  Under  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  ia 
which  God  was  pleased  in  his  grace  to  dwell  among  his  people  and  walk 
with  them  in  the  wilderness,  it  was  still  under  a  reserve:  there  was  a 
holy  place  wherein  the  symbol  of  God's  presence  was  hidden  away  from 
mortal  gaze.  No  man  might  come  near  to  it  except  in  one  only  way,  and 
then  only  once  in  the  year,  "The  Holy  Ghost  this  signifying,  that  the 
way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was  not  yet  made  manifest,  while  as  the  first 
tabernacle  was  yet  standing."  Our  subject  to-day  illustrates  the 
appointed  way  of  access  to  God.  This  chapter  shows  that  the  way  of 
access  to  God  is  by  atonement,  and  by  no  other  method.  We  cannot 
draw  near  unto  the  Most  High  except  along  the  blood-besprinkled  way 
of  sacrifice.  Our  Lord  Jesus  said :  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father, 
but  by  me  ;"  and  this  is  true  in  many  senses,  and  in  this  among  them, 
that  our  way  to  God  lies  only  through  the  sacrifice  of  his  Son. 

The  reason  of  this  is  that  sin  lieth  at  the  door.  Brethren,  a  pure 
and  holy  God  cannot  endure  sin :  he  cannot  have  fellowship  with  it,  of 
with  those  who  are  rendered  unclean  by  it,  for  it  would  be  inconsistent 
with  his  nature  so  to  do.  On  the  other  hand,  sinful  men  cannot  have 
fellowship  with  God :  their  evil  nature  could  not  endure  the  fire  of  his 
holiness.  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  devouring  fire  ?  Who 
among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings  ?  What  is  that  devouring 
fire,  and  what  are  those  everlasting  burnings,  but  the  justice  and  holiness 
of  God?  The  apostle  saith,  "Even  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  A 
guilty  soul  would  perish  if  it  were  possible  for  it  to  draw  near  to  God 
apart  from  the  Mediator  and  his  atonement.  The  fire  of  God's  nature 
must  consume  the  stubble  of  our  nature  so  long  as  there  is  sin  in  us  or 
about  us.  Hence  the  difficulty  of  access,  a  difficulty  which  only  a  divine 
method  can  remove.  God  cannot  commune  with  siuful  men,  for  he  is 
huly.  Sinful  men  cannot  commune  with  a  holy  God,  because  he  must 
No.  1,923. 

17 


428  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

destroy  them,  even  as  he  destroyed  Nadab  and  Abihu  when  they  intruded 
into  his  holy  place.  That  terrible  judgment  is  mentioned  in  the  opening 
verses  of  the  chapter  before  us  as  the  reason  why  the  ordinances  herein 
contained  were  first  of  all  made. 

How,  then,  shall  men  come  to  God  ?  Only  in  God's  own  way.  He 
himself  devised  the  way,  and  he  has  taught  it  to  us  by  a  parable  in 
this  chapter.  It  would  be  very  wrong  to  prefer  any  one  passage  of 
Scripture  beyond  another,  for  all  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  ;  but 
if  we  might  do  so,  we  should  set  this  chapter  in  a  very  eminent  and 
prominent  place  for  its  fulness  of  instruction,  and  its  clear  yet  deep 
docfrinal  teaching.  It  treats  upon  a  matter  which  is  of  the  very  highest 
importance  to  all  of  us.  We  are  here  taught  the  way  by  which  the  sin  that 
blocks  the  door  may  be  taken  away,  so  that  a  seeking  soul  may  be  intro- 
duced into  the  presence  of  God  and  stand  in  his  holy  place,  and  yet 
live.  Here  we  learn  how  we  may  say,  with  the  astonished  prophet,  "  I 
have  seen  God,  and  my  life  is  preserved."  Oh  that  we  might  to-day  so 
learn  the  lesson  that  we  may  enter  into  the  fullest  fellowship  with  the 
Father,  and  with  his  Sun  Jesus  Christ,  in  that  safe  way,  that  only  way, 
which  God  has  appointed  for  us.  Oh  for  the  power  and  guidance  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  know  and  use  "  the  new  and  living  way  "  ! 

Before  I  proceed  to  enlarge  upon  this  chapter,  I  want  to  notice  that, 
of  course,  this  was  only  a  type.  This  great  day  of  atonement  did  not 
Bee  an  actual  atonement  made,  nor  sin  really  put  away ;  but  it  was  the 
figure  of  heavenly  things — the  shadow  of  good  things  to  come.  The 
substance  is  of  Christ.  If  this  day  of  atonement  had  been  real  and 
satisfactory,  as  touching  God  and  the  conscience  of  men,  there  would 
never  have  been  another ;  for  the  worshippers  once  purged  would  have 
had  no  more  conscience  of  sin.  If  they  had  lived  fifty  or  a  hundred 
years,  they  would  never  have  needed  another  day  of  atonement  ;  but 
because  this  was,  in  its  nature,  imperfect  and  shadowy,  being  only 
typical,  therefore  every  year,  on  the  seventh  month,  on  the  tenth  day 
of  the  month,  a  fast  was  proclaimed,  sin  was  confessed,  victims  were 
slain,  and  atonement  was  again  presented.  In  the  Jewish  year,  so  often 
as  it  came  round,  on  one  special  day  they  were  commanded  to  afflict 
their  souls,  even  though  it  was  a  Sabbath  of  rest.  In  very  deed  a 
remembrance  of  sin  was  made  every  year,  a  painful  remembrance  for 
them,  although  sweetened  hy  a  new  exhibition  of  the  plan  by  which  sin 
is  cleansed.  The  Lord  said,  "This  shall  be  an  everlasting  statute  unto 
you";  it  lasted  as  long  as  the  Mosaic  economy  in  the  letter,  and  its 
spirit  and  substance  last  on  for  ever.  They  had  that  day  to  re- 
member that  their  sin  was  not  put  away  once  for  all  and  for  ever, 
by  all  their  types  and  ceremonies,  and  therefore  they  had  again  to  humble 
themselves  and  come  before  God  with  sacrifices  which  could  never  truly 
put  away  sin.  This  Israel  had  to  do  constantly  until  Jesus,  the  true 
High  Priest  appeared,  and  now  they  have  no  sacrificing  priest,  nor  altar, 
nor  holy  of  holies.  By  Jesus  Christ's  one  offering  of  himself,  sin  was 
put  away,  once  for  all,  effectually  and  finally,  so  that  believers  are  really 
clean  before  God.  Now  if  I  should  seem  to  run  the  type  into  the 
substance  you  will  just  dissever  them  in  your  own  minds.  It  is  not 
easy  so  to  speak  as  to  keep  shadow  and  substatice  quite  clear  of  each 
other.     We  are  apt  to  say,  "  This  is  so  and  so,"  when  we  mean,   "  this 


THR   ANNUAL   ATONEMENT.  429 

represents  so  and  so";  and  we  have  our  Lord's  example  for  so  doing,  for 
he  said,  "  This  is  my  body  and  my  blood,"  when  he  meant  that  the 
bread  and  wine  represented  his  body  and  blood.  We  are  not  speaking 
to  fools,  nor  to  those  who  will  wrench  the  letter  from  its  obvious  spiritual 
sense.  I  shall  trust  to  your  intelligence  and  the  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  you  will  in  this  discourse  discern  between  the  symbol  and  the 
substance.  May  the  divine  Spirit  help  me  and  help  you  to  a  right  under- 
?tanding  of  this  sacred  type  ! 

I.  Now,  then,  let  us  come  to  the  text,  and  note,  first,  what  was 
DONE  on  that  particular  day.  The  text  tells  ub  what  was  done  sym- 
bolically— "  On  that  day  shall  the  priest  make  an  atonement  for  you, 
to  cleanse  you,  that  ye  may  be  clean  from  all  your  sins  before  the  Lord." 

The  persons  themselves  were  cleansed.  If  any  of  them  had  become 
unclean  so  as  to  be  denied  communion  with  God  and  his  people,  they  were 
made  clean,  so  that  they  might  go  up  to  the  tabernacle,  and  mingle  with 
the  congregation.  All  the  host  were  that  morning  regarded  as  unclean, 
and  all  had  to  bow  their  heads  in  penitent  sorrow  because  of  their  un- 
cleanness.  After  the  sacrifice  and  the  sending  away  of  the  scapegoat 
the  whole  congregation  was  clean  and  in  a  condition  t  rejoice.  If  it 
happened  to  be  the  year  of  jubilee,  the  joyful  trumpets  rang  out  as  soon 
as  the  atonement  was  complete.  Every  year,  within  four  days  after  the 
Day  of  Atonement,  the  people  were  so  clean  that  th«T  kept  the  joyful 
Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Jewish  Rabbis  were  wont  to  say  that  no  man 
had  ever  seen  sorrow  who  had  not  seen  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and 
that  no  man  had  ever  seen  gladness  who  had  not  witnessed  the  hilarity 
and  delight  of  the  people  during  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 

The  people  themselves  were  made  to  be  a  clean  people ;  and  I  lay 
great  stress  on  this,  because  unless  you  yourself  are  purged,  everything 
that  you  do  is  defiled  in  the  sight  of  God.  When  a  man  was  unclean, 
if  he  went  into  a  tent  and  sat  upon  anything  it  was  unclean ;  if  a  friend 
touched  his  garments  he  was  rendered  unclean.  The  man  himself 
needed  first  to  be  delivered  from  impurity,  and  it  is  precisely  the 
same  in  your  case  and  mine.  I  have  need  to  cry,  "  Purge  me  with 
hyseop,  and  /  shall  be  clean ;  wash  me,  and  /  shall  be  whiter  than 
snow."  Your  very  person  by  nature  is  defiled,  and  obnoxious  to 
the  justice  of  God.  In  body,  soul,  and  spirit  you  are  by  nature  alto- 
gether as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  your  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy 
rags :  you  yourself  need  to  be  washed  and  renewed.  It  is  a  far  simpler 
thing  to  remove  outward  stains  than  it  iS  to  purge  the  very  substance 
and  nature  of  man;  yet  this  is  what  was  done  on  the  day  of  atone- 
ment typically,  and  this  is  what  our  redeeming  Lord  actually  does  fur 
us.  We  are  outlaws,  aud  his  atonement  purges  us  of  outlawry,  and 
makes  us  citizens ;  we  are  lepers,  and  by  his  stripes  tve  are  so  healed  as 
to  be  received  among  the  clean.  By  nature  we  are  only  fit  to  be  flung 
into  those  fires  which  burn  up  corrupt  and  oflFensive  things;  but  his 
sacrifice  makes  us  so  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  that  all  the  forces 
of  heaven  stand  sentinel  about  us.  Once  black  as  night,  we  are  so 
purged  that  we  shall  walk  with  him  in  white,  for  we  are  worthy. 

Their  persons  being  made  clean,  they  were  also  purged  of  all  the  sins 
confessed.  I  called  attention,  in  the  reading  of  the  chapter,  to  its  many 
*'  ails."    I  think  there  are  seven  or  eight  of  them.     The  work  which 


43©  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

was  done  on  that  day  was  comprehensive:  a  clean  sweep  was  made  of 
sin.  I  begin  with  that  which  was  confessed,  for  it  was  that  for  which 
cleansing  would  be  most  desired.  It  is  said  that  "  Aaron  shall  lay 
both  his  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  live  goat,  and  confess  over  him  all  the 
iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel."  All  sin  that  was  confessed  over 
the  scapegoat  was  can'ied  away  into  a  land  not  inhabited.  Sin  that  is 
confessed  is  evidently  real  sin,  and  not  a  mere  dream  of  a  morbid  con- 
science. There  is  a  certain  mythical  cloud  of  sin  which  people  talk  about, 
and  affect  to  deplore,  and  yet  they  have  no  sense  of  the  solid  weight  and 
heinousness  of  their  actual  iniquity.  Certain  grievous  sins  are  comparable 
to  cauldrons  of  foaming  filth :  no  man  will  willingly  own  to  them,  however 
clearly  they  may  be  his  ;  but  when  he  does  own  to  them  before  God,  let 
him  recollect  that  it  is  this  real  sin,  this  foul  and  essentially  abominable 
transgression,  which  is  put  away  by  the  atonement  of  Christ.  Sin  con- 
fessed with  tears,  sin  which  causes  the  very  heart  to  bleed — killing  sin, 
damning  sin — this  is  the  kind  of  sin  for  which  Jestis  died.  Sham  sin- 
ners may  be  content  with  a  sha'u  Saviour  ;  but  our  Lord  Jesus  is  the 
real  Saviour,  who  did  really  die,  and  die!  for  real  sin.  Oh,  how  this 
ought  to  comfort  you,  you  that  are  sadly  bearing  the  pressing  burden  of 
an  execrable  life  ;  you,  too,  who  are  crushed  into  the  mire  of  despon- 
dency beneath  the  load  of  your  guilt  I  Brethren,  sin  which  you  are 
bound  to  own  to  as  most  assuredly  committed  is  the  sort  of  pollution 
from  which  Jesus  cleanses  all  believers.  Sin  which  you  dare  not  con- 
fess to  man,  but  acknowledge  only  as  you  lay  your  hand  upon  the  divine 
sacrifice, — such  sin  the  Lord  removes  from  you. 

The  passage  is  very  particular  to  mention  *'  all  sins."  "  The  goat 
shall  bear  upon  him  all  their  iniquities."  This  includes  every  form  of 
sin,  of  thought,  of  word,  of  deed,  of  pride,  of  falsehood,  of  lust,  of  malice, 
of  blasphemy.  This  comprehends  crimes  against  man,  and  offences 
against  God,  of  peculiar  bkckuess  ;  and  it  does  not  exclude  sins  of  in- 
advertence, or  carelessness,  or  of  omission.  Transgressions  of  the  body, 
the  intellect,  the  affections  are  all  blotted  out.  The  outrageous 
scandals  which  I  dare  not  mention  are  yet  pardonable;  yea,  such 
have  been  pardoned.  There  is  not  the  like  degree  of  virus  in  all 
sins ;  but  whether  or  no,  the  atonement  is  for  all  transgressions. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  not  pour  out  his  heart's  blood  to  remove  one 
set  of  stains  and  leave  the  rest;  but  every  spot  and  trace  of  sin  he 
takes  away  from  the  soul  that  puts  its  trust  in  him.  "  Wash  me,"  said 
David,  "and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  He  looked  for  the  extreme 
of  cleanness  :  and  such  the  Saviour  brings  to  the  soul  for  whom  he 
has  made  effectual  atonement.  I  desire  to  be  so  plain  and  broad  that  the 
chief  of  sinners  may  gather  hope  from  my  words.  I  speak  in  very 
simple  language,  but  the  theme  is  full  of  sublimity,  especially  to  you 
that  feel  your  need  of  it.  The  atonement  removed  all  sin.  I  must  give 
you  the  exact  expression.  He  says,  ^'  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  and  all  their  transgressions  in  all  their  sin?," 

It  seems  that  the  divine  atonement  puis  away  the  sin  of  sin — the 
essence  and  heart  of  sin.  Sin  has  its  core,  its  kernel,  its  mortal  spot. 
Within  a  fruit  there  is  a  central  stone,  or  pip ;  this  may  serve  as  the 
likeness  of  sin.  Within  each  iniquity  there  seems  to  lie  a  something 
more  essentially  evil  than  the  act  itself:  this  is  the  kernel  of  intent, 


THE   ANNUAL   ATONEMENT.  i31 

the  core  of  obstinacy,  the  inner  hate  of  the  mind.  Whatever  may  be 
the  sin  of  the  soul,  or  the  soul  of  the  sin,  atonement  has  been  made  for 
it  all.  Most;,  sins  are  a  conglomerate  of  sins.  A  sin  may  be  compared 
to  a  honeycomb :  there  are  as  many  sins  within  one  sin  as  there  are 
cells  within  apiece  of  comb.  Sin  is  a  swarming,  hiving,  teeming  thing. 
You  can  never  estimate  its  full  vileness,  nor  perceive  all  its  evil  bearings. 
All  sorts  of  sins  may  hide  away  in  one  sin.  It  would  puzzle  all  the 
theologians  in  the  world  to  tell  what  sin  was  absent  from  Adam's  first 
offence.  I  could  take  any  point  you  choose,  and  show  that  Adam  sinned  in 
that  direction.  All  sin  was  within  that  first  sin.  Sin  is  a  multitudinous 
evil,  an  aggregate  of  all  manner  of  filthiness,  a  chain  with  a  thousand 
deadly  links.  A  sinner  is  like  a  man  possessed  with  a  devil  who  cries, 
*'  My  name  is  Legion  :  for  we  are  many  "  :  it  is  one  in  evil,  and  yet  count- 
less in  forms.  The  atonement  is  more  than  equal  to  sin:  it  takes 
away  all  our  transgressions  in  all  our  sins.  It  ia  the  fullest  purga- 
tion that  could  be  imagined.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  not  left  upon  those 
for  whom  he  has  made  atonement  a  single  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
thing,  so  far  as  their  justification  is  concerned.  He  has  not  left  an 
iniquity  for  which  they  can  be  condemned  before  the  bar  of  judgment. 
*'  Ye  are  clean  every  whit "  is  his  sure  verdict,  and  none  can  con- 
tradict it. 

It  appears  from  this  chapter,  too,  that  another  thing  was  done.  Not 
only  were  all  the  sins  that  they  had  committed  put  away,  but  also  all 
their  holy  things  were  purged.  There  stood  the  altar  upon  which  only 
holy  things  were  offered  ;  but  because  imperfect  men  ministered  there  it 
needed  to  be  sprinkled  with  blood  before  it  could  be  clean.  There  was 
the  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle,  which  was  dedicated  solely  to  God's 
service,  wherein  the  holiest  rites  of  God's  ordaining  were  celebrated; 
but  because  the  priests  that  served  there  were  fallible,  and  unholy 
thoughts  might  cross  their  minds  even  when  they  handled  the  holy 
vessels,  therefore  the  blood  was  sprinkled  seven  times  within  the  holy 
place.  Inside,  within  the  veil,  the  sanctuary  was  called  the  "  holy  of 
holies."  Yes,  but  standing,  as  it  did  at  first,  in  the  midst  of  the  camp 
of  an  erring  people,  and  afterwards  near  to  it,  it  needed  to  be  purged. 
It  is  written,  "  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  holy  place, 
because  of  the  uncleanness  of  the  children  of  Israel."  Even  the  mercy- 
seat,  and  the  ground  whereon  it  rested,  were  sprinkled  with  the  blood 
of  the  sacrifice  seven  times.  0  brothers  and  sisters,  I  do  feel  so  glad 
that  our  Lord  has  atoned  for  the  sins  of  our  holy  things.  I  rejoice 
that  Jesus  forgives  the  sins  of  my  sermons.  I  have  preached  my  very 
soul  out  among  you  with  purity  of  motive,  seeking  to  win  men  for 
Christ ;  but  I  dare  not  hope  to  have  them  accepted  in  and  of  themselves, 
for  I  perceive  that  they  are  defiled  with  sin.  1  feel  so  glad  that  Jesus 
has  purified  our  prayers.  Many  saints  spend  much  time  in  hearty, 
earnefct  cries  to  God;  but  even  on  your  knees  you  sin;  and  herein  is 
our  comfort,  that  the  precious  blood  has  made  atonement  for  the  short- 
comings of  our  supplications.  Sometimes  when  we  get  together,  beloved, 
we  sing  to  the  praise  of  our  Lord  with  heart  and  will.  I  have  felt  ia 
this  place  as  if  you  and  I  and  all  of  us  were  so  many  burning  coals,  all 
blazing  within  a  censer,  and  thus  letting  loose  the  odours  of  the  sweet 
incense  of  our  Lord's  praise.     How  often  has  a  pillar  of  fragrant  smoke 


432  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

risen  from  this  house  to  heaven !  Yes,  but  even  then  there  was  siu  in 
our  praises,  and  iniquity  in  our  doxologies.  We  need  pardon  for  our 
psalms,  and  cleansing  for  our  hymns.  Blessed  be  God,  atonement  is  made 
for  all  our  faults,  excesses,  and  shortcomings,  Jesus  puts  away,  not 
only  our  unholy  things,  but  the  sins  of  our  holy  things  also. 

Once  more,  on  that  day  all  the  people  ivere  cleansed.  All  the  congre- 
gation of  the  house  of  Israel  were  typically  cleansed  from  all  sin  by  the 
day  of  atonement :  not  the  priests  only,  but  all  the  people :  not  the 
princes  only,  but  the  poorest  servants  in  the  camp.  The  aged  woman 
and  the  little  child,  the  grey  beard  and  the  youth,  were  alike  purified. 
Men  of  business  inclined  to  covetousness,  they  were  cleansed ;  and  young 
men  and  maidens  in  their  gaiety,  too  apt  to  descend  into  wantonness — 
they  were  all  made  clean  that  day.  This  gives  great  comfort  to  those 
of  us  who  love  the  souls  of  the  multitude.  All  who  believe  are  justified 
from  all  things.  It  is  written,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  I  have  often  heard  the  text  quoted  with 
the  "us"  left  out ;  permit  me  to  put  it  in  at  this  moment — "cleanseth 
us  from  all  sin."  Now  put  yourself  into  the  '*us."  Dare  to  believe 
that  grace  admits  you  there.  By  an  act  of  faith  let  all  of  us  all  round 
the  galleries  and  in  this  great  area  say,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  cleanseth  us."  If  you  pull  "  us "  to  pieces  it  is  made  up  of  a 
great  many  "mes."  A  thousand  thousand  times  "me"  will  all  pack 
away  into  a  single  "iis.^'  Let  each  one  say — "The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  me,  and  cleanseth  me  from  all  sin."  Be 
glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  because  of  this  gracious  truth.  This  was  done 
on  the  day  of  atonement  in  the  symbol,  and  it  has  been  really  done  by 
the  Lord  Jesus  through  his  atoning  sacrifice. 

II.  Now  we  notice,  in  the  second  place,  HOW  IT  WAS  done.  We 
have  seen  what  was  done,  and  this  is  most  cheering  ;  but  now  we  will  see 
how  it  was  done.  I  shall  have  to  be  brief  in  this  description.  The 
atonement  was  made  first  of  all  by  sacrifice.  1  see  a  bullock  for  a  sin- 
oflfering,  a  ram  for  a  burnt-oflfering,  and  again  a  goat  for  a  sin-offering. 
Many  victims  were  offered  that  day,  and  thus  the  people  were  reminded 
of  the  instrumental  cause  of  af.onement,  namely,  the  blood  of  sacrifice. 
We  know  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  could  never  take  away 
sin ;  but  very  distinctly  do  these  point  to  the  sufferings  of  our  dear 
Redeemer.  The  woes  he  bore  are  the  expiation  for  our  guilt.  "  He  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities:  the 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are 
healed."  If  you  want  to  know  by  what  means  sin  is  put  away,  think 
of  Messiah's  life  of  grief  and  shame  and  arduous  service;  think  of 
his  agony  and  bloody  sweat  in  the  garden;  think  of  the  betrayal  and 
denial,  the  scourging  and  the  spitting.  Think  of  the  false  accusations 
and  the  reproaches  and  the  jeers;  think  of  the  cross,  the  nailed 
hands  and  feet,  the  bruised  soul,  and  the  broken  spirit.  Fierce 
were  the  fires  which  consumed  our  sacrifice.  "My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  is  the  quintessence  of  agony ;  and  this 
came  from  the  heart  which  was  crushed  for  our  sins.  Atonement  was 
made  for  your  sins  and  mine  by  the  shedding  of  blood — that  is  to  say, 
by  our  Lord's  suflPering,  and  specially  by  his  laying  down  his  life  on 
our  behalf.     Jesus  died  :  by  that  death  he  purged  our  sins.     He  who 


THE   ANNUAL   A'l'ONEMENT.  433 

only  hath  imraovtality  gave  up  the  gliost  ;  in  the  cold  emlirace  of  death 
the  Lord  of  glory  slept.  They  wrapped  him  in  spices  and  linen  clo'hes 
find  laid  him  in  the  tomb  of  Joseph  of  Arimathgea.  In  that  death 
lay  the  essential  deed  by  which  sin  dies  and  grace  reigns  tliruugh 
righteousness  unto  eternal  life. 

Notice,  next,  that  the  atonement  was  made  not  only  by  the  blood  of 
Baciifiee,  but  hy  the  'presentation  of  the  Hood  ivithin  the  veil.  "With  the 
Bmoke  of  incense  and  a  bowl  filled  with  blood  Aaron  passed  in'o  the  most 
holy  place.  Let  us  never  forget  that  our  Lord  has  gone  into  the  heavenly 
places  with  better  sacrifices  than  Aaron  could  present.  His  merits  are  the 
Bweet  incense  which  burns  before  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace.  His 
death  supplies  that  blood  of  sprinkling  which  we  find  even  in  heaven. 
"  For  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands,  which 
are  the  figures  of  the  true  ;  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the 
presence  of  God  for  us."  "  Neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves, 
but  by  his  own  blood  he  entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place,  having 
obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us."  The  presenting  of  the  blood 
before  God  effects  the  atonement.  Tlie  material  of  the  atonement  is  in 
the  blood  and  merits  of  Je:-us,  but  a  main  part  of  the  atoning  act  lies 
in  the  presentation  of  these  in  the  heavenly  places  by  Jesus  Christ 
himself. 

Furthermore,  atonement  teas  made  effectual  by  its  application  to  thd 
thing  or  person  cleansed.  The  atonement  was  made  for  the  holy  place: 
it  was  sprinkled  seven  times  with  blnod.  The  same  was  done  to  the 
altar;  the  horns  thereof  were  smeared  seven  times.  So  to  make  the 
atonement  effectual  between  you  and  God  the  blood  of  Jesus  must  be 
sprinkled  upon  you  by  a  lively  faith.  Though  this  does  not  so  plainly 
appear  in  the  type  before  us  as  to  the  people  on  this  occasion,  yet  it 
comes  out  in  other  types :  the  cleansing  blood  was  ever  the  blood  of 
sprinkling.  Before  the  blood  of  the  Paschal  lamb  could  cause  the 
avenger  to  pass  over  the  house,  it  must  be  marked  with  the  crimson 
sign.  This  is  that  scarlet  thread  in  the  window  which  delivers  the 
Lord's  Rahabs  in  the  day  of  destruction.  Before  any  man  caa  receive 
reconciliation  with  God  the  atonement  must  be  applied  to  his  own  heart 
and  conscience.  Faith  is  that  bunch  of  hyssop  which  we  dip  into  the 
blood,  and  with  it  sprinkle  the  lintel  and  two  side  posts  of  the  house 
wherein  we  dwell,  and  so  we  are  saved  from  destruction. 

Further,  my  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  inasmuch  as  no  one  type  was 
sufficient,  the  Lord  set  forth  the  method  of  the  removal  of  sin,  as  far  as  we 
are  concerned,  hy  the  scapegoat.  One  of  two  goats  was  chosen  to  live. 
It  stood  before  the  Lord,  and  Aaron  confessed  all  the  sins  of  Israel 
upon  its  head.  A  fit  man,  selected  for  the  purpose,  led  this  goat  away 
into  a  land  not  inhabited.  What  became  of  it  ?  Why  do  you  ask  the 
qutstion?  It  is  not  to  edification.  You  may  have  seen  the  famous 
picture  of  the  scapegoat,  representing  it  as  expiring  in  misery  in  a  desert 
place.  That  is  all  very  pretty,  and  I  do  not  wonder  that  iraaginatioa 
should  picture  the  poor  devoted  scapegoat  as  a  sort  of  cursed  thing, 
left  to  perish  amid  accumulated  horrors.  But  please  observe  that  this 
is  all  fancy — mere  groundless  fancy.  The  Scripture  is  entirely  silent 
as  to  anything  of  the  kind,  and  purposely  so.  All  that  the  type  teaches 
IB  this  :  in  symbol  the  scapegoat  has  all  the  sin  of  the  people  laid  upon 

2£ 


484  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACl-E    PUr,PIT. 

it,  and  when  it  is  led  away  into  the  solitary  wilderness,  it  has  gone,  and 
the  sin  with  it.  We  may  not  follow  the  scapegoat  even  in  imagination. 
It  is  gone  where  it  can  never  be  found,  for  there  is  nobody  to  find  it :  it 
is  gone  into  a  land  not  inhabited, — into  "  no  man's  land  "  in  fact.  Stop 
where  the  Scripture  stops :  to  go  beyond  what  is  written  is  unwise,  if 
not  presumptuous.  Sin  is  carried  away  into  the  silent  land,  the  unknown 
wilderness.  By  nature  sin  is  everywhere,  but  to  believers  in  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ  sin  is  nowhere.  The  sins  of  God's  people  have  gone 
beyond  recall.  Where  to  ?  Do  not  ask  anything  about  that.  If  they 
were  sought  for  they  could  not  be  found  ;  they  are  so  gone  that  they 
are  blotted  out.  Into  oblivion  our  sins  have  gone,  even  as  the  scape- 
goat went  out  of  track  of  mortal  man.  The  death  of  the  scapegoat 
does  not  come  into  the  type  ;  in  fact,  it  would  mar  the  type  to  think  of 
it.  Of  Melchizedek,  we  read  that  he  was  witliout  father,  without  mother, 
without  descent,  and  so  on,  because  these  things  are  not  mentioned  in 
Scripture,  and  the  omission  is  part  of  the  teaching;  so  in  this  case,  the 
fate  of  the  scapegoat  is  not  spoken  of,  and  the  silence  is  a  part  of  the 
instruction.  The  scapegoat  is  gone  we  know  not  where ;  and  so  our 
sin  has  vanished  quite  away  ;  nobody  will  ever  find  the  scapegoat,  and 
nobody  will  ever  find  the  believer's  sins. 

"  Where  are  my  sins?  Oh  where?"  Echo  answers,  "Where?"  Gone 
to  the  land  of  nobody,  where  Satan  himself  could  not  find  them.  Yea, 
where  God  himself  cannot  find  them.  He  says  he  has  cast  our  sin 
behind  his  back,  where  he  cannot  see.  What  part  of  the  creation  must 
that  be  which  lies  behind  God's  back,  whereas  he  is  everywhere  present, 
beholding  all  things  both  by  niglit  and  by  day?  There  is  no  such  place 
as  "  behind  his  back";  and  there  is  no  place  for  our  sins.  They  have 
gone  into  the  nowhere.  "  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far 
hath  he  removed  our  transgressions  from  us.''  He  has  cast  them  into 
the  depths  of  the  sea — and  even  that  is  not  so  good  a  figure  as  the 
scapegoat,  for  things  that  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  are  still  there, 
but  the  scapegoat  soon  passed  away  altogether,  and,  as  far  as  Israel  was 
concerned,  it  ceased  to  be.  The  sins  of  God's  people  are  absolutely  and 
irrevocably  forgiven.  Never,  never,  never  can  they  be  laid  to  our 
charge ;  they  are  extinct,  buried,  blotted  out,  forgotten.  "  Who  shall  lay 
anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?" 

Yet,  dear  friends,  the  ceremony  was  not  quite  finished ;  for  now  every- 
body who  had  had  a  hand  in  it  must  needs  be  washed,  so  that  everybody 
might  be  clean.  There  is  Aaron :  he  takes  off  his  garments,  and 
washes  himself  scrupulously  clean ;  yea,  he  does  it  a  second  time.  Here 
is  the  man  who  took  the  scapegoat  away,  and  he  washes  himself.  Here 
is  a  third  person,  who  carried  away  the  skin  and  the  flesh  of  the  sin- 
offering,  and  burnt  them  without  the  camp ;  he  also  washes  himself. 
Everybody  becomes  purged;  the  whole  camp  is  clean  right  through.  So, 
when  Jesus  completes  his  sacrifice,  we  sing : 

"  Now  both  the  sinner  and  surety  are  free." 

No  sin  remains  upon  him  on  whom  the  Lord  once  laid  the  iniquities  of 
us  all.  The  great  atonement  is  made,  and  everything  is  cleansed,  from 
beginning  to  end.  Christ  hath  put  it  all  away  for  ever  by  the  water 
and  the  blood  which  flowed  from  his  riven  side.     All  is  purified,  and 


THE   ANNUAL  ATONEMENT.  435 

the  Lord  looks  down  on  a  clean  camp ;  and  soon  he  will  have  them  re- 
joicing before  him,  each  man  in  his  tabernacle,  feasting  to  the  full.  I 
am  so  glad  :  my  joy  overflows.  0  Lord,  who  is  a  pardoning  God  like 
thee  ?  Where  can  such  forgiveness  be  found  as  thou  dost  freely  give  to 
sinners  through  Jesus,  thy  Son  ? 

in.  In  the  third  place,  I  ask  your  attention,  for  a  brief  interval,  to 
this  special  point — who  did  it  ?  The  answer  is,  Aaron  did  it  all. 
Aaron  was  quite  alone  in  the  work  of  that  day.  It  was  heavy,  and  even 
exhausting  work,  but  he  had  no  assistant.  Aaron  performed  the  work 
of  priest  and  Levite  that  day,  and  no  one  helped  him ;  for  it  is  written, 
"  There  shall  be  no  man  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  when  he 
goeth  in  to  make  an  atonement  in  the  holy  place,  until  he  come  out, 
and  have  made  an  atonement  for  himself,  and  for  his  household,  and  for  all 
the  congregation  of  Israel."  The  tabernacle  seemed  lonely  that  day. 
Aaron  went  into  its  courts  and  chambers,  and  saw  no  sign  of  man.  Of 
course  there  were  lamps  to  be  lighted,  but  Aaron  had  to  light  them  him- 
self :  theshewbread  had  to  be  changed — Aaron  had  to  change  it.  All  the 
offices  of  the  tabernacle  were  left  to  his  sole  care  for  the  day.  When 
it  came  to  killing  the  victims,  priests  and  Levites  were  there  on  other 
days,  but  now  the  high-priest  must  do  it  all.  He  must  kill,  and  receive 
the  blood,  and  himself  sprinkle  it.  He  must  kindle  the  sacrificial  fire, 
and  lay  the  burning  coals  upon  the  incense.  Both  the  incense  and  the 
basin  of  blood  he  must  carry  into  the  holy  place  with  his  own  hands. 
Methinks  I  see  him  looking  around  in  the  solitude.  He  says,  "  I  looked, 
and  there  was  no  man."  Of  the  people  there  was  none  with  him.  In 
the  holy  place  there  stood  no  priest  to  minister  before  the  Lord  save 
himself  alone.  It  must  have  been  with  trembling  that  he  lifted  up 
the  curtain  and  passed  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High  with 
the  censer  smoking  in  his  hand.  There  he  stood  in  that  awful  pre- 
sence quite  alone  with  the  Eternal:  no  man  was  with  him  when  he 
sprinkled  the  blood  again  and  again  till  the  seven-fold  rite  was 
finished.  Three  times  he  goes  in  and  out,  and  never  a  soul  is 
there,  so  much  as  to  smile  upon  him.  The  tension  of  mind  and 
heart  which  he  endured  alone  that  day  must  have  been  trying  in- 
deed. All  that  livelong  day  he  must  have  been  conscious  of  a  burden 
of  responsibility  and  a  weight  of  reverence  enough  to  bow  him  to  the 
dust,  and  yet  no  one  was  present  to  cheer  him.  Now  fix  your  eye  on  the 
great  antitype  of  Aaron.  There  was  none  with  our  Lord  :  he  trod  the 
winepress  alone.  He  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  j^ody  on  the 
tree.  He  alone  went  in  where  the  thick  darkness  covered  the  throne  of 
God,  and  none  stood  by  to  comfort  him.  "All  the  disciples  forsook  him, 
and  fled."  It  would  have  been  a  very  natural  thing,  one  would  think, 
that  Peter  should  have  defended  him,  and  even  died  with  him ;  but  no 
one  died  with  Jesus  except  thieves,  and  nobody  could  suspect  that  thieves 
aided  him  in  his  sacrifice :  they  showed  the  need  of  the  sacrifice,  but  they 
could  do  no  more.  Worship  our  Lord  as  working  salvation  by  his  own 
single  arm.  Do  not  tolerate  those  who  would  share  his  work.  Do  not 
believe  in  priests  of  any  church  who  pretend  to  offer  sacrifice  for  the 
quick  and  the  dead.  They  cannot  help  you,  and  you  do  not  need  their 
nelp.  Do  not  put  your  own  merits,  works,  prayers,  or  anything  else  side 
by  side  with  your  one  lone  High  Priest,  who  in  his  white  garments  of  holj 


436  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

gervice  performed  the  whole  work  of  expiation,  and  then  came  forth  in 
his  garments  of  glory  and  of  beauty  to  gladden  the  eyes  of  his  chosen. 
I  say  no  more.  Let  that  truth  abide  in  your  hearts — our  High  Priest 
alone  has  made  reconciliation. 

IV.  Lastly,  what  wkre  the  people  to  do  for  whom  this  atonement 
was  made  ?  There  were  two  things  they  had  to  do  that  day,  only  I  must 
add  that  one  of  them  was  doing  nothing.  Fur  the  first  thing,  they  had  to 
afflict  their  souls  that  day.  Brethr-on,  does  it  seem  to  you  a  strange 
thing  that  on  a  day  of  rest  they  were  to  afflict  their  souls  ?  Think  of 
it  a  little,  and  you  will  see  that  there  was  cause  for  it.  We  most 
rightly  sing — 

•'Here  let  our  hearts  begin  to  melt, 
While  we  his  death  record, 
And,  with  our  j  >y  tor  pirduu'd  guilt 
Mourn  that  we  pierced  the  Lord." 

It  was  a  day  of  confession  of  sin.  And  sh  juld  not  confession  be  made 
with  sorrowful  repentance  ?  A  dry-eyed  confession  is  a  hypocritical 
confession.  To  acknowledge  sin  without  grieving  over  it  is  to  aggra- 
vate sin.  We  cannot  think  of  our  sin  without  grieving,  and  the  more 
sure  we  are  that  it  is  forgiven,  the  more  sorry  we  are  that  ever  it  was 
committed.  Sin  seems  all  the  greater  because  it  was  committed  against 
a  sin-forgiving  God.  If  you  do  wrong  to  a  person,  and  he  grows  angry, 
you  may  be  wicked  enough  to  persist  in  the  wrong  ;  but  if,  instead  of 
growing  angry,  he  forgives,  and  does  you  good  in  return,  then  you  will 
deeply  regret  that  ever  you  had  an  unkind  thought  towards  him.  The 
Lord's  pardoning  love  makes  us  feel  truly  sorry  to  have  offended  him. 

Not  only  was  it  a  day  of  confession,  but  it  was  a  day  of  sacrifice.  No 
tender-hearted  Israelite  could  think  of  that  bullock,  and  ram,  and  goat 
dying  for  him,  without  saying,  *'  That  is  what  I  deserve."  If  he  heard 
the  moans  of  the  dying  creature  he  would  say,  "  My  own  heart  groans 
and  bleeds."  When  we  think  of  our  dying  Lord  our  emotions  are 
mingled:  we  feel  a  pleasing  grief  and  a  mournful  joy  as  we  stand  at 
Calvary.    Thus  it  is  we  sing — 

"  Alas  !  and  did  ray  Saviour  bleed  ? 
And  did  my  Sovereign  die  ? 
Could  he  devote  that  sacred  head 
For  such  a  worm  as  I  ? 

**  **  Was  it  for  crimes  that  I  have  done 

He  died  upon  the  tree  ? 
Amazing  pity,  grace  unknown. 
And  love  beyond  degree. 

♦*  Well  might  the  sun  in  darkness  hide,  , 

And  shut  his  glories  in, 
When  God  the  mighty  Maker  died 
For  man,  the  creature's  sin! 

♦♦Well  m'ght  I  hide  my  blushing  face 
When  his  dear  Cross  appears. 
Dissolve  my  heart  in  thankt'ulnesa, 
And  melt  my  eyes  to  tears." 


THE   ANNUAL   ATONEMENT.  437 

It  was  a  day  of  sacrifice,  and  hence  a  day  of  affliction  of  their  souls,  and 
herein  we  are  in  sympathy  with  them. 

Once  more,  it  was  a  day  of  perfect  cleansing,  and  hence,  by  a  strange 
logic,  a  day  of  the  affliction  of  the  soul ;  for,  oh !  when  sin  is  forgiven, 
when  we  know  it  is  forgiven,  when  by  divine  assurance  we  know  that 
God  has  blotted  out  our  sins  like  a  cloud,  then  it  is  we  mourn  over  our 
iniquities.  "  They  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced  " — that 
look  gives  life :  "  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one  mourneth  for 
his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitter- 
ness for  his  firstborn  "—this  bitterness  is  one  of  the  truest  signs  of  life. 
They  were  to  afflict  their  souls.  Brethren,  we  cannot  talk  of  the  cross 
of  Christ  except  in  subdued  tones.  If  you  think  you  can  laugh  and 
sport  yourself  because  your  sin  is  forgiven,  you  know  nothing  of  the 
matter.  Sin  has  been  pardoned  at  such  a  price  that  we  cannot  hence- 
forth trifle  with  it.  The  sacrifice  was  so  august  that  we  must  ever  speak 
of  it  with  holy  trembling,  I  always  feel  a  suspicion  of  those  converts 
who  get  up  and  glibly  boast  that  once  they  were  drunkards,  thieves, 
blasphemers,  and  so  forth.  Brother,  if  you  do  tell  the  story  of  your 
ein,  blush  scarlet  to  think  it  should  be  true.  I  am  ashamed  to  hear  a 
man  talk  of  his  sins  as  an  old  Greenwich  pensioner  might  talk  of  his 
sea-fights.  I  hate  to  hear  a  man  exhibiting  his  old  lusts  as  if  they 
were  scars  of  honour.  Friend,  these  things  are  disgraceful  to  you, 
however  much  the  putting  of  them  away  may  be  to  the  honour  and 
glory  of  God ;  and  they  are  to  be  spoken  of  by  you  with  shame  and 
confus'ioa  of  face.  Afflict  your  soul  when  you  remember  what  you  once 
were. 

On  the  day  of  atonement  they  were  to  afflict  their  souls,  and  yet  they 
were  to  rest.  Can  these  things  come  together — mourning  and  resting  ? 
Oh  yes,  you  and  I  know  how  they  meet  in  one  bosom.  I  never  am  so 
truly  happy  as  when  a  sober  sadness  tinges  my  joy.  When  I  am  fullest 
of  joy  1  could  weep  my  life  away  at  Jesus'  feet.  Nothing  is  more 
really  sweet  than  the  bitterness  of  repentance.  Nothing  is  more  health- 
ful than  self-abhorrence,  mixed  with  the  grateful  love  which  hides  itself 
in  the  wounds  of  Jesus.  The  purified  people  were  to  rest  ;  they  were 
to  rest  from  all  servile  work.  I  will  never  do  a  hand's  turn  to  save  my- 
self by  my  own  merits,  works,  or  feelings.  I  have  done  for  ever  with 
all  interference  with  my  Lord's  sole  work.  Salvation  as  to  its  meritorious 
cause  is  complete ;  we  will  not  think  of  beginning  it  over  again  ;  for  that 
would  be  an  insult  to  the  Saviour.  *'  It  is  finished,"  saith  our  Lord 
Jesus,  as  he  bowed  his  dear  triumphant  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost ; 
and  if  it  is  finished  we  will  not  dream  of  adding  to  it.  It  is  finished  ; 
we  have  no  work  to  do  with  the  view  of  self-salvation.  But  you  say 
to  me — "Have  we  not  to  work  out  our  own  salvation?"  Certainly  we 
have.  We  are  to  work  out  our  own  salvation  because  God  works  it  in 
us.  It  is  our  own  salvation,  and  we  show  it  forth  in  our  lives  :  we  work 
it  out  from  within ;  we  develop  it  from  day  to  day,  and  let  men  see  what 
the  Lord  has  done  for  us.  It  must  first  be  worked  for  us,  and  then  in 
us,  or  we  can  never  work  it  out. 

They  were  assuredly  to  cease  from  all  sinful  work.  How  can  the 
pardoned  man  continue  in  sin  ?  We  have  done  with  toiling  for  the 
devil  LOW.     We  will  no  more  waste  our  lives  in  his  service.     Many 


4S8  METROPOLITAN   TABERNAOr.E   PULPIT. 

men  are  worn  to  rottenness  in  the  service  of  their  lusts,  but  the 
Servant  of  God  has  been  set  free  from  that  yoke  of  bondage.  We  are 
slaves  no  longer :  we  quit  the  hard  bondage  of  Egypt  and  rest  in  the 
Lord. 

We  have  also  done  with  selfish  work ;  we  now  seek  first  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  and  look  that  all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto  us  by  the 
goodness  of  our  heavenly  Father.  Henceforth  we  find  rest  by  bearing 
the  easy  yoke  of  Christ.  We  joy  to  spend  and  be  spent  in  his  beloved 
service.  He  hath  made  us  free,  and  therefore  we  are  under  bonds  to  his 
love  for  ever.  0  Lord,  I  am  thy  servant,  I  am  thy  servant,  thou  hast 
loosed  my  bonds ;  henceforth  I  am  bound  to  thee.  God  grant  that  this 
may  be  a  high  day  to  you,  because  you  gladly  realize  the  grand  truths 
which  are  shadowed  forth  in  these  delightful  types.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  kkad  before  Sermon — Leviticus  xvi. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 240,291/564, 


THE    RED    HEIFEE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  June  29th,  1879,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  metropolitan  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  For  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling 
the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh  :  how  much  more  shall  the  blood 
of  Chiist,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  ofl'ered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge 
your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  f  " — Hebrews  ix.  13,  14. 

Beloved  brethren  in  Christ,  you  dwell  in  great  nearness  to  God.  He 
calls  you  "a  people  near  unto  him."  His  grace  has  made  you  his  sons 
and  daughters,  and  he  is  a  Father  unto  you.  In  you  is  his  word  falfiUed, 
"  I  will  dwell  in  them  and  walk  in  them,  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and 
they  shall  be  my  people."  Remember  that  your  favoured  position  as 
children  of  God  has  placed  you  under  a  peculiar  discipline,  for  now 
God  dealeth  with  you  as  with  sons,  and  sons  are  under  household  law. 
The  Lord  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  near  unto  him.  Special 
favour  involves  special  rule.  There  were  no  strict  laws  made  as  to  the 
behaviour  of  the  Amalekites,  Amorites,  and  Egyptians,  because  they 
were  far  off  from  God,  and  the  times  of  their  ignorance  he  winked  at ; 
but  the  Lord  set  Israel  apart  to  be  his  people,  and  he  came  and  dwelt 
in  the  midst  of  the  congregation ;  the  sacred  tent  wherein  he  displayed 
his  presence  was  pitched  in  the  centre  of  the  camp,  and  there  the  great 
King  uplifted  his  banner  of  fire  and  cloud ;  hence,  as  the  Lord  brought 
the  people  so  'lear  to  himself,  he  put  them  under  special  laws,  such  as 
belong  to  his  palace  rather  than  to  the  outskirts  of  his  dominion.  They 
were  bound  to  keep  themselves  very  pure,  for  they  bore  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord,  and  were  a  nation  of  priests  before  him.  They  oiight  to  have 
been  holy  spiritually,  but  being  in  their  childhood  they  were  taught  this 
by  laws  referring  to  external  cleanliness.  Read  the  laws  laid  down  in 
Leviticus  and  see  what  care  was  required  of  the  favoured  nation,  and 
how  jealously  they  were  to  keep  themselves  from  defilement. 

Just  as  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  were  put  under  stringent 

regulations  so  do  those  who  live  near  to  God  come  under  a  holy  discipline 

in  the  house  of  the  Lord.     "  Even  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."     We 

are  not  now  speak"ig  of  our  saJvation,  or  of  our  justification  as  siunei-o, 

iSTo.  1,481.  jg 


440  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

but  of  the  Lord's  dealings  towards  us  as  saints.  In  that  respect  we 
must  walk  carefully  with  him,  and  watch  our  steps,  that  we  offend  not. 
Our  earnest  desire  is  so  to  behave  ourselves  in  his  house  that  he  may 
always  permit  us  to  have  access  with  boldness  to  his  presence,  and  may 
never  be  compelled  to  reject  our  prayers  because  we  have  been  falling 
into  sin.  Our  heart's  desire  and  inward  longing  is  that  we  may  never 
lose  our  Father's  smile.  If  we  have  lost  fellowship  with  him,  even  fur 
an  hour,  our  cry  is,  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him,  that  I 
might  come  even  to  his  seat ";  for  when  we  are  in  fellowship  with  God 
we  are  happy,  we  are  strong,  we  are  full  of  heavenly  aspirations  and 
emotions.  Beneath  the  sky  there  is  no  joy  like  that  of  communion  with 
God  ;  it  is  incomparable  and  inexpressible,  and  therefore  when  we  lose 
the  presence  of  God,  even  for  a  little,  we  are  like  a  dove  bereaven  of  its 
mate,  which  ceases  not  to  grieve.  Our  heart  and  our  flesh  cry  out  for 
God,  for  the  living  God.     ^NHien  shall  we  come  and  appear  before  God  ? 

Now,  beloved,  in  order  that  we  may  learn  how  to  renew  our  fellow- 
ship with  God  whenever  we  lose  it  by  a  sense  of  sin,  I  have  selected  the 
subject  of  this  morning.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  will  graciously  enlighten  us, 
we  shall  see  how  the  conscience  can  be  kept  clean,  that  so  the  heart  may 
be  able  to  dwell  with  God.  We  shall  see  our  danger  of  defilement  and 
the  way  by  which  our  uncleanness  can  be  put  away  ;  may  we  have  grace 
given  to  avoid  the  pollutions  which  would  hinder  fellowship,  and  gTace 
to  seek  the  purification  by  which  uncleanness  is  removed  and  fellowship 
restored.  I  shall  first  endeavour  to  desa-ibe  the  type  which  is  alluded  to 
by  the  apostle  in  the  words,  "  The  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  un- 
clean," and  then,  secondly,  we  shall  magnifij  the  Antitype,  dwelling  upon 
the  words,  "  How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through 
the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  con- 
science from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ?" 

I.  Let  us  describe  the  type.  In  the  nineteenth  chapter  of 
Numbers  you  will  find  the  type ;  be  so  good  as  to  open  your  Bibles,  and 
refresh  your  memories. 

First,  the  type  mentions  ceremonial  defilements,  which  were  the  sym- 
bols of  the  unoleaniiess  caused  by  sin.  The  Israelites  could  very  readily 
render  themselves  unclean,  so  as  to  be  unfit  to  go  up  to  the  tabernacle  of 
God.  There  were  uncleannesses  connected  both  with  birth  and  with 
death,  with  meats  and  with  drinks,  with  garments  and  with  houses.  The 
rules  were  very  minute  and  all-pervading,  so  that  a  man  could  scarcely 
move  abroad,  or  even  remain  within  his  own  tent,  without  incurring  un- 
cleanness in  one  way  or  another,  and  becoming  unfit  to  enter  the  courts 
of  the  Lord  or  to  be  an  accepted  member  of  the  congregation.  In 
the  passage  in  Numbers  which  is  now  before  us,  the  one  source  of  defile- 
ment dealt  with  is  death.  "  Whosoever  toucheth  one  that  is  slain  with 
a  sword  in  the  open  fields,  or  a  dead  body,  or  a  bone  of  a  man,  or  a  grave, 
shall  be  unclean  seven  days."  Now,  death  is  peculiarly  the  symbol  of 
sin,  as  well  as  the  fruit  of  sin.  Sin,  like  death,  defaces  the  image  of 
God  in  man.  As  soon  as  death  grasps  the  body  of  a  man  it  destroys 
the  bloom  of  beauty  and  the  dignity  of  strength,  and  drives  forth  from 
the  human  form  divine  that  mysterious  something  which  is  the  token  of 
life  within.  However  comely  a  corpse  may  appear  for  a  time,  yet  it  is 
defaced ;  the  excellence  of  life  has  departed,  and  alas,  in  a  few  hours,  or 


THE   RED   HEIFER.  441 

at  longest  in  a  few  days,  the  image  of  God  begins  utterly  to  pass  away ; 
corruption  and  tlie  woi-m  commence  their  desolating  work,  and  horror 
follows  in  their  train.  Abraham,  however  much  he  may  love  his  Sarah, 
soon  becomes  anxious  to  bury  his  beloved  dead  out  of  his  sight.  Now, 
what  death  does  for  the  "  human  face  divine,"  that  sin  does  for  the 
spiritual  image  of  God  upon  us.  It  utterly  defaces  it.  Human  nature 
in  perfection  is  a  coin  of  the  realm  of  God,  minted  by  the  great  King ; 
but  by  sin  it  is  battered  and  defaced,  to  the  great  dishonour  of  the  King 
whose  image  and  superscription  it  bears.  Hence  sin  is  most  obnoxious 
to  God,  and  death  is  obnoxious  as  the  type  of  sin. 

The  defilements  which  came  to  the  Israelite  by  death  must  have  been 
very  frequent.  As  a  whole  generation  died  in  the  wilderness,  most  of 
the  inhabitants  must  again  and  again  have  come  under  the  law  of  un- 
cleanness  on  account  of  the  death  of  parents  or  friends.  In  the  field  a 
man  might  dig  up  human  remains,  or  plough  over  a  grave,  or  find  a 
body  slain  by  accident,  and  he  was  at  once  unclean.  How  frequent, 
therefore,  were  the  occasions  of  defilement !  But  ah,  my  brethren,  not 
so  frequent  as  the  occasions  of  pollution  to  our  consciences  in  such  a 
world  as  this,  for  in  a  thousand  ways  we  err  and  transgress. 

*•  Oh  for  a  lodge  in  some  vast  wilderness, 
Some  boundless  contiguity  of  shade," 

where  never  sin  might  reach  my  soul  again !  But  it  is  in  vain  to  sigh 
in  this  fashion,  even  if  we  could  escape  from  the  throng  of  men  we 
should  not  thereby  escape  from  sin.  The  Israelite  might  meet  with  de- 
filement even  in  his  tent.  I  have  already  reminded  you  that  these 
statutes  about  the  dead  present  to  us  only  a  part  of  the  occasions  of  de- 
filement which  surrounded  the  people  of  Israel :  they  were  much  more 
numerous  than  this.  A  man  might  become  unclean  even  in  his  sleep ; 
so  closely  did  the  law  track  him  into  his  most  secret  places,  and  surround 
his  most  unguarded  hours.  Even  thus  doth  sin  beset  us.  Like  a  dog 
at  one's  heels,  it  is  always  with  us !  Like  our  shadow,  it  follows  us,  go 
"where  we  may.  Yea,  and  when  the  sun  sliines  not,  and  shadows  are 
gone,  sin  is  still  there.  Whither  shall  we  flee  from  its  presence,  and 
where  shall  we  hide  from  its  power?  When  we  would  do  good,  evil  is 
present  with  us.  How  humbled  we  ought  to  be  at  the  recollection  of 
this ! 

The  Israelite  became  unclean  even  in  the  act  of  doing  good ;  for 
assuredly  it  was  a  good  deed  to  bury  the  dead.  A  man  would  be  defiled 
if  out  of  charity  he  helped  to  inter  the  poor,  or  the  slain,  or  the  poor 
relics  of  mortality  which  might  lie  exposed  upon  the  plain,  and  yet  this 
A\as  a  praiseworthy  action,  Alas,  there  is  sin  even  in  our  holy  things. 
A  morality  so  pure  that  no  human  eye  can  detect  a  flaw  may  yet  be 
faulty  to  the  eye  of  God,  Brethren,  sin  stains  our  piety  and  pollutes 
our  devotion.  We  do  not  even  pray  without  needing  to  ask  God  to 
forgive  the  prayer.  Our  acts  of  faith  have  a  measure  of  unbelief  in 
them,  for  the  faith  is  never  so  strong  as  it  ought  to  be.  Our  penitential 
tears  have  some  grit  of  impenitence  in  them,  and  our  heavenly  aspira- 
tions have  a  measure  of  carnality  to  degrade  them.  The  evil  of  our 
nature  clingeth  to  all  that  we  do.  Who  shall  bring  a  clean  thing  out 
of  an  unclean  ?     Not  one.     One  way  or  another  defilement  will  come 


44:2  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

upon  us.  "We  have  been  once  washed  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  we 
are  clean  before  the  bar  of  God,  and  yet  in  the  divine  family  we 
need  that  our  feet  be  washed  after  walking  awhile  in  this  dusty  world, 
and  there  is  not  one  disciple  who  is  above  the  need  of  this  washing. 
To  one  and  all  our  Lord  saith,  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part 
in  me." 

The  touching  of  the  dead  not  only  made  the  man  unclean,  but  ne 
became  a  fountain  of  defilement.  "  And  whatsoever  the  unclean  person 
toucheth  shall  be  unclean  ;  and  the  soul  that  toucheth  it  shall  be  unclean 
until  even."  While  a  man  was  unclean  he  might  not  go  up  to  the 
worship  of  God,  and  he  was  in  danger  of  being  cut  off  from  among  the 
congregation,  "because,"  saith  the  law,  "he  hath  defiled  the  sanctuary 
of  the  Lord."  Pollution  went  forth  from  the  polluted.  Do  you  and  I 
sufficiently  remember  how  much  of  evil  we  are  spreading  when  we  are  out 
of  communion  with  God  ?  Every  ungenerous  temper  creates  the  like  in 
others.  We  never  cast  a  proud  look  without  exciting  resentment  and  bad 
feelings  in  others.  Somebody  or  other  will  follow  our  example  if  we  be 
slothful ;  and  thus  we  may  be  doing  great  mischief  even  when  we  are 
doing  nothing.  You  cannot  even  bury  your  talent  in  a  napkin  without 
setting  an  example  to  others  to  do  the  hke,  and  were  that  example 
followed  by  all  how  dreadful  would  be  the  consequences  I  Observe  that 
I  am  not  now  speaking  of  outside  sinners,  but  of  the  saints  of  God.  As 
the  ordinances  in  the  chapter  before  us  were  for  Israel,  so  these  things 
are  spoken  to  those  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is.  My  soul's 
longing  is,  that  we  may  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  well  pleasing, 
and  may  not  become  unfit  for  communion  with  him. 

This  uncleanness  prevented  the  man  from  going  up  to  the  worship  of 
God,  and  it  separated  him  from  that  great,  permanent  congregation  which 
was  called  to  dwell  in  God's  house  by  residing  all  around  the  holy  place. 
He  was,  so  to  speak,  excommunicated,  suspended,  at  any  rate,  in'  bis 
communion  :  he  could  bring  no  offering,  he  could  not  stand  among  th*^ 
multitude  and  view  the  solemn  worship,  he  was  unclean,  and  must  regard 
himself  so.  Do  children  of  God  ever  get  here  ?  Ah,  dear  friends,  so  far 
as  our  consciences  are  concerned  we  too  often  come  among  the  unclean. 
We  are  not  polluted  as  the  heathen,  nor  condemned  with  the  world,  but  as 
children  of  God  we  feel  that  we  have  erred,  and  our  conscience  smites 
us.  Sin  is  already  put  away  from  us,  as  we  are  criminals  tried  before  a 
judge,  but  it  comes  upon  the  conscience  even  as  a  child's  faults  cause 
him  to  grieve.  It  is  from  the  conscience  that  this  uncleanness  is  to  be 
purged,  and  our  whole  sermon  is  upon  that  matter.  I  speak  not  of 
the  actual  taking  away  of  sin  before  God,  but  the  removal  of  its 
defilement  from  the  conscience,  so  that  communion  with  God  may  be 
possible.  Kemember  the  word  of  the  Lord,  "Your  iniquities  have 
separated  between  you  and  your  God,  and  your  sins  have  hid  his  face 
from  you  that  he  will  not  hear."  When  sin  is  on  your  conscience  it  wants 
no  law  to  prevent  your  communion  with  God ;  for  you  cannot  approach 
him,  you  are  afi'aid  to  do  so,  and  you  have  a  distaste  for  it.  Until  the 
pardoning  blood  speaks  peace  within  your  spirit,  you  cannot  draw  near 
unto  God.  The  apostle  saith,  '*  Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart  in 
full  assurance  of  faith,  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  con- 
Bcieuce,  and  our  bodies  washed  with   pure  water."     It  is  the  washing 


THE   RED    HEIFER.  443 

which  enables  us  to  draw  near.  We  shrink,  we  tremble,  we  find  com- 
munion impossible  until  we  are  made  clean. 

This  much  about  the  defilements  described  in  the  chapter;  now 
concerning  the  cleansing  which  it  mentions. 

The  defilement  was  frequent,  but  the  cleansing  was  always  ready.  At 
a  certain  time  all  the  people  of  Israel  brought  a  red  heifer  to  be  used  in 
the  expiation.  It  was  not  at  the  expense  of  one  person,  or  tribe,  but 
the  whole  congregation  brought  the  red  cow  to  be  slain.  It  was  to  be 
their  sacrifice,  and  it  was  brought  for  them  all.  It  was  not  led, 
however,  up  to  the  holy  place  for  sacrifice,  but  it  was  brought  forth 
without  the  camp,  and  tliere  it  was  slaughtered  in  the  presence  of  the 
priest,  and  wholly  burnt  with  fire,  not  as  a  sacrifice  npon  the  altar,  but 
as  a  polluted  thing  which  was  to  be  made  an  end  of  outside  the  camp. 
It  was  not  a  regular  sacrifice  or  we  should  have  found  it  described  in 
Leviticus ;  it  was  an  ordinance  entirely  by  itself,  as  setting  forth  quite 
another  side  of  truth. 

To  return  to  the  chapter ;  the  red  heifer  was  killed,  before  the  un- 
cleanness  was  committed,  just  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  made  a 
curse  for  sin  long,  long  ago.  Before  you  and  I  had  lived  to  commit  the 
uncleanness  there  was  a  sacrifice  provided  for  us.  For  the  casing  of  our 
conscience  we  shall  be  wise  to  view  this  sacrifice  as  that  of  a  substitute 
for  sin,  and  consider  the  results  of  that  expiation.  Sin  on  the  conscience 
needs  for  its  remedy  the  result  of  the  Redeemer's  substitution. 

The  red  heifer  was  slain :  the  victim  fell  beneath  the  butcher's  axe. 
It  was  then  all  taken  up — skin,  flesh,  blood,  dung,  everything — no  trace 
of  it  must  be  left,  and  it  was  all  burnt  with  fire,  together  with  cedar 
wood,  and  hyssop,  and  scarlet  wool,  which  I  suppose  had  been  used  in 
the  previous  sprinkling  of  the  heifer's  blood,  and  so  must  be  consumed 
with  it.  The  whole  was  destroyed  outside  the  camp !  Even  as  our 
Lord,  though  in  himself  without  spot,  was  made  sin  for  us,  and  suffered 
without,  the  camp,  feeling  the  withdrawings  of  God,  while  he  cried,  "  My 
God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  Ah,  what  it  cost  our  Lord 
to  come  into  our  place  and  to  bear  the  iniquities  of  men ! 

Then  the  ashes  were  collected  and  laid  in  a  clean  place  accessible  to 
the  camp.  Everybody  knew  where  the  ashes  were,  and  whenever  there 
was  any  uncleanness  they  went  to  this  ash-heap  and  took  away  a  small 
portion.  Whenever  the  ashes  were  spent  they  brought  another  red 
heifer,  and  did  the  same  as  they  had  done  before,  that  always  there 
might  be  this  purification  for  the  unclean. 

But  while  this  red  cow  was  slaughtered  for  all,  and  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  towards  the  holy  place  for  all,  no  one  derived  any  personal 
benefit  from  it  in  reference  to  his  own  uncleanness  unless  he  made  a 
personal  use  of  it.  When  a  man  became  unclean  he  procured  a  clean 
person  to  go  on  his  behalf  to  take  a  little  of  the  ashes,  and  to  put  them 
in  a  cup  with  running  water,  and  then  to  sprinkle  this  water  of  purifica- 
tion upon  him,  upon  his  tent,  and  all  the  vessels  therein.  By  that 
Bprinkling,  at  the  end  of  seven  days,  the  unclean  person  was  purified. 
There  was  no  other  method  of  purification  fi-om  his  uncleanness  but 
this.  It  is  so  with  us.  To-day  the  hving  water  of  the  divine  Spirit's 
sacred  influences  must  take  up  the  result  of  our  Lord's  substitution,  an-d 
this  must  be  applied  to  our  consciences.  That  which  remaineth  of  Christ 


444  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

after  the  fire  hath  passed  upon  him,  eyen  the  eternal  merits,  the  endiiiing 
virtue  of  our  great  sacrifice,  must  be  sprinlded  upon  us  through  the 
Spirit  of  our  God.  Tlien  are  we  clean  in  conscience,  but  not  till  then. 
We  have  two  degrees  of  purification  by  this  means,  as  in  the  type.  Our 
Lord  rose  again  on  the  third  day,  and  blessed  are  they  who  receive  the 
third  day  justification  by  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord.  Thus  is  sin  re- 
moved fi-'om  the  conscience  ;  but  yet  as  long  as  we  are  here  in  this  body 
there  will  be  some  tremblings,  some  measure  of  unrest,  because  of  sin 
within ;  but  blessed  be  God  there  is  a  seventh  day  purification  coming, 
which  will  complete  the  cleansing.  "When  the  eternal  Sabbath  breaks, 
then  shall  be  the  last  sprinkling  with  the  hyssop,  and  we  shall  be  clean, 
and  we  shall  enter  into  the  rest  which  remaineth  fur  the  people  of  God, 
clean  every  whit.  We  shall  come  before  God  at  last  without  spot  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  and  be  as  able  to  commune  with  him  as  if 
we  had  never  transgressed,  being  presented  faultless  before  his  presence 
with  exceeding  great  joy. 

Thus  much  concerning  the  type,  with  which  we  have  already  mingled 
some  degree  of  exposition. 

IL  Let  us  magnify  the  great  Anti-type.  "  For  if  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean, 
sanctifieth  to  the  purification  of  the  flesh  :  how  much  more  shall  the  blood 
of  Christ  ?"  How  much  more?  He  doth  not  give  us  the  measure,  but 
leaves  it  with  a  note  of  interrogation.  We  shall  never  be  able  to  tell 
how  much  more,  for  the  difference  between  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of 
goats  and  the  blood  of  Christ,  the  diflFerence  between  the  ashes  of  a  red 
cow  and  the  eternal  merits  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  must  be  infinite.  Let  us 
help  your  judgments  while  we  set  furth  the  exceeding  greatness  of  our 
mighty  Expiator,  by  whom  we  are  reconciled  to  God. 

First,  then,  our  defilement  is  much  greater,  for  the  defilement  spoken  of 
in  the  text  is  on  the  conscience.  Now,  I  can  believe  that  the  Israelite 
when  he  was  rendered  unclean  by  touching  a  corpse  by  necessity,  or  a 
piece  of  a  bone  by  accident,  felt  nothing  on  his  conscience,  for  there  was 
no  sin  in  the  matter ;  he  was  only  ceremonially  unclean,  and  that  was  all. 
His  ceremonial  disability  troubled  him,  for  he  would  be  glad  to  go  up 
to  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  and  hold  fellowship  with  the  hosts  of  Israel, 
but  there  was  nothing  on  his  conscience.  If  there  had  been,  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  goats  could  not  have  helped  him.  Beloved,  you  and  I 
know  what  it  is  at  times  to  have  defilement  upon  the  conscience,  and 
to  go  mourning  because  \\q  have  erred  from  the  Lord's  commands.  The 
ungodly  do  not  thus  sorrow :  their  conscience  by  fits  and  starts  accuses 
them,  but  they  never  listen  to  its  accusations  so  as  to  feel  their  inability 
to  draw  nigh  to  God.  Nay,  they  will  even  go  with  a  guilty  conscience 
to  their  knees,  and  pretend  to  offer  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  prayer  and 
of  praise,  while  still  they  are  unforgiven,  alienated,  and  rebellious.  You 
and  I,  if  we  are  indeed  the  Lord's  people,  cannot  do  this.  Guilt  on 
our  conscience  is  to  us  a  horrible  thing.  There  are  no  pains  of  body, 
there  are  no  tortures  inflicted  by  the  Inquisition  which  are  at  aU  com- 
parable to  the  whips  of  burning  \\ire  which  lash  the  guilty  conscience. 
You  hear  persons  speak  about  the  horrible  figures  of  mediae s'al  agea 
with  regard  to  hell,  and  the  strong  metaphors  sometimes  used  by  the 
orthodox  to  this  day ;  let  them  remember  that  they  are  only  figu]*es,  and 


THE    RED   HEIFER. 


445 


then  let  any  man  who  has  felt  the  agonies  of  a  guilty  conscience  judge 
whether  the  figares  can  possibly  be  overdrawn.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to 
feel  yourself  gailty,  and  the  better  man  you  are,  the  more  will  it  grieve 
you  to  be  consciously  in  a  wrong  state.  I  ask  any  truly  regenerate  man 
here,  who  at  bottom  has  an  assurance  that  his  sin  is  ah'eady  forgiven  before 
God,  whether  he  can  do  wrong  without  smarting  ?  Whenever  you  have 
transgressed,  and  you  are  conscious  of  it,  though  you  do  not  doubt  the 
love  of  God  to  you,  are  you  not  like  one  who  has  all  his  bones  broken  ? 
I  know  you  are,  and  the  better  man  you  are  the  more  intense  will  have 
been  the  terror  of  your  spirit  while  guilt  has  been  upon  your  conscience 
in  any  degree.  Well,  now,  that  which  can  take  guilt  off  the  conscience 
must  be  infinitely  greater  than  that  which  can  merely  put  away  a  cere- 
monial defilement. 

Brethren,  guilt  on  the  conscience  is  a  most  effectual  bar  to  drawing 
near  to  God.  The  Lord  bids  his  people  come  near  to  him,  and  there  is  a 
way  of  access  always  open ;  but  as  long  as  you  are  conscious  of  sin  you 
cannot  use  that  way  of  access.  We  can  come  to  God  as  sinners  to  seek 
pardoUj  but  we  cannot  come  before  the  Lord  as  dear  children  while  there 
is  any  quarrel  between  us  and  our  great  Father.  No,  we  must  be  clean, 
•  ■:•  we  cannot  approach  our  God.  See  how  the  priests  washed  their  feet 
;  „  the  laver  before  they  offered  incense  unto  the  Lord.  We  cannot  have 
1  jilowship  with  God  while  there  is  a  sense  of  unconfessed  and  unforgiven 
sin  upon  us.  "  Be  ye  reconciled  to  God  "  is  a  text  for  saints  as  well  as 
f  jr  sinners :  children  may  quarrel  with  a  father  as  well  as  rebels  with  a 
king.  There  must  be  oneness  of  heart  with  God,  or  there  is  an  end  to 
communion,  and  therefore  must  the  conscience  be  purged. 

The  man  who  was  unclean  coidd  have  come  up  to  the  tabernacle  if  there 
had  been  no  law  to  prevent  it,  and  it  is  possible  that  he  could  have 
worshipped  God  in  spirit,  notwithstanding  his  ceremonial  disqualification. 
The  defilement  was  no  barrier  in  itself  except  so  far  as  it  was  typical  ; 
but  sin  on  the  conscience  is  a  natural  wall  between  God  and  the  soul. 
You  cannot  get  into  loving  communion  until  the  conscience  is  at  ease ; 
therefore,  I  charge  you,  fly  at  once  to  Jesus  for  peace. 

Beloved,  if  our  consciences  were  more  fully  developed  than  they  are  we 
should  have  as  great  a  sense  of  the  frequency  of  our  uncleanness  as  ever 
the  thoughtful  Israelite  had  of  his  danger  of  ceremonial  uncleanness.  I 
tell  you  solemnly  that  the  talk  which  we  have  heard  lately  about  perfection 
in  the  flesh  cometh  of  ignorance  of  the  law  and  of  self.  When  I  have  read 
expressions  which  seem  to  claim  that  the  utterers  were  free  fi'om  sin  in 
thought,  and  word,  and  deed,  I  have  been  sorry  for  the  deluded  victims 
of  self-conceit,  and  shuddered  at  their  spirit.  The  sooner  this  boasting  is 
purged  out  of  the  Church  of  God  the  better.  God's  true  people  have  the 
spirit  of  truth  within  them,  convincing  them  of  sin,  and  not  the  proud  and 
lying  spirit  which  leads  men  to  say  they  have  no  sin.  True  saints  abide 
in  the  place  of  penitence  and  constant  faith  in  the  atoning  blood,  and  dare 
not  exalt  themselves  as  the  Pharisee  who  cried,  "  God,  I  thank  thee  that  I 
am  not  as  other  men  are."  "  There  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth,  that 
doeth  good,  and  sinneth  not."  (Ecc.  vii.  20.)  Why,  beloved,  according 
to  my  own  experience,  we  are  constantly  being  defiled  by  being  in  this 
polluted  world,  and  g'  ing  up  and  down  in  it.  As  a  man  could  not  take 
a  walk  without  stumbling  over  a  grave,  nor  could  he  shut  himself  up  in 


446  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

his  house  without  the  danger  of  death  entering  there,  so  are  we  every- 
where Hable  to  sin.  It  seems  all  but  inevitable  so  long  as  we  are  in  this 
body  and  in  this  sinful  world  that  we  should  come  into  contact  with  sin  in 
some  form  or  other,  and  any  contact  with  sin  is  defiling.  Our  Lord  could 
live  among  sinners  and  remain  undefiled,  because  there  was  no  evil  in  his 
heart ;  but  in  our  case  sin  without  awakes  the  echoes  from  within,  and  so 
causes  a  measure  of  consent  and  defilement.  The  vnll  more  or  less  yields  to 
the  temptation,  and  when  the  will  does  not  yield,  the  imagination  plays  the 
traitor,  and  the  affections  parley,  and  so  betray  the  soul.  Although  it 
may  be  accompanied  with  a  resolve  not  to  fall  into  evil,  the  very  thought 
of  evil  is  sin.  Sin  does  not  cross  over  the  sensitive  plate  of  our  soul  as 
it  is  exposed  in  its  daily  camera  "\Aathout  leaving,  even  if  we  do  not  see  it 
ourselves,  some  trace  and  stain  which  God  sees.  Our  fellow-men  are  a 
terrible  source  of  defilement  to  us.  Did  you  not  notice  in  the  chapter 
which  we  read  (Num.  xix.)  that  he  who  touched  the  dead  body  of  a 
man  was  unclean  seven  days  ?  Now,  if  you  look  in  Leviticus  xi.  22  you 
will  see  that  whosoever  touched  the  carcase  of  an  unclean  beast  was  only 
unclean  until  the  evening.  Thus  a  dead  man  was  seven  times  more 
defiling  than  a  dead  beast.  Such  is  God's  estimate  of  fallen,  unregenerate 
man,  and  it  is  a  just  one,  for  wicked  men  do  many  things  which  brute 
beasts  never  do.  All  ungodly  men  defile  us,  and  I  am  not  sure  that  I 
may  end  there,  the  truth  is  wider  still :  I  do  not  care  how  you  pick 
your  company,  and  you  ought  to  pick  it  with  great  choiceness,  but  even 
if  you  associate  with  none  but  saints  they  will  be  an  occasion  of  sin  to 
you  at  some  time  or  other :  there  will  be  something  about  them,  ay, 
even  about  their  holiness,  which  may  raise  your  idolatry  of  them,  or 
your  envy  of  them,  and  in  some  way  or  other  cause  you  to  sin.  You 
cannot,  as  you  are  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  dwell  among  a  people  of 
unclean  lips,  be  altogether  without  uncleanness,  and  therefore  you  will 
always  have  need  to  use  the  way  of  cleansing  which  the  Lord  has 
prepared  and  revealed. 

Remember  that  in  the  type  the  least  touch  defiled:  if  they  only 
picked  up  a  bone  the  Israelites  were  unclean ;  if  they  only  walked  over  a 
grave  they  were  unclean.  My  brethren,  the  best  of  you  can  hardly 
read  in  the  newspaper  an  account  of  a  crime  without  some  taint  clinging 
to  you.  You  cannot  see  sin  in  another  without  standing  in  fearful 
jeopardy  of  being  in  some  degree  infected  thereby.  Sin  is  of  so  subtle 
and  penetrating  a  nature  that  long  before  we  are  aware  it  tarnishes  our 
brightness  and  eats  into  our  spirit.  The  pure  and  holy  God  alone  is 
undefiled ;  but  as  for  the  best  of  his  saints  they  need  to  veil  their  faces 
in  his  presence  and  cry,  "  Unclean,  unclean." 

Under  the  old  law  men  might  be  unclean  who  did  not  know  it.  A 
man  might  have  touched  a  bone  and  not  be  aware  of  it,  yet  the  law 
operated  just  as  much  :  he  might  walk  across  a  grave  and  not  know  it, 
but  he  was  unclean.  I  fear  that  our  proud  sense  of  what  we  think  to  be 
our  inward  cleanness  is  simply  the  stupidity  of  our  conscience.  If  our 
conscience  v,-eve  more  sensitive  and  tender,  it  would  perceive  sin  where 
now  we  congratulate  ourselves  that  everything  is  pure.  My  brethren, 
this  teaching  of  mine  puts  us  into  a  very  lowly  place,  but  the  lowlier  our 
position  the  better  and  the  safer  for  us,  and  the  more  shall  we  be  able  to 
prize  the  expiation  by  which  we  draw  near  to  God. 


THE   EED   HEIFER.  447 

Since  the  stain  is  upon  the  conscience,  its  removal  is  a  far  greater 
work  than  is  the  removal  of  a  mere  ritual  uncleanness. 

Secondly  upon  this  head,  our  sacrifice  is  greater  in  itself.  I  will  not 
dwell  upon  each  point  of  its  greatness  lest  I  weary  you,  but  just  notice 
that  in  the  slaughter  of  the  heifer  blood  was  presented  and  sprinkled 
towards  the  holy  place  seven  times,  though  it  came  not  actually  into  it ; 
so  in  the  atonement  through  which  we  find  peace  of  conscience  there  is 
blood,  for  "  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin." 
That  is  a  settled  decree  of  the  Eternal  Government,  and  the  conscience 
will  never  get  peace  till  it  understands  the  mystery  of  the  blood.  We 
need  not  only  the  suiferings  of  Christ,  but  the  death  of  Christ,  which  is 
set  forth  by  his  blood.  The  substitute  must  die.  Death  was  our  doom, 
and  death  for  death  did  Christ  render  unto  the  eternal  God.  It  is  by  a 
sense  of  our  Lord's  substitutionary  death  that  the  conscience  becomes 
purged  from  dead  works. 

Furthermore,  the  heifer  itself  was  offered.  After  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  towards  the  tabernacle  by  the  priestly  hand,  the  victim  itself 
was  utterly  consumed.  Read  now  our  text :  "  Christ,  who  through  the 
eternal  Spirit  offered  up  himself  without  spot  unto  God."  Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  gave  not  merely  his  death,  but  his  whole  person,  with  all 
that  appertained  unto  it,  to  be  our  substitutionary  sacrifice.  He  offered 
himself,  his  person,  his  glory,  his  holiness,  his  life,  his  very  self,  in  our 
stead.  But,  brethren,  if  a  poor  heifer  when  it  was  offered  and  consumed 
made  the  unclean  man  clean,  how  much  more  shall  we  be  cleansed 
by  Jesus,  since  he  gave  himself,  his  glorious  self,  in  whom  dwelt  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  ?     Oh  what  a  sacrifice  is  this ! 

It  is  added  that  our  Lord  did  this  "by  the  Eternal  Spirit."  The  heifer 
was  not  a  spiritual  but  a  carnal  offering.  The  creature  knew  nothing 
of  what  was  being  done,  it  was  the  involuntary  victim  ;  but  Christ  was 
under  the  impulses  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  was  poured  upon  him,  and 
he  was  moved  by  him  to  render  up  himself  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  Hence 
somewhat  of  the  greater  efficacy  of  his  death,  for  the  willinghood  of  the 
sacrifice  greatly  enhanced  its  value.  To  give  you  another,  and  probably 
a  better,  interpretation  of  the  words,  there  was  an  eternal  spirit  linked 
with  the  manhood  of  Christ  our  Lord,  and  by  it  he  gave  himself  unto 
God.  He  was  God  as  well  as  man,  and  that  eternal  Godhead  of  his  lent 
an  infinite  value  to  the  sufferings  of  his  human  fi'ame,  so  that  he 
offered  himself  as  a  whole  Christ,  in  the  energy  of  his  eternal  power 
and  Godhead.  Oh,  what  a  sacrifice  is  that  on  Calvary  !  It  is  by 
the  blood  of  the  man  Christ  that  you  are  saved,  and  yet  it  is  written, 
"The  church  of  God  which  he" — that  is  God — "hath  redeemed  with 
his  own  blood."  One  who  is  both  God  and  man  has  given  himself 
as  a  sacrifice  for  us.  Is  not  the  sacrifice  inconceivably  greater  in  the 
fact  than  it  is  in  the  type  ?  Ought  it  not  most  effectually  to  purge  our 
conscience  ? 

After  they  had  burnt  the  heifer  they  swept  up  the  ashes.  All  that 
could  be  burnt  had  been  consumed.  Our  Lord  was  made  a  sacrifice  for 
sin,  what  remains  of  him?  Not  a  few  ashes,  but  the  whole  Christ, 
which  still  remaineth,  to  die  no  more,  but  to  abide  for  ever  unchanged. 
He  came  uninjured  through  the  fires,  and  now  he  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  us.     It  is  the  application  of  his  eternal  merit  which 


448  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

makes  ns  clean,  and  is  not  that  eternal  merit  inconceivably  greater  than 
the  ashes  of  an  heifer  ever  can  be  ? 

Now,  my  brethren,  I  want  you  ^o'  a  moment  to  recollect  that  onr 
Lord  himself  was  spotless,  pnre  and  perfect,  and  yet — speak  it  with 
bated  breath — God  "  hath  made  hi  a  to  be  sin  for  ns,"  even  him  who 
knew  no  sin.  "Whisper  it  with  greater  awe  still,  "  He  was  made  a  cnrse 
for  ns," — yes,  a  curse,  as  it  is  written,  "  Cursed  is  everyone  that  hangeth 
on  a  tree."  That  red  heifer,  though  without  spot  and  never  having 
borne  a  yoke,  was  regarded  as  a  polluted  thing.  Take  it  out  of  the  camp. 
It  must  not  hve  ;  kill  it.  It  is  a  polluted  thing ;  burn  it  right  up ;  for 
God  cannot  endure  it.  Behold,  and  wonder  that  God's  own  ever  blessed, 
adorable  Son  in  inconceivable  condescension  of  unutterable  love,  took 
the  place  of  sin,  the  place  of  the  sinner,  and  was  numbered  with  the 
transgressors.  He  mnst  die,  hang  him  up  on  a  cross;  he  must  be  for- 
saken of  men,  and  even  deserted  of  God.  "  It  pleased  the  Father  to  brnise 
him  ;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief;  he  shall  make  his  soul  an  oflPering  for 
Fin."  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we  have  turned  everyone  to 
his  own  way,  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all," — 
not  the  punishment  merely,  but  the  iniquity,  the  very  sin  itself  was  laid 
upon  the  Ever  Blessed.  The  wise  men  of  our  age  say  it  is  impossible 
that  sin  should  be  lawfully  imputed  to  the  innocent ;  that  is  what  the 
philosophei'S  say,  but  God  declares  that  it  was  done :  "  He  hath  made 
him  to  be  sin  who  knew  no  sin."  Therefore,  it  was  possible;  yea.  it 
is  done;  it  is  finished.  The  sacrifice  then  is  much  grenter.  "How  much 
more,"  we  may  cry  exultingly  as  we  think  of  it,  "  shall  the  blood  of  Christ, 
who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  piirge 
onr  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ?  " 

Now  we  wull  take  a  step  farther.  As  the  defilement  and  the  sacrifice 
were  greater,  so  the  purging  is  much  greater.  The  purifying  power 
of  the  blood  of  Christ  must  be  much  greater  than  the  purging 
power  of  the  water  mixed  with  the  ashes  of  the  heifer.  For,  first,  that 
could  not  purge  conscience  from  sin,  but  the  applicatiou  of  the  atone- 
ment can  do  it,  and  does  do  it.  I  am  not  going  to  speak  this  morning 
about  doctrine  at  all,  but  about  fact.  Did  you  ever  feel  the  atonem.ent 
of  Christ  applied  by  the  Holy  G  host  to  your  conscience  ?  Then  I  am 
certain  of  it  that  the  change  upon  your  mind  has  been  as  sudden  and 
glorious  as  if  the  darkness  of  midnight  had  glowed  into  the  brightness 
of  noonday,  I  remember  well  its  effects  upon  my  soul  at  the  first,  how 
it  broke  my  bonds  and  made  my  heart  to  dance  with  delight.  But  I 
have  found  it  equally  powerful  since  then,  for  when  I  am  examining 
myself  before  God  it  sometimes  comes  to  pass  that  I  fix  my  eye  upon 
some  one  evil  which  I  have  done,  and  I  turn  it  over  until  the  memory 
of  it  eats  into  my  very  soul  like  a  caustic  acid,  or  like  a  gnawing  worm, 
or  like  coals  of  fire.  I  have  tried  to  argue  that  the  fault  was  excusable 
in  me,  or  that  there  were  certain  circumstances  which  rendered  it  almost 
impossible  that  I  could  do  otherwise,  but  I  have  never  succeeded  in 
quieting  my  conscience  in  that  fa=;hion  ;  yet  I  am  soon  at  rest  when  I 
come  before  the  Lord,  and  cry,  "  Lord,  though  I  am  thine  own  dear 
child,  I  am  unclean  by  reason  of  this  sin  :  apply,  again,  the  merit  of  my 
Lord's  atoning  sacrifice,  for  hast  thou  not  said — If  any  man  sin  we  have 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous?     Lord,  hear 


THE    RED   HEIPKR.  449 

his  advocacy,  and  pardon  my  offences."  My  brethren,  the  peace  which 
thus  comes  is  very  sweet.  Yon  cannot  pray  acceptably  before  that  peace, 
and  you  may  thank  God  that  you  cannot  pray,  for  it  is  a  dreadftd  thing 
to  be  able  to  go  on  with  your  devotions  as  well  under  a  sense  of  guilt  as 
when  the  conscience  is  at  rest.  It  is  an  ill  child  that  can  be  happy  while 
it.--  father  is  displeased ;  a  true  child  can  do  nothing  till  he  is  forgiven. 

Now,  the  sprinkling  of  the  ashes  of  the  heifer  upon  the  unclean  was 
not  comprehensible  as  to  its  effect  by  anybody  who  received  it.  I  mean 
that  there  was  no  obvious  connection  between  the  cause  and  the  effect. 
Supposing  an  Israelite  had  been  unclean,  and  had  been  sprinkled  with 
this  water ;  he  might  now  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  but  would  he 
see  any  reason  for  the  change  ?  He  would  say,  "  I  have  received  the 
water  of  separation  and  I  am  clean,  but  I  do  not  know  why  the  sprink- 
ling of  those  ashes  should  make  me  clean  except  that  God  has  so  ap- 
pointed." Brethren,  you  and  I  do  know  how  it  is  that  God  has  made 
us  clean,  for  we  know  that  Christ  has  suffered  in  our  stead.  Substitution 
explains  the  mystery,  and  hence  it  has  much  more  effect  upon  the  con- 
science than  an  outward,  ritualistic  form  which  could  not  be  explained. 
Conscience  is  the  understanding  exercised  upon  moral  subjects,  and  that 
which  convinces  the  understanding  that  all  is  right  soou  gives  peace  to 
the  conscience. 

Time  presses,  and  therefore  I  will  only  just  say,  that  as  the  ashes  of 
the  heifer  were  for  all  the  camp  so  are  Christ's  merits  for  all  his  people. 
As  they  were  put  where  they  were  accessible,  so  may  you  always  come 
and  partake  of  the  cleansing  power  of  Christ's  precious  atonement.  As 
a  mere  sprinkling  made  the  unclean  clean,  even  so  may  you  come 
and  be  cleansed  even  though  your  faith  be  but  little,  and  you  seem  to 
get  but  little  of  Christ.  0  brethren,  the  Lord  God  of  his  infinite 
mercy  give  you  to  know  the  power  of  the  great  sacrifice  to  work  peace 
in  you,  not  after  three  or  seven  days,  but  at  once ;  and  peace  not 
merely  for  a  time,  but  for  ever. 

One  riddle  I  must  explain  to  you.  Solomon,  according  to  the  Jewish 
tradition,  declared  that  he  did  not  understand  why  the  ashes  of  the  heifer 
made  everybody  unclean  except  those  who  were  unclean  already.  You 
saw  in  the  reading  that  the  priest,  the  man  who  killed  the  red  cow,  the 
person  who  swept  up  the  ashes,  and  he  who  mixed  the  ashes  with  water 
and  sprinkled  them,  were  all  rendered  unclean  by  those  acts,  and  yet  the 
ashes  purified  the  unclean.  Is  not  this  analagous  to  the  riddle  of  the 
brazen  serpent  ?  It  was  by  a  serpent  that  the  people  were  bitten,  and  it 
was  by  a  serpent  of  brass  that  they  were  healed.  It  is  by  Christ's  being 
regarded  as  unclean  that  we  become  clean,  and  the  operation  of  his  sacrifice 
is  just  like  that  of  the  ashes,  for  it  both  reveals  uncleanness  and  removes 
it.  If  you  are  clean,  and  you  think  of  Christ's  death,  what  a  sense  of 
sin  it  brings  upon  you  !  You  judge  of  the  sin  by  the  atonement.  If 
you  are  unclean,  drawing  near  to  Christ  takes  that  sin  away. 

"  Thus  while  his  death  my  sin  displays 
In  all  its  blackest  hue, 
Such  is  the  mystery  of  grace, 
It  seals  my  pardon  too." 

If  we  think  we  are  unclean,  a  sight  of  the  atoning  blood  makes  us  see 
2f 


450  METROPOLITAN   TABBRNACLK   PULPIT. 

how  unclean  we  are  ;  and  if  we  judge  ourselves  unclean,  then  the  app]i« 
cation  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  gives  our  conscience  rest. 

Now,  what  is  all  this  business  about  ?  This  slain  heifer, — I  understand 
that,  for  it  admitted  the  unclean  Israelites  to  the  courts  of  the  Lord  ; — 
but  this  Christ  of  God  offering  himself  without  spot  by  the  eternal 
Spirit, — what  is  that  for  ?  The  object  of  it  is  a  service  far  higher :  it  is 
that  we  may  be  purged  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God.  The 
dead  works  are  gone,  God  absolves  you,  you  are  clean,  and  you  feel  it. 
What  then  ?  Will  you  not  abhor  dead  works  for  the  future  ?  Sin  is 
death.  Labour  to  keep  from  it.  Inasmuch  as  you  are  dehvered  from 
the  yoke  of  sin,  go  forth  and  serve  God.  Since  he  is  the  living  God, 
and  evidently  hates  death,  and  makes  it  to  be  an  uncleanness  to  him, 
get  you  to  living  things.  Offer  to  God  living  prayers,  and  living  tears, 
love  him  with  living  love,  trust  him  with  living  faith,  serve  him  with 
living  obedience. 

Be  all  alive  with  his  life;  not  only  have  life,  but  have  it  more 
abundantly.  He  has  purged  you  from  the  defilement  of  death,  now  live 
in  the  beauty  and  glory  and  excellency  of  the  divine  life,  and  pray  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  quicken  you  that  you  may  abide  in  full  fellowship  with 
God.  If  an  unclean  person  had  been  made  clean,  and  had  then  said, 
"  I  will  not  worship  the  Lord,  neither  will  I  serve  him,"  we  should 
account  him  a  wretched  being !  And  if  any  person  here  were  to  say, 
"  My  sin  is  forgiven  and  I  know  it,  but  I  will  do  nothing  for  God," 
we  might  well  cry,  "  Ah,  wretched  man !"  What  a  hypocrite  and  a 
deceiver  such  a  person  must  be.  Where  pardon  is  received  at  the  hands 
of  the  Lord  the  soul  is  sure  to  feel  a  love  to  God  rising  within  itself. 
He  who  has  had  much  forgiven  is  certain  to  love  much,  and  to  do  much 
for  him  by  whom  that  forgiveness  has  been  obtained. 

The  Lord  bless  you  for  Jesus'  sake.     Amen. 


Portion  or  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Numbers  xix. 


HiMNS  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—395,  561,  303. 


THE   BLOOD   OF   SPRINKLlNa 


Deliveeed  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  February  28th,  1886,  cy 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


And  to  Jesus  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that 
speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel.  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh. 
For  if  they  escaped  not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we 
escape,  if  we  turn  away  from  him  that  speaketh  from  heaven." — Hebrews  xii.  24,  25. 

We  are  joyfully  reminded  by  the  apostle  that  we  are  not  come  to 
Mount  Sinai  and  ita  overwhelming  manifestations.  After  Israel  had 
kept  the  feast  of  the  Passover,  God  was  pleased  to  give  his  people  a 
sort  of  Pentecost,  and  more  fully  to  manifest  himself  and  his  law  to 
them  at  Sinai.  They  were  in  the  wilderness,  with  the  solemn  peaks 
of  a  desolate  mountain  as  their  centre  ;  and  from  the  top  thereof, 
in  the  midst  of  fire,  and  blackness,  and  darkness,  and  tempest,  and 
with  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  God  spake  with  them.  "  The  earth 
shook,  the  heavens  also  dropped  at  the  })resence  of  God  :  even  Sinai 
itself  was  moved  at  the  presence  of  God,  the  God  of  Israel."  We  are 
not  come  to  the  dread  and  terror  of  the  old  covenant,  of  which 
our  apostle  saith  in  another  place,  "The  covenant  from  the 
Mount  Sinai  gendereth  unto  bondage "  (Gal.  iv.  24.)  Upon  the 
believer's  spirit  there  rests  not  the  slavish  fear,  the  abject  terror,  the 
fainting  alarm,  which  swayed  the  tribes  of  Israel ;  for  the  manifestation  of 
Gud  w'hich  he  beholds,  though  not  less  majestic,  is  far  more  full  of  hope 
and  joy.  Over  us  there  rests  not  the  impenetrable  cloud  of  apprehen- 
Bion  ;  we  are  not  buried  in  a  present  darkness  of  despair  ;  we  are  not 
tossed  about  with  a  tempest  of  horror ;  and,  therefore,  we  do  not  ex- 
ceedingly fear  and  quake.  How  thankful  we  should  be  for  this  !  Israel 
was  privileged  even  in  receiving  a  fiery  law  from  the  right  hand  of 
Jehovah  ;  but  we  are  far  more  favoured,  since  we  receive  "  the  glorious 
gospel  of  the  blessed  God." 

Our  apostle  next  tells  us  what  we  are  come  to.  I  suppose  he  speaks  of 
all  the  saints  after  the  death  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord  and  the  descent 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  refers  to  the  whole  church,  in  the  midst  of  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  now  dwells.  We  are  come  to  a  more  joyous  sight  than 
Sinai,  and  the  mountain  burning  with  fire.  The  Hebrew  worshipper, 
apart  from  his  sacrifices,  lived  continually  beneath  the  shadow  of  the 
Kg.  1,888. 

19 


452  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLE   PULPIT. 

dnrkness  of  a  broken  law  ;  he  was  startled  often  by  the  tremendous  note 
of  the  trumpet,  which  threatened  judgment  for  that  broken  law  ;  and 
thus  he  lived  ever  in  a  condition  of  bondage.  To  what  else  could  the  law 
bring  him  ?  To  convince  of  sin  and  to  condemn  the  sinner  is  its  utmost 
power.  The  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lives  in  quite  another 
atmosphere.  He  has  not  come  to  a  barren  crag,  but  to  an  inhabited  city, 
Jerusalem  above,  the  metropolis  of  God.  He  has  quitted  the  wilderness 
for  the  land  which  floweth  with  milk  and  honey,  and  the  material  mount 
which  might  be  touched  for  the  spiritual  and  heavenly  Jerusalem.  He 
has  entered  into  fellowship  with  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  who 
are  to  him,  not  cherubim  with  flaming  swords  to  keep  men  back  from  the 
tree  of  life,  but  ministering  spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of 
salvation.  He  is  come  to  the  joyous  assembly  of  all  pure  intelligences 
who  have  met,  not  in  trerablinsr,  but  in  joyous  liberty,  to  keep  the 
feast  with  their  great  Lord  and  King.  He  thinks  of  all  who  love  God 
throughout  all  worlds,  and  he  feels  that  he  is  one  of  them ;  for  he  has 
come  to  "the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first-born,  which  are 
written  in  heaven."  Moreover,  he  has  come  "  to  God  the  Judge  of  all," 
the  umpire  and  rewarder  of  all  the  chosen  citizens  who  are  enrolled  by  his 
command,  the  ruler  and  judge  of  all  their  enemies.  God  is  not  to  them 
a  dreadful  person  who  speaks  from  a  distance;  but  he  is  their  Fatiier 
and  their  Friend,  in  whom  they  delight  themselves,  in  whose  presenee 
there  is  fulness  of  joy  for  them.  Brethren,  our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father,  our  God.  To  him  we  have  coine  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Moreover,  in  th«  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  we  realize  the  oneness  of  the 
church  both  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  spirits  of  just  meu  made 
perfect  are  in  union  with  us.  No  gulf  divides  the  militant  from  the 
triumphant;  we  are  one  army  of  the  living  God.  We  sometimes  speak 
of  the  holy  dead;  but  there  are  none  such:  they  live  unto  God  ;  they 
are  perfected  as  to  their  spirits  even  now,  and  they  are  waiting  for 
the  moment  when  their  bodies  also  shall  be  raised  from  the  tomb  to  be 
again  inhabited  by  their  immortal  souls.  We  no  longer  shudder  at  the 
sepulchre,  but  sing  of  resurrection.  Our  condition  of  heart,  from  day 
to  day,  is  that  of  men  who  are  in  fellowship  with  God,  fellowship  with 
angels,  fellowship  with  perfect  spirits. 

We  have  also  come  to  Jesus,  our  Saviour,  who  is  all  and  in  all.  In 
him  we  live;  we  are  joined  unto  him  in  one  spirit;  he  is  the  Bridegroom 
of  our  souls,  the  delight  of  our  hearts.  We  are  come  to  him  as  the 
Mediator  of  the  new  covenant.  What  a  blessed  thing  it  is  to  know 
that  covenant  of  which  he  is  the  Mediator!  Some  in  these  days  despise 
the  covenant ;  but  saints  delight  in  it.  To  them  the  everlasting  cove- 
nant, **  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure,"  is  all  their  salvation  and  all 
their  desire.  We  are  covenanted  ones  through  our  Lord  Jesus.  God 
hus  pledged  himself  to  bless  us.  By  two  immutable  things  wherein  it 
is  impossible  for  him  to  lie,  he  has  given  us  strong  consolation,  and 
good  hope  through  grace,  even  to  all  of  us  who  have  fled  for  refuge 
to  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  are  happy  to  live  under  the  covenant  of  grace, 
the  covenant  of  promise,  the  covenant  symbolized  by  Jerusalem  above, 
which  is  free,  aud  the  mother  of  us  all. 

Then  comes  the  last  thing  of  all,  mentioned  last,  as  I  shall  have  to 
show  you,  for  a  purpose.    We  have  come  "to  the  blood  0/ sprinkling," 


THE  BLOOD   OP    SPRTNKLTNO.  453 

On  th«t  first  day  at  Sinai  no  blood  of  sprinklinsf  was  presenLed  ;  bnt 
afterwards  it  was  used  by  divine  order  to  ratify  the  national  covenant 
which  the  tribes  made  with  Jehovah  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  Of  that 
covenant  the  Lord  says,  "which  my  covenant  they  brake,  although  I  was 
an  husband  unto  them."  He  never  brake  his  covenant,  but  they  brake 
it ;  for  they  failed  to  keep  that  condition  of  obedience  without  which  a 
covenant  founded  upon  works  falls  to  the  ground.  We  have  come  to  the 
blood  of  sprinkling  which  has  fallen  upon  a  covenant  which  never  shall  be 
broken  ;  for  t'le  Lord  hath  made  it  to  endure  though  rocks  and  hills  re- 
move. This  is  called  by  the  Holy  Ghost  "  a  better  covenant,  which  was 
established  upon  better  promises."  We  are  come  to  the  covenant  of 
grace,  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  it,  and  to  his  blood,  which  is  the  seal  of 
it.  Of  this  last  we  are  going  to  speak  at  this  time — "  The  blood  of 
Bpi'inkling  which  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel." 

I  shall  need  this  morning  to  occupy  all  the  time  with  what  I  regard 
as  only  the  first  head  of  my  discourse.  What  is  it  ?  "  The  blood  of 
sprinkling."  It  will  be  our  duty  afterwards  to  consider  ivhere  we  are — 
"  we  are  come  unto  this  blood"  ;  and  thirdly,  to  remember  what  then? 
"  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh." 

L  First,  What  is  it  ?  What  is  this  "  blood  of  sprink- 
ling "  ?  In  a  few  words,  "  the  blood  of  sprinkling "  represents 
the  pains,  the  sufferings,  the  humiliation,  and  the  death  of  the 
L  ird  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  endured  on  the  behalf  04"  guilty 
man.  When  we  speak  of  the  blood,  we  wish  not  to  be  undersfooi 
a-  referring  solely  or  mainly  to  the  literal  material  blood  which 
flj.ved  from  the  wounds  of  Jesus.  We  believe  in  the  literal  fact 
of  his  shedding  his  blood  ;  but  when  we  speak  of  his  cross  and  blood  we 
mean  those  sufferings  and  that  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  which 
he  magnified  the  law  of  God;  we  mean  what  Isaiah  intended  when  he 
said,  "  He  shall  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin";  we  mean  all  the 
griefs  which  Jesus  vicariously  endured  on  our  behalf  at  Gethsemane,  and 
Gabbatha,  and  Golgotlia,  and  specially  his  yielding  up  his  life  upon  the 
tree  of  scorn  and  doom.  "The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  "  Without  shedding  of  blood 
there  is  no  remission";  and  the  shedding  of  blood  intended  is  the  death 
of  Jesus,  the  Sou  of  God. 

Remember  that  his  sufferings  and  death  were  not  apparent  only, 
but  true  and  real ;  and  that  they  involved  an  incalculable  degree  of  pain 
and  anguish.  To  redeem  our  souls  cost  our  Lord  an  exceeding  sorrow- 
fulness "even  unto  death";  it  cost  him  the  bloody  sweat,  the  heart 
broken  with  reproach,  and  specially  the  agony  of  being  forsaken  of  his 
Father,  till  he  cried,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 
Our  Mediator  endured  death  under  the  worst  possible  aspects,  bereft  of 
those  supports  which  are  in  all  other  cases  of  godly  men  afibrded  by  the 
goodness  and  faithfulness  of  God.  His  was  not  merely  a  natural  death, 
but  a  death  aggravated  by  supernatural  circumstance,  which  infinitely 
intensified  its  woe.  This  is  what  we  mean  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  his 
sufferings,  and  his  death. 

These  were  voluntarily  undertaken  by  himself  out  of  pure  love  to  us, 
and  in  order  that  we  might  thereby  be  justly  saved  from  deserved 
punishment.     There  was  no  natural  reason  on  his  own  account  why  he 


454  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

should  suffer,  bleed,  and  die.  Far  from  it, — "  He  only  hath  iramor" 
fcality."  But  out  of  supreme  love  to  us,  that  man  might  be  forgiven 
without  the  violation  of  divine  rectitude,  the  Sun  of  God  assumed 
human  flesh,  and  became  in  very  deed  a  man,  in  order  th*t  he  might 
be  able  to  offer  in  man's  place  a  full  vindication  to  the  righteous  and 
unchangeable  law'  of  God.  Being  God,  he  thus  showed  forth  the  won- 
drous love  of  God  to  man  by  being  willing  to  suffer  personally  rather 
than  the  redeemed  should  die  as  the  just  result  of  their  sin.  The 
matchless  majesty  of  his  divine  person  lent  supreme  efficacy  to  his 
sufferings.  It  was  a  man  that  died,  but  he  was  also  God,  and  the 
death  of  incarnate  God  reflects  more  glory  upon  law  than  the  deaths  of 
myriads  of  condemned  creatures  could  have  done.  See  the  yearning 
of  the  great  God  for  perfect  righteousness  :  he  had  sooner  die  than 
stain  his  justice  even  to  indulge  his  mercy.  Jesus  the  Lord,  out  of 
love  to  the  Father  and  to  men,  undertook  willingly  and  cheerfully  for 
■our  sakes  to  magnify  the  law,  and  bring  in  perfect  righteousness.  This 
work  was  so  carried  out  to  the  utmost,  that  not  a  jot  of  the  suffering 
was  mitigated,  nor  a  particle  of  the  obedience  foregone  :  "  he  became 
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  th^  cross."  Now  he  hath  finished 
transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteous- 
ness: for  he  has  offered  such  an  expiation  that  God  is  just,  and  the 
just«fier  of  him  that  believeth.  God  is  at  once  the  righteous  Judge, 
and  the  infinitely  loving  Father,  through  what  Jesus  hath  suffered. 

Brethren,  though  I  have  said  that  there  was  no  reason  why  the  Son 
■of  God  should  bleed  and  die  on  his  own  account,  yet  towards  us  there 
was  a  reason.  Our  Lord  from  of  old  in  the  eternal  covenant  was  con- 
stituted the  head  and  representative  of  all  who  were  in  him ;  and  so, 
when  the  time  came,  he  took  the  place,  bore  the  sin,  and  suffered  the 
penalty  of  those  whom  the  Father  gave  him  from  before  the  foundations 
■of  the  world.  He  is  as  much  the  representative  man  as  the  first  Adu  a 
was  the  representative  man  ;  and  as  in  Adam  the  sin  was  committed  which 
rained  us,  so  in  the  second  Adam  the  atonement  was  made  which  saves 
us.  "  As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive." 
There  was  no  other  person  so  fit  to  undertake  the  enterprise  of  our 
redemption  as  this  second  man,  who  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  He 
properly,  but  yet  most  generously  and  spontaneously,  came  and  shed 
his  precious  blood,  in  the  room  and  place  and  stead  of  sinners,  to  bring 
the  guilty  near  to  God. 

But  the  text  does  not  merely  speak  of  the  blood  shed,  which  I  have 
explained  to  you,  but  of  "the  blood  of  sprinkling."  This  is  the 
atonement  applied  for  divine  purposes,  and  specially  applied  to  our  own 
hearts  and  consciences  by  faith.  For  the  explanation  of  this  sprinkling 
we  must  look  to  the  types  of  the  Old  Testament.  In  the  Old  Testament 
the  blood  of  sprinkling  meant  a  great  many  things ;  in  fact,  I  cannot 
just  now  tell  you  all  that  it  signified.  We  meet  with  it  in  the  Book  of 
Exodus,  at  the  time  when  the  Lord  smote  all  the  first-born  of  Egypt. 
Then  the  blood  of  sprinkling  mQoxvi  preservation.  The  basin  filled  with 
blood  was  taken,  and  a  bunch  of  hyss  )p  was  dipped  into  it,  and  the 
lintel  and  the  two  side-posts  of  every  house  tenanted  by  Israelites  were 
smeared  with  the  blood ;  and  when  God  saw  the  blood  upon  the  house  of 
the  Israelite,  he  bade  the  destroyer  pass  that  family  by,  and  leave  their 


THE   BLOOD   OF   SPRINKLING.  465 

firsfc-born  nnharmed.     Tlie  sprinkled  blood  meant  preservation  :  it  was 
Israel's  passover  and  safeguard. 

The  sprinkled  blood  very  frequently  signified  the  confirmntion  of  a 
covenant.  So  it  is  used  in  Exodus  xxiv.,  which  I  read  to  you  just  now. 
The  blood  was  sprinkled  upon  the  book  of  the  covenant,  and  also  upon 
the  people,  to  show  that  the  covenant  was,  as  far  as  it  conld  be,  con- 
firmed by  the  people  who  promised,  "All  that  the  Lord  hath  said  will  we 
do."  The  blood  of  balls  and  of  goats  in  that  case  was  but  a  type  of  the 
sacrificial  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  lesson  which  we  learn 
from  Exodus  xxiv.  is  that  the  blood  of  sprinkling  means  the  blood  of 
ratification  or  confirmation  of  the  covenant,  which  God  has  been  pleased 
to  make  with  men  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Since  Jesus 
died,  the  promises  are  Yea  and  Amen  to  all  believers,  and  must  assuredly 
be  fulfilled.  The  covenant  of  grace  had  but  one  condition,  and  that 
condition  Jesus  has  fulfilled  by  his  death,  so  that  it  has  now  become  a 
covenant  of  pure  and  unconditional  promise  to  all  the  seed. 

In  many  cases  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  meant  purification.  If  a 
person  had  been  defiled,  he  could  not  come  into  the  sanctuary  of  God 
without  being  sprinkled  with  blood.  There  were  the  ashes  of  a  red 
heifer  laid  up,  and  these  were  mixed  with  blood  and  water ;  and  by 
their  being  sprinkled  on  the  unclean,  his  ceremonial  defilement  was 
removed.  There  were  matters  incident  to  domestic  life,  and  accidents 
of  outdoor  life,  which  engendered  impurity,  and  this  impurity  was  put 
away  by  the  sprinkling  of  blood.  This  sprinkling  was  used  in  the  case 
of  recovery  from  infectious  disease,  such  as  leprosy ;  before  such  persons 
could  mingle  in  the  solemn  assemblies,  they  were  sprinkled  with  the 
blood,  and  thus  were  made  ceremonially  pure.  In  a  higher  sense  this  is 
the  work  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  It  preserves  us,  it  ratifies  the 
covenant,  and  wherever  it  is  applied  it  makes  us  pure  ;  for  "  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  We  have  our 
hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience ;  for  we  have  come  unto 
the  obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  sprinkling  of  the  blood  meant,  also,  saticii/icution.  Before  a  man 
entered  upon  the  priesthood  the  blood  was  put  upon  his  right  ear, 
and  on  the  great  toe  of  his  right  foot,  and  on  the  thumb  of  his  right 
hand,  signifying  tiiat  all  his  powers  were  thus  consecrated  to  God.  The 
ordination  ceremony  included  the  sprinkling  of  blood  upon  the  altar 
round  about.  Even  thus  hath  the  Lord  Jesus  redeemed  us  unto  God  by 
his  death,  and  the  crinkling  of  his  blood  hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  God  for  ever.  He  is  made  of  God  unto  us  eanctification, 
and  all  else  that  is  needed  for  the  divine  service. 

One  other  signification  of  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  acceptation 
mid  access.  When  the  high  priest  went  into  the  most  holy  place  once  a 
year,  it  was  not  without  blood,  which  he  sprinkled  upon  the  ark  of  the 
covenant,  and  upon  the  mercy-seat,  which  was  on  the  top  thereof.  All 
approaches  to  God  were  made  by  blood.  There  was  no  hope  of  a  man 
drawing  near  to  God,  even  in  symbol,  apart  from  the  sprinkling  of  the 
blood.  And  now  to-day  our  only  way  to  God  is  by  the  precious  sacrifice 
of  Christ ;  the  only  hope  for  the  success  of  our  prayers,  the  acceptance 
of  our  praises,  or  the  reception  of  our  holy  works,  is  through  the  ever- 
abiding  merit  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     The 


456  MKTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Holy  Ghost  bids  us  enter  into  the  holiest  by  tiie  blood  of  Jesus ;  there 
is  no  other  way. 

There  were  other  uses  besides  these,  but  it  may  suffice  to  put  down 
the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  as  having  these  etfects,  namely,  that  of  pre- 
servation, satisfaction,  purification,  sanctificatiou,  and  access  to  God. 
This  was  all  typified  in  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  but  actually 
fulfilled  in  the  great  sacrifice  of  Christ. 

With  this  as  an  explanation,  T  desire  to  come  still  closer  to  the  text, 
and  view  it  with  great  care  ;  for  to  my  mind  it  is  singularly  full  of 
teaching.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  us  into  the  truth  which  lies  herein 
like  treasure  hid  in  a  field  ! 

First.  The  blood  of  sprijikUng  is  the  centre  of  the  divine  manifestation 
vnder  the  gospel.  Observe  its  innermost  place  in  the  passage  before  ns.* 
You  are  privileged  by  almighty  grace  to  come  first  to  Mount  Zion,  to  climb 
its  steeps,  to  stand  upon  its  holy  summit,  and  to  enter  the  city  of  the 
living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  In  those  golden  streets,  surround- 
ing the  hallowed  shrine,  yon  behold  an  innumerable  company  of  angels. 
What  a  vision  of  glory  I  But  you  must  not  rest  here ;  for  the  great  general 
assembly,  the  festal  gatheiiug,  the  solemn  convocation  of  the  enrolled 
in  heaven,  is  being  held,  and  all  are  there  in  glad  attire,  surrounding 
their  God  and  Lord.  Press  onward  to  the  throne  itself,  where  sits  the 
Judge  of  all,  surrounded  by  those  holy  spirits  who  have  washe  1  their 
robes,  and,  therefore,  stand  before  the  throne  of  God  in  perfpcii-m. 

Have  you  not  come  a  long  way  ?  Are  you  not  admitted  into  the 
very  centre  of  the  whole  revelation  ?  Not  yet.  A  step  further  lands 
you  where  stands  your  Saviour,  the  Mediator,  with  the  new  covenant. 
Now  is  your  joy  complete  ;  but  you  have  a  further  object  to  behold. 
What  is  in  that  innermost  shrine  ?  What  is  that  which  is  hidden 
a.vay  in  tlie  holy  of  holies  ?  What  is  that  which  is  the  most  precious 
and  costly  thing  of  all,  the  last,  the  ultimatum,  God's  grandest  revela- 
tion ?  The  precious  blood  of  Chris*-,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot — the  blood  of  sprinkling  This  comes  last  ;  it  is  the 
innermo-st  truth  of  the  dispensation  of  grace  undei  which  we  live. 
Brethren,  when  we  climb  to  heaven  itself,  and  pass  the  gate  of  pearl, 
and  wend  our  way  through  the  innumerable  hosts  of  angels,  and  come  even 
to  the  throne  of  God,  and  see  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect,  and 
hear  their  holy  hymn,  we  shall  not  have  gone  beyond  the  influence  of  the 
blood  of  sprinkling  ;  nay,  we  shall  see  it  there  more  truly  present  than  in 
any  other  place  beside.  "What !"  say  you,  "the  blood  of  Jesus  in  heaven?" 
Yes.  The  earthly  sanctuary,  we  are  told,  was  purified  with  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  of  goats,  "but  the  heavenly  things  themselves  with  better 
sacrifices  than  these  "  (Heb.  is.  23).  When  Jesus  entered  once  for  all 
into  the  holy  place,  he  entered  by  his  own  blood,  having  obtained 
eternal  redemption  for  us:  so  saith  the  apostle  in  the  ninth  chapter  of 
this  epistle.  Let  those  who  talk  lightly  of  the  precious  blood  correct 
their  view  ere  they  be  guilty  of  blasphemy  ;  for  the  revelation  of  God 
knows  no  lower  deep,  this  is  the  heart  and  centre  of  all.  The  miinifesta- 
tion  of  Jesus  under  the  gospel  is  not  only  the  revelation  of  the  Mediator, 

*  For  this  line  of  thought  I  am  much  indebted  to  a  chapter  in  an  adniirabla  book, 
entitled  "  Every-day  Life,"  by  C.  H.  Waller,  M.A.    Shaw  and  Co. 


THE   BLOOD   OF   SPHINKLLNO.  457 

but  especially  of  his  sficrifice.  Tlie  appearance  of  God  the  Judge  of  all, 
the  vision  of  hosts  of  angels  and  perfect  S{»irits,  do  but  lead  up  to  that 
sacrifice  which  is  the  source  and  focus  of  all  true  fello.\;:liip  between 
God  and  his  crcat  ires.  Tliis  is  the  character  which  Jesas  wears 
in  the  innermost  shrine  where  he  reveals  himself  most  clearly  to 
those  who  are  nearest  to  him.  He  looks  like  a  lamb  that  has  beea 
slain.  There  is  no  sight  of  him  which  is  more  full,  more  glorious, 
more  complete,  than  the  vision  of  hiiu  as  the  great  sacrifice  for  sin. 
The  atonement  of  Jesus  is  the  concentration  of  the  divine  glory;  all 
other  revelations  of  God  are  completed  and  intensified  here.  Yon  have 
not  co^iiC  to  the  central  sun  of  the  great  spiritual  system  ut  grace  till 
you  have  come  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling — to  those  sufferings  of 
Mei^siah  which  are  not  for  himself,  but  are  intended  to  bear  upon 
others,  even  as  drops  when  they  are  sprinkled  exert  their  influence 
where  they  fall.  Unless  you  have  learned  to  rejoice  in  that  blood  which 
taketh  away  sin,  you  have  not  yet  caught  the  key-note  of  the  gospel 
dispensation.  The  blood  of  Christ  is  the  life  of  the  gospel.  Apart  from 
atonement  you  may  know  the  skin,  the  rind,  the  husk  of  the  gospel ; 
bu:  its  inner  kernel  you  have  not  discovered. 

I  next  ask  you  to  look  at  the  text  and  observe  that  this  sprhilcling  of 
ihe  blood,  as  mentioned  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  pa'^sage,  is  ahsolately 
identical  ivith  Jesus  h>'mself.  Read  it.  *'  To  Jesus  the  mediator  of  the 
new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better 
things  than  that  of  Abel.  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh." 
He  saith  it  is  the  blood  that  speaketh  ;  and  then  he  proceeds  to  say, 
"  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh."  This  is  a  very  unexpected 
turn,  which  can  only  be  explained  upon  the  supposition  that  Jesus  and  the 
blood  are  identical  in  the  writer's  view.  By  what  we  may  call  a  singularity 
in  grammar,  in  putting  hijn  for  it,  the  Spirit  of  God  intentionally  sets 
forth  the  striking  truth,  that  the  sacrifice  is  identical  with  the  Saviour. 
"■  We  are  come  to  the  Saviour,  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  and  to 
the  blood  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh  ;  see  that  ye  refuse  not  him." 
Beloved  friends,  there  is  no  Jesus  if  there  is  no  b'ood  of  sprinkling; 
there  is  no  Saviour  if  there  is  no  sacrifice.  I  put  this  strongly,  because 
the  attempt  is  being  made  nowadays  to  set  forth  Jesus  apart  from  his 
cross  and  atonement.  He  is  held  up  as  a  great  ethical  teacher,  a  self- 
sacrificing  spirit,  who  is  to  lead  the  way  in  a  grand  moral  reformation, 
and  by  his  influence  to  set  up  akinglom  of  moral  influence  in  the  world. 
It  is  even  hinted  that  this  kingdom  has  never  had  prominence  enough 
given  to  it  because  it  has  been  overshadowed  by  his  cross.  But  where 
is  Jesus  apart  from  his  sacrifice  ?  He  is  not  there  if  you  have  left  out 
the  blood  of  sprinkling,  which  is  the  blood  of  sacrifice.  Without  the 
atonement,  no  man  is  a  Christian,  and  Christ  is  not  Jesus.  If  you  have 
torn  away  the  sacrificial  blood,  you  have  drawn  the  heart  out  of  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  robbed  it  of  its  life.  If  you  have  trampled 
on  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  counted  it  a  common  thing,  instead  of 
putting  it  above  you  upon  the  lintel  of  the  door,  and  all  around  you  upon 
the  two  side-posts,  you  have  fearfully  transgressed.  As  for  me,  God 
forbid  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
since  to  me  that  cross  is  identical  with  Jesus  himself.  I  know  no  Jesua 
buL  lie  who  died  the  just  for  the  unjust.    You  can  separate  Jesus  and 


458  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  blood  materially ;  for  by  the  spear-thrusfc,  and  all  his  other  wounds, 
the  blood  was  drawn  away  from  the  body  of  our  Lord ;  but  spiritually 
this  "blood  of  sprinkling"  and  the  Jesus  by  whom  we  live,  are  in- 
separable. In  fact,  they  are  one  and  indivisible,  the  selfsame  thing,  and 
you  cannot  truly  know  Jesus,  or  preach  Jesus,  unless  you  preach  him 
as  slain  for  sin  ;  you  cannot  trust  Jesus  except  you  trust  him  as  making 
peace  by  the  blood  of  his  cross.  If  you  have  done  with  the  blood  of 
sprinkling,  you  have  done  with  Jesus  altogether;  he  will  never  part  with 
his  mediatorial  glory  as  our  sacrifice,  neither  can  we  come  to  him  if  we 
ignore  that  character.  Is  it  not  clear  in  the  text  that  Jesus  and  the 
blood  of  sprinkling  are  one  ?  What  God  hath  joined  together,  let  no 
man  put  asunder.     Note  this  right  carefully. 

Thirdly,  observe  that  this  "  blood  of  sprinkling"  is  put  in  close  contact 
with  "  the  new  covenant."  I  do  not  wonder  that  those  who  are  lax  in 
their  views  of  the  atonement  have  nothing  honourable  to  say  concerning 
the  covenants,  old  or  new.  The  doctrine  of  the  covenants  is  the  marrow 
of  divinity  ;  but  these  vain-glorious  spirits  affect  to  despise  it.  This  is 
natural,  since  they  speak  slightingly  of  the  atonement.  What  covenant 
is  there  without  blood  ?  If  it  be  not  ratified,  if  there  be  no  sacrifice  to 
make  it  sure,  then  is  it  no  covenant  in  the  sight  of  God  or  of  enlightened 
men.  But,  0  beloved,  ye  who  know  your  Lord,  anJ  follow  on  to  know 
him  yet  better,  to  you  the  covenant  of  promise  is  a  heritage  of  joy,  and 
his  atonement  is  most  precious  as  the  confirmation  of  it.  To  us  the 
sacrificial  death  of  our  Lord  is  not  a  doctrine,  but  the  doctrine,  not  an 
outgrowth  of  Christian  teaching,  but  the  essence  and  marrow  of  it.  To 
us  Jesus  in  his  atonement  is  Alpha  and  Omega,  in  him  the  covenant 
begins  and  ends.  You  see  how  it  was  confirmed  by  blood.  If  it  be  a 
man's  covenant,  if  it  be  confirmed,  it  standeth ;  but  this  is  God's  cove- 
nant, confirmed  with  promises,  oaths  and  blood,  and  it  stands  fast  for 
ever  and  ever.  Every  believer  is  as  much  interested  in  that  covenant  as 
was  Abraham  the  father  of  believers  ;  for  the  covenant  was  made  with 
Abraham  and  his  spiritual  seed;  and  in  Christ  it  is  confirmed  to  all 
that  seed  for  ever  by  his  most  precious  blood.  That,  also,  is  evident 
enough  in  the  text :  fail  not  to  consider  it  well. 

Bat,  fourthly,  I  waat  you  to  notice  that  according  to  the  text  the  blood 
is  the  voice  of  the  new  dispensatioii.  Observe  that  on  Sinai  there  was 
"  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  the  voice  of  words  ;  which  voice  they 
that  heard  entreated  that  the  word  should  not  be  spoken  to  them  any 
more."  You  look,  therefore,  under  the  new  dispensation,  for  a  voice, 
and  you  do  not  come  to  any  till  you  reach  the  last  object  in  the  list,  and 
there  see  "  the  blood  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh."  Here,  then,  is  the 
voice  of  the  gospel  ;  it  is  not  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  nor  the  voice  of 
words  spoken  in  terrible  majesty  ;  but  the  blood  speaks,  and  assuredly 
there  is  no  sound  more  piercing,  more  potent,  more  prevailing.  God 
heard  the  voice  of  Abel's  blood  and  visited  Cain  with  condign  punish- 
ment for  killing  his  brother;  and  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God,  cries  in  the  ears  of  God  with  a  voice  which  is  ever 
heard.  How  can  it  be  imagined  that  the  Lord  God  should  be  deaf  to 
the  cry  of  his  Son's  sacrifice?  Lo,  these  many  ages  the  blood  has  cried 
— "  Forgive  them  !  Forgive  them  !  Accept  them  !  Deliver  them  from 
going  down  into  the  pit,  for  I  have  found  a  ransom  I  " 


TH?3   BLOOD   OF   SPRINKLING.  459 

The  blood  of  sprinkling  has  a  voice  of  instruction  to  us  even  as  it 
has  a  voice  of  intercessiou  with  God.  It  cries  to  us,  "  See  the  evil  of 
sin  !  See  how  God  loveth  righteousness  !  See  how  he  loveth  men  ! 
See  how  impossible  it  is  for  you  to  escape  from  the  punishment  of  sin 
except  by  this  great  sacrifice  in  which  the  love  and  the  justice  of  God 
equally  appear  !  See  how  Jehovah  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  freely 
delivered  him  up  for  us  all." 

What  a  voice  there  is  in  the  atonement ! — a  voice  which  pleads  for 
holiness  and  love,  for  justice  and  grace,  for  truth  and  mercy.  "  See 
that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh." 

Do  you  not  hear  it  ?  If  you  take  away  the  blood  of  sprinkling  from 
the  gospel,  you  have  silenced  it.  It  has  no  voice  if  this  be  gone.  "Oh," 
they  say,  "the  gospel  has  lost  its  power"!  What  wonder  when  they 
have  made  it  a  dumb  gospel  !  How  can  it  have  power  when  they 
take  away  that  which  is  its  life  and  speech  ?  Unless  the  preacher  is  ever- 
more preaching  this  blood,  and  sprinkling  it  by  the  doctrine  of  faith, 
his  teaching  has  no  voice  either  to  rouse  the  careless  or  to  cheer  the 
anxious.  If  ever  there  should  come  a  wretched  day  when  all  our  pulpits 
shall  be  full  of  modern  thought,  and  the  old  doctrine  of  a  substitutionary 
sacrifice  shall  be  exploded,  then  will  there  remain  no  word  of  comfort 
for  the  guilty  or  hope  for  the  despairing,  Hnshed  will  be  for  ever  those 
silver  notes  which  now  console  the  living,  and  cheer  the  dying  ;  a  dumb 
spirit  will  possess  this  sullen  world,  and  no  voice  of  joy  will  break  the 
blank  silence  of  despair.  The  gospel  speaks  through  the  propitiation 
for  sin,  and  if  that  be  denied,  it  speaketh  no  more.  Those  who  preach 
not  the  atonement  exhibit  a  dumb  and  dummy  gospel ;  a  mouth  it  hath, 
but  speaketh  not  ;  they  that  make  it  are  like  unto  their  idol. 

Let  me  draw  you  nearer  still  to  the  text.  Observe,  that  this  voice  is 
identical  with  the  voice  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  for  it  is  put  so.  "  The  blood 
of  spriukh'ng  that  speaketh.  See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh." 
Whatever  the  doctrine  of  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  may  be,  it  is  the  main 
teaching  of  Jesus  himself.  It  is  well  to  notice  that  the  voice  which  spoke 
ft-om  Sinai  was  also  the  voice  of  Christ.  It  was  Jesus  who  delivered  that 
law  the  penalty  of  which  he  was  himself  to  endure.  He  that  read  it  out 
amidst  the  tempest  was  Jtsus.  Notice  the  declaration — "Whose  voice 
then  shook  the  earth."  Whenever  you  hear  the  gospel,  the  voice  of  the 
precious  blood  is  the  voice  of  Jesus  himself,  the  voice  of  him  that  shook 
the  earth  at  Sinai.  This  same  voice  shall  by-and-by  shake,  not  the 
earth  only,  but  also  heaven.  \Vhat  a  voice  there  is  in  the  blood  of 
sprinkling,  since  indeed  it  is  the  voice  of  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  who 
both  makes  and  destroys !  Would  you  have  me  silence  the  doctrine  of  the 
blood  of  sprinkling  ?  Would  any  one  of  you  attempt  so  horrible  a 
deed  ?  Sliall  we  be  censured  if  we  continually  proclaim  the  heaven-sent 
messHge  of  the  blood  of  Jesus?  Shall  we  speak  with  bated  breath 
because  some  affected  person  shudders  at  the  sound  of  the  word 
"blood"?  or  some  "cultured"  individual  rebels  at  the  old-fashioned 
thought  of  sacrifice  ?  Nay,  verily,  we  will  sooner  have  our  tongue  cut 
out  than  cease  to  speak  of  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  For 
me  there  is  nothing  worth  thinking  of  or  preaching  about  but  this 
grand  truth,  which  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  whole  Christian 
system,  namely,  that  God  gave  his  Son  to  die  that  sinners  might  live. 


460  METROPOLITAN   TARERNACTjI?    PULPIT. 

This  is  not  the  voice  of  the  blood  only,  hnt  the  voice  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  himself.     So  saith  the  text,  and  who  can  contradict  it  ? 

Fni'ther,  ray  brethren,  from  the  text  I  learn  another  truth,  namely,  that 
this  blood  is  always  sfeaJciiu/.  The  text  saith  not "  the  blood  of  sprinkling 
that  spoke,"  but  "that  speaketh."  It  is  always  speaking,  it  always 
remaineth  a  plea  with  God  and  a  testimony  to  men.  It  never  will  be 
silenced,  either  one  way  or  the  other.  In  the  intercession  of  our  risen 
and  ascended  Lord  his  sacrifice  ever  speaketh  to  the  Most  High.  By 
the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  atonement  will  always  speak  in 
edification  to  believers  yet  upon  the  earth.  It  is  the  blood  that  speaketh. 
According  to  our  text,  this  is  the  only  speech  which  this  dispcMsation 
yields  us.  Shall  that  speech  ever  be  still  ?  Shall  we  decline  to  hear  it? 
Shall  we  refuse  to  echo  it  ?  God  forbid.  By  day,  by  night,  the  great 
sacrifice  continues  to  cry  to  the  sons  of  men,  "  Turn  ye  from  your  sins, 
for  they  cost  your  Saviour  dear.  The  times  of  yoar  ignorance  God 
winked  at,  but  now  coramandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent,  since  he 
is  able  to  forgive  and  yet  be  just.  Your  offended  God  has  himself  pro- 
vided a  sacrifice ;  come  and  be  sprinkled  with  its  blood,  and  be  reconciled 
once  for  all."  The  voice  of  this  blood  speaks  wherever  there  is  a 
guilty  conscience,  wherever  there  is  an  anxious  liearc,  wherever  there  is 
a  seeking  sinner,  wherever  there  is  a  believing  mind.  It  speaketh  with 
sweet,  familiar,  tender,  inviting  voice.  There  is  no  music  like  it  to  the 
sinner's  ear  :  it  charms  away  his  fears.  It  shall  never  cease  its  speak- 
ing so  long  as  there  is  a  sinner  yet  out  of  Christ  ;  nay,  so  long  as  there 
is  one  on  earth  who  still  needs  its  cleansing  power  because  of  fresh 
backslidings.  Oh,  hear  ye  its  voice  !  Incline  your  ear  aad  receive  its 
blessed  accents  :  it  says,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saitli 
the  Lord  ;  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ; 
though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool." 

This  part  of  my  discounse  will  not  be  complete  unless  I  bid  you  notice 
that  we  are  expressly  told  that  this  precious  blood  speaks  "  betier 
things  than  that  of  Abel."  I  do  not  think  that  the  whole  meaning  of  the 
passage  is  exhausted  if  we  say  that  Abel's  blood  cries  for  vengeance,  and 
that  Christ's  blood  speaks  for  pardon.     Dr.  Watts  puts  it : — 

"  BloDd  has  a  voice  to  pierce  the  skies : 
•  Reven<i;e  !  '  the  blood  of  Abel  cries; 

But  the  dear  stream  when  Christ  was  slain 

Sp  aks  peace  as  loud  from  ev'ry  vein." 

That  is  quite  true  ;  but  I  conceive  that  it  is  not  all  the  sense,  and  per- 
haps not  even  the  sense  here  intended.  Revenge  is  scarcely  a  goud  thing  ; 
yec  Abel's  blood  spake  good  things,  or  we  should  hardly  read  that 
Christ's  blood  speaks  "  better  things."  What  does  the  blood  of  Abel  speak  ? 
The  bloo  1  of  Abel  speaks  to  a  complete  and  believing  obedience  to  God. 
It  shows  us  a  man  who  believes  God,  and,  notwithstanding  the  enmity 
of  his  brother,  brings  to  God  the  appointed  sacrifice  of  faith,  strictly 
following  up,  even  to  the  bitter  end,  his  holy  obedience  to  the  Most 
High.  That  is  what  the  blood  of  Abel  says  to  me ;  and  the  blood  of 
Jesus  says  the  same  thing  most  emphatically.  The  death  of  Jesus  Christ 
was  the  crown  and  close  of  a  perfect  life  ;  it  was  a  fit  completion  of  a 
course  of  holiness.  In  obedience  to  the  Great  Father,  Jesus  even  laid  down 


! 


THE   BLOOD   OF   SPRINKLING.  461 

his  life.  Bub  if  this  be  all  the  blood  of  Jesus  speaks,  as  some  say  that 
it  is,  then  it  does  not  speak  better  things  than  the  blood  of  Abel ;  for 
it  only  says  the  same  things  in  a  louder  voice.  The  martyrdom  of  any 
saint  has  a  voice  for  obedience  to  God  as  truly  as  the  martyrdom  of 
Jesus ;  but  the  death  of  our  Lord  says  far  more,  infinitely  more, 
than  this :  it  not  only  witnesses  to  complete  obedience,  but  it  provides 
the  way  by  which  the  disobedient  may  be  forgiven  and  helped  to 
obedience  and  holiness.  The  cross  has  a  greater,  deeper,  gladder  gospel 
for  fallen  men  than  that  of  a  perfect  example  which  they  are  unable  to 
follow. 

The  blood  of  Abel  said  this,  too — that  he  was  not  ashamed  of  his 
faith,  but  witnessed  a  good  confession  concerning  his  (rod,  even  to  the 
death ;  he  put  his  life  in  his  hand,  and  was  not  ashamed  to  stand  at  the 
altar  of  God,  and  avow  his  faith  by  obediently  offering  the  ordained 
sacrifice.  Now,  I  grant  you  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  also  declares  that 
he  was  a  faithful  and  true  witness,  who  willingly  sealed  his  witness  with 
his  blood.  He  proved  by  shedding  his  blood  that  he  could  not  be  turued 
aside  from  truth  and  righteousness,  even  though  death  stood  in  his  way ; 
but  if  that  is  all  that  the  blood  of  sprinkling  speaketh,  it  saith  no  better 
things  than  the  blood  of  Abel.  "  Be  faithful  unto  death,"  is  the  voice 
of  x\bel  as  well  as  of  Jesus.  Jesus  must  have  said  more  than  this  by 
his  bluod-shedding. 

The  blood  of  Abel  said  good  things ;  that  is  implied  in  the  fact  that 
the  bluod  of  Jesus  Christ  says  better  things ;  and  no  doubt  the  blood 
of  Abel  rises  to  the  dignity  of  teaching  self-sacrifice.  Here  was  a  man, 
a  keeper  of  sheep,  whu  by  his  mode  of  life  laid  out  his  life  for  the  good 
of  those  committed  to  his  charge  ;  and  at  the  last,  in  obedience  to  God, 
he  yielded  himself  up  to  die  by  a  brother's  hand.  It  was  the  first 
draught  of  a  picture  of  self-sacrihce.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  also  made 
a  complete  self-sacrifice.  All  his  life  long  he  gave  himself  to  men.  He 
lived  never  for  himself.  The  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men  were 
united  in  one  passion  which  filled  his  whole  souL  He  could  say,  "  The 
real  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up."  His  death  was  the  completion 
of  his  perfect  self-sacrifice.  But  if  that  were  all,  the  blood  of  Jesus 
saith  no  better  thing  than  Abel's  death  saith,  though  it  may  say  it  more 
emphatically. 

Our  Lord's  blood  saith  "better  things  than  that  of  Abel"  ;  and  what 
doth  it,  say  ?  It  saith,  "  There  is  redemption  through  his  blood,  the 
forgiveness  of  sins  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace."  "  He  his  own 
self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  that  we  being  dead  to  sins 
should  live  unto  righteousness :  by  whose  stripes  we  were  healed."  "  He 
hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might  be 
made  the  righteotisness  of  God  in  him."  The  voice  of  the  blood  is  this, 
"  For  I  will  be  merciful  to  their  unrighteousness,  and  their  sins  and  their 
iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Now,  my  brethren,  these  are  better 
things  than  Abel's  blood  could  say,  and  they  are  what  the  blood  of 
Jesus  spedks  to  every  one  upon  whom  it  is  sprinkled  by  faith.  It  must 
be  applied  to  each  one  of  us  by  faith,  or  it  says  nothing  to  us.  But  when 
it  falls  on  each  believing  individual,  it  saith  to  him  words  of  blessing 
which  pacify  his  conscience  and  delight  his  soul. 


462  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

The  apostle  says  that  "  Ye  are  come  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling."  Is 
it  so  ?  Has  that  blood  of  sprinkling  ever  been  applied  to  you  ?  Do 
you  feel  it  ?  Are  you  preserved  ?  Are  you  cleansed  ?  Are  you 
brought  nigh  to  God  ?  Are  you  sanctified  unto  God's  service  by  the 
atoning  sacrifice  ?  If  so,  then  go  you  out,  and  in  firm  confidence  that 
never  can  be  shaken,  make  your  glory  in  the  blood  of  sprinkling.  Tell 
every  sinner  whom  you  meet  that  if  the  Lord  Jesus  wash  him  he  shall 
be  whiter  than  snow.  Preach  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Lamb  of  God, 
and  then  sing  of  it.  Recollect  that  wondrous  threefold  song  in  the 
fifth  chapter  of  the  Revelation,  where,  first  of  all,  the  elders  and  Hving 
creatures  round  about  the  throne,  sing  a  new  song,  saying,  "  Thou  wast 
slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kin- 
dred, and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation."  Then  ten  thousand  times 
ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of  thousands  of  angels  take  up  the  strain 
and  cry,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain."  Nor  is  this  all  ; 
for  the  apostle  tells  us,  "Every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and 
on  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,  and 
all  that  are  in  them,  heard  I  saying,  Blessing,  and  honour,  and 
glory,  and  power,  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throue,  an  1  unto 
the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever."  See  you  not  that  they  all  extol  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  his  sacrificial  character  as  the  Lamb  slain?  I  have  scant 
patience  with  those  who  dare  to  put  this  great  truth  into  the  background, 
and  even  sneer  at  it  or  misrepresent  it  of  set  purpose.  Sirs,  if  you 
would  be  saved  you  must  have  the  blood  of  Jesns  sprinkled  upon  you. 
He  that  believeth  not  in  Christ  Jesus,  in  Jesus  the  atoning  sacrifice,  must 
perish.  The  eternal  God  must  repulse  with  infinite  disgust  the  man 
who  refuses  the  loving  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  Inasmuch  as  he  counted 
himself  unworthy  of  this  wondrous  sacrifice,  this  marvellous  expiation, 
there  remaineth  no  other  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  nothing  for  him  but  that 
eternal  blackness  and  darkness  and  thunder  which  were  foreshadowed 
at  Sinai.  Those  who  refuse  the  atonement  which  wisdom  devised, 
which  love  provided,  and  which  justice  has  accepted,  have  signed  their 
own  death-warrant,  and  none  can  wonder  that  they  perish.  The  Lord 
lead  us  to  glory  in  Christ  crucified.    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Exodus  xx.  1 — 21 ; 

xxiv.  1 — 8. 


Hymns  fkom  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 236,  279,  291. 


PROCLAMATION   OF  ACCEPTANCE  AND  VENGEANCE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  August  12th,  1877,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,  and  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our 
God;  to  comfort  all  that  mourn." — Isaiah  Ixi.  2. 

We  know  that  this  Scripture  speaks  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
We  say  not  this  as  if  we  rehed  upon  our  own  opinion,  we  know  it  of 
a  surety  from  the  Lord's  o^ai  Kps,  for,  reading  this  passage  in  the  syna- 
gogue at  Nazareth,  he  said,  "  This  day  is  this  Scripture  fulfilled  in  your 
ears."  It  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth  whom  the  Lord  hath  anointed  to  preach 
deliverance  to  the  captives  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  and 
our  text  tells  us  that  he  was  also  sent  to  make  a  proclamation  which 
should  usher  in  the  year  of  acceptance  and  the  day  of  vengeance. 

Notice  well  the  expression,  to  proclaim,  because  a  proclamation  is  the 
message  of  a  king,  and  where  the  word  of  a  king  is  there  is  power.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  announce  the  will  of  the  King 
of  kings.  He  saith,  "  I  am  come  in  my  Father's  name,"  and  again, 
"  My  doctrine  is  not  mine,  but  his  that  sent  me."  Every  word  of  the 
gospel  is  backed  by  the  authority  of  "  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  in- 
visible," and  he  who  rejects  it  is  guilty  of  treason  against  Jehovah,  God 
of  all.  The  gospel  is  not  of  the  nature  of  a  commonplace  invitation  or 
human  exhortation,  which  may  be  accepted  or  refused  at  will  without  in- 
volving guilt;  but  it  is  a  divine  proclamation,  issued  from  the  throne  of 
the  Eternal,  which  none  can  reject  without  becoming  thereby  rebels 
against  the  Infinite  Majesty.  Now  if  it  be  so,  let  us  give  the  divine 
edict  our  most  earnest  attention,  and  take  heed  what  we  hear.  When  a 
proclamation  is  issued  by  the  head  of  a  state,  all  good  citizens  gather 
around  to  read  what  has  been  said  to  tbem,  and  to  know  what  the  su- 
preme law  may  be:  and  so,  when  God  proclaims  his  will,  all  right- 
hearted  men  desire  to  know  what  it  is,  and  what  bearing  it  has  upon 
them,  what  the  Lord  demandeth  or  what  the  Lord  promiseth,  and  what 
is  their  share  therein.  Beloved  hearers,  listening  to  the  gospel  ^^  "*• 
always  be  very  solemn  work,  since  it  is  listening  to  tb^  "  20 
No.  1,369. 


^64  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Though  the  voice  is  that  of  man  yet  the  truth  is  of  God ;  I  pray  you  do 
not  trifle  with  it. 

Nor  let  it  be  forgotten  that  a  proclamation  must  be  treated  with  pro- 
found respect,  not  merely  by  receiving  attention  to  its  contents,  but  by 
gaining  obedience  to  its  demands.  God  does  not  speak  to  us  by  his 
Sen  that  we  may  be  gratified  by  hearing  the  sound  of  his  voice,  but  that 
we  may  yield  to  his  wiU.  "We  are  not  to  be  hearers  only,  but  doers  of 
the  word.  We  should  be  quick  in  obedience  to  the  command  of  the 
proclamation,  swift  in  acceptance  of  its  promise,  and  cheerftd  in  sub- 
mission to  its  demand.  "Who  shall  resist  the  proclamations  of  Jehovah  ? 
Is  he  not  our  Creator  and  King  ?  Who  is  stubborn  enough  to  refuse 
obedience?  Or  who  hath  brazen  face  enough  to  dispute  his  sway? 
Shall  not  he  who  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  shaketh  them  when  he 
pleaseth,  and  will  destroy  them  at  his  pleasure,  be  regarded  with  reve- 
rential awe  by  the  creatures  of  his  hand  ?  0  Son  of  God,  since  it  is  a 
divine  proclamation  which  thou  dost  publish,  send  forth  thy  Holy  Spirit 
that  we  may  receive  it  with  deepest  reverence  and  lowHest  obedience, 
lest,  through  our  neglect,  we  do  despite  to  thee  as  weU  as  to  thy  Father. 
When  a  proclamation  is  not  made  by  an  ordinary  herald,  but  when  the 
Prince  himself  comes  forth  to  declare  his  Father's  will,  then  should  aU 
hearts  be  moved  to  sevenfold  attention.  It  is  the  Son  of  God,  anointed 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  wiio  acts  as  herald  unto  us,  and  so  by  each  Person 
of  the  divine  Trinity  we  are  called  upon  to  bow  a  listening  ear  and  an 
obedient  heai-t  to  what  the  Lord  proclaims.  Attention,  then!  The 
I'.Iesscnger  of  the  Covenant  makes  proclamation!  Attention  for  the 
King  of  kings  I 

AV^ith  this  as  a  preface,  let  me  notice,  that  there  are  three  points  in  the 
proclamation  worthy  of  oiu*  best  attention:  the  first  is  the  acceptable 
year ;  the  next,  the  vengeance  day ;  and  the  third,  the  comfort  derived 
from  loth, — "  to  comfort  all  that  mourn," 

I.  Jesus,  in  the  first  place,  proclaims  the  acceptable  year  of  the 
Lord.  Take  the  expression  to  pieces  and  it  comes  to  this, — the  year  of 
the  Lord,  and  the  year  of  acceptance. 

Now,  what  was  the  year  of  t/is  Lord?  There  can  be,  I  think,  very 
little  question  that  this  relates  to  the  jubilee  year.  Every  seventh  year 
was  the  Lord's  year,  and  it  was  to  be  a  sabbath  of  rest  to  the  land ;  but 
the  seventh  seventh  year,  the  fiftieth  year,  which  the  Lord  reserved  unto 
himself,  was  in  a  very  marked  and  especial  sense  the  year  of  the  Lord. 
Now,  our  Lord  Jesus  has  come  to  proclaim  a  period  of  jubilee  to  the 
true  seed  of  Israel.  The  seed  of  Abraham  now  are  not  the  seed  accord- 
ing to  the  law,  but  those  who  are  born  after  the  promise.  There  are 
privileges  reserved  for  Israel  after  the  flesh,  which  they  will  yet  receive 
in  the  day  when  they  shall  acknowledge  Christ  to  be  the  Messiah ;  bst 
•very  gi-eat  blessing  which  was  promised  to  Abraham's  seed  after  the 
flesh  is  now  virtually  promised  to  Israel  after  the  Spirit,  to  those  who  by 
faith  are  the  children  of  believing  Abraham. 

Now,  beloved,  to  all  who  beUeve,  our  Lord  Jesus  proclaims  a  year  of 
jubilee.  Let  us  dwell  upon  the  four  privileges  of  the  jubilee,  and  accept 
with  deUght  the  proclamation  which  our  Lord  has  made. 

In  the  year  of  jubilee,  as  w^e  read  in  the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  Levi- 
ticus, there  was  a  release  of  all  persons  who  had  sold  themselves   for 


PROCLAMATION   OF   ACCEPTANCE    AND   VENGEANCE. 


465 


servants.  Pinched  by  great  poverty,  and  unable  to  meet  their  debts,  it 
sometimes  happened  that  men  were  compelled  to  say  to  their  creditor, 
"  Take  us  and  our  wives  and  children,  and  accept  our  services  instead 
of  money.  We  have  no  goods  or  chattels,  and  our  land  has  been  mort- 
gaged long  ago,  but  here  we  are ;  we  cannot  pay  in  any  other  way,— 
give  us  food  and  raiment  and  lodging,  and  we  will  put  ourselves  under 
apprenticeship  to  you."  The  law  of  Moses  ordained  that  such  persons 
were  not  to  be  treated  harshly,  nor  regarded  as  slaves,  but  as  hired 
servants,  but  still  it  must  have  been  an  unpleasant  condition  of  servifeude 
for  a  freebom  Israelite.  How  happy  then  was  the  morning  when  the 
jubilee  trumpet  sounded,  and  the  generous  law  came  into  operation  which 
said,  "  He  shall  serve  thee  unto  the  year  of  jubilee,  but  then  shall  he 
depai't  from  thee,  both  he  and  his  children  with  him."  From  that 
moment  he  owed  no  more  ser-vice,  however  great  his  debt  might  have 
been ;  he  looked  upon  his  wife  and  cliildren  and  rejoiced  that  they  were 
all  his  own  and  all  free  from  the  yoke,  so  that  they  could  at  once  return 
to  the  possession  of  their  fathers,  all  live  in  the  cottage  in  which  they 
formerly  dwelt,  and  enjoy  the  piece  of  land  which  they  had  formerly 
called  their  own.  Liberty,  that  gladsome  sound,  liberty  had  come  to 
them;  no  matter  that  they  had  long  been  under  obligations  to  the 
ci'editor,  those  obligations  ceased  on  the  sound  of  the  sacred  trumpet. 
Beloved  souls  now  present,  proclamation  is  made  to  you  in  the  Lord's 
name  that  if  you  are  under  bondage  to  sin  and  to  sinfal  habits,  there  is 
liberty  for  you ;  faith  in  Jesus  will  set  you  fi-ee.  If  you  are  in  bondage 
under  justice  and  the  broken  law  there  is  deliverance.  If  you  are  under 
bondage  through  fear  of  death,  or  from  the  rage  of  Satan,  our  divine 
Lord  and  Master  has  come  into  the  world  on  pui-pose  to  break  these 
bonds  in  sunder,  and  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives.  Ye  need  be 
bound  no  longer ;  if  ye  believe  in  Jesus  ye  are  bound  no  longer,  but  ye 
are  set  free  from  all  the  bondage  of  the  law,  from  the  slavery  of  Satan 
and  from  the  dread  of  death.  Take  the  liberty  which  the  great  Lord 
freely  presents  to  you,  and  be  no  longer  slaves.  Jesus  has  brought  in 
redemption  and  finished  atonement,  and  behevers  are  free ;  come  and 
rejijice  therein. 

The  next  jubilee  blessing  was  the  redemption  of  alhtiated  possessions. 
E\'ery  man  had  his  own  plot  of  ground  in  the  Holy  Land,  but  through 
the  pressure  of  the  times  it  sometimes  happened  that  a  man  aUenated  his 
property :  he  was  in  need  of  ready  money,  his  children  wanted  bread  to 
eat,  and  he,  therefore,  parted  with  his  land.  It  was  gone :  the  vines  and 
the  figtrees,  the  corn  and  the  oU,  passed  over  to  another ;  but  it  was  not 
gone  fur  ever,  he  had  no  power  to  sell  beyond  the  year  of  jubilee.  When 
the  joyful  morning  dawned  he  went  back  to  his  family  estate ;  it  was  all 
his  own  again,  clear  of  all  encumbrances ;  the  little  homestead,  and  the 
farmyard,  and  the  fields,  and  the  garden,  aU  had  come  back  to  him, 
and  none  could  dispute  his  right.  Just  so  my  Lord  and  Master  declares 
to  all  who  believe  in  him  that  the  estate  which  Adam  forfeited  is  restored 
to  all  for  whom  the  Second  Adam  died.  The  alienated  heritage  is  our 
own  again.  The  great  Father's  love,  and  favour,  and  care,  yea,  all 
things,  ^\'hether  things  present  or  things  to  come,  or  life  or  death,  all  are 
©urs,  and  we  are  Christ's  and  Christ  is  God's.  If  we  are  believers,  and 
are  of  the  true  seed  of  Israel,  this  day  the  Lord  Jesus  proclauns  to  us  a 
2g 


466  METROPOLITAN   TABKUNAUbiO   PULPIT. 

restoration  of  all  the  lost  privileges  and  blessings  which  originallj  belonged 
to  manhood.  Behold,  beUevers,  all  covenant  blessings  are  yours,  rejoice 
in  them !  Partake  of  heavenly  blessings  freely.  Let  your  soul  rejoice 
in  ifes  portion,  and  dehght  itself  in  fatness. 

It  followed,  also,  as  a  tliird  blessing  of  the  year  of  the  Lord  that  all 
debts  were  discharged.  The  man  who  had  sold  himself  had,  as  it  were, 
made  a  composition  of  his  debts  by  the  sale  of  himself,  and  this  implied 
a  full  and  final  discharge  at  the  jubilee.  The  person  also  who  had  mort- 
gaged his  land  up  to  the  jubilee  year  had  discharged  his  debts  thereby, 
and  when  the  man  received  back  himself  and  his  property,  no  further 
habihty  rested  upon  him,  he  was  cleared  of  all  charges.  The  jubilee  did 
not  give  the  man  back  himself  and  his  land  under  a  reserve,  but  unre- 
servedly. If  debt  had  still  been  due  the  release  would  have  been  a  mere 
farce,  since  he  would  have  had  to  mortgage  his  land  and  sell  himself  again 
directly  to  meet  the  demand.  No,  there  was  a  full  discharge,  a  cancelling 
of  all  debts,  a  removal  of  all  incumbrances  upon  the  man  and  upon  his 
estate,  and  he  was  free.  What  a  joy  this  must  have  been !  He  who  is 
in  debt  is  in  danger  ;  a  honest  man  sleeps  on  a  hard  bed  till  he  has  paid 
what  he  owes.  He  who  is  immersed  in  debt  is  plunged  in  misery,  driven 
to  his  wits'  end,  not  knowing  what  to  do.  Happy  is  he  that  is  delivered 
from  debt  once  for  all.  Now  behold,  0  believers  in  Jesus,  your  debts 
before  the  Lord  are  all  discharged,  the  handwriting  that  was  against 
you  is  nailed  to  the  cross,  receipted  in  the  crimson  lines  of  Jesus' 
precious  blood.  Being  justified  by  faith  ye  are  clear  before  the  siglit 
of  the  Eternal;  none  can  lay  anything  to  your  charge.  What  joyfi;l 
iiotes  are  these !  Jesus  makes  the  proclamation,  who  will  not  believe  it 
and  be  glad. 

A  fourth  blessing  of  the  jubilee  trumpet  was  rest.  They  had  their 
/ands,  but  they  were  not  to  till  them  for  a  year.  No  more  the  sjjade 
and  the  plough,  the  sickle  and  the  flail, — they  were  to  put  away  instru- 
ments of  labour,  and  rest  for  twelve  months.  Think  of  a  whole  year  of 
perfect  repose,  wherein  they  might  worship  and  adore  God  all  the  week 
round,  make  every  day  a  holy  festival,  and  the  whole  year  a  Sabbath  of 
Sabbatlis  unto  the  Most  High.  Brethren,  the  Israelites  had  no  small 
priviliBges  under  the  ceremonial  covenant,  if  they  had  lived  up  to  it,  but 
they  failed  to  do  so,  for  it  has  sometimes  been  questioned  whether  they 
ever  kept  a  jubilee  at  all,  and  whether  the  Sabbatic  year  was  ever  once 
observed.  If  they  had  obeyed  the  Lord  they  ^^•ould  have  been  favoured 
indeed :  for  in  the  matter  of  holidays  and  quiet  resting  times  they  were 
favoured  above  all  people.  Think  of  one  year  in  seven  of  absolute 
cessation  from  toil.  What  repose  for  them !  And  then  they  had  also  the 
year  after  the  seventh  seven,  so  that  every  man  who  reached  the  fiftieth 
year  enjoyed  two  consecutive  years  of  absolute  rest  from  all  labour,  and 
yet  knew  no  want,  for  the  ground  brought  forth  plentifully,  and  every 
man  helped  himself.  Those  who  had  land  had  a  good  store  to  last  them 
through  three  years,  and  those  who  had  none  were  fed  by  the  spontaneous 
produce  of  the  soil.  We  Hve  not  under  such  laws,  and  if  we  did  I  am 
afraid  we  should  not  have  the  faith  to  trust  in  the  Lord  and  avail  our- 
selves of  the  divinely  appointed  holiday.  But,  beloved,  we  rest  spiritually. 
He  that  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Clu-ist  has  entered  into  rest.  Now 
no  more  does  he  strive  to  work  out  a  righteousness  of  his  own,  for 


PROCLAMATIOxV    OF   ACCEPTANCE   AND    VENGEANCE.  407 

he  has  already  a  divine  one,  and  needs  no  other.  It  is  his  pleasure  to 
worship  God,  but  he  no  longer  trembles  beneath  his  wrath ;  it  is  hia 
delight  to  do  his  comniandments,  but  he  toils  and  frets  no  longer  as  a 
slave  under  the  law  ;  he  has  become  a  free  man,  and  a  beloved  child,  and 
the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding  keeps  his  heart  and 
mind.  Being  justified  by  faith  he  has  peace  with  God,  and  enjoys  the 
influences  of  the  divine  Comforter  whose  indweUing  gives  rest  to  the  soul. 

The  jubilee  year,  according  to  our  text,  was  called  "  the  year  of  the 
Lord; "  and  the  reason  for  all  the  four  jubilee  blessings  was  found  in  the 
Lord.  First,  the  servants  were  set  free  because  God  said  "  they  are  my 
servants,  which  I  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  (Lev.  xxv.  42). 
Ah,  poor  burdened  soul,  if  thou  believest  in  Christ  thou  shalt  go  free,  for 
thou  art  the  Lord's  own — his  chosen,  his  redeemed,  and  therefore  he 
claims  thee,  and  will  suffer  no  other  lord  to  have  dominion  over  thee. 
The  devil  seeks  to  lay  an  embargo  upon  thee,  and  hold  thee  a  slave, 
but  Jesus  saith,  "  Let  go  my  captives,  for  I  have  redeemed  them  with  my 
blood."  Jesus  claims  you,  0  penitent  souls ;  he  cries  to  sin  as  once  the 
Lord  said  to  Pharaoh,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  my  people  go."  Jesus 
says  of  each  repenting  soul,  "Loose  him  and  let  him  go,  for  he  is  mine. 
My  Father  gave  him  to  me — he  is  my  chosen,  my  beloved.  Neither  sin 
nor  Satan,  nor  death  nor  hell,  shall  hold  him,  for  he  is  mine." 

The  land  also  was  set  free  for  this  same  reason,  for  concerning  it  the 
Lord  said,  "  The  land  is  mine  "  (Lev.  xxv.  23).  The  freehold  of  the 
land  was  vested  in  Jehovah  himself,  consequently  he  ordained  that  no 
man  should  hold  any  portion  of  it  by  right  of  purchase  beyond  the 
fiftieth  year,  for  the  land  was  entailed  and  must  go  back  to  those  for 
whom  he  had  appointed  it  at  the  jubilee  year.  So  the  blessings  of  the 
everlasting  covenant  are  God's,  and  therefore  he  appoints  them  unto  you 
poor  believing  simiers,  and  you  shall  have  them,  for  the  divine  decree 
shall  not  be  frustrated.  As  surely  as  he  appointed  Christ  to  reign, 
and  placed  him  on  the  throne,  so  does  he  appoint  you  to  reign  with  him, 
and  you  shall  sit  upon  his  throne  though  all  the  devils  in  hell  should 
say  you  nay. 

So,  too,  the  debts  were  all  discharged,  because  on  the  day  befure  the 
jubilee  the  great  atonement  had  swept  away  all  transgression  and  in- 
debtedness towards  God,  and  he  would  have  his  people  forgive  all  the 
debts  of  their  fellow  men.  All  things  are  the  Lord's,  and  he  exercised 
his  crown  rights  on  the  day  of  jubilee  so  far  as  to  declare  all  debts  dis- 
charged. "The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fuhiess  thereof"  was  the 
motto  of  the  jubilee,  and  sufficient  reason  for  the  cancelling  of  obhga- 
tions  between  man  and  man. 

As  for  rest,  that  came  also,  because  it  was  God's  year,  and  was  hallowed 
unto  the  Lord.  "  A  jubilee  shall  the  fiftieth  year  be  unto  you :  ye 
shall  not  sow,  neither  reap  that  which  groweth  of  itself  in  it,  nor  gather 
the  grapes  in  it  of  thy  vine  undressed.  For  it  is  the  j  ubilee ;  it  shall  be 
holy  unto  you  :  ye  shall  eat  the  increase  thereof  out  of  the  field."  During 
man's  years  the  earth  brings  forth  thorns  and  thistles,  and  man  must 
earn  his  bread  with  the  sweat  of  his  face ;  but  when  God's  year  conies 
then  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  are  glad,  and  the  desert  re- 
joices and  blossoms  as  the  rose.  When  the  Lord's  owti  kingdom  comoth 
thea  shall  the  earth  yield  her  increase  as  she  has  never  done  before.    My 


468  METROPOLITAN   TABERKACLE   PULPIT. 

beioved,  I  bi'iist  you  know  the  blessedness  of  living  in  God's  year,  for 
you  live  by  faith  upon  his  providence,  casting  all  your  care  upon  him, 
for  he  careth  for  you.  This  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  soul,  the  counterpart 
of  heaven.  You  behold  the  work  of  atonement  ftiUy  accomphshed  on 
your  behalf,  and  know  yourselves  to  be  delivered  from  all  your  liabilities 
to  the  law,  and  tlierefore  your  heart  leaps  within  you.  You  are  clean 
delivered,  set  free,  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  therefore  do  you 
come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  your  heads. 

But  the  text  speaks  also  of  the  "  acceptable  year  of  the  LordP  Now, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  come  to  proclaim  to  sinners  the  Lord's  accept- 
ance of  guilty  men  through  his  great  sacrifice.  Apart  from  the  work  of 
our  Lord  Jesus,  men  as  sinners  are  unacceptable  to  God.  Some  of  you 
know  the  misery  of  being  in  that  condition ;  it  is  horrible  to  feel  that  the 
Lord  is  weary  of  you  and  your  vain  oblations.  Since  you  have  come  in 
your  own  name  and  righteousness,  God  has  not  accepted  you,  neither  has  he 
heard  your  prayers  nor  listened  to  your  cries,  nor  had  respect  unto  your 
/ 1  religious  observances,  for  he  saith,  "  Yea,  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  I 
\  will  not  hear."  If  the  Spirit  of  God  has  convinced  you  of  your  natural 
'  unacceptableness  with  God,  you  must  have  been  brought  into  a  very  sad 
state  indeed  ;  for  not  to  be  accepted  of  God,  and  to  be  aware  of  it,  is 
cause  for  intense  sorrow.  But  now  be  sure,  thou  that  believest  in  Jesns, 
titiat  thou  art  accepted  of  God  :  notwithstanding  thine  infirmities  and  sins 
thou  art  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  by  him  who  hath  said,  "  I  wall  accept 
yott  with  your  sweet  savour."  And  now,  being  thus  accepted  as  to  yoiu-  per- 
sons, your  petitions  shall  come  up  with  acceptance  before  the  Lord.  As 
for  your  prayers,  God  heareth  them  ;  as  for  your  tears,  he  putteth  them 
into  his  bottle  ;  as  for  your  works,  he  counteth  them  to  be  fruits  of  his 
Spirit  and  accepts  them.  Yea,  now  that  thou  art  accepted  in  Christ,  all 
that  thou  art  and  aU  that  thou  hast,  and  all  thou  dost, — the  whole  of 
thee  is  acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Thrice  happy  am  I  to  have  to  talk  upon  such  a  subject  as  this.  Come 
ye  who  are  willing  now  to  believe  in  Jesus,  this  is  the  acceptable  year 
of  the  Lord  ;  God  is  reconciled,  man  is  favoured,  blessings  abound.  Now 
is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation.  Let  sin  be  confessed 
and  the  confession  shall  be  accepted,  and  you  shall  find  forgiveness.  Let 
transgression  be  repented  of,  the  repentance  shall  be  accepted,  and  you 
shall  hear  a  voice  saying, "  Go  and  sin  no  more ;  thy  sins,  which  are  many, 
are  forgiven  thee."  Hail !  thou  that  art  graciously  accepted,  blessed  art 
\  thou  among  women  !  And  thou  too,  my  brother,  remember  the  words  of 
•  Solomon,  "  Go  thy  way,  eat  thy  bread  with  joy,  and  drink  thy  wine  with 
'  a  merry  heart ;  for  God  now  accepteth  thy  works."  (Eccl.  ix.  7.)  Come 
to  Jesus  by  faith,  for  though  you  come  with  a  limping  walk,  and  your 
faith  is  feeble,  yet  shall  you  be  accepted.  Come  ye  who  have  broken 
hearts  and  sorrowing  spirits,  come  ye  that  are  downcast  and  dare  not 
look  up,  this  is  no  conunon  time,  the  Lord  Jesus  has  made  it  a  red  letter 
year  for  you  ;  for  he  proclaims  a  year  of  grace  and  acceptance.  Behold 
in  this  anno  Domini,  or  year  of  our  Lord,  we  have  a  choice  year  of  grace 
set  apart  for  us.  Who  will  not  come  to  our  gracious  Prince,  accept  his 
mercy,  and  lire  ? 

Thus  you  see  we  get  a  double  meaning  from  the  text — the  year  of 
jubilee  with  all  its  accimiulated  privileges  of  ft'ee  grace,  and  the  year  of 


PEOCLAMATION    OF  ACCEPTANCE    AND   VENGEANCK.  469 

acceptance  in  which  whosoever  will  may  come,  and  God  will  accept  him 
if  he  Cometh  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  trusting  alone  in  the  atoning  l)lood. 

II.  May  the  Lord  help  us  while  we  speak  upon  the  second  part  of  the 
text :  the  "day  of  vengeance  of  our  god."  Does  not  the  sound  of 
vengeance  grate  upon  your  ear  ?  Does  it  not  seem  discordant  to  the 
sweet  tenour  of  the  passage  ?  Vengeance  !  Shall  that  happen  side  by 
side  -with  acceptance  ?  Yes,  beloved,  this  is  the  mysteiy  of  the  gospel ; 
the  system  of  redemption  marries  justice  and  mercy  ;  the  method  of 
suretiship  unites  severity  and  grace  ;  the  economy  of  substitution  blends 
acceptance  and  vengeance.  This  gospel  mystery  is  to  be  published 
to  every  creature  under  heaven,  for  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
to  every  one  that  believeth.    We  sweetly  sang  just  now  : 

•*  Here  I  behold  his  inmost  heart, 

Where  gnioe  and  vengeance  strangely  join, 
Piercing  his  Son  wilh  sliai'pest  smart, 
To  make  the  purcliased  pleasure  mine." 

Now  behold  in  this  text  you  have  the  heart  of  God  laid  bare,  for  you 
have  the  year  of  acceptance  coupled  with  the  day  of  vengeance.  Let  us 
explain  this  strange  commingling,  and  at  the  same  time  expound  the 
text. 

In  the  first  place,  whenever  there  is  a  day  of  mercy  to  those  who  be- 
lieve, it  is  always  a  day  of  responsil)ility  to  those  who  reject  it,  and  if 
they  continue  in  that  state  it  is  a  daij  of  increased  ivrnfh  io  unbelievers. 
It  is  not  possible  for  the  gospel  to  be  without  some  efil'ct.  If  it  be  a 
savour  of  life  unto  life  to  those  who  receive  it,  it  must  of  necessity  from 
its  own  intrinsic  vigour  be  a  savour  of  death  unto  death  to  those  who 
reject  it.  To  this  sword  there  are  two  edges — one  will  kill  our  fears,  or 
the  other  will  surely  kill  our  pride  and  destroy  our  vain  hopes  if  we  yield 
not  to  Christ.  You  may,  perhaps,  have  noticed  that  when  our  Ijord  read 
this  passage  at  Nazareth,  he  stopped  short,  he  did  not  read  it  all ;  he  read 
as  far  down  as,  "  to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,"  and  then 
he  closed  the  book  and  gave  it  to  the  minister  and  sat  down.  I  suppose 
that  at  the  commencement  of  his  ministry,  before  he  had  been  rejected 
by  the  nation,  and  before  he  had  suffered  for  sin,  he  wisely  chose  to  allude 
to  the  gentler  topics  rather  than  to  those  more  stern  and  terrible  ones ; 
but  he  did  not  conclude  his  ministry  without  referring  to  the  stern 
words  which  followed  those  which  he  had  read.  If  you  will  turn  to 
Luke's  twenty-first  chapter  you  will  find  him  saying  in  the  twenty-first 
and  twenty-second  verses,  '*  Then  let  them  which  are  in  Judea  flee  to  the 
mountains  ;  and  let  them  which  are  in  the  midst  of  it  depart  out ;  and 
let  not  them  that  are  in  the  countries  enter  thereinto.  For  these  be  the 
days  of  vengeance,  that  all  things  which  are  written  may  be  fulfilled." 
You  know  the  story  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  the  most  harrowing  of 
all  naiTatives,  for  the  anger  of  God  was  concentrated  upon  that  wicked 
city  beyond  aU  precedent.  It  was  because  they  rejected  Christ  that 
vengeance  came  upon  them.  They  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity 
when  at  last  they  disowned  their  king  and  cried  out,  "  Away  with  him, 
away  with  him,  let  him  be  crucified."  Mark  you  then,  dear  hearer,  that 
if  you  have  heard  the  gospel  and  rejected  it,  you  have  incurred  great 
guilt,  and  you  can  never  sin  so  cheaply  as  you  did  1  eA)re  ;  for  you  there 


'^t\J  MKTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PUl.PIT. 

will  be  a  day  of  vengeance  above  the  men  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha, 
because  you  have  perpetrated  a  crime  A\hich  they  were  not  capable  of 
committing — you  have  rejected  the  Christ  of  God.  The  year  of  accept- 
ance to  believers  will  be  a  day  of  vengeance  to  those  who  obey  not  his 
gospel. 

Another  meaning  of  the  text  comes  out  in  the  fact  that  tfiere  is  ajy- 
pointcd  a  day  of  vengeance,  for  all  the  enemies  of  Christ,  and  this  will 
happen  in  that  bright  future  day  for  which  we  are  looking.  Not  merely 
for  rejecters  of  his  gospel  will  there  be  vengeance,  but  for  all  men  and 
fiillen  spirits  who  dare  to  oppose  his  sway.  Behold  he  comes  a  second 
time  ;  every  winged  hour  hastens  his  advent,  and  when  he  comes  it  will 
be  a  great  and  a  dreadful  day  to  his  foes.  It  will  be  to  his  saints  the  day 
of  their  revelation,  manifestation,  and  acceptance,  but  to  the  ung(tdly 
"  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God."  "  Enoch,  the  seventh  from 
Adam,  prophesied  of  these,  saying,  Behold,  the  Lord  cometh  with  ten 
thousands  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to  convince 
all  that  are  ungodly  among  them  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they 
have  ungodly  committed,  and  of  all  their  hard  speeches  which  ungodly 
sinners  have  spoken  against  him."  Paul  also  bears  ^^ntness  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  be  revealed  fi-om  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels,  "  In  flaming 
fire  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist :  who  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting 
destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his 
power;  when  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be 
admired  in  all  them  that  believe."  Note  the  vengeance  and  the  grace 
•combined.  The  prophet  Isaiah  saw  our  great  champion  returning  from 
his  last  fight,  and  thus  spake  concerning  him  :  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh 
from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah?  this  that  is  glorious 
in  his  apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength  ?  I  that 
speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save.  Wherefore  art  thou  red  in 
thine  apparel,  and  thy  garments  like  him  that  treadeth  in  the  winefat  ? 
I  have  trodden  the  winepress  alone ;  and  of  the  people  there  was 
none  with  me  :  for  I  will  tread  them  in  mine  anger,  and  tramj^-le  them 
in  my  fury  ;  and  their  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my  garments, 
and  I  will  stain  all  my  raiment.  For  the  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine 
heart,  and  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come."  Observe,  again,  the 
connection  between  the  day  of  vengeance  and  the  year  of  the  redeemed. 
At  the  second  advent  Christ  will  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints, 
and  they  shall  be  manifested  in  the  fulness  cf  their  acceptance,  but 
it  will  be  an  overwhelming  day  of  vengeance  for  all  those  who  have 
hardened  their  hearts  and  continued  in  their  sins.  "  Behold,  the  day 
cometh,  that  shall  bum  as  an  oven  ;  and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that 
do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble  :  and  the  day  that  cometh  shall  bum  them 
up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch." 

However,  I  consider  that  the  chief  meaning  of  the  text  lies  in  this — 
that  "the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God"  was  that  day  irhen  he  made  all 
the  transgressions  of  his  people  to  meet  vpon  the  head  of  our  great  Surely. 
Sin  with  many  streams  had  been  flowing  down  the  hills  of  time  and 
forming  by  their  dread  accumulation  one  vast  and  fathomless  lake.  Int© 
this  the  sinner's  substitute  must  be  plunged.     He  had  a  baptism  to  be 


PROCLAMATION   OF   ACCEPTANCE   AND   VENGEANCE. 


471 


baptized  with  and  he  must  endure  it,  or  all  his  chosen  must  perish  for 
ever.  That  was  a  day  of  vengeance  when  all  the  waves  and  billows  ©f 
divine  wrath  went  OAor  his  innocent  head. 

"  Came  at  length  tlie  dreadful  night  ; 
Vengeance  with  its  iron  rod 
Stood,  and  with  collected  might 

Bruised  the  harmless  Lamb  of  God, 
See,  my  soul,  thy  Saviour  see, 
Prostrate  in  Gethsemane  !" 

From  his  blessed  person  there  distilled  a  bloody  sweat,  for  his  soul  was 
exceedingly  sorrowful  even  unto  death.  All  through  the  night  with 
scourgings  and  buffetings  and  spittings  of  cruel  men,  he  was  tortured 
and  abused ;  he  was  rejected,  despised,  maltreated,  and  pierced  in  his  in- 
most soul  by  man's  scorn  and  cruelty.  Then  in  the  morning  he  was 
taken  out  to  be  crucified,  for  nothing  could  suffice  short  of  his  death. 
The  outward  sorrows  of  crucifixion  ye  know,  but  the  inward  griefs  ye  do 
not  know,  for  what  our  Lord  endured  was  beyond  what  any  mortal 
man  could  have  b(jrne.  The  infinity  of  the  Godhead  aided  the  manhood, 
and  I  doubt  not  Hart  was  right  in  saying  that  he 

"  Bore  all  Incarnate  God  could  bear 
With  strength  enough  but  none  to  spare." 

It  was  an  awful  "  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God,"  for  the  voice  cried  aloud, 
"  Awake,  0  sword,  against  my  shepherd,  against  the  man  that  is  my 
fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  doctrine  that  justice  was  executed 
upon  our  great  Substitute  is  the  most  inipciiant  that  was  ever  propounded 
in  the  hearing  of  men ;  it  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  whole  gospel, 
and  I  fear  that  the  church  which  rejects  it  is  no  longer  a  church  of  Christ. 
Substitution  is  as  much  a  standing  or  falli'.ig  article  in  the  church  as  the 
doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  itself  My  brethren  and  sisters,  there 
would  never  ha-s-e  been  an  acceptable  year  if  there  had  not  been  a  day  of 
vengeance.     Be  ye  sure  of  this. 

And  now  let  us  look  at  the  instructive  type  by  which  this  truth  was 
taught  to  Israel  of  old.  The  year  of  jubilee  began  with  the  day  of 
atonement.  "  Then  shalt  thou  cause  the  trumpet  of  the  jubile  to  sound 
on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  in  the  day  of  atonement  shall 
ye  make  the  trumpet  sound  throughout  all  your  land."  What  did  the 
high  priest  do  on  that  day  ?  Eead  for  yourselves  the  seventeenth  chapter 
of  Leviticus.  On  that  day  he  washed  himself  and  came  forth  before  the 
people,  not  wearing  his  breast-plate,  nor  his  garments  of  glory  and  beauty, 
of  blue  and  scarlet  and  fine  Hnen ;  but  the  high  priest  wore  the  ordinary 
linen  garments  of  a  common  priest.  Even  thus  the  Lord,  who  counted 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  laid  aside  all  his  glory,  a«id  was 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man.  Then  the  priest  took  a  bullock  and,  having 
offered  it,  went  within  the  veil  with  the  censer  full  of  burning  coals  of 
fire,  and  sweet  incense  beaten  small,  with  which  he  filled  the  inner  court 
with  perfumed  smoke.  After  this  he  took  the  blood  of  the  bullock  and 
sprinkled  it  before  the  mercy-seat  seven  times.  Thus  our  Lord  entered 
within  the  veil  with  his  owti  blood  and  with  the  sweet  incense  of  his  own 
merits,  to  make  atonement  for  us.  Of  the  two  goats,  one  was  killed  as  a 
Bin-ofiPering,  and  his  blood  was  sprinkled  within  the  veil,  and  the  other 
was  used  for  a  scapegoat.     Upon  the  head  of  the  scapegoat  Aaron  laid 


.4:72  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

both  his  hands,  and  confessed  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
"  putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat,"  which  was  then  taken  into 
the  wilderness  as  the  type  of  the  carrying  away  of  sin  into  oblivion. 
Do  you  not  see  your  Lord  and  Master  bearing  your  sin  away  ?  "  As 
far  as  the  east  is  frora  the  west,  so  far  hath  he  removed  our  transgressions 
from  us."  Is  there  any  wonder  that  a  jubilee  of  peace  should  follow  such 
a  taking  away  of  iniquity  as  our  great  High-priest  has  accomplished  ? 
Jesus  is  entered  into  the  heavens  for  us,  can  we  doubt  of  our  acceptance 
with  God? 

The  bodies  of  the  beasts  whose  blood  was  brought  into  the  sanctuary 
for  sin  on  the  day  of  atonement  were  not  suffered  to  remain  in  the  holy 
place,  but  were  carried  forth  -^vithout  the  camp  to  be  utterly  consumed 
with  fire,  in  token  that  sin  is  loathsome  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  must 
be  put  away  from  his  presence.  Even  thus  did  our  Lord  suflFer  without  the 
gate  and  cry,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  "  Christ 
also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might 
bring  us  to  God."  All  this  was  absolutely  needful  to  a  jubilee.  Without 
atonement,  no  rejoicing.  Before  there  can  be  acceptance  for  a  single 
Binner,  sin  must  be  laid  on  Jesus  and  carried  away.  The  blood  of  Jesus 
must  be  shed,  and  must  be  presented  within  the  veil,  for  "  without  shed- 
ding of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin ;"  for  no  man  lining  under 
heaven  can  there  be  pardon  or  acceptance  with  God  in  any  way  but  by 
the  bloody  sacrifice  which  our  Redeenier  offered  when  he  bowed  his 
head  and  gave  up  the  ghost  on  Calvary.  This  great  truth  we  must  never 
becloud,  nor  ever  ceasa  to  publish  so  long  as  we  have  a  tongue  to  move. 

The  day  of  vengeance  then  is  intimately  connected  with  the  year  of 
acceptance ;  and  mark,  beloved,  fJwij  must  be  so  conmcted  experimentally 
in  the  heart  of  all  God's  people  hy  the  tmchiny  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  for 
whenever  Christ  comes  to  make  us  live,  the  law  comes  first  to  kill  us. 
There  is  no  healing  without  previous  wounding.  Depend  upon  it,  there 
never  will  be  a  sense  of  acceptance  in  any  man  until  first  he  has  had  a 
sense  of  the  just  and  righteous  vengeance  of  God  against  his  sin.  Have 
you  noticed  that  remarkable  parallel  to  our  text  in  the  thirty-fifth 
chapter  of  Isaiah,  Avhere  salvation  and  vengeance  are  so  closely  joined. 
There  we  read  in  the  third  verse  and  onward,  "Strengthen  ye  the 
weak  hands,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees.  Say  to  them  that  are  of  a 
fearful  heart,  be  strong,  fear  not :  behold,  your  God  will  come  with 
vengeance,  even  God  with  a  recompence  ;  he  will  come  and  save  you. 
Then  the  eyes  of  t!ie  blind  shall  be  opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf 
shall  be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the 
tongue  of  the  dumb  sing  :  for  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break  out, 
and  streams  in  the  desert."  0  poor  trembling  convinced  sinner,  God 
has  come  A\'ith  vengeance  to  you,  but  his  intent  is  to  save  you.  Every 
soul  that  is  saved  must  feel  that  wrath  is  deserved  and  that  the 
death  punishment  is  due  on  account  of  sin,  and  when  this  is  known 
and  felt  acceptance  by  faith  will  follow.  There  must  be  a  death  blow 
struck  at  all  self-sufiiciency  and  self-righteousness,  and  the  man  must 
be  laid  as  dead  at  the  feet  of  Christ  before  ever  he  will  look  up  and  find 
life  and  healing  in  the  great  atoning  sacrifice.  When  our  Lord  puts  on 
the  helmet  of  salvation,  he  also  girds  about  him  the  garments  of  vengeance, 
and  we  must  see  him  in  all  his  array.     (See  Isaiah  Lix.  17.)      The  day 


PROCLAMATION   OF   ACCEPTANCE    AND    VENGEANCE. 


473 


of  vengeance  is  a  needfnl  companion  to  the  year  of  acceptance  ;  have 
they  gone  together  in  yonr  experience  ? 

III.  I  wish  time  would  occasionally  stay  his  rapid  flight,  or  at  least 
allow  us  to  pluck  a  feather  from  his  wing  while  we  contemplate  such  a 
subject  as  this.      But  I  must  close  with  the  third  head,  namely,  the 

COMFOET    FOR    MOURNERS    DERIVABLE    FROM     BOTH     THESE      THINGS. 

"  To  comfort  all   that  mourn." 

Now,  I  have  no  hope  of  interesting,  much  less  of  doing  any  good  to,  any 
in  this  house  of  prayer  who  do  not  come  under  the  description  of  mourners. 
The  sower's  duty  is  to  sow  the  seed  everywhere,  but  he  knows  witliin 
himself  that  it  will  take  no  root  anywhere  except  where  the  plough  has 
been  first  at  work.  If  the  I^ord  has  made  thee  a  mourner  then  the 
blessed  subject  of  this  morning  will  comfort  thee ;  but  the  Lord  never 
comforts  those  who  do  not  want  comfort.  If  you  can  save  yourself,  go 
and  do  it :  if  you  are  righteous,  "he  that  is  righteous  let  him  be  righteous 
still."  I  say  it  in  sarcasm,  as  yon  perceive,  for  you  cannot  save  yourself, 
nor  are  you  righteous ;  but  if  you  think  so,  go  your  way  and  try  it— vainly 
try  it,  for  surely  when  you  have  fanned  your  best  works  into  a  flame,  and 
have  walked  by  the  light  of  the  sparks  of  the  fire  which  you  have  kindled, 
you  shall  have  this  at  the  Lord's  hands — you  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow 
and  be  astonished  that  you  were  ever  so  mad  as  to  dream  of  self-salvation 
or  of  justification  by  your  owm  works. 

But  oh,  ye  mourners,  what  joy  is  here,  joy  because  this  is  the  year  of 
acceptance,  and  in  the  year  of  acceptance,  or  jubilee,  men  were  set  free  and 
their  lands  were  restored  without  money.  No  man  ever  paid  a  penny  of 
redemption  money  on  the  jubilee  morning :  every  man  was  free  simply 
because  juhiles  was  proclaimed:  no  merit  was  demanded,  no  demur  was 
offered,  no  delay  allowed,  no  dispute  permitted.  Jubilee  came,  and  the 
bondman  was  free.  And  now,  to-day,  whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus  is 
Baved,  pardoned,  freed,  without  money,  without  merit,  without  prepara- 
tion, simply  because  he  believeth,  and  God  declareth  that  he  that  be- 
lieveth is  justified  from  all  things  from  which  he  could  not  be  justified 
by  the  law  of  Moses.  Dost  thou  believe  ?  Then  art  thou  of  the  house 
Df  Israel,  and  thou  hast  God's  warrant  for  it,  thou  art  free.  Eejoice  in 
thy  liberty !  Surely  this  is  sweet  comfort  for  all  that  mourn.  Look 
not  for  any  marks  and  evidences,  signs  and  tokens,  look  not  for  any 
merits  or  attainments,  look  not  for  any  progress  in  grace  or  advance- 
ment in  piety  as  a  ground  of  salvation ;  listen  only  to  the  proclamation 
of  the  gospel,  and  accept  the  divine  decree  which  ordains  a  jubilee.  Art 
thou  but  of  the  chosen  seed,  dost  thou  believe  in  Jesus,  then  for  thee  it 
is  an  accepted  year.  Come,  bring  hither  thy  griefs  and  sorrows,  and 
leave  them  at  the  cross,  for  the  Lord  accepts  thee,  and  who  shall  say 
thee  nay  ? 

An  equal  joy-note  however  rings  out  from  the  other  sentence  concern- 
ing the  day  of  vengeance.  If  the  day  of  vengeance  took  place  when  our 
Lord  died,  then  it  is  over.  The  day  of  vengeance  was  past  and  gone 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago  and  more. 

"  Now  no  more  His  wrath  we  dread, 
Vengeance  smote  our  Surety's  head  ; 
Legal  claims  are  fully  met, 
Jesus  paid  the  rlrcadfu!  debt." 


474  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACI.K    PUI,PIT. 

My  heart,  dost  thou  bleed  for  sin  and  mourn  because  of  it  ?  Be  it  so  ; 
but  it  has  ceased  to  be,  for  Christ  made  an  end  of  it  when  he  took  it 
up  to  his  cross  and  bore  it  there  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  0  behever, 
art  thou  bowed  dowai  and  troubled  on  account  of  past  sin  ?  It  is  right 
thou  shouldst  repent,  but  still  remember  thy  past  sin  exists  no  more,  the 
pen  is  drawn  through  it  and  it  is  cancelled,  for  the  day  of  vengeance 
is  over.  God  will  not  t'wice  take  vengeance  for  the  same  sin.  Either 
the  atonement  which  Jesus  offered  was  enough,  or  it  was  not ;  if  it  was 
not,  then  woe  be  to  us,  for  we  shall  die  ;  but  if  it  was  sufficient  — if  "It 
is  finished  "  was  not  a  lie  but  a  truth,  then  he  hath  "  finished  transgres- 
sion and  made  an  end  of  sin."  The  sin  of  the  believer  is  amiihilated 
and  abolished,  and  can  never  be  laid  to  his  charge.  Let  us  rejoice  that 
the  day  of  vengeance  is  over,  and  the  year  ^^f  acceptance  has  begun. 

In  another  sense,  however,  it  may  be  that  some  are  mourning  because 
of  the  temptations  of  Satan.  Here,  toc>,  they  may  be  comforted,  for 
Jesus  has  come  to  take  vengeance  on  the  evil  one,  and  the  God  of  peace 
shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly.  Are  you  afi-aid  of  death  ? 
Behold  Christ  has  taken  revenge  on  death,  for  he  bids  you  cry,  because 
of  his  resurrection,  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  0  grave,  where  is  thy 
victory  ?" 

Are  we  mourning  to-day  because  our  dear  ones  are  not  converted  ?  It 
is  a  good  thing  to  mourn  on  that  account,  but  let  us  take  comfort,  for 
this  is  an  acceptable  year ;  let  us  pray  f^^r  them,  and  the  Lord  will  save 
them.  Are  we  mourning  because  sin  is  rampant  in  the  wide  world  ?  Let 
us  rejoice,  for  our  Lord  has  broken  the  dragon'shead,  and  the  day  of  ven- 
geance must  come  when  the  Lord  will  overthrow  the  powers  of  darkness. 
Have  we  been  looking  with  mournful  spirit  upon  old  Rome,  and  the  Mo- 
hanuuedan  imposture,  and  the  power  of  Buddhism  and  Brahminism  and 
other  the  sway  of  ancient  idolatries  ?  Let  us  be  glad.  Behold  the  Avenger 
cometh  !  He  comes  a  second  time,  and  comes  conquering  and  to  conquer. 
Then  shall  the  day  of  his  vengeance  be  in  his  heart,  and  the  year  of  his 
redeemed  shall  come.  From  the  seven  hills  the  deceiver  shall  be  torn,  no 
more  to  curse  the  sons  of  men  with  his  pretensions  to  be  the  vicar  of  God. 
In  blackest  night  shall  set  for  ever  the  crescent  of  Mohammed,  which 
already  wanes ;  its  baleful  light  shall  no  more  afflict  unhappy  nations.  Then 
shall  fall  the  gods  of  the  Hindoos  and  the  Chinese,  broken  like  potters' 
vessels  by  the  rod  of  iron  which  Jesus  wields.  At  his  appearing  the 
whole  earth  shall  acknowledge  that  he  who  was  "  despised  and  rejected  of 
men  "  is  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  Behold,  the  day  cometh 
on  apace,  let  all  that  mourn  be  comforted.  The  day  of  vengeance,  the 
full  year  of  the  millennial  glory,  the  day  of  the  overthrow  of  error,  the 
year  of  the  acceptance  of  creation  in  all  her  former  beauty,  the  age  when 
God  shall  be  all  in  all,  is  near  at  hand.     Hasten  it,  0  Lord.    Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  Read  before  Sermon — Leviticus  xvi.  29 — 84, 
and  Leviticus  xxv.  1 — 24 :  39 — 43. 


Hym-ns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 289,  271,  299. 


III.    PROPHETICAL. 


FOOTSTEPS  OF   MERCY. 


31   pennon 

DELIVERED  BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"If  there  be  a  messenger  -with  him,  an  interpreter,  one  among  a  thousand,  to  shew 
unto  men  his  uprightness:  then  he  is  gracious  unto  him,  and  saith,  Deliver  him 
from  going  down  to  the  pit :  I  have  found  a  ransom." — Job  xxxiii.  23i  24. 

When  God  has  distinct  and  definite  purposes  of  mercy  towards  an 
individual,  he  often  begins  with  stern  discipline,  and  brings  him  low  by 
affliction  and  sorrow.  As  the  good  husbandman  cuts  down  the  trees 
and  makes  a  clearance  of  the  soil  before  he  sows  the  grain  and  prepares 
for  a  harvest,  so  does  our  God  cut  down  all  our  goodly  cedars,  our 
pleasures,  and  our  pride,  in  order  that  the  heart  may  be  afterwards 
ploughed,  broken,  harrowed,  and  made  ready  to  receive  the  good  seed  of 
the  word.  Elihu  describes  this  preparatory  breaking-up  process  as  being 
brought  about  by  sickness.  It  is  often  so :  I  doubt  not,  that  a  sick-bed  is 
one  of  God's  best  orators  to  the  sons  of  men.  But  God  is  by  no  means 
restricted  to  any  uniform  method  ;  nor  is  the  experience  of  the  redeemed 
precisely  similar  in  its  details,  though  notwithstanding  all  its  diversities, 
it  leads  to  one  and  the  same  result.  Sometimes  a  storm  at  sea  has 
brought  men  to  their  senses,  and  aroused  their  conscience,  and  so  they 
have  cried  to  the  Lord  in  their  trouble.  At  other  times  serious  losses  in 
business  have  brought  men  into  such  distress  of  mind,  that  they  have 
been  driven  to  seek  riches  more  enduring  than  silver  and  gold  ;  a 
competence  more  to  be  relied  on  than  the  profits  of  trade  or  the 
stability  of  banks;  and  comfort  more  genuine  and  lasting  than  wealth, 
though  it  be  the  accumulation  of  years,  can  afford.  Yea,  and  without 
either  of  these,  the  Holy  Ghost  has  not  unfrequently  been  pleased  to 
convince  men  of  their  sin,  and  reduce  them  to  utter  self-despondency  and 
abject  self-abhorrence.  This  he  has  effected  in  such  a  way  as  neither 
sickness  nor  poverty  could  have  done  of  themselves.  He  has  brough-c 
the  man  very  low,  even  to  the  gates  of  hell.  In  his  own  apprehension 
the  man  has  been  lost,  and  then  it  is  that  mercy  has  commenced  her 
work,  her  blessed  work  that  shall  open  to  him  the  gates  of  righteousness, 
and  bring  the  soul  up  to  heaven  itself. 

Now,  I  hope  there  are  some  here  present  whom  God  has  been  pre- 
paring for  his  grace — to  such  there  will  be  good  tidings  in  the  sermon.   I 

No.  905.  - 


478  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

shall  not  delay  you,  bub  proceed  at  once  to  deal  with  the  text  in  the 
natural  order  it  suggests,  as  the  welcome  facts  are  marshalled  before 
us.  Does  it  not  tell  of  a  messenger — a  message — a  gracious  disposition — 
a  great  deliverance  — and  an  amazing  ransom? 

I.  When  God  has  thus,  in  the  way  of  providence,  prepared  any 
human  lieart  for  a  work  of  grace,  one  of  the  first  means  of  blessing  the 
chosen  man  is  to  se.xd  him  a  messexgkr. 

I  suppose  the  passage  before  us  may  be  primarily  referred  to 
Christian  ministers,  who  become,  through  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  inter- 
preters to  men's  souls.  They  should  be  men  of  a  thousand,  well  taught ; 
they  should  have  high  moral  and  spiritual  qualifications;  in  fact,  they 
should  be  the  pick  and  cull  of  mankind.  "When  God  sends  a  faithful 
gospel-messenger  to  a  man,  it  is  a  sign  of  great  love  to  that  man's  soul. 
I  ask  no  honour  for  ministers  as  men,  but  this  I  do  asic,  that  when 
they  preach  to  you  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  they  shall  be  accepted 
as  God's  messengers,  and  that  their  message  at  least  shall  be  treated 
with  the  respect  which  God's  word  demands. 

But  I  prefer  to  believe,  with  many  expositors,  that  the  full  meaning 
of  these  words  will  never  be  found  in  ministers  of  mortal  race;  we 
must  rather  refer  it  to  the  Great  Messenger  of  the  covenant,  the  Great 
Interpreter  between  God  and  man,  whose  presence  to  the  sin-sick  soul 
is  a  sure  prophecy  of  mercy.  Where  God  the  Father  sends  his  beloved 
Son  to  a  man,  where  Christ  comes  to  the  man's  conscience  and  talks 
with  him,  showing  the  credentials  of  a  Saviour,  and  constraining  the 
faith  of  the  sinner,  there  it  is  that  salvation  is  obviously  intended  by 
the  Lord,  and  will  be  effectually  perfected  in  that  man  unto  everlasting 
life.  With  this  view  I  proceed,  regarding  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the 
herald  of  mercy.  Mark  well  the  titles,  a  messenger,  an  interpreter, 
one  among  a  thousand.  Is  there  any  other  than  Jesus  to  whom  they  so 
fitly  belong?  Let  us  contemplate  him  as  a  messenger.  That  is  just 
what  Jesus  Christ  is.  Now,  a  messenger  cometh  not  in  his  own  name, 
he  must  be  sent,  and  it  is  a  great  comfort  to  know  that  Jesus  Clirist 
did  not  come  to  save  men  merely  on  his  own  account,  but  he  came  com- 
missioned by  the  Father,  he  was  sent  of  God.  God  has  appointed 
Clu'ist  to  be  the  Saviour.  Those  who  accept  Christ,  and  trust  in 
him,  accept  the  very  person  God  himself  has  ordained.  Christ  is  no 
amateur  Saviour,  who  comes  without  a  commission.  In  his  hands  he 
bears  the  ro)al  stamp  of  the  divine  authority.  0  trembling  sinner, 
trust  him  whom  God  has  trusted.  Lay  hold  of  him  whom  God  has 
appointed. 

Another  description  that  belongs  to  him,  as  I  believe,  is  an  inter- 
preter. Jesus  Christ  is  indeed  a  blessed  interpreter.  An  interpreter  must 
understand  two  languages.  Our  Lord  Jesus  understands  the  lan- 
guage of  God.  Whatever  are  the  great  truths  of  divine  intelligence  and 
mfiiiite  wisdom,  too  high  and  mysterious  for  us  to  comprehend  or  ev6'.i 
to  discern,  Christ  fully  understands  them  all.  He  knows  how  to  speak 
with  God  as  the  fellow  of  God,  co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  him.  His 
prayers  are  in  God's  language.  He  speaks  to  God's  heart.  He  can 
make  out  the  sighs,  and  cries,  and  tears  of  a  poor  sinner,  and  he 
can  take  up  the  meaning,  and  interpret  them  all  to  God.  He  under- 
stands the  divine  language,  and  thus  he  can  communicate  with  God. 


FOOTSTEPS   OF  MEKCT.  i79 

Moreover,  Jesns  understands  our  language,  for  he  is  a  man  like  our- 
selves, touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  smarting  under  our 
sicknesses.  He  can  read  whatever  is  in  the  heart  of  man,  and  so  he  can 
tell  to  God  the  language  of  man,  and  speak  to  man  in  the  language  of 
man  what  God  would  say  to  him.  How  happy  we  ought  to  be  that  there 
is  so  blessed  a  Daysman  to  put  his  hand  upon  us  both,  that  he  can 
be  equal  with  God,  and  yet  can  be  brother  with  poor  simple  men!  The 
best  of  it  is  that  our  Lord  is  such  an  interpreter  that  he  can  not  only 
interpret  to  the  ear  but  also  to  the  heart,  and  this  is  a  great  point.  I, 
perhaps,  might  be  enabled  to  interpret  a  Scripture  to  your  ears,  but,  0 
beloved,  when  you  have  heard  the  letter  you  may  miss  the  right, 
heavenly,  and  spiritual  meaning.  But  our  Lord  can  bring  the  word 
home  to  your  soul.  He  can  tell  you  of  God's  mercy,  not  in  words  only, 
but  with  a  sweet  sense  of  mercy  shed  abroad  in  your  heart.  He  can 
make  the  sinner  feel  the  way  of  salvation,  as  well  as  know  it;  he  can 
make  him  rejoice  in  it  as  well  as  listen  to  it;  he  can  lead  him  to  accept 
it  as  well  as  to  understand  it.  Oh,  blessed  interpreter!  mighty  with 
God,  so  that  the  heart  of  God  is  affected  with  the  woes  and  griefs  of 
men;  mighty  with  men  so  that  the  great  love  of  God,  which  is  an 
ocean  without  a  bottom  or  a  shore,  is  made  intelligible  to  us,  and  even 
our  poor  stony  hearts  are  softened,  and  the  adamant  is  made  to  run  like 
wax,  while  the  divine  interpreter  talks  to  our  inmost  souls. 

This  messenger,  then,  this  interpreter,  is  he  not  "  one  among  a 
thousand"?  0  peerless  Jesus!  who  among  the  sons  of  the  mighty  can 
be  compared  with  thee  ?  Elihu  may  well  be  supposed  to  use  a  definite 
number  when  an  indefinite  is  intendciJ.  What  is  one  of  a  thousand,  or 
one  of  ten  tliousaud,  when  surely  there  is  never  the  like  of  C  irist 
between  heaven  and  hell?  All  the  range  of  the  universe  cannot  find 
his  equal,  his  equal  as  a  Saviour,  as  a  messenger,  as  an  interpreter. 
Oh  I  but  those  who  know  him  will  tell  you  that  no  words  can  ever  set 
forth  his  worth.  Disciples  of  Jesus  who  have  followed  him  and  held 
communion  with  him  for  the  space  of  twenty  years  and  more,  will  tell 
you  that  his  preciousness  grows  upon  them  by  acquaintance.  Whereas 
they  thought  him  sweet  at  first,  they  think  him  sweetest  and  best  of  all 
now,  the  loveliest  of  all  the  lovely,  the  fairest  of  all  the  fair,  the  chief 
among  ten  thousand,  yea,  and  the  altogether  lovely.  I  tell  you  that  if 
there  were  a  thousand  Saviours,  I  would  have  none  but  Christ.  If  the 
gods  of  the  heathen,  and  the  saints  of  the  papists  could  help  them,  if 
the  ceremonies  of  our  modern  papists  could  deliver  their  souls  instead 
of  enthralling  them,  yet  would  we  repudiate  them,  we  would  have 
nothing  to  do  with  them  in  whole  or  in  part ;  but  we  would  still  cling 
to  him  who  is  the  one  mediator  between  God  and  men,  for  he  is  the 
chief  among  ten  thousand  to  our  souls.  He  is  such  a  Saviour  that 
there  is  no  other  can  vie  with  him:  all  rivalry  must  prove  abortive, 
seeing  that  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay.  He  is  the  door  of  heaven, 
all  the  rest  is  hard  wall,  and  there  is  no  passing  through — a  light  from 
God,  and  all  other  lights  are  darkness — very  God  come  down  to  us  in 
our  flesh  to  save  us,  and  where  shall  you  find  tlie  match  of  this?  0 
cherubim  and  seraphim,  what  Saviour  could  ye  devise  that  should 
emulate  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God  ?  0  ye  angels,  fairest  among 
the  goodly  throng  that   salute   Jehovah    day    and    night    with   your 


480  METROPOLITAN   TABEENACl.E   PULPIT, 

ceaseless  music,  whom  will  ye  laud  and  mag^nifj  but  Jesus  in  your 
jubilant  worshipful  songs  ?  As  ye  survey  the  glorious  company  of  the 
apostles,  the  noble  army  of  the  martyrs,  and  the  radiant  fellowship  of 
the  church  redeemed,  will  ye  chant  any  other  name  ?  Is  he  not  in  your 
esteem  the  chief  among  a  thousand,  the  sole  heritor  of  all  blessing 
and  praise?  Accept  him,  sinner;  receive  him  joyfully  into  thy 
spirit,  for  such  a  one  will  never  woo  thee  as  this  precious  one,  the 
choseu  of  God.  Who,  save  Jesus,  then,  should  be  chosen  and  precious 
to  thy  soul  ? 

It  is  a  great  sign  of  mercy  whenerer  Christ  comes  to  any  sinner. 
But  how,  say  you,  can  he  come  to  a  sinner?  I  will  tell  you.  He 
has  come  to  you  now,  to  everyone  of  you.  Jesus  comes  in  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel.  There  is  never  a  gospel  sermon  preached  but 
it  is,  in  fact,  Jesus  coming  with  open  arms  of  love  to  receive  the  sinner. 
He  comes  to  you  in  these  Bibles  and  New  Testaments  of  yours. 
Every  one  of  those  volumes  that  lies  in  your  house  is  a  standing  token  of 
Christ's  mission,  whispering  to  him  that  hath  ears  to  hear  that  he  is 
still  ready  to  receive  the  sinner.  And  I  trust  he  comes  to  some  of  you 
now,  in  the  motions  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  your  heart,  saying  to 
you,  "  Close  in  with  him ;  reject  him  no  longer,  bow  down  thine  ear  and 
listen  to  him,  lift  up  thine  eye  and  look  to  him,  concerning  whom  we 
sang  so  truly  just  now  : — 

"  There  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One, 
There  is  life  at  this  moment  for  thee." 

This  is  the  first  stage. 

II.  Now,  secondly,  wherever  this  divine  messenger  comes,  according 
to  the  text,  he  reveals  God's  UPRroHTNESs. 

A  lesson,  let  me  assure  you,  of  deep  interest  and  paramount 
importance  ;  the  occasion  on  which  it  is  taught  is  peculiarly  im- 
pressive. You  remember  Elihu  has  been  describing  a  man  greatly 
afflicted,  chasteaed  with  pain,  wasted  with  disease,  reduced  to  a  skeleton, 
and  brought  nigh  to  death.  We  have  shown  you  that  ere  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  comes  in  mercy  to  deal  with  a  soul,  such  tribulation  is 
dealt  out  by  God  to  break  up  the  fallow  ground  of  the  heart.  No  marvel 
that  the  suflPerer  is  appalled  with  tokens  of  ju'lgment.  What  message, 
then,  can  the  divine  messenger  bring  more  suitable  or  more  refreshing 
than  that  which  reveals  to  man  the  uprightness  of  God  in  having 
afflicted  him  ?  You  think,  perhaps,  that  God  has  been  very  hard  with 
you.  In  your  distraction  you  say,  "  How  long  I  have  been  ill !  how 
long  I  have  been  out  of  work !  how  long  my  wife  has  been  afflicted ! 
how  many  of  my  dear  children  have  died  !  what  strokes  God  has  laid 
upon  me  without  intermission  I"  Now  shall  new  views  spring  up,  and 
comfortable  thoughts  arise.  But  who  shall  bridge  the  interval  ?  Wlien 
Christ  comes  to  you  as  an  interpreter  he  will  make  you  discern  th« 
wisdom,  and  the  love,  and  cause  you  to  feel  the  pity  and  the  tenderness 
of  him,  who  as  a  father  rebukes  you,  not  in  anger  but  in  his  dear 
covenant  love.  Instead  of  kicking  against  the  pricks,  you  will  say, 
"  Ah  !  Lord,  it  is  of  thy  mercy  I  am  not  consumed ;  I  can  see  there  is  a 
hand  of  love  in  this ;  God  would  not  let  me  go  on  in  sin,  and  wandci  nto 
endless  woe ;  he  is  blocking  up  my  road,  he  is  putting  massive  clii.ins 


FOOTSTEPS  OF  MKRCY.  481 

across  the  broad  way  to  stop  me ;  he  is  digging  pits  in  my  path  that  I 
may  come  to  a  pause,  and  so  I  will  turn  back  from  this."  Depend  upon 
it,  "there  is  nothing  more  dreadful  in  the  conclusion  than  a  life  that  is 
happy  in  the  om mission  of  sin.  If  you  have  prosperity,  and  all  that 
heart  can  wi;-'\  vhVe  pursuing  an  evil  courpe,  tretnble.  for  it  is  likely 
enough  that  God  will  give  you  up;  you  are  having  your  portion  in 
this  life.  0  ye  unconverted  1  are  any  of  you  tried  and  troubled, 
vexed  and  disquieted?  while  I  am  sorry  for  your  troubles,  I  hope  God 
has  designs  of  love  towards  you;  if  you  look  to  Christ  he  will  explain 
to  yc  n  the  heavenly  moral  of  these  earthly  trials,  and  show  you 
the  7  brightness  of  God  in  dealing  thus  severely  with  his  rebeUious 
child/ 

Further  than  this,  the  gospel  of  Christ  explains  to  the  sinner  the 
uprightness  of  God  in  the  doom  of  the  impenitent,  even  tf  he  send  him 
down  to  hell.  Oh  1  a  man  may  find  ftulfc  with  hell,  and  say,  "  Will  God 
consign  men  to  the  devouring  fire?  Will  he  destroy  their  souls  ?  Will 
he  damn  men  for  their  offences?"  but  if  once  the  Great  Interpreter 
comes  to  you,  you  will  wonder,  not  that  God  should  destroy  men  for 
sin,  but  that  he  has  not  destroyed  you  long  ago.  Oh  !  I  could  have 
argued  with  a  bold  front  against  eternal  punishment  till  I  knew  what 
sin  meant,  and  then  I  gave  in  at  once,  and  I  wish  that  some  of  my 
bretliren  who  seem  to  speak  dubiously  about  the  wrath  of  God,  could 
feci,  as  some  of  us  have  felt,  the  horror  of  great  darkness  that  sin  brings 
a:ross  a  soul  when  it  is  made  to  feel  the  righteous  ire  that  encompasses 
pnd  impends  it;  there  is  no  cavilling  then,  the  only  cry  is,  "0  my  God, 
deliver  me,  for  I  deserve  all  thy  wrath  can  bring  upon  me,  and  if 
tliou  shouldst  smite  me  to  destruction  thou  wilt  be  justified  when  thou 
jndgest,  and  clear  when  thou  condemnest."  Mark  you,  it  is  a  blessed 
thing  when  Christ  brings  a  sinner  to  plead  guilty,  when  he  is  quite 
willing  to  plead  guilty,  and  when,  instead  of  railing  at  the  justice  of 
the  sentence,  he  stands  dumb  with  silence,  feeling  that  God  is  upright, 
and  would  not  be  upright  even  if  he  did  not  thus  condemn.  There  is 
hope,  there  is  more  than  hope,  there  is  confidence  in  our  heart  towards 
ajiy  sinner  who  is  convinced  of  the  uprightness  of  God  in  his  present 
affliction  or  in  any  other  that  God  may  please  to  send  upon  him,  either 
in  this  life  or  in  the  life  to  come.  Ah !  but  this  is  learning  to  some 
profit  for  a  man  to  see  the  uprightness  of  God  in  everything,  and  then 
by  contrast  to  bewail  his  own  ignorance  and  foolishness.  Mercy  is 
surely  come  to  you  when  you  can  think  of  God's  holiness  with  reverence, 
and  upbraid  yourself  with  bitter  reproach  for  what  an  unholy  creature 
you  have  been.  It  is  a  rough  wind,  that  north  wind,  but,  0  my 
Brethren,  what  a  healthy  wind  it  is  I  It  sweeps  away  the  fevers  of  our 
pride,  and  drives  away  the  mists  of  our  self-righteousness.  Self- 
righteous,  indeed  1  such  wretches  as  we  are,  such  offenders  against  God 
and  truth  as  we  have  been,  for  us  to  talk  of  goodness  when  we  are 
altogether  vile,  for  us  to  boast  of  something  hopeful  in  us  when  the  whole 
head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint — this  is  sheer  insanity.  When 
the  blessed  interpreter  comes  and  deals  graciously  with  the  spirit,  we 
©onfess  that  God  is  upright,  but  as  for  ourselves  we  have  gone  astray 
like  lost  sheep  ;  we  have  done  the  things  which  we  ought  not  to  have 
done,  we  have  left  undone  the  things  which  we  ought  to  have  done,  and 
2  H 


4d4  METKOPOLITAN    TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

there  is  no  health  in  us.  Oh,  those  visions  of  God,  how  humiliatinfr  they 
are  I  So  Job  himself  made  confession,  *'  I  have  heard  of  tliee  by  the 
hearing  of  the  ear:  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore  T  abhor 
myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  This  supplies  us  with  the  second 
etage  in  the  experience  of  divine  mercy — Christ  is  recognised,  the 
uprightness  of  God  is  revealed  and  understood. 

III.  The  third  stage  is  this — "  Then  he  is  gracious  unto  him." 
God  deals  with  convinced  sinners  in  a  way  of  grace.  Every  word 
here  is  weighty.  "  Then  he  is  gracious  unto  him."  Mark  the  time — 
then!  God  is  gracious  to  a  man  when,  Christ  having  come  to 
him  as  a  messenger  and  an  interpreter,  he  is  led  to  discern  his  own  sin 
aud  God's  uprightness.  When  he  is  humble,  then  God  shows  himself  to 
be  gracious.  No  debts  are  pronounced  forgiven  by  the  Great  Master  of 
all  till  they  are  owned,  and  no  release  from  the  pains  of  bankruptcy  are 
granted  until  we  feel  that  we  have  nought  with  which  to  pay.  When 
a  Boul  pleads  total  insolvency  and  is  truly  penniless,  then  there  is  free 
forgiveness.  When  men  admit  the  justice  of  God  if  he  should  punish 
them,  then,  not  till  then,  mercy  comes  in  and  the  punishment  is  put 
away.  It  is  not  consistent  with  the  holiness  of  God  to  pardon  a  sinner 
while  he  denies  his  guilt,  or  invents  excuses  to  pnlliate  his  crimes;  nor 
is  it  reasonable  for  a  sinner  to  expect  remission  while  he  vaunts  his 
self-righteousness.  How  shall  the  hardness  of  a  man's  heart  move  the 
compassion  of  his  judge  ?  Come,  poor  soul,  fall  on  thy  knees,  confess 
that  God  is  upright,  and  then  he  will  be  gracious  to  thee. 

The  way  as  well  as  the  time  demands  your  notice.  It  is  through  the 
messenger  that  God  is  gracious.  Then — that  is  when  the  messenger 
comes.  When  Jesus  interposes  then  God  is  gracious.  You  shall  never 
taste  of  grace  except  out  of  the  golden  cup  of  Christ's  atonement.  It  is 
tuto  that  golden  cup  that  God  has  poured  the  infinity  of  his  grace. 
Drink  of  it,  sinner,  by  simply  trusting  in  Christ.  Drink  of  it  in  any 
other  way  thou  never  canst.  Narrowly  observe  what  the  text  says, 
"  Then  he  is  gracious  unto  him."  All  salvation  comes  by  way  of  grace. 
The  word  "  grace  "  as  used  by  us  in  its  Latin  form  explains  its  own 
meaning.  We  speak  of  "  gratis  " — a  thing  free  from  cost ;  like  the 
prescription  of  a  physician  if  given  without  fee ;  or  the  medicine  sup- 
plied at  the  dispensary  without  charge.  All  God's  mercy  to  a  sinner  is 
gratis.  He  never  sells,  he  always  gives.  He  asks  no  payment.  He 
acts  from  no  motives  raised  or  suggested  by  anything  in  us,  but  because 
he  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy,  and  he  will  have  com- 
passion on  whom  he  will  have  compassion.  Dear  heart,  it  is  a  blessing 
for  thee  when  thou  canst  see  that  nothing  but  Christ  can  serve  thy  turn, 
when  thou  hast  done  with  appealing  to  justice,  and  all  thy  knocks  are 
ftt  mercy's  door.  0  sinner,  you  cannot  be  saved  except  by  erace  in 
the  beginning,  grace  in  the  middle,  and  grace  in  the  end.      What  but 


Footsteps  of  mkivcy.  4Sft 

grace  can  pardon  sins  such  as  jours  and  mine  ?  What  but  grace  co;iM 
take  such  as  we  are  and  make  us  God's  children  ?  What  but  grace  could 
snatch  us  from  hell,  and  lift  us  up  to  heaven  ?  When  the  man  if 
humbled,  and  Christ  is  revealed  to  him,  then  it  is  that  God  deals 
graciously  with  the  man,  and  then  it  is  that  he  knows  he  has  found 
grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.  And  I  like  the  thought,  that  it 
does  not  say  God  ever  leaves  off  being  gracious  to  that  man.  Where 
we  do  not  read  that  God  ceases,  we  may  believe  that  he  continues. 
Does  he  once  deal  graciously  with  a  sinner  ?  he  will  always  be  gracious 
to  that  sinner.  Never  will  he  change.  That  sinner  once  blessed,  shall 
be  blessed  through  life,  and  blessed  in  death,  and  blessed  in  eternity, 
through  the  sovereign,  overflowing,  immutable  grace  which  is  in  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord. 

Well,  we  have  come  a  long  way.  We  have  found  the  sinner  sick  and 
near  to  die;  the  interpreter  has  come ;  he  has  shown  him  the  upright- 
ness of  God,  and  given  him  an  assurance  of  God's  gracious  disposition — ■ 
now  the  sinner  knows  that  Christ  alone  can  save  him. 

IV.  Let  us  proceed  to  the  next  stage— God  delivers  thej  sinner. 
"He  saith.  Deliver  him  from  going  down  into  the  pit."  What  shall 
we  understand  by  this  ?  Does  it  refer  to  ^^  the  grave"  which  is  dug 
like  a  pit  ?  Well,  such  an  interpretation  may  harmonise  with  Elihu'a 
discourse  as  he  describes  the  man  whose  soul  draweth  near  to  the  grave 
and  his  life  to  the  destroyers;  but  when  delivered  from  going  down 
into  the  pit,  his  flesh  shall  be  fresher  than  a  child's,  he  shall  return  to 
the  days  of  his  youth.  So  the  psalmist  celebrates  the  lovingkindness 
^if  the  Lord — "0  Lord,  thou  hast  brought  up  my  soul  from  the  grave ; 
thou  hast  kept  me  that  I  should  not  go  down  into  the  pit."  What 
more  shall  we  understand  by  the  pit  from  which  the  soul  is  delivered? 
The  pit  is  often  used  in  Scripture  as  the  emblem  of  great  distress  and 
misery.  Captives  in  the  East  were  frequently  shut  up  in  pits  all  night. 
So  Isaiah  says,  "  They  shall  be  gathered  together  as  prisoners  are 
gathered  in  the  pit,  and  shall  be  shut  up  in  the  prison."  (Isaiah 
ixiv.  22.)  And  again  in  another  place,  "  The  captive  exile  hasteneth 
that  he  may  be  loosed,  and  that  he  should  not  die  in  the  pit,  nor  that 
his  bread  should  fail."  (Isaiah  li.  14.)  There  is  a  bondage  of  soul, 
which  involves  depression  of  spirits,  and  failing  of  heart  that  may  well 
be  likened  to  confinement  in  a  pit  from  which  there  appears 
no  way  of  escape.  But  may  we  not  understand  still  more  by 
the  pit  ?  Alas !  then,  dear  friends,  we  sometimes  read  of  the 
pit,  when  the  word  is  pregnant  with  deeper  meaning,  even 
of  the  pit  that  is  bottomless,  that  place  of  torment  prepared 
for  devils  and  lost  souls.  Oh,  if  there  were  time,  what  a 
picture  we  have  before  us  1  The  pit,  the  bottomless  pit^ 
an   awful  representation,    a  horrible  rision   of  the  future  wrath  of 


484  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Gdd  !  The  pit,  black,  dark,  descending,  adown  which  the  soul  slips 
and  slides,  and  falls  headlong  1  Going  down  into  the  pit — what  a 
dreadful  expression  1  Not  going  down  as  miners  do  to  seek  for  ore, 
but  being  hurled  by  the  strong  hand  of  the  avenging  angel  down- 
wards into  the  abyss  1  There  on  the  verge  of  the  precipice  you  are  ; 
though  not  falling  down  that  abyss  yet,  your  feet  have  almost  gone, 
your  steps  have  well  nigh  slipped.  At  such  a  crisis  the  mercy  of  God 
comes  to  the  sinner's  aid,  and  cries  in  thrilling  tones,  "  Deliver  him !" 
It  is  not  a  mere  shout  of  warning,  it  is  a  voice  that  hath  power  in  it, 
it  is  the  clear  silvery  note  of  rescue,  and  the  man  is  delivered  just  as 
he  is  about  to  sink  to  rise  no  more.  Kings  and  emperors,  when  they 
have  condemned  men  to  die,  can  exercise  the  prerogative  of  mercy. 
Let  the  royal  mandate  issue  concerning  a  prisoner,  "  Deliver  him," 
then  the  prison  doors  are  opened,  for  the  king's  pardon  has  been  given. 
Just  such  a  thing  doth  God  with  condemned  sinners,  when  they  bow 
down  before  him  and  confess  the  righteousness  of  the  sentence.  Through 
Jesus  Christ,  the  heavenly  messenger,  he  saith,  *'  Deliver  him  !  deliver 
him!"  There  is  a  legal  pardon.  The  man  is  set  free  from  the  bonds 
of  the  jailer,  instead  of  being  given  over  to  the  hands  of  the  executioner. 
Henceforth  he  shall  live  in  peace  and  joy.  *'  Deliver  him  I  "  Perhaps 
the  three  significations  of  the  pit  I  have  alluded  to  may  be  combined  in 
one  dark  picture.  Sickness  brings  the  sinner  to  the  immediate  prospect, 
not  of  death  only,  but  of  his  endless  doom.  The  sorrows  and  remorse 
of  his  soul  produce,  as  it  were,  a  foretaste  of  that  anguish  which  knows 
no  abatement.  And  anon !  Hell  doth  yawn  at  his  feet  "  a  universe  of 
death" — "worse  than  fables  yet  have  feigned,  or  fear  conceived." 

How  many  witnesses  we  might  call  to  speak  to  the  truth  of  all 
this!  Why,  Elihu  said,  "  Lo,  all  these  things  worketh  God  often- 
times with  man."  The  anguish  is  real,  and  the  joy  of  rescue  is 
real  likewise.  Did  not  Hezekiah  feel  them  both  ?  The  message  cams 
to  him,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  set  thine  house  in  order,  for  thou 
shalt  die  and  not  live."  Then  he  prayed  vehemently,  and  he  wept 
sore.  Afterwards  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him  that  his  prayer 
was  heard,  that  his  tears  were  seen,  and  that  his  life  should  be 
spared.  And  this  is  what  he  said :  "  Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great 
bitterness ;  but  thou  hast  in  love  to  my  soul  delivered  it  from  the  pit  of 
corruption ;  for  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back."  What  a 
shout  of  joy  is  that  of  David  when  he  says,  "  He  brought  me  up  out  of 
a  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay,  and  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  and 
established  my  goings  "  1  In  like  manner  Jonah  speaks,  "  Thou  hast 
brought  up  my  life  from  the  pit,  0  Lord  my  God."  Very  memoraMe 
too  is  the  sweet  promise  of  God  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  by  the  mouth 
of  the  prophet  Zechariah,  "  As  for  thee  also,  by  the  blood  of  thy 
covenant  I  have  sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no 


FOOTSTEPS  OF    MERCY.  485 

water."     Yes,  my  dear  friends,  and  I   feel   bound  to  say  tor  myself,  to 
the  praise  of  my  God — 

"  Thy  love  was  great,  thy  mercy  free, 
Which  from  the  pit  delivered  me." 

Well  do  I  remember  when  the  sentence  went  forth  to  my  soul, 
"  Deliver  him  !"  The  time  did  indeed  seem  long  first.  I  was  years 
and  years  upon  the  brink  of  hell — I  mean  in  my  own  feeling.  I  was 
unhappy,  I  was  desponding,  I  was  despairing.  I  dreamed  of  hell, 
my  life  was  full  of  sorrow  and  wretchedness,  believing  that  I  waa 
lost.  But  oh  I  the  blessed  gospel  of  the  God  of  grace  came  to  me  at 
length  with  that  soft  voice,  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye 
ends  of  the  earth  !"  With  it  came  a  sovereign  word,  "Deliver  him  I' 
ani  I  who  was  but  a  minute  before  as  wreti'hed  as  a  soul  could  be, 
could  have  danced  for  very  merriment  of  heart,  and  as  the  snow 
fell  on  my  road  home  from  the  little  house  of  prayer  I  thought 
every  snow-flake  tallied  with  me,  and  told  of  the  pardon  I  had  found; 
for  I  was  white  as  the  driven  snow  through  the  grace  of  God.  Oh ! 
that  word,  "Deliver  him!"  It  so  restrains  the  temptations  of  Satan, 
and  quells  the  strivings  of  conscience,  that  the  poor  soul  has  in- 
stantaneous liberty,  and  rejoices  with  joy  unspeakable.  Mark  you,  my 
dear  friend,  if  ever  you  should  look  to  Christ  by  simple  faith,  and  God 
should  say,  "  Deliver  him;"  that  "Deliver  him"  will  last  you  for  ever. 
God  does  not  play  fast  and  loose  with  sinners.  If  he  pardons  to- 
day he  will  not  condemn  to-morrow.  He  does  not  loose  and  then 
bind  again.  He  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth.  Once  he  says,  "  Deliver 
him,"  you  may  wallc  through  all  the  earth,  and  who  shall  lay  anything  to 
yourcharge:  for  who  is  he  that  can  arrest  you  and  cast  you  into  prison 
against  this,  "  Deliver  him  "?  There  may  have  come  into  this  place  some 
great  offender.  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  discriminate  amongyou,  or  single 
out  any  one  of  these  thousands,  but  there  may  be  here  some  one  of  the 
very  blackest  class  of  sinners.  To  you  Christ's  gospel  has  come. 
I  hope  you  have  been  led  to  feel  that  you  are  guilty,  to  confess  your 
sin,  and  to  own  that  you  can  only  be  saved  through  God's  grace  and 
mercy.  Well  now,  if  you  will  but  trust  my  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus 
who  once  died  on  Calvary's  cross,  and  now  lives  enthroned  in  glory ;  if 
you  will  but  trust  him  now,  the  sentence  shall  come  from  the  tlirone, 
*'  Deliver  him,"  or  "  Deliver  her,  from  going  down  into  the  pit."  Oh  ! 
there  have  been  many  outcasts  in  these  very  aisles,  who  have  found 
grace  and  obtained  remission  of  their  sins.  The  harlot  has  heai-d 
the  word,  "  Deliver  her  from  going  down  to  the  pit."  The  thief  and  the 
drunkard  too,  though  in  their  own  conscience  on  the  very  brink  of  hell, 
and  all  but  sliding  in,  have  heard  it,  and  they  are  here  among  tlie 
happy  worshippers  chat  praise  God.     Some  of  us  who  never  fell  into 


486  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

tliose  fouler  vices,  fchousjh  depraved  in  our  hearts  as  they,  have  heard 
that  blessed  sound,  and  we  are  here  to  express  our  soul's  desire  that 
you  all  knew  it.  0  that  you  all  trusted  Christ.  0  that  you  were 
all  saved  by  that  blessed  mandate,  "Deliver  him  from  going  down  into 
the  pit." 

V.  The  last  thing  is  that  GoD  explains  to  the  sinnkr  whom  he 
DELIVERS  the  REASON  OF  HIS  DELIVERANCE.  "Deliver  him  from 
goiim-  down  into  the  pit ;  I  have  found  a  ransom." 

"  I  have  found  a  ransom  " — a  covering.  Catch  the  thought.  There 
are  yonr  sins  like  a  foetid  slough,  reeking  with  corruption,  they  are 
black ;  like  a  huge  pool  of  blood,  they  are  scarlet.  It  is  abhorrent  to 
the  pure  eyes  of  God  to  look  upon  the  heart  that  is  a  very  reservoir  of 
pollution.  He  must  smite  yon  if  he  look  at  it.  Listen — "  I  have  found 
a  covering."  Christ  comes  in  and  covers  it  all.  "  Blessed  is  that  man 
whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered."  As  the  mercy- 
Beat  covered  the  law,  and  was  called  a  covering,  so  does  the  atonement 
of  Christ  cover  the  perfect  law  of  God,  and  it  puts  out  of  God's  sight 
every  sin  of  all  those  who  trust  in  Christ. 

But  take  the  word  as  we  get  it  in  the  English  version — a  ransom  . 
that  means  a  price.  When  a  man  was  in  debt,  he  used  to  be,  accor^ling 
to  the  old  law,  put  into  prison.  Well,  how  did  he  get  his  disc-iiiu-ge  ? 
He  came  out  if  the  debt  was  paid,  of  course,  at  once.  So  God  saith, 
"Deliver him;  I  havefoima  a  price,  I  have  found  a  i-eLompense,  I  have 
found  a  substitute,  I  have  found  a  ransom."  The  Lord  Jesus  Clirist, 
has  suffered  for  us  what  God's  wrath  demanded  of  us. 

"  He  bore,  that  we  might  never  bear, 
His  Fatlier's  righteous  ire." 

Christ  stood  in  our  stead  that  we  might  go  free.  I  have  told  you  this 
grand  old  tale  so  many  times  in  this  house,  that  sometimes  as  I  am 
coming  here  I  think  to  myself — "  I  can  hnd  no  new  metaphor  to 
illustrate  it,  and  no  new  words  to  rouse  the  languid  attention;  they  will 
tell  me  that  I  am  always  harping  on  the  same  string."  Still,  still,  I  must 
continue  to  expound  and  enforce  this  substitutionary  suffering  of 
Christ.  I  cannot  help  it.  It  is  as  much  as  my  soul  is  worth  to  keep  it 
back,  for  I  am  persuaded  that  it  is  the  very  essence  of  the  gospel— the 
vicarious  suffering  of  Christ.  At  any  rate,  I  have  no  gospel  to  preach 
to  you  but  this,  that  God  has  punished  Christ  instead  of  you  that  will 
believe  on  Christ,  and  therefore  he  cannot  punish  you ;  you  are  clear. 
Christ  has  paid  your  debts ;  the  receipt  is  given ;  you  are  liberated.  Gud 
has  no  claims  upon  you  from  his  justice  now  ;  they  are  all  discharged. 
Christ  has  discharged  all  your  liabilities.  "  By  him  all  that  believe  are 
justified  from  all  things,  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the 
law  of  Moses." 


FOOTSTEPS   OF  MERCY.  487 

Never  listen,  I  entreat  you,  my  dear  hearers,  to  the  derisive  sneer  of 
the  scorner,  as  he  attempts  to  east  discredit  upon  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  the  imputation  of  our  sins  to  the  great  Redeemer.  I  know  that 
it  is  not  in  the  power  of  sceptic,  rationalist,  socinian,  or  infidel  to  bring 
forth  one  argument  that  can  refute  the  plain  testimony  which  abounds 
in  the  Scriptures.  But  they  can  and  they  do  ask  if  our  moral  sense  of 
rectitude  is  not  shockoi  at  inflicting  punishment  on  the  innocent,  and 
bestowing  rewards  as  well  as  pardon  on  the  guilty.  Do  they  object  to 
you  that  it  were  unjust  on  the  part  of  G-od  to  make  one  man  suffer 
personally  for  another  man's  sin  ?  Tell  them,  if  they  better  understood 
the  doctrine,  they  would  see  that  instead  of  outraging  the  morality  of 
men,  it  manifests  the  righteousness  of  God.  Tell  them,  as  one  of  our 
most  famous  Puritans  did,  that  the  Redeemer  and  redeemed  have  such 
an  intimate  relation,  that  what  one  doeth  or  suifereth,  the  other  may  be 
accounted  to  do  or  suffer ;  it  is  no  unrighteousness,  if  the  hand  olfend 
for  the  head  to  be  smitten  ;  Christ  is  our  head,  and  we  are  his  members. 
Tell  them  that  he  who  suffered,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  had  power  to 
lay  down  his  life  and  power  to  take  it  again :  his  submission  therefoi'e 
was  voluntary.  Tell  them  tliat  he  who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his 
own  body  on  the  tree,  agi-eed  and  stipulated  to  bear  our  iniquities;  the 
whole  matter  was  settled  in  covenant  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
Tell  them  once  more  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  counted  the  cost  and 
estimated  the  recompense,  when  he  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him 
endured  the  cross  ;  he  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  shall  be 
satisfied;  with  honour  and  glory  shall  he  be  crowned.  Because  he 
humbled  himself,  therefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  him:  and 
because  he  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  to  him  is  given  a  name 
which  is  above  every  name.  Tell  them  his  mediatorial  glory  surpaa- 
seth  thou<;ht.  Bid  them  cease  their  pitiless  clamour  and  leave  us  to 
our  joys.  It  is  the  sweetest  music  out  of  heaven,  and  it  is  the  source  of 
the  music  of  heaven.  *'  I  have  found  a  ransom."  Christ's  ransom  for 
enslaved  sinners  is  the  world's  good  news.  Tell  it,  then,  and  as  you 
hear  it,  let  your  hearts  rejoice. 

You  notice  these  words,  "I  have  found  a  ransom."  You  do  not  find 
it  for  yourselves.  You  could  not  ever  have  discovered  it,  much  less 
have  brought  it  into  the  world.  But  God  found  it  out.  The  infinite 
wisdom  of  God  was  needed  to  find  out  the  way  of  salvation  by  a  sub- 
stitute. "  I  have  found  a  ransom."  Now,  since  God  has  found  it,  and 
God  is  satisfied  with  it,  let  me,  chief  of  sinners  though  I  be,  find  rest  in 
this  divine  satisfaction.  Conscience  says  to  me,  "  Well,  but  how  con 
your  sins  be  forgiven  ?"  Again  conscience  thunders,  "  Recollect  such 
a  day,  such  a  night,  such  an  act,  such  a  blasphemy.  Dost  thou  think 
Christ  can  wash  such  a  devil  as  thou  art  ?"  I  answer,  "  Well,  if  God 
is  satisfied,  I  am  sure  I  will  be."     If  you  owe  a  debt,  and  your  creditor 


488  MRTROPULITAN   TABERNACLE   PULFiT. 

takes  the  money  of  another,  and  he  is  quite  easy  about  it,  wist,  man,  do 
not  you  be  uneasy  about  it ;  if  he  is  satisfied  you  may  be,  and  if  God  ia 
content  with  Christ,  so,  poor  sinner,  let  you  and  I  be  satisfied,  and  let 
us  begin  to  sing — 

"  I  will  praise  thee  every  day ! 

Now  thine  anger's  turn'd  away, 

Comfortable  thoughts  arise 

From  the  bleeding  sacrifice 

Jesus  is  become  at  length 

My  salvation  and  my  strength 

And  his  praises  shall  prolong. 

While  I  live,  my  pleasant  song. 

0  bless  the  dear  name  of  him  who  suffered  in  your  stead.  0  take 
his  ransom-price;  look  at  it;  turn  over  every  sacred  drop  of  it  in 
your  memory  and  your  gratitude.  Be  satisfied,  and  more  than  satisfied ; 
rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad  to  be  delivered  from  going  down  into 
the  pit.  God  has  found  an  all-sufficient  and  a  most  blessed  ransom 
for  your  souls,  and  therefore  you  are  delivered. 

What  more  can  I  say  to  you,  my  dear  hearers?  I  have  told  you 
the  way  of  mercy,  and  I  have  described  to  you  the  footsteps  of  mercj 
in  the  experience  of  those  who  have  proved  its  saving  efficacy ;  but  I 
■cannot  l)ring  Christ  to  your  souls,  or  when  Christ  comes  nigh  unto 
you,  as  he  doth  now  in  the  ministry  of  his  gospel,  I  cannot  make  you 
open  the  doors  of  your  hearts  to  receive  him.  0  ye  who  do  not  believe 
and  are  yet  in  your  sins,  what  more  can  I  do  for  you  than  thus  to  cry 
aloud  in  your  ears,  and  proclaim  to  you  the  path  of  life?  This  one 
thing  I  can  do :  I  can  stand  here  and  break  my  heart  to  think  that 
you  refuse  him.  But  no;  I  cannot  take  leave  of  you  thus.  I  must 
again  beseech,  and  entreat,  and  implore  you  as  you  love  your  souls, 
turn  not  away  from  the  divine  messenger,  from  Jesus  Christ  the 
friend  of  sinners.  He  asks  no  great  thing  of  you;  he  bids  you  not 
pass  through  ceremonies  that  will  take  you  days  and  months,  but 
now,  one  believing  glance  at  yonder  cross,  one  glance  at  him  who  died 
there  for  sinners,  and  it  is  done.  Christ  is  honoured;  God  is  satisfied; 
you  are  saved.  Go  your  way  and  tell  your  friends  what  great  things 
he  has  done  for  you,  and  God  bless  you.     Amen. 


I  KNOW  THAT  MY  REDEEMER  LIVETH. 


^ 


sermon 

Dbuvbred  on  Sunday  Morning,  April  12th,  1863,  bt  thi 

REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTOM. 


'*For  I  know  that  my  redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  fha  Iatt«r  JM 
apon  the  earth  :  and  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my  flen 
shall  I  see  God :  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not 
another ;  though  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me." — Job  xix.  25 — 27. 

The  hand  of  God  has  been  upon  us  heavily  this  week.  An  aged  deacon, 
who  has  been  for  more  than  fifty  years  a  member  of  this  Church,  has 
been  removed  from  our  midst ;  and  a  sister,  the  beloved  wife  of  another 
of  our  Church-officers,  a  member  for  nearly  the  same  term  of  years,  has 
tallen  asleep.  It  is  not  often  that  a  Church  is  called  to  sorrow  over  the 
departure  of  two  such  venerable  members — let  not  our  ears  be  deaf  to 
such  a  double  admonition  to  prepare  to  meet  our  God.  That  they  were 
preserved  so  long,  and  upheld  so  mercifully  for  so  many  years,  was  not 
only  a  reason  of  gratitude  to  them,  but  to  us  also,  I  am,  however,  80 
averse  to  the  preaching  of  what  are  called  funeral  sermons,  that  I  for- 
bear, lest  I  appear  to  eulogise  the  creature,  when  my  only  aim  should 
be  to  magnify  the  grace  of  God. 

Our  text  deserves  our  profound  attention ;  its  preface  would  hardly 
have  been  written  had  not  the  matter  been  of  the  utmost  importance  in 
the  judgment  of  the  patriarch  who  uttered  it.  Listen  to  Job's  remark- 
able desire :  "  Oh  that  my  words  were  now  written  I  oh  that  they  were 
printed  in  a  book !  That  they  were  graven  with  an  iron  pen  and  lead 
in  the  rock  for  ever ! "  Perhaps,  hardly  aware  of  the  full  meaning  of 
the  words  he  was  uttering,  yet  his  holy  soul  was  impressed  with  a  sense 
of  some  weighty  revelation  concealed  within  his  words ;  he  therefore 
desired  that  it  might  be  recorded  in  a  book ;  he  has  had  his  desire 
the  Book  of  books  embalms  the  words  of  Job.  He  wished  to  have  them 
graven  on  a  rock;  cat  deep  into  it  with  an  iron  pen,  and  then  the  lines 

No.  504. 

2 


490  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

inlaid  with  lead ;  or  he  would  have  them  engraven,  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  ancients,  upon  a  sheet  of  metal,  so  that  time  might  not 
be  able  to  eat  out  the  inscription.  He  has  not  had  his  desire  in  that 
respect,  save  only  that  upon  many  and  many  a  sepulchre  those  words  of 
Job  stand  recorded,  "  I  know  that  my  redeemer  liveth."  It  is  the 
opinion  of  some  commentators  that  Job,  in  speaking  of  the  rock  here, 
intended  his  own  rock-hewn  sepulchre,  and  desired  that  this  might  be 
his  epitaph ;  that  it  might  be  cut  deep,  so  that  ages  should  not  wear  it 
out;  that  when  any  asked,  "Where  does  Job  sleep?"  as  soon  as  they 
saw  the  sepulchre  of  the  patriarch  of  Uz,  they  might  learn  that  he 
died  in  hope  of  resurrection,  resting  upon  a  living  Redeemer.  Whether 
such  a  sentence  adorned  the  portals  of  Job's  last  sleeping-place 
we  know  not;  but  certainly  no  words  could  have  been  more  fitly 
chosen.  Should  not  the  man  of  patience,  the  mirror  of  endurance,  the 
pattern  of  trust,  bear  as  his  memorial  this  golden  line,  which  is  as  full 
of  all  the  patience  of  hope,  and  hope  of  patience,  as  mort.al  language 
can  be?  Who  among  us  could  select  a  more  glorious  motto  for  his  last 
escutcheon?  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  a  few  of  those  who  have  written 
upon  this  passage  cannot  see  Christ  or  the  resurrection  in  it  at  all.  Albert 
Barnes,  among  the  rest,  expresses  his  intense  sorrow  that  he  cannot  find 
the  resurrection  here,  and  for  my  part  I  am  son-y  for  him.  If  it  had 
been  Job's  desire  to  foretel  the  advent  of  Christ  and  his  own  sure  resur- 
rection, I  cannot  see  what  better  words  he  could  have  used;  and  if  those 
truths  are  not  here  taught,  then  language  must  have  lost  its  original  object, 
and  must  have  been  employed  to  mystify  and  not  to  explain;  to  conceal 
and  not  to  reveal.  What  I  ask,  does  the  patriarch  mean,  if  not  that  he 
shall  rise  again  when  the  Redeemer  stands  upon  the  earth  ?  Bretliren, 
no  unsophisticated  mind  can  fail  to  find  here  what  almost  all  believers 
have  here  discovered.  I  feel  safe  in  keeping  to  the  old  sense,  and  we 
ahall  this  morning  seek  no  new  interpretation,  but  adhere  to  the 
common  one,  with  or  without  the  consent  of  our  critics. 

In  discoursing  upon  them  I  shall  speak  upon  three  things.  First, 
let  us,  with  the  patriarch,  descend  into  the  grave  and  behold  the  ravages  of 
death.  Then,  with  him,  let  us  look  up  on  high  for  present  consolation. 
And,  still  in  his  admirable  company,  let  us,  in  the  third  place,  anticipate 
future  delights. 

I.    First  of  all  then,  with  the  patriarch  of  Uz,  let  us  descend 

INTO  the  sepulchre. 

The  body  has  just  been  divorced  from  the  soul.  Friends  who  loved 
most  tenderly  have  said — "  Bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight."  The  body 
is  borne  upon  the  bier  and  consigned  to  the  silent  earth;  it  is  surrounded 
by  the  earthworks  of  death.  Death  has  a  host  of  troops.  If  the  locusts 
and  the  caterpillars  be  God's  army,  the  worms  are  the  army  of  death. 
These  hungry  warriors  begin  to  attack  the  city  of  man.  They  commence 
with  the  outworks ;  they  storm  the  munition,  and  overturn  the  walls. 
The  skin,  the  city  wall  of  manhood,  is  utterly  broken  down,  and  the 
towers  of  its  glory  covered  with  confusion.  How  speedily  the  cruel 
invaders  deface  all  beauty.  The  face  gathers  blackness ;  the  coun 
tenance  is  defiled  with  corruption.  Those  cheeks  once  fair  with  youth, 
imd  ruddy  with  health,  have  fallen  in,  even  as  a  bowing  wall  and  a 


I    KNOW   THAT   MY   REDEEMER    LIVETH.  4f)T 

totterin}^  fence ;  those  eyes,  the  windows  of  the  mind  whence  joy  and 
Borrow  looked  forth  by  turns,  are  now  filled  up  with  the  dust  of  death ; 
those  lips,  the  doors  of  the  soul,  the  gates  of  Mansoul,  are  carried  away, 
and  the  bars  thereof  are  broken.  Alas,  ye  windows  o  agates  and  gates 
of  carbuncle,  where  are  ye  now?  How  shall  I  mourn  for  thee,  0  thou 
captive  city,  for  the  mighty  men  have  utterly  spoiled  thee!  Thy  neck, 
once  like  a  tower  of  ivory,  has  become  as  a  fallen  column ;  thy  nose,  so 
lately  comparable  to  "the  tower  of  Lebanon,  which  looketh  toward 
Damascus,"  is  as  a  ruined  hovel ;  and  thy  head,  which  towered  like 
Carmel,  lies  low  as  the  clods  of  the  valley.  Where  is  beauty  now  ? 
The  most  lovely  cannot  be  known  fi'om  the  most  deformed.  The 
yessel  so  daintily  wrought  upon  the  potter's  wheel,  is  cast  away  upon 
the  dunghill  with  the  vilest  potsherds.  Cruel  have  ye  been,  ye  warriors 
of  death,  for  though  ye  wield  no  axes  and  bear  no  hammers,  yet  have 
ye  broken  down  the  carved  work ;  and  though  ye  speak  not  with 
tongues,  yet  have  ye  said  in  your  hearts,  "We  have  swallowed  her 
np,  certainly  this  is  the  day  that  we  have  looked  for;  we  have  found,  we 
have  seen  it."  The  skin  is  gone.  The  troops  have  entered  into  the 
town  of  Mansoul.  And  now  they  pursue  their  work  of  devastation; 
the  pitiless  marauders  ^all  upon  the  body  itself.  There  are  those 
noble  aqueducts,  the  veins  through  which  the  streams  of  life  were 
wont  to  flow,  these,  instead  of  being  rivers  of  life,  have  become 
blocked  up  with  the  soil  and  wastes  of  death,  and  now  they  must 
be  pulled  to  pieces ;  not  a  single  relic  of  them  shall  be  spared. 
Mark  the  muscles  and  sinews,  like  great  highways  that  penetrating 
the  metropolis,  carry  the  strength  and  wealth  of  manhood  along 
— their  curious  pavement  must  be  pulled  up,  and  they  that  do 
traffic  thereon  must  be  consumed ;  each  tunnelled  bone,  and 
curious  arch,  and  knotted  bond  must  be  snapped  and  broken. 
Fair  fabrics,  glorious  storehouses,  costly  engines,  wonderful  machines — 
all,  all  must  be  pulled  down,  and  not  one  stone  left  upon  another. 
Those  nerves,  which  like  telegraphic  wires  connected  all  parts  of  the  city 
together,  to  carry  thought  and  feeling  and  intelligence — these  are  cut. 
No  matter  how  artistic  the  work  might  be, — and  certainly  we  are  fear- 
fully and  wonderfully  made,  and  the  anatomist  stands  still  and  marvels 
to  see  the  skill  which  the  eternal  God  has  manifested  in  the  formation  of 
the  body — but  these  ruthless  worms  pull  everything  to  pieces,  till  like 
a  city  sacked  and  spoiled  that  has  been  given  up  for  days  to  pillage  and 
to  flame,  everything  lies  in  a  heap  of  ruin — ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to  dust. 
But  these  invaders  stop  not  here.  Job  says  that  next  they  consume 
his  reins.  We  are  wont  to  speak  of  the  heart  as  the  great  citadel  of  life, 
the  inner  keep  and  donjohn,  where  the  captain  of  the  guard  holdeth  out 
to  the  last.  The  Hebrews  do  not  regard  the  heart,  but  the  lower 
viscera,  the  reins,  as  the  seat  of  the  passions  and  of  mental  power.  The 
worms  spare  not;  they  enter  the  secret  places  of  the  tabernacle  of 
life,  and  the  standard  is  plucked  from  the  tower.  Having  died,  the 
heart  cannot  preserve  itself,  and  falls  like  the  rest  of  the  frame — a  prey 
to  worms.  It  is  gone,  it  is  all  gone !  The  skin,  the  body,  the  vitals, 
all,  all  has  departed.  There  is  nought  left.  In  a  few  years  ye  shall 
turn  up  the  sod  and  say,  "  Here  slept  so-and-so,  and  where  is  he  now?" 


492  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  ye  may  search  and  hunt   and   dig,  but  ye   shall  find   no  relic. 
Mother  Earth  has  devoured  her  own  offspring. 

Dear  friends,  why  should  we  wish  to  have  it  otherwise?  Why  should 
we  desire  to  preserve  the  body  when  the  soul  has  gone  ?  What  vain 
attempts  men  have  made  with  coffins  of  lead,  and  wrappings  of  myrrh 
and  frankincense.  The  embalming  of  the  Egyptians,  those  master 
robbers  of  the  worm,  what  has  it  done?  It  has  served  to  keep  some 
poor  shrivelled  lumps  of  mortality  above  ground  to  be  sold  for 
curiosities,  to  be  dragged  away  to  foreign  climes,  and  stared  upon  by 
thoughtless  eyes.  No,  let  the  dust  go,  the  sooner  it  dissolves  the 
better.  And  what  matters  it  how  it  goes  !  If  it  be  devoured  of  beasts, 
if  it  be  swallowed  up  in  the  sea  and  become  food  for  fishes!  What,  if 
plants  with  their  roots  suck  up  the  particles  !  What,  if  the  fabric 
passes  into  the  animal,  and  from  the  animal  into  the  earth,  and  from 
the  earth  into  the  plants,  and  from  the  plant  into  the  animal  again ! 
What,  if  the  winds  blow  it  along  the  highway !  What,  if  the  rivera 
carry  it  to  the  waves  of  ocean !  It  is  ordained  that  somehow  or  other 
it  must  be  all  separated — "  dust  to  dust,  ashes  to  ashes."  It  is  part  of 
the  decree  that  it  should  all  perish.  The  worms  or  some  other  agents 
of  destruction  must  destroy  this  body.  Do  not  seek  to  avoid  what  God 
has  purposed;  do  not  look  upon  it  as  a  gloomy  thing.  Regard  it  as  a 
necessity;  nay  more,  view  it  as  the  platform  of  a  miracle,  the  lofty  stage 
of  resurrection,  since  Jesus  shall  surely  raise  again  from  the  dead  the 
particles  of  this  body,  however  divided  from  one  another.  We  have 
heard  of  miracles,  but  what  a  miracle  is  the  resurrection !  All  the 
miracles  of  Scripture,  yea  even  those  wrought  by  Christ,  are  small  com- 
pared with  this.  The  philosopher  says,  "  How  is  it  possible  that  God 
shall  hunt  out  every  particle  of  the  human  frame  ?"  He  can  do  it :  he 
has  but  to  speak  the  word,  and  every  single  atom,  though  it  may  have 
travelled  thousands  of  leagues,  though  it  may  have  been  blown  as  dust 
across  the  desert,  and  anon  have  fallen  upon  the  bosom  of  the  sea,  and 
then  have  descended  into  the  depths  thereof  to  be  cast  up  on  a 
desolate  shore,  sucked  up  by  plants,  fed  on  again  by  beasts,  or  passed 
into  the  fabric  of  another  man, — I  say  that  individual  atom  shall  find 
its  fellows,  and  the  whole  company  of  particles  at  the  trump  of  the 
archangel  shall  travel  to  their  appointed  place,  and  the  body,  the  very 
body  which  was  laid  in  the  ground,  shall  rise  again. 

I  am  afraid  I  have  been  somewhat  uninteresting  while  tarrying  upon 
the  exposition  of  the  words  of  Job,  but  I  think  very  much  of  the  pith 
of  Job's  faith  lay  in  this,  that  he  had  a  clear  view  that  the  worms  would 
after  his  skin  destroy  his  body,  and  yet  that  in  his  flesh  he  should  see 
God.  You  know  we  might  regard  it  as  a  small  miracle  if  we  could 
preserve  the  bodies  of  the  departed.  If,  by  some  process,  with  spices 
and  gums  we  could  preserve  the  particles,  for  the  Lord  to  make  those 
dry  bones  live,  and  to  quicken  that  skin  and  flesh,  were  a  miracle  cer- 
tainly, but  not  palpably  and  plainly  so  great  a  marvel  as  when  the 
worms  have  destroyed  the  body.  When  the  fabric  has  been  absolutely 
broken  up,  the  tenement  all  pulled  down,  ground  to  pieces,  and  flung 
in  handfuls  to  the  wind,  so  that  no  relic  of  it  is  left,  and  yet  when  Christ 
itands  in  the  latter  days  upon  the  earth,  all  the  structure  shall   be 


I   KNOW    THAT   MY   REDEEMER   LIVETH.  493 

brought  together,  bone  to  his  bone — then  shall  the  might  of  Omnipo- 
tence be  seen.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,  and  happy  is  h« 
who  finds  no  difficulty  here,  who  looks  at  it  as  being  an  impossibility 
with  man  but  a  possibility  with  God,  and  lays  hold  upon  the  omnipo- 
tence of  the  Most  High  and  says,  "Thou  sayest  it,  and  it  shall  be 
done ! "  I  comprehend  thee  not  great  God  ;  I  marvel  at  thy  purpose  to 
raise  my  mouldering  bones;  but  I  know  that  thou  doest  great  wonders, 
and  I  am  not  surprised  that  thou  shouldst  conclude  the  great  drama  of 
thy  creating  works  here  on  earth  by  re-creating  the  human  fiarae  by 
the  same  power  by  which  thou  didst  bring  from  the  dead  the  body  of  thy 
Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  that  same  divine  energy  which  has  regenerated 
human  souls  in  thine  own  image. 

II.  Now,  having  thus  descended  into  the  grave,  and  seen  nothing 
there  but  what  is  loathsome,  let  us  look  up  with  the  patriarch 

AND  behold  a  sun  SHINING  WITH  PRESENT  COMFORT. 

" I  know,"  said  he,  "that  my  Redeemer  liveth."  The  word  "Redeemer* 
here  used,  is  in  the  original  "  goel " — kinsman.  The  duty  of  the  kins- 
man, or  goel,  was  this:  suppose  an  Israelite  had  alienated  his  estate, 
as  in  the  case  of  Naomi  and  Ruth;  suppose  a  patrimony  which  had 
belonged  to  a  family,  had  passed  away  through  poverty,  it  was  the 
gocl's  business,  the  redeemer's  business  to  pay  the  price  as  the  next  of 
kin,  and  to  buy  back  the  heritage.  Boaz  stood  in  that  relation  to  Ruth. 
Now,  the  body  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  heritage  of  the  soul — the 
soul's  small  farm,  that  little  plot  of  earth  in  which  the  soul  has  been 
wont  to  walk  and  delight,  as  a  man  walketh  in  his  garden  or  dwelleth 
in  his  house.  Now,  that  becomes  alienated.  Death,  like  Ahab,  takes 
away  the  vineyard  from  us  who  are  as  Naboth;  we  lose  our  patrimonial 
estate ;  Death  sends  his  troops  to  take  our  vineyard  and  to  spoil  the 
vines  thereof  and  ruin  it.  But  we  turn  round  to  Death  and  say,  "  I 
know  that  my  Goel  liveth,  and  he  will  redeem  this  heritage ;  I 
have  lost  it;  thou  takest  it  from  me  lawfully,  0  Death,  because  my  sin 
hath  forfeited  my  right;  I  have  lost  my  heritage  through  my  own 
offence,  and  through  that  of  my  first  parent  Adam;  but  there  lives  one 
who  will  buy  this  back."  Brethren,  Job  could  say  this  of  Christ  long 
before  he  had  descended  upon  earth,  "  I  know  that  he  liveth;"  and  now 
that  he  has  ascended  up  on  high,  and  led  captivity  captive,  surely  we  may 
with  double  emphasis  say,  "  I  know  that  my  Goel,  my  Kinsman  liveth, 
and  that  he  hath  paid  the  price,  that  I  should  have  back  my  patrimony, 
so  that  in  my  flesh  I  shall  see  God."  Yes,  my  hands,  ye  are  redeemed 
with  blood;  bought  not  with  corruptible  things,  as  with  silver  and 
gold,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  Yes,  heaving  lungs  and 
palpitating  heart,  ye  have  been  redeemed!  He  that  redeemed  the  soul 
to  be  his  altar  has  also  redeemed  the  body,  that  it  may  be  a  temple  for 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Not  even  the  bones  of  Joseph  can  remain  in  the 
house  of  bondage.  No  smell  of  the  fire  of  death  may  pass  upon  the 
garments  which  his  holy  children  have  worn  in  the  furnace. 

Remember,  too,  that  it  was  always  considered  to  be  the  duty  of  the 
goel,  not  merely  to  redeem  by  price,  but  where  that  failed,  to  redeem  by 
power.  Hence,  when  Lot  was  carried  away  captive  by  the  four  kings, 
Abraham  summoned  his  own  hired  servants,  and  the  servants  of  all  his 


494  MBTROPOLITAW  TABERNACLB    PULPIT. 

friends,  and  went  out  against  the  kings  of  the  East,  and  brought  back 
Lot  and  the  captives  of  Sodom.  Now,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  wlio  once 
has  played  the  kinsman's  part  by  paying  the  price  for  us,  lireth,  and  he 
will  redeem  us  by  power.  0  Death,  thou  tremblest  at  this  name!  Thou 
knowest  the  might  of  our  KinsmanI  Against  his  arm  thou  canst  not 
stand!  Thou  didst  once  meet  him  foot  to  foot  in  stem  battle,  and  0 
Death,  thou  didst  indeed  tread  upon  his  heel.  He  voluntarily  submitted 
to  this,  or  else,  0  Death,  thou  hadst  no  power  against  him.  But  he 
slew  thee.  Death,  he  slew  thee!  He  rifled  all  thy  caskets,  took  from  thee 
the  key  of  thy  castle,  burst  open  the  door  of  thy  dungeon  ;  and 
now,  thou  knowest.  Death,  thou  hast  no  power  to  hold  my  body;  thou 
mayst  set  thy  slaves  to  devour  it,  but  thou  shalt  give  it  up,  and  all 
their  spoil  must  be  restored.  Insatiable  Death,  from  thy  greedy  maw 
ret  shall  return  the  multitudes  whom  thou  hast  devoured.  Thou  shalt 
be  compelled  by  the  Saviour  to  restore  thy  captives  to  the  light  of  day. 
I  think  I  see  Jesus  coming  with  his  Father's  servants.  The  chariots  of 
the  Lord  are  twenty  thousand,  even  thousands  of  angels.  Blow  ye  the 
trumpet !  blow  ye  the  trumpet !  Immanuel  rides  to  battle  1  The  Most 
Mighty  in  majesty  girds  on  his  sword.  He  comes !  He  comes  to  snatch 
by  power,  his  people's  lands  from  those  who  have  invaded  their  portion. 
Oh,  how  glorious  the  victory!  No  battle  shall  there  be.  He  comes,  he 
sees,  he  conquers.  The  sound  of  the  trumpet  shall  be  enough;  Death 
shall  fly  affrighted ;  and  at  once  from  beds  of  dust  and  silent  clay,  to 
reialms  of  everlasting  day  the  righteous  shall  arise. 

To  linger  here  a  moment,  there  was  yet,  very  conspicuously  in  the  Old 
Testament,  we  are  informed,  a  third  duty  of  the  goel,  which  was  to 
avenge  the  death  of  his  friend.  If  a  person  had  been  slain,  the  Goel 
was  the  avenger  of  blood;  snatching  up  his  sword,  he  at  once  pursued 
the  person  who  had  been  guilty  of  bloodshed.  So  now,  let  us  picture 
ourselves  as  being  smitten  by  Death.  His  arrow  has  just  pierced  us 
to  the  heart,  but  in  the  act  of  expiring,  our  lips  are  able  to  boast  of 
vengeance,  and  in  the  face  of  the  monster  we  cry,  "  I  know  that  my 
Goel  liveth."  Thou  mayst  fly,  0  Death,  as  rapidly  as  thou  wilt,  but 
no  city  of  refuge  can  hide  thee  from  him;  he  will  overtake  thee;  he 
will  lay  hold  upon  thee,  0  thou  skeleton  monarch,  and  he  will  avenge 
my  blood  on  thee.  I  would  that  I  had  powers  of  eloquence  to  work 
out  this  magnificent  thought.  Chrysostom,  or  Christmas  Evans  could 
picture  the  flight  of  the  King  of  Terrors,  the  pursuit  by  the  Redeemer, 
the  overtaking  of  the  foe,  and  the  slaying  of  the  destroyer.  Christ  shall 
certainly  avenge  himself  on  Death  for  all  the  injury  which  Death 
hath  done  to  his  beloved  kinsmen.  Comfort  thyself  then,  0  Christian ; 
thou  hast  ever  living,  even  when  thou  diest,  one  who  avenges  thee,  one 
who  has  paid  the  price  for  thee,  and  one  whose  strong  arms  shall  yet 
set  thee  free. 

Passing  on  in  onr  text  to  notice  the  next  word,  it  seems  that  Job 
found  consolation  not  only  in  the  fact  that  he  had  a  Goel,  a  Redeemer, 
but  that  this  Redeemer  liveth.  He  does  not  say,  "  I  know  that  my 
Goel  shall  live,  but  that  he  lives," — having  a  clear  view  of  the  self- 
existence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
lor  ever.     And  you  and  I  looking  back  do  not  say,  "  I  know  that  he 


I   KNOW   THAT   MY   REDEEMER    LITBTH.  405 

did  Itve,  but  he  lives  to-day."  This  very  day  you  that  mourn  and 
sorrow  for  venerated  friends,  your  prop  and  pillar  in  years  gone  by, 
you  may  go  to  Christ  with  confidence,  because  he  not  only  lives,  but 
he  is  the  source  of  life;  and  you  therefore  believe  that  he  can  give 
forth  out  of  himself  life  to  those  whom  you  have  committed  to  the 
tomb.  He  is  the  Lord  and  giver  of  life  originally,  and  he  shall  be 
specially  declared  to  be  the  resurrection  and  the  life,  when  the  legions 
of  his  redeemed  shall  be  glorified  with  him.  If  I  saw  no  fountain  from 
which  life  could  stream  to  the  dead,  I  would  yet  believe  the  promise 
when  God  said  that  the  dead  shall  live;  but  when  I  see  the  fountain 
provided,  and  know  that  it  is  full  to  the  brim  and  that  it  runneth  over, 
I  can  rejoice  without  trembling.  Since  there  is  one  who  can  say,  "  I 
am  the  resurrection  and  the  life,"  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  see  the  means 
already  before  us  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  look 
up  to  our  Goel  then  who  liveth  at  this  very  time. 

Still  the  marrow  of  Job's  comfort  it  seems  to  me  lay  in  that  little 
word  *'  My."  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth."  Oh,  to  get  hold  of 
Christ!  I  know  that  in  his  offices  he  is  precious.  But,  dear  friends, 
we  must  get  a  property  in  him  before  we  can  really  enjoy  him.  What 
ig  honey  in  the  wood  to  me,  if  like  the  fainting  Israelites,  I  dare  not 
eat.  It  is  honey  in  my  hand,  honey  on  my  lip,  which  enlightens  mine 
eyes  like  those  of  Jonathan.  What  is  gold  in  the  mine  to  me?  Men 
are  beggars  in  Peru,  and  beg  their  bread  in  California.  It  is  gold  in 
my  purse  which  will  satisfy  my  necessities,  purchasing  the  bread  I 
need.  So,  what  is  a  kinsman  if  he  be  not  a  kinsman  to  me.  A 
Redeemer  that  does  not  redeem  me,  an  avenger  who  will  never  stand 
up  for  my  blood,  of  what  avail  were  such?  But  Job's  faith  was  strong 
and  firm  in  the  conviction  that  the  Redeemer  was  his.  Dear  friends, 
dear  friends,  can  all  of  you  say,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth." 
The  question  is  simple  and  simply  put;  but  oh,  what  solemn  thing! 
hang  upon  your  answer,  "Is  it  my  Redeemer?"  I  charge  you  rest 
not,  be  not  content  until  by  faith  you  can  say,  "  Yes,  I  cast  myself 
upon  him;  I  am  his,  and  therefore  he  is  mine."  I  know  that  fall 
many  of  you,  while  you  look  upon  all  else  that  you  have  as  not  being 
yours,  yet  can  say,  "  My  Redeemer  is  mine."  He  is  the  only  piece  of 
property  which  is  really  ours.  We  boiTow  all  else,  the  house,  the  chil- 
dren; nay,  our  very  body  we  must  return  to  the  Great  Lender.  But 
Jesus,  we  can  never  leave,  for  even  wlien  we  are  absent  from  the  body 
we  are  present  with  the  Lord,  and  I  know  that  even  death  cannot 
separate  us  from  him,  so  that  body  and  soul  are  with  Jesus  truly  even 
in  the  dark  hours  of  death,  in  the  long  night  of  the  sepulchre,  and  in 
the  separate  state  of  spiritual  existence.  Beloved,  have  you  Christ? 
It  may  be  you  hold  him  with  a  feeble  hand,  you  half  think  it  is  pre- 
sumption to  say,  "He  is  my  Redeemer;"  yet  remember,  if  you  hare 
but  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  that  little  faith  entitles  you  to  say, 
and  say  now,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth." 

There  is  another  word  in  this  consoling  sentence  which  no  doabt 
served  to  give  a  zest  to  the  comfort  of  Job.  It  was  that  he  could  s^, 
"  I  know" — "  I  KNOW  that  my  Redeemer  liveth."  To  say,  "  I  hope  so, 
I  trust  so,"  is  comfortable;  and  there  are  thousands  in  the  fold  of  Jesni 


496  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

who  hardly  crer  get  mnch  further.  But  to  reach  the  marrow  of  conso- 
lation you  must  say,  "I  know."  Ifs,  buts,  and  perhapses,  are  sure 
murderers  of  peace  and  comfort.  Doubts  are  dreary  things  in  times  of 
sorrow.  Like  wasps  they  sting  the  soul!  If  I  have  any  suspicion  that 
Christ  is  not  mine,  then  there  is  vinegar  mingled  with  the  gall  of  death. 
But  if  I  know  that  Jesus  is  mine,  then  darkness  is  not  dark ;  even  the 
night  is  light  about  me.  Out  of  the  lion  cometh  honey;  out  of  the 
eater  cometh  forth  sweetness.  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth." 
This  is  a  brightly-burning  lamp  cheering  the  damps  of  the  sepulchral 
vault,  but  a  feeble  hope  is  like  a  flickering  smoking  flax,  just  making 
darkness  visible,  but  nothing  more.  I  would  not  like  to  die  with  a 
mere  hope  mingled  with  suspicion.  I  might  be  safe  with  this  but 
hardly  happy;  but  oh,  to  go  down  into  the  river  knowing  that  all  is 
well,  confident  that  as  a  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm  I  have  fallen 
into  the  arms  of  Jesus,  and  believing  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which 
I  have  committed  to  him.  I  would  have  you,  dear  Christian  friends, 
never  look  upon  the  full  assurance  of  faith  as  a  thing  impossible  to 
you.  Say  not  "  It  is  too  high ;  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  I  have  known 
one  or  two  saints  of  God  who  have  rarely  doubted  their  interest  at  all. 
There  are  many  of  us  who  do  not  often  enjoy  any  ravishing  ecstaciea, 
but  on  the  other  hand  we  generally  maintain  the  even  tenour  of  our  way, 
simply  hanging  upon  Christ,  feeling  that  his  promise  is  true,  that  hifl 
merits  are  sufficient,  and  that  we  are  safe.  Assurance  is  a  jewel  for 
worth  but  not  for  rarity.  It  is  the  common  privilege  of  all  the  saints 
if  they  have  but  the  grace  to  attain  unto  it,  and  this  grace  the  Holy 
Spirit  gives  freely.  Surely  if  Job  in  Arabia,  in  those  dark  misty  ages 
when  there  was  only  the  morning  star  and  not  the  sun,  when  they 
law  but  little,  when  life  and  immortality  had  not  been  brought  to 
light, — if  Job  before  the  coming  and  advent  still  could  say,  "  /  know^ 
yon  and  I  should  not  speak  less  positively.  God  forbid  that  onr 
positiveness  should  be  presumption.  Let  us  try  ourselves,  and  see 
that  onr  marks  and  evidences  are  right,  lest  we  form  an  ungrounded 
hope;  for  nothing  can  be  more  destructive  than  to  say,  "  Peace,  peace, 
where  there  is  no  peace."  But  oh,  let  us  build  for  eternity,  and  build 
solidly.  Let  us  not  be  satisfied  with  the  mere  foundation,  for  it  is  from 
the  upper  rooms  that  we  get  the  widest  prospect.  Let  us  pray  the  Lord 
to  help  us  to  pile  stone  on  stone,  until  we  are  able  to  say  as  we  look  at 
it,  "  Yes,  I  Tcnow,  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth."  This,  then,  for 
present  comfort  to-day  in  the  prospect  of  departure. 

III.  And  now,  in  the  third  and  last  place,  as  the  anticipation  of 
FDTUEE  DELIGHT,  let  me  Call  to  your  remembrance  the  other  part  of 
the  text.  Job  not  only  knew  that  the  Redeemer  lived,  but  he  antici- 
pated the  time  when  he  should  stand  in  (he  latter  day  upon  the  earfh. 


I   KNOW   THAT   MY    REDEEMER   LIVETH.  497 

No  doubt  Job  referred  here  to  our  Saviour's  first  advent,  to  the  time 
when  Jesus  Christ,  "  the  goal,"  the  kinsman,  should  stand  upon  the 
earth  to  pay  in  the  blood  of  his  veins  the  ransom  price,  which  had, 
indeed,  in  bond  and  stipulation  been  paid  before  the  foundation  of  the 
jvorld  in  promise.  But  I  cannot  think  that  Job's  vision  stayed  there  ; 
ne  was  looking  forward  to  the  second  advent  of  Christ  as  being  the 
period  of  the  resurrection.  We  cannot  endorse  the  theory  that  Job 
arose  from  the  dead  when  our  Lord  died,  although  certain  Jewish 
believers  held  this  idea  very  firmly  at  one  time.  We  are  persuaded 
that  "the  latter  day"  refers  to  the  advent  of  glory  rather  than  to 
that  of  shame.  Our  hope  is  that  the  Lord  shall  come  to  reign 
in  glory  where  he  once  died  in  agony.  The  bright  and  hallowed 
doctrine  of  the  second  advent  has  been  greatly  revived  in  our  churches 
in  these  latter  days,  and  I  look  for  the  best  results  in  consequence. 
There  is  always  a  danger  lest  it  be  perverted  and  turned  by  fanatical 
minds,  by  prophetic  speculations,  into  an  abuse ;  but  the  doctrine  in 
itself  is  one  of  the  most  consoling,  and,  at  the  same  time,  one  of  the 
most  practical,  tending  to  keep  the  Christian  awake,  because  the  bride- 
groom Cometh  at  such  an  hour  as  we  think  not.  Beloved,  we  believe 
that  the  same  Jesus  who  ascended  from  Olivet  shall  so  come  in  like 
manner  as  he  ascended  up  into  heaven.  We  believe  in  his  personal 
advent  and  reign.  We  believe  and  expect  that  when  both  wise  and 
foolish  virgins  shall  slumber;  in  the  night  when  sleep  is  heavy  upon  the 
saints;  when  men  shall  be  eating  and  drinking  as  in  the  days  of  Noah, 
that  suddenly  as  the  lightning  flasheth  from  heaven,  so  Christ  shall 
descend  with  a  shout,  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  and  reign  with 
him.  We  are  looking  forward  to  the  literal,  personal,  and  actual  standing 
of  Christ  upon  earth  as  the  time  when  creation's  groans  shall  be  silenced 
for  ever,  and  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creature  shall  be  fulfilled. 

Mark,  that  Job  describes  Christ  as  standing.  Some  interpreters  have 
read  the  passage,  "he  shall  stand  in  the  latter  days  against  the  earth;** 
that  as  the  earth  has  covered  up  the  slain,  as  the  earth  has  become  the 
charnel-house  of  the  dead,  Jesus  shall  arise  to  the  contest  and  say, 
"  Earth,  I  am  against  thee ;  give  up  thy  dead !  Ye  clods  of  the  valley 
cease  to  be  custodians  of  my  people's  bodies !  Silent  deeps,  and  you,  ye 
cavems  of  the  earth,  deliver,  once  for  all,  those  whom  ye  have  im- 
prisoned!"  Macphelah  shall  give  up  its  precious  treasure,  cemeteriea 
and  graveyards  shall  release  their  captives,  and  all  the  deep  places  of 
the  earth  shall  resign  the  bodies  of  the  faithful.  Well,  whether  that 
be  so  or  no,  the  posture  of  Christ,  in  standing  upon  the  earth,  is 
significant.  It  shows  his  triumph.  He  has  triumphed  over  sin,  which 
which  once  like  a  serpent  in  its  coils  had  bound  the  earth.  He  has 
defeated  Satan.     On  the  very  spot  where  Satan  gained  his  power  Christ 

2i 


498  METROPOrJTAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

has  gained  the  victory.  Earth,  which  was  a  scene  of  defeated  goodness, 
whence  mercy  once  was  all  but  driven,  where  virtue  died,  where  every- 
thing heavenly  and  pure,  like  flowers  blasted  by  pestilential  winds,  hung 
down  their  heads,  withered  and  blighted — on  this  very  earth  everything 
that  is  glorious  shall  blow  and  blossom  in  perfection ;  and  Christ  himself, 
once  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  fairest  of  all  the  sons  of  men,  shall 
come  in  the  midst  of  a  crowd  of  courtiers,  while  kings  and  princes  shall 
do  him  homage,  and  all  the  nations  shall  call  him  blessed.  "  He  shall 
stand  in  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth." 

Then,  at  that  auspicious  hour,  says  Job,  "  In  my  flesh  I  shall  see 
God."  Oh,  blessed  anticipation — "I  shall  see  God."  He  does  not 
say,  "  I  shall  see  the  saints " — dou^^tless  we  shall  see  them  all  in 
heaven — but,  "  I  shall  see  Godr  Note  he  does  not  say,  "  I  shall  see 
the  pearly  gates,  I  shall  see  the  walls  of  jasper,  I  shall  see  the  crowns  of 
gold  and  the  harps  of  harmony,"  but  "  I  shall  see  God  ;"  as  if  that  were 
the  sum  and  substance  of  heaven.  "  In  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God."  The 
pire  in  heart  shall  see  God.  It  was  their  delight  to  see  him  in  the 
ordinances  by  faith.  They  delighted  to  behold  him  in  communion  and 
in  prayer.  There  in  heaven  they  shall  have  a  vision  of  another  sort. 
We  shall  see  God  in  heaven,  and  be  made  completely  like  him ; 
the  divine  character  shall  be  stamped  upon  us  ;  and  being  made 
like  to  him  we  shall  be  perfectly  satisfied  and  content.  Likeness- 
to  God,  what  can  we  wish  for  more  ?  And  a^  sight  of  God,  what  can  we 
desire  better?  We  shall  see  God,  and  so  there  shall  be  perfect  content- 
ment to  the  soul  and  a  satisfaction  of  all  the  faculties.  Some  read  the 
passage,  "  Yet,  I  shall  see  God  in  my  flesh,"  and  hence  think  that  there 
is  here  an  allusion  to  Christ,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  word  made 
flesh.  Well,  be  it  so,  or  be  it  not  so,  it  is  certain  that  we  shall  see 
Christ,  and  He,  as  the  divine  Redeemer,  shall  be  the  subject  of  our 
eternal  vision.  Nor  shall  we  ever  want  any  joy  beyond  simply  that  of 
seeing  him.  Think  not,  dear  friend,  that  this  will  be  a  narrow  sphere 
for  your  mind  to  dwell  in.  It  is  but  one  source  of  delight,  "  I  shall  see 
God,"  but  that  source  is  infinite.  His  wisdom,  his  love,  his  power,  all 
his  attributes  shall  be  subjects  for  your  eternal  contemplation,  and  as 
he  is  infinite  under  each  aspect,  there  is  no  fear  of  exhaustion.  His 
works,  his  purposes,  his  gifts,  his  love  to  you,  and  his  glory  in  all  his 
purposes,  and  in  all  his  deeds  of  love — why,  these  shall  make  a  theme 
that  never  can  be  exhausted.  You  may  with  divine  delight  antici- 
pate the  time  when  in  your  flesh  you  shall  see  God. 

But  I  must  have  you  observe  how  Job  has  expressly  made  us  note 
that  it  is  in  the  same  body.  "  Yet,  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God ;"  and 
then  he  says  again,  "  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eye  shall 
behold  and  not  another."    Yes,  it  is  true  that  I,  the  very  man  standing 


I    KNOW   THAT    MY    REDEEMER   LIVETH.  499 

here,  though  I  must  go  down  to  die,  yet  I  shall  as  the  same  man  mos 
certainly  arise  and  shall  behold  my  God.  Not  part  of  myself,  thoug 
the  soul  alone  shall  have  some  ^iew  of  God,  but  the  whole  of  myself 
my  flesh,  my  soul,  my  body,  my  spirit  shall  gaze  on  God.  We  shall 
not  enter  heaven,  dear  friends,  as  a  dismasted  vessel  is  tugged  into 
harbour ;  we  shall  not  get  to  glory  some  on  ooards,  and  some  on 
broken  pieces  of  the  ship,  but  the  whole  ship  shall  be  floated  safely  into 
the  haven,  body  and  soul  both  being  safe.  Christ  shall  be  able  to  say, 
"  A II  that  the  father  giveth  to  me  shall  come  to  me,"  not  only  all  the 
persons,  but  all  of  the  persons — each  man  in  his  perfection.  There 
shall  not  be  found  in  heaven  one  imperfect  saint.  There  shall  not  be  a 
saint  without  an  eye,  much  less  a  saint  without  a  body.  No  member 
of  the  body  shall  have  perished ;  nor  shall  the  body  have  lost  any  of  its 
natural  beauty.  All  the  saints  shall  be  all  there,  and  all  uf  all ;  the 
same  persons  precisely,  only  that  they  shall  have  risen  from  a  state  of 
grace  to  a  state  of  glory.  They  shall  be  ripened ;  they  sliall  be  no 
more  the  green  blades,  but  the  full  corn  in  the  ear;  no  more  buds  but 
flowers;  not  babes  but  men. 

Please  to  notice,  and  then  I  shall  conclude,  how  the  patriarch  puts  it  as 
being  a  real  personal  enjoyment.  "  Whom  mine  eye  shall  behold,  and  not 
another."  They  shall  not  bring  me  a  report  as  they  did  the  Queen  of 
Sheba,  but  I  shall  see  Solomon  the  King  for  myself.  I  shall  be  able  to 
say,  as  they  did  who  spake  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  "  Now  I  believe, 
not  because  of  thy  word  who  did  bring  me  a  report,  but  I  have  seen  him 
for  myself."  There  shall  be  personal  intercourse  with  God ;  not  through 
the  Book,  which  is  but  as  a  glass ;  not  through  the  ordinances ;  but 
directly,  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  be  able  to 
commune  with  the  Deity  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend.  "Not 
another."  If  I  could  be  a  changeling  and  could  be  altered,  that  would 
mar  my  comfort.  Or  if  my  heaven  must  be  enjoyed  by  proxy,  if 
draughts  of  bliss  must  be  drunk  for  me,  where  were  the  hope  ?  Oh,  no; 
for  myself,  and  not  through  another,  shall  I  see  God.  Have  we  not  told 
you  a  hundred  times  that  nothing  but  personal  religion  will  do,  and  is 
not  this  another  argument  for  it,  because  resurrection  and  glory  are 
personal  things?  "  Not  another."  If  you  could  have  sponsors  to  repent 
for  you,  then,  depend  upon  it,  you  would  have  sponsors  to  be  glorified 
for  you.  But  as  there  is  not  another  to  see  God  for  you,  so  you  must 
yourself  see  and  yourself  find  an  interest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

In  closing  let  me  observe  how  foolish  have  you  and  I  been  when  we 
have  looked  forward  to  death  with  shudders,  with  doubts,  with  loathings. 
After  all,  what  is  it  ?  Worms !  Do  ye  tremble  at  those  base  crawling 
things?  Scattered  particles!  Shall  we  be  alarmed  at  these ?  To  meet 
the  worms  we  hare  the  angels;  and  to  gather  the  scattered  particles  we 


500  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

have  the  voice  of  God.  I  am  sure  the  gloom  of  death  is  altogether  gone 
now  that  the  lamp  of  resm'rection  burns.  Disrobing  is  nothing  now  that 
better  garments  await  us.  We  may  long  for  evening  to  undress,  that 
we  may  rise  with  God.  I  am  sure  my  venerable  friends  now  present, 
in  coming  so  near  as  they  do  now  to  the  time  of  the  departure,  must 
have  some  visions  of  the  glory  on  the  other  side  the  stream.  Bunyan 
was  not  wrong,  my  dear  brethren,  when  he  put  the  land  Beulah  at  the 
close  of  the  pilgrimage.  Is  not  my  text  a  telescope  which  will  enable 
you  to  see  across  the  Jordan ;  may  it  not  be  as  hands  of  angels  to  bring 
you  bundles  of  myrrh  and  fi'ankincense  ?  You  can  say,  "  I  know  that 
my  Redeemer  liveth."  You  cannot  want  more;  you  were  not  satisfied 
with  less  in  your  youth,  you  will  not  be  content  with  less  now.  Those 
of  us  who  are  young,  are  comforted  by  the  thought  that  we  may  soon 
depart.  I  say  comforted,  not  alarmed  by  it;  and  we  almost  envy  those 
whose  race  is  nearly  run,  because  we  fear — and  yet  we  must  not  speak 
thus,  for  the  Lord's  will  be  done — I  was  about  to  say,  we  fear  that  our 
battle  may  last  long,  and  that  mayhap  our  feet  may  slip;  only  he  that 
keepeth  Israel  does  not  slumber  nor  sleep.  So  since  we  know  that  our 
Redeemer  liveth,  this  shall  be  our  comfort  in  life,  that  though  we  fall 
we  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down ;  and  since  our  Redeemer  liveth,  this 
shall  be  our  comfort  in  death,  that  though  worms  destroy  this  body, 
yet  in  our  flesh  we  shall  see  God. 

May  the  Lord  add  his  blessing  on  the  feeble  words  of  this  morning, 
and  to  him  be  glory  for  ever.    Amen. 

"Gravp,  fhe  e-nardian  of  our  dusf. ! 

Grave,  the  treasury  of  the  skiea ! 
Every  atom  of  thy  trust 

Rests  in  hope  ag:ain  to  rise. 
Hark  !  the  judgment  trumpet  calls  ; 

Soul,  rebuild  thy  house  of  clay, 
Immortality  thy  walls. 

And  Eternity  thy  day." 


"LO,    I    COME":    EXPOSITION. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  April  26th,   1891,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not  desire ;  mine  ears  hast  thou  opened :  burnt 
offering  and  sin  offering  hast  thou  not  required.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come :  in  the 
volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me,  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God  :  yea,  thy  law 
is  within  my  heart." — Psalm  xl.  6 — 8. 

Explained  to  us  by  the  apostle  Paul  in  Hebrews  x.  5 — 7  : 

"  Wherefore  when  he  cometh  into  the  world,  he  saith,  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou 
wouldest  not,  but  a  body  hast  thou  prepared  me :  in  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices  for 
sin  thou  hast  had  no  pleasure.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  (in  the  volume  of  the  book 
it  is  written  of  me,)  to  do  thy  will,  O  God." 

We  have,  in  the  use  made  of  the  passage  by  the  inspired  apostle^ 
sufficient  authority  for  appl^dng  the  quotation  from  the  fortieth  psalm 
to  our  divine  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  With  such  a  commentary, 
we  are  sure  of  our  way  and  our  whereabouts.  We  might  have  been 
perplexed  as  to  its  meaning  had  it  not  have  been  for  this  ;  although,  I 
think,  even  without  the  guidance  of  the  New  Testament  passage,  those 
who  are  familiar  with  Holy  Writ  woidd  have  felt  that  the  words  could 
not  be  fulfilled  in  David,  but  must  belong  to  a  greater  than  he,  even 
to  the  divine  Messiah,  who  in  the  fulness  of  time  would  come  into  the 
world.  We  rejoice  that  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  here  speaks  of  him- 
self. Who  but  he  can  declare  his  own  generation  ?  Here  he  is 
both  the  subject  of  the  words  and  the  speaker  also.  The  word  is  from 
himself  and  of  himseif,  and  so  we  have  double  reason  for  devout  atten- 
tion. He  tells  us  what  he  said  long  ago.  He  declares,  "  Then  I  said, 
Lo,  I  come."  Because  he  has  come  to  us,  we  gladly  come  to  him;  and 
now  we  reverently  wait  upon  him  to  hear  what  our  Lord  shall  speak  ; 
for,  doubtless,  he  will  speak  peace  to  us,  and  will  cause  us  to  learn, 
through  his  Spirit,  the  meaning  of  his  words.  0  Saviour,  say  to  each 
of  our  hearts,  "  Lo,  I  come  "  ! 

I.  Without  further  preface,  I  call  upon  you  to  notice,  first, 
the  sweeping  away  of  THE  SHADOW.  "  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou 
didst  not  desire  .  .  .  :  burnt  offering  and  sin  offering  hast  thou  not 
required." 

When  the  Soti  of  God  is  born  i?ito  the  world,  there  is  an  end  of  all 
types  by  which  he  was  formerly  prefigured.  The  symbols  end  when  the 
No.  2,202.  3 


502  METROPOLITAN   TABEBNACLE    PULPIT. 

truth  itself  is  made  fully  manifest.  The  sacrifices  of  the  law  had 
their  times  and  place,  their  teaching  and  their  influence.  Blessed 
were  those  in  Israel  whose  spiritual  minds  saw  beneath  the  outward 
sign,  and  discerned  the  inward  truth !  To  them  the  sacrifices  of  the 
holy  place  were  a  standing  means  of  fellowship  with  Q-od.  Day  after 
day  they  saw  the  Grreat  Propitiation  as  they  beheld  the  morning  and 
the  evening  lamb  :  so  often  as  they  looked  upon  a  sacrifice,  they 
beheld  the  Lamb  of  Grod  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  In 
the  Paschal  supper  they  were  instructed  by  the  slaying  of  the  un- 
blemished victim,  the  roasting  with  fire,  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood 
upon  the  door  without,  and  the  feasting  upon  the  sacrifice  within. 
Spiritual  men  could  have  found  in  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  old 
law  a  very  library  of  gospel  literature ;  but,  alas !  the  people  were  carnal, 
sensual,  and  unbelieving,  and  therefore  they  often  forgot  even  to  cele- 
brate the  appointed  sacrifices  :  the  Passover  itself  ceased  for  long 
periods,  and  when  the  festivals  were  maintained,  there  was  no  life  or 
reality  in  them.  After  they  had  been  chastened  for  their  neglect,  and 
made  to  wander  in  exile  because  of  the  wandering  of  their  hearts  after 
their  idols,  they  were  restored  from  captivity,  and  were  led  to  keep  the 
ceremonial  law ;  but  they  did  it  as  a  heartless,  meaningless  formality, 
and  thus  missed  all  spiritual  benefit :  with  the  unlighted  candle  in 
their  hand  they  bhndly  groped  in  the  dark.  They  slew  the  sacrifices, 
and  presented  their  peace-offerings ;  but  the  soul  had  gone  out  of  the 
service,  and  at  last  their  God  grew  weary  of  their  formal  worship,  and 
said,  ' '  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations  ;  incense  is  an  abomination  unto 
me."  We  read,  "  To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices 
unto  me  ?  saith  the  Lord :  I  am  full  of  the  burnt  offerings  of  rams, 
and  the  fat  of  fed  beasts  ;  and  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  bullocks, 
or  of  lambs,  or  of  he  goats.  When  ye  come  to  appear  before  me,  who 
hath  required  this  at  your  hand,  to  tread  mj^  courts  ?  "  When  once 
the  life  is  gone  out  of  the  best  symbolism,  the  Lord  abhors  the  carcase  ; 
and  even  a  divinely  ordained  ritual  becomes  a  species  of  idolatry. 
When  the  heart  is  gone  out  of  the  externals  of  worship,  they  are  as 
shells  without  the  kernel.  Habitations  without  living  tenants  soon 
become  desolations,  and  so  do  forms  and  ceremonies  without  their 
spiritual  meaning.  Toward  the  time  of  our  Lord's  coming,  the  out- 
ward worship  of  Judaism  became  more  and  more  dead  :  it  was  time 
that  it  was  buried.  It  had  decayed  and  waxed  old,  and  was  ready  to 
vanish  away,  and  vanish  away  it  did ;  for  our  Lord  set  aside  the  first, 
or  old,  that  he  might  establish  the  second,  or  new.  The  stars  were  no 
longer  seen  with  their  twinklings,  for  the  sun  had  arisen. 

Thii  removal  of  these  things  was  ivholesale.  We  have  four  sorts  of 
sacrifice  mentioned  here,  but  I  need  not  go  into  details.  Sacrifices  in 
which  blood  was  shed  were  aboHshed  when  the  Son  of  God  offered 
himself  without  spot  unto  God.  Bloodless  offerings,  such  as  fine  flour, 
and  wine,  and  oil,  a,nd  sweet  cane  bought  with  money,  and  precious 
incense — which  were  tokens  of  gratitude  and  consecration — these  also 
were  no  longer  laid  upon  the  altar.  Sacrifice  and  offering  both  were 
not  desired ;  and  burnt-offerings,  which  signified  the  delight  of  God 
in  the  great  Sacrifice,  were  ended  by  the  Lord's  actual  accejjtance  of 
that  Sacrifice  itself.    Even  the  sin-offering,  which  was  burned  without 


"lo,  I  come":  exposition.  503 

tlie  camp  as  a  thing  accursed,  altogether  ceased.  It  represented  sin 
laid  upon  the  victim,  and  the  victim's  being  made  a  curse  on  that 
account.  It  might  have  seemed  always  useful  as  a  reminder,  for  they 
were  alwaj^s  sinning,  and  always  needing  a  sin-offering ;  but  even  this 
•was  not  required.  Nothing  of  the  old  ceremonial  law  was  spared. 
Now  we  have  no  ark  of  the  covenant,  with  its  shekinah  light  between 
the  wings  of  the  cherubim.  Now  we  have  no  brazen  laver,  no  table 
of  shewbread,  no  brazen  altar,  and  no  sacred  veil :  the  holy  of  holies 
itself  is  gone.  Tabernacle  and  temple  are  both  removed.  "  Neither  in 
this  mountain,  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  shall  men  worship  the  Father"; 
but  the  time  is  come  when  "  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him 
in  spirit  and  in  truth."  A  clean  sweep  has  been  made  of  aU  the 
•ancient  rites,  from  circumcision  up  to  the  garment  with  its  fringe  of 
blue.  These  were  for  the  childhood  of  the  church,  the  pictures  of  her 
first  school-books  ;  but  we  are  no  longer  minors,  and  we  have  grace 
given  us  to  read  with  opened  eyes  that  everlasting  classic  of  "the 
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  Now  hath  the  brightness  of 
the  former  dispensation  been  quite  eclipsed  by  the  glory  which  excelleth. 

As  these  outward  things  vanish,  they  go  away  with  Grod's  mark  of 
non-esteem  upon  them  :  tliey  are  such  things  as  he  did  not  desire.  "  Sacri- 
fice and  offering  thou  didst  not  desire."  The  Lord  God  had  no  desire 
for  matters  so  trivial  and  unsatisfactory.  They  were  good  for  the 
people,  to  instruct  them,  if  they  had  been  willing  to  learn ;  but  they 
fulfilled  no  desire  of  the  heart  of  God.  He  says,  "  Will  I  eat  the  flesh 
of  bulls,  or  drink  the  blood  of  goats  ?  "  By  the  prophet  Micah  he 
asks,  "  Will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands  of  rams,  or  with  ten 
thousands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  "  These  furnish  no  delight  for  the  great 
Spirit,  and  give  no  pleasure  to  the  thrice  holy  Jehovah.  The  formal 
Worshipper  supposed  that  his  offerings  were,  in  and  of  themselves, 
pleasing  to  Gud,  and  therefore  brought  his  "  burnt  offerings,  with 
calves  of  a  year  old."  So  far  as  they  believingly  understood  the 
meaning  of  a  sacrifice,  and  presented  it  in  faith,  their  offerings  were 
acceptable ;  but  in  themselves  considered  these  were  far  from  being 
•what  the  Lord  desired.  He  that  filleth  heaven  and  earth  saith,  "I 
•will  not  reprove  thee  for  thy  sacrifices  or  thy  burnt  offerings,  to  have 
been  continually  before  me.  I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house, 
nor  he  goats  ou.t  of  thy  folds.  For  every  beast  of  the  forest  is  mine, 
and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills.  I  know  all  the  fowls  of  the 
mountains :  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  are  mine.  If  I  were 
hungry,  I  would  not  tell  thee  :  for  the  world  is  mine,  and  the  fulness 
thereof."  The  spiritual,  the  infinite,  the  almighty  Jehovah  could  not 
-desire  merely  outward  ritual,  however  it  might  appear  glorious  to  men. 
The  sweetest  music  is  not  for  his  ear,  nor  the  most  splendid  robes  of 
priests  for  his  eye.  He  desired  something  infinitely  more  precious 
than  these,  and  he  puts  them  away  with  this  note  of  dissatisfaction. 

And  more,  these  sacrifices  passed  away  with  the  mark  upon  them 
that  they  loere  not  what  God  required.  "  Burnt  offering  and  sin  offering 
hast  thou  not  required."  What  did  God  require  of  man?  Obedience. 
He  said  by  Samuel,  "  To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken 
than  the  fat  of  rams."  He  saith  in  another  place,  "  He  hath  shewed 
thee,  0  man,  what  is  good ;  and  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee, 


504  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PFLPIT. 

but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy 
God  ?  "  The  requirement  of  the  law  was  love  to  God  and  love  to  men. 
This  has  always  been  God's  great  requirement.  He  seeks  spiritual 
worship,  obedient  thought,  holy  living,  grateful  praise,  devout  prayer 
— these  are  the  requirements  of  the  Creator  and  Benefactor  of  men. 
Ritualistic  matters  were  so  far  required  as  they  might  minister  to  the 
good  of  the  people,  and  while  they  stood  they  could  not  neglect  them 
without  loss;  but  they  were  not  the  grand  requirement  of  a  just 
and  holy  God,  and  therefore  men  might  fulfil  these  without  stint  or 
omission,  and  yet  God  would  not  have  of  them  what  he  required.  Yea, 
he  asks,  "  Who  hath  required  this  at  your  hand,  to  tread  my  courts  ?  " 
To  see  his  law  magnified,  his  justice  vindicated,  his  sovereignty 
acknowledged,  and  his  holiness  imitated,  is  more  to  his  mind.  Absolute 
conformity  to  the  standard  of  moral  and  spiritual  rectitude  which  he 
has  set  up  is  his  demand,  and  he  can  be  content  with  nothing  less. 
These  things  are  not  found  in  sacrifice  and  offering,  neither  do  they 
always  go  therewith,  and  therefore  the  outward  sacrifice  was  not  what 
God  required. 

They  ivere  so  to  be  put  away  as  never  to  he  followed  by  the  same  Idnd  of 
things.  Shadows  are  not  replaced  by  other  shadows.  The  ceremonials 
of  Aaron  are  not  to  be  followed  by  another  set  of  carnal  ordinances. 
There  are  some  who  seem  to  think  that  they  are  so  to  be.  Instead  of 
Aaron,  whom  God  ordained,  we  have  a  so-called  priesthood  among  us 
at  this  day,  claiming  an  apostolical  succession,  which  is  impossible  if 
they  are  priests,  since  no  apostle  was  a  priest.  Instead  of  rites  which 
God  has  ordained  we  have  rites  of  man's  invention.  The  blessed 
ordinances  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  such  as  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper,  have  been  prostituted  from  their  instructive  and  memorial 
intent  into  a  kind  of  witchcraft ;  so  that  by  what  is  called  baptism 
children  are  said  to  be  born  again,  and  made  members  of  Christ  and 
children  of  God,  while  in  the  second,  or  what  they  call  Holy  Com- 
munion, the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  profanely  said  to  be  repeated  or 
continued,  even  in  the  unbloody  sacrifice  of  the  mass.  Ah,  friends ! 
our  Lord  did  not  put  away  that  grand,  magnificent  system  of  Mosaic 
rites  to  introduce  the  masquerade  in  which  Rome  delights,  which 
certain  Anglicans  would  set  up  among  us.  No,  no;  we  have  done 
with  the  symbolic  sj'stem,  and  have  now  but  the  two  outward  ordi- 
nances of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  are  meant  only  for 
believers  who  know  what  it  is  to  be  buried  with  Christ,  and  to  feed 
on  him.  You  have  no  right  to  bring  in  your  own  forms  and  cere- 
monies, and  place  them  in  the  church  of  Christ.  Beyond  what  God 
has  ordained  we  may  not  dare  to  go  ;  and  even  in  those  things  we 
may  not  rest  as  though  there  were  anything  in  them  of  their  own 
operation,  apart  from  their  sacred  teaching.  These  are  instructive  to 
you  if  you  have  a  mind  to  be  instructed,  and  if  you  know  the  truths 
whicu  they  set  forth ;  but  do  not  imagine  that  men  have  come  under 
another  kind  of  ceremonialism,  another  system  of  ritual  and  rubric, 
for  it  is  not  so.  The  rites  appropriate  to  priests  are  abolished  with 
the  Aaronic  priesthood,  and  can  never  be  restored  :  "  He  taketh  away 
the  first,  that  he  may  establish  the  second."  When  he  cometh  into  the 
world  these  carnal  ordinances  must  go  out  of  the  world.    Sacrifice  and 


"  LO,    I   COME  "  :    EXPOSITION.  505 

offering,  burnt  offering  and  sin  offering,  and  all  other  patterns  of 
heavenly  things,  are  swept  away  when  the  heavenly  things  themselves 
appear. 

II.  Thus  much  upon  the  shadows  being  swept  away ;  and  now, 
secondly,  let  us  view  the  revelation  of  the  substance.  We  find 
the  Son  of  God  himself  appearing.  We  read  here,  and  we  hear  him 
say — "  Mine  ears  hast  thou  opened."  The  Lord  himself  comes,  even 
he  who  is  all  that  these  things  foreshadowed. 

JVTien  he  comes  he  has  a  prepared  ear.  The  margin  hath  it,  "  Mine  ears 
hast  thou  digged."  Our  ears  often  need  digging ;  for  they  are  blocked 
up  by  sin.  The  passage  to  the  heart  seems  to  be  sealed  in  the  case 
of  fallen  man.  But  when  the  Saviour  came,  his  ear  was  not  as  ours, 
but  was  attentive  to  the  divine  voice.  He  says,  "  He  wakeneth  mine 
ear  to  hear  as  they  that  are  taught.  The  Lord  Grod  hath  opened  mine 
ear,  and  I  was  not  rebellious."  Our  Lord  was  quick  of  understanding 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  :  he  knew  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  was,  and 
he  could  say,  "  I  do  always  the  thing  that  pleases  him."  As  man,  he 
had  a  divine  instinct  of  holiness,  which  made  him  to  know  and  love 
the  Father's  will,  and  caused  him  always  to  translate  that  will  into  his 
own  life.  You  see  he  came  with  an  opened  ear,  and  some  think  that 
here  we  have  an  allusion  to  the  boring  of  the  ear  in  the  case  of  the 
servant  who  had  a  right  to  liberty,  but  refused  to  quit  his  servitude, 
because  he  loved  his  master,  and  wished  to  remain  with  him  for  ever. 
It  is  not  certain  that  there  is  any  such  reference  ;  but  it  is  certain  that 
our  Lord  was  bound  for  ever  to  the  service  which  he  had  undertaken 
for  his  Father,  and  that  he  would  not  go  back  from  it.  He  pledged 
himself  to  redeem  us,  and  he  set  his  face  like  a  flint  to  do  it.  He 
loved  his  Father,  and  he  loved  his  chosen  so  much  that  he  vowed  to 
execute  the  Father's  work,  even  to  what  I  might  call  "  the  bitter  end," 
if  I  did  not  know  that  it  was  a  sweet  and  blessed  end  to  him.  His 
ear  was  prepared  for  his  service. 

But  our  Lord  came  also  with  a  prepared  lodtj  :  hence,  the  apostle  Paul, 
when  he  quoted  this  passage,  probably  taking  the  words  from  the 
Septuagint  translation,  writes,  "A  body  hast  thou  prepared  me." 
You  will  wonder  how,  in  one  passage,  it  should  speak  of  the  ear,  and 
the  next  should  speak  of  the  body ;  and  yet  there  is  small  difference  in 
the  sense.  We  do  not  think  of  an  ear  without  a  body — that  would  be 
a  sorry  business.  The  reading  in  the  Hebrews  is  involved  in  the  text 
as  it  stands  in  the  Psalm.  If  the  ear  is  there,  a  body  is  there  ;  you 
cannot  even  dream  of  an  ear  hearing  if  separate  from  the  rest  of  the 
body.  The  apostle  gives  us  the  sense  of  the  text  rather  than  the 
words  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  dealing  as  he  was  with  Jews  by  whom 
the  Septuagint  was  prized,  he  quoted  from  the  version  which  they  would 
be  sure  to  acknowledge — and  very  properly  and  wisely  so — because 
that  version  was  perfectly  accurate  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew. 
Any  way,  he  was  inspired  to  read  it — "A  body  hast  thou  prepared 
me."  There  was  fashioned  by  the  Holy  Q-host,  in  the  womb  of  the 
blessed  Virgin,  a  body  fitted  to  embody  the  Son  of  God.  Wrought 
mysteriously,  by  means  into  which  we  must  not  inquire — for  what  God 
hath  veiled  must  remain  covered — that  body  was  suited  to  set  forth 
the  great  mystery,  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh." 


.■506  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PITLPIT. 

The  whole  body  of  Christ  was  prepared  for  him  and  for  his  great 
"work.  To  begin  with,  it  was  a  sinless  body,  without  taint  of  original 
sin,  else  God  could  not  have  dwelt  therein.  It  was  a  body  made  highly 
vital  and  sensitive,  probably  far  beyond  what  ours  are ;  for  sin  has  a 
blunting  and  hardening  effect  even  upon  flesh,  and  his  flesh,  though  it 
was  in  the  "likeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  was  not  sinful  flesh,  but  flesh 
-which  yielded  prompt  obedience  to  his  spirit,  even  as  his  whole  human 
nature  was  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  His  body 
was  capable  of  great  endurance,  so  as  to  know  the  griefs  and  agonies 
and  unspeakable  sorrows  of  a  delicate,  holy,  and  tender  kind  which  it 
was  necessary  for  him  to  bear.  "  A  body  hast  thou  prepared  me."  In 
the  fulness  of  time  he  came  into  that  body,  which  was  admirably 
adapted  to  enshrine  the  G-odhead.  Wondrous  mystery,  that  the  infant 
■of  Bethlehem  should  be  linked  with  the  Infinite ;  and  that  the  weary 
man  by  the  shores  of  Galilee  should  be  very  God  of  very  God,  revealed 
in  a  body  prepared  for  him !  "A  body  hast  thou  prepared  me  "  :  he 
had  a  prepared  ear  and  a  prepared  body. 

He  who  assumed  that  hody  was  existent  before  that  body  was  prepared. 
He  says,  "A  body  hast  thou  prepared  me.  Lo,  I  come."  He  from 
old  eternity  dwelt  with  God :  the  Word  was  in  the  beginning  with 
•God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  We  could  not  any  one  of  us  have  said 
that  a  body  was  prepared  for  us,  and  therefore  we  would  come  to  it ; 
for  we  had  had  no  existence  before  our  bodies  were  fashioned.  From 
•everlasting  to  everlasting  our  Lord  is  God,  and  he  comes  out  of  eternity 
into  time — the  Father  bringing  him  into  the  world.  He  was  before 
all  worlds,  and  was  before  he  came  into  the  world  to  dwell  in  his 
prepared  body. 

Beloved,  the  human  nature  of  Christ  was  taken  on  him  in  order  that  he 
miyht  he  able  to  do  for  us  that  ivhich  God  desired  and  required.  God 
desired  to  see  an  obedient  man,  a  man  who  would  keep  his  law  to  the 
full ;  and  he  sees  him  in  Christ.  God  desired  to  see  one  who  would 
vindicate  the  eternal  justice,  and  show  that  sin  is  no  trifle  ;  and  behold 
our  Lord,  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  entering  into  that  prepared  body, 
was  ready  to  do  all  this  mighty  work,  by  rendering  to  the  law  a  full 
recompense  for  our  dishonour  of  it !  An  absolutely  perfect  righteous- 
ness he  renders  unto  God :  as  the  second  Adam,  he  presents  it  for  all 
whom  he  represents.  He  bows  his  head  a  victim  beneath  Jehovah's 
sword,  that  the  truth,  and  justice,  and  honour  of  God  might  suffer  no 
detriment.  His  body  was  prepared  to  this  end.  Incarnation  is  a  means 
to  atonement.  Only  a  man  could  vindicate  the  law,  and  therefore  the 
Son  of  God  became  a  man.  This  is  a  wonderful  being,  this  God  in 
our  nature.  "  Emmanuel "  is  a  glorious  word.  Surely  for  the  incarnation 
and  the  atonement  the  world  was  made  from  the  first.  Was  this  the 
reason  why  the  morning  stars  sang  together  when  they  saw  the  corner- 
stone of  the  world,  because  they  had  an  inkling  that  here  God  would 
bo  manifest  as  nowhere  else  beside,  and  the  Creator  would  be  wedded 
to  the  creature  ?  That  God  might  be  manifested  in  the  Christ,  it  may 
even  bo  that  sin  was  permitted.  Assuredly,  there  could  have  been  no 
sacrifice  on  Calvary  if  there  had  not  first  of  all  been  sin  in  Eden.  The 
whole  scheme,  the  whole  of  God's  decrees  aud  acts,  worked  up  to 
an  atoning  Saviour.     Of  the  pyramid  of  creation  and  of  providence 


*'  LO,    I    COME  "  :    EXPOSITION.  607 

Christ  is  tlie  apex  :  he  is  the  flower  of  all  that  Grod  hath  made.  His 
divine  nature  in  strange  union  with  humanity  constitutes  a  peerless 
personage,  such  as  never  was  before,  and  can  never  be  again.  Grod 
in  our  nature  one  Being,  and  yet  wearing  two  natures,  is  altogether 
imique.  He  saith,  "  A  body  hast  thou  prepared  me.  Lo,  I  come." 
Think  of  this  :  it  is  a  truth  fitter  for  meditation  than  for  sermonizing. 
The  Lord  give  us  to  know  it  well  by  faith  ! 

III.  But  now,  thirdly,  I  call  your  attention  to  the  declaration'  of 
THE  Christ,  made  in  the  text :  "  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not 
desire.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come."  Observe  when  he  says  this.  It  is 
in  the  time  of  failure.  All  the  sacrifices  had  failed.  The  candle  flickered, 
and  was  dying  out,  and  then  the  great  light  arose,  even  the  eternal 
light,  and  like  a  trumpet  the  words  rung  out,  "  Lo,  I  come."  All  this 
has  been  of  no  avail ;  now  I  come.  It  is  in  the  time  of  failure  that 
Christ  always  does  appear.  The  last  of  man  is  the  first  of  God  ;  and 
when  we  have  come  to  the  end  of  all  our  power  and  ho]3e,  then  the 
eternal  power  and  Godhead  ajDpears  with  its  "  Lo,  I  come." 

When  our  Lord  comes,  it  is  with  the.  view  of  filling  up  the  vacuum 
which  had  now  been  sorrowfully  seen.  God  does  not  desire  these 
things  ;  God  does  not  require  these  things  ;  but  he  does  desire  and  he 
does  require  something  better :  and  lo,  the  Christ  has  come  to  bring 
that  something.  That  awful  gap  which  was  seen  in  human  hope  when 
Moses  had  passed  away,  and  the  Aaronic  priesthood,  and  all  the  ordi- 
nances of  it  were  gone,  Christ  was  born  to  fiU.  It  looked  as  if  the 
light  of  ages  had  been  quenched,  and  God's  glorious  revelation  had 
been  for  ever  withdrawn ;  and  then,  in  the  dark  hour,  Jesus  cries, 
''  Lo,  I  come  !  "  He  fills  the  blank  abyss  :  he  gives  to  man  in  reality 
what  he  had  lost  in  the  shadow. 

When  he  appears,  it  is  as  the  personal  Lord.  Lay  the  stress  upon 
the  pronoun,  "Lo,  /come."  The  infinite  -£'yo  appears.  "Lo,  /come," 
No  mere  man  could  talk  thus,  and  be  sane.  No  servant  or  prophet  of 
God  would  ever  say,  "  Lo,  I  come."  Saintly  men  talk  not  so.  God's 
prophets  and  apostles  have  a  modest  sense  of  their  true  position :  they 
never  magnify  themselves,  though  the}^  magnify  their  ofiice.  It  is  for 
God  to  say,  "  Lo,  I  come."  He  who  says  it  takes  the  body  prepared 
for  him,  and  comes  in  his  own  proper  personality  as  the  I  AM.  "In 
him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  He  comes 
forth  from  the  ivory  palaces  to  inhabit  the  tents  of  manhood.  He 
takes  upon  himself  the  body  prepared  for  him  of  the  Lord  God,  and  he 
stands  forth  in  his  matchless  personality  ready  to  do  the  will  of  God. 
"  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell."  Every- 
thing is  stored  up  in  his  blessed  person,  and  we  are  complete  in  him. 

Observe  the  joyful  avowal  that  he  makes — "Lo,  I  come."  This  is  no 
dirge  :  I  think  I  hear  a  silver  trumpet  ring  out — "  Lo,  I  come."  Here 
is  a  joyful  alacrity  and  intense  eagerness.  The  coming  of  the  Saviour 
was  to  him  a  thing  of  exceeding  willingness.  "  For  the  joy  that  was 
set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame," 

He  comes  with  a  icord  calling  attention  to  it ;  for  he  is  not  ashamed  to 
be  made  partaker  of  our  flesh.  "  Lo,"  saith  he,  "  I  come.  Behold, 
behold,  I  come."  This  is  no  clandestine  union  ;  he  bids  heaven  behold 
iiim  come  into  our  nature.     Earth  is  bidden  to  gaze  upon  it.     0  ye 


508  METROPOLIT.VN    TABEKXACLE    PULPIT. 

sinners,  listen  to  this  inviting  "  Lo  !  "  Others  have  cried  to  you,  "  Lo, 
here  !  and  Lo,  there  "  ;  but  Jesus  looks  on  you,  and  cries,  "  Lo,  I  come." 
Look  hither :  turn  all  your  thoughts  this  way,  and  behold  your  Grod  in 
your  nature  ready  to  save  you.  Verily,  the  incarnate  Grod  is  a  subject 
meet  for  the  loftiest  thoughts  of  sages,  and  for  the  lowliest  thoughts  of 
children.  Blessed  are  the  children  of  grace  who  can  sit  at  the  feet 
of  the  incarnate  Grod  and  look  up,  forgetting  all  the  wisdom  of  the 
Greeks,  and  all  the  sign-seeking  of  the  Jews  in  the  satisfaction  which 
they  find  in  Jesus. 

I  think,  too,  I  hear  in  this  declaration  of  the  coming  One  a  note  of  finality. 
He  takes  away  the  sacrifice  from  Aaron's  altar;  but  he  says,  "  Lo,  I 
come."  There  is  an  end  of  it.  "  Lo,  I  come."  Is  there  anything 
after  this?  Can  anything  supersede  this — "Lo,  I  come."  "  Lo,  I 
come  "  has  been  the  perpetual  music  of  the  ages.  Read  it,  "  Lo,  I  am 
come "  ;  for  it  is  in  the  present  tense,  and  how  sweet  the  sound ! 
Christ  is  come,  and  joy  with  him.  Read  it  as  well  in  the  future,  if 
you  will,  "  Lo,  I  come,"  for  he  comes  "the  second  time  without 
Bin  unto  salvation";  here  is  our  chief  hope!  "  Lo,  I  come."  He 
himself  is  the  last  word  of  God.  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word  "  ; 
and  so  he  was  God's  first  word.  But  he  is  the  end  as  well  as  the  be- 
ginning :  God's  last  word  to  man ;  Christ  is  God's  ultimatum.  Look 
for  no  new  revelation — "  Lo,  I  am  come,"  shines  on  for  ever.  Do  not 
ask,  "  Aj.'t  thou  he  that  should  come,  or  do  we  look  for  another  ?  "  He 
has  come;  look  for  no  other.  Behold,  he  came  to  give  what  God 
desires,  what  God  requires  ;  what  would  you  more  ?  Let  him  be  all 
your  salvation  and  all  your  desire.  Let  him  be  "the  desire  of  all 
nations."  He  is  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  requirements  of  the  human 
race,  as  well  as  the  full  amount  of  what  God  requires. 

IV.  Next,  I  beg  you  to  note  the  reference  to  preceding  writings. 
He  says,  "  Lo,  I  come:  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of 
me."  If  I  preached  from  the  passage  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  I 
might  fairly  declare  that  in  the  ivhole  volume  of  Holy  Scripture  much  is 
written  of  our  Lord  and  prescribed  for  him  as  Messiah.  The  page  of 
inspiration  is  fragrant  with  the  name  of  Jesus.  He  is  the  top  line  of 
the  entire  volume,  and  in  the  Greek  word  I  see  a  half  allusion  to  this. 
He  is  the  head-line  of  contents  to  every  chapter  of  Scripture.  He  is 
of  all  Scripture  the  sum.  "In  the  beginning  was  the  word."  Every- 
thing speaks  of  him.  The  Pentateuch,  and  the  books  of  the  prophets, 
and  the  Psalms,  and  the  gospels,  and  the  epistles  all  speak  of  him. 
"  In  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  wi'itten  of  me." 

Preaching  as  I  am  from  the  Psalms,  I  cannot  take  so  long  a  range. 
I  must  look  back  and  find  what  was  written  in  David's  day,  and  within 
the  Pentateuch  certainly ;  and  where  do  I  find  it  written  concerning 
his  coming  ?  The  Pentateuch  drips  with  prophecies  of  Christ  as  a 
honeycomb  overflowing  with  its  honey.  Chiefly  is  he  to  be  found  in 
the  head  and  front  of  the  book :  so  early  as  the  opening  chapters  of 
the  Book  of  Genesis,  when  Adam  and  Eve  had  sinned,  and  we  were 
lost,  behold  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  volume  of  the  book  in  these  terms : 
"  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  So  early 
was  it  written  that  the  Redeemer  would  be  born  in  our  nature  to 
vanquish  our  foe. 


"lo,  I  come":  exposition.  509 

But  I  confess  I  do  not  feel  shut  out  from  another  interpretation.  I 
conceive  that  our  Lord  here  refers  to  another  book,  the  book  of  the 
divine  purposes,  the  volume  of  the  eternal  covenant.  There  was  a 
time  before  all  time,  when  there  was  no  day  but  the  Ancient  of  Days, 
when  all  that  existed  was  the  Lord,  who  is  all  in  all :  then  the  sacred 
Three  entered  into  covenant,  in  mutual  agreement,  for  a  sublime  end. 
Man  sinning,  the  Sou  of  God  shall  be  the  surety.  Christ  shall  bear  the 
result  of  man's  offence  ;  he  shall  vindicate  the  law  of  God,  and  make 
Jehovah's  name  more  glorious  than  ever  it  has  been.  The  second 
person  of  the  divine  Unity  was  pledged  to  come,  and  take  up  the 
nature  of  men,  and  so  become  the  firstborn  among  many  brethren  to 
lift  up  a  fallen  race,  and  to  save  a  number  that  no  man  can  number, 
elect  of  God  the  Father,  and  given  to  the  Son  to  be  his  heritage,  his 
portion,  his  bride.  Then  did  the  Well-beloved  strike  hands  with  the 
eternal  God,  and  enter  into  covenant  engagements  on  our  behalf  :  "In 
the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written."  That  sealed  book,  upon  whose 
secrets  no  angel's  eye  has  looked,  a  book  written  by  the  finger  of  God 
long  before  he  wrote  the  book  of  the  law  upon  tables  of  stone,  that 
book  of  God  may  be  spoken  of  in  the  Psalm,  "  And  in  thy  book  all 
my  members  were  written,  which  in  continuance  were  fashioned,  when 
as  yet  there  was  none  of  them."  Our  Lord  came  to  carry  out  all  his 
suretyship  engagements :  his  work  is  the  exact  fulfilment  of  his 
engagements  recorded  in  the  eternal  covenant,  "ordered  in  all  things 
and  sure."  He  acts  out  every  mysterious  line  and  syllable,  even  to  the 
full.  Theu  he  said,  "  A  body  hast  thou  prepared  me.  Lo,  I  come  :  in 
the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me."  It  is  ever  a  pleasing 
study  to  see  our  Lord,  both  in  the  written  Word,  and  in  the  eternal 
covenant  of  grace. 

V.  I  must  close  with  the  fiith  point,  the  delight  of  him  that 
COMETH.  He  said,  "  Lo,  I  come."  As  I  have  already  told  you,  there 
is  wonderful  delight  in  that  exclamation — "  Lo,  I  come  "  ;  but  lest  we 
should  mistake  our  Lord,  he  adds,  "  I  deliy-ht  to  do  thy  will,  0  my 
God :  yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart."  There  can  be  no  denial  of 
his  joy  in  his  service. 

Note  well,  that  he  came  in  complete  subserviency  to  his  Father,  God.  "I 
delight  to  do  " — what?  "  Thy  will."  His  own  will  was  absorbed  in 
the  divine  will.  His  pleasure  it  was  to  say,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  tiiou 
wilt."  It  was  his  meat  and  his  drink  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent 
him,  and  to  finish  his  work.  Though  he  was  Lord  and  God,  he  became 
a  lowly  servant  for  our  sakes.  Though  high  as  the  highest,  he  stooped 
low  as  the  lowest.  The  Bling  of  kings  was  the  servant  of  servants, 
that  he  might  save  his  people.  He  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a 
servant,  and  girded  himself,  and  stood  obediently  at  his  Father's  call. 

He  had  a  prospective  delight  as  to  his  work.  Before  he  came,  he  de- 
lighted in  the  thought  of  his  incarnation.  The  Supreme  Wisdom 
saith,  "  My  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men."  Happy  in  his 
Father's  courts,  he  yet  looked  forward  to  an  access  of  happiness  in 
becoming  man.  "Can  that  be  ?  "  saith  one.  Could  the  Son  of  God  be 
happier  than  he  was?  As  God,  he  was  infinitely  blessed;  but  he 
knew  nothing  by  experience  of  the  life  of  man,  and  into  that  sphere  he 
desired  to  enter.     To  the  Godhead  there  can  be  no  enlargement,  for  it 


510  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT, 

is  infinite ;  but  still  there  can  be  an  addition  ;  our  Lord  was  to  add  the 
Bitture  of  man  to  that  of  God.  He  would  live  as  man,  suffer  as  man, 
and  triumph  as  man,  and  yet  remain  God :  and  to  this  he  looked 
forward  with  a  strange  delight,  inexplicable  except  upon  the  knowledge 
of  the  great  love  he  bore  to  us.  He  had  given  his  heart  so  entirely  to 
his  dear  bride,  whom  he  saw  in  the  glass  of  predestination,  that  for  her 
he  would  endure  all  things. 

"  Yea,  saith  the  Lord,  for  her  I'll  go 

Through  all  the  depths  of  care  and  woe, 
And  on  the  cross  v/ill  even  dare 
The  bitter  pangs  of  death  to  bear." 

It  was  wondrous  love.  Our  Lord's  love  surpasses  all  language  and 
even  thought.  I  am  talking  prodigies  and  miracles  at  every  word  I 
utter.     It  was  delightful  to  our  Lord  to  come  hither. 

' '  What  did  he  delight  in?  "  saith  one.  Evidently  he  delighted  in  God's 
laiv.  "  Thy  law  is  within  my  heart."  He  resolved  that  the  beauties 
of  the  law  of  the  Lord  should  be  displayed  by  being  embodied  in  his 
own  life,  and  that  its  claims  should  be  vindicated  by  his  own  death. 
To  achieve  this,  he  delighted  to  come  and  keep  it  and  honour  it  by  an 
obedience  both  active  and  passive.  He  delighted  in  God's  will  also, 
and  that  is  somewhat  more  ;  for  law  is  the  expression  of  will,  and  this 
may  be  altered ;  but  the  will  of  the  great  King  never  changes.  Our 
Lord  delighted  to  carry  out  all  the  purposes  and  desires  of  the  Most 
High  God.  He  so  delighted  in  the  will  of  God  that  he  came  to  do  it, 
and  to  bear  it,  "  by  the  which  will  we  are  sanctified  through  the 
offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all." 

He  delighted  also  in  God.  He  took  an  intense  delight  in  glorifying 
the  Father.  He  came  to  reveal  the  Father,  and  make  him  to  be  be^ 
loved  of  men.  He  did  all  things  to  please  God.  Moreover,  he  took  a 
delight  in  lis ;  and  here,  though  the  object  of  his  love  is  less,  the  love 
itself  is  heightened  by  the  conspicuous  condescension.  The  Lord  Jesus 
took  a  deep  delight  in  his  people,  whose  names  were  written  on  his 
heart,  and  graven  on  the  palms  of  his  hands.  His  heart  was  fixed 
on  their  redemption,  and  therefore  he  would  present  himself  as  a 
sacrifice  on  their  behalf.  The  people  whom  the  Father  gave  him  from 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world  lay  on  his  very  soul ;  for  them  he- 
had  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with,  and  he  was  straitened  till  it  was 
accomplished.  He  gave  himseK  no  rest  till  he  had  left  both  joy  and 
rest  to  ransom  his  own. 

May  I  go  a  step  fui'ther  and  say  that  he  had  an  actual  delight  in  his 
coming  among  men  '^  "I  dehght  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God  " — not  merely 
to  think  of  doing  it.  When  our  Lord  was  here,  he  was  the  most  blessed 
of  men.  Do  you  start  ?  Do  you  remind  me  that  he  was  "  a  man  of 
sorrows  "  ?  I  grant  you  that  none  was  more  afflicted ;  but  I  still  stand 
to  it,  that  within  him  dwelt  a  joy  of  the  highest  order.  To  him  it  was 
joy  to  be  in  sorrow,  and  honour  to  be  put  to  shame.  Do  you  think 
that  lightens  our  estimate  of  his  self-denial  and  disinterestedness  ? 
Nay,  it  adds  weight  to  it.  Some  people  fancy  that  there  is  no  credit  in. 
doing  a  thing  unless  you  are  miserable  in  doing  it.  Nay,  brethren^ 
that  is  the  very  reverse.  Obedience  which  is  unwillingly  offered  and 
causes  no  joy  in  the  soul,  is  not  acceptable.     We  must  serve  God  with 


"  LO,    I   COME  "  :    EXPOSITION.  51! 

our  heart,  or  we  do  not  serve  him.  Obedience  rendered  without  delight 
in  rendering  it  is  only  half  obedience.  You  shall  say  what  you  will 
about  the  greatness  of  my  Lord's  agonies.  You  shall  never  go  too  far 
in  your  estimate  of  his  unfathomable  griefs  ;  but  going  with  you  to 
the  full  in  it  all,  I  shall  take  liberty  still  to  say  that  he  had  within 
himself  a  fountain  of  joy,  which  enabled  him  to  endure  the  cross,  and 
even  to  despise  the  shame.  Blessed  among  men  was  he,  even  when 
he  was  made  a  curse  for  us !  AVith  delight  he  gave  himself  for  us, 
and  made  a  cheerful  surrender  of  himself,  that  he  might  be  the 
ransom  for  many.     The  text  is  express  upon  that  fact. 

And  all  this  because  our  Lord  came  xvith  such  intense  heartiness.  He 
says,  "  Yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart."  Our  Lord  is  most  thorough 
in  all  that  he  does.  His  work  is  never  slovenly,  nor  in  a  half-hearted 
way.  He  does  not  even  sit  on  the  well  and  talk  to  a  poor  woman,  but 
what  his  heart  is  there.  He  does  not  go  into  a  fisherman's  hut,  but 
what  his  heart  is  there,  and  he  heals  the  sick  one.  He  does  not  sit 
down  to  supper  with  his  followers,  but  what  his  heart  is  there,  and  he 
reveals  his  love.  I  wish  we  were  always  at  home  when  the  Lord  calls 
for  us  !  Sometimes  we  are  all  abroad,  and  our  heart  is  away  from  the 
service  of  our  Eather ;  but  he  loved  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart,  and 
mind,  and  strength.  For  us  he  gave  his  whole  being,  rejoicing  to 
redeem  us.  He  was  alwa3^s  intense.  Whether  he  preached  or  prac- 
tised, Jesus  was  all  there  and  always  there.  Hence  his  delight ;  for- 
what  a  man  does  with  his  heart  he  delights  to  do.  These  two  senteuces- 
are  melodious  of  joy  to  my  ear.  "I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God  : 
yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart." 

Hear  this  one  other  word.  It  is  all  done  now.  Jesus  has  fulfilled, 
the  Father's  will  in  the  salvation  in  the  midst  of  his  ransomed  ones. 
And  shall  I  tell  you,  need  I  tell  you,  what  must  be  the  delight,  thi^- 
heavenly  joy  of  our  Lord.,  now  that  the  tvork  is  finished  ?  He  is  now  the- 
focus,  the  centre,  the  source  of  bliss.  What  must  be  his  own  delight ! 
We  often  say  of  the  angels  that  they  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that 
repenteth.  I  doubt  not  that  they  do,  but  the  Bible  does  not  say  so. 
The  Bible  saj's,  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God 
over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  What  means  the  presence  of  the 
angels  ?  Why,  that  the  angels  see  the  joy  of  Christ  when  sinners 
repent.  Hear  them  say  to  one  another,  "Behold  the  Father's  face! 
How  he  rejoices !  Gaze  on  the  countenance  of  the  Son  !  What  a 
heaven  of  delight  shines  in  those  eyes  of  his !  Jesus  wept  for  these 
sinners,  but  now  he  rejoices  over  them.  How  resplendent  are  the 
nail-prints  to-day,  for  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord's  death  are  believing 
and  repenting  !  That  blessed  countenance  which  is  always  as  a  sun, 
shineth  in  the  fulness  of  its  strength,  now  that  he  sees  of  the  travail, 
of  his  soul."     He  who  suffered  feels  a  joy  unsearchable,        v 

*'  The  first-bom  sons  of  light 

Desire  in  vain  its  depths  to  see : 
They  cannot  read  the  mystery — 

The  length,  the  breadth,  the  height." 

Oh,  the  joy  of  triumphant  love  !     The  joy  of  the  crucified,  whose  pre- 
pared body  is  the  body  of  his  glory  as  once  it  was  the  body  of  his- 


512  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

humiliation!     In  that  mauhood  he  still  rejoices,  and  delights  to  do 
the  will  of  the  Father. 

My  time  has  fled,  and  yet  I  am  expected  to  say  something  about 
missions.  What  shall  I  say  ?  My  brothers,  sisters,  all  of  you,  do  you 
know  anything  about  the  truths  I  have  spoken?  Then  go  and  tell 
the  heathen  that  the  Lord  is  come.  Here  is  a  message  worth  the 
telling.  Mary  Magdalene,  and  the  other  Maries,  haste  to  tell  the 
disciples  that  the  Lord  had  risen ;  will  you  not  go  and  tell  them  that 
he  has  come  down  to  save?  "Lo,  I  come,"  saith  he.  Will  you  not 
take  up  his  words,  and  go  to  the  people  who  have  never  heard  of  him, 
and  say,  "  Lo,  he  has  come."  Tell  the  Ethiopians,  the  Chinese,  the 
Hindoos,  and  all  the  islands  of  the  sea  that  God  has  come  hither  to 
save  men,  and  has  taken  a  prepared  body,  that  he  might  give  to  Grod 
all  he  required,  and  all  that  he  desired,  that  sinful  men  might  be 
accepted  in  the  Beloved,  with  whom  God  the  Father  is  well  pleased. 
Go,  and  take  to  the  heathen  this  sacred  Book.  "  In  the  volume  of  the 
book  it  is  written  of  him."  Do  not  begin  to  doubt  the  Book  yourself. 
Why  should  you  send  missionaries  to  teach  them  about  a  book  in 
which  3'-ou  do  not  yourself  believe  ?  Tell  the  nations  that  "  In  the 
volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  him."  Believe  this  Book,  and 
spread  it.  Help  Bible  societies,  and  all  such  efforts  ;  and  aid  mis- 
sionary societies,  which  carrj'  the  Book  and  proclaim  the  Saviour.  The 
men  of  the  Book  of  God  are  the  men  of  God,  such  as  the  world  needs. 
Bid  such  men  go  and  open  the  Book  of  God,  and  teach  the  nations 
its  blessed  news.  Go,  dear  friends,  and  assure  the  heathen  that  there 
is  happiness  in  obedience  to  God.  So  the  Saviour  found  it.  He  de- 
lighted in  God's  will,  even  to  the  death,  and  they  will  also  know 
delight  as  in  their  measures  they  bow  before  the  authority  of  the 
Word  and  the  will  of  the  one  living  and  true  God,  the  God  of  Abraham, 
of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  Jehovah,  the  I  AM,  must  be  worshipped,  for 
beside  him  there  is  none  else.  Give  glory  unto  God,  whom  our  Lord 
Jesus  has  come  to  glorify.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  xl. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 383,  271,  229. 


"LO,   I  COME":   APPLICATION. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  May  3rd,  1891,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON,  ^^ 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINOTON. 


'•Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come." — Psalm  xl.  7. 

To  my  great  sorrow,  last  Sunday  night  I  was  unable  to  preach.  I  had 
prepared  a  sermon  upon  this  text,  with  much  hope  of  its  usefulness ; 
for  I  intended  it  to  be  a  supplement  to  the  morning  sermon,  which 
was  a  doctrinal  exposition.  The  evening  sermon  was  intended  to  be 
practical,  and  to  commend  the  whole  subject  to  the  attention  of  en- 
quiring sinners.  I  came  here  feeling  quite  fit  to  preach,  when  aa 
overpowering  nervousness  oppressed  me,  and  I  lost  aU  self-control, 
and  left  the  pulpit  in  anguish.  I  come  hither  this  morning  with  the 
same  subject.  I  have  been  turning  it  over,  and  wondering  why  it 
was  so.  Peradventure,  this  sermon  was  not  to  be  preached  on  that 
occasion,  because  God  would  teach  the  preacher  more  of  his  own 
feebleness,  and  cast  him  more  fully  upon  the  divine  strength.  That 
has  certainlj'  been  the  effect  upon  my  own  heart.  Perhaps,  also,  there 
are  some  here  this  morning  who  were  not  here  last  Lord's-day  evening, 
whom  God  intends  to  bless  by  the  sermon.  The  people  were  not  here, 
peradventure,  for  whom  the  eternal  decree  of  God  had  designed  the 
message,  and  they  may  be  here  now.  You  that  are  fresh  to  this  place, 
should  consider  the  strange  circumstance,  which  never  happened  to  me 
before  in  the  forty  years  of  my  ministry  ;  and  you  may  be  led  ta 
enquire  whether  my  bow  was  then  unstrung  that  the  arrow  might 
find  its  ordained  target  in  your  heart.  The  two  sermons  will  now  go 
forth  together  from  the  press ;  and  perhaps,  going  together,  they  may 
prove  like  two  hands  of  love  wherewith  to  embrace  lost  souls,  and 
draw  them  to  the  Saviour,  who  herein  saith,  "  Lo,  I  come."  God 
grant  it  may  be  so  ! 

The  times  when  our  Lord  says,  **  Lo,  I  come,"  have  all  a  family 
likeness.  There  are  certain  crystals  which  assume  a  regular  shape, 
and  if  you  break  them,  each  fragment  will  show  the  same  conformation ; 
if  you  were  to  dash  them  to  shivers,  every  particle  of  the  crystal  would 
be  still  of  the  same  form.  Now  the  goings  forth  of  Christ  which  were 
of  old,  and  his  coming  at  Calvary,  and  that  great  advent  when  he 
No.  2,203. 

2k  4: 


514  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

shall  come  a  second  time  to  judge  the  earth  in  righteousness,  all  these 
have  a  likeness  the  one  to  the  other.  But  there  is  a  coming  of  what  I 
may  call  a  lesser  sort,  when  Jesus  cries  "  Lo,  I  come"  to  each 
individual  sinner,  and  brings  a  revelation  of  pardon  and  salvation ;  and 
this  has  about  it  much  which  is  similar  to  the  great  ones.  My  one 
desire  this  morning  is  to  set  forth  the  Lord  Jesus  as  saying  to  you,  as 
once  he  did  to  me,  "Lo,  I  come."  Still  he  cries  to  the  weak,  destitute, 
forlorn,  hopeless  sinner,  "  Lo,  I  come."  I  shall  talk  about  that  com- 
ing, and  hope  that  you  will  experience  it  now,  and  thus  be  able  to 
follow  me  in  what  I  say.  I  speak  to  the  unconverted  mainly ;  but 
while  I  do  so  I  shall  hope  to  be  refreshing  the  grateful  memories  of 
those  already  saved  ;  but  this  will  all  depend  upon  the  working  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.     To  him,  then,  lift  up  your  hearts  in  prayer. 

I.  I  will  commence  with  this  observation  :  the  Lord  Christ  has 
TIMES  OF  HIS  FIRST  COMINGS  TO  MEN;  "  Then  Said  I,  Lo,  I  come." 

What  are  these  times  ?  Mayhap  some  here  present  have  reached 
this  season,  and  this  very  day  is  the  time  of  blessing  when  the  text 
shall  be  f  idfilled  :  "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come."  Gro  with  me  to  the  first 
record  in  the  volume  of  the  Book,  when  it  was  said  that  he  should 
come.     You  will  find  it  in  the  early  chapters  of  Grenesis. 

Jesus  said,  "Lo,  I  come  "  wlien  tnati's  prohation  icas  a  failure.  Man 
in  the  Garden  of  Eden  had  every  advantage  for  obedience  and  life. 
He  had  a  perfect  nature,  created  without  bias  towards  evil,  and  he  was 
surrounded  with  every  inducement  to  continue  loyal  to  his  Maker.  He 
was  placed  under  no  burdensome  law.  The  precept  was  simple  and 
plain  :  "Of  every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  may  est  freely  eat :  but  of 
the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it : 
for  in  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."  Only 
one  tree  was  reserved  :  all  the  rest  were  given  up  to  be  freely  enjoyed. 
In  a  very  short  time — some  think  it  was  on  the  first  day,  but  that  we  do 
not  know — our  mother  Eve  ate  of  the  fruit,  and  father  Adam  followed 
her,  and  thus  human  probation  ended  in  total  failure.  They  were 
weighed  in  the  balances,  and  found  wanting :  "Adam  being  in  honour 
continued  not."  At  that  point  we  read  in  the  volume  of  the  Book  that 
the  Seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  Then  our 
Redeemer  said,  "Lo,  I  come."  Hearken  to  me,  my  friend  :  you  also 
have  had  your  probation,  as  you  have  thought  it  to  be.  You  quitted 
your  father's  roof  with  every  hoj)e,  your  mother  judged  you  to  be  of  a 
most  amiable  character,  and  your  friends  expected  to  see  in  you  one 
whose  life  would  honour  the  family.  You  thought  so  yourself.  Yom- 
probation  has  reversed  that  hope  :  you  have  turned  out  far  other  than 
you  should  have  been ;  and  looking  back  upon  the  whole  of  your  life 
to  this  moment,  you  ought  to  be  ashamed.  It  has  been  a  terrible 
breaking  down  for  you,  and  for  all  who  know  you ;  and  you  are  sitting 
in  this  place  feeling,  "  Yes,  it  is  so ;  the  tests  have  proved  me  to  be  as 
a  broken  reed.  I  am  under  condemnation  by  reason  of  my  trans- 
gressions against  God."  How  rejoiced  I  am  to  tell  you  that,  at  such 
a  time  when  you  are  conscious  that  you  are  a  dead  failure,  Jesus  says, 
*'Lo,  I  come!"  If  you  had  not  been  a  failure  you  would  not  have 
wanted  him,  and  he  never  comes  as  a  superfluity;  but  now  in  your 
complete  break-down  you  must  have  him  or  perish,  and  in  infinite  pity 


LO,    I    COME  "  :    APPLICATION. 


bib 


he  cries,  "  Lo,  I  come."     Is  not  this  good  news  for  you  ?     Believe  it 
and  live. 

That  also  was  a  time  when  man's  clever  dealings  with  the  devil  had  turned 
out  a  great  failure.     The  serpent  came  and  said,  *'  God  doth  know  that 
in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  then  your  eyes  shall  be  opened,  and  ye  shall 
be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil."     How  craftily  he  put  it!     How 
cunningly  he  insinuated  that  God  was  jealous  of  what  man  might 
become,  and  was  keeping  him  back  from  a  nobler  destiny !     He  even 
dared  to  say,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die,"  thus  giving  the  Lord  the  lie 
direct.     He  seemed  to  say — His  threat  is  a  mere  bugbear,  a  thing  to 
scare  you  from  a  great  advance  in  knowledge  and  position.     "  Ye 
shall  not  surely  die."     Eve,  in  her  supposed  wisdom,  was  not  able  to 
cope  with  the  serpent's  subtlety.     ''And  when  the  woman  saw  that 
the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and  that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  a 
tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise,  she  took  of  the  fruit  thereof,  and 
did  eat,  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband  with  her;  and  he  did  eat." 
The  devil  had  played  his  cards  so  well  that  man  was  left  bankruj)t  of 
virtue,  bankrupt  of  happiness,  bankrupt  of  hope.     Then,  in  the  volume 
of  the  Book,  it  was  written,  "I  said,  Lo,  I  come."     Yes,  in  the  hour 
when  hellish  falsehood  had  robbed  man  of  everything.     No  man  hath 
yet  dealt  with  the  devil  without  being  a  loser.     The  arch-deceiver 
promises  very  fairly ;   but  he  lies  from  beginning  to  end.     I  know 
he  j^romised  you  pleasure  unbounded,  and  liberty  unrestrained.    Now, 
the  pleasure  is  burnt  out,  and  the  ashes  of  that  which  once  blazed  and 
crackled,  are  terrible  to  look  upon.     As  for  liberty,  where  is  it  ?     You 
have  become  the  bond-slave  of  sin.     You  were  to  enjoy  life,  and  lo, 
3'ou  are  plunged  in  death !    It  may  be,  there  are  in  this  house  jDersons 
who  bear  in  their  bodies  the  marks,  not  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  of  the 
devil's  temptations.     He  has  made  you  so  to  sin  that  your  bones  are 
filled  with  the  sins  of  your  youth ;  and  you  know  it.     He  needs  a  long 
spoon  who  eats  out  of  the  same  dish  as  the  devil,  and  your  spoon  has 
not  been  long  enough.     Sin  has  overreached  and  betrayed  you ;  and 
you  stand  trembling  before  God  as  the  result  of  having  listened  to  the 
falsehoods  of   hell,  and  having  rejected  the   commands  of  heaven. 
Supposing  such  a  person  to  be  present — and  I  feel  sure  he  is — I  pray 
that  he  may  hear  my  text  as  from  the  Lord  Jesus  himself.     "  Then 
said  I,  Lo,  I  come."     The  devil    has  trodden  you  down,  but  Jesus 
comes  to  raise  you  up.     Your  paradise  is  lost,  and  by  him  it  is  to  be 
restored.     Jesus  has  come  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins. 
That  crafty  head  which  deceived  you,  the  Lord  Jesus  has  broken  ;  he 
came  for  this  purpose.     If  you  had  not  been  betrayed,  you  would  not 
have  needed  a  deliverer  ;  but  your  misery  has  made  room  for  his  mercy. 
Not  while  Adam  is  perfect  in  paradise  is  there  any  news  of  the  Seed  of 
the  woman  bruising  the  serpent's  head ;  but  after  the  serpent  has  done 
his  deceitful  work,  and  has  ruined  the  race,  then  we  hear  that  ancient 
gospel  of  God,  and  see  the  sole  hope  of  fallen  man.    Here  is  good  cheer 
for  you  who  look  with  shame  upon  your  foolish  yielding  to  Satan's  deceits. 
You  are  caught  as  silly  birds  in  a  snare ;  you  have  been  as  foolish  as 
the  fish  of  the  sea  which  are  taken  in  a  net ;  but  when  you  are  captives, 
Christ  comes  to  be  your  Liberator,  and  God  commends  his  love  towards 
you  in  that  while  you  are  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly. 


516  METEOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Further  than  this,  when  we  find  the  first  promise  of  our  Lord's 
coming,  ''  in  the  volume  of  the  Book,"  we  find  that  mans  covering  teas  a 
failure.  The  guilty  pair  had  gathered  the  leaves  of  the  fig-tree,  and 
had  made  themselves  aprons,  for  they  knew  that  they  were  naked. 
This  was  the  first  fruit  of  that  boasted  tree  of  knowledge,  and  it  is 
the  principal  one  to  this  day.  Their  scant  coverlet  contested  them. 
for  a  little  while  ;  but  when  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God  was  heard  in 
the  garden  they  confessed  that  their  aprons  were  good  for  nothing ; 
for  Adam  owned  that  he  was  afraid  because  he  was  naked,  and  that 
therefore  he  had  hidden  himself  in  the  thick  groves  of  the  garden. 
It  is  easy  to  make  a  covering  which  pleases  us  for  a  season  ;  but  self- 
righteousness,  presumption,  pretended  infideKty,  and  fancied  natural 
excellence — all  these  things  are  like  green  fig-leaves,  which  shrivel  up 
before  long,  lose  their  freshness,  and  are  rather  an  exposure  than  a 
covering.  It  may  be  that  my  hearer  has  found  his  imaginary  virtues 
failing  him.  It  was  when  our  first  parents  knew  that  they  were  naked 
that  the  Saviour  said,  "  Lo,  I  come."  My  downcast  hearer,  if  you  are 
no  longer  in  your  own  esteem  as  good  as  you  used  to  be ;  if  you  can 
no  longer  hide  the  fact  that  you  have  broken  God's  law,  and  deserve 
his  wrath ;  if  you  no  longer  believe  the  devil's  lie  that  you  shall  suffer 
no  penalty,  but  may  even  be  the  better  for  sin,  then  the  Lord  the 
Saviour  says  to  you,  "  Lo,  I  come."  To  you,  0  naked  sinner,  shivering 
in  your  own  shame,  blushing  scai-let  with  conviction — to  you  he  comes. 
When  you  have  nothing  left  of  your  own,  he  comes  to  be  your  robe  of 
righteousness,  wherein  you  may  stand  accepted  with  God. 

That  first  news  of  the  coming  Champion  came  at  a  time  when  all 
man's  pleas  were  failures.  Adam  had  thrown  the  blame  on  Eve — 
"  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the 
tree,  and  I  did  eat."  Eve  had  also  thrown  the  blame  on  the  serpent ; 
but  the  Lord  God  had  silenced  all  such  excuses,  and  driven  them  from 
their  refuges.  He  had  made  them  feel  their  guilt,  and  had  pro- 
nounced upon  them  the  inevitable  sentence  ;  and  then  it  was  that  he 
spake  of  the  "Seed  of  the  woman."  Here  was  man's  first,  and  last, 
and  best  hope.  So  too,  my  friend,  when  you  dare  no  longer  plead 
your  innocence,  nor  mention  extenuations  and  excuses,  then  Jesus 
comes  in.  If  conscience  oppresses  you  so  sorely  that  you  cannot 
escape  from  it ;  if  it  be  so  that  all  you  can  say  is  "  Guilty,  Wilfully 
Guilty,"  then  Jesus  comes.  If  you  neither  blame  your  surroundings, 
nor  your  companions,  nor  the  providence  of  God,  nor  your  physical 
weakness,  nor  anything  else,  but  just  take  aU  the  blame  to  yourself 
because  you  cannot  help  doing  so,  then  Jesus  comes  in.  Verily  you 
have  sinned  against  God,  against  your  parents,  against  your  fellow- 
men,  against  light,  against  knowledge,  against  conscience,  and  against 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  you  stand  speechless, 
unable  to  offer  any  plea  by  way  of  self-justification.  It  is  in  that 
moment  of  shame  and  confusion  that  the  Saviour  says,  *'  Lo,  I  come." 
For  such  as  you  are  he  is  an  Advocate.  When  a  sinner  cannot  plead 
for  himself,  Christ  pleads  for  him;  when  his  excuses  have  come  to 
an  end,  then  will  the  Lord  put  away  his  sin,  through  his  own  great 
eacrifice.     Is  not  this  a  precious  gospel  word  ? 

When  our  Lord  did  actually  arrive,  fulfilling  the  text  by  being  born 


"lo,  I  come":  application-,  517 

of  a  woman,  it  was  tohen  man's  religion  had  proved  a  failure.  Sacrifices 
and  offerings  had  ceased  to  be  of  wtxy  value :  God  had  put  them  away 
as  a  weariness  to  him.  The  scribes  and  the  Pharisees,  with  all  their 
phylacteries  and  wide-bordered  garments,  were  a  mere  sham.  There 
seemed  to  be  no  true  religion  left  upon  the  earth.  Then  said  Christ, 
*'Lo,  I  come."  There  was  never  a  darker  thirty  years  than  when 
Herod  slew  the  innocents,  and  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  pursued 
the  Son  of  God,  and  at  last  nailed  him  to  the  tree.  It  was  then  that 
Jesus  came  to  us  to  redeem  us  by  his  death.  Do  I  speak  to  any  man 
here  whose  religion  has  broken  down  ?  You  have  observed  a  host  of 
rites  and  ceremonies :  you  were  christened  in  your  infancy,  you  were 
duly  confirmed,  you  have  taken  what  you  call  "the  blessed  sacrament"  ; 
or  it  may  be  you  have  sat  always  in  the  most  plain  of  meeting-houses, 
and  listened  to  the  most  orthodox  of  preachers,  and  you  have  been 
amongst  the  most  religious  of  religious  people ;  but  now,  at  length, 
the  Spirit  of  God  has  shown  you  that  all  these  performances  and 
attendances  are  worthless  cobwebs  which  avail  you  nothing.  You  see 
now  that — 

*'  Not  all  the  outward  forms  on  earth, 

Nor  rites  that  God  has  given, 
Nor  will  of  man,  nor  blood,  nor  birth, 

Can  raise  a  soul  to  heaven." 

You  are  just  now  driven  to  despair,  because  the  palace  of  your 
imaginary  excellence  has  vanished  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision. 
If  I  had  told  you  that  your  religiousness  was  of  no  value,  j'ou  would 
have  been  very  angry  with  me,  and  perhaps  you  would  have  said, 
**  That  is  a  bigoted  remark,  and  you  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  making 
it."  But  now  the  Spirit  of  God  has  told  it  you,  and  you  feel  its  force : 
he  is  great  at  convincing  of  sin.  When  the  Spirit  of  truth  comes  to 
deal  with  the  religiousness  of  the  flesh,  he  withers  it  in  a  moment.  All 
religion  which  is  not  spiritual  is  worthless.  All  religion  which  is  not 
the  supernatural  product  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  fiction.  One  breath 
from  the  Spirit  of  God  withers  all  the  beauty  of  our  pride,  and 
destroys  the  comeliness  of  our  conceit ;  and  then,  when  our  own  religion 
is  dashed  to  shivers,  the  Lord  Jesus  comes  in,  saying,  "  Lo,  I  come." 
He  delights  to  come  in  his  glorious  personality,  when  the  Pharisee 
can  no  longer  say,  "  God,  I  tliank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other 
men "  ;  and  when  the  once  bold  fisherman  is  crying,  "Lord,  save,  or  I 
perish."  If  you  feel  that  you  need  something  infinitely  better  than 
Churchianity,  or  Dissenterism,  or  Methodism — in  fact,  that  you  need 
Christ  himself  to  be  formed  in  you — then  to  you,  even  to  you,  Jesus 
says,  "  Lo,  I  come."  When  man  is  at  his  worst,  Christ  is  seen  at  his 
best.  The  Lord  walks  to  us  on  the  sea  in  the  middle  watch  of  the  night. 
He  draws  nigh  to  those  souls  which  draw  nigh  to  death.  When  you 
part  with  self  you  meet  with  Christ.  When  no  shred  of  hope  remains, 
then  Jesus  says,  "  Lo,  I  come." 

Once  more.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  to  come  a  second  time ;  and  when 
will  he  come  ?  He  will  come  whe7i  man^s  hope  is  a  failure.  He  will 
come  when  iniquity  abounds,  and  the  love  of  many  hath  waxed  cold. 
He  will  come  when  dreams  of  a  golden  age  shall  be  turned  into  the 
di-ead  reality  of  abounding  evil.    Do  not  dream  that  the  world  will  go 


518  METKOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

on  improvi-.Tg'  and  improving,  and  that  the  improvement  "will  naturally 
culminate  in  the  millennium.  No  such  thing.  It  may  grow  better  for 
a  while,  better  under  certain  aspects ;  but,  afterwards  the  power  of 
the  better  element  will  ebb  out  like  the  sea,  even  though  each  wave 
should  look  like  an  advance.  That  day  shall  not  come  except  there 
be  a  falling  away  first.  Even  the  wise  virgins  will  sleep,  and  the  men 
of  the  world  will  be,  as  in  the  days  of  Noah,  eating  and  drinking, 
marrying  and  being  given  in  marriage.  On  a  sudden,  the  Lord  will 
come  as  a  thief  in  the  night.  The  deluge  of  fire  will  find  men  as 
unprepared  as  did  the  deluge  of  water.  He  will  come  taking  vengeance 
on  his  adversaries.  When  things  wax  worse  and  worse  we  see  the 
tokens  of  his  speedy  coming.  He  will  shortly  appear,  for  the  sky 
is  darkening.  When  every  hojpe  will  seem  blotted  out,  and  nothing 
but  grim  ages  of  anarchy  and  ungodliness  are  to  be  expected,  then 
our  Deliverer  will  come.  When  the  tale  of  bricks  was  doubled  in 
Egypt,  Moses  came ;  and  when  the  world  attains  to  its  utmost  unbelief 
and  iniquity,  Jesus  will  come.  So  at  this  moment  my  hearer  may  be 
saying,  "I  cannot  be  worse  than  I  am;  if  I  am  not  actually  in  hell 
already,  yet  I  feel  a  fire  within  which  tortures  my  soul.  The  sword  of 
vengeance  hangs  over  my  head  suspended  by  a  single  hair.  I  tremble 
to  live,  and  I  fear  to  die.  Ijost !  Lost !  Lost !  I  am  past  hope  !  " 
This  is  the  time  for  my  text :  "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come."  He  wiio  is 
able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  appears  to  the  soul  when  every  other 
hope  disappears.  In  your  deep  distress  I  see  a  token  for  good.  You 
are  now  reduced  to  spiritual  death,  and  now  I  trust  the  eternal  life 
will  visit  you. 

Now  all  this  I  put  before  you  in  simple  language,  believing  what  I 
say,  and  trusting  that  if  I  describe  your  case,  you  will  know  that  I 
mean  it  for  you.  I  have  heard  of  a  preacher  who  was  so  fearful  lest  he 
should  be  thought  personal,  that  he  said  to  his  congregation,  "  Lest 
any  of  you  should  think  that  what  I  have  said  was  meant  for  you,  I 
would  observe  that  the  sermon  I  am  preaching  was  prepared  for  a 
congregation  in  Massachusetts."  I  can  plead  nothing  of  the  sort.  I 
refer  to  you,  my  hearer,  in  the  most  pointed  manner.  I  will  attend 
to  Massachusetts,  if  ever  the  Lord  sends  me  there  ;  but  just  now  / 
mean  you.  Oh,  that  you  may  have  grace  to  take  home  these  thoughts 
to  yourselves ;  for  if  you  do  so,  they  will  by  the  Spirit's  power  bring 
the  light  of  hope  into  your  souls ! 

II.  Secondl}^  I  would  remark  that  Christ  coirES  to  sinners  in  the 
GLORY  OF  HIS  PERSON  :  "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come."  Note  that  glorious 
I !  Have  you  not  seen  people  engaged  in  urgent  work  who  did  not 
understand  their  business  ?  Apprentices,  and  other  unskilful  people, 
are  muddling  time  away.  They  are  making  bad  worse,  and  running 
great  risk.  Perhaps  a  great  calamity  will  occur  if  the  work  is  not 
done  well  and  quickly,  A  first-rate  worker  is  sent  for.  See,  the  man 
has  come  who  understands  the  business.  He  cries,  "Let  me  come  1 
Stand  out  of  my  way !  You  are  on  the  wrong  tack :  let  me  do  it 
myself  !  "  You  have  not  blamed  him  for  egotism,  for  the  thing  needed 
to  be  done,  and  he  could  do  it,  and  the  others  could  not.  Everybody 
recognized  the  master  workman,  and  gave  place  to  him.  The  announce- 
ment of  his  coming  was  the  end  of  the  muddle,  and  the  signal  of  hope. 


"liO,  1  come":  application.  519 

Even  so  Jesus  comes  to  you  sinners,  and  his  presence  is  your  salvation. 
He  says,  "  Lo,  I  come."     Yv'hat  does  he  mean  '? 

He  means,  the  setting  of  all  else  on  one  side.  There  is  the  priest — he 
has  not  helped  you  much ;  he  may  go,  for  Jesus  says,  "  Lo,  I  come." 
There  are  your  own  efforts  and  doings ;  there  are  your  feelings  and 
thinkings ;  there  are  your  ceremonies  and  austerities ;  there  are  3'our 
prayers  and  tears ;  there  are  your  hearings  and  readings — aU  these 
must  be  laid  aside  as  grounds  of  confidence,  and  Jesus  alone  must  be 
your  trust.  He  can  do  for  you  what  none  of  these  can.  You  are  trying 
to  work  yourself  up  to  repentance  and  faith,  and  you  cannot  succeed. 
Let  im  come,  and  he  will  bring  every  good  thing  with  him.  It  is 
glorious  to  see  our  Lord  throwing  down  all  our  bowing  walls  and 
tottering  fences,  and  to  hear  him  cry,  "Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a 
foundation."     Everything  else  vanishes  before  his  perfect  salvation. 

Before  him  there  is  a  setting  of  self  aside.  You  have  been  your  own 
confidence.  What  you  could  feel,  or  do,  or  think,  or  resolve,  had 
become  the  ground  of  your  confidence ;  but  now  Jesus  puts  seK  down, 
and  he  is  himself  exalted.  By  Avorking  yourself  to  death,  you  cannot 
effect  your  own  salvation.  Lo,  Jesus  comes  to  save  you.  You  cannot 
weave  yourseK  a  garment.  Lo,  he  comes  to  clothe  you  from  head  to 
foot  with  his  own  seamless  rolae  of  righteousness.  He  annihilates 
self  that  he  may  fiU  all  things. 

Here  is  a  glorious  setting  of  himself  at  our  side  and  in  our  place.  Mr. 
]\[oody  tells  a  story,  which  I  would  fain  hope  may  be  true  ;  for  one 
would  like  to  hear  something  good  about  a  Czar  of  Russia,  and  espe- 
cially about  our  once  enemy,  the  Emperor  Nicholas.  The  story 
concerns  a  soldier  in  the  barracks  who  was  much  distressed  by  his 
heavy  debts.  He  was  in  despair,  for  he  owed  a  great  deal  of  money, 
and  could  not  tell  where  to  get  it.  He  took  a  piece  of  paper,  and  made 
a  list  of  his  debts,  and  underneath  the  list  he  wrote,  "  Who  wiU  pay 
these  debts  ?  "  He  then  lay  down  on  the  barrack  bed,  and  fell  asleep, 
with  the  paper  before  him.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  passed  by,  and, 
taking  up  the  paper,  read  it,  and  being  in  a  gracious  mood  signed 
at  the  bottom,  '•  Nicholas."  Was  not  that  a  splendid  answer  to  the 
question  ?  When  the  soldier  woke  up  and  read  it,  he  could  scarcely 
believe  his  own  eyes.  "  Who  will  pay  these  debts  ?  "  was  the  despair- 
ing question.  "  Nicholas "  was  the  all-suf&cient  answer.  So  are 
we  answered,  Who  will  bear  our  sins?  The  grand  reply  is  "Jesus." 
He  puts  his  own  name  to  our  liabiKties,  and  in  effect,  that  he  may  meet 
them,  he  says,  "Lo,  I  come."  Your  debt  of  sin  is  discharged  when 
you  believe  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no 
remission  ;  "  but  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  dear  Son,  cleanseth 
us  from  all  sin.  You  are  not  now  to  bear  your  own  sins.  Behold 
the  scape-goat,  who  carries  them  away  into  the  wilderness!  Yea, 
Jesus  says,  "  Lo,  I  come !  "  He  takes  our  sins  upon  himself,  he  bears 
their  penalty,  and  we  go  free.  Blessed  word — "  Lo,  I  come  "  :  I  come 
to  take  your  weight  of  sin,  your  burden  of  punishment.  I  come  to  be 
made  a  curse  for  you,  that  you  may  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  me.  Sinner,  stand  out  of  the  way,  and  let  Jesus  appear  for  you, 
and  fill  your  place !  He  sets  you  on  one  side,  and  then  he  sets  himself 
where  you  have  been.     Jesus  is  now  the  one  pillar  on  which  to  lean, 


520  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

the  one  foundation  on  which  to  build,  the  one  and  only  rest  of  our 
weary  souls. 

He  sets  himself  where  we  can  see  him ;  for  he  cries,  "  Zo,  I  come  " ; 
that  is  to  say,  "  See  me  come."  He  comes  openly,  that  we  may  see 
him  clearly.  How  I  wish  the  Lord  would  reveal  himself  at  this 
moment  to  each  one  of  those  who  are  weary  of  earth,  of  self,  of  sin, 
and  possibly  even  weary  of  life  itself !  Oh,  if  you  could  but  see  Jesus 
standing  in  your  room  and  stead,  you  would  have  faith  to  stand  in  his 
place,  and  so  become  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved  "  !  0  Lord,  hear  my 
prayer,  and  cause  poor  hearts  to  see  thee  descending  from  the  skies, 
to  uplift  sinners  from  the  dark  abyss  !  Holy  Spirit,  touch  that  young 
man's  eyes  with  heavenly  salve,  that  he  may  see  where  salvation  lies. 
Deal  with  that  poor  woman's  dim  eyes  also,  that  she  may  perceive  the 
Lord  Christ,  and  find  peace  in  him.  Jesus  cries,  "  Lo,  I  come !  Look 
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

"  There  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One  ; 
There  is  life  at  this  moment  for  thee. 
Then  look,  sinner — look  unto  him,  and  be  saved — 
Unto  him  who  was  nail'd  to  the  tree.'' 

Should  3'ou  even  lie  in  all  the  despair  and  desolation  which  I  described, 
1  would  persuade  you  to  beheve  in  Jesus.  Trust  him,  and  you  shall 
find  him  all  that  you  want. 

Our  Lord  sets  himself  to  he  permanently  our  all  in  all.  When  he 
•came  on  earth,  he  did  not  leave  his  work  till  he  had  finished  it.  Even 
when  he  rose  to  glorj',  he  continued  his  service  for  his  chosen,  living 
to  intercede  for  them.  Jesus  was  a  Saviour  nineteen  hundred  years 
ago,  and  he  is  a  Saviour  still ;  and  he  will  be  a  Saviour  until  all  the 
•chosen  race  shall  have  been  gathered  home.  He  tells  us,  "  I  said, 
Lo,  I  come  "  ;  but  he  does  not  say,  "  I  said,  I  will  go  away,  and  quit 
the  work."  Our  Lord's  ear  is  bored,  and  he  goes  out  no  more  from 
the  service  of  salvation.  It  is  not  written  of  any  penitent  souls,  "  Ye 
shall  seek  me,  but  shall  not  find  me  "  ;  but  it  is  written,  "  If  thou  seek 
him,  he  will  be  found  of  thee."  0  my  hearer,  you  are  now  in  the  place 
where  the  gospel  is  preached  to  you — yes,  to  you,  for  we  are  sent  to 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature ;  and  though  you  should  be  the  worst, 
and  most  benighted,  and  most  guilty  of  all  the  creatures  out  of  hell,  yet 
you  are  a  creature,  and  we  preach  Christ  to  you.  0  poor  heart,  may 
the  Lord  Jesus  say  to  you  "  Lo,  I  come  ! "  for  he  comes  to  stay, — to  stay 
until  he  has  worked  salvation  in  you  as  he  has  worked  out  salvation 
for  you.  He  will  not  leave  a  believer  till  he  has  presented  him  spotless 
before  the  throne  of  God  with  exceeding  joy.  I  wish  I  could  make 
all  this  most  clear  and  plain.  You  are  altogether  ruined  by  your  own 
fault,  and  you  cannot  undo  the  evil.  You  have  done  all  you  can,  and 
it  has  come  to  nothing.  You  are  steeped  in  sin  up  to  your  tliroat ; 
yea  the  filth  has  gone  over  your  head :  you  are  as  one  drowned  in 
black  waters.  Despairing  one,  cast  not  your  eyes  around  to  seek  for 
a  friend,  for  you  will  look  in  vain  to  men.  No  arm  can  rescue  you, 
save  one;  and  that  is  the  arm  of  Jesus,  who  now  cries  "  Lo,  I  come.'* 
Set  everji;hing  else  on  one  side,  and  trust  yourself  with  the  Saviour, 
Christ  the  Lord. 


"lo,  I  come":  application.  521 

III.  Oh,  that  many  may  be  comforted  while  I  dwell  on  a  third  head ! 
Christ  ik  his  coming  is  his  own  introduction. 

Rere  our  Lord  is  his  own  herald,  "Lo,  I  come."  He  does  not  wait  for 
an  eloquent  preacher  to  act  as  master  of  the  ceremonies  to  him :  he 
introduces  himself.  Therefore  even  I,  the  simplest  talker  on  earth, 
may  prove  quite  sufficient  for  my  Lord's  purpose  if  he  will  graciously 
condescend  to  bless  these  plain  words  of  mine.  It  is  not  I  that  say 
that  Jesus  comes,  but  in  the  text  our  Lord  himself  declares,  "  Then 
said  I,  Lo,  I  come."  You  need  not  do  anything  to  draw  Christ's 
attention  to  you  ;  it  is  Christ  who  draws  your  attention  to  himself.  Do 
you  see  this  ?  You  are  the  blind  bat ;  and  he  is  all  eye  towards  you, 
and  bids  you  look  on  him.  I  hear  you  cry,  "  Lord,  remember  me," 
and  I  hear  him  answer,  '*  Soul,  remember  me."  He  bids  you  look  on 
him  when  you  beseech  him  to  look  on  j^ou. 

Se  comes  when  quite  unsought,  or  sought  for  in  a  wrong  ivay.  To  many 
men  and  women  Christ  has  come  though  they  had  not  even  desired 
him.  Yea,  he  has  come  even  to  those  who  hated  him.  Saul  of  Tarsus 
was  on  his  way  to  worry  the  saints  at  Damascus,  but  Jesus  said,  "Lo, 
I  come  "  ;  and  when  he  looked  out  of  heaven  he  turned  Saul,  the 
persecutor,  into  Paul,  the  apostle.  The  promise  is  fulfilled,  "  I  was 
found  of  them  that  sought  me  not  >  I  was  made  manifest  unto  them 
that  asked  not  after  me."  Herein  is  the  glorious  sovereignty  of  his 
love  fully  exercised,  and  grace  reigns  supreme.  "  Lo,  I  come,"  is  the 
announcement  of  majestic  grace  which  waiteth  not  for  man,  neither 
tarrieth  for  the  sons  of  men. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  is  the  ivay  to  himselj.  Did  you  ever  notice  that  ?  He 
comes  himself  to  us,  and  so  he  is  the  wa}'  by  which  we  meet  him.  He 
is  our  rest,  and  the  way  to  our  rest ;  he  says,  "  I  am  the  way."  You 
want  to  know  how  to  get  to  Christ  ?  You  have  not  to  get  to  Christ, 
for  he  has  come  to  you.  It  is  well  for  you  to  come  to  Christ;  but  that 
is  only  possible  because  Christ  has  come  to  you.  Jesus  is  near  you : 
near  you  now.  Backslider,  he  comes  to  you  !  Wandering  soul,  roving 
to  the  very  brink  of  perdition,  the  good  Shepherd  cries,  "  Lo,  I  come." 
He  is  the  way  to  himseK. 

Remember,  also,  that  he  is  the  blessing  which  he  hrings.  Jesus  not 
only  gives  life  and  resurrection,  but  he  says,  "I  am  tiie  resurrection 
and  the  life,"  Christ  is  salvation,  and  everything  needful  to  salvation 
is  in  him.  If  he  comes,  all  good  comes  loith  him,  or  rather  in  him. 
An  enquirer  once  said  to  a  minister,  "  The  next  step  for  me  is  to 
get  a  deeper  conviction  of  sin."  The  minister  said,  "  No  such  thing, 
my  friend :  the  next  step  is  to  trust  in  Jesus,  for  he  says,  Come  unto 
me."  To  come  to  Jesus,  or  rather  to  receive  Jesus  who  has  come  to 
us,  is  the  one  essential  step  into  eternal  salvation.  Though  our  Lord 
does  say,  "  Come  unto  me,"  he  has  preceded  it  with  this  other  word, 
"Lo,  I  come."  Poor  cripple,  if  you  cannot  come  to  Jesus,  ask  him  to 
come  to  you  ;  and  he  will.  Here  you  lie,  and  you  have  been  for  years 
in  this  case ;  you  have  no  man  to  put  you  into  the  pool,  and  it  would 
do  you  no  good  if  he  did  ;  but  Jesus  can  make  you  whole,  and  V  e  is 
here.  You  cannot  stir  hand  or  foot  because  of  spiritual  paralysis ; 
but  your  case  is  not  hopeless.  Listen  to  my  Lord  in  the  text,  "  Then 
said  I,  Lo,  I  come."     He  has  no  paralysis.     He  can  come,  leaping  over 


522  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

the  mountains  of  division.  I  know  my  Lord  came  to  me,  or  I  should 
never  have  come  to  him  :  why  should  he  not  come  to  you  ?  I  came  to 
him  because  he  came  to  me. 

"  He  drew  me,  and  I  followed  on. 
Charmed  to  confess  the  voice  divine." 

"Why  should  he  not  draw  us  also  ?  Is  he  not  doing  so  ?  Yield  to  the 
pressure  of  his  love. 

"  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come."  You  see  our  Lord  is  his  own  spokesman. 
He  says  to  me,  "  Gro  and  tell  those  peoj^le  about  my  coming  ''  ;  and  I 
gladly  do  so ;  but  you  will  forget  my  words,  and  refuse  to  accept  the 
Coming  One.  Your  consciences  will  be  unawakened,  your  hearts 
unmoved  :  I  fear  it  will  be  so.  But  if  this  text  be  fulfilled  concerning 
our  Lord  this  day — "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come" — you  will  hear  him. 
If  he  speaks  he  is  himself  the  Almighty  Word,  and  his  voice  will 
reach  your  hearts,  and  accomplish  his  purpose.  Dear  Christian 
people,  join  with  me  in  this  prayer  :  Lord,  speak  to  thy  chosen  ones 
that  lie  here  in  their  death-like  despair,  far  oil  from  thee,  and  say  to 
each  one  of  them,  "  Lo,  I  come."  0  downcast  soul,  this  is  jomv 
morning :  this  is  the  set  time  to  favour  you :  this  day  is  salvation 
come  to  your  house  and  to  your  heart.  Make  haste  and  come  down 
from  the  tree  of  your  frivolity  or  your  self-righteousness.  Receive 
the  Lord  Jesus,  for  to-day  he  must  abide  in  your  house  and  in  your 
heart:  the  hour  for  the  imperial  "  must  "  of  the  eternal  jDurpose  has 
arrived.  Grod  grant  it  may  be  so !  May  this  be  an  hour  of  which 
Jesus  shall  declare, — "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  !  " 

IV.  Our  next  point  is  this — Christ,  to  cheer  us,  reveals  his  reasons 
FOR  coming.  Only  a  few  words  on  this.  Note  the  rest  of  the  verse : 
"  Lo,  I  come  :  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me."  When 
"we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  un- 
godly, because  it  was  the  due  time  according  to  covenant  purposes.  Christ 
comes  to  a  guilty  sinner,  just  as  he  once  came  to  a  manger  and  a 
stable,  because  so  it  was  appointed.  There  is  nothing  for  him  to  get, 
but  everything  for  him  to  give ;  but  he  comes  because  so  it  ia  written 
in  the  volume  of  the  divine  decrees — 

"  Thus  the  eternal  counsel  ran, — 
Almighty  grace,  arrest  that  man  !  " 

Therefore  in  love  the  Saviour  appears  to  the  sinner,  and  by  grace 
arrests  him  in  his  mad  career. 

It  is  his  Father'' s  will.  Christ's  coming  to  save  a  soul  is  with  his 
Father's  full  consent  and  aid.  The  Father  wills  that  you  who  believe 
in  him,  lost  though  you  be,  should  now  be  saved,  and  Jesus  comes  to 
do  the  will  of  the  Father. 

He  comes  because  his  heart  is  set  on  you.  He  loves  you,  and  so  he 
hastens  to  your  rescue.  Your  salvation  is  his  delight.  Though  your 
soul  is  sunk  in  a  sea  of  need,  and  you  are  in  despair  because  of  that 
need,  Jesus  loves  you,  and  comes  to  meet  your  case.  The  best  of  aU 
is  that  Jesus  loves  you.  One  asked  an  old  man  of  ninety,  "Do  you 
love  Jesus?"  and  the  old  man  answered  with  a  smile,  "I  do,  indeed  ; 
but  I  can  tell  you  something  better  than  that."  His  friend  said, 
"  Something  better  than  loving  Jesus !     What  is  that  ?  "     The  old 


"lo,  I  come":  application.  52S' 

disciple  replied,  "  He  loves  we."  0  soul,  I  wish  you  could  see  this  fact, 
which  is  indeed  better  than  your  love  to  Jesus,  namely,  his  love  to 
you !  Because  he  loved  his  redeemed  from  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  therefore  in  due  time  he  says,  "  Lo,  I  come." 

The  fact  is,  you  have  need,  and  he  has  love,  and  so  he  comes.  There  is 
no  hope  for  you  unless  he  does  come,  and  that  is  why  he  comes.  If 
you  had  a  penny  of  your  own,  he  would  not  give  you  his  purse  ;  if  you 
had  a  rag  of  your  own,  he  would  not  give  you  his  robe  ;  if  you  had  a 
breath  of  your  own,  he  would  not  give  you  his  life.  But  now  you  are 
naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable,  and  lost,  and  dead,  Jesus  reveala 
himself,  and  you  read  concerning  him,  "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come." 
He  gives  you  his  reasons — reasons  not  in  yourself,  but  all  in  his 
grace.  There  is  no  good  in  you ;  there  is  no  reason  in  you  why  the 
Lord  should  save  you ;  but  because  of  his  free,  spontaneous,  rich, 
sovereign,  almighty  grace,  he  leaps  out  of  heaven,  he  descends  to 
earth,  he  plunges  into  the  grave  to  pluck  his  beloved  from  destruction. 

Y.  Here  is  my  last  word :  Christ's  cojiing  is  the  best  plea  fob 
OUH  EEOEiviNG  HIM,  and  receiving  him  now.  0  sirs,  remember  you 
have  not  to  raise  the  question  whether  he  will  come  or  not.  He  is 
come.  You  have  not  to  say,  How  can  I  come  to  him  ?  He  comes  to 
you.  You  do  want  a  Mediator  between  your  soul  and  God ;  but  you 
do  not  want  any  mediator  between  j^ourself  and  Jesus ;  for  he  says, 
"  Lo,  I  come."  To  you  in  all  your  filthiness,  in  all  your  condemnation, 
in  all  your  hopelessness,  he  comes.  "Wait  not  for  anybody  to  intro- 
duce you  to  him,  or  him  to  you ;  he  has  introduced  himself,  and  here 
is  his  card — "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come."  No  pleas  are  needed  to 
persuade  him  to  come  to  you,  for  he  says,  "Lo,  I  come."  Though  3'ou 
cannot  think  of  a  single  argument  why  he  should  appear  to  you  in 
mercy,  he  does  so  appear.  It  is  written,  "  I  will  have  mercy  upon  her 
that  had  not  obtained  mercy ;  and  I  will  say  to  them  which  were  not 
my  people,  Thou  art  my  people ;  and  they  shall  say.  Thou  art  my 
God."  0  words  of  wondrous  grace !  Our  gracious  Lord  does  not 
wait  for  our  entreaties  ;  but  of  his  own  accord  he  says,  "  Lo,  I  come." 
Without  asking  you,  and  without  your  asking  him,  he  puts  in  an 
appearance  in  the  sovereignty  of  his  grace. 

No  search  is  needed  to  find  the  Lord,  for  he  comes  in  manifested 
grace,  and  calls  upon  us  to  see  him.  "  I  have  long  been  searching  for 
Christ"  murmiir.i  one.  What !  seeking  for  the  sun  at  noonday?  Jesus 
is  not  lost.  It  IS  you  that  are  lost,  and  he  is  searching  for  you.  He 
says,  "  Lo,  I  couie  "  :  it  is  you  that  will  not  come.  Still  one  declares, 
that  he  has  been  seeking  the  Lord  Jesus  for  many  a  day.  This  is 
sadly  strange,  for  Jesus  is  near.  "  Say  not  in  thine  heart,  AVlio  shall 
ascend  into  heaven  ?  or.  Who  shall  descend  into  the  deep  ?  The  word 
is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy  heart,  that  if  thou  wilt 
confess  with  thy  mouth  tlie  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thy  heart 
that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved."  If 
thou  believest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  thou  shalt  be  saved.  Searching 
after  Christ?     Nay,  verily  he  saith,  "  Lo,  I  come." 

Moreover,  no  waiting  is  needed,  and  no  preparation  is  to  be  made 
by  you.  Why  do  j'ou  wait  ?  HE  does  not  wait,  but  cries,  "  Lo,  I  come  !  " 
"  I  will  get  ready  for  Christ",  say  you  ;  but  it  is  too  late  to  talk  so,, 


524  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

•when  he  cries,  "  Lo,  I  am  come."  Receive  him !  If  you  are  in  yourself 
Badly  unready,  yet  he  himself  will  make  everj^thing  ready  for  himself. 
Only  open  wide  the  door,  and  let  him  in.  Do  you  say,  "  But  I  am 
ashamed ''  ?  Be  ashamed.  He  bids  you  be  ashamed,  and  be  con- 
founded, while  he  declares,  "  I  do  not  this  for  your  sakes."  Yet  be  not 
so  ashamed  as  to  commit  another  shameful  deed  by  shutting  the  door 
in  j^our  Redeemer's  face.  Shut  not  out  your  own  mercy.  A  pastor  in 
Edinburgh,  in  going  round  his  district,  knocked  at  the  door  of  a  poor 
woman,  for  whom  he  had  brought  some  needed  help ;  but  he  received 
no  answer.  When  next  he  met  her,  he  said  to  her,  "  I  called  on  Tues- 
day at  your  house."  She  asked,  "  At  what  time?  "  "  About  eleven 
o'clock ;  I  knocked,  and  you  did  not  answer.  I  was  disappointed,  for  I 
called  to  give  you  help."  "  Ah,  sir!  "  said  she,  "  I  am  very  sorry.  I 
thought  it  was  the  man  coming  for  the  rent,  and  I  could  not  pay  it, 
and  therefore  I  did  not  dare  to  go  to  the  door."  Many  a  troubled 
soul  thinks  that  Jesus  is  one  who  comes  to  ask  of  us  what  we  cannot 
give  ;  but  indeed  he  comes  to  give  us  all  things.  His  errand  is  not  to 
condemn,  but  to  forgive.  Miss  not  the  charity  of  Grod  through  unbelief. 
Run  to  the  door,  and  say  to  your  loving  Redeemer,  "  Lord,  I  am  not 
worthy  that  thou  shouldest  come  under  my  roof;  but  as  thou  hast 
come  to  me,  I  welcome  thee  with  all  my  heart." 

No  assistance  is  wanted  by  Christ  on  your  part.  He  does  not  come 
with  half  a  salvation,  and  look  to  you  to  complete  it.  He  does  not 
come  to  bring  you  a  robe  half  woven,  which  you  are  to  finish.  How 
could  you  finish  it  ?  Could  the  best  saint  in  the  world  add  anything 
to  Christ's  righteousness  ?  No  good  man  would  even  dream  of  adding 
his  home-spun  to  that  raiment  which  is  of  wrought  gold.  What !  are 
■gou  to  make  up  the  deficient  ransom  price?  Is  it  deficient?  Would 
you  bring  your  clods  of  mud  into  the  royal  treasury,  and  lay  them 
down  side  by  side  with  sapphires?  Would  you  help  Christ?  Go, 
yoke  a  mouse  with  an  elephant !  Go  harness  a  fly  side  by  side  with 
an  archangel.     But  dream  not  of  yoking  yourself  with  Christ. 

He  says,  "  Lo,  I  come",  and  I  trust  you  will  reply,  "  My  Lord,  if 
thou  art  come,  aU  is  come,  and  I  am  complete  in  thee." 

"  Thou,  O  Christ,  art  all  I  want, 
More  than  all  in  thee  I  find." 

Receive  him :  receive  him  at  once.  Dear  children  of  God,  and  sinners 
that  have  begun  to  feel  after  him,  say  with  one  accord,  "Even  so, 
come  quickly.  Lord  Jesus."  If  he  says,  "  Lo,  I  come,"  and  the  Spirit 
and  the  bride  say,  Come ;  and  he  that  heareth  says.  Come,  and  he 
that  is  athirst  comes,  and  whosoever  will  is  bidden  to  come  and  take 
the  water  of  life  freely  ;  then  let  us  join  the  chorus  of  comes,  and 
come  to  Christ  ourselves.  "  Behold,  the  Bridegroom  cometh ;  go  ye 
out  to  meet  him !  "  Ye  who  most  of  all  need  him,  be  among  the 
first  and  gladdest,  as  you  hear  him  say,  "  Lo,  I  come." 

All  that  I  have  said  will  be  good  for  nothing  as  to  saving  results 
unless  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  apply  it  with  power  to  your  hearts.  Join 
with  me  in  prayer  that  many  may  see  Jesus  just  now,  and  may  at 
once  behold  and  accept  the  present  salvation  which  is  in  him. 


BfiOUGHT  UP  FROM  THE  HORRIBLE  PIT. 


%  liitmDit 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  August  13th,  1882,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE.    NEWINGTON. 


"I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord  ;  and  he  inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry.  He 
brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay,  and  set  my  feet  upon  a 
rock,  and  established  my  goings.  Aud  he  hath  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth,  even 
praise  unto  our  God:  many  shall  see  it,  and  fear,  and  shall  trust  in  the  Lord."— 
Psalm  xl.  1—3.    * 

This  passage  has  been  used  with  great  frequency  as  the  expression  of  the 
experience  of  the  people  of  God,  and  I  think  it  has  been  very  rightly  so 
used.  It  is  a  very  accurate  picture  of  the  way  in  which  sinuei's  are 
raised  up  from  despair  to  hope  and  salvation,  and  of  the  way  in  which 
saints  are  brought  out  of  deep  troubles,  and  made  to  sing  of  divine  love 
and  power.  Yet  I  am  not  certain  that  the  first  verse  could  be  truthfully 
uttered  by  all  of  us  ;  I  question,  indeed,  whether  any  of  us  could  thus 
speak.  Could  we  say, — "  I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord."  Think  ye, 
brethren,  might  it  not  read, — "  I  waited  impatiently  for  the  Lord,"  in 
the  case  of  most  of  us?  All  the  rest  may  stand  true,  but  this  would 
need  to  be  modified.  We  could  hardly  speak  in  our  own  commendation 
if  we  considered  our  conduct  in  the  matter  of  patience,  for  that  is,  alas, 
still  a  scarce  virtue  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  If  we  read  the  psalm 
through  we  shall  see  that  it  was  not  written  exclusively  to  describe  the 
experience  of  God's  people.  Secondarily  we  may  regard  it  as  David's 
language,  but  in  the  first  instance  a  greater  than  David  is  here.  The 
first  person  who  uttered  these  words  was  the  Messiah,  and  that  is  quite 
clear  if  you  read  the  psalm  through  ;  for  we  fall  upon  such  language  as 
this  :  "  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not  desire  ;  mine  ears  hast 
thou  opened :  burnt  offering  and  sin  offering  hast  thou  not  required. 
Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come  :  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of 
me,  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God :  yea,  thy  law  is  within  my 
heart."  We  need  not  say  with  the  Ethiopian,  *'  Of  whom  speaketh 
the  prophet  this  ?  Of  himself  or  of  some  other  ? "  for  we  are  led  at 
once  by  the  plainest  indications  to  see  that  he  is  not  speaking  of  himself, 
but  of  our  Lord ;  and  if  we  needed  confirmation  of  this  we  get  it  in 
Hebrews  x.,  where  Paul  expressly  quotes  this  passage  as  referring  to  the 
Lord  Jesus.  To  him,  indeed,  alone  of  all  men  can  it  with  accuracy  be 
applied.  So  this  morning  I  shall  have  to  show  that  this  text  of  ours  is 
No.  1,674.  5 


526  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

most  fit  to  be  the  language  of  the  Lord,  our  representative  and  covenant 
Head.  When  I  have  shown  this,  you  wiU  then  see  how  we  can  use  the 
eelf-same  expressions,  because  we  are  in  him.  Each  believer  becomes 
a  mirror  in  which  is  reflected  the  experience  of  our  Lord  ;  but  it  would 
be  ill  for  us  to  be  so  taken  up  with  the  mere  reflection  as  to  forget  the 
exjDress  image  by  which  this  experience  is  formed  in  us. 

I  shall  ask  you,  then,  at  this  time,  to  observe  our  divine  Lord  when 
in  his  greatest  trouble.  Notice,  first,  our  Lord's  behaviour, — "I  waited 
patiently  for  the  Lord ;  and  he  inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry  ''  ; 
then  consider,  secondly,  our  Lord's  deliverance,  expressed  by  the  phrase, 
*'  He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay," 
and  so  forth :  then  let  us  think,  thirdly  of  the  Lord's  reivard  for  it, — 
"many  shall  see,  and  fear,  and  trust  in  the  Lord": — that  is  his  great 
€nd  and  object,  and  in  it  he  sees  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  is  satis- 
fied. AVe  shall  close,  fourthly,  by  perceiving  the  Lord's  lilcemss  in  all 
his  saved  ones;  for  they  also  are  brought  up  from  the  pit  of  destruction, 
and  a  new  song  is  put  into  their  mouths.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them 
brethren,  since  in  each  one  of  them  his  own  experience  is  repeated  though 
upon  a  smaller  scale. 

I.  First,  let  us  think  of  our  Lord's  behaviour.  "  I  waited 
patiently  for  the  Lord."  Here  we  greatly  need  the  teaching  of  the  Holy 
Ohost ;  may  it  be  given  us  abundantly.  First,  our  Lord's  conduct  when 
he  was  under  the  smarting  rod  was  that  of  ivaiting.  He  waited  upon 
the  Lord  all  his  life,  and  this  waiting  became  more  conspicuous  in  his 
passion  and  death.  He  went  down  into  Gethsemane,  and  there  he 
prayed  earnestly  ;  but  with  sweet  submission ;  for  he  said,  "  Never- 
theless, not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  Complete  submission  was  the 
essential  spirit  of  his  prayer.  He  rose  up  from  prayer  all  crimson  with 
his  bloody  sweat,  and  he  went  to  meet  his  foes,  delivering  himself  up 
voluntarily  to  be  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter.  He  did  not  unsheathe 
the  sword  as  Peter  did ;  much  less  did  he  flee,  like  his  disciples,  but  he 
waited  upon  the  will  of  the  Most  High,  enduring  all  things  till  the 
Father  should  give  him  deliverance.  When  they  took  him  before  Annas 
and  Caiaphas,  and  Pilate  and  Herod,  hurrying  him  from  bar  to  bar,  how 
patiently  he  kept  silence,  though  false  witnesses  appeared  against  him. 
Like  a  sheep  betbre  her  shearers  he  was  dumb,  submitting  himself  without 
a  struggle.  In  the  omnipotence  of  patience  he  held  his  peace  even 
from  good,  because  it  was  so  written  of  him.  When  they  led  him  away 
to  crucifixion  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  he  did  not  even  en- 
courage the  lamentations  of  the  sympathizing  women  who  surrounded 
him  ;  but  in  his  wondrous  patience  he  said,  "  Daughters  of  Jerusalem, 
weep  not  for  me."  He  did  not  refuse  to  bear  his  cross,  or  to  let  the  cross 
bear  him.  He  did  not  complain  of  contempt  and  contumely,  since  these 
were  appointed  him.  When  they  nailed  him  to  the  tree,  and  there  he  hung 
in  tlie  burning  sun,  tortured,  fevered,  agonizing,  the  words  that  es(;aped 
him  were  not  those  of  murmuring  and  repining,  but  those  of  pity,  pain, 
patience,  and  submission.  Till  he  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  up  the 
ghost,  he  bowed  his  whole  being  to  his  Father's  will,  waiting  his  time 
and  pleasure.  He  steadily  took  a  long  draught  at  the  appointed  cup, 
and  drained  it  to  the  bitter  end.  His  eyes  were  unto  the  Lord  as  the 
eyes  of  servants  are  to  the  hands  of  their  masters  ;  he  waited  in  service, 


BROUGHT  UP  FROM  THE  HORRIBLE  PIT,  527 

in  hope,  in  resignation,  and  in  confidence.  He  knew  that  God  would 
help  him  and  deliver  him,  he  knew  that  his  head  would  be  raised  on 
high  above  the  sons  of  men  ;  but  still  he  waited  for  the  Father's  time, 
and  meanwhile  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  himself 
the  form  of  a  servant,  and  as  a  servant  yielded  all  his  strength  to  the 
work  which  was  given  him  to  do.  He  was  wilhng  in  the  hour  of  his 
passion  to  be  treated  as  the  scum  and  scorn  of  all  mankind,  nor  did  he 
hurry  the  hour  when  all  the  shame  and  scorn  should  blossom  into  glory 
and  honour.  He  went  down  in  his  waiting  even  to  the  utmost  of  self- 
denial,  and  truly  proved  that  he  came  not  to  do  his  own  will,  but  the 
will  of  him  that  sent  him.  Never  man  served  and  waited  like  this 
man. 

Our  text  adds  to  this  word  "waited"  the  word  "patiently."  "I 
waited  patimfhj.'"  If  you  would  see  patience,  look  not  at  Job  on  the 
dunghill,  but  look  at  Jesus  on  the  cross.  Job,  the  most  patient  of  men, 
was  assuredly  impatient  at  the  same  time  ;  but  this  blessed  Lord  of  ours 
gave  himself  up  completely,  and  showed  not  the  slightest  sign  of  re- 
pining. Not  a  speck  of  impatience  can  be  detected  in  the  crystal  stream 
of  our  Lord's  submission.  His  soul  was  all  melted,  and  it  all  flowed 
into  the  mould  of  the  Father's  will :  no  dross  was  in  or  about  him, 
nothing  which  refused  to  melt  and  to  run  into  the  mould.  One  would 
have  supposed  that  he  would  have  spoken  an  angry  word  to  Judas,  who 
betrayed  him ;  instead  of  which  he  gently  asked  of  him,  "  Friend,  where- 
fore art  thou  come  ? "  It  would  not  have  seemed  wonderful  if  he  had 
upbraided  the  Jews  who  so  falsely  accused  him,  or  the  rulers  who  so 
unjustly  treated  him  ;  but  here  is  the  patience  of  the  saintly  One,  he 
was  perfect  master  of  his  own  spirit.  His  answer  to  his  murderers  was 
the  prayer,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do." 
So  meek  and  lowly  in  heart  was  he  that  to  men  he  gave  no  sliarp  replies  : 
his  answers  were  all  steeped  in  gentleness  ;  take  for  example  his  word 
to  the  high  priest :  "  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness  of  the  evil ;  but 
if  well,  why  smitest  thou  me?"  They  sat  down  around  the  cross  and 
mocked  him,  jeered  at  him,  insulted  over  him,  and  made  mirth  even  of 
his  cries  and  prayers ;  but  lie  did  not  utter  a  single  word  of  rebuke, 
much  less  did  he  leap  from  the  cross  to  dash  his  mockers  in  pieces,  and 
prove  by  their  destruction  that  he  was  indeed  the  mighty  Son  of  God, 
"  I  waited  patiently,"  saith  he.  No  thought  or  word  or  deed  of  im- 
patience can  be  charged  upon  him  ;  waiting,  he  waited,  and  waited  still. 
We  are  in  such  a  hurry  when  we  are  in  trouble ;  we  hasten  to  escape 
from  it  at  once  ;  every  minute  seems  an  hour,  and  every  day  an  age. 
"  Help  me  speedily,  0  my  God ! "  is  the  natural  cry  of  the  child  of  God 
under  the  rod ;  but  our  Saviour  was  in  no  ill  haste  to  get  from  the 
chastisement  which  came  upon  him  for  our  sakes :  he  was  at  leisure  in 
his  woe.  So  thoroughly  was  he  resolved  to  do  his  Father's  will  that 
even  on  the  morning  of  his  resurrection  he  arose  with  deliberation,  and 
quitted  the  grave  in  order,  folding  his  grave-clothes  and  laying  the 
napkin  by  itself.  He  steadily  persevered  in  all  his  work  of  hoUness 
and  sorrow  of  sacrifice,  never  accepting  deliverance  till  his  work  was 
done.  Patiently  he  endured  to  have  his  ear  bored  to  the  door-post,  to 
have  his  h«ad  encircled  with  thorns,  his  cheeks  distained  with  spittle, 
his   back  furrowed  with  the  lash,  his  hands  and   feet  nailed  to  the 


528  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLR  PULPIT. 

wood,  and  his  heart  pierced  with  the  spear.  In  his  body  on  fch«  tree 
patience  was  written  out  in  crimson  characters. 

Now,  this  was  needful  for  the  completeness  of  his  atonement.  N"o 
expiation  could  have  been  made  by  an  impatient  Saviour.  Only  a  per- 
fect obedience  could  satisfy  the  law ;  only  an  unblemished  sacrifice  could 
put  away  our  sins.  There  must  not,  therefore,  be  about  our  Substitute 
a  trace  of  resistance  to  the  Father's  will,  nor  as  a  saci'ifice  must  he 
struggle  against  the  cords,  or  turn  his  head  away  from  the  sacrificial 
knife.  In  truth,  his  was  a  willing,  patient  doing  and  suffering  of  the 
divine  will.  "  He  gave  his  back  to  the  siniters  and  his  cheeks  to  them 
that  plucked  off  the  hair :  he  hid  not  his  face  from  shame  and  spitting." 
**  I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord,"  saith  he;  and  you  know,  brethren, 
how  true  was  the  declaration. 

But  while  the  Saviour  thus  waited,  and  waited  patiently,  we  must  not 
forget  that  he  waited  praijerfuUij ;  for  the  text  speaks  of  a  cry  which  he 
lifted  up,  and  of  God's  inclining  himself  to  it.  That  patience  which 
does  not  pray  is  obstinacy.  A  soul  silent  to  God  is  apt  to  be  sullen 
rather  than  submissive.  A  stoical  patience  hardens  itself  against  grief, 
and  asks  no  deliverance ;  but  that  is  not  the  patience  which  God  loves, 
it  is  not  the  patience  of  Christ.  He  used  strong  crying  and  tears  unto 
him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death.  Let  Gethsemane  tell  of  that 
wresMing  which  infinitely  excelled  the  wrestling  of  Jacob:  Jabbok  ia 
outdone  by  Kedron.  His  was  a  wrestling,  not  to  sweat  alone,  but  unto 
Bweat  of  blood :  he  sweats  who  works  for  bread,  the  statf  of  life ;  but 
he  sweats  blood  who  works  for  life  itself.  What  prayers  those  must 
have  been  under  such  a  fenrful  physical,  mental,  and  spiritual  agony 
wliich  were  so  fervent  that  they  brought  an  angel  from  the  throne,  and 
yet  so  submissive  that  they  are  the  model  of  resignation.  He  agonised 
as  earnestly  as  if  he  sought  his  own  will,  and  yet  he  wholly  resigned  him- 
self to  the  Father,  saying,  "  Lo,  I  come :  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it 
is  written  of  me,  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God."  Our  Lord  was 
always  praying :  there  never  was  a  moment  in  his  life  in  which  he  was 
not  in  full  communion  with  God,  unless  we  except  the  period  when  he 
cried,  "  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  He  did  often  go  aside  to  pray 
a  more  special  prayer,  but  yet  even  when  he  spake  to  the  people,  even 
when  he  faced  his  foes,  his  soul  was  still  in  constant  fellowship  with  his 
Father.  But  ah,  when  he  came  between  the  upper  and  the  nether  mill- 
stones, when  this  good  olive  w-as  ground  in  the  olive  press,  and  all  the 
oil  of  his  life  was  extracted  from  him,  then  it  was  that  his  strong  crying 
and  tears  came  up  before  the  Lord  his  God,  and  he  was  heard  in  that  he 
feared. 

Now,  brothers  and  sisters,  look  at  your  pattern,  and  see  how  far  short 
you  have  come  of  it.  At  least,  I  will  remember  with  regret  how  far 
short  I  have  come  of  it.  Have  we  waited  ?  Have  we  not  been  in  too 
great  a  hurry  ?  Has  it  not  been  too  much  our  desire  that  the  Lord 
might  make  his  will  like  our  will  rather  than  make  our  will  like  his  ? 
Have  you  not  had  a  will  of  your  own  sometimes,  and  a  strong  will  too  ? 
Have  you  not  been  as  the  bullock  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke  ?  Have 
you  not  kicked  against  the  pricks  ?  You  have  not  waited,  but  you  have 
worried.  Can  we  say  that  we  waited  patiently  ?  Oh,  that  patience  1 
Every  man  thinks  he  has  it  until  he  needs  it,  but  only  let  his  tender 


BROUGHT  UP  FROM  THE  HORRIBLE  PIT.  529 

point  be  touched,  and  you  will  see  how  little  patience  he  possesses.  It 
is  the  fire  which  tries  onr  supposed  resio-nation,  and  under  that  process 
much  of  our  palace  of  patience  burns  like  wood,  hay,  and  stubble.  Old 
crosses  fit  the  shoulder,  but  let  a  new  cross  be  laid  upon  us  and  we 
writhe  under  it.  Suffering  is  the  vocation  of  a  Christian,  but  most  of 
us  come  short  of  our  high  calling.  Our  Lord  Jesus  has  joined  together 
reigning  and  suffering,  for  we  read  of  "  the  kingdom  and  patience  of 
Jesus  Christ";  he  was  the  royal  example  of  patience,  but  what  are  we?^ 
Remember,  again,  that  Jesus  prayed  importunately  while  he  waited: 
*'  being  in  an  agony,  he  prayed  more  earnestly."  Have  we  not  at  times 
restrained  prayer  ?  Have  we  not  pleaded  as  an  excuse  for  our  feeble 
petitions  the  very  facts  which  ought  to  have  been  a  spur  to  our  earnest- 
ness ?  "I  felt  too  ill  to  pray."  Couldst  thou  not  pray  for  health  with 
all  the  more  fervency?  "  J  felt  too  burdened  to  pray."  Shouldst  thou 
not  pray  for  help  to  bear  thy  burden  ?  Can  we  ever  safely  say  to  our- 
selves, "  I  may  be  excused  from  supplication  now,  for  my  sorrow  is  great." 
Talk  not  so.  Here  is  thy  balm  and  benediction,  thy  comfort  and  thy 
cordial :  here  is  thy  strength  and  succour,  thy  constancy  and  confidence. 
Even  in  the  midnight  of  the  soul  let  us  arise  and  pour  out  our  hearts  like 
w'ater  before  the  Lord.  0  tried  believer,  get  thee  to  thy  knees,  and 
from  above  the  mercy-seat  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  shine  forth  upon 
thee.  Pray  even  as  Jesus  did,  and  as  all  his  saints  have  done,  so  shall 
you  in  patience  possess  your  soul.  In  due  time  the  Lord  inclined  to 
the  afflicted  suppliant,  listening  to  his  moaning  from  the  bottom  of  the 
pit:  of  this  it  is  high  time  tor  us  to  speak.  Yet  let  us  not  leave 
this  first  point  till  we  learn  from  the  example  of  our  Lord  that  patience 
is  seen  in  waiting  as  well  as  in  suffering.  To  bear  a  great  weight  for  an 
hour  or  two  is  nothing  compared  with  carrying  a  load  for  many  a  day. 
Patience  knows  its  letters,  but  waiting  reads  the  page,  and  praying  re- 
hearses it  in  the  ears  of  God.  Let  us  add  to  our  patience  waiting,  and 
to  waiting  prayer. 

II.  We  come,  secondly,  to  consider  our  Lord's  deliverance.  In 
due  time,  when  patience  had  had  her  perfect  work,  and  prayer  had  at 
last  prevailed,  our  suffering  Lord  was  brought  up  again  from  the  deeps 
of  sorrow.     His  deliverance  is  set  forth  under  two  images. 

First,  it  is  represented  as  a  bringing  up  out  of  a  horrible  pit.  It  is  a 
terribly  suggestive  metaphor.  I  have  been  in  the  dungeon  in  Rome  in 
which,  according  to  tradition,  Peter  and  Paul  were  confined  (though, 
probably,  they  were  never  there  at  all).  It  was  indeed  a  horrible  pit, 
for  originally  it  had  no  entrance  but  a  round  hole  in  the  rock  above ; 
and  when  that  round  hole  at  the  top  was  blocked  with  a  stone,  not  a  ray 
of  light  nor  a  particle  of  fresh  air  could  possibly  enter.  The  prisoners 
were  let  down  into  the  cavern,  and  there  they  were  left.  When  once  the 
opening  was  closed  they  were  cut  off"  from  all  communication  with  their 
fellow  men.  No  being  has  ever  been  so  cruel  to  man  as  man.  Man  is 
the  worst  of  monsters  to  his  kind,  and  his  cruel  inventions  are  many. 
He  has  not  been  content  to  leave  his  fellows  their  natural  liberty,  but  he 
built  prisons  and  digged  pits  in  w^hich  to  shut  up  his  victims.  At  first 
they  would  place  a  man  in  a  dry  well  merely  for  custody  and  confinement, 
or  they  would  drop  him  into  some  hollow  cavern  in  the  earth  in  which 
corn  or  treasure  had  been  concealed:  but  afterwards  with  greater 
21 


530  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

ingenuity  of  malice  they  covered  over  tlic  top  of  these  pits  so  that  the 
prisoners  could  not  be  partakers  of  God's  bountiful  air,  or  the  merciful 
light  of  the  sun,  or  the  silver  sheen  of  the  moon.  Covered  all  over  and 
shut  in,  the  captives  were  buried  alive.  Even  in  modern  times  we  have 
seen  what  they  call  ouhliettes,  or  dungeons  in  which  prisoners  were 
immured,  to  be  forgotten  as  dead  men  out  of  mind,  buried  so  as  never 
to  come  forth  again.  Such  unfortunates  as  were  doomed  to  enter  these 
tombs  of  living  men  bade  fiirewcll  to  hope.  They  were  inhabitants  of 
oblivion,  dwellers  in  the  land  of  deathshade,  to  remain  apart  from  their 
kind,  cut  off  from  memory.  These  worst  of  dungeons  may  illustrate  our 
text, — "  He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an  horrible  pit." 

In  the  original  we  get  the  idea  of  a  crash,  as  when  some  mailed 
warrior  in  the  midst  of  the  battle  stumbles  into  a  pit,  and  there  he  lies 
bruised  and  broken :  and  there  is  the  thought  of  the  fall  of  waters 
rushing  strangely,  furiously,  mysteriously.  The  Hebrew  hath  it,  "  the 
pit  of  noises,"  or  as  some  render  it,  "the  pit  of  destruction."  Such  was 
the  condition  of  our  dear  Redeemer  when  he  was  bearing  our  sin  and 
Buffering  in  our  stead. 

Just  notice,  first,  that  our  Lord  was  like  a  man  put  into  a  pit,  and  so 
made  to  be  quite  alone.  Imagine  yourself  now  confined  in  one  of  those 
caverns,  with  the  big  stone  rolled  over  the  mouth  of  it.  There  would  be 
neither  hearing  nor  answering.  Now  will  you  know  the  dread  solemnity 
of  silence.  You  may  speak,  but  no  gentle  whisper  of  sympathy  will 
reach  your  ears  in  return ;  you  may  cry  again  and  again  and  make  the 
dungeon's  dome  echo  to  your  voice,  but  you  are  speaking  as  to  brass — no 
man  cares  for  your  soul.  You  are  alone;  alone  in  a  fearful  solitude. 
Thus  it  happened  to  our  Saviour.  All  his  disciples  forsook  him  and 
fled,  and  what  was  infinitely  worse,  his  God  forsook  him  too.  He  cried, 
"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Can  any  man  tell 
me  all  that  was  meant  by  that  infinite  lament  ? 

Of  course,  a  prisoner  in  such  a  pit  as  that  was  in  total  darkness.  He 
could  not  see  the  walls  which  enclosed  him,  nor  so  much  as  his  own 
hand.  No  beam  of  sunlight  ever  wandered  into  that  stagnant  air  ;  the 
captive  would  have  to  grope  for  the  pitcher  of  water  and  the  morsel  of 
bread  which  a  cruel  mercy  would  allot  to  him.  Our  Lord  was  in  the 
dark  ;  midnight  brooded  over  his  spirit.  He  said — "  Now  is  my  soul 
troubled."  "My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful  even  unto  death."  His 
was  a  pit  of  gloom,  the  region  of  the  shadow  of  death,  a  land  of  darkness 
as  darkness  itself. 

AVhen  a  man  is  shut  up  in  a  pit  he  is,  of  course,  full  of  distress.  If 
you  were,  any  of  you,  to  go  into  one  of  the  solitary  cells  of  our  own 
jails,  I  warrant  you  a  short  sojourn  in  it  would  be  quite  enough.  These 
cells  some  years  ago  were  thought  to  be  wonderful  cures  for  all  sorts  of 
evil  dispositions  in  men,  but  probably  they  have  oftener  destroyed  reason 
than  conquered  depravity.  Go  iu,  if  you  dare.  Ask  the  warder  to  shut 
to  the  door,  and  leave  you  in  the  dark  all  alone,  that  you  may  try  the 
solitary  system  for  yourself.  No,  I  should  not  advise  you  to  try  it  even 
for  five  minutes,  for  you  might  even  in  that  short  space  inflict  such  an 
injury  upon  your  nervous  system  as  you  would  never  recover.  I  believe 
that  many  of  the  gentler  ones  here  would  be  quite  unable  to  bear  total 
darkne.-s  and  solitude  even  for  the  shortest  space.     In  the  grim  gloom 


BEOUGHT  UP  FROM  THE  HORRIBLE  PIT.  531 

the  soul  is  haunted  with  phantom  fears,  while  Iiorror  peoples  tlie  place 
which  is  empty  of  human  behigs;  the  heart  is  worried  with  evil  imagina- 
tions, and  pierced  with  arrows  of  distress  ;  grief  takes  hold  of  the  spirit, 
and  alarm  conquers  hope.  In  our  Lord's  case,  the  grief  and  sorrow  which 
he  felt  can  never  be  described,  nor  need  it  be  conceived.  It  was  sometlung 
tantamount  to  the  miseries  of  damned  souls.  The  holy  Jesus  could  not 
feel  the  exact  misery  which  takes  hold  on  abandoned  rebels,  but  he  did 
suffer  what  was  tantamount  to  that  at  the  judgment-seat  of  God.  lie 
gave  a  quid  2^^'o  quo,  a  something  which  in  God's  esteem,  reckoning  the 
dignity  of  his  mighty  person,  stood  instead  of  the  sinner's  eternal  sulfer- 
ing.  He  felt  woe  upon  woe,  night  blackening  night-.  Do  not  try  to 
realize  his  agony ;  he  wills  that  you  should  not,  for  he  has  trodden  the 
winepress  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  were  none  with  him,  as  if  to 
show  that  none  could  understand  his  sorrows,  and  that  we  can  do  no 
more  than  speak  of  his  "unknown  sufferings." 

But  I  must  add,  to  complete  the  figure,  that  shut  up  in  such  a  pit 
there  might  be  a  great  tumult  above,  like  to  the  tramping  of  armed  hosts, 
or  there  might  be  a  rush  of  waters  underneath  the  captive  deep  in  earth's 
bowels.  He  could  not  tell  what  the  noise  was,  nor  whence  it  came  ;  and 
hence  he  would  often  be  in  terrible  fear  while  he  sat  alone  in  the  thick 
darkness.  Our  Lord  had  his  fears,  for  we  read  that  he  was  heard  in  that 
he  feared.  Torrents  of  sin  rushed  near  him  ;  floods  of  wrath  were  heard 
around  him,  and  cataracts  of  grief  fell  upon  him.  Besides,  there  was  a 
mystery  about  this  anguish  which  intensified  it, — a  mystery  not  to  be 
written  or  explained.  Oar  Redeemer's  spirit  was  cast  down  within  him 
far  beyond  anything  that  is  common  to  men ;  in  that  horrible  pit,  that 
pit  of  destruction,  he  lay  with  none  to  pity  or  sustain. 

But,  oh,  change  the  strain,  and  sing  unto  the  Lord  awhile,  as 
we  read  the  verse,  "  He  brought  me  np  out  of  an  horrible  pit."  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  lifted  up  from  all  sorrow  of  spirit  at  that  moment 
when  he  said  so  bravely,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  though  he  died  yet  was 
he  lifted  up  from  death,  as  it  is  written,  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in 
hell;  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption."  His 
spirit  ascended  to  God,  and  by-and-by,  when  the  third  day  had  blushed 
with  morning  light,  his  body  rose  from  the  tomb,  to  ascend  in  due  time 
to  glory.  He  came  up  out  of  the  pit  of  the  grave,  delivered  from  all 
fear  of  corruption,  pain,  or  defeat.  Now  his  sorrow  is  ended,  and  his 
brow  is  clear  from  care.  His  visage  is  marred  no  more  :  he  bears  the 
scars  which  do  but  illumine  his  hands  and  feet  with  splendour,  but 

"  No  more  the  bloody  speai', 

The  cross  and  nails  no  more, 

For  hell  itself  shakes  at  his  name, 

And  all  the  heavens  adore." 

Sing  ye  unto  the  Lord,  ye  saints  of  his,  as  ye  behold  your  Master 
brought  up  again  from  among  the  sorrowfid,  the  despised,  the  deserted, 
the  dead. 

A  second  figure  is,  however,  used  here  to  express  our  Lord's  grief  and 
deliverance  from  it, — "  Out  of  the  miry  day''  Travellers  tell  us  that 
wherever  pits  are  still  used  as  dungeons  they  are  damp,  foul,  and 
utterly  loathsome ;  for  they  are  never  cleansed,  however  long  the  prisoner 


532  METROPOLITAN  TATJERNACLK   PULPIT. 

may  liave  been  there,  or  however  great  the  number  of  victims  shut  up 
within  them.  You  know  wliat  the  prisons  of  Europe  were  in  Howard's 
days,  they  were  even  worse  in  tlie  East  in  periods  further  back.  The 
imprisoned  wretch  often  found  himself  sinking  in  mire;  he  found  no 
rest,  no  liope  of  comfort,  and  when  extricated  he  needed  a  hand  to  drag 
him  out  of  the  thick  clay.  Our  blessed  Lord  and  IMaster  found  himself 
when  lie  was  suflFering  for  us  where  everything  appeared  to  give  way 
beneath  him  ;  las  spirits  sank,  his  friends  failed  him,  and  his  heart  melted 
like  wax.  Every  comfort  was  taken  from  hiui.  His  blessed  manhood 
found  nothing  upon  this  earth  upon  which  it  could  stay  itself,  fur  lie 
had  been  made  sin  for  us,  made  a  curse  for  us,  and  so  every  founda- 
tion of  comfort  departed  from  him.  He  was  deprived  of  visible  support, 
and  w^as  reduced  to  a  sad  condition.  As  a  man  who  has  fallen  into  a 
slough  cannot  stir  so  as  to  recover  himself,  so  was  it  with  our  Redeemer, 
who  says  in  the  Psalms, — "  I  sink  in  deep  mire,  where  there  is  no 
standing."  Some  morasses  are  so  destructive  that,  if  a  man  should  once 
fall  into  them,  lie  might  give  up  his  life  for  lost  unless  some  one  came 
that  way  to  drag  him  out.  80  did  the  Saviour  sink  in  the  miry  clay  of 
our  sin  and  misery  until  the  Lord  Alnn'ghty  lifted  him  out.  The  clay 
of  sorrow  clung  to  him;  it  held  to  him  while  he  was  performing  the 
great  work  of  our  redemption.  But  the  Lord  brought  him  up  out  of 
it.  There  is  no  mire  upon  his  garments  now  :  his  feet  no  longer  sink, 
he  is  not  held  by  the  bands  of  death,  he  slides  not  into  the  grave  again. 
He  was  dragged  down,  as  it  were,  by  bearing  our  sin,  but  that  is  over, 
and  he  hath  ascended  on  high  :  he  hath  led  captivity  captive,  and  re- 
ceived gifts  for  men.  All  honour  be  unto  him,  and  to  his  Father  who 
delivered  him. 

As  we  read  our  text  we  pursue  this  story  of  our  j\Laster's  deliverance, 
and  we  are  told  that  lie  was  brouijht  up  out  of  the  lowest  deeps.  Say  the 
words  or  sing  them  as  you  choose, — "  He  brought  me  up."  God  up- 
raised his  obedient  Son  from  the  depths  into  which  he  had  descended  on 
our  account.  He  was  brought  up,  like  Jonah  wdio  went  to  the  bottom 
of  the  mountains,  and  yet  was  landed  safely  on  the  shore.  He  was 
brought  up  like  Joseph,  who  rose  from  a  pit  to  a  palace ;  like  David,  who 
was  led  up  from  the  sheepfold  to  the  kingdom.  "  The  king  shall  joy  in 
thy  strength,  0  Lord;  and  in  thy  salvation  how  greatly  shall  he  rejoice ! 
His  glory  is  great  in  thy  salvation :  honour  and  majesty  hast  thou  laid 
upon  him.  For  thou  hast  made  him  most  blessed  for  ever :  thou  hast 
made  him  exceeding  glad  with  thy  countenance." 

Then  we  are  told  he  was  set  on  a  rocic,  and  oh,  the  gloi-y  of  our 
blessed  Lord  in  this  matter,  for  now  he  stands  on  a  firm  foundation  in 
all  that  he  does  for  us.  Judgment  and  truth  confirm  his  ways,  and  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  approves  his  doings.  Clu'ist  has  no  sandy  founda- 
tion for  his  work  of  mercy  or  his  word  of  comfort.  When  he  saves  he 
has  a  right  to  save :  when  he  puts  away  sin  he  does  it  on  indisputable 
grounds :  when  he  helps  and  delivers  his  people  he  does  it  according  to 
law,  according  to  the  will  of  the  Highest.  As  Justifier,  Preserver,  and 
Perfecter  of  his  people,  he  stands  upon  a  rock.  This  day  I  delight  to 
think  of  my  Lord  as  settling  his  church  with  himself  upon  the  immutable 
foundations  of  the  covenant,  on  the  decree  of  God,  on  the  purpose  of 
the  Father,  on  his  own  work,  and  on  the  promise  of  God  that  he  would 


BROUGHT  UP  FROM  THE  HORRIBLE  PIT.  633 

reward  him  in  that  work.  Well  may  we  say  that  his  feet  are  upon  a  rock, 
for  he  is  himself,  by  another  figure,  the  Rock  of  ages,  the  Rock  of  our 
salvation. 

And  now  the  goings  of  our  glorious  Christ  are  csfahlished.  Wliou  he 
goes  out  to  save  a  sinner,  lie  knows  that  he  can  do  it,  and  has  a  right 
to  do  it.  AVhen  he  goes  up  to  his  Father's  throne  to  make  intercession 
for  sinners,  his  goings  are  established,  and  the  desire  of  his  heart  is  given 
him.  When  he  comes  in  among  his  church,  or  marches  forth  with  his 
people  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  his  goings  are  established.  "  For  the 
king  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  and  through  the  mercy  of  the  most  High  he 
shall  not  be  moved."  He  shall  surely  come  a  second  time  without  sin 
unto  salvation,  for  so  has  the  Father  decreed :  his  glorious  goings  are 
as  surely  established  as  were  those  of  his  labour  and  suffering.  We  shall 
never  be  w^ithout  a  Saviour  :  we  shall  never  have  a  fallen  or  a  van- 
quished Saviour  ;  for  his  goings  are  established  for  continuance,  cer- 
tainty, and  victory.  Such  honour  have  all  his  saints  ;  for  "  the  steps 
of  a  good  man  are  ordered  of  the  Lord"  ;  and  again,  "none  of  his 
steps  shall  slide." 

Best  of  all,  there  is  a  new  song  in  the  mouth  of  our  Well-leloved.  It 
is  grand  to  think  of  Jesus  singing.  Read  the  twenty-second  Psalm,  and 
you  will  find  him  doing  it,  as  also  in  the  Hebrews  :  "  hi  the  midst  of  the 
church  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee."  Toward  the  end  of  his  earthly 
career  you  hear  him  bursting  into  song.  Was  not  that  a  grand  occasion 
just  before  his  passion,  when  he  was  going  out  to  die ;  we  read  that  "  after 
supper  they  sang  a  hymn,"  If  we  had  been  bound  to  die  that  night,  as 
he  was,  we  should  rather  have  wept  or  prayed  than  sang.  Not  so  our 
Lord.  I  do  not  know  what  psalm  they  sang  :  probably  a  part  of  the 
great  Hal  lei,  usually  sung  after  the  Passover,  which  consists  of  those 
Psalms  at  the  end  of  the  book  which  are  so  full  of  praise.  I  believe  the 
Saviour  himself  pitched  the  tune  and  led  the  strain.  Think  of  him 
singing  when  near  his  hour  of  agony  !  Going  to  scorn  and  mockery,, 
singing !  Going  to  the  thorn-crown  and  the  scourge,  singing  !  Going 
to  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,  singing !  For  the  joy  that  was  set- 
before  him  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame  !  But  now,  what 
must  that  new  song  be  which  he  leads  in  heaven  ?  "  They  sang,  as  it 
were,  a  new  song  before  the  throne " ;  but  it  is  he  that  leads  the- 
heavenly  orchestra.  How  greatly  he  excels  Miriam,  the  sister  of 
Moses,  when  she  took  her  timbrel  and  led  forth  the  women  in  their 
dances,  saying,  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  gloriously : 
the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the  sea."  This  is  called 
"  the  song  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  "  ;  so  I  gather 
that  the  Lamb's  new  song  is  after  the  same  triumphant  fashion  :  it  is  the 
substance  of  that  which  Moses's  song  foreshadowed.  In  Christ  Jesus 
the  Lord  our  God  has  led  captivity  captive.  Let  us  praise  him  on  the 
high  sounding  cymbals.  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed 
gloriously.  The  powers  of  darkness  are  destroyed  ;  sin,  death,  and  hell 
are  drowned  in  the  atoning  blood  :  the  depths  have  covered  them  : 
there  is  not  one  of  them  left.  Oh,  "  sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath 
triumphed  gloriously."     "Ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our  God." 

III.  Such  is  the  exalted  condition  of  our  Lord  at  this  hour  ;  let  us 
turn  and  look  upon  the  Lord's  reward.  The  Lord's  reward  for  having 


534  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

gone  down  into  the  horrible  pit,  and  having  snnk  in  the  miry  clay  for  us, 
is  this, — that "  many  shall  see,  and  fear,  and  trnst  in  the  Lord."  "Many!^' 
Not  all  mankind,  but  "  many  "  shall  look  to  Jesns  and  live.  Alas  !  vast 
nnmbers  continne  in  nnbelief ;  but  "many"  shall  believe  and  live;  and 
the  Lord's  "  many  "  means  very  many.  As  I  was  thinking  over  my  text, 
I  thought,  "  I  hope  there  will  be  some  at  the  Tabernacle  this  morning 
that  belong  to  the  '  many '  who  shall  see  and  fear  and  trust  in  the 
Lord."  "  Many  shall,"  ibr  the  Lord  hath  promised  it.  But,  Lord,  they 
will  not.  "Bat  they  shall,"  says  God.  Oh,  but  many  refuse.  "But 
they  shall,"  says  God,  and  he  hath  the  key  of  men's  hearts,  and  power 
over  their  judgments  and  their  wills.  "  Many  shall."  Do  you,  oh  ye 
unbelievers,  think  that  Jesus  shall  die  in  vain  ?  Oh  sinners,  if  you  will 
not  have  Christ,  others  will.  You  may  despise  him,  but  he  will  be  none 
the  less  glorious.  You  may  reject  his  salvation  but  he  shall  be  none  the 
less  mighty  to  save.  He  is  a  king,  and  ye  cannot  pluck  a  single  jewel 
from  his  crown.  If  you  are  so  foolish  as  to  provoke  his  iron  rod  so  that 
he  shall  break  you  in  shivers  with  it,  yet  he  will  be  glorious  in  the  sight 
of  God,  and  he  will  save  his  own.  Notwithstanding  your  hardness  of 
heart,  be  this  know^i  unto  you,  oh  House  of  Israel,  that  "  many  shall  see, 
and  fear,  and  trust  in  the  Lord." 

What  shall  the  many  do  ?  They  shall  "  see^  Their  eyes  shall  be 
opened,  and  they  shall  see  their  Lord  in  the  horrible  pit,  and  in  the  miry 
clay  ;  and  as  they  look  they  shall  see  that  he  was  there  for  them.  What 
joy  this  will  create  in  their  spirits  !  If  they  do  not  see  the  Lord  Jesus 
as  their  substitute  they  shall,  at  any  rate,  be  made  to  see  the  exceeding 
sinfulness  of  sin.  If  when  Jesus  only  takes  imputed  sin,  and  has  no  sin 
of  his  own,  yet  he  must  be  cast  into  the  horrible  pit  and  sink  in  the  miry 
clay  ;  then  what  will  become  of  men  who  have  their  own  sins  about  them, 
provoking  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord?  If  God  thus  smites  his  well- 
beloved,  oh  sinner,  how  will  he  smite  you !  Beware,  ye  that  forget  him, 
lest  he  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver  you.  By  the 
sufiering  Surety  all  covered  with  his  own  gore,  I  do  beseech  you,  provoke 
not  God ;  for  if  his  Only- Begotten  must  suffer  so,  you  must  suffer  yet 
more  if  you  first  break  his  law,  and  next  reject  his  gospel. 

**  Many  shall  see."  Do  you  wonder  that  it  is  added,  "  and  shall /ear  "  ? 
It  makes  men  fear  to  see  a  bleeding  Christ,  and  to  know  that  they 
crucified  him.  It  makes  men  fear,  however,  with  a  sweet  filial  fear  that 
is  akin  to  hope,  when  they  see  that  Jesus  died  for  sinuers,  the  just  for 
the  unjust,  to  bring  them  to  God.  Oh,  when  they  see  the  Lord  of  love 
acting  as  a  scapegoat,  and  bearing  their  sins  away  into  the  wilderness  of 
forge tfulness,  they  begin  to  hate  their  evil  ways,  and  to  h^ave  a  reverent 
fear  of  God ;  f  )r  so  saith  the  Scripture,  "  there  is  forgiveness  with  thee 
that  tliou  mayest  be  feared." 

But  best  of  all — and  this  is  the  chief  point — they  come  to  "  trust  in 
the  Lord."  They  build  their  hope  of  salvation  upon  the  righteousness 
of  God  as  manifested  in  Christ  Jesus.  Oh,  I  would  to  God  that  some  of 
you  would  trust  him  at  once.  Beloved  friend,  are  you  trying  to  be  saved 
by  your  own  works  ?  That  is  a  delusion.  Are  you  hoping  to  be  saved 
by  your  own  feelings?  That  is  a  lie.  But  you  can  be  saved,  you  shall 
be  saved:  if  you  will  trust  yourself  with  that  blessed  One  who  was  alone 
in  the  dark  pit  of  noises  for  the  sake  of  sinners,  and  slipped  in  the  miry 


BROUGHT  UP  FROM  THE  HORRIBLK  PIT.  535 

clay  for  the  ungodly,  you  shall  assuredly  be  saved  from  wrath  through 
him.  Trust  him,  and  as  surely  as  he  liveth  you  shall  be  saved;  for 
he  that  trusteth  in  him  cannot  perish.  God's  truthfulness  were  gone  if 
the  believer  could  be  lost.  Hath  he  not  said,  "  He  that  believeth  and 
is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  The  throne  of  God  must  rock  and  reel  before 
the  cross  of  Christ  shall  lose  its  power  to  save  those  that  believe. 

IV.  Fourthly,  let  us  see  the  Lord's  likeness  in  his  people.  This 
whole  passage,  as  I  said  in  the  beginning,  has  often  been  used  by  indi- 
vidual believers  as  a  description  of  their  own  deliverance.  It  is  a  true 
picture,  because  we  are  made  like  unto  our  Head,  and  all  the  brethren  are 
partakers  of  that  which  the  Head  has  endured.  Do  I  speak  to  any  of 
my  Master's  servants  in  sore  trouble  ?  Dear  friends,  are  you  made  to 
wait,  though  your  trial  is  sharp  and  severe  ?  Is  it  so  that  your  prayer  has 
not  yet  been  answered  ?  Then  remember  the  waiter's  place  was  once  occu- 
pied by  the  Lord  Jesus,  for  he  says,  "  I  waited  patiently."  If  the  Lord 
keeps  you  waiting  for  a  certain  blessing  year  after  year  do  not  despair. 
He  will  give  it  at  length  if  it  be  truly  for  your  good,  for  he  hath  said  "  no 
good  thing  will  I  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  He  kept 
his  Son  waiting,  and  he  may  very  well  keep  you  in  like  posture,  for  how 
long  did  you  delay,  and  cause  the  Lord  of  grace  to  wait  on  you! 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  wait  for  him."  I  have  seen  people  very  uppish 
when  they  have  called  on  a  public  man  and  have  had  to  wait  a  little  ; 
they  feel  that  they  ought  not  to  be  kept  in  the  lobby  ;  but  suppose  some 
young  man  said  to  them,  "  I  am  his  own  son,  and  yet  I  have  been 
waiting  an  hour."  Then  they  are  more  patient.  So  when  God  keeps 
you  waiting  do  not  be  proud,  and  say,  "  Wherefore  should  I  wait  for  the 
Lord  any  longer  ?  "  but  remember  "  It  is  good  for  a  man  both  to  hope 
and  quietly  wait  for  the  salvation  of  God."  Jesus  waited — "  waited  pa- 
tiently." Seek  to  be  like  him,  and  in  patience  possess  your  soul.  "  I 
cannot  see  how  I  am  to  be  delivered."  Wait.  "  Ah,  this  is  such  a  heavy 
burden."  Wait.  "But  I  am  ready  to  die  under  this  terrible  load." 
Wait !  Wait  on  !  Though  he  tarry,  wait  for  him  :  he  is  worth  waiting  for. 
"  Wait "  is  a  short  word,  but  it  takes  a  deal  of  grace  to  spell  out  its  full 
meaning,  and  still  more  grace  to  put  it  in  practice.  Wait :  wait.  "  Oh, 
but  I  have  been  unfortunate."  Wait.  "  But  I  have  believed  a  promise, 
and  it  has  not  been  fulfilled."  Wait ;  for  you  wait  in  blessed  company : 
you  may  hear  Jesus  saying,  "  I  waited  patiently."  Blessed  be  his  name, 
he  is  teaching  us  to  do  the  same  by  his  gracious  Spirit. 

Next,  the  Lord  may  send  you,  his  dear  child,  a  very  heavy  sorrow : 
you  may  fall  into  the  horrible  pit,  and  see  no  light,  no  comfort,  and  no 
one  may  be  able  to  cheer  you  or  help  you.  Some  that  have  a  touch  of 
despondency  in  their  nature  have  been  brought  so  low  as  almost  to 
despair  of  life.  They  have  sat  in  darkness  and  seen  no  light :  they  have 
felt  the  wails  of  their  prison  and  have  not  discovered  a  crack  or  cranny 
through  which  escape  was  possible :  they  have  looked  up,  and  even  theii 
they  have  seen  nothing  to  console  them.  Ah,  well,  here  is  a  word  I 
commend  to  you, — the  Saviour  says  it :  "  He  brought  me  up."  The 
Lord  God  can  and  will  bring  up  his  troubled  ones.  You  will  have  to 
write  in  your  diary  one  of  these  days,  "  He  brought  me  up."  I  was  in 
the  dark,  I  was  in  the  dungeon,  but  "  He  brought  me  up."  I  can  per- 
sonally say  this  with  gladsome  gratitude,  for  "  He  hath  brought  me  up/' 


586"  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

again  and  again.  My  heart  is  glad  as  I  reflect  upon  my  past  deliverances. 
I  have  often  wondered  why  I  am  so  often  shut  up  in  prison,  and  bound 
as  with  fetters  of  steel ;  but  I  cease  to  wonder  when  I  think  of  the  many 
among  you  who  are  called  to  wear  the  like  bonds.  This  is  my  portion, 
that  I  may  be  a  witness-bearer  for  my  Cod,  and  that  I  may  be  able  to 
speak  to  the  experiences  of  God's  tempted  people,  and  tell  how  gra- 
ciously the  Lord  delivers  his  servants  who  trust  in  him.  Faith  shall 
never  be  ashamed  or  confounded,  world  without  end.  God  can  and  will 
hasten  to  the  rescue  of  the  faithful.  I  set  to  my  seal  also  that  "  He 
brought  me  up";  and,  beloved  brother  in  tribulation,  he  will  bring  you 
up ;  only  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him. 

'*Ah,"  say  you,  ''but  I  do  not  know  how  to  stand,  for  I  sink  as  in 
miry  clay,  through  faintness  of  heart :  I  cannot  find  the  slightest  foot- 
hold for  my  hope."  No,  you  are  sinking  in  the  miry  clay  like  your 
Master;  but  in  answer  to  prayer  the  Lord  will  bring  you  up  out  of 
your  hopeless  state,  and  he  will  set  your  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  establish 
your  goings,  and  give  you  joy,  and  peace,  and  delight.  Wherefore  see, 
and  fear,  and  trust  in  God,  and  give  glory  to  his  blessed  name. 

Lastly,  do  I  address  any  seeking  one  who  finds  no  rest  for  the  sole 
of  his  foot  ?  Dear  friend,  are  you  sinking  in  the  deep  mire  of  your  guilt  ? 
The  Lord  can  pardon  you,  for  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son, 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Are  you  shut  up  by  conscience  in  the  prison- 
house  under  a  just  sense  of  deserved  wrath?  Jesus  will  give  you 
immediate  rest  if  you  come  to  him.  Do  you  feel  as  if  you  cannot  kneel 
to  pray,  for  your  very  knees  slip  in  the  mire  of  doubt?  Remember, 
Jesus  makes  intercession  for  the  transgressors.  Do  you  seem  as  if,  every 
time  you  move,  you  are  burying  your  hope,  and  slipping  deeper  and 
deeper  into  ruin?  The  Lord  hath  plenteous  redemption.  Do  not 
despair.  You  cannot  deliver  yourself,  but  God  can  deliver  you :  you 
cannot  stand  of  yourself,  but  God  can  make  you  to  stand.  You  cannot 
go  to  him  nor  go  abroad  among  your  fellow-men  with  comfort,  but 
the  Lord  can  make  you  to  run  in  his  ways.  You  shall  yet  go  forth  with 
joy  and  be  led  forth  with  peace ;  the  mountains  and  the  hills  shall  break 
forth  before  you  into  singing,  and  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  clap  their 
hands.  Only  see  Christ,  and  fear  and  trust  your  God,  and  you  too  shall 
sing  unto  Jehovah  your  deliverer,  and  this  shall  be  your  song  : — 

"  He  raised  me  from  a  hoi-rid  pit, 
Where  mourning  long  I  lay, 
And  from  my  bonds  released  my  feet, 
Deep  bonds  of  miry  clay. 

Firm  on  a  rock  he  made  me  stand, 

And  taught  my  cheerful  tongue 
To  praise  the  wonders  of  his  hand 

In  a  new  thankful  song." 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  xl. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 196,  40,  332. 


OUE  LOED'S  TRIUMPHANT  ASCENSION. 


Intended  foe,  Eeading  on  Lord's-day,  May  11th,   1890, 
delivered  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWIXGTON, 
On  Lord'' s-dny  Morning,  Ajml  27///,   1S90. 


"  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led  captivity  captive  :  thou  hast  received 
gifts  for  men;  yea,  for  the  rebellious  also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among 
them." — Psalm  Ixviii.  18. 

The  hill  of  Zion  had  been  taken  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Jebusites. 
They  had  held  it  long  after  the  rest  of  the  country  had  been  subdued ; 
but  David  at  last  had  taken  it  from  them.  This  was  the  mountain 
ordained  of  Jehovah  of  old  to  be.  the  place  of  the  Temple.  David, 
therefore,  with  songs  and  shouts  of  rejoicing,  brought  up  the  ark  from 
the  abode  of  Obed-edom  to  the  place  where  it  should  remain.  That 
is  the  literal  fact  upon  which  the  figure  of  the  text  is  based.  We  are  at 
no  loss  for  the  spiritual  interpretation,  for  we  turn  to  Ephesians  iv.  8, 
where,  quoting  rather  the  sense  of  the  passage  than  the  exact  words, 
Paul  says,  ' '  AVhen  he  ascended  up  on  high,  he  led  captivity  captive,  and 
gave  gifts  imto  men."  The  same  sense  is  found  in  Colossians  ii.  15  : 
"And  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he  made  a  show 
of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it."  Not  misled  by  the 
will-o'-the-wisp  of  fancy,  but  guided  by  the  clear  light  of  the  infallible 
Word,  we  see  our  way  to  expound  our  text.  In  the  words  of  David 
we  have  an  address  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  concerning  his  ascent  to 
his  glory.  "Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast  led  captivity 
captive  :  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men  ;  yea,  for  the  rebellious  also, 
that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them." 

Our  Saviour  descended  when  he  came  to  the  manger  of  Bethlehem, 
a  babe ;  and  further  descended  when  he  became  "  a  man  of  sorrows, 
and  acquainted  with  grief."  He  descended  lower  still  when  he  was 
obedient  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross  ;  and  further  j'^et  when 
his  dead  body  was  laid  in  the  grave.  AVell  saith  our  ajDOstle,  "Now 
that  he  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that  he  also  descended  first  into  the 
lower  parts  of  the  earth  ?  "  Long  and  dark  was  the  descent :  there 
were  no  depths  of  humiliation,  temptaliun,  and  affliction  which  he  did 
not  fathom.  Seeing  ho  stood  in  their  place  and  stead,  he  went  as 
No.  2,142. 


538  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

low  as  justice  required  that  sinners  should  go  who  had  dared  to 
violate  the  law  of  God.  The  utmost  abyss  of  desertion  heard  him.  cry, 
*'  My  Grod,  my  Grod,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  Low  in  the  grave 
he  lay ;  hut  he  had  his  face  upward,  for  he  could  not  see  corruption. 

On  the  third  day  he  quitted  the  couch  of  the  dead,  and  rose  to  the 
light  of  the  living.  He  had  commenced  his  glorious  ascent.  To 
prove  how  real  was  his  resurrection,  he  stayed  on  earth  some  forty 
days,  and  showed  himself  to  many  witnesses.  Magdalene  and  James 
saw  him  alone  ;  the  eleven  beheld  him  in  their  midst ;  the  two  on  the 
road  conversed  with  him  ;  five  hundred  brethren  at  once  beheld  him. 
He  gave  infallible  proofs  that  he  was  really  risen  from  the  dead,  and 
these  remain  with  us  unto  this  day  as  historic  facts.  He  ate  a  piece 
of  a  broiled  fish  and  of  an  honeycomb,  to  prove  that  he  was  no  phantom. 
He  said  to  the  apostles,  "Handle  me,  and  see  that  it  is  I  myself;  for 
a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have."  One  laid  his 
finger  in  the  print  of  the  nails,  and  even  thrust  his  hand  into  his  side. 
Their  very  doubts  were  used  to  make  the  evidence  clearer.  The  fact 
that  Jesus  died  was  put  beyond  question  by  the  spear-thrust ;  and  the 
fact  that  he  was  alive,  in  a  material  form,  was  equally  weU  established 
by  the  touch  of  Thomas.  Beyond  a  doubt,  Christ  Jesus  has  risen 
from  the  dead,  and  become  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept. 

This  being  settled  beyond  question,  the  time  came  for  our  Lord  to 
continue  his  homeward,  upward  journey,  and  return  unto  the  glory 
from  which  he  had  comedown.  From  "the  mount  called  Olivet," 
while  his  disciples  surrounded  him,  "he  was  taken  up;  and  a  cloud 
received  him  out  of  their  sight."  The  rest  of  his  upward  progress  we 
cannot  describe.  Imagination  and  faith  step  in,  and  conceive  of  him 
as  rising  beyond  all  regions  known  to  us,  far  above  all  imaginable 
height.  He  draws  near  to  the  suburbs  of  heaven;  and  surely  the 
poet  is  not  wrong  when  he  says  of  the  angels — 

*'  They  brought  his  chariot  from  on  high 
To  bear  him  to  his  throne ; 
Clapp'd  their  triumphant  wings,  and  cried, 
'  The  glorious  work  is  done.'  " 

"  Lift  up  3^our  heads,  0  ye  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting 
doors,  that  the  King  of  glory  may  come  in."  How  high  he  ascended 
after  he  passed  the  pearly  portal  Paul  cannot  tell  us,  save  that  he  says 
"he  ascended  up  far  above  all  heavens,"  and  describes  him  as  "  set  at 
God's  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above  all  principality, 
and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion"  ;  and  as  "  dwelling  in  the  light 
which  no  man  can  approach  unto."  The  man  Christ  Jesus  has 
gone  back  to  the  place  from  whence  his  Grodhead  came.  Thou  art 
the  King  of  glory,  0  Christ !  Thou  art  the  eternal  Son  of  the  Father ! 
Thou  sittest  ever  in  the  highest  heaven,  enthroned  with  all  glory, 
clothed  with  all  power,  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  Unto  thy 
name  we  humbly  present  our  hallelujahs,  both  now  and  for  ever. 

I.  Now,  concerning  the  text  itself,  which  speaks  of  the  ascent  of 
our  ever  blessed  Lord,  we  shall  say,  first,  that  oua  Lord's  triumph 

WAS    SET    FORTH    BY    HIS    ASCENSION. 

He  came  here  to  fight  the  foes  of  God  and  man.  It  was  a  tremendous 


I  OTJB   lord's   triumphant   ASCENSION.  630' 

"battle,  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  spiritual  wickednesses 
and  evil  powers.  Our  Lord  fought  against  sin,  and  death,  and  hell, 
and  hato  of  God,  and  love  of  falsehood.  He  came  to  earth  to  be  our 
champion.  For  j-ou  and  for  me,  beloved,  he  entered  the  lists,  and 
wrestled  till  he  sweat  great  drops  of  blood:  yea,  "he  poured  out  his 
soul  unto  death."  Wlien  he  had  ended  the  struggle  he  declared  his 
victory  by  ascending  to  the  Father's  throne. 

Noio  his  descent  is  ended.  There  was  no  need  for  him  to  remain  amid 
the  men  who  despised  him.  The  shame,  and  suffering,  and  blasphemy, 
and  rebuke  are  far  beneath  him  now.  The  sun  has  risen,  and  the 
darkness  of  night  has  fled.  He  has  gone  up  beyond  the  reach  of 
sneering  Sadducees  and  accusing  Pharisees.  The  traitor  cannot  again 
kiss  him,  Pilate  cannot  scourge  him,  Herod  cannot  mock  him.  He 
is  far  above  the  reach  of  priestly  taunt  and  vulgar  jest. 

"No  more  the  cruel  fipeaj-, 
The  cross  and  nails  no  more ; 
For  hell  itself  shakes  at  his  frown, 
And  all  the  heavens  f.dore." 

I^ow,  also,  our  Lordh  loorh  was  done.  "VVe  are  sure  that  the  purpose 
of  his  love  is  secure,  or  he  would  not  have  returned  to  his  rest.  The 
love  that  brought  him  here  would  have  kept  him  here  if  all  things 
necessary  for  our  salvation  had  not  been  finished.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
is  no  sudden  enthusiast,  who  rashly  commences  an  enterprise  of  which 
he  wearies  before  it  is  accomplished.  He  does  not  give  up  a  work 
which  he  has  once  undertaken.  Because  he  said,  *'  I  have  finished 
the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do,"  and  then  ascended  to  the 
Father,  I  feel  safe  in  asserting  that  all  that  was  required  of  the  Lord 
Christ  for  the  overthrow  of  the  powers  of  darkness  is  performed  and 
endured:  all  that  is  needed  for  the  salvation  of  his  redeemed  is 
fully  done.  Whatever  was  the  design  of  Christ's  death,  it  will  be 
accomplished  to  the  full ;  for  had  he  not  secured  its  accomplishment 
he  would  not  have  gone  back.  I  do  not  believe  in  a  defeated  and 
disappointed  Savioiu',  nor  in  a  divine  sacrifice  which  fails  to  effect  its 
purpose.  I  do  not  believe  in  an  atonement  which  is  admirably  wide 
but  fatally  ineffectual.  I  rejoice  to  hear  my  Lord  say,  "All  that 
the  Father  giveth  me  shall  come  to  me."  Whatever  was  the  purpose 
of  the  Christ  of  God  in  the  great  transaction  of  the  cross,  it  must 
be  fully  effected :  to  conceive  a  failure,  even  of  a  partial  kind,  is 
scarcely  reverent.  Jesus  has  seen  to  it  that  in  no  point  shall  his  work 
be  frustrated.  Nothing  is  left  undone  of  all  his  covenanted  engage- 
ments. "  It  is  finished  "  is  a  description  of  every  item  of  the  divine 
labour ;  and,  therefore,  has  he  ascended  on  high.  There  are  no 
dropped  stitches  in  the  robe  of  Christ.  I  say  again,  the  love  that 
brought  oux  Lord  here  would  have  kept  him  here  if  he  had  not  been 
absolutely  sure  that  all  his  work  and  warfare  for  our  salvation  had 
been  accomplished  to  the  full. 

Further,  as  we  see  here  the  ending  of  our  Lord's  descent  and  the 
accomplishment  of  his  work,  remember  that  Ms  ascent  to  the  Father  is 
representative.  Every  believer  rose  with  him,  and  grasped  the  in- 
heritance.    When  he  uprose,  ascending  high,  he  taught  our  feet  the 


540  METBOPOLITAN    TABEUXACLE    PULPIT. 

way.  At  the  last  his  people  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  the  Lord 
in  the  aii-,  and  so  shall  they  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  He  has  made  a 
stairway  for  Jiis  saints  to  climb  to  their  felicity,  and  he  has  trodden  it 
himself  to  assure  us  that  the  new  and  living  way  is  available  for  us. 
In  his  ascension  he  bore  all  his  people  with  Jiira.  As  Levi  was  in  the 
loins  of  Abraham,  when  Melchisedek  met  him,  so  were  all  the  saints 
in  the  loins  of  Christ  when  he  ascended  up  on  high.  Not  one  of  the 
number  shall  fail  to  come  where  the  head  has  entered,  else  were  Jesus 
the  head  of  an  imperfect  and  mutilated  body.  Though  you  have  no 
other  means  of  getting  to  glory  but  faith  in  Jesus,  that  way  wiU 
bring  you  there  without  fail.  Not  only  will  he  not  be  in  glory  and 
leave  us  behind,  but  he  cannot  be  so,  since  we  are  one  with  him ;  and 
where  he  is  his  people  must  be.  We  are  in  the  highest  glory  in 
Jesus  as  our  representative,  and  by  faith  we  are  raised  up  together, 
and  made  to  sit  together  in  the  heavenlies,  even  in  him. 

Our  LonVs  ascent  is  to  the  highest  heaven.  I  have  noticed  this  already; 
but  let  me  remind  j'ou  of  it  again,  lest  you  miss  an  essential  point. 
Oiir  Lord  Jesus  is  in  no  inferior  place  in  the  glory  land.  He  was  a 
servant  here,  but  he  is  not  so  there.  I  know  that  he  intercedes,  and 
thus  carries  on  a  form  of  service  on  our  behalf ;  but  no  strivings,  and 
cryings,  and  tears  are  mingled  with  his  present  pleadings.  With 
authority  he  pleads.  He  is  a  priest  upon  his  throne,  blending  with 
his  plea  the  authority  of  his  personal  merit.  He  saith,  "All  power 
is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth  "  ;  and  therefore  he  is  glorious 
in  his  prayers  for  us.  He  is  Lord  of  every  place,  and  of  everything ; 
he  guides  the  wheel  of  providence,  and  directs  the  flight  of  angels ; 
his  kingdom  ruleth  over  all.  He  is  exalted  above  every  name  that  is 
named,  and  all  things  are  put  under  him.  Oh,  what  a  Christ  we  have 
to  trust  in  and  to  love  ! 

And  on  this  account  2ve  are  called  upon  in  the  text  to  think  much  of 
his  blessed  Person.  When  we  speak  of  what  Christ  has  done,  we  must 
think  much  of  the  doing,  but  still  more  of  the  Doer.  We  must  not 
forget  the  Benefactor  in  the  benefits  which  come  to  us  through  him. 
Note  well  how  David  puts  it.  To  him  the  Lord  is  first  and  most 
prominent.  He  sees  him,  he  speaks  to  him.  "  Thou  hast  ascended 
on  high.  Thou  hast  led  captivity  captive.  Thou  hast  received  gifts 
for  men."  Three  times  he  addresses  him  by  that  personal  pronoun 
"thou."  Dwell  on  the  fact  that  he,  the  Son  of  David,  who  for  our 
sakes  came  down  on  earth  and  lay  in  the  manger,  and  hung  upon  a 
woman's  breast,  has  gone  up  on  high,  into  the  glory  infinite.  He  that 
trod  the  weary  ways  of  Palestine  now  reigns  as  a  King  in  his  palace. 
He  that  sighed,  and  hungered,  and  wept,  and  bled,  and  died,  is  now 
above  all  heavens.  Behold  your  Lord  upon  the  cross — mark  the  five 
ghastly  wounds,  and  all  the  shameful  scourging  and  spitting  which 
men  have  wrought  upon  him  !  See  how  that  blessed  body,  prepared 
of  the  Holy  Grhost  for  the  indwelling  of  the  Second  Person  of  the 
adorable  Trinity,  was  evil  entreated  !  But  there  is  an  end  to  all  this. 
*'  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high."  He  that  was  earth's  scorn  is  now 
heaven's  wonder.  I  saw  thee  laid  in  the  tomb,  wrapped  about  with 
cerements,  and  embalmed  in  spices ;  but  thou  hast  ascended  on  high, 
where  death  cannot  touch  thee.     The  Chi-ist  that  was  buried  here  is  now 


OUE  lord's  triumphant  ascension.  541 

upon  the  throne.  The  heart  which  was  broken  here  is  palpitating  in 
his  bosom  now,  as  full  of  love  and  condescension  as  when  he  dwelt 
among  men.  He  has  not  forgotten  us,  for  he  has  not  forgotten  him- 
self, and  we  are  part  and  parcel  of  himself.  He  is  still  mindful  of 
Calvary  and  Gethsemane.  Even  when  you  are  dazzled  by  the  super- 
lative splendour  of  his  exalted  state,  still  believe  that  he  is  a  brother 
born  for  adversity. 

Let  us  rejoice  in  the  ascent  of  Christ  as  being  the  ensign  of  his 
victory,  and  the  symbol  thereof.  He  has  accomplished  his  work.  If 
thou  hadst  not  led  captivity  captive,  0  Christ,  thou  hadst  never 
ascended  on  high ;  and  if  thou  hadst  not  won  gifts  of  salvation  for 
the  sins  of  men,  thou  hadst  been  here  still  suffering  !  Thou  wouldst 
never  have  relinquished  thy  chosen  task  if  thou  hadst  not  perfected 
it.  Thou  art  so  set  on  the  salvation  of  men,  that  for  the  joy  that  was 
set  before  thee,  thou  didst  endure  the  cross,  despising  the  shame ; 
and  we  know  that  all  must  have  been  achieved,  or  thou  wouldst 
still  be  working  out  thy  gracious  enterprise.  The  voice  of  the 
ascension  is — Consummatum  est  :   "  It  is  finished." 

II.  Having  led  your  thoughts  that  way,  I  would,  secondly,  remind 
you  that  the  Lord's  triumphal  ascent  demonstrated  the  defeat 
OF  ALL  OUR  FOES.  "  Thou  hast  led  captivity  captive  "  is  as  certain  as 
"  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high." 

Brethren,  tve  icere  captives  once — captives  to  tyrants,  who  wrought 
us  woe,  and  would  soon  have  wrought  us  death.  We  were  captives 
to  sin,  captives  to  Satan,  and  therefore  captives  under  spiritual  death. 
We  were  captives  under  divers  lusts  and  imaginations  of  our  own 
hearts :  captives  to  error,  captives  to  deceit.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
has  led  captivity  captive.  There  is  our  comfort.  Yet,  forget  not  that 
we  were  hopeless  captives  to  all  these :  they  were  too  strong  for  us, 
and  we  could  not  escape  from  their  cruel  bondage. 

The  Lord  Jesus,  ly  his  glorious  victory  here  heloiv,  has  subdued  all  our 
adversaries,  and  in  his  going  up  on  high  he  has  triumphed  over  them 
all,  exhibiting  them  as  trophies.  The  imagery  may  be  illustrated  by 
the  triumph  of  Eoman  conquerors.  They  were  wont  to  pass  along  the 
Via  Sacra,  and  climb  up  to  the  Capitol,  dragging  at  their  chariot - 
wheels  the  vanquished  princes  with  their  hands  bound  behind  their 
backs.  All  those  powers  which  held  you  captive  have  been  vanquished 
by  Christ.  Whatever  form  your  spiritual  slavery  took,  you  are  clean 
delivered  from  it ;  for  the  Lord  Christ  has  made  captives  those  whose 
captives  you  were.  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you."  Con- 
cerning Satan,  our  Lord  has  bruised  his  head  beneath  his  heel. 
Death  also  is  overcome,  and  his  sting  is  taken  away.  Death  is  no 
more  the  king  of  dread  :  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin  ;  and  the  strength 
of  sin  is  the  law.  But  thanks  be  to  Grod,  which  giveth  us  the  victory 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Whatever  there  was  or  is,  which 
can  oppress  our  soul,  and  hold  it  in  bondage,  the  Lord  Jesus  has 
subdued  and  made  it  captive  to  himself. 

What  then  ?  Why,  henceforth  the  poiver  of  all  our  adversaries  is  broken. 
Courage,  Christians  !  you  can  fight  your  way  to  heaven,  for  the  foes 
who  dispute  your  passage  have  been  already  worsted  in  the  field. 
They  bear  upon  them  the  proofs  of  the  valour  of  your  leader.     True, 


542 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


the  flock  of  the  Lord  is  too  feeble  to  force  its  way  ;  but  listen,  "  The 
Breaker  is  come  up  before  them,  and  the  King  at  the  head  of  them." 
Easily  may  the  sheep  follow  where  the  Shepherd  breaks  the  way.  We 
have  but  to  follow  those  heavenly  feet,  which  once  were  pierced,  and 
none  of  our  steps  shall  slide.  Move  on,  0  soldiers  of  Jesus,  for  your 
Captain  cries,  "  Follow  me  !  "  Would  he  lead  you  into  evil  ?  Has  he 
not  said,  "Thou  shalt  tread  upon  the  lion  and  adder:  the  young 
lion  and  the  dragon  shalt  thou  trample  under  feet."  Your  Lord  has 
set  his  foot  on  the  necks  of  your  enemies :  you  wage  war  with  van- 
quished foes.  What  encouragement  this  glorious  ascension  of  Christ 
should  give  to  every  tried  believer ! 

Remember,  again,  that  the  victory  of  our  Lord  Christ  is  the  victory  of 
all  who  are  in  him.  ''  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's 
head."  Now,  the  seed  of  the  woman  is,  first  of  all,  the  Lord  Jesus; 
but  also,  it  is  all  who  are  in  union  with  him.  There  are  still  two  seeds 
in  the  woi'ld : — the  seed  of  the  serpent,  and  these  cannot  enter  into 
this  rest ;  and  the  seed  of  the  woman,  who  are  born,  not  of  blood,  nor 
of  the  will  of  man,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  but  of  God  :  in  these 
last  is  the  living  and  incorruptible  seed,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for 
ever.  Jesus,  our  Lord,  represents  them  in  all  that  he  does — they  died 
in  him,  were  buried  in  him,  are  raised  in  him,  and  in  the  day  when  he 
triumphed,  they  led  captivity  captive  in  him.  Looking  at  the  great 
battle  now  raging  in  the  world,  I  gaze  with  jo^'ful  confidence.  We 
are  fighting  now  with  Popery,  with  Mahometanism,  with  idolatry  in 
the  foulest  forms ;  but  the  battle  is  in  effect  won.  We  are  struggling 
with  the  terrible  infidelity  which  has  fixed  itself  like  a  cancer  upon 
the  church  of  God,  and  our  spirit  sinks  as  we  survey  the  horrors  of 
this  almost  civil  war.  How  often  we  groan  because  the  battle  does 
not  go  as  we  would  desire  it !  Yet  there  is  no  reason  for  dismay. 
God  is  in  no  hurry  as  we  are.  He  dwells  in  the  leisure  of  eternity, 
and  is  not  the  prey  of  fear,  as  we  are.  We  read  concerning  the 
multitude,  when  they  needed  to  be  fed,  that  Jesus  asked  Philip  a 
question  ;  but  yet  it  is  added,  "  Howbeit  Jesus  knew  what  he  would 
do."  So  to-day  the  Lord  vnny  put  many  cj^uestions  to  his  valiant  ones, 
and  "for  the  divisions  of  Reuben  there  maybe  great  searchings  of 
heart"  ;  but  he  knows  what  he  is  going  to  do,  and  we  may  lay  our 
heads  upon  his  bosom  and  rest  quiet.  If  he  does  not  tell  us  how  he 
will  effect  his  purpose,  yet  assuredly  he  will  not  fail.  His  cause  is 
sure  to  win  the  victory,  for  how  can  the  Lord  be  defeated  ?  A  van- 
quished Christ !  We  have  not  j^et  learned  to  blaspheme,  and  so  we 
put  the  notion  far  from  us.  No,  brethren,  by  those  bleeding  hands 
and  feet  he  has  secured  the  struggle.  By  that  side  opened  down  to 
his  heart  we  feel  that  his  heart  is  fixed  in  our  cause.  Specially  by  his 
resurrection,  and  hy  his  climbing  to  the  throne  of  God,  he  has  made 
the  victory  of  his  truth,  the  victory  of  his  church,  the  victory  of 
himself  most  sure  and  certain. 

III.  Let  us  notice,  thirdly,  that  our  Lord's  triumphant  ascension 
WAS  CELEBRATED  BY  GIFTS.  The  custom  of  bcstowing  gifts  after  victory 
was  practised  among  the  Easterns,  according  to  the  song  of  Deborah. 
Those  to  whom  a  triumph  was  decreed  in  old  Eome  scattered  money 
among  the  populace.    Sometimes  it  seemed  as  if  every  man  in  the  city 


OUB  lord's  teiumphant  ascension.  543 

was  made  rich,  by  his  share  of  the  spoils  of  vanquished  princes.  Thus 
our  Lord,  when  he  ascended  on  high,  received  gifts  for  men,  and 
scattered  largess  all  around. 

The  psalm  says:  "Thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men."  The  Hebrew 
hath  it,  "Thou  hast  received  gifts  in  Adam" — that  is,  in  human 
nature.  Our  Lord  Christ  had  everything  as  Lord ;  but  as  the  man, 
the  Mediator,  he  has  received  gifts  from  the  Father.  ' '  The  King 
eternal,  immortal,  invisible,"  has  bestowed  upon  his  triumphant 
General  a  portion  with  the  great,  and  he  has  ordained  that  he  shall 
divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong.  This  our  Lord  values,  for  he 
speaks  of  all  that  the  Father  has  given  him  with  the  resolve  that  he 
will  possess  it. 

When  Paul  quotes  the  passage,  he  says,  "He  gave  gifts  to  men."  Did 
Paul  quote  incorrectly  ?  I  trow  not.  He  quoted,  no  doubt,  from  the 
Greek  version.  Is  the  Greek  version  therefore  compatible  with  the 
Hebrew  ?  Assuredly ;  for  Dr.  Owen  says  that  the  word  rendered 
"received"  may  be  read  "gave."  And  if  not,  for  Christ  to  receive 
for  men  is  the  same  thing  as  to  give  to  men,  for  he  never  receives  for 
himself,  but  at  once  gives  it  to  those  who  are  in  him.  Paul  looks  to  the 
central  meaning  of  the  passage,  and  gives  us  the  heart  and  soul  of  its 
sense.  He  is  not  intending  to  quote  it  verbatim,  but  to  give  in  brief  its 
innermost  teaching.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  nothing  which  he  does 
not  give  to  his  church.  He  gave  himself /or  us,  and  he  continues  still 
to  give  himself  to  us.  He  receives  the  gift,  but  ho  only  acts  as  the 
conduit-pipe,  through  which  the  grace  of  God  flows  to  us.  It  pleased 
the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell ;  and  of  his  fulness 
have  all  we  received. 

What  are  these  great  ascension  gifts  ?  I  answer  that  the  sum  of 
them  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  I  invite  your  adoring  attention  to  the  sacred 
Trinity  herein  manifested  to  us.  How  delightful  it  is  to  see  the 
Trinity  working  out  in  unity  the  salvation  of  men !  ' '  Thou  hast 
ascended  on  high "  :  there  is  Christ  Jesus.  "Thou  hast  received  gifts 
for  men  "  :  there  is  the  Father,  bestowing  those  gifts.  The  gift  itself 
is  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  the  great  largess  of  Christ's  ascension, 
which  he  bestowed  on  his  church  at  Pentecost.  Thus  you  have  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  blessedly  co-working  for  the  benediction  of  men, 
the  conquest  of  evil,  the  estalolishment  of  righteousness.  0  my  soul, 
delight  thyself  in  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit.  One  of  the  sins  of 
modern  theology  is  keeping  these  divine  Persons  in  the  background, 
so  that  they  are  scarcely  mentioned  in  their  several  workings  and 
offices.  The  theology  which  can  feed  your  souls  must  be  full  of 
Godhead,  and  yield  to  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  perpetual  praise. 

Beloved,  the  gifts  here  spoken  of  are  those  brought  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  "  The  water  that  I  shall  give  him,"  said  Christ,  "  shall  be  in 
him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  He  said  again, 
"If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink."  We  read 
that  he  "  spake  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believed  on  him  should 
receive."  "If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto 
your  children  :  how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him  ?  "  To  conquer  the  world  for  Christ 
■we  need  nothing  but  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  in  the  hour  of  his  personal 


544  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

victory  lie  secured  us  this  boon.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  be  but  given 
we  have  in  him  all  the  weapons  of  our  holy  war. 

But  observe,  according  to  Paul,  these  gifts  which  our  Lord  gave  are 
embodied  in  men ;  for  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  upon  men  whom  he  has 
chosen,  and  works  through  them  according  to  his  good  pleasure. 
Hence  he  gave  some,  apostles,  some,  evangelists,  and  some,  pastors 
and  teachers.  No  one  may  be  judged  to  be  given  of  God  to  the 
church  in  any  of  these  offices  unless  as  the  Spirit  dwells  upon  him. 
All  are  given  of  God  uj^on  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  rests,  whatever  their 
office  may  be.  It  is  ours  to  accept  with  great  joy  the  men  who  are  chosen 
and  anointed  to  speak  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  be  they  what  they  may. 
Paul,  Apollos,  Cephas,  they  are  all  the  gifts  of  the  risen  Christ  to  his 
redeemed  ones,  for  their  edifying  and  perfecting.  The  Holy  Spirit,  in 
proportion  as  ho  abides  in  these  servants  of  God,  makes  them  to  be 
precious  benisons  of  heaven  to  his  people,  and  they  become  the  cham- 
pions by  whom  the  world  is  subdued  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

These  gifts,  given  in  the  form  of  men,  are  given  for  men.  Churches 
do  not  exist  for  preachers ;  but  preachers  for  churches.  AVe  have 
sometimes  feared  that  certain  brethren  thought  that  the  assemblies  of 
believers  were  formed  to  provide  situations  for  clerical  persons  ;  but, 
indeed,  it  is  not  so.  My  brethren  in  the  church,  we  who  are  your 
pastors  are  your  servants  for  Christ's  sake.  Our  rule  is  not  that  of 
lordship,  but  of  love.  Ever}'  God-sent  minister,  if  he  discharges  his 
duty  aright,  waits  upon  the  bride  of  Christ  with  loving  diligence, 
and  delights  greatly  to  hear  the  Bridegroom's  voice.  I  wish  that 
you  who  talk  of  my  Lord's  servants  as  if  they  were  rival  performers 
would  cease  thus  to  profane  the  gifts  of  the  ascended  King.  The 
varying  abilities  of  those  by  whom  the  Lord  builds  up  his  church 
are  all  arranged  by  infinite  wisdom,  and  it  should  be  ours  to  make 
the  most  we  can  of  them.  Comparing  and  contrasting  the  Lord's 
gifts  is  unprofitable  work.  It  is  better  to  drink  of  the  well  of  Elim 
than  to  grow  hot  and  feverish  in  disputing  as  to  whether  it  is  better 
or  worse  than  Beersheba  or  Sychar.  One  minister  may  be  better 
for  you  than  another ;  but  another  may  be  better  for  somebodj'  else 
than  the  one  you  prefer.  The  least  gifted  may  be  essential  to  a 
certain  class  of  mind;  therefore,  despise  no  one.  When  God  gives 
gifts,  shall  3'ou  turn  them  over  contemptuously,  and  say,  '*  I  like 
this  well;  but  the  other  I  like  not"?  Lid  the  Father  bestow  these 
gifts  upon  his  Son,  and  has  the  Holy  Sj)irit  put  them  into  different 
earthen  vessels  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  might  be  of  God ; 
and  will  you  begin  judging  them?  No,  Beloved,  the  Lord  hath 
sent  me  to  preach  his  gospel,  and  I  rejoice  to  feel  that  I  am  sent  for 
your  sake.  I  entreat  you  to  profit  as  much  as  you  can  by  me  by 
frequent  hearing,  by  abounding  faith,  by  practical  obedience  to  the 
Word.  Use  all  God's  servants  as  you  are  able  to  profit  by  them.  Hear 
them  prayerfully,  not  for  the  indulgence  of  your  curiosity,  nor  for  the 
pleasing  of  your  ear  with  rhetoric,  but  that  you,  through  the  Word  of 
God,  may  feel  his  Spirit  working  in  our  hearts  all  the  purpose  of  his 
will.  Our  conversion,  sanctification,  comfort,  instruction,  and  useful- 
ness, all  come  to  us  by  the  Holy  Sj)irit,  and  that  Spirit  sends  his 
powerful  messages  by  the  men  whom  he  has  given  to  be  his  mouths 


OTTR   lord's    triumphant   ASCENSION.  545 

to  men.  See  how  wonderful  was  that  ascension  of  our  Lord,  in  which 
he  scattered  down  mercies  so  rich  and  appropriate  among  the  sons  of 
men.  From  his  glorious  elevation  above  all  heavens,  he  sends  forth 
pastors,  and  preachers,  and  evangelists,  through  whom  the  Holy  Spirit 
works  mightily  in  them  that  believe.  By  them  he  gathers  the  redeemed 
together,  and  builds  them  up  as  a  church  to  his  glory. 

ly.  I  want  the  attention  of  all  who  are  unconverted,  for  I  have 
glorious  tidings  for  them.  To  them  I  speak  under  my  fourth  head, 
OUR  Lord's  triumph  has  a  very  special  bearing. 

"Thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men,^^  not  for  angels,  not  for  devils, 
but  for  men — poor  fallen  men.  I  read  not  that  it  is  said,  "for 
bishops  or  ministers,"  but  "for  men";  and  yet  there  is  a  special 
character  mentioned.  Does  the  text  particularly  mention  "  saints,"  or 
those  that  have  not  defiled  their  garments  ?  No,  I  do  not  read  of  them 
here.  What  a  strange  sovereignty  there  is  about  the  grace  of  God ! 
Truly  he  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy ;  for  in  this 
instance  he  selects  for  special  mention  those  that  you  and  I  would  have 
passed  over  without  a  word.  "  Yea,  for  the  rebellious  also.^^  I  must 
pause  to  brush  my  tears  awa3^  Where  are  you,  ye  rebels  ?  Where  are 
those  who  have  lived  in  rebellion  against  God  all  their  lives?  Alas  !  you 
have  been  in  ojien  revolt  against  him :  you  have  raged  against  him  in 
your  hearts,  and  spoken  against  liim  with  your  tongues.  Some  have 
sinned  as  drunkards,  others  have  broken  the  laws  of  purity,  truth, 
honesty.  Many  rebel  against  the  light,  violate  conscience,  and  disobey 
the  Word — these  also  are  among  the  rebellious.  So  are  the  proud,  the 
wrathful,  the  slothful,  the  profane,  the  unbelieving,  the  unjust. 
Hear,  all  of  you,  these  words,  and  carry  them  home  ;  and  if  they  do  not 
break  your  hearts  with  tender  gratitude  you  are  hard  indeed.  ' '  Yea, 
for  the  rebeUious  also."  When  our  Lord  rode  home  in  triumph  he 
had  a  pitying  heart  towards  the  rebellious.  When  he  entered  the 
highest  place  to  which  he  could  ascend,  he  was  stiR  the  sinner's  friend. 
When  all  his  pains  and  griefs  were  being  rewarded  with  endless  hor- 
ror, he  turned  his  eye  upon  those  who  had  crucified  him,  and  bestowed 
gifts  upon  them. 

This  description  includes  those  who  have  rebelled  against  God, 
though  once  they  professed  to  be  his  loyal  subjects.  Perhaps  I  am 
addressing  some  who  have  so  far  backslidden  that  they  have  thrown 
up  all  religion  and  have  gone  back  into  the  world  and  its  sins :  these 
are  apostates  from  the  profession  which  once  they  made.  To  these  I 
would  give  a  word  of  encouragement,  if  they  will  turn  to  the  Lord. 
Once  upon  a  time,  John  Bunyan  was  under  great  temptation  from 
the  devil.  This  trial  he  records  in  his  "Grace  Abounding."  He 
thought  that  God  had  given  him  up,  and  that  he  was  cast  away  for 
ever  ;  and  yet  he  found  hope  in  this  text.  I  have  copied  out  a  little 
bit  which  refers  to  it : — "I  feared  also  that  this  was  the  mark  that 
the  Lord  did  set  on  Cain,  even  continual  fear  and  trembling  under  the 
heavy  load  of  guilt  that  he  had  charged  upon  him  for  the  blood  of 
his  brother  Abel.  Then  did  I  wind  and  twine  and  shrink  under  the 
burden  that  was  upon  me,  which  burden  did  also  so  oppress  me  that 
I  could  neither  stand,  nor  go,  nor  lie,  either  at  rest  or  quiet.  Yet 
that  saying  would  sometimes  come  into  my  mind,  '  He  hath  received 
2  m 


646  METROPOLITAN  TABERXACLE  PULPIT. 

gifts  for  the  rebellious.'  Eebellious,  thouglit  I,  why  surely  they  are 
such  as  once  were  under  subjection  to  their  Prince,  even  those  who, 
after  they  had  sworn  subjection  to  his  government,  have  taken  uf 
arms  ag-ainst  him  ;  and  this,  thought  I,  is  my  very  condition.  Once  I 
loved  him,  feared  him,  served  him ;  but  now  I  am  a  rebel,  and  I  have 
sold  him.  I  said,  let  him  go  if  he  will,  but  yet  he  has  gifts  for  rebels ; 
and  then  rvhy  not  for  me  ?  " 

Oh,  that  I  could  cause  every  despairing  heart  to  reason  in  this  way ! 
Oh,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  would  put  this  argument  into  every  troubled 
mind  at  this  moment :  '■'■And  then  why  not  for  me  ?  "  Come  home,  dear 
brother,  come  home,  for  there  are  gifts  for  the  rebellious  ;  and  ivhy  not 
for  yo^i  ?  I  know  you  deserted  the  Lord's  Table,  but  the  Lord  of  the 
Table  has  not  deserted  you.  I  know  you  have,  as  far  as  you  could, 
forsworn  the  name  of  Christ,  and  even  wished  you  could  be  unbaptized : 
but  that  could  not  be,  nor  can  the  Lord  leave  you  to  perish.  I  know 
you  have  done  evil  with  both  hands  eagerly ;  and  perhaps  now  you 
are  living  in  a  known  sin,  and  when  you  go  home  to-day  you  will  see  it 
before  your  eyes.  Nevertheless,  I  charge  you,  return  unto  the  Lord  at 
once.  Come  to  3-our  Lord  and  Saviour,  who  still  prays,  "  Fatlier,  forgive 
them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Behold  how  in  his  glory  he 
"  hath  received  gifts  for  men ;  yea,  for  the  rebellious  also."  0  my  soul, 
I  charge  thee,  on  thine  own  account,  hang  on  to  this  most  precious 
declaration,  for  thou,  too,  hast  been  a  rebel.  Would  God  that  all  my 
brothers  and  sisters  would  be  cheered  by  this  dear  word,  and  take  it 
home  to  themselves  with  a  believing  repentance  and  a  holy  hatred  of 
sin  !  I  would  print  the  woi-ds  in  stars  across  the  brow  of  night.  "  Yea, 
for  the  rebellious  alsoV 

V.  I  have  done  when  I  have  handled  the  fifth  point,  which  is  this  : 
Ouu  Lord's  triumphant  ascension  secures  the  consummation  of 
HIS  whole  work,  ^^lat  doth  it  sa}^  ?  "  That  the  Lord  God  might 
dwell  among  them."  When  our  Lord  Christ  came  here  at  the  first  he 
was  willing  enough  to  "dwell"  among  us;  but  it  could  not  be. 
"The  word  was  made  flesh  and  tabernacled  among  us,"  like  a 
Bedouin  in  his  tent,  but  not  as  a  dweller  at  home.  He  could  not 
"  dwell "  here  on  that  occasion.  He  was  but  a  visitor,  and  badly 
treated  at  that.  "  There  was  no  room  for  him  in  the  inn,"  where 
«ver3'body  else  was  freely  welcome.  "He  came  unto  his  own" — 
surelj^  they  will  lodge  him,  "but  his  own  received  him  not.''  There 
was  no  room  for  him  in  the  temple — there  he  had  to  use  the  scourge. 
There  was  no  room  for  him  in  the  open  streets,  for  they  took  up  stones 
to  stone  him.  Out  of  the  synagogue  they  hurried  him,  to  cast  him 
do^vii  headlong  from  the  brow  of  the  hill.  "  Away  with  him  !  Away 
with  him!  "  was  the  cry  of  the  ribald  crowd.  This  dear  visitor,  who 
came  here  all  unarmed,  without  sword  or  bow,  they  treated  as  though 
he  had  been  a  spy  or  an  assassin,  who  had  stolen  among  them  to  do 
ihem  ill.  And  so  they  ran  upon  him  with  a  spear,  and  he,  quitting 
these  inhospitable  realms  which  knew  him  not,  took  home  with  liim 
the  marks  of  man's  discourtesy.  0  earth,  eai-th,  how  couldst  thou 
drive  away  thy  dearest  friend,  and  compel  him  to  be  as  a  wayfaring 
man,  that  tarrieth  but  for  a  night ;  nay,  worse,  as  a  man  astonied,  who 
meets  with  wounding  in  the  house  of  his  friends  ? 


OUR  lord's  triumphant  ascension.  547 

After  he  had  risen  again,  he  went  home,  that  from  this  throne  he 
might  direct  a  work  by  which  earth  should  become  a  place  where  God 
coiiUl  abide.  Again  is  the  temple  of  God  to  be  with  men,  and  he 
shall  dwell  among  them.  This  world  of  ours  has  been  sprinkled  with 
the  precious  blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  it  is  no  longer  as  an 
unclean  thing.  Jesus  is  the  Lamb  of  God  who  so  taketh  away  the 
sin  of  the  world  that  God  can  treat  with  men  on  terms  of  grace,  and 
publish  free  salvation.  The  Lord  God  himself  had  long  been  a 
stranger  in  the  land.  Did  not  the  holy  man  of  old  say,  "I  am  a 
stranger  with  thee,  and  a  sojourner,  as  all  my  fathers  were  "  ?  But 
Jesus,  the  ascended  One,  is  pouring  down  such  gifts  upon  this  sin- 
smitten  world,  that  it  will  yet  become  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness  and  the  God  of  righteousness. 

This  promise  is  partly  fulfilled  before  your  own  eyes  this  day  ;  for 
the  Holy  Spirit  came  at  Pentecost,  and  he  has  never  returned.  Jesus 
said,  "  Pie  shall  abide  with  you  for  ever."  The  Holy  Dove  has 
often  been  greatly  grieved,  but  he  has  never  spread  his  wings  to  depart. 
This  is  still  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit.  You  hardly  need  to  i)ray  to 
have  the  Spirit  poured  out ;  for  that  has  been  done.  What  you  need 
is,  a  baptism  of  the  Holj''  Spirit ;  namely,  to  go  down  personally  into  that 
glorious  flood  Avhich  has  been  j)oured  forth.  Oh,  to  be  immersed  into 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  into  fire :  covered  with  his  holy  influence, 
"phmgcd  in  the  Godhead's  deepest  sea,  and  lost  in  his  immensity  I" 
Here  is  our  life  and  power,  for  thus  the  Lord  God  doth  dwell  among 
us.  Ever  since  the  ascension  the  Holy  Ghost  has  remained  among 
men,  though  he  has  not  been,  at  all  seasons,  equally  active.  All 
through  the  night  of  Romanism,  and  the  schoolmen,  he  still  tarried : 
there  were  humble  hearts  which  rejoiced  to  be  his  temples  even  in  those 
doleful  days.  To-day  he  is  still  with  his  regenerated  ones.  In  spite 
of  impudent  strivings  against  the  divine  inspiration  of  his  Holy 
Scripture,  and,  notwitlistanding  the  follies  of  ecclesiastical  amuse- 
ments, he  is  with  his  chosen.  Lord,  what  is  man  that  thy  Spirit 
should  dwell  with  him  ?  But  so  it  is  ;  and  this  is  why  our  Lord  went 
up  to  Heaven  and  received  divine  gifts  that  by  him  the  Lord  God 
might  dwell  among  us. 

But  there  cometh  a  day  when  this  shall  be  carried  out  to  the  letter. 
Moth  inks  I  hear  the  angels  say,  "Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye 
gazing  up  into  heaven?  This  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you 
into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into 
heaven."  Now,  "  in  like  manner  "  must  mean  in  Person.  In  Person 
our  Lord  was  taken  up  into  heaven,  and  in  Person  he  will  come  again ; 
and  when  he  cometh,  the  Lord  God  will,  indeed,  dwell  among  us. 
Oh,  that  the  day  would  come  !  "We  wait  and  watch  for  his  glorious 
appearing  ;  for  then  will  he  dwell  among  men  in  a  perfect  fashion. 
"What  happy  days  shall  we  have  when  Jesus  is  here !  What  a  millen- 
nium his  presence  will  bring ;  there  can  be  no  such  auspicious  era 
without  it,  any  more  than  there  can  be  summer  without  the  sun.  He 
must  come  first,  and  then  will  the  golden  age  begin.  The  central 
glor}'  of  that  period  shall  be  that  the  Lord  is  here.  "  The  Lord  God 
shall  dwell  among  them."  Then  shall  be  heard  the  song  which  will 
never  end,  earth's  homage  to  the  Lord,  who  renewed  the  heavens  and 


548  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

tla.e  earth,  and  has  taken  up  his  dwelling  in  them.  *'  They  shall  hunger 
no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more  ;  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them, 
nor  any  heat;  for  he  that  sitteth  on  the  throiie  shall  dwell  among 
them."  Up  till  now  this  work  has  been  going  on ;  but  as  yet  it  is 
incomplete.  "  Every  prospect  pleases,  and  only  man  is  vile,"  is  still, 
most  sadly  true.  The  rankness  of  sin  destroys  the  sweet  odours  of  this 
world,  so  that  the  pure  and  holy  God  cannot  abide  in  it ;  but  since  the 
Lord  Jesus  hath  sweetened  it  with  his  sacred  merits,  and  the  Spirit  is 
purif^ang  it  by  his  residence  in  men,  the  Lord  smelleth  a  savour  of  rest, 
and  he  will  not  give  up  this  poor  fallen  planet.  Even  now  his  angels 
come  and  go  in  heavenly  traffic  with  the  chosen.  Soon  the  little  boat 
of  this  globe  shall  be  drawn  nearer  to  the  great  ship,  and  earth  shall 
lie  alongside  heaven.  Then  shall  men  praise  God  day  and  night  in  his 
temple.  Heaven  shall  find  her  choristers  among  the  ransomed  from 
among  men.  The  whole  world  shall  be  as  a  censer  filled  with  incense 
for  the  Lord  of  hosts.  All  this  will  be  because  of  those  gifts  received 
and  bestowed  by  our  Lord  Jesus  in  the  day  when  he  returned  to  his 
glory,  leading  captivity  captive.  0  Lord,  hasten  thy  coming  !  AVe 
are  sure  that  thine  abiding  presence  and  glorious  reign  will  come  in 
due  season.  Thy  coming  down  secured  thy  going  up  :  thy  going 
up  secures  thy  coming  down  again.  Wherefore,  we  bless  and  magnify 
thee,  0  ascended  Lord,  with  all  our  hearts,  and  rise  after  thee  as 
thou  dost  di-aw  us  upward  from  grovelling  things.     So  be  it !     Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before   Sermon — Psalm  Ixviii. ; 
Ephesians  iv.  1 — 13. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 322,  317,  449. 


CHRIST'S  UNIVERSAL  KINGDOM,  AND  HOW  IT  COMETPI. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  April  25th,   1880,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


^■*  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession.  Thou  shalt  break  them  with  a  rod 
of  iron  ;  thou  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel." — Psalms  ii.  8,  9. 

Observe,  dear  friends,  the  wonderful  contrast  between  the  violent  excite- 
ment of  the  enemies  of  the  Lord,  and  the  sublime  serenity  of  God  himself. 
He  is  not  disturbed  though  the  heathen  so  furiously  rage,  and  their  kings 
and  mighty  ones  set  themselves  in  battle  array.  He  smiles  at  them  :  he 
hath  them  in  derision.  You  and  I  are  often  downcast  and  depressed,  and 
our  forebodings  are  dark  and  dismal,  but  God  sits  in  his  eternal 
peacefulness,  and  serenely  overrules  tumult  and  rebellion.  The  Lord 
reigneth,  and  his  throne  is  not  moved,  nor  his  rest  broken,  whatever  may 
be  the  noise  and  turmoil  down  below. 

Notice  the  sublimity  of  this  divine  calm.  While  the  heathen  and  their 
princes  are  plotting  and  planning  how  to  break  his  bands  asunder,  and 
cast  his  cords  from  them,  he  has  already  defeated  their  devices,  and 
he  says  to  them,  "Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion." 
"You  will  not  have  my  Son  to  reign  over  you,  but  nevertheless  he 
reigns.  While  you  have  been  raging  I  have  crowned  him.  Your 
imaginations  are  indeed  vain,  for  I  have  forestalled  you,  and  established 
him  upon  his  throne.  Hear  him  as  he  proclaims  my  decree,  and  asserts 
his  filial  sovereignty."  God  is  ever  beforehand  with  his  adversaries  : 
tliey  finri  their  scheming  frustrated,  and  their  craft  baffled,  even  before 
they  have  begun  to  execute  their  plans.  By  God's  decree  the  ever 
blessed  Son  of  the  Highest  is  placed  in  power,  and  exalted  to  his  throne. 
The  rulers  cannot  snatch  from  his  hand  the  sceptre,  nor  dash  from 
his  head  the  crown  :  Jesus  reigns  and  must  reign  till  all  enemies  are 
put  under  his  feet.  God  has  set  him  firmly  upon  Zion's  sacred  hill, 
and  raging  nations  cannot  cast  him  down :  the  very  idea  of  their  so  doing 
excites  the  derision  of  Jehovah,  he  disturbs  not  his  great  soul  because 
of  their  blustering.  As  if  it  were  a  banquet  rather  than  a  conflict,  the 
Lord  God,  as  himself  a  king,  speaks  to  the  King's  Son,  even  to  his 
Anointed  on  his  right  hand,  and  having  owned  his  royal  rank,  confers 
upon  him  the  highest  honours.  At  great  feasts  many  a  monarch  haa 
been  known  to  say  to  his  favourite,  "Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee, 
No.  1,535.  7 


550  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

and  nothing  shall  be  denied  thee  this  day."  Even  thus  doth  the 
great  Father  say  to  his  glorious  Son  the  Prince  of  Peace,  "Ask  of 
me,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  heathen,  thine  inheritance,  and  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,  thy  possession."  He  bids  him  open 
his  mouth  wide,  and  request  a  boundless  dominion.  He  will  give  him 
distant  nations,  yea,  and  the  whole  round  earth  to  be  his  kingdom. 
There  is  an  air  of  regal  festivity  and  peaceful  joy  about  all  this  which 
strangely  contrasts  with  the  uproar  of  the  adversaries.  Brethren,  I  wish 
we  could  enter  in  some  measure  into  this  sublime  quiet.  We  may  well  be 
confident  since  God  is  so.  If  the  Captain  be  assured  of  victory  it  behoves 
the  common  soldier  to  be  bravely  hopeful.  The  battle  is  the  Lord's,  and 
since  he  is  the  Lord  God  omnipotent,  fear  about  the  issue  of  the  conflict 
is  foolish  and  wicked.  All  events  are  in  his  hand — his  hand  who  can  dash 
whole  worlds  to  dust,  or  make  them  when  it  pleases  him.  What  can  stand 
against  the  almighty  will  ?  Who  shall  say  unto  Jehovah,  "  AVhat  doest 
thou?"  In  this  eternal  all-sufficiency  is  our  rest,  and  we  may  therefore 
cease  from  anxiety.  Stand  thou  still,  my  weary  brother,  and  see  the  salva- 
tion of  God.  Put  not  forth  thy  timorous  hand  to  stay  the  trembling  ark, 
but  know  that  Jehovah  can  protect  his  own.  Lay  thy  Martha  cares  aside  : 
tit  at  thy  Saviour's  feet,  and  listen  to  his  voice.  He  will  tell  thee  that  God 
reigneth  yet,  and  that  his  anointed  shall  reign  also.  Things  are  not  as  they 
eeem :  all  is  well  when  all  looks  ill.  If  the  heavens  are  clouded  the  sun 
is  not  put  out :  if  the  evening  hath  darkened,  even  to  midnight,  yet  the 
morning  cometh  :  to  the  moment  shall  it  break,  nor  can  all  the  powers 
of  darkness  hinder  the  dawning  day.  Jehovah's  fixed  decrees  remain 
engraved  as  in  eternal  brass,  nor  can  the  craft  of  hell  efface  a  single  line 
nor  stay  the  execution  of  a  single  purpose.  Despite  all  opposition  the 
sacred  purpose  will  blossom  into  the  actual  providence,  and  the  provi-r 
deuce  will  ripen  into  salvation.  God's  plan  will  be  carried  out  without 
failure  in  any  point,  and  there  is  no  cause  for  alarm. 

If  we  were  more  calm  and  restful  we  should  do  our  work  better,  for  do 
■we  not  gather  both  wisdom  and  courage  when  we  abide  in  quietness  and 
confidence  ?  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  the  strength  of  his  saints.  The 
assurance  of  faith,  if  we  were  filled  with  it,  would  make  us  go  forth 
"fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners."  Alas,  our  short-sighted  fretfulness,  our  anxious  mistrust,  and 
our  timorous  suspicion  cause  us  needless  distress,  weaken  us  for  service, 
and  expose  us  to  the  assaults  of  our  adversaries.  Without  the  prepara- 
tion of  the  gospel  of  peace  our  feet  are  unshod,  and  we  are  unfit  for  the 
heavenly  pilgrimage.  Grovelling  here  below  among  the  troubles  of  the 
hour,  the  most  of  Christians  are  a  timorous  folk,  and  act  like  the 
tribe  of  Reuben  in  the  day  of  Barak's  battle,  to  whom  Deborah 
cried,  "  Why  abodest  thou  among  the  sheep-folds,  to  hear  the  bleatings 
of  the  flocks?"  0  ye  who  He  among  the  pots,  and  do  servile  work 
in  abject  fear,  arise  to  a  braver  spirit.  Up  ye  to  the  everlasting 
hills  and  breathe  a  purer  air :  gird  yourselves  with  the  belt  of  confidence 
in  God,  and  you  shall  be  "  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  hia 
might."  May  God  grant  that  the  subject  of  this  morning  may  help  us 
out  of  the  depressing  influences  which  surround  us,  and  raise  us  into  fel- 
lowship with  the  calm  in  which  Jehovah  sits  smiling,  and  out  of  which  he 
saith,  "Yet  have  I  set  my  King  upon  my  holy  hill  of  2'ion." 


Christ's  universal  kingdom,  and  how  it  cometh.        651 

Our  text  suggests  to  ns  this  morning,  first,  that  the  kingdoms  of  the 
earth,  and  the  earth  itself,  are  Christ's  inheritance, — "  I  shall  give  thee- 
the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance."  Leave  out  those  little  words  which; 
the  translators  have  inserted,  for  they  but  feebly  help  the  sense.  "  I  will 
give  the  heathen,  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth, 
thy  possession."  When  we  have  dwelt  upon  that  we  shall  then  notice 
that  this  is  to  he  had  for  the  asking:  "  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give." 
Thirdly,  we  shall  note  that  the  power  by  which  the  dominion  shall  be 
gained  is  altogether  of  God :  '•' I  shall  give."  And  fourthly,  we  shall  remark 
that  in  order  to  complete  the  conquest  of  the  world  all  existing  and  all 
fware  confederacies  against  tlie  Lord,  and  against  his  Christ,  shall  be 
lit ter I g  destroyed:  "Thou  shalt  break  them  Avith  a  rod  of  iron;  thou 
shalt  d:!  !i  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel." 

I.  Lor  our  comfort  let  us  notice  the  teaching  of  the  text  that:  the 
Lord  will  give  to  Christ  the  heathen  as  his  inheritance  and. 

THE   uttermost   PARTS    OF    THE    EARTH    AS    HIS    POSSESSION.      This  I 

take  to  refer  to  our  Lord  as  man.  Already  as  God  the  kingdom  of  the 
divine  Son  ruleth  over  all.  There  never  was  a  limit  to  the  reign  of  Jesus 
as  God,  not  even  when  he  was  hanging  on  the  cross ;  he  was  the  ever- 
lasting Father  even  when  he  was  "  the  child  born,  the  Son  given." 

It  is  in  his  wondrous  nature  as  God-man  Mediator  that  these  words- 
may  be  understood,  for  so  the  apostle  Paul  evidently  interpreted  them. 
The  mysterious  sentence,  "  Thou  art  my  Son  ;  this  day  have  I  begotten 
thee,"  may  refer  to  the  deep  and  secret  truth  of  the  eternal  filiation  of  our 
Lord,  whatever  that  may  be ;  but  Paul  quotes  it  in  the  thirteenth  Acts 
as  referring  to  his  resurrection.  Here  are  his  words,  "  And  we  declare 
unto  you  glad  tidings,  how  that  the  promise  which  was  made  unto  the 
fathers,  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  unto  us  their  children,  in  that  he 
hatli  raised  up  Jesus  again ;  as  ii  is  also  written  in  the  second  psalm, 
Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee."  It  is  in  resurrection 
power  that  Christ  comes  forth,  and  God  gives  to  him  to  have  dominion 
over  the  earth  and  all  that  is  upon  it.  Because  he  liveth  and  was  dead 
he  hath  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death.  By  virtue  of  his  humiliation  he 
reigns.  For  the  suffering  of  death  he  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour* 
The  heavenly  host  proclaim  his  worthiness  to  take  the  book  and  open  its 
seven  seals,  singuig,  "  For  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God 
by  thy  blood."  Ho  descended  that  he  might  ascend  above  all  things  and 
fill  all  things ;  he  laid  aside  his  glory  that  he  might  be  crowned  with  this 
new  glory  and  honour,  and  might  have  all  things  put  under  his  feet  as 
the  Son  of  man.  We  speak  therefore  of  Jesus  Christ  the  risen  One,  who; 
once  died,  but  has  now  risen  from  the  tomb,  and  quitted  this  earth  for 
the  splendours  of  the  New  Jerusalem. 

Our  conviction  is  that  this  same  Jesus  is  to  reign  over  the  whole 
world.  I  shall  not  enter  into  the  question  whether  this  will  be  accom- 
plished before  his  second  advent,  or  will  be  the  result  of  his  glorious 
appearing.  I  should  not  like  to  assert  that  this  consummation  will  be 
reached  before  his  advent,  for  that  might  seem  to  militate  against  our 
duty  to  watch  for  his  coming,  which  may  be  at  any  moment :  on  the 
other  hand,  I  would  not  venture  to  assert  that  the  gospel  cannot  be 
universally  victorious  before  his  coming,  because  I  perceive  that  this 
opinion  is  a  pillow  for  many  an  idle   head,  and    is   ruinous  to  the 


552  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

hopeful  spirit  of  missionary  enterprise.  It  is  enough  for  me  that  a 
wide  dominion  will  be  given  to  our  Lord  at  some  time  or  other,  and 
that  assuredly  his  kingdom  shall  embrace  all  the  nations  of  mankind. 
The  whole  earth  shall  yet  be  filled  with  his  glory  ;  the  seed  of  the  woman 
shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head  and  clear  the  world  of  his  slimy  trail. 

For  the  next  few  minutes  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  keep  your  Bibles 
going,  for  the  appeal  must  be  to  God's  own  word.  I  gather  that  the 
king^dom  of  Christ  is  to  be  so  extensive  as  to  comprehend  all  mankind, 
first,  because,  of  the  exceeding  breadth  of  the  prophecy  of  it  which  was 
made  to  Abraham  in  Genesis  xii.  3.  That  is  an  old  covenant  promise 
which  refers  to  Abraham  as  the  father  of  the  faithful,  and  to  his  one 
great  seed,  even  Jesus,  the  promised  Messiah.  Here  are  the  far-reaching 
words, — "  In  thee  shall  all  famihes  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  Assuredly 
they  are  not  as  yet  all  blessed  in  him  to  such  an  extent  as  to  exhaust  the 
divine  meaning.  When  God  in  covenant  promises  a  blessing  it  is  no 
light  thing,  and  ther«fore  I  am  sure  that  this  grand  covenant  blessing  of 
the  nations  is  something  more  than  a  name.  Though  I  doubt  not  that 
the  whole  earth  is  to  some  extent  the  better  because  of  the  coming  of 
Christ:,  and  his  peace-making  death,  and  the  spread  of  his  pure  faith,  yet 
I  cannot  believe  that  multitudes  Avho  live  and  die  in  the  thick  darkness 
of  ignorance  and  idolatry  are  really  blessed  in  Christ  in  such  a  sense  as 
to  make  it  a  covenant  blessing.  How  much  are  Tartary,  China,  and 
Thibet  blessed  by  the  gospel  ?  There  must  be  something  better  yet  for 
all  the  families  of  the  earth  than  anything  they  have  hitherto  received. 
All  the  families  of  the  earth  shall  yet  know  that  the  promised  seed  hath 
lived  and  died  for  them,  and  some  of  every  kindred  and  tongue  shall 
find  salvation  in  him. 

Jacob,  too,  when  he  spake  concerning  the  Shiloh  in  Genesis  xlix.  10, 
said,  "  Unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  tlie  people  be."  By  the  people 
is  not  meant  the  seed  of  Israel,  but  the  nations,  or  the  Gentiles ;  so  the  8ep- 
tuagint  and  the  Syraic  understand  it,  and  so  indeed  it  is.  Jesus,  our  great 
Shiloh,  sets  up  the  standard,  and  his  chosen  rally  around  in  ever  growing 
numbers  till  the  dispersed  of  Babel  shall  find  in  him  a  new  centre,  and 
a  pure  language  shall  be  given  to  them  in  him.  The  words  mean  not 
"gathering"  only,  but  a  willing  obedience,  the  fruit  of  faith  and  the 
expression  of  piety.  To  this  is  parallel  the  word  of  Paul  in  Eomans  xv.  12  : 
"And  again,  Esaiassaith,  There  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse,  and  he  that  shall 
rise  to  reign  over  the  Gentiles;  in  him  shall  the  Gentiles  trust."  It  is 
evident,  then,  that  the  nations  shall  come  to  trust  in  the  Messiah,  and 
thus  shall  they  find  life  eternal. 

Moses,  too,  in  Deuteronomy  xxxii.  21,  to  which  passage  Paul  in 
the  Romans  so  especially  refei'S,  speaks  of  the  heathen  nations  when 
he  says,  "  I  will  move  them  to  jealousy  with  those  who  are  not 
a  people ;  I  will  provoke  them  to  anger  with  a  foolish  nation." 
Truly  this  is  fulfilled  in  these  days  when  the  gospel  line  hath  gone 
out  throughout  all  the  earth,  and  its  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth ; 
and  this  our  own  foolish  nation,  this  once  barbarous  people  which  seemed 
shut  out  from  God,  worshipping  idols  with  all  the  cruel  rites  of  the 
Druids,  has  been  brought  into  covenant  with  God  and  made  to  rejoice  in 
him.  Degraded  heathen  in  all  lands  have  become  believers,  and  so 
shall  all  nations  be  brought  belie vingly  to  Jesus'  feet,  that  Israel  may  be 


Christ's  universal  kingdom,  and  how  it  cometh.        553 

angered  and  provoked  to  jealousy  nntil  her  time  shall  come,  when  she 
sliall  look  on  him  whom  she  hath  pierced,  and  shall  mourn  for  him,  and 
turn  to  him  with  full  purpose  of  heart. 

When  we  reach  the  Psalms  we  come  into  the  clear  light  of  prophecy 
concerning  the  kingdom  of  our  blessed  Master.  Our  text  stands  first, 
and  is  sufficient  in  itself:  the  heathen  are  to  be  his  inheritance,  and  the 
utmost  bounds  of  the  world  are  to  be  his  possession.  Turn  to  that 
famous  passion  psalm,  the  twenty-second.  Its  pathos  with  regard  to  the 
griefs  of  the  crucified  One  is  deep  and  touching.  You  see  him  hanging 
on  the  tree,  a  gazing-stock  to  scoflfers,  with  his  tongue  cleaving  to  hia 
jaws,  and  his  heart  melting  like  wax  in  the  midst  of  his  bowels ;  and  yet 
^re  the  psalm  closes  the  plaintive  gives  place  to  the  triumphant,  and  the 
dying  One  cries,  "  All  the  ends  of  the  world  shall  remember  and  turn  unto 
the  Lord  :  and  all  the  kindreds  of  the  nations  shall  worship  before  thee. 
For  the  kingdom  is  the  Lord's :  and  he  is  the  governor  among  the  nations. 
All  they  that  be  fat  upon  earth  shall  eat  and  worship :  all  they  that 
go  down  to  the  dust  shall  bow  before  him :  and  none  can  keep  alive  hia 
own  soul."  On  the  cross  this  prospect  cheered  our  dying  Master's  heart, 
that  the  kingdom  should  be  the  Lord's,  and  that  all  the  kindreds  of  the 
nations  should  come  and  worship  before  him  ;  let  it  cheer  us  also.  Do 
you  think  that  the  crucified  Lord  will  be  disappointed  of  the  end  for 
which  he  died  ?  Will  you  venture  to  assert  that  a  single  drop  of  hia 
blood  was  shed  for  nought?  Rest  assured  that  he  shall  see  of  the  travail 
of  his  soul,  till  even  his  great  loving  heart  shall  be  content.  God  hath 
said  it,  "  I  will  divide  him  a  portion  with  the  great,  and  he  shall  divide  the 
spoil  with  the  strong,  because  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death;" 
and  be  ye  calmly  confident  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  will  stand. 

Turn  your  Bibles  over  till  you  reach  Psalm  Ixvi.,  and  the  fourth 
verse,  and  there  you  come  upon  another  word  of  comfort :  "  All  the  earth 
shall  worship  thee,  and  shall  sing  unto  thee  ;  they  shall  sing  to  thy 
name."  This  sentence  is  not  merely  the  passionate  hope  of  an  enthusi- 
astic worshipper,  but  a  voice  inspired  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  plainly  declar- 
ing that  all  peoples  shall  ador«  their  Maker  with  hearty  praise  an(3 
joyful  song. 

How  glowing  is  the  language  of  Psalm  Ixxii.  Can  we  expect  too  great 
things  for  our  king  when  we  remember  the  gracious  words  beginning  at 
the  eighth  verse  :  "He  shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from 
the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.  They  that  dwell  in  the  wilderness 
shall  bow  before  him ;  and  his  enemies  shall  lick  the  dust.  The  kings  of 
Tarshish  and  of  the  isles  shall  bring  presents :  the  kings  of  Sheba  and 
Seba  shall  offer  gifts.  Yea,  all  kings  shall  fall  down  before  him :  all 
nations  shall  serve  him."  Eead  on  at  verse  seventeen :  "  His  name  shall 
endure  for  ever :  his  name  shall  be  continued  as  long  as  the  sun :  and 
men  shall  be  blessed  in  him  :  all  nations  shall  call  him  blessed,"  These 
terms  include  the  most  barbarous  tiibes  that  exist,  and  they  specially 
mention  nations  which  boast  that  they  were  never  conquered :  such  aa 
the  untamed  rovers  of  the  wilderness,  who  centuries  ago  laughed  at  the 
Roman  power.  The  legions  which  subdued  all  other  peoples  could  not 
conquer  the  sons  of  Ishniael ;  fleet  of  foot  as  a  hart,  swift  as  a  young  roe, 
they  fled  over  the  desert  sands,  out  of  reach  of  the  pursuer ;  yet  these 
ehivll  bow  before  our  Lord,  and  joyfully  pay  him  homage.     He  will  sway 


654  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

his  sceptre  where  sceptre  was  never  owned  before ;  he  shall  set  np  a 
throne  where  all  other  authority  has  been  laughed  to  scorn. 

You  will  not  be  wearied  if  I  ask  you  to  look  at  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  verse  9. 
There  you  will  find  it  written,  "All  nations  whom  thou  hast  made  shall 
come  and  worship  before  thee,  0  Lord ;  and  shall  glorify  thy  name."  It 
is  not  to  be  mere  outside  worship  that  shall  be  paid,  for  the  nations  are 
to  glorify  his  name,  which  is  a  high  form  of  praise.  All  nations  are  to 
glorify  the  Lord,  and  this  they  have  not  done  as  yet. 

We  expected  to  find,  and  we  are  not  disappointed  in  our  expectation, 
that  Isaiali  would  be  sure  to  speak  concerning  these  things.  I  would 
rather  you  heard  the  word  of  God  by  far  than  my  word,  and  there- 
fore we  will  keep  to  our  reading.  It  will  bring  you  encouragement 
and  heart-cheer  to  know  what  prophets  said  in  the  olden  time,  when  only 
Israel  had  the  light.  They  did  not  think  the  light  would  be  confined 
to  the  one  peculiar  people,  but  they  expected  that  on  the  nations  which 
sat  in  darkness  light  would  break,  and  they  also  would  seek  the  Lord. 
Turn  to  Isaiah  and  read.  See  what  he  says  in  his  second  chapter.  "  It 
shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  that  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's 
house  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  shall  be 
exalted  above  the  hills  ;  and  all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it.  And  many 
people  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of 
the  Lord,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob ;  and  he  will  teach  us  of  his 
ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths :  for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the 
law,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.  And  he  shall  judge 
among  the  nations,  and  shall  rebuke  many  people :  and  they  shall  beat 
their  swords  into  plowshares,  and  their  spears  into  pruninghooks: 
nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn 
war  any  more."  I  can  but  give  samples.  The  passages  abound  all 
through  Isaiah  in  which  there  is  the  intimation  of  the  general  spread  of 
the  lledeemer's  kingdom.  Turn  to  Isaiah  xlix.  6  :  "  It  is  a  light  thing 
that  thou  shouldest  be  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of  .Jacob,  and 
to  restore  the  preserved  of  Israel :  I  Avill  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to  the 
Gentiles,  that  thou  mayest  be  my  salvation  unto  the  end  of  the  earth. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  and  his  Holy  One,  to  him 
whom  man  despiseth,  to  him  whom  the  nation  abhorreth,  to  a  servant  of 
rulers.  Kings  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  also  shall  worship,  because  of 
the  Lord  that  is  faithful,  and  the  Holy  one  of  Israel,  and  he  shall  choose 
thee."  (v.  12.)  "Behold,  these  shall  come  from  far:  and,  lo,  these 
from  the  north  and  from  the  weet ;  and  these  from  the  land  of  Sinim." 
"  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  behold :  all  these  gather  them- 
selves together,  and  come  to  thee." 

Nor  is  Isaiah  alone  in  such  prophecies  as  these.  I  cannot  detain  you 
by  reading  \vhat  Ezekiel  saith  concerning  the  ever  deepening  waters 
which  shall  carry  life  to  all  lands ;  and  I  will  only  mention  one  word  of 
Jeremiah,  because  it  so  peculiarly  proves  that  the  homage  paid  by 
heathen  nations  to  our  liord  will  be  that  of  their  hearts  ;  and  that 
the  reign  of  Christ,  whatever  it  may  be  else,  will  certainly  be  a  spiritual 
reign.  Jeremiah  iii.  17:  "  They  shall  call  Jerusalem  the  throne  of  the 
Lord;  and  all  the  nations  shall  be  gathered  unto  it,  to  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  to  Jerusalem  :  neither  shall  they  walk  any  more  after  the  imagina- 
tion of  their  evil  heart."     Christ  will  work  a  heart-change  when  he 


CHRIST'S   UNIVERSAL   KINGDOM,   AND   HOW   IT   COMETH.  555 

shall  win  the  nations  to  allegiance,  and  this  shall  lead  to  a  manifest 
change  of  life, — "neither  shall  they  walk  any  more  after  the  imagination 
of  their  evil  heart." 

Daniel,  that  John  of  the  Old  Testament,  of  course  saw  more  clearly 
than  any  the  coming  kingdom  of  the  Anointed  One.  What  doth  he 
say  in  chapter  vii.  18  ?  "  Bat  the  saints  of  the  Most  High  shall  take  the 
kingdom,  and  possess  the  kingdom  for  ever,  even  for  ever  and  ever. 
Until  the  Ancient  of  days  came,  and  judgment  was  given  to  the  saints 
of  the  Most  High ;  and  the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed  the 
kingdom.  And  the  kingdom  and  dominion,  and  the  greatness  of  the 
kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the 
saints  of  the  Most  High,  whose  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and 
all  dominions  shall  serve  and  obey  him."  Can  anything  be  more  positive 
than  this  last  word  ? 

Look  how  the  idols  are  to  be  destroyed  according  to  the  prophet 
Zephaniah  (ii.  11) :  "  The  Lord  will  be  terrible  unto  them  :  for  he  will 
famish  all  the  gods  of  the  earth ;  and  men  shall  worship  him,  every  one 
from  his  place,  even  all  the  isles  of  the  heathen."  Zechariah  says  to  the 
same  effect  (ix.  10) :  "He  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  heathen,  and  his 
dominion  shall  be  from  sea  even  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  even  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth."  (xiv.  2)  "  And  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the 
earth :  in  that  day  there  shall  be  one  Lord,  and  his  name  one." 

Lest  I  should  weary  you,  I  forbear  to  quote  any  more.  To  me  it 
is  evident  beyond  all  contradiction  that  according  to  the  whole  run  of 
Scripture  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  extend  over  all  parts  of  the  earth, 
and  over  all  races  and  conditions  of  men,  and  therefore  I  charge  you 
never  despair  for  the  grand  old  cause.  An  infidel  notion  is  abroad 
that  these  diflFerent  religions  have  sprung  up  at  different  times  as  develop- 
ments of  the  rehgious  instinct,  and  that  they  may  all  profitably  exist  side 
by  side  with  ours.  It  is  admitted  that  the  religion  of  Christ  is  excellent, 
and  that  it  deserves  a  large  following,  but  still  other  religions  have  their 
advantages  and  must  not  be  despised :  nay,  something  better  than  the  gospel 
of  Christ  may  yet  be  discovered.  This  is  the  current  talk  in  certain 
circles,  and  we  would  at  once  express  our  horror  at  it.  Jesus  is  not  to 
share  a  divided  throne.  Cast  ye  with  abhorence  from  your  souls  every 
such  blasphemous  thought.  Jesus  must  reign  till  all  enemies  are  put 
under  his  feet,  and  to  him  all  rivals  are  enemies.  If  Jesus  be  King  he 
is  the  only  Potentate.  Christians  are  enlisted  under  a  banner  which 
does  not  brook  another  standard  side  by  side  with  it,  they  serve  a  prince 
who  will  not  share  dominion  with  others,  who  will  not  submit  that  even 
a  province  shall  be  rent  away  from  his  government.  He  shall  reign  for 
ever  and  ever.  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  Hallelujah !  Like 
a  burst  of  thunder  let  all  hearts  that  love  him  say,  Amen. 

II.  It  appears  from  our  text  that  this  universal  dominion  is  to 
BE  ASKED  FOR.  Thus  saith  the  Father  to  his  glorious  Son,  "  Ask  of  me, 
and  I  will  give  thee."  Beloved,  Jesus  fails  not  to  ask.  We  do  not  doubt 
that  he  responds  to  the  Father's  invitation,  and  asks  for  his  inheritance. 
This  is  the  way  in  wdiich  the  psalm  before  us  touches  upon  the  priestly 
character  of  Christ  as  combined  with  his  kingly  office.  He  ever  liveth 
to  intercede,  and  a  part  of  his  daily  intercession  is  to  ask  that  the 
heathen  may  be  his  inheritance.     Now,  beloved,  this  is  a  lesson  to  us^ 


556  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

We  belong  to  Christ  ;  we  are  members  of  that  body  of  which  he  is  the 
mystical  Head,  and  it  is  ours  to  act  with  him  in  his  life-work  :  as  he  asks, 
we  are  to  ask  with  him.  As  Jesus  suffers  in  his  people,  so  he  pleads  la 
them.  Let  us  cry  day  and  night  unto  God  for  the  coming  and  kingdom 
of  our  Lord.  Let  the  throne  of  the  Highest  be  surrounded  by  our  per- 
petual prayers.  Let  us  urge  for  the  Lord  Jesus  his  suit  in  the  courts 
above,  that  the  heathen  maybe  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of 
the  earth  his  possession.  We  are  so  truly  one  with  him  that  his  sympathies 
and  hopes  are  ours ;  his  glory  is  our  glory,  his  victory  our  victory,  and  there- 
fore our  supplications  should  naturally  and  spontaneously  arise  for  him 
every  day  of  our  lives.  Our  union  with  him  has  given  us  a  kingdom, 
the  same  kingdom  as  that  which  he  claims.  He  himself  has  said  it  : 
"  It  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom."  As  surely 
as  he  sets  his  Son  upon  his  holy  hill  of  Zion,  so  surely  will  the  Lord 
bring  us  all  there.  Our  prayers  therefore  should  daily  rise  together 
with  the  pleadings  of  the  great  Intercessor  himself,  0  Lord,  tliine  is 
the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory  ;  let  thy  will  be  done  ia 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven. 

This  prayer  is  one  which  is  commanded  by  God  himself.  About  its 
fitness  we  can,  therefore,  have  no  doubt.  Your  Saviour  taught  you  to 
say,  "  Thy  kingdom  come."  In  this  text  we  find  it  prescribed  as  a 
prayer  to  the  Well-beloved, — "Ask  of  me";  and  therefore  it  is  certainly 
a  proper  prayer  for  us,  and  we  may  use  it  without  question.  We  are 
highly  honoured  in  being  permitted  to  present  such  a  petition :  to  be 
allowed  to  pray  for  myself  is  mercy,  to  be  permitted  to  pray  for  my 
fellow  man  is  favour,  but  to  be  suffered  to  pray  for  Jesus  is  honour. 
It  is  written,  "  Prayer  also  shall  be  made  for  him  continually,"  and  thus 
there  is  a  special  honour  put  upon  those  who  intercede.  My  Lord's 
prayer  for  me  saves  me ;  but  when  he  bids  me  pray  for  him,  he  dignifies 
me,  and  I  say  with  David,  "  Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great." 
Whatever  else  we  forget,  never  from  our  private  intercessions  let  us  omit 
the  prayer  that  the  heathen  may  come  to  glorify  Christ. 

It  is  a  joy  to  know  that  this  prayer  will  be  effectual  to  the  full.  It  is 
no  vain  desire,  no  dream  of  a  fevered  brain :  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God 
himself  suggests  it,  for  he  says,  "  Ask,  and  I  shall  give  thee."  This  union 
of  precept  and  promise  is  found  attached  to  every  covenant  blessing,  but 
here  it  is  conspicuously  and  distinctly  stated  in  so  many  words — "  Ask, 
and  I  shall  give  thee."  Concerning  this  thing  the  promise  of  God  is 
definite,  w^e  may  therefore  pray  with  full  assurance.  Let  us  avail  our- 
selves of  this  plain  direction  every  hour  of  our  lives.  0  church  of  God, 
ask  on  Christ's  behalf,  and  the  Lord  God  will  give  him  the  kingdom. 
Heir  of  heaven,  ask  on  behalf  of  the  Elder  Brother,  for  the  Elder  Brother 
pleads  in  thee,  and  God  will  hear  both  thee  and  him,  and  he  will  grant 
the  united  request.  My  heart  is  full  of  confidence  when  pleading  upon 
this  subject:  what  surer  warrant  do  we  want  than  "Ask,  and  I  shall 
give  thee  "  ? 

Let  our  prayer  be  wide  and  far-reaching.  Let  our  desires  embrace 
the  world.  Pray  not  for  your  own  country  only,  though  it  needs  it,  and 
God  alone  knows  how  much ;  but  pray  for  the  colonies,  the  continent, 
and  the  far  off  lands.  Ask  that  all  heathens  may  become  Christians. 
Plead  that  the  whole  round  earth  may  be  the  Lord's :  that  the  uttermost 


Christ's  universal  kingdom,  and  how  it  cometh.        567 

parts  of  the  eavtli  may  resound  with  songs  in  his  praise.  On  this  earth  his 
blood  has  fallen ;  the  precious  drops  could  not  be  gathered  up  again,  and 
BO  this  globe  remains  blood-marked, — the  one  star  upon  which  the  Son 
of  God  poured  out  his  life.  It  must  be  the  Lord's :  the  sacrifice  of 
Calvary  has  made  it  sacr«d  to  the  Son  of  God.  As  our  Government 
marks  with  the  broad  arrow  those  stores  which  belong  to  it,  so  did 
Christ  upon  the  tree,  w^hen  the  blood  fell  from  his  hands,  and  feet,  and 
side,  mark,  as  it  were,  with  something  more  full  of  meaning  than  the 
broad  arrow,  this  round  earth  on  which  he  bled,  and  it  must  be  for  ever 
and  ever  his  by  right  of  purchase  and  ransom.  It  was  made  subject  to 
vanity  for  a  little  season,  but  it  is  to  be  redeemed  from  it ;  and  when  it 
shall  be  purified  and  beautified  in  the  day  of  the  manifestation  of  the 
sons  of  God,  you  will  not  know  it :  for  it  will  come  forth  as  "  a  new 
heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  Its  sister 
stars  have  long  wondered  at  its  silence,  or  its  discord,  but  at  the  sight  of 
its  restoration  to  the  choirs  of  holiness  they  will  sing  in  deep  delight, 
and  chant  a  new  song  unto  the  Lord.  With  what  admiration  will  they 
I>erceive,  rising  up  from  this  once  beclouded  orb,  a  flame  of  unquenchable 
praise  with  pillars  of  perfumed  smoke,  the  incense  of  eternal  gratitude. 
Sweeter  the  offering  of  this  once  fallen  world  than  that  of  any  other 
sphere,  for  it  has  been  redeemed,  and  upon  it  have  been  seen  marvels  of 
free  grace  and  dying  love  such  as  no  other  world  has  known.  Oh, 
may  this  soon  come  to  pass;  may  the  prayer  be  heard;  and  God  be 
praised ;  but  it  can  only  be  accomplished  through  his  own  appointed 
method,  the  asking  of  Christ,  the  pleading  of  the  church.  Oh,  rouse 
thee,  church,  to  ask.  Awake  thee  from  thine  unholy  lethargy,  and  cry 
day  and  night  unto  God.  Cease  not,  but  with  anguish,  like  a  woman 
in  travail,  cry  aloud  and  spare  not,  until  he  give  the  risen  Lord  the 
heathen  for  his  inheritance,  and  make  his  throne  higher  than  the  kings 
of  the  earth. 

III.  Thirdly,  this  dominion  is  to  be  gained  by  the  power  of 
GOD.  Notice  the  text,  for  it  is  very  explicit :  "  Ask  of  me,  and  /  shall 
give  thee.''  The  power  and  grace  of  God  will  be  conspicuously  seen  in 
the  subjugation  of  this  world  to  Christ  :  every  heart  shall  know  that  it 
was  wrought  by  the  power  of  God  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  Christ 
and  his  church.  I  believe,  brethren,  that  tlie  length  of  time  spent  in 
the  ficcomplishment  of  the  divine  plan  has  much  of  it  been  occupied  with 
getting  rid  of  those  many  forms  of  human  power  which  have  intruded 
into  the  place  of  the  Spirit.  If  you  and  I  had  been  about  in  our 
Lord's  day,  and  could  have  had  everything  managed  to  our  hand,  we 
should  have  converted  Caesar  straight  away  by  argument  or  by  oratory ; 
w^e  should  then  have  converted  all  his  legions  by  every  means  within  our 
reach  ;  and,  I  warrant  you,  with  Cassar  and  his  legions  at  our  back  we 
would  have  Christianised  the  world  in  no  time :  would  we  not  ?  Yes, 
but  that  is  not  God's  way  at  all,  nor  the  right  and  eflFectual  way  to  set 
up  a  spiritual  kingdom.  Bribes  and  threats  are  alike  unlawful,  eloquence 
and  carnal  reasoning  are  out  of  court,  the  powder  of  divine  love  is  the 
one  weapon  for  this  campaign.  Long  ago  the  prophet  wrote,  "  Not  by 
might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  The  fact  is 
that  such  conversions  as  could  be  brought  about  by  physical  force,  or  by 
mere  mental  energy,  or  by  the  prestige  of  rank  and  pomp,  are  not 


558  ^tETROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPn'. 

conversions  at  all.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  not  a  kingdom  of  this  world, 
else  would  his  servants  fight ;  it  rests  on  a  spiritual  basis,  and  is  to  be  ad- 
vanced by  spiritual  means.  Yet  Christ's  servants  gradually  slipped  down 
into  the  notion  that  his  kingdom  was  of  this  world,  and  could  be  upheld 
by  human  power.  A  Roman  emperor  professed  to  bo  converted,  using 
a  deep  policy  to  settle  himself  upon  the  throne ;  then  Christianity  became 
the  State-patronized  religion :  it  seemed  that  the  world  was  Cliristian- 
ized,  whereas,  indeed,  the  church  was  heathenized.  Hence  sprang  the 
monster  of  a  State-church,  a  conjunction  ill-assorted,  and  fraught  with 
untold  ills.  This  incongruous  thing  is  half  human,  half  divine  as  a 
theory  it  fascinates,  as  a  fact  it  betrays ;  it  promises  to  advance  the 
truth,  and  is  itself  a  negation  of  it.  Under  its  influences  a  system  of 
religion  was  fashioned,  which  beyond  all  false  religions,  and  beyond 
even  Atheism  itself,  is  the  greatest  hindrance  to  the  true  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Under  its  influence  dark  ages  lowered  over  the  world ; 
men  were  not  permitted  to  think ;  a  Bible  could  scarcely  be  found,  and  a 
preacher  of  the  gospel,  if  found,  was  put  to  death.  That  was  the  result 
of  human  power  coming  in  with  the  sword  in  one  hand  and  the  gospel 
in  the  other,  and  developing  its  pride  of  ecclesiastical  power  into  a  triple 
crown,  an  Inquisition,  and  an  infallible  Pope.  This  parasite,  this  canker, 
this  incubus  of  the  church  will  be  removed  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  by 
his  providence  in  due  season.  The  kings  of  the  earth  who  have  loved 
this  unchaste  system  will  grow  weary  of  it  and  destroy  it.  Read  Reve- 
lation xvii.  16,  and  see  how  terrible  her  end  will  be.  The  death  of  the 
system  will  come  from  those  who  gave  it  life  :  the  powers  of  earth  created 
the  system,  and  they  will  in  due  time  destroy  it. 

Frequently  do  we  meet  with  the  idea  that  the  world  is  to  be  converted 
to  Christ  by  the  spread  of  civilization.  Now,  civilization  always  follows 
the  gospel,  and  is  in  a  great  measure  the  product  of  it ;  but  many  people 
put  the  cart  before  the  horse,  and  make  civilization  the  first  cause. 
According  to  their  opinion  trade  is  to  regenerate  the  nations,  the  arts 
are  to  ennoble  them,  and  education  is  to  purify  them.  Peace  Societies 
are  formed,  against  which  I  have  not  a  word  to  say,  but  much  in 
their  favour ;  still,  I  believe  the  only  efficient  peace  society  is  the  church 
of  God,  and  the  best  peace  teaching  is  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 
The  grace  of  God  is  the  great  instrument  for  uplifting  the  world  from  the 
depths  of  its  ruin,  and  covering  it  with  happiness  and  holiness.  Christ's 
cross  is  the  Pharos  of  this  tempestuous  sea,  like  the  Eddystone  light- 
house flinging  its  beams  through  the  midnight  of  ignorance  over  the 
raging  waters  of  human  sin,  preserving  men  from  rock  and  shipwreck, 
piloting  them  into  the  port  of  peace.  Tell  it  out  among  the  heathen 
that  the  Lord  reigneth  from  the  tree  ;  and  as  ye  tell  it  out  believe  that 
the  power  to  make  the  peoples  believe  it  is  with  God  the  Father,  and 
the  power  to  bow  them  before  Christ  is  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  Saving 
energy  lies  not  in  learning,  nor  in  wit,  nor  in  eloquence,  nor  in  any- 
thing save  in  the  right  arm  of  God,  who  will  be  exalted  among  the 
heathen,  for  he  hath  sworn  that  surely  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation 
of  God.  The  might  of  the  Omnipotent  One  shall  w^ork  out  his  pur- 
poses of  grace,  and  as  for  us,  we  will  use  the  simple  processes  of  prayer 
and  faith.  "Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  thee."  Oh,  that  we  could 
keep  in  perpetual  motion  the  machinery  of  prayer.     Pray,  pray,  pray, 


CHEIST's  universal  kingdom,   and  how   it  COMETH.  55d 

and  God  will  give,  give,  give,  abundantly,  and  supernaturally,  above  all 
that  we  ask,  or  even  think.  He  must  do  all  things  in  the  conquering 
work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  cannot  convert  a  single  child,  nor  bring 
to  Christ  the  humblest  peasant,  nor  lead  to  peace  the  most  hopeful  youth; 
all  must  be  done  by  the  Spirit  of  God  alone,  and  if  ever  nations  are  to  be 
born  in  a  day,  and  crowds  are  to  come  humbly  to  Jesus'  feet,  it  is  thine. 
Eternal  Spirit,  thine  to  do  it.  God  must  give  the  dominion,  or  the  rebels 
will  I'emain  unsubdued. 

IV.  Thus  the  power  of  God  worketh  to  bring  about  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  ;  and  this  involves  the  breaking  up  of  all  the  con- 
federacies WHICH  NOW  exist  OR  EVER  SHALL  EXIST  FOR  THE 
HINDRANCE   OF   THE    REDEEMER'S   KINGDOM. 

Oiir  text  employs  a  figure  which  is  very  full  of  meaning.  "He  shall 
break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron."  He  breaks  not  the  subject  nations,  nor 
the  inherited  heathen,  but  the  kings  of  the  earth  who  stood  up  and  took 
counsel  together  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Anointed.  Against 
these  he  will  lift  up  his  iron  rod  of  stern  justice  and  irresistible  power. 
Over  his  own  inheritance  he  will  sway  a,  silver  sceptre  of  love  ;  over  his 
own  possession  he  shall  reign  with  gentleness  and  grace  ;  but  as  for  his 
adversaries,  he  will  deal  with  them  in  severity,  and  display  his  power  in 
them.  How^  shall  they  stand  out  against  him?  They  have  formed 
their  confederacy  with  great  care  and  skill :  as  when  men  prepare  clay 
and  make  it  plastic  for  the  potter's  use,  so  have  they  made  all  things 
ready ;  they  have  set  their  design  upon  the  wheel,  and  caused  it  to  revolve 
in  their  thoughts,  and  with  great  skill  they  have  fashioned  it.  Lo,  there 
it  stands  finished,  and  fair  to  look  upon.  Yet  at  its  very  best  it  is 
nothing  more  than  a  potter's  vessel.  It  may  be  of  the  purest  clay,  and 
of  such  exquisite  workmanship  that  it  shall  enchant  every  man  of  taste, 
but  it  attaineth  to  be  nothing  more  than  an  earthen  vessel,  and  therefore 
woe  unto  it  when  the  rod  of  iron  falls  upon  it.  Woe  to  all  human 
societies  and  brotherhoods  which  are  framed  to  resist  the  Lord.  Mark 
the  confiict  and  its  end !  It  is  brief  enough.  A  stroke !  Where 
is  the  hope  of  the  Lord's  adversary  ?  Gone,  gone,  utterly  gone ; 
only  a  few  potsherds  remain.  Oh  for  such  a  smiting  of  the  apostacy 
of  Rome !  Oh  for  one  touch  of  the  iron  rod  upon  the  imposture 
of  Mohammed !  Oh,  for  a  blow  at  Buddhism,  and  a  back  stroke  at 
the  superstition  of  Brahminism,  and  at  all  the  idols  of  the  heathen ! 
Woe  unto  the  gods  of  the  land  of  Sinim  in  that  day ;  a  single 
stroke  shall  set  the  potsherds  flying.  Wherefore,  then,  should  we 
fear,  although  they  plot  and  plan ;  although  a  solemn  conclave  of  cardinals 
be  held,  though  the  Pope  fulminate  his  bulls,  though  the  Sultan  ordain 
that  every  convert  to  Christianity  sliall  be  put  to  death,  though  still 
the  scofi'ers  revile  at  Christianity,  and  say  that  it  spreads  not  as  once 
it  did  ?  A  speedy  answer  shall  confound  them,  or  if  not  speedy  yet  the 
stroke  shall  be  sure.  Our  King  waits  a  while.  He  hath  leisure.  Haste 
belongs  to  weakness ;  his  strength  moves  calmly.  Only  let  him  be 
aroused  and  you  shall  see  how  quick  are  his  paces.  He  redeemed  the 
world  in  a  few  short  hours  upon  the  tree,  and  I  warrant  you  that  when 
he  getteth  that  iron  rod  once  fairly  to  work  he  will  not  need  many  days 
to  ease  him  of  his  adversaries,  and  make  a  clean  sweep  of  all  that  set 
themselves  against  him.     If  you  want  to  see  how  it  will  be  done,  read,  I 


560  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

pray  yon,  Daniel  ii.  31  : — "Thou,  0  king,  sawest,  and  behold  a  great 
image.  This  great  image,  whose  brightness  was  excellent,  stood  before 
thee ;  and  the  form  thereof  was  terrible.  This  image's  head  was  of  fine 
gold,  his  breast  and  his  arms  of  silver,  his  belly  and  his  thighs  of  brass, 
his  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay."  It  was  a  strange 
conglomeration :  all  the  metallic  empires  are  set  forth  as  combined  in 
one  image ;  which  image  is  the  embodied  idea  of  monarchical  power, 
which  has  fascinated  men  even  to  this  day.  The  prophet  goes  on 
to  say,  "Thou  sawest  still  that  a  stone  was  cut  out  without  hands, 
which  smote  the  image  upon  his  feet  that  were  of  iron  and  clay,  and 
brake  them  to  pieces.  Then  was  tlie  iron,  the  clay,  the  brass,  the  silver, 
and  the  gold,  broken  to  pieces  together,  and  became  like  the  chaff  of  the 
summer  threshingfloors  ;  and  the  wind  carried  them  away,  that  no  place 
was  found  for  them  :  and  the  stone  that  smote  the  image  became  a  great 
mountain,  and  filled  the  Avhole  earth."  And  so  it  is  to  be :  the  vision  is 
being  each  day  fulfilled.  The  gospel  stone,  which  owes  nothing  to  human 
strength  or  wisdom,  is  breaking  the  image,  and  scattering  all  opposing 
powers.  No  system,  society,  confederacy,  or  cabinet  can  stand  which  is 
opposed  to  truth  and  righteousness.  I,  even  I,  that  am  but  of  yester- 
day, and  know  nothing,  have  seen  one  of  the  mightiest  of  empires  of 
modern  times  melt  away  on  a  sudden  as  tlie  rime  of  the  morning  in  the 
heat  of  the  sun.  I  have  seen  monarchs  driven  out  of  their  tyrannies 
by  the  powers  of  a  single  man,  and  a  free  nation  born  as  in  an  hour. 
I  have  seen  states  which  fought  to  hold  the  negro  in  perpetual  cap- 
tivity subdued  by  those  Avhom  they  despised,  while  the  slave  has 
been  set  free.  I  have  seen  nations  chastened  under  evil  governments, 
and  revived  when  the  yoke  has  been  broken,  and  they  have  returned  to 
the  way  of  righteousness  and  peace.  He  who  lives  longest  shall  see  most 
of  this.  Evil  is  short-lived.  Truth  shall  yet  rise  above  all.  The  Lord 
saith,  overturn,  overturn  till  he  shall  come  whose  right  it  is,  and  God 
shall  give  it  him.  AVoe  unto  those  that  stand  against  the  Lord  and  his 
anointed,  for  they  shall  not  prosper.  "  Be  wise  now  therefore,  0  ye 
kings :  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth.  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a 
little.     Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him." 


CHRIST'S  WORK  NO  FAILURE. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  January  30th,  1887,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE  metropolitan  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


*'  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,  till  he  have  set  judgment  in  the  earth :  and 
Ihe  isles  shall  wait  for  his  law." — Isaiah  xUi.  4. 

Previous  verses  at  the  close  of  the  forty-first  chapter  indicate  the 
litter  faihire  of  the  hope  of  man  from  man.  God  himself  looked,  and 
behold  "  there  was  no  man  ;  even  among  them,  and  there  was  no  coun- 
sellor, that,  when  I  asked  of  them,  could  answer  a  word."  How  often  it 
is  so  in  human  history :  man  fails  to  find  leadership  and  help  in  man ! 
•Great  men  are  raised  up  now  and  then,  and  the  tendency  is  to  make 
idols  of  them,  and  so  to  trust  in  an  arm  of  flesh.  These  die,  and  then 
their  fellows  look  out  in  the  church,  and  in  the  world,  for  other  men 
upon  whom  they  may  dote  after  the  same  manner  ;  but  it  sometimes 
happens  that  they  look  in  vain ;  none  arise  whom  they  can  elect  for 
leaders.  Just  now  I  think  it  is  so  in  more  departments  than  one. 
Look  where  you  may,  where  will  you  see  the  man  who  is  equal  to  the 
■crisis  ?  Somehow  or  otlier,  in  the  providence  of  God,  every  hour  has, 
in  due  time,  had  its  man  ;  but  if  our  hopes  are  fixed  in  men,  we  must 
feel  at  this  time  s  trely  pressed. 

In  expounding  the  one  verse  which  I  have  selected  for  a  text,  I  shall 
need  to  open  up  the  whole  passage.  Follow  me,  therefore,  with  opened 
Bibles,  and  obey  the  first  word  of  the  chapter,  which  is,  Behold. 

We  are  commanded  at  all  times  to  behold  the  Son  of  God.  There 
IS  never  a  season  in  which  he  is  not  a  fit  subject  for  contemplation  and 
expectation.  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God"  is  the  standing  rule  from 
generation  to  generation,  from  the  first  of  January  to  the  last  of 
December.  But  specially  in  cloudy  and  dark  days  ought  we  to  behold 
him.  When  after  having  looked,  and  looked  long,  you  see  no  man  and 
no  counsellor,  then  this  precept  has  an  emphatic  force  about  it,  "Behold 
my  servant,  whom  I  uphold  ;  mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth." 
.When  all  other  saviours  fail,  look  to  the  Saviour  whom  God  has  set  up. 
The  darker  all  things  else  become,  the  more  eagerly  look  for  his  appear- 
ing, whose  coming  is  as  a  morning  without  clouds.  When  the  lower 
lights  are  burning  dim,  behold  the  lamp  above. 

Oar  great  comfort  is  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ts  always  to  be  beheld. 
No.  1,945. 

2n  8 


562  METEOPOLITAN  TABEKNACLE   PULPIT. 

He  eTer  lives  and  ever  works  for  his  people.  We  must  view  him  not 
merely  as  one  who  appeared  upon  the  scene  years  ago,  but  as  still  living, 
lie  died  in  the  heat  of  the  battle,  but  he  rose  again  to  secure  the 
victory,  "We  do  not  found  our  hopes  of  a  brighter  future  upon  a  dead 
Saviour  ;  our  hopes  for  the  future  of  the  world,  and  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  God's  gracious  purposes  hang  upon  one  who  ever  liveth,  and 
is  at  this  time  in  the  place  of  vantage,  carrying  on  his  great  work  and 
warfare  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  My  text  saith,  "  Behold  my  servant  "  ; 
and  that  matchless  servant  of  God  is  to  be  beheld — not  with  the  eye  of 
sense,  that  were  little  worth,  for  men  saw  him  in  that  way,  and  crucified 
him  ;  but  he  is  to  be  beheld  with  the  eye  of  faith,  and  this  is  a  noble 
sight ;  for  those  who  look  to  him  in  that  manner  are  lightened,  and  their 
faces  are  not  ashamed.  At  the  commencement  of  my  discourse,  I 
beseech  you,  dear  brethren,  to  look  to  Jesas  Christ  the  ever-living 
Worker.  If  you  have  been  troubled  and  fretted  by  peering  into 
these  gloomy  times  and  perceiving  nothing  that  can  raise  your  spirits, 
I  pray  you  look  about  you  no  longei",  but  look  up  !  There  he  sits 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  even  the  Father,  the  appointed  man,  the 
glorious,  chosen  Deliverer.  Behold  him,  and  your  fears  and  sorrows  will 
fly  away. 

The  text  declares  coucerning  our  Lord  that  "  he  shall  not  fail  nor  be 
discouraged."  This  leads  us  to  consider  what  is  the  work  which  Jesus 
Christ  has  undertaken,  in  which  he  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged. 
Our  text  directs  us  in  this  matter,  for  it  tells  us  that  he  has  come  to 
*'  set  judgment  in  the  earth,"  and  that  *'  the  isles  shall  wait  for  his  law." 
The  earth  is  to  be  delivered  from  misrule  and  sin,  and  men  are  to  be  sub- 
missive to  his  instruction  and  direction.  There  are  some  who  doubt  it, 
but  I  still  believe  in  that  verse  which  we  sang  just  now  : — 

"  Jesus  shall  reign  where'er  the  sun 
Does  his  successive  journeys  run  : 
His  kingdom  stretch  from  shore  to  shore, 
Till  moons  shall  wa.x  and  wane  no  mora.'' 

Our  Lord  has  come  to  save  his  own  elect,  and  he  will  save  every  one  of 
them.  No  eoul  for  whom  he  stood  as  surety  and  substitute  shall  ever  be 
cast  away.  The  sheep  shall  pass  again  under  the  hand  of  him  that 
telleth  them,  and  they  shall  all  be  there.  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be 
discouraged";  but  he  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be 
satisfied. 

As  for  the  Lord's  second  coming,  we  know  not  when  it  shall  be. 
Shall  the  world  grow  darker  and  dari;er  till  he  comes  ?  It  may  be  so. 
There  are  passages  of  Scripture  and  signs  of  the  times  which  may  be 
taken  to  indicate  it.  On  the  other  hand,  shall  the  age  grow  brighter 
and  brighter  till  he  appears  to  bring  the  perfect  day?  Through  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  shall  there  yet  be  periods  in  wiiich  multitudes 
shall  be  converted,  and  whole  nations  shall  be  saved  ?  I  do  not  know  : 
there  are  texts  that  seem  to  look  that  way,  and  many  a  brave  worker 
hopes  as  much.  There  are  brethren  who  can  map  out  unfulfilleii 
prophecy  with  great  distinctness  ;  but  I  confess  my  inabihty  to  do  so. 
They  get  a  shilling  box  of  mathematical  instruments.  They  stick  down 
one  leg  of  the  compasses  and  describe  a  circle  here  and  a  circle  there,  an  i 


CHRIST'S   WORK   NO   FAILURE.  563 

they  draw  two  or  three  lines,  and  there  it  is.  Can  you  not  see  it,  as 
plain  as  a  pikestaff?  I  am  sick  of  diagrams  ;  I  have  seen  enough  of 
them  to  make  another  volume  of  Euclid.  My  impression  is  that  very 
little  is  to  be  learned  from  the  major  part  of  these  interpretations 
or  speculations.  I  do  not  think  that  anybody  can  map  out  the  future 
so  as  to  be  absolutely  sure  of  anything  definite  except  certain  great, 
clearly-stated  facts.  It  is  certain  that  the  Lord  will  come,  that  he  will 
come  in  such  an  hour  as  the  most  of  men  lojk  not  for  him;  and  that 
his  coming  will  be  a  surprise  even  to  many  of  his  own  church.  He  may 
come  at  this  moment  while  yet  I  am  sjieaking  to  you,  and  he  may  delay 
his  coming,  if  so  it  pleaseth  him,  through  many  a  century  yet.  It  may 
sound  strange  for  me  to  say  so,  but  if  our  Lord  were  not  to  come  for 
ages,  we  should  not  be  justified  in  saying,  "My  Lord  delayeth  his 
coming,"  nor  would  any  projihecy  of  Scripture  be  broken.  Further- 
more, it  seems  to  me  pretty  clear  that  truth  and  righteousness  are  to 
win  the  day  upon  the  earth ;  the  idols  are  to  be  abolished,  war  is  to 
cease,  and  the  great  Jehovah  is  to  be  called  "  the  G-od  of  the  whole 
earth."  Either  before  or  after  his  second  advent — I  am  not  going  into 
that  question  this  morning — this  polluted  earth  is  to  be  cleansed,  and 
this  round  planet  of  ours,  which  to-day  is  darkened  by  sin,  shall  yet 
shine  out,  like  a  new-born  sun,  in  all  the  pristine  light  which  beamed 
irom  it  when  first  it  came  from  its  Maker's  hands.  The  Lord  shall 
reign  over  all  mankind,  and  a  period  of  peace,  and  rest,  and  holiness 
shall  be  the  fruit  of  his  blessed  sway.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  not  rest  till 
he  has  subdued  all  things  unto  himself,  and  put  down  all  the  spiritual 
wickednesses  which  now  tyrannize  over  the  world. 

I  do  not  think  it  necessary  for  me  to  go  further  into  detail  as  to  all 
that  our  Lord  is  resolved  to  do.  \Yhat  I  have  to  say  is  this,  ivliakver 
he  has  tmdertalcen,  he  will  perform :  whatever  commission  he  has  re- 
ceived he  will  fulfil.  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  "  till  all  his 
work  is  done.  Brethren,  we  get  doubting  sometimes.  "We  ask.  Is  it 
all  right?  Are  matters  moving  on?  Behold  him  who  is  at  the  head 
of  all  aflfaii's,  the  director  of  the  high  politics  of  heaven,  the  great  one 
upon  whose  shoulders  rests  tlie  business  of  God  in  the  salvation  of  men ! 
Behold  him,  and  be  comforted.  You  and  I  may  fail ;  shame  on  us  if 
we  do  1  We  may  be  discouraged  ;  it  will  he  our  sin  if  we  are :  but  he 
shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  till  he  shall  have  wrought  out  every 
point  of  the  promise  of  grace,  and  shall  have  accomplished  every  iota 
of  the  eternal  purpose  of  love. 

Ihelieve  in  the  final  iier severance  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  believe 
in  the  final  perseverance  of  every  saint  as  an  individual.  Furthermore, 
I  believe  in  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints  as  a  body  :  the  church  of 
God  shall  live,  and  continue  her  work  till  she  has  accomplished  it. 
*' The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  her."  But  far  diviner  is 
the  thought  to  me  of  the  final  perseverance  of  the  Christ  of  God.  If 
he  were  to  lay  down  the  task  and  say  it  is  impossible,  woe  worth  the 
day  to  us !  If  he  were  to  turn  his  back  upon  his  high  enterprise, 
and  say,  "  I  will  save  no  more  of  these  rebellious  beings ;  I  will  attempt 
no  more  to  shed  light  into  the  darkness  which  comprehendeth  it  not;  I 
"will  give  up  the  task  in  which  men  so  madly  oppose  me";  then  were 
hope  blotted  out  of  the  language  of  men.     But  while  this  test  stands 


564  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLK   PULPIT. 

true  the  door  of  hope  is  open.     We  need  not  fail  or  be  discouraged, 
since  he  will  not. 

This  miming  I  shall  speak  to  you  in  the  hope  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  may  fire  you  with  nevv  courage  for  the  holy  war.  First,  lei  this 
truth  be  considered  and  believed ;  and  then,  secondly,  let  this  truth  be 
believed  and  enjoyed. 

I.     First,  then,  let  this  truth  be  coNSiDEaED  and  believed. 

Will  you  now  thoughtfully  turn  it  over  in  your  minds  ?  It  is  certainly 
a  very  niarvellons  enterprise  which  our  Lord  Jesas  Christ  has  under- 
tiken.  Tlie  salvation  of  a  single  soul  involves  a  miracle.  The  salva- 
tion of  myriads  upon  myriads  of  the  human  race :  what  shall  I  call 
it  but  a  mountain  of  marvels  ?  The  removal  of  the  darkness  which 
has  settled  over  mankind  in  tenfold  night — what  a  divine  labour  ! 
The  ending  of  the  enmity  which  exists  between  man  and  Grod,  the 
reconciling  of  man  unto  his  Maker — what  a  design  !  The  redeeming 
of  this  world  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  the  setting  up  of  a  king- 
dom of  truth  and  holiness — what  an  enterprise  !  Such  wonders  has 
Jesus  undertaken,  and  such  wonders  he  will  achieve.  He  died  to  lay 
the  foundation  of  his  all-conquering  kingdom,  and  he  still  lives  that 
this  kingdom  may  be  established  in  its  supremacy,  and  all  nations  may 
flow  to  it.  Beloved,  I  fail  to  conceive,  much  more  to  express,  the 
vastness  of  the  task  which  he  has  undertaken.  Those  of  you  who  love 
your  fellow-men  often  mourn  your  powerlessness  with  a  single  indi- 
vidual. What  hard  work  it  is  to  deal  with  our  own  countrymen  ! 
How  are  we  baffled  by  their  poverty,  their  ignorance,  their  misery,  their 
sin  !  You  have  only  to  battle  with  a  single  vice,  drunkenness,  to  wit, 
to  feel  what  a  monster  is  to  be  overcome.  Only  think  for  a  moment  of 
the  social  impurity  of  this  city,  and  you  are  sick  at  heart  as  you 
remember  it.  Now,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  come  to  cleanse  this 
Au'^ean  stable  ;  and  he  will  cleanse  it.  The  stream  of  the  river  of  life 
shall  run  through  the  foulest  parts  of  the  earth  till  even  those  horrible 
regions  which  are  comparable  to  the  Dead  Sea  shall  be  reclaimed. 

The  problem  staggers  us.  The  systems  of  evil  are  colossal.  The  hold 
of  evil  on  the  race  is  terrible.  M  m  is  inveterately  a  sinner.  You  cannot 
cure  him  of  rebellion  :  he  is  desperately  set  on  mischief.  Even  when 
the  consequences  of  his  sin  wound  and  afflict  him  he  still  returns  to  it. 
If  you  prove  to  him  to  a  demonstration  that  a  thing  is  right  and  profitable, 
he  does  not  therefore  love  it  ;  if  you  prove  it  to  be  injurious,  he  there- 
fore chooses  it.  By  the  use  of  an  accursed  logic  he  pats  darkness  for 
light  and  light  for  darkness,  and  thus  stultifies  his  conscience,  and  hardens 
his  he  u  t.  If,  perchance,  you  convince  his  judgment,  you  have  not  won 
his  affection,  you  have  not  carried  his  will,  you  have  not  subdued  his 
mind.  Notliing  but  Omnipotence  itself  can  save  a  single  soul.  What 
must  be  that  mighty  power  which  shall  cause  nations  to  run  unto  the 
Lord  !  They  that  dwell  in  the  wilderness  are  to  bow  before  him,  and 
his  enemies  are  to  lick  the  dust.  What  a  conquest  this  !  How  shall 
Ethiopia  be  made  to  stretch  out  her  hands  to  him  ?  Look  how  black 
ai-e  the  hearts  of  her  inhabitants,  as  well  as  their  faces  !  How  shall 
China  and  Hindosstan,  beclouded  by  their  fiilse  philosophies,  be  led  to 
own  the  trutli  ?  Look  you,  sirs,  look  ab  this  great  mountain,  and  do 
not    uuder-estimate    its  mass;    and  then    remember  that   before  our 


CHRIST'S   WORK   NO   FAILURE.  565 

Zerubbabel  it  must  and  shall  become  a  plain.  The  stone  mentioned 
by  Daniel,  cnt  out  of  the  mountiiin  without  hands,  smote  the  monstrous 
image  and  brake  it,  and  in  due  time  filled  the  whole  earth.  In  the 
night  virions  the  same  prophet  saw  the  Son  of  Man  having  dominion, 
and  glory,  ami  a  kingdom,  that  all  people  should  serve  him.  So 
must  it  be.     But  how  great  a  thing  it  is  ! 

The  task  is  rendereil  the  more  severe  because  our  Lord  Jesus  at  this 
present  works  largely  by  a  church,  which  is  a  poor  and  faulty  instru- 
ment for  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose.  I  sometimes  think  there 
are  more  difficulties  connected  with  the  church  than  with  the  world  ; 
for  the  church  is  often  worldly,  faithless,  lethargic,  and  I  was  about  to 
add,  inhuman.  Mii:ht  I  not  almost  say  as  much,  for  she  seems  at  times 
well  nigh  destitute  of  tender  sympathy  for  the  lost  and  perishing  ?  The 
church  at  one  hour  receives  the  light  and  reflects  it  like  the  full  moon,  so 
that  you  have  hoj'e  of  her  enlightening  men  ;  but  soon  she  wanes  into  a 
mere  ring  of  light,  and  becomes  obscured.  She  declines  from  the  truth, 
she  forgets  the  glorious  gospel  entrusted  to  her,  and  she  seeks  after  the 
rotten  philosophies  of  men.  How  many  times  since  Pentecost  has  the 
church  started  aside  after  the  wisrlom  of  men,  and  after  a  while  has 
painfully  returned  to  her  first  faith  ?  At  the  present  moment  there  is 
jiiSt  that  kind  of  wandering  going  on;  and  this  hinders  the  work 
of  the  Lord.  If  a  man  has  to  do  a  work,  he  says  to  himself, 
"  Give  me  good  tools,  at  any  rate.  If  I  have  to  strike  a  heavy- 
blow,  do  not  trouble  me  with  a  broken  hammer.  If  I  have  to 
write,  give  me  a  pen  that  will  not  hinder  my  hand."  But  alas !  the 
church  is  too  often  false  to  her  Master's  purpoi^e,  and  traitorous  to  his 
truth.  Yet,  brethren,  the  Lord  will  largely  do  his  work  and  accom- 
plish his  gi.od  pleasure  by  such  means  as  these.  He  will  not  fail  nor 
be  discouraged.  If  all  Christians  should  become  lukewarm,  till 
the  whole  church  became  nauseous,  as  the  church  of  Laodicea,  yet  still 
the  Lord  Jesus  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged.  The  disciple  may  sleep, 
but  the  great  Saviour  agonizes  over  men.  Let  this  battalion  and  the 
other  waver  as  it  may,  he  who  holds  the  banner  in  the  very  centre  of 
the  fight  will  never  be  moved  :  he  will  hold  the  field  against  all  comers; 
for  the  Altogether  Lovely  One  is  the  Standard-bearer  among  ten 
thousand.  Though  you  mourn  over  the  disciples,  rejoice  over  their 
Master.     They  faint  or  fly,  but  "  he  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged." 

To  help  you  to  believe  this  great  truth,  I  beg  you  to  notice  who  he  is 
that  hath  undertaken  all  this  :  kindly  read  at  the  commencement  of  the 
chapter:  "Behold  my  servant,  whom  I  uphold,  mine  elect,  in  whom  my 
soul  delighteth."  I  am  sure  that  he  who  is  thus  spoken  of  will  not  fail 
nor  be  discouraged;  for,  first,  he  is  God's  oivn  special  servant.  God  has 
many  servants,  but  the  Christ  is  above  all  others  called  of  God  "my 
servant."  He  is  a  Son  far  excelling  all  other  sons,  and  in  the  same 
sense  he  is  a  Servant  far  exceeding  all  other  servants.  He  took  upon 
himself  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh.  He  is  a  servant  as  none  of  us  can  ever  hope  to  be  in  so 
high  and  wonderful  a  sense :  he  performs  all  the  will  of  the  Father.  If 
he  that  was  Lord  of  all  became  a  servant,  do  you  think  he  will  not 
accomplish  his  service?  If  he  that  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth 
laid  aside  his  splendour  and  veiled  himself  in  our  inferior  clay,  do  you 


5gg  MBTllOPOLITAN   TABEKNACLE   PULPIT. 

think  he  will  fail  in  the  purpose  for  which  he  did  this?  Can  the  incar- 
nation of  God  be  a  failure?  Can  the  life  of  the  Son  of  G-od  among 
men  end  in  defeat  ?  Your  heart  gives  immediate  answer — God's  own 
servant  will  fulfil  his  service. 

Then  the  great  God  says  of  him,  "My  servant  whom  I  uphold.''  \( 
God  upholds  him,  how  can  he  fail?  Though  God  upholds  all  his  people, 
yet  beyond  all  others  he  is  upholding  his  own  chosen  Son  and  servant : 
how,  then,  can  he  fail  ?  Is  it  possible  with  the  divine  power  perpetually 
streaming  into  him  and  abiding  in  him,  that  he  should  fail,  or  be 
discouraged?  The  text  may  be  read,  "Behold  my  servant  upon  whom 
I  lean,"  and  the  picture  is  of  a  great  Oriental  monarch  who  comes 
forth  leaning  upon  a  favourite  lord,  whom  he  honours  by  placing  him  in 
that  position,  indicating  thereby  that  he  trusts  his  affiiirs  with  him,  aul 
regards  him  as  his  right  hand  man,  a  very  pillar  of  the  State.  Yes, 
"we  say  it  with  reverence,  God  the  Father  leans  on  Jesus  the  Christ. 
He  rests  his  honour  and  glory  with  the  person  of  the  incarnate  God  ; 
and  now  he  comes  before  us  as  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  revealing  his  glory 
through  the  Mediator,  putting  his  own  sovereign  power  into  the  keeping 
of  his  Son,  whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things.  Can  that 
Glorified  One  fail  ?  Has  the  Father  trusted  his  kingdom  of  grace 
with  one  who  will  be  overcome  ?  H.iw  can  he  fail  whom  the  Father 
upholds,  and  upon  whom  the  Father  leans  all  the  dignity  and  glory  of 
his  moral  government  ?     "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged." 

Then  the  Scripture  adds  this  very  significant  word,  "  Mine  elect  in 
ivhom  my  soul  delighteth.''  The  chosen  of  God,  the  most  choice  cue 
that  God  knows,  shall  he  prove  a  failure  ?  N"ot  only  does  God  delight 
in  him,  but  it  is  put  more  strongly  still  :  "  In  whom  my  soul 
delighteth."  Do  you  taste  the  marrow  of  the  expression  ?  It  seems 
to  rne  to  be  exceeding  full.  The  chief  delight  of  God  is  in  his  Son,  as 
Mediator.  God  said  of  the  world,  that  it  was  very  good  ;  but  we  read 
not  that  his  soul  delighted  in  it  :  but,  see,  the  very  soul  of  the  God- 
head is  moved  and  filled  with  delight  because  of  the  Saviour,  com- 
missioned to  redeem.  Blessed  Father,  we  do  not  wonder  that  thou  art 
taken  up  with  delight  in  Jesus  ;  for  even  we  ourselves,  when  we  get  a 
sight  of  him,  are  ravished  with  his  charms.  There  is  none  like  him. 
He  is  thine  Only  Begotten,  the  Son  of  thy  heart  ;  well  mayest  thou  be 
well  plca'fed  with  him.  How,  then,  is  it  pjssible  that  one  whom  the 
Lord  loves  so  well,  in  whom  his  soul  delighteth,  should  be  put  upon  a 
work  in  which  he  can  fail,  or  should  be  left  in  that  work  to  be  dis- 
couraged ?  It  is  impossible.  The  conneotion  of  Jesus  of  Xazareth  with 
Jehovah,  God  of  all,  makes  it  absolutely  certain  that  the  divine  enter- 
prise to  which  he  has  pledged  himself  shall  assuredly  succeed.  "He 
shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged." 

Fui'thermore,  our  Lord  is  the  abiding  iJlace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
text  says,  "  I  have  put  my  spirit  upon  him  " — the  Holy  Ghost,  to 
whom  be  glory  and  honour  for  ever,  the  Holy  Spirit,  very  God  of 
very  God,  dwells  in  Christ.  Upon  us  he  comes  in  measure.  We 
sometimes  receive  a  large  portion  of  his  power,  but  still  we  are  not 
capable  of  receiving  all  the  fulness  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  Christ  has 
the  residue  of  the  Spirit  abiding  in  him.  The  Holy  Spirit  descended 
like  a  dove,  and  re.^ted  upon  him,  and  it  does  rest  upon  him  still.     My 


Christ's  work  no  failure.  567 

brethren,  do  you  dream  that  he  on  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  always  rests 
can  fail  or  be  discouraged  ?  Do  yon  believe  that  the  Gospel  system  is 
to  die  out  ?  Is  it  going  to  be  throttled  by  philosophy  ?  strangled  by 
modern  thought  ?  or  trampled  down  beneath  the  hoof  of  anarchy  ? 
Nay,  while  the  Holy  Ghost  abideth  upon  the  great  Servant  of  Jehovah 
we  cannot  know  a  fear.  The  anointing  on  the  head  will  descend  to 
the  skirts  of  the  garments;  and  as  he  cannot  fail  nor  be  discouraged, 
neither  shall  we  be  dismayed.  He  who  is  owned,  honoured,  trusted, 
sustained,  loved,  and  anointed  of  God  cannot  but  be  successful.  Jesus 
must  persevere  successfully  to  the  end. 

Notice  yet  further,  that  the  success  of  Jesus  is  guaranteed  hy  ihe  decree 
of  God.  It  is  written,  "He  shall  bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gen- 
tiles." Oh,  those  blessed  "shalls"  and  "wills"!  Some  people  make 
little  of  them,  but  I  make  everything  of  them.  Here  my  heart  rests  ; 
if  God  says  "shall,"  then  it  certainly  shall  be.  "The  Lord  said  unto 
my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy 
footstool."  Think  you  he  spake  in  vain  ?  Turn  to  the  second  Psalm, 
and  read  :  "  I  will  declare  the  decree  :  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  me, 
Thou  art  my  Son ;  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.  Ask  of  me,  and  I 
shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession.  Thou  ehalt  break  them  with  a 
rod  of  iron  ;  thon  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel." 
Shall  this  solemn  proclamation  of  Jehovah  be  mere  waste  paper  ?  My 
brethren,  the  sun  may  forget  to  shine,  the  eye  of  the  world  may  be 
darkened  ;  yon  mighty  ocean  may  cease  to  ebb  and  flow,  and  the  heart 
of  the  earth  may  die  ;  all  nature  may  be  driven  on  the  rock  of  fate  in 
general  wreckage  and  confusion  ;  but  no  word  of  God  shall  fall  to  the 
ground  ;  for  that  word  is  essential  life  and  power.  If  Jehovah  hath 
spoken,  it  is  done.  If  he  declares  it,  it  shall  be.  Therefore  the  Christ 
must  and  shall  succeed,  for  his  work  is  the  subject  of  a  divine  decree. 

Yet,  brethren,  it  may  be  that  at  times  we  fear  that  the  gospel  is  not 
prospering  nor  fulfilling  the  purpose  for  which  God  hath  sent  it. 
Looking  back  on  past  history,  and  looking  out  upon  the  present  state  of 
affairs,  we  are  afraid  that  things  are  not  going  well.  Possibly  this  may 
arise  out  of  our  Lord's  way  of  ivorJdng,  which  is  so  diflFerent  from  what 
our  minds  would  choose.  It  is  written  in  the  second  verse,  "  He  shall 
not  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street."  You 
are  in  an  awful  hurry,  are  you  not  ?  But  he  is  never  in  haste.  You 
would  make  a  great  stir  and  noise,  I  know,  but  Jesus  will  not  thus 
spread  the  gospel.  You  would  go  out  and  fight  all  the  enemies  of 
truth,  and  set  clamour  against  clamour,  cry  against  cry ;  but  "  he  shall 
not  strive."  You  would  shout,  and  rage,  and  rave ;  but  he  shall  not; 
cry.  You  would  advertise  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  but  he  shall  not 
cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street.  When  Mahomet  commenced 
his  enterprise  he  announced  that  Paradise  was  to  be  found  beneath  the 
shadow  of  swords,  and  numbers  of  brave  men  rushed  to  the  battle  ; 
they  swept  everything  before  them,  and  stained  continents  with  blood  : 
they  carried  the  name  of  Allah  and  Mahomet  over  Asia  and  Northern 
Africa,  and  seemed  intent  on  conquering  Europe :  and  yet  the  work 
done  will  not  endure.  The  prophet  and  his  caliphs  did  indeed  strive, 
and  cry,  and  cause  their  voices  to  be  heard  in  the  street :  but  Christ's 


568 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


■system  is  the  very  reverse  of  that :  his  weapons  afe  not  carnal.  Behold: 
his  battle-axe  and  weapons  of  war  !  Truth  divinely  strong,  with  na 
human  force  at  the  back  of  it  but  that  of  holiness  and  love  ;  a  gospel 
full  of  gentleness  and  mercy  to  men,  proclaiined  not  by  the  silvi  r  trum- 
pets of  kings,  but  by  the  plain  voices  of  lowly  men,  Tlie  gospel  seeks 
neither  prestige  nor  patronage  from  the  State ;  nor  does  it  ask  to  be. 
advocated  by  scholastic  sophistry,  or  human  eloquence.  It  does  not 
even  aim  at  becoming  predominant  by  force  of  the  learning  or  talent 
of  its  teachers.  It  has  neither  pomp  to  commend  it,  nor  arms  ta 
enforce  it.  It  finds  its  strength  rathur  in  feebleness  than  in  power. 
Tlie  kingdom  comes  by  the  Holy  Spirit  dropping  like  dew  on  human 
hearts,  and  fertilizing  them  with  a  divine  life.  Christ's  kin^-Joiu. 
comes  not  with  observation,  but  in  the  stillness  of  tie  soul.  All  that 
is  really  the  work  of  God  is  wrought  in  the  silence  of  the  heart  by  that 
wind  which  bloweth  where  it  listeth.  Sweetly  the  Holy  Spirit  con- 
Btraineth  all  things  by  his  own  power  ;  but  the  day  of  his  power  is  not 
with  roar  of  tempest,  but  with  the  noiseless  fall  of  the  dew.  You, 
ardent  spirit  that  you  are,  are  all  in  a  hurry ;  you  are  going  to  push  the 
church  before  you,  and  drag  the  world  after  you.  Go  and  do  it !  But 
if  the  Lord  works  not  after  your  fashion,  be  not  greatly  surprised ;  for 
it  is  written,  "  He  shall  not  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be 
heard  in  the  street." 

His  purpose  shall  stand,  and  he  will  do  all  his  pleasure.  He  will  do 
his  work  ail  the  more  surely  because  he  sets  about  it  quietly.  I  always 
delight  in  a  man  who  can  aSbrd  to  go  about  his  life-work  without  fuss,, 
bluster,  or  loud  announcement.  See  how  a  master-workman  lays  down 
his  tools!  He  arranges  his  plan,  sketches  his  ideal,  and  then  begins 
as  he  means  to  go  on.  He  will  do  the  thing  in  that  way,  depend  upon 
it.  Another  fellow  flings  his  tools  about,  rushes  at  the  work  without 
system,  makes  the  dust  fly,  litters  the  place  with  chips,  s[)oils  the  work, 
and  leaves  it  in  disgust.  Our  Saviour  works  not  so  :  he  calmly,  deli- 
berately, resolutely  pursues  his  mighty  plan;  and  he  will  perform  it. 
"  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged." 

Note  well  the  spirit  in  which  he  ivories.  He  is  gentleness  itself,  and 
that  always :  "  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax 
shall  he  not  quench."  You  cannot  work  in  hot  haste  in  this  spirit. 
Gentleness  makes  good  and  sure  speed,  but  it  cannot  endure  rashness 
and  heat.  We  know  reformers  who,  if  they  had  the  power,  would  be 
like  bulls  in  a  china-shop ;  they  would  do  a  great  deal  in  a  very  short 
time.  But  the  world's  best  Friend  is  not  given  to  quench  and  bruise- 
Here  is  a  bruised  reed,  and  it  is  of  no  use  to  anybody  :  you  cannot 
even  get  music  out  of  it,  much  less  lean  upon  it;  yet  he  does  not  brea^ 
it  Here  is  a  smoking  flax,  a  wick  with  an  offensive  smell,  containing 
very  little  heat,  and  no  hght;  yet  he  does  not  put  it  out.  This  olt 
quoted  text  is  used,  as  you  know,  in  the  New  Testament,  in  reference 
to  the  Pharisees  :  they  thought  themselves  strong  pillars,  but  tlie  Lord 
knew  that  tliey  were  only  bruised  reeds ;  they  thought  themselves  great 
lights,  but  he  knew  that  they  were  only  as  smoking  flax  ;  and  yet  ha 
did  not  go  out  of  his  way  to  snuflf  them  out.  Even  to  them,  though 
often  righteously  indignant,  he  was  yet  gentle,  and  only  assailed  them 
when  they  put  themselves  in  his  way,  and  forced  a  verdict  from  him. 


CHRIST'S   WOliK   NO   FAILURE.  669 

The  Lord  Jesns  was  too  good  and  great  to  be  irritated  by  Pharisees. 
Lions  do  not  hunt  for  "  rats  and  mice,  and  such  small  deer."  Great 
principles  are  laid  down,  which  in  due  time  destroy  the  meannesses 
which  it  is  not  worth  while  to  attack  in  detail.  The  smoking  flaxes  of 
error,  and  the  bruised  reeds  of  pretence  go  in  due  season,  buL  the  gentle 
Lord  is  not  in  hot  haste  to  put  them  out  of  the  way.  Hence  we  grow 
discouraged.  But  he  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  any  the  moi'e 
because  of  his  gentleness.  Nay,  let  me  tell  yoii,  brethren,  it  is  the  quiet 
man,  the  meek  man,  who  is  always  hard  to  be  turned  aside  from  his 
purpose.  When  a  man  is  passionate,  and  easily  excited,  you  have  only 
to  wait  a  while,  and  he  will  cool  down  ;  perhaps  chill  down  below  zero. 
These  fiery  fellows  will  be  easily  managed  by  the  devil,  or  somebody 
else,  after  the  flame  is  over.  Give  me  a  man  who  deliberately  makes  up- 
*his  mind,  calmly  sets  to  work,  and  patiently  bears  all  rebuffs,  and  I 
know  that  what  he  sets  himself  to  do  will  be  done.  He  will  work  in 
God's  way,  and  will  not  put  forth  his  hand  to  snatch  a  premature  succesS' 
at  the  expense  of  principle.  He  is  quiet  because  he  is  sure,  patient 
because  he  is  strong,  gentle  because  he  is  firm.  The  man  who  cannot 
be  provoked  is  the  man  who  cannot  be  turned  aside.  You  cannot  dis- 
courage him  :  he  will  go  through  with  his  work,  even  to  the  end  ;  be 
you  sure  of  that.  As  you  Ioi)k  at  our  blessed  Master,  patient  and  im- 
movable amidst  all  the  battle  and  the  strife,  you  may  assure  yourself 
that  he  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged.  I  do  not  admire  Nnpoleon, 
except  in  the  matter  of  his  cool  courage,  but  for  that  he  was  noteworthy. 
They  always  represent  him  in  the  midst  of  the  battle  with  folded  arms. 
His  eagle  eye  is  on  the  conflict,  but  he  is  motionless  as  a  statue.  Every 
soldier  in  the  imperial  army  felt  that  victory  was  sure,  for  the  captain 
was  so  self-possessed.  If  he  had  been  hurrying  to  and  fro,  rushing 
here,  there,  and  everywhere,  and  making  a  great  fuss  about  everything,, 
they  would  have  inferred  that  defeat  was  impending.  But  see  him 
yonder  !  All  is  well.*  He  knows  what  he  is  at.  It  is  all  right,  for  he- 
does  not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard;  he  is  calm,  for 
he  can  see  that  all  is  well.  There  stands  the  Crucified  this  day,  upon 
the  vantage  ground,  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  he  surveys  the 
battle-field  in  calm  expectancy  until  his  enemies  are  made  his 
footstool.  Tender  towards  the  weakest  of  the  weak,  and  kind  even  to- 
the  unthankful  and  the  evil,  we  may  see  in  all  this  morcifiiluess  the  pledge 
of  his  success.  "He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,  till  he  has  set 
judgment  in  the  earth  :  and  the  isles  shall  wait  for  his  law." 

Consideration  of  the  statement  leads  us  to  believe  it  firmly. 

II.  1  want  you  to  give  me  a  few  minutes  while  I  say,  let  this 
TRUTH  BE  BELIEVED  AND  ENJOYED.  I  Want  you  to  enjoy  the  fruit  of 
this  truth,  and  to  be  made  glad  by  it. 

First,  enjoy  it  by  recollecting  that  Jesus  has  flaished  the  work  for  his 
people ;  that  first  work  wherein  he  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness, 
and  bore  the  penalty  of  human  guilt,  and  laid  the  foundation  whereupon 
should  be  built  the  temple  of  God.  Jesus  has  done  all  things  well.  He 
persevered  in  his  life  labour  till  he  could  say,  "  It  is  finished."  From 
the  hour  when  as  a  child  he  said,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my 
Father's  business  ?  "  all  through  the  contradiction  of  sinners,  and  the 
weakness,  and  the  poverty,  and  the  shame  in  which  his  life  was  spent. 


570  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

you  never  see  about  our  Divine  Master  any  indication  of  failing  or  of 
being  discouraged.  We  sorrowfully  cry,  "lam  almost  ready  to  give 
up";  but  he  never  spoke  in  that  fashion,  nor  even  thought  it.  He  had 
reckoned  upon  all  the  toil  and  the  grief.  He  had  foreseen  it  all :  he  had 
taken  it  into  his  calculaiions,  and  therefore  he  was  not  surprised  and 
downcast.  He  determined  to  go,  for  our  sakes,  to  death  and  the  grave, 
and  to  bear  the  shame  of  our  sin  and  the  curse  of  our  guilt,  and  even  to 
be  put  by  the  Father  into  darkness  on  our  account.  He  set  his  face 
like  a  flint  ;  and  like  a  flint  his  face  remained  to  the  bitter  end.  He 
never  turned  aside.  Let  us  bless  him  this  day  for  his  persevering  love. 
It  is  not  a  half-finished  salvation  that  we  behold  on  yonder  bloody  tree  : 
it  is  not  an  incomplete  redemption  that  we  see  in  that  rising  again  of 
Jesus  from  the  dead.  When  we  look  up  to  him  in  his  glory  we  know 
and  feel  that  through  all  the  agony  and  death  he  did  not  fail,  and  was' 
not  discouraged,  and  that  he  has  set  up  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be 
removed  for  ever.     There  let  us  rest  with  peaceful  confidence. 

The  next  reflection  which  I  want  you  to  enjoy  is  this — he  ivill finish 
the  luorlc  in  his  Relieving  people.      He  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged 
until  he   has  completely  saved  you  and  me.     If  I  had  been  my  own 
saviour  I  should  have  given  up  the  work  long  ago.     We  meet  now  and 
then  with  supposed  perfect  people,  but  the  most  of  us  dare  not  whisper 
the  word  perfection.     When   I   have  overcome  a  whole  body  of  sin, 
and  have  risen  to  be  somewhat  like  my  Lord,  it  seems  to  me  as  if 
a  new  body  of  death   were  formed  about  me.      I  kill  one  dragon, 
and    lo,    his    body    yields    a   crop    of    monsters.       My   evil    nature 
seems  to  have  coats  like  an  onion,  and  when  I  have  taken  off  one 
of  them,  it  only   lays   bare  another  quite  as   offensive.      Will  it  not 
be  so  to   the  end   of  the  chapter  ?      You    may   be   growing  better ; 
I  hope  you  are,  but  I   shall  be  all   the  more  hopeful  that  you  are 
so  if  you  fear  that  you  are  growing  worse.     If  you  think  less  and  less 
of  yourselves,  it  is  probably  true  that  you  are  grovving  in  grace ;   but  if 
you  think  more  and  more  of  yourselves,  it  is  highly  probable  that  you 
are  growing  in  pride.     There  is  a  great  difference  between  being  puffed 
up  and  being   built  up.     I  can  clearly  see  that  I  shall  fail  and  be  dis- 
couraged if  salvation  rests  with  me ;  but  here  is  my  comfort — He  will 
not  fail  nor  be  discouraged.     If  my  Lord  begins  with  me,  he  will  never 
be  beaten  off  from  his   purpose.      What  bad  stufl"  is  our  humanity  ! 
What  wretched  raw  material  for  sainthood  !     It  must  be  hard,  treading 
and  pounding  such  gritty  clay ;    and  I    wonder   not   that    both   the 
hands  and  the  feet  of  the  great  Worker  were  sorely  wounded,  since  he 
had  such  clay  to  deal  with.     When  he  fashions  us  on  the  wheel,  and 
we  begin  to  assume  somewhat  of  the  form  which  he  intends  for  us,  yet 
we  crack  and  spoil  when  we  come  to  the  oven,  and  all  his  work  upon  us 
seems  lost.     He  has  to  grind  us  down  again,  to  a  powder,  and  begin 
with  us  again  de  novo,  and  fashion  us  once  more.    It  would  have  been 
an  easier  work  to  have  created  new   beings  altogether  than   to  take 
us  poor  fallen  ones  and  lift  us  up  to   become  sons  of  God.     The 
Almighty  Lord  had  only   to   have   said,    "  Let  a  church  be  !  "    and 
a  church  most  fair  and  spotless  would  have  leaped  into  being  ;  but 
instead    thereof,  he   works  upon   us  sinful  ones,  and  undertakes  to 
make  us  perfectly  pure,  and  present  us  to  himself  without  spot,  or 


CHRIST'S   WORK   NO   FAILURE.  571 

wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  What  a  marvel  of  grace  !  He  will  do  it, 
brother.  He  will  do  it,  sister.  He  has  not  grown  weary  of  the  work, 
neither  is  he  discouraged  by  all  our  ill  behaviour.  Before  he  began  he 
knew  all  about  it.  Had  he  not  been  a  far-seeing  Christ,  able  to  fore- 
see all  our  shortcomings  and  backslidings,  he  might  have  been  surprised 
into  weariness;  but  he  says,  "  I  knew  that  thou  art  obstinate";  and 
again,  "I  knew  that  thou  wouldest  deal  very  treacherously."  He  fore- 
knew all  our  ingratitude,  backsHding,  unbelief,  and  unworthiness,  and 
therefore  he  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  till  his  work  in  us  is  done, 
and  we  are  fit  for  heaven. 

Again,  dear  friends,  he  ivill  finish  Ms  ivorh  hij  his  peojjle.  Whatever 
the  work  is  that  is  to  be  done  by  the  church,  he  will  not  fail  nor  be  dis- 
couraged until  it  is  performed.  I  do  not  know  whether  any  of  yuu  have 
noticed  in  my  text  a  very  singular  thing.  If  you  have  the  Revised 
Version,  the  margin  will  give  you  some  rather  singular  information. 
The  text  might  be  read  thus  :  "  A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and 
the  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench  :  yet  he  shall  not  burn  dimly  nor  be 
bruised."  Though  he  deals  with  bruised  reeds  and  smoking  flaxes, 
yet  he  himself  is  not  crushed,  nor  does  his  light  become  a  mere  glimmer. 
To  my  mind,  this  is  a  deeply  interesting  use  of  words,  and  should  not 
be  allowed  to  slip.  Christianity  just  now,  they  say,  is  a  mere  smoke, 
the  old-fashioned  doctrine  especially  burns  very  dim.  Do  not  you 
believe  it :  the  light  of  Jesus  shall  not  darken  or  grow  less.  Those 
souls  that  can  see  his  light  will  tell  you  that  his  face  shines  still  like 
the  sun.  There  is  a  glory  about  him  that  is  undiminished  and 
undiminishable.  He  does  not  glimmer,  and  he  is  not  crushed.  He 
is  no  reed;  his  enemies  will  one  day  find  that  he  carrieth  a  rod  of  iron. 
He  is  a  pillar  of  the  house  of  our  God  :  he  beareth  up  all  thing-s,  for 
he  is  strong  and  mighty,  and  he  cannot  fail.  I  want  you  to  eject  at 
the  hack  door  every  suggestion  that  enters  your  house  as  to  the  defeat 
of  the  Christ  and  the  failure  of  the  gospel ;  it  is  not  possible,  it  cannot 
be.  You  may  smoke  like  the  flax,  you  may  be  broken  like  the  reed  ; 
but  he  will  never  glimmer  nor  be  a  crushed  reed,  even  to  the  end  : 
wherefore  comfort  one  another  with  these  words. 

And  to  conclude,  I  should  not  have  treated  the  text  properly  if  I  did 
not  say  that  it  has  in  it  great  comfort  to  those  of  you  who  are  as 
yet  outside  of  the  Church  of  God,  and  are  not  numbered  with  his  people. 
Will  you  kindly  read  the  sixth  and  seventh  verses  ? — "  He  shall  not  fail 
nor  be  discouraged,"  till  he  has  done,  what  ? — the  Divine  will,  and  this 
is  a  part  of  it  :  "To  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the  prisoners 
from  the  prison,  and  them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison  house." 
Oh,  say  you,  I  cannot  see  Christ  !  He  has  come  on  purpose  to  make 
you  see.  Turn  your  sightless  eyeballs  this  way.  Breathe  this  prayer, 
"  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me."  And  if  he  saith  :  "  What 
wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  ?  "  answer,  "  Lord,  that  I  might 
receive  my  sight."  In  one  single  moment,  ay,  while  the  clock  is  ticking, 
Jesus  Christ  can  take  the  scales  from  a  blind  man's  eyes  and  let  in 
such  a  flood  of  daylight  that  he  shall  see  heaven  itself.  Lord,  do  it 
this  morning.  0  dear  hearts,  will  you  not  each  one  cry,  Lord,  do  it  to 
me  ?  Are  you  saying  that,  my  friend  ?  He  will  do  it.  He  loves  to 
hear  a  blind  man's  cry.     Do  yon  not  remember  in  the  New  Testament 


572  METROPOLXTAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

how  often  he  stood  still  when  he  heard  a  blind  man's  cry.  Poor  blin*! 
soul!  cry  to  him  now.  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,  he  will 
come  to  you,  and  save  you. 

"  Ah  ! "  paifch  one,  "  but  I  am  worse  than  that,  I  am  shut  up  in  prison." 
Kindly  read  the  seventh  verse  ai^ain  : — "  To  brins^  out  the  prisonei's- 
from  the  prison."  You  are  miseral)le,  without  hope,  sliiit  up  in  an  iron 
cage.  He  has  come  who  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  ;  he  has  come 
on  purpose  to  fetch  you  out  of  the  cage.  Ask  him  to  break  the  bars  in 
sunder.  I  see  him  lay  his  pierced  hand  to  that  iron  bar.  You  have 
tiled  it  a  long  while,  and  it  has  broken  the  teeth  of  your  file  ;  you  have 
tried  to  shake  it  in  its  place,  but  you  could  not  stir  it  in  the  least.  See 
what  he  does  I  He  plucks  bar  after  bar  out  of  its  place,  as  if  they  had 
been  so  many  reeds,  and  you  are  free.  Arise  and  take  your  liberty  I 
The  Son  of  God  has  made  you  free.  If  thou  hast  trusted  him,  he  has 
broken  the  gates  of  brass,  and  cut  the  bars  of  iron  in  sunder  ;  thou  art 
free,  enjoy  thy  liberty. 

"  Oh,  but,"  saith  one,  "  in  my  case  it  is  blindness  and  slavery 
united."  Listen,  then.  He  has  come  to  "bring  them  that  sit  in 
darkness  out  of  the  prison-house."  You  cannot  see  the  bars  that  shut 
you  in,  nor  even  mark  the  limits  of  your  narrow  cell ;  but  he  has  come 
who  will  give  eyes  to  you,  and  light  to  those  eyes,  and  liberty  to  your 
enlightened  sight.  Only  trust  him.  All  things  are  possible  to  him 
that  believeth  when  Christ  is  near.  Thou  knowest  not,  thou  who  art 
now  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  how  high  he  can  lift  thee  in  an  instant  T 
Out  of  the  belly  of  hell,  if  thou  wilt  cry,  he  can  lift  thee  in  a  moment, 
to  the  very  heights  of  heaven.  I  say  no  more  of  ray  Lord  than  he 
deserves  to  have  said  of  him;  nay,  nor  yet  half  as  much.  Try  him,  and 
see  if  he  will  fail.  Try  him  now,  thou  in  the  worst  and  lowest  of  cir- 
cumstances, thou  devil-bound  and  devil-tortured  spirit.  Dare  to  believe 
that  Jesus  can  do  all  things  for  thee.  Leave  thyself  with  him.  Go 
thy  way,  for  as  thou  hast  believed  so  shall  it  be  unto  thee.  To  the 
name  of  him  that  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  be  glory  for  ever 
and  ever !    Amen. 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  xli.  28,  29  j 

xlii.  1—16. 


Hymns  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 72  (Song  I.),  339,  953. 


THE   SHAME  AND   SPITTING. 
Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  July  27th,  1879,  bt 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THK   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"T  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  oflF  the  hair: 
I  Lid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting." — Isaiah  1.  6. 

Of  whom  speaketh  tlie  prophet  this  ?     Of  himself  or  of  some  other  ? 
We  cannot   doubt  but  what  Isaiah  here  wrote  concerning   the   Lord 
Jesiis  Christ.     Is  not  this  one  of  the  prophecies   to  which  our  Lord 
himself  referred  in  the  incident  recorded  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of 
Luke's  gospel  at  the  thirty-first  verse?  ''Then  he  took  unto  him  the 
twelve,  and  said  unto  them,  Behold,  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  all 
things  that  are  written  by  the  prophets  concerning  the  Sun  of  man  shall 
be  accomplished.     For  he  shall  be  delivered  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  shall 
be  mocked,  and  spitefully  entreated,  and   spitted   on :    and  they  shall 
scourge  him,  and  put  him  to  death."     Such  a  remarkable  prophecy  ul 
scourging  and  spitting  as  this  wiiich  is  now  before  us  must  surely  refer 
to  the  Lord  Jesus ;  its  highest  fulfilment  is  assuredly  found  in  him  alone. 
Of  whom  else,  let  me  ask,  could  you  conceive  the  prophet  to  have  spoken 
if  you  read  the  whole  chapter  ?     Of  whom  else  could  he  say  in  the  same 
breath,"  I  clothe  the  hea'ens  with  blackness, and  I  make  sackcloth  their 
covering,     I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that 
plucked  off  the  hair."  (Verses  3  and  6.)     What  a  descent  from  the  om- 
nipotence which  veils  the  heavens  with  clouds  to  the  gracious  condescen- 
sion which  does  not  veil  its  own  face,  but  permits  it  to  be  spat  upon !  No 
other  could  thus  have  spoken  of  himself  but  he  who  is  both  God  and 
man.    He  must  be  divine :  how  else  could  he  say,  "  Behold,  at  my  rebuke 
I  dry  up  the  sea,  I  make  the  rivers  a  wilderness  "  ?  (Verse  2.)     And  yet 
lie  must  at  the  same  time  be  a  "Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with 
giief,"  for  there  is  a  strange  depth  of  pathos  in  the  words,  "  I  gave  my 
back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair  :  I 
hid  not  my  face  from  shame   and   spitting."      Whate^■er  others  may 
say,  we  believe  that  the  speaker  in  this  verse  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the 
King  of  the  Jews,  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of  man,  our  Redeemer. 
It  is  the  Judge  of  Israel  whom  they  have  smitten  with  a  rod  upon  the 
■cheek  who  here  plaintively  declares  the  griefs  which  he  has  undergone. 
2^0.  1,486. 

9 


574  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

We  have  before  us  the  language  of  prophecy,  but  it  is  as  accurate  &» 
though  it  had  been  written  at  the  moment  of  the  event.  Isaiah  might 
have  been  one  of  the  Evangelists,  so  exactly  does  he  describe  what  *our 
Saviour  endured. 

I  have  already  laid  before  you  in  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures  some  of 
the  passages  of  the  New  Testament  wherein  the  scourging  and  the  shame 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  are  described.  We  saw  him  first  at  the  tribunal  of 
his  own  countrymen  in  Matthew  xxvi.,  and  we  read,  "Then  did  they  spit 
in  his  face,  and  buffeted  him  ;  and  others  smote  him  with  the  palms  of 
their  hands."  It  was  in  the  hall  of  the  high  priest,  among  his  own 
countrymen,  that  first  of  all  the  shameful  deeds  of  scorn  were  ^^l•ought 
upon  him.  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not." 
His  worst  foes  were  they  of  his  own  household  ;  they  despised  and 
abhorred  him,  and  would  have  none  of  him.  His  own  Father's  husband- 
men said  among  themselves, — "  Tliis  is  the  heir  ;  let  us  kill  him,  and  let 
us  seize  on  his  inheritance."  This  was  his  treatment  at  the  hand  of  the 
house  of  Israel. 

The  same  treatment,  or  the  like  thereto,  was  accorded  him  in  Herod's 
palace,  where  the  lingering  shade  of  a  Jewish  royalty  still  existed. 
There  what  I  might  venture  to  call  a  pattern  mixture  of  Jew  and 
Gentile  power  held  court,  but  our  Lord  fared  no  better  in  the  united 
company.  By  the  two  combined  the  Lord  was  treated  with  equal 
derision  (Luke  xxiii.  11).  "Herod  with  his  men  of  war  set  him  at 
nought,  and  mocked  him,  and  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous  robe." 

Speedily  came  his  third  trial,  and  he  was  delivered  altogether  to  the 
Gentiles.  Then  Pilate,  the  governor,  gave  him  up  to  the  cruel  process 
of  scourging.  Scourging  as  it  has  been  practised  in  the  Enghsh  army 
is  atrocious,  a  barbarism  which  ought  to  make  us  blush  for  the  past, 
and  resolve  to  end  it  for  the  future.  How  is  it  that  such  a  horror  has 
been  tolerated  so  long  in  a  country  where  we  are  not  all  savages  ?  But 
the  lash  is  nothing  among  us  compared  with  what  it  was  among  the 
.Romans.  I  have  heard  that  it  was  made  of  the  sinews  of  oxen,  and  that 
in  it  were  twisted  the  hucklebones  of  sheep,  with  slivers  of  bone,  in 
order  that  every  stroke  miglit  more  eftectually  tear  its  way  into  the  poor 
quivering  flesli,  which  was  mangled  by  its  awfid  strokes.  Scourging  was 
such  a  punishment  that  it  was  generally  regarded  as  worse  than  death 
itself,  and  indeed,  many  perished  while  eiuluring  it,  or  soon  alterwards. 
Our  blessed  Redeemer  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters,  and  the  ploughers 
made  deep  furrows  there.  0  spectacle  of  misery !  How  can  we  bear  to  loolc 
thereon?  Nor  was  that  all,  for  Pilate's  soldiers,  caUing  all  the  band 
together,  as  if  there  weve  not  enough  for  mockery  unless  all  were  mustered, 
put  him  to  derision  by  a  mock  enthronement  and  a  mimic  coronation  ; 
and  when  they  had  thus  done  they  again  buffeted  and  smote  him,  and 
spat  in  his  face.  There  was  no  kind  of  cruelty  which  their  heartlessness 
could  just  then  invent  which  they  did  not  exercise  upon  his  blessed 
person  :  their  brutal  sport  had  full  indulgence,  for  their  innocent  victim 
offered  neither  resistance  nor  remonstrance.  This  is  his  own  record  of 
his  patient  endurance,  "  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks 
to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair:  I  hid  not  my  face  fi'om  shame  and 
spitting." 

Behold  your  King!     I  bring  him  forth  to  you  this  morning  in  spiril 


THE   SHAME   AND   SPITTING.  575 

and  crj,  "  Behold  the  Man  I "  Turn  hither  all  your  eyes  and  hearts  and 
look  upon  the  despised  and  rejected  of  men  I  Gaze  reverently  and 
lovingly,  with  awe  for  his  sufferings  and  love  for  his  pei'son.  The  sight 
demands  adoration.  I  would  remind  you  of  that  which  Moses  did  when 
he  saw  the  bush  that  burned  and  was  not  consumed — fit  emblem  of  our 
Lord  on  fire  with  griefs  and  yet  not  destroyed  ;  I  bid  you  turn  aside  and 
see  this  gi-eat  sight,  but  first  attend  to  the  mandate — "put  off  thy  shoes 
from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground." 
All  round  the  cross  the  soil  is  sacred.  Our  suffering  Lord  has  con- 
secrated every  place  whereon  he  stood,  and  therefoi'e  our  heai'ts  must  be 
filled  with  reverence  while  we  linger  under  the  shadow  of  his  passion. 

May  the  Holy  SjMrit  help  you  to  see  Jesus  in  four  lights  at  this  time. 
In  each  view  he  is  w'orthy  of  devout  attention.  Let  us  view  him  first  as  the 
representative  of  God;  secondly,  as  the  substi'tute  of  his  inople  ;  thirdly,  as 
the  servant  of  Jehovah ;  and  fonrtlily,  as  the  Comforter  of  his  redeemed. 

I.  First,  I  invite  you  to  gaze  upon  your  despised  and  rejected  Lord 
as  THE  REPRESENTATIVE  OF  GoD.  In  the  pcrsou  of  Christ  Jesus,  God 
himself  came  into  the  world,  making  a  special  visitation  to  Jerusalem  and 
the  Jewish  people,  but  at  the  same  time  coming  very  near  to  all  mankird. 
The  liord  called  to  the  people  whom  he  had  favoured  so  long  and  whom 
he  was  intent  to  favour  still.  He  says,  in  the  second  verse,  "  I  came  " 
and  "  I  called."  God  did  in  very  deed  come  down  into  the  midst  ot 
mankind. 

Be  it  noted,  that  when  our  Lord  came  into  this  world  as  the  represent- 
ative of  God,  he  came  with  all  his  divine  power  about  him.  The  chapter 
before  us  says,  "  Is  my  hand  shortened  at  all,  that  it  cannot  redeem  ?  or 
have  I  no  power  to  deliver  ?  behold,  at  my  rebuke  I  dry  up  the  sea,  I 
make  the  rivers  a  wilderness."  The  Son  of  God,  when  he  was  here,  did 
not  perform  those  exact  miracles,  because  he  was  bent  upon  marvels  of 
beneficence  rather  than  of  judgment.  He  did  not  repeat  the  plagues  of 
]i]gypt,  for  he  did  not  come  to  smite,  but  to  save  ;  but  he  did  greater 
wonders  and  wrought  miracles  which  onght  far  more  powerfully  to 
have  won  men's  confidence  in  him  because  they  were  full  of  goodness 
and  mercy.  He  fed  the  hungry,  he  healed  the  sick,  he  raised  the  dead, 
and  he  cast  out  devils.  He  did  equal  marvels  to  those  which  were  wrought 
in  Egypt  when  the  arm  of  the  Lord  was  made  bare  in  the  eyes  of  all  the 
pejple.  It  is  true  he  did  not  change  water  into  blood,  but  he  tiirne  I 
water  into  wine.  It  is  true  he  did  not  make  their  fish  to  stink,  but  by  liis 
word  he  caused  the  net  to  be  filled  even  to  bursting  with  great  fishes. 
He  did  not  break  the  whole  staff  of  bread  as  he  did  in  Egypt,  but  he 
multiplied  loaves  and  fishes  so  that  thousands  of  men  and  women  and 
children  were  fed  from  his  bounteous  hand.  He  did  not  slay  their  first- 
born, but  he  restored  the  dead.  I  grant  you  that  the  glory  of  the 
Godhead  was  somewhat  hidden  in  the  person  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
but  it  was  still  there,  even  as  the  glory  was  upon  the  face  of  Moses  when 
he  covered  it  with  a  veil.  No  essential  attribute  of  God  was  absent  in 
Christ,  and  every  one  might  have  been  seen  in  him  if  the  people  had  not 
been  wilfully  blind.  He  did  the  works  of  his  Fatlier,  and  those  works 
bare  witness  of  him  that  he  was  come  in  his  Father's  name.  Yes,  God 
was  personally  in  the  world  when  Jesus  walked  the  blessed  fields  of  tha 
Holy  Land,  now,  alas,  laid  under  the  curse  for  rejecting  him. 


576  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULriT. 

But  when  (iod  tliiis  came  among  men  he  was  nnacknowledged.  What 
?;iith  tlie  prophet?  "  Wherefore  when  I  came  was  there  no  man?  when 
I  called  was  there  none  to  answer?"  A  few,  taught  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  discerned  him  and  rejoiced;  but  they  were  so  very  few  that  we 
may  say  of  the  whole  generation  that  they  knew  him  not.  Those  who 
had  some  dim  idea  of  his  excellence  and  majesty  yet  rejected  him. 
Herod,  because  he  feared  that  he  was  a  king,  sought  to  slay  him.  The 
kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the  riders  took  counsel  together, 
against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  anointed.  He  was  emphatically  and 
beyond  all  others  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  Though,  as  I  have 
said,  the  Godhead  in  him  was  but  scantily  veiled,  and  gleams  of  its  glory 
burst  forth  ever  and  anon,  yet  still  the  people  would  have  none  of  it, 
and  the  cry,  "  Away  with  him,  away  with  him,  let  him  be  crucified," 
was  the  verdict  of  the  age  upon  which  he  descended.  He  called  and 
there  was  none  to  answer;  he  spread  out  his  hands  all  the  day  long  unto 
a  rebellious  people  who  utterly  rejected  him. 

Yet  our  Lord  when  he  came  into  the  world  was  admirably  adapted  to 
be  the  representative  of  God,  not  only  because  he  was  God  himself,  but 
because  as  man  his  whole  human  nature  was  consecrated  to  the  work, 
and  in  him  was  neither  flaw  nor  spot.  He  was  untouched  by  any  motive 
other  than  the  one  desire  of  manifesting  the  Father  and  blessing  the 
sons  of  men.  Oh,  beloved,  there  was  never  one  who  had  his  ear  so  near 
the  mouth  of  God  as  Jesus  had.  His  Father  Imd  no  need  to  speak  to 
him  in  dreams  and  visions  of  the  night,  for  when  all  his  faculties  were 
wide  awake  there  was  nothing  in  them  to  hinder  his  understanding  the 
mind  of  God  ;  and  therefore  every  morning  when  his  Father  wakened 
him  he  spake  into  his  ear.  Jesus  sat  as  a  scholar  at  the  Father's  feet 
that  he  might  learn  first,  and  then  teach.  The  things  which  he  heard 
of  the  Father  he  made  known  unto  men.  He  says  that  he  spake  not 
his  own  words  but  the  words  of  Him  that  sent  him,  and  he  did  not 
his  own  deeds,  but  "  my  Father,"  saith  he,  "  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he 
doeth  the  work."  Now,  a  man  thus  entirely  agreeable  to  the  mind  and 
will  of  the  great  God  was  fitted  to  be  the  representative  of  God.  Both 
the  alliance  of  his  manhood  with  the  Godhead  and  its  perfect  character 
qualified  it  to  be  the  fittest  dwelling  of  God  among  men.  Yes,  dear 
friends,  our  Saviour  came  in  a  way  which  should  at  once  have  commanded 
the  reverent  h(jmage  of  all  men.  Even  his  great  Father  said,  "  They 
will  reverence  my  Son."  Enough  of  the  Godhead  was  manifested  to  im- 
press and  no  more,  lest  it  should  alarm.  With  a  soul  of  gentlest  mould 
and  a  body  Hke  our  own  he  was  altogether  adapted  to  be  the  repi'esenta- 
tive  of  God.  His  errand,  too,  was  all  gentleness  and  love,  for  he  came 
to  speak  words  in  season  to  the  weary,  and  to  comfort  those  that  were 
•cast  down  :  sorely  such  an  errand  should  have  secured  him  a  welcome. 
]  [is  course  and  conduct  were  most  conciliatory,  for  he  w  ent  among  the 
])eople,  and  ate  with  publicans  and  sinners ;  su  gentle  was  he  that  he  took 
little  children  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  them ;  for  this,  if  for  nothing 
else,  they  ought  to  have  welcomed  him  right  heartily  and  rejoiced  at 
the  sight  of  him.  Our  text  tells  us  how  contrary  was  their  cnnduct 
towards  him  to  that  which  he  deserved  :  instead  of  being  welcomed  he 
was  scourged,  and  instead  of  being  honoured  he  was  scorned.  Cruelty 
smote  his  back  and  plucked  off'  the  hair  from  his  face,  while  derision 


THE   SHAME   AND   SPITTING.  577 

jeered  at  him  and  cast  its  spittle  upon  him.  Shame  and  contempt  were 
poured  upon  him,  though  he  was  God  himself.  That  spectacle  of  Christ 
spat  upon,  and  scourged,  represents  what  man  virtually  does  to  his  God, 
what  he  would  do  to  the  Most  High  if  he  could.     Ilart  well  puts  it : — 

"  See  how  the  patient  Jesus  stands. 
Insulted  in  his  lowest  case  ! 
Sinners  have  bound  the  Almighty  hands, 
And  spit  in  their  Creator's  face." 

When  our  parents  broke  the  command  of  their  Maker,  obeying  the  ad- 
vice of  the  devil  rather  than  the  word  of  God,  and  preferring  a  poor 
apple  to  the  divine  fa\oiir,  they  did  as  it  were  spit  into  the  face  of  God ; 
and  every  sin  committed  since  has  been  a  repetition  of  the  same  contempt 
of  the  Eternal  One.  When  a  man  will  have  his  pleasure,  even  though 
it  displeases  God,  he  as  good  as  declares  that  he  despises  God,  prefers 
himself,  and  defies  the  wrath  of  the  Most  High.  When  a  man  acts 
contrary  to  the  command  of  God  he  does  as  good  as  say  to  God,  "  This 
is  better  for  me  to  do  than  what  thou  bidst  me  do.  Either  thou  art 
mistaken,  in  thy  prohibitions,  or  else  thou  dost  wilfully  deny  me  the 
highest  pleasure,  and  I,  being  a  better  judge  of  my  own  interests  than 
thou  art,  snatch  at  the  pleasure  which  thou  dost  refuse  me.  I  judge  thee 
either  to  be  unwise  or  unkind."  Every  act  of  sin  does  despite  to  the 
sovereignty  of  God:  it  denies  him  to  be  supreme,  and  refuses  him 
obedience.  E\ery  act  of  sin  does  dishonour  to  the  love  and  wisdom  of 
God,  for  it  seems  to  say  that  it  would  have  been  greater  love  to  have  per- 
mitted us  to  do  evil  than  to  have  commanded  us  to  abstain  from  it.  All 
sin  is  in  many  ways  an  insult  to  the  majesty  of  the  thrice  Holy  God,  and 
he  regards  it  as  such. 

Dear  friends,  this  is  especially  the  sin  of  those  who  have  heard  the 
gospel  and  yet  reject  the  Saviour,  for  in  their  case  the  Lord  has  come  to 
them  in  the  most  gracious  form,  and  yet  they  have  refused  him.  The 
Lord  might  well  say,  "  I  have  come  to  you  to  save  you,  and  you  will  not 
regard  me.  I  have  come  saying  to  you, '  Look  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved, 
all  the  ends  of  the  earth,'  and  you  close  your  eyes  in  unbelief.  I  have 
come  saying,  'Let  us  reason  together :  though  your  sins  be  as  crimson,  they 
shall  be  as  wool,'  but  you  will  not  be  cleansed  from  your  iniquity.  I  have 
come  with  the  promise,  '  All  manner  of  sin  and  iniquity  shall  be  forgiven 
unto  men.'  What  is  your  reply?  "  In  the  case  of  many  the  answer  is, 
"  ^Ye  prefer  our  own  righteousness  to  the  righteousness  of  God."  If  that 
is  not  casting  spittle  into  the  face  of  God  I  know  not  what  is,  for  our 
righteousnesses  are  well  described  as  "  filthy  rags,"  and  we  have  the  impu- 
dence to  say  that  these  are  better  than  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus.  Or  if  we  do  not  say  this  when  we  reject  the  Saviour  we  tell  him  that 
we  do  not  want  him,  for  we  do  not  need  a  Saviour  :  this  is  as  good  as  to  say 
that  God  has  played  the  fool  with  the  life  and  death  of  bis  own  Son. 
What  greater  derision  can  be  cast  upon  God  than  to  consider  the  blood 
of  atonement  to  be  a  superfluity  ?  He  who  chooses  sin  sooner  than 
repentance  prefers  to  suffer  the  wrath  of  God  rather  than  be  holy  and 
dwell  in  heaven  for  ever.  For  the  sake  of  a  few  paltry  pleasures  men 
forego  the  love  of  God,  and  are  ready  to  run  the  risk  of  an  eternity  of 
divine  wrath.  They  think  so  little  of  God  that  he  is  of  no  account  with 
2o 


578  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

them  at  all.  All  this  is  in  reality  a  scorning  and  despising  of  the  Lord 
God,  and  is  well  set  forth  by  the  insults  which  were  poured  upon  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

Woe's  me  that  it  should  ever  be  so.  My  God  !  my  God  !  To  what  a 
sinful  race  do  I  belong.  Alas,  that  it  should  treat  thine  infinite  good- 
ness so  despitefully  !  That  thou  shouldst  be  rejected  at  all,  but  especially 
that  thou  shouldest  be  rejected  when  dressed  in  robes  of  love  and  arrayed 
in  gentleness  and  pity  is  horrible  to  think  upon.  Do  you  mean  it,  0 
men  ?  Can  you  really  mean  it  ?  Can  you  deride  the  Lord  Jesus  who 
died  for  men  ?  For  which  of  his  works  do  ye  stone  him,  when  he  lived 
only  to  do  good  ?  For  which  of  his  griefs  do  you  refuse  him,  when  he 
died  only  that  he  might  save  ?  "  He  saved  others,  himself  he  cannot 
save,"  for  he  had  so  much  love  that  he  could  not  spare  himself.  I  can 
understand  your  resisting  the  thunder  of  Jehovah's  power,  for  1  know 
your  insanity ;  but  can  you  resist  the  tenderness  of  Jehovah's  love  ?  If 
you  do  I  must  charge  you  with  brutality,  but  therein  I  wrong  the 
brutes,  to  whom  such  crimes  are  impossible.  I  may  not  even  call  this 
cruel  scorning  diabolical,  for  it  is  a  sin  which  devils  never  did  commit, 
perhaps  would  not  have  committed  had  it  been  possible  to  them. 
They  have  never  trifled  with  a  Redeemer,  nor  rejected  the  blood  of 
atonement,  for  our  Lord  took  not  up  the  fallen  angels,  but  he  took  up 
the  seed  of  Abraham.  Shall  the  favoured  race  spit  upon  its  friend  ? 
God  grant  we  may  be  brought  to  a  better  mind.  But  there  is  the 
picture  before  you.  God  himself  set  at  nought,  despised,  rejected,  put 
to  shame,  perpetually  dishonoured  in  the  person  of  his  dear  Son.  The 
sight  should  breed  repentance  in  us.  We  should  look  to  him  whom  we 
have  scourged,  and  mourn  for  him.  0  Holy  Spirit,  work  this  tender 
grace  in  all  our  hearts. 

II.  And  now,  secondly,  I  want  to  set  the  Lord  Jesus  before  you  in 
another  light,  or  rather  beseech  him  to  shine  in  his  own  light  before  your 
eyes  : — as  the  substitute  for  his  people.  Eecollect  when  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  suffered  thus  it  was  not  on  his  own  account  nor  purely 
for  the  sake  of  his  Father,  but  he  "  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions, 
he  was  bruised  fur  our  iniquities :  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  There  has  risen  up  a  modern 
idea  which  I  cannot  too  much  reprobate,  that  Christ  made  no  atonement 
for  our  sin  except  upon  the  cross  :  whereas  in  this  passage  of  Isaiah  we 
are  taught  as  plainly  as  possible  that  by  his  bruising  and  his  stripes,  as 
well  as  by  his  death,  we  are  healed.  Never  divide  between  the  lite  and 
the  death  of  Christ.  How  could  he  have  died  if  he  had  not  lived  ? 
How  could  he  suffer  except  while  he  lived  ?  Death  is  not  suffering,  but 
the  end  of  it.  Guard  also  against  the  evil  notion  that  you  have  nothing 
to  do  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  for  he  could  not  have  made  an 
atonement  by  his  blood  if  he  had  not  been  perfect  in  his  Hfe.  He  could 
not  have  been  acceptable  if  he  had  not  first  been  proven  to  be  holy, 
harmless,  and  undefiled.  The  victim  must  be  spotless,  or  it  cannot  be 
presented  for  sacrifice.  Draw  no  nice  hues  and  raise  no  quibbling  ques- 
tions, but  look  at  your  Lord  as  he  is  and  bow  before  him. 

Understand,  my  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  that  Jesus  took  upon  him- 
self our  sin,  and  being  found  bearing  that  sin  he  had  to  be  treated  as  sin 
should  be  treated.    Now,  of  all  the  things  that  ever  existed  sin  is  the 


THE    SHAME   AND   SPITTING.  679 

most  shameful  thing  that  can  be.  It  deserves  to  be  scourged,  it  deserves 
to  be  spit  upon,  it  deserves  to  be  crucified  ;  and  because  our  Lord  liad 
taken  upon  himself  our  sin,  therefore  must  he  be  put  to  shame,  there- 
fore must  he  be  scourged.  If  you  want  to  see  what  God  thinks  of  sin, 
see  his  only  Son  spat  upon  by  the  soldiers  when  he  was  made  sin  for 
us.  In  God's  sight  sin  is  a  shameful,  horrible,  loathsome,  abominable 
thing,  and  when  Jesus  takes  it  he  must  be  forsaken  and  given  up  to 
scorn.  This  sight  will  be  the  more  wonderful  to  you  when  you  recollect 
\\ho  it  was  that  was  spat  upon,  for  if  you  and  I,  being  sinners,  were 
scourged,  and  smitten,  and  despised,  there  would  be  no  wonder  in  it ; 
but  he  who  took  our  sin  was  God,  before  whom  angels  bow  with  reverent 
awe,  and  yet,  seeing  the  sin  was  upon  him,  he  was  made  subject  to  the 
most  intense  degree  of  shame.  Seeing  that  Jesus  stood  in  our  stead,  it  is 
written  of  the  eternal  Father  tliat  "  He  spared  not  his  own  Son."  "  It 
pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  him :  he  hath  put  him  to  grief";  he  made 
his  soul  an  oft'ering  for  sin.  Yes,  beloved,  sin  is  condemned  in  the  flesh 
and  made  to  appear  exceeding  shameful  when  you  recollect  that,  even 
though  it  was  only  laid  on  our  blessed  Lord  by  imputation,  yet  it  threw 
him  into  the  very  depths  of  shame  and  woe  ere  it  could  be  removed. 

Reflect,  also,  upon  the  voluntariness  of  all  this.  He  willingly  sub- 
mitted to  the  endurance  of  suffering  and  scorn.  It  is  said  in  the  text, 
"  He  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters."  They  did  not  seize  and  compel 
him,  or,  if  they  did,  yet  they  could  not  have  done  it  without  his  consent. 
He  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters.  He  gave  his  cheek  to  those  that 
plucked  ofl"  the  hair.  He  did  not  hide  his  face  from  shame  and  spitting : 
he  did  not  seek  in  any  way  to  escape  from  insults.  It  was  the  voluntari- 
ness of  his  grief  m  hich  constituted  in  great  measure  the  merit  of  it. 
That  Christ  should  stand  in  our  stead  by  force  were  a  little  thing,  even 
had  it  been  possible  ;  but  that  he  should  stand  there  of  his  own  free 
v/ill,  and  that  being  there  he  should  willingly  be  treated  with  derision, 
this  is  grace  indeed.  The  Son  of  God  was  willingly  made  a  curse  for 
us,  and  at  his  own  desire  was  made  subject  to  shame  on  our  account. 
I  do  not  know  how  you  feel  in  listening  to  me,  but  while  I  am  speak- 
ing I  feel  as  if  language  ought  scarcely  to  touch  such  a  theme  as 
this  :  it  is  too  feeble  for  its  task.  I  want  you  to  get  beyond  my 
words  if  you  can,  and  for  yourselves  meditate  upon  the  fact  that  he  who 
covers  the  heavens  with  blackness,  yet  did  not  cover  his  own  face,  and  he 
who  binds  up  the  universe  with  the  girdle  which  holds  it  in  one,  yet  was 
bound  and  blindfolded  by  the  men  he  had  himself  made  ;  he  whose  face 
is  as  the  brightness  of  the  sun  that  shineth  in  its  strength  was  once  spit 
upon.  Surely  we  shall  need  faith  in  heaven  to  believe  this  wondrous 
fact.  Can  it  have  been  true,  that  the  glorious  Son  of  God  was  jeered  and 
jested  at  ?  I  have  often  heard  that  there  is  no  faith  wanted  in  heaven, 
l)ut  I  rather  judge  that  we  shall  want  as  much  faith  to  believe  that  these 
things  were  ever  done  as  the  patriarchs  had  to  believe  that  they  would 
be  done.  How  shall  I  sit  down  and  gaze  upon  /mn  and  think  that  his  dear 
face  was  once  profaned  with  spittle  ?  When  all  heaven  shall  lie  prostrate 
lat  his  feet  in  awful  silence  of  adoration  will  it  seem  possible  that  once  he 
[was  mocked?  When  angels,  and  principalities,  and  powers  shall  all  be 
roused  to  rapture  of  harmonious  music  in  his  praise,  will  it  seem  possible 
Ithat  once  the  most  abject  of  men  plucked  out  the  hair  ?     Will  it  not 


580  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

appear  incredible  that  those  cacred  hands,  wliich  are  "  as  gold  rings  set 
with  the  beryl,"  were  once  nailed  to  a  gibbet,  and  that  those  cheeks' 
wln'eh  are  "  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers,"  should  have  been  bat- 
tered and  bruised  ?  We  shall  be  quite  certain  of  the  fact,  and  vet  we 
shall  never  cease  to  wonder,  that  his  side  was  gashed,  and  his  face  \\as 
spit  upon  ?  The  sin  of  man  in  this  instance  will  always  amaze  us. 
How  could  you  commit  this  crime  ?  Oh,  ye  sons  of  men,  how  could  ye 
treat  such  an  one  with  crufl  scorn  ?  0  thou  brazen  thing  called  sin. 
thou  hast,  j.ideed,  as  the  prophet  saith,  "a  whore's  fui'ehead";  thou  hast 
a  demon's  heart,  hell  burns  within  thee.  Why  couldst  thou  not  spit  upon 
earthly  splendours?  Why  must  heaven  be  thy  scorn?  Or  if  heaven, 
why  not  spit  on  angels !  Was  there  !io  place  for  thy  base  deed  but  the- 
Well-beloved's  face ?  Was  there  no  place  for  thy  spittle  but /ms  face? 
His  face !  Woe  is  me !  His  face !  Should  such  loveliness  receive  such 
shame  as  this  ?  I  could  wish  that  man  had  never  been  created,  or  that, 
being  created,  he  had  been  swept  into  nothingness  rather  than  have  lived 
to  commit  such  horror. 

Yet  here  is  matter  for  our  faith  to  rest  upon.  Beloved,  trust  your- 
selves in  the  hands  of  your  great  Substitute.  Did  he  bear  all  this  shame  ? 
then  there  must  be  more  than  enough  mei'it  and  efficacy  in  this,  which- 
Avas  the  prelude  of  his  precious  death — and  especially  in  his  death  itself 
— there  must  be  merit  sufficient  to  put  away  all  transgression,  iniquity, 
and  sin.  Our  shame  is  ended,  for  he  has  borne  it !  Our  punishment  is 
rei.joved  :  he  has  endured  it  all.  Double  for  all  our  sins  has  our  Re- 
deemer paid.  Eeturn  unto  thy  rest,  0  my  soul,  and  let  peace  take  ful' 
possession  of  thy  weeping  heart. 

III.  But  time  fails  us,  and  therefore  we  will  mention,  next,  the  third 
h'ght  in  which  it  is  our  desire  to  see  the  Saviour.  Beloved,  we  desire  t;;- 
see  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  servant  of  God.  He  took  upon 
himself  the  form  of  a  servant  w^hen  he  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  man. 
Observe  how  he  performed  this  service  right  thoroughly,  and  remember 
we  are  to  look  upon  this  third  picture  as  our  copy,  which  is  to  be  the 
guide  of  our  life.  I  know  that  many  of  you  are  glad  to  call  yourselves- 
the  servants  of  God ;  take  not  the  name  in  vain.  As  Jesus  was,  so  are 
yoii  also  in  this  w'orld,  and  you  are  to  seek  to  be  like  him. 

First,  as  a  servant,  Christ  was  personally  prepared  for  service.  He 
was  thirty  years  and  more  here  below,  learning  obedience  in  his  father's 
house,  and  the  after  yeai's  were  spent  in  learning  obedience  by  the  things- 
which  he  suffered.  What  a  servant  he  was,  for  he  never  went  about  lii.i 
own  errands  nor  went  by  his  own  will,  but  he  waited  always  upon  his 
Father.  He  was  in  constant  communication  with  heaven,  both  by  day 
and  by  night.  He  says,  "  He  wakeneth  morning  by  morning,  he  wakeneth 
mine  ear  to  hear  as  the  learned."  The  blessed  Lord  or  ever  the  day 
broke  heard  that  gentle  voice  which  called  him,  and  at  its  whisper  he 
arose  before  the  sunrise,  and  there  the  dawning  found  him,  on  the  moun- 
tain side,  waiting  upon  God  in  wrestling  prayer,  taking  his  message  from 
the  Father  that  he  might  go  and  deliver  it  to  tlie  children  of  men.  He- 
Joved  man  much,  but  he  loved  his  Father  more,  and  he  never  came  to- 
tell  out  the  love  of  God  without  having  as  man  received  it  fresh  from 
the  divine  lieart.  He  knew  that  his  Father  heard  him  always,  and  he 
lived  in   the  spirit  of  conscious    acceptance.     Have  you,  ever   notice^' 


THK    SMAMP:    A\I)    SlMTl'INU.  581 

;th«fc  sometimes  a  passage  will  begin,  "At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and 
«aid,"  and  yet  there  is  no  notice  that  he  had  been  speaking  to  anybody 
before,  or  that  anybody  had  been  speaking  to  him  ?  What  he  said  was 
an  answer  to  a  voice  whicli  no  ear  heard  but  his  own,  for  he  was  always 
standing  with  opened  eai-,  listening  to  the  eternal  voice,  Such  service 
did  Jesus  render,  and  you  must  render  the  same.  You  cannot  do 
your  Lord's  will  except  you  live  near  to  him.  It  is  of  no  use  trying  to 
preach  with  power  unless  we  get  our  message  from  our  heavenly  Father's 
own  self.  I  am  sure  you  a-.i  hearers  know  the  difference  bet\veen  a  dead 
word  which  comes  from  a  man's  own  brain  and  lip,  and  a  living  word 
A\hich  the  preacher  delivers  fresh  as  the  manna  which  fell  from  heaven. 
The  word  should  come  from  the  minister  like  bread  hot  from  the  oven,  or 
better  still,  like  a  seed  with  life  in  it ;  not  as  a  parched  grain  with  the  germ 
•dead  and  killed,  but  as  a  living  seed  which  roots  itself  in  your  souls, 
and  sp]-ings  up  to  a  harvest.  This  made  our  I^ord  such  a  good  servant 
that  he  listened  to  his  Father's  voice  and  yielded  himself  to  the  Father's 
will  to  perfection. 

Our  text  assures  us  that  this  service  knew  no  reserve  in  its  conse- 
"Cration.  We  generally  draw  back  somewhere.  I  am  ashamed  to  say  it, 
but  I  mourn  that  I  have  done  so.  Many  of  us  could  give  to  Christ  all 
our  health  and  strength,  and  all  the  money  we  have,  very  heartily  and 
-cheerfully ;  but  when  it  comes  to  a  point  of  reputation  we  feel  the  pinch. 
To  be  slandered,  to  have  some  filthy  thing  said  of  you  ;  this  is  too  much 
for  flesh  and  blood.  You  seem  to  say,  "  I  cannot  be  made  a  fool  of,  I 
cannot  bear  to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  impostor ; "  but  a  true  servant  of 
■Christ  must  make  himself  of  no  reputation  when  he  takes  upon  himself 
the  work  of  his  Lord.  Our  blessed  Master  was  witling  to  be  scofled  at 
by  the  lewdest  and  the  lowest  of  men.  The  abjects  jeered  at  him ; 
the  reproach  of  them  that  reproached  God  fell  upon  him.  He  became 
the  song  of  the  drunkard,  and  when  the  rough  soldiery  detained  him  in 
the  guard-room  they  heaped  up  their  ridicule,  as  though  he  were  not 
worthy  of  the  name  of  man. 

"  Tliey  bow  their  knees  to  me,  and  cry,  'Hail,  King': 
Whatever  scofls  or  scornfulness  can  bring, 
1  am  the  floor,  the  sink,  where  (hey  it  fling  : 

Was  ever  grief  like  minef 

"  The  soldiers  also  spit  npon  that  face 
Which  angels  did  desire  to  have  the  grace 
And  prophets  once  to  see,  but  found  no  place  : 

Was  ever  grief  like  minef  " 

ITerod  and  Pilate  were  the  very  dross  of  men,  and  yet  he  permitted  them  to 
judge  him.  Their  servants  were  vile  fellows,  and  yet  he  resigned  himself 
to  them.  If  he  had  breathed  upon  them  with  angry  breath,  he  might  have 
flashed  devouring  fire  upon  them,  and  burned  them  up  as  stubbie ;  but 
his  omnipotent  patience  restrained  his  indignation,  and  he  remained  as 
a  sheep  before  her  shearers.  He  allowed  his  own  creatures  to  pluck  his 
hair  and  spit  in  his  face.  Such  patience  should  be  yours  as  servants  of 
<jod.  We  are  to  be  willing  to  be  made  nothing  of,  and  even  to  be  counted 
■as  the  offscouring  of  all  things.  It  is  pitiful  for  the  Christian  to  refuse 
to  sufler,  and  to  become  a  fighting  man,  crying,  "  We  must  stand  up 
■for  oui- rights."     Did  you  ever  see  Jesus  in  that  posture?     There  is  a 


582  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

propensity  in  us  to  say,  "  I  will  have  it  out."  Yes,  but  you  cannot  pio- 
ture  Jesus  in  that  attitude.  I  defy  a  painter  to  depict  him  so :  it  is 
somebody  else,  and  not  Christ.  No !  he  said,  "  I  gave  my  back  to  the 
smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair :  I  hid  not  my 
face  from  shame  and  spitting." 

Tliere  is  something  more  here  than  perfect  consecration  in  the  mere 
form  of  it,  for  its  heart  and  essence  are  manifest  in  an  obedient  delight  in 
the  will  of  the  Father.  T^^.e  words  seem  to  me  to  express  alacrity.  It  is  not 
said  that  he  reluctantly  permitted  his  enemies  to  pluck  his  hair,  or  smite  his 
back,  but  it  is  written,  "  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiter,  and  my  cheeks  to 
them  that  plucked  oS"  the  hair."  He  could  not  delight  in  it ;  how  could 
he  delight  in  suffering  and  shame  ?  These  things  were  even  mere  repug 
nant  to  his  sensitive  nature  than  they  can  be  to  us  ;  and  yet,  "  For  the 
joy  that  was  set  bef(r'e  him  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame." 
He  was  ready  for  this  dreadful  treatment,  for  he  said,  "  I  have  a  bap- 
tism to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  am  I  straitened  until  it  be  accomp- 
lished ! "  He  was  ready  for  the  cup  of  gall,  and  willing  to  drink  it  to  its 
dregs,  though  it  was  bitterness  itself  to  him.  He  gave  his  back  to  the 
smiters. 

All  this  while — now  follow  me  in  this  next  point — there  was  no  flinch- 
ing in  him.  They  spat  in  his  face,  but  what  says  he  in  the  seventh  verse. 
"  I  have  set  my  face  like  a  flint."  If  they  are  about  to  defile  his  face  he  is 
resolved  to  bear  it ;  he  girds  up  his  loins,  and  makes  himself  more  deter- 
mined. Oh,  the  bravery  of  our  Master's  silence  !  Cruelty  and  shame 
could  not  make  him  speak.  Have  not  your  lips  sometimes  longed  to 
speak  out  a  denial  and  a  defence  ?  Have  you  not  felt  it  wise  to  be  quiet, 
but  then  the  charge  has  been  so  excessively  cruel,  and  it  has  stung  you  so 
terribly  that  you  hungered  to  resent  it.  Base  falsehoods  aroused  your 
indignation,  and  you  felt  you  must  speak  and  probably  you  did  speak, 
though  you  tried  to  keep  your  lips  as  with  a  bridle  while  the  wicked 
were  before  you.  But  our  own  beloved  Lord  in  the  omnipotence  of 
his  patience  and  love  would  not  utter  a  word,  but  like  a  lamb  at  the 
slaughter  he  opened  not  his  mouth.  He  witnessed  a  good  confession 
by  his  matchless  silence.  Oh,  how  mighty — how  gloriously  mighty 
was  his  patience  !  We  must  copy  it  if  we  are  to  be  his  disciples.  We, 
too,  must  set  our  faces  like  flints,  to  move  or  to  sit  still,  according  to  the 
Father's  will,  to  be  silent  or  to  speak,  as  most  shall  honour  him.  "I 
have  set  my  face  like  a  flint,"  saith  he,  even  though  in  another  place  he 
cries,  "My  heart  is  like  wax,  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  bowels." 

And  do  you  notice  all  the  while  the  confidence  and  quiet  of  his  spirit? 
He  almost  seems  to  say,  "  You  may  spit  upon  me,  but  you  cannot  find 
fault  with  me.  You  may  pluck  my  hair,  but  you  cannot  impugn  my  in- 
tegrity ;  you  may  lash  my  shoulders,  but  you  cannot  impute  a  fault  to 
me.  Your  false  witnesses  dare  not  look  me  in  the  face :  let  me  know 
wlio  is  mine  adversary,  let  him  come  near  to  me.  Behold,  Adonai 
Jehovah  will  keep  me,  who  is  he  that  shall  condemn  me  !  Lo,  they  all 
shall  wax  old  as  a  garment,  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up."  Be  calm  then, 
0  true  servant  of  God !  In  patience  possess  your  soul.  Serve  God 
Bteadily  and  steadfastly  though  all  men  should  belie  you.  Go  to  the 
bottom  of  the  service,  dive  even  to  the  very  depth,  and  be  content  even 
to  lie  in  Christ's  grave,  for  you  shall  share  in  Christ's  resurrection.    Di> 


THE   BHAME   AND  SPITTINO.  583 

not  dream  that  the  path  to  heaven  is  up  the  hill  of  honour,  it  winda 
down  into  the  valley  of  humiliation.  Imagine  not  that  you  can  grow 
great  eternally  by  being  great  here.  You  must  become  less,  and  less,  and 
less,  even  though  you  should  be  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  for  this 
is  the  path  to  everlasting  glory, 

I  have  not  time  to  expound  the  last  two  verses  of  the  chapter,  but  they 
read  you  a  noble  lesson.  "  He  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters ;  "  if,  then, 
any  of  you  walk  in  darkness  and  have  no  light,  this  is  no  new  thing  for 
a  servant  of  God.  The  chief  of  all  servants  persevered,  though  men  des- 
pised him.  Follow  him,  then.  Stay  yourselves  upon  God  as  he  did,  and 
look  for  a  bright  ending  of  your  trials.  He  came  out  into  the  light  ulti- 
mately, and  there  he  sits  in  inconceivable  splendour  at  his  Father's  right 
hand,  and  so  shall  all  the  faithful  come  out  of  the  cloud  and  shine  forth 
as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  Only  bear  on  with  resolute 
patience,  and  glory  shall  be  your  reward,  even  as  it  is  his. 

IV.  Lastly,  I  am  to  set  him  forth  in  his  fourth  character,  as  the 
COMFOETEU  OF  HIS  PEOPLE  ;  but  I  must  ask  you  to  do  this,  while 
I  just,  as  it  were,  make  a  charcoal  sketch  of  the  picture  I  would  have 
painted. 

Eemember,  first,  our  blessed  Lord  is  well  qualified  to  speak  a  word  in 
season  to  him  that  is  weary,  because  he  himself  is  lowly,  and  meek,  and 
so  accessible  to  us.  When  men  are  in  low  spirits  they  feel  as  if  they 
could  not  take  comfort  from  persons  who  are  harsh  and  proud.  The 
comforter  must  come  as  a  sufferer ;  he  must  come  in  a  lowly,  broken 
spirit,  if  he  would  cheer  the  afflicted.  You  must  not  put  on  your  best 
dress  to  go  and  visit  the  daughter  of  poverty,  or  go  with  your  jewels 
about  you  to  show  how  much  better  off"  you  are  than  she.  Sit  down  by 
the  side  of  the  downcast  man  and  let  him  know  that  you  are  meek 
and  lowly  of  heart.  Your  Master  "  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters,  and 
his  cheek  to  them  that  plucked  off*  the  hair,"  and  therefore  he  is  the 
Comforter  you  want. 

Remark  not  only  his  lowliness,  but  his  sympathy.  Are  you  full  of 
aches  and  pains  this  morning?  Jesus  knows  all  about  them,  for  he 
"  gave  his  back  to  the  smiters."  Do  you  suffer  fi-om  what  is  worse  than 
pain,  from  scandal  and  slander  ?  "  He  hid  not  his  face  from  shame  and 
spitting."  Have  you  been  ridiculed  of  late?  Have  the  graceless  made 
fiui  of  your  godhness?  Jesus  can  sympathise  with  you,  for  you  know 
what  unholy  mirth  they  made  out  of  him.  In  every  pang  that  rends 
your  heart  your  Lord  has  borne  his  share.  Go  and  tell  him.  Many 
will  not  understand  you.  You  are  a  speckled  bird,  differing  from  all  the 
rest,  and  they  will  all  peck  at  you ;  but  Jesus  Christ  knows  this,  for  he 
was  a  speckled  bird  too.  He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate 
from  sinners,"  but  not  separate  from  such  as  you.  Get  you  to  him  and 
he  will  sympathise  with  you. 

In  addition  to  his  gentle  spirit  and  his  power  to  sympathise,  there  is 
this  to  help  to  comfort  us — namely,  his  example,  for  he  can  argue  thus 
with  you,  "  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters.  Cannot  you  do  tlie  like  ? 
Shall  the  disciple  be  above  his  master  ?  "  If  I  can  but  get  on  the  door- 
step of  heaven  and  sit  down  in  the  meanest  place  there  I  shall  feel  I 
ha\  e  an  infinitely  better  position  than  I  deserve,  and  shall  I  think  of  my 
deal-,  blessed  Lord  and  Master  giving  bis  face  to  be  spit  upon,  and  then 


584  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

^ive  myself  airs,  and  say,  "  I  cannot  bear  this  scorn,  I  cannot  bear  this 
pain"!  AVhat,  does  the  King  pass  over  the  brook  Kedron,  and  mnst 
there  be  no  brook  Kedron  for  yon  ?  Does  the  Master  bear  the  cross, 
and  must  your  shoulders  never  be  galled  ?  Did  they  call  the  Master  of 
the  house  "Beelzebub,"  and  must  they  call  you  "Reverend  Sir"?  Did 
they  laugh  at  him,  and  scoff  at  him,  and  must  you  be  honoured  ?  Are 
you  to  be  "gentleman"  and  "lady"  where  Christ  was"  that  fellow"? 
For  his  birth  they  loaned  him  a  stable,  and  for  his  burial  he  borrowed  a 
grave.  0  friends,  let  pride  disappear,  and  let  us  count  it  our  highest 
honour  to  be  permitted  to  stoop  as  low  as  ever  we  can. 

And,  then,  his  example  further  comforts  us  by  the  fact  that  he  was 
calm  amid  it  all.  Oh,  the  deep  rest  of  the  Saviour's  heart !  They 
set  him  up  upon  that  mock  throne,  but  he  did  not  answer  with  an  angry 
word;  they  put  a  reed  into  his  hand,  but  he  did  not  change  it  to  an 
iron  rod,  and  break  them  like  potters'  vessels,  as  he  mii>ht  have  done. 
There  was  no  wincing  and  no  pleading  for  mercy.  Sighs  of  pain  were 
forced  from  him,  and  he  said,  "  I  thirst,"  for  he  was  nut  a  stoic  ;  but 
there  was  no  fear  of  man,  or  timorous  shrinking  of  heart. 

Tlie  King  of  Martyrs  well  deserves  to  wear  the  martyr's  crown,  for 
right  royally  did  he  endure  :  there  was  never  a  patience  like  to  his. 
That  is  your  copy,  brotlier,  that  is  your  copy,  sister — you  must  write 
very  carefully  to  write  as  well  as  tliat.  You  had  need  your  Master  held 
your  hand  ;  in  fact,  whenever  children  in  Christ's  school  do  write  ac- 
cording to  his  copy,  it  is  always  because  he  holds  their  hand  by  his 
Spirit, 

Last  of  all,  our  Saviour's  triumph  is  meant  to  be  a  stimuhis  and  en- 
couragement to  us.  He  stands  befui'c  us  this  morning  ns  the  Comforter 
of  his  people.  Consider  Him  that  endured  such  contradiction  of  sinners 
against  himself  lest  ye  be  weary  and  faint  in  your  minds;  for  though  he 
was  once  abased  and  despised,  yet  now  he  sitteth  at  tlie  i-iglit  hand  of 
God,  and  reigns  over  all  things;  and  tlic  clay  is  coming  when  every  knee 
shall  bow  before  him,  and  every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord, 
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  Tiiey  that  spat  upon  him  will  rue  the 
day.  Come  hither,  ye  that  derided  him!  He  has  raised  yon  from  t!ie 
dead,  come  hither  and  s^iit  upon  him  now  !  Ye  that  scourged  hiin,  bring 
your  rods,  see  what  ye  can  do  in  this  day  of  his  glory  !  See,  they  i^y 
before  him,  they  invoke  the  hills  to  shelter  them,  they  ask  the  rocks  to 
open  and  conceal  them.  Yet  it  is  nothing  but  his  face,  that  selfsame 
face  they  spat  upon,  which  is  making  eai-th  and  heaven  to  flee  away.  Yea, 
all  things  lice  bef  )re  the  majesty  of  his  fiown  who  once  gave  his  back  to 
the  sniiters,  and  his  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair.  Be  like 
liim,  then,  ye  who  bear  his  name ;  trust  him,  and  hve  for  him,  and  you 
siiall  reign  with  him  in  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 


I'oRTiOxVS  OF  Scripture  Read  bkfore  Sermon — Isaiah  1.;  liii.  1 — 7; 
Matthew  xxvi.  62—68;  Luke  xxiii.  8—11 :  Matthew  xxvii.  27—30. 


Hy.\u\s  from  "Our  Own  Hvmn  Book"— 327,  937,  268. 


THE   SURE   TRIUMPH   OF  THE   CRUCIFIED   ONE. 


Delivered    on     Lord's-Day    Morning,    April    25th,    1875,   by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Behold,  my  servant  shall  deal  prudently,  he  shall  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and 
be  very  high.  As  many  were  astonished  at  thee  ;  his  visage  was  so  marred  more 
than  any  man,  and  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men :  So  shall  he  sprinkle  many 
nations  ;  the  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  him  ;  for  that  which  had  not  been 
told  them  shall  they  see ;  and  that  which  they  had  not  heard  shall  they  consider."— 
Isaiah  Hi.  13-15. 

Modern  Jewish  writers  refuse  to  see  the  Messiah  in  this  passage,  but 
their  predecessors  were  not  so  blind.  The  Targum  and  the  ancient 
Rabbins  interpreted  it  of  the  Messiah,  and  indeed  all  attempts  to 
explain  it  apart  from  him  are  palpable  failures.  Christian  commenta- 
tors in  all  ages  have  seen  the  Lord  Jesus  here.  How  could  they  do 
otherwise?  To  whom  else  could  the  prophet  have  referred?  If  the 
Man  of  Nazareth,  the  Son  of  God,  be  not  right  visible  in  these  three 
verses,  they  are  dark  as  midnight  itself.  We  do  not  hesitate  for  a 
moment  in  applying  every  word  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Dear  brethren,  when  our  Lord  ascended  on  high  he  gave  us  this 
commission  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature."  Our  duty  is  to  obey  that  command,  whether  men  will  hear 
or  whether  they  will  forbear  ;  the  commission  is  unconditional,  and  is 
not  dependent  upon  our  success.  If  up  to  this  date,  1875,  there  had 
never  been  a  solitary  convert  through  Christian  ministry,  if  the  whole 
of  the  church  of  God  had  hitherto  laboured  in  vain,  and  the  succession 
of  saints  had  only  been  kept  up  by  miracle,  it  would  not  affect  our 
duty  one  iota.  Our  business  is  to  preach  the  gospel,  even  to  those  who 
are  aroused  to  persecution  thereby.  We  are  to  sow,  whether  a  harvest 
follow  or  not.  Success  is  with  God;  service  belongs  to  us.  I  believe, 
therefore,  that  true  faith,  when  it  is  in  a  healthy  condition,  will  enable 
us  to  go  plodding  on,  carefully  scattering  the  seed,  even  by  the  wayside 
and  on  stony  places;  yet  there  is  flesh  about  us  all,  and  faith  is  not 
always  unalloyed  with  sight,  and  consequently  we  occasionally  flag  and 
No.  1,231. 

10 


586  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

almost  faint  if  we  do  not  see  some  present  usefulness.  This  passage 
may  cheer  us  if  we  fear  that  we  have  spent  our  strength  for  naught, 
for  such  certainly  was  the  condition  of  the  church  of  God  at  the  time 
when  this  passage  was  addressed  to  it.  There  is  a  break  made  in  our 
version  between  the  52nd  and  5ord  chapters,  but  no  such  break  should 
have  been  made,  and  if  we  read  straight  on  we  shall  see  that  these 
consoling  words  are  meant  for  mourning  workers.  We  hear  even 
prophets  saying,  "Who  hath  believed  our  report,  and  to  whom  is  tlie 
arm  of  the  l.ord  revealed  ?  "  Even  the  bravest  of  the  prophets 
lamented  that  the  offence  of  the  cross  hindered  men  from  seeing  the 
comeliness  of  the  Messiah.  All  glorious  as  he  was  to  the  prophets 
when  they  beheld  his  substitutionary  griefs,  he  was  not  understood  by 
the  multitudes  who  only  saw  in  him  a  man  smitten  of  God  and 
afflicted,  having  no  beauty  that  they  should  desire  him.  To  support 
them  under  circumstances  so  dispiriting  there  comes  in  this  comfort- 
able word  of  our  text,  in  which  the  marred  visage  and  disfigured  form 
of  the  great  servant  of  the  Lord  are  fully  recognised,  and  yet  the  voice 
of  the  Lord  declares  that  the  shame  and  contempt  caused  thereby  will 
be  temporary,  and  the  ultimate  result  will  be  sure  ;  the  issue  of  the 
great  scheme  of  redemption  is  by  no  means  uncertain,  his  cause  must 
prosper,  his  throne  must  be  established,  and  the  will  of  the  Lord  must 
be  done.  Let  us  brace  ourselves  up  this  morning  with  the  delightful 
prospect  of  the  predestinated  triumph  of  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord 
and  of  his  Christ. 

In  handling  our  text  we  shall  note,  first,  that,  directing  us  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  it  dwells  upon  the  character  of  his  dealings, — "My 
servant  shall  deal  prudently,  he  shall  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and 
be  very  high."  Then^  secondly,  it  mentions  the  stumhling-Uock  ivhich 
lies  in  his  ivay,  the  great  hindrance  to  the  progress  of  his  work  : 
"  Many  were  astonished  at  thee  ;  his  visage  was  so  marred  more 
than  any  man,  and  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men."  Thirdly, 
we  see  in  the  verses  before  us  the  certainty  of  the  removal  of  this  hin- 
dra7ice :  "  He  shall  sprinkle  many  nations ;  the  kings  shall  shut  their 
mouths  at  him."  And,  fourthly,  the  manner  of  its  accomplishment. 
namely,  by  instruction  in  the  gospel :  "  For  that  which  had  not  been 
told  them  they  shall  see ;  and  that  which  they  had  not  heard  shall 
they  consider." 

I.  The  character  of  our  Lord's  dealings.  He  is  called  in 
the  text,  "3Iy  servant,''  a  title  as  honourable  as  it  is  condescending. 
The  Lord  Jesus  has  undertaken  in  infinite  love  to  become  the  servant 
of  the  Father  for  our  sakes,  and  he  is  a  servant  like  unto  Moses,  who 
was  set  over  the  Lord's  house  to  manage  the  affairs  of  the  dispensation. 
Jesus,  though  a  Son  and  therefore  JiOrd,  has  deigned  to  become  the 
great  servant  of  God  under  the  present  economy ;  he  conducts  the 
affairs  of  the  household  of  God,  and  it  is  said  in  the  text,  and  it  is  to 
that  we  have  to  draw  attention,  that  he  deals  prvclentli/.  He  who  took 
upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant  acts  as  a  wise  servant  in  everything ; 
and  indeed  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  for  "  in  him  are  hid  all  the  trea- 
sures of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  This  prudence  was  manifest  in  the 
days  of  his  ilesh,  from  his  childhood  among  the  doctors  in  the  temple 
on  to  his  confession  before  Pontius  Pilate.   Our  Lord  was  enthusiastic  : 


THE   SURE   TRIUMPH   OF   THE   CRUCIFIED   ONE.  587 

there  was  a  fire  burning-  within  him  which  nothing  could  quench,  he 
found  his  meat  and  drink  in  doing  his  Father's  will ;  but  that  enthu- 
siasm never  carried  him  into  rashness,  or  forgetfulness  of  sound  reason  ; 
he  was  as  wise  and  prudent  as  the  most  cold-hearted  calculator  could 
have  been.  Our  Saviour  was  full  of  love,  and  that  love  made  him 
frank  and  open-hearted  ;  no  frigid  reserve  kept  him  at  a  distance  from 
the  people,  or  shrouded  him  in  a  cloud  of  mystery,  he  was  a  man 
among  men,  transparent,  childlike,  " the  holy  child  Jesus";  but  for 
all  that  he  was  ever  prudent,  and  "  committed  himself  unto  no  man, 
for  he  knew  what  was  in  man."  Too  many  who  aspire  to  be  leaders 
of  the  people  study  policy,  craft,  and  diplomacy,  and  think  it  needful 
to  use  language  as  much  for  the  concealment  as  for  the  declaration 
of  their  thoughts  ;  such  men  watch  their  own  words  till  their  very 
soul  seems  withered  within  them.  The  Friend  of  sinners  had  not 
a  fraction  of  that  thing  about  him ;  and  yet  he  was  wiser  and  more 
prudent  than  if  diplomacy  had  been  his  study  from  his  youth  up. 
You  see  his  wisdom  when  he  baffles  his  adversaries;  they  think  to 
entangle  him  in  his  speech,  but  he  breaks  their  snares  asunder  as 
with  a  wave  of  our  hand  we  sweep  cobwebs  from  our  path.  You  see 
his  wisdom  when  he  deals  with  his  friends  :  he  has  many  things  to 
say  unto  them,  but  he  perceives  that  they  cannot  l)ear  them  ;  he, 
therefore,-  does  not  overload  their  intellects,  lest  undigested  truth 
should  breed  mischief  in  their  souls.  Little  by  little,  like  the  in- 
creasing brightness  of  the  dawn,  he  lets  light  into  their  souls,  lest 
their  eyes  should  utterly  fail  before  the  brilliance  thereof.  He  does 
not  send  them  upon  difficult  errands  at  first ;  he  reserves  for  their 
riper  years  and  stronger  days  the  sterner  tasks  and  more  heroic  deeds 
of  daring.  As  we  see  his  career  in  the  light  of  the  four  evangelists,  it 
is  distinguished  for  his  prudence,  and  in  that  respect  "  never  man 
spake  like  this  man." 

He  who  on  earth  became  obedient  unto  death  has  now  gone  into  the 
ghry,  but  he  is  still  over  the  house  of  Grod,  conducting  its  affairs.  He 
deals  2yrude)iflij  still.  Our  fears  lead  us  to  judge  that  the  affairs  of 
Christ's  kingdom  are  going  amiss,  but  we  may  rest  assured  that  all  is 
well,  for  the  Lord  hath  put  all  things  under  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and 
made  him  to  be  head  over  all  things  to  his  church.  The  pleasure  of 
the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  the  hand  of  Jesus  still.  We  err,  but  he  does 
not.  Nay,  the  very  points  wherein  we  err  are  overruled  by  him  for  the 
display  of  his  unerring  wisdom  and  consummate  skill.  The  storms 
and  tempests  which  surround  the  church  serve  only  to  illustrate  the 
wisdom  and  power  of  our  great  Pilot ;  he  has  ultimate  designs  which 
are  not  apparent  upon  the  surface,  and  these  he  never  fails  to  accomplish. 

Brethren,  all  along  through  the  history  of  the  church  the  dealings 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  with  his  people  have  been  very  remarkable.  The 
wisdom  in  them  is  often  deep,  and  only  discoverable  by  those  who 
seek  it  out,  and  yet  frequently  it  sparkles  upon  the  surface  like  gold  in 
certain  lands  across  the  sea.  Xote  how  the  Lord  has  made  his  church 
learn  truth  by  degrees,  and  purified  her  first  of  one  error  and  then  of 
another.  The  church  has  fallen  first  into  one  folly  and  then  into 
another,  but  her  Lord  has  borne  with  her  and  delivered  her.  Full 
often  he  has  allowed  her  to  work  her  folly  out,  so  as  to  see  its  result. 


588  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

and  by  this  process  he  has  stamped  out  the  error  effectually,  so  that  it 
will  never  gain  power  again.  At  the  present  time  the  gross  folly  of 
uniting  with  the  State  is  being  practically  proved  before  the  eyes  of  al/ 
men,  and  when  it  has  come  to  its  fulness  it  will  end,  never  to  be  revived 
again.  "We  wonder  sometimes  why  he  allows  this  or  that  error  to 
exist,  and  we  ask  how  it  can  be  that  the  church  should  be  so  despoiled 
of  her  purity  and  weakened  in  her  strength.  We  wonder  that  our 
Lord  does  not  judge  the  evil  and  punish  it  at  once,  or  that  he  does 
mot  raise  up  some  strong  voice  to  protest  against  it,  and,  sending  his 
Holy  Spirit  therewith,  destroy  the  evil  at  once.  I  trow  he  might,  but 
there  is  prudence  in  the  withholding  of  his  power.  The  wise  physician 
iolerates  disease  until  it  shall  have  reached  the  point  at  which  he  can 
gra])ple  with  it,  so  as  to  eradicate  it  from  the  system,  so  has  the  good 
Lord  allowed  some  ills  to  fester  in  the  midst  of  his  church,  that  he  may 
ultimately  exterminate  them.  We  wish  to  see  great  success  following  all 
forms  of  ministry,  we  would  see  our  missionary  societies  prosperous  to 
such  a  degree  that  a  nation  should  be  born  in  a  day  ;  but  the  Lord  with- 
holds success  in  a  great  measure,  and  herein  he  is  dealing  prudently.  He 
keeps  us  back  from  prosperity,  till  we  have  learned  that  it  does  not 
after  all  arise  out  of  our  plans,  and  schemes,  and  resources,  and  ener- 
gies :  he  would  strip  us  of  pride ;  he  would  put  us  in  such  a  condition 
that  it  would  be  safe  to  us  to  give  us  success,  and  would  be  glorious  to 
liimself  also.  Often  has  a  church,  like  Israel  of  old,  to  sutfer  defeat 
till  it  finds  out  and  destroys  the  Achan  who  troubles  the  camp.  The 
church  has  been  foiled  and  humbled  till  at  last  in  sheer  despair  she 
has  fallen  upon  her  face  in  prayer,  and  lifted  up  her  heart  to  the  strong 
for  strength,  and  then  her  strength  has  returned,  and  victory  has 
•waited  on  her  banners.  As  rivers  iilter  and  purify  in  their  running,  so 
does  the  church  in  her  course  become  pure  through  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  her  Lord. 

Study  the  pages  of  ecclesiastical  history,  and  you  will  see  how  Jesus 
■Christ  has  dealt  wisely  in  the  raising  up  of  fitting  men  for  all  times. 
I  could  not  suppose  a  better  man  for  Luther's  age  than  Luther,  yet 
Luther  alone  would  have  been  very  incomplete  for  the  full  service 
needed  had  it  not  been  for  Calvin,  whose  calm  intellect  was  the  com- 
plement of  Luther's  fiery  soul.  You  shall  not  find  a  better  age  for 
Wickliffe  to  have  been  born  in  than  the  time  in  which  he  shone  forth 
as  the  morning  star  of  the  Reformation.  God  fits  the  man  for  the 
place,  and  the  place  for  the  man ;  there  is  an  hour  for  the  voice,  and  a 
voice  for  the  hour. 

Our  Lord  has  done  all  things  well  even  unto  this  day,  but  now, 
perhaps,  we  are  getting  a  little  tired ;  it  is  near  two  thousand  years 
since  he  died,  and  there  has  been  a  long  talk  about  its  being  the  end 
of  the  six  thousand  years  since  creation's  day,  and  we  murmur  to  each 
other  that  the  great  Sabbath  must  surely  be  very  near.  I  am  not 
much  in  love  with  this  chronological  theory,  for  I  think  we  cannot  be 
very  certain  that  we  have  not  long  ago  passed  beyond  the  seventh 
thousand  years.  It  is  very  questionable  to  me  whether  we  do  not 
altogether  misunderstand  the  chronology  of  the  Old  Testament ;  cer- 
tainly nothing  is  more  perplexing  than  the  ancient  Hebrew  num- 
bering.    Still,  so  the  many  will  have  it,  and  possibly  so  it  is.     A 


THE    SURE   TRIUMPH   OF   THE   CRUCIFIED   ONE.  589; 

portion  of  the  church  not  only  expects  the  Lord's  second  advent,  but 
i^ets  into  a  state  of  feverishness  about  the  matter.     Surely,  say  they, 
ills   delays   have  been  very  great:  why  are  his  chariots  so  long  in 
coming?     Ah,  brethren,  the  Master  knows  best.     It  may  please  him 
to  finish  up  the  present  dispensation  to-day  ;  if  so,  he  will  doubtless 
deal  prudently  in  so  doing  :  but  it  may  be  that  myriads  of  years  are 
yet  to  elapse  before  his  appearing,  and  if  so  there  will  be  wisdom 
in  the  delay.     Let  us  leave  the  matter  alone,  for  while  the  general  fact 
that  he  will  come  is  clearly  revealed  in  order  to  quicken  our  diligence,. 
the  details  are  veiled  in  mystery,  since  they  would  only  gratify  our- 
curiosity.    If  I  knew  that  our  Lord  would  come  this  evening,  I  should 
preach  just  as    I  mean  to   preach  ;  and  if  I    knew  he  would  come 
during  this  sermon,  I  would  go  on  preaching  until  he  did.     Chris- 
tian  people  ought  not  be  standing  with  their  mouths   open,  gazing' 
up  into  heaven  and  wondering  what  is  going  to  happen  ;    but  they 
should  abide  with  loins  girt  and  lamps  burning,  rea'ly  for  his  appearing,, 
whenever  it  may  be.     Go  straight  ahead  upon  the  business  your  Lord 
has  appointed  you,  and  you  need  be  under  no  apprehension  of  being- 
taken  by  surprise.     On  one  occasion  I  called  to  see  one  of  our  friends,, 
and  I  found  her  whitening  the  front  steps.     AVhen  she  saw  me  she- 
jumped  up  and  blushingly  said,  "  Oh  dear,  sir,  I  am  sorry  you  caught, 
me  like  this;  I  wish  I  had  known  you  were   coming."     "My  dear 
sister,"   I  said,  "  I  hope  that  is  how  the  Lord  will   find  me  at  his. 
coming — doing  my  duty."     I  should  like  to  be  found  whitening  the 
steps  when  the  Lord  comes,  if  that  were  my  duty.    Steady  perseverance- 
in  appointed  service  is  far  better  than  prophetical  speculation,  especially- 
if  such  speculation  leads  us  to  self-conceit  and  idleness.      AYe  may  rest, 
assured  that  the  future  is  safe,  for  Jesus  will  deal  wisely  and  come  at,, 
the  right  time  ;  therefore  we  may  leave  all  matters  in  his  hands.     If 
the  times  are  dark,  it  is  right  they  should  be  ;    if  the  times  are  bright, 
it  is  right  they  should  be  ;  I  at  least  cannot  change  the  times,  and- 
t  herefore  my  duty  is  to  do  the  work  God  has  given  me  to  do,  whether  the 
times  be  dark  or  bright.     For  all  practical  purposes  it  is  enough  for  us. 
that  infinite  wisdom  is  at  the  helm  of  affairs  ;  "  my  servant  shall  deal 
prudently." 

Another  translation  of  the  passage  is  "  my  servant  shall  have  pros- 
perous success."    Let  us  append  that  meaning  to  the  other.    Prosper II ij- 
will  grow  out  of  our  Lord s  prudent  dealings.     The  pleasure  of  the  Lord 
prospers  in  the  hands  of  Jesus.     The  gospel  will  prosper  in  the  thing- 
whereto  God  has  sent  it.     The  decrees  of  God  will  be  accomplished  ; 
his  eternal  purposes  will  be  fulfilled.     We  may  desire  this  or  that,  and 
our  wish  may  or  may  not  be  granted,  but  whatsoever  the  Lord  has, 
a])pointed  in  his  infinite  wisdom  to  be  done  will  come  to  pass  to  the- 
last  jot  and  tittle.    The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  will  not  miss  of  its  fore- 
seen result  in  reference  to  any  individual  under  heaven,  and  no  end  that 
was  designed  in  the  eternal  plan  of  redemption  shall  be  left  unaccom- 
•jlished.      All   along  the  line  the  Captain  of  our   salvation  will   be 
victorious,  and  in  every  point  and  detail  of  the  entire  business  the  will 
of  the  Lord  shall  be  done,  and  all  heaven  and  earth  shall  be  filled  with 
praise  as  they  see  that  it  is  so. 

In  consequence  of  this  the  text  tells  us  tlie  Lord  shall  he  exalted  and 


590  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

extolled.  How  well  he  deserves  to  be.  exalted  and  extolled  for  his 
matchless  prudence  !  Too  highly  he  cannot  be  esteemed.  At  the 
present  time  you  will  say  the  name  of  Christ  is  not  honoured ;  but 
wait  awhile,  and  he  shall  be  very  high.  His  name  is  even  now  more 
honoured  than  in  former  days,  when  it  was  the  jest  of  the  nations. 
The  prudent  plans  which  the  Lord  has  adopted  are  surely  working  out 
the  growth  of  his  kingdom,  and  will  certainly  result  in  bringing  to  the 
front  his  name,  and  person,  and  teaching.  Perhaps  you  think  that 
certain  doctrines  are  hindrances  to  the  success  of  the  gospel :  you  know 
not  what  you  say.  In  the  end  it  shall  be  seen  that  every  part  of  his 
teachings,  and  procedure,  and  every  act  of  his  life,  and  all  his  govern- 
ment in  providence  were  so  wisely  ordered,  that  as  a  whole  they  secured 
in  the  best  and  speediest  manner  the  exalting  and  extolling  of  his  holy 
name.  The  star  of  Jesus  rises  higher  every  hour;  the  twilight  of 
Calvary  brightens  towards  millennial  day.  He  was  despised  and 
rejected  of  men,  but  now  tens  of  thousands  adore  him  ;  and,  according 
to  the  omnipotent  promise  of  the  Father,  to  him  every  knee  shall  bow 
and  every  tongue  confess  that  he  is  Lord.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  at 
work  glorifying  Jesus,  and  providence  is  bending  all  its  forces  to  the 
same  end.  In  heaven  Jesus  is  exalted  and  extolled  ;  in  his  church  he 
is  very  high ;  and  even  in  the  world  itself  his  name  is  a  word  of  power 
already,  and  destined  to  be  supreme  in  ages  to  come.  Thus  much, 
then,  upon  the  character  of  Messiah's  dealings. 

II.  Xow  let  us  view  the  Stumbling  Block  in  the  way  of  our 
Lord.  It  is  his  cross,  which  to  Jew  and  Greek  is  ever  a  hindrance. 
As  if  the  prophet  saw  him  in  vision,  he  cries  out,  "  As  many  were 
astonished  at  thee  ;  his  visage  was  so  marred  more  than  any  man,  and 
his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  men."  When  he  was  here,  his  personal 
position  and  condition  and  appearance  were  very  much  against  the 
spread  of  his  kingdom.  He  was  the  son  of  a  carpenter,  he  wore  the 
smock-frock  of  a  peasant,  he  associated  with  publicans  and  sinners. 
Is  he  the  Son  of  David  ?  We  looked  for  a  great  prince  ;  we  hoped  for 
another  Solomon.  Is  this  he  ?  Therefore  the  Jews  rejected  the  meek 
and  lowly  prince  of  the  house  of  David,  and,  alas,  they  persist  in  their 
rejection  of  his  claims. 

To-day  he  has  risen  from  the  grave  and  gone  into  his  glory,  but  the 
ottence  of  the  cross  has  not  ceased,  for  upon  his  gospel  there  remains 
the  image  of  his  marred  visage,  and  therefore  men  despise  it.  The 
preaching  of  the  cross  is  foolishness  to  many.  The  main  doctrine  of 
the  gospel  concerns  Jesus  crucified, — Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  put  to  an 
ignominious  death,  because  for  our  sakes  he  was  numbered  with  the 
transgressors,  and  bore  the  sin  of  many.  Men  will  tell  you  they 
eould  believe  Christianity  if  it  were  not  for  the  atonement ;  that  is  to 
say,  if  Jesus  will  come  down  from  the  cross,  modern  scoffers  will  believe 
in  him,  just  as  the  ancient  ones  tauntingly  promised  to  do ;  but  of  the 
gospel  we  may  say  that  atoning  blood  is  the  pledge  thereof,  and  if  you 
leave  out  the  substitutionary  work  of  Christ  from  it,  there  is  no  gospel 
left.  It  is  a  body  without  a  soul.  This,  then,  seems  to  be  the  impedi- 
ment to  the  spread  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom  : — he  himself  with  his 
marred  visage,  and  his  gospel  with  a  visage  equally  uncomely  in  the 
eyes  of  carnal  men. 


THE    SURE   TRIUMPH    OF   THE   CRUCIFIED   ONE.  591 

The  practical  part  of  the  gospel  is  equally  a  stumbling-block  to  un- 
godly men,  for  when  men  inquire  what  they  must  do  to  be  saved,  they 
are  told  that  they  must  receive  the  gospel  as  little  children,  that  they 
must  repent  of  sin,  and  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Very  hum- 
bling precepts  for  human  self-sufficiency  !  And  after  they  are  saved, 
if  they  inquire  what  they  should  do,  the  precepts  are  not  those  which 
commend  themselves  to  proud,  hectoring  human  nature — for  they  are 
such  as  these — "  Be  kindly  affectioned  one  to  another,"  "  forgiving 
one  another  and  forbearing  one  another  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake 
has  forgiven  you."  To  the  world  which  loves  conquerors,  and  blasts 
of  trumpets,  and  chaplets  of  laurel,  this  kind  of  teaching  has  a  marred 
visage,  and  an  uncomely  form. 

Then,  what  seems  even  more  humbling,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  his 
prudent  dealing  not  only  brings  before  us  a  gospel  offensive,  because  of 
the  doctrine  of  atonement,  and  offensive  in  its  practical  precepts,  but 
he  sends  this  gospel  among  us  by  men  who  are  neither  great  nor  noble, 
nor  even  among  the  wise  of  this  world.  The  proud  say,  "  AVe  would 
submit  ourselves  to  men  of  master-minds,  but  we  cannot  endure  these 
foolish  ones.  Send  us  philosophers  and  orators  combined,  let  men 
overcome  us  by  cogent  arguments,  let  them  master  us  by  words  whose 
splendour  shall  dazzle  our  intellects."  Instead  of  which  the  Lord  sends 
a  man  who  talks  liumbly,  plainly,  and  perhaps  even  coarsely.  Very 
simple  is  what  he  says  :  "  Believe  and  live  ;  Christ  in  your  stead  suf- 
fered for  you,  trust  him  :"  he  says  this  and  little  more.  Is  not  this  the 
fool's  gospel  ?  Is  it  not  worthy  to  be  called  the  foolisluiess  of  preach- 
ing ?  "Men  do  not  like  this,  it  is  an  oifence  to  their  dignity.  They 
would  hear  Cassar  if  he  would  officiate  in  his  purple,  but  they  cannot 
endure  Peter  preaching  in  his  fisherman's  coat.  They  will  hear  a 
pope  in  his  sumptuous  array,  or  a  cardinal  in  his  red  hat,  and  they 
would  not  object  to  listen  to  a  well-trained  dialectician  of  the  schools, 
or  an  orator  from  the  forum ;  but  they  are  indignant  at  the  man  who 
disdains  the  excellency  of  speech,  and  styles  the  wisdom  of  this  world 
folly.  How  can  the  gospel  spread  by  such  means?  How,  indeed, 
unless  the  Lord  be  with  it,  using  human  weakness  to  display  the 
power  of  his  grace  ? 

Worse  still,  if  worse  can  be,  the  people  who  become  converted  and 
follow  the  Saviour  are  generally  of  the  poorer  sort,  and  lightly  esteemed. 
"  Have  any  of  the  rulers  believed?"  is  still  the  question.  With  what 
scorn  do  your  literary  men  speak  of  professed  Christians  !  Have  you 
ever  seen  the  sneer  upon  the  face  of  your  "  advanced  thought"  gentle- 
man, and  of  the  far-gone  school  of  infidels,  when  they  speak  of  the 
old  women  and  the  semi-idiots  who  listen  to  the  pious  platitudes  of 
evangelical  doctrines?  They  know  how  to  despise  us  if  they  know 
nothing  else  !  But  is  such  scorn  worthy  of  men  ?  It  is  only  another 
version  of  the  old  sneer  of  the  Pharisees  when  they  said,  "  Hearest 
thou  what  these  say  ?  "  and  pointed  to  tlie  boys  and  the  rabble,  who 
shouted,  "  Hosanna,  blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  Contempt  has  always  followed  at  the  heels  of  Jesus,  and  it 
always  will  till  the  day  of  his  glory.  If  the  great  ones  of  the  earth 
despise  the  Lord  Jesus,  on  their  own  heads  be  their  blood ;  to  him  it 
is  a  glory  rather  than  a  shame  that "  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached 


592  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

to  them."  He  is  the  people's  Christ  of  R-hom  it  was  written  of  old, — 
"  I  have  exalted  one  chosen  out  of  the  people."  He  rejoices  to  be  called 
a  leader  and  commander  of  the  people,  and  he  is  glad  that  "the  com- 
mon people  hear  him  gladly."  But  here  stands  the  head  and  front  of 
the  difficulty, — the  cross,  which  is  the  soul  of  Christianity,  is  also  its 
stumbling  block. 

If  any  here  are  offended  with  Christ  because  of  his  cross,  I  beg 
them  to  dismiss  the  prejudice.  Should  it  lead  any  man  to  doubt  the 
Saviour  or  withhold  his  heart  from  him  because  he  comes  with  a 
visage  marred  with  sorrow  ?  If  he  came  to  teach  us  to  be  unhappy 
and  to  prescribe  to  us  rules  for  increasing  misery,  we  might  be 
excused  if  we  shunned  his  teaching  ;  but  if  he  comes  bearing  the 
grief  himself  that  we  may  not  bear  it,  and  if  those  lines  of  agony 
were  wrought  in  his  countenance  because  he  carried  our  griefs  and  our 
sorrows,  they  ought  to  be  to  us  the  most  attractive  of  all  beauties.  I 
reckon  that  the  scar  across  the  warrior's  face,  which  he  gained  in 
defending  his  country,  is  no  disfigurement  to  him  ;  it  is  a  beauty  spot. 
If  my  brother  had  in  saving  my  life  lost  an  arm  or  received  a  hideous^ 
wound,  he  would  be  all  the  more  beautiful  in  my  esteem  ;  certainly  I 
could  not  shun  him  on  that  account.  The  wounds  of  Jesus  are 
precious  jewels  which  should  charm  our  eyes,  eloquent  mouths  which 
should  win  our  hearts.  Be  attracted  by  him,  all  of  you  !  Hide  not  your 
faces  from  him  !  Look  on  him  and  live  and  love.  That  crown  of  thorns 
has  far  more  true  glory  about  it  than  any  crown  of  gold;  those  hands 
pierced  and  nailed  it  should  be  your  delight  to  kiss;  before  that  once 
sorrowing  person  you  should  bow  with  joyful  alacrity.  Jesus,  thou 
marred  One,  thy  cross,  instead  of  being  a  stumbling-block  to  us  is  the 
glory  of  our  faith. 

That  the  gospel  is  spoken  very  plainly  and  that  God  blesses  very 
simple  people  ought  not  to  offend  anybody.  Ought  it  not  rather  to 
make  us  hopeful  for  the  conversion  of  men  because  God  may  so  largely 
bless  commonplace  instruments.  Ought  the  conversion  of  the  poor 
and  the  illiterate  to  be  any  offence  to  us  ?  It  shows  a  want  of  humanity; 
it  looks  as  if  pride  had  dried  up  the  milk  of  human  kindness  in  us,  if 
we  can  grudge  to  those  who  have  so  little  of  this  present  world  the 
priceless  boons  of  another. 

III.  The  certainty  of  the  removal  of  this  stumbling 
BLOCK  and  the  spread  of  Christ's  kingdom.  As  his  face  was  marred, 
so  surely  "shall  he  sprinkle  many  nations  ;  "  by  which  we  understand, 
first,  that  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  are  to  fall  in  a  copious  shower 
over  all  lands.  Jesus  shall  by  his  speech  which  drops  as  the  dew 
and  distils  as  the  rain,  sprinkle  not  the  Jews  only,  but  the  Gentile 
nations  everywhere.  Thy  brethren  abhorred  thee,  0  Imraanuel  !  they 
despised  thee,  0  ilau  of  Nazareth  !  but  all  lands  shall  hear  of  thee, 
and  feel  thee  coming  down  like  showers  upon  the  mown  grass.  The 
dusky  tribes  afar  off,  and  the  dwellers  in  the  land  of  the  setting  sun 
shall  hear  thy  doctrine,  and  shall  drink  it  in  as  the  fleece  of  wool 
sucks  up  dew.  Thou  shalt  sprinkle  many  nations  with  thy  gracious 
word. 

This  sprinkling  we  must  interpret  according  to  the  jMosaic. 
ceremonies,  and  you  know  there  was  a  sprinkling  with  blood,  to  set 


THE   SURE  TRIUMI'II    OF  THE   CRUCIFIED   ONE.  693 

fortli  pardon  of  sin.  and  a  sprinkling  with  water  to  set  forth  purifi- 
cation IVom  i.liv  power  of  sin.     Jesus  Christ  with 

"  The  water  and  the  blood 
From  his  riven  side  which  flowed," 

has  sprinkled  not  only  many  men  but  many  nations,  and  the  day  will 
come  when  all  nations  shall  feel  the  blessed  drops  which  are  scattered 
from  his  hands,  and  know  them  to  be  "  of  sin  the  double  cure," 
■cleansing^  transgressors  both  from  its  guilt  and  power. 

Dr.  Kitto  explains  the  passage  by  an  Oriental  custom.  He  says  that 
kings  when  they  invited  their  subjects  to  great  festivals  would  employ 
persons  to  sprinkle  with  perfnnie  all  who  arrived,  as  they  passed  the 
palace  gate.  I  scarcely  think  that  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  text, 
but  at  any  rate  it  supplies  an  iihistration  of  it.  Jesus  invites  men  of 
all  nations  to  come  to  the  gos])el  feast,  and  as  they  enter  he  casts  upon 
them  the  sweet  perfumes  of  his  love  and  grace,  so  that  they  are  fra- 
grant before  the  Lord.  There  were  no  perfumes  for  thee,  0  Jesus, 
upon  Calvary !  Vinegar  and  gall  were  all  they  could  afford  thee  ;  but 
now,  since  thou  hast  gone  to  heaven  thou  dost  provide  perfumes  for 
multitudes  of  the  sons  of  men,  and  nations  north  and  south  and  east 
and  west  are  refreshed  with  the  delicious  showers  of  fragrance  which 
through  the  gospel  fall  upon  them. 

The  text,  then,  claims  for  Jesus  Christ  that  the  influence  of  his 
grace  and  the  power  of  his  work  shall  be  extended  over  many  nations, 
and  shall  have  power  not  over  the  common  people  only,  but  over  their 
leaders  and  rulers.  "  The  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  him  ;"  they 
shall  have  no  word  to  say  against  him  ;  they  shall  be  so  subdued  by  the 
majesty  of  his  power  that  they  shall  silently  pay  him  reverence,  and 
prostrate  themselves  before  his  throne.  Kings,  mark  you.  I  am 
always  glad  to  hear  of  noblemen  being  converted,  though  I  am  by 
no  means  inclined  to  flatter  the  great,  or  to  think  more  of  one 
man's  sonl  than  of  another's.  I  am  glad,  however,  to  hear  of  the 
salvation  of  peers  and  princes,  for  it  iialicates  the  wide  spread  of  the 
gospel  when  all  classes  are  affected  by  it,  and  when  those  who  usually 
stand  aloof  yield  themselves  to  its  power.  "  Kings  shall  shut  their 
mouths  at  him."  This  promise  has  not  been  fulfilled  yet.  There  are 
those  who  think  that  the  Biblical  prophecies  are  pretty  nearly  accom- 
plished, and  that  we  are  passing  into  a  new  dispensation.  Well,  I  dare 
not  dogmatise,  but  I  dare  question  most  of  the  talk  I  hear  nowadays 
about  the  future.  Scores  of  prophecies  are  not  yet  fulfilled.  Kings  have 
not  shut  their  mouths  at  him  yet:  they  have  mostly  opened  their  mouths 
wide  against  him,  and  reviled  and  blasphemed  him  and  persecuted 
his  saints.  There  must  be  brighter  days  to  come  for  this  poor  world 
yet,  when  even  princes  shall  humbly  obey  our  Lord.  The  more  I  study 
the  Bible,  the  more  sure  I  am  of  two  things  which  I  cannot  reconcile  ; 
first,  that  Christ  will  come  at  such  an  hour  as  men  look  not  for  him, 
and  may  come  now;  and  secondly,  that  the  gospel  is  to  be  preached  in 
all  nations,  and  that  "  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  remember  and 
turn  unto  the  Lord."  I  do  not  know  which  of  the  two  things  I  am 
surest  of  ;  neither  do  I  know  how  to  reconcile  them;  but  they  are  both 
m  the  AVord,  and  in  due  time  they  will  be  reconciled  by  history  itself. 
2p 


694  METEOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

Assuredly  the  day  will  come  when  the  mightiest  prince  shall  count  it. 
his  highest  honour  to  have  his  name  enrolled  as  a  member  of  the  church 
of  Christ.  "  Yea,  all  kings  shall  fall  down  before  him ;  all  nations 
shall  serve  him."  The  little  handful  of  corn  in  the  earth  upon  the  top 
of  the  mountains  is  yet  to  increase  till  the  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like 
Lebanon.  "  They  shall  not  teach  every  man  his  neighbour,  and  every 
man  his  brother,  saying,  know  the  Lord  ;  for  all  shall  know  him  from 
the  least  to  the  greatest." 

We   look  for   this,  and  come  it  will.     0    thorn-crowned  King  of 
Calvary,  kings  shall' be  thy  courtiers  yet ! 

IV.  Let  us  consider  the  manner  of  its  accomplishment.  How 
will  it  come  to  pass  ?  Will  there  be  a  new  machinery  ?  Will  the  world 
be  converted,  and  the  kings  be  made  to  shut  their  mouths  by  some  new 
mode  of  operation  ?  I  do  not  think  so.  Will  the  saints  take  the 
sword  one  day  ?  Will  it  be  accomplished  by  that  wonderful  imple- 
ment of  civilisation,  a  gun-boat  ?  Shall  we  convert  the  Hottentots  by 
gunpowder  ?  We  have  had  a  little  trial  of  these  carnal  weapons,  and 
some  admire  the  success,  but  they  may  live  to  lament  it.  The  Prince 
of  Peace  bids  us  put  the  sword  into  its  scaljbard ;  his  weapons,  like  his 
kingdom,  are  not  carnal,  No,  the  way  which  has  been  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  dispensation  will  last  to  its  close.  I  believe  that  this 
battle  is  to  be  fought  out  on  the  line  upon  which  it  began.  It 
pleases  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe. 
To  conceive  that  oui-  Lord  will  end  the  present  mode  of  warfare,  as 
though  it  were  admitted  that  evil  could  not  be  conquered  by  the  use  of 
instrumentality,  is  to  my  mind  to  do  him  gi-eat  dishonour.  To  me  it 
is  plain  that,  as  he  has  chosen  to  magnify  his  power  by  using  feeble 
instruments,  he  will  continue  to  do  so  till  the  victory  is  won. 
He  has  never  yet  relinquished  his  work  so  as  to  give  the  enemy  an 
opportunity  of  claiming  a  victory.  To  change  weapons  is  to  lay  one's 
self  open  to  the  charge  of  being  unable  to  conquer  with  those  first 
used ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  our  Lord.  The  very  same  grain  of  mus- 
tard which  is  now  so  small  is  yet  to  become  a  tree  with  far-spreading 
branches,  the  leaven  is  yet  to  leaven  the  whole  lump.  The  last  harvest 
will  be  the  result  of  sowing  by  men  and  not  by  some  miraculous  agency. 
The  dividing  of  the  people  at  last  will  be  made  from  the  contents  of 
one  and  the  same  gospel  drag-net,  which  we  are  bound  to  use  till  the 
heavens  be  no  more. 

According  to  this  passage,  these  kings  and  nations  are  first  of  all  to 
hear.  "  Faith  coming  by  hearing."  They  are  to  hear  something  new. 
Well,  brethren,  if  they  are  to  hear,  we  must  preach  and  teach,  so  that 
our  clear  line  of  duty  is  to  go  on  spreading  the  gospel.  Jesus  Christ 
would  have  his  servants  preach  and  teach  the  gospel.  Are  you  doing 
it  ?  Go  on  doing  it,  brother,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whatever 
comes.  Have  you  not  done  it  ?  Begin  to  do  so  now,  as  one  of  Christ's 
servants,  and  pray  for  divine  help.  Do  you  say  you  cannot  do  it  ? 
You  can.  You  are  hiding  your  talent  in  a  napkin  ;  take  it  out,  thou 
unfaithful  servant,  lest  thy  Lord  come  and  judge  thee  !  But  you  can- 
not teach  many  ?  Who  said  you  could  ?  Teach  one.  Oh,  but  you 
cannot  preach  ?  Who  said  preach  ?  Teach  ;  teach  somehow.  Cause 
the  people  to  know  the  story  of  the  cross.     But  you  cannot  teach  kings. 


THE    SURE   TRIUMPH    OF   THE   CRUCIFIED   ONE.  595 

you  say.  AVhy  need  you  ?  Teach  servants  and  children  ;  only  do 
spread  Uie  gospel.  The  world  is  to  be  won  to  Christ,  if  it>  be  ever  won 
at  all,  by  hearing  the  glad  tidings  of  a  dying  Saviour's  love,  and  how 
can  they  hear  without  a  preacher,  and  how  can  they  preach  except 
they  be  sent  ?  Christ  sends  you,  for  he  says,  "Let  him  that  heareth 
say  '  Come.'  "     In  the  power  of  that  commission  say  at  once, 

"  Now  will  I  tell  to  sinners  round 
What  a  dear  Saviour  I  have  found, 
Point  them  to  his  redeeming  blood 
And  say,  Behold  the  way  to  God.'' 

These  people  appear  not  only  to  have  heard,  but  to  have  seen. 
"  That  which  had  not  been  told  them  shall  they  see."  This  seeing  is 
not  with  their  bodily  eyes  but  by  the  perceptions  of  their  minds.  Faith 
comes  by  the  soul  perceiving  what  the  gospel  means.  We  cannot 
believe  in  that  which  we  do  not  perceive.  Therefore  we  must  go 
on  telling  people  the  gospel  till  they  see  what  the  gospel  is.  Many 
men  will  never  know  the  gospel  till  they  have  been  told  it  a  thou- 
sand times,  and  you  must  keep  on  telling  it  to  them  till  you  get 
to  that  thousandth  time.  "  What  do  you  mean  by  that  ? "  say  you. 
I  mean  this,  that  it  must  be  line  upon  line  and  precept  upon  precept, 
almost  to  the  exhaustion  of  patience,  a  mother's  prayers,  a  teacher's 
anxieties,  providences,  sicknesses,  twitches  of  conscience,  ministries  of 
all  sorts,  and  many  pleadings,  and  it  is  only  at  the  last  stroke  that  the 
word  will  be  achieved,  though  all  the  other  efforts  will  have  contributed 
towards  it.  Go  on,  dear  brother,  go  on,  and  teach  Jesus  Christ  till  the 
people  see  him.  That  sight  will  come  upon  a  sudden.  How  many  times  have 
I  heard  the  young  convert  say,  "  I  knew  all  about  this  before,  sir ;  I 
have  heard  it  many  times,  but  I  could  not  see  it ;  now  I  do  see  it." 
Oh,  how  it  makes  a  man  shut  his  mouth  at  Christ  in  humble  silence, 
when  he  perceives  at  last  that  his  marred  visage  and  suffering  form 
were  tokens  of  divine  love,  and  that  by  such  sorrows  sin  is  purged 
away.     A^ould  to  God  you  all  saw  him  now. 

After  they  had  seen,  it  appears  from  the  text  that  they  considered, 
"  That  which  they  had  not  heard  shall  they  consider."  This  is  how 
men  are  saved  :  they  hear  the  gospel,  they  catch  the  meaning  of  it, 
and  then  they  consider  it.  Let  us  pray,  dear  friends,  that  God  would 
set  unconverted  people  considering.  If  we  can  but  get  them  to  think, 
we  have  great  hopes  of  them.  If  any  of  you  here  have  never  yielded 
to  Jesus  Christ,  I  would  ask  you  to  hear  or  read  about  him  ;  spend  this 
afternoon  in  carefully  reading  one  of  the  gospels ;  turn  to  Matthew, 
or  Mark,  or  Luke,  or  John,  and  read  the  story  of  his  passion,  and  ask 
God  to  let  you  see  what  it  all  means ;  and  when  you  do  see  it,  turn  it 
all  over  in  your  minds.  Think  of  it.  Think  how  wonderful  it  is  that 
God  sliould  become  man  to  suffer  in  your  stead.  See  if  it  be  reasonable 
to  disbelieve  it  or  right  to  refuse  to  love  the  Saviour.  There  are 
a  thousand  reasons  why  you  should  rush  into  his  arms  and  say, 
"  Incarnate  Deity,  how  can  I  resist  thee  ?  Bleeding  Omnipotence, 
how  dare  I  doubt  thee  ?  Immortal  love,  crucified  for  my  sins,  I  yield 
myself  to  thee  !     I  would  be  thy  servant  for  ever." 

It  is  clear  that  those  people,  when  they  had  seen  and  considered 


596  >rRTROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

silently,  accepted  the  Lord  as  their  Lord,  for  they  shut  their  mouths  at 
him  ;  they  ceased  from  all  opposition  ;  they  quietly  resigned  their  wills, 
and  paid  allegiance  to  the  great  King  of  kings.  Brothers  and  sisters, 
we  want  to  see  this  done  for  Christ  now  by  hundreds  here.  There 
is  a  great  religions  stir  just  now,  and  we  desire  that  this  church, 
and  all  the  churches  abroad,  should  use  the  favourable  breeze. 
You  know  how  in  harvest  time  the  farmer  gets  all  the  men  he  can  to 
work,  and  they  toil  on  through  long  hours.  I  have  seen  them  workin  i; 
briskly  beneath  the  bright  moonlight  to  get  in  the  wheat.  This  is  our 
harvest  time,  and  we  must  get  our  sheaves  in.  The  Lord  has  mucii 
corn,  and  it  needs  to  be  garnered  ;  I  pray  you  make  long  hours  and  work 
hard  for  Jesus,  and  let  the  subject  expounded  this  morning  inspirit  you 
therein.  The  success  of  the  gospel  is  in  no  jeopardy  whatever.  Jesus 
must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet.  If  the  devil 
can  persuade  you  that  Christ  is  going  to  give  up  the  war,  or  is  going  to 
fight  it  out  on  another  line,  and  dispense  with  your  efforts,  you  will 
soon  grow  idle.  You  will  fintl  an  excuse  for  laziness  in  some  sup- 
posed conversion  of  the  world  by  miracle,  or  some  other  wonderful 
affair.  You  will  say  the  Lord  is  coming,  and  the  war  wid  all  be 
over  at  once,  and  there  is  no  need  of  your  fighting  it  out  now.  Do 
not  believe  it.  Our  Commander  is  able  to  fight  it  through  on  this  line ; 
in  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  by  the  power  of  the  Eternal  Spirit, 
we  are  bound  to  keep  right  on  till  this  world  yields  before  God.  You 
remember  the  American  general  who,  when  the  nation  was  eager  for 
speedy  victory,  said  he  did  not  know  when  that  would  come,  but  that 
he  would  keep  on  pegging  away.  That  is  what  we  are  bound  to  do  ;  to 
keep  on  "  pegging  away."  No  gunner  may  leave  his  gun,  no  sub- 
altern may  disperse  his  band,  no  officer  may  suggest  a  retreat. 
Brethren,  Popery  must  fall,  Mahommedanism  must  come  down,  and 
all  the  idol  gods  must  be  broken,  and  cast  to  the  moles  and  to  the 
bats.  It  looks  a  task  too  gigantic,  but  the  bare  arm  of  God — only 
think  of  that — his  sleeve  rolled  up,  omnipotence  itself  made  bare, — 
^hat  cannot  it  accomplish  ?  Stand  back,  devils !  when  God's  bare 
arm  comes  into  the  fight,  you  will  all  run  like  dogs,  for  you  know 
your  Master.  Stand  back,  heresies  and  schisms,  evils  and  delusions ; 
you  will  all  disappear,  for  the  Christ  of  God  is  mightier  than  you.  Oh, 
believe  it.  Do  not  be  downhearted  and  dispirited,  do  not  ran  to  new 
schemes  and  fancies  and  interpretations  of  prophecy.  Go  and  preach 
Jesus  Christ  unto  all  the  nations.  Go  and  spread  abroad  the  Saviour's 
blessed  name,  for  he  is  the  world's  only  hope.  The  cross  is  the  banner 
of  our  victory.  God  help  us  to  look  to  it  ourselves,  and  then  to  hold 
it  up  before  the  eyes  of  others,  till  our  Lord  shall  come  upon  his 
throne.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  lii. 


Hymus  feom  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 72,  418,  352. 


I 


A  SIMPLE   REMEDY. 


^    Sermon 

Delivered  on  Lord's  Day  Morning,  September  1st,  1872,  by 

C.  H.   SPURGEON, 

AT     THE     METROPOLITAN     TABERNACLE,      NKVVINGTON. 


"  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed." — Isaiah  liii.  5. 

Ever  since  the  fall,  healing  has  been  the  chief  necessity  of  manhood. 
There  was  no  physician  in  Paradise,  but  outside  that  blissful  enclosure 
professors  of  the  healing  art  have  been  precious  as  the  gold  of  Ophir. 
Even  in  Eden  itself  there  grew  the  herbs  which  should  in  after 
days  yield  medicine  for  the  body  of  man.  Before  sin  came  into  the 
world,  and  disease,  which  is  the  consequence  of  it,  God  had  created 
plants  of  potent  efficacy  to  soothe  pain,  and  wrestle  with  disease. 
Blessed  be  his  name,  while  thus  mindful  of  the  body,  he  had  not 
forgotten  the  direr  sicknesses  of  the  soul ;  but  he  has  raised  up  for  us  a 
plant  of  renown,  yielding  a  balm  far  more  eflf'e'tual  than  that  of  Gilead. 
This  he  had  done  before  the  plague  of  sin  had  yet  infected  us.  Christ 
Jesus,  the  true  mediciiie  of  the  sons  of  men,  was  ordained  of  old  to 
heal  the  sicknesses  of  his  people. 

Everywhere,  at  this  present  hour,  we  meet  with  some  form  or  other  of 
sickness  ;  no  place,  however  healthful,  is  free  from  cases  of  disease.  As 
for  moral  disease,  it  is  all  around  us,  and  we  are  thankful  to  add  that 
the  remedy  is  everywhere  within  reach.  The  Beloved  Physician  has 
prepared  a  healing  medicine  which  can  be  reached  by  all  classes,  which 
is  available  in  every  climate,  at  every  hour,  under  every  circumstance, 
and  elfiictua!  m  every  case  wherever  it  is  received.  Of  that  medicine 
we  shall  speak  this  morning,  praying  that  we  may  have  God's  help  in 
so  doing. 

It  is  a  great  mercy  for  us  who  have  to  preach,  as  well  as  for  you  who 
have  to  hear,  that  the  gospel  healing  is  so  very  sim.ple  ;  our  text  describes 
it—"  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  These  six  words  contain  the 
marrow  of  the  gospel,  and  yet  scarcely  one  of  them  contains  a  second 
syllable.  They  are  words  for  plain  people,  and  in  them  there  is  no 
affectation  of  mystery  or  straining  after  the  profound.  I  looked  the  other 
day  into  old  Culpepper's  Herbal.  It  contains  a  marvellous  collection  of 
No.  1,UG8. 


598  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

wonderful  remedies.  Had  this  old  herbalist's  perscriptions  been  uni- 
versally followed,  there  would  not  long  have  been  any  left  to  prescribe 
for;  the  astrological  herbalist  would  soon  have  extirpated  both  sickness 
and  mankind.  Many  of  his  receipts  contain  from  twelve  to  twenty  different 
drugs,  each  one  needing  to  be  prepared  in  a  peculiar  manner;  I  think  I 
once  counted  forty  diiferent  ingredients  in  one  single  draught.  Very 
different  are  these  receipts,  with  their  elaboration  of  preparation,  from 
the  Biblical  prescriptions  which  effectually  healed  the  sick — such  as 
these  :  "  Take  a  lump  of  figs,  and  lay  it  for  a  plaister  upon  the  boil,"  or 
that  other  one  :  "  Gro  and  wash  in  Jordan  seven  times ; "  or  that 
other :  "  Take  up  thy  bed  and  walk."  One  cannot  but  admire  the 
simplicity  of  truth,  while  falsho.id  conceals  her  deformities  with  a 
thousand  trickeries.  If  you  would  see  Calpepper's  Herbal  carried  out 
in  spiritual  things,  go  and  buy  a  Directory  for  the  carrying  on  of  the 
Ritualistic  services  of  the  Cliurch  of  England,  or  the  Church  of  Rome. 
You  shall  find  there  innumerable  rules  as  to  when  you  shall  bow,  and 
to  what  quarter  of  the  heavens  you  shall  look  :  when  you  shall 
stand  up,  and  when  you  shall  kneel :  when  you  shall  dress  in  black,  in 
white,  in  blue,  or  in  violet :  how  you  shall  pray,  and  what  you  shall 
pray,  a  collect  being  appointed  for  to-day,  and  another  for  to-morrow. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  you  would  know  the  true  way  of  having  your  souls 
healed,  go  to  the  AVord  of  God,  and  study  such  a  text  as  this  :  "  With 
his  stripes  we  are  healed."  In  the  one  case  all  is  mysterious,  in  the 
other  all  is  simple  and  clear.  Quackery  cannot  live  without  mystery, 
show,  ceremony,  and  pretence.  But  the  truth  is  as  plain  as  a  pikestaff, 
legible  as  though  it  were  written  on  the  br(^ad  heavens,  and  so  simple 
that  a  babe  may  comprehend  it.  "  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed,"  I 
saw  in  Paris,  years  figo,  a  public  vendor  of  quack  medicines,  and  an 
extraordinary  personage  he  was.  He  came  riding  into  the  market-place 
with  a  fine  chariot  drawn  by  horses,  richly  comparisoned,  while  a 
trumpet  was  sounded  before  him.  This  mighty  healer  of  all  diseases 
made  his  appearance  clothed  in  a  coat  of  as  many  colours  as  that  of 
Joseph,  and  on  his  head  was  a  helmet  adorned  with  variegated  plumes. 
He  delivered  himself  of  a  jargon  which  might  be  French,  which  might 
also  be  Latin,  or  might  be  nonsense,  for  no  one  in  the  crowd  could 
understand  it.  With  a  little  persuasion  the  natives  bought  his  medi- 
cines, persuaded  that  so  great  and  wise  a  man  could  surely  cure  them. 
Truly,  this  is  one  reason  why  there  is  an  adoption  in  the  Romish 
Church  of  the  Latin  tongue,  and  why  iu  many  other  churches  there  is 
an  affectation  of  a  theological  jargon  which  nobody  can  comprehend, 
and  which  would  not  be  of  any  use  to  them  if  they  did  compiehend  it; 
the  whole  is  designed  to  delude  the  multitude.  To  what  purpose  are 
fine  speeches  in  the  gosjiel  ministry.  Sicknesses  are  not  healed  by 
eloquence.  It  was  an  ill  day  in  which  rhetoric  crept  into  the  church 
of  God,  and  men  attempted  to  make  the  gospel  a  subject  fur  oratory. 
The  gospel  wants  no  human  eloquence  to  recommend  it.  It  stands 
most  securely  when  without  a  buttress.  Like  beauty,  it  is  most 
adorned  when  unadorned  the  most.  The  native  charms  of  the  gospel 
suffice  to  commend  it  to  those  who  have  spiritual  eyes,  and  those  who 
are  blind  will  not  admire  it,  deck  it  as  we  may.  I  shall,  therefore,  con- 
tent my.self  this  morning  with    declaring  the  gospel  to  you  in  the 


A   SIMPLE    REMF.DY.  599 

plainest  possible  language,  without  any  atteinpis  at  excellency  of 
Bpeech.  I  know  it  to  be  the  gospel  of  God;  I  know  it  will  save  you 
if  you  receive  it ;  it  has  saved  me ;  it  has  saved  thousands  more.  I 
shall  put  it  before  you  in  plain,  unvarnished  language.  I  beseech  you 
to  receive  it ;  and  I  pray  that  God's  Holy  Spirit  may  lead  you  so  to  do. 

Coming  at  once  to  our  text,  we  observe,  first,  that  these  are  sad 
words:  '^With  his  stripes  we  are  healed";  we  remark,  sei^ondly,  that 
these  are  glad  ivords ;  aud,  then,  we  shall  notice,  thirdly,  that  these  are 
very  suggestive  ivords. 

I.  These  are  sad  words.  They  are  part  of  a  mournfal  piece  of 
music,  which  might  be  called  "  the  Eequiem  of  the  Messiah."  Hear  ye 
its  solemn  notes  :  "  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
sorrows  :  yet  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted. 
But  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniqui- 
ties :  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him;  and  with  his  stripes 
we  are  healed."  Do  you  not  feel  that  the  song  so  softly  plaintive  has 
touched  your  heart  to  pity,  and  moistened  your  eye  with  tears.  "  With 
his  stripes  we  are  healed."  This  is  not  the  brine  of  woe,  but  yet  it  is 
salt  with  sorrow.  The  sun  is  not  eclipsed,  but  it  shines  through  a  cloud. 
No  one  reads  the  inner  sense  of  these  words  without  feeling  grief  of 
souL  This  is  caused  by  the  fact,  that  the  words  imply  the  existence  of 
disease,  and  speak  of  great  suffering  connected  with  the  remedy, 

I  say  these  are  sad  words,  because  they  imply  disease.  "  With  his 
stripes  we  are  healed."  This  "  we,"  comprehends  within  itself  all  the 
saints,  and  hence  it  is  clear  that  all  the  saints  needed  healing.  Those 
who  are  to-day  before  the  throne  of  God,  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or 
any  such  thing,  were  once  defiled  as  the  lepers  who  were  shut  out  of  the 
camp  of  Israel.  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  Jacob,  David,  Elijah,  Heze- 
kiah,  Daniel, — all  these  were  once  sick  of  the  accursed  malady  of  sin. 
All  the  excellent  of  the  earth  among  us  now,  who  have  been  saved  by 
sovereign  grace,  were  once  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others  ;  as  surely 
shapen  in  iniquity  and  conceived  in  sin  as  the  rest  of  mankind.  There 
is  a  confession  here,  by  implication,  of  all  who  are  washed  in  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  that  they  needed  washing  ;  of  all  who  are  healed  by  his  stripes, 
that  they  were  sore  sick  with  sin.  This  confession  is  true,  every 
child  of  God  will  join  in  it,  and  he  that  knows  himself  best  will  make 
it  with  greatest  emphasis.  We  were  so  diseased,  that  nothing  could 
have  restored  us  but  the  precious  blood  of  our  dear  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  dread  fact  that  sin  has  infected  the  entire  family 
of  man.  We  are  all  sinful,  smful  through  and  through,  corrupt  with 
evil  passions  aud  depraved  desires.  Our  fathers  were  fallen  men,  and 
so  are  we,  and  so  will  our  children  be.  The  putting  of  bitter  for 
eweet,  and  of  sweet  for  bitter,  of  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for 
darkness,  is  engendered  in  us  all.  "Every  one  of  them  is  gone  back; 
they  are  altogether  become  filthy,  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no 
not  one." 

Oh,  m-  urnful,  miserable  fact — in  a  fair  world,  "  where  every  prospect 
pleases,"  beneath  a  glorious  sky  where  stars  peer  down  upon  us  like  the 
eyes  of  God,  man  lives  a  rebel  to  his  God,  a  traitor  to  the  truth,  an 
enemy  of  good,  a  slave  of  evil.  He  who  was  made  to  rule  the  world 
rules  not  himself.    Fashioned  for  wisdom,   he  drivels  like  a  fool  i 


600  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT, 

ordained  ibr  immortality,  he  labours  for  the  wh^q  of  sin,  which  is 
death.  Sin  has  dimmed  his  eye,  hardened  his  heart,  uncrowned  his 
hf^ad,  weakened  his  strength,  filled  him  with  putrifying  sores,  and  left 
liiia  naked  to  his  sliame. 

The  disease  of  sin  is  of  the  most  loathsome  character.  Supposing  it 
possible  for  every  man  to  have  had  the  leprosy,  and  yet  for  no  man  to 
have  had  sin,  that  would  have  been  no  calamity  at  all  compared  with 
that  of  our  becoming  sinful.  If  it  could  so  have  happened  that  we 
could  have  been  deprived  of  our  most  useful  faculties,  and  yet  had 
remained  innocent,  that  would  have  been  a  small  catastrophe  compared 
with  this  depiaviug  of  our  nature  by  sin.  To  inoculate  the  parent  stock 
with  evil  was  the  great  desiga  of  Satan,  for  he  knew  that  this  would 
work  the  worst  conceivable  ill  to  God"s  creatures.  Hell  itself  is  not 
more  horrible  than  sin.  No  vision  ghastly  and  grim  can  ever  be  so 
terrible  to  the  spiritual  eye  as  the  hideous,  loathsome  thing  called 
sin.  Eemember  that  this  dread  evil  is  in  us  all  We  are  at  this  day, 
every  one  of  us,  by  nature  only  fit  to  be  burned  up  with  the  abomina- 
tions of  the  universe.  If  we  think  we  are  better  than  that  we  do  not 
know  ourselves.  It  is  a  part  of  the  infatuation  of  evil  that  its  victims 
pride  themselves  upon  their  excellence.  Our  infernal  pride  makes  ua 
cover  our  leprous  foreheads  with  the  silver  veil  of  self-deception.  Like 
a  foul  bog  covered  over  with  greenest  moss,  our  nature  hides  its  rotten- 
ness beneath  a  film  of  suppositious  righteousness. 

And,  brethren,  while  sin  is  loathsome  before  God  at  the  present  time, 
it  will  lead  to  the  most  deadly  result  in  due  season.  There  is  not 
a  man,  or  woman  among  us  that  can  escape  the  damnation  of  hell 
apart  from  the  healing  virtue  of  the  Saviour's  atoniu';,'  sacrifice.  No, 
not  one.  Yon  lovely  little  girl  is  defiled  in  heart,  all)eit  t;hat  as  yet  no- 
thing worse  than  childish  folly  is  discoverable  ;  leave  but  that  little  mind 
to  its  own  devices,  and  the  fair  child  will  become  an  arch-transgressor. 
Yonder  most  amiable  youth,  although  no  blasphemous  word  has  ever 
blackened  his  lip,  and  no  lustful  th  ught  has  yet  inflamed  his  eye, 
must  yet  be  born  agnin,  or  he  may  wander  into  foulest  ways  ;  and 
yonder  most  moral  tradesman,  though  he  has  as  yet  done  justice  to  his 
fellow  men,  will  perish  if  he  be  not  saved  by  the  grace  of  G-od  through 
Christ  Jesus.  Sin  dwelleth  in  us,  and  will  be  deadly  in  the  case  of 
every  one  among  us,  without  a  solitary  exception,  unless  we  accept  the 
remedy  which  God  has  provided. 

Ah,  dear  fi-iends,  this  disease  is  none  the  better  because  we  do  not 
feel  it.  It  is  all  the  worse.  It  is  one  of  the  worst  symptoms  in  some 
diseases,  when  men  become  incapable  of  feeling.  It  is  dreadful  when 
the  delirious  sick  man  cries  out  "  I  am  well  enough ;  I  will  leave  this 
bed  ;  I  will  go  to  my  business."  Hear  how  he  raves  ;  must  we  not  put 
him  under  restraint  ?  The  louder  his  boasts  of  health  the  more  sad  the 
delirious  patient's  condition.  When  ignorance  is  known  and  felt  it  is 
not  dense,  but  he  who  knows  nothing,  and  yet  fancies  that  he  knows 
everything,  is  ignorant  indeed. 

Sin  is  also  a  very  painful  disease  when  it  is  known  and  felt.  Whea 
the  Spirit  of  God  leads  a  man  to  see  the  sin  which  is  really  in  himself,, 
then  how  he  changes  his  note.  Oh,  children  of  God,  have  you  forgotten, 
how  acutely  sin  made  you  smart  ?    Those  black  days  of  conviction ! — my 


A   SIMPLE   REMEDY.  601 

60ul  hath  them  still  in  remembrance,  remembering  the  wormwood  and 
the  gall.  The  period  of  my  conviction  of  sin  is  burnt  into  my  memory 
as  with  a  red-hot  iron:  its  wounds  are  cured,  but  the  scars  remain.  A& 
Habakkuk  has  well  put  it,  "  When  I  heard,  my  belly  trembled,  my  li[)s 
quivered  at  the  voice,  rottenness  entered  into  my  bones,  and  I  trembled 
in  myself."  Oh,  'tis  a  burden,  this  load  of  sin,  a  burden  which  might 
crush  an  angel  down  to  hell.  There  I  stood,  and  seemed  like  another 
staggering  Atlas,  bearing  up  a  world  of  sin  upon  these  shoulders,  and 
fearing  every  moment  lest  I  should  be  crushed  into  the  abyss  and  justly 
lost  for  ever.  Only  let  a  man  once  feel  sin  for  half-an-hour,  really  feel 
its  tortures,  and  T  warrant  you  he  would  prefer  to  dwell  in  a  pit  of 
snakes  than  to  live  with  his  sins.  Remember  that  cry  of  David,  "My 
sin  is  ever  before  me;"  he  speaks  as  though  it  haunted  him.  He  shut 
his  eyes  but  he  still  saw  its  hideous  shape  ;  he  sought  his  bed,  but 
like  a  nightmare  it  weighed  upon  his  breast ;  he  rose,  and  it  rose:  with 
him ;  he  tried  to  shake  it  off"  among  the  haunts  of  men,  in  business 
and  in  pleasure,  but  like  a  blood-sucking  vampire  it  clung  to  him. 
Sin  was  ever  before  him,  as  though  it  were  painted  on  his  eye-balls, 
the  glass  of  his  soul's  window  was  stained  with  it.  He  sought  his 
closet  but  could  not  shut  it  out,  he  sat  alone  but  it  sat  with  him; 
he  slept,  but  it  cursed  his  dreams.  His  memory  it  burdened,  his  imagi- 
nation it  lit  up  with  lurid  flame,  his  judgment  it  armed  with  a  ten- 
thonged  whip,  his  expectations  it  shrouded  in  midnight  gloom.  A 
man  needs  no  worse  hell  than  his  own  sin,  and  an  awakened  conscience. 
Let  this  be  instead  of  racks  and  whips  of  burning  wire.  Conscience 
once  aroused  will  find  in  sin  the  worm  undying,  the  unquenchable 
fire,  and  the  bottomless  pit.  Though  God  himself  will  punish  sin, 
yet  it  is  a  wolf  which  tears  its  own  flesh,  a  viper  which  turns  its 
envenomed  fang  upon  itself.  Peradventure  many  of  you  may  reply, 
"  But  we  do  not  feel  this  !"  True,  because  you  have  contrived  for  the 
present  to  give  sedatives  to  conscience.  I  pity  you  because  you 
are  not  aware  of  the  truth.  I  see  how  it  is  with  you.  Yon  think 
your  money  making,  or  spending  your  days  pleasantly,  or  your 
performance  of  your  daily  labour,  is  all  you  need  consider  ;  but 
if  you  were  not  deceived  by  sin  you  would  know  better ;  you 
would  understand  that  you  are  God's  creatures  and  that  God  did 
not  make  you  to  live  for  yourselves.  Which  among  you  builds  a 
house  and  does  not  intend  either  to  live  in  it  or  gain  something  by 
the  letting  of  it  ?  And  do  you  think  God  made  you  without  designing 
to  glorify  himself  in  you  ?  Oh,  men  and  women,  did  your  Creator  make 
you  that  you  might  live  only  for  yourselves,  and  make  your  bellies  your 
gods  ?  l)o  you  dream  that  you  may  miss  the  end  of  your  being,  and 
not  have  it  required  at  your  hands  ?  Will  he  suffer  you  to  rob  him  of 
your  service,  and  wink  at  your  rebellion,  and  treat  it  as  if  it  were 
nothing  ?  It  shall  not  be  so,  as  ye  will  find  to  your  cost.  Oh,  may  you 
be  taught  now  the  evil  of  sin.  Spirit  of  God,  it  is  thine  office  to  con- 
vince the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment ;  do  thine 
office  now,  for  none  will  apply  for  healing  till  they  feel  the  smart, 
none  will  look  to  the  stripes  of  Jesus  till  they  feel  the  wounds 
of  sin.  When  sin  is  bitter,  Christ  is  sweet ;  but  only  then.  Wliea 
death  threatens,  then  do  men  fly  to  Christ  for  life.     No  man  ever  lovea 


602  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Christ  till  he  loathes  himself;  no  man  ever  cares  for  Jesns  till  he  comes 
to  see  that  out  of  Jesus  he  is  a  lost,  ruined,  and  undone  soul.  Oh,  may 
God  grant  that  the  sorrowful  part  of  tiiese  words  may  ring  in  your 
ears  till  you  mourn  your  grievous  sin. 

But  there  is  a  second  sorrow  in  the  verse,  and  that  is  sorrow  for 
the  suffering  ly  tvhich  we  are  healed.  "  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed." 
I  find  that  the  word  here  used  is  in  the  singular,  and  not  as  the 
translation  would  lead  you  to  suppose.  I  hardly  know  how  to  translate 
the  word  fully.  It  is  read  by  some  as  "  weal,"  "  bruise,"  or  "  wound," 
meaning  the  mark  or  print  of  blows  on  the  skin ;  but  Alexander  says 
the  word  denotes  the  tumour  raised  in  flesh  by  scourging.  It  is  else- 
where translated  "blueness,"  "hurt,"  and  "spots,"  and  evidently  refers 
to  the  black  and  blue  marks  of  the  scourge.  The  use  of  a  singular 
noun  may  have  been  intended  to  set  forth  that  our  Lord  was  as  it  were 
reduced  to  a  mass  of  bruising,  and  was  made  one  great  bruise.  By  the 
Buffering  which  that  condition  indicated  we  are  saved. 

Our  text  alludes  partly  to  the  sufferings  of  his  body,  but  much 
more  to  the  agonies  of  his  soul.  The  body  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
■was  bruised.  Scourging  under  the  Jewish  law  was  always  moderate  ; 
there  was  a  pause  made  at  a  point  which  mercy  had  appointed. 
Thirty-nine  stripes  were  all  that  could  be  given.  But  our  Lord  was 
not  beaten  according  to  the  Jewish  law  ;  he  was  scourged  by  Pilate, 
and  the  scourging  of  the  Romans  was  peculiarly  brutal.  They 
stopped  not  at  the  forty  stripes  save  one,  they  smote  at  random, 
according  to  their  own  will.  The  Saviour  endured  a  scourging  which 
was  intended  to  be  a  substitute  for  death, — "  I  will  scourge  him  and 
release  him,"  said  Pilate, — but  instead  of  its  being  a  substitute  for 
death  it  became  a  prelude  to  it.  Probably  most  men  would  prefer 
to  die  rather  than  to  be  scourged  after  the  Roman  fashion,  and  might  be 
wise  in  making  such  a  choice.  Sinews  of  oxen  were  intertwisted  with 
knuckle  bones  of  sheep,  and  these  were  armed  with  small  slivers  of 
bone,  so  that  every  stroke  gashed  the  flesh  deeply,  and  caused  fearful 
wounds  and  tearings  ;  as  saith  the  prophet,  "  the  ploughers  made 
deep  furrows."  Our  Saviour's  back  was  ploughed  and  furrowed  deeply 
in  the  day  of  his  scourging.  Now  you  may  look  at  the  person  ot  Jesus, 
your  substitute  and  sacrifice,  covered  with  livid  bruises  by  human  cruelty, 
and  say,  "  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed." 

But  you  must  not  stop  there  and  think  that  flesh  wounds  were  all  his 
stripes,  for  our  Lord  bore  more  terrible  stripes  in  his  soul.  He  was 
smitten  in  his  heart  each  day  of  his  life.  He  had  to  suffer  the  ills  of 
providence.  Being  a  man  he  had  sympathy  with  us  in  all  those  stripes 
which  are  the  inheritance  of  Adam's  sons  ;  he  felt  the  stripes  of  poverty, 
stripes  of  weariness,  stripes  of  sickness,  stripes  of  heaviness,  stripes  of 
bereavement ;  above  all  others,  he  was  a  "  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted 
with  grief."  Moreover,  he  had  to  run  the  gauntlet  of  all  mankind. 
Stripes  fell  upon  our  Saviour  from  all  sorts  of  men,  for  every  man's  sin 
laid  a  stroke  upon  his  shoulder.  When  he  was  here  on  earth,  if  he  saw 
men  sin,  that  smote  him ;  if  he  heard  them  speak  a  wrong  word,  that 
smote  him  ;  having  sinned,  we  have  been  hardened  by  sin ;  but  he  was 
pure  and  perfect,  and  it  was  a  bruise  to  him  to  come  into  contact  with 
'sin.     You  know  how  his  adversaries  called  him  a  drunken  man  and  a 


p 


A   SIMPLE   REMEDY.  603 


wine-bibber;  how  they  said  he  had  a  devil,  and  was  mad.  Thus  they 
were  all  striking  him ;  each  man  laying  on  his  blow  with  all  his  might. 
Worse  than  all,  he  was  wounded  in  the  house  of  his  friends.  Was  any 
blow  equal  to  that  which  Judas  lay  upon  thnse  shoulders  ?  And  next 
to  that,  could  anything  surpass  in  pain  the  blows  which  Peter  gave 
when  he  said,  "  I  knovr  not  the  man  I"  There  was  a  cruel  process  in 
the  English  navy,  in  which  men  were  made  to  run  the  gauntlet  all 
along  the  ship,  with  sailors  on  each  side,  each  man  being  bound  to  give 
a  stroke  to  the  poor  victim  as  he  ran  along.  Our  Saviour's  life  was  a 
running  of  the  gauntlet  between  his  enemies  and  his  friends,  who  all 
struck  him,  one  here  and  another  there.  By  those  sorrowful  and  shame- 
ful stripes  we  this  day  are  healed. 

Satan,  too,  stru;  k  at  him.  I  think  I  see  the  Arch-fiend  ascend  from 
the  pit  with  haste,  and,  lifting  himself  upon  his  dragon  wings,  come 
forward  to  strike  the  Saviour,  daring  to  inflict  upon  his  soul  the 
accursed  temptations  of  hell.  He  smote  him  in  the  desert,  and  in  the 
garden,  till  beneath  that  smiting  great  drops  of  blood  crimsoned  his 
face.  But  this  was  nothing,  compared  with  the  fact  that  he  was 
smitten  of  God.  Oh,  what  a  word  is  that  !  If  God  were  to  lay  his  finger 
on  anyone  of  us  this  morning,  only  his  finger,  we  should  be  struck  with 
sickness,  paralysis,  aye,  and  death.  Then  think  of  God  smiting  !  God 
must  smite  sin  wherever  he  sees  it ;  it  is  just  that  he  should  do  so  ;  it  is 
as  much  an  essential  part  of  God's  nature  that  he  should  crush  sin,  as  that 
he  should  love,  for,  indeed,  it  is  only  love  in  another  form  that  makes  him 
hate  that  which  is  evil.  So  when  he  saw  our  sin  laid  upon  his  Son,  he 
smote  him  with  the  blows  of  a  cruel  One,  till  beneath  that  smiting  his 
Son  cried  out,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  "  ?  He 
was  bearing  in  that  moment  all  the  crushing  blows  of  that  great  sword 
of  vengeance,  of  which  we  read  in  the  prophets — "Awake,  O  sword, 
against  my  shepherd,  and  against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow,  saith  the 
Lord." 

Put  these  things  all  together  as  best  you  can,  for  I  lack  words  with 
which  fitly  to  describe  these  bruises  from  the  ills  of  life ;  bruises  from, 
friends  and  foes,  stripes  from  Satan,  and  smitings  from  God,  and  surely 
it  is  the  most  sorrowful  story  that  ever  was  told. 

"  O  king  of  grief !  (a  title  strange,  yet  true ; 

To  thee,  of  all  kings,  only  due.) 
0  king  of  wounds!  how  shall  I  grieve  for  thee 

Who  in  all  grief  outrunnest  me  ? 
Shall  I  weep  blood  ?  why,  thou  hast  wept  such  store, 

That  all  thy  body  was  one  sore. 
Shall  I  be  scourged,  flouted,  boxed,  sold  ? 

'Tis  but  to  tell  the  tale  is  told  ; 
My  God,  my  God,  who  dost  thou  part  from  me, 

Was  such  a  grief  as  cannot  be." 

One  needs  to  be  a  Niobe,  a  dripping  well  of  tears,  to  mourn  the 
chief  among  ten  thousand  made  the  chief  of  sufferers.  That  the  ever 
blessed  One  should  suffer  I  That  the  Lord  of  life  should  bleed  1 
The  r.Dgels  worship  him,  and  yet  Jehovah  smote  him  !  He  is  so  fair, 
that  nothing  else  is  beautiful  to  any  eye  that  has  once  gazed  upon  him, 
and  yet  they  spit  in   his  face  and  mar  his  lovely  countenance  with 


604  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

cruel  blows  of  brutal  fists  !  He  is  all  tenderness,  but  they  are  all 
cruelty !  He  is  harmless  as  a  lamb,  he  never  thoujiht  nor  spoke  a 
thiug  of  wrong  to  mortal  man,  but  yet  they  strike  hirn  as  though  he 
were  a  fierce  beast  of  prej',  fit  only  to  be  bruised  to  death.  He  is  all 
love,  and,  when  they  smite  him  worst,  he  doth  but  pray  for  them,  yet 
smite  they  still !  No  curses  drop  from  those  dear  lips,  but  words  of 
pity  only,  and  of  sweet  intercession,  follow  each  blow,  yet  still  they 
wound,  and  buffet,  and  blaspheme !  Oh,  grief,  far  deeper  than  the  sea  I 
Oh.  woe  immeasural'le  !  They  smite  him  for  whom  they  ought  to  have 
gladly  died,  him  for  whom  the  noble  army  of  martyrs  counted  it  all 
joy  to  lender  up  their  lives.  They  despitefully  entreat  him  who  came 
on  errands  of  pure  mercy  and  disinterested  grace.  Oh,  cruel  whips  and 
cruel  hands,  and  yet  more  cruel  hearts,  of  wicked  men  !  Surely  we 
should  never  read  such  words  as  these  without  feehng  that  they  call 
for  sorrow — sorrow,  which  if  mingled  with  spiritual  repentance,  will  be  a 
fit  anointing  for  his  burial,  or,  at  least,  a  bath  in  which  to  w'ash  away 
the  blood  stains  from  his  dear,  and  most  pure  flesh. 

IJ.  Next — and  may  the  Spirit  of  God  help  us  with  fresh  power — 
THESE  ARE  GLAD  WORDS.  "  With  his  Stripes  we  are  healed,"  They  are 
glad  words,  first,  because  they  spealc  of  limling.  "  AVe  are  healed." 
Understand  these  Avords,  Oh,  beloved,  of  that  virtual  healing  which  was 
given  you  in  the  day  when  Jesus  Christ  died  upon  the  Cross.  In  the 
moment  when  Christ  yiehled  up  the  ghost,  all  his  elect  might  have  said, 
and  said  with  truth,  "  We  are  healed  ;"  for,  from  that  moment  their  sins 
were  put  away  ;  a  full  atonement  was  made  for  all  the  chosen.  Christ 
had  laid  down  his  life  for  his  sheep  ;  he  had  redeemed  his  saints  from 
among  men  ;  the  ranscm  price  was  fully  paid  ;  for  sin  a  complete 
expiation  was  made;  the  redeemed  were  clear.  Let  us  this  morning 
walk  up  and  down  with  perfect  peace  and  confidence,  for  from  the 
day  when  Jesus  died  we  were  perfectly  clear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  God.  "With  his  stripes  we  are  healed,"  or  rather  "we  were 
healed,"  for  the  words  are  in  the  past  in  the  original  Hebrew.  "  With  his 
stripes  we  were  healed."  My  sins,  they  ceased  to  be,  centuries  ago  ;  my 
debts,  my  Saviour  paid  them  before  I  was  born,  and  nailed  up  the 
receipted  bill  to  his  Crnss,  and  I  can  see  it  there.  The  handwriting 
of  ordinances  that  was  contrary  to  us,  he  took  it  away  and  nailed  it  to 
his  Cross.  I  can  see  it,  and  while  I  read  the  long  list  of  my  sins 
— oh,  how  long,  what  a  roll  it  wanted  to  contain  them, — yet  I  see  at 
the  bottom,  "The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin."  It  matters  not  how  long  that  roll  was  ;  the  debt  is  all  discharged. 
I  am  acquitted  before  God,  and  so  is  every  believer  in  Jesus.  Every 
soul  that  rests  in  Jesus  was  at  the  time  wdien  Jesus  died,  there  and 
then  absolved  before  the  sacred  judgment  seat.  "Who  shall  lay  any- 
thing to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?"  is  a  fit  challenge  to  ring  forth  from 
the  Cross  where  atonement  was  finished. 

But,  dear  friends,  there  is  an  actual  application  of  the  great  expiation 
to  us  when  by  faith  we  receive  it  individually,  and  it  is  that  also  which 
is  intended  here.  To  as  many  as  have  believed  in  Jesus,  his  stripes 
have  given  the  healing  of  forgiveness  of  sin,  and,  moreover,  it  has 
conquered  the  deadly  power  of  sin.  Sin  no  longer  hath  dominion  over 
tiiem,  tor  they  are  not  under  the  law  but  under  grace.     Nothing  evei 


I  A   PTMPLK  r.EArFDY.  f;05 

delivers  a  man  from  the  power  of  sin  like  a  sight  of  the  suffering  Saviour. 
[  have  heard  of  a  man  who  had  lived  a  dissolute  life,  who  could  never 
be  reflaimed  from  it  by  any  means,  but  at  last,  when  he  saw  his 
mother  sicken  and  die  from  grief  at  his  ways,  the  thought  that  she  had 
died  becfiuse  of  his  sins  touched  his  heart,  and  made  him  repent  of 
his  ungodliness.  If  there  was  such  elficacy  to  cause  repentance,  in 
that  form  of  suffering,  much  m.ore  is  there  when  we  come  to  see  Jesus 
die  in  our  stead.  Then  our  heart  melts  with  love  to  him ;  then  hatred 
of  sin  takes  possession  of  the  soul ;  and  the  reigning  power  of  evil 
is  therefore  destroyed.  Christ's  stripes  have  healed  us  of  all  love  of  sin. 
Faith  in  the  Crucified  One  has  healed  our  eyes ;  once  they  were  blind, 
for  "  when  we  saw  him,  there  was  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire 
him."  K"ow,  since  we  have  seen  his  stripes,  we  see  all  beauties  unite 
in  his  adorable  person.  I  know,  beloved,  if  you  have  put  your  trust 
in  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  you  think  him  to  be  the  most  pi'ecious  of 
beings,  you  see  a  loveliness  in  him  which  all  heaven's  angels  could 
not  rival.  The  stripes  of  Immanuel  have  also  healed  our  hearts.  "  We 
hid  as  it  were,  our  faces  from  him  ;  he  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed 
him  not,"  but  now  our  hearts  delight  in  him,  and  we  turn  Our  faces 
towards  him  as  the  flowers  look  to  the  sun.  We  only  wish  that  w'e 
could  see  him  face  to  face.  And  he  has  healed  our  feet,  too,  for  they 
were  prone  to  evil ;  note  the  verse  that  follows  our  text,  "  All  we  like 
sheep  have  gone  astray;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way." 
A  sight  of  his  stripes  has  brought  us  back  ;  and,  cliarmed  by  the 
disinterested  love  which  suiTered  in  our  stead,  we  follow  the  j^reat  bishop 
and  shepherd  of  our  souls,  and  desire  never  again  to  wander  from  his 
commands.  From  head  to  foot  his  stripes  have  bound  up  our  wounds, 
and  mollified  them  with  ointment.  He  forgiveth  all  our  iniquities, 
he  healefch  all  our  diseases.  Beloved,  if  you  would  be  cured  of  any  sin, 
however  spreading  its  infection,  fly  to  Jesus'  wounds.  This  is  the  only 
way  to  be  rid  of  the  palsy  of  fear,  the  fever  of  lust,  the  sore  blains  of 
remorse,  or  the  leprosy  of  iniquity  ;  his  stripes  are  the  only  specific  for 
transgression. 

J^feii  have  tried  to  overcome  their  passions  by  the  contemplation  of 
death,  but  they  have  failed  to  bury  sin  in  the  grave  ;  they  have  striven 
to  subdue  the  rage  of  lust  within  their  nature  by  meditating  upon  hell, 
but  that  has  only  rendered  the  heart  hard  and  callous  to  love's  appeals. 
He  who  once  believingly  beholds  the  mystery  of  Christ  suffering  for 
him,  shakes  off  the  viper  of  sin  into  the  fire  which  consumed  the  great 
sacrifice.  Where  falls  the  blood  of  the  atonement,  sin's  hand  is  palsied, 
its  grasp  is  relaxed,  its  sceptre  falls,  it  vacates  the  throne  of  the  heart; 
and  the  spirit  of  grace,  and  truth,  and  love,  and  righteousness,  occupies 
the  royal  seat. 

I  may  be  addressing  some  this  morning  who  despair  of  being  saved. 
Behold  Christ  smarting  in  your  stead,  and  you  will  never  despair  again. 
If  Jesus  bore  the  transgressors'  punishment  there  is  every  room  for 
hope.  Peradventure  your  disease  is  love  of  the  world  and  a  fear  of  man ; 
You  dare  not  become  a  Christian  because  men  would  laugh  at  you.  .  If 
you  could  hear  the  scourges  fall  upon  the  Saviour's  back,  you  would 
henceforth  say,  "  Did  he  suffer  thus  for  me  ?  I  will  never  be  ashamed 
of  him  again,"  and  instead  of  shunning  the  fight  you  would  seek  out 


(JOG  METEOPOLITAN  TABEENACLE   PULPIT. 

the  thick  of  the  fray.  "  "With  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  It  is  a 
universal  medicine.  There  is  no  disease  by  which  your  sonl  can  be 
afflicted,  hut  an  application  of  the  blue  bruises  of  your  Lord  will 
take  out  tlie  deadly  virus  from  your  soul.  Are  you  ambitious  ?  This 
will  bring  you  down.  Are  you  desponding  ?  This  will  lift  you  up. 
Are  you  hot  with  passion  ?  This  will  cool  you.  Are  you  chill  with 
indolence  ?  This  will  stimulate  you.  The  Cross  !  the  Cross  !  the  Cross 
of  Christ !  what  power  dwells  in  it !  Full  sure  if  even  for  Satan  that 
Cross  had  been  set  up  on  earth,  it  would  have  lifted  him  from  hell  to 
heaven !  But  it  is  not  for  him;  it  is,  howeve  \  for  the  vilest  of  the  sons 
of  men  ;  and  there  are  no  sons  of  men  so  corrupt  that  the  Cross  of 
Christ  cannot  purge  them  of  all  evil.  Bear  ye  this  gospel  into  Africa, 
where  superstitious  sorcery  holds  men's  minds  in  thraldom,  it  will 
uplift  before  all  eyes  the  charter  of  Afric's  liberty;  Ethiopia  shall 
stretch  out  her  hand's,  liberated  from  her  chains,  when  she  shall  see  a 
Crucified  Saviour.  Bear  ye  the  Cross  amongst  the  Brahmins  or  among 
the  Soodras  of  Hindostan,  preach  the  Cross  amongst  a  race  of  men  who 
boast  their  wisdom;  and  they  shall  become  ignorant  in  their  own  esteem 
but  truly  wise  before  the  Lord,  when  they  shall  see  the  light  that 
streams  from  Immanuel's  wounds.  Even  Oriental  cunning  and  las- 
civiousness  are  thus  healed. 

Do  not  tell  me  that  we  ought  mainly  to  preach  Christ  exalted.  I  will 
preach  my  Lord  upon  the  throne  and  delight  therein,  but  the  great 
remedy  for  ruined  manhocd  is  not  Christ  in  glory,  but  Christ  in  shame 
and  death.  We  know  some  who  select  Christ's  Second  Advent  as  their 
one  great  theme,  and  we  would  not  silence  them;  yet  do  they  err. 
The  second  coming  is  a  glorious  hope  for  saints,  but  there  is  no  cure  in 
it  for  sinners  ;  to  them  the  coming  of  the  Lord  is  darkness  and  not 
light ;  but  Christ  smitten  for  our  sins,  there  is  the  star  which  breaks 
the  sinner's  midnight.  I  know  if  I  preached  Christ  on  the  throne  many 
proud  hearts  would  have  him;  but,  Oh,  sirs,  ye  must  have  Christ  on  the 
Cross  before  ye  can  kno\f  him  on  the  throne.  Ye  must  bow  before  the 
Crucified,  ye  must  trust  a  dying  Saviour,  or  else  if  ye  pretend  to  honour 
him  by  the  glories  which  are  to  come,  ye  do  but  belie  him,  and  ye  know 
him  not.  To  the  Cross,  to  the  Cross,  to  the  Cross  !  write  that  upon 
the  sign-posts  of  the  road  to  the  city  of  refuge  !  Fly  there,  ye  guilty 
ones,  as  to  the  only  sanctuary  for  the  sinful,  for  "  with  his  stripes  we 
are  healed."     There  is  joy  in  this. 

There  is  another  joy  in  the  text— ^o?/  in  the  honour  ivhich  it  Irings  to 
Christ.  The  stripes,  let  us  lament  them;  the  healing,  let  us  rejoice 
therein  ;  and  then,  the  physician,  let  us  honour  him.  "With  his  stripes 
we  are  healed."  Jesus  Christ  works  real  cures.  "We  are  healed,  effectually 
healed.  "We  were  healed  when  we  first  believed,  we  are  healed  still. 
Abiding  cure  we  have,  for  still  to  his  wounds  we  fly.  An  eternal  cure  have 
we,  for  never  man  was  healed  by  Christ  and  then  relapsed  and  died. 
*•  "With  his  stripes  we  are  healed,"  by  nothing  else ;  by  no  mixture  of  some- 
thing else  with  those  stripes ;  not  by  priestcraft,  not  by  sacraments,  not 
by  our  own  prayers,  not  by  our  own  good  works.  "  "With  his  stripes  we 
aie  healed," — healed  of  all  sin  of  every  kind,  of  sins  past,  of  sins  pre- 
sent, and  sins  to  come  ;  we  are  healed,  completely  healed  of  all,  and 
that  in  a  moment;  not  through  long  years  of  waiting  and  of  gradually 


A   SIMPLE   REMEDY.  607 

growing  better,  but  "  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed,"  completely  healed, 
even  now.  Blessed  be  his  name.  Now,  child  of  God,  if  thon  wouldst 
give  glory  to  God,  declare  that  thou  art  healed  this  morning.  Be  not 
always  saying,  "I  hope  I  am  saved."  The  man  who  says  he  hopes 
he  is  cured  does  not  greatly  recommemi  the  physician  ;  but  the 
man  who  knows  he  is,  he  is  the  man  who  brings  him  honour.  Let 
us  speak  positively  :  we  can  do  so.  Let  us  speak  out  in  the  face  of  all 
mankind,  and  not  be  ashamed.  Let  us  say,  "As  surely  as  we  were 
diseased,  so  surely  are  we  healed  through  the  stripes  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Let  us  give  Jesus  all  glory,  let  us  magnify  him  to  the 
utmost. 

I  see  now  in  vision  a  company  of  men  gathering  herbs  along  the 
slopes  of  the  Seven  Hills  of  Rome ;  with  mystic  rites  they  cull  those 
ancient  plants,  whose  noxious  influence  once  drugged  our  fathers  into 
deadly  slumbers.  They  are  compounding  again  the  cup  of  Rome's 
ancient  sorcery,  and  saying  :  '•  Here  is  the  universal  medicine !  the 
great  Catholic  remedy."  I  see  them  pouring  their  Belhidonna,  Monks- 
hood, and  deadly  Henbane,  into  the  great  pot  for  ever  sinnnering  on  the 
Papal  hearth.  Think  you  the  nations  are  to  be  healed  by  this  accursed 
amalgam  ?  Will  not  the  end  be  as  in  the  days  of  the  prophets,  when 
one  gathered  wild  gourds,  and  they  cried  out,  "  there  is  death  in  the 
pot  ?  "  Ay,  indeed,  so  it  will  be,  even  though  Oxford  and  Canterbury 
set  their  seal  upon  the  patent  medicine.  Come,  ye  brave  sons  of 
protesting  fathers!  Come  and  overturn  this  witches'  caldron,  and 
spill  it  back  into  the  hell  for  which  alone  it  is  fit.  Pity  that  even  old 
Tiber's  tawny  flood  should  be  poisoned  with  it,  or  bear  its  deadly 
mixture  to  tliat  sea  across  which  once  sailed  the  apostolic  barque. 
The  wine  of  Rome's  abominations  is  now  imported  into  this  island,  and 
distributed  in  a  thousand  towns  and  villages  by  your  own  national 
clergy,  and  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men  are  being  made  drunk 
therewith.  Ye  lovers  of  your  race,  and  of  your  God,  stop  the  traflic,. 
and  proclaim  around  the  Popish  caldron,  "  There  is  no  healing  there." 
No  healing  plants  ever  grew  upon  the  Seven  Hills  of  Rome,  nor  jire  the 
roots  improved  in  virtue  if  transplanted  to  Canterbury,  or  the  city  oa 
the  Isis.  There  is  one  divine  remedy,  and  only  one.  It  is  no  mixture.. 
Receive  ye  it  and  live — "  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  No 
sprinkling  can  wash  out  sin,  no  confirmation  can  confer  grace,  no 
masses  can  propitiate  God.  Your  hope  must  be  in  Jesus,  Jesus 
smitten,  Jesus  bruised,  Jesus  slain,  Jesus  the  Substitute  for  sinners.. 
Whosoever  believes  in  him  is  healed,  but  all  other  hopes  are  a  lie  from 
top  to  bottom.  Of  sacramentarianism,  I  will  say  that  its  Alpha  is  a 
lie,  and  its  Omega  is  a  lie,  it  is  false  as  the  devil  who  devised  it;  but 
Christ,  and  only  Christ,  is  the  true  Physician  of  souls,  and  his  stripes 
the  only  remedy.  Oh,  for  a  trumpet  to  sound  this  through  every  town 
of  England  !  through  every  city  of  Europe  !  Oh,  to  preach  this  in  the 
Colosseum!  or  better  still  from  the  pulpit  of  St.  Peter's  ! — "With  his 
stripes  we  are  healed."  Away,  away  ye  deceivers,  with  your  mixtures 
and  compounds :  away  ye  proud  sons  of  men  with  your  boastings  of 
what  ye  feel,  and  think,  and  do,  and  what  ye  intend  and  vow.  "  With 
his  stripes  we  are  healed."  A  crucified  Saviour  is  the  sole  and  only  hope- 
of  a  sinful  world. 


€08  METEOPOLITAN  TABERNACl.E   PULPIT. 

III.  Xou-,  I  said  this  is  a  very  suggestive  text,  but  I  shall  not  give 
you  the  suggestions,  for  time  has  failed  me,  except  to  say  that  whenever 
a  man  is  I'lealed  through  the  stripes  of  Jesus,  the  instincts  of  his  nature 
should  make  him  say,  "  I  will  spend  the  strength  I  have,  as  a  healed 
man,  for  him  who  healed  me."  Every  stripe  on  the  back  of  Christ 
cries  to  me,  "Thou  art  not  thine  own  ;  thou  art  bought  with  a  price." 
What  say  you  to  this — you  who  p.rofess  to  be  healed  ?  Will  you 
live  to  liini  ?  Will  you  not  say,  "  For  me  to  live  is  Christ.  I 
desire  now,  having  been  healed  through  his  precious  blood,  to  spend 
and  be  spent  in  liis  service."  Oh,  if  you  all  were  brought  to  this  it 
would  be  a  grand  day  for  London, — if  we  had  a  thousand  men  who 
would  preach  nothing  but  Christ,  and  live  nothing  but  Christ,  what 
would  the  world  see  ?  A  thousand  ?  Nay,  give  us  but  a  dozen  men 
on  fire  with  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  if  they  would  preach  Christ  out  and 
out,  and  "through  and  through,  and  nothing  else,  the  world  would  know 
a  change  before  long.  We  should  hear  a<iain  the  cry,  "  The  men  that 
turn  tiie  world  upside  down  have  come  hither  also."  Nothing  beneath 
the  sun  is  so  mighty  as  the  gospel.  Believe  me,  there  is  nothing  so  wise 
as  Christ,  and  nothing  so  potent  over  human  hearts  as  the  Cross.  Vain 
are  the  dreams  of  intellect,  and  the  boasts  of  culture.  Give  me  the 
Cross  and  keep  your  fineries. 

You  will  know  this  when  you  come  to  die,  beloved.  You  will 
find  nothing  able  to  cheer  your  departing  moments  but  the  Saviour 
on  the  bloody  tree.  When  the  man  is  panting  for  existence,  and  the 
breath  is  hard  to  fetch,  and  the  spirit  faces  eternity,  you  want  no 
priest,  no  dead  creed,  no  gaucy  oratory,  no  sacraments,  no  dreams; 
you  will  demand  certainties,  verities,  divine  realities;  and  where  find 
you  them  but  in  the  divine  Substitute  ?  Here  is  a  rock  to  put  your 
foot  on,  here  are  the  rod  and  the  staff  of  God  himself  to  comfort 
you.  Then  nothing  will  seem  more  admirable  than  the  simple  truth 
that  God  became  man  and  suffered  in  man's  stead,  and  that  God 
has  promised  that  whosoever  believeth  in  his  Son  shall  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life. 

Beloved,  if  you  know  that  Jesus  has  healed  you,  serve  him,  by  telling 
others  about  the  healing  medicine.  Whisper  it  in  the  ear  of  one ;  tell 
it  in  your  houses  to  the  twos ;  preach  it,  if  you  can,  to  the  hundreds 
and  thousands ;  print  it  in  the  papers  ;  write  it  with  your  pen  ;  spread 
it  through  every  nook  and  corner  of  the  land.  Tell  it  to  your  children ; 
tell  it  to  your  servants  ;  leave  none  around  you  ignorant  of  it.  Hang  it 
up  everywhere  in  letters  of  boldest  type.  "  With  his  stripes  we  are 
healed."  Oh,  sound  it!  sound  it!  sound  it  loud  as  the  trump  of 
doom  !  and  make  men's  ears  to  hear  it,  whether  they  will  or  no ! 
The  Lord  bless  you  with  this  healing.    Amen. 


rCRT.TONS   OF    SCRIPTURE   READ   BEFORE   SeRMON — Mark  XV.  1 — 39 : 

Isaiah  liiL 


r 


INDIVIDUAL  SIN  LAID  ON  JESUS. 


^   pennon 

Deliveeed  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  April  10th,  1870,  bi 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT   THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way; 
and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." — Isaiah  liii.  6. 

I  THINK  I  addressed  you  from  this  text  four  years  ago,*  but  I  feel  quite 
safe  iu  returniug  to  it,  for  we  shall  never  exhaust  it  ;  it  is  a  verse  so 
wealthy  in  meaning,  that  if  I  had  during  the  whole  four  years  dilated 
upon  it  every  Sabbath,  it  would  be  my  fault  if  the  theme  were  stale. 
On  this  occasion  I  desire  mainly  to  draw  attention  to  a  part  of  the  text 
upon  which  little  was  said  on  the  former  occasion.  The  vine  is  the 
same,  but  we  shall  gather  clusters  from  a  bough  ungleaned  before.  The 
jewels  are  the  same,  but  we  will  place  them  in  another  light  and  view 
them  from  another  angle.  May  God  grant  that  some  who  derived  no 
comfort  from  our  former  word  may  be  led  to  find  peace  and  salvation 
in  Christ  this  morning.  The  Lord  in  his  infinite  mercy  grant  it  may 
be  so. 

I  shall  first  ^/ye  a  general  expo  if  ion  of  the  text ;  then  in  the  second 
place,  shall  dwell  upon  the  special  doctrine  ivhich  I  ivish  to  teach ;  and 
then,  thirdly,  we  shall  draw  from  that  special  doctrine  a  special  lesson. 

I.  First,  we  will  give  a  general  exposition  of  the  text.  "  All 
we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray ;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own 
way;  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 

The  text  naturally  breaks  itself  up  into  these  three  heads — is  a  con- 
fession general  to  all  penitents,  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray;"  a 
personal  confession  lieculiar  to  each  one,  "We  have  turned  every  one  to 
his  own  way;"  and  then,  the  august  doctrine  of  substitution,  which  is 
the  very  soul  and  spirit  of  the  entire  gospel,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on 
him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 

Our  exposition,  then,  begins  with  the  confession  ivhich  is  universal  to  all 
penitents — it  is  acknowledged  here  by  the  persons  speaking,  who  call 
themselves  "  all  ive  " — that  they  all  had,  like  sheep,  broken  the  hedge  of 
God's  law,  forsaken  their  good  and  ever  blessed  Shepherd,  and  wandered 
into  paths  perilous  and  pernicious.  A  comparison  is  here  used,  audits 
use  shows  that  the  confession  was  a  thoughtful  one,  and  not  a  matter  of 
careless  form.    Man  is  here  compared  to  a  beast,  for  sin  brings  out  the 

*  "  Sin  Laid  on  Jesus,"  No.  G9i,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit. 

No.  925.  29 

2q 


glO  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

animal  part  of  us,  and  while  holiness  allies  us  to  angels,  sin  degrades  us 
to  brutes.  "We  are  not  likened  to  one  of  the  more  noble  and  intelligent 
animals,  but  to  a  silly  sheep.  All  sin  is  folly,  all  sinners  are  fools. 
Sheep  are  dishonoured  by  the  comparison  here  used,  for  with  all  their 
silliness  they  have  never  been  known  to  rush  into  the  fire  after  having 
felt  the  flame.  You  will  observe  that  the  creature  selected  for  comparison 
is  one  that  cannot  live  without  care  and  attention.  There  is  no  such 
thing  as  a  wild  sheep.  There  could  not  long  be  sheep  unless  they  were 
tended  and  cared  for  by  a  shepherd.  The  creature's  happiness,  its 
safety,  and  very  existence,  all  depend  upon  its  being  under  a  nurture  and 
care  far  above  its  own.  Yet  for  all  that,  the  sheep  strays  from  the 
shepherd.  Man's  happiness  lies  in  being  under  the  direction  of  the 
Lord,  in  being  obedient  to  God,  in  being  in  communion  with  God,  and 
departure  from  God  is  death  to  all  his  highest  interests,  destruction  to 
all  his  best  prospects  ;  yet  for  all  that,  as  the  sheep  goeth  astray,  even 
so  doth  man. 

The  sheep  is  a  creature  exceedingly  quick-witted  upon  the  one  matter 
of  going  astray.  If  there  be  but  one  gap  in  the  hedge  the  sheep  will 
find  it  out.  If  there  be  but  one  possibility  out  of  five  hundred  that  by 
any  means  the  flock  shall  wander,  one  of  the  flock  will  be  quite  certain 
to  discover  that  possibility,  and  all  its  companions  will  avail  themselves 
of  it.  So  is  it  with  man.  He  is  quick  of  understanding  for  evil  things. 
God  made  man  upright,  but  he  hath  sought  out  many  inventions,  the 
inventions  being  all  to  destroy  his  own  uprightness,  and  to  do  despite 
to  the  law  of  God.  But  that  very  creature  which  is  so  quick-witted  to 
wander  is  the  least  likely  of  all  animals  to  return.  The  ox  knoweth  its 
owner,  and  the  ass  knows  its  master's  crib;  even  the  swine  that  will 
wander  by  day  will  return  to  the  trough  by  night,  and  the  dog  will 
scent  out  his  master  over  many  a  league,  but  not  so  the  sheep.  Sharp 
as  it  is  to  discover  opportunities  for  going  astray,  it  seems  to  be  bereft 
of  all  wit  or  will  to  come  back  to  the  fold.  And  such  is  man — wise 
to  do  evil,  but  foolish  towards  that  which  is  good.  With  a  hundred 
eyes,  like  Argus,  he  searches  out  opportunities  for  sinning ;  but,  like 
Bartimeus,  he  is  stone  blind  as  to  repentance  and  return  to  God. 

The  sheep  goes  astray,  it  is  said,  all  the  more  frequently  when  it  is 
most  dangerous  for  it  to  do  so;  propensities  to  stray  seem  to  be 
developed  in  the  very  proportion  in  which  they  ought  to  be  subdued. 
Whereasin  our  own  land  a  sheep  might  wander  with  some  safety,  it  wanders 
less  than  it  will  do  in  the  Oriental  plains,  where  for  it  to  go  astray  is  to 
run  risks  from  leopards  and  wolves.  Those  very  men  who  ought  to  be 
most  careful,  and  who  are  placed  in  positions  where  it  is  best  for  them 
to  be  scrupulous,  are  those  who  are  most  prone  to  follow  after  evil,  and 
with  heedless  carelessness  to  leave  the  way  of  truth. 

The  sheep  goes  astray  ungratefully.  It  owes  everything  to  the 
shepherd,  and  yet  forsakes  the  hand  that  feeds  it  and  heals  its  diseases. 
The  sheep  goes"  astray  repeatedly.  If  restored  to-day  it  may  not  stray 
to-day  if  it  cannot,  but  it  will  to  morrow  if  it  can.  The  sheep  wanders 
further  and  further,  from  bad  to  worse.  It  is  not  content  with  the  distance 
it  has  reached,  it  will  go  yet  greater  lengths ;  there  is  no  limit  to  its 
wandering  except  its  weakness.  See  ye  not  your  own  selves,  ray 
brethren,  as  in  a  mirror?     From  him  that  has  blessed  you  you  have 


mDIVIDUAL  Sm  LAID  ON  JESUS.  611 

gone  astray ;  to  him  you  owe  your  all,  and  yet  from  him  you  con- 
tinually depart.  Your  sins  are  not  occasional,  they  are  constant,  and 
your  wanderings  are  not  slight,  but  you  wander  further  and  further, 
and  were  it  not  for  restraining  grace  which  has  prevented  your  footsteps 
you  would  have  wandered  even  now  to  the  utmost  extremities  of  guilt, 
and  utterly  destroyed  your  souls. 

"All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray."  What,  is  there  not  one 
faithful  soul  ?  Alas  !  No !  "  There  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not 
one."  Search  the  ranks  of  the  blessed  in  heaven,  and  there  is  not  one 
saint  before  the  throne  who  will  boast  that  when  on  earth  he  never 
sinned.  Search  the  church  of  God  below,  and  there  is  not  one,  however 
closely  he  walks  with  God,  but  must  confess  that  he  has  erred  and 
strayed  from  God's  ways  like  a  lost  sheep.  Yain  is  the  man  who 
refuses  to  confess  this,  for  his  hypocrisy  or  his  pride,  whichever  may  be 
the  cause  of  such  a  nonconfession,  proves  that  he  is  not  one  of  God's 
chosen,  for  the  chosen  of  God  unanimously,  mournfully,  but  heartily 
take  up  this  cry,  "All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray."  A  general 
confession,  then,  is  uttered  in  our  text. 

This  confession  by  the  mass  is  backed  up  by  a  personal  acknowledg- 
ment from  each  one,  "  We  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way."  Sin 
is  general  but  yet  special ;  all  are  sinners,  but  each  one  is  a  sinner  with 
an  emphasis.  No  man  has  of  himself  turned  to  God's  way,  but  in  every 
case  each  one  has  chosen  "  his  own  way."  The  very  gist  of  sin  lies 
in  our  setting  up  our  own  way  in  opposition  to  the  way  and  will  of 
God.  We  have  all  done  so,  we  have  all  aspired  to  be  our  own  masters, 
we  have  all  desired  to  follow  our  own  inclinations,  and  have  not  sub- 
mitted ourselves  to  the  will  of  God.  The  text  implies  that  each  man 
has  his  own  peculiarity  and  speciality  of  sin;  all  diseased,  but  not  oil 
precisely  with  the  same  form  of  disease.  It  is  well ,  my  brethren,  if 
each  of  us  in  examining  himself  has  found  out  what  is  his  own  peculiar 
transgression,  for  it  is  well  to  know  what  evil  weeds  flourish  most 
readily  in  the  soil  of  our  heart,  what  wild  beast  that  is  most  native  to 
the  forests  of  our  soul.  Many  have  felt  that  their  peculiar  sin  was  so 
remarkably  evil  and  so  surpassingly  vile,  that  it  separated  them  alto- 
gether from  the  common  rank  of  sinners.  They  felt  that  their  iniquities 
were  unique,  and  like  lone  peaks  lifted  themselves  defiantly  towards 
the  pure  heavens  of  God,  provoking  the  fiercest  thunderbolts  of  wrath. 
Such  persons  have  almost  been  driven  to  despair  under  the  belief  that 
they  were  peculiarly  great  sinners,  as  Paul  puts  it,  the  very  chief  of 
sinners.  I  should  not  wonder  if  this  feeling  which  each  one  imagines 
to  be  peculiar  to  himself  may  have  come  over  very  many  of  us,  and  the 
shadow  of  despair  may  for  awhile  have  fallen  upon  very  many  of  us, 
for  it  is  no  unusual  thing  for  an  awakened  conscience  to  feel  its  own 
sinfulness  to  be  above  measure  and  parallel,  the  worst  that  has  ever 
defiled  mankind. 

As  this  speciality  of  sin  happens  to  be  the  point  to  which  I  desire 
to  call  your  attention,  as  I  wish  to  show  that  the  atoning  sacrifice  of 
Christ  not  only  applies  to  sin  in  the  general,  since  "  all  we  like  sheep 
have  gone  astray,"  but  applies  to  sin  in  the  special,  for  "  we  have 
turned  every  one  to  his  own  way" — I  pass  it  over  slightly  now,  and 
introduce  you  further  in  the  exposition  of  the  text,  to  what  I  called 


;612  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

the  amjusl  doctrine  of  the  substitution  of  Christ,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  OB 
him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 

We  have  seen  the  confession  of  sin  made  by  the  mass,  we  lightly 
touched  the  peculiar  confession  made  by  each  awakened  individual,  put 
all  these  together  and  you  see  a  mass  of  sin — did  I  say  you  see  it  ?  It  is 
a  mass  of  sin  too  great  to  be  beheld  by  the  human  understanding,  an 
enormous  load  of  iniquity  against  God.  What  is  to  be  done  with  the 
oflFenders  ?  The  only  thing  tliat  can  be  done  with  them,  in  the  ordinary 
rule  of  justice,  is  to  punish  them  for  their  oflFences ;  and  that  punish- 
ment must  be  such  as  was  threatened,  indignation,  wrath,  destruction^ 
death.  That  God  should  punish  sin  is  not  a  matter  of  caprice  with  him ; 
it  was  not  with  him  an  alternative  as  to  whether  he  might  or  might  not 
punish  sin.  We  speak  always  with  holy  awe  when  we  speak  of  anything 
concerninij:  him,  but  with  reverence  we  say  it  was  not  pos-ible  that 
God  should  wink  at  the  iniquity  of  man  ;  it  was  not  possible  that 
he  should  treat  it  with  indifPerence.  His  attribute  of  justice,  which  is 
as  undoubtedly  a  part  of  his  glory  as  his  attribute  of  love,  required 
that  sin  should  be  punished.  Moreover,  as  God  had  been  pleased  to 
make  a  moral  universe  to  be  governed  by  laws,  there  would  be  an  end 
of  all  government  if  the  breaking  of  law  involved  no  penalty  whatever. 
If,  after  the  great  King  of  all  the  earth  had  promulgated  a  law,  with 
certain  penalties  annexed  to  the  breach  of  it,  he  did  not  cause  those 
penalties  to  be  exacted,  there  would  be  an  end  to  the  whole  system 
of  his  government,  the  foundations  would  be  removed;  and  if  the 
foundations  be  removed  what  shall  the  righteous  do  ?  It  is  infinitely 
benevolent  of  God,  I  will  venture  to  say,  to  cast  evil  men  into  hell.  If 
that  be  thought  to  be  a  hard  and  strange  statement,  I  reply  that 
inasmuch  as  there  is  sin  in  the  world,  it  is  no  benevolence  to  tolerate  so 
great  an  evil ;  it  is  the  highest  benevolence  to  do  all  that  can  be  done 
to  restrain  the  horrible  pest.  It  would  be  far  from  benevolent  for  our 
government  to  throw  wide  the  doors  of  all  the  jails,  to  abolish  the 
office  of  the  judge,  to  suffer  every  thief  and  every  offender  of  every 
kind  to  go  unpunished ;  instead  of  mercy  it  would  be  cruelty;  it  might 
be  mercy  to  the  offending,  but  it  would  be  intolerable  injustice  towards 
the  upright  and  inoffensive.  God's  very  benevolence  demands  that  the 
detestable  rebellion  of  sin  against  his  supreme  authority  should  be  put 
down  with  a  firm  hand,  that  men  may  not  flatter  themselves  that  they 
can  do  evil  and  yet  go  unpunished.  The  necessities  of  moral  govern- 
ment require  that  sin  must  be  punished.  The  effeminate  and 
sentimental  talkers  of  this  boastful  age  represent  God  as  though  he 
had  no  attribute  but  that  of  gentleness,  no  virtue  but  that  of  indiffer- 
ence to  evil ;  but  the  God  of  the  Bible  is  glorious  in  holiness,  he  will 
by  no  means  spare  the  guilty,  at  his  bar  every  transgression  is  meted 
out  its  just  recompense  of  reward.  Even  in  the  New  Testament, 
wherein  stands  that  golden  sentence,  "  God  is  love,"  his  other  attributes 
are  by  no  means  cast  into  the  shade.  Read  the  burning  words  of 
Peter,  or  James,  or  Jude,  and  see  how  the  God  of  Sabaoth  abhorreth 
evil !  As  the  God  who  must  do  right,  the  Lord  cannot  shut  his  eyes  to 
the  iniquities  of  man ;  he  must  visit  transgression  with  its  punishment. 
He  has  done  it,  has  done  it  terribly,  and  he  will  do  it ;  even  to  all 
eternity  he  will  show  himself  the  God  that  hateth  iniquity  and  sin. 


I.\i)iVll)UAL   SIN    LAID    UN    JE8US.  613 ' 

What,  then,  is  to  become  of  man  ?  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone 
astray  ;"  sin  must  be  piinislied ;  what,  then,  can  become  of  us  ?  Infinite 
love  has  devised  the  expedient  of  representation  and  substitution.  I 
call  it  an  expedient,  for  we  can  only  use  the  language  of  men.  You 
remember,  brethren,  that  you  and  I  fell  originally  from  our  first  estate 
by  no  act  of  our  own,  we  all  of  us  fell  in  the  first  Adam's  transgression. 
Now,  had  we  fallen  individually  and  personally,  in  the  first  place,  apart 
from  another,  it  may  be  that  our  fall  would  have  been  hopeless,  like 
the  fall  of  the  apostate  angels,  who  having  sinned  one  by  one  and 
•not  representatively,  are  reserved  in  chains  of  darkness  for  ever  under 
the  condemnation  and  wrath  of  God;  but  inasmuch  as  the  first  fountain 
•of  evil  came  to  us  through  our  parent,  Adam,  there  remained  for  God 
a  loophole  through  which  his  divine  love  might  enter  without  violation" 
of  justice.  The  principle  of  representation  wrecked  us,  the  principle 
of  representation  rescues  us.  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God  becomes  a 
man  and  re-heads  the  race,  becomes  the  second  Adam,  obeys  the  law 
of  God,  bears  the  penalty  of  sin,  and  now  stands  as  the  Head  of  all 
those  who  are  in  him :  and  who  are  these  but  such  as  repent  of  sin  and  put 
their  trust  in  him  ?  These  get  out  of  the  old  headship  of  the  first  Adam 
wherein  they  fell,  and  through  the  atoning  sacrifice  are  cleansed  from 
all  personal  guilt,  brought  into  union  with  the  second  Adam,  and  stand 
again  in  him,  abiding  for  ever  in  acceptance  and  felicity.  See,  then, 
how  it  is  that  God  has  been  pleased  to  deliver  his  people.  It  has  been 
through  carrying  out  a  principle  with  which  the  very  system  of  the 
universe  commenced,  namely,  that  of  representation.  I  repeat  it,  had 
we  been  always  and  altogether  separate  units,  there  might  have  been  no 
possibility  of  our  salvation  ;  but  though  every  man  sins  separately,  and 
the  second  clause  of  our  text  confesses  that  fact,  yet  we  all  sin  in  con- 
nection with  others.  For  instance,  who  shall  deny  that  each  man 
receives  propensities  to  sin  from  his  parents,  and  that  we  transmit 
peculiarities  of  sin  to  our  own  children  ?  "We  stand  in  connection  with 
race,  and  there  are  sins  of  races  peculiar  to  races  and  to  nationalities. 
We  are  never  put  on  a  probation  of  entire  separation ;  we  always  stand 
in  connection  with  others,  and  God  has  availed  himself  of  this  which  I 
called  a  loophole  to  bring  in  salvation  for  us,  by  virtue  of  our  union 
with  another  man,  who  is  also  more  than  man,  the  Son  of  God  and  yet 
the  son  of  Mary,  the  Infinite  who  once  became  an  infant,  the  Eternal 
who  lived,  and  bled,  and  died  as  the  representative  of  all  who  put  their 
trust  in  him. 

Now  you  will  say,  perhaps,  that  still,  albeit  this  might  have  been  at 
the  bottom  of  the  whole  system  of  moral  government,  you  do  not 
quite  see  the  justice  of  it.  The  reply  to  that  remark  is  this,  if  God 
sees  the  justice  of  it  you  oujiht  to  be  content  with  it.  He  it  was  against 
whom  every  sin  was  aimed,  and  if  he  pleased  to  gather  up  the  whole 
bundle  of  the  sin  of  his  people,  and  say  to  his  beloved  Son,  "  I  will 
visit  thee  for  all  these,"  and  if  Jesus  our  representative  joyously  con- 
sented to  bear  our  sins  as  our  representative,  who  are  you  and  who  am 
I  that  we  should  enter  any  caveat  against  what  God  the  infinitely  just 
One  consents  to  accept  ?  Tne  text  does  not  say  that  our  sins  were  laid 
on  Christ  Jesus  by  accident,  but  "  ike  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all."    We  sing  sometimes,  "  I  lay  my  sins  on  Jesus  ; "  that  is  a 


614  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

very  sweet  act  of  faith,  bat  at  the  bottom  of  it  there  is  another  laying, 
namely,  that  act  in  which  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  lay  our  sins  on  Jesus, 
for  apart  from  the  Lord's  doiug  it  our  sins  could  never  have  been  trans- 
ferred to  the  Redeemer.     The  Lord  is  so  just,  that  we  dare  not  think  of 
examining  his  vei'dicts,  so  infinitely  pure  and  holy,  that  what  he  does 
we  accept  as  being  necessarily  right ;  and  inasmuch  as  we  derive  such 
blessed  results  from  the  divine  plan  of  substitution,  far  be  it  from  us 
to  raise  any  question  concerning  it.     Jesus  was  accepted  as  the  natural 
substitute  and  representative  of  all  those  who  trust  him,  and  all  the  sin 
of  these  was  laid  on  him,  so  that  they  were  freed  from  guilt.     Jesus  was 
regarded  as  if  all  these  sins  were  his  sins,  was  punished  as  if  these  were 
his  sins,  was  put  to  shame,  forsaken  of  God,  and  delivered  to  death  as  if  he 
had  been  a  sinner;  and  thus  through  divine  grace  those  who  actually  com- 
mitted the  sins  are  permitted  to  go  free.      They  have  satisfied  justice 
through  the  sufferings  of  their  substitute.    Beloved  brethren,  the  most  fit 
person  to  be  a  substitute  for  us  was  Christ  Jesus ;  and  why  ?    Because  he 
had  been  pleased  to  take  us  his  people  into  union  with  himself.    If  he  was 
our  head,  and  he  had  made  us  to  be  members  of  his  body,  who  more  fit  to 
suffer  for  the  body  than  the  head  ?     If  he  had,  and  Scripture  tells  us  so, 
entered  into  a  mysterious  conjugal  union  with  us,  who  more  fit  to  suffer  for 
the  spouse  than  her  husband  ?    Christ  is  man,  hence  his  fitness  and  adapta- 
tion to  be  a  substitute  for  man.     The  creature  that  sins  must  be  the 
creature  that  suffers ;  man  breaks  God's  law,  and  man  must  honour  it. 
As  by  man  came  death,  by  man  also  must  come  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead,  and  Jesus  Christ  was  undoubtedly  man  of  the  substance  of  his  mother. 
He  was  fit  to  be  our  substitute  because  he  was  a  pure  man.     He  had 
no  offence  in  him;  neither  Satan,  nor  the  more  searching  eye  of  God 
could  find  any  evil  in  him ;  he  was  under  no  obligation  to  the  law 
except  as  he  put  himself  under  the  law ;  he  owed  nothing  to  the  great 
moral  Governor  until  he  voluntarily  became  a  subject  of  his  moral 
government  on  our  behalf.     Hence,  being  without  obligation  himself, 
having  no  debts  of  his  own,  he  was  fit   to  take  upon  himself  our 
liabilities ;  and  as  he  was  under  no  obligations  for  himself,  he  was  a 
fitting  one  to  become  under  obligations  for  us.     Moreover,  he  did  all 
this  voluntarily,  and  his  fitness  much  lies  here.     If  a  substitute  should 
be  dragged  to  death  for  us  unwillingly,  if  such  could  be  the  case,  an 
injustice  would  be  perpetrated  in  the  very  act,  but  Jesus  Christ  taking 
up  his  cross,  and  going  forth  willingly  to  suffer  for  us,  proved  his  fit- 
ness to  redeem  us.    Once  more,  his  being  God  as  well  as  man,  gave  him 
the  strength  to  suffer,  gave  him  the  power  to  stoop.     If  he  had  not 
been  so  lofty  as  to  be  fellow  with  t!ie  eternal  God,  he. would  not  have 
stooped  so  low  as  to  redeem  us,  but — 

"  From  the  highest  throne  in  glory 
To  the  cross  of  deepest  woe," 

was  such  a  descent  that  there  was  an  infinite  merit  in  it;  when  he 
stooped,  even  to  the  grave  itself,  there  was  an  infinite  merit  by  which 
justice  was  satisfied,  the  law  was  vindicated,  and  those  for  whom  he 
died  were  effectually  saved. 

I  do  not  want  to  proceed  to  the  other  point  until  every  one  here  has, 
got  the  thought,  and  grasped  it,  and  received  it  ;  we  have  gone  astray^ 


INDIVIDUAL  SIN   LAID   ON  JESUS.  gj^ 

but  the  strayings  of  as  many  of  us  as  believe  were  laid  on  Christ ;  we 
have  each  chosen  our  own  way  of  sin,  but  those  sins  are  not  ours  now, 
they  are  laid  on  our  great  Substitute  if  we  are  trusting  in  him  ;  he  has 
paid  to  the  utmost  farthing  all  the  debt  of  those  sins,  has  borne  the 
fulness  of  divine  wrath,  and  there  is  no  wrath  against  us.  Just  as  the 
bullock  was  laid  on  the  altar  to  be  burnt,  God's  wrath  came  like 
consuming  fire  and  burnt  the  bullock,  and  there  was  no  fire  left ;  so 
when  the  wrath  of  God  fell  on  Christ,  it  consumed  him,  and  there  was 
no  fire  left,  no  wrath  left,  it  spent  itself.  God  has  no  anger  against  a 
soul  that  believes  in  Jesus,  neither  has  that  soul  any  sin,  for  its  sin  has 
been  laid  on  Christ,  and  it  cannot  be  in  two  places  at  once :  Christ 
has  carried  it,  and  the  sin  has  ceased  to  be — and  the  believing 
soul  though  in  itself  as  black  as  hell,  is  now  as  bright  as  Christ  himself 
when  he  w<is  transfigured,  for  Christ  has  finished  transgression,  made 
an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness.  Thus  we  con- 
clude our  general  exposition  of  the  verse. 

II.  I  now  desire  for  a  short  time,  but  with  all  the  earnestness  of  my 
soul,  to  dwell  on  the  special  doctrixe  taught  in  the  central  clause 
of  the  text — "  We  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  and  the  Lord 
hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 

Each  man  and  each  woman,  from  a  natural  difference  of  constitution, 
from  the  variations  in  education,  and  from  the  diversities  of  circum- 
stances, has  sinned  somewhat  differently  from  every  other.  Two 
brothers  educated  by  the  same  parents  will  yet  display  diversities  of 
transgression.  No  man  treads  exactly  in  the  same  footsteps  as  another, 
and  some  take  roads  which,  though  equally  wrong,  are  diametrically 
opposite.  One  turns  to  the  right  hand,  and  another  to  the  left,  both 
equally  renouncing  the  onward  path.  Now,  the  glory  of  the  text  that 
I  want  to  bring  out  is  this,  that  if  thou  believest  in  Jesus  Christ,  this 
special  sin  of  thine  was  laid  on  him,  as  well  as  all  those  thine  other 
sins,  in  which  thou  standest  on  an  equality  with  thy  fellow  men.  There 
was  a  publican,  he  had  been  a  common,  gross  offender,  rough  and  harsh 
to  his  brother  Jews,  in  demanding  an  inordinate  tax ;  he  was  a  man  of 
low  habits,  indulging  in  drunkenness,  unchastity,  and  other  defilements, 
yet  when  that  publican  went  up  to  the  house  of  God  and  said,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  the  atonement  just  met  the  publicaa's 
iniquity,  and  exactly  took  away  the  publican's  transgression.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  was  a  Pharisee,  the  opposite  of  the  publican, 
proud  and  self-righteous,  not  submitting  himself  to  the  righteousness  of 
God,  but  considering  himself  to  be  in  all  things  better  than  other  men, 
yet  you  will  remember  that  when  he  fell  from  off'  his  horse  as  he  was 
riding  to  Damascus,  and  heard  a  voice  that  said,  "  Why  persecutest  thou 
me?"  that  very  same  Pharisee  said,  "God  forbid  that  I  should  glory  save 
in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  for  there  was  in  Christ  precisely 
that  which  met  the  Pharisee's  sin.  In  our  Lord's  day  there  were 
Sadducees,  too — that  is,  men  who  said  there  is  neither  angel  nor  spirit, 
infidels,  sceptics,  free-thinkers,  your  Broad  Church  sinners.  Now, 
these  men  neither  went  into  coarse  transgression  with  the  pub- 
lican nor  into  superstition  with  the  Pharisee,  but  they  had  their 
direct  antagonism  to  the  truth  of  God,  and  I  doubt  not  cases  occurred 
to  prove  that  in  the  pardoning  blood  of  Christ  the  Sadducee's  case  was 


616'  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

met.  No  matter  in  what  peculiar  direction  any  one  of  the  Lord's  sheep 
has  gone  astray,  the  Lord  has  laid  that  particukr  straying  upon  the 
Saviour.  I  want  to  speak  now  so  as  to  fetch  forth  some  individuals 
here  this  morning.  It  may  be  that  one  here  to-day  is  saying,  "  I 
Binned  against  an  early  Christian  training;  no  one  ever  had  a  better 
mother  or  a  tenderer  father ;  I  knew  the  Word  of  God,  like  Timothy, 
from  my  youth ;  but  I  did  despite  to  all  this  teaching,  and  sinned, 
with  what  aggravation  of  infamy  I  sinned  against  the  clearest  light !" 
Brother,  thy  sin  is  very  great,  but  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Jesus  thine 
iniquity.  Look  thou  to  the  cross,  and  see  it  laid  there.  "  x\y,"  saith 
another,  "but  I  have  had  the  strivings  of  God's  Spirit;  in  addition  to 
an  early  Christian  education,  I  have  sat  under  an  earnest  gospel 
ministry;  I  have  often  been  impressed;  I  have  been  driven  to  my 
chamber  to  pray,  but  I  have  quenched  the  holy  emotions,  and  have 
continued  in  sin."  0  guilty  one,  the  Lord  has  laid  on  his  dear  Son 
thine  iniquity.  Canst  thou  look  to  Jesus  now  and  trust  Christ,  "  The 
Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world"?  Then  this 
offence  of  thine  against  the  Holy  Ghost  is  put  away.  "  But,"  saith 
another,  "I  am  conscious  of  having  had  naturally  a  remarkable  tender- 
ness of  spirit ;  from  my  early  childhood  1  knew  right  from  wrong,  and 
when  I  sinned  it  cost  me  much  trouble  to  sin  ;  I  have  had  to  wound 
my  conscience  before  I  could  speak  an  ill  word,  or  commit  an  evil 
action."  Ah  !  my  brethren,  that  is  a  very  condemning  thing  to  sin 
against  a  tender  conscience.  It  is  a  great  boon,  and  in  this  age  a  very 
unusual  boon,  to  have  much  sensitiveness  and  delicacy  of  moral  con- 
stitution, and  if  you  have  violated  it,  it  is  certainly  a  great  transgression, 
but  though  "  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way,  the  Lord  hath 
laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  Let  no  despairing  thoui^ht  come 
upon  thee  as  though  this  sin  were  unpardonable.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ,  his  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Look  thou,  now,  by  faith 
to  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  find  that  thy  sin  is  blotted  out. 

There  may  be  one  in  this  place  who  says,  "  Sir,  I  committed  a  sin 
under  certain  remarkable  circumstances  which  I  would  not,  could  not, 
mention,  but  the  remembrance  of  that  one  sin  rankles  in  my  soul 
at  this  hour;  if  I  had  not  deliberately  and  with  malice  aforethought, 
not  having  the  fear  of  God  before  mine  eyes,  chosen  that  sin,  there 
might  have  been  hope,  but  that  sin  like  a  millstone  is  about  my  neck 
and  will  sink  me  for  ever  and  ever."  Hark  thee,  soul,  canst  thou  see 
Christ  on  the  cross?  Wilt  thou  now  confide  in  him?  If  so,  though 
thy  sin  be  as  scarlet  it  shall  be  as  wool,  though  it  be  red  like  crimson 
it  shall  be  as  snow.  I  know  not  what  thy  sin  may  hare  been,  but  if  it 
were  murder  itself,  if  thou  wouldst  now  trust  the  Son  of  God  thy  sin 
should  vanish  quite  away  from  thee,  and  thou  shouldst  be  clean,  clean 
every  whit,  before  the  all-seeing  eye  of  eternal  justice.  0  that  thou 
wouldst  believe,  and  this  should  be  true  to  thee.  '•  Nay,"  cries  another, 
"  but  mine  has  been  a  life  of  peculiarly  gross  sin;  I  would  not  have  my 
character  unmasked  before  this  congregation  on  any  account."  Consider 
then,  my  friend,  what  it  will  be  to  have  it  published  before  a  greater 
congregation,  before  the  entire  universe  ?  "Ah,"  sayest  thou,  "I  fear 
my  condemnation  is  certain,  for  my  transgressions  have  not  been  those 
of  thought  merely,  but  of  act;  the  members  of  my  body  have  been  the 


INDIVIDUAL   SIN   LAID   ON   JESUS.  fitigr. 

instruments  of  uncleanness."  Listen,  I  pray  thee,  "All  manner  of  sin 
and  of  iniquit}'  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men."  There  is  no  sin  so  black, 
save  only  one,  but  it  may  find  forgiveness ;  ay,  and  without  exception, 
there  is  no  sin  that  is  possible  to  man  but  what  it  shall  be  forgiven  to 
any  man  who  comes  to  Christ,  and  with  simple  trust  doth  cast  himself 
on  him.  Thine  extreme  evil  was  laid  on  Christ ;  though  thou  hast 
turned  unto  thine  own  way,  yet  this  too  was  laid  on  him. 

Do  I  not  hear  here  and  there  in  the  congregation  hearts  sighing  out, 
"  He  does  not  strike  my  case  yet ;  mine  has  not  been  gross  sin,  but  I 
have  hardened  my  heart;  I  used  to  feel  at  one  time;  I  had  great 
drawings  towards  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  I  gave  him  up ;  I  have  back- 
slidden, I  have  from  time  to  time  rejected  gospel  invitations,  until  now 
at  last  the  Lord  has  sworn  in  his  wrath  that  I  shall  not  enter  into  his 
rest;  my  transgressions  have  gone  over  my  head  like  overflowing 
waters,  I  sink  in  them  as  in  deep  mire  where  there  is  no  standing."  Ay, 
but  soul,  I  must  bring  thee  back  to  the  text.  Thou  hast  turned  to 
thine  own  way,  but,  if  thou  believest,  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Jesus  even 
this  iniquity  also;  if  thou  wilt  trust  him,  thy  hardenings  of  heart 
shall  now  be  forgiven  thee.  Thou  art  not  too  late,  the  gate  of  mercy 
still  stands  open  wide ;  if  thou  trustest  in  Jesus  this  iniquity  shall  be 
blotted  out,  "Alas!"  saith  another,  "but  I  have  been  a  hypocrite;  I 
have  come  to  the  Lord's-table,  and  yet  I  have  never  had  an  interest  in 
Christ;  I  have  been  baptised,  but  yet  I  never  had  true  faith,"  "Well, 
now,  I  will  say  this  to  end  all  matters — if  thou  hast  perpetrated  all  the 
sins  that  ever  were  committed  by  men  or  devils,  if  thou  hast  defiled 
thyself  with  all  the  blackness  that  could  be  raked  out  of  the  lowermost 
kennels  of  hell,  if  thou  hast  spoken  the  most  damnable  blasphemies 
and  followed  the  most  outrageous  vices,  j'et  Jesus  Christ  is  an  infinite 
Saviour,  and  nothing  can  exceed  the  merit  of  his  precious  blood.  "The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  dear  Son,  cleanseth  us  fi'om  all  sin," 
•Canst  thou  believe  this?  Canst  thou  do  Christ  the  honour  to  believe 
this,  and  come  and  ci'ouch  at  the  feet  that  once  were  pierced?  Ah! 
man,  thou  shalt  find  mercy  now,  and  thou  shalt  clap  thine  hands  and 
say,  "  He  hath  blotted  out  my  sins  like  a  cloud,  and  like  a  thick  cloud 
mine  iniquities." 

I  am  afraid  I  do  not  convey  to  you  the  pleasure  of  my  own  soul  in 
turning  over  this  thought,  but  it  has  charmed  me  beyond  measure. 
Here  were  Lot's  sins,  scandalous  sins,  I  cannot  mention  them,  they 
were  very  different  from  David's  sins.  Black  sins,  scarlet  sins,  were 
those  of  David,  but  David's  sins  are  not  at  all  like  those  of  Manasseh  ; 
the  sins  of  Manasseh  were  not  the  same  as  those  of  Peter — Peter  sinned 
in  quite  a  different  track  ;  and  the  woman  that  was  a  sinner,  you  could 
not  liken  her  to  Peter,  neither -if  you  look  to  her  character  could  you 
«et  her  side  by  side  with  Lydia ;  nor  if  you  think  of  Lydia,  can  you  see 
her  without  discovering  a  great  divergence  between  her  and  the 
Philippian  jailer.  They  are  all  alike,  they  have  all  gone  astray,  but 
they  are  all  different,  they  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  but 
here  is  the  blessed  gathering  up  of  them  all,  the  Lord  hath  made  to 
meet  on  the  Redeemer,  as  in  a  common  focus,  the  iniquity  of  all  these; 
and  up  yonder  Magdalena's  song  joins  sweetly  with  that  of  the  woman 
who  was  a  sinner,  and  Lydia,  chaste,  but  yet  needing  pardon,  sings  side 


618  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT, 

by  side  with  Bathsheba  and  Rahab ;  while  David  takes  up  the  strain 
with  Samson  and  with  Gideon,  and  these  with  Abraham  and  with  Isaac, 
all  differently  sinners,  but  the  atonement  meeting  every  case.  We 
always  think  that  man  a  quack  who  advertises  a  medicine  as  healing 
every  disease,  but  when  you  come  to  the  great  gospel  medicine,  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  you  have  there  in  very  deed  what  the  old 
doctors  used  to  call  a  cathoUcon^  a  universal  medicine  which  meets 
every  case  in  its  distinctness,  and  puts  away  sin  in  all  its  separateness 
of  guilt  as  if  it  were  made  for  that  sin,  and  for  that  sin  alone. 

III.  My  time  has  gone,  and  therefore  I  must  close  with  this,   a 

SPECIAL  DUTY  ARISING  OUT  OF  THE  SPECIAL   DOCTRINE. 

My  dear  brother,  if  in  my  discourse  I  have  at  all  described  you,  or  if 
not  having  described  you,  I  have  yet  from  that  very  reason  indicated 
you  as  an  indescribable,  look  thou  to  Christ  and  find  mercy,  and  then  ever 
afterwards  make  it  a  rule  with  thy  soul,  that  as  thou  hast  been  a  special 
sinner  thou  wilt  have  special  love  and  special  gratitude,  and  do  thy 
Lord  special  service.  Oh  !  if  it  takes  twenty  times  the  grace  to  save 
me  that  it  does  another,  then  I  will  render  to  my  Saviour  twenty  times 
the  love  and  twenty  times  the  service.  If  I  am  an  out-of-the-way 
straying  sheep,  peculiarly  and  specially  black,  defiled  and  disgraced, 
then  if  he  loves  me  I  will  go  upon  this  rule,  that  having  had  much  for- 
given I  will  love  much. 

Brethren  and  sisters,  I  wish  you  did  feel,  I  wish  I  did  feel,  more 
and  more  the  peculiarity  of  the  weight  of  our  personal  sin,  for  I  am 
sure  it  is  the  way  to  drive  us  into  manliness  of  Christian  service. 
If  you  perform  homage  to  Christ  as  one  of  a  crowd,  you  do  but 
little,  and  that  little  badly.  For  eminent  service  you  need  to  get  away 
from  the  crowd,  and  serve  the  Lord  personally  by  yourself,  and  as 
an  individual.  Get  alone,  I  mean  in  a  sense  of  obligation,  separate 
yourself,  as  if  you  were  a  marked  man,  and  must  serve  Jesus  Christ  in 
a  marked  way.  The  separation  of  pride  is  detestable,  but  individuality 
of  service  is  admirable.  Those  who  stand  steadily  in  the  rank  and  file  do 
well,  but  those  who  step  forward  to  lead  the  forlorn  hope  do  better.  0 
for  more  Davids  to  come  forth  and  say,  "  Who  is  this  uncircumcised 
Philistine  that  he  should  defy  the  armies  of  the  living  God  ?"  0  that 
the  Christian  church  had  more  self-sacrificing  men,  like  old  Curtius, 
who,  when  there  is  a  chasm  to  fill  up,  leap  into  it,  and  feel  it  an 
honour  to  be  swallowed  up  for  Christ's  sake  and  the  truth's  sake. 
0  for  many  a  Christian  Scfevola,  who,  like  the  Roman  hero,  will  hold 
his  hand  in  the  fire  if  need  be,  and  flinch  not,  feeling  that  all  suffering 
were  little  to  bear  for  one  who  bled  for  us.  We  want  more  consecrated 
men.  May  God  raise  them  up ;  and  he  will  if  you  who  feel  your  special 
sinnership  find  special  mercy,  and  then  render  to  God  special  returns. 

It  has  struck  me  that  we  want  more  and  more  in  the  pulpit,  and  in 


INDIVIDUAL   SIN    LAID   ON   JESUS.  glQi 

the  pew,  individuality  in  our  Christian  experience  and  service.  You 
see  we  are  all  individuals  in  sinning,  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his 
own  way,  and  yet  many  Christian  people  want  to  have  their  experience 
modelled  after  the  example  of  some  one  else.  They  do  not 
like  to  grow  like  God's  trees  in  the  forest,  with  their  gnarled 
roots  and  twisted  boughs;  they  want  to  be  clipped  like  Dutch 
trees  into  one  uniform  stiffness.  "Why,  you  lose  the  beauty  of  Christianity 
when  you  lose  the  individuality  of  Christians.  In  preaching  and  Sunday  - 
school  teaching,  and  everything  else,  the  tendency  is  to  go  too  much  in 
ruts  and  grooves  ;  one  might  fancy  that  men  and  women  were  made  by 
machinery  like  pens  at  Birmingham,  all  of  a  sort.  We  would  have 
every  man  in  grace  as  individual  as  he  was  in  sin.  We  need  the 
originality  of  saintly  life  as  well  as  of  sinnership.  It  were  well  if  a 
Christian  man  would  step  out  of  the  beaten  track  and  carry  out  his 
individuality,  and  be  what  God  especially  meant  him  to  be.  Brethren, 
there  is  a  part  of  this  world  which  can  never  get  a  blessing  except 
through  you.  Christ  has  power  over  all  flesh,  and  he  has  given  his 
servants  power  over  their  little  portions  of  that  great  mass.  All  the 
ministers  that  ever  lived  cannot  bring  to  Christ  those  souls  whom  God 
has  ordained  that  I  shall  be  the  means  of  turning  to  Christ;  and  neither 
I  nor  my  brethren,  preach  as  we  may,  can  bring  to  Christ  the  man  whom 
God  has  ordained  to  save  through  yonder  obscure  village  local  preacher 
who  is  now  standing  on  a  log  on  the  village  green,  or  holding  forth  in 
a  wooden  shed  in  the  backwoods  of  America.  There  is  a  place  for  every 
man,  and  the  way  for  every  man  to  find  that  out  is  to  be  himself  and 
nobody  else ;  as  he  used  to  be  himself  when  he  was  a  sinner,  so  let  him 
be  himself  now  he  has  become  a  saint,  and  follow  out,  under  God's 
guidance,  the  movements  of  his  own  individualities,  the  singularities  of 
his  own  nature.  Tush,  about  planing  ofi"  your  angles  and  getting 
rid  of  the  points  God  has  made  in  you  distinct  from  other  men.  It 
will  never  do.  You  lose  of  Christianity  the  very  beauty  and  excellence 
if  you  do  this.  Your  fine  critics  would  have  Rowland  Hill  preach  like 
Thomas  Chalmers  ;  Rowland  Hill  must  never  utter  a  witticism  in  the 
pulpit,  yet  he  could  not  be  Rowland  Hill  if  he  did  not;  he  must, 
therefore,  be  transmogrified  into  some  one  else,  for  these  superfine 
gentlemen  will  not  allow  that  Rowland  Hill  as  Rowland  Hill  can 
honour  God.  Wisdom  will  be  justiSe'i  of  all  her  children.  Whether 
you  speak  with  the  learning  of  Apollos,  or  with  the  eloquence  of  a. 
Paul,  or  with  the  blunt  homeliness  of  a  Cephas,  the  Lord  will  get  to 
himself  honour,  if  you  speak  sincerely;  and  it  is  not  for  Paul  to  mimic 
Cephas,  nor  for  Cephas  to  ape  Apollos.  As  we  have  turned  every  one  to 
his  own  way,  and  our  peculiar  sin  has  been  laid  on  Christ,  so  let  each 
believer  now  in  his  own  way,  under  the  direction  of  Christ,  seek  to 
serve  his  Lord  and  Master. 


€20  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

My  great  practical  lesson  from  it  is  this.  You  are  always  seeinsr  new 
inventions  in  the  world,  men  are  evermore  bringing  out  some  new 
system  or  scheme  ;  we  tunnel  the  earth,  we  split  the  clouds,  we  speak 
by  lifihtning,  we  ride  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  but  in  the  Christian 
church  how  few  inventors  we  have !  Eobert  Raikes  invented  the 
Sundny  School,  John  Pounds  invented  Ragged  Schools ;  have  we  come 
to  the  end  of  gracious  ingenuity  ?  Oh,  if  we  loved  Christ  better,  every 
man  would  invent  something,  he  would  have  a  mode  of  action  growing 
out  of  his  own  peculiar  capacities;  he  would  feel  that  God  meant  to 
meet  a  case  by  him  that  would  never  be  met  by  anybody  else.  Men 
are  all  alive  about  this  world,  and  all  asleep  about  the  world  to  come. 
I  would  urge  you  each  to  have  a  mission,  to  espouse  a  work,  to  obtain 
a  calling.  Ask  God  not  to  put  you  into  the  Sunday  School  as  a 
matter  of  mere  providence,  but  as  a  matter  of  special  ordination ;  and 
if  you  are  ordained  to  be  a  Sunday-school  teacher,  ask  him  to  put  you 
into  some  particular  class,  not  as  by  an  accident,  but  as  a  special 
sphere  for  your  special  character  and  taste,  and  mode  of  thought,  and 
manner  of  action.  Follow  out  as  God  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  help  you, 
the  promptings  of  the  divine  life  that  God  has  put  within  you,  and  as 
you  served  Satan  with  all  your  individuality,  even  so  serve  him  upon 
whom  the  Lord  of  old  did  lay  your  iniquity.  The  Lord  bless  you  for 
Christ's  sake. 


PoETiON  OF  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  liiL 


THE   SHEEP  BEFOEE   THE   SHEARERS. 


xn\o\{ 


DELIVEEED   BY 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT    THE    METROPOIJTAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"Asa  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth." — Isaiah 
liii.  7. 

It  is  very  suggestive  of  the  way  in  which  our  Lord  Jesus  took  the 
sinner's  place  that  we  are  here  in  the  context  comj)ared  to  sheep :  "  All 
we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray,"  and  then  he  who  comes  to  take  our 
place  is  compared  to  a  sheep  also, — "  As  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is 
dumb."  It  is  Avonderful  how  complete  was  the  interchange  of  positions 
between  Christ  and  his  people,  so  that  what  they  were  that  he  became, 
in  order  that  Avhat  he  is  they  may  become.  See  how  closely  he  became 
like  his  brethren.  I  can  very  well  understand  how  we  should  be  like  to 
the  sheep  and  he  to  the  shepherd ;  but  I  should  never  have  dared  to 
coin  the  comparison  which  likens  Mm  to  a  sheep.  I  dare  try  to  explain, 
but  I  should  never  have  dared  to  utter  it  if  I  had  not  found  it  here. 
To  liken  the  Son  of  the  Highest  to  a  sheep  would  have  been  unpardon- 
able presumption  had  not  his  own  Spirit  employed  the  condescending 
figure. 

Though  the  emblem  is  very  gracious,  it  is  by  no  means  novel,  for 
our  Lord  had  been  long  before  Isaiah's  day  typified  in  the  lamb  of  the 
Passover.  To  call  him  "  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin 
of  the  world,"  is  a  very  frequent  mode  of  explaining  to  us  how  he  made 
expiation  for  our  transgressions :  and  indeed  even  in  his  glory  he  is  the 
Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  before  whom  angels  and  the  redeemed 
are  bowing.  I  delight  to  bring  before  your  minds  the  singular  com- 
munion between  yourselves  and  Jesus  :  you  "  like  sheep,"  and  he  "  as  a 
sheep  ;"  you  like  sheep  in  your  wanderings,  he  like  a  sheep  in  his 
patience ;  you  most  like  sheep — I  mean  myself  and  you — most  like 
slieep  for  foolishness,  but  he  only  like  a  sheep  for  the  sweet  submissive- 
ness  of  his  spirit,  so  that  beneath  the  shearer's  hand  "  he  openeth  not 
his  mouth." 

I.  I  will  not  keep  you  with  any  preface,  but  invite  you  to  consider, 
first,  OUR  Saviour's  patience,  under  the  figure  of  a  sheep  before  her 
shearers.  Let  us  view  our  Lord's  patience  by  the  help  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

I  do  not  think  I  will  preach  to  you,  but  I  will  set  before  you  as  opea 
No.   1,543. 

lo 


€22  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

a  window  as  I  can,  and  ask  you  to  look  in.  and  behold  the  Lamb  of 
God.  Our  Lord  was  brought  to  the  slaughter,  and  brought  in  another 
sense  by  another  figure  to  the  shearers :  to  the  slaughter  that  he  might 
die ;  to  the  shearers  that  he  might  be  shorn  of  his  comfort,  and  of  his 
honours,  shorn  even  of  his  good  name,  and  shorn  at  last  of  life  itself. 
"While  he  was  before  the  slaughtermen  he  was  quiet  as  a  lamb  tliat  is 
led :  when  he  was  under  the  shearers  he  was  as  silent  as  a  sheep  that 
lieth  to  be  shorn.  You  know  the  story  of  how  patient  he  was  before 
Pilate,  and  Herod,  and  Caiaphas,  and  on  the  cross.  You  have  no 
record  of  his  groaning,  or  of  his  uttering  any  exclamation  as  though 
impatient  of  the  pain  and  shame  which  he  received  at  the  hands  of 
wicked  men ;  you  have  not  one  bitter  word,  one  hard  speech.  Pilate 
cries,  "  Answerest  thou  nothing  ?  Behold  how  many  things  they  witness 
against  thee";  and  Herod  is  bitterly  disappointed,  for  he  expected  to 
see  some  miracle  wrought  by  him.  All  that  he  does  say  is  like  the 
bleating  of  a  sheep,  only  so  infinitely  more  full  of  meaning.  He  utters 
sentences  like  these, — "  For  this  purpose  was  I  born,  and  came  into  the 
world,  that  I  might  bear  witness  to  the  truth,"  and,  "  Father,  forgive 
them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."     He  is  all  patience  and  silence. 

Now  remember,  first,  that  our  Lord  was  dumb  and  opened  not  his 
mouth  against  his  adversaries,  and  did  not  accuse  one  of  them  of  cruelty 
or  injustice.  They  slandered  him,  but  he  replied  not ;  false  witnesses 
arose,  but  he  answered  them  not.  He  did  not  say,  like  Paul,  "  God 
shall  smite  thee,  thou  white  wall."  I  am  not  going  to  condemn  Paul, 
but  I  certainly  am  not  going  to  commend  him.  In  contrast  with  the 
Master  how  differently  he  behaves  !  Jesus  lets  not  fall  a  word  against 
anybody,  though  they  are  doing  everything  that  malice  can  invent 
against  him.  For  Pilate  he  even  makes  a  half  apology,  "  He  that 
delivered  me  unto  thee  hath  the  greater  sin."  One  would  have  thought 
he  must  have  spoken  when  they  spat  in  his  face.  Might  he  not  have 
said,  "  Friend,  why  doest  thou  this  ?  For  which  of  all  my  works  dost 
thou  insult  me  ?"  But  the  time  for  such  expostulations  was  over.  When 
they  smote  him  on  the  ftice  with  the  palms  of  their  hands,  it  would  not 
have  been  wonderful  if  he  had  said,  "  "Wherefore  do  you  smite  me  so  ?" 
But  no  ;  he  speaketh  not.  He  brings  no  accusation  to  his  Father.  He 
had  only  to  have  lifted  his  eye  to  heaven,  or  to  have  felt  a  wrathful 
wish,  and  legions  of  angels  would  have  chased  out  the  ribald  soldiery  ; 
one  flash  of  a  seraph's  wing  and  Herod  had  been  eaten  by  worms,  and 
Pilate  had  died  the  death  he  well  deserved  as  an  unjust  judge.  The 
hill  of  the  cross  might  have  become  a  volcano's  mouth  to  swallow  up 
the  whole  multitude  who  stood  there  jesting  and  jeering  at  him :  but 
no,  nothing  of  the  kind,  there  was  no  display  of  power,  or  rather  there 
was  so  great  a  display  of  power  over  himself  that  he  did  not  use  his 
might  against  his  bitterest  foes ;  he  restrained  Omnipotence  itself  with  a 
strength  which  never  can  be  measured,  for  his  mighty  love  availed  even 
to  restrain  divine  wrath.  He  kept  back  the  natural  indignation  which 
must  have  come  over  his  spirit  against  the  injustice,  the  falsehood,  the 
shameful  malice  of  his  foes ;  he  held  it  all  back,  and  was  patient,  meek, 
silent  to  the  end. 

Again,  as  he  did  not  utter  a  word  against  his  adversaries,  so  he  did 
not  say  a  word  against  ang  one  of  lis.     You  remember  how  Zipporab 


THE  SHEEP  BEFORE  THE  SHEARERS.  (J28 

said  to  Moses,  "Surely  a  bloody  husband  art  thou  to  me,"  as  she  saw 
her  child  bleeding ;  and  surely  Jesus  might  have  said  to  his  church, 
"  Thou  art  a  costly  spouse  to  me,  to  bring  me  all  this  shame  and  blood- 
shedding."  But  he  giveth  liberally,  he  openeth  the  yeiy  fountain  of 
his  heart,  and  he  upbraidetli  not.  He  had  reckoned  on  the  uttermost 
expenditure,  and  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame. 

"  This  was  compassion  like  a  God, 
That  when  the  Saviour  knew 
The  price  of  pardon  was  his  blood. 
His  pity  ne'er  withdrew." 

No  doubt  he  looked  across  the  ages ;  for  that  eye  of  his  was  not  dim, 
€Ten  when  bloodshot  on  the  tree,  and  he  might  have  looked  at  your 
indifference  and  mine,  at  our  coldness  of  heart,  and  unfaithfulness,  and 
he  might  have  left  on  record  some  such  words  as  these  :  "  I  am  suffering 
for  those  who  are  utterly  unworthy  of  my  regard ;  their  love  will  be  a 
very  poor  return  for  mine.  Though  I  give  my  whole  heart  for  them, 
how  lukewarm  is  their  love  to  me !  I  am  sick  of  them,  I  am  weary  of 
them,  and  it  is  woe  to  me  that  I  should  be  laying  down  my  heart's 
blood  for  such  a  worthless  race  as  these  my  people  are."  But  there  is 
not  a  hint  of  such  a  feelillg,  not  a  trace  of  it.  He  is  dumb  before  the 
shearers.  They  shear  away  everything  from  him,  they  strip  him  to  the 
last  rag,  till,  as  he  hangs  upon  the  tree,  he  says,  "  I  can  tell  all  my  bones, 
they  look  and  stare  upon  me,"  and  yet  he  murmurs  not  against  our 
cruel  sins.  He  was  stripped  because  we  were  naked,  that  he  might 
cover  our  nakedness,  and  yet  he  makes  no  complaint  against  us,  nor 
utters  a  single  syllable  by  way  of  regret  that  he  had  entered  upon  so 
severe  an  enterprise,  and  that  he  was  paying  so  heavy  a  pi'ice.  No. 
"  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the 
shame,"  and  not  a  syllable  is  uttered  that  looks  like  murmuring,  or 
wishing  that  he  had  not  commenced  the  work. 

And  again,  as  there  was  not  a  word  against  his  adversaries,  nor  a 
word  against  you  nor  me,  so  there  was  not  a  word  against  Ms  Father  or 
of  repining  at  the  severity  of  the  punishment  of  our  sin.  You  know  how 
Cain  said,  "  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear,"  and  yet  to  me 
he  seems  to  have  been  treated  with  strange  leniency,  that  first  red-handed 
man.  Sometimes  you  and  I  have  cried,  when  under  a  comparatively 
light  grief,  "Surely  my  grief  cannot  be  weighed  in  the  scales,  nor 
measured  in  the  balances.  '  We  have  thought  ourselves  lordly  dune 
by.  We  have  dared  to  cry  out  against  God,  "My  face  is  foul  with 
weeping,  and  on  my  eyelids  is  the  shadow  of  death ;  not  for  any  in- 
justice in  mine  hands  :  also  my  prayer  is  pure."  But  not  so  the  Saviour ; 
in  his  mouth  were  no  complaints.  Yet  it  is  quite  impossible  for  us 
to  conceive  how  the  Father  pressed  and  bruised  him.  How  often  did 
that  olive  press  revolve ;  how  was  the  screw  tightened  again  and  again 
and  again,  to  bring  the  stones  together,  to  bruise  out  of  him  liis  very 
life !  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him ;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief," 
He  alone  of  all  mankind  could  truly  say,  "  All  thy  waves  and  thy 
billows  have  gone  over  me  " ;  yet  there  is  not  a  comj)laint,  for  "  My 
(jod,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "  is  a  cry  of  grief^  but  it  is 
not  a  cry  of  repining.     It  shows  manhood  in  its  weakness,  but  not 


g24  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIX. 

manhood  in  revolt.  There  is  the  cry  of  grief,  but  there  is  not  the  voice 
of  rebellion  there,  nor  even  of  despair.  We  have  the  Lamentations  of 
Jeremiah,  but  where  are  the  lamentations  of  Jesus  ?  Jesus  wept,  and 
Jesus  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  but  he  never  murmured  nor  felt 
rebellion  in  his  heart. 

Beloved,  I  feel  as  if  I  could  not  preach  upon  this,  but  ask  you  just 
to  look  in  there,  within  the  open  door,  and  see  Jesus  like  the  lamb  wait- 
ing in  the  shaml)les :  not  straggling,  when  the  knife  is  at  his  throat, 
but  waiting  there  to  die,  and  dying  with  his  own  consent;  laying  down 
his  life  willingly  for  our  sakes.  Look  again,  and  see  yout-  Lord  and 
Saviour  lying  down  stretched  out  in  passive  resignation  beneath  the 
shearers,  as  they  take  away  everything  that  is  dear  to  him,  and  yet  he 
opeueth  not  his  mouth.  I  see  in  this,  in  Christ  our  Lord,  complete, 
suhmiHsion.  He  gives  himself  up ;  there  is  no  reserve  about  it.  The 
sacrifice  did  not  need  binding  with  cords  to  the  horns  of  the  altar.  How 
different  from  your  case  and  mine  ?  He  stands  there  willing  to  suffer, 
to  be  spit  upon,  to  be  shamefally  entreated,  and  to  die,  for  in  him  there 
was  a  complete  surrender.  There  was  no  reserve  about  his  body,  soul, 
or  spirit.  He  was  wholly  given  up  to  do  the  Father's  will,  and  work  out 
our  redemption.  There  was  a  complete  self-conquest  too.  In  him  no 
faculty  arose  to  plead  for  liberty,  and  ask  to  be  exempted  fiom  the 
general  strain ;  no  limb  of  the  l)ody,  no  portion  of  the  mind,  no  faculty 
of  the  spirit  started,  but  all  submitted:  a  whole  Christ  giving  up  his 
whole  being  unto  God,  that  he  might  perfectly  offer  himself  without  spot 
for  our  redemption. 

There  was  not  only  self-conquest,  but  there  was  a  complete  absorption 
in  his  ivork.  The  sheep,  lying  there,  thinks  no  more  of  the  pastures,  it 
just  gives  itself  up  to  the  shearer.  And  Christ  forsook  his  Father  that 
he  niighc  be  one  flesh  with  us ;  that  was  at  the  \Qvy  first,  and  therefore 
he  came  here  and  was  joined  unto  us  at  Bethlehem.  He  kept  up  the 
union  to  the  end,  and  hence  he  was  one  with  us  in  death.  The  zeal  of 
God's  house  did  eat  him  up  in  Pilate's  hall  as  well  as  everywhere  else, 
for  there  he  witnessed  a  good  confession.  Xo  thought  had  he  but  for 
the  clearing  of  the  divine  honour,  and  the  salvation  of  God's  elect.  His 
powers  were  concentrated  into  one  desire,  and  the  passion  of  love  to  men 
made  his  heart  hot  within  him  till  it  melted  and  ran  out  in  a  stream 
of  love  and  blood.  Oh,  brethren,  I  wish  we  could  ever  get  to  this,  to 
submit  our  whole  spirit  to  God,  to  resign  ourselves  completely,  to  learn 
self-conquest,  and  then  the  delivering  up  of  conquered  self  entirely  to 
God :  the  absorption  of  it  all  in  one  desire,  the  burning  up  of  the  sacri- 
fice till  it  should  be  like  Elias'  sacrifice  on  Carmel,  when  the  fire  came 
down  from  heaven,  and  consumed  not  only  the  bullock,  but  the  wood 
and  the  stones  of  the  altar,  and  licked  up  the  water  that  was  in  the 
trenches,  and  the  whole  sacrifice  went  up  in  one  vast  cloud  of  fire  and 
smoke  to  heaven,  a  whole  burnt  offering  to  the  living  God.  This  is  just 
what  one  could  wish  might  happen  unto  us,  even  as  it  happened  unto 
the  Lord's  Christ  on  that  day. 

The  wonderful  serenity  and  submissiveness  of  our  Lord  are  still  better 
set  forth  by  our  text,  if  it  be  indeed  true  that  sheep  in  the  east  are 
even  more  docile  than  with  us.  Those  who  have  seen  the  noise  and 
roughness  of  many  of  our  washings  and  shearings  will  hardly  believe  the 


THE    SHEEP   BEFORE   THE    SHEARERS.  g.25 

testimony  of  that  ancient  writer  Philo-Judaeus  wlien  he  affirms  that 
the  sheep  came  Yoluntarily  to  be  shorn.  He  says  :  "  Woolly  rams  laden 
•with  thick  fleeces  put  themselves  into  his  hands  (the  shepherd's)  to 
have  their  wool  shorn,  being  thus  accustomed  to  pay  their  yearly  tribute 
to  man,  their  king  by  nature.  The  sheep  stands  in  a  silent  inclining 
posture,  unconstrained  under  the  hand 'of  the  shearer.  These  things 
may  appear  strange  to  those  who  do  not  know  the  docility  of  the  sheep, 
•but  they  are  true." 

II.  Thus  I  have  very  feebly  indeed  set  before  you,  dear  friends,  the 
I'.atience  of  our  beloved  Master.  Now  I  want  you  to  follow  me,  in  the 
.sucond  place,  to  vieav  our   own  case  under  the  same  metaphor. 

AS   THAT   WHICH    IS   USED   IN   REFERENCE   TO  OUR   LORD. 

Did  not  I  begin  by  saying  that  because  we  were  sheep  he  deigns  to 
■compare  himself  to  a  sheep  ?  Now,  just  go  back  again.  Our  Lord 
"was  a  sheep  under  the  shearers,  and  as  he  is  so  arc  we  also  in  this 
world.  Though  we  shall  never  be  offered  up  like  a  lamb  in  the  temple 
by  way  of  expiation,  yet  the  saints  for  ages  were  the  flock  of  slaughter, 
■as  it  is  written,  "  For  thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long,  we  are 
.accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter ! "  Jesus  sends  us  forth  as  sheep 
in  the  midst  of  wolves,  and  we  are  to  regard  ourselves  as  living  sacrifices, 
.ready  to  be  offered  up.  I  dwell,  however,  more  particularly  upon  the 
second  symbol :  we  can  go,  and  do  go,  as  sheep  under  the  shearers'  hands. 
I  want  to  speak  to  you  a  little  to-night  about  this  figure,  as  I  ha^'e  no 
•doubt  it  has  been  wrought  out  in  the  lives  of  many  here  present,  and 
may  perhaps  be  wrought  out  at  this  present  time,  and  in  future  days  in 
the  rest  of  you. 

Just  as  a  sheep  is  taken  by  the  shearer,  and  its  wool  is  all  cut  oflP,  so 
■doth  the  Lord  take  his  people  and  shear  them,  taking  away  all  their 
comforts  at  times,  all  their  earthly  comforts,  and  leaving  them  bare  as 
shorn  sheep.  I  wish  when  it  came  to  our  turn  to  undergo  this  shearing 
operation  it  could  be  said  of  us  as  of  our  Lord,  "As  a  sheep  before  her 
shearers,  so  he  openeth  not  his  mouth."  I  fear  that  we  open  our  mouths 
a  great  deal,  and  make  no  end  of  complaint.  But  now  to  the  figure. 
We  need  to  be  reconciled  to  the  shearing  process,  and  to  that  end  I 
shall  speak  at  this  time. 

First,  remember  that  a  sJiepp  rewards  its  owner  for  all  his  care  and 
trouble  by  being  shorn.  There  is  nothing  else  that  I  know  of  that  a 
sheep  can  do.  It  yields  food  when  it  is  killed,  but  while  it  is  alive  the 
•one  payment  that  the  sheep  can  make  to  the  shepherd  is  to  yield  its 
fleece  in  due  season.  And  so,  dear  friends,  a  sheep,  if  it  were  intelli- 
gent, might  well  be  reconciled  to  be  shorn  because  it  would  say,  "  The 
:3hepherd  deserves  to  be  rewarded  for  his  pains,  and  so  I  am  content  to 
go  down  to  the  shearing  house,  to  yield  my  fleece  that  he  may  be 
i-epaid."  Some  of  God's  people  can  give  to  Christ  a  tribute  of  gratitude 
i)y  active  service,  and  they  sliould  do  so  gladly  every  day  of  their  lives  ; 
but  many  others  cannot  do  much  in  active  service,  and  about  the  only 
reward  they  can  give  to  their  Lord  is  to  give  up  their  fleece  by  sutteriug 
vi'hen  he  calls  upon  them  to  siuTer ;  submissi\ely  yielding  to  be  shorn  of 
their  personal  comfort  when  the  time  comes  lor  patient  esidurancG. 
And,  mark  you,  those  who  serve  Christ  actively  ought  to  feel  that  what 
%hQY  do  in  tliat  way  is  all  too  little,  and  if  they  can  supplement  it  by 
2r 


g26  METROPOLITAN   TABKRNACLE   PULPIT. 

passive  service,  by  yielding  theuiselves  to  be  shorn  as  others  are,  they; 
ought  to  rejoice  that  in  this  way  they  can  show  forth  to  Christ  the- 
more  abundant  gratitude  for  what  he  has  done  for  them. 

Here  comes  the  shearer ;  he  takes  the  sheep  and  begins  to  cut,  cut, 
cut,  cut,  taking  away  the  wool  l)y  wholesale.  Affliction  is  often  used  as 
the  big  shears.  The  husband  is  taken  away,  or  perhaps  the  wife, 
little  children  are  taken  away,  property  is  taken  away,  health  is  taken 
away.  Sometimes  the  shears  even  cut  off  your  good  name;  slander- 
comes,  everything  seems  to  come  and  remove  your  consolations,  till 
all  comforts  vanish.  "Well,  this  is  your  shearing  time,  and  it  may  be- 
that  you  are  not  able  to  glorify  God  to  any  very  large  extent  except  by 
undergoing  this  process ;  and  if  this  be  the  fact,  do  you  not  think  thai 
you  and  I,  like  good  sheep  of  Christ,  should  surrender  cheerfully  ami 
say,  "  I  lay  myself  down  with  this  intent,  that  thou  shouldst  taki^ 
from  me  anything  and  everything,  and  do  what  thou  wilt  with  me  ;  for 
I  am  not  mine  own,  I  am  bought  with  a  price,  and  so  I  would  clieer- 
fully  yield  to  anything  by  which  thou  mayest  get  some  honour  out  o," 
me.  Thou  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  clip  and  shear  me  as  thou  wilt,. 
so  long  as  thou  seest  some  sort  of  return  for  all  thy  tender  care  an  1' 
bitter  woe. 

Notice  that  the  sheep  is  itself  henpfited  hy  (he  operation  ofsheariwi. 
Before  they  begin  to  shear  the  sheep  the  wool  is  long  and  old,  antl' 
every  bush  that  catches  it,  every  thistle  with  which  it  gets  entangled, 
every  briar  that  it  passes  by,  tears  off  a  bit  of  the  wool,  and  the  sheep- 
looks  ragged  and  forlorn.  If  the  wool  were  left  on  it  when  the  heat  of 
summer  came  it  would  not  be  able  to  bear  itself,  it  would  be  so 
overloaded  with  clothing  that  it  would  be  as  we  ourselves  are  when  we 
ha^-e  kept  on  our  borrowed  wool,  our  flannels  and  broadcloths,  too  late. 
After  the  heat  of  summer  has  come  w' e  have  to  throw-  off"  our  thick  clothes  r 
we  cannot  bear  them;  so  the  sheep  is  the  better  for  losing  its  wool,  it 
would  become  a  hindrance  to  it  and  not  a  comfort  if  it  could  retain 
it.  So  brethren,  when  the  Lord  shears  us,  we  do  not  like  the  operation- 
any  more  than  the  sheep  do  ;  but  first,  it  is  for  his  glorij,  and  secondly, 
it  really  is  for  our  benefit,  and  therefore  we  are  bound  most  willingly  to 
submit.  There  are  many  things  which  we  should  have  liked  to  have- 
kept  which,  if  we  bad  kept  them,  would  not  have  proved  blessings,  but 
curses.  Remember,  a  stale  blessing  is  a  curse.  The  brazen  serpent 
preserved  as  a  relic  became  a  snare  to  the  people  till  it  was  broken  up- 
and  called  Nehushtan,  a  piece  of  brass.  The  manna,  though  it  came 
from  heaven,  was  only  good  so  long  as  God's  command  made  it  a  blessing, 
but  when  they  kept  it  over  its  due  time  it  bred  worms  and  stank,  and 
then  it  was  no  blessing.  I  do  believe  that  many  persons  if  they 
could  would  keep  their  blessings  stinking  in  the  house  till  they  filled 
their  cupboards  with  worms.  But  God  will  not  have  it  so.  Up  to  a. 
certain  point  for  you  to  be  wealthy  was  a  blessing  ;  it  would  not  have 
been  a  blessing  any  longer,  and  so  the  Lord  took  your  riches  away.  Up- 
to  that  point  your  child  was  a  boon,  but  it  would  have  been  no  longer 
so,  and  therefore  it  fell  sick  and  died.  You  may  not  be  able  to  see  it,. 
but  it  must  certainly  be,  that  (lod,  when  he  withdraws  a  blessing  from. 
his  people,  takes  it  away  because  it  would  not  be  a  blessing  any  longer. 
liemember  this  text,  "  Xo  good  thing  will  I  withhold  from  them  that, 


THE  sni:i;p  biofore  the  sheauehs.  (j27 

walk  uprij^htly,"  and  if  that  be  true,  then  this  is  true,  "No  really  good 
thing  will  I  take  away  from  them  that  walk  upriglitly,"  for  that  is 
something  more  than  withholding. 

When  the  wool  goes,  it  is  because  the  sheep  does  not  really  want  it, 
it  is  better  without  it.  Mr.  Jouatt,  who  has  written  upon  sheep,  tells 
us,  "  As  the  spring  advances  the  old  wool  is  no  longer  needed  to  defend 
the  animal  from  the  cold,  and  it  becomes,  from  its  weight  and  its  warmth, 
a  nuisance  rather  than  a  comfort."  When  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  sends 
;»ffliction  and  trial  to  shear  us,  while  we  hope  to  glorify  him  in  the 
process,  it  is  alpo  good  for  us  that  we  should  have  it  cut  away.  Though 
we  do  not  lilsc  it  at  the  time,  it  is  working  our  lasting  good. 

You  who  know  something  about  sheep  will  remember  that  before 
sheep  are  shoi-n  llieij  are  aliuaijs  waslwd.  Were  you  over  present  at  the 
scene  when  they  drive  them  down  to  the  brook,  to  the  place  whei'e  they 
have  dammed  up  the  stream  to  make  a  pool  for  washing  ?  There  the 
)uen  stand  in  rows,  while  the  shepherd  stands  in  the  water  breast  high. 
The  sheep  are  driven  down,  and  the  men  seize  them,  throw  them  into 
the  water,  keeping  their  faces  above  water,  and  swill  them  round  and 
round  and  round  to  wash  the  wool  l)efore  they  clip  it  oif.  You  see 
them  come  out  on  the  other  side  frighteni'd  to  death,  poor  things, 
wondering  whatever  is  coming,  no  doubt  under  the  impression  that 
they  are  going  to  be  drowned,  and  when  they  escape  they  stand  bleating 
on  the  other  shore  as  one  by  one  they  finish  their  swim.  I  want  to 
snggest  to  you,  brethren,  that  whenever  a  trial  threatens  to  overtake 
you,  before  it  actually  arrives  you  should  ask  the  Lord  to  sanctify  you. 
1  f  he  is  going  to  clip  the  wool,  ask  him  to  wash  it  before  he  takes  it  off; 
ask  to  be  cleansed  in  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  That  is  a  very  good  custom 
Christian  people  have  of  asking  a  blessing  on  their  meals  before  they 
cat  bread.  Do  you  not  think  it  is  even  more  necessary  to  ask  a  blessing 
on  our  troubles  before  we  get  into  them?  Here  is  your  dear  child 
likely  to  die;  will  you  not,  dear  parents,  meet  together  and  ask  God 
to  bless  tlie  death  of  that  child,  if  it  is  to  happen,  flere  are  things 
going  badly  in  trade:  would  it  not  be  a  good  thing  to  hold  a  special 
meeting  in  the  family,  and  ask  God  to  bless  your  declining  business  to 
you  ?  There  is  a  had  crop ;  the  harvest  fails ;  would  it  not  be  well  to 
say — "  Lord,  sanctify  this  poverty,  this  loss,  this  year's  bad  harvest : 
cause  it  to  be  a  means  of  grace  to  us.  The  evil  is  coming,  and  ere  it 
comes  we  would  ask  a  blessing  on  it."  Why  not  ask  a  blessing  on  the 
cup  of  bitterness  as  well  as  upon  the  cup  of  thanksgiving  ?  Ask  to  be 
washed  belbre  you  are  shorn,  and  if  the  shearing  must  come,  let 
that  be  your  chief  concern.  "  Lord,  if  thou  art  coming  to  take  my  wool, 
make  it  clean  before  thou  takest  it :  wash  what  thou  takest,  and  wash 
me  also,  and  I  shall  be  clean ;  yea,  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than 
snow." 

After  the  washing,  and  the  sheep  has  dried,  the  sheep  actually  loses 
irlutt  was  its  comfort.  It  is  thrown  down,  and  you  see  the  shearers ; 
you  wonder  at  them  and  pity  the  poor  sheep.  The  sheep  is  losing  what 
was  its  comfort.  It  will  happen  to  you  that  you  shall  lose  what  is  your 
comfort.  Will  you  recollect  this  ?  Because  the  next  time  you  receive 
a  fresh  comfort  you  must  say,  this  is  a  loan.  Oh  sheep,  there  is  no 
wool  on  your  back  but  what  will  corae  off;  child  of  God,  there  is  no 


-,SQ  METllOrOMTAN   TABEUNACLE    PULriT. 

comfort  in  your  possession  but  what  will  either  leave  you,  or  you  will 
leave  it.  Nothing  is  our  own  except  our  God.  "  Wliy,"  says  one, 
"not  our  sin?"  That  was  our  own,  I  own  that,  but  Jesus  has  tahen 
that  upon  himself,  and  we  call  it  no  more  our  own.  There  is  nothiui^ 
our  own  but  our  God,  and  there  is  no  blessing  that  we  have  but  what, 
when  the  Lord  sends  it  to  us,  it  is  on  the  agreement  that  we  shall 
have  it  only  for  a  time.  It  is  held  on  lease,  terminable  at  the  will  of 
the  Lord.  We  foolislily  consider  that  our  mercies  belong  to  us,  and 
when  the  Lord  takes  them  away  we  half  grumble.  If  you  borrow  any- 
thing ol'  a  neighbour,  you  ought  not  to  send  it  back  with  tears^  or 
say,  "la  i  sorry  you  recall  it."  A  loan,  they  say,  should  go  laughing 
home,  and  so  should  what  God  loans  us.  "We  should  rejoice.  He 
gives,  and,  blessed  be  his  name,  he  takes  but  what  he  gave ;  he  does  not 
take  to  himself  anything  of  ours,  he  takes  to  himself  what  he  lent  us. 
All  our  ])ossessions  are  but  favours  borrowed  here  to  be  returned  anon. 
So  as  the  sheep  yields  up  its  wool  and  loses  its  comfort,  so  must  wc 
yield  up  all  our  comforts  one  by  one ;  or  if  they  remain  with  us  till 
wc  die,  we  shall  part  with  them  then,  we  shall  not  take  so  much  as  one 
of  them  across  the  stream  of  death.  Our  spiritual  riches  are  of  another 
kind,  and  they  are  laid  up  already  in  heaven,  but  of  all  things  here  below 
we  shall  take  not  a  thread  with  us. 

The  shearers,  when  they  are  taking  the  wool  off  the  sheep,  take 
ca%e  not  to  hurt  the  sheep:  they  clip  as  close  as  they  can,  but  they  do 
not  cut  the  skin.  If  possible  they  will  not  make  a  gush  or  a  wound, 
or  draw  blood,  even  in  the  smallest  degree.  When  they  do  make  a 
gash,  it  is  because  the  sheep  does  not  lie  still ;  but  a  careful  shearer 
has  bloodless  shears.  Of  this  Thomson  sings  in  his  Seasons,  and  the 
passage  is  so  good  an  illustration  of  the  whole  subject  that  I  will  adorn 
my  discourse  with  it  : — 

"  IIow  meek,  how  patient,  the  mild  creature  lies! 
Wliat  softness  in  its  melancholy  face, 
Wliat  dumb  coni]ilaining  innocence  appears! 
Fear  not,  ye  gentle  tribes !  'tis  not  the  knife. 
Of  horrid  slaughter  that  is  o'er  you  waved  ; 
No,  'tis  the  tender  swain's  well  guided  shears, 
\\  ho  having  now,  to  pay  his  annual  care, 
Borrow'd  your  lleecc,  to  you  a  cumbrous  load, 
Will  send  you  bounding  to  your  hills  again." 

Be  ye  sure  that  when  the  Lord  is  clipping  and  shearing  us  he  will  not 
hurt  US;  he  will  tiike  our  comforts  away,  but  he  will  not  really  injure 
us,  or  cause  a  wound  to  onr  spirits.  Hath  he  not  said,  "  In  the  world 
ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  in  me  ye  shall  have  peace."  If 
ever  the  shears  do  make  us  bleed,  it  is  because  we  kick,  because 
we  struggle.  If  we  were  patient  as  the  sheep,  we  should  just  lie  still, 
and  the  process  would  cost  us  very  little  pain.  What  pain  there  was 
would  become  delightful,  seeing  we  had  submitted  ourselves  entirely 
to  the  divine  will.  Pain  grows  into  pleasure  when  you  come  to  feel 
that  God  wills  it ;  you  are  glad  to  suffer  because  he  ordains  you 
should.  It  is  the  kicking  and  the  struggling  that  make  the  shearing 
work  at  all  hard,  but  if  we  are  dumb  before  the  shearers  no  hurt  can 
come.     The    Lord   may   clip   wonderfully  close :    I  have    known  him 


THE    SHFEP   BEFORE    THE    SHEARERS.  gi;(j 

clip  some  very  close,  wlio  did  not  seem  to  have  a  bit  of  wool  left, 
for  they  were  stripped  entirely,  just  as  Job  was  when  he  cried,  "  Naked 
came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return  thither," 
but  still  he  was  able  to  add,  "  Tho  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken 
away,  and  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord." 

You  will  notice  about  sheepshearing  that  the  shearers  always  shrar  at 
a  suilable  lime.  It  would  be  a  very  wicked,  cruel,  and  unwise  thing  to 
begin  sheepshearing  in  winter  time.  There  is  a  proverb  which  talks 
about  God  ''  tempering  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb."  It  may  be  so, 
but  it  is  a  very  wicked  practice  to  shear  lambs  while  winds  need  tem- 
pering. Sheep  are  shorn  when  it  is  warm,  genial  weather,  when  they 
can  atlbrd  to  lose  their  fleeces,  and  are  all  the  better  for  being  relieved  of 
them.  As  the  suuimer  comes  on  sheepshearing  time  comes.  Have  you 
ever  noticed  t!i;i,t  whenever  the  Lord  afflicts  us  he  selects  the  best  pos- 
sible time  ?  I'hcre  is  a  prayer  that  he  put  into  his  disciples'  mouths, 
*'  Pray  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter":  the  spirit  of  that  prayer 
may  be  seen  in  the  seasonableness  of  our  sorrows,  lie  will  not  send  us 
our  worst  troubles  at  our  worst  times.  I  have  frequently  noticed,  and 
I  have  treasured  it  up  with  gratitude,  that  when  I  have  had  strong 
inclinations  to  sin,  the  opportunity  has  not  come  ;  that  if  ever  I  have 
had  opportunities  of  sinning  temptingly  put  before  me,  then  I  have 
had  no  inward  longing  towards  the  sin.  When  the  inward  desire  and 
the  opportunity  meet,  that  is  a  very  dangerous  case  indeed,  but  the  Lord 
keeps  his  people  from  that.  So  if  you  notice,  if  your  soul  is  depressed 
the  Lord  does  not  send  you  a  very  heavy  burden ;  but  reserves  such  a 
load  for  times  when  you  have  had  joy  in  the  Lor<l,  and  that  joy  has 
been  your  strength.  It  has  got  to  be  a  kind  of  feeling  with  us  that  when 
we  have  much  delight  a  trial  is  near,  but  when  sorrow  thickens  de- 
liverance is  approaching.  The  Lord  does  not  send  us  two  burdens  at  a 
time,  or  if  he  does  he  sends  double  strength.  It  is  an  observation  which 
I  suppose  no  one  would  make  but  an  Irishman,  and  I  am  nut  one,  that 
you  never  knew  the  west  wind  blow  when  the  east  wind  is  troubling 
you.  You  never  knew  the  wind  blow  from  the  north  when  it  was 
blowing  from  the  south.  As  a  rule,  except  it  be  in  a  tornado  or  a 
cyclone,  the  wind  blows  from  some  one  quarter.  "  He  stayeth  his  rough 
wind  in  the  day  of  the  east  wind."  He  knows  how  to  prevent  our 
suffering  more  tribulation  than  we  can  bear.  He  shears  us,  but  not  to 
injure  us  ;  he  clips  away  the  wool,  but  sends  the  genial  temperature  so 
that  we  may  be  able  to  flourish  under  our  loss.  Let  that  be  noted,  and 
let  God  be  thanked  for  it. 

There  is  another  thing  to  remember.  When  God  takes  away  our 
mercies  he  is  ready  to  supply  us  with  more.  It  is  with  us  as  with  the 
sheep,  ihere  is  new  ivool  coming.  AVhenever  the  l^ord  takes  away  our 
eartlily  comforts  with  one  hand,  one,  two,  three,  he  restores  with  tiie 
other  hand  six,  twelve,  scores,  a  hundred;  he  takes  away  by  spoon I'uls, 
and  he  gives  by  cartloads:  we  are  crying  and  whining  about  the  little 
k)ss,  and  yet  it  is  necessary  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  receive  the 
great  mercy.  Yes,  it  will  be  so,  we  shall  yet  have  cause  for  rejoicing, 
•'joycometh  in  the  morning."  There  is  always  as  good  fish  in  the 
sea  as  ever  came  out  of  it,  and  when  one  set  of  favours  is  taken  away 
there  are  more  mercies  to  come.    The  great  sea  of  divine  love  has  bigger 


630  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

fish  in  it  than  ever  we  have  taken  out  of  it.  If  we  have  lost  one  position, 
there  is  another  position  for  us  ;  if  we  have  been  driven  out  of  one  place, 
there  is  yet  a  refuge  for  us.  God  opens  a  second  door  when  he  shuts  the 
first.  If  he  takes  away  the  manna,  as  he  did  from  his  people  Israel,  it  is 
because  tliere  is  the  corn  of  Canaan  for  them  to  live  upon.  If  the 
water  of  the  rock  did  not  follow  the  tribes  any  longer,  it  was  because  they 
could  drink  of  the  Jordan,  and  of  the  brooks  that  flowed  in  that  land 
of  hills  and  valleys.  Yes,  there  is  new  wool  coming  ;  do  not  therefore 
fret  at  the  shearing.  I  have  given  these  thoughts  in  brief,  that  we  may 
come  to  this  last  word. 

III.  Let  us,  in  the  third  place,  endeavour  to  imitate  the  example 
OF  OUR  blkssf.d  Lord  whkn  our  turn  comes  to  be  shorn.  Let  us 
be  dumb  before  the  shearers,  submissive,  quiescent,  even  as  he  was. 

I  have  been  giving,  in  everything  I  have  said,  a  reason  for  so  doing. 
I  have  shown  that  it  glorifies  God,  rewards  the  Shepherd,  and  benefits 
ourselves.  I  have  shown  that  he  measures  and  tempers  our  affliction, 
and  sends  the  trial  at  the  right  time.  I  have  shown  you  in  many  ways 
that  we  are  wise  to  submit  ourselves,  as  the  sheep  does  to  the  shearer, 
and  the  more  completely  we  do  so  the  better.  Oh,  brethren,  we  shall 
be  happy  when  we  have  done  with  self:  it  will  be  all  well  with  us  what- 
ever we  may  have  gone  through,  when  we  learn  that  verse  of  Toplady's : 

"  Sweet  to  He  passive  in  Thy  band, 
And  Icnow  no  will  but  tliiiie." 

I  know  we  struggle  a  good  deal,  and  we  make  excuses  for  struggling. 
Sometimes  we  say,  "  Oh,  this  is  so  painful,  I  cannot  be  patient !  I  could 
have  borne  anything  else  ;  but  not  this."  AVhen  a  father  is  going  to 
correct  his  child  does  he  select  something  that  is  pleasant  ?  Oh  dear  no. 
The  painfalness  of  the  chastisement  is  the  essence  of  it,  and  even  so  the 
bitterness  of  your  sorrow  will  be  a  blessing  to  you.  By  the  blueness 
of  the  wound  the  heart  will  be  made  better.  Do  not  rebel  becanse  your 
trial  seems  strange.  It  is  as  good  as  saying,  "  If  I  have  it  all  my  own 
way  I  will  not  rebel,  but  if  everything  does  not  please  me  I  will  not 
endure  it."  Sometimes  we  complain  because  of  our  great  weakness. 
"Lord,  were  I  stronger  I  would  not  mind  this  heavy  loss;  I  am  like  a 
B2YQ  leaf  driven  of  the  tempest."  But  who  is  to  be  the  judge  of  the 
suitability  of  your  trial  ?  You  or  God  ?  Since  the  Lord  judges  this  trial 
to  be  suitable  to  your  weakness,  depend  upon  it  it  is  so.  Lie  still,  lie 
still,  lie  quite  still !  "Alas,"  you  say,  "  ray  grief  comes  from  the  most 
cruel  quarter;  this  trouble  did  not  arise  directly  from  God,  it  came 
through  my  cousin  or  my  brother,  who  ought  to  have  treated  me  with 
gratitude.  I  could  have  borne  it  if  it  had  not  come  in  that  way ;  it  was 
not  an  enemy,  then  I  could  have  borne  it."  Then  let  me  tell  you  it  is 
not  a  traitor  after  all.  God  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  your  tribulation, — 
look  through  the  second  causes  to  the  great  First  Cause.  It  is  a  great 
mistake  when  we  fret  over  the  human  instrument  which  smites  us,  and 
forget  the  hand  which  uses  the  rod.  If  I  strike  a  dog  with  a  stick,  he 
bites  my  stick — that  is  because  he  is  stupid  ;  if  he  thought  a  little  he 
would  bite  me,  or  else  take  the  bIo^v  and  bow  in  obedience.  Now,  you 
must  not  begin  biting  the  stic-k.  After  all  it  is  God  that  uses  that  staff, 
though  it  be  of  ebony  or  of  blackthorn.    It  is  well  to  have  done  with  all 


THE   SlIEKP    BKFORE   THE    SHBARERR.  631 

fill  is  picking  and  choosing,  and  to  leave  the  whole  matter  in  the  hand  of 
itnfiiiite  wisdom.  A  sweet  singer  has  put  this  matter  very  prettily,  let  me 
<;jiiot:e  the  lines  : — 

"  But  when  my  Lord  did  ask  me  on  m  liat  side 
I  were  content, 
Tlie  grief  whereby  I  must  be  purified, 
To  me  was  sent, 

•As  each  inisgined  angui>h  did  appear, 
Each  withering  bliss 
Before  my  soul,  I  cried,  '  Oh  !  spare  me  here, 
Oh,  no,  not  this  ! ' 

"  Like  one  that  liaving  need  of,  deep  within, 
'J'he  siu'geon's  knife, 
AVould  hardly  bear  that  it  should  graze  the  skin, 
Though  for  his  life. 

"  Nay,  then,  but  He,  who  best  doth  understand 
Both  what  we  need, 
And  what  can  bear,  did  take  my  case  in  hand, 
Nor  crying  heed." 

This  is  the  pith  of  my  sermon:  oh  sheep,  yield  thyself,  yield  thyself! 
Oh  believer,  yield  tliyself,  lie  passive,  lie  passive,  struggle  not!  There 
is  no  use  in  struggling,  for  our  great  Shearer,  if  he  means  to  shear,  will 
do  it;  if  he  means  to  send  us  trials  and  troubles  he  will  not  spare  for 
our  crying,  he  will  not  mind  our  whining,  he  will  do  his  will  and 
carry  out  his  purpose.  What  is  the  good,  therefore,  of  rebellion  ? 
Did  not  I  say  just  now  that  the  sheep,  by  struggling,  might  be  cut 
Iby  the  shears!  So  you  and  I,  if  we  struggle  agiiinst  God,  we  shall 
get  two  troubles  instead  of  one,  and  after  all  there  is  not  half  so 
much  trouble  in  a  trouble  as  there  is  in  our  kicking  against  the 
trouble.  The  eastern  ploughman  when  he  ploughs  has  a  goad,  and 
pricks  the  ox  to  make  it  move  along  ;  he  does  not  hurt  it  much,  but 
suppose  the  ox  flings  out  the  moment  it  touches  him,  he  drives  the 
goad  into  himself,  and  bleeds.  So  is  it  with  us,  if  we  kick  out  against 
divine  providences  we  shall  get  a  sore  wound,  much  more  than  was  ever 
needful ;  we  shall  ciidure  much  more  pain  than  would  have  come  if  we 
had  yielded  to  the  divine  will.  What  is  the  use  of  kicking  and  struggling 
then,  you  fretful  ones?  You  cannot  make  one  hair  white  or  black. 
You  that  are  troubled,  rest  with  us,  for  you  cannot  make  shower  or  shine, 
rain  or  fine  weather,  with  all  your  groaning.  Did  you  ever  bring  a 
penny  into  the  till  by  fretting,  or  put  a  loaf  on  the  table  by  complaint, 
or  get  a  shilling  in  your  pocket  by  murmm-ing  ?  ]\[urmuring  is  wasted 
breath,  and  J'rcttiiig  is  wasted  time.  But  to  lie  still  in  the  hand  of 
<j!od  brings  a  blessing  to  the  souk  I  wish  myself  that  I  could  be  more 
-quiet,  calm,  and  self-possessed,  but  an  active  mind  is  apt  to  turn  upon 
itself  to  its  own  wounding,  when  all  the  cares  of  a  church  and  a  great 
work  press  heavily.  I  long  to  cry  habitually,  "  Lord,  do  what  thou 
wilt,  when  thou  vilt,  as  thou  wilt  with  me,  thy  servant:  appoint  me 
honour  or  dishonour,  wealth  or  poverty,  sickness  or  health,  exhilaration 
jor  depression,  and  1  will  take  alt  right  gladly  from  thy  hand."     A  man 


632 


METROPOLITAN   TAUKUNACLE    I'L'Ll'lT. 


IS  not  far  from  {fhe  gates  of  heaven  when  he  is  fully  submissive  to  tba 
Lord's  will.  Though  heaven  is  uphill  the  road  to  it  is  downhill,  and 
when  a  man  has  gone  down  so  much  that  he  is  dead  to  self,  he  is  not 
far  from  entering  into  that  eternal  life  where  God  shall  be  all  in  all,  in 
bliss  for  ever  and  ever.  You  that  have  been  shorn  have,  I  hope, 
received  a  word  of  comfort  to-night  through  the  ever  blessed  Spirit  of 
God.  May  God  bless  it  to  you.  Oh  that  the  sinner,  too,  would 
submit  himself  to  God,  yield  himself  up,  and  rebel  no  longer  I  Submit 
yourselves  unto  God,  let  every  thought  be  brought  into  captivity  to 
liim,  and  the  Lord  send  his  blessing,  for  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  liii. 


Hymns  prom  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—758,  752,  703. 


OUE  EXPECTATION. 


DELIVERED    BY 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT   THE    METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE,    NEWINGTON. 


"He  shall  see  his  seed." — Isaiah  liii.  10. 
The  first  thoug-lit  suggested  by  this  text  is,  that  Jesus  is  still  alive  ;•. 
for  to  see  anything  is  the  act  of  a  living  person.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
died.  We  know  tJiat  he  died.  "We  are  glad  tliat  there  is  over- 
whelming evidence  that,  not  in  appearance,  but  in  fact,  he  died.  His 
side  was  pierced ;  he  was  given  up  by  the  Roman  authorities  for 
burial ;  the  imperial  authorities  were  sure  of  his  death.  The  soldier 
had  made  assurance  doubly  sure  by  piercing  his  side.  His  disciples 
buried  him.  They  would  not  have  left  him  in  the  cave  if  they  had 
felt  any  doubt  about  his  death.  They  went  in  the  morning  after 
the  Sabbath  to  embalm  him.  They  were  all  persuaded  that  he  hadi 
really  died.  Blessed  be  the  dying  Christ !  Here  our  living  hopes  take 
their  foundation.  If  he  had  not  died,  we  must  have  died  for  ever.. 
The  more  assured  we  are  of  his  death,  the  more  assured  we  feel  of' 
the  life  of  all  who  are  in  him. 

But,  my  brothers,  he  is  not  dead.  Some  years  ago,  someone,  wishing 
to  mock  our  holy  faith,  brought  out  a  handbill,  which  was  plastered 
everywhere — "  Can  you  trust  in  a  dead  man?"  Our  answer  would, 
have  been,  "  No ;  nobody  can  trust  in  a  man  who  is  dead."  But  it 
was  known  by  those  who  printed  the  bill  that  they  were  misrepresent- 
ing our  faith.  Jesus  is  no  longer  dead.  He  rose  again  the  third  day.. 
We  have  sure  and  infallible  proofs  of  it.  It  is  an  historical  fact,  better- 
proved  than  almost  any  other  wliich  is  commonly  received  as  historical,, 
that  he  did  really  rise  again  from  the  grave.  He  arose  no  more  tO" 
die.  He  has  gone  out  of  the  land  of  tears  and  death.  He  has  gone- 
into  the  region  of  immortality.  Ho  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  eveui 
the  Father,  and  he  reigns  there  for  ever.  We  love  him  that  died,  but 
we  rejoice  that  he  who  died  is  not  dead,  but  ever  liveth  to  mak^: 
intercession  for  us. 

Dear  children  of  God,  do  not  be  afraid  that  Christ's  work  will  break 
down  because  he  is  dead.  lie  lives  to  carry  it  on.  That  which  lie 
purchased  for  us  by  his  death,  he  lives  to  secure  for  us  by  his  life.  Do- 
not  let  your  faith  be  a  sort  of  dead  faith  dealing  with  a  dead  man  ;, 
let  it  be  instinct  with  life,  with  warm  blood  in  its  veins.  Go  to  youi;' 
No.  2,186.  j_^ 


'634 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 


own  Christ,  your  living  Christ ;  make  him  3'our  familiar  Friend,  the 
Acquaintance  of  your  solitude,  the  Companion  of  your  pilgrimage.  Do 
not  think  that  there  is  a  great  gulf  between  j^ou,  a  living  man,  and 
him.  The  shades  of  death  do  not  divide  you  from  him.  He  lives,  he 
feels,  he  sympathizes,  he  looks  on,  he  is  ready  to  help,  he  will  help 
you  even  now.  You  have  come  in  to  the  place  where  prayer  is  wont  to 
be  made,  burdened  and  troubled,  and  jo\i  seek  relief  ;  let  the  thouglit 
that  your  Lord  is  a  living  Friend  ease  you  of  your  burden.  He  is 
still  ready  to  be  your  strong  Helper,  and  to  do  for  you  what  he  did  for 
needy  ones  in  the  days  of  his  sojourn  here  below.  I  want  even  you, 
who  do  not  know  him,  to  remember  that  he  lives,  that  you  may  seek 
him  to-night — that  ere  another  sun  shall  rise  you  may  find  him,  and, 
finding  him,  may  yourselves  be  found,  and  saved.  Do  not  trj-  to  live 
without  the  living,  loving  Friend  of  sinners.  Seek  his  healing  hand  ; 
then  beg  for  his  company  ;  get  it ;  keej)  it ;  and  joii  shall  find  that  it 
makes  life  below  like  heaven  above.  When  3'ou  live  with  the  living 
Christ,  you  will  live  indeed.  In  him  is  light,  and  the  light  is  the  life 
•of  men. 

And  now  to  the  text  itself,  with  brevity.  I  have  to  observe  upon 
it,  fii'st,  that  Chrisfs  death  produced  a  posterity.  "When  thou  shalt 
make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he  shall  see  his  seed."  Evidently 
the  death  of  Christ  was  fruitful  of  a  seed  for  him.  Secondly,  that 
posterity  remains.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  does  not  look  to-day  on 
emptiness :  he  is  not  bereaved  of  his  household,  but  still  he  sees  his 
seed.  And,  thirdly  and  lastly,  that  posterity  is  tinder  his  immediate  eye 
at  all  times,  for  "i/e  shall  see  his  seed." 

I.  Well,  first  of  all,  the  death  of  Christ  has  produced  a  pos- 
terity. We  do  not  read  here  that  the  Lord  Christ  has  followers. 
That  would  be  true ;  but  the  text  prefers  to  say  he  has  a  seed.  We 
read  just  now  tliat  the  Lord  Jesus  has  disciples.  That  would  be 
distinctly  true  ;  but  the  text  does  not  so  read.  It  says,  *'  He  shall  see 
his  seed.''''  Wh}-  liis  seed?  Why,  because  everyone,  who  is  a  true 
follower  or  disciple  of  Christ,  has  been  born  by  a  new  birth  from  him 
into  the  position  of  disciple.  There  is  no  knowing  Christ  except 
through  the  new  birth.  We  are  naturally  sold  under  sin,  and  Ave 
■cannot  discern  the  spiritual  and  real  Christ  until  we  have  a  spirit 
created  within  us  by  the  new  birth,  of  which  he  said,  "  Ye  must  be 
born  again."  This  is  the  gate  of  entrance  into  discijoleship.  None 
•can  be  written  in  the  roll  of  followers  of  Christ  unless  they  are  also 
written  in  the  register  of  the  family  of  Grod — "  this  and  that  man  was 
born  there."  Other  men  can  get  disciples  for  themselves  by  the  means 
that  are  usual  for  such  ends  ;  but  all  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  pro- 
•tluced  by  miracle.  They  are  all  discipled  by  being  newly-created. 
Jesus,  as  he  looks  upon  them  aU,  can  say,  "  Behold,  I  make  all  things 
new."  They  all  come  into  the  world,  of  which  he  is  King,  by  being 
born  into  it.  There  is  no  other  way  into  the  first  world  but  by  birth  : 
and  there  is  no  other  way  into  the  second  world,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness,  but  by  birth,  and  that  birth  is  strictly  connected  with 
the  pangs  of  the  Saviour's  passion,  "when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul 
an  offering  for  sin,  he  shall  see  his  seed."  See,  then,  the  reason  why 
we  have  here  the  remarkable  expression — "his  seed." 


OUR   EXPECTAnON.  6.^5 

Learn  from  this  that  all  who  truly  follow  Christ,  and  are  saved  by 
tim,  have  his  life  in  them.  The  parent's  life  is  in  the  child.  From  the 
parent  that  life  has  been  received.  It  is  Christ's  life  that  is  in  every 
true  believer — *'  For  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God;  when  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also 
appear  with  him  in  glory."  We  have  our  natural  life,  and  this  makes 
tis  men  :  we  have  our  spiritual  life,  and  this  makes  us  Christians.  AVe 
take  life  from  our  parents,  this  links  us  with  the  first  Adam :  we  have 
taken  life  from  Christ,  and  this  joins  us  to  tire  second  Adam.  Do  not 
mistake  me ;  that  same  life  which  abides  in  Christ,  at  the  right  hand 
■of  God,  is  that  everlasting  life  which  he  has  bestowed  upon  all  those 
who  put  their  trust  in  him.  That  water  springing  up  into  everlasting 
life  he  gave  us.  He  made  it  to  be  in  us  a  well  of  water  springing  np. 
The  first  drops  of  that  living  spring,  the  whole  outcome  of  the  spring, 
and  the  spring  itself,  came  from  him. 

Let  me  put  it  to  you,  beloved  hearers.  Do  you  know  anything  about 
this  new  birth?  Do  you  know  anything  about  this  divine  life?  There 
are  multitudes  of  religious  people,  very  religious  peoj^le  ;  but  they  are 
•as  dead  as  door-nails.  Multitudes  of  religious  persons  are  like  wax- 
works, well-proportioned,  and  you  might  mistake  them  by  candle-light 
for  life;  but  in  the  light  of  God  you  would  soon  discover  that  there 
is  a  mighty  difference,  for  the  best  that  human  skill  can  do  is  a  poor 
imitation  of  real  life.  You,  dear  hearer,  dressed  in  the  garments  of 
family  religion,  and  adorned  with  the  jewels  of  moral  virtue,  may  be 
nothing  beyond  "  a  child  of  nature  finely  dressed,  but  not  the  living 
child."  God's  living  children  may  not  seem  to  be  quite  so  handsome, 
nor  so  charmingly  arrayed  as  you  are,  and  in  their  own  esteem  they 
may  not  be  worthy  to  consort  with  you  ;  but  there  is  a  solemn  differ- 
ence between  the  living  child  and  the  dead  child,  however  you  may 
try  to  conceal  it.  Righteous  men  know  themselves  to  be  sinners : 
sinners  believe  themselves  to  be  righteous  men.  There  is  more  truth 
in  the  fear  of  the  first  than  there  ca,n  be  in  the  faith  of  the  second ; 
for  the  faith  of  the  second  is  founded  on  a  falsehood.  Beloved,  we 
become,  I  say  again,  the  followers  of  Christ  by  being  made  partakers 
of  his  life,  and  unless  his  life  be  in  us,  we  may  say  what  we  will  about 
Christ,  and  profess  what  we  like  about  following  him  ;  but  we  are  not 
in  the  secret.  We  are  out  of  the  spiritual  world  altogether — that 
world  of  which  he  is  the  Head,  the  Creator,  the  Lord.  You  see  why 
the  word  "seed"  is  used.  We  come  to  him  by  birth:  we  are  partakers 
of  his  life. 

Furthermore,  believers  in  our  Lord  are  said  to  be  his  seed  because 
they  are  like  kiiiu  I  wish  that  I  could  say  this  with  less  need  to  qualify 
it;  but  the  man  who  really  believes  in  Jesus,  and  in  whom  the  divine  life 
is  strong  and  powerful,  is  like  to  Jesus,  and  especially  like  to  Jesus 
in  this — that,  as  the  Christ  consecrated  himself  wholly  to  God's  service 
and  glory,  so  has  this  believer  done  ;  and  as  the  Christ  founded  his  suc- 
cesses on  being  dead  and  buried,  surrendering  honour,  and  comfort,  and 
life  itself,  for  his  work,  so  should  the  true  believer  be  willing  to  give 
up  anything  and  everything,  that  he  may  achieve  his  life-purpose,  and 
bring  glory  to  God.  "As  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world" — that  is, 
we  are  bent  upon  the  glory  of  God  ;  filled  with  love  to  men,  and  anxious 


fi36  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

for  their  salvation,  tliat  God  may  be  glorified  thereby.  You  know  best^ 
brothers  and  sisters,  whether  this  is  true  of  you  ;  but  if  we  have  not 
the  Spii'it  of  Christ,  we  are  none  of  his.  If  we  are  not  like  Christ,  it 
is  not  possible  that  we  are  his  seed,  for  the  seed  is  like  the  parent. 
Surely,  children  are  like  their  father — not  all  to  the  same  degree  ;  but 
still  there  is  the  evidence  of  their  souship  in  their  likeness  to  him  from 
whom  they  came.  Our  Lord's  true  people  are  like  him,  or  they  could 
not  be  styled  "his  seed."  Alas,  the  old  nature  blots  and  blurs  the- 
resemblance  !  The  stamp  of  the  first  Adam  is  not  altogether  removed ;. 
but  it  ought  to  grow  fainter  and  fainter,  while  the  lines  of  the  divine- 
portrait  should  grow  stronger  and  clearer.  Is  this  the  experience  of 
our  life  in  Christ  ?  I  pray  that  it  may  be  so.  It  should  cause  us 
great  searcliiug  of  heart  if  there  is  not  in  us  an  increasing  likeness 
to  our  Lonl. 

There  is  this  to  be  said  also  for  tliose  who  are  called  his  seed — that 
they  prosecute  the  same  ends,  and  expect  to  receive  the  same  rewards 
We  are  towards  Christ,  his  seed,  and  thus  we  are  heirs  to  all  that  he- 
has — heirs  to  his  business  on  earth,  heirs  to  his  estate  in  heaven.  W& 
are  to  be  witnesses  to  the  truth  as  Jesus  was,  and  to  go  about  doing 
good  as  he  did,  and  to  seek  and  save  the  lost  after  his  example- 
This  we  must  inherit,  as  a  son  follows  his  father's  business.  All 
that  Christ  has  belongs  to  his  seed.  As  a  man  hands  down  to  his  pos- 
tei-ity  his  possessions,  Christ  Jesus  has  made  over  to  his  people  all  that 
he  is,  and  all  that  he  has,  and  all  that  he  ever  will  be,  that  they  may 
be  with  him,  and  behold  his  glory,  and  shine  with  him  as  the  stars  for 
ever  and  ever.  We  are  his  seed  in  this  respect — that  he  has  taken 
us  into  his  family,  and  given  us  the  family  patrimony,  and  made  us 
partakers  of  all  things  in  himself. 

Now,  beloved,  this  is  all  through  his  death.  We  are  made  his  seed 
through  his  death.  Why  through  his  death  principally  ?  Wh}-, 
because  it  was  by  reason  of  his  death  for  us  tliat  the  Father  could 
come  and  deal  with  us,  and  the  Spirit  could  breathe  upon  us,  and  new- 
create  us.  There  was  no  dealing  with  us  by  a  just  Cod  until  th& 
atoning  Sacrifice  had  rolled  away  the  stone  that  blocked  the  way,, 
namely,  the  necessity  that  sin  should  be  punished.  Christ  having  died 
for  us,  we  came  into  another  relation  to  justice,  and  it  became  possible 
for  us  to  be  regenerated,  and  brought  into  the  household  of  God. 
Beloved,  I  think  that  you  know,  in  your  own  experience,  that  it  was  his- 
death  that  really  operated  most  upon  you  in  the  matter  of  your  con- 
version. I  hear  a  great  talk  about  the  example  of  Christ  having- 
great  effect  upon  ungodly  men ;  but  I  do  not  believe  it,  and  certainly 
have  never  seeiwj.  It  has  great  effect  upon  men  when  they  are  born 
again,  and  are  saved  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  are  full  of  gratitude 
on  this  account ;  but  before  that  happens,  we  have  known  men  admire 
the  conduct  of  Christ,  and  even  write  books  about  the  beauty  of  his 
character,  while,  at  the  same  time,  they  have  denied  his  Godhead.  Thua 
they  have  rejected  him  in  his  essential  character,  and  there  has  been 
no  effect  produced  upon  their  conduct  by  their  cold  admiration  of  his 
life.  But  when  a  man  comes  to  see  that  he  is  pardoned  and  saved 
through  the  death  of  Jesus,  he  is  moved  to  gratitude,  and  then  to 
love.    "  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."     Tliat  love  which  he- 


OUE    KXl'ECTATIOX. 


537 


-displayed  in  liis  death  has  touched  the  mainspring  of  our  being,  and 
moved  us  with  a  j)assion  to  which  we  were  strangers  before ;  and, 
because  of  this,  we  hate  the  sins  that  once  were  sweet,  and  turn  witli 
all  our  hearts  to  the  obedience  that  once  was  so  unpleasant.  There 
is  more  effect  in  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ  to__chauge  the  human 
character  than  in  every  other  consideration.  The  cross  once  seen,  sin  is 
■crucified  :  the  passion  of  the  Master  once  ai)prehended  as  being  endured 
for  us,  we  then  feel  that  we  are  not  our  own,  but  are  bought  with 
a  price.  This  perception  of  redeeming  love,  in  the  death  of  our  Lord 
Jesus,  makes  all  the  difference :  this  prepares  us  for  a  higher  and  a 
better  life  than  we  have  ever  known  before.  It  is  his  death  that 
does  it. 

And  now,  beloved,  if  by  his  death  we  have  become  his  seed  (and  I 
think  I  speak  at  this  time  to  many  who  can  truly  say  thej'  hope  that 
it  is  so  with  them),  then  let  us  consider  the  fact  for  a  minute.  We  are 
his  seed.  They  speak  of  the  seed  royal.  What  shall  I  say  of  the  seed 
of  Christ  ?  Believer,  jou  may  be  a  poor  person,  living  in  an  obscure 
lane,  but  3'ou  arc  of  the  imperial  house.  You  are  ignorant  and  un- 
lettered, it  may  be,  and  your  name  will  never  shine  in  the  roll  of 
science,  but  ho  who  is  the  divine  Wisdom  owns  you  as  one  of  his 
seed.  It  may  be  that  you  are^sick:  even  now  your  head  is  aching, 
jour  heart  is  faint  ;^ou  feefthat  by-and-by  you  will  die.  Ah,  well! 
but  you  are  of  his  seed  who  died,  and  rose,  and  is  gone  into  glory. 
You  are  of  the  seed  of  him  *'  who  only  hath  immortality."  You  may 
jDut  away  your  crowns,  ye  kings  and  emperors — earth,  yellow  earth, 
hammered,  and  decorated,  with  other  sparkling  bits  of  soil — you  may 
put  them  all  away,  as  altogether  outdone  in  value  !  We  have  crowns 
infinitely  more  precious,  and  we  belong  to  a.  royal  house  trauscendently 
more  glorious  than  any  of  yours. 

But  then  it  follows,  if  we  are  thus  of  a  seed,  that  we  ought  to  be 
united,  and  love  each  other  more  and  more.  Chi-istian  people,  3'ou 
ought  to  have  a  clannish  feeling!  "Oh,"  says  one,  "3'ou  mean  that 
the  Baptists  ought  to  get  together!  "  I  do  not  mean  anything  of  the 
kind.  I  mean  that  the  seed  of  Christ  should  be  of  one  heart ;  and  we 
ought  to  recognize  that,  wherever  the  life  and  love  of  Jesus  are  to  be 
found,  there  our  love  goes  out.  It  is  very  delightful,  at  Cliristmas 
time,  or  perhaps  at  some  other  time  in  the  year,  for  all  the  family  to 
meet;  and  though  your  name  may  be  "Smith"  or  "Brown,"  yet 
you  feel  there  is  some  importance  in  your  name,  when  all  your  clan 
have  met  togetlitr.  It  may  be  a  name  that  is  very  common,  or  very 
obscure  ;  but,  somehow,  you  feel  quite  great  on  that  day  when  all  the 
members  of  the  family  liave  joined  to  keep  united  holiday.  Your 
love  to  one  another  gathers  warmth,  as  the  glowing  coals  are  drawn 
together.  So  may  it  be  in  your  heart  towards  all  tliose  that  belong 
to  Christ !  You  are  of  the  blood  royal  of  heaven.  You  are  neitlier 
a  Guelph  nor  a  HohenzoUern,  but  you  are  a  Christian ;  and  that  is  a 
greater  name  than  all.  He  has  a  seed— even  he  whom,  unseen,  we 
this  night  adore.  My  inmost  soul  glories  in  the  Head  of  my  clan — in 
him  of  the  pierced  hands,  and  the  nailed  feet,  who  wears  for  his  princely 
star  tlie  lance-mark  in  his  side  !  Oh,  how  blessedly  bright  is  he  !  How 
transcendently  glorious  are  the  nail-prints  !     We  adore  him  in  the 


638  METROPOLITAN   TABER>fACLE    PULPIT. 

infinite  majesty  of  his  unutterable  love.  We  are  of  his  seed,  and  sO' 
we  are  near  akin  to  him.  Do  not  think  that  I  am  too  familiar.  I  go^ 
not  beyond  the  limit  which  this  word  allows  me  ;  nay,  I  have  scarcely 
come  up  to  the  edge  of  it.  We  are  truly  of  the  seed  of  Jesus,  even, 
as  the  Jews  are  of  the  seed  of  Israel— not  born  after  the  flesh,  for  he 
had  none  born  to  him  in  that  way  ;  but  born  after  the  Spirit,  wherein 
his  seed  is  as  the  stars  of  heaven.  We  rejoice  with  exultation  as  we- 
read  the  text,  "  He  shall  see  his  seed." 

Thus  much  on  oiu-  first  point. 

II.  Now,  my  second  point  is,  that  posterity  of  his  remains. 
Our  Lord  alwaj^s  has  a  seed.  That  seems  to  me  to  be  clear  from  the 
indefiniteness  of  the  text.  It  does  not  say  that  he  shall  see  his  seed  for 
so  long,  and  then  no  longer ;  but  it  stands  as  a  prophecy  fulfille.l, 
always  fulfilling,  and  always  to  be  fulfilled: — "He  shall  see  his 
seed."  Christ  will  always  have  a  seed  to  see.  His  church,  then,  will 
never  die  out  while  the  world  standeth  ;  and  throughout  eternity  that 
seed  must  still  exist  in  the  endless  state ;  for  world  without  end  our- 
Lord  Jesus  shall  see  his  seed. 

I  notice  that  the  word  is  in  the  plural — "He  shall  see  his  seeds,"  as. 
though  some  were  truly  his  seed,  and  yet  for  a  time,  at  least,  differed 
from  the  rest.  Our  Lord  said  of  those  not  yet  converted,  "Other 
sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold:  them  also  I  must  bring ; '' 
and  again,  "  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which 
shall  believe  on  me  through  their  word."  Christ  will  see  generation^ 
after  generation  of  those  redeemed  by  his  blood  who  shall  be  born, 
into  his  family,  and  shall  call  him  blessed.  Instead  of  the  fathers- 
shall  be  the  children,  whom  he  will  make  princes  in  all  the  earth. 
The  Sej)tuagiut  reads  it,  "He  shall  see  a  long-lived  seed."  Thougk 
I  do  not  think  that  the  version  is  correct,  it  shows  that  still  it  was 
thought  and  believed  that  the  Messiah  would  have  a  perpetual 
seed.  Certainly  it  is  so.  Beloved,  if  it  had  been  possible  to  destroy 
the  church  of  (iod  on  earth,  it  would  have  been  destroyed  long  ago.. 
The  malice  of  hell  has  done  all  that  it  could  do  to  destroy  the  seed  of 
Christ — the  seed  that  sprang  from  his  death.  Standing  in  the  Colos- 
seum at  Rome,  I  could  not,  as  I  looked  around  on  the  ruins  of  that 
vast  house  of  sin,  but  praise  God  that  the  church  of  God  existed,, 
though  the  Colosseum  is  in  ruins.  Anyone  standing  there,  when  the 
thousands  upon  thousands  gloated  their  eyes  with  the  sufferings  of 
Christians,  would  have  said,  "  Christianity  will  die  out;  but  the  Colos- 
seum, so  firmly  built,  will  stand  to'the  end  of  time ;  "  but  lo,  the 
Colosseum  is  a  ruin,  and  the  church  of  God  more  firm,  more  strong, 
more  glorious  than  ever !  Only  read  the  story  of  the  persecutions 
under  NerOj  and  under  Diocletian,  in  the  olden  times,  and  you  will 
wonder  that  Christianity  survived  the  cruel  blows.  Every  form  of 
torture  which  devils  could  invent  was  inflicted  upon  Christian  muii 
and  women.  Not  here  and  there,  but  everywhere,  they  were  huntiul 
down  and  persecuted.  It  makes  one  thrill  with  horror  as  he  reads  of 
women  tossed  on  the  horns  of  bulls,  or  set  in  red-hot  iron  chairs;  and. 
men  smeared  witli  honey  to  be  stvmg  to  death  by  wasps,  or  dragged, 
at  the  heels  of  wild  horses,  or  exposed  to  savage  beasts  in  the  amplii- 
theatre      B;)t  I  will  say  no  more  about  it.     The  gallant  vessel  of  the- 


OUR   EXPECTATION.  639^ 

church  ploughed  the  red  waves  of  a  crimson  sea,  her  prow  scarlet 
with  gore,  but  the  ship  itself  was  the"  better  for  its  washing-,  and  sailed 
all  the  more  gallantly  because  of  boisterous  winds.  As  to  our  own. 
country,  read  the  story  of  persecutions  here.  You  will  have  enough 
if  you  only  read  Foxe's  "Book  of  Martyrs."  I  wish  that  every  house 
had  in  it  a  large-typed  copy  of  the  "Book  of  Martyrs."  Well  do  L 
recollect,  as  a  child,  how  many  hours,  how  many  days,  I  spent  looking; 
at  the  pictures  in  an  old-fashioned  "Book  of  Martyrs,"  and  wondering- 
how  the  men  of  God  suffered,  as  they  did,  so  bravely.  I  recollect 
how  I  used  to  turn  to  that  boy  of  Brentford,  who  was  first  beaten  witli. 
rods,  and  afterwards  tied  to  the  stake,  cheerfully  to  burn  for  Christ's- 
sake.  I  am  reminded,  by  the  effect  which  it  had  uj)on  my  m.ind,  of 
what  was  said  of  a  certain  ancient  church  in  this  city  of  London, 
which  was  greatly  persecuted.  Many,  many  years  ago,  a  number 
of  persons  were  noticed  to  be  going  towards  Smithfield,  early  one 
morning,  and  somebody  said,  "  Whither  are  you  going  '?  "  "  We 
are  going  to  Smithfield."  "  What  for  ?  "  "  To  see  our  pastor  burnt." 
"  Well,  but  what,  in  the  name  of  goodness,  do  you  want  to  see  him. 
burnt  for?  What  can  be  the  good  of  it?"  They  answered,  "We 
go  to  see  him  burn  that  we  may  learn  the  way."  Oh,  but  that  was 
grand  !  "To  learn  the  way !  "  Then  the  rank  and  file  of  the  followers 
of  Jesus  learned  tln'  way  to  suffer  and  die  as  the  leaders  of  the  church. 
set  the  example.  Yet  tlie  church  in  England  was  not  destroyed  by 
persecution,  but  it  became  more  mighty  than  ever  because  of  the- 
opposition  oLila-foes. 

Since  then  there  have  been  laborious  attempts  to  destroy  the  church 
of  Christ  by  eri-or.  One  hundred  3'ears  ago  or  so,  throughout  the  most 
of  our  Dissenting  churches,  a  sort  of  Unitarianism  was  triumphant. 
The  essential  doctrines  of  the  gospel  were  omitted,  the  pith  of  it  was. 
taken  away,  the  marrow  was  torn  out  of  its  bones.  The  Church  ol 
England  was  asleep,  too  ;  and  everywhere  it  seemed  as  if  there  was  a^ 
kind  of  orthodox  heterodoxy  that  did  not  believe  anything  in  par- 
ticular, and  did  not  hold  that  there  was  a  doctrine  worth  anybody's 
living  for  or  dying  for,  but  that  all  religious  teaching  should  be  like 
a  nose  of  wax,  that  you  might  shape  whichever  way  you  liked.. 
It  looked  as  if  the  living  church  of  God  would  be  extinguished  alto- 
gether ;  but  it  was  not  so,  for  God  did  but  stamp  his  foot,  and,  from, 
all  parts  of  the  country,  men  like  Mr.  Wesley  and  Mr.  Whitefield,  came 
to  the  front,  and  hundreds  of  others,  mighty  men  of  valour,  proclaimed 
the  gospel  with  unusual  power,  and  away  went  the  bats  and  the  owls 
back  to  their  proper  dwelling-place.  The  same  mischievous  experiment 
is  being  tried  now,  and  there  will  be  the  same  residt ;  for  the  living 
Christ  is  still  to  the  front.  The  King  is  not  off  the  ground  yet :  the 
battle  will  be  won  b}'  his  armies.  Jehovah  has  declared  his  decree, 
•'Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion."  Our  Lord 
shall  see  his  seed  on  the  conquering  hand  yet. 

Worldliness  has  gone  a  long  way  to  destroy  the  church  of  God.  I 
judge  it  to  be  the  worst  cankerworm  that  as^ails  us.  Persons  come 
into  the  church  with  a  profession  which  they  never  carry  out.  Have 
we  not  all  around  us  persons  who  say  that  they  are  Christians,  and 
are  not,  but  do  lie      And  many  who,  we  hope,  are  Christians,  are  but. 


-g40  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE    PULPIT. 

very  poverty-stricken  specimens  of  the  race,  with,  little  love,  little  zeal 
(indeed,  they  are  afraid  to  be  too  zealous),  little  searching  of  the  Word, 
little  prayer,  little  consecration,  little  communion  with  Grod.  They 
are  enougii  to  kill  all  hope  of  better  things.  The  Lord  have  mercy 
upon  his  poor  church  when  she  comes  to  be  neitjier  cold  nor  hot,  so 
that  he  is  ready  to  spue  her  out  of  liis  mouth  !  Yet,  still  the  lukewarm 
can  be  heated  :  the  cause  is  not  dead.  "  He  shall  see  his  seed."  Take 
it  as  a  standing  miracle  that  there  are  any  godly  people  on  the  face  of 
the  earth ;  for  there  would  not  be  one  were  it  not  for  the  exertion  of 
miraculous  power.  Christianity  is  not  a  natural  growth  :  it  is  con- 
stantly a  divine  creation.  Christian  life  needs  to  have  daily  the 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  church  must  perpetually  receive 
fresh  light  and  life  from  above,  or  else  it  would  die  ;  but  still  stands 
the  promise,  "  He  shall  see  his  seed."  While  sun  and  moon  endure, 
1;here  shall  be  a  people  who  follow  the  Lamb  ;  and  even  though  they 
be  so  few  that  Elias  might  say,  "  I,  only  I,  am  left,  and  they  seek  my 
life  to  take  it  away,"  God  will  reserve  to  himself  thousands  that  have 
not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal. 

III.     And  now  I  am  to  wind  up  with  this  third  thought : — This 

POSTERITY  IS  ALWAYS  UNDER  THE  IMMEDIATE  EYE  OF  ChRIST.     "He  shall 

see  his  seed."  Oh,  I  like  this,  "He  shall  see  his  seed  "  !  He  sees  them 
when  they  are  first  born  anew.  I  keep  looking  out  from  this  pulpit  for 
that  small  portion  of  them  that  may  be  born  in  this  place  ;  and  there  are 
many  watchful  brethren  and  sisters  here,  who  try  to  speak  to  all  that 
■come  into  the  place  in  whom  there  are  movings  of  the  Spirit.  If  there  is 
an  anxious  soul,  they  seek  to  find  him  out.  We  cannot  sec  them  all ;  but 
HE  shall  see  his  seed.  Sometimes  it  is  a  question  whether  they  are  his 
seed  or  not — a  very  great  question  with  themselves,  but  none  with  him : 
he  sees  his  seed.  Some  are  seeking;  they  have  hardly  found ;  they  are 
longing ;  they  have  scarcely  realized  the  way  of  faith.  Ah,  well !  he 
sees  your  first  desires,  your  humble  breathings,  your  lowly  hopes,  j'our 
trembling  approaches.  He  sees  you.  There  is  not  a  child  of  his,  born 
in  any  out-of-the-way  place,  but  what  he  perceives  him  at  once.  The 
first  living  cry,  the  first  living  tear,  he  observes.  "  He  shall  see  his 
seed."  AVhat  a  mercy  to  have  such  a  Watcher !  We  poor  earthly 
pastors  are  of  small  use ;  but  this  great  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of 
souls,  with  an  eye  that  never  misses  a  single  new-born  lamb  of  gi'ace — 
what  a  mercy  to  have  such  a  Shepherd  to  look  after  the  whole  flock  ! 
"  He  shall  see  his  seed." 

Yes,  and  ever  afterward,  wherever  his  seed  may  wander,  he  still 
«ees  them.  Some  of  you,  perhaps,  have  lived  long  in  England,  but 
you  are  contemplating  going  far  away — to  Australia  or  America. 
You  wonder  whether  you  will  meet  with  any  friend  who  will  help  you 
spiritually.  Do  not  fear.  "He  shall  see  his  seed."  "Rivers  unknown 
to  song,  are  not  unknown  to  God."  And  if  you  should  have  to  dwell 
quite  alone  in  the  bush,  and  have  no  Christian  acquaintance,  still  go 
direct  to  the  Son  of  God,  for  "He  shall  see  his  seed."  The  eye  of 
Christ  is  never  off  from  the  eye  of  faith.  If  you  look  to  him,  rest  you 
well  assured  that  he  looks  to  you. 

The  beauty  of  it  is,  that  this  look  of  Christ,  whereby  he  sees  hig 
fieed,   is  one  of   intense  delight.     I  cannot  preach  upon  that  most 


I 


OUR   EXPECTATION. 


641 


precious  topic,  tut  I  wisli  you  to  think  it  over :  it  is  a  divine  pleasure 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  to  look  at  you  :  it  is  promised  him  as  a  reward  for  his 
death.  Mother,  you  know  yourself  what  a  pleasure  it  has  been  for 
30U  to  look  at  your  daughter,  and  to  see  her  grow  up.  You  would 
not  like  to  tell  her  all  you  have  thought  of  her  :  you  have  looked  at  her 
with  intense  delight.  Now,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  looks  at  you  in  just 
the  same  way.  Love  is  blind,  they  say.  Jesus  is  not  blind ;  but  he 
does  see  in  his  people  much  more  than  they  ever  will  see  in  themselves. 
He  sees  their  hopes,  their  desires,  their  aspirations;  and  he  often 
takes  the  will  for  the  deed,  and  marks  that  for  a  beauty  which  now 
may  be  half-developed,  and  therefore  not  all  we  could  wish  it  to  be. 
It  is,  at  present,  the  caricature  of  a  virtue ;  but  it  is  well  meant,  and 
will  come  right,  and  the  Lord  sees  it  as  it  will  be,  and  he  rejoices 
in  it.  Oh,  what  blessed  eyes  those  are  of  his  that  can  spy  out  beau- 
ties which  only  he  can  see  !  Since  he  has  created  them,  and  put  them 
there  himself,  he  sees  them.  "  He  shall  see  his  seed."  He  suffered 
so  much  for  our  redemption,  that  he  must  love  us.  We  cost  higi  so 
much,  that  he  must  delight  in  us. 

"  The  Son  with  joy  looks  down,  and  sees 

The  purchase  of  his  agonies."  , 

"  He  shall  see  his  seed." 

Brethren,  our  Saviour  will  always  behold  his  redeemed  ones.  He 
will  see  all  his  seed  to  the  last.  When  they  come  to  the  river  which 
divides  them  from  the  celestial  country,  "  he  shall  see  his  seed."  It 
may  possibly  be  gloomy  with  some  of  you ;  but  it  is  not  often  dark 
at  death-time.  Many  of  the  Lord's  children  have  a  fine  candle  to  go 
to  bed  with.  Even  if  they  go  to  bed  in  the  dark,  they  fall  asleej)  the 
sooner ;  but  in  either  case,  their  Lord  will  see  them  if  they  cannot  see 
him.  When  you  can  see  nothing,  and  the  brain  begins  to  reel,  and 
thought  and  memory  flee,  he  sees  his  seed. 

But  what  a  seed  he  will  have  to  see  in  the  morning !  I  am  not  yet 
an  old  man,  as  some  suppose  from  the  many  years  of  my  ministry,  but 
I  am  often  looking  forward  to  that  blessed  morning,  when  all  the  sacred 
seed  shall  meet  around  the  throne.  I  believe  the  Christ  will  come  in  to 
see  all  his  beloved  purchased  ones ;  and  he  will  search  to  see  whether 
we  are  all  there.  Then  shall  the  sheep  pass  again  under  the  hand 
of  him  that  telleth  them,  and  he  will  count  them,  for  he  knows  whom 
he  bought  with  his  blood,  and  he  will  see  that  they  are  there  in  full 
tale.  I  think  that  I  hear  the  reading  of  the  register,  the  muster-roll. 
Will  you  be  there  to  answer  to  your  name  ?  Dear  friends,  all  the  Lord's 
seed  will  be  there — all  that  were  born  into  his  house  with  a  new  birth. 
They  shall  answer,  "Ay,  ay,  ay,  we  are  here;  we  are  here!  "  Oh,  but  the 
joy  we  shall  have  in  being  there — the  delight  in  beholding  his  face  , 
yet,  if  all  our  joys  are  put  together,  they  will  not  equal  the  joy  that 
he  will  have  when  he  finds  them  all  there  for  whom  he  shed  his  blood 
— all  whom  the  Father  gave  him — all  who  gave  themselves  to  him — all 
who  were  born  as  his  seed — not  one  lost!  "Of  all  whom  thou  hast 
given  me,  I  have  lost  none."  Oh,  the  joy,  the  delight,  of  our  Well- 
beloved  in  that  day  !     Then  shall  he  see  his  seed  ! 

And  I  beHeve  that  it  will  be  a  part  of  his  heaven  for  him  to  look 
2s 


642  METROrOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

upon  His  redeemed.  He  is  the  Bridegroom,  they  make  up  the  bride ; 
and  the  bridegroom's  joy  is  not  in  seeing  his  bride  for  once  on  the 
wedding-day,  but  he  takes  delight  in  her  as  long  as  they  both  live. 
A  true  husband  and  a  true  spouse  are  alwa^^s  lovers :  they  are  always 
linked  together  by  strong  ties  of  affection ;  and  it  is  so  with  that 
model  Husband,  the  Lord  Christ,  and  his  perfect  church  above.  He 
loves  his  people  no  less,  and  he  could  not  love  them  any  more,  than 
when  he  died  for  them,  and  so  for  ever  "  he  shall  see  his  seed." 

Thus  have  I  talked  with  you  in  a  very  poor  and  feeble  way,  as  far 
as  my  speech  is  concerned :  but  the  doctrine  is  not  feeble,  the  gospel 
is  not  poor.  0  you  that  are  the  seed  of  Christ,  go  out  and  magnify 
him  by  your  lives !  Be  worthy  of  your  high  calling.  Show  the 
nobility  of  your  pedigree  by  the  magnanimity  of  your  Uves.  And, 
you  that  are  not  among  his  seed,  see  where  you  are  !  What  can  you 
do  ?  All  that  you  can  do  will  bring  you  no  further  :  you  must  be 
born  again  ;  and  this  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  Spirit  of 
God  works  the  new  birth  in  his  own  way,  but  he  works  according  to 
the  gospel.  What  is  the  gospel?  "He  that  believeth  and  is  bap- 
tized shall  be  saved."  I  give  you  the  gospel  without  mutilating  it, 
just  as  I  get  it  in  the  gospel  by  Mark,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is 
baptized  shall  be  saved."  Obey  the  precept,  and  the  promise  is 
yours.  God  help  you  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  so  to  have 
eternal  life  !  The  moment  you  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  you  are  born 
again.  May  he,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  seal  the  message  with  his  blessing 
to  everyone  in  this  house,  for  his  own  name's  sake  !     Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — John  xii.  20 — 45. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book  "—325,  332,  302. 


JESUS  IXTERCEDING  FOR  TRANSGRESSORS. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-Day  Morning,  November  IStii,  1877,  by 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


•'  And  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors." — Isaiah  liii.  12. 

Our  blessed  Lord  made  intercession  for  transgressors  in  so  many  words 
while  he  was  being  crucified,  fur  he  was  heard  to  say,  "  Father,  forgive 
them;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  It  is  generally  thought  that  he 
nttered  this  prayer  at  the  moment  when  the  nails  were  piercing  his 
hands  and  feet,  and  the  Roman  soldiers  were  roughly  performing  their 
duty  as  executioners.  At  the  very  commencement  of  his  passion  he 
begins  to  bless  his  enemies  with  his  prayers.  As  soon  as  the  rock  of  our 
salvation  was  smitten  there  flowed  forth  from  it  a  blessed  stream  of  inter- 
•cession. 

Our  Lord  fixed  his  eye  upon  that  point  in  the  character  of  his  perse- 
•cutors  which  was  most  favourable  to  them,  namely,  that  they  knew  net 
what  they  did.  He  could  not  plead  their  innocence,  and  therefore  he 
pleaded  their  ignorance.  Ignorance  could  not  excuse  their  deed,  but  it 
did  lighten  their  guilt,  and  therefore  our  Lord  was  quick  to  mention  it 
.as  in  some  measure  an  extenuating  circumstance.  The  Roman  soldiers, 
■of  course,  knew  nothing  of  his  higher  mission  ;  they  were  the  mere 
tools  of  those  who  were  in  power,  and  though  they  "mocked  him, 
<;oming  to  him,  and  ofiering  him  vinegar,"  they  did  so  because  they  mis- 
understood his  claims  and  regarded  him  as  a  foolish  rival  of  Ctesar,  only 
•worthy  to  be  ridiculed.  No  doubt  the  Saviour  included  these  rough 
Gentiles  in  his  supplication,  and  perhaps  their  centurion  who  "  glorified 
<5od,  saying.  Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  man,"  was  converted  in 
answer  to  our  Lord's  prayer.  As  for  the  Jews,  though  they  had  some 
measure  of  light,  yet  they  also  acted  in  the  dark.  Peter,  who  would  not 
have  flattered  any  man,  yet  said,  "And  now,  brethren,  I  wot  that 
through  ignorance  ye  did  it,  as  did  also  your  rulers."  It  is  doubtless 
true  that,  had  they  known,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of 
glory,  though  it  is  equally  clear  that  they  ought  to  have  known  him,  for 
Jiis  credentials  were  clear  as  noon  day.     Our  Redeemer,  in  that  dying 

No.  1,385. 

15 


g44  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

prayer  of  liis,  shows  how  quick  he  is  to  see  anything  which  is  in  any 
degree  favourable  to  the  poor  ch'ents  whose  cause  lie  has  undertaken. 
He  spied  out  in  a  moment  the  only  fact  upon  which  compassion  could 
find  foothold,  and  he  secretly  breathed  out  his  loving  heart  in  the  cry,. 
"  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  Our  great 
Advocate  will  be  sure  to  plead  wisely  and  etficiontly  on  our  behalf;  he 
will  urge  every  argument  which  can  be  discovered,  for  his  eye,  quickenedi 
by  love,  will  suOer  nothing  to  pass  which  may  tell  in  our  favour. 

The  prophet,  however,  does  not,  I  suppose,  intend  to  confine  our- 
thoughts  to  the  one  incident  which  is  recorded  by  the  evangelists,  for  the- 
intercession  of  Christ  was  an  essential  part  of  his  entire  life-work.  The 
mountain's  side  often  heard  him,  beneath  the  chilly  night,  pouring  out. 
his  heart  in  supplications.  He  might  as  fitly  be  called  the  man  of 
prayers  as  "  the  man  of  sorrows."  He  was  always  praying,  even  when 
his  lips  moved  not.  While  he  was  teaching  and  working  miracles  by 
day  he  was  silently  communing  with  God,  and  making  supplication  for- 
men  ;  and  his  nights,  instead  of  being  spent  in  seeking  restoration  froni 
his  exhausting  labours,  were  frequently  occupied  with  intercession.  In- 
deed, our  Lord's  whole  life  is  a  prayer.  His  career  on  earth  was  inter- 
cession wrought  out  in  actions.  Since  "he  prayeth  best  who  loveth 
best,"  he  was  a  mass  of  prayer,  for  he  is  altogether  love.  He  is- 
not  only  the  channel  and  the  example  of  prayer,  but  he  is  the  life  and 
force  of  prayer.  The  greatest  plea  with  God  is  Christ  himself.  The- 
argument  which  always  prevails  with  God  is  Christ  incarnate,  Christ, 
fulfilling  the  law,  and  Christ  bearing  the  penalty.  Jesus  himself  is  the- 
reasoning  and  logic  of  prayer,  and  he  himself  is  an  ever  living  prayer- 
unto  the  M<;st  High. 

It  was  part  of  our  Lord's  official  work  to  make  intercession  for  the- 
transgressors.  He  is  a  Priest,  and  as  such  he  brings  his  offering,  and. 
presents  prayer  on  the  behalf  of  the  people.  Our  Lord  is  the  Great 
High  Priest  of  our  profession,  and  in  fulfilling  this  office  we  read  that 
he  offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears  ; 
and  we  kno^v  that  he  is  now  offering  up  prayers  for  the  souls  of  men.. 
This,  indeed,  is  the  great  work  which  he  is  carrying  on  to-day.  We 
rejoice  in  his  finished  work,  and  rest  in  it,  but  that  relates  to  his  atoning 
sacrifice  ;  his  intercession  springs  out  of  his  atonement,  and  it  will  never 
cease  while  the  blood  of  his  sacrifice  retains  its  power.  The  blood  of 
sprinkling  continues  to  speak  better  things  than  that  of  Abel.  Jesus  is- 
pleading  now,  and  will  be  pleading  till  the  heavens  shall  be  no  more. 
For  all  that  come  to  God  by  him  he  still  presents  his  merits  to  the 
Father,  and  pleads  the  causes  of  their  souls.  He  urges  the  grand  argu- 
ment derived  from  his  life  and  death,  and  so  obtains  innumerable  blessings 
for  the  rebellious  sous  of  men. 

I.  I  have  to  direct  your  attention  this  morning  to  our  ever-living; 
Lord  making  intercession  for  the  transgressors;  and  as  I  do  so  I  shall 
pray  God,  in  the  first  place,  that  all  of  us  may  be  roused  to  adjura- 
tion FOR  HIS  GRACE.  Come,  brethren,  gather  up  your  scattered  thoughts 
and  meditate  upon  him  who  alone  -u-as  found  fit  to  stand  in  the  gap  and  turn. 
away  wrath  by  his  pleading.  If  you  will  consider  his  intercession  for- 
transgressors  I  think  you  will  be  struck  with  the  love,  and  tenderness,  and; 
graciousness  of  his  heart,  when  you  recollect  that  he  offered  i?ifercessio/i> 


JESUS  INTEKCEDING  FOE  TEANSGRESSOHH.  645 

rerdally  tchile  he  was  standing  in  the  midst  of  their  sin.  Sin  heard 
•of  and  sin  seen  are  two  very  dilferent  things.  We  read  of  crimes  in  tne 
mewspapers,  but  we  are  not  at  all  so  horrified  as  if  we  had  seen  them  foi 
ourselves.  Our  Lord  actually  saw  human  sin,  saw  it  unfettered  and  un- 
restrained, saw  it  at  its  worst.  Transgressoi's  surrounded  his  person,  and 
by  their  sins  darted  ten  thousand  arrows  into  his  sacred  heart,  and  yet 
while  they  pierced  him  he  prcjyed  for  them.  The  mob  compassed  him 
Toiind  about,  yelling,  "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him,"  and  his  answer  was 
■"Father,  forgive  them":  he  knew  their  cruelty  and  ingratitude,  and  felt 
them  most  keenly,  but  answered  them  only  with  a  prayer.  The  great 
ones  of  the  earth  were  there,  too,  sneering  and  jesting — Pharisee  and 
Sadducee  and  Herodian — he  saw  their  selfishness,  conceit,  falsehood,  and 
bloodthirstiness,  and  yet  he  prayed.  Strong  bulls  of  Bashan  had  beset  him 
round,  and  dogs  had  compassed  him,  yet  he  interceded  for  men.  Man's 
sin  had  stirred  up  all  its  strength  to  slay  God's  love,  and  therefore  sin  had 
arrived  at  its  worst  point,  and  yet  mercy  kept  pace  with  malice,  and  out- 
Tan  it,  for  he  sought  forgiveness  fur  his  tormentors.  After  killing  pro- 
phets and  other  messengers,  the  wicked  murderers  were  now  saying,  "  This 
is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  that  the  inheritance  may  be  ours."  And 
jet  that  heir  of  all  things,  who  might  have  called  fire  from  heaven  upon 
them,  died  crying,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  He  knew  that  what  they 
■did  was  sin,  or  he  would  not  have  prayed  "  forgive  them,"  but  yet  he 
:set  their  deed  in  the  least  unfavourable  light,  and  said,  "  they  know  not 
what  they  do."  He  set  his  own  sonship  to  work  on  their  behalf,  and 
appealed  to  his  Father's  love  to  pardon  them  for  his  sake.  Never  was 
virtue  set  in  so  fair  a  frame  before,  never  goodness  came  so  adorned 
■w'ith  abundant  love  as  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  yet  they 
liated  him  all  the  more  for  his  loveliness,  and  gathered  round  him  with 
the  deeper  spite  because  of  his  iufinite  goodness.  He  saw  it  all,  and 
felt  the  sin  as  you  and  I  cannot  feci  it,  for  his  heart  was  purer,  and 
therefore  tenderer  than  ours :  he  saw  that  the  tendency  of  sin  was  to 
put  him  to  death,  and  all  like  him,  yea  and  to  slay  God  himself  if  it 
could  achieve  its  purpose,  for  man  had  become  a  Deicide  and  must  need? 
•crucify  his  God — and  yet,  though  his  holy  soul  saw  and  loathed  all  this 
tendency  and  atrocity  of  transgression,  he  still  made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  convey  my  own  idea,  but  to 
me  it  seems  beyond  measure  wonderful  that  he  should  know  sin  so 
thoroughly,  understand  its  heinousness,  and  see  the  diift  of  it,  and  feel 
it  so  wantonly  assailing  himself  when  he  was  doing  nothing  but  deeds  of 
ilvindness;  and  yet  with  all  that  vivid  sense  of  the  vileness  of  sin  upon 
liim,  even  there  and  then  he  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors, 
saying,  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know^  not  what  they  do." 

Ai'.othcr  point  of  his  graciousness  was  also  clear  on  that  occasion, 
aiamely,  that  he  should  ilius  intercede  while  in  agony.  It  is  marvellous 
that  he  should  be  able  to  call  his  mind  away  from  his  own  pains  to  con- 
iiidcr  their  transgressions.  You  and  I,  if  we  are  subject  to  great  pains 
of  body,  do  not  find  it  easy  to  command  our  minds,  and  especially  to 
•collect  our  thoughts  and  restrain  them,  so  as  to  forgive  the  person 
inflicting  the  pain,  and  even  to  invoke  blessings  on  his  head.  Remember 
that  your  Lord  was  suffering  while  he  made  intercession,  beginning  to 
suffer    the    pangs  of   death,    suffering   in    soul   as  ^\ell    as   in  body. 


646  BIKTUOl'OJ.lJ'AN    TABERXACfiE   PL'i.lTi'. 

for  he  had  freslily  come  from  the  garden,  where  his  soul  was  c\'<"eodi7igj 
sorrowfii],  even  unto  death.     Yet  in  the  midst  of  that  depie-isioii   of 
spirit,  which  might  well  have  made  him  forgetful  of  the  wretched  beings 
wno  were  putting  him  to  death,  he  forgets  himself,  and  he  only  thinks  of 
them,  and  pleads  for  them.     I  am  sure  that  we  should  have  been  taken 
up  with  our  pains  even  if  w^e  had  not  been  moved  to  some  measure  of 
resentment  against  our  tormentors ;  but  we  hear  no  complaints  from  our 
Lord,  no  accusations  lodged  with  God,  no  angry  replies  to  them  such  as 
Paul  once  gave — "God  shall  smite  thee,  thou  whited  wall";  not  even  a., 
word  of  mourning  or  of  complaining  concei-ning  the  indignities  which  he 
endured,  but  his   dear  heart  all  ascended  to  heaven  in  that  one  blessed 
petition  for  his  enemies,  which  there   and   then   he   presented   to  his. 
Father. 

But  I  will  not  confine  your  thoughts  to  that  incident,  because,  as  I 
have  already  said,  the  prophet's  words  had  a  wider  range.  To  me  it  is- 
marvellous  ihat  he,  being  pure,  should  plead  for  fransr/ressors  at  all:  for- 
you  and  for  me  amongst  them — let  the  wondei-  begin  there.  Sinners  by 
nature,  sinners  by  practice,  wilful  sinners,  simiers  who  cling  to  sia 
with  a  terrible  tenacity,  sinners  who  come  back  to  sin  after  we; 
have  smarted  for  it ;  and  yet  the  Just  One  has  espoused  our  cause,  and 
has  become  a  suitor  for  our  pardon.  We  are  sinners  who  omit  duties. 
when  they  are  pleasures,  and  who  follow  after  sins  which  are  known  to 
involve  sorrow  :  sinners,  therefore,  of  the  most  foolish  kind,  wanton^. 
wilful  sinners,  and  yet  he  who  hates  all  sin  has  deigned  to  take  our  part,. 
and  plead  the  causes  of  our  souls.  Our  Lord's  hatred  of  sin  is  as  great  as 
his  love  to  siimers ;  his  indignation  against  everything  impure  is  as  great  as- 
that  of  the  thrice  holy  God  who  re\engeth  and  is  furious  when  he  comes, 
inco  contact  with  evil ;  and  yet  this  divine  Prince,  of  whom  we  sing,. 
"  Thou  lovest  righteousness  and  hatest  \a  ickedness,"  espouses  the  cause- 
of  transgressors,  and  pleads  for  them.  Oh,  matchless  grace!  Surely 
angels  wonder  at  this  stretch  of  condescending  love.  Brethren,  words 
fail  me  to  speak  of  it.     I  ask  you  to  adore ! 

Further,  it  is  to  me  a  very  wonderful  fact  that  in  his  ylory  lie  sJiould' 
still  be  pleading  for  sinners.  There  are  some  men  who  when  they  have 
reached  to  high  positions  forget  their  former  associates.  They  knew  the- 
poor  and  needy  friend  once,  for,  as  the  proverb  hath  it,  poverty  brings 
us  strange  bedfellows,  but  when  they  have  risen  out  of  such  conditions  they 
are  ashamed  of  the  people  whom  once  they  knew.  Our  Lord  is  not  thus 
forgetful  of  the  degraded  clients  whose  cause  he  espoused  in  the  days  of 
his  humiliation.  Yet  though  I  know  his  constancy  I  marvel  and  admire,. 
The  Son  of  man  on  earth  pleading  for  sinners  is  very  gracious,  but  I  am 
overwhelmed  when  I  think  of  his  interceding  fur  sinners  now  that  he 
reigns  yonder,  where  harps  unnumbered  tune  his  praise  and  cherubim  and 
seraphim  count  it  their  glory  to  be  less  than  nothing  at  his  feet,  wherj 
all  the  glory  of  his  Father  is  resijleiident  in  himself,  and  he  sitteth  at  the- 
right  hand  of  God  in  divine  favour  and  majesty  unspeakable.  How  can 
we  hear  without  amazement  that  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords 
occupies  himself  with  caring  for  transgressors — caring  indeed  for  you  and 
me.  It  is  condescension  that  he  should  commune  with  the  blood- 
washed  before  his  throne,  and  allow^  the  i^erfect  spirits  to  be  his  com- 
panions, but  that  his  heart  should  steal  away  from  all  heaven's  felicities- 


JESUS   INTERCKDING   FOR   TRANSaiiESSuKS.  817 

to  remember  such  poor  creatures  as  we  are  and  make  incessant  prayer 
on  our  behalf,  this  is  hke  his  own  loving  self — it  is  Christlike,  Godlike. 
Methinks  I  see  at  this  moment  our  great  High  Priest  pleading  before 
the  throne,  wearing  his  jewelled  breastplate  and  his  garments  of  glory 
and  beauty,  wearing  our  names  upon  his  breast  and  his  shoulders  in  tlie 
most  holy  place.  What  a  vision  of  incomparable  love!  It  is  a  fact,  and 
no  mere  dream.  He  is  within  the  holy  of  holies,  presenting  the  one 
sacrifice.  His  prayers  are  always  heard,  and  heard  for  us,  but  the  marvel 
is  that  the  Son  of  God  should  condescend  to  exercise  such  an  office  and 
make  intercession  for  transgressors.  This  matchless  grace  well  nigh  seals 
my  lips,  but  it  opens  the  floodgates  of  my  soulj'and  I  would  fain  pause  to 
worship  him  whom  my  words  fail  to  set  forth. 

Again,  it  is  gloriously  gracious  that  our  Lord  should  continue  to  do  this; 
fi jT  lo,  these  eighteen  hundred  years  and  more  he  has  gone  into  his  glory, 
yet  hath  he  never  ceased  to  make  intercession  for  transgressors.  Never 
on  heaven's  most  joyous  holiday  when  all  his  armies  are  marshalled, 
and  in  their  glittering  squadrons  pass  in  review  before  the  King  of 
kings,  has  he  forgotten  his  redeemed  ones.  The  splendours  of  heaven 
have  not  made  him  indifferent  to  the  sorrows  of  earth.  Never, 
though,  for  aught  we  know,  he  may  have  created  myriads  of  worlds, 
and  though  assuredly  he  has  been  ruling  the  courses  of  the  entire  uni- 
verse, never  once,  I  say,  has  he  suspended  his  incessant  pleading  for  the 
transgressors.  Nor  will  he,  for  the  holy  Scriptures  lead  us  to  believe 
tliat  as  long  as  he  lives  as  mediator  he  will  intercede  :  "  He  is  able  to 
save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  He  lived  and  lives  to  intercede,  as 
if  this  were  the  express  object  of  his  living.  Beloved,  as  long  as  the 
great  Redeemer  lives  and  there  is  a  sinner  still  to  come  to  him,  he  will 
still  continue  to  intercede.  Oh,  my  Master,  how  shall  I  praise  thee  ! 
Hadst  thou  nndertaken  such  an  office  now  and  then,  and  hadst  thou 
gone  into  the  royal  presence  once  in  a  while  to  intercede  for  some 
special  cases,  it  would  have  been  divinely  gracious  on  thy  part,  but  that 
thou  shouldst  always  be  a  suppliant,  and  never  cease  to  intercede,  sur- 
passes all  our  praise.  Wonderful  are  his  words  as  written  in  prophecy 
by  Isaiah, — "  For  Zion's  sake  will  I  nut  hold  my  peace,  and  fur  Jeru- 
salem's sake  I  will  not  rest  until  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth  as 
brightness,  and  the  salvation  thereof  as  a  lamp  that  burneth."  As  the 
lamp  in  the  temple  went  not  out,  so  neither  hath  our  Advocate  ceased  to 
plead  day  nor  night.  Unwearied  in  his  labour  of  love,  withuut  a  pause 
he  has  urged  our  suit  befure  the  Father's  face.  Beloved,  I  Avill  not  en- 
large, I  cannot,  for  adoration  of  such  love  quite  masters  me ;  but  let 
your  hearts  be  enlarged  with  abounding  love  to  such  an  intercessor  as 
this,  who  made,  who  does  make,  and  who  always  will  make  intercession 
for  the  transgressors.  I  have  said,  '•'  ivilt  malce,''  and  indeed  this  is  no 
bare  assertiun  of  mine,  for  my  text  may  be  read  in  tlie  future  as  well  as 
in  the  past :  indeed,  as  you  will  perceive  upon  a  little  thought,  it  must 
have  been  meant  to  be  understood  in  the  future,  since  the  pruphecy 
was  written  some  seven  hundred  years  before  our  Lord  had  breathed 
his  intercessory  prayer  at  the  cross :  although  the  prophet,  in  order  tu 
make  his  language  pictorial  and  vivid,  puts  it  in  the  past  tense,  it  was 
actually  in  the  future  to  him,  and  therefure  we  cannot  err  in  reading  it 


S48  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

in  the  fnfcnre,  as  I  have  done — "he  shall  make  intercession  for  the  trans- 
gressors." Constant  love  puts  np  a  ceaseless  plea.  Endless  compassion 
breathes  its  endless  praj^er.  Till  the  last  of  the  redeemed  has  been 
gathered  home  that  interceding  breath  shall  never  stay,  nor  cease  to 
prevail. 

II.  Thus  have  I  called  you  to  feel  admiration  for  his  grace ;  and  now, 
secondly,  I  do  earnestly  j^ray  that  we  may  be  led  of  the  Holy  Ghost  so 
to  view  his  intercession  for  transgressors  as  to  put  our  confidence  in 
HIMSELF.  There  is  ground  for  a  sinner's  confidence  in  Christ,  and 
there  is  abundant  argument  for  the  believer's  complete  reliance  in  him, 
from  the  fact  of  his  perpetual  intercession. 

Let  me  show  you  this  first,  because,  beloved,  his  intercession  succeeds. 
God  heareth  him,  of  that  we  do  not  doubt ;  but  what  is  the  basis  of  this 
intercession  ?  For  whatever  that  is,  seeing  it  makes  the  intercession  to  be 
successful,  we  may  safely  rest  on  it.  Read  carefully  the  verse  :  "  Because 
he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death  :  and  he  was  numbered  with  the 
transgressors  ;  and  he  bare  the  sin  of  many."  See,  then,  the  success  of 
his  plea  arises  out  of  his  substitution.  He  pleads  and  prevails  because 
he  has  borne  the  sin  of  those  for  whom  he  intercedes.  The  main  stay 
and  strength  of  his  prevalence  in  his  intercession  lies  in  the  completeness 
of  the  sacrifice  which  he  offered  when  he  bore  the  sin  of  many.  Come, 
then,  my  soul,  if  Christ's  prayer  prevails  because  of  this,  so  will  thy 
faith.  Resting  on  the  same  foundation,  thy  faith  will  be  equally  secure 
of  acceptance.  Come,  my  heart,  rest  thou  on  that  truth — "  he  bare  the 
sin  of  many."  Throw  thyself  with  all  thy  sin  upon  his  substitution  and 
feel  that  this  is  a  safe  resting-place  for  thy  believing,  because  it  is  a 
solid  basis  for  thy  Lord's  intercession.  The  perfect  sacrifice  will  bear 
all  the  strain  which  can  possibly  come  upon  it ;  test  it  by  the  strongest 
faith  and  see  for  thyself ;  plead  it  with  the  boldest  requests  and  leara 
its  boundless  prevalence.  Thou  mayest  urge  the  plea  of  the  precious 
blood  with  the  Father,  seeing  the  Lord  Jesus  has  urged  it,  and  has 
never  failed. 

Now,  again,  there  is  reason  for  transgressors  to  come  and  trust  in  Jesus 
Christ,  seeing  he  'plcads  for  them.  You  need  never  be  afraid  that  Chi-ist 
will  cast  you  out  when  you  can  hear  liiui  pleading  for  you.  If  a  son  had 
been  disobedient  and  had  left  his  father's  house,  and  were  to  come  back 
again,  if  he  had  any  fear  about  his  father's  receiving  him,  it  would  all 
disappear  if  he  stood  listening  at  the  door  and  heard  his  lather  praying 
for  him.  "  Oh,"  saith  he,  **  my  coming  back  is  an  answer  to  my  father's 
prayer,  he  will  gladly  enough  receive  me."  Whenever  a  soul  comes  to 
Christ  it  need  have  no  hesitancy,  seeing  Christ  has  already  prayed  for  it 
that  it  might  be  saved.  I  tell  you,  transgressors,  Christ  prays  for  you 
when  you  do  not  pray  for  yourselves.  Did  he  not  say  of  his  believing 
people,  "  Neither  pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall 
believe  on  me  through  their  word  "?  Before  his  elect  become  believers 
they  have  a  place  in  his  supplications.  Before  you  know  yourselves  to 
be  transgressors  and  have  any  desire  for  pardon,  while  as  yet  you  are 
lying  dead  in  sin,  his  intercession  has  gone  up  even  for  such  as  you  are. 
"  Father,  forgive  them  "  was  a  prayer  for  those  who  had  never  sought 
forgiveness  for  themselves.  And  when  you  dare  not  pray  for  yourselves 
he  is  still  praying  for  you  :  when  under  a  sense  of  sin  you  dare  not  lift 


JESUS   INTERCEDING   FOR   TRANSGRESSORS.  649 

SO  nmch  as  your  eyes  towards  heaven,  when  yon  think  "  Surely  it 
would  be  in  vain  for  me  to  seek  my  heavenly  Father's  face,"  he  is 
pleading  for  you.  Ay,  and  when  you  cannot  plead,  when  through  deep 
distress" of  mind  you  feel  choked  in  the  very  attempt  to  pray,  when  the 
ilanguage  of  supplication  seems  to  blister  your  lip  because  you  feel  your- 
self to  be  so  unworthy,  ■when  you  cannot  force  even  a  holy  groan  from 
your  despairing  heart,  he  stills  pleads  for  you.  Oh  what  encouragement 
this  ought  to  give  you.  If  yon  cannot  pray  he  can,  and  if  you  feel  as 
lif  your  prayers  must  be  shut  out,  yet  his  intercession  cannot  be  denied. 
■Come  and  trust  him !  Come  and  trust  him  !  He  who  pleads  for  you  will 
not  reject  you :  do  not  entertain  so  unkind  a  thought,  but  come  and 
i^ast  yourself  upon  him.  Hath  he  not  said,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me 
I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out  "?  Venture  upon  the  assured  truth  of  that 
word,  and  you  will  be  received  into  the  abode  of  his  love. 

I  am  sure  too  that  if  Jesus  Christ  pleads  for  transgressors  as  trans- 
gressors, while  as  yet  they  have  not  begun  to  pray  for  themselves,  Ae  ivill 
he  sure  to  hear  them  tvhen  they  are  at  last  ted  to  pray.  When  the  trans- 
j^ressor  becomes  a  penitent,  when  he  weeps  because  he  has  gone  astray, 
let  us  be  quite  sure  that  the  Lord  of  mercy  who  went  after  him  in  his 
sin  will  come  to  meet  hiui  now  that  he  returns.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
about  that.  I  have  known  what  it  is  to  catch  at  this  text  when  I  have 
ibeen  heavy  in  heart.  I  have  seen  my  sinfulness,  and  I  have  been  filled 
with  distress,  but  I  have  blessed  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  he  makes 
intercession  for  the  transyressors,  for  then  I  may  venture  to  believe 
that  he  intercedes  for  me,  since  I  am  a  transgressor  beyond  all  doubt. 
Then  again,  when  my  spirit  has  revived,  and  I  have  said,  "  But  yet  I  am 
:a  child  of  God,  and  I  know  I  am  born  from  above,"  then  I  have  drawn 
ii  further  inference, — if  he  makes  intercession  for  transgressors  then 
'depend  upon  it  he  is  even  more  intent  upon  pleading  for  his  own  people. 
If  he  is  heard  for  those  who  are  out  of  the  way,  assuredly  he  will  be 
heard  for  those  who  have  returned  unto  the  shepherd  and  bishop  of  their 
■souls.  For  them  above  all  others  he  will  be  sure  to  plead,  for  he  lives 
to  intercede  for  all  who  come  unto  God  by  him. 

In  order  that  our  confidence  maybe  increased,  consider  the  effect  of  our 
Lord's  intercession  for  transyressors.  Remember,  first,  that  many  of  the 
worst  of  transgressors  have  been  preserved  in  life  in  answer  to  Christ's 
prayer.  Had  it  not  been  for  his  pleading  they  would  have  been  dead 
long  ago.  You  know  the  parable  of  the  fig  tree  that  cumbered  the 
ground,  bearing  no  fruit,  and  impoverishing  the  soil.  The  master  of 
the  vineyard  said,  "  Cut  it  down,"  but  the  vine  dresser  said,  "  Let 
it  alone  this  year  also,  till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung  it :  and  if  it  bear 
fruit,  well."  Need  I  say  who  he  is  that  stays  the  axe  which  else  had 
long  ago  been  laid  at  the  root  of  the  barren  tree  ?  1  tell  you  ungodly 
men  and  women  that  you  owe  your  very  lives  to  my  Lord's  interference 
on  your  behalf.  You  did  not  hear  the  intercession,  but  the  great  owner 
of  the  vineyard  heard  it,  and  in  answer  to  the  gracious  entreaties  of  his 
Son  he  has  let  you  live  a  little  longer.  Still  are  you  where  the  gospel 
can  come  at  you,  and  where  the  Holy  Spirit  can  renew  you  ?  Is  there 
no  ground  for  faith  in  this  gracious  fact  ?  Can  you  not  trust  in  him 
through  whose  iustrumentaUty  you  are  yet  ahve?  Say  to  your  heavenly 
father, 


650  METROPOLITAN   TABEIINACLE   PULPIT. 

"  Lord,  and  am  I  yet  alive, 
Not  in  torments,  not  in  hell ! 
Still  doth  thy  jrood  Spirit  strive — 
AVith  the  chief  of  sinners  dwell  ?  '' 

And  then  believe  in  him  to  whose  pleading  you  owe  the  fact  that  yora 
are  within  reach  of  mercy.  AVell  doth  it  become  you  to  confide  in  him 
who  has  already  been  your  preserver  from  death  and  hell.  May  the 
divine  Spirit  teach  you  the  reasonableness  of  my  argument,  and  lead 
you  at  once  to  humble  faith  in  Jesus. 

Remember  next,  that  iJiC  fjifl  of  the.  Holy  Spirit  which  is  needful  for- 
the  quickening  of  transgressors  was  the  result  of  Christ's  intercession. 
Our  poet  was  right  when  he  said  : — 

"'Tis  by  thine  intercedinir  breath 
The  Sjiirit  dwells  with  men." 

I  do  not  doubt  but  that  between  the  prayer  of  Christ  for  his  murderers 
and  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost  at  Pentecost  there  was  an  inti- 
mate connection.  As  the  prayer  of  Stejjhen  brought  Saul  into  the  church 
and  made  him  an  apostle,  so  the  prayer  of  Christ  brought  in  three 
thousand  at  Pentecost  to  become  his  disciples.  The  Spirit  of  God  waa 
given  "  to  the  rebellious  also  "  in  answer  to  the  pleadings  of  our  Lord^ 
Now,  it  is  a  great  blessing  thus  to  have  the  Spirit  of  God  given  to  the- 
sons  of  men,  and  if  this  comes  through  Jesus'  prayers  let  us  trust  ia 
him,  for  what  will  not  come  if  we  rely  upon  his  power  ?  Upon  sinners. 
he  will  still  display  his  power  ;  they  will  be  pricked  in  their  hearts,  and 
will  believe  in  him  whom  they  have  pierced. 

It  is  through  Christ's  intercession  that  our  poor  prayers  are  accepfed 
wUh  God.  John,  in  the  Revelation,  saw  another  angel  standing  at  the 
-altar,  having  a  golden  censer,  to  whom  there  was  given  much  incense, 
that  he  should  offer  it  with  the  prayers  of  all  saints  upon  the  golden, 
altar  which  was  before  the  throne.  Whence  comes  the  much  incense  r 
What  is  it  but  Jesus'  merits  ?  Our  prayers  are  only  accepted  because- 
of  his  prayers.  If,  then,  the  intercession  of  Christ  for  transgressors  has 
made  the  prayers  of  trangressors  to  be  accepted,  let  us  without  wavering 
put  our  trust  in  him,  and  let  us  show  it  by  offering  our  supplications 
with  a  full  assurance  of  faith,  and  an  unstaggering  confidence  in  tiie- 
promise  of  our  covenant  God.  Are  not  all  the  promises  yea  and  amen 
in  Christ  Jesus  ?  Let  us  remember  him,  and  ask  in  faith,  nothing, 
wavering. 

It  is  through  the  prayers  of  Christ,  too,  that  we  are  Tcept  in  the  hour 
of  temptation.  Remember  what  he  said  to  Peter,  "I  have  prayed  for 
thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not,"  when  Satan  desired  to  have  him  and  sift 
him  as  wheat.  "  Father,  keep  them  from  the  evil "  is  a  part  of  our 
Lord's  supplication,  and  his  Father  hears  him  always.  AVell,  if  we  aro 
kept  in  the  midst  of  temptation  from  being  destroyed  because  Christ 
pleads  for  us,  let  us  never  fear  to  trust  ourselves  in  his  kind,  careiul 
hands.  He  can  keep  us,  for  he  has  kept  us.  If  his  prayers  have  de- 
livered us  out  of  the  hand  of  Satan,  his  eternal  power  can  bring  us  safely 
home,  thougli  death  lies  in  the  way. 

Indeed,  it  is  because  he  pleads  tliat  ive  are  saved  at  all.  He  is  "able- 
also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he 


JESUS   INTERCEDING  FOR  TRANSGRESSORS.  651 

ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."     This,  also,  is  one  grand. 
reason  why  we  are  able  to  challenge  all  the  accusations  of  the  world. 
and  of  the  devil,  for  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?     It  is  Christ  that 
died,  yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  who    also   maketh    intercession    for   us."      Satan's   charges   are 
all  answered  by  our  Advocate.     He  defends  us  at  the  judgment  seat. 
when  we  stand  there  like  Joshua  in  filthy  garments,  accused  of  the  devil ;. 
and  therefore  the  verdict  is  always  given  in  our  favour — "  Take  away 
his  filthy  garments  fi'om  him."     Oh  ye   that  would  bring  slanderous 
accusations  against  the  saints  of  God,  they  will  not  damage  us  in  the 
court  of  the  great  King,  for  "if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate- 
with   the    Father,   Jesus    Christ    the    righteous."      Think,    my    dear 
brethren  and  sisters,  of  what  the  intercession  of  Jesus  has  done,  and 
you  will  clearly  perceive  great  inducements  to  place  your  sole  reliance 
in  your  Lord,     You  who  have  never  trusted  him,  will  you  not  this  very 
morning  begin  to  do  so  ?     Come,  weary  heart,  take  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be 
your  confidence, — what  more  do  you  want?    Can  you  desire  a  better 
friend  than  he  is,  a  more  pre\'alcnt  advocate  before  the  throne  ?     Come,, 
leave  all  other  trusts,  and  yield  yourselves  to  him  this  morning.     I  pray 
you  accept  this  advice  of  love.     And  you,  ye  saints,  if  you  are  foolish 
enough  to  have    doubts  and  fears,  come,  see  how  Jesus  pleads  for  you. 
Give  him  your  burden  to  bear,  leave  with  him  your  anxieties  at  this 
moment  that  he  may  care  for  you.     He  will  carry  on  your  suit  before  the 
eternal   throne,   and  carry  it  through  to  success.     He  who  engages  a 
solicitor  to  manage  liis  legal  business  among  men  leaves  his  affairs  in  his 
hands,  and  he  who  has  such  a  pleader  before  God  as  Christ  Jesus,  the 
Wonderful,  Counsellor,  has  no  need  to  torment  himself  with  anxieties. 
Rather  let  him  rest  in  Jesus,  and  wait  the  result  with  patience. 

"  Give  him,  my  soul,  thy  cause  to  plead, 
Nor  doubt  the  Father's  grace." 

So  much,  then,  for  the  duty  of  exercising  confidence  in  him.  May  tlie 
Holy  Ghost  fill  you  with  faith  and  peace. 

111.  And  now,  in  the  third  place,  I  pray  that  our  text  may  inspire  us 
with  the  spirit  of  obedience  to  his  example.  I  say  obedience  to  his 
example,  for  I  take  the  example  of  Christ  to  be  an  embodied  precept  as 
much  binding  upon  us  as  his  written  commands.  The  life  of  Christ  is 
a  precept  to  tho-se  who  profess  to  be  his  disciples.  Now,  brethren  in 
Christ,  may  I  put  a  few  practical  matters  before  you,  and  will  you  endea- 
vour by  the  help  of  God's  Spirit  to  carry  them  out  ? 

I'irst,  then,  your  Lord  makes  intercession  for  the  transgressors,  there- 
f  reiiuiiate  him  htj  foryiving  all  transgressions  against  yourself.  Have  any 
(.•if ended  you  ?  Let  the  very  recollection  of  the  offence  as  far  as  possible 
pass  from  your  minds,  for  none  have  ever  injured  you  as  men  injured 
him ;  let  me  say,  as  you  yourself  have  injured  him.  They  have  not  nailed 
you  to  a  cross,  nor  pierced  your  hands,  and  feet,  and  side ;  yet  if  lie  said,. 
*'  Father,  forgive  them,"  well  may  you  say  the  same.  Ten  thousand 
talents  did  you  owe  ?  Yet  he  forgave  you  all  that  debt,  not  without  a 
grievous  outlay  to  himself :  your  brother  owes  you  but  a  hundred  pence,. 
\. ill  you  take  him  by  the  throat?  Will  you  not  rather  freely  forgive- 
him  even  to  seventy  times  seven?     Can  you  not  forgive  him?     If  yoii 


•652  MKTllOl'OMTAN    TABKRNACLE    PULPIT. 

find  it  to  be  impossible  I  will  not  speak  to  you  any  longer  as  a 
Christian,  because  I  must  doubt  if  you  are  a  believer  at  all.  The  Lord 
cannot  accept  you  while  you  are  unforgiving,  since  he  himself  says, 
■"  Theref<)re  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there  rememberest 
that  thy  brother  hath  ought  against  thee ;  leave  there  thy  gift  before  the 
altar,  and  go  thy  Avay ;  first  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  come 
and  ofler  thy  gift."  If  peace  be  not  made  thou  wilt  not  be  accepted. 
God  hears  not  those  in  whose  hearts  malice  and  enmity  find  a  lodging. 
Yet  I  Avould  speak  to  thee  in  tones  of  love  rather  than  with  words  of 
.threatening:  as  a  follower  of  the  gentle  Christ  I  beseech  thee  imitate  him 
in  this,  and  thou  shalt  find  rest  and  comfort  to  thine  own  soul.  From 
^the  day  in  which  Christ  forgiveth  thee  rise  to  that  nobility  of  character 
which  finds  a  pleasure  in  forgiving  all  offences  fully  and  frankly  for 
'Christ's  salcc.  Surely,  the  atonement  which  he  offered,  if  it  satisfied  (jod, 
may  well  satisfy  thee,  and  make  amends  for  the  sin  of  thy  brother 
against  thee  as  well  as  against  the  Lord.  Jesus  took  upon  himself  the 
transgressions  of  the  second  table  of  the  law,  as  well  as  of  the  first,  and 
wilt  thou  bring  a  suit  against  thy  brother  for  the  sin  which  Jesus  bore  ? 
Brethren,  ye  must  forgive,  for  the  blood  has  blotted  the  record  !  Let 
these  words  of  Scripture  drop  upon  your  hearts  like  gentle  dew  from 
iieaven, — "  Be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tender-hearted,  forgiving  one 
:another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you." 

Next,  imitate  Christ,  dear  friends,  in  lAeading  for  yourselves.  Since 
jou  are  transgressors,  and  you  see  that  Jesus  intercedes  for  transgressors, 
make  bold  to  say,  "  If  he  pleads  for  such  as  I  am,  I  will  put  in  my  humble 
j)etition,  and  hope  to  be  heard  through  him.  Since  I  hear  him  cry, '  Father, 
rforgive  them,'  I  will  humbly  weep  at  his  feet,  and  try  to  mingle  my  faint 
^nd  trembling  plea  with  bis  all-prevalent  supplication."  When  Jesus 
.-says,  "  Father,  forgive  them,"  it  will  be  your  wisdom  to  cry,  "  Father, 
forgive  me^  Dear  hearer,  that  is  the  way  to  be  saved.  Let  thy  prayers 
hang,  like  the  g  Iden  bells,  upon  the  skirts  of  the  great  High  Priest ; 
he  will  carry  them  within  the  veil,  and  make  them  ring  out  sweetly  there. 
As  music  borne  on  the  breeze  is  heard  afar,  so  shall  thy  prayers  have  a 
Listener  in  heaven  because  Jesus  wafts  them  there.  Since  thy  prayers  are 
ifeeble,  yoke  them  tj  the  omnipotence  of  his  intercession :  let  his  merits 
be  as  wings  on  which  they  may  soar,  and  his  power  as  hands  with  which 
they  may  grasp  the  priceless  boons.  What  shall  I  say  to  those  who  refuse 
to  pray  \\\\q\\  they  have  such  an  encouragement  as  the  aid  of  Jesus  ? 
Tones  of  tenderness  are  suitable  when  addressing  the  ungodly,  when  we 
would  ])crsaade  them  to  pray;  but  if  they  refuse  the  intercession  of 
Jesus  Christ  himself,  then  must  we  add  our  solemn  warnings.  If  you 
perish,  your  blood  be  on  your  own  heads  :  we  must  say  Amen  to  your 
condemnation,  and  bear  witness  that  you  deserve  to  be  doubly  punished. 
IRejecters  of  great  mercy  must  expect  great  wrath.  The  intercession  of 
your  Saviour,  when  refused,  will  be  visited  upon  you  most  terribly  in  the 
•day  when  he  becomes  your  judge. 

Let  us  imitate  our  Lord  in  a  third  point,  dear  friends :  namely,  if  we 
have  been  forgiven  our  transgressions,  Jet  us  now  intercede  for  trans- 
gressors, since  Jesus  does  so.  He  is  the  great  example  of  all  his  dis- 
ciples, and,  if  he  makes  it  his  constant  business  to  suppUcate  for  sinners, 
•  should  not  his  people  unite  with  him  ?     Therefore  would  I  stir  up  your 


JESUS   INTERCEDING   FOR   TRANSGRESSORS.  Q^f^ 

pure  minds  by  way  of  remembrance,  to  come  together  in  your  hundreds, 
and  in  your  thousands,  to  pray.  Never  let  our  prayer-meetings  decline- 
Let  us,  as  a  cliurch,  make  intercession  for  transgressors,  and  never  rest 
from  seeking  the  conversion  of  all  around  us.  I  trust  that  every  day,  sO' 
often  as  you  bow  the  knee  for  yourselves,  you  will  make  intercession  for- 
the  transgressors.  Poor  things,  many  of  them  are  sinning  against  their 
own  souls,  but  tbey  know  not  what  they  do.  They  think  to  find  pleasure 
in  sin  :  in  this,  also  they  know  not  what  they  do.  They  break  the 
Sabbath,  they  despise  the  sanctuary,  they  reject  Christ,  they  go  down- 
ward to  hell  ^vith  mirth,  singing  merry  glees  as  if  they  were  going  to  a 
wedding  feast :  they  know  not  what  they  do.  But  you  do  know  what, 
they  are  doing.  By  your  humanity — scarcely  shall  I  need  to  urge  a 
stronger  motive, — I  say,  by  mere  humanity,  I  beseech  you,  do  all  you  can. 
for  these  poor  souls,  and  especially  pray  for  them.  It  is  not  much  you 
are  asked  to  do ;  you  are  not  pointed  to  the  cross  and  bidden  to  bleed 
there  for  sinners,  you  are  but  asked  to  make  intercession.  Intercession, 
is  an  honourable  service  ;  it  is  an  ennobling  thing  that  a  sinner  like 
yourself  should  be  allowed  to  entreat  the  King  for  others.  If  you  could 
have  permission  to  frequent  the  Queen's  courts  you  would  not  think  it  a 
hardsliipto  be  asked  to  present  a  petition  for  another;  it  v/oiild  be  to  you 
a  delight  to  be  enjoyed,  a  privilege  to  be  snatched  at  eagerly,  that  you 
should  be  permitted  to  present  requests  for  others.  Oh,  stand  where-. 
Abraham  stood  and  plead  for  sinners  :  Sodom  could  scarce  be  worse- 
than  many  portions  of  the  world  at  this  hour.  Plead,  then,  with  all 
your  hearts.  Plead  again,  and  again,  and  again  with  the  Lord,  though 
ye  be  but  dust  and  ashes,  and  cease  not  till  the  liord  say,  "  I  have  heard 
the  petition,  I  will  bless  the  city,  I  will  save  the  millions,  and  my  Son 
shall  be  glorified." 

I  have  not  quite  done,  for  I  have  a  further  duty  to  speak  of,  and  it: 
is  this  ;  let  us  take  care,  dear  friends,  that  if  we  do  plead  for  others. 
we  mix  with  it  tli&  doing  of  good  to  them,  because  it  is  not   recorded 
that  he  made  intercession  for  transgressors  until  it  is  first  written,  "he 
bare  the  sin  of  many."     For  us  to  pray  for  sinners  without  instruct- 
ing them,  without  exerting  ourselves  to  arouse  them,  or  making  any 
sacrifice  for  their  conversion,  without  using  any  likely  means  for  their- 
impression  and  conviction,  would  be  a  piece  of  mere  formality  on  our- 
part.     According  to  our  ability  we  must  prove  the  sincerity  of  our  peti- 
tions by  our  actions.     Prayer  without  effort  is  falsehood,  and  that  can- 
not be  pleasing  to  God.       Yield    up  yourselves  to   seek  the   good  of' 
others,  and  then  may  you  intercede  with  honest  hearts. 

I>astly,  (/  O/irist  a2)pears  in  heaven  for  us,  let  us  he  glad  to  appear  on 
ear Ih  for  him.  He  owns  us  before  God  and  the  holy  angels,  let  us  not 
be  ashamed  to  confess  him  before  men  and  devils.  If  Christ  i^leads  with 
God  for  men,  let  us  not  be  backward  to  plead  with  men  fur  God.  If' 
he  by  h.is  intercession  saves  us  to  the  uttermost,  let  us  hasten  to  serve 
him  to  the  uttcmir)st.  If  he  spends  eternity  in  intercession  for  us,  let, 
us  spend  our  time  in  intercession  for  his  cause.  If  he  thinks  of  us,  we 
ought  also  to  think  of  his  people,  and  especially  supplicate  for  his  afflicted. 
If  he  watches  our  cases,  and  adapts  his  prayers  to  our  necessities,  let  us, 
observe  the  needs  of  his  people,  and  plead  for  them  with  understanding. 
Alas,  how  soon  do  men  weary  of  pleading  for  our  Lord.    If  a  whole  day  is  set. 


«fi54  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACI;E    I'Ur.PIT. 

apart  for  prayer  and  the  meetinf^  is  not  carefully  managed  it  readily  be- 
comes a  weariness  of  the  flesh.  Prayer-meetings  very  easily  lose  their  flame 
,and  bnrn  low.  Shame  on  these  laggard  spirits  and  this  heavy  flesh  of  ours, 
which  needs  to  be  pampered  with  hveliness  and  brevity,  or  we  go  to  sleep  at 
■onr  devotions.  "  For  ever  "  is  not  too  long  for  him  to  plead,  and  yet  an 
hour  tries  us  here.  On,  and  on,  and  on  through  all  the  ages,  still  his 
intercession  rises  to  the  throne,  and  yet  we  flag  and  our  prayers  are  half 
■dead  in  a  short  season.  See,  iloses  lets  his  hands  hang  down,  and  Amelek 
is  defeating  Joshua  in  the  plain  !  Can  we  endure  to  be  thus  losing  victories 
and  causing  the  enemy  to  triumph  ?  If  your  ministers  are  unsaccessfal, 
if  your  labourers  f  )r  Christ  in  foreign  lands  make  little  headway,  if  the 
work  of  Christ  di'ags,  is  it  not  because  in  the  secret  place  of  inter- 
cession we  have  but  little  strength  ?  The  restraining  of  prayer  is  the 
weakening  of  the  church.  If  we  aroused  ourselves  to  lay  hold  u]).)u 
the  covenant  angel  and  resolutely  cried,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except 
thou  bless  me,"  we  should  enrich  ourselves  and  our  age.  If  we  used  more  of 
the  strong  reasons  whicli  make  up  the  weapon  of  all-prayer,  our  \'ictorics 
would  not  be  so  few  and  far  between.  Oar  interceding  Lord  is  hindered 
"for  lack  of  an  interceding  church;  the  kingdom  comes  not  because  so 
little  use  is  made  of  the  throne  of  grace.  Get  ye  to  your  knees,  my 
brethren,  for  on  your  knees  ye  conquer.  Go  to  the  mercy-seat  and  re- 
main there.  What  better  argument  can  I  use  with  you  than  this — 
-Jesus  is  there,  and  if  you  desire  his  company  you  must  ofttimes  resort 
thither?  If  you  want  to  taste  his  dearest,  sweetest  love,  do  what  he  is 
doing :  union  of  work  will  create  a  new  communion  of  heart.  Let  us 
never  be  absent  when  praying  men  meet  together.  Let  us  make  a  point 
of  frequenting  assemblies  gathered  for  prayer,  even  if  we  give  up  other 
occupations.  While  we  live  let  us  be  above  all  things  men  of  prayer, 
and  when  we  die,  if  nothing  else  can  be  said  of  us,  may  men  give  us 
this  e]iita])ii,  which  is  al:> )  our  Lord's  memorial — "He  made  intercession 
.for  the  tran.gressurs."     Amen. 


I'uii'i'iMX  OF  ScKiPTL'HK  ii;:ad  bekoub  Sermon —Isaiah  liii. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 327,  412,  329. 


WHO  IS  THIS? 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  February  13th,  1887,  Bi 

C.    H.    SPURGEON. 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE.    NKWINGTON. 


*'  Behold,  the  Lord  hath  proclaimed  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  Say  ye  to  the 
•daughter  of  Zion,  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh  ;  behold,  his  reward  is  with  him,  and 
iiis  work  before  him.  And  they  shall  call  them,  The  holy  people.  The  redeemed  of  the 
Lord:  and  thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city  not  forsaken.  Who  is  this  that 
•cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah  ?  this  that  is  glorious  in  his 
apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength  ?  I  that  speak  in  righteousness, 
mighty  to  save." — Isaiah  Ixii.  11,  12  ;  Ixiii.  1. 

Israel  was  often  in  great  trouble,  frequently  oppressed  by  neighbouring 
nations.  It  would  not  have  boea  so  if  they  had  been  fnithful  to 
Jehovah  ;  but  as  a  chastisement  for  their  idolatry  they  were  given  over 
into  the  hands  of  adversaries.  One  nation,  near  akin  to  them,  was  very 
jealous  of  them.  The  Edomites,  the  sped  of  Esau,  were  always  watch- 
ing against  Israel,  and  whenever  the  nation  fell  on  evil  times,  and 
powerful  kingdoms  invaded  them,  Edom  was  ever  in  alliance  with  ttie 
enemy,  ready  to  profit  by  lyruel's  sorrows.  Hence  Edom  was  the 
typical  adversary  of  Israel,  and  is  in  that  manner  mentioned  here  with 
Bozrah,  its  capital  city. 

The  Lord  God  of  Israel  often  interposed  to  rescue  his  people.  I  need 
not  go  over  the  history  ;  but  any  one  of  these  appearances  for  the  over- 
throw of  Israel's  enemies  may  be  represented  in  the  language  now 
before  us,  in  the  commencement  of  the  sixty-third  chapter.  God  coming 
forth  in  the  glory  of  his  strength  ovei-throws  Israel's  enemies,  and  is 
seen  in  vision  returning  from  their  plaughter.  I  take  the  text  as  a  repre- 
sentation of  those  marvellous  victories  which  the  Lord  wrought  ft^r  his 
chosen  people  when  he  put  forth  his  power  on  their  behalf.  The  first 
verse  represents  the  astonishment  of  the  prophet  and  of  the  people,  as 
they  beheld  the  Lord  glorious  in  power,  when  he  had  vindicated  the  cause 
of  his  oppressed  people,  and  had  crushed  the  power  of  their  adversaries. 

As  in  God's  immediate  dealings  with  men  we  usually  see  the  Son  of 
God  most  manifest,  this  passage  may  fiily  represent  the  glorious  appear- 
ings  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  whenever  he  has  come  forth  to  vindicate 
the  cause  of  his  people  and  to  overthrow  their  enemies.  This  visi'  n 
will  be  astoundingly  fulfilled  in  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  fourteenth  and  nineteenth  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Revela- 
tion give  us  parallel  passages  to  this.  What  astonishment  there  will 
be  among  the  sous  of  men  when  he  elmll  app  ar  in  his  vesture  dipped 
iu  blood,  smiting  the  nations  with  his  iron  rod — ^yea,  dashing  them  in 
No.  1,947  jg 


6n6  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

pieces  as  pottors'  vessels !  In  those  last  trempndous  times,  when  the  Jay 
of  vengeance  shall  have  arrived,  then  shall  the  winepress  be  troddem 
without  the  city,  even  the  great  winepress  of  the  wrath  of  God.  No 
tongue  can  fully  tell  the  terrors  of  that  day  when  our  Lord  shall  say, 
"  Ah,  I  will  ease  me  of  mine  adversaries."  While  he  shall  give  victory 
to  the  cause  of  peace,  and  purity,  and  truth,  and  righteousness,  and 
s'lall  save  all  those  who  believe  in  him,  he  shall  bruise  Satan  under 
his  feet,  and  crush  the  powers  of  darkness.  Then  shall  these  words  of 
the  prophet  be  more  fully  understood  :  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from 
Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah  ?  this  that  is  glorious  in  his 
apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength?  " 

The  commentators  and  expositors  almost  universally  deny  that  this 
text  may  be  used  as  referring  to  our  Lord's  passion.  They  tell  us  that 
to  do  so  would  be  to  wrest  the  Scripture  from  its  obvious  moaning  ;  at 
any  rate,  at  the  best,  it  would  be  a  mere  accommodation  of  tlie  passage. 
Now,  I  take  up  the  gage  of  battle,  and  deny  the  assertion.  The  church 
by  a  holy  instinct  has  referred  the  passage  to  our  Lord's  first  as  well  aa 
his  second  coming,  and  she  has  not  been  in  error.  The  very  first  re- 
ference of  this  text  is  to  the  Lord's  passion  in  its  spiritual  aspect  as 
a  battle  against  the  enemies  of  our  souls.  I  grant  you  that  the  text 
does  not  speak  of  our  Lord  as  trampled  upon  and  crushed  in  the  wine- 
press, and  the  blood  which  stains  his  garments  is  not  said  to  be  his  own 
blood,  but  that  of  his  foes.  Such  a  representatioa  might  have  been 
expected  had  it  been  the  prophet's  design  to  describe  the  sufferings  ot 
our  Lord  ;  he  does  not  describe  the  sufferings  themselves,  but  he  does 
most  clearly  depict  their  grand  result.  If  we  take  a  deeply  spiritual 
sight  of  our  Lord's  passion,  such  as  a  prophet  would  be  likely  to  have 
before  him  in  vision,  we  see  upon  his  garments,  as  the  result  of  his 
sufferings,  not  so  much  his  own  blood  as  the  blood  of  the  enemies 
whom  in  death  he  overthrew. 

The  passage  is  poetical :  the  battle  is  a  spiritual  one  ;  the  conflict  is 
with  sin  and  with  the  powers  of  darkness  ;  and  the  conqueror  returns 
from  the  fight  having  utterly  destroyed  his  foes,  of  which  his  Idood-dyed 
garments  are  the  surest  evidence.  Our  Lord's  passion  was  the  battle  of 
all  battles,  upon  which  the  whole  campaign  of  his  life  turned ;  and  had  he 
not  there  and  then  vanquished  all  our  adversaries,  and  had  he  not  at  the 
resurrection  couie  back  as  one  who  had  trampled  down  all  his  f^es, 
then  there  had  been  no  glorious  appearing  in  the  latter  days.  That 
first  combat  is  the  cause  of  the  ultimate  triumph.  I  look  upon  this  sixty- 
third  of  fsaiah  as  the  prophetic  statement  of  the  event  described  by  Paul 
in  Colossians  ii.  15  : — '-And  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers, 
he  made  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it."  On  the 
resurrection  morning  it  would  have  been  correct  poetically  to  have  used 
the  language  of  our  text.  Unseen  spirits,  viewing  our  Lord  after  a  spiritual 
manner,  might  have  exclaimed  as  they  beheld  the  risen  Saviour — 

"  Who  is  this  that  comes  from  Edom, 

All  his  raiment  stain'd  with  blood  ; 
To  the  slave  proclaiming  freedom ; 

Bringing  and  bestowing  good : 
Glorious  in  the  garb  he  wears, 
Glorious  in  the  spoils  he  bears  ?  " 


WHO  IS  THIS  5  6.57 

I  mean  so  to  nse  the  passage  this  morning,  with  a  consciousness  that  I 
am  not  accommodating  it,  noi'  taking  it  from  its  natural  sense  at  all  ;  but 
rather  placing  it  in  the  light  of  its  first  great  t'ultiluient.  I  have  not 
concealed  from  you  its  relation  to  the  Second  Advent,  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  appear  in  victory  "clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood"  ; 
but  at  the  same  time  this  is  a  picture  of  salvation  rather  than  destruc- 
tion, and  its  hero  appears  as  "  mighty  to  save,"  in  fulfilment  of  a  diving 
proclamation  :  "  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh."  The  scene  before  us 
describes  an  interposition  of  the  Messiah  ;  the  return  of  the  divinely 
appointed  champion  from  the  defeat  of  his  enemies.  As  it  is  evidently 
a  picture  of  salvation  rather  than  of  damnation  ;  as  the  main  feature  in 
it  is  that  he  is  mighty  to  save  ;  as  the  great  and  chief  element  of  the 
whole  thing  is  that  the  year  of  his  redeemed  is  come,  and  that  the  war- 
rior's own  arm  has  brought  salvation  to  his  people;  I  cannot  for  a 
moment  question  that  this  text  is  applicable  to  the  first  coming  of 
Christ.  Then  he  did  battle  with  the  hosts  of  sin  and  death  and  hell,  and 
so  vanquished  them  that  in  his  resurrection  he  returned  with  the  keys 
of  death  and  of  hell  at  his  girdle.  Then  was  he  seen  as  "  mighty  ta 
save."  Now  lend  me  your  hearts  as  well  as  your  ears,  while  I  proceed 
to  the  great  subject  before  us,  and  may  the  Holy  Spirit  grant  us  his 
gracious  aid ! 

I.  First,  in  my  text  there  is  a  proclamation  :  "  Behold,  the  Lord 
hath  proclaimed  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  Say  ye  to  the  daughter  of 
Zion,  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh ;  behold,  his  reward  is  with  him,  and 
his  work  before  him.  And  they  shall  call  them,  The  holy  people,  The 
redeemed  of  the  Lord :  and  thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city  not 
forsaken."  The  commentators  as  a  whole  can  see  no  connection  be- 
tween the  sixty-third  chapter  and  the  preceding  part  of  the  Book  of 
Isaiah;  but  surely  that  connection  is  plain  enough  to  the  common 
reader.  In  these  verses  the  coming  of  the  Saviour  is  proclaimed,  and 
in  the  next  chapter  that  coming  is  seen  in  vision,  and  the  evangelical 
prophet  beholds  the  Saviour  so  vividly  that  he  is  startled,  and  enquires, 
"Who  is  this?" 

Let  us  consider  this  proclamation  broadly ;  for  we  have  no  time  to 
dwell  upon  its  details.  I  desire  to  apply  its  spiritual  lessons  as  I  go  on, 
aiming  chiefly  at  the  comfort  of  those  who  are  in  soul  trouble.  Are  any 
of  you  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  sin  ?  Do  you  see  sin  to  be  an  enemy 
too  powerful  fur  you  to  overcome  ?  Are  you  unable  to  escape  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  enemy  ?  Here  is  a  proclamation.  God,  the  ever- 
gracious  One,  demands  your  attention  while,  as  a  King,  he  proclaims 
his  word  of  mercy  to  the  daughter  of  Zion:  "  Behold,  thy  salvation 
cometh." 

This  great  announcement  tells  you  that  there  is  a  salvaiion  from 
without.  Within  your  heart  there  is  nothing  that  can  save  you:  all 
within  you  is  carnal,  sold  under  sin.  Out  of  bondage  only  bondage  can 
arise.  The  proclamation  is,  "  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh."  It  comes 
to  you  I'rom  a  source  beyond  yourself;  it  does  not  arise  from  within 
you,  for  it  could  not  do  so.  Salvation  comes  from  God  himself.  "What 
a  blessing,  that  when  there  was  no  salvation  in  you,  nor  the  possibility  of 
its  coming  from  within^  it  canie  from  above !  Salvation  comes  not  Irom 
man's  will,  or  merit,  or  efforts.     "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."    *'  It  is  not 

2t 


658  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth 
mercy."  0  soul,  if  the  Lord  God  comes  to  save  you,  Edom  and  Bozrah, 
sin  and  hell,  will  soon  be  broken  in  pieces !  The  power  of  yoar  sins,  and 
the  tyranny  of  your  sinful  habits,  the  cords  of  your  companionships,  the 
bondage  of  Satan  himself,  must  speedily  yield  when  salvation  comes 
from  the  eternal  throne,  and  the  mighty  One  of  Israel  hastens  to  the 
rescue. 

It  is  a  salvation  ivhich  comes  through  a  person.  "  Thy  salvation 
Cometh ;  behold,  his  reward  is  with  him,  and  his  work  before  him." 
The  great  salvation  which  we  have  to  proclaim  is  salvation  by  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  died  on  the  cross,  is 
also  the  Son  of  the  Highest.  Him  hath  God  set  forth  to  be  the  pro- 
pitiation for  sin,  to  be  the  deliverer  of  mankind  from  the  bondage  of 
evil.  Behold  him,  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world !  Behold  him,  the  beloved  of  the  Father !  Power  to  save  unto 
the  uttermost  is  laid  upon  him  ;  he  is  a  Saviour,  and  a  great  one.  Ee- 
member  this,  and  do  not  look  to  rites  and  ceremonies,  or  to  creeds  and 
doctrines,  but  to  the  person  of  Jesus,  who  is  God  and  man.  Simeon 
said,  when  he  beheld  our  Lord  as  a  babe,  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  thy 
salvation":  truly  we  may  say  the  same  with  emphasis  when  we  see  him 
in  his  resurrection. 

This  salvaticn  leads  to  holiness ;  for  the  text  says  of  those  who  receive 
the  Saviour,  "  They  shall  call  them.  The  holy  people."  If,  dear  friend, 
you  are  to  be  saved,  you  are  also  to  be  sanctified ;  indeed,  that  sanctifi- 
cation  is  the  essence  of  salvation.  This  will  give  you  great  joy,  I  know  ; 
for  no  man  really  desires  salvation,  rightly  understanding  what  he  de- 
sires, without  meaning  by  it  that  he  may  be  saved  from  the  power  of 
sin,  and  may  no  longer  be  in  servitude  to  his  own  lusts,  or  to  the  wicked 
customs  of  the  world.  Sinners,  rejoice ;  the  great  Jehovah  proclaims 
to  you  a  salvation  which  shall  so  purify  you  that  you  shall  be  saved  from 
your  sins,  and  shall  be  called  "  Tiie  holy  people."  Is  not  that  the  best 
news  you  have  ever  heard  ? 

Further,  it  is  salvation  by  redemption ;  for  it  is  written  that  thej 
shall  be  called  "  The  redeemed  of  the  Lord."  In  the  sacred  Scriptures 
there  is  no  salvation  for  men  except  by  redemption.  You  have  enslaved 
yourselves,  and  your  heritage  is  under  bond ;  and  therefore  you  and  it 
must  be  ransomed.  Behold,  your  Redeemer  pays  your  ransom.  His 
own  heart's  blood  Messiah  pours  forth,  that  men  who  have  been  enslaved 
may  be  set  free.  R.edemption  by  substitution  is  the  gospel.  Christ 
stands  in  your  stead,  a  sufferer  because  of  your  sins  :  you  are  set  in 
Christ's  stead,  rewarded  because  of  his  righteousness,  accepted  because 
of  his  acceptableness  with  God.  This  is  a  sure  and  satisfactory  salva- 
tion ;  a  salvation  which  satisfies  the  conscience  of  man  as  well  as  the 
justice  of  God.  This  salvation  is  to  you  without  money  and  without 
price ;  but  it  cost  the  Redeemer  nothing  less  than  himself.  Behold 
in  him  the  ransom  paid  in  full,  so  that  he  bids  you  go  free.  He 
saith,  "  Fear  not :  for  I  have  redeemed  thee."  Tell  it  out  among  the 
heathen,  tell  it  out  among  the  fallen,  that  there  is  salvation,  salvation 
by  a  great  redemption,  full  and  free.  All  that  lost  ones  have  to  do 
is  joyfully  to  accept  the  purchased  freedom,  and  go  forth  in  joy  and 
peace. 


WHO  IS  THIS?  659 

This  salvation  is  complete.  "  Thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought  out,  A  city 
not  forsaken."  See  the  beginning  of  it  :  "  Thou  shalt  be  called,  Sought 
out."  See  the  end  of  it :  thou  shalt  be  called,  "  Not  forsaken."  You 
will  not  begin  with  God,  but  God  will  begin  with  you.  You  shall  be 
sought  out,  and  then  you  will  seek  him.  He  seeks  you  even  now. 
You  shall  be  known  as  one  that  was  sought  out,  a  sheep  that  wandered, 
a  piece  of  money  that  fell  into  the  dust ;  but,  behold,  you  are  sought 
out  till  the  Saviour  says,  "  Rejoice  with  me ;  for  I  have  found  my  sheep 
which  was  lost."  This  is  the  gracious  beginning  of  salvation.  But 
suppose  the  Lord  found  you,  and  then  left  you  ;  you  would  perish  after 
all.  But  it  shall  not  be  so  ;  for  the  same  Lord  who  calls  you  "  Sought 
out "  also  calls  you  "  Not  forsaken."  You  shall  never  be  forsaken  of  the 
grace  of  God,  nor  of  the  God  of  grace.  Whatever  you  may  be,  notwith- 
standing your  weakness  and  your  waywardness,  you  shall  be  known  in 
heaven  by  these  two  names — first,  that  you  were  "  sought  out,"  and 
next,  that  you  were  "  not  forsaken."  It  makes  my  eyes  sparkle  with 
delight  to  think  how  fully  those  two  names  describe  myself.  I  delight 
to  sing  : — 

'•  Jesus  sought  me  when  a  stranger, 

Wandering  Irom  the  fold  of  God  ; 
He,  to  rescue  me  from  danger. 

Interposed  his  precious  blood." 

Equally  true  is  that  other  word,  "  not  forsaken."  Notwithstanding  all 
my  provocations  and  rebellions,  I  believe  in  him  who  hath  said,  "  1  will 
never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  I  shall  not  die  but  live,  because  he 
is  with  me. 

This  salvation  which  we  have  to  proclaim  to  you,  then,  is  one  that 
comes  to  you  who  lie  despairing  at  hell's  dark  door.  You  shall  be  sought 
out  according  to  the  sovereign  grace  of  God.  Jesus  comes  to  you  when 
you  are  afraid  to  come  to  him.  fou  feai  that  if  you  were  to  commence 
the  march  to  heaven  you  would  faint  by  the  way ;  but  he  who  travels 
in  the  greatness  of  his  strength  is  come  that  you  may  lean  on  him. 
You  that  are  smitten  with  faintness  of  heart  because  you  know  your 
own  weakness  and  changeableness,  you  shall  be  helped  and  sustained  to 
the  end.  He  that  begins  the  good  work  of  grace  in  the  heart  is  no 
changeling,  but  he  will  carry  it  on  and  carry  it  out  to  the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  his  grace.  Oh,  this  is  worth  proclaiming  !  Oh,  for  a  silver 
trumpet  with  which  to  blow  a  blast  that  might  awaken  all  who  slumber  ! 
There  is  salvation  ;  salvation  by  a  glorious  person  ;  salvation  unto 
hohness  ;  salvation  by  redemption ;  a  salvation  so  perfect  that  those 
who  receive  it  shall  never  be  forsaken.  0  dear  hearer,  do  you  not  wish 
to  have  this  salvation  ?  Do  you  not  desire  to  obtain  it  at  once  ?  If 
you  do,  I  beg  you  to  follow  me  now,  while  I  direct  you  to  him  who  is 
the  salvation  of  his  people.  While  we  fix  our  eyes  upon  the  glorious 
person  raised  up  and  upheld  by  God,  by  whom  this  salvation  is  brought 
to  the  sons  of  men,  I  pray  that  you  may  believe  in  him  unto  eternal 
life. 

II.  To  introduce  this  person,  I  now  come  to  consider  the  question 
"  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom  ? "  The  prophet  beholds  in 
vision  the  Captain  of  salvation,  returning  from  battle,  arrayed  like  the 
warriors  of  whom  we  read,  '^the  valiant  men  are  in  scarlet."    He 


660  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

beholds  the  majestic  march  of  this  mighty  Conqueror,  and  he  cries. 
"Who  is  this  ?"  Now,  when  a  soul  first  hears  the  proclamation  of  God'sl 
salvation,  and  then  sees  Jesus  coming  to  him,  he  says,  "  AVho  is  this  ?  "" 
The,  question  in  part  arises  from  anxiety,  as  if  he  said,  "  Who  is  this 
thit  espouses  my  cause  ?  Is  he  able  to  save  ?  Has  he  really  conquered 
my  euemies  ?  "  The  heart  enquires,  "  You  preach  to  me  a  Saviour, 
but  what  sort  of  a  Saviour  is  he  ?  Is  he  able  ?  Is  he  willing  ?  Is 
he  tender  ?  Is  he  strong  ?"  What  you  are,  dear  friend,  is  easily  told, 
for  you  are  lost  and  ruined ;  but  the  great  question  you  need  to  consider, 
is — Who  is  he  that  comes  to  save  you  ?  And  you  may  well  with 
anxiefy  put  the  question,  because  it  concerns  your  own  personal  welfare 
— "  Is  he  such  a  Saviour  as  will  be  able  to  save  me  ?  " 

The  question  arose  from  anxiety,  but  it  also  indicates  ignorance.  We  do- 
not  any  of  us  know  our  Lord  Jesus  to  the  full  yet.  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  is 
a  question  we  may  still  put  to  the  sacred  oracle.  Paul,  after  he  had 
known  Christ  fifteen  years,  yet  desired  that  he  might  know  him  ;  for 
his  love  passeth  knowledge.  If  this  passage  refers  to  our  Saviour's; 
resurrection,  it  is  a  remarkable  truth  that  even  his  disciples  did  noD 
know  him  when  he  had  arisen.  Launcelot  Andrewes,  in  a  famous  sermoa 
on  this  text,  enlarges  on  this  point,  and  I  am  content  to  borrow  from, 
him.  Magdalene,  of  all  the  women  in  the  world,  ought  to  have  known 
him,  but  she  supposed  him  to  be  the  gardener.  The  two  disciples  that 
walked  with  him  to  Emmaus  were  with  him  long  enough  to  have  spied 
him  out,  and  yet  in  all  that  long  walk  they  did  not  know  him.  Do  yoa 
wonder  that  they  did  not  discern  their  Lord  ?  Would  it  have  been  a 
marvel  had  they  said,  "  Who  is  this  ?  Behold  him  travelling  in  the 
greatness  of  his  strength,  and  yet  a  few  hours  ago  we  saw  him  dead,, 
and  helped  to  lay  his  lifeless  body  in  Joseph's  tomb !  Who  is  this  ? 
We  saw  him  stripped !  They  took  his  garments  from  him  on  the 
cross,  and  now  he  is  'glorious  in  his  apparel.'  Who  is  this?  His 
enemies  made  nothing  of  him,  they  spat  in  his  face,  they  nailed  him  to 
the  tree  ;  but,  lo,  his  garments  are  dyed  with  the  blood  of  his  foes,  and 
he  comes  back  more  than  conqueror  !  Who  is  this  ?  "  I  do  not 
wonder  that  when  the  person  of  Christ  first  flashes  on  the  sinners  eye, 
he  thinks  to  himself :  He  was  once  a  babe  at  Bethlehem,  a  weary  man 
before  his  foes,  scourged,  spat  upon  ;  is  this  the  Saviour  ?  And  does  he 
come  to  me  and  propose  that  I  should  put  my  trust  in  him  as  having 
overthrown  all  my  adversaries  ?     "  Who  is  this  ?  " 

As  the  sinner  looks,  and  looks  again,  he  cries,  "  Who  is  this  ? "  im 
deliyhted  amazement.  Is  it  indeed  the  Son  of  God?  Does  he  intervene 
to  save  me?  The  God  whom  I  oflFended,  does  he  stoop  to  fight  and 
rout  my  sins?  He  without  whom  was  not  anything  made,  lieaven's 
darling,  and  the  delight  of  angels,  can  it  be  he?  Thesuul  is  astonished,. 
and  scarce  believes  for  joy.  Yet,  beloved,  it  is  even  he.  This  same 
Jesus  is  both  Lord  and  God.  When  he  ascended  up  on  high  he  led 
captivity  captive,  and  made  an  open  show  of  his  vanquished  foes.  He 
naded  the  hand^\riting  of  ordinances  that  was  against  us  to  his  cross  ; 
he  brake  the  head  of  the  serpent,  and  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power 
of  death,  that  is,  the  devil.  How  could  he  be  less  than  God?  It  is  he, 
and  none  other  than  he,  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  who  took  upon 
himself  the  form  of  a  ser\^ant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men,  and 


WHO   IS   THIS  ?  661 

(ucoaiuc  obedient  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  It  is  he  whom 
-God  hath  highly  exalted,  and  given  him  a  name  that  is  above  every 
•name,  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow^.  No  wonder 
that  the  soul  enquires,  "  Who  is  this?" 

I  think  the  question  is  asked,  also,  hy  ivaij  of  adoration.  Sueh  a 
•question  is  elsewhere  so  used.  Here  is  an  instance — "  Who  is  a  God 
like  unto  thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the  transgression 
•of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage?"  So  that,  as  the  soul  begins  to  see 
Jesus,  its  anxiety  is  removed  by  knowledge,  and  is  replaced  by  an 
astonishment  which  ripens  into  worship.  Adoringly  the  spirit  cries, 
"  Who  is  this  ?  "  What  a  Saviour  I  have !  How  could  it  have  come 
about  that  he  should  die  for  me  ?  What  a  Saviour  is  he  in  his  death  ! 
What  a  Saviour  in  his  rising  again  !  What  a  Saviour  in  his  ascension 
Tip  to  heaven  !  What  a  Saviour  in  his  enthronement  !  What  a 
Saviour  in  his  glorious  advent,  when  he  shall  come  to  gather  together 
)iis  own  !  Who  is  this  ?  We  are  lost  in  wonder  as  we  bow  before  the 
infinite  majesty  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  adore  him  as  God,  our  Saviour, 
for  ever  and  ever. 

It  appears  from  the  question  that  the  person  ashing  it  hioivs  whejice 
the  Conqueror  came ;  for  it  is  written,  "  Who  is  this  that  coraeth  from 
Edoin,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah  ?  "  Yes,  our  Redeemer  has 
returned  from  death,  as  said  the  Psalmist,  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption." 
He  came  again  from  the  land  of  the  enemy.  He  died  and  descended 
into  the  regions  of  the  dead  ;  but  he  loosed  the  bands  of  death,  for  he 
could  not  be  holden  of  them.  He  went  forth  to  fight  with  all  the 
adversaries  of  our  souls,  even  with  all  the  powers  of  darkness.  It  was 
a  terrible  battle.  How  thick  and  fast  the  shafts  flew  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  fight !  Our  hero  soon  knew  the  garments  rolled 
in  blood,  for  he  became  covered  with  a  bloody  sweat.  He  flinched  not 
from  the  horrible  conflict,  although  his  body  had  become  one  bleeding 
wound.  How  sharp  were  the  swords  that  w'ounded  him,  when  his  friends 
proved  cowards,  and  one  of  them  betrayed  him !  How  terrible  were  the 
blades  that  sheathed  themselves  in  his  body  and  mind  !  They  pierced 
his  hands  and  his  feet  :  they  laid  open  his  very  heart.  His  head  was 
Weeding  with  the  thorns,  and  his  back  with  the  knotted  scourges  ;  but 
lie  ceased  not  to  grapple  with  the  evil  powers.  He  said,  "  This  is  your 
hour,"  and  full  well  he  found  it  so.  He  had  in  the  midst  of  the  fight 
.to  groan  as  well  as  sweat;  that  cry  was  forced  from  him,  "  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  But  quickly  followed  the  victorious 
:shout  of  "  It  is  finished,"  and  there  and  then  he  hurled  his  treniendous 
adversary  headlong,  crushed  his  head,  and  left  him  fallen,  no  more 
io  rise ! 

"  '  'Tis  finished,'  said  his  dying  breath, 
And  shook  the  gates  of  hell." 
As  on  this  Resurrection  day  we  see  our  Lord  come  back  to  us,  we  per- 
ceive his  garments  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  all  who  strove  against  us. 
I  beseech  you  to  lay  hold  of  this,  and  trust  my  blessed  Lord ;  for  he  has 
fought  with  all  the  enemies  of  our  souls,  and  he  has  returned  from  the 
enemy's  country,  leading  captivity  captive.  We  may  look  at  him  this 
»day  right  trustfully,  for  his  fight  is  over,  and  his  enemies  are  crushed. 


662  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

as  grapes  in  the  winefat.     We  not  only  trust  our  Lord,  but  we  worsh^ 
him  this  day  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 

'  "  Bruised  is  the  serpent's  head, 

A«4  Hell  is  vanquish'd,  death  is  dead, 

And  to  Christ  gone  up  on  hiwlx, 

Captive  is  captivity.         Alleluia  !  " 

Next  notice  that  the  prophet  in  vision  observes  the  colour  of  the  Con- 
querofs  garments :  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed 
garments  from  Bozrah  ?  "  Red  is  not  Christ's  colour ;  hence  the  question 
arises,  "  Wherefore  art  thou  red  in  thine  apparel  ?  "  Our  Beloved's 
garments  are  whiter  than  any  fuller  can  make  them.  The  glory  of  his 
purity  is  such  that  we  say  to  ourselves,  "Eed,  why,  that  is  the  colour  of 
Edom,  the  adversary !  Red,  that  is  the  colour  of  the  earth  of  our  man- 
hood  !  Red  is  the  colour  of  our  scarlet  sins. "  Why  is  he  red  ?  Brethren, 
although  the  text  treats  of  the  blood  of  his  adversaries,  yet  I  would  have 
you  devoutly  think  of  our  Lord  literally  as  shedding  his  c  wn  blood,  for 
his  victory  was  thus  accomplished.  The  text  sets  forth  the  result 
of  that  blood-shedding  in  the  overthrow  of  his  enemies  and  ours; 
but  we  cannot  separate  the  effect  from  the  cause.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
when  our  Lord's  own  blood  was  shed,  sin  and  death  and  hell  were 
trodden  down  and  destroyed  as  grapes  in  the  winepress.  When  he  was 
suffering  he  was  then  smiting  down  his  enemies.  By  the  shedding  of 
his  own  blood  he  was  shedding  the  blood  of  his  foes.  The  life  of  the 
powers  of  darkness  was  taken  away  by  his  death.  When  I  see  Jesus 
coming  back  literally  covered  with  his  own  blood,  I  discern  him 
spiritually  as  encrimsoned  with  the  slaughter  of  evil  and  its  abettors. 
Glory  be  to  his  name  !  I  shall  never  cease  to  look  upon  my  Lord  in 
the  red  colours  as  in  the  prime  of  his  beauty.  The  blood-red  colours 
are  the  colours  of  victory.  He  never  looks  so  lovely  as  when  he 
appears  as  "  a  Lamb  that  has  been  slain."  I  remember  how  Rutherford 
seems  to  glow  and  burn  when  in  his  prose  poetry  he  talks  of  "  the 
bonnie  red  man."  That  crimson  vest  is  his  most  royal  garment.  He 
hath  taken  away  all  our  transgressions  and  iniquities,  and  covered  all 
our  scarlet  sins,  and  we  see  the  blood  of  them  in  his  blood.  Glory  be 
to  the  bleeding  Christ,  I  say  !  If  there  be  one  hallelujah  louder  than 
any  other,  let  it  be  unto  him  who  wears  the  vesture  dipped  in  blood. 
His  own  blood  is  the  token  and  proof  that  the  blood  of  all  his  spiritual 
foes  has  been  shed.  Our  warfare  is  accomplished  and  our  sin  is  par- 
doned. Behold  the  colours  of  atonement,  for  they  are  the  ensigns  of 
eternal  victory. 

"  Why  that  blood  his  raiment  staining  ? 

'Tis  the  blood  of  many  slain  ;  ] 

Of  his  foes  there's  none  remaining, 
None  the  contest  to  maintain  : 

Fallen  they  are  no  more  to  rise, 

All  their  glory  prostrate  lies." 

But  yet  the  question  comes  from  one  who  perceives  that  the  Con- 
queror is  royally  arrayed.  "This  that  is  glorious  in  his  apjiarel." 
0  dear  hearers,  the  Jesus  we  have  to  preach  to  you  is  no  mean 
Saviour  ;  he  is  clothed  with  glory  and  honour  because  of  the  suffering 
of  death.     He  wears  to-day  a  greater  splendour  than  adorned  the  sona 


WHO  IS  THIS?  663 

of  Aaron  ;  our  great  High  Priest  hath  put  on  all  his  jewels.  He  wears 
also  the  majesty  of  his  kingship  :  "  On  his  head  are  many  crowns."  He 
is  this  day  arrayed  in  light  and  glory.  His  majesty  is  too  bright  for 
mortal  eyes  to  gaze  upon.  When  the  beloved  John  beheld  hiiu  lie  fell 
at  his  feet  as  dead.     He  is  "glorious in  his  apparel." 

The  questmi  ends  with  "  travelliiig  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength." 
He  did  not  come  back  from  slaughtering  our  enemies  feeble  and 
wounded,  but  he  returned  in  majestic  march,  Hke  a  victor  who  would 
have  all  men  know  that  his  force  is  irresistible.  The  earth  shook  be- 
neath our  Lord's  feet  on  the  resurrection  morning,  for  *''  there  was  a  great 
earthquake."  The  Eoman  guards  became  as  dead  men  at  his  appearing. 
Beloved,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  no  petty,  puny  Saviour.  He  is 
travelling  to  meet  poor  sinners  ;  but  he  is  travelling  in  the  greatness 
of  his  strength.  "  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth'" 
said  he.  As  he  travels  through  the  nations  it  is  as  a  strong  man  against 
whom  none  can  stand,  mighty  to  rescue  every  soul  that  puts  its  trust  in 
him. 

There  is  the  question.  I  leave  it  with  you,  praying  that  every  soul 
here  that  is  oppressed  by  the  powers  of  hell,  may  ask  the  question, 
*'  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom  ?  " 

in.  Thirdly,  let  us  consider  the  answer.  Upon  this  I  must  be 
brief. 

Xo  one  can  answer  for  Jesus :  he  must  speak  for  himself.  Like  the 
sun,  he  can  only  be  seen  by  his  own  light.  He  is  his  own  interpreter. 
Not  even  the  angels  could  explain  the  Saviour:  they  get  no  further  than 
desiring  to  look  into  the  things  which  are  in  him.  He  himself  answers 
the  question  "  Who  is  this  ?  "  His  personality  comes  out :  "  I,  the  Lord 
Jesus.  It  is  none  other  than  myself  who  has  come  forth  to  overthrow 
the  adversary."  The  speaker  was  too  modest  to  ask  the  mighty  Saviour 
who  he  was ;  but  that  Saviour  was  not  too  lofty  to  give  him  the  in- 
formation which  was  desired.  0  poor  heart!  Jesus  will  show  himself 
to  you  if  you  desire  to  know  him.  He  will  come  near  to  you  when  you 
dare  not  come  nigh  to  him.  In  his  own  light  you  will  see  him,  and 
if  you  are  bewildered  and  befogged,  but  yet  truly  anxious,  he  will 
manifest  himself  to  you  in  his  great  love,  and  say  to  you,  "  It  is  I ;  be 
not  afraid." 

The  answer  which  our  Lord  gives  is  twofold.  He  describes  himself 
first  as  a  speaker:  ''I  that  speak  in  righteousness."  Is  he  not  the 
Word  ?  Every  word  that  Christ  speaks  is  true :  he  speaks  not  in 
falsehood,  but  in  righteousness.  The  gospel  which  he  proclaims  is  a  just 
and  righteous  one,  meeting  both  the  claims  of  God  and  the  demands  of 
conscience.  0  soul,  if  thou  wilt  hearken  to  Jesus  thou  shalt  hear  that 
from  him  which  thou  couldst  never  hear  from  any  other  lip!  "Xever 
man  spake  like  this  man."  He  will  speak  of  God's  holiness,  and  yet  he 
will  speak  to  thy  comfort.  He  will  reveal  God's  justice,  and  yet  God's 
love  to  thee.  Oh,  hear  thou  what  the  Christ  has  to  say,  and  believe  every 
word  of  it  without  a  cavil,  for  therein  lies  salvation.  "  Hear,  and  your 
soul  shall  live." 

Our  Lord  also  describes  himself  as  a  Saviour :  "  I  that  speak  in 
righteousness,  mighty  to  save."  Now,  observe  that  the  word  "  mighty" 
is  joined  with  his  saving,  and  not  with  his  destroying.    Although  he 


664  METROPOLITAN  TABKRNACLE   PULPIT. 

can  crnsh  his  foes  as  easily  as  a  man  can  crush  with  his  feet  the  berries 
of  the  grape,  the  prophet  does  not  speak  of  him  as  "  mighty  to  tread 
down  his  enemies."  He  will  prove  himself  thus  miiihty  in  that  day  of 
vengeance  which  is  in  his  heart;  but  just  now  he  reveals  himself  in  the 
year  of  his  redeemed  as  "  mighty  to  save."  Kejoice  in  this,  0  my 
hearers!  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  a  Savi  mr,  and  he  is  grand  in  that 
capacity.  Nothing  is  beyond  his  power  in  the  line  of  salvation.  He 
saith,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  There  is  no 
manner  of  sin  which  he  cannot  forgive;  there  is  no  sort  of  hardness  of 
heart  which  he  cannot  remove  ;  there  are  no  spiritual  difficulties  which 
he  cannot  surmount.  "  His  reward  is  with  hira,  and  his  work  before 
him."  *'  He  shall  not  fail,  nor  be  discouraged."  Oh  that  he  stood  here 
this  morning  instead  of  me !  I  do  but  prattle  concerning  him,  and  yet 
it  is  the  best  that  I  can  do.  If  you  use  the  eyes  of  faith,  my  Lord,  who 
hath  overcome  the  foes  of  his  redeemed,  stands  before  you  to-day ;  and 
if  you  ask  who  he  is,  he  proclaims  himself,  for  he  would  have  you  know 
himself.  To  know  Jesus  is  the  first,  the  chief,  the  highest  piece  of 
human  knowledge.  He  is  your  teacher,  and  this  is  your  lesson.  He 
answers  the  question  of  the  prophetic  catechism,  and  when  it  is  asked, 
"Who  is  this  ?  "  he  replies,  "  I  that  speak  in  righteousness  mighty  to 
save."  Fall  at  his  feet,  and  love  and  adore  him  this  day,  and  then  your 
heaven  shall  begin  below. 

Thus  have  we  gone  through  the  text  in  a  very  poor  and  hurried  way ; 
for  I  want  just  a  few  minutes  to  make  practical  use  of  the  subject  ere  I 
send  you  away. 

May  the  Holy  Ghost  now  apply  the  truth  with  power !  Poor  troubled 
one !  thy  sins  are  many,  and  they  grievously  oppress  thee.  Thou  seest 
no  hope  of  escape  from  the  justice  of  God,  or  from  the  power  of  evil 
within  thy  nature.  Hearken  to  the  proclamation,  as  I  dwell  upon  it 
again.  "  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh."  Jesus  can  save  you,  for  he  is 
"mighty  to  save"! 

He  can  save  you;  for  he  has  saved  others  like  you.  He  has  these  many 
years  kept  his  hand  at  this  work.  Your  case  will  not  perplex  him  ;  he  is  at 
home  at  the  business  of  saving  sinners.  The  chief  of  sinners  was  saved 
long  ago  ;  and  if  the  chief,  then  you,  although  you  may  be  the  next 
greatest,  can  be  saved.  Jesus  has  never  been  put  to  a  nonplus  yet. 
He  that  conquered  Edom  and  Bozrah,  he  that  led  captivity  captive 
and  vanquished  all  the  hosts  of  hell  shall  never  be  defeated.  Do  not 
tell  me  that  his  arm  is  shortened,  that  he  cannot  save.  He  can  save 
you,  you  who  now  desire  to  be  made  holy.  You  with  the  hard  heart, 
who  desire  to  have  it  softened,  he  can  do  the  mighty  deed.  He  can 
raise  the  spiritually  dead  and  even  restore  those  who  have  become 
corrupt.     He  can  do  it,  though  nobody  else  can. 

He  can  overthrow  all  your  enemies.  Satan  has  you  now  in  his  grasp, 
and  you  are  not  able  to  war  with  him.  One  evil  passion  or  another  binds 
you.  You  seem  watched  like  Peter  in  prison,  and  bound  even  as  he  was ; 
but  he  who  loosed  Peter  can  release  you.  Jesus  can  say  to  the  prisoners, 
"  Go  forth,"  and  forth  they  shall  go.  There  is  no  temptation,  no  sin, 
no  infernal  influence  ft'om  which  he  cannot  rescue  his  chosen.  He  is  so 
mighty  to  save  that  he  can  deliver  every  soul  that  trusts  in  him,  however 
great  its  extremity.     Leave  your  enemies  to  Jesus  ;  they  baffle  you, 


I 


i  WHO  IS  THIS  ?  665 

but  lie  can  rout  them.     His  garment  is  already  dyed  witli  their  blood, 
wherefore  be  not  afraid  ! 

He  can  do  this  alone.  If  you  trust  Jesus,  and  none  but  Jesus,  you 
have  an  all-sufficient  salvation.  "  I  have  trodden  the  wine-press  alone, 
and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me."  "I  looked,  and  there  was 
none  to  help  ;  I  wondered  that  there  was  none  to  uphold  :  therefore 
mine  own  arm  brought  salvation  unto  me."  Poor  sinner !  hang  on  to 
Jesus  and  his  one  salvation.  If  you  have  no  other  sort  of  hope, 
if  thou  canst  see  no  good  thing  in  thyself,  if  thy  prayers  die  on 
thy  lips,  if  thou  canst  not  weep,  if  thou  canst  not  feel,  if  thou 
hast  not  even  so  much  as  a  jot  of  anything  that  is  commendable 
about  thee,  still  cling  thou  to  Jesus,  to  Jesus  only.  The  great  battle 
of  salvation  he  fought  single-handed ;  and  he  can  save  thee  single- 
handed.  He  is  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  and  he  will 
not  stain  his  princedom  by  failing  in  salvation.  I  fear  I  have  never 
done  more  in  my  own  salvation  than  rather  to  hinder  than  help  my 
Lord,  and  yet  I  know  that  though  I  believe  not,  he  abideth  faithful.  He 
will  stand  to  his  office,  even  though  I  fail  in  my  pledges.  When  he  saves, 
he  does  truly  save.  He  is  master  of  the  business.  He  put  himself 
apprentice  to  it  when  he  was  here  below,  and  set  to  work  to  heal  all 
manner  of  sickness,  and  he  never  failed  even  then  ;  but  now  that  he 
has  gone  through  death  and  hell  for  us,  and  made  himself  perfect  through 
suffering,  he  is  a  master  workman,  and  he  can  save  in  the  teeth  of  all 
opposition.     Do  but  irnst  him,  and  thou  shalt  find  it  so. 

Let  me  add  to  this,  dear  troubled  friend,  that  he  is  able  to  save  you 
noiv.  Do  you  notice  that  verse,  "  The  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine 
heart,  and  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come"  ?  I  leaped  with  joy  at 
those  words  as  I  studied  them.  Yes,  I  thought,  I  will  tell  these  sinners 
that  the  day  of  vengeance  is  in  God's  heart,  and  I  will  warn  them  that 
if  they  do  not  turn  to  him  he  will  destroy  them.  Ah  !  but  that  venge- 
ance is  as  yet  in  his  heart;  he  le:s  it  lie  therein  his  long-suffering 
patience.  But  iJte  year  of  his  rcdeenied  is  come:  it  is  present,  it  is  now. 
It  is  not,  ''To-day  will  I  destroy  you";  but,  "To-day,  if  ye  will  hear 
his  voice,  harden  not  jour  hearts,  as  in  the  provocation."  To-day  is  the 
day  of  salvation :  "  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come."  We  speak  of 
our  dates  as  '^  Anno  Domini,'^  and  so  they  are  :  these  days  are  in  the 
year  of  our  Lord.  We  live  in  tlie  years  of  our  Redeemer,  years  of  his 
redeemed,  years  of  pard>.ning  love.  Oh,  that  you  would  come  now 
that  your  year  is  come  !  Jesus  is  able  to  save  you  at  this  hour.  This 
morning  in  February,  this  cold  and  bitter  morning,  when  the  east  wind 
searches  you  to  the  very  marrow,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  can  warm 
your  hearts  with  a  summertide  of  love.  It  was  such  a  morning  as  this 
when  I  first  found  my  Lord  :  when  the  snow-flakes  fell  so  abundantly, 
•each  one  seemed  to  say  that  Jesus  had  made  me  whiter  than  snow. 
Even  this  cruel  east  wind  will  breathe  comfort  to  you  if  you  will  look  to 
my  Lord  dressed  in  his  vesture  dipped  in  blood.  Behold  the  glorious 
apparel  of  his  love  and  righteousness.  He  comes  back  from  death  and 
hell  triumphant,  so  that  you  may  never  come  under  their  yoke.  He 
proclaims  life  to  you  because  your  foes  are  dead.  He  washes  your 
garments  white  because  his  are  dyed  with  blood.  You  shall  live  for 
«ver  because  he  died,  and  you  shall  triumph  because  he  has  won  the 


666  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

battle  on  your  behalf.     You  shall  go  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer 
because  he  conquers. 

Jesus  has  done  the  work  already.  L'here  is  nothing  to  be  endured  by 
him  in  order  to  save  you  from  your  sins  :  the  expiation  is  made,  the 
redemption  is  paid,  the  righteousness  is  wrought  out.  Of  this  salvation 
our  Lord  said,  at  the  moment  when  he  won  the  victory,  "  It  is  finished"  ; 
and  finished  it  is  for  ever.  Without  seam,  and  woven  from  the  top 
throughout,  was  the  garb  the  Saviour's  body  wore,  and  now  he  presents 
a  garment  like  to  it  to  every  naked  sinner  who  trusts  him,  and  he 
says,  "  Put  it  on."  It  is  freely  given  though  it  was  dearly  wrought. 
It  cost  our  Lord  his  life  to  weave  it,  his  blood  to  dye  it ;  but  to  the 
sinner  it  is  a  free  gift,  and  if  he  will  but  have  it,  he  also  shall  be 
glorious  in  his  apparel,  and  Jesus  will  strengthen  him  till  he  also  shall 
travel  in  the  greacness  of  his  strength.  Oh  that  you  would  believe  in 
Jesus  Christ  this  morning  ! 

It  is  a  sad  wonder  that  men  do  not  believe  in  Jesus.  It  is  a  mournful 
wonder  that  you,  who  have  been  hearing  the  gospel  for  so  many  years, 
do  not  believe  in  him.  What  are  you  at  ?  AVIiy,  if  somebody  were  to 
preach  to  you  any  other  gospel  than  what  I  have  delivered,  you  would 
grow  angry,  you  would  not  hear  it.  Why  is  it  that  you  delight  to  hear 
the  gospel,  and  yet  will  not  accept  it  to  your  own  salvation  ?  Many  of 
yom  have  a  great  admiration  of  my  Lord,  after  a  fashion,  and  you  love 
to  hear  me  praise  him  ;  but  what  is  it  to  you  ?  What  can  he  be  to  you 
unless  you  trust  him  ?  "  Ob,  but  I  don't  teel  my  sins."  Have  I  not 
told  you  many  times  that  salvation  does  not  lie  in  your  feelings?  "  Oh, 
but  I  am  not — "  Have  I  not  told  you  over  and  over  again  that  it  is  not 
what  1J0U  are,  but  what  Jesus  is  ?  Hearken  unto  me.  Cease  from  self, 
and  come  to  Jesus  just  as  you  are.  Let  us  finish  by  each  one  of  us 
singing  this  verse  from  the  heart,  and  all  of  us  together  with  our 
tongues  : — 

"A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm, 
On  Christ's  kind  arms  J  fall : 
He  is  my  strength  and  righteousness, 
My  Jesus  and  my  all.'' 


Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Isaiah  Isil ; 
Ixiii.  1—14. 


HTAm»  from  "  Our  Own  Hymn  Book" — 317,  315,  663. 


SHUTTING,    SEALING,    AND    COVERING; 

OE, 

MESSIAH'S    GLORIOUS    WORK. 


i    $^m^ 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  September  24th,  1882,  by 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people  aiiJ  upoQ  thy  holy  city,  to  finish  th& 
transgression,  and  to  make  an  end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and 
to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and  to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to 
anoint  the  most  Holy." — Daniel  ix.  21. 

The  Lord  God  appointed  a  set  time  for  the  coming  of  his  Son  into  the 
■world;  nothing  was  left  to  chance.  Infinite  wisdom  dictated  the  hoar 
at  which  the  Messiah  should  be  born,  and  the  moment  at  which  he 
should  be  cut  off.  His  advent  and  his  work  are  the  highest  point  of 
the  purpose  of  God,  the  hinge  of  history,  the  centre  of  providence,  the 
crowning  of  the  edifice  of  grace,  and  therefore  peculiar  care  watched 
over  every  detail.  Once  in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  the  Son  of  God 
appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  and  this  is  the 
event  before  which  all  other  events  must  bow.  The  studious  mind  will 
be  delighted  to  search  out  the  reasons  why  the  Messiah  came  not  before, 
and  why  he  did  not  tarry  till  yet  later  ages.  Prophecies  declared  the 
date;  but  long  before  infallible  wisdom  had  settled  it  for  profoundest 
reasons.  It  was  well  that  the  Redeemer  came  :  it  was  well  that  he  came 
in  what  Scripture  calls  the  fulness  of  time,  even  in  these  last  days. 

Note,  again,  that  the  Lord  told  his  people  somewhat  darkly,  but  still 
with  a  fair  measure  of  clearness,  when  the  Christ  would  come.  Thus 
he  cheered  them  when  the  heavy  clouds  of  woe  hung  over  their  path. 
This  prophecy  shone  like  a  star  in  the  midst  of  the  sorrows  of  Israel :  so 
bright  was  it  that  at  the  period  when  Christ  came  there  was  a  general 
expectation  of  him.  Holy  men  and  women,  diligent  in  the  study  of  the 
Scriptures,  were  waiting  for  him  :  Simeon  was  waiting  for  the  consolation 
of  Israel,  and  Anna  looked  for  redemption  in  Jerusalem  with  others  of  like- 
mind.  Not  only  the  Jews,  but  the  Samaritans  expected  him,  for  the- 
woman  at  the  well  exclaimed,  "1  know  that  Messias  cometh,  which  is- 
called  Christ."  Even  in  heathen  lands  there  was  a  remarkable  cessatiott. 
No.  1,681.  ^^ 


668  SHUTTING,    SEALEXG,   AND    COVERING; 

from  stir  and  battle ;  an  unusual  peace  reigned  over  all  the  nations,  and 
the  hush  of  expectation  ruled  the  hour — 

*'  No  war,  or  battle's  sound, 
Was  heard  the  world  around  : 

The  idle  spear  and  shield  were  high  uphung  ; 
The  booked  chariot  stood 
Unstained  with  hostile  blood  ; 

The  trumpet  spake  not  to  the  armfed  throng  ; 
And  kings  sat  still  with  awful  eye, 
A.S  if  they  surely  knew  their  sovran  Lord  was  by." 

iJeii  were  looking  out  for  the  coming  One;  for  the  corn  of  earth  was 
ripe  for  the  reaper.  Men  were  on  the  tij)toe  of  expectation,  and  won- 
dered when  the  promised  Prince  would  arrive.  Alas,  they  knew  him  not 
when  he  appeared.  After  this  fashion  are  things  at  the  present  moment 
with  regard  to  the  Second  Advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  Of  that 
day  and  of  that  hour  knoweth  no  man;"  but  it  is  known  unto  God, 
and  fixed  in  the  roll  of  his  eternal  purposes.  "  Known  unto  God  are 
all  his  works  from  the  creation  of  the  world,"  and  especially  those 
grand  works  which  concern  the  person  of  our  adorable  Lord  Jesus. 
He  shall  come  as  God  hath  appointed :  the  vision  of  his  glory  shall  not 
tarry.  He  has  given  us  suggestive  hints  as  to  that  glorious  appear- 
ing; and  he  has  plainly  taught  us  to  be  looking  for  and  hastening  unto 
the  day  of  the  Lord.  Among  his  last  words  are  these,  "  Surely  I  come 
quickly  :"  these  are  words  of  consolation  as  well  as  of  warning.  He  bids 
us  watch  constantly  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  that  it  overtake  us  not 
as  a  thief  in  the  night;  and  he  assures  us  that  he  will  descend  from 
heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  the  trump  of 
God :  wherefore  comfort  one  another  with  the  glad  tidings,  and  when- 
ever your  hearts  sicken  because  of  abounding  sin,  hear  ye  with  the 
ear  of  faith  the  voice  of  promise  crying,  "  Behold,  the  Bridegroom 
Cometh."  Kesb  assured  that  he  cometh  who  will  in  the  fullest  and  most 
manifest  sense  finish  transgression,  and  make  an  end  of  sin,  and  bring 
in  everlasting  righteousness.  The  advent  of  the  Well-beloved  is  the 
consolation  of  his  mourning  saints.  Both  at  his  first  and  second  appear- 
ings  the  Lord  not  only  cometh  to  drive  away  the  wicked  as  chaif,  but 
also  to  comfort  and  exalt  his  elect:  it  is  a  day  that  shall  burn  as  an 
oven,  and  yet  to  the  redeemed  it  will  be  the  gladdest  day  that  ever 
dawned. 

The  first  advent  of  our  Lord  is  spoken  of  in  our  text  as  ordained  to 
be  ere  the  seventy  weeks  were  finished,  and  the  city  should  be  destroyed ; 
and  so  it  was  even  as  the  prophet  had  spoken.  I  shall  not  occupy  your 
time  by  attempting  to  fix  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  periud  in- 
tended by  tlie  seventy  weeks,  and  the  seven  weeks  and  three- score  and 
two  weeks.  That  is  a  deep  study,  requiring  much  research  and  learning, 
and  I  conceive  that  the  discussion  of  such  a  subject  would  be  of  no 
great  practical  use  to  us  this  Sabbath  morning.  You  will  be  better 
nourished  upon  the  Lord  himself  than  upon  times  and  seasons.  Suffice 
iL  to  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  the  Messiah,  came  exactly  as  it 
•j'as  prophesied,  and  remained  on  earth  as  it  was  foretold  he  should  do: 
in  the  middle  of  the  predestinated  week  he  was  cut  off,  wheii  he  had 
■completed  three  years  and  a  half  of  saving  ministry,  and  within  another 


OR,  MESSIAH'S  GLORIOUS  WORK.  669- 

period  of  like  length  the  gospel  was  preached  throughout  all  nations, 
and  Messiah's  peculiar  relation  to  Israel  was  cut  off.  At  another  time 
it  may  afford  you  profitable  contemplation  if  you  consider  the  four 
hundred  and  ninety  years  from  the  decree  of  the  king  for  rebuilding  to 
the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem. 

We  will  at  this  present  hour  survey  the  work  of  the  Messiah — th-at  is 
his  Hebrew  name,  or  of  Christ,  which  is  the  Greek  interpretation  thereof. 
Let  vs  strreij  the  ivork  of  the  Anointed.  Secondly,  let  us  inquire  as  to 
our  participation  in  it ;  and  then,  thirdly,  let  us  contemplate  the  con- 
sequences ivhich  folloiv  upon  our  being  sharers  in  it,  or  upon  our  not  being 
participanis  in  it.  Oh  for  a  measure  of  the  anointing,  that  we  may  fitly 
meditate  upon  our  great  theme.     Come,  Holy  Spirit,  and  rest  upon  us. 

I.  First,  Let  us  survey  the  Messiah's  woiik.  According  tO' 
my  text  it  divides  itself  into  two  grand  works,  which  two  works  sub- 
divide themselves  in  each  case  into  three  pai'ticulars. 

The  first  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  overthrow  of  evil,  and 
it  is  thus  described, — "To  finish  the  transgression,  and  to  make  an  end 
of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity."  But  our  Lord's  labour  is 
not  all  spent  upon  down-pulling  work ;  he  comes  to  build  up,  and  his 
second  work  is  the  setting  up  of  righteousness  in  the  world,  described 
again  by  three  sentences :  "  To  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and 
to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the  Most  Holy." 

The  first  ivorlc  of  the  Messiah  is  the  overthrow  of  evil.  This  overthrow 
of  evil  is  described  by  three  words.  If  I  were  to  give  you  a  literal! 
translation  from  the  Hebrew  I  might  read  the  passage  thus  :  "  To  shut 
up  the  transgression,  to  seal  up  sin,  and  to  cover  up  iniquity."  Accord- 
ing to  learned  men,  those  are  the  words  which  are  here  used,  and  the 
three  put  together  are  a  singularly  complete  description  of  the  putting 
away  of  sin.  First,  it  is  shut  up:  it  is,  as  it  wei-e,  taken  prisoner,  and 
confined  in  a  cell ;  the  door  is  fastened,  and  it  is  held  in  durance  :  it  is 
out  of  sight ;  held  to  a  narrow  range ;  nnable  to  exercise  the  power 
it  once  possessed.  In  a  word,  it  is  "restrained" — so  the  mai'gin  of  our 
Bibles  reads  it.  The  Hebrew  word  signifies  to  hold  back,  to  hold  in, 
to  arrest,  to  keep  in  prison,  to  shut  in  or  shut  up.  Its  dominion  is- 
finished,  for  sin  itself  is  bound.     Christ  has  led  captivity  captive. 

But  it  is  not  enough  to  shut  up  the  vanquished  tyrant,  unless  he  be 
shut  up  for  ever;  and  therefore,  lest  there  should  be  any  possibility  of' 
bis  breaking  loose  again,  the  next  sentence  is,  "  To  seal  up''  The 
uses  of  the  seal  are  many,  but  here  it  is  employed  fur  certiiinty  of  custody. 
Just  as  when  Daniel  was  thrown  into  the  lions'  den  the  king  sealed  the- 
stone  with  his  own  signet  and  with  the  signet  of  his  lords ;  or,  better  still, 
as  when  our  divine  Master  was  laid  in  the  grave,  they  rolled  the  stone  to 
the  mouth  of  the  sepulchre,  and  his  enemies  set  a  seal  and  a  watch,  lest- 
his  body  should  be  stolen  by  his  disciples.     In  his  case, 

"  Vain  the  stone,  the  watch,  the  seal, 
Christ  has  burst  the  gates  of  helL" 

But  sin  cannot  thus  arise.  It  is  imprisoned  in  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus,. 
and  never  can  it  come  forth  ;  for  the  seal  royal  of  the  immutable  God 
is  set  upon  the  door.  Thus  is  sin  placed  doubly  out  of  sight :  it  is  shut. 
up  and  sealed  xip,  as  a  document  put  into  a  case  and  then  sealed  down.. 


670  SHUTTING,  SEALING,  AND  COVEKING; 

"Finished"  and  "made  an  end  of"  are  the  two  words  used  in  our 
authorised  version,  and  they  give  the  essence  of  the  meaning.  To 
borrow  a  figure  from  current  events, — Arabi,  the  Egyptian  rebel,  is  shut 
up  as  our  prisoner,  and  his  defeat  is  sealed,  therefore  his  rebellion  is 
finished  and  an  end  is  made  of  it.  Even  thus  is  it  with  transgression : 
our  Lord  has  vanquished  evil,  and  certified  the  same  under  the  hand  and 
seal  of  the  Omnipotent,  and  therefore  we  may  with  rapture  hear  him  say, 
"  It  is  finished,"  and  also  behold  him  rise  from  the  dead  to  seal  our 
justification. 

Yet,  as  if  this  might  not  suffice,  the  next  term  in  the  Hebrew  is  to 
cover  up;  for  the  word  to  make  reconciliation  or  expiation  is  usually  in 
the  Hebrew  to  cover  over.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  transgression  ia 
forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered."  Christ  has  come  to  cover  sin,  to  atone 
for  it,  and  so  to  hide  it.  His  glorious  merits  and  substitutionary  suf- 
ferings and  death  put  away  sin  so  completely  that  God  himself  beholds 
it  no  more.  He  has  blotted  it  out,  cast  it  into  the  sea,  and  removed  it 
from  us  as  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west.  The  two  former  sentences 
speak  of  finishing  transgression  and  making  an  end  of  sin,  and  these 
expressions  are  full  and  complete,  while  this  third  one  explains  the  means 
by  which  the  work  is  done,  namely,  by  an  expiation  which  covers  up 
every  trace  of  sin.  Thus  in  the  three  together  we  have  a  picture  of  the 
utter  extinction  of  sin  both  as  to  its  guilt  and  its  power,  ay,  and  its 
very  existence :  it  is  put  into  the  dungeon  and  the  door  is  shut  upon  it ; 
after  this  the  door  is  sealed  and  then  it  is  covered  up,  so  that  the  place 
of  sin's  sepulchre  cannot  be  seen  any  more  for  ever.  Sin  was  aforetime 
in  God's  sight,  but  through  Christ  Jesus  we  read,  "  Thou  hast  forgiven 
the  iniquity  of  thy  people ;  thou  hast  covered  all  their  sin ;  thou  hast 
taken  away  all  thy  wrath."  Sin  was  in  God's  way  till  Christ  shut  it  up, 
and  now  it  pushes  itself  no  more  into  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  Sin  was 
always  breaking  loose  till  Jesus  sealed  it  up,  and  now  it  cannot  come 
forth  to  lay  any  accusation  against  the  justified. 

The  three  words  might  be  put  into  one  word  by  saying  Christ  has 
made  a  clean  sweep  of  sin  of  every  kind.  Whatever  may  be  its  special 
development,  whether  it  be  transgression,  which  means  the  breaking  of 
bounds,  or  sin,  which  is  any  want  of  conformity  to  the  law,  or  iniquity 
— that  is  to  say,  in-equity,  or  the  want  of  equity,  a  default  in  righteous- 
ness ;  in  all  forms  in  which  it  can  be  described  Christ  has  shut  it  up, 
sealed  it  up,  and  covered  it  up  by  his  atoning  sacrifice  once  for  all. 
The  depths  have  covered  it ;  if  it  be  searched  for,  it  cannot  be  found ; 
our  blessed  Scapegoat  has  carried  it  away  into  the  land  of  forgetfulness ; 
it  shall  not  be  mentioned  against  us  any  more  for  ever.  Those  three 
words  contain  infinitely  more  of  meaning  than  I  have  either  space  or 
ability  to  set  forth. 

Observe,  dear  friends,  that  the  terms  for  sin  are  left  in  an  absolute 
form.  It  is  said,  "to  finish  transgression,"  "to  make  an  end  of  sins," 
"  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity."  "Whose  transgression  is  this  ? 
Whose  sins  are  these  ?  Whose  iniquity  is  it  ?  It  is  not  said.  There  is 
no  word  employed  to  set  out  the  persons  for  whom  atonement  is  made, 
as  is  done  in  verses  like  these — "  Christ  loved  the  church  and  gave  him- 
self for  it ;"  "I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep."  The  mass  of  evil  is 
left  unlabelled,  that  any  penitent  sinner  may  look  to  the  Messiah  and  find 


OR,  MESSIAH'S  GLORIOUS  WORK.  671 

in  him  the  remover  of  sin.  What  transgression  is  finished?  Trans- 
gression of  every  kind.  But  what  sins  are  made  an  end  of  ?  Sins  of 
every  sort — against  law  and  against  gospel,  against  God  and  against 
men,  sins  past,  sins  present,  sins  to  come.  And  what  iniquity  is  ex- 
piated? Every  form  of  iniquity,  whatever  falls  short  by  omission, 
whatever  goes  beyond  by  commission.  Christ  in  this  passage  is  spoken 
of  in  general  terms  as  removing  sins,  transgressions,  and  iniquities  in  th. 
mass.  In  other  places  we  read  of  the  objects  of  his  substitution 
but  here  all  is  left  indefinite  to  encourage  all.  He  gives  us  no  catalogue 
of  offences ;  for  where  should  he  write  it  ?  The  very  heavens  could  not 
hold  the  enumeration  ;  but  he  just  takes  the  whole,  unformed,  horrible, 
black,  disgusting  mass,  and  this  is  what  he  does  with  it, — he  en- 
closes it,  fastens  it  up,  and  buries  it  for  ever.  In  the  words  of  our 
version  he  finishes  it,  makes  an  end  of  it,  and  makes  expiation  for 
it.  The  Messiah  came  to  wipe  out  and  utterly  destroy  sin,  and  this  is, 
and  will  be,  the  effect  of  his  work.  Put  all  the  three  sentences  into  one 
and  this  is  the  sum  of  them. 

Indulge  me  for  a  few  minutes  while  I  take  the  sentences  separately 
and  press  each  cluster  by  itself.  And  first  notice  that  it  is  said 
he  came  to  finish  the  transgression.  As  some  understand  it,  our  Lord 
came  that  in  his  death  transgression  might  reach  its  highest  develop- 
ment, and  sign  its  own  condemnation.  Sin  reached  its  finis,  its  ulti- 
matum, its  climax,  in  the  murder  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  could  not  pro- 
ceed further :  the  course  of  malice  could  no  further  go.  They  had 
stoned  the  prophets  and  killed  everyone  that  was  sent  unto  them ;  but 
now  he  came,  and  God  said,  "  They  will  reverence  my  Son,"  but  they  did 
not ;  on  the  other  hand,  they  cried,  "  This  is  the  heir ;  let  us  kill  him, 
and  the  inheritance  shall  be  ours."  Sin  finished  itself  when  it  brought 
forth  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  could  produce  no  riper  fruit,  for 
no  supposable  crime  can  exceed  the  putting  to  death  of  Jesus  our 
Lord  Now  hath  sin  finished  itself,  and  now  hath  Jesus  come  to  finish 
it.  "  Thus  far,"  saith  he,  "  thou  shalt  go,  but  no  further  :  here  in  my 
wounds  and  death  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed."  Sin  virtually 
committed  suicide  when  it  slew  the  Saviour,  for  his  death  became  its  death. 
The  kingdom  of  sin  was  overthrown  in  that  day  when  it  smote  the  Prince 
of  Peace  :  then  was  a  period  put  to  the  dominion  of  evil ;  and,  to  come 
back  to  the  Hebrew,  the  Lord  restrained  transgression,  and  Satan  was 
bound  with  a  great  chain.  "  The  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at ; 
but  now  commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent."  Sin  may  no  longer 
range  unchecked.  Sin  is  now  arrested  and  held  under  warrant,  restrained 
under  the  bonds  of  law;  and  from  the  day  of  our  Lord  by  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  sin  has  become  more  and  more  shut  up  as  to  its  reigning 
power.  Some  men  have  been  altogether  delivered  from  the  rule  of  evil, 
and  other  men  who  remain  its  slaves  yet  go  not  to  such  a  pitch  of  outward 
riot  as  they  would  have  done  had  not  Christ  appeared.  Sin  is  being 
besieged ;  it  skulks  behind  its  earthworks  ;  its  sorties  are  becoming  fewer 
and  less  forcible ;  and  though  it  is  still  powerful,  the  hour  of  its  pride 
is  passed,  its  head  has  received  a  deadly  wound  :  the  age  has  come  in 
which  the  victory  of  truth  and  righteousness  is  guaranteed  by  the  death 
of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Thy  finis  is  written,  0  transgression !  written 
by  the  pierced  hand  1     Thy  huge  volume  has  in  it  writing  long  enough 


672  SHUTTING,   SEALING,   AND  COVERING  | 

and  gi-ievous  enough,  full  enough  of  blasphemy  against  God  and  of  evil 
towards  men  ;  but  now  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  the  pen  from  thee,  and 
thou  sbalt  write  no  more,  as  thou  hast  done.  The  huge  leviathan  of 
evil  has  met  its  match,  and  is  placed  under  the  power  of  the  Avenger. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  Behold,  I  will  put  my  hook  in  thy  nose  and 
my  bridle  in  thy  lips,  and  I  will  turn  thee  by  the  way  by  which  thou 
earnest."  The  Lord  hath  set  bounds  to  the  transgression  which  afore- 
time broke  all  bounds.  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  doth  much  more 
abound.  Sin  is  shut  up  that  grace  may  have  libertyo  This  is  one  part 
of  our  Lord's  great  work  :  all  glory  be  unto  his  name,  he  has  accom- 
plished it  with  power,  and  the  power  of  the  enemy  is  broken. 

Now  take  the  second  sentence,  which  in  our  version  is,  "  To  malre  an 
end  of  sin."  Messiah  has  come  to  proclaim  so  free,  so  rich,  so  gracious 
a  pardon  to  the  sons  of  men  that  when  they  receive  it  sin  virtually  ceases 
to  be  :  it  is  made  an  end  of.  The  man  that  is  in  Christ,  and  hath  Christ 
for  his  covenant  head,  is  this  day  so  delivered  from  all  sin  whatsoever, 
that  he  may  boldly  ask  the  question,  "  AVho  shall  lay  anything  to  the 
charge  of  God's  elect?"  If  Christ  has  made  an  end  of  sin  there  is  an 
end  of  it :  the  matter  is  ended,  and  no  more  is  to  be  said.  Down  among 
the  dead  men  let  sin  lie,  for  ever  buried  by  the  right  hand  of  the 
conquering  Saviour. 

But  the  Hebrew  has  it  *'  to  seal  up  sms."  Now  I  take  it  to  mean  just 
this.  There  are  certain  handwritings  which  are  against  us,  and  they 
■would  be  produced  against  us  in  court,  but  by  the  order  of  the  judge  all 
these  handwritings  are  sealed  up,  and  regarded  as  out  of  sight :  no 
man  dare  break  the  seal,  and  no  man  can  read  them  unless  the  seal 
be  broken ;  therefore  they  will  never  be  brought  against  us.  They 
have  become  virtually  null  and  void.  Everything  that  can  be  brought 
as  an  accusation  against  God's  people  is  now  sealed  up  and  put  out 
of  the  way  once  for  all,  never  to  be  opened  and  laid  to  their  charge 
before  the  living  God.  Or,  if  you  regard  sin  as  a  captive  prisoner,  you 
must  now  see  that  by  Christ's  death  the  prison  wherein  sin  lies  is  so 
sealed  that  the  enemy  can  never  come  forth  again  in  its  ancient  power. 
Sin  could  once  sit  on  the  highest  mountain,  and  look  over  the  world  and 
say,  "  All  this  is  mine  "  ;  and  the  embodiment  of  sin  could  come  to 
Christ  and  say  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  *'  All  these  will  I  give 
thee,"  as  though  he  claimed  ihem  all  for  his  own.  But  it  is  not  so 
to-day.  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  is  this  day  exalted  upon 
the  top  of  the  hills,  and  though  as  yet  all  nations  tio  not  flow  unto  it, 
yet  a  glorious  company  comes  streaming  up  to  the  temple  of  the  living 
God,  and  that  company  shall  increase  from  day  to  day.  As  when  a 
brooklet  groweth  to  a  stream,  and  the  streamlet  rises  to  a  river,  and 
the  river  swells  till  it  rolls  in  fullest  force  into  the  shoreless  main,  so 
is  it  yet  to  be  with  the  ever-growing  church  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  ere 
long  shall  carry  all  before  it,  and  cover  the  earth  with  blessing.  Evil, 
thou  canst  not  reign  !  Jesus  has  come  and  overcome  thee  himself,  and 
taught  man  to  vanquish  thee  !  Thou  canst  not  come  again  to  the  crown 
thou  once  hadst,  for  the  seed  of  the  woman  hath  broken  thy  head  :  he 
shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever,  and  thou  shalt  die!  Hallelujah!  The 
coffin  01  sin  is  both  shut  up  and  fastened  down  with  the  seal  of  Christ's 
victory. 


OR,  Messiah's  glorious  work.  673 

Bat  now,  the  last  expression  is  in  Eniiiish,  he  haili  come  "  fo  make 
reconcilinlmifor  wiquilij  "  ;  that  is,  to  end  the  stri'c  between  God  and  man 
by  a  glorious  reconciliation,  a  making  again  of  peace  between  these 
twain ;  so  that  God  loveth  man,  and,  as  a  consequence,  man  loveth 
God.  In  the  blessed  atonement  of  Christ,  God  and  man  meet  at  a 
-chosen  meeting-place.  Christ  is  Jehovah's  dailing  and  our  delight. 
A  slain  Saviour  is  well  |)]easing  to  God,  and  oh,  how  pleasing  he  is  to  a 
sinner  who  is  dt  eply  under  a  sense  of  sin  !  Here,  here  is  that  mercy- 
seat  sprinkled  with  blood  where  man  may  speak  to  God  without  fear, 
and  where  God  doth  sjicnk  to  man  without  wrath.  Here  righteousness 
and  peace  have  met  together ;  mercy  and  truth  have  kissed  each  other. 
Oh,  glorious  reconciliation  which  Christ  has  made  by  honouring  the  law 
in  l\is  life  and  in  his  death. 

Now,  take  the  Hebrew  for  it,  and  read  the  sentence  thus, — to  cover 
iniquity.  Oh,  what  bliss  this  is:  to  think,  dear  liiends,  tliat  sin  is  now 
once  for  all  covered!  Not  as  though  it  lay  rankling  there  beneath  some 
■coverlet  through  which  fire  might  burn,  or  lightning  strike  ;  but  Christ's 
covering  is  such  that,  if  you  could  heap  hell  over  sin,  it  were  not  so 
hidden  ;  and  if  you  could  pile  worlds  upon  it,  it  were  not  so  concealed  ; 
and  if  all  heaven  bowed  to  overlay  it,  it  were  not  so  out  of  sight  as  when 
Jesus  buried  it  deeper  than  the  lowest  depths,  where  no  memory  can 
remember  it,  or  mind  perceive  it. 

"  Our  guilt  sliall  vanish  quite  away, 
Though  black  as  hell  before, 
Shall  be  dissohed  beneath  the  sea, 
And  shall  be  found  no  more.'' 

This  is  what  is  to  be  done  with  the  whole  kingdom  of  evil,  as  well  with 
the  power  of  it  as  with  the  guilt  of  it.  Dagon  is  to  fall  and  to  be  broken, 
and  the  very  stump  of  him  is  to  be  demolished.  As  when  the  darkness 
ilies  before  the  sun,  not  a  trace  of  its  blackness  is  left,  so  is  sin  to  be 
destroyed  utterly  from  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  merely  the 
guilt  of  sin  that  is  shut  up  and  sealed  and  covered,  but  sin  itself,  its 
power,  its  dominion,  its  habit,  its  defilement,  the  dread  that  comes  of  it, 
and  the  fear  and  the  burning  of  heart  which  it  engenders.  All  the  foul 
birds  of  sin's  filthy  cage  must  fly  away,  never  to  return,  chased  away  by 
the  glorious  work  of  him  who  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins.  Fui 
this  the  Messiah  was  cut  off,  and  this  by  his  death  is  achieved. 

"  O  love !  thou  bottomless  abyss  ! 

My  sins  are  swallow'd  up  in  thee  ; 
Cover'd  is  my  unrighteousness. 

Nor  spot  of  guilt  remains  on  me. 
While  Jesu's  blood,  through  earth  and  skies, 
Mercy,  free,  boundless  mercy  cries  !  " 

I  fail  to  describe  this  triumphant  overthrow  of  sin  and  Satan.  I  have 
neither  wisdom  nor  language  answerable  to  such  a  theme.  I  invite  you 
now  for  a  few  minutes  to  consider  the  second  work,  namely,  the  setting 
up  of  righteousness.  This  is  set  before  us  in  three  expressions  :  first,  in  the 
words  "  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,"  And  what  is  that  ?  Why, 
his  own  righteousness  which  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,  and  will 
never  be  taken  waj  from  those  who  have  it,  and  will  never  cease  to  be 
2u 


674  SHUTTING,   SEALING,  AND  COVERING; 

their  beauty  and  their  glorious  Jesus.  The  work  of  Christ  in  his  life 
and  death  is  by  God  imputed  to  his  people :  indeed,  it  is  theirs  because 
they  are  one  ^f  ith  Christ.  He  is  the  Lord  their  righteousness,  and  they 
are  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  Saints  are  so  righteous  in  Jesus 
Christ  that  they  are  more  righteous  than  Adam  was  before  he  fell,  for  he 
had  but  a  creature  righteousness,  and  they  have  the  righteousness  of  the 
Creator :  he  had  a  righteousness  which  he  lost,  but  believers  have  a 
righteousness  which  they  can  never  lose,  an  everlasting  righteousness. 
Nor  is  that  all  the  meaning  of  our  text :  those  to  whom  God  imputes 
righteousness,  to  them  also  he  imparts  righteousness.  He  makes  them 
pure  in  heart,  he  changes  their  desires,  he  makes  them  love  that  which 
is  right  and  just  and  good,  and  so  he  gives  them  grace  to  lead  godly, 
sober,  honest,  and  holy  lives.  This  rigTiteousness  shall  noc  be  crushed 
out  of  them,  for  the  work  of  the  Spirit  shall  continue  until  they  shall 
become  perfect,  and  be  meet  to  dwell  with  God  in  light.  Happy  are 
those  spirits  to  whom  Christ  gives  an  everlasting  righteousness,  for 
theirs  is  the  kingdom  and  in  it  they  shall  shine  forth  as  the  sun.  They 
are  right  and  they  shall  be  right;  they  are  true  and  they  shall  never 
degenerate  into  falsehood ;  they  are  God's  own  children  and  they  shall 
go  on  to  develop  the  image  of  Christ,  their  elder  brother,  till  they 
shall  be  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing.  This  Christ  came 
to  do  :  he  imputes  and  imparts  righteousness,  and  thus  brings  in  ever- 
lasting righteousness  as  the  foundation  of  his  kingdom. 

Next,  in  order  to  the  setting  up  of  a  kingdom  of  righteousness  he  i? 
come  that  he  may  "  seal  up  vision  and  prophecy."  That  is,  by  fulfilling 
all  the  visions  and  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  in  himself,  he  ends 
both  prophecy  and  vision.  He  seals  up  visions  and  prophecies  so  that 
they  shall  no  more  be  seen  or  spoken ;  they  are  closed,  and  no  man  can  add 
to  them  ;  and  therefore — and  that  is  the  point  to  note — the  gospel 
is  for  ever  settled,  to  remain  eternally  the  same.  Christ  has  set  up  a 
kingdom  that  shall  never  be  moved.  His  truth  can  never  be  changed  by 
any  novel  revelation.  If  any  man  come  to  you  and  say,  "  I  am  a 
prophet !  "  bid  him  go  and  find  believers  among  the  foolish,  for  to  you 
Jesus  has  sealed  up  prophecy.  If  any  man  come  and  say,  "  I  have 
sofiaewhat  to  reveal  which  contradicts  the  old  gospel,"  tell  him  to  go  and 
preach  to  those  who  choose  to  hear  him,  but  you  know  better,  for  Christ 
to  you  has  sealed  up  prophecy  and  vision,  and  there  is  to  be  no  more  of 
it.  There  is  no  need  of  it,  because  in  Christ  God  has  spoken  all  he 
means  to  say  concerning  the  way  of  salvation.  Until  such  time  as  Christ 
himself  shall  come  the  canon  is  complete;  and  though  there  be  many 
voices  crying,  "  Lo,  here  I  "  and  "  Lo,  there  !  "  and  some  so  fascinating- 
that  they  might  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  the  very  elect,  yet  those 
whom  Christ  has  chosen  know  the  Shepherd's  voice,  and  "a  stranger  will 
they  not  follow,  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  strangers."  Brethren, 
there  always  was  something  better  yet  to  come  in  ail  times  till  Christ 
arrived,  but  after  the  best  there  cometh  none.  A  certain  philosopher 
taught  this ;  the  next  philosopher  taught  that,  and  the  next  one  contra- 
dicted this  and  that,  and  taught  another  thing  ;  while  another  master 
arose  and  contradicted  all  who  w  ent  before.  So  man  groped  as  in  the  dark 
for  the  wall ;  but  now  the  day  has  dawned,  and  the  true  Hght  shineth, 
for  Christ  hath  appeared.     This,  then,  is  an  essential  part  of  the  settinsr 


OR,  MESSIAH'S  GLORIOUS  WORK.  G75 

up  of  that  which  is  good — namely,  to  settle  truth  on  a  fixed  basis, 
whereon  we  may  stand  steadfast,  immovable.  The  candles  are  snuffed 
out  because  the  day  itself  looks  out  from  the  windows  of  heaven.  Rejoice 
in  this,  beloved.  God  makes  you  righteous  in  Christ  and  with  Christ, 
and  in  order  that  you  shall  never  be  perplexed  with  change,  he  sets  aside 
all  other  teachers,  that  Christ  may  be  your  all  in  all. 

Then,  as  if  this  were  not  enough,  and  truly  it  would  not  be  enough, 
he  is  also  come  io  anoint  the  Most  Holy,  or  the  Holy  of  holies,  as  you  may 
read  it.  And  what  means  this  ?  Nothing  material,  for  the  Holy  of 
holies,  the  place  into  which  the  High  Priest  went  of  old  is  demolished, 
and  the  veil  is  rent.  The  most  holy  place  is  now  the  person  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  he  was  anointed  that  God  might  dwell  in  him. 
Together  with  Christ  the  Holy  of  holies  is  now  his  church,  and  that 
church  was  anointed  or  dedicated  when  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  at  Pentecost, 
to  be  with  us,  and  to  abide  in  us  fur  ever.  That  was  a  noble  part  of  the 
setting  up  of  the  great  kingdom  of  righteousness,  when  tongues  of  fire 
escended  and  sat  upon  each  of  the  disciples,  and  they  Ijegan  to  speak 
with  other  tongues  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance.  This  is  Christ's 
work,  fur  which  he  came,  and  for  which  he  ascended  on  high,  to  set  up 
the  truth,  to  set  up  righteousness,  and  to  make  it  everlasting  by  the 
dwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Church  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the 
sons  of  men. 

Thus  you  see,  in  six  ways,  which  condense  themselves  intu  two,  our 
Lord  set  about  his  lordly  enterprise.  Heaven  rings  with  the  praises  of 
the  Messiah  who  came  to  destroy  the  work  of  sin,  and  to  set  up  the 
kingdom  of  I'ighteousness  in  the  midst  of  the  world. 

IL  Let  us  now  enquire  as  to  our  participation  in  these  two 
WORKS.  1  will  put  a  few  questions  as  briefly  as  I  can,  and  I  pray  6od, 
the  Holy  Ghost,  that  every  one  of  us  may  honestly  answer  them. 

First,  dear  brethren,  Christ  has  come  into  the  world  to  do  all  this  good 
work,  but  has  he  done  it  for  us  ?  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave 
his  only  begotten  Son,"  What  for?  "That  whosoever  beUeveth  in 
him  might  not  perish."  There  is  a  general  aspect  to  the  atonement, 
but  there  is  quite  as  surely  a  special  object  in  it.  God  loved  the  world, 
and  therefore  he  gave  his  Son.  But  to  what  end  did  he  give  his  Sun  ? 
Here  is  the  answer,  "  That  whosoever  believeth  in  him  might  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life."  There  was  a  special  eye  to  believers.  Come, 
then,  have  you  believed  ?  The  first  question  that  is  to  help  you  to  answer 
that  enquiry  is  this — Is  your  sin  shut  up  as  to  its  power  ?  "  Sin  shall  not 
have  dominion  over  you"  if  Christ  is  in  you.  How  is  it  between  your 
soul  and  evil?  Is  there  war  or  peace?  Once  you  loved  sin;  you 
could  not  have  enough  of  it.  Is  it  so  now?  Do  yuu  still  delight 
in  evil  ?  For  if  you  do,  the  love  of  God  is  not  in  you.  Can  you  still 
put  forth  your  hand  to  iniquity  as  you  once  did?  Then  do  not 
pretend  that  Christ  has  done  anything  for  you.  If  you  are  a  believer, 
your  sin  may  not  be  absolutely  dead,  but  it  is  shut  up  for  dead  :  it  is 
fast  held  in  the  condemned  cell.  It  may  still  breathe,  but  it  is  crucified 
with  Christ.  How  it  tugs  to  get  its  hands  loose  from  the  nails  !  How 
it  struggles  to  get  its  feet  down  from  the  tree !  But  it  cannot,  for  He 
that  nailed  it  there  knew  how  to  drive  nails,  and  how  to  fasten  the 
utfender  to  the  tree.     Do  you  begin  to  grow  weary  of  iniquity  ?     Is  it 


676  SHUTTING,   SEALING,   AND  COVERING; 

distasteiul  aud  unplGasatit  to  you  ?  And  when  looking  over  the  day  you 
perceive  where  yon  have  spoken  unadvisedly  or  acted  hastily,  or  in 
any  other  way  soiled  your  character,  do  you  feel  as  if  you  w.juld  fain  wash 
out  every  spot  with  tears?  If  it  be  so,  Christ  has  begun  with  you:  he 
has  come  to  shut  up  your  sin,  and  to  end  its  reign :  it  shall  no  more 
have  dominion  over  you.  It  may  be  in  yon,  but  it  shall  not  be  on  the 
throne:  it  may  threaten  you,  but  it  shall  n<)t  command  you:  it  may 
grieve  yon,  but  it  shall  not  destroy  you.  You  are  under  another  master  : 
you  serve  the  Lord  Christ.     Judge  you  how  this  matter  fores  with  you. 

The  next  que.stion  arising  out  of  the  text  is.  Is  your  sin  sealed  up  as 
to  its  condemning  power  ?  Have  you  ever  felt  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  your  soul,  saying  to  you,  "  Go  in  peace ;  thy  sins  which  are 
many,  are  all  forgiven  thee  "  ?  Have  you  clutched  that  promise,  "  He 
that  believeth  in  him  is  not  condemned  "  ?  Have  yuu  believed  in  Jesiis  ? 
and  has  that  blessed  word,  "  There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation," 
breathed  a  deep  calm  over  your  spirit  ?  Some  of  you  do  not  know  what 
I  mean ;  bat  others  of  you  do.  Oh,  what  bliss,  what  a  heaven  it  is  to 
know,  "  I  am  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb ; — I  am  delivered,  clean 
delivered  from  every  sin,  past,  present,  and  to  come,  as  to  anyp  )S3ibility 
of  its  being  laid  to  my  charge.  Christ  has  put  my  sins  into  a  bag,  sealed 
them  up,  hurled  that  bag  into  the  sea,  and  flung  them  out  of  existence, 
and  they  are  gone,  never  to  be  found  again  any  more."  He  has  made 
an  end  of  sin.  Come,  dear  hearer,  do  you  know  anything  about  this  ? 
If  you  do  not,  it  is  the  one  thing  you  want  to  know,  and  until  you  know  it 
you  will  never  have  any  rest  to  your  spirit,  but  you  will  be  tossed  to  and 
ft-o  as  upon  a  raging  sea.  "  Tliere  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the 
wicked."  There  is  no  peace  to  any  of  us  till  Christ  hath  made  an  end 
of  our  sin.     How  is  it  with  your  hearts  ? 

And  next,  is  your  sin  covered  as  to  its  appearance  before  God?  Has 
the  Lord  Jesns  Christ  made  such  an  expiation  for  your  sin  that  it  no 
longer  glares  in  the  presence  of  the  Most  High,  but  you  can  come  unto 
God  witliout  dread  ?  Can  you  hopefully  say,  "  Lord  God,  thou  seest  no 
sin  in  me,  for  thou  hast  covered  me  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
and  washed  me  in  his  blood  "  ?  Did  you  ever  feel  the  sweetness  of 
that  ?  It  is  rapture !  I  can  recollect  times  when  I  have  been  driven 
to  doubt  whether  it  could  be  true,  it  seemed  too  good;  and  then 
again,  when  my  faith  has  revived  I  have  said,  "  Good  as  it  is,  it  is 
true,  for  it  is  like  God  to  do  these  great  marvels,  and  to  put  away  the  sins 
of  his  people  and  cover  them  once  for  all."  Oh  then  there  has  been  a 
joy  within  my  spirit  not  at  all  like  the  joy  of  harvest,  or  the  joy  of 
marriage,  or  the  joy  of  a  firstborn  child  in  the  house.  No ;  it  is  a  joy 
like  the  bliss  of  angels,  deep,  unspeakable,  mysterious,  divine.  Have 
you  ever  felt  it?  You  will  feel  constantly  if  Christ  comes  to  dwell 
with  you :  you  \vill  then  be  assured  in  your  heart  that  he  has  made  an 
end  of  your  sin. 

Further,  let  me  question  you  about  the  next  point.  Has  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  made  you  righteous?  Do  you  glory  in  his  blood  and 
righteousness,  and  do  you  now  seek  after  that  which  is  pure  and  holy  ? 
"  Be  not  deceived;  God  is  not  mocked:  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth, 
that  shall  he  also  reap."  If  we  continue  in  sin  we  shall  perish  in  sin.  He 
is  saved  who  comes  out  from  evil  and  seeks  to  live  honestly,  righteously, 


OR,    MESSIAH'S   GLORIOUS    WORK.  677 

soberly,  after  the  manner  of  the  godly  and  the  saintly.  Is  it  so  with 
you  ?  Is  there  a  great  and  deep  change  in  your  spirit,  so  that  yon  now 
love  those  good  things  which  once  yon  despised  and  ridiculed  in  others? 
Oh,  if  you  cannot  answer  my  poor  questions,  how  will  you  stand  before? 
the  judgment-seat  of  God  when  he  shall  test  you  as  with  fire? 

Furthermore,  are  the  prophecies  and  visions  sealed  up  as  to  you: 
Are  they  fulfilled  in  you?  When  God  declares  that  he  wmII  wash  us  and 
make  us  whiter  than  snow,  is  it  so  w  ith  you  ?  When  he  declares  that 
he  will  cleanse  our  blood,  which  h;is  not  yet  been  cleansed,  is  it  so  with 
you  ?  When  he  says,  "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  them,  and  a  right 
spirit  will  I  put  within  them  :  and  I  will  write  my  law  upon  their 
hearts  ;"  is  it  so  with  you?  Are  you  fishing  about  after  empty  dreams 
and  fancies,  or  have  you  laid  hold  upon  the  old  prophecies  and  the 
ancient  visions,  and  discovered  the  substance  of  them  to  be  deeply 
wrought  in  your  very  heart  ? 

Nor  is  this  all :  are  you  anointed  to  be  most  holy  to  the  Lord?  Are 
you  set  apart  that  you  may  serve  him?  Has  the  Holy  Spirit  come  upon 
you,  giving  you  a  desire  to  do  good?  Have  you  a  wish  to  rescue  the  perish- 
ing, a  longing  to  bring  the  wandering  sheep  back  to  the  great  Shepherd's 
fold?  Is  the  Spirit  of  God  so  upon  you  to-day  that  you  can  truly  say, 
"  I  am  not  my  own  ;  I  am  bought  with  a  price  "  ?  Jesus,  the  Messiah, 
came  to  do  all  these  things,  and  if  he  has  not  dune  them  to  you,  then  he 
has  not  come  to  you  ;  you  are  still  a  stranger,  still  far  off  from  him.  Oh, 
may  the  Lord  make  you  desperately  unhappy  till  you  come  to  Jesus ; 
may  yon  never  know  what  quiet  means  till  you  find  it  at  the  pierced 
feet !  From  this  hour  may  you  breathe  sighs,  and  may  every  pulse  be  a 
new  agony  of  spirit,  till  ar,  last  you  can  say,  "  Yes,  the  Messiah  was  cut 
off,  and  cut  oft"  for  me,  and  all  that  he  came  to  do  he  did  for  me,  and  I 
am  a  sharer  and  a  partaker  in  it  all." 

III.  Lastly,  we  have  but  a  brief  interval  in  which  to  speak  of  the 
RESULTS  OF  PARTICIPATING  IN  ALL  THIS.  The  results  !  I  want  a 
vvcjek  to  speak  of  them  in.  They  are,  first  of  all,  security.  How  can 
that  man  be  lost  whose  transgression  is  finished,  and  whose  sin  has 
ceased  to  be?  What  is  there  for  him  to  dread  on  earth,  in  heaven, 
or  in  hell?  If  Christ  has  put  away  my  sin,  I  cannot  die;  il'  Christ 
has  washed  away  my  guilt,  I  cannot  be  condemned;  I  am  safe,  and  may 
triumphantly  sing — 

"  More  happy,  but  not  more  secure, 
The  glorified  spirits  in  heaven," 

Wherefore,  rejoice  in  this. 

And  now,  inasmuch  as  you  are  secure,  you  are  also  reconciled  to  God, 
and  made  to  delight  in  him.  God  is  your  friend  and  you  are  one  of  the 
iriends  of  God.  Eejoice  in  that  hallowed  friendship,  and  live  in  the 
assurance  of  it.  Now  you  have  the  anointing,  do  not  doubt  it.  Christ 
has  made  it  yuurs  by  his  death.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  lesteth  upon 
you  ;  you  are  fit  for  service  ;  set  about  it  without  further  question.  The 
anointii'.g  is  upon  you;  you  are  most  holy  to  the  Lord;  so  let  your  life 
be  wholly  consecrated.  Your  heart  ought  to  be,  and  shall  be  by  the 
Sj)ir!t's  power,  as  holy  as  that  innermost  shrine  into  which  no  un- 
authoiized  foot  ever  intruded,  into  which  only  once  in  the  year  the  high 


678  SHUTTING,    SEALING,   AND   COVERING- 

priest  went,  and  then  not  without  blood.  God  dwelleth  in  yon,  and 
you  in  God.  Oil,  blessed  consequences, — you  shall  soon  dwell  with  hiin 
for  ever ! 

Bat  now  suppose  when  I  p.it  the  question  you  had  to  shake  your  head 
and  say,  "  No,  it  is  not  so  with  me."  Then  hear  th(!se  few  sentences.  If 
tlie  Messiah  has  not  done  this  for  you,  then  your  sin  will  be  finished  in 
another  way  ; — sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death.  An  awful 
death  awaits  you, — death  unto  God,  and  parity  and  joy.  Woe,  woe,  to 
yon.  Death  on  the  pale  horse  pursues  you,  and  will  overtake  you  soon. 
Then  will  one  woe  be  past,  but  another  will  follow  it.  If  Christ  has 
never  made  an  end  of  your  sin,  then  mark  this,  your  sin  will  soon 
make  an  end  of  yon,  and  all  your  hopes,  your  pleasure,  your  boasting,  your 
peace  will  perish.  Oh,  terrible  end  of  all  that  is  hopeful  within  you.  You 
shall  be  a  desolation  fwr  ever  and  for  ever.  Has  not  Christ  reconciled 
yon?  Then  mark  this,  your  enmity  will  increase.  There  is  no  peace 
between  God  and  you  now,  but  soon  will  the  war  begin  in  which  he 
must  conquer,  and  you,  never  yielding,  will  continue  for  ever  more  to 
hate  God,  and  to  find  in  that  hate  your  utmost  torment,  your  fiercest  hell. 
Have  you  never  had  the  righteousness  of  Christ  brought  in  ?  Then 
mark  this,  your  unrighteousness  will  last  for  ever.  One  of  these  days  God 
will  say,  "  He  that  is  unholy,  let  him  be  unholy  still :  he  that  is  filthy, 
let  him  be  filthy  still."  That  will  be  the  most  awful  thing  that  can  ever 
happen  to  you.  You  have  heard  of  the  fable  of  Medusa's  head  :  who- 
ever looked  upon  it  when  it  was  held  up  was  turned  to  stone,  and  one 
day,  sinner,  you  shall  look  at  death,  and  it  will  petrify  your  character  so 
that  it  shall  be  fur  ever  what  it  is  when  death  came  to  you.  Where 
death  finds  you,  there  judgment  shall  find  you,  and  there  eternity  shall 
leave  you.  Oh,  wretched  soul,  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  ever- 
lasting righteousness  of  Christ! 

Are  not  the  piuphecies  fulfilled  m  you,  the  prophecies  of  mercy  ? 
Then  listen.  The  prophecies  of  woe  will  be  written  large  across  your 
history.  "  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  with  all  the  nations  that 
forget  God."  Beware,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  he  tear  you  in  pieces,  and 
there  be  none  to  deliver.  I  will  nut  detain  you  with  many  such  words  of 
terror,  but  through  the  Old  Testament  they  roll  like  peals  of  thunder,  nor 
is  the  Xew  Testament  less  stern  tuwards  him  that  goeth  on  in  his 
iniquity  and  will  not  turn  unto  the  Christ. 

Lastly,  will  you  never  be  anointed  to  be  most  holy  ?  Then  remember, 
holiness  and  you  will  stand  at  a  distance  for  ever,  and  to  be  far  off  from 
holiness  must  necessarily  be  to  be  far  off  from  heaven  and  happiness. 
Sin  is  misery;  in  it  lies  both  the  root  and  the  fruit  of  eternal  woe. 
Purity  is  paradise :  to  be  right  with  God  is  to  be  right  with  yourself  and 
all  created  things ;  but  if  ye  will  not  be  holy,  then  must  ye  by  force  of 
your  own  choice  be  for  ever  tossed  about  upon  the  restless  sea  of  wretched- 
ness. God  save  you,  brothers  and  sisters ;  God  save  you  for  Christ's 
Bake.     Amen. 


THE    KING-PRIEST. 


ttmti\\ 

Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Morning,  September  21st,  1879,  by 

C.    H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  He  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne  ;  and  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne : 
and  the  counsel  of  peace  s-hall  be  between  them  both." — Zechariah  vi.  18. 

Let  lis  first  look  at  the  historical  setting  of  this  passage.  It  would  seem 
that  three  Jews  of  the  captivity  had  come  from  Babylon  with  a  contri- 
bution towards  the  building  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  under  Zerubbabel 
and  Joshua.  Their  names  are  given  in  the  tenth  Terse  of  the  chapter 
before  us.  Now,  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  had  become  exceedingly  exclu- 
sive, and  in  some  measure  rightly  so.  They  would  not  accept  help 
for  the  building  of  the  temple  from  the  Samaritans  because  they  were  a 
mixed  race,  but  they  said  to  them  ''  Ye  have  nothing  to  do  with  us 
to  build  a  house  unto  our  God,  but  we  ourselves  together  will  build  unto 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  Possibly  they  had  begun  to  feel  some 
coolness  with  reference  to  the  captivity  at  Babylon  that  inasmuch  as 
they  did  not  come  back  to  their  own  land  their  descent  must  be  proved 
before  they  acknowledged  them.  If  they  would  not  quit  the  ease  and 
comfort  of  the  towns  in  which  they  were  settled,  and  come  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  work  with  their  brethren  could  they  be  sure  that  they 
were  really  Israelites.  At  any  rate  there  would  need  to  be  some  enquiry 
into  their  pedigree  that  they  might  not  be  receiving  help  from  Samaritan 
pretenders.  There  was,  however,  no  difficulty  about  the  acceptance  of 
the  offerings  in  this  case,  for  the  prophet  Zechariah  was  bidden  to  hasten 
down  that  same  day  and  meet  the  three  worthy  Jews  from  Babylon. 
He  was  to  accept  for  the  Lord  the  tribute  which  they  had  brought, 
and  make  of  it  crowns  of  silver  and  gold.  He  was  then  to  go  with 
these  brethren  and  Josiah,  the  son  of  Zephaniah,  their  host,  down  to  the 
temple,  call  for  the  high  priest,  Joshua,  or  Jesus,  the  sou  of  Josedech, 
and  place  these  coronets  of  silver  and  gold  upon  his  head.  This  was 
to  be  done,  not  as  an  honour  to  the  individual,  but  as  a  prophetic  token 
that  there  would  in  due  time  arise  one  who  would  be  a  priest  crowned 
with  many  crowns.  This  illustrious  personage,  who  is  called  "  the 
Branch,"  was  to  spring  out  of  the  decayed  house  of  David,  like  a  shoot 
from  a  tree  which  has  been  cut  down  even  to  the  stump :  according  to 
the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  "  and  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the 
No.  1,495.  Ig 


630  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

Stem  of  Jesse,  and  a  Branch  shall  grow  ont  of  his  roots."  (Is.  xi.  1). 
He  \Yas  to  be  both  a  priest  and  a  king,  even  as  David  had  prophesied  in 
the  hundred  and  tenth  Psalm — "The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not 
repent,  thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek."  JSTow 
Melchizedek  combined  the  king  and  the  priest  in  one  person,  as  also 
doth  onr  Lord  Jesus  of  whom  Zechariah  spoke.  This  royal  priest  was- 
to  build  the  real  temple  of  God,  which  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  could 
never  be,  for  the  Most  High  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands. 
ft  was  also  intimated  by  the  prophet  that  as  ot  that  particular  time  men 
had  come  from  afar,  and  had  brought  offerings  to  the  temple,  so  in 
the  days  of  this  great  priest-king  many  should  come  from  the  uttermost 
ends  of  the  earth,  and  should  themselves  be  built  into  the  temple  of  the 
Lord  God.  This  is  the  historical  setting  of  our  text :  now  we  have 
to  learn  its  spiritual  lesson.     May  the  Holy  Spirit  be  our  instructor. 

Last  Sabbath  morning  we  spoke  of  the  foundation  of  the  temple  of 
God.     We  su'.v  how 

"  The  churcli's  one  foundation 
Is  Jesus  Christ,  oiir  Lord." 

"We  may  not  forget  that  he  who  is  the  foundation  is  also  the  builder 
of  the  spiritual  house :  "  He  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord ;  and 
he  shall  bear  the  glory."  There  is  but  one  who  is  the  true  architect 
and  master-builder  of  the  church  of  God,  even  Jesus  Christ.  His  hands 
have  laid  the  foundation  of  the  house,  his  hands  shall  also  finish  it.  So 
great  is  the  fulness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  that  no  figures  can  exhaust  his 
character  ;  he  is  not  only  foundation  and  builder,  but  he  is  the  "  head  stone 
of  the  corner";  the  pinnacle  as  well  as  the  basemeut,  the  Omega  as  well 
as  the  Alpha,  the  finisher  as  well  as  the  begiiuier.  He  begins,  he  carries 
on,  and  he  completes  the  divine  structure  of  the  church,  and  when  all 
this  is  done,  it  is  he  that  estabhshes  the  structure,  provisions  and 
furnishes  it,  keeps  and  preserves  it,  and,  best  of  all,  it  is  he  that  is  the 
glory  in  the  midst,  dwelling  in  the  church,  as  a  monarch  in  his  own 
halls,  and  inakiug  it  to  be  a  palace  as  well  as  a  temple.  It  is  the  Lord 
Jesus  Avho  walks  among  the  golden  candlesticks  of  the  church,  who  loads 
her  table  with  bread  and  wine,  and  sends  forth  his  rod  of  power  from 
her  midst.  As  a  King  as  well  as  a  Priest  he  dwells  in  his  palace-temple.. 
As  the  Shekinah  was  the  glory  of  the  tabernacle  of  God  among  men  irt 
days  of  old,  so  is  the  presence  of  Jesus  the  glory  of  the  church  at  this- 
h  )ur.  "  Lo,  I  am  ever  with  yon  ;  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world  "  is  our 
pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire,  our  glory  and  our  defence. 

Our  text  tells  us  that  the  promised  builder  of  the  spiritual  temple  will 
inhabit  and  build  it  in  his  double  character  as  priest  and  king.  The 
church  is  built  up  by  none  other  than  by  this  Melchisedek,  and  it  is 
built  by  hiui  in  virtue  of  both  his  offices  as  king  and  priest.  As  king  he 
j)uts  forth  po\^er,  and  as  pi'iest  he  displays  holiness;  as  a  king  he  uprears 
the  walls,  and  as  a  priest  he  sanctifies  them  unto  the  Lord.  At  this- 
moment  it  will  be  well  f  jr  our  faith  to  open  her  eyes  and  look  up  into 
heaven  itself  and  see  our  great  Priest-King  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  exalted,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  working  by  his  Spirit  among  mea 
for  the  perfecting  of  his  church  below\  Our  Solomon  is  both  ruigui ng 
and  building.     Of  his  throne  we  may  well  say  "  there  was  not  the  like 


THE   KING-PI!  lEST.  (jgjj 

in  any  kingdom,"  and  of  his  temple  we  may  also  add  that  it  is  "  ex- 
ceeding magnincal,  of  fame  and  glory  througliont  all  countries." 

I  shall  try  tliis  morning  to  set  our  Lord  Jesus  before  yon,  as  far  as  I 
can,  ill  that  double  glory  which  is  peculiar  to  himself:  in  the  majesty 
of  his  royalty  and  the  holiness  of  his  priesthood.  Such  lights  meet  not 
in  any  other  star.  To  no  one  else  belongeth  the  royal  priest  liood,  save 
only  that  he  reflects  his  own  brightness  upon  his  brethren,  whom  he  hath 
made  to  be  priests  and  kings. 

The  subject  will  run  thus  :  first  let  us  consider  the  glojions  comhination 
of  offices  in  the  person  of  Christ;  secondly,  let  us  notice  the  luippy  result 
of  it — "the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both";  and  then, 
thirdly,  let  us  suggest  the  action  on  our  part  ■which  is  harmonious  thereto ; 
— make  crowns  and  set  them  upon  the  head  of  Jesus. 

I.  First,  then,  I  want  yon  to  consider  at  this  time  the  glorious 
COMBINATION  which  is  found  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Note,  first  that  he  is  King,  and  of  him  as  king  it  is  written,  "  he  shall 
sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne."  One  has  the  idea  of  ease  suggested  by  tlie 
expression.  Few  kings  have  been  able  to  sit  and  rule,  but  they  have  been 
forced  to  rise  and  rush  hither  and  thither  to  defend  their  sovereignty. 
No  other  seat  in  the  world  is  so  uneasy  as  a  throne.  "We  have  seen 
monarchs  elevated  by  their  soldiery,  or  borne  aloft  by  the  fickle  throng ;: 
bayonets  or  bahot  boxes  have  been  the  frail  supports  of  their  thrones. 
The  later  centuries  have  been  a  sorry  time  for  kings.  As  once  men 
feared  to  be  thought  prophets,  so  might  men  in  revolutionary  times 
have  cried  out  each  one,  "  I  am  not  a  king  nor  the  son  of  a  king."  But 
our  Lord  Jesus  sits  upon  a  throne  which  knows  no  trouble  ;  once  for  all 
has  he  bled  and  died,  but  now  he  has  gone  into  his  glory  never  to  be  dis- 
turbed again.  The  I;ord  who  hath  set  him  on  the  throne  by  an  unal- 
terable decree  hath  his  enemies  in  derision,  and  Jesus  waits  in  perfect 
rest  until  his  foes  shall  be  made  his  footstool.  Publicly  recognised  as 
King  of  kings  by  the  divine  enthronement  which  his  Father  has  giwen 
him,  he  is  not  a  king  warring  for  a  disputed  crown,  nor  i)attliiig  to 
drive  invaders  from  his  realm,  but  he  sits  and  rules  upon  his  throne. 

Sitting  is  the  posture  of  abiding  as  well  as  resting.  Jesus  reigns  on,, 
and  will  reign  on  so  long  as  the  moon  endureth.  "  Thy  throne,  0  God, 
is  for  ever  and  ever."  Even  we,  who  are  yet  young,  have  seen  dynasties 
come  and  go,  and  we  have  seen  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  moved  and 
tossed  to  and  fro  as  the  waves  of  the  sea,  yet  the  throne  of  Jesus  has  not 
been  shaken,  for  it  is  written,  "  Tiie  Lord  sitteth  upon  the  flood  ;  yea, 
the  Lord  sitteth  King  for  ever."  "  The  Lord  is  great  in  Zion,  and  he  is 
high  above  all  the  people."  "The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever." 
HaUelujah. 

As  a  King,  he  is  described  as  sitting  iq^on  his  own  throne.  Ho  luia- 
not  usurped  the  throne  of  another,  but  his  right  to  sovereignty  is  indis- 
putable. He  has  well  deserved  to  be  King  of  men  since  ho  is  their 
Redeemer.  His  Father  hath  given  him  a  crown  as  the  reward  of  tho 
travail  of  his  soul,  even  as  he  promised  "  Therefore  will  I  divide  him  a 
portion  with  the  great,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong, 
because  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto  death."  He  sits  upon  a  throne 
which  he  has  won  by  conquest,  for  he  has  vanquished  tho  powers  of 
darkness,  and  led  captivity  captive.     His  right  to  his  throne  can  never 


682  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

be  disputed,  for  it  is  accorded  to  him  by  the  enthusiastic  suflFrages  of  all 
his  people.     Do  we  not  sing 

"  Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem, 
And  crown  him  Lord  of  all  "? 

There  is  no  monarch  so  secure  as  he.  He  is  really  and  truly  King  byj 
right  divine.  He  is  King  by  descent,  for  he  is  Son  and  heir  of  thej 
Highest.  He  is  King  by  his  own  intrinsic  excellence,  for  there  is  none 
to  be  compared  to  him.  And  he  is  King  by  his  own  native  mii>-ht  and 
majesty,  for  he  himself  holds  the  throne  against  all  comers,  and  sliall 
hold  it  till  all  enemies  shall  be  under  his  feet.  Thus  is  he  spoken  of  as 
King. 

A  hint  or  two  is  given  as  to  his  position  as  priest,  namely,  that  he  is 
first  priest  before  he  is  King,  for  so  was  the  type  in  the  text,  Jesus 
the  son  of  Josedech  was  already  high  priest,  and  then  he  was  crowned 
with  the  gold  and  silver  crowns.  Xow,  the  kingdom  of  which  we  speak 
to-day  it  not  that  of  Christ's  essential  royalty  as  by  nature  divine,  and 
therefore  Lord  of  all,  but  that  which  his  Father  hath  given  him,  be- 
cause, "  Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and 
became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  AVherefore 
God  also  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above 
every  name  :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things 
in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth ;  and  that 
every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of 
God  the  Father."  .Jesus  reigns  because  he  died.  For  the  suffering  of 
death  he  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  The  saints  in  heaven  sing, 
"  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof,  for 
thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood." 

We  note,  too,  with  regard  to  our  Lord's  priesthood  that  he  is  said  to 
sit,  for  if  he  sits  as  king  it  is  implied  that  he  sits  as  priest :  indeed,  it  is 
expressly  said,  "  He  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne."  Xow,  of  no 
other  priest  is  it  said  that  he  sitteth,  for  the  apostle  saith,  "  Every  priest 
standeth  daily  ministering  and  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices, 
which  can  never  take  away  sins."  There  was  no  seat  provided  within 
the  holy  place  for  Aaron,  or  for  any  of  the  priests ;  they  were  servants 
of  God,  and  they  stood  daily  ministering.  "  But  this  man,  after  he  had 
offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God; 
from  henceforth  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool.  For 
by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified." 
Jesus  sitteth  still  for  evermore  in  quiet  expectancy,  for  all  his  work  is 
done :  no  merit  to  be  wrought  out  to  complete  his  righteousness,  no 
sufferings  to  be  endured  to  perfect  his  atonement.  "  It  is  finished,"  he 
said  as  he  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  it  is  finished ;  and  in  token  thereof 
Jehovah  saith  unto  him,  "  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thine 
enemies  thy  footst®ol."  So  far,  then,  we  have  a  glimpse  of  the  King 
sitting  on  his  throne,  and  of  the  priest,  crowned,  and  resting  from  his 
labours. 

Thus  far  we  have  seen  each  ofiice,  now  we  are  to  see  the  two  com- 
bined in  the  Lord  Jesus :  and  to  make  the  combination  clear  we  shall 
notice,  first,  that  as  a  priest  he  is  royal ;  and  then,  secondly,  that  as  a 
king  he  is  priestly.     Consider,  now,  that  as  a  priest  our  Lord  is  royal. 


THE   KIXG-PRIEST.  688 

He  was  a  priest  when  he  honoured  the  law  by  his  own  death  :  he  was  a 
priest  when  he  took  upon  liimself  our  sin,  and  bore  it,  otfering  his  own 
soul  as  the  yietim  upon  the  altar  of  his  body  :  he  was  to  the  full  a  priest 
when  he  presented  his  one  saci'ifice  for  sin,  but  never  let  it  be  forgotten  that 
even  then,  in  his  nature,  he  was  a  king.  The  sword  of  vengeance  awoke 
against  the  man  who  was  Jehovah's  fellow  even  when  he  bled.  The 
laws  which  he  vindicated  had  been  ordained  by  himself;  and  it  adds  a 
special  glory  to  his  priestly  work  of  atonement  that  it  was  wrought  by 
the  royal  Lawgiver  himself.  The  subject  broke  the  laws,  but  it  was  the 
King  who  bore  the  penalty.  He  that  is  under  law  ofFeudeth,  but  he  that 
made  the  law  came  under  the  law  that  he  might  make  amends  to  the  in- 
jured honour  of  his  own  justice.  This  was  a  notable  deed  of  love  and  of 
justice  combined.  Let  us  confide  the  more  surely  upon  the  sacrifice  of 
our  great  High  Priest,  because  of  the  dignity  of  his  nature,  and  the 
supremacy  of  his  rank,  even  when  he  made  himself  of  no  reputation  and 
took  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant. 

Our  Lord  stooped  to  the  lowest  service  for  our  sakes  when  he  was 
acting  a  priest  among  us  in  these  lower  realms.  He  presented  himself 
as  an  offering  for  sin,  and  men  scourged  him,  and  spat  upon  him ;  and 
hung  him  up  like  a  felon,  and  in  all  this  shame  and  suffering  v.-e  look  to 
him  as  our  Saviour.  Thus  he  made  expiation  for  sin.  But  though  we 
are  to  look  to  him  in  that  capacity  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  as  men  sought 
cleansing  of  a  priest,  we  must  never  forget  that  now  he  expects  homage 
from  us,  and  we  must  come  to  him  for  government  as  men  pay  obedience 
to  a  kuig.  Think  of  him  as  the  crucified  One  as  much  as  you  will,  for 
as  such  he  is  your  atoning  sacrifice,  but  remember  that  this  same  Jesus 
which  was  crucified  God  hath  proclaimed  to  be  both  Lord  and  King. 
Trust  in  the  man  of  the  thorn-crown  must  foster  and  nourish  reverence 
for  the  Lord  who  weareth  many  crowns.  AVe  must  not  only  trust  but 
worship.  We  must  never  dissever  from  that  shame  and  spitting  the  fact 
that  the  four  living  creatures  and  the  elders  prostrate  themselves  before 
tlie  Lamb,  and  sing  unto  his  praise,  "  Thou  art  worthy  to  take  the  book, 
and  to  open  the  seals  thereof :  for  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us 
to  God  by  thy  blood." 

"  Salvation  to  God,  who  sits  on  the  throne, 
Let  all  cry  aloud,  and  honour  the  Son  ; 
The  praises  of  Jesus  the  angels  proclaim, 
Fall  down  on  their  faces  and  worship  the  Lamb." 

0  you  that  come  to  him  to-day  laden  with  guilt  and  full  of  fears,  to 
Avash  yourselves  in  the  fountain  which  he  filled  trom  his  own  veins,  you 
must  also  come  to  obey  hun,  and  to  walk  in  his  statutes.  You  may  not 
come  to  him  merely  that  you  may  get  your  sins  forgiven,  you  must  come 
to  be  cleansed  from  the  power  of  e\il,  and  to  yield  yourselves  unto  God. 
Jesus  was  given  that  he  might  be  a  leader  and  a  commander  to  the 
people,  as  well  as  their  deliverer  and  Saviour.  A  true  disciple  looks  to 
his  Master  for  ruling  as  well  as  for  teaching,  and  he  expects  to  render 
obedience  as  well  as  to  receive  instruction.  There  may  be  no  separation 
between  these  two  points  : — our  priest  to  save  must  ever  be  regarded  as 
our  king  to  rule.  He  puts  away  sin,  but  he  expects  to  reign  over  the 
forgiven  spirit ;  he  washes  our  feet,  but  he  looks  that  we  also  practisQ 


684  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

his  precepts  and  example  of  love,  for  he  says — '•'  Ye  also  ought  to  wash 
one  another's  feet." 

At  this  moment  in  heaven,  if  voir  eyes  of  faith  can  see  the  Lord 
Jesus,  you  perceive  that  he  is  pleading  for  his  people  as  a  priest.  It  is 
a  priest's  duty  to  offer  intercession  for  those  over  whom  he  is  ap- 
pointed ;  and  this  Jesus  does  continually.  Hath  he  not  said,  "  For 
Zion's  sake  will  I  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not 
rest"?  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them  that  come  to 
Gud  by  him.  But  do  not  forget  that  our  Lord  does  not  make  in- 
tercession otherwise  than  royally.  There  is  no  prostration  now  amidst 
the  olives  of  the  gloomy  garden,  no  bloody  sweat,  no  strong  crying 
and  tears.  He  saith  not,  ''  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt,"  but' he  urges 
his  suit  in  another  fiishiou.  The  interceding  priest  has  laid  aside  his 
blood-stained  garments  and  put  on  his  robes  of  holiness  for  glory  and  for 
beauty.  Jewelled  breastplate  ;  ephod  of  gold  and  blue,  and  purple  and 
scarlet ;  mitre  and  fine  linen  and  gold ;  and  girdle  of  needlework  the  High 
Priest  wore  on  favoured  days ;  all  typical  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
now  that  he  has  gone  within  the  veil.  With  authority  he  pleads  with 
God  from  the  throne  of  his  power.  He  asks  and  he  has ;  he  speaks  andl 
it  is  done  ;  for  the  intercessor  of  the  saints  before  the  throne  of  God  is 
now  the  King  immortal,  eternal,  invisible,  the  only  wise  God,  our  Saviour. 
Oh,  what  prevalence  there  is  in  his  plea,  and  when  we  give  him  our  cause 
to  plead,  how  confident  we  may  feel  that  the  blessing  will  come  to  us. 

As  a  priest  our  Redeemer  not  only  pleads  with  God,  but  he  blesses 
the  people.  It  was  the  work  of  the  high  priest  to  pronounce  the  benedic- 
tion over  the  house  of  Israel,  Jesus  dues  that,  but  he  does  it  royally ;  I 
mean  he  does  it  with  the  power  of  a  king  as  well  as  with  the  commission 
of  a  priest.  He  does  not  merely  wish  us  good,  but  he  works  us  good. 
There  is  omnipotent  sovereignty  at  the  back  of  the  priestly  benediction. 
He  that  speaks  and  declares  his  people  to  be  justified,  accepted,  pre- 
served, and  blessed  is  he  who  can  make  good  his  words.  The  benediction 
of  Jesus  the  Priest  is  the  benediction  of  Jesus  the  King.  Let  us 
rejoice  and  be  glad  in  this. 

And  now,  beloved,  it  is  as  a  priest  that  Jesus  sends  out  his  gospel  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth.  In  that  gospel  he  invites  men  to  come  to  him 
that  he  may  purge  them  from  their  uncleanness.  To-day  he  speaks  by 
us,  his  ministers,  and  bids  men  come  to  the  great  Priest  that  he  may 
heal  them  of  their  leprosy,  and  deliver  them  from  all  manner  of  defile- 
ment; but,  mark  you,  it  is  an  invitation  from  a  King  as  well  as  from  a 
priest,  and  he  that  rejects  it  shall  be  counted  guilty  of  disloyalty  and 
high  treason.  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  It  is  not,  O 
sons  of  men,  that  Jesus  offers  you  salvation,  and  leaves  it  to  you  whether 
you  will  have  it  or  not ;  but  if  you  reject  it  your  rejection  will  be  re- 
quired at  your  hands.  Beware,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  perish. 
The  invitation  to  the  wedding  of  the  great  King  is  made  freely,  of  his 
voluntary  bounty,  but  if  any  who  are  bidden  shall  refuse  to  come  the 
King  will  be  wroth,  and  send  forth  his  armies  against  those  who  thus 
proclaim  their  enmity.  Jesus  is  not  only  priest,  asking  you  to  come  to 
him  and  receive  of  his  forgiving  love,  but  he  is  a  King  as  well,  who 
will  break  with  a  rod  of  iron  all  that  dare  to  trample  on  his  blood,  and 
slight  his  priestly  grace. 


THE  KDTG-PRIEST.  685 

Thus  I  have  put  forward  the  combination  in  one  form,  and  testified 
that  Jesus  as  a  priest  is  right  kingly  in  all  that  he  doth.  Let  us  now 
turn  the  other  side  of  the  truth  towards  the  light,  and  see  that  as  a 
King  he  ahraijii  retains  his  priesily  cliarader,  and  in  the  deeds  of  his 
sovereignty  he  acts  not  otherwise  than  as  the  high-priest  of  his  people. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  King  over  all  at  this  very  moment.  He 
reigns  over  the  whole  world,  and,  notwithstanding  all  this  hurly-burly  of 
affairs,  this  perpetual  clamour  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars,  his  king- 
dom ruleth  over  all.  Our  Lord  is  master  of  the  game,  and  he  shall 
surely  win  at  the  end.  "  The  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulders." 
But,  blessed  be  his  name,  our  Lord's  kingly  majesty  is  ever  softened  and 
sweetened  by  his  priestly  tenderness,  else  he  would  have  crashed  this 
world  out  of  existence  long  ago.  If  rule  had  been  all,  and  mercy  had 
not  claimed  her  share,  justice  would  have  swept  away  this  rebellious  race. 
If  Jesus  were  not  priest  as  well  as  King  he  would  say  to  his  augels,  "  Go 
and  smite  that  nation  which  refuses  my  gospel.  Destroy  antichiist  that 
lifts  his  triple  crown  against  my  sole  sovereignty.  Go  and  scourge  that 
favoured  nation  which,  having  the  gospel  of  peace,  yet  chooses  war,  and 
with  high  looks  and  lofty  words  provokes  bloodshed."  He  does  not 
destroy,  because  his  office  is  to  forgive  and  save.  A  priest  must 
show  longsuft'ering,  gentleness,  and  compassion,  for  to  tliat  end  is  he 
taken  from  among  men  and  ordained  for  men  in  the  things  of  God, 
Such  is  our  Lord:  "He  is  not  slack  concerning  his  promise,  but  he 
is  longsuifering  to  usward,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 
that  all  should  come  to  repentance."  This  longsufferiug  of  the  King 
leadeth  to  repentance :  its  intent  is  man's  salvation.  We,  v/ho  are 
short  of  patience,  cry  eagerly  to  him,  "  Come,  0  King.  Come,  0  King"; 
but  he  answers,  "  I  tarry  yet  a  while  in  mercy  that  still  more  may  be 
gathered  to  my  name,  and  may  wash  themselves  in  my  atoniug  blood." 
Tliink  of  this,  my  brethren.  Do  not  lower  Christ's  sovereignty,  but  at 
the  same  time  learn  to  see  it  shining  with  gentler  beams  through  the 
medium  of  his  priestly  character. 

And,  now,  to-day,  among  his  servants  Jesus  alone  is  King,  and  as  a 
king  he  commands  us.  He  lays  certain  laws  upon  his  servants,  and  he 
bids  us  teach  all  men  to  observe  his  statutes ;  but,  oh,  it  is  so  sweet  to 
think  that  our  King  in  Zion  is  also  a  faithful  and  merciful  high  priest, 
touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  ready  to  help  us,  and  prompt 
to  forgive  us.  My  brother,  though  Jesus  commands  thee,  yet  he  pities 
thy  \^■eakness,  and  helps  thee  to  obey.  He  has  given  thee  a  law,  but  he 
kiKjws  thy  feebleness,  and  so  he  gives  thee  grace  to  keep  it ;  ay,  and  when 
th.)u  dost  nrit  keep  it  he  hath  pity  upon  the  ignorant,  and  upon  them 
that  are  oi1t  of  the  way,  and  thy  sins  of  ignorance  and  of  trans- 
gression he  continues  still  to  put  away.  When  his  servants  were  about 
lii:ii  here  on  earth,  he  not  only  gave  his  commands  to  them,  but  he 
pi;;yed  for  them  that  they  n ight  be  kept  from  disobeying  in  the  hour 
of  trial,  and  he  restored  them  when  they  had  fallen.  He  not  only  ruled 
his  little  band  of  followers,  but  he  kept  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
He  was  their  king,  and  their  priest  too.  Read  the  commands  of  Jesus 
with  becoming  reverence,  for  he  is  your  kiug ;  but  let  them  not  distress 
you,  for  he  knows  your  weakness  and  will  help  you  to  do  what  of  your- 
self you  are  incapable  of  doing.     He  is  a  king,  but  the  priestly  garment 


686  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

is  always  over  the  kingly  vesture :  whatever  the  ornaments  of  his  im- 
perial splendour,  he  is  still  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  the  foot.  The 
priesthood  covers  all,  and  removes  all  cause  of  dread  from  every  believing 
mind. 

The  same  is  true  of  our  great  King  when  he  goes  out  to  war.  He  is 
the  Lord  mighty  in  battle  ;  in  righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  make 
war.  The  psalmist  crieth,  "  Gird  thy  sword  upon  thy  thigh,  0  most 
mighty,  with  thy  glory  and  thy  majesty.  And  in  thy  majesty  ride  pros- 
perously because  of  truth  and  meekness  and  righteousness  ;  and  thy  right 
hand  shall  teach  thee  terrible  things.  Thine  arrows  are  sharp  in  the 
heart  of  the  king's  enemies  ;  whereby  the  people  fall  under  thee."  But 
the  wars  of  Christ  are  not  like  the  wars  of  earthly  monarchs.  His  sword 
is  not  in  his  hand,  but  it  goeth  out  of  his  mouth,  and  with  this  he  smites 
and  rules  the  nations.  He  is  clothed  in  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood,  but  it 
is  his  own  blood.  Every  battle  of  the  warrior  is  with  confused  noise, 
and  garments  rolled  in  blood ;  but  this  is  a  warfare  of  another  fashion, 
for  he  wrestles  not  with  men,  but  with  their  sins ;  not  with  princes  and 
armies,  but  with  falsehood  and  iniquity.  His  victories  are  not  those  of 
mighty  men  who  return  from  the  fray,  amidst  the  groans  of  widows  and 
the  cries  of  orphans ;  but  his  bloodless  triumphs  make  glad  the  poor  and 
the  oppressed,  and  only  crush  down  principalities  and  powers  and 
spiritual  wickednesses  in  high  places,  bringing  good  to  all  who  seek  his 
face.     He  is  a  king,  but  evermore  the  patron  and  true  priest  of  men. 

Among  ourselves  at  this  day,  beloved,  we  who  know  him  delight  to 
own  him  as  our  king.  0  Lord  Jesus,  thou  greater  Joseph,  the  shepherd 
and  stone  of  Israel ;  all  our  sheaves  pay  obedience  unto  thy  sheaf,  and 
all  thy  father's  children  bow  down  before  thee.  Thou  more  glorious 
Judah,  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise,  unto  thee  shall  the 
gathering  of  the  people  be.  The  chief  among  ten  thousand  and  the 
altogether  lovely  art  thou.  Yes,  beloved,  this  glorious  one  is  our  brother, 
and  delights  to  be  regarded  as  a  priest  taken  from  among  men,  being  one 
of  ourselves,  able  to  sympathize  with  our  infirmities.  Oar  liord  is  higher 
than  the  highest,  and  yet  he  stoops  as  low  as  the  lowest.  He  is  kingly 
even  to  deity,  and  yet  so  truly  a  priest  that  in  all  our  afflictions  he  is 
afflicted.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.  Ruler  of  our  race,  he 
is  yet  partaker  of  our  flesh  and  blood,  and  he  is  acquainted  with  all  its 
sorrows.     True  king,  and  yet  true  priest. 

Thus  I  would  have  you  blend  the  idea  in  both  ways,  and  see  Jesus  as 
a  royal  priest  and  a  priestly  king. 

"  Jesus,  the  King  of  glory,  reigns 
On  Sion's  heavenly  hill ; 
Looks  like  a  lamb  that  has  been  slain, 
And  wears  his  priesthood  still." 

Such  is  your  Lord.  May  your  view  of  him  be  clear,  your  faith  in 
him  be  firm,  your  love  to  him  be  fervent,  your  joy  in  him  be  over- 
flowing, and  your  obedience  to  him  be  constant.  Trust  the  Priest  and 
serve  the  King,  and  ever  pay  your  vows  unto  him  who  is  "a  priest 
upon  his  throne." 

11.  Secondly,  and  very  briefly,  we  shall  now  meditate  upon  the 
HAPPY   RESULT  of  all  this.      The  text   says,  "  The  counsel  of  peace 


THE   KING-PRIEST.  g87 

'  shall  be  between  them  both."  I  confess  myself  unable  dogmatically  to 
interpret  this  passage,  for  there  are  no  less  than  three  possible  mean- 
ings. I  must  give  yon  them  all,  and  leave  you  to  judge  for  yourselves. 
The  most  natural  reading,  to  my  mind,  is  this — that  when  we  shall  see 
in  the  person  of  Christ  the  king  and  the  priest  combined,  the  counsel  of 
peace  shall  be  between  them  both.  These  offices,  the  king  and  the  priest, 
being  comlnned  in  one,  shall  make  a  deep  and  lasting  peace  for  us,  a 
peace  arranged  by  the  deep  thought  and  counsel  of  God,  and  therefore 
fall  of  wisdom,  truth,  and  certainty.  When  we  see  the  Lawgiver  him- 
self making  atonement  for  our  transgressions  we  have  peace  indeed : 
when  ruler  and  Saviour  meet  in  one  person  the  rest  is  sure  and  profound. 
Beloved,  if  this  be  not  the  meaning  of  the  passage,  it  is  at  least  a  pre- 
cious truth.  If  we  want  peace  we  can  only  obtain  it  by  knowing  Christ 
as  priest  and  king — the  counsel  of  peace  must  lie  between  these  two. 
Oh,  do  you  know  Christ,  my  dear  hearers,  as  your  priest  ?  Have  you 
seen  him  offering  sacrifice  for  your  sin  ?  Does  he  stand  instead  of  you 
before  God?  Do  you  present  your  prayers  and  your  praises  to  God 
through  him  ?  Well,  then,  you  have  begun  to  know  what  peace  is,  for 
peace  comes  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  the  priest — peace  by  his  righteous- 
ness, peace  by  his  sacrifice.  But  if,  knowing  this,  you  are  still  in 
trouble  of  heart,  remember  that  you  need  to  know  him  also  as  your 
king.  When  he  subdues  your  iniquities,  when  the  power  of  sin  is  taken 
away  as  well  as  the  guilt  of  it,  then  you  shall  know  the  perfection  of 
peace.  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,"  saith  he,  "  and  learn  of  me,  and  ye 
shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls."  It  is  not  in  a  mere  belief  in  Christ  as 
your  Saviour  that  you  will  ever  get  perfect  peace,  it  is  by  yielding  up 
yourself  unto  him  that  he  may  rule  and  reign  over  you  completely. 
This  man  shall  be  the  peace  when  he  is  Lord  as  well  as  i3riest.  As  long 
as  your  will  rebels  against  your  Eedeemer's  rule  you  cannot  have 
unbroken  rest.  It  is  idle  for  you  to  talk  about  trusting  in  the  blood 
of  Jesus  unless  you  submit  to  his  sceptre.  The  cross  itself  cannot  save 
you  if  you  divorce  it  from  the  crown.  Your  Saviour  must  be  a  priest 
upon  his  throne  to  you ;  his  blood  must  be  on  your  conscience,  and  his 
yoke  must  be  upon  your  neck.  There  is  no  counsel  of  peace  until  it  is 
between  both  these  :  the  kingly  priest,  the  priestly  king,  alone  can  make 
and  maintain  the  peace  of  God  within  you.  That  is  a  great  and  deep 
truth  :  may  we  learn  it  well. 

But  it  is  thought  by  some  wise  men  that  the  text  means  the  counsel 
of  peace  shall  be  between  Jehovah  the  Father,  and  the  Son.  I  am  not 
sure  that  such  a  meaning  would  suggest  itself  to  every  reader,  and  as  the 
most  obvious  meaning  is  generally  to  be  preferred,  I  will  not  contend 
for  this  second  meaning.  However,  as  an  interpretation  it  is  certainly 
not  too  far-fetched,  and,  even  if  it  caimc/t  be  sustained,  it  is  certainly  a 
very  great  truth.  It  is  between  God,  the  Eternal  Father,  and  Jesus 
Christ,  our  Melchizedek,  or  king-priest,  that  the  counsel  of  peace  has 
been  established  on  our  behalf.  You  never  know  God  so  as  to  have 
peace  with  him  till  you  know  God  in  human  flesh.  Only  the  incarnate 
God  can  end  the  trouble  of  your  spirit.  Ay,  and  it  must  be  that 
incarnate  God,  bleeding,  suffering,  dying,  making  expiation  for  sin,  and 
then  rising  to  the  throne  and  ruling  over  all,  that  must  be  seen  before 
you  can  perceive  how  the  infinitely  glorious  Jehovah  can  be  at  peace  with 


ggS  irETROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

you.  God  in  covenant  is  God  at  peace  with  man.  There  was  a  counsel 
between  the  Trinity  at  the  making-  of  man,  "  Let  us  make  man":  and 
so  alsD  there  was  a  counsel  between  the  divine  Persons  at  the  redemp- 
tion of  man, — the  counsel  of  peace  is  between  them  both.  It  is  a  joy 
for  ns  to  know  that  between  Jesus  our  priest-king  and  the  everlasting 
God  peace  has  been  established  for  us,  peace  which  never  can  be  l)roken. 
Oar  first  covenant-head  broke  the  treaty,  and  left  us  at  war  \\ith  God, 
but  the  second  Adam  has  fulfilled  and  established  the  covenant  of  grace, 
and  believing  in  his  name  we  have  peace  with  God. 

But  there  is  a  third  meaning,  and  although  I  am  not  sure  of  it  as  the 
•sense  here,  it  is  assuredly  a  blessed  truth,  and  appears  to  me  to  be  con- 
gruous with  the  connection.  Let  mo  go  back  to  the  historical  circum- 
•stances.  Here  were  these  three  men  that  had  come  from  Babylon.  The 
prophet  is  to  take  them  to  the  house  of  a  Jew  resident  in  Jerusalem. 
'There  might  be  some  little  differences  between  these  men  and  the 
Jerusalem  Jews.  These  Babylonian  Jews  had  not  come  up  to  dwell 
in  Jerusalem  :  but  Josiah  the  son  of  Zephaniah  was  a  resident  there,  and 
he  might  have  demurred,  and  have  said,  "We  cannot  tabc  your  present 
to  the  temple  because  you  do  not  bring  yourselves  and  come  to  abide 
with  your  own  people."  No,  but  they  were  to  go  up,  together,  bearing 
.the  gold  and  silver  crowns,  and  put  them  upon  the  head  of  the  priest. 
They  were  to  go  up  in  unity  and  love,  and  tliey  were  to  furnish  in  their 
■own  persons  types  of  other  far-off  ones  who  should  come  to  the  great 
■crowned  priest  whose  coming  the  prophet  had  foretold.  Thus  said  the 
^proj)het,  "  They  that  are  far  off  shall  come  and  Ijuild  in  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  and  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  you." 
.Now,  certainly,  it  is  in  Jesus  Christ  the  Priest  and  King  that  the 
•Jews  who  were  nigh,  and  the  Gentiles  who  were  afar  off,  are  brought 
together,  and  made  one.  In  him  the  middle  v.all  of  partition  is  broken 
down,  and  the  counsel  of  peace  is  between  us  both.  The  day  shall 
-come  wlicn  our  glorious  Lord  shall  be  more  clearly  manifested  than  now 
in  the  glory  of  his  second  advent,  and  when  the  Jews  shall  behold  hitn  as 
the  priestly  king,  and  bow  before  him  ;  then  shall  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  also  be  gathered  in,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  reign  over 
the  whole  earth.  May  that  day  speedily  dawn !  We  have  reason  to 
■expect  it ;  therefore,  let  us  pray  for  it  and  strive  for  its  on-bringing. 
Jesus  the  Priest  and  King  is  the  uniter  of  the  divided  nations.  Jew  and 
Gentile  are,  after  all,  of  one  blood,  and  one  God  is  the  Father  of  all ;  why 
should  they  not  become  one  ?  "  One  touch  of  nature  makes  the  whole 
world  kin";  but  one  touch  of  Jesus  Christ  shall  do  it  infinitely  better, 
shall  do  it  once  for  all. 

in.  I  close  with  the  third  point,  which  was  this,  the  action  which 
IS  harmonious  with  these  truths.  The  connection  of  <nir  text 
suggests  to  us  to  do  exactly  what  the  prophet  Zechariah  advised  the 
Babylonian  Jews  and  Josiah  to  do.  I  will  read  you  what  he  said  : — 
"  Take  silver  and  gold  and  make  crowns  and  set  them  upon  the  head  of 
Joshua"  or  Jesus.     This  is  what  is  to  be  done. 

First,  ''take."  "Take  silver  and  gold."  That  is,  bring  the  choicest 
things  you  have.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  a  priest,  should  you  not  bring  your 
ofiFerings  to  him  !  If  Jesus  Christ  be  a  king,  should  you  not  bring 
tribute   to   your   king !      If  you   have   gold   and  silver,  bring    them, 


THE  KING-PRIEST.  689 

for  to  him  shall  be  ^ven  of  the  gold  of  Ophir.  If  you  have  talent,  which 
is  much  more  valuable  than  gold  and  silver,  bring  ability,  tact,  genius ; 
bring  all  the  acquisitions  of  learning,  all  the  acquirements  of  experience, 
and  all  your  natural  gifts,  and  consecrate  them  all  to  him.  Whether 
you  have  these  or  not,  bring  your  heart,  which  is  more  precious  by  far, 
the  very  essence  of  your  being  ;  make  this  a  crown  for  Jesus.  Come, 
bring  your  soul,  your  life,  your  all.  Has  he  redeemed  you  ?  Then  be 
his  for  ever.  Is  he  your  king  ?  Do  not  mock  him  with  a  half-hearted 
service  ;  be  loyal  to  -such  a  sovereign,  and  serve  him  with  spirit,  soul,  and 
body.  Take  silver  and  gold  and  bring  them  unto  him.  Bring  your 
whole  being  to  him. 

What  next  ? — "  Take  "  ;  then  "  make  ".*  "  make  crowns."  Come,  my 
brethren,  I  invite  you  to  this  occupation.  You  say,  "We  are  neither 
goldsmiths  nor  silversmiths."  Nevertheless,  make  crowns.  Try  your 
hands  this  morning,  and  make  crowns  for  Jesus  with  such  material  as  ye 
have.  Fashion  the  crown  of  memory.  Think  of  what  he  has  done  for  you 
from  the  first  day  until  now.  Interweave  and  intertwist  the  recollections 
of  the  past :  hammer  out  the  gold  of  gratitude,  set  in  it  the  gems  of 
love,  and  make  a  coronet  for  his  dear  head.  Make  crowns  by  holy  con- 
templation and  thought.  Think  how  great  your  Lord  is,  and  how  great 
he  deserves  to  be — how  blessed,  how  ever-blessed.  Then  make  crowns 
of  purposes  of  what  you  hope  to  be  and  do.  Plot  and  plan  within  your 
spirit  something  you  have  not  yet  done,  which  you  are  able  to  do 
before  you  go  home  to  heaven.  Look  out  some  child  you  may  teach,  some 
sinner  you  may  woo  and  win,  some  treasure  you  may  spend  for  Jesus, 
some  precious  promise  you  may  whisper  in  the  ear  of  the  distressed, 
some  holy  enterprise  you  may  suggest  to  earnest  youth.     Make  crowns ! 

It  seems  to  me  so  sweet  that  it  should  be  said,  "  Set  them  upon  the 
head  of  Jesus."  Brethren  and  sisters,  let  us  crown  him  ourselves.  We 
hope  to  do  so  in  heaven  :  let  us  do  it  here.  Onr  love  shall  be  the  gold, 
our  praise  shall  find  the  gems,  our  thanksgivings  and  our  humble  labours 
shall  furnish  the  silver,  and  then  we  will  set  the  golden  chaplets  about  his 
brow,  which  once  was  rent  with  thorns  for  us.  Coronets  for  Jesus !  Coro- 
nets for  Jesus !  Crowns  for  our  priestly  King !  Let  us  make  and  bring  them. 

I  return  to  that  blessed  precept,  "  Set  them  upon  the  head  of  Jesus." 
Whenever  we  have  made  a  crown  let  us  take  care  to  pat  it  on  his  head 
ourselves.  Have  you  never,  when  you  have  been  doing  something  for  him, 
or  giving  something  to  his  cause,  wished  that  you  could  present  it  to  him 
personally.  Well,  you  may  do  so  in  spirit,  and  that  is  as  much  a  matter 
of  fact  as  if  you  did  it  bodily.  With  your  shoe  from  off  your  foot,  let 
your  spirit  draw  near  to  Jesus,  and  in  thought  offer  to  his  own  self  the 
deed  which  you  have  ^\T0ught.  Speak  to  him,  and  tell  hiin  that  this  is 
done  for  him  alone.  I  do  not  know  a  greater  pleasure  upon  earth  than 
to  think  of  something  you  can  do  for  Jesus,  and  then  to  do  it  for  him, 
and  to  tell  him  so, — "  Jesus,  I  did  it  all  for  thee.  I  thought  not  of  my 
brethren's  praise,  nor  do  I  think  of  it  now,  but  I  did  this  deed  unto  thee 
a-lone.  Here  is  the  best  crown  I  can  make,  and  I  put  it  on  thy  head." 
The  love  of  Jesus  will  suggest  and  produce  many  a  deed  which  else  had 
never  been  done.  If  you  have  a  beautiful  alabaster  box  it  is  not  pleasant  to 
break  it,  and  if  you  have  choice  ointment  it  is  not  according  to  nature  to 
pour  it  out  upon  another.  No,  but  when  you  are  before  his  feet,  the  feet 
2x 


690 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


of  Jesus  your  Lord,  then  is  it  a  delight  to  break  the  alabaster  box  and 
to  pour  out  its  fragrant  contents /<?r  him.  The  utmosc  waste  is  ec(jnomy 
when  it  is  done  for  him,  and  to  sacrifice  strength,  soul,  health,  life,  is  to 
save  it  all,  when  it  is  spent  for  him.  Where  should  it  go  ?  Where  should 
my  all  go  ?  For  what  should  my  bodily  frame  be  consumed  ?  Where 
.should  my  soul  be  poured  out  but  for  his  honour  ?  Do  you  not  feel  it  so  ? 
You  will  if  you  distinctly  recognise  that  he  is  king  and  priest.  You  will 
bring  crowns  and  put  them  on  his  head  if  you  know  whu  and  what  he  is. 
And  what  is  said  last  ?  It  is  said  that  this  should  be  a  memorial  to 
those  three  men  and  to  the  brother  who  had  entertained  them..  I  suppose 
these  crowns  of  silver  and  gold  were  hung  up  in  the  temple,  and  when 
anybody  said,  "  What  are  those  crowns  yonder  ?  "  it  would  be  answered, 
"  Those  are  coronets  which  were  made  by  order  of  the  prophet  Zechariah, 
by  Heldai  and  Tobijah  and  Jedaiah,  who  came  from  Babylon,  and  they 
are  in  memorial  of  those  men,  and  in  memorial  of  the  hospitality  of  Josiah 
the  son  of  Zephaniah,  who  entertained  them  at  his  house  when  they  came. 
They  are  hung  up  in  the  temple  in  honour  of  the  coming  priestly  king,  and 
in  memorial  of  those  four  men  who  presented  an  offering  to  the  Lord." 
It  seems  very  wonderful  that  God  should  allow  in  his  house  memorials  of 
his  servants,  but  he  does  so  ;  and  our  great  priestly  King  allows  memorials 
of  his  people  in  his  temple  now.  We  shall  never  forget,  shall  we,  while 
the  world  standeth  the  sacrifice  of  Paul,  and  how  he  made  crowTis  and  set 
them  on  the  head  of  Jesus  ?  Never  while  the  earth  lasts  shall  we  forget 
the  sacrifice  of  John,  and  Peter,  and  James.  Nay,  the  church  will  not. 
forget  the  sacrifices  of  Luther,  and  Calvin,  and  Zwingle,  and  Wycliffe,  and 
the  holy  lives  and  ardent  ministries  of  Whitefield  and  Wesley  shall  not  be 
forgotten  in  the  church,  because  they  made  crowns  and  set  them  on  the 
head  of  Jesus.  "Oh,"  say  you,  "but  we  must  not  remember  men.'" 
"  Nay,"  say  I,  "  but  w^e  may  remember  men,  and  women,  too,  for  our 
Lord  has  set  us  the  example.  '  Wheresoever  this  gospel  is  preached 
there  shall  this  which  this  woman  hath  done  be  mentioned  for  a  memo- 
rial  of  her.'"  My  Master  thinks  much  of  his  people,  and  in  the 
plenitude  of  his  great  goodness  the  little  things  which  they  do  for 
him  are  had  in  remembrance.  Did  he  not  say  of  Cornelius,  "Thy 
prayers  and  thine  alms  have  come  up  as  a  memorial  of  thee."  This  is 
sweet  to  think  upon.  While  our  King-priest  shall  have  the  crowns,  and 
wear  them,  yet  we,  if  we  bring  love-tokens  and  honourable  spoils  to  him, 
shall  be  remembered,  too,  in  that  day  when  he  shall  award  the  praise 
to  his  people,  saying,  "Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servants."  The 
Lord  whom  we  serve  will  immortalize  our  service  by  uniting  it  with  his 
service.  We  shall  rest  from  our  labours,  but  our  works  shall  follow 
us.  The  righteous  shall  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance,  they  shall 
shine  forth  as  the  sun  when  their  Lord's  glory  shall  be  revealed.  Their 
priest  shall  make  them  priests,  their  king  shall  make  them  kings,  and 
they  shall  for  ever  be  filled  with  the  vision  of  the  priest  upon  his: 
throne.     So  may  it  be  with  us.     Amen. 

Portions  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Psalm  ex. ; 
Zechariah  vi.  9 — 15  ;  Ephesiaus  ii.  11 — 22. 


I 


Hymns  from" Our *Own  Hymn  Book"— 154,  419,  395: 


THE    LOWLY    KING. 


Delivered  on  Thursday  Evening,  June  25th,  1885,  by 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,  NEWINGTON. 


"  Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion;  shout,  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem :  beh:ld,  thy 
King  Cometh  uuto  thee  :  he  is  just,  and  having  salvation ;  lowly,  and  riding  upon  an 
ass,  and  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass." — Zechariah  ix.  9. 

I  DO  not  intend  to  expound  the  whole  text  at  any  length,  but  simply  to 
dwell  upon  the  loivUness  of  Jesus.  Yet  this  much  I  may  say :  when- 
ever God  would  have  his  people  especially  glad,  it  is  always  in  himself. 
If  it  be  written,  "Rejoice  greatly,"  then  the  reason  is,  "Behold,  thy 
King  Cometh  unto  thee  !  "  Our  chief  source  of  rejoicing  is  the  pre- 
sence of  King  Jesus  in  the  midst  of  us.  Whether  it  be  his  first  or  his 
second  advent,  his  very  shadow  is  delight.  His  footfall  is  music  to  our 
ear. 

That  delight  springs  much  from  the  fact  that  he  is  ours.  *'  Rejoice 
greatly,  0  daughter  of  Zion:  .  .  .  behold,  tky  King  cometh  unto  thee." 
Whatever  he  may  be  to  others,  he  is  thy  King,  and  to  whomsoever 
he  may  or  may  not  come,  he  cometh  unto  thee.  He  comes  for  thy 
deliverance,  thine  honour,  thy  consummated  bliss.  He  keeps  thy  com- 
pany :  he  makes  thy  house  his  palace,  thy  love  his  solace,  thy  nature  his 
home.  He  who  is  thy  King  by  hereditary  right,  by  his  choice  of  thee, 
by  his  redemption  of  tliee,  and  by  thy  willing  choice  of  him,  is  coming 
to  thee ;  therefore  do  thou  shout  for  joy. 

The  verse  goes  on  to  show  why  the  Lord  our  King  is  such  a  source 
of  gladness :  "  He  is  just,  and  having  salvation."  He  blends  righteous- 
ness and  mercy  ;  justice  to  the  ungodly,  and  favour  to  his  saints.  He 
has  worked  out  the  stern  problem — how  can  God  be  just,  and  yet  save 
the  sinful  ?  He  is  just  in  his  own  personal  character,  just  as  having 
borne  the  penalty  of  sin,  and  just  as  cleared  from  the  tin  which  he 
voluntarily  took  upon  him.  Having  endured  the  terrible  ordeal,  he  is 
saved,  and  his  people  are  saved  in  him.  He  is  to  be  saluted  with 
hosannas,  which  signify,  "  Save,  Lord  ";  for  where  he  comes  he  brings 
victory  and  consequent  salvation  with  him.  He  routs  the  enemies  of 
his  people,  breaks  for  them  the  serpent's  head,  and  leads  their  captivity 
captive.    We  admire  the  justice  which  marks  his  reign,  and  the  salvatioa 

No.  1,86L  ^^ 


g92  METROPOLITAN  TABBRNACLE  PULPIT. 

which  attends  his  sway  ;  and  in  both  respects  we  cry,  "  Blessed  is  h« 
that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord" ! 

Moreover,  it  is  written  of  him  that  he  is  lowly,  which  cannot  be  said 
of  many  kings  and  princes  of  the  earth ;  nor  would  they  care  to  have  it 
said  of  them.  Thy  King,  0  daughter  of  Jerusalem,  loves  to  have  his 
lowliness  published  by  thee  with  exceeding  joy.  His  outward  state 
betokens  the  humility  and  gentleness  of  his  character.  He  appears 
to  be  what  he  really  is :  he  conceals  nothing  from  his  chosen.  In  the 
height  of  his  grandeur  he  is  not  like  the  proud  monarchs  of  earth.  The 
patient  ass  he  prefers  to  the  noble  charger;  and  he  is  more  at  home  with 
the  common  people  than  with  the  great.  In  his  grandest  pageant,  in  his 
capital  city,  he  was  still  consistent  with  his  meek  and  lowly  character, 
for  he  came  "  riding  upon  an  ass."  He  rode  through  Jerusalem  in 
state  ;  but  what  lowliness  marked  the  spectacle  !  It  was  an  extempo- 
rized procession,  which  owed  nothing  to  Garter-king-at-arms,  but  every- 
thing to  the  spontaneous  love  of  friends.  An  ass  was  brought,  and  its 
foal,  and  his  disciples  sat  him  thereon.  Instead  of  courtiers  in  their 
robes,  he  was  surrounded  by  common  peasants  and  fishermen,  and  chil- 
dren of  the  streets  of  Jerusalem :  the  humblest  of  men  and  the  youngest 
of  the  race  shouted  his  praises.  Boughs  of  trees  and  garments  of  friends 
strewed  the  road,  instead  of  choice  flowers  and  costly  tapestries :  it  was 
the  pomp  of  spontaneous  love,  not  the  stereotyped  pageantry  which 
power  exacts  of  fear.  With  half  an  eye  every  one  can  see  that  this  King 
is  of  another  sort  from  common  princes,  and  his  dignity  of  another  kind 
from  that  which  tramples  on  the  poor.  According  to  the  narrative,  as 
well  as  the  prophecy,  there  would  seem  to  have  been  two  beasts  in  the 
procession.  I  conceive  that  our  Lord  rode  on  the  foal,  for  it  was 
essential  that  he  should  mount  a  beast  which  had  never  been  used 
before.  G-od  is  not  a  sharer  with  men ;  that  which  is  consecrated  to 
his  peculiar  service  must  not  have  been  aforetime  devoted  to  lower  uses. 
Jesus  rides  a  colt  whereon  never  man  sat.  But  why  was  the  mother 
there?  Did  not  Jesus  say  of  both  ass  and  foal,  "Loose  them,  and 
bring  them  unto  me "  ?  This  appears  to  me  to  be  a  token  of  his 
tenderness  :  he  would  not  needlessly  sever  the  mother  from  her  foal. 
1  like  to  see  a  farmer's  kindness  when  he  allows  the  foal  to  follow  when 
tlie  mare  is  ploughing  or  labouring;  and  I  admire  the  same  thought- 
fuhiess  in  our  Lord.  He  careth  for  cattle,  yea,  even  for  an  ass  and  her 
foal.  He  would  not  even  cause  a  poor  beast  a  needless  pang  by  taking 
a>vay  its  young  ;  and  so  in  that  procession  the  beast  of  the  field  took 
its  part  joyfully,  in  token  of  a  better  age  in  which  all  creatures  shall  be 
delivered  from  bondage,  and  shall  share  the  blessings  of  his  unsuffering 
reign.  Our  Lord  herein  taught  his  disciples  to  cultivate  delicacy,  not 
only  towards  each  other,  but  towards  the  whole  creation.  I  like  to 
see  in  Christian  people  a  reverence  towards  life,  a  tenderness  towards  all 
God's  creatures.  There  is  much  of  deep  truth  in  those  lines  of  "  The 
Ancient  Mariner  "  : — 

"  He  prayeth  best  who  loveth  best 
All  things  both  great  and  small." 

Under  the  old  law  this  tenderness  was  inculcated  by  those  precepts 
which  forbade  the  taking  of  the  mother-bird  with  her  young,  and  the 


THE  LOWLY  KING.  698 

seething  of  a  kid  in  its  mother's  milk.  Why  were  these  things  for- 
bidden ?  There  would  seem  to  be  no  harm  in  either  of  these  practices, 
but  God  would  have  his  people  tender-hearted,  sensitive,  and  delicate  in 
their  handling  of  all  things.  A  Christian  should  have  nothing  of  the 
savage  about  him  ;  but  everything  that  is  considerate  and  kind.  Our 
Lord  rode  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  with  an  ass,  and  a  colt  the 
foal  of  an  ass  ;  for  he  is  lowly  in  heart,  and  gentle  to  all.  His  is  no 
mission  of  crushing  power,  and  selfish  aggrandisement;  he  comes  to 
bless  all  things  that  be,  and  to  make  the  world  once  more  a  Paradise, 
wherein  none  shall  be  oppressed.  Blessed  Saviour,  when  we  think  of 
the  sufferings  of  thy  creatures,  both  men  and  beasts,  we  pray  thee  to 
hasten  thy  second  advent,  and  begin  thy  gentle  reign  ! 

Now,  this  riding  of  Christ  upon  an  ass  is  remarkable,  if  you  remember 
that  no  pretender  to  be  a  prophet,  or  a  divine  messenger,  has  imitated 
it.  Ask  the  Jew  whether  he  expects  the  Messiah  to  ride  thus  through 
the  streets  of  Jerusalem.  He  will  probably  answer  "  No."  If  he  does 
not,  you  may  ask  him  the  further  question,  whether  there  has  appeared 
in  his  nation  anyone  who,  professing  to  be  the  Messiah,  has,  at  any  time, 
come  to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem  *'  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a 
colt  the  foal  of  an  ass."  It  is  rather  singular  that  no  false  Messiah  has 
copied  this  lowly  style  of  the  Son  of  David.  When  Sapor,  the  great 
Persian,  jested  with  a  Jew  about  his  Messiah  riding  upon  an  ass,  he 
said  to  him,  "I  will  send  him  one  of  my  horses":  to  which  the  Rabbi 
replied,  "  You  cannot  send  him  a  horse  that  will  be  good  enough,  for 
that  ass  is  to  be  of  a  hundred  colours."  By  that  idle  tradition  th« 
Rabbi  showed  that  he  had  not  caught  the  idea  of  the  prophet  at  all, 
since  he  could  not  believe  in  Messiah's  lowliness  displayed  by  his  riding 
upon  a  common  ass.  The  rabbinical  mind  must  needs  make  simplicity 
mysterious,  and  turn  lowliness  into  another  form  of  pomp.  The  very 
pith  of  the  matter  is  that  our  Lord  gave  himself  no  grand  airs,  but  was 
natural,  unaffected,  and  free  from  all  vain-glory.  His  greatest  pomp  went 
no  further  than  riding  through  Jerusalem  upon  a  colt  the  foal  of  an 
ass.  The  Mohammedan  turns  round  with  a  sneer,  and  says  to  the 
Christian,  "  Your  Master  was  the  rider  on  an  ass  ;  our  Mohammed  was 
the  rider  on  a  camel;  and  the  camel  is  by  far  the  superior  beast."  Just 
so ;  and  that  is  where  the  Mohammedan  fails  to  grasp  the  prophetic 
thought :  he  looks  for  strength  and  honour,  but  Jesus  triumphs  by 
weakness  and  lowliness.  How  little  real  glory  is  to  be  found  in  tlie 
grandeur  and  display  which  princes  of  this  world  affect !  There  is  far 
more  true  glory  in  condescension  than  in  display.  Our  Lord's  riding 
on  an  ass  and  its  foal  was  meant  to  show  us  how  lowly  our  Saviour  is, 
and  what  tenderness  there  is  in  that  lowliness.  When  he  is  proclaimed 
King  in  his  great  Father's  capital,  and  rides  in  triumph  thiough  the 
streets,  he  sits  upon  no  prancing  charger,  such  as  warriors  choose  for  their 
triumphs,  but  he  sits  upon  a  borrowed  ass,  whose  mother  walks  by  its 
side.  His  poverty  was  seen,  for  of  all  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  he 
owned  not  one ;  and  yet  we  see  his  more  than  royal  wealth,  for  he  did 
but  say,  "  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them,"  and  straightw  ay  their  owner 
yielded  them  up.  No  forced  contributions  supply  the  revenue  of  this 
prince ;  but  his  people  are  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power.  He  is  thy 
King,  0  Ziou !     Shout,  to  think  that  thou  hast  such  a  Lord !     Where 


C94 


METEOPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 


the  sceptre  is  love,  and  the  crown  is  lowliness,  the  homage  should  be 
peculiarly  brisfht  with  rejoicing.  None  shall  groan  beneath  such  a 
sway ;  but  the  people  shall  willingly  offer  themselves ;  they  shall  find 
their  liberty  in  his  service,  their  rest  in  obedience  to  him,  their  honour 
in  his  glory. 

Now,  my  brethren,  you  may  forget  the  hosannas  of  that  day  of  Palms, 
for  I  beg  you  to  confine  your  thoughts  to  the  considerHtion  of  the  low- 
liness of  our  divine  Lord  and  Master.  "  Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto 
thee  .  .  .  lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass." 

Let  us  think  for  a  few  minutes  upon  the  displai/s  of  the  loivUness  of 
our  Lord  Jesiis  Christ;  then  upon  the  causes  of  that  lowUness ;  and 
thirdly,  upon  certain  lessons  to  he  learnt  from  that  lowliness. 

1.  First,  then,  let  us  think  of  the  displays  of  lowliness  made 
BY  OUR  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  You  do  not  need  me  to  remind  you  how 
devoutly  we  worship  him  as  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever.  Yet  while 
on  earth  he  veiled  his  Godhead,  and  laid  bare  his  lowliness.  His  sojourn 
here  below  was  full  of  the  truest  greatness  ;  but  it  was  a  grandeur,  not 
of  loftiness,  but  of  lowliness  ;  not  of  glory,  but  of  humiliation.  Our 
Lord  was  never  more  glorious  in  the  deepest  sense  than  in  his  humilia- 
tion :  because  of  it  "  he  shall  be  exalted,  and  extolled,  and  shall  be  very 
high." 

First,  think  of  the  lowliness- of  Christ  in  even  nndertaking  the  salvation 
of  guilty  men.  Man  without  sin,  as  God  first  made  him,  is  certainly  a 
noble  creature.  It  is  written,  "  Thou  hast  made  him  a  little  lower  than 
the  angels."  But,  as  a  sinner,  man  is  a  base  and  dishonourable  being, 
only  worthy  to  be  desiroyed.  \\\  that  character  he  has  no  claims  to  be 
regarded  of  God  at  all.  If  it  had  pleased  the  divine  supremacy  to  blot 
this  rebel  race  from  existence,  God  might  readily  have  repaired  the  loss 
by  the  creation  of  superior  beings ;  and  it  was  lowliness  of  the  tenderest 
kind  which  led  our  Lord,  who  took  not  up  angels  when  they  fell,  to 
take  up  the  seed  of  Abraham.  If  it  were  possible  for  some  tall  arch- 
angel to  espouse  the  cause  of  emmets  upon  their  hill  in  yonder  forest, 
it  would  be  a  wondrous  stoop  ;  yet  it  would  be  nothing  compared  with 
the  condescension  of  the  eternal  God  in  bowing  from  his  lofty  throne  to 
redeem  and  sanctify  the  sons  of  men.  We  are  frail  creatures  at  the 
best;  born  yesterday,  we  die  to-day:  we  are  as  green  leaves  in  the 
forest  for  a  while,  and  then  our  autumn  comes,  we  fade,  and  the  wind 
carries  us  away.  For  such  ephemera  the  Lord  of  glory  came  to  this 
sin-shadowed  gube.  Were  he  not  of  a  lowly  mind,  he  had  never  found 
his  delights  with  the  sons  of  men,  nor  would  he  have  thought  upon  the 
woes  of  poor  and  needy  ones. 

Herein,  in  the  next  place,  he  showed  his  lowliness — that  he  actually 
assumed  our  nature.  I  cannot  tell  that  story,  it  is  too  wonderful.  A 
free  spirit  voluntarily  encases  itself  in  human  clay :  a  pure  spirit  willingly 
becomes  a  partaker  of  flesh  and  blood  !  This  is  marvellous  lowliness. 
The  strong  is  compassed  with  infirmity ;  the  happy  assumes  capacity  for 
suffering  ;  the  infinitely  holy  becomes  one  of  a  race  notorious  lor  its 
iniquity!  This  is  a  triumph  of  lowliness.  The  great  God,  the  Infinite 
of  ages,  unites  himself  with  a  human  body;  he  is  born  into  our  infaufey, 
he  grows  up  into  our  youth,  he  toils  through  our  manhood  ;  he  accom- 
plishes a  life  like  our  own !     This  is  a  miracle  of  lowliness.    Methinks 


THE  LOWLY  KING.  695 

the  angels  still  gaze  into  these  things,  and  wonder  at  the  Word  made 
flesh.  It  is  particularly  said  of  our  incarnate  Lord  that  he  was  *'seea 
of  angels";  and  that  leads  us  to  believe  that  angels  watched  hira  with 
intense  curiosity,  and  ever-growing  interest,  wondering  what  it  all  could 
mean,  that  he,  who  made  and  ruled  the  lieavens,  should  be  born  of  a 
woman,  and  made  under  the  law.  They  wondered  that  he  should  eat, 
and  drink,  and  sleep,  and  sigh,  and  suffer,  like  the  creatures  of  his 
hand  ;  and  should,  indeed,  be  such  as  they  were  !  Surely  they  talk  of 
it  now  with  hushed  voices  and  astonished  hearts,  and  will  so  talk  of  it 
throughout  the  ages.  Made  lower  than  his  angels  are,  his  angels  must 
feel  a  solemn  awe  at  such  a  divine  descent  of  love.  This  lowliness  was 
■such  as  only  God  could  display :  let  us  worship  in  the  person  of  our 
Lord  a  condescending  love  as  unique  as  the  Person  who  exhibited  it. 

Furtliermure,  when  our  Lord  found  himself  below,  in  the  fashion  of  a 
man,  he  manifested  his  true  lowliness  by  carrying  out  to  the  full  the  part 
of  a  servant.  He  had  taken  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant  by  be- 
coming man,  but  it  was  no  matter  of  form  with  him.  He  became  actually 
obedient ;  having  put  on  the  livery  of  service,  he  executed  the  lowest  office. 
Never  scuUiou  in  a  king's  kitchen  did  menial  work  so  thoroughly  as  he. 
In  his  great  house  there  are  vessels  to  honour  and  to  dishonour,  and  he 
selected  to  be  used  for  the  lowest  offices  ;  he  made  himself  of  no  reputa- 
tion ;  he  became  a  servant  of  servants ;  all  they  that  saw  him  laughed 
him  to  scorn;  "he  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed  him  not."  If  any- 
body was  wanted  to  talk  with  a  fallen  woman,  he  was  soon  seen  sitting 
on  the  well  ;  if  anyone  was  needed  to  win  a  publican,  he  was  speedily  at 
the  house  of  Zaccheus.  If  any  man  must  needs  be  slandered  as  having 
a  devil  and  being  mad,  he  is  ready  to  bear  the  worst  reproach.  He  could 
truthfully  say,  "  Ye  call  me  Master,  and  Lord:  and  ye  say  well  ;  for  so 
I  am"  ;  yet  he,  their  Master  and  Lord,  had  washed  their  feet,  and 
tlierein  proved  that  he  was  meek,  and  lowly  of  heart.  Brothers,  it  is  a 
wonderful  thing  that  the  Lord  of  all  should  have  become  the  servant  of 
a;l;  it  is  SO  wonderful  that  many  have  lost  their  way  in  thinking  of  it; 
I  hey  have  been  unable  to  grasp  the  idea  of  Godhead  combined  with 
servitude,  majesty  united  with  obedience.  Indeed,  it  is  only  by  faith 
that  we  can  realize  that  he  that  built  all  things  yet  became  so  poor  a  thing 
as  Mary's  Son,  so  sad  a  being  as  the  Man  of  sorrows,  so  lowly  a  per- 
sonage as  the  *'  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  Yet  so  it  was ;  and  herein 
Jie  showed  the  truth  of  his  own  statement,  "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in 
lieart."  He  wore  the  yoke  himself,  and  therefore  can  experimentally 
say,  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me  .  .  .  and  ye  shall  find 
rest  unto  your  s  -uls."  This  is  he  who  breaks  not  the  bruised  reed,  and 
quenches  not  the  smoking  flax.  This  is  he  who  "endured  such  con- 
tradiction of  sinners  against  himself."  His  life  was  one  long  proof  of 
meekness  and  lowliness,  and  in  nothing  did  he  fail :  he  exhorts  us  to 
conquer  by  the  same  persevering  methods ;  for  he  has  proved  that  gentle- 
ness and  meekness  will  prevail. 

Still,  let  me  keep  you  thinking  upon  the  lowliness  of  your  Lord  when 
I  bid  you  remember  his  life-long  poverty.  He  does  not  advise  his  dis- 
ciples voluntarily  to  espouse  poverty,  unless  it  be  for  his  sake,  and  then 
they  do  well.  Times  have  been,  and  may  be  again,  when  believers  must 
forsake  all  things  for  his  cause ;  but  in  his  day  some  of  his  disciples 


696  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

ministered  to  him  of  their  substance,  and  therefore  had  substance.    He 

did  not  command  these  to  renounce  that  substance,  and  become  poor, 
though  I  doubt  not  that,  when  persecution  came,  many  of  them  gladly 
did  so  for  his  sake.  Not  to  all  did  he  put  the  test,  "  Sell  all  that  thou 
hast " ;  but  it  was  needful  to  his  own  personal  work  that  he  should 
become  poor,  that  his  people  might  be  made  rich  ;  and  this  he  cheerfully 
endured.  He  was  laid  in  a  borrowed  cradle  in  the  stable  wherein  he  was 
born  ;  he  dwelt  in  his  work-life  in  borrowed  houses,  and  lived  upon  the 
charity  of  his  followers  ;  and  when  he  rested,  it  was  iu  a  borrowed  bed ; 
for  though  the  foxes  had  holes,  he  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head.  He 
preached  from  a  borrowed  boat ;  and  when  he  fell  asleep,  and  died,  he 
was  buried  in  a  borrowed  tomb,  for  he  had  no  foot  of  land  for  a  pos- 
session. He  endured  poverty  as  if  he  were  to  the  manner  born ;  for  he 
was  quite  at  home  among  the  poor  and  lowly,  receiving  sinners  and 
eating  with  them.  Truly,  a  dignity  surrounded  him  far  more  real  than 
that  which  has  been  conceived  to  hedge  a  king;  and  yet  in  his  poverty 
he  never  seemed  uneasy,  and  the  society  of  the  poor  and  unlearned 
never  grieved  him.  He  was  with  the  poorest  as  one  of  them ;  and  they 
knew  it,  and  therefore  they  loved  to  gather  about  him.  He  was  so  sweetly 
and  tenderly  their  associate  that  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly. 

Remember,  that  he  might  have  quitted  that  poverty  at  any  moment ; 
he  that  could  turn  water  into  wine,  might  have  quaffed  fall  many  a 
delicious  draught  had  he  so  willed ;  he  that  could  multiply  bread  and 
fish  needed  never  to  have  hungered.  A  word  from  him  might  have 
created  palaces  more  wonderful  than  the  dreams  of  Aladdin,  and  wealth 
greater  than  the  abundance  of  Solomon,  for  nothing  was  impossible  to 
him.  If  he  had  willed  to  make  himself  the  object  of  his  own  life,  he 
could  have  surrounded  himself  with  every  luxury  ;  but,  instead  thereof, 
"  though  he  was  rich,  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that  ye  through 
his  poverty  might  be  rich."     In  this  he  magnified  his  lowliness. 

But  I  think  I  see  more  of  his  lowliness  at  times  in  his  associates 
than  in  anything  else ;  because  men  may  be  very  poor,  and  yet  they 
may  be  very  proud.  I  think  I  have  seen  it  sadly  so.  I  have  known 
men  without  a  penny  wherewith  to  bless  themselves  as  full  of  caste 
feeling  as  the  wealthiest  peer.  They  are  working-men,  it  may  be,  but 
they  think  themselves  superior  persons,  of  remarkable  gifts,  and  eminent 
respectability.  We  are  a  little  overdone  with  superior  persons  just 
now.  Almost  everywhere  I  come  across  them,  in  this  department  and 
in  that,  and,  of  course,  I  look  up  to  them  with  such  respect  as  I  can ; 
but  sometimes  a  little  more  reverence  is  asked  of  us  than  we  can 
conveniently  bestow.  In  this  age  we  have  to  be  careful  not  to  trench 
upon  the  dignity  of  certain  persons ;  and  yet  he  who  was  in  all 
respects  superior  to  us  all,  never  playeil  the  superior  person  once  in 
all  his  life.  He  sat  on  a  well,  and  talked  to  a  woman ;  and  his  dis- 
ciples, we  read,  marvelled  that  he  spoke  to  a  woman.  It  is  not  to  "  the 
women,"  as  we  get  it  in  our  Authorized  Version,  but  the  Revised  Version 
puts  it  more  correctly,  '*  they  marvelled  that  he  was  speaking  with  a 
woman,"  They  thought  that  such  a  one  as  he  should  not  speak  to  any 
woman ;  for  they  were  tinctured  with  the  exclusiveness  of  the  period. 
I  do  not  suppose  that  it  occurred  to  our  Lord  that  he  was  doing 
anything  remarkable  in  speaking  to  a  woman;  for  he  was   born  of 


THE  LOWLY  KIKG.  697 

woman,  and  he  never  disowned  the  tender  ties  which  come  of  such  a 
birth.  To  some  men  it  would  be  a  great  come-down  to  speak  familiarly 
to  any  one  if  he  did  not  keep  a  carriage.  Even  in  our  churches  the 
silly  caste  feeling  will  intrude,  and  brethren  in  Christ  hardly  think  a 
poor  saint  to  be  their  equal.  Our  Lord  had  no  pride  of  manner  about 
him,  for  his  lowliness  was  in  his  heart.  We  read  that  the  publicmis  and 
sinners  gathered  round  him :  even  women  of  ill-fame  listeued  with 
tearful  eyes  to  his  teaching.  Oh,  no,  we  never  mention  them,  of  course ! 
We  call  them  "  outcasts,"  and  treat  them  as  oflFcasts :  yet  Jesus  had  a 
kind  word  for  them.  What  a  congregation  he  often  had,  of  those  whom 
Pharisees  abhorred  I  yet  he  never  said  to  one  of  them,  "Begone !"  His 
rule  was  to  welcome  all,  saying,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out."  Those  publicans  were  certainly  very  mean  characters ; 
they  collected  a  hateful  tax  for  the  foreigner,  and  squeezed  out  an  extra 
portion  for  themselves:  but  yet  the  Saviour  never  said  to  a  single 
publican  "Begone!"  Quite  the  contrary,  he  gave  the  publican  an 
honourable  place  in  his  parable ;  he  made  one  of  them  an  apostle,  and 
he  went  to  abide  in  the  house  of  another,  who  received  him  joyfully. 
He  did  not  merely  speak  a  good  word  to  these  degraded  persons, 
but  he  actually  sat  at  table  with  them  as  a  friend.  "  Horrible,  was  it 
not  ?"  So  the  Pharisees  thought.  "G-lorious,"  say  we,  as  we  reverence 
that  divine  humility  which  scorned  nothing  that  lived,  and  especially 
nothing  in  the  form  of  man  or  woman.  *'  This  man  receiveth  sinners," 
was  said  in  disdain :  let  it  be  thundered  out  in  a  hymn  as  glorious  as 
the  song  of  the  seraphim,  who  continually  do  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy ! " 
Never  was  purity  more  pure  than  when  its  incarnation  bowed  to  become 
"  a  Friend  of  pubhcans  and  sinners." 

He  did  what  was  more  singular  still :  he  received  little  children.  Now, 
I  can  see  some  reason  for  talking  with  grown-up  men  and  women,  even 
if  they  be  debased  and  depraved  ;  but  as  for  those  boys  and  girls,  what 
can  be  done  with  them  ?  When  they  heard  the  children  crying  "  Hosanna  " 
in  the  temple,  the  Pharisees  demanded  of  him,  "  Hearest  thou  what 
these  say  ?  "  As  much  as  to  say,  "  Tiiese  boys !  are  these  thine  admirers  ? 
D>'St  thou  find  thy  followers  among  children  ?"  He  had  a  lowly  answer 
for  them  ;  Init  it  was  one  which  silenced  them.  These  hosannas  came  of 
our  biessed  Lord  having  said,  "  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto  me, 
and  forbid  them  not:  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God."  He  accepted 
children  as  the  pattern  of  the  kind  of  people  who  enter  his  kingdom  j 
he  himself  was  called  God's  holy  child  Jesus  ;  and  he  was  at  home  with 
children  because  of  his  perfect  giiilelessness  and  gentleness.  Proud  men 
seldom  care  for  children,  nor  children  for  them ;  but  our  Lord,  in  his 
true  lowliness  of  heart  loved  children,  and  they  loved  him. 

I  wish  we  had  a  longer  time  in  which  to  set  out  all  the  lovely  lowli- 
ness of  our  adorable  Christ  ;  but  I  must  only  gather  a  few  ears 
where  I  would  have  preferred  to  have  reaped  sheaves.  Our  Lord's 
patient  learing  under  accusations  that  were  so  foul  and  false,  was 
another  proof  of  his  lowliness.  "  I  hear,"  says  a  man,  "  that  a  calumny 
has  been  whispered  against  me,  and  I  will  drag  it  to  light.  I  will  have 
it  out,  let  it  cost  what  it  may.  Who  dares  breathe  upon  my  character  ? 
He  shall  feel  the  law,  and  know  that  he  cannot  defame  me  witli  i.a- 
punity."     Some  professing  Christians  appear  to  lose  their  balance;  when 


<^98  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

misrepresented  :  the  lamb  roars  like  a  lion,  and  the  ox  eats  flesh  like 
the  leop.ird.  Churches  have  been  rent,  and  families  ruined,  to  avenge  a 
hasty  word.  Is  not  that  spirit  the  opposite  of  the  mind  of  our  blessed 
Master  ?  They  said  he  was  a  drunken  man  and  a  wine-bibber  :  the 
■charge  must  have  grieved  him,  but  he  did  not  become  angry,  and 
threaten  his  accusers.  It  was  most  important  that  his  character  should 
be  cleared  ;  he  smiled  to  himself  as  he  thought,  "  I  will  not  contradict 
the  accusation,  for  everybody  knows  that  it  is  not  true."  They  said  that 
he  had  a  devil,  and  he  did  condescend  to  answer  that,  and  confounded 
all  his  accusers  by  making  them  see  the  absurdity  of  the  charge ;  for  if 
•the  devil  was  in  Jesus  fighting  against  the  devil,  then  the  devil  must 
have  become  divided  against  himself,  and  his  kingdom  would  soon 
•come  to  an  end.  Towards  the  end  of  our  Lord's  life,  his  enemies 
gathered  up  their  charges,  and  flung  them  in  set  form  before  Pilate's 
jadgment-seat,  but  he  answered  them  never  a  word  :  "  He  was  led  as  a 
^heep  to  the  slaughter;  and  like  a  lamb  dumb  before  her  shearer,  so 
opened  he  not  his  mouth."  In  silence  he  maintained  his  lowliness.  Oh, 
if  he  had  spoken  who  could  speak  as  never  man  spake ;  if  he  had 
defended  himself  with  his  own  irresistible  oratory,  with  such  a  subject 
as  himself  to  speak  upon,  he  might  have  made  them  all  go  out  of  the 
jiidgment-hall,  as  once  he  had  scattered  them  when  his  client  was  a 
woman  taken  in  adultery.  He  might  have  turned  the  crowd  against 
their  rulers,  had  he  chosen ;  or  divided  their  counsels  by  setting 
Piiarisees  against  Sadducees,  but  he  sought  not  himself.  He  had  been 
•content  to  ask,  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin  ? "  "  For  which  of 
those  works  do  ye  stone  me  ?  "  And  when  he  came  to  his  end  he  had 
no  harder  word  for  them  than  "  Father,  forgive  them  ! " 

To  crown  all,  you  know  how  our  Well-belovei  died.  He  laid  down  his 
life  for  US' — dearest  pledge  of  lowliness  !  The  decease  which  he  accom- 
plished at  Jerusalem  was  no  famous  death  in  battle,  amid  the  roar  of 
•cannon,  and  the  blast  of  trumpet,  shaking  heavenand  earth  with  tidings  of 
■victory.  His  was  no  death  amid  the  tears  of  a  nation  who  prepare  for 
their  beloved  prince  a  more  than  royal  mourning.  No,  he  dies  with 
malefactors  ;  he  dies  at  the  common  gallows  ;  he  dies  amid  a  crowd  of 
scoffers,  where  felons  cast  contempt  upon  him  as  he  hangs  between  them. 
Hear  how  the  ribald  throng  challenge  his  divine  sonship,  and  say,  "  If 
thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from  the  cross  "  !  The  bearing  of 
«uch  obloquy,  the  endurance  of  such  scorn,  was  the  utmost  proof  of  a 
lowliness  of  spirit  which  we  humbly  admire,  and  feebly  imitate,  but 
which  we  can  never  equal. 

II.    I  shall  but  occupy  you  one  or  two  minutes  while  I  try  to  explain 

THE   CAUSE  OF  THIS  LOWLINESS. 

His  supreme  lowliness  of  character  grew  out  of  the  actual  lowliness 
of  his  heart.  He  never  aimed  at  humility,  nor  laboured  after  it :  it 
was  natural  to  him.  Of  all  sickening  things,  the  pride  that  apes 
iiumility  is  the  most  loathsome  :  not  a  particle  of  that  nauseous  vice 
was  found  in  our  Lord.  He  never  puts  on  an  air,  nor  strikes  an  atti- 
tude, nor  plays  the  humble  part  ;  but  he  is  meek  and  lowly,  and  all  can 
Bee  it.  He  is  never  other  than  he  seems  to  be,  and  he  always  is  and 
«eems  to  be  the  meekest  of  mankind.  His  inmost  heart  was  seen,  and 
«een  to  be  all  lowliness. 


THE   LOWLY  KING.  699 

Why  was  he  so  ?  I  conceive  that  he  was  so  lowly  because  he  was  so 
great.  A  little  man  feels  the  necessity  of  magnifying  hinaself,  and 
therefore  becomes  proud.  Pride  is  essentially  meanness.  It  is  the 
little  man  that  cannot  afford  to  be-little  himself.  Some  of  us  are  too  low 
to  be  lowly,  too  mean  to  be  meek.  True  greatness  is  ever  unconscious, 
and  never  seeks  to  make  a  display.  It  magnifies  a  man  when  he 
can  sink  himself  for  the  good  of  others.  No  one  knew  how  to 
descend  so  gracefully  as  our  Lord,  for  his  great  mind  knew  well  the 
ways  of  self-denial.  A  man  who  is  greatly  rich  is  not  ashamed  to 
be  seen  in  well-worn  clothes  in  those  same  places  where  the  pre- 
tentious bankrupt  would  not  venture  except  in  his  newest  attire. 
He  who  has  a  small  estate  puts  a  diamond  ring  upon  his  finger,  and 
holds  it  so  that  it  sparkles  in  the  light,  to  let  all  people  see  that  he 
is  a  man  worth  something ;  but  your  eminent  men  of  wealth  scorn  such 
display.  Truly  great  men  are  humble.  I  have  often  heard  it  said  of  men 
of  large  substance,  "  He  is  singularly  unassuming  ;  you  would  never 
dream  that  he  is  a  man  of  property."  So,  too,  of  men  of  genius 
have  we  heard  it  said,  "  he  gave  himself  no  airs,  he  was  as  modest  and 
ii'iendly  as  the  least  of  us."  Just  so  ;  and  that  very  much  accounts 
for  his  high  standing.  He  that  is  somebody  to  others  is  nobody  to 
himself.  He  who  was  more  than  all,  even  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  was, 
theiefore,  for  that  very  reason,  lowly  of  heart. 

He  was  lowly,  next,  because  he  was  so  loving.  Mothers  are  frequently 
proud  of  their  children,  but,  I  think,  they  are  seldom,  if  ever,  proud  to 
their  children.  No,  if  they  love  them,  they  do  not  think  that  it  is  any 
condescension  to  kiss  them,  or  wash  them,  or  carry  them  in  their  bosom. 
I  never  heard  of  a  father  who  thought  that  he  was  very  humble-minded 
because  he  allowed  his  boy  to  clamber  upon  his  knee,  and  hold  on  with 
his  aims  about  his  neck.  Those  whom  we  love  we  elevate  to  an  equality 
with  ourselves;  or,  rather,  we  go  down  to  them.  Love  is  a  charming 
leveller.  Jesus  had  so  much  love  that  he  could  not  be  anything  but  lowly 
towards  his  little  ones.  You  never  yet  heard  even  a  blasphemer  impute 
pride  to  God.  Though  our  blood  has  chilled  when  we  have  heard  the 
High  and  Mighty  One  arraigned  for  this  and  that  by  arrogant  tongues  ; 
yet  we  have  not  known  profanity  to  run  in  that  line.  It  would  be  too 
absurd  to  impute  pride  either  to  God,  or  to  his  ever-blessed  Son,  Jesus 
Christ.  The  reason  for  this  evident  freedom  from  pride  is  the  fact  that 
"God  is  love."  The  fulness  of  divine  love  blinds  the  eye  which  looks 
askance  upon  it.  God  is  patient,  for  he  is  loving :  Christ  is  lowly  of 
heart,  because  his  heart  is  made  of  love. 

Moreover,  once  more,  our  blessed  Master  was  so  absorbed  in  his  great 
object  that  he  was  necessarily  lowly.  The  man  who  is  driving  at  a 
great  object  has  no  time  for  the  affectations  of  self-adulation.  He  has 
no  time  in  which  to  think  of  how  he  appears  to  others.  He  does  not 
stand  at  the  glass  to  arrange  his  beauties;  the  idea  would  be  too  absurd. 
He  cannot  be  too  particular  about  how  he  puts  that  poetic  word,  or  how 
he  mouths  that  polished  sentence;  his  sole  desire  is  to  deliver  his  mes- 
sage, and  to  impress  men  with  the  matter  in  hand.  Earnestness  carries 
the  speaker  beyond  the  orator's  rules  of  self-display;  his  rhetoric  is 
melted  down  by  his  enthusiasm.  A  great  orator  can  readily  be  made 
to  appear  ridiculous  by  the  comic  critic,  who  coolly  looks  down  from  the 


700  METROPOLITAN  TABERXACLE  PULPIT. 

gallery  upon  hitn ;  but  what  cares  he  ?  His  theme  so  absorbs  him  that 
he  has  tbrgotteu  all  elegance  of  attitude  and  gesture,  and  only  carea 
to  carry  his  point.  He  would  make  himself  a  fool,  ten  thousand  times 
deep,  if  he  coald  but  win  his  suit,  and  bless  his  country  thereby.  He 
cares  for  nothing  but  his  subject  and  his  aim.  So  is  it  pre-eminently 
with  our  Lord :  he  pursues  his  course  careless  of  man's  esteem.  He 
burns  his  way,  his  zeal  eats  him  up,  he  is  straitened  till  his  work  is 
accomplished,  and  therefore  he  has  no  thought  about  the  maintaining  of 
his  dignity.  His  greatness  and  his  intense  devotion  forbid  anything 
approximating  to  pride,  and  by  force  of  nature  he  is  meek  and  lowly 
in  heart.  Because  he  has  a  great  object  to  achieve,  and  that  object 
has  absorbed  his  whole  self,  he  must  walk  in  all  lowliness  of  mind. 
Blessed  Master,  teach  us  this  way  of  lowliness !  Fire  us  with  an  am- 
bition for  thy  glory  which  shall  shut  out  every  thought  of  pride  ! 

III.  What  are  the  lessons  to  be  leahxed  from  this  lowli- 
ness of  our  Lord  ? 

The  lessons  are,  first,  brethren,  let  us  he  lowly.  Did  I  hear  one  say, 
"  Well,  I  will  try  to  be  lowly  "  ?  You  cannot  do  it  in  that  way.  We 
must  not  try  to  act  the  lowly  part ;  we  must  he  lowly,  and  then  we  shall 
naturally  act  in  a  humble  manner.  It  is  astonishing  how  much  of  pride 
there  is  in  the  most  modest.  Of  course  I  do  not  mean  in  those  who  say 
that  they  are  perfect.  No,  I  leave  them  to  their  own  vain-glory ;  but 
in  us  poor,  imperfect  creatures,  what  a  deal  of  pride  there  is !  How  we 
condemn  pride!  We  feel  that  it  would  be  well  if  all  were  as  humble  as- 
we  are.  We  boast  that  we  detest  boasting.  We  flatter  ourselves  that 
we  hate  flattery.  When  we  are  told  that  we  are  singularly  free  from 
pride,  we  feel  as  proud  as  Lucifer  himself  at  the  consciousness  that  the 
compliment  is  right  well  deserved.  We  are  so  experienced,  so  solid,  so 
discerning,  so  free  from  self-confidence,  that  we  are  the  first  to  be- 
caught  in  the  net  of  self-satisfaction.  Brethren,  we  must  pray  God  tO' 
matLe  us  humble.  If  we  become  lowliest  of  the  lowly  it  will  not  be  much 
of  a  condescension  on  our  part;  we  shall  only  come  down  to  tlie  point 
which  we  ought  never  to  have  left.  Down  in  the  dust  is  the  fit  place 
for  such  poor  mortals  as  we  are.  What  right  have  we  to  be  anything 
else  but  meek  and  lowly  ? 

Alas !  we  can  be  very  proud  in  many  ways  :  let  me  give  you  a  case  or 
two  in  point.  Yonder  is  one  that  is  called  to  suffer,  and  he  rebels 
against  it.  Hear  his  complaint — ''  Why  should  I  be  called  to  endure 
Bu3h  great  trials?  What  have  I  done  that  I  am  thus  tried?"  Do  you 
not  at  once  detect  the  great  "I"  ?  Very  ditferent  is  this  from  the  lowly 
prayer,  "  Nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt." 

"  Bui ,  then,  persons  have  spoken  evil  of  me.  I  do  not  deserve  to  he 
treated  thus."  Clearly  it  is  specially  wrong  for  any  one  to  speak  amis* 
of  such  an  excellent  being  as  you  are.  Therj  lies  the  grievance.  Be- 
cause you  are  so  good,  it  is  horrible  wickedness  tu  traduce  you.  You 
reply,  "  But,  really,  it  was  so  mahcious,  and  the  chaige  was  so  absurd 
and  unreasonable."  Just  so.  People  ought  to  be  peculiarly  careful  not 
to  hurt  your  feelings,  for  you  are  so  deserving  and  praiseworthy.  la 
not  self-esteem  the  spring  of  half  our  sorrow  ?  We  are  so  wonderfully 
good  in  our  own  judgment  that  we  claim  the  box-seat  of  the  coach,  aad 
the  chief  seat  in  the  synagogue.     If  we  were  really  lowly  of  heart,  we 


THE  LOWLY  KING.  701 

should  siij,  "  I  have  been  treated  very  badly,  but  when  I  think  of  how 
my  Lord  was  treated,  I  cannot  dream  of  complaining.  This  severe 
critic  cannot  see  my  excellences ;  but  I  do  not  wonder,  for  I  cannot 
see  them  myself.  He  has  been  finding  fault  with  me,  and  his  charges 
were  not  true  ;  but,  if  he  had  known  me  better,  he  might  have  found 
more  fault  with  me,  and  have  been  nearer  the  truth.  If  I  do  not  de- 
serve censure  in  this  way,  I  do  in  another ;  and  so  I  will  cheerfully 
bear  what  is  measured  out  to  me.  Yea,  if  it  be  in  no  sense  my  due,  I 
will  give  my  back  to  the  smiters,  as  my  Master  did."  Oh,  that  the 
Lord  would 'make  us  meek  and  lowly,  in  heart,  and  we  should  submit 
to  wrong  rather  than  resist  evil ! 

"But  surely,"  cries  one,  "you  do  not  want  me  to  associate  with 
sinners ! "  No,  dear  friend,  I  do  not  want  such  a  good  person  as 
you  are  to  go  near  them  at  all ;  I  could  not  so  degrade  your  honourable 
self.  Moreover,  if  you  did  go  near  them,  you  would  aggravate  them  by 
your  self-opinionated  goodness.  If  your  perfections  are  not  quite  so  full- 
blown as  usual,  I  would,  however,  suggest  that  you  might  do  sinners 
good  by  kindly  speaking  to  them ;  and  that  to  gather  up  your  skirts 
in  fear  and  trembling,  lest  you  should  be  defiled  by  their  presence  is  not 
the  most  excellent  way.  When  you  are  afraid  lest  the  wind  should 
blow  from  a  sinful  person  towards  your  nobility,  you  act  the  fool, 
if  not  the  hypocrite  ;  perhaps  both.  Why,  you  would  have  been  in  hell 
yourself  if  it  had  not  been  for  sovereign  grace!  You,  fine  ladies  and 
prime  gentlefolk,  you  would  have  been  as  surely  cast  away  as  the  vilest 
of  mankind,  if  it  had  not  been  for  infinite  compassion !  It  ill  becomes 
us  to  boast,  since  we  have  enough  sins  of  our  own  to  plunge  us  in 
despair,  were  it  not  for  the  love  of  the  lowly  Saviour,  who  his  own  self 
bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree.  0  Lord,  stamp  out  our  pride, 
and  make  us  lowly  in  heart ! 

Lastly,  let  us  learn  to  say  to  the  despondent  and  timorous  words  of 
cheer.  Since  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  so  meek  and  lowly,  poor, 
trembling,  guilty  one,  you  may  come  to  him !  You  may  come  to  him 
now !  I  was  sitting  the  other  night  amongst  some  excellent  friends, 
who,  I  suppose,  were  none  of  them  rich,  and  some  of  them  poor.  I  am 
sure  it  never  entered  into  my  head  to  think  how  much  money  they 
owned,  for  I  felt  myself  very  much  at  home  with  them,  until  one  of  them 
remarked,  "  You  do  not  mind  mixing  with  us  poor  folk  ? "  Then  I 
felt  quite  ashamed  for  myself  that  they  should  think  it  necessary  to 
make  such  a  remark.  I  was  so  much  one  with  them  that  I  felt  honoured 
by  having  fellowship  with  them  in  the  things  of  God,  and  it  troubled 
me  that  they  should  think  I  was  doing  anything  remarkable  in  con- 
versing with  them.  Dear  friends,  do  not  think  hardly  of  any  of  us 
who  are  ministers  of  Christ ;  and  you  will  think  hardly  of  us  if  you 
conceive  that  we  think  it  a  coming-down  to  associate  with  any  of  you  ! 
We  are  in  heart  and  soul  your  brothers,  bone  of  your  bone,  your  truest 
friends  whether  you  are  rich  or  poor.  We  desire  your  good,  for  we  are 
your  servants  for  Christ's  sake.  Above  all,  do  not  think  hardly  of  our 
Lord  and  Master  by  supposing  that  it  will  be  a  strange  thing  for  him 
to  come  to  your  house,  or  to  your  heart.  It  is  his  habit  to  forgive  the 
guilty,  and  renew  the  sinful.  Come  to  him  at  once,  and  he  will  accept 
you  now.     Jesus  is  exceedingly  approachable.     He  is  not  hedged  about 


702  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

with  guards  to  keep  off  the  poor  or  the  sinful.  Your  room  may  be  rery 
humble ;  what  cares  he  for  that  ?  He  will  come,  and  hear  your 
prayer.    Many  a  time  Jesus  has  had  no  room  to  pray  in,  but 

"  Cold  mountains,  and  the  midnight  air, 
Witnessed  the  fervour  of  hia  prayer." 

Do  you  complain  that  you  cannot  arrange  your  words  correctly  ? 
What  is  that  to  him  ?  He  looks  more  at  the  sincerity  of  your  heart 
than  at  the  grammar  of  your  language.  Let  your  heart  talk  to  him  ] 
without  words,  and  he  wiU  understand  you. 

Do  you  complain  with  shamed  face  that  you  are  such  a  sinner  ?  You 
are  not  the  first  sinner  that  Jesus  has  met  with,  nor  will  you  be  the  last. 
You  are  heavy-laden  with  sin ;  but  he  knows  more  about  the  weight 
of  sin  than  you  do.  That  terrible  load  of  guilt  wearies  you ;  but  it 
pressed  him  down  even  more  terribly  when  it  brought  him  into  the  dust 
of  death.  It  makes  you  weep  to  think  of  sin  ;  but  it  caused  him  ta 
sweat  great  drops  of  blood.  You  feel  that  you  cannot  live  under  so 
crushing  a  burden ;  and  he  did  not  live  under  it,  but  gave  up  the  ghost 
in  agony.  Do  not  crucify  your  Lord  afresh  by  suspecting  that  he  is 
proud,  and  will  therefore  pass  you  by.  Do  not  insult  him  by  dreaming 
that  he  will  reject  you  for  your  insignificance  or  unworthiness.  Come, 
and  welcome,  to  him  who  will  delight  to  bless  you.  Come  to  him  at 
once,  without  further  question  or  hesitation.  Come  just  as  you  are,  fall 
at  his  pierced  feet,  and  trust  the  merit  of  his  blood,  and  the  good  Lord 
will  accept  you  on  the  spot,  for  he  has  said,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I 
will  in  no  wise  cast  out. " 

God  bless  yon,  by  leading  you  all  to  love  this  lowly  and  loving  LordT 
Even  at  this  present  moment  I  pray  that  you  may  take  that  step  which 
will  secure  our  meeting  in  heaven  to  adore  eternally  our  King,  so  meek 
and  lowly,  who  will  then  dwell  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  lead  us  to  living 
fountains  of  water ! 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon— Matthew  xi. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 878,  765,  384. 


HOW   HEARTS  ARE   SOFTENED. 


Delivered  on  Lord's-day  Mornino,  September  18th,  1887,  bt 

C.   H.   SPURGEON, 

AT  THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,   NEWINGTON. 


"  And  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications  :  and  they  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have 
pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one  mounieth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in 
bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn.  In  that  day  shall  there 
be  a  great  mourning  in  Jerusalem,  as  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  of 
Megiddon." — Zechariah  xii.  10,  11. 

Hardness  of  heart  is  a  great  and  grievous  evil.  It  exists  not  only  in 
the  outside  world,  but  in  many  who  frequent  the  courts  of  the  Lord's 
house.  Beneath  the  robes  of  religion  many  carry  a  heait  of  stone.  It 
is  more  than  possible  to  come  to  baptism  and  the  sacred  supper,  to  come 
constantly  to  the  hearing  of  the  Word,  and  even,  as  a  matter  of  form,  to- 
attend  to  private  religious  duties,  and  yet  still  to  have  an  unrenewed 
heart,  a  heart  within  which  no  spiritual  life  palpitates,  and  no  spiritual 
feeling  exists.  Nothing  good  can  come  out  of  a  stony  heart ;  it  is 
barren  as  a  rock.  To  be  unfeeling  is  to  be  unfruitful.  Prayer  with- 
out desire,  praise  without  emotion,  preaching  without  earnestness — 
■what  are  all  these  ?  Like  the  marble  images  of  life,  they  are  cold  and 
dead.  Insensibility  is  a  deadly  sign.  Frequently  it  is  the  next  stage 
to  destruction.  Pharaoh's  hard  heart  was  a  prophecy  that  his  pride 
would  meet  a  terrible  overthrow.  The  hammer  of  vengeance  is  not  far 
off  when  the  heart  becomes  harder  than  an  adamant  stone. 

Many  and  great  are  the  advantages  connected  with  softness  of  spirit. 
Tenderness  of  heart  is  one  of  the  marks  of  a  gracious  person.  Spiritual 
8ensiJ)ility  puts  life  and  feeling  into  all  Christian  duties.  He  that  prays 
feelingly,  prays  indeed ;  he  that  praises  God  with  humble  gratitude, 
praises  him  most  acceptably,  and  he  that  preaches  with  a  loving  heart 
has  the  essentials  of  true  eloquence.  An  inward,  living  tenderness, 
which  trembles  at  God's  word,  is  of  great  price  in  the  sight  of  God. 

You  are  in  this  matter  agreed  with  me  :  at  least,  I  know  that  some  of 
you  are  thoroughly  thus  minded  ;  for  you  are  longing  to  be  made  tender 
and  contrite.  Certain  of  you  who  are  truly  softened  by  divine  grace  are 
Tery  prone  to  accuse  yourselves  of  being  stony-hearted.  We  are  poor 
judges  of  our  own  condition,  and  in  this  matter  many  make  mistakes. 
Mark  this :  the  man  who  grieves  because  he  does  not  grieve  is  often  the 
man  who  grieves  most.  He  that  feels  that  he  does  not  feel  is  probably  the 
No.  1,983. 

20 


704 


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 


most  feeling  man  of  us  all  ;  I  suspect  that  hardness  is  almost  gone  when 
it  is  mourned  over.  He  who  can  feel  his  insensibility  is  not  insensible. 
Those  who  mourn  that  their  heart  is  a  heart  of  stone,  if  they  were  to  look 
calmly  at  the  matter  might  perceive  that  it  is  not  all  stone,  or  else  there 
would  not  be  a  mourning  because  of  hardness.  But,  whether  this  be  so 
or  not,  I  address  myself  to  all  of  you  whose  prayer  is  for  godly  sorrow 
for  sin.  It  is  written  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  "  I  will  take  away  the 
stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh."  I  praj 
that  this  may  be  ftilfilled  in  you  even  now.  The  object  of  this  sermon 
is  to  show  how  this  tenderness  is  to  be  obtained,  and  how  an  evangelical 
sorrow  for  sin  can  be  produced  in  the  heart,  and  maintained  there.  I 
would  set  forth  the  simple  method  by  which  the  inward  nature  can  be 
made  living,  feeling,  and  tender,  full  of  warm  emotions,  fervent 
breathings,  and  intense  affections  towards  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  While 
I  speak  I  beseech  you  to  pray :  Create  in  me  a  tender  heart,  0  Lord, 
and  renew  within  me  a  contrite  spirit. 

It  will  be  instructive  to  keep  to  the  words  of  the  text.  This  passage 
is  peculiarly  suited  to  our  purpose,  and  it  will  add  authority  to  that 
which  we  teach.  Observe  that  holy  tenderness  arises  out  of  a  divine 
operation.  "  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  Jenisaleui,  the  suirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications," 
Secondly,  it  is  actualhj  loroaght  by  the  look  of  faith :  "And  they  shall 
look  upon  me  whom  tliey  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him." 
And,  thirdly,  the  tenderness  which  comes  in  this  way  leads  to  mourning 
for  sin  of  an  intense  kind :  "  They  shall  mourn  for  him,  as  one  mourneth 
for  his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in 
bitterness  for  his  firstborn.  In  that  day  shall  there  be  a  great  mourning 
in  Jerusalem,  as  the  mourning  of  Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  of 
Megiddon." 

I.    First,  note  that  the  holy  tenderness  which  makes  men 

"MOURN   for   sin   ARISES   OUT   OF  A   DIVINE    OPERATION.        It   is   not   in 

fallen  man  to  renew  his  own  heart.  Can  the  adamant  turn  itself  to 
wax,  or  the  granite  soften  itself  to  clay  ?  Only  he  that  stretcheth  out 
the  heavens  and  layeth  the  foundation  of  the  earth  can  form  and  re- 
form the  spirit  of  man  within  him.  The  power  to  make  the  rock  of  our 
nature  flow  with  rivers  of  repentance  is  not  in  the  rock  itself 

The  power  lies  in  the  omnipotent  Spirit  of  God,  and  it  is  an  omen  for 
good  that  he  delights  to  exercise  this  power.  The  Spirit  of  God  is 
prompt  to  give  life  and  feehng.  He  moved  of  old  upon  the  face  of  the 
waters,  and  by  his  power  order  came  out  of  confusion.  That  same  Spirit 
at  this  time  broods  over  our  souls,  and  reduces  the  chaos  of  our  natural 
state  to  light  and  life  and  obedience.  There'  lies  the  hope  of  our 
ruined  nature.  Jehovah  who  made  us  can  make  us  over  again.  Our 
case  is  not  beyond  his  power.  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  Is 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  He  can  change  the  nether  mill- 
stone into  a  mass  of  feeling,  and  dissolve  the  northern  iron  and  the 
steel  into  a  flood  of  tears.  When  he  deals  with  the  human  mind  by  his 
secret  and  mysterious  operations,  he  fills  it  with  new  life,  perception,  and 
emotion.  "God  maketh  my  heart  soft,"  said  Job,  and  in  the  best  sense 
this  is  true.  The  Holy  Spirit  makes  us  like  wax,  and  we  become  im- 
pressible to  his  sacred  seal.     Eemember,  you  that  are  hard  of  heart, 


HOW  HEARTS  ARE   SOFTENED. 


705 


that  yonr  hope  lies  this  way  ;  God  himself,  who  melts  the  icebergs  of 
the  northern  sea,  must  make  your  soul  to  yield  up  its  hardness  in  the 
presence  of  his  love.  Nothing  short  of  the  work  of  God  within  you 
can  eflFect  this.  "  Ye  must  be  born  again,"  and  that  new  birth  must 
be  from  above.  The  Spirit  of  God  must  work  regeneration  in  you.  He 
is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham ;  but  until 
he  works  you  are  dead  and  Insensible.  Even  now  I  perceive  the  loings 
f«Tf.h  of  his  power  :  he  is  moving  you  to  desire  his  divine  working,  and 
in  that  gracious  desire  the  work  has  already  begun. 

Note  next,  that  as  this  tenderness  comes  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  it 
also  comes  hy  his  ivorJcing  in  full  co-operation  with  the  Father  and  icith 
tlip,  Son.  In  our  text  we  have  all  the  three  persons  of  the  diviae 
Trinity.  We  hear  the  Father  say,  "  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of 
David  the  spirit  of  grace,"  and  that  Spirit  when  poured  out  leads  men 
to  look  to  hi  in  whom  they  pierced,  even  to  the  incarnate  Son  of  God. 
'JMius  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  fulfils 
the  purpose  of  the  Father  by  revealing  the  Son,  and  thus  the  heart  of 
man  is  reached.  The  divine  Father  sends  forth  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
he  bears  witness  to  the  Son  of  God,  and  so  men  come  to  mourn  for  sin. 
We  believe  in  the  three  persons  of  the  blessed  God,  and  yet  we  are 
equally  clear  that  God  is  one.  We  see  the  divers  operations  of  these 
three  divine  persons,  but  we  perceive  that  they  are  all  of  one,  and  work 
to  the  selfsame  end,  namely,  that  grace  may  reign  by  delivering  us 
from  our  natural  impenitence,  and  by  causing  us  to  sorrow  because  we 
have  sinned.  The  Holy  Spirit  worketh  not  without  the  Father  and  the 
Son,  but  proves  himself  to  be  in  full  union  with  both  by  his  operations 
upon  the  soul  of  man.  Do  not  think,  therefore,  when  thou  feelest  the 
Holy  Ghost  melting  thee,  that  the  Father  will  refuse  thee  :  it  is  he  that 
sent  the  Holy  Spirit  to  deal  with  thee.  Imagine  not  that  thou  canst 
feel  repentance  for  sin  and  bow  in  sorrow  at  the  Saviour's  feet,  and 
that  Jesus  will  reject  thee ;  for  it  is  he  who  sent  the  Spirit  of  grace  to 
bring  thee  to  repentance,  and  make  thee  mourn  because  of  the  ill  which 
thou  hast  done.  The  glorious  one  God,  who  made  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  is  dealing  with  thy  heart  if  the  Holy  Ghost  is  now  working  in 
thee  as  "  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications." 

This  operation  is  an  unseen  secret  ivorJc.  Thou  canst  not  perceive 
the  work  of  the  Spirit  by  the  senses  of  the  flesh ;  it  is  spiritually 
discerned.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  was  poured  out  at  Pentecost, 
there  were  divers  signs  attendant  thereupon,  such  as  rushing  mighty 
wind,  and  cloven  tongues  as  it  were  fire ;  but  these  were  outward  signs 
only,  the  Spirit  himself  is  inward  and  secret.  The  Spirit  is  as  the 
wind,  invisible  save  by  its  effects.  The  Holy  Ghost  cometh  as  the  dew 
which  in  soft  silence  refreshes  the  tender  herb.  Not  with  sound  of 
trumpet  or  observation  of  man  doth  the  Spirit  perform  his  gracious 
deeds.  His  working  is  one  of  the  secrets  and  mysteries  which  no  man 
can  explain  to  his  fellow.  He  that  feels  the  movement  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  knows  that  a  singular  work  is  going  on  within  him,  but  what  ib 
is,  or  who  it  is  that  worketh  it,  he  knoweth  not.  Do  not,  therelore, 
expect  to  be  informed  when  the  Spirit  is  upon  thee.  Marvel  not  if  it 
should  so  happen  that  he  is  dealing  with  thee  now,  though  thou  knowest 
it  not,  "  For  God  speaketh  once,  yea  twice,  yet  man  perceiveth  it  not." 

2y 


70G  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   PUIiPIT. 

The  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  consciously  perceived  by  the 
human  heart,  but  they  are  not  always  attributed  to  their  right  cause* 
Many  a  man,  to  use  the  words  of  our  hymn, 

"  Wonders  to  feel  his  own  hardness  depart." 

Tie  ^oes  not  know  how  his  new  tenderness  has  been  prodoced.  He^ 
finds  himself  anxious  to  hear  and  understand  the  gospel,  and  he  feels 
that  the  gospel  affects  him  as  it  never  did  before,  but  he  does  not  per- 
ceive those  "  invisible  "  cords  of  love  which  are  drawing  him  towards 
his  Saviour.  Before  long  he  will  cry,  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God";  but 
as  yet  he  perceives  not  the  divine  cause.  It  is  well  set  forth  by  Mr. 
Bunyan  in  his  parable  of  the  fire  which  burned  though  a  man  tried 
to  quench  it.  There  was  one  behind  the  wall  who  secretly  poured  oil 
upon  the  fire.  He  himself  was  unperceived,  but  the  fire  burned  because 
of  what  he  poured  on  it.  You  can  see  the  flame,  but  you  cannot  see 
the  hidden  One  who  ministers  the  fuel.  The  Spirit  of  God  may  work* 
in  yon,  my  dear  hearer,  this  morning,  but  it  will  not  be  with  special 
token  of  marvel,  or  voice,  or  vision.  Not  with  earthquake,  nor  wind,  nor 
fire  will  he  come,  but  with  "  a  still  small  voice."  He  may  deal  with 
many  of  you  at  once,  and  yet  none  may  see  it  in  his  fellow.  I  expect 
that  he  will  work  upon  many  at  this  time,  for  much  prayer  has  been 
put  up  that  the  Lord  Jesus  may  be  glorified  in  our  midst. 

But  the  secret  operation  of  the  Spirit  is  known  by  its  eficcts,  for  it  i& 
sweetly  productive.  We  read  in  the  text  of  "  the  spirit  of  grace  and  of 
supplications,"  which  must  mean  that  the  Spirit  produces  graciousness 
and  prayerfiilness  in  the  soul  upon  which  he  works.  The  man  is  now 
willing  to  receive  the  grace  or  free  favour  of  God ;  he  ceases  to  be 
proud,  and  becomes  gracious.  He  is  put  into  a  condition  in  which 
God's  grace  can  deal  with  him.  As  long  as  you  are  self-righteous,  God 
cannot  deal  with  you  in  the  way  of  favour;  you  are  upon  wrong  ground, 
for  you  are  making  claims  which  he  cannot  possibly  allow.  Alercy  and 
merit  can  no  more  blend  than  fire  and  water.  You  must  be  willing  to 
receive  as  a  free  favour  what  God  will  never  give  you  if  you  claim  it  by 
right.  When  thou  art  made  conscious  of  sin,  then  forgiveness  can  be 
granted.  When  thou  art  malleable  under  the  hammer  of  God's  Word, 
then  will  he  work  his  work  of  love  upon  thee.  When  thou  dost  lay  thine 
own  righteousness  aside,  and  take  up  the  cry,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me 
a  sinner,"  then  shalt  thou  go  to  thy  house  justified.  It  needs  the  Spirit 
of  grace  to  give  us  grace  to  receive  grace.  We  are  so  graceless  that  v/e- 
will  not  even  accept  grace  till  God  gives  us  "grace  for  grace" — grace  to 
accept  grace.  Blessed  is  the  hour  when  the  Spirit  of  Gud  comes  to  us 
as  the  Spirit  of  grace,  and  works  in  us  that  graciousness  which  makes 
us  value  and  seek  after  the  free  grace  of  God  in  its  further  lorms. 
Grace  itself  clears  out  a  space  in  the  heart  for  grace  to  enter  and  ctirry 
on  its  work. 

It  is  also  said  that  the  Lord  will  pour  out  **  the  spirit  of  supplica- 
tions." This  is  the  creation  of  desires  and  longings  which  express 
themselves  in  prayer.  When  the  Holy  Ghost  works  savingly  upon  the 
heart,  then  the  man  begins  to  approach  the  mercy-seat  with  frequent 
and  lervent  supplications.  The  words  may  be  broken  and  confused ; 
but  what  are  words  ?     Sighs,  tears,  heavings  of  the  breast,  and  upward 


HOW  HEARTS  ARE   SOFTENED.  7-07 

glancings  of  the  eye — these  are  true  prayers,  and  are  very  prevalent 
with  God.  Brethren,  we  poor  preachers  cannot  make  men  pray.  We 
can  produce  a  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and  read  it  to  them,  and  get 
them  to  utter  the  responses ;  but  we  cannot  make  them  pray  by  thia 
means :  the  Spirit  of  God  is  still  needed.  The  child  may  be  taught  a 
form  of  prayer  at  its  mother's  knee,  and  he  may  repeat  it  daily  till  he 
is  old,  and  yet  he  may  never  have  prayed  in  all  those  years.  Only  the 
Spirit  of  God  can  produce  the  smallest  atom  of  prayer.  I  tell  you, 
there  was  never  a  prayer  on  earth  that  God  could  accept,  but  what  first 
came  down  from  heaven  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  the 
soul.  But  here  is  the  point :  have  you  this  "  spirit  of  supplications  " 
this  morning  ?  Are  you  groaning,  crying,  sighing — "  Lord,  save,  or  I 
perish  ;  give  me  Christ,  or  else  I  die  "  ?  Well  then,  I  trust  you  have 
come  under  the  sacred  outpouring  promised  in  the  text — "  I  will  pour 
upon  the  house  of  David,  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications." 

All  this  leads  on  towards  the  tenderness  which  begets  mourning  for  sin. 
Again,  I  say,  this  is  the  point  from  which  help  must  come  for  the 
sinner.  You  that  have  been  striving  to  feel,  and  yet  cannot  feel,  and 
do  not  feel — you  should  look  to  the  strong  for  strength,  and  to  the 
living  for  life.  He  who  in  the  day  of  his  creation  breathed  into  the 
nostrils  of  man  the  breath  of  life,  so  that  he  became  a  living  soul,  can 
infuse  the  new  life  into  you,  and  give  you  with  it  all  the  feeling  which 
is  natural  thereto.  Think  much  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  he  can 
make  thee  live  in  the  truest  sense.  It  is  God's  to  give  thee  a  tender 
heart,  not  thine  to  create  it  within  thyself.  Do  not  attempt  first  to 
renew  thy  heart,  and  then  to  come  to  Christ  for  salvation ;  for  thia 
renewal  of  heart  is  salvation.  Come  thou  as  thou  art,  confessing  all 
thy  hardness,  thy  wicked,  wilful  obduracy  and  obstinacy,  confess  it  all ; 
and  then  put  thyself  into  the  hands  of  the  Spirit,  who  can  remove 
thy  hardness  at  the  same  time  that  grace  removes  thy  guilt.  The 
Holy  Spirit  can  make  thy  heart  as  tender  as  the  apple  of  the  eye, 
and  cause  thy  conscience  to  be  as  sensitive  as  a  raw  wound,  which  feels 
the  slightest  touch.  God  grant  us  grace  to  deal  with  him  about  these 
things,  and  not  to  be  lucking  to  ourselves.  As  well  hope  to  extract 
juice  from  the  stones  of  the  sea-beach,  as  spiritual  feeling  from  the 
carnal  mind.  He  who  can  make  the  dry  bones  live,  and  he  alone,  can 
make  the  hardened  mourn  over  sin. 

II.     But  now  I  come  to  the  core  and  centre  of  our  subject :  this 

TENDERNESS  OF  HEART  AND  MOURNING  FOR  SIN  IS  ACTUALLY 
WROUGHT    BT    A    FAITH-LOOK   AT   THE   PIERCED    SON   OF    GOD.        TrOC 

Borrow  for  sin  comes  not  without  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  but  even  the  Spirit 
of  God  himself  does  not  work  it  except  by  leading  us  to  look  to  Jesus 
the  crucified.  There  is  no  true  mourning  for  sin  until  the  eye  has  seen 
Christ.  It  is  a  beautiful  remark  of  an  old  divine,  that  eyes  are  made 
for  two  things  at  least ;  first,  to  look  with,  and  next,  to  weep  with. 
The  eye  which  looks  to  the  pierced  One  is  the  eye  which  weeps  for  him. 
O  soul,  when  thou  comest  to  look  where  all  eyes  should  look,  even  to 
him  who  was  pierced,  then  thine  eye  begins  to  weep  for  that  for  which 
all  eyes  should  weep,  even  the  sin  which  slew  thy  Saviour !  There  is  no 
saving  repentance  except  within  sight  of  the  cross.    That  lepentauce  of 


708  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

sin  which  omits  Christ,  is  a  repentance  which  will  have  to  be  repented 
of.  If  sach  sorrow  may  be  called  repentance  at  all,  it  is  only  as  wild 
grapes  are  yet  called  grapes,  though  they  have  in  them  none  of  the 
qualities  and  virtues  of  the  clusters  of  the  true  vine.  Evangelical 
repentance  is  acceptable  repentance,  and  that  only  ;  and  the  essence  of 
evangelical  repentance  is  that  it  looks  to  him  whom  it  pierced  by  its  siu. 
Sorrow  for  sin  withovt  faith  in  Christ  is  the  hard  bone  without  the 
marrow :  it  kills,  but  never  blesses.  It  is  a  tempest  of  the  soul  with 
thunder  and  lightning,  but  no  rain.  God  save  us  from  remorse  !  it 
worketh  death. 

Mark  you,  wherever  the  Holy  Spirit  does  really  conie,  it  always  leads 
the  soul  to  look  to  Christ.  Never  yet  did  a  man  receive  the  Spirit  of 
God  unto  salvation,  unless  he  received  it  to  the  bringing  of  him  to 
look  to  Christ  and  mourn  for  sin.  Faith  and  repentance  are  bom 
together,  Hve  together,  and  thrive  together.  Let  no  man  put  asunder 
what  God  hath  joined  together.  No  man  can  repent  of  sin  without 
believing  in  Jesus,  nor  believe  in  Jesus  without  repenting  of  sin. 
Look,  then,  lovingly  to  him  that  bled  upon  the  cross  for  thee,  for  in  that 
look  thou  shalt  find  pardon,  and  receive  softening.  How  wonderful 
that  all  oar  evils  should  be  remedied  by  that  one  sole  prescription, 
"  Look  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth"!  Yet  none 
will  look  until  the  Spirit  of  God  inclines  them  so  to  do ;  and  he  works 
on  none  to  their  salvation  unless  they  yield  to  his  influences  and  turn 
their  eyes  to  Jesus. 

Note  well  that  this  look  to  the  lyierced  One  is  'peculiarly  dear  to  God. 
Observe  the  change  of  the  pronoun  in  the  middle  of  the  verse  :  "  They 
shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for 
him."  The  )?2eandtheM?«  refer  to  the  same  person.  I  lay  no  special  stress 
upon  this,  and  I  do  not  attempt  to  prove  any  doctrine  from  it ;  but 
certainly  it  is  remarkable  that  when  we  read  this  verse  with  defined 
views  as  to  the  oneness  of  Christ  with  God,  and  the  union  of  God  and 
man  in  one  person  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  find  the  pronouns  perfectly 
correct,  and  understand  why  there  should  be  "  me  "  in  one  case,  and 
"  Aw^j  "  in  another.  If  you  adopt  any  other  theory,  then  the  passage 
would  seem  to  be  a  jumble  of  words.  It  is  instructive  to  note  that  the 
Lord,  instead  of  saying,  "They  shall  look  upon  him  whom  they  have 
pierced,"  cannot  keep  himself  in  the  third  person,  but  bursts  upon  the 
scene  in  his  own  individuality.  Either  you  have  here  the  Father 
regarding  himself  as  pierced  in  his  Son,  or  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
himself  speaking  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy  of  himself,  and  personally 
noting  those  looks  of  faith  and  penitence  which  are  fixed  upon  his  sacred 
person.  He  has  such  a  delight  in  those  looks  of  believing  sorrow,  that, 
he  mentions  them  as  having  personally  beheld  them  :  "  They  shall  look 
upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced."  Nothinu;  pleases  Jesus  more  than 
the  faith-looks  of  his  people.  In  every  stage  of  their  history  the 
glances  of  believers'  eyes  are  very  precious  to  him.  "  Thou  hast 
ravished  my  heart,  my  sister,  my  spouse  ;  thou  hast  ravished  my  heart: 
with  one  of  thine  eyes,"  saith  the  Bridegroom  in  the  heavenly  canticle* 
Surely  the  first  glance  of  a  tearful,  penitent  eye  to  Christ  is  very  dear 
to  him.  He  saith, "  I  have  seen  him  and  observed  him."  Nobody  sees  oor- 
look  of  faith  but  himself,  and  it  is  not  needful  that  anyone  else  shouldr 


HOW  HEARTS  ARE   SOFTENED.  709 

see  it :  is  it  not  a  matter  between  our  own  soul  and  our  Lord  ?  He 
foresaw  that  look,  and  in  this  verse  uttered  a  prophecy  concerning;  it ; 
and  he  looks  back  upon  it  with  pleasure,  keeping  it  before  his  mind  as  a 
part  of  his  satisfaction  for  the  travail  of  his  soul.  The  looks  of  faith 
and  the  tears  of  repentance  are  precious  jewels  to  our  Lord  Jesus.  He 
rejoices,  so  much  when  one  sinner  repenteth  that  the  angels  see  his 
joy.  0  dear  hearts,  if  this  morning,  in  those  pews,  you  look  to 
Christ  believingly,  accepting  him  as  God's  salvation,  then  is  the  pro- 
mise fulfilled  before  the  eyes  of  him  who  spake  it,  and  said,  "They 
shall  look  on  me  whom  they  have  pierced."  He  will  be  glad  of 
your  faith :  he  invites  it,  he  accepts  it,  he  rewards  it.  "  They  looked 
unto  him  and  were  lightened  :  and  their  faces  were  not  ashamed." 
Looking  unto  Jesus  we  receive  joy,  and  we  give  him  joy.  As  he 
delighteth  in  mercy,  so  he  delights  in  those  who  come  to  him  and 
accept  his  mercy.  He  was  lifted  on  a  cross  to  be  looked  at,  he  was 
nailed  there  that  he  might  be  a  perpetual  spectacle,  and  his  heart  was 
pierced  that  we  might  see  the  blood  and  water,  which  are  our  double 
cure. 

The  look  which  blesses  us  so  as  to  produce  tenderness  of  heart,  is  a 
look  to  Jesus  as  the  pierced  0)w.  On  this  I  want  to  dwell  for  a  season. 
It  is  not  looking  to  Jesus  as  God  only  which  affects  the  heart,  but  look- 
ing to  this  same  Lord  and  God  as  crucified  for  us.  We  see  the  Lord 
pierced,  and  then  the  piercing  of  our  own  heart  begins.  When  the  Lord 
reveals  Jesus  to  us,  we  begin  to  have  our  sins  revealed.  We  see  who  it 
was  that  was  pierced,  and  this  deeply  stirs  our  sorrow.  Come,  dear 
souls,  let  us  go  together  to  the  cross  for  a  little  while,  and  note  who 
it  ivas  that  there  received  the  spear-thiust  of  the  Roman  soldier.  Look 
at  his  side,  and  mark  that  fearful  gash  which  has  broached  his  heart, 
and  set  the  double  flood  in  motion.  The  centurion  said,  "Truly  this 
was  the  Son  of  God."  He  who  by  nature  is  God  over  all,  "  without 
whom  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made,"  took  upon  himself  our 
nature,  and  became  a  man  like  ourselves,  save  that  he  was  without  taint 
of  sin.  Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  became  obedient  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  It  is  he  that  died  !  He  who  only 
hath  immortality  condescended  to  die  !  He  was  all  glory  and  power  ; 
and  yet  he  died  !  He  was  all  tenderness  and  grace  ;  and  yet  he  died  ! 
Infinite  goodness  was  hanged  upon  a  tree  !  Boundless  bounty  was 
pierced  with  a  spear  !  This  tragedy  exceeds  all  others  !  However  dark 
man's  ingratitude  may  seem  it)  other  cases,  it  is  blackest  here  !  However 
horrible  his  spite  against  virtue,  that  spite  is  cruellest  here  !  Here  hell 
has  outdone  all  its  former  viilHuiee,  crying,  "This  is  the  heir;  let  us 
kill  him."  God  dwelt  among  us,  and  man  would  have  none  of  him. 
So  lar  as  man  could  pierce  his  God,  and  slay  his  God,  he  went  about 
to  commit  the  hideous  crime  ;  for  man  slew  the  Lord  Christ,  and  pierced 
him  with  a  spear,  and  therein  showed  what  he  would  do  with  the 
Eternal  himself,  if  he  could  come  at  him.  Man  is,  at  heart,  a  deicide. 
He  would  be  glad  if  there  were  no  God  :  he  says  in  his  heart,  "  No 
God  ";  and,  if  his  hand  could  go  as  far  as  his  heart,  God  would  not 
exist  another  hour.  This  it  is  which  invests  the  piercing  of  our  Lord 
•with  such  intensity  of  sin  ;  it  meant  the  piercing  of  God.  But  why  ? 
Why  and  wherefore  is  the  good  God  thus  persecuted  ?    By  the  loving- 


710  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   PULPIT. 

kindness  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  by  the  glory  of  his  person,  and  by  the 
perfection  of  his  character,  I  beseech  you  be  amszed  and  ashamed  that 
he  should  be  pierced.  This  is  no  common  deaih  I  This  murder  is  no 
ordinary  crime.  0  man,  he  that  was  pierced  with  the  spear  was  thy 
Gud  !     On  the  cross  behold  thy  Maker,  thy  Benefactor,  thy  best  Friend ! 

*•  Alas  !  and  did  my  Saviour  bleed  ? 
And  did  my  Saviour  die  ? 
Would  he  devote  that  sacred  head 
For  such  a  worm  as  I  ?  " 

Look  steadily  at  the  pierced  One,  and  noie  the  suffering  which  is 
covered  by  the  word  "  pierced."  Oar  Lord  suffered  greatly  and 
grievously.  I  cannot  in  one  discourse  rehearse  the  story  of  his  sorrows; 
the  griefs  of  his  life  of  poverty  and  persecution ;  the  griefs  of  Geth- 
semane,  and  the  bloody  sweat ;  the  griefs  of  his  desertion,  denial,  and 
betrayal  ;  the  griefs  of  Pilate's  hall,  and  the  scourging,  and  the  spitting, 
and  the  mockery  ;  the  griefs  of  the  cross,  with  its  dishonour  and  agony. 
The  sufferings  of  our  Lord's  body  were  only  the  body  of  his  sufferings. 

"  'Twas  not  the  insulting  voice  of  scorn 
So  deeply  wrung  his  heart  ; 
The  piercing  nail,  the  pointed  thorn. 
Caused  not  the  saddest  siuart : 

•*  But  every  strugglins  sigh  betray'd 
A  heavier  grief  within, 
How  on  His  burden'd  soul  was  laid 
The  weight  of  human  sin." 

Our  Lord  was  made  a  curse  for  us.  The  penalty  for  sin,  or  that  which  was 
equivalent  thereto,  he  endured.  "  He  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his 
own  body  on  the  tree."  "  The  chastisement  of  onr  peace  was  upon  him; 
and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  Brethren,  the  sufferings  of  Jesus 
ought  to  melt  our  hearts.  I  mourn  this  morning  that  I  do  not  mourn 
as  I  should.  I  accuse  myself  of  that  hardness  of  heart  which  I  con- 
demn, since  I  can  tell  you  this  story  without  breaking  down.  My 
Lord's  griefs  are  untellable.  Behold  and  see  if  there  was  ever  sorrow 
like  unto  his  sorrow  1  Here  we  lean  over  a  dread  abyss  and  look  down 
into  fathomless  gulfs.  Now  we  are  upon  great  waters,  where  deep  calleth 
unto  deep.  If  you  will  steadfastly  consider  Jesus  pierced  for  our  sins,  and 
all  that  is  meant  thereby,  your  hearts  must  relent.  Sooner  or  later  the 
cross  will  bring  out  all  the  feeling  of  which  you  are  capable,  and  give 
you  capacity  for  more.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  puts  the  cross  into  the 
heart,  the  heart  is  dissolved  in  tenderness.  Crux  in  corcle,  as  the  old 
preachers  used  to  say,  this  is  the  source  of  godly  sorrow.  The  hardness 
ot  the  heart  dies  when  we  see  Jesus  die  in  woe  so  great. 

It  behoves  us  further  to  note  who  it  was  that  pierced  him — '  They 
shall  look  on  me  whom  they  have  pierced  "  ;  the  "  they,"  in  each  case, 
relates  to  the  same  persons.  We  slew  the  Saviour,  even  we,  who  look 
to  him  and  live.  If  a  man  were  condemned  and  put  to  death,  you 
might  enquire  who  it  was  that  slew  him  ;  and  you  might  be  told  that  it 
was  the  judge  who  condemned  him  ;  but  that  would  not  be  all  the  truth. 
Another  might  blame  the  jury  who  brought  m  the  verdict  of  guilty,  Of 


HOW  HEARTS  AEB  SOFTENED.  711 

the  executioner  who  actually  hanged  him  ;  but  when  you  go  to  the  root 
of  the  matter,  you  would  find  that  it  was  the  man's  crime  which  waa 
the  real  blameworthy  cause  of  his  death.  In  the  Saviour's  case  sin 
was  the  cause  of  his  death.  Transgression  pierced  him.  But  whose 
transgression  ?  Whose  ?  It  was  not  his  own,  for  he  knew  no  sin, 
neither  was  guile  found  in  his  lips.  Pilate  said,  "I  find  no  fault  in  this 
man."  Brethren,  the  Messiah  was  cut  off,  but  not  for  himself.  Our 
sins  slew  the  Saviour.  He  suffered  because  there  was  no  oflier  way  of 
vindicating  the  justice  of  God  and  allowing  us  to  escape.  The  sword 
which  else  had  smitten  us  was  awakened  against  the  Lord's  Shepherd, 
against  the  man  that  was  Jehovah's  fellow.    Truly  may  we  sing— 

♦*  'Twas  for  my  sins  my  dearest  Lord 
Hung  on  the  cursdd  tree. 
And  groan'd  away  a  dying  life 
For  thee,  my  soul,  for  thee. 

*'  Oh,  how  I  hate  those  lusts  of  mine 
That  crucified  my  God  ; 
Those  sins  that  pierced  and  nail'd  his  flesh 
Fast  to  the  fatal  wood ! 

•*  Oh,  if  my  soul  were  form'd  for  woe, 
How  would  I  vent  my  sighs  ! 
Repentance  should  like  rivers  flow 
From  both  my  streaming  eyes." 

If  this  does  not  break  and  melt  our  hearts,  let  ns  note  why  Tie  eame 
into  a  position  in  ivhich  he  could  be  pierced  by  our  sins.  It  was  love, 
mighty  love,  nothing  else  but  love  which  led  him  to  the  cross.  No 
other  charge  can  ever  be  laid  at  his  door  but  this,  that  he  was  '*  found 
guilty  of  excess  of  love."  He  put  himself  in  the  way  of  piercing 
because  he  was  resolved  to  save  us.  He  loved  us  better  than  he  loved 
himself.  And  shall  we  hear  of  this,  and  think  of  this,  and  consider 
this,  and  remain  unmoved  ?  Are  we  worse  than  brutes  ?  Has  all  that 
is  human  quitted  our  humanity  ?  If  God  the  Holy  Ghost  is  now  at 
"work,  a  sight  of  Christ  will  surely  melt  our  heart  of  stone. 

Furthermore,  notice  that  looking  to  the  pierced  One  causes  mourning 
in  every  case.  All  hearts  yield  to  this.  Under  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  this  works  efficaciously  of  itself.  Nothing  else  is  needed.  "  They 
shall  look  upon  me,"  and  "  they  shall  mourn."  Faith  in  Christ  is  suffi- 
cient for  the  production  of  acceptable  and  deep  repentance  ;  this,  and 
this  only,  without  mortifications  and  penances. 

Let  me  also  say  to  you,  beloved,  that  the  more  you  look  at  Jesug 
crucified,  the  more  you  will  mourn  for  sin.  Growing  thought  will 
bring  growing  tenderness.  I  would  have  you  look  much  at  the  pierced 
One,  that  you  may  hate  sin  much.  Books  which  set  forth  the  passion 
of  our  Lord,  and  hymns  which  sing  of  his  cross,  have  ever  been  most 
dear  to  saintly  minds  because  of  their  holy  influence  upon  the  heart  and 
conscience.  Live  at  Calvary,  beloved ;  for  there  you  will  live  at  your 
best.  Live  at  Calvary,  and  love  at  Calvary,  till  live  and  love  become  the 
same  thing.  I  would  say,  look  to  the  pierced  One  till  your  own  heart 
is  pierced.  An  old  divine  saith,  "  Look  at  the  cross  until  all  that  is  on 
the  cross  is  in  your  heart."    He  further  says:  Look  at  Jesus  until 


7Ji?  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

he  looks  at  you.  Steadily  view  his  suffering  person  until  he  seems  to 
turn  his  head  and  look  at  you,  as  he  did  at  Peter  when  he  went  out 
and  wept  bitterly.  See  Jesus  till  you  see  yourself:  mourn  for  him  till 
you  mourn  for  your  sin. 

The  whole  of  this  subject  leads  me  to  observe  that  the  conversion  of 
the  Jews  will  come  from  a  sight  of  the  crucified  Messiah.  I  conclude 
from  this  text  that  Israel  will  be  brought  to  know  the  Lord,  noc  by 
a  vision  of  Christ  in  his  glory,  but  by  a  sight  of  Christ  in  his  humilia- 
tion. "They  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  shall 
mourn  for  him."  But  1  also  conclude  that  this  holds  good  of  all  man- 
kind. By  the  preaching  of  Christ  crucified  will  their  hearts  be  broken. 
The  cros:*;  is  God's  hammer  of  love,  wherewith  he  smites  the  hearts  of 
men  with  irresistible  blows.  Men  tell  us  we  should  preach  Christ  as 
an  example.  We  do  preach  him  as  an  example,  and  rejoice  to  do  so  ; 
but  we  can  never  allow  that  view  of  our  Lord  to  overshadow  our 
preaching  of  him  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  He  suffered  in  the  room,  and 
place,  and  stead,  of  guilty  men,  and  this  is  the  gospel.  Whatever 
others  may  preach,  "  we  preach  Christ  crucified."  We  will  ever  bear 
the  cross  in  the  forefront.  The  substitution  of  Christ  for  the  sinner 
is  the  essence  of  the  gospel.  We  do  not  keep  back  the  doctrine  of  the 
Second  Advent  ;  but,  first  and  foremost,  we  preach  the  pierced  One  ; 
for  this  it  is  that  shall  lead  to  evangelical  repentance,  when  the  Spirit 
of  grace  is  poured  out.  0  brethren,  whatever  else  you  preach,  or  do 
not  preach,  preach  Christ  crucified !  Jesus  ChrisD  my  Lord  as 
crucified  is  my  main  topic,  and  shall  be  till  I  die.  I  trust  you  feel  a 
pleasure  in  thinking  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  any  character  in  which  he  is 
revealed,  but  yet  the  cross  is  that  whereon  he  is  most  lifted  up,  and  this 
is  the  chief  attraction  for  sinful  men.  Though  it  be  to  the  Jews  a  stum- 
blingblock  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness,  it  is  still  the  power  of  God 
unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth. 

IIL  My  time  is  nearly  over,  and  therefore  I  must  only  for  a  minute 
touch  upon  the  surface  of  my  third  subject :  the  sight  of  Christ 

CRUCIFIED   WILL  PRODUCE   A   MOURNING  FOR  SIN  OF  A  VERY  THOROUGH 

character.  It  will  be  immediate.  If  the  Spirit  of  God  grants  us  an 
inward  sight  of  Christ,  we  shall  bleed  inwardly  at  once.  The  senteuces 
are  fast  joined  together — "  They  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have 
pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn."  How  rapidly  the  Spirit  of  God  often 
works!  "His  word  runneth  very  swiftly."  With  a  single  blow  of 
grace  the  bars  of  iron  are  broken.  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  foaming  at  the 
mouth  with  rage  against  Jesus  of  Nazareth  and  his  disciples,  but  a 
flash  and  a  word  changed  him.  '*  Why  persecutest  thou  me  ? "  showed 
him  the  pierced  Lord,  and,  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?" 
was  his  speedy  answer.  One  glimpse  at  Christ  will  make  yonder  stub- 
born sinner  bow  the  knee.     Look  on  him,  Lord ! 

This  mourning,  according  to  our  text,  is  refined  mid  pure.  They  shall 
mourn  for  Mm,  they  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him.  For  Jesus  they 
Buriow  rather  than  for  themselves.  Sin  is  not  mentioned  in  these  verses, 
and  yet  the  sorrow  is  all  concerning  sin.  The  grief  for  sin  itself  is 
overborne  and  compassed  about  by  the  greater  grief  occasioned  by  the 
sad  results  of  sin  upon  the  person  of  the  pierced  One.  Sin  is  grieved 
over  as  it  is  against  the  Lord :  even  as  David  cries,  "  Against  thee,  thee 


1 


HOW  HEARTS  ARE  SQFTENED.  719 

only,  have  I  sinned."  The  mourning  of  a  penitent  is  not  because  of 
hell :  if  there  were  no  hell  he  would  mourn  just  as  much.  His  grief  is 
not  for  what  sin  might  cost  himself,  but  for  what  it  has  cost  the  Sub- 
stitute. He  bemoans  himself  thus:  "Oh.  how  could  I  have  pierced 
him!  How  could  I  have  wounded  the  Beloved?  Lover  of  my  soul, 
how  could  I  have  pierced  thee?"  True  penitents  smite  upon  their 
breasts  as  they  behold  their  Saviour  bleeding  on  the  tree.  This  is  the 
sense  of  sin  wliich  is  the  mark  of  God's  electing  love,  the  token  of  the 
effectual  calling  of  his  grace. 

In  this  mourning  there  is  a  touching  tenderness :  "  They  shall  be  in 
bitterness  for  him,  as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  firstborn."  It  is 
not  a  son  laoaentintj  for  a  father,  for  there  the  grief  might  be  as  much  for 
the  loss  of  the  father's  care  and  help  as  for  the  father's  self;  but  in  the 
case  of  a  father  mourning  his  young  son,  the  father  is  not  supposed  to 
lose  anything  but  his  boy ;  his  grief  is  for  the  child  himself.  Mourning 
for  a  son  is  caused  by  a  pecuHarly  pure  and  unmixed  love.  Somewhat 
that  is  of  the  earth  earthy  may  enter  into  the  mourning  for  a  wife ;  but 
for  his  son  a  father  laments  with  a  love  which  none  may  question.  For 
an  only  son  the  mourning  is  bitter  indeed,  and  for  a  firstborn  it  is  as 
gall  and  wormwood.  The  Israelite  was  specially  sensitive  concerning 
the  death  of  his  offspring.  To  lose  his  firstborn  was  as  when  a  nation 
loses  its  prince.  To  lose  his  only  son  was  to  quench  the  light  of  the 
house.  The  old  man  mourns,  "  I  am  as  good  as  dead.  I  am  blotted 
out  of  the  book  of  the  living,  for  I  have  now  no  son  to  bear  my  name. 
The  lamp  has  gone  out  in  my  tent,  for  my  son,  my  only  son,  my  first- 
born, has  gone  down  to  the  gates  of  the  grave ! "'  The  case  was  hope- 
less for  the  future  ;  none  remained  to  continue  his  family  among  those 
who  sit  in  tlie  gate,  and  the  old  man  rent  his  clothes  and  wept  sore. 
It  is  a  bitter  mourning  which  we  have  when  we  see  Jesus  slain  by  our 
sins.  Were  it  not  for  the  consequences  wliich  grace  has  caused  to  flow 
therefrom,  our  sorrow  would  be  hopeless  and  helpless  ;  for  we  feel  that 
in  killing  Jesus  we  have  destroyed  our  best,  our  only  hope,  our  one  and 
only  joy.  His  death  was  the  hiding  of  the  sun,  and  the  shaking  of  the 
earth,  and  we  feel  it  to  be  so  within  our  own  souls.  All  that  is  worth 
having  is  g.ne  when  Jesus  is  gone.  When  God's  only  Sou,  his  first- 
born, dies,  we  sympathize  with  the  great  Father,  and  feel  ourselves 
bereaved  of  our  chief  joy,  our  hope,  our  delight. 

This  sorrow  is  ijitense.  The  word  "  bitterness "  is  used  twice. 
Sorrow  at  the  cross-foot  is  sorrow  indeed,  sorrow  upon  sorrow,  grief 
upon  grief.  Then  we  have  bitterness  and  bitterness,  bitterness  upon 
bitterness,  the  bitterness  of  bitterness.  Thank  God,  it  is  a  healthy 
tonic  :  he  that  hath  tasted  this  bitterness  may  say,  "  Surely  the  bitter- 
ness of  death  is  past." 

And  this  kind  of  mourning  is  very  extraordinary.  The  prophet  could 
not  recollect  any  mourning  which  he  had  ever  heard  of  that  was  like  it, 
except  the  lamentation  of  the  people  for  the  death  of  Josiah.  Then 
all  Judah  mourned,  and  Jeremiah  wrote  sad  dirges,  and  other  prophets 
and  poets  poured  forth  their  lamentations.  Everywhere  throughout 
the  land  there  went  up  an  exceeding  great  and  bitter  cry,  for  the 
good  king  had  fallen,  and  there  were  no  princes  of  like  mind  to  lollow 
liiiu.    Alas,  puor  natiun  !  it  was  thy  last  bright  hour  which  saw  liim  ride 


714  METROPOLITAN    TABERNACLE  PULPIT. 

to  the  battle ;  in  his  death  thy  star  has  set !  In  the  valley  of 
Hadadrimmon  the  mourning  began,  but  it  spread  through  all  the  land. 
The  fatal  fight  of  Megiddon  was  wailed  by  every  woman  in  Jerusalem. 
Bravely  had  Josiah  kepc  his  word,  and  sought  to  repel  the  Egyptian 
invader  ;  but  the  hour  of  Judah's  punishment  was  come,  and  Josiah 
died.  A  mourning  as  sincere  and  deep  comes  to  us  when  we  perceive 
that  Jesus  died  for  us.  Blessed  be  his  name ;  the  joy  that  comes  of  it 
when  we  see  sin  put  away  by  his  death,  turns  all  the  sorrow  into  joy. 

This  mourning  is  personal  grief ;  every  man  repents  apart,  and  every 
woman  apart.  It  is  a  private,  personal  grief ;  it  is  not  produced  by  the 
contagion  of  example,  but  by  the  conviction  of  the  individual  con- 
science. Such  sorrow  is  only  to  be  assuaged  by  Jesus  Christ  himself 
when  he  is  revealed  as  the  salvation  of  God. 

Brethren,  I  am  conscious  that  I  have  not  preached  as  I  ought  to 
have  preached  this  morning.  I  have  been  mastered  by  my  subject. 
I  could  sit  down  alone  and  picture  my  divine  Master  on  the  cross. 
I  delight  to  do  so.  It  is  my  comfort  to  meditate  on  him.  I  see  him 
hanging  on  the  tree,  and  carefully  survey  him,  from  his  head  encircled 
with  the  thorns,  down  to  his  blessed  feet,  made  by  the  nails  to  be 
fountains  of  crimson  blood.  I  have  wept  behind  the  cross  at  the  marks 
of  the  dread  scourging  which  he  bore  ;  and  then  coming  to  the  front  I 
have  gazed  upon  his  pierced  hands,  and  lingered  long  before  that 
opened  side.  Then  I  feel  as  if  I  could  die  of  a  pleasing  grief  and 
mournful  joy.  Oh,  how  I  then  love  and  adore  !  But  here  before  this 
crowd  I  am  a  mere  lisper  of  words — words  which  fall  far  below  the 
height  of  this  great  argument.  Ah  me  !  Ah  me !  Who  among  the 
sons  of  men  could  fitly  tell  you  of  his  unknown  agonies,  his  piercing 
anguish,  his  distraction  and  heart-break  ?  Who  can  fully  interpret  that 
awful  cry  of  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachthani  ?  My  God,  my  God,  why^ 
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "  Alone  I  can  hide  my  face  and  bow  my 
head  ;  but  here  what  can  I  do  ?     0  Lord,  what  can  thy  servant  do  ? 

"  Words  are  but  air,  and  tongues  but  clay, 
And  thj  compassions  are  divine." 

I  cannot  tell  of  love's  bieediog,  love's  agony,  love's  death  !  If  thfr 
Holy  Ghost  will  graciously  come  at  this  time,  and  put  me  and  my  words 
altogether  aside,  and  set  my  Lord  before  you,  evidently  crucified  among 
you,  then  shall  I  be  content,  and  you  will  go  home  thoughtful,  tender, 
hating  sin,  and  therefore  more  deeply  happy,  more  serenely  glad  than 
ever  before.    The  Lord  grant  ic  for  his  name's  sake !   Amen. 


Portion  of  Scripture  read  before  Sermon — Zechariah  xi.  3 ;  xii. 


Hymns  from  "Our  Own  Hymn  Book"— 296.  284,  290. 


^''fceton  Thee 


I'J'^n'-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01099  3071 


Date  Due 


/r< 


Ffk-i> 


'm^ 


*  1995 


"im 


7 


m.^ 


""'*^lM*i,sM.!it5ynK«##^ 


,^fl|^Ute^^XM. 


Fiif  P'licr^ 


jUN  2i  '?^' 


