nde oe 


Hoh 
mah 


ic 


* 


Say soos 


‘ 
aN) \s 


SN 
Ake 


% ee 
a | 


ih 


‘e 


oY ‘ 
ihe 


nv 


oo 


; 
<j 


= Seer 
Sr! rier e gee eee = 


a ee 


Sos 
Leone 


ae 


aes 
= Pua 
ae 


che Ohealogicas Sem 


Ayonr'd ut 


PRINCETON, N. J. 


Robinson, Ezekiel Gilman, 
1815-1894. 
Christian theology 


ep ee XS 


CHRISTIAN ‘THEOLOGY 


NANG 


EZEKIEL GILMAN ROBINSON, D.D., LL. D. 


President and Professor of Theology in the Rochester Theological 
Seminary, and tater, President of Brown University and 
Professor of Ethics in the University of Chicago 


ROCHESTER, N. Y. 
PRESS OF E. R. ANDREWS, 1 AQUEDUCT ST. 


& 


PREEA OE: 


EZEKIEL GILMAN ROBINSON was born at Attleborough, Mass., 
March 23, 1815, and died in Boston, June 13, 1894. He was grad- 
uated at Brown University in 1838, and took his Theological 
course at Newton, Mass. His honorary degrees were conferred by 
Brown and Harvard. He was Professor of Theology in the Roch- 
ester Theological Seminary from 1853 to 1872, and President of 
Brown University from 1872 until 1889. During his last year of 
instruction at Rochester, 1871-72, he revised and printed three 
hundred and twenty pages of his ‘‘ Christian Theology.” The 
book was not originally designed for publication; but was printed 
for the use of students in theology at their earnest solicitation. 

After Dr. Robinson became President of Brown University it was 
hoped that he would complete and give to the public his ‘‘ Christian 
Theology.” But on account of his long continued and absorbing 
duties at Brown, the revision of the ‘‘ Christian Theology ” remained 
until the author’s death incomplete and precisely as it was left when 
Dr. Robinson removed from Rochester to Providence, in 1872. 
There have been repeated requests that the work, in some practica- 
ble form, be given to the public. In deference to that expression, 
and to the opinion of several of Dr. Robinson’s former pupils whose 
judgment is entitled to consideration, three hundred copies have 
been prepared for distribution. 

The entire) edition comprises considerably less than four hun- 
dred copies, including the hitherto incomplete copies which were ori- 
ginally used by two classes of students. With the exception of pages 
81-96, pp. 161-176 and pp. 305-320 which are reprinted almost 
without change, the first 320 pages are the identical sheets which 
were printed in 1872. The additional pages are now printed for 
the first time. They contain most of the section on Regeneration, 


IV. _ PREFACE. ) 


the sections on Repentance and Faith, Sanctification, and Eschatol- 
ogy. This portion of the book has been prepared by a comparison 
of manuscript notes taken by students during the later years of Dr. 
Robinson’s theological instruction. It is believed that these addi- 
tional pages faithfully represent the views of the author, and give 
to the book a measure of completeness and value which it would 
not have were they omitted. An Appendix contains the Inaugural 
Address on Experimental Theology, delivered at Rochester, July, 
1853. The Index has been prepared by the Rev. Robert Kerr 
Eccles, M. D., of Salem, Ohio, and the list of Corrigenda, at the 
close of the volume, by Alfred G. Langley, A. M., of Newport, R. I. 

The treatment of Eschatology may appear somewhat disappoint- 
ing on account of its brevity and the want of reference to phases of 
the subject which have recently received special attention in this 
country. But it must be distinctly remembered that these sections 
were written more than twenty years ago. ‘The only present alter- 
native is to print what is here given or to print nothing on these | 
themes. Manifestly no hand has now the right, fof the sake of 
amplification or symmetry, essentially to change or to enlarge what 
Dr. Robinson is known to have taught his last classes in theology. 
Had he revised these brief notes on Eschatology, probably he would 
have expressed his views more fully, yet undoubtedly with great 
caution and with pronounced deference to the declarations of Script- 
ure. ‘lhe main positions of this portion of the book are significantly 
accordant with the preceding views of the holiness of God, the fact 
and turpitude of human sin, and the immutability of moral law. 
For that reason, if for no other, notwithstanding their brevity, the 
insertion of the sections on Eschatology seems fully justified. 

It is not expected that Dr. Robinson’s former pupils will fully 
agree with all the statements of this volume. He would not expect, 
perhaps would not wish, such a result. But if these pages serve to 
quicken into fll and just realization that personal gratitude of 
which his students are conscious; and if mature men are led to recog- 


nize anew and with full appreciation the source to which they owe 


PREFACE. Vv. 


“a most potent influence in their mental and spiritual growth, the 
book may be more useful than if it were a ‘‘standard ” of belief. 

Those who were unacquainted with Dr. Robinson’s personality 
-and methods of instruction should understand that, however they 
may value this book, the printed page can only imperfectly indi- 
-cate the power of the living teacher or yield the satisfaction with 
which his instruction was received. 

This ‘* Christian Theology” and the prolonged but now finished 
-service of its author, as a religious teacher, take their proper place 
-in the history of theological thought and instruction in America. 


BerOSERuR: 
Rochester, N. Y., Nov. 1, 1894. 


CHAO ATP Owe 


10. 
iL 2 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
Bie 
18. 
19. 
20. 
‘21. 


22. 
24. 
‘20. 
- 26. 

27. 
28. 


CONTENTS. 


PSO AG OMEN seats oe sitet a eats ee oe a Belo red Oo HEV 
Pare LeEOMm CONTENTS 2c... bastede oo. ba ee an ee LE Ass VII-VIII 
INTRODUCTORY, 1-45 
RNASE Ley PICU TL OM mer tte 1S A) PAs 8 erly ye I A 8 ee 1-2 
ANU MLR TR o eae Bot de Salli 8 o> 3 St USNR AEN AS Soe en cai Bee pn Se ee ele Oa a 3-7 
JS WISE a Seal 2 dle RUMI, Nis Min ae Oe me ea 7-17 
ASS GARAGES 0 oN Ne ir a le oe aA EAT a 17-20 
Pee ERATION Sar, eee oe ale ed a oleae Bh IRS eh ied 20-22 
OLAS PETAL 5) lege ed A oe AA SI eS, eA Dee a a 22-24 
PSECU HS ENG) UU Ys toe 8 ee SR ee RR) A ee 24-26 
RUNG LCT RA teee emcee) Sy tS) OY Se Se hs Ee 27-32 
Choe Te Ey Silly A iTS SIRS GM aCe tye RD kt A a 33-45 
DOCTRINE OF GOD, 46-115. 
PROOns OUNGOD Ss UeXISTENCE, 22-0 occ uen loll tees 46-58 
ORIGIN OF OUR CONCEPTIONS OF GOD,-..__-..---..---.------- 58-61 
Tem AT VOR COI ot Ua hae te a bee ee oe 61-63 
tyro OD ath. tne es 2 se eo ke ee es ee 64-66 
ATTRIBUTES OF GoD AND His ESSENTIAL BEING, ___.---_---- 67-69 
Mem n ee TER OG COD dt . e ine. shun eh ee ao eae ae ae 70-82 
THe ETERNAL PURPOSES OR DECREES OF GOD,----..----------- 83-87 
(LO SIS ct oR aE Sm ae ot Pete apms fA E ae FN eam oes 5 al 88-92 
Pw ieAUsH OF THEI OCREATION, .Used ose 2 eal eo a 25S 93-95 
CONSERVATION AND GOVERNMENT: SPECIAL PROVIDENCE, -.-..- 95-108 
OP ORCS 0 SSO a tr 0 Ae a Pena as See Rr tae Ryn 103-109 
J TE SES, ole a Sh as ee eee ee REAM) pee Se ANP ent? ee en Bp ee 109-115 
ANTHROPOLOGY, 116-178. 
CREATION AND: First EstaTE oF MAN,.--------- pee E Lae Mee Ae te 116-122 
erm re H sy NEA Ny 8... at. ee me ee ee a oe 122-128 
CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL; OR MAN AS HE NOW IS, ---------- 128-137 
pre ee gee oe SS or) oo I I Sia ae ee Sok 187-145 
OP TOT COPA SS SE a 2 ee CR eR ai eat 2 a, a ap a elope pie 145-149 
CONFLICTING VIEWS OF ORIGINAL SIN, .-..---.---.---------- 149-164 
SP eIMATLOM LOR. INEANTS ice ose Sone Cee ae ea eed ales 164-169 


VIII. ' CONTENTS. 


29. 
30. 


dl. 
32. 
33, 
34, 
30. 


53) 


37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42, 
43. 
44, 
45, 
46. 
AT. 
48. 
49, 
50. 
51. 


52." 
53. 
4. 
55. 
56. 
57. 


ORIGIN ‘OFTHE SOUL Arce cee ee es ee ee ee MONT, 169-173° 
INABILITY) AND: RESPONSI BILIDY: sot oso eee en ee eee 173-178 - 
SOTERIOLOGY, 179-843. 
ORIGIN AND NATURE OF THE PLAN OF, SALVATION, -_....---- 179-180 
PREPARATION FOR THE COMING OF CHRIST,._...----.---.---- 180-185. 
PEO A TA Wie Se eet a ee)! Geen ee 186-196. 
THE PERSON OF JESUS CHRIST,-_-_-_-- PRE Ota eers bineeOe eK, mE CS." 196-197 
THe Human NATURE OF CHRIST, ----- i ial. Ee re Tail oe ate ae 197 
Tat (DIVINITY Of (CHRIST tote be ouedice Sek ny oe ey seb. Sane eee 198-211 
Tan Two (NATURESVOE 4) BSUSIC HRICT cee ee ee 212-221 
Tue Two STATES oF CHRIST ae eo tie oo) See Pa ees 221-229» 
Pe ORY SPIRE FD Gime ere eae. 2 bt coe td eee 229-234 
Der PRINTER eee ee a Ee ane ae 234-252: 
THe ORPICHS \OR KOH RIST Sati ong) Oe ee 252-255 
THE. ATONEMENT! ut ees i eT A 255-287 
NECESSITY OF THEVA TONEMENT,” Ooi UCU OM See ee 288-291 
REQUISITES IN THE ATONEMENT, -_--.-.- eR le see Ae ev ey eae 291-295 
EXTENT OF THE (ATONEMENT,.col bo uo ee Ae ae 295-296. 
J UBTERTOATION: le 6 ae hs Ae aa ieee eo hh ere ne 297-807 
CxIMING AND, FURCTION Meteo cl fae Se ee Ges eee 308-317 
REGENERATION, : Soe s Oe A Oe ata sg een ee te ee 317-827 
REPENTANCE AND SAITH 0 2 OU ho eo, a 3827-3839" 
DANOTEPICATT ON dianagian: 5 Sat ier ewe due ee pas Mepind papeareer yi 8 6) 340-342 
THE) KINGDOM OF OHRIBT,. Jano a Se ee ie ee 342-3438. 
ESCHATOLOGY, 344-352. 
DocTRINE OF Last THINGS DEPENDENT UPON REVELATION, -- - 344- 
DEATH AND THE STATE OF THE SOUL IMMEDIATELY AFTER DEATH, 344-847 
THE FINAL PERSONAL COMING OF CHRIST,.....--.2--.22.---- 347-348. 
TH RESURRECTIONS 2 100" Gost Pee core ee ee or 348-349 
PHEALAST: JUDGMENT, (or oe) a ee Re a 3849-350» 
FINAL STATE OF THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE WICKED,..--..-.-- 300-3852 
UN 3155 4 FSA BERT URI DUES 7 Wie MRIS ACs. hud OS SES eee 353-367 
TN Dae iets ek PRs See So, anh ee eg tan ree eG fot e e 369-381 
GORRIGENDA "ooo lave ds oe ek ee et 


CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY. 


INTRODUCTORY. 


$ 1—lLdea and Definition. 


Theology, strictly speaking, is the science which treats 
of God. The term, having varied in comprehensiveness at 
different periods, is now used to denote the science! which 
treats of both God and man as moral beings, and of their 
mutual relations. Christian Theology’ treats of these sub- 
jects according to the teachings of the Christian religion. 

Theology is thus commensurate in its range of meaning 
with religion; and the two are also otherwise closely 
related. Religion is the rendering to God of the service 
and worship supposed to be due and acceptable to him—is 
a distinct and determinate life in relation to God; and 
whether regarded subjectively as spirit and life, or objec- 


1. Any objection that can be valid against the right of Theology to be calleda 
Science, must be equally available against a Science of Mind, of Ethics, of Eco- 
nomics, or, in fact, of any species of knowledge not reducible to the formulas of 
numbers and dimensions. But if the word science denotes classification and 
systematic arrangement of what is actually known in respect to any given sub- 
ject, then Christian Theology is entitled to be calleda science. ‘‘ A science isa 
complement of cognitions, having, in point of form, the character of logical per- 
fection; in point of matter, the character of real truth.”—Sir Wm. Hamilton’s 
Lectures on Logic, lec. 24, {| uxxx. 

2. Theology may be specifically entitled, Biblical, Systematic, Dogmatic, Scien- 
tific, Polemic, or otherwise, according to its special aim; but a truly Christian 
Theology would seem to demand, at this day, a treatment, which to some extent 
at least, should partake of all the characteristics implied in these several titles. 


y DEFINITION. 


tively as form and phenomena, is man’s convictions’ re- 
vealing themselves, in self-consciousness or to outward 
observation, as vital and determinative force. The convic- 
tions themselves are explicable, only by taking into account 
a two-fold consciousness of dependence and obligation, by 
recognizing the double and correlative existence of a con- 
stitutional susceptibility for divine things, and those phe- 
nomena and traditions which man regards as authoritative 
communications of divine thought and will. Without 
recognition of this divine thought and will, there can be no 
religion. Theology treats of the truths or principles which 
Religion thus implies, embodies or involves. Theology, 
therefore, has to do with religion, objectively considered, 
very much as Geology has todo with the earth’s crust; and 
with Religion subjectively considered, very much as Phys- 
iology has to do with the hidden principle of life. The 
Christian theologian, as such, while critically attentive to — 
all religions, is strictly concerned with the principles and 
doctrines of the Christian religion alone, or with the convic- 
tions embosomed in the Christian consciousness, resolved 
into formulas in the creeds of the church, and referable to 
a formal Revelation, which has been authenticated as 
authoritative and divine. 


1. Schleiermacher’s well known definition of religion as “ feeling of absolute 
dependence” assumes that this feeling is immediate and uncaused in the soul, 
andis not the invariable correlative of thought. The followers of Schleiermacher, 
known as the ‘‘mediating” school, have so modified his definition, as to recog- 
nise the office of truth. Nitzsch,a fair representative of the school, says: ‘*‘ Reli- 
gion is an active and passive relation of the finite consciousness to the Creator, 
Upholder and Ruler.”—Note2, §6, Christ. Lehre ; (trans. Clark’s Yor. Theol. 
Iib.) As representative of the opponents of the above definitions, see Lechler, 
Theo. Stud.und Krit., 1851, pp. 755-825, who says pp. 786 and 788: ‘* Religion 
is a divine act, is God’s well-considered and predetermined revelation of himself 
in humanity,”’—‘‘is the fellowship established of God between himself and 
humanity.” See an abridged translation of Lechler’s article in Bid. Sac., April, 
1852.—Ebrard, Dogmatik, vol. p. 18. Comp. Kant, Meta physic of Hthies, trans. 
by Semple, p. 247. On the derivation of the word Religion, comp. Cicero de 
Nat. Deo. 11: 28, with Lactantius, Znst. Div., 4: 28. On the whole subject 
of Religion, Nitzsch, Ch. Lehre, §§ 6-21.—Herzog, Realencycl., arts. ‘* Ab- 
hangigkeitsgefuhl ” and ‘* Religion.” 


SOURCES. 3 


S$ 2— Sources. 


These may be divided into direct or original, indirect or 
collateral, tributary or auxiliary. 

1. Christianity is distinctively a Revealed Religion. 
Christian Theology, therefore, has to do with revealed truth, 
and its one direct and controlling source, to which the deci- 
Sive appeal must always be made, is the Sacred Scriptures. 
No doctrine is to be received which is unwarranted by their 
teachings. But the Author of the Scriptures was also the 
prior author of man, and of the world in which man lives. 
And the Scriptures presuppose a certain amount of reli- 
gious knowledge to be already in the possession of man,— 
Acts, 17: 19. He is so constituted, intellectually and 
morally, and so surrounded by objects which spring from 
the divine mind and embody divine thoughts, that he can- 
not but have some knowledge of God and his will,—Rom., 
1: 18-20; and this knowledge, so far as it is positive and 
indubitable, cannot but be authoritative. 

2. All other Sciences, therefore, whether mental, moral or 
physical, so far as their teachings relate to the same subjects 
as those of the Bible, must be an indirect source’ of Theol- 
ogy collateral with the Bible. It is not the province of 
these sciences to teach the distinctive truths of Christian 
Theology; they can give no satisfactory answer to ques- 
tions of first cause or of final cause; they know nothing 
of supernatural methods and aims—of a salvation through 
the interposition of a Divine Redeemer; their sphere is 
restricted to the observable processes of Nature; but in 
their explanation of these processes, they have spoken so 


1., These may be regarded as mere HELPS in understanding the one exclusive 
source, the Bible. See Am. Theo. Rev., vol. 1, pp. 115-119. But a help which 
so far proves a master as to compel the discontinuance of interpretations that 
have existed for centuries, and to put meanings into the words of the Bible not 
before thought of, must be regarded, however ancillary its position, as having 
some kind of authority and some kind of right to speak in its own name. See 
Essay 11, ‘‘ Revelation and Science,” in The Church and the World, for 1866. 
—Wiseman’s Lectures on Science and: Revealed Religion.—Baden Powell on 
the Order of Nature. 


4 SOURCES. 


explicitly as to have dictated a change from the former inter- 
pretation of various parts of the Scriptures, and thus to have 
established their claim to be regarded as an indirect, though 
so far as their teachings extend, an authoritative, source of 
Theology. | 

3. Thus Theology has been a progressive science. Its 
principles have been formulated along centuries of conflict, 
and its formulas have been collected into gradually widen- 
ing creeds, confessions and systems. Parallel with the 
growth of these, and as a reflex of their changes, have been 
the types of piety into which the beliefs of the church have 
been crystallized. Within these creeds, confessions, sys- 
tems and types of piety, the Divine Spirit, the formative 
force of Christianity, has garnered the thoughts which the 
Church has gathered from the Bible ; and through these, as 
an organic and indivisible whole, the doctrines of the Chris- 
tian Church, amid endless discussions and controversies, 
have become what we now denominate Christian Theology. 
The Theology of to-day is the growth of all the centuries 
since the beginning of the Christian era’. As auxiliary or 
tributary sources, therefore, of which use must be made in 
constructing a system of Theology, may be mentioned : 
» (1.) The History of Doctrines. (a.) Their genesis in the 
facts of the Gospels and the teachings of the Apostles, 
including the process of their successive recognition and 
enunciation at various periods in the history of the chureh. 
No doctrine can be fully understood or intelligently held, 
the historical origin of which is not understood. (6.) The 
process of their growth or development, including the con- 
troversies elicited, and the methods of philosophy applied 
to the discussion of them. A strong light is thus often 
thrown on the phases of special doctrines and on the texts 
cited in their support. (c.) The relative position of doc- 


1. itis Theology, and not, as rationalists assume, Revelation, that has been pro- 
gressive ; and the manifest errors of J. H. Newman’s theory of Development are, 
that the ‘‘idea” to be developed, ‘‘is not in the sacred text, but in the mind of 
the reader,” and that the development must be by the ‘‘ developing authority ” of 
‘*the Holy See.” See his Assay on the Development of Christian Doctrine. 
Compare chh. 1 and 2. 


~ 


SOURCES. 9) 


trines at different periods, one doctrine being elevated at 
one time to the depression of another, which, in a succeed- 
ing age, itself becomes conspicuous. Some acquaintance 
with these alternations in the theological scale is indispen- 
sable to him who would preserve himselffrom distorted views. 

(2.) The Types of Piety, the special manifestations of the 
practical spirit of Christianity, at strongly marked periods 
of its history. These types, products of doctrines, single 
or combined, furnish in themselves practical tests both of 
the truth of the doctrines they represent and of the relative 
position these should occupy in a doctrinal system. 

(3.) The different Schools of Theology in our own day and 


y . : ° ° 
their various methods. Every age has its special methods, no 


one of which is faultless, and its prevailing systems, no one of 
which contains all truth, or is wholly devoid of truth; and 
since every theologian will have his special method and sys- 
tem, it becomes indispensable ti.at he constantly guard himself 
against narrowness and prejudice, by employing such tests 
and analyses as will enable him to detect in contemporary 
methods and systems, the truth under allits various guises. 
Without intelligent consultation of this source, onesidedness 
is almost inevitable. There is always danger of finding in the 
Bible whatever our method prompts, or our sect maintains. 

These tributary sources, brought under a single designa- 
tion, may not inappropriately be denominated the Church. 
The dissociation of the Bible and the Church, as conjoint 
sources of Theology, and the array of these as antagonistic 
in authority, has been the natural result of the Romanist 
and Protestant controversy about the true theory of the 
Church. To the Romanist, the Church—by which he 
means the hierarchy—not only preceded the Bible in time 
and produced it, but is superior to it in authority’; even 
the canons and the rubrics are set practically above it. 
To the ultra Protestant, the Bible—by which he means his — 


1. The ‘‘fontes” of Theology, according to Cardinal Perrone, inhis Prelectiones 
Theologice Proleg., v. 1, p. 16, should vary according to the aim of the theologian- 
When dealing with Jews, we should draw ‘‘ex vetere Testamento atque auctori. 
tatibus, quas ipsi non respuunt ;” when with Protestants and heretics, ‘‘ex sacris 


6 SOURCES. 


interpretation of it—was not only anterior in origin to the 
Church, but is superior to it in authority, while the Church, 
which to him is only an assemblage of individuals, can 
never give to her utterances any greater weight of authority 
than that which attaches to individual opinions’. But the 
Church and the Scriptures are authorities which can never 
be justly or safely divided’. The old question of the priority 
of their origin, answer it as we may, can never determine 
the question of their relative authority; for though the 
Christian Church was founded upon the recognized author- 
ity of the Old Testament Scriptures, Matt., 5: 17, 19. Luke, 
16: 17) “John, 2% 22.) Acts, 20° 14-40) .72\Piin. Shai aes 
2 Pet., 1; 19; yet the Church must have originated before 
the writing of any portion of the New Testament, and must 
also have been built on the unwritten teachings of the New 
Testament Apostles and Prophets ; and only as the Church 
has studied and obeyed the written teachings of both Tes- 
taments, has she proved herself to be the Church of the liv- 
ing God. Without the Scriptures of both Testaments, the 
‘Church has no accredited or infallible guide for herself, 
or authority for her teachings; and without the Church, the 
Scriptures have no visible, trustworthy expounder of their 
meaning, 1 Tim., 3: 14,15. [The forced Protestant con- 


litteris universim sumptis ;” when with those ‘‘ quise Catholicos profitentur—ex 
Romanorum Pontificorum constitutionibus atque Conciliorum presertim cecu- 
menicorum decretis, ex recepta in Ecclesia Catholica ‘doctrina et Patrum 
auctoritate.” 

1. ‘‘ Ecclesia docet quod credidit non quod novit,” Augustine, Works, v. 5, Migne 
ed., pt. 2, p. 1618. Onthe Romanist side: see Perrone, 7’heoi., props. 1-12, vol. 1; 
Mohler, Symbolism, pt. 1, c. 5. On the Protestant side: see Nitzsch, Prot. Beant- 
wortung ad. Symb. von Moehler. For extreme or rationalistic Protestant views, see 
Schenkel, Das Wesen d. Protestant. Comp. his Dogmatik vom Standpunkte des 
Gewissen. See also a critique on Schenkel by DeWette in Theol. St. u. Krit., 
heft 1, 1848; and in the same, h. 1, 1854, a letter to Schenkel by Hagenbach. 

2. What may be the conception of the relation of these autborities, on the part 
of those who reiterate the ‘‘absolute and final authority of the Bible,” and yet 
bind themselves to abide, as theological teachers, by the meaning of the ‘‘stand- 
ards” of their ‘‘church,” it may be difficult to determine. Which is ‘‘ final” in 
such a case, the Bible or the ‘‘ standard?” Was the Westminster Assembly of 
divines, for instance, so gifted with insight as to determine for a finality the 
meaning of Scripture, and have the past two hundred years thrown no addi- 
tional light on its pages ? 


RELATIONS. °° 7 


struction of this passage by Connybeare and Howson, hap- 
piuly is not sustained by the great majority of either the 
most ancient or the most modern expositors. That the 
phrase ‘‘ pillar and ground of the truth’? must be in appo- 
sition to the phrase ‘‘church of the living God,’ would 
seem hardly to admit of a doubt. See Meyer in loco.| The 
Church neglecting or setting aside the authority of the Scrip- 
tures, has always plunged into fanaticism or superstition ; 
and Scripture, read in contempt of the views of the genera- 
tions of believers who have studied its meaning and repro- 
duced itin their lives, has always been made to teach another 
gospel than that of Christ, and ‘in due time has been reduced 
to the level ofany other ancient and by-gone literature. 


$ 3— Relations. 


These are numerous, extending to almost every depart- 
ment of human knowledge; complex, the subjects related 
being as closely interlaced as are the various forces which 
God employs in the world ; and interdependent, inasmuch 
as the Divine mind and will, represented by Theology, 
stand at the center of all knowledge and forces, giving 
unity of meaning to the one and of operation to the other. 
To sketch even the most obvious of these relations requires 
careful discrimination. We can here instance those only 
to which the student of Theology will do well to give 
special heed. 

1. To the Theologies and Mythologies of other religions, in 
’ which the nations have blindly groped their way after the 
true God and atrue Theology. (a.) To Hinduism, (Veda- 
ism, Brahmanism, Buddhism,) with its monotheism, incar- 
nations and trinities, and its primeval and fallen man’. 


1. See Colebrooke, Hssays on the Religion and Philosophy of the Hindus.— 
Hardwick’s Christ and other Masters, vol. 1, pt. 11, chh. 1-4.—Max Muller’s 
Chips, vol. 1.—Rowland Williams, Christianity and Hinduism.—Dorner’s 
Hist. of the Doctrine of the Person of Christ, vol. 1, Intro, 


8 RELATIONS. 


(6.) To the religion of ancient Egypt, with its circumcision, 
sacrifices, priests and temples, and itsimmortality of the soul’. 
(c.) To Zoroastrianism, with its angelology and its resur- 
rection’. (d.) To the polytheisms of various religions, with 
their deifications of nature and apotheoses of heroes and 
social benefactors*. Due attention to this relation will not 
only give us clearer conceptions and more sharply defined 
statements of Christian doctrine, but show the immeasur- 


able superiority of the doctrines of Christianity over those 
of other religions". 


2. To Natural Theology, or to that knowledge of God 
which may be supposed to be derived from the study of 
nature alone. How shall this relation be regarded by us ? 
Shall we first treat of natural theology as a distinct science 
which shall serve as the basis’ of our revealed theology, or 
shall we combine the two under one general title of Chris- 
tian Theology, drawing our materials alike, from revelation, 


1. See Wilkinson’s Ancient Haoyptians.—Bunsen’s Hgypt’s Place in Univ. 
Hist., vols. 1 and 4.—Hardwick’s Christ and other Masters, vol. 2, pt. 4, chh. 1. 
and 2.—Bib. Sac., Jan. 1868, art. 5. 

2. Max Muller’s Chips, vol. 2, ‘‘ The Zend-Avesta, and the Modern Parsis.”— 
Haug, Hssays on the Sac. Lang., Writings and Religion of the Parsses : also, 
Am. Theo. Rev., April ’63, art. 5.—Hardwick, Christ and other Masters, vol. 
2, pt. 4, chh. 3 and 4. ; 

3. Max Muller’s Chips, vol. 2, ‘‘ Comparative Mythology.” —Herzog, Realency, 
art. “ Polytheismus.” 

4. See F. D. Maurice, Religions of the World. The materials that may be 
derived from a consideration of this relation would enable us also to vindicate 
Christianity against the insinuation, and sometimes direct assertion, of its indebt- 
edness to Gentile sources. The new Science of Comparative Religion now 
makes the comparison possible, and will soon render it necessary. See J. F. 
Clarke, Ten Great Religions. 

5. In an elaborate articleon Natural Theology in the Bid. Sac., vol. 3, pp. 276, 
277, we read: ‘‘It forms the basis on which the written revelation 1ests,”’—“ the 
revealed system must be founded on natural theology.” Dr. Chalmers, in his 
Nat. Theol., vol. 2, Am. ed., pp. 298, 299, says: ‘‘ Natural theology is quite 
overrated by those who would represent it as the foundation of the edifice.” 
‘*Christianity rests on its own proper basis; and if instead of this, she is made 
to rest on an antecedent natural religion, she becomes weak throughout, because 
weak radically.” Comp. vol. 1, p. 177. Dr. Chalmers, however, is not quite 
consistent with himself, for his Nat. Theo. is a foundation on which his Jnsti- 
tutes of (Revealed) Theology unquestionably rests, and all the more for the ana- 
lytical method which he has adopted, and so earnestly advocated. 


RELATIONS. d 


and from every avenue of nature which revelation and 
Science may together open to us. The latter method seems 
preferable, and for the following reasons : 

(1.) Both Testaments of the Scriptures appeal to the 
teaching of nature as cognizable to all men, and as pro- 
ceeding from the same Will with their supernatural 
declarations. This teaching they incorporate with their 
own, combining the two into one harmonious whole. Job, 
passim ; Ps., 8 and Ps., 19: 1-6, compare Ro., 10:18. Matt., 
5:45, 16: 3. Luke, 12: 24, 18: 2-5. Acts, 17: 24-29. Ro., 
1: 18-21, 2: 14-15. Heb., 3: 4. What the Scriptures thus 
unite we should not divorce. 

y (2.) To separate Natural Theology from Revealed is un- 
scientific ; they both treat of the same Being, whose will, how- 
ever various his methods, 1s one and immutably the same. 
It is unscientific to distribute our knowledge of this Being 
into kinds according to the sources from which it is de- 
rived, rather than according to some principle that shall 
giveit unityand harmony. If God speaks to us, it matters 
not through what channels so that we be sure the voice 
is his; to sum up his declarations according to their 
sources, is to run the risk of dividing against itself the 
_ authority of him who is one and indivisible. 

y (3.) We cannot in fact now construct a strictly Natural 

Theology. The office of the Bible as a supernatural revela- 
tion, is to interpret, to supplement and to complete, the prior 
revelation of nature. Inthe fulfillment of its office, the Bible 
has so completely irradiated every natural source of divine 
knowledge as to leave it quite impossible for us to dis- 
tinguish between the knowledge which is natural in its origin 
and that which is supernatural. Even Plato and Plutarch, 
Cicero and Seneca, could not escape the traditions and 
mythologies of their nations and times, and escape now 
from the influence of Christianity must be proportionately 
as much more difficult as Christianity is more philosophical 
and conformable to nature than were the religions of Greece 
and Rome. Every modern work on natural theology shows 
its indebtedness to Christianity. No amount of science 


10 RELATIONS. 


could have produced the Bridgewater Treatises, or Dr. 
Chalmers’ two volumes on natural theology, without the 
light that shines from the New Testament. The Leibnitz- 
Wolfian philosophy attempted to construct a system by 
strict demonstration, independently of revelation, and the 
result, as Hase (Ch. Hist., $410) admits, ‘‘was a Natural 
Theology whose essential principles were derived from the 
Christian system.”’ 


(4.) The attempt to distinguish between Natural and 
Revealed Theology, remanding each as it does to an inde- 
pendent and clearly definable domain, has led in the past - 
to no inconsiderable mischief. And the result has been the 
same, whether the attempt has been made by those who 
would exalt the Bible at the expense of nature, or by those 
who would exalt nature at the expense of the Bible. It has 
led, (a.) to unsupported theories of God’s relation to the 
natural world ; (6.) to unauthorised definitions of miracles 
as violations or suspensions of the laws of nature ; (@.) to 
unnatural and repulsive types of piety, which have sprung 
from a violation of the natural laws of personal being in obe- 
dience to supposed supernatural requirements, and have 
resulted in caricatures, rather than in realizations, of the 
ideal man typified in Christ; and (d.), in no small degree, 
to German Rationalism, which had its formal origin in a 
reaction against the separation of revelation from nature by 
abrupt and impassable chasms, but which sprung, in reality, 
from the Leibnitz-Wolfian philosophy'—a philosophy that 
aspired to demonstrate, on the principles of exact science, 
a natural theology, on which revealed theology could rest as 
on an immutable foundation—and which, as the comple- 
tion of its work, has claimed to have reduced all that was 


1. It is worthy of note, though for some reason not recognized in histories of 
Rationalism, that Reimarus, who is very generally admitted to have been the 
author of the Wolfenbittel Fragments, was an adherent of this philosophy; and 
in the preface to his able treatise on natural theology, (Die Vornehmsten Wahr- 
heiten d. nat. relig.,) he sets forth that science as the ‘‘ foundation” without 
which ‘‘a slight shock would suffice to make faith and Christianity, and, in 
fact, all religion. totter and fall.” 


RELATIONS. . 11 


regarded as supernatural to the dreary and hopeless level 
of the natural. No inconsiderable portion of the argument 
for the independent treatment of natural theology is derived 
from an unwarranted extension of its domain. Within its 
precincts, it is quietly assumed, hes the science of Ethics, 
and all that can be said in behalf of the independence of the 
latter is forced to do service in support of the unauthorized 


claims of the former’. Deontology is not an integral part of 


> 
‘ 


theology, natural or revealed; whereas Ontology being 
esential and common to both, they should not be treated 
as independent sciences”. 

3. To Ethics, or the science of morals. Until after the 
middle of the 16th century, dogmatic theology was made to 


include ethics*, as an integral part of itself. From that: 


time to the present the question of their relation has been 


1. For an example of this kind of extension and argumentation, see the art. 
in Bib. Sac., vol. 3; cf. vol. 1, p. 744. 

2. On the relation of the Revealed to the Natural, see Bowen, Metaphysics 
and Hthics, pt. 2, ch. 10.—Chalmers, Vat. Theol., bk. 5, ch. 4. 

8. In 1577 Lambert Daneau, of the Reformed (Calvinist) church, took the first 
Stepstowards their separation, by publishing his Hthice Christiane libri tres, and 
in 1634, Geo. Calixtus, one of the most noted theologians of the Lutheran church, 
published a work entited Hpitome Theologie moralis, in which he not only dis- 
tinguished between theology as dogmatic and moral, but also between ethics 
or morals as theological and philosophical. Ethics thenceforward were recog- 
nized as an independent science, and theology began to be distributed under the 
two general titles of dogmaticand moral. Ethics were, thenceforward, also clear- 
ly distinguished as philosophical, or as Christian, according to the method of 
treatment—as philosophical when its principles were grounded in reason, and 
as Christian when derived from the teachings of Christ and his Apostles. 'The 
latter has been and still continues to be the prevailing German method. See 
Rothe, Theo. Hthik, Harless Uhristliche Hthik, (translation by Morrison in 
Clark’s For. Theo. Lib. )\—Wuttke, Handbuch d. chr. Sittenlehre.—Schimid, chr. 
Sittenlehre ; cf. art. Ethik, by Dorner, in Herzog, Realency. In English litera- 
ture, since the time of Hobbes, (see Sir Jas. Mackintosh, Progress of Hth. Phil.. 
&c.—Whewell, Lects. on Hist. of Moral Phil. in Eng.,) ethical principles have 
been made, except by a few such authors as Wardlaw aud Dymond, to rest on 
the authority of reason, that of Scripture being appealed to as corroborative 
rather than as fundamental. American writers on Ethics have followed the 
English. But any attempt now to distinguish between what is derived from 
reason alone, irradiated as it has been by the light of Christianity, and what 
from the Scriptures, is simply impossible. Cf. Neander, Geschicte d. chr. 
Hthik, 3, Einleitung. 


de RELATIONS, 


more or less discussed, though their right to independent 
treatment remains undisputed. But as many of their prin- 
ciples are derived from common sources', and as they aim 
directly at a common end, the welfare of man, it is impossi- 
ble that their domains should not impinge. 

Several methods of dealing with this relation are now 
possible: (a.) to imitate many Protestant theologians of 
the middle and latter half of the 17th century, who 
remanded all ethical questions to a Moral Theology which 
served as an appendix to their Dogmatic Theology ; or 
(6.) like many modern Germans to treat of Dogmatics 
and ‘‘Christian Ethics’? as codrdinate branches of a more 
comprehensive Systematic Theology ; or (e.) with Nitzsch, 
in his System der chr. Lehre, to distinguish between Dog- 
matics as the doctrines of the Churches’, and Christian doc- 
trine as the teaching of Scripture and superior to all formu- 
laries, and selecting the latter to show at each step the 
relation of faith to practice, and of doctrine to life; or (d.) 
to treat of Theology as wholly independent of Ethics, with 
which it isto be regarded as only casually connected by 
community of aim’, the former as working from above down- 
ward and from without inward, and the latter from beneath 
upward and from within outward ; or (e.) ike Dr. Alexan- 
der* of Princeton, and Dr. Chalmers’, to treat of Theology 
and Ethics as independent, but closely related, and mutu- 
ally helpful, sciences; or (7/.) like Dr. Taylor’ of New 
Haven, and Prof. Finney’, and all those American authors 
who in their systems attach so much importance to theories 
of the will, of moral agency, of natural ability, &c., to con- 


1. To attempt to distinguish between the sources of Theology and Ethics, by 
restricting the former to the formal teachings of an objective revelation and the 
latter to the affirmations of the subjective nature of man, is not only to contra- 
dict history and fact, but to remove the foundations of morality by severing it 
from religion. 

2. § 2-4. cf. Bretschneider, Dogmatik, vol. 1, § 5. 

3. See Hampden’s Bampton Lectures, lec. 6. 

4, See his Moral Science, specially the preface. 

5. Institutes of Theol., vol. 1, lec. 1.—Memoirs, vol. 2, pp. 218, 219. 

6. Compare his Moral Government with his Revealed Theol. 

Comp. the first half of his Systematic Theol. with the last half. 


— 


RELATIONS. Wwe 13 


struct a system of moral science, on which as a foundation, 
our theology is to be reared ; or finally, (g.) to treat of each 
ethical question, both theoretic and practical, only and 
always as it emerges in our theological enquiries, and 
always under the guidance of the Chistian Revelation. This 
last method would seem to be both natural and legitimate. 
A complete system of Theology necessarily brings us face 
to face, at particular points, with the questions which must 
be fundamental in any system of theoretic ethics, viz: the 
nature and office of conscience, the idea of law, the theory 
and nature of virtue, the nature and ground of moral obli- 
gation, &c. And as to practical ethics, if moral duties and 
moral character be the final aim of all true religious and 
theological investigation, there is no reason why our theo- 
logy, if it be, as it should, in the fullest sense biblical and 
christian, should not also, at every stage of its progress, take 
cognizance of those facts and laws of being which lie at the 
basis of practical morality, but a full discussion of which, 
with the wide subject of casuistry, belongs more especially 
to the science of Ethics’. 


, 4. To Metaphysical Philosophy. This has always been 
a close and perplexingly delicate relation. All attempts to 
sever it have been, and ever must be, in vain. Indeed, 
theology and metaphysics both deal, in many instances, 
with the same questions’, and each will necessarily con- 
tribute, as it always has done, more or less directly to the 
conclusions of the other. Many of the facts of conscious- 
ness also, with which Psychology, the main branch of mod- 
ern metaphysics, has to do, underlie some of the principal 
doctrines of Christianity*, and the theologian cannot ignore 
them even if he would. 

A metaphysical philosophy moreover is the necessary 
possession of all enlightened nations—is at once the product 


1. See Ebrard, Dogmatik, § 16. 

2. The well known ‘dictum of Sir William Hamilton, that ‘no difficulty 
emerges in Theology which has not previously emergedin Philosophy,” implies 
not only acertain community of domain, but also an inseparable alliance of office. 

3. cf. Porter, The Human Intellect, p. 14; also Bud. Sac., vol. 3, pp. 6838-4. 


14 RELATIONS. 


and measure of a nation’s intelligence. Being, in fact, the 
philosophy of the human mind, it very naturally becomes, 
in respect to related branches of knowledge, a method? ac- 
cording to which the study of these is prosecuted. A people’s 
metaphysics, therefore, necessarily must affect their theo- 
logy. Every doctrine of theology will be more or less colored _ 
by the philosophy through which it is contemplated. 

The real difficulty here, is to determine just how far our 
philosophy can aid us without misleading. The exact point 
where aid becomes dangerous, is not clearly perceivable. 
The most that can here be said is, that as the aid cannot be 
declined’, nor the influence escaped, we should be ever on 
our guard lest our Theology should anywhere substitute the 
suggestions of our Philosophy for the plain declarations of 
Scripture. Philosophy, asa method, may help explain the 
Scriptures—may aid in analysing and classifying their truths 
and facts, as well as in establishing their trustworthiness, 
but its aid must ever be regarded as that of a servant and 
never that of a master’. 

5. To the Natural Sciences. The demonstrable conclu- 
sions of a real science must certainly have a positive 
authority ; so must also the explicit declaration of the 

1. ‘“‘Theology—Christian theology is, asa human science, a philology and his- 
tory. applied by philosophy ; and the comparatively ineffectual character of our 
British theology has, for generations, in the case of England, mainly resulted 
from the deficiency of its philosophical element. The’want of a philosophical 
training in the Anglican clergy, to be regretted at all times, may soon, indeed, 
become lamentably apparent, were they called on to resist an invasion, now so 
likely, of certain foreign philosophico-theological opinions.” Sir Wm. Hamilton’s 
Phil. Discussions, Am. ed., app. 3, p. 714. Prophetic words, already fulfilled! 

2. The aversion of some good people to metaphysics in theology, may consist » 
with soundness of piety, but with neither breadth nor soundness of intelligence. 
Every man has just as much of metaphysics as, all things considered, he is capa- 
ble of, or in other words, as he has of mental discipline; the Aind or quality of 
his metaphysics, must depend, in part, on mental constitution, and, in part,on edu- - 
cational influences. No system of theology ever yet existed, no single treatise 
was ever yet made to embody an author’s view of Scripture teaching, which did 
not betray an underlying system of metaphysics. 

3. See Hagenbach, Hney. u. Methodologie d. theo. Wissenchaften, §§ 28-30.— 
Mansel, Limits of Relig. Thought.—McCosh, Intui. of the Mind, pt. 2, bk. 2, c. 5, 
sec. 5. —Vinet, Outlines of Philosophy, sec. 2.—Porter, The Human Intellect, c. 8. 


RELATIONS. an 15 


divine word. But these two authorities cannot clash. God 
cannot contradict in his word what he has already declared 
in his works. Many of the doctrines of the Bible, it is true, 
lie- altogether above and beyond the range of natural 
science, but none can be maintained that are unquestion- 
ably contrary to its indubitable teachings. There need be 
no timidity here, but there should. be caution. A true 
theology and a real science, must in the end be in harmony. 
But before we shape our theology, or seek to accommodate 
our interpretation of Scripture, to the demands of science, 
we may first justly demand that the claims of the science 
be established beyond dispute. We should ask no scien- 
tist to put on the trammels of theology, neither should the 
theologian consent to pay deference to the mere guesses of 
a science which is yet in its nonage. Our understanding of 
God’s word, must be our absolute and final authority, until 
our understanding of it, or the word itself, shall be shown 
to be demonstrably in error’. 

6. Tothe Science of Biblical Hermeneutics’. Itis the office 
of systematic theology, not only to summarize the interpre- 
tations of Scripture, but also to justify the interpretations 
which it adopts. In the exercise of this latter function, it 
should see, (a,) that due attention is paid to the distinction 
between literal language and metaphorical, and between 
the poetical, parabolic, historical and didactic portions of 
scripture; (.) that too much reliance is not placed on mere 
grammar, lexicography and wsus loguendi: but, (¢.) that 
due attention be given to the harmony of one part of Scrip- 
ture with another, and specially of each author with 
himself®. ; 


, 7. To Catechisms, Symbols or Creeds, and Comparative 
Dogmatics. The catechism is a popular summary of the 

1. See Tayler Lewis, The Sia Days of Creation ; Critique of the same by Prof. 
Dana in Bib. Sac., vol. 18, pp. 80-129 and 631-656.—G uizot, ‘‘ Faith and 
Science,” Kitto’s Jour. Sac. Lit., vol. 5. 

2. See Hagenbach, Theol. Hncy. u. Methodologie, §52.—Ernesti, Principles 
of Interp.—Fairbairn, Hermeneu. Manual. 

3. See Ellicott, in Aids of Faith, pp. 503-511. 


~~ 


16 RELATIONS. 


rudiments of theology, in the form of questions and 
answers, and is for scientific theology just what an elemen- 
tary treatise would be for any other science. A symbol or 
creed embodies the belief of a certain number of persons at 
a given time, and may have been assented to, or voluntarily 
adopted, more or less widely by others. All such symbols, 
which were mere compromises in their origin, bear unmis- 
takable evidence of the fierce struggles through which they 
passed in coming into being’, and of the skillful handiwork 
of the one or more who shaped them to the exigencies of 
theirday. They are valuable as indices, but worthless as 
authorities to him whose care is to know, not what a given 
people may have accepted as true, but what the Scriptures 
teach. The dogmatic treatises of individual authors may 
be of service, and should have weight with us, just in pro- 
portion to their manifest qualifications for trustworthy 
judgments of the meaning of Scripture. The selection of 
any one or more of these, of any given age or sect, or the 
adoption of any particular creed or confession as ultimate 
authority in theology, is simply preposterous and an offence 
against the authority of the word of God. Buta comparison 


1. This is not untrue of the so-called Apostolic creed, but is specially manifest 
in the Nicene, the misnamed Athanasian, and all the multitudinous confessions 
originated within the last 340 years. See Witsius, Hzercitationes in Symb. Apos. 
—Pearson, On The Creed.—Harvey, The Three Creeds.—Hase, Libri Symboliet. 
—Niemeyer, Callectio Confessionum.—Dean Stanley, Hist. of the Hastern Ch., 
and, on the Athanasian Creed, in Contemporary Rev., August, 1870. 

The origival designation of a summary of belief was always significant. It 
was a Creed, when the person or persons adopting it spoke freely, recognizing no 
authority but God; a Confession, when there was a power, civil or ecclesiastical, 
to which the party confessing was amenable, (Augsburg, Westminster, &c.); a 
Consensus, when certain parties had been induced to accept, in the given formula, 
what they had before dissented from, (Genevensis, Polonae; &c.); Articles, when 
a statement had been adopted by opposing parties as a kind of mutual compact 
of belief, (Smalcald, Church of England); Canons, when an ecclesiastical body 
declared by authority what should be believed, (Trent, Dort); Declaration, 
when a single church, in the exercise of its independenee, or an assembly of 
members of independent churches, made declaration of its belief, (Savoy and 
New Hamp. Bapt. Convention). On the word Symbol, see ctuBorov in Suicert 
Thesaurus. 'The more generic and more prevalent formulary, is expressive of 
the formulation of points of belief in the confession or creed. 


AIMS AND USES.  _ 14 


of the catechisms, creeds and theological systems of the 

‘various divisions and subdivisions of christendom, may be 
serviceable to discriminating minds.! 

y 8. To Practical Theology. This is the relation of science 
toart. Practical theology is scientific theology applied. 
The word practical, in this connection, has been used ina 
somewhat loose and indefinite sense, sometimes trenching 
in its breadth of meaning on the sphere of ethics or of 
practical religion, and sometimes limiting itself to the mere 
functions of the clergyman; but it may not unwarrantably 
be made to include, (@.) all instrumentalities employed in 
the origination of christian life, (Sunday-schools, catechet- 
ical instructions, exhortations, etc.) ;.(0.) whatever nurtures 

and cultivates christian life and builds up christian char- 
acter, (homiletical and liturgical service and pastoral visi- 
tation); and (¢.) church organization and government, 
whereby the whole body is made efficient, active, healthful 
and progressive. To all these varied forms of activity, 
systematic theology, as furnishing guiding principles, 
sustains an intimate and indissoluble relation.* 


+ oo 


S$4—Aims and Uses. 


The Idea, Sources and Relations of Christian Theology 
being as already described it evidently should aim: 

» 1. To ascertain the whole truth pertaining to God and 

“man as moral beings, and to their mutual relations. But 

as every other source has become fully intelligible only 

under the tuition of the written word of God, it follows that 


1. See Marheineke, Christi. Symbolik, and Institut. Symbolice, etc.; Moehler, 
Symbolik, (Eng. trans.,) and Baur, Gegensate des Cathol. u. Protest. : Koellner, 
Symbolik aller Christl. Confess. ; Schneckenburger, vergleichende Darstellung 
d. luther u. reform. Lehrbegriffs ; Winer, comp. Darstellug d. Lehre. d. 
verschied. Christl. Kirchenpartien. dritte ausg. 

2. See Hagenbach, Hncy. u. Methodologie, §§ 96-98; Bridges, The Christian 
Ministry ; Palmer, Homiletik ; Vinet, Pastoral Theol. ; Shedd, Homiletics and 
Past. Theol. ; Hoppin, Office and Work of the Christian Ministry ; etc. 


18 AIMS AND USES. 


the prominent aim of theology should be to ascertain by 
patient enquiry and by exact interpretation, the teachings 
of the sacred Scriptures. What it thus ascertains it should 
aim, | 

2. To classify and systematize. (a@.) All revealed truths 
or doctrines, relating to God and his purposes which are 
indivisibly one, must be interdependent, and when taken 
together constitute a harmonious whole; and to exhibit 
this whole each truth must be adjusted to its right position, 
every truth being one-sided or inexact in proportion to the 
mal-adjustment of its relations to others. (6.) Disciplined 
intellect always demands system and order, every mind 
being systematic and orderly in the classification of its pos- 
sessions according to the degree of its discipline. (¢c.) Each 
doctrine, as well as the totality of christian truth, becomes 
intelligible and thus available to both the theologian and 
the preacher, in proportion as each is contemplated in its 
true relation to all the others. | 

The deep-seated popular prejudice against systems of 
theology, is easily accounted for as the natural heritage of 
Protestantism. It was against the scholastic systems of 
theology, as well as against papal assumptions and priestly 
corruptions, that the reformers arrayed themselves. Scho- 
lasticism had enslaved medieval theology, and the appeal 
of the reformers was immediately and without qualification 
to the holy Scriptures. But a lapse from this method into 
rigid systemization in the 17th century was rapid and inevi- 
table, from which again a reaction led back the Protestant 
mind, not only to its original dislike ofall scholasticism, but 
to a settled and hereditary distrust of allsystems of theology". 

The tendency to a disregard of the systematic relations of 
truth in popular ministrations, both in the pulpit and by 


1. This distrust shews itself as positive hostility in many later Anglican 
writers. See Hssays and Reviews, specially essay I. Dean Stanley, Hssays. 
Herbert Spencer, First Principles. Hampden, Bampton Lectures, and Hey, 
Lectures on the Articles. On the other side, see Leon. Wood, Lectures, lec. 
8. Princeton Hssays, 2d series, essay 3. Garbett’s Bampton Lectures The Dog- 
matic Faith. 


AIMS AND USES. 19 


the press, has been, and still is, one of the noticeable signs 
of our time. Single truths are often wrenched from their 
connection with coordinate truths and treated as if in no 
way qualified by them. Special doctrines and consequently 
special duties, are thus often thrown out of their true posi- 
tion, and carried to the verge of positive error. Several 
causes contribute to strengthen and perpetuate the tendency, 
among which may be mentioned; undue reliance on mere 
philology in the interpretation of scripture, to the neglect of 
the analogy of scripture and the analogy of faith ; the 
intensely practical spirit of the age; the wide spread demand 
for social, political and religious reforms; and withal, the 
methods and claims of physical science, as contradistin- - 
guished from those of metaphysical philosophy. Against 
the mischief ofthis tendency one great safeguard may be found 
in a thoroughly biblical and systematic Christian Theology. 

3. Another aim should be, to ascertain by careful and 
searching analysis those distinctions between doctrines, and 
those shades of meaning in particular doctrines,’ without a 
recognition of which, there can be no scientific exactness, 
and consequently no trustworthy system. The lines that 
separate truth from error, are often very delicate, and some- 
times obscure. Gross and perc us errors Lee had their 
origin in a failure to discern them.’ 

Tn pursuance of this aim much may be learned from the 
Protestant scholastic theologians of the 17th century, and 
even from the Romanist schoolmen of the 12th and 13th 
centuries. Many of their distinctions were too refined and 
subtle to be true ; many now adopted are too crude and ill- 
defined to be just. 

Refinement of analysis is not as sometimes alleged a hin- 
drance to a successful proclamation of the truth. On the 


1. See Ellicott, Aids to Faith, pp. 503-511. 

2. Tributary to this, would be a critical examination of words and phrases 
used in the Septuagint and afterwards by the Apostles in their Epistles, and a 
careful scrutiny of the meaning of theological terms at different periods of the 
history of the Church. See Max. Mueller, Science of Language, vol. 2, pp. 526-580. 

3. ‘“‘Campbellism” for instance, and its doctrine of faith. 


20 LIMITATIONS. 


contrary, it is requisite not only to accuracy and depth of 
view, but to that clearness of perception and vividness of 
apprehension which are the first conditions to its effective 
presentation: It is accurate analysis also which alone can 
supply the variety, freshness, instructiveness and searching 
power in pulpit ministrations, so eagerly welcomed and so 
rarely exhibited. The general truths of Christianity are 
now so well understood that generalities are threadbare and 
common-place ; and novelties in the gospel must always be 
crudities. The special need of our timeis, not novel themes, . 
but that use of the inexhaustibie fullness of the old eternal 
truths which is made possible by the thorough analysis of a 
scientific and systematic theology. ; 

4. Theology should aim to indicate clearly the relation 
subsisting between the doctrines of Christianity and the 
Christian life. All real righteousness or true Christian life is 
referable to healthy emotions; these to intelligent convic- 
tions ; these again to conscious belief; and this, at last, to 
sound (hygienic, dye7<,) doctrine.’ 


S 5— Limitations. 


The desire in man for knowledge when once awakened, 
may become insatiable. The further the mind pushes its 
inquiries in a given direction, the more intense is its desire 
to proceed. And in most departments of knowledge no 
limits need be imposed on this desire. The physical limits 
in Natural Science may be gradually extended before a 
spirit of resolute and patient inquiry ; and evenin Psychol- 
ogy the facts of consciousness, subjected to new analyses, 
may be compelled to disclose more and more of their long 
kept secrets. Butin Theology there are unchangeable limits 
—hbarriers which no skill of man can pierce or surmount. 
Attempts to pass them have resulted, sometimes in gross 
crrors of doctrine and practice, and sometimes in a total 


1. See Chris. Rev., April, 1859; Am. Theol. Rev., Jan., ’59, art. 7. 


LIMITATIONS. 21 


disbelief of whatever escapes the test of sense. The limits 
le chiefly within the limitations of our own nature. 


1. To us as finite beings, infinite subjects are necessarily 
incomprehensible. Revelation tells us of the infinite God, 
of his eternal purposes, and of an eternal duration in the 
past ;* but any attempt to state exhaustively the contents of 
these thoughts, or to traverse the whole region they cover, 
is to cross limits beyond which thinking becomes a delusion 
and a snare.” 


2. As limited in our experience, many truths are incommu- 
nicable to us for lack of typical terms. There are modes of 
existence and personal relations brought to light in the Scrip- 
tures, for the judging of which finite minds have no experi- 
ential criteria, and for even the understanding of which they 
have no correlative Knowledge whence the omniscient Spirit 
in his revelation could draw metaphorical or typical forms 
of thought.? Of this class of truths are the doctrines of the 
Trinity, and of the two natures in the Person of Christ. 

3. As limited in our ratiocinative faculties, certain great 
coordinate truths, like those of divine sovereignty and 
human freedom, must remain inexplicably conjoined ; and 
any attempt to solve the mystery of their conjunction must 
result in confusion or contradiction of thought. 


4. To us as limited in our Know edge of ourselves, (@.) of 
our mental and our volitiona! processes, (0.) of the relation of 
the soul to the body, (¢.) of the nature of the essence of the 
soul itself, many of the doctrines relating to the work of the 
Holy Spirit in the heart of man—to the method of regenera- 
tion—to the mode of the soul’s existence after death, &c., &c., 


1. ‘‘How an eternal duration can be now actually past, is a thing utterly as 
impossible for our narrow understandings to comprehend, as anything that is 
not an express contradiction can be imagined to be; and yet to deny the truth 
of the proposition that an eternal duration is now actually past, would be to 
assert something still far more uninielligible, even a real and express contradic- 
tion.”—Sam. Clarke, The Being and Attributes of God, p. 9. 

2. See Mansel, Limits of Religious Thought, and various critiques on the 
same, in the Quarterlies of ’59 and ‘60. 

3. See McCosh, Typical Forms in Creation, book 3, specially ch. 3, 


29 REQUISITES. 


must remain inscrutably mysterious; and any attempt to 
lift the veil of their mystery by forcing the boundaries of 
our knowledge, can only result in final disaster to our 
theological system. 

5. Perhaps we should add the purposed silence of the 
Scriptures.’ It is not impossible that this silence is never 
selfimposed, and that it is always made imperative by our 
incapacity to understand ; and yet there are certain ques- 
tions about which we are instinctively disposed to be inquis- 
itive, and to which, so far as we know, the answer might 
have been intelligible. Such are the questions of the rela- 
tion of God to the material universe, the origin of sin, the 
relation of departed spirits to the living, &c., &c. To all 
these the Scriptures give no response. In the presence of 
this suggestive silence, the prudent theologian will be cau- 
tious of conjectures and theories.* Within the prescribed 
limits of revealed truth we may pursue our inquiries with 
zeal and confidence unflagging, but beyond the silent bound- 
aries we should beware of aspiring to pass.*® 


S 6—Lequisites. 


1. A certain amount of intellectual discipline, of general 
knowledge and of special acquisition: (@.) Intellectual dis- 
cipline, because careful analysis and discrimination must be 
made, and because a vast body of correlated thought must 
be brought under survey; (0.) of general knowledge, 
because in the examination of the truths and. doctrines of 
Theology we are not only taken back to a remote antiquity 


1. See Fairbairn, 7’ypology of the Scriptures, pt. 1, ch. 6. 

2. ‘He that will reduce a knowledge into an art, will make it round and uni- 
form; but in Divinity many things must be left abrupt and concluded with this: 
‘O altitudo sapientiea et scientiwe Dei! etc. So again the Apostle saith: ‘ Ha 
parte scimus ;’ and to have the form of a total, where there is matter but for a 
part, cannot be without supplies by supposition and presumption.”—Bacon, 
Advancement of Learning, near the close. 

3. Chalmers, Nat. Theol., book 5, ch. 1. 


REQUISITES. 93 


in which they originated, but are required to trace their 
interlacings with the thinking and principles of the civilized 
world ; (c.) of special acquisition, such as some acquaintance 
with the principles of mental philosophy and the conclusions 
of natural science, because of the intimate relations of these 
with theology, and some knowledge of the original languages 
of the Scriptures, because many points in Christian doctrine 
are determinable only by minuteness of textual criticism 
which no translation can make in the fullest sense appre- 
clable.! | 

2. Experimental acquaintance with the truths of Chris- 
tianity. Every proposition that is to command assent must 
be intelligible; and to be intelligible must be capable of 
being tested by the special faculties addressed by it; and 
these faculties to perform their functions must have been 
trained by exercise. Christian truths are addressed to the 
religious faculties of man, the moral reason,’ the conscience, 
the affections, the will ; and these to perform their testing 
functions aright, must have been trained by exercise. This 
training by exercise is nothing else than Christian experience. 
Wanting this experience one lacks a fundamental requisite 
in the study of theology. 1 Cor. 2: 14, 15. 

3. A minute and comprehensive acquaintance with the 
contents of the Scriptures; minute, because some of the 
most conclusive evidence in support of the most important 
doctrines often lie in incidental expressions, in the particles 
of language and in implications and logical inferences ; 
comprehensive, including not only single books and epistles 
as wholes, but the entire Scriptures, because the revealed 
truth of the Bible is an organic whole, each part of which 
is requisite to the full understanding of every other. 


1. See Tholuck on Theo. Ency. and Methodology in Bid. Sac., vol.'1; also 
in the same vol., art. 7, Nov. number. ‘‘ Theology, comprehending (or rather 
being itself contained in) a wider sphere of scholarship than any other learned 
profession, and its successful cultivation necessarily proportioned to the degree 
in which that scholarship is applied ; it follows that the theology of a country 
can never transcend, and will rarely fall beneath, the level of its erudition ;” Sir 
Wm. Hamilton, Phil. Discussions, p. 376. 

2. See Pres. Hopkins, Moral Science, div. 1, ch. 2. 


24. METHODS OF INQUIRY. 


4. That hearty love of truth as such, which growing into 
enthusiasm, supplies a tireless energy in the pursuit of it. 
Such love and enthusiasm never fail to command the 
approval of reason and the sanction of conscience. 

5. A devout, humble and prayerful spirit. Devout com- 
munion with the omniscient Spirit and unfeigned submis- 
sion to his guidance, are indispensable to him who would 
know the mind of the Spirit through whom the truth has 
been revealed.’ 


S$ 7—WMethods of Inquiry. 


These may be considered as either special or general, 
according as wecontemplate the treatment of single topics, 
or the disposition and treatment of these as parts of a whole. 

In respect to the former, we must determine: (@.) Whether 
we will resort at’ once to the Scriptures and attempt to 
ascertain. each doctrine de novo et ab ovo for ourselves; or 
whether, accepting from our creed or catechism each for- 
mula we will take it to the Scriptures for justification ; or 
whether, which seems more feasible than the first and more 
rational than the second, adopting a kind of exegetico-dog- 
matic method, ¢. e. taking the statements of the highest 
authorities, both creeds and single authors, we will subject 
them, for verification, modification, or rejection, as the case 
may be, to the critical tests of Scripture; (0.) whether we — 
will aim, by relying exclusively on the latest accredited 
exegesis, to be distinctively biblical; or, by tracing the pro- 
gress of theological discussion, to be chiefly historical; or, by 
regarding system, to be pre-eminently systematic; or, by 
regarding ecclesiastical authority, to be uniformly didactic 
and dogmatic; or, by attention to other sects, to be prevail- 
ingly polemic; or whether we should not rather adopt just so 
much of all these methods as may be requisite to a full jus- 
tification of each of our doctrinal conclusions ; (¢c.) whether 


1. Woods, Lects., 1, 127 and 128. 


METHODS OF INQUIRY. 25 


we will classify the proofs of our doctrinal positions as 
respectively those from Revelation and those from Reason, 
or whether we will rather regard every legitimate argument 
as equally revealed and authoritative, be it founded on the 
letter of Scripture, on the facts of consciousness, or on the 
demonstrations of science.! 

As respects the general distribution of the principal parts 
of theology, various methods have been adopted. The old- 
est and still most prevalent of these, the topical method, 
now known as the synthetic, begins with God the First 
Cause of all things, and ends with the final salvation of man. 
Several other methods were propounded in the 17th century, 
among which were: the analytic, adopted by Geo. Calixtus, 
Prof. of Helmstadt, (died 1656,) and in later years by Dr. 
Chalmers, and which, as compared with the synthetic, 
begins at the opposite pole of theological thought, or with 
the salvation of man: the federal or covenant method, 
adopted by Coccejus of the University of Leyden, (died 1656, ) 
by his disciples Burmann, Witsius and others, and which 
followed the supposed covenants of God with man and with 
Christ: the economic, adopted by Leydecker of the Univer- 
sity of Utrecht, (died 4721,) and which distributed the whole 
of theology under the three persons of the Trinity.’ In later 
times other methods still have been proposed.* But the 


1. It is not here intended to be intimated that the isolated authority of either 
consciousness or science is equal with that of Scripture, but that the teachings of 
the three sources constitute a conjoint authority which is not to be divided. It 
_is noteworthy how often the authority of the Scripture is confidently put forth 
to the exclusion of every other, when the very thought which the Scripture is 
cited as sustaining is one which a careful study of the facts of consciousness, or 
of some branch of modern science, has enabled the exegete to find in the words. 

2. Adopted also by Marheineke in his Dogmatik. 

3. The biblico-historical method has been adopted at different periods in pop- 
ular treatises, as for instance by Jonathan Edwards, in his Hist. of Redemption. 
See also a species of Christological method propounded by Andrew Fuller, 
Works, vol. 1, p. 684 and ff. Among the most noticeable of those proposed by 
later theologians are, that of Hase, who distributes his whole system of theology 
under Ontology and Christology, and that of Nitzsch, whose general divisions 
are: Agathology, Ponerology and Soteriology. For other older methods, see 
Hase, Hutterus Redivivus, p. 40 and ff. ; and for various later ones, Hagenbach, 
Enclo. u. Method., p. 288 and ff.; and Nitzsch, Chr. Lehre, § 57. 


296 METHODS OF INQUIRY. 


synthetic retains its hold, and may be regarded as prefer- 
able to any other, because, 


1. Itisthe most accordant with the method which God 
has adopted in the revelation of himself, in his works and 
his word. 


2. It accords more nearly than any other, with the order 
in which Christian doctrines have been progressively appre- 
hended and elaborated in history, and are still apprehended. 
by individual minds. 


8. Itis more scientific than any other, inasmuch as it more 
clearly recognizes than any other, the causal or semi-organic 
relation subsisting between the fundamental truths of chris- 
tianity. The first and deepest thought of religion and of 
theology is that of God, the creator and controller of all; 
the second, is that of man, the creature and image of God, 
now fallen and helpless; and the third, is that of an inter- 
posing Redeemer and his work of redemption, &c., &c. 


4, When proper regard is paid to relations in its distribu- 
tion of topics,’ it anticipates less in its several stages than 
any other, and is consequently under far less necessity than 
any other, of returning on its own track. 


5. For beginners in the study of systematic theology, it 
has the great merit of simplicity of plan, lucidity of order 
and lozieal connection of parts. 


In these lectures, omitting Apologetics excepting the ques- 
tion of Inspiration, the order will be: Doctrine of God, or 
Theology proper: Man, or Anthropology: Salvation, or 
Soterology and Soteriology: Last things, or Eschatology. 


1. The doctrine of the Trinity is ordinarily introduced in the synthetic 
method, under the doctrine of God, thus necessarily anticipating and taking out 
of its connection, the doctrine of the Person of Christ. This is not only illo- 
gical but throws the whole order of thought into confusion. It was this 
confusion which compelled Chalmers to abandon the synthetic for the analytic 
method. See Introductions to his Wat. Theol. and to his Institutes of Theol. 
and pt. 1, lect. 1, of his Jnstitutes. For a complex modification of the syn- 
thetic proposed by Hagenbach, see his Hncy. u. Method., p. 290. 


BIBLIOLOGICAL.  _ 27 


$ 8— Libliological. 


SOME OF THE MOST NOTE-WORTHY WRITERS ON SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY. 


These may be distributed under three well known divisions: the first 
extending from the time of the Apostles to that of John of Damascus in the 
8th century; the second from John to the Reformation in the 16th century ; 
the third from the Reformation to our own day. 

1. During the first period, Systematic Theology was in its forming state. 
Most of the fathers, both Greek and Latin, discussed questions that are funda- 
mental in doctrinal theology, yet no one of them surveyed these questions as a 
whole and reduced them to logical order. The nearest approach to this was 
made by Isidore of Seville, (d. 636,) in his Sententiarum libri tres ; sive de 
summo bono, made up, as its title indicates, of extracts from the fathers. 

2. The three great writers of the second period were, (a.) John of Damascus, 
(d. 754,) the author of the first complete treatise on Systematic Theology, enti- 
tled Exdoote axgiBycs tio oeodégou motewc, or, de fide orthodowa. He was 
both the first and the last great theologian of the Greek church; was the firg€ 
to apply the formulas of Aristotle to theology, and so laid the foundation 
for scholastic theology. His doctrinal statements were mostly taken from the 
fathers of Cappadocia, Basil of Cesarea, Gregory of Nyssa, and Gregory of 
Nazianzen. The treatise of John is still valuable for its discussion of the doc- 
trine of the person of Christ, (see Christian Rev. Dec., 1842,)—Anselm, (d. 1109,) 
though he arranged no system, yet wrote the tractate, Cur Deus homo, which 
gave to the Church a theory of the atonement that still survives, and which, 
in any thorough discussion of the atonement, must receive careful attention. 
(b.) Peter Lombard, (d. 1164,) “magister sententiarum,’ wrote a treatise 
entitled Sententiarum libri quatuor, and which was for a long period the one 
great authority in the Latin church, subsequent writers contenting themselves 
with writing commentaries on it. It was drawn from the writings of the Latin 
fathers, and is distinguished for its philosophical acumen and the skill with 
which it reconciles the opposing views of the fathers, which Abelard (d. 1142,) 
had put into such sharp contradiction in his Sic e¢ Non. (c.) Thomas Aquinas 
(d. 1274,) one of the ablest theologians of any period, wrote Commentarium in 
quat. libros sententiarum ; summa theologie, which, pre-eminently scholastic in 
method, and thoroughly Romish in doctrine, is yet transparently clear in thought, 
and has always had a charm for the lovers of profound and exact thinking. 

3. Writers of the third period subdivide themselves, at the beginning, into 
two general classes—Lutherans and Reformed (Calvinists,) and afterwards 
into a variety of schools. 

A. Lutherans. 

(a.) Melancthon, (d. 1560.) His Loci* Communes, first printed in 1521, con- 
sisted originally of an abstract of his lectures on the Epist. to the Romans and 
 wasa summary of the doctrines of that epistle ; was in sentiment strictly Augus- 
tinian, (Calvinistic,) but treated neither of the Incarnation nor of the Atonement. 
It was subjected to great modifications in the editions of 1535 and 1548, 


* On the word “locus ” see Heppe, Dogmatik d. deutschen Protest. im16 Jahrhundert, vol. 1, §2. 


98 BIBLIOLOGICAL. 


adopting the theory of Synergism and defending the Calvinistic doctrine 
of the supper. According to Heppe, Dogmatik, vol. 1, $38, 84 editions of the 
Loci were published in Melancthon’s life time. 

(b.) Martin Chemnitz, (d. 1588,) Prof. at Wittenberg; Loci Theologici ; the 
first commentator on the Loci of Mel. and one of the ablest and most learned of 
those who adopted his views. 

(c.) Leonard Hutter, (d. 1616); Compend. Locor Theolog. introduced into all 
the schools; and larger work, Loct Com. Theol. opposed to the views of Melanc- 
thon; called “ Lutherus redivivus.” 

(d.) John Gerhard, Prof. at Jena, (d. 1687) ; Loct Theolog.in 9 vol., 4to.; styled 
by Hase for his learning and piety “one of the Prot. ecclesiastical fathers ;” his 
work one of the highest authorities in Lutheran theology. 

(e.) George Calixt, Prof. at Helmstadt, ( d. 1656,) distinguished for his erudi- 
tion and broad charity ; wrote Hpitome Theol.; separated Theology from Moral 
Science and introduced a scholastic and the analytic method ; sought to reduce 
all creed tests to the Apostles’ creed, and to reunite Catholics and Protestants 
—hence called Syncretist by the Lutherans. Sympathized more with the views 
of Melancthon than of Luther. 

(f.) Ab. Calov, Superintendent at Wittenberg, (d. 1686) ; Systema Locor. Theol. ; 
adopted the scholastic and analytic methods of Calixtus, but violently aieated 
him and his views; an honest zealot, whose daily prayer was, Imple me, 
Deus, odio haereticorum. . 

(g.) J. A. Quenstedt, Prof. at Wittenberg, (d. 1688,) are didactico-pole 
mica ; a compact and logical treatise, neither original nor independent in spirit, 
but concise and comprehensive in its statement of orthodox Lutheranism as found 
in its expounders from Hutter to Calov: analytic and scholastic in method. 

(h.) J. F. Buddeus, Prof. at Halle and Jena, (d. 1729); Institutiones Theologia 
dogmat. ; analytic in method but wholly free from scholasticism, both in form 
and phraseology ; opposed the Wolfian philosophy; by no means one of the 
ablest, but one of the most temperate and best written of the Lutheran treatises. 
The author’s sympathies were more with the pietists than with their opponents. 

Rationalism aud Pietism here interrupt the historical continuity of Lutheran 
Theology. The few of its writers who adopted the philosophy of Liebnitz, did 
not enough modify the course of Lutheranism to require here to be specified. 
The pietists, regarding religion as a matter of the heart rather than of the under- 
standing, neglected systematic Theology ; and the original rationalists, or natu- 
ralists, were so much more intent on the work of destruction than of construction 
that they contributed nothing to dogmatics. Representative of opponents of 
initial rationalism may be mentioned ; j 
(a) G. T. Zacharie, Prof. at Kiel, (d. 1777); Biblische Theologie; biblical in con- 
tradistinction to systematic; had but little influence beyond its own generation. 

(j.) J. Ch. Doederlein, Prof. at Butzow, (d. 1789) ; Institutio Theol. Chr. ; evan- 
gelical, though carefully adjusted, both in its statements and in its definitien of 
orthodoxy, to the exigencies of its time. 

Representative of the opponents of later and more pronounced Rationalism, 
and known distinctively as Supernaturalists, but differing widely in spirit and 
method from the Lutheranism of the 17th century are, 


BIBLIOLOGICAL. 29 


(k.) T. C. Storr, Prof. vat Tuebingen, (d. 1805) ; Doctrine Chr. Pars. theoretica ; 
afterwards translated from Latin into German, and edited and illustrated by C. 
Ch. Flatt, also of Tuebingen. See Storr and Flatt’s Hlements of Bib. Theol., 
translated into Eng. by 8.8. Schmucker; evangelical, but almost worthless in its 
biblical exegesis. 

(1.) F. V. Reinhard, Court preacher at Dresden and author of the well-known 
Plan of Jesus, (d. 1812,) Vorlesungen ueber die Dogmatik ; his supernaturalism 
rather moral and philosophical than theological; not comprehensive nor 
vigorous. 

(m.) G. Ch. Knapp, Prof, at Halle, (d. 1825); Vorlesungen weber die chr. Glau- 
benslehre, (Chr. Theology, trans. into Eng. by Leon. Woods Jr. Andover, 1831) ; 
rests exclusively on the authority of the Scriptures as a supernatural Revela- 
tion; recognizes historical development and yet independent of Lutheran 
traditions and to a great extent of philosophical systems. A. Hahn, Prof. at 
Leipsic, Lehrbuch d. ch. Glaubens, not unlike Knapp, in spirit and in method. 

Representative of Rationalists is, 

(n.) J. A. L. Wegscheider, Prof. at Halle, (d. 1848); nstitutiones Theologie 
Chr. dog.; grossly rationalistic. 

Intermediate, between Rationalists and Supernaturalists are, 

(o.) K. G. Bretschneider, General superintendent in Gotha, (d. 1848); Hand- 
buch der Dogmatik, d. evan. Kirche :—“ rational supernaturalist ”—elaborate 
and comprehen«ive. De Wette, Dogmatik, belongs to the same _ school, 
Twesten, Prof. at Berlin, Dogmatik; 2 vols. on the doctrine of God and 
angelology published many years since: never finished; an elaborate presen- 
tation, so faras it goes, of old orthodox Lutheranism. The Dogmatik of 
Schmid, of Erlangen, and the Christi Person und Werk of Thomasius, are of 
the same character. 

B. Reformed, (Calvinistic). The Reformed writers on systematic theology 
are more naturally distributed than the Lutheran, into schools that are deter- 
minable by differences in philosophical method or in the fundamental principles 
of their systems. 

Of the most noted writers we may name: 

(a.) John Calvin, Prof. at Geneva, (d. 1564); nstitutio Chr. Religionis ; 
entirely superior to Melanctons’ Loci, whether in depth, comprehensiveness or 
logic; and incomparably more influential in Protestant Christendom than any 
other single treatise. In strict harmony with the views of Calvin may be 
mentioned the Loci Communes of Peter Martyr, a fugitive Italian, Prof. at 
Zurich, (d. 1562); the Compendium Relig. Chr. of Bullinger, also of Zurich, 
(d. 1575); the Loct Com. Theol. of Musculus, Prof. at Berne, (d. 1563) ; and the 
Syntagma Theol. Chr. of Polanus, Prof. at Basle, (d. 1610). 

(b.) Belonging to the hyper-Calvinistic school, which originated with the 
great exegete, Beza, were Peter Ramus, martyred St. Bartholomew’s night, 
1572, author of Commentarium de Religione Chr. ; Bucanus, Prof. at Lausanne, 
Institutiones Theologie, 1 vol., (trans. into Eng. by Rebert Hill, 1606) ; John Sharp 
a Scotchman, Cwrsus Theologicus ; Benedict Pictet, Prof. at Geneva, (d. 1724) ; 
Institutiones Theologica, 2 vols. 8vo. (trans. into Eng. by Rev. Fred. Leroux, 1833.) 

(c.) German Reformed, The two most noted writers were Ursinus, Prof. at 


30 BIBLIOLOGICAL. 


Heidelberg, (d. 1583,) and Olevianus, also of Heidelberg, (d. 1587,) who were the 
joint authors of the Heidelberg Catechism, the great symbol of this school. 
(Ursinus also wrote a Loci Theologict.) Itstype of doctrine was that of the 
Melancthonian party of the Lutheran Ch., rather than that of the strict predes- 
tinationists, though the later writers verged towards the latter type. ~ 

(d.) Scholasticism in the Reformed Ch. ; introduced by Wollebius, Prof. at 
Basle, (d. 1629,) Theologie Compend., (trans. into Eng. by Alex. Ross in 1656) ; his 
type of doctrine is strictly that of Calvin; Ebrard, Dogmatik, $34, pronounces 
him “ decidedly the ablest theologian that ever lived—a true Peter Lombard of 
reformed scholasticism.” Scholasticism reached its highest development in 
the renowned Gilbert Voetius, Prof. at Utrecht, (d. 1576,) author of Jnstitutiones 
Theologie and of Disputationes Select, 5 vols., 4to. 

(e.) The Federal School, (“Covenant System”); originated with Coccejus, 
Leyden (d. 1669,) in reaction against scholasticism. He wrote Swmma Doctrine 
de Hedere et Testamento Dei. Francis Burmann, Utrecht, (d. 1681); Synopsis 
Theologie ac speciatim Oecononie Kederum Dei, etc., 2 vols.: and Herman Wit- 
sius, Leyden, (d. 1708); Oeconomia Federum Dei. 'The latter less able than the 
former, is better known through English translations. This school gave its 
method and phraseology to English Puritan Theology. 

(f.) Those affected by Cartesianism : (Des Cartes, starting with honest doubt, 
founded all philosophy in consciousness—in this found his evidence of the 
existence of God; referred the universe and all it contains, even necessary 
truths to the will of God; held ideas to be innate and the reason rather than 
the will to be the grand characteristic of man. As related to theology, the ques- 
tion of Cartesianism was, the capacity of unaided reason for the knowledge of 
divine things.) Voetius had opposed Des Cartes, and others of the scholastic 
school had joined in the opposition, particularly Van Mastricht of Utrecht, 
(d. 1706,) in his Theologia theoretico-practica, and even bitterly in his Theologia 
seu Gangrena Cartesiana, while several of the federalists, like Heidanus and 
Burmann, defended and adopted the principles of hissystem. Van Til of Leyden, 
(d. 1718,) one of the ablest Ref. theologians, in his Theologie utriusque Comp. 
tum Nat. tum Rev.; Vitringa in his Doctrina Chr. Rel.; and Marckius in his 
Compendium Theologie Chr. didactico-elenct., attempted to mediate between the 
Scholastics and the Cartesians. 

(g.) The school at Saumur—Amyraldism and Placeanism. The views of this 
school, initiated by the Scotchman John Cameron, took the distinctive form 
with Amyrald, (d. 1664,) of predestinationism conditioned by “hypothetical 
universalism,” and with Placeeus, (d. 1655,) of mediate, in contradiction to im- 
mediate, imputation. Against Amyrald’s views of sin, Rivetus, (d. 1651,) collected 
many testimonies from previous authors. See vol. 3d of his works, and first 
series Princeton Essays. 

(A.) Francis Turretin, Prof. Geneva, (d. 1687,) Institutio Theol. elenctice ; one 
of the ablest theologians of the last quarter of the 17th century ; independent 
of existing schools and methods; an earnest opponent of Amyraldism and a 
zealous defender of the orthodoxy of the Synod of Dort; a sound exegete and 
a devout philosopher. 

(.) Those affected by the Leibnitzian-Wolfian Phil.; [Wolf completed and 
systematised the phil. of Leibnitz, the two fundamental ideas of which were 


BIBLIOLOGICAL. — OL 


monadology, including the notion of an inherent self-developing energy in 
every monad, and pre-established harmony. Both philosophy and theology, 
with Wolf, became mere systems of definitions and formal deductions. As 
applied to theology, his philosophy distinguished between revealed theology 
and natural, assuming the latter to be demonstrable, and the contents of the 
former to be reducible to definitions aud dogmas, which are representative of 
real as well as of formal truths.] Daniel Wyttenbach, Prof. first at Berne and 
then at Marburg, (d. 1779,) adopted the Wolfian method in his Tentamen Theol. 
dog., as did also J. F. Stapfer, Prof. Berne, (d. 1775,) in his Institutiones 
Theol. polem. 

(j.) Of later writers may be mentioned Schleiermacher, Prof. Berlin, (d. 1834,) 
Chr. Glaubenslehre ; though independent of all confessions yet more Reformed 
than Lutheran; the creator of an epoch in German theology ; rationalistic in 
criticism, pantheistic in philosophy, but devoutly earnest and christian in 
spirit. C. J. Nitzsch, Berlin, (d. 1868,) System d. chr. Lehre, (Chr. Doctrine, 
trans. Clarke’s Library,) mediates between Lutheran and Reformed ; Ethicol 
theological. Lange, Chr. Dogmatik, and Ebrard, Chr. Dogmatik ; both of them 
decidedly Reformed and evangelical 

(K.) Socinianism; name derived from Laelius Socinus, (d. 1562,) and his 
nephew Faustus Socinus, (d. 1604.) | The views of the early writers of the sect 
are found in the Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum, 8 vols. fol., and in the Raco- 
vian catechism. Socinianism, as yet, has produced no complete treatise on sys- 
tematic theology. 

(¢.) Arminians ; name derived from Arminius, Prof. Leyden, (d. 1609.) Their 
ablest writer was Philip Limborch, Prof. in Remonstrant Gymnasium at Amster- 
dam, (d. 1712); Theologia Christiana ; written with exegetical and philosophical 
skill. Richard Watson, Eng. Theological Institutes ; able but prolix. 

(m.) Anglican ; Thos. Stackhouse, (d. 1752,) Complete Body of Divinity ; gath- 
ered mostly from Anglican divines; no philosophical skill; hesitating and 
uncertain in his doctrinal views. Bishop Tomline, (d. 1827,) Hlements of Chr. 
Theology ; anti-Calvinistic and weak. John Hey, Prof. Divinity, Cambridge, 
(d.1815,) Lectures on Divinity ; mediates like most Anglican theologians 
between Romanist and Reformed doctrines. Pearson on The Creed, and 
Burnet on The thirty-nine Articles, should also be mentioned. 

(n.) Presbyterian, (Calvinistic); (Eng.) Thos. Ridgely, (d. 1734,) Body of 

Divinity ; lectures on the Assembly’s larger Catechism. (Scotch.) George 

Hill, Prin. St. Mary’s, (d. 1820,) Lecs. on Diwwinity. John Dick, (d. 1833,) Lees. 
on Theology ; echo of Turretin. Chalmers, (d. 1847,) Jnstitutes of Theol. ; ana- 
lytic in method ; less dogmatic and more moderately Calvinistic than the other 
Scotch theologians; of no special value. (Amer.) Breckenridge, Doctrine of 
God objectively and subjectively considered ; mediate imputation. Hodges’ Out- 
lines ; immediate imputation. Jas. Richards, (d. 1843,) Prof. Auburn, Lecs, . 
on Ment. Phil and Theol. ; new school. . 

(0.) Quakerism ; Robert Barclay, a Scotchman, (d. 1690,) wrote Theologie vere 
Chr. Apologia, on the basis of certain Theses Theologice, which he had previ- 
ously written and sent to the scholars and clergy of all lands; afterwards pub- 
lished in English, An Apology for the true Chr. Divinity ; not a formal 
treatise on systematic theology, but the ablest exposition of the views of the 
Quakers. 


32 BIBLIOLOGICAL: 


(p.) Baptists: (Eng.) John Gill, (d. 1771,) Body of Divinity, hyper-Calvinistic ; 
Andrew Fuller, (d. 1815,) wrote no one treatise on theology, but smaller works 
and essays; followed the elder Jona. Edwards in his earlier writings, in which 
he is temperately old school, especially in his treatment of the doctrine of the 
atonement, but the younger Edwards in his later essays, in which in his treat- 
ment of the atonement he is decidedly new school; (Freewill Baptist, Amer.,) 
Prof. New Hampton, N. H.: Nat. and Revealed Theol. ; Arminian. 

(q.) Independents: (Eng.) George Payne, (d. 1848,) Lecs. on Theol.; J. Pye 
Smith, (d. 1851,) Hirst Lines of Theol. (Amer.) Jonathan Edwards, Sr., wrote 
no complete treatise on systematic theology, but by several of his essays pre- 
pared the way for New Eng. (new school,) theology. Sam/’l Hopkins, (d. 1818,) 
pupil and disciple of Edwards, System of Theology ; theory of “ disinterested bene- 
volence.” Nath’l Emmons, (d. 1840,) Sermons, “ Exercise Scheme ;’ a compound 
of extreme old-schoolism and extreme new-schoolism, Dr. Dwight, Pres. 
of Yale Col., (d 1817,) Theology in a series of Sermons ; moderate or diluted 
Calvinism. Leonard Woods, Prof. And., (d. 1847,) Lecs. on Theology, Hopkin- 
sian and “ Taste scheme.” N. W. Taylor, New Haven, (d.1858,) Moral Govern- 
ment and Revealed Theology ; extreme new school. Bennet Tyler, Prof. E. 
Windsor, (d. 1858,) Lees. on Theology ; opposed to Dr. Taylor; modified and 
softened type of Calvinism. C. J. Finney, Prof. at Oberlin, Lecs. on Systematic 
Theology ; extreme new school. 

(r.) Modern Roman Catholicism ; (German,) George Hermes, Prof. at Muenster 
and afterwards at Bonn, (d. 1831): Christcathholische Dogmatik ; an attempt to 
establish the Romish doctrines by philosophical processes ; his method con- 
demned by the last and by the present Popes. J. Kuhn, Katholische Dogmattk ; 
a more successful attempt to adjust the relations of faith and reason in theo- 
logy. (Italian,) Cardinal Perrone, Prof. Collegium Romanum ; Prelectiones 
Theologice, 9 vols., 8vo., first published in 1835, with very many editions since ; 
in high esteem at Rome and with all thorough going Catholics ; is specially 
able in its exposition of the Romish theories of the church and of its sacraments. 

(s.) There are alsomany special historical treatises, and monographs on single 
doctrines, to which the student of theology will do well to give attention ; of 
such, are: Moehler, Symbolism, with the answers (not translated,) of Nitzsch 
and Baur; Neander, Planting and Training of the Chr. Church; Schaff, Hist of 
the Apostolic Ch.; Chr. Fried. Schmid, Prof. Tuebingen, Biblische Theologie d. N. 
Tes.t, andWeiss, Prof Kiel, Lehrbuch d. bib. Theol. d. N. Test.; Baur, Die chr. 
Lehre von der Trinitaet; Dorner, Hntwicklungsgeschicte d. Lehre von d. Person 
Christi , or Doctrine of the Person of Christ, trans. Clark’s library; Baur, Die 
chr. Lehre von d. Versoehnung, and various treatises and essays on the Atonement 
by (Scotch) McLeod, Smeaton, Young; (Amer.) Beman, Hodge, (Princeton 
Essays), Barnes, Park, Bushnell and others. Mueller, Chr. Doctrine of Sin, trans. 
by Urwick, and various discussions of the doctrine of sin in Princeton Hssays, 
in Amer. Bib. Repository, by Moses Stuart, second series, vol. 2,and in a contro. 
versy between Dr. Park, bib. Sac., vols. 8 and 9 and Dr. Hodge, Hodge’s 
Essays ; Ullmann, Sintess of Jesus, &c., &e. 

On Bibliography, see Hase, Hutterus Redivivus. Ebrard, Dogmatik, $8 17-51. 
Heppe, Dogmatik des Deutsches Protest,, Schweizer, Die Glaubensiehre d. Evan. 
ref. Kirche. Baur, Dogmengeschicte. W. Gass, Geschicte d. protest. Dogmatik. 


INSPIRATION. ys Ba 


S$ 9— Inspiration. 


Christian Theology builds on the Christian Scriptures. 
Are these Scriptures trustworthy? The question divides 
itself into two others: Are the Scriptures genuine and 
authentic? Are their contents authoritative? The first of 
these questions is answered in ‘‘ Introductions’? to the 
Scriptures and in treatises on the canon: we here restrict 
ourselves to the latter. Were the writers of the Bible so 
controlled and guided by superhuman wisdom as to make 
their writings authoritative and infallible sources of reli- 
gious knowledge? The answer to this question constitutes 
the Doctrine of Inspiration. The very diverse views of 
authors in discussing it may, with sufficient accuracy for 
our present purpose, be arranged under the three follow- 
ing classes. | 

1. Those who hold to ‘‘ Plenary Inspiration ;’ that is, 
that the sacred writers were so guided by the Holy Spirit as 
to secure absolute accuracy in every respect to whatever 
they have contributed to our present canonical Scriptures. 
The holders of this general view have been subdivided into: 
(a.) The supporters of a rigid theory of verbal inspiration, 
commonly known as the Mechanical Theory, and including 
nearly all the Protestant Theologians of the 17th century,' 
many, particularly among the English and Scotch, in the 
18th, and a few in the present century, among the last of 
whom may be mentioned Carson, Haldane, Gaussen, Count 
Gasparin; and (0.) Those who maintain the inspiration of 
all the thoughts but not of all the language of Scripture— 
who believe that the sacred writers were so guided and con- 
trolled by the Divine Spirit as to be allowed to fall into no 
error or mistake of doctrine or fact, though in all that per- 


1. What were the views of the early Church Fathers is still a question in dis- 
pute. So much is clear, however, that the theory of verbal inspiration can be 
ascribed to them only by imparting to their imagery a meaning wholly foreign 
to their thoughts. See Lee, /nsp. of Script., appendix G. Westcott, Intro. to 
the Study of the Gospels, appendix B. Archbp. Manning, Temp. Mission of 
the OE iat 


834 INSPIRATION. 


tained to the mode of presentation, each writer was left to 
the free activity and spontaneous movement of his own mind. 
This is known as the Dynamical Theory, and is supported by 
the majority of later English, Scotch and American writers.’ 

The views of this class are open to the criticism of build- 
ing on purely a priori conceptions of what the records of a 
supernatural revelation must be if inspired, assuming (a.) 
that whatever proceeds from the mind of God must come to 
us inan absolutely perfect form—an assumption contra- 
dicted by the analogy of the material creation and by the 
plainest facts of the Scriptures themselves, to say nothing of 
the impossibility of any standard of perfection of form that 
shall not be relative and thus ever changing; ‘(0.) that ethi- 
cal and religious truth to be authoritative must be couched 
in fixed and definite forms of speech, which represent pre- 
cisely and exhaustively the ‘‘mind of the Spirit’’—an _ 
assumption contradicted by the progressive history con- 
tained in the Bible itself, by the history of Christian doc- 
trines, and by the consciousness of every reflecting mind 
that reads the Scriptures; and (c.) that the Holy Spirit in 
inspiration must have acted either upon or with the spirit of 
the biblical writers, according to some ascertained and defin- 
able method. The difficulties which this sharply defined 
theory of inspiration encounters in the Scriptures, are too 
often dealt with by this class of writers in a manner that 
fails utterly to strengthen the confidence of candid minds in 
the view they would support. 

2. In reaction from the more rigid theories just named 
arose that of the ‘‘ Naturalists,’’ of those who, regarding 
the literatures of all religions as alike inspired, recognize 
in the Jewish and Christian Scriptures a greater degree of 
inspiration than in any other literature, because they find 
in the Jewsa “‘ genius for religion”? which has distinguished — 


1. See Doddridge, Dissertation on Insp. Dick, Essay on the Insp. of the H. 
Scrip. WHenderson, Divine Insp. Lee, Insp. of Scrip. Westcott, Introduc- 
tion, etc. Intro. ch. Wood’s Lectures. Hannah, Bampt. Lect., The Relation 
bet. Divine and Human Hlements in H. Scrip. Tayler Lewis, The Divine 
Human in the Scripts. THodge’s Outlines. 


INSPIRATION, | A 35 


them above every other people. ‘This view, originated by 
English Deists and elaborated by German Rationalists, is 
that on which the Positivists of all shades of thought are 
now rapidly harmonizing.’ 

A full discussion of all that is involved in this theory 
would require us to traverse the whole field of Apologetics, 
for it is not so much the distinctive inspiration of the Scrip- 
tures which it impugns, as it is the supernatural authority 
of the religion whose origin the Scriptures record. The Chris- 
tian religion claims to be, in comparison with all other reli- 
gions, in an exclusive sense, revealed, and affirms its records 
to have been made by men who were guided as no other 
writers ever were by an Omniscient Spirit. But if there be 
a common inspiration of all religious literatures, that of the 
Jewish differing from the others only in degree, then (@.) God 
is self contradictory, having inspired some men to assert 
what he has inspired others to contradict—some to teach 
and urge as, obligatory what Christianity -pronounces 
immoral and wicked; (0.) there is no ultimate standard by 
which to eunemich: religious truth from error, and, each 
man’s convictions and ethical principles varying with his 
tastes and culture, there can be no common standard of 
-appeal, and right and wrong must be variable quantities. 

3. As mediating between the two extremes appeared 
the advocates of ‘‘ Partial Inspiration ;’* or those who 
recognize the special and supernatural office of the Holy 
Spirit | in the illumination and guidance of the writers, only 
in the records of ethical and athe truth. Very differ- 
ent explanations of the method of inspiration are found 
among the holders of this general view—some accepting 
the Dynamical Theory, others maintaining that the work 
of the Spirit in Inspiration differed from his ordinary offices 
mer eee nt 

1. Thos. Carlyle, Theo. Parker, R. W. Emerson, and the radical Unitarians 
of our own country, also belong here. 

2. What may have been the origin of this unsatisfactory phrase is uncertain, 
but since its use by Bishop Warburton, [The Doctrine of Grace, b. 1, c. 6, 7,] 
it has maintained its place, and serves, though imperfectly, to designate a class 
of writers, 


26 INSPIRATION. 


in believers, not in kind, but in degree only,* and others still 
declining to theorize on the subject. ‘Their formula is, not 
that the Scriptures ave the Word of God, but that they 
contain the Word of God. They are also arranged under 
two sub-classes: the one maintaining that all the doctrinal 
teachings of Scripture are inspired, but that these teachings 
lie embedded in pure human composition which may be 
more or less accurate, according to the critical habits of the. 
writers and their opportunities for exact information ;’ and 
the other affirming that even with the doctrinal and ethical 
teachings of the biblical writers are Beg dee ott their own 
abchnal misconceptions and errors.* 

The views of this class of writers are objectionable as 
making an unwarrantably broad distinction between the 
Scriptures and the Word of God—as having been supported 
by an over readiness to recognize errors of ignorance or of 
prejudice on tle part of the Scripture writers—as requiring 
each reader of the Bible to distinguish by his own ‘‘ verify- 
ing faculty’? between truth and error, and as resting, in 
fact, notwithstanding the disclaimers of some of its advocates, 
on theories of the Spirit’s method of operation in inspi- 
ration, a subject of which neither the Scriptures, nor con- 
sciousness give us any information whatever. 


1. This theory, originated by Schleiermacher, adopted with various qualifica- 

tions and modifications by his followers, was defended by Morell in his Phi- 
losophy of Religion, has received the sanction of Arnold, Maurice, and other 
English writers, and constitutes the basis of DoT te bike Doctrine of Inspi- 
ration. 
_ 2. Neander, Life of Christ, author’s ‘‘ Address” to American readers, prefixed 
to Amer. translation, and the text ; passim. 'Thohick, Die Inspirationslebre in 
der Deutschen Zeitschrift, 1850, dnsiion! in Kitto’s Jour. of Sac, Lit., vol. 7, 
sec. series, and in Noyes’ Essays. Coleridge, Works, vol. 5, Amer. ed. siden 
ing Spirit. Arnold, of Rugby, Life and Correspondence and essays on ‘‘ The 
Bible” and ‘‘ Interpretation of the Script.” in his Miscellanies. Maurice, Theolog. 
Essays. Dean Stanley, Hist. of Jewish Ch. ; Hssays on Ch. and State ; and the 
conservative portion of the Anglican broad- ‘Churh party. 

8. German Rationalists. F. W. Newman, Hebrew Monarchy and Phases of 
Faith. Jowett, Comment, on the Epistle of St. Paul, and on ‘Int. of Script.” 
in Hssays and Reviews. Colenso, The Pentateuch and Bk. of Josh. and Comment. 
on Hpistle to the Romans ; and extremists of the broad-Church party. 


INSPIRATION. z, 37 


Discarding then every theory of Inspiration, and declining 
any attempt to state by what method the Spirit must have 
fulfilled the Divine will in the writing of the Scriptures, we 
turn at once to the Scriptures themselves. In examining 
these we shall find: (a.) that we must. distinguish between 
the office of the Holy Spirit in the original communication 
or revelation’ of the thoughts of God, and that Divine super- 
intendence of the same Spirit which secured accuracy in 
the record of the revelations. To some of the Old Testament 
prophets, as well as to the New Testament apostles, the 
offices of the Spirit in revelation and in the guidance of their 
minds as authors, were vouchsafed in conjunction, and to 
other writers, like the unknown authors of several historical 
books in the Old Testament, and Mark and Luke in the 
New, there may have been granted as there was needed by 
them only the inspiration that secured the needed accuracy. 
(6.) Inasmuch as what was thus revealed and recorded 
reaches us only through the imagery and phraseology pecu- 
liar to the communicating prophet or apostle, not to say also 
in many cases to the intermediate penman through whom 
their words have been recorded, it is simply impossible for 
us to distinguish between the Divine and the human in any 
given message—between the word of God and the Scriptures 
through which that word has come to us; (¢.) inasmuch also 
as each successive writer reflects the age and country in 
which he wrote, and each age and writer was an advance on 
the preceding as well asa type of the following, and all 
became fully intelligible only in the light of the final and 
consummating period of the Apostles, it is evident that the 
Bible can be properly understood only as a whole, as an 
organic growth of many centuries, all of which are necessary 
to be taken into account if we would see the consistency of 
its parts, the one with another; and (d.) though the writ- 
‘ings of each age, Mosaic, Prophetic and Christian, are now 
requisite to the completeness and intelligibility of Scripture 
as a whole, yet to each age its own revelations and writings, 


1. Unveiling, aroxdduuc: see Westcott’s Intro. to Stud. pp. 34-36, Amer. Ed. 


38 INSPIRATION. 


conjoined with all that had preceded, must have been abso- 
lutely authoritative, because it was as complete and explicit 
a revelation of the Divine mind as then was possible. To 
deny, therefore, that the Bible is a Divine book on the 
ground of its real or supposed imperfections, is as unreason- 
able as to deny that the world is the creation of God because 
itis not what weshould call absolutely perfect, or that Jesus 
Christ was Divine because while on earth he was limited 
in power and knowledge,' was a man of sorrows and finally 
died. The question of Inspiration is to be decided, not by 
imaginary tests, but like every other question of fact, by 
adequate evidence. 


The direct evidence, that the writers of the Scriptures were 
divinely guided, lies within a narrow compass, and may be 
conveniently distributed into that which pertains to the © 
writers of the New Testament, and that to the writers of 
the Old. 


We will begin with the New TresraMENT : 


1. The Gospels claim that Christ promised Inspiration to 
his Apostles: John, 14: 16, 17 and 26 ; 15: 26, 27; 16: 13-15. 
Comp. Acts, 1: 8. This promise is clearly included in the 
authority to. bind and loose: Matt., 16: 18, 19; 18: 18; 
John, 20: 22, 23—and seems to be necessarily implied in the 
promised aid of the Spirit in times of special need : Matt., 
1): 19,20; ;Mark,. 13:7 01s Luke, 123.1112, 

2. The New Testament claims that, in accordance with 
Christ’s promise, the Apostles were divinely inspired in their 
teachings: Actes 4:.84,11:-12; 15): 28% 1 Pett inde 
makes abundant claim to Divine guidance and authority, 
or to the inspiration of his writings, both when vindicating 
his apostleshi , 1: 11-24, and 2: 1-14; 1 Cor., 1 
1; 9: 1; 2Cor., 11:5; 12: 11—and in other connections : 
@ Gor., 2.2.7, 10-13 3; 14.:)86,-37' 2 Cord, 34446 Gas 
8-10 and 12; Eph., 3: 2-4; 1 Thes., 4: 2. Comp. also, 
Gall 28 620012) Peti 3: 1Opkbee Rev talon 


1. John, 5: 19; Matt., 24: 36. 


INSPIRATION. | Bans 


3. In conjunction with the claim just named it is notice-. 
able: (a.) that the Apostles, while distinctly recognizing the 
Divine authority of the Old Testament, put themselves on a 
level with its authors: 2 Tim., 3: 15, 16'; 2 Pet., 1: 19-21°; 
and, (0.) that the entire New Testament is pervaded by a 
spirit and tone of Divine authority which are quite unac- 
countable, except on the assumption thatthe writers regarded 
themselves as writing under the direction of supernatural 
wisdom. 

If it here be said that the Apostles are incompetent wit- 
nesses for their own inspiration, since they may have been 
deceived or deceivers; or if it be maintained that the evi- 
dence adduced is rather for the divine origin of what is 
taught than for any divine direction in the mode of teaching, 
whether oral or written ; observe 

That the Gospels contain explicit promises of Divine 
attestation of the Apostles’ mission—Matt., 21: 21; John, 
14; 12-14—and the Acts minutely detailed accounts of 
miraculous, fulfillments: Acts, 4: 30, 31; 5: 12, 16; 16: 
Pee ele tee Comp. 2.-Cor., 127 123713 3:3 Heb.,.2: 4. 
To suppose these promises and recorded fulfillments to have 
had.their origin in the dishonesty, or fanaticism, or vanity of 
the Apostles, or in the minds of forgers of their names, or 
in legendary stories, is to suppose what is to the last degree 
inconsistent with the transparent and healthful, moral and 
intellectual atmosphere everywhere pervading the New Tes- 
tament; while the supposition that the teachings, thus 
attested as divine, should have been left to the thousand acci- 
dents of an unguided record by men whom education and 
the time had loaded with prejudices, would be inconsistent 
with the teachings themselves, even had no claim of super- 


1. The reference here is unquestionably to the Old Testament Scriptures. 
Oedrvevoroc may be a predicate, but it is more natural to regard it as an attribute 
of the subject, and at the same time to retain «ai and render it ‘‘also.” As Meyer 
remarks, no one then doubted the inspiration of the Jewish Scriptures and there 
was no occasion for setting it forth, but there was occasion in the Apostle’s mind 
for asserting that these inspired Scriptures were ‘‘also profitable,” &c., &c. 

2. 2 Pet., 3: 16 does not refer to the Old Testament. See Meyer’s Commentary. 


40 INSPIRATION. 


natural guidance been made by the writers. And this 
inconsistency is the more apparent from, 


2. The absolute impossibility of accounting for the 
superhuman moral teaching and the spotlessness of 
character, which the New Testament writers uniformly 
ascribe to Christ, unless Christ was what they represent. 
But if he was such a Being, then it is simply inconceivable 
that the Apostles should have been other than what they 
claim. 


3. The New Testament, written by various authors, each 
of whom maintained his own individuality of character and 
purpose, is yet such a unity of thought, aim and spirit, as 
is absolutely unaccountable, unless a Divine, superintending 
Spirit ruled in them all. Each writer seems to have had his 
own immediate end in view, and to have pursued it as inde- 
pendently asif he stood by himself alone. Nothing seems 
farther from the mind of either of them than that he was 
contributing to a body of literature that should afterwards 
rule the world. . 


4, The almost measureless separation of the New Testa- 
ment, in respect to both substance and form of thought, from 
all the literatures that immediately preceded or followed its 
origin, and the total absence from all the thinking of the age 
in which the New Testament theology and morality must 
have originated, of anything that can account for their ori- 
gin, leave us no alternative but to accept the explanation 
which the writers themselves supply. The historical growth 
of all other literatures—the organic relation of each age to 
the preceding—is universally recognized ; but the applica- 
tion of this law to the New Testament shows how unaccount- 
_ able was its origin, if it be denied to have been supernatural. 


5. There is a simplicity and directness of statement in the 
New Testament—a calmness of tone, and even on the most 
difficult questions, a precision and comprehensiveness of 
expression, combined with a more than human reticence,— 
which lift its writings entirely above the dogmatism and 
pretentiousness of ordinary authors, and impart to them a 


‘ . : 
INSPIRATION. 41 


majesty and authority simply inexplicable on any other 
theory than that of divine aid in their origin. 

6. Biblical Christianity, that is, a Christianity which 
appeals for its authorization and direction to the New Testa- 
ment Scriptures rather than to tradition, has exhibited, 
amid all the social and religious revolutions through which 
it has passed, a recuperative and irrepressible energy which 
is unaccountable, unless its records, supernaturally provided 
and preserved, embody the mind and the will of the Supreme 
Being. There is no known form of criticism to which these 
records have not been subjected—every system of religion, 
philosophy and science having in turn tried its analysis on 
them ; and yet the religion which these records contain, and 
the purity and existence of which rest on the records them. 
selves, was never purer, or more aggressive, or more author 
itative over the consciences of men, than it now is. 

7. The person and character of Christ, and the spirit and 
form of his religion, do not differ more unmistakably in 
kind from those of all other teachers of religion and their 
religions, than do the apostolic writings from all other lite- 
ratures :—their writings are stamped with the marks of 
supernatural guidance different in kind, and not in degree 
only, from all that can be claimed for any other writers. 

Those portions of the New Testament not written by the 
Apostles may be regarded as of equal authority with theirs, 
if we remember that, 

1. Inspiration in the Apostolic church was not restricted 
to the Apostles but bestowed on many others, possibly on 
ieereteaieatli?, LS: 11s 27,128 5.212 931 -Cor., 11:43 
14: 24-34. 

2. The complete harmony of the spirit, facts and doctrines 
of these writings with those of the Apostles, affords a strong 
presumptive argument in support of an inspired authority, 
co-ordinate with that of the Apostles. This is true of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, as well as of the Gospels of Mark 
and Luke. 

3. This view, furthermore, is strengthened by the close 
intimacy which the latter half of the Acts and the Epistles 


49 INSPIRATION. 


of Paul, show to have subsisted between Mark and Luke 
and the Apostles.. And with the foregoing agree, 

4, The unvarying testimony and traditions of the early 
Church in respect to Mark and Luke; (a.) of Mark, that he 
accompanied Peter as interpreter or secretary and com- 
posed his Gospel from the oral teachings of Peter ;? (6.) of 
Luke, that, as the intimate companion of Paul, his writings 
had the special assistance and sanction of that apostle.* 

Nor is the claim of Divine guidance in the composition of 
the New Testament invalidated by any of the literary, logi- 

cal, scientific or historical defects which modern criticism 
have made apparent. These may invalidate exact theories, 
but not the fact, of inspiration. What are declared to be 
defects according to our standard of judgment, manifestly 
were not defects in the eyes of either the writers of the New 
Testament or of the people for whom they specially wrote. 
A revelation which should have contradicted what was then 
accounted sound logic, or was held as undoubted fact, either 
of nature or of history, would have been a hopeless failure. 
In using human instruments, whether individuals or genera- 
tions, for his purposes, the infinitely-wise God used them in 
strict accordance with the laws of their mental operations. 
In searching for traces of the Divine Mind in the result of 
the divine working, our survey must be of the work asa 
whole, and not of mere fragments nor of petty details. From 
single effects, or from series of effects in the natural world, 
we may discern no Creator—nothing but traces of blind force 
through which the Creator works ; it may be only when the 
harmonious whole reveals to us its unity of design, that the 
designing mind of the Creator speaks to us and we hear; 
so in all the details and single portions of Scripture we find, 
so far as Inspiration! is concerned, nothing but evidence of 


1. Col, 4: 10, 11; Philem., 24; 2 Tim., 4: 11. 

2. Eusebius, quotation from Papias, Hecles. Hist., 3, 29. Justin Martyr, Diai. 
cum Tryphone, sec. 106, p. 360, ed. Otto. Irenaeus, adv. Hares, 3,1. Ter- 
tullian, adv. Mare. 

3. Irenaeus, adv. Heres, 8, 1, 1 and 3, 14, 1. Eusebius’ Heel. Hist., 8, 4. 
Tertullian, adv. Marc., 4, 2. 4, 5. 


INSPIRATION. 43 


the imperfect minds of the writers: but from the Bible as an 
organic unity speaks unmistakably the Omniscient mind 
that organized it. . 

Inspiration of the OLD TESTAMENT: 

As preliminary to evidence of this, observe, (a.) it is abso- 
lutely certain, that the Old Testament existed for many 
centuries, and the Septuagint translation of it for at least 
a century and a half, before the coming of Christ; (0.) the 
Old Testament writings were universally recognized by the 
Jews at the coming of Christ as sacred and inspired: John, 
19: 28, 29; and, (c.) the further we advance in historical 
criticism, in Oriental explorations and excavations, the more 
the evidence accumulates of the absolute trustworthiness of 
the Old Testament as mere history.? 

As direct evidence of its Inspiration may Be mentioned : 

1. Thespecial kind ofreference to the Old Testament made 
by Christ and the New Testament writers. If these latter 
were inspired, as we think they are shown to have been, 
then must the Old Testament have been written by inspired 
‘men; (@.) Christ cited the Old Testament as undisputed 
emomomer: Matin On tes TI 1B 1b): 4 22 BT 2b 04's 
Mark, 7: 9, 10, 18; Luke, 24: 25-27, 44-46; John, 10: 
31-36; (6.) the Apostles in all their writings uniformly 
appealed to it as absolutely authoritative ;* (c.) the Apostles 
directly assert the Inspiration of the Old Testament : 2 Tim., 
Beene rete, 1°20) 21.° 

2. The Inspiration of the Old Testament is to be inferred 
from the numerous, explicit and varied protestations to 


1. Evidence of supernatural knowledge is here carefully to be distinguished 
from evidence of supernatural aid in recording what is known. 

2. See the Introductions of Hug, Haevernick, Bleek, Keil, Davidson, Horne ; 
treatises on the Canon by Stuart, Alexander, Gaussen, Westcott, as well as the 
word ‘‘Canon” and names of the Old Testament books, in Winer’s Bidlisches 
Woerterbuch, Herzog’s Hncyclo. and Smith’s Bible Dictionary. 

3. See Rawlinson’s Herodotus and his Bampton Lectures on Historical Hoi- 
dences ; Layard’s Nineveh; Hengstenberg’s Pentateuch; and Egypt and the 
booksof Moses; Kurtz, The Old Covenant; B. B. Edwards, in the B20. oe vol. 2. 

4. See their Epistles and the Acts, passim. Comp. also Mark, 1: 2, 3, and the 
entire Epistle to the Hebrews. . 

5. See note, p. 39. 


44. _ INSPIRATION. 


that effect on the part of the authors of a VaR large portion 
of it; and still more from— 

3. The abounding prophecies aor predictions—in short 

the prophetic nature of the whole Old Testament in its rela- 
tion to Jewish and Christian history ; (a.) express iy 
tions of Jewish events; among many passages, see Is., 
28; 45: 1; Jer., 25: 12; ch. 28; 381: 16; (6.) numerous bis 
phecies respecting the introduction of Christianity, and 
special predictions of events in the life of Christ, as of the 
place of his birth, circumstances of his death,’ &. 

4. Thé Divine authority of the whole of the Old Testa- 
ment is also to be inferred from the fact that neither Christ 
nor the Apostles, nor any New Testament writer ever makes 
any distinction between parts of it: on the contrary, Christ 
seems to have taken special pains by enumeration of its 
parts to sanction the authority of the whole: Matt., 5: 17, 
18; Luke, 24: 44. 

OspsEcTIoNS. 1. Errors: (@.) in cosmogony and cosmol- 
ogy: founded in an attempt to interpret the orientalisms of 
Genesis according to the exact and scientific rules of the 
occidental mind; (6.) ethnology: ethnological science has 
not yet invalidated the trustworthiness of the account which 
Genesis gives of the original distribution of the races; 
(c.) chronology: this is a difficulty for the solution of which 
we have not yet the definite data; (d.) statistics: itis always 
to be remembered that in rude ages and among semi-civilized 
peoples, like those of the early periods of the Jewish history, 
exaggerations and employment of round numbers always 
prevail. To inspire was not to educate. 

2. The gross anthropomorphic and anthropopathic ideas 
of God. Revelation being necessarily progressive and by 
types, they who are inspired to make it must begin.at the 
level of the people to whom it is made. The inspiration of 
the Bible began at the level of the Jews just escaped from 
three centuries of slavery, but ever elevating them, gave 
them also progressively spiritual conceptions of God. 


1. See citations throughout the New: Testament. 


INSPIRATION. | 45 


3. The Old Testament contains unintelligible and unful- 
filled prophecies. The objection, on either side of it, rests on 
false conceptions of both the nature and design of prophecy ; 
the former assuming that it must be a complete picture of 
what is foretold, and be designed to be fully understood 
before fulfillment, and the latter assuming, what cannot be 
proved, that certain events were specified which did not 
and cannot now take place. 

4. Immoral influence: (a.) from the bad examples of great 
personages, like Abraham, Jacob and David: but the record 
never commends their misdeeds; it only reports them 
impartially, presenting elsewhere the moral precepts by 
which they and their acts are to be measured: (0.) from 
its low motives of temporal rewards and penalties: the 
objection forgets that motives must always be such as a peo- 
ple can appreciate, and that the motives of the Old Testa- 
ment were progressively elevated and pure as the revelation 
progressed historically: (c.) a fiercely vindictive spirit as 
shown against the Canaanites and in the imprecatory Psalms: 
but it is here forgotten that the Old Testament is not to be 
judged in the light of the nineteenth century of the Chris- 
tian era, but in the dim twilight of the fourteen centuries 
during which it was written. The fate of the Canaanites 
was contrary to neither the spirit nor the usage of the times, 
and need not now disturb us; it was not the imprecations of 
the Psalms that were inspired of God, but his purposes and 
ideas of which these were by the times the necessary vehi- 
cle; just as the adultery of David was not by divine com- 
mand though the divine purposes in regard to the natural 
descent of Christ, were thereby accomplished.’ 


1. See Hengstenberg, Genuineness of the Pentateuch, and his Christology of 
the O. T.. 

In addition to the works above referred to, see Wordsworth, Inspiration of 
Holy Scripture. Lee, Inspiration of Scripture. Steudel, Inspiration of the 
Apostles, Ch. Rev., Jan. and April, 61. Bannerman, Inspiration of the Scrip- 
tures. Prof. Fitch, Bib. Sac., vol. 12. Garbett, Doctrine of the Insp. of Holy 
Script. Aids to Faith, essays 7 and 9, Row, The Nature and Hatent of 
Divine Insp. Curtis, The Human Hlement in the Insp. of the Sac. Scripts. 


46 DOCTRINE OF GOD. 


DOCTRINE OF GOD. 


ns 


§$10—Proofs of his Hxistence, 


The Bible never attempts to prove the being of God, but 
always assumesit. Indeed the very idea of a Revelation-pre- 
supposes the recognized existence of a Revealer. The Scrip- 
tures accordingly assume this existence as well-known and 
universally admitted. 

In like manner, the earliest Christian apologists attempted 
no formal proof of the divine existence. Denying as they 
did the real existence of the heathen deities, and compelled in 
consequence of this, to defend themselves against the charge 
of atheism, it was not so much the existence of God as their 
recognition of it, which they were required to prove. The 
apologists of the first two or three centuries did little else than 
assume the being of God as an intuitive belief or an axiomatic 
truth of religion.1 But from the close of the 4th and beginning 
of the 5th centuries, there began to be something like formal 
argumentation in support of the belief. From the time of 
Anselm in the 12th century, this argumentation became 
more elaborate—was pursued by the Schoolmen—and in the 
17th and 18th centuries became, among Protestant writers, 
one of the engrossing topics of both theology and philosophy. 

It may here be asked, why not now imitate the writers of 
Scripture in assuming the existence of God, or at least the 
earliest apologists, in appealing to conscicusness, and so 
dispense with all argumentation on the question. In the 
pulpit this doubtless is ordinarily the preferable method, 
but it is indispensable that we somewhere: vindicate the 
truth of this fundamental conception of theology, because, 

1. The legitimacy of the assumption and appeal has been 
denied. It has been Paka that the idea of God, the Crea- 


1. Justin Martyr, Apologia 1, ch. 6, Dial. cum Try.,c. 93. Tertullian, Ape, 
ce. 17. De Test. Anime, c.2. Clement of Alex., Strom. 5, 12. 
2. See Augustine, de libero Arbit., lib. 2, c. 8-15, 


OO EE _ 


DOCTRINE OF GOD. © 47 


tor and Ruler of the universe, is a fiction of the imagination, 
or, at least, the product of ungrounded fears. 

2. The assumption must rest on some recognized and 
defensible grounds, and the appeal must be made to some- 
thing in consciousness, which can and ought to be vindi- 
cated at the tribunal of reason. If the existence of God be 
not logically demonstrable, it may. yet be so supported 
against atheism as that not to believe it would be Pate ely 
unreasonable. 

3. Whatever may be the origin of the idea of God, or of the 
universal belief in his existence, whether Has a (from a 
primal revelation,) innate,’ instinctive,* intuitional,® neces- 
sary,* or inferential,® the belief must be capable of some 
kind of rational justification or it cannot be rationally 
retained. The origin of the idea of God is not to be con- 
founded with the method of its justification. 

4. The need of this justification is now rendered impera- 
tive by the persistent use made of both metaphysical phi- 
losophy and physical science*in attempted proof of the 
non-existence of a personal God. The author of the Bible, 
if it be what it claims, must also be the author of Nature, 


1. See Descartes, Principia Philosoph., part 1, sects. 14 and 17. Comp. 
Cudworth, Jntellectual System, Harrison’s ed., containing Mosheim’s notes, vol. 
3, pp. 87-48; also Locke, Human Understanding, bk. 1, ch. 4. 


2. See Renan quoted and criticised by Max Miller, Chips, vol. 1, pp. 345-6, 
Amer. ed. 


3. Theodore Parker, Discourse of a ae bk. 1, ch. 2.—Max Miiller, Onips, 
vol. 1, pp. 348-9. 


4. Calderwood, Philosophy of the Infinite, ch. 2, though asserting, p. 48, that 
‘‘there are no arguments for the being of God sufficient to warrant the belief 
as it is held among men,” yet declares it, p. 43, to be ‘‘a necessary belief, that 
is, a belief essential to our nature, so that the opposite cannot be believed, 
when the real problem is presented to the mind,” and speaks of it indifferently 
as a ‘‘ primary belief,” an ‘‘intuitional belief,” and an ‘‘innate,” a ‘‘ fundamen- 
tal,” a ‘‘necessary conviction.” 


5. Mc Cosh, Intuttions of the Mind, bk. 2, ch. 5, sec. 2, in language not 
specially lucid says, ‘‘ the belief in God is native to man”—‘‘yet it is not a 
single instinct incapable of analysis, but is the proper issue of a number of single 
principles, all tending to a certain point.” ‘‘There are both experiential and 
a priort elements.” 


° 


48 DOCTRINE OF GOD. 


and his existence be reflected alike in consciousness and in 
the unvarying order of the physical universe. 

Arguments for the Divine existence have been variously 
classified, though commonly distributed under the two 
general divisions of a priori and a posteriori. This distri- 
bution, however, has been objected to on the ground that 
the socalled a priori is, in truth, a posteriori, since it rests on 
experience and is inductive from fact rather than deductive 
from principle.t Considerable diversity has always existed 
in the special classification of arguments ;* but all legitimate 
evidence of the Divine existence, at present employed, would 
seem to be reducible to one or another of the five following 
well established kinds.of argument : 

1. The Cosmological, or argument from contingency. It 
has been variously stated: by Aristotle,’ that the motion 
manifest in the world must have required an immovable 
mover as its cause; by Leibnitz,* and Wolff,’ that a uni- 
verse of contingent things and dependent beings, must have 
the ground of its. existence in a self-existent or necessary 
Being. With slight variations’ it has continued to be fre- 


1. See Lord Brougham, Discourse of VN. atural Theol., part 1, sec. 4.—Bid. Sac., 


vol. 6, pp. 614-15. : 
2. Thos. Aquinas, Summa Theol. pars. 1, ques. 2, art. 3, employs five argu- 


ments; but the first three are only branches or forms of the cosmological, the . 


other two being the ontologlcal and the teleological ; he makes no use of. the 
historical or of the moral. The first Protestant theologians, both Lutheran and 
Reformed, assumed the existence of God as a truth planted in or impressed on 
the minds of all men, see Melancthon’s Loci, locus de Deo, and Calvin’s 
Institutiones, lib. 1, cap. 3; but their successors soon entered on the work of 
argumentation in its support, and, in due time, under the guidance of Des- 
cartes, Leibnitz, Wolff, and Kant, the five general classes of argumentation 
now employed, were clearly recognized. 

3. Metaphysica, 4, 6. Comp. the first argument of Thos. Aquinas. 

4, Theod. P. 1, §7 Comp. Aquinas’ second argument. 

5. Theol. Nat., P. 1, § 24. 

6. See Clarke, Demonstration of the Being of God, prop. 3. Dr. Emmons, 
Works, vol. 2, sermon 1, states the argument thus: ‘‘This world might have 
had a beginning ;” if so, ‘‘then it might have had a cause ofits existence; if the 
world might have had a cause, then it must have had a cause.” The argument, 
by the insertion of a negative, may be made equally available for the opposite 
conclusion, 


- — 


EXISTENCE OF GOD. 40 


quently and confidently employed; but in all its various 
forms it is virtually this: whatever exists must either be 
self-existent or have been caused to exist ; the Cosmos is an 
ageregate of contingent phenomena and as such cannot be 
self-existent and eternal; it must therefore have been cre- 
ated, and its creator must be God. 

The weakness of the argument has always been in its sec. 
ond step or its minor premise—in its inability to show 
beyond a doubt, that the Cosmos is not an endless, self- 
contained succession of phenomena, an infinite series of 
causes and effects. Such an infinite series of causes can be 
shewn to be metaphysically impossible, only by assuming 
the very thing to be proved, viz.: that it is not infinite— 
that because each member of the series is dependent, there- 
fore the infinite whole must be dependent?. The opponents 
of the argument affirm furthermore, that an infinite series 
of causes and the eternity of matter, are no more incon- 
ceivable® or irrational than the supposition of an infinite and 
eternal Being who has been the Creator of all’. 

The argument has also been objected to on the ground of 
the untenableness of its idea of causation. Phenomenal 
relation, it is said, is no evidence of causal connexion. The 
sensationalist philosophers, maintaining that all our knowl- 
edge comes through external experience, affirm that expe- 
rience gives simply the antecedence and consequence of 
phenomena and can prove nothing more than invariableness 
of sequence*—that the only idea we can have of cause is 


1. See Gillespie, Necessary Haistence of God, pp. 24-29. 

2. F. W. Newman, Nat. History of the Soul, p. 36. 

3. The notion of an infinite series of causes was once supposed to be over- 
thrown by the geologic evidence of successive cataclysms—of complete 
extinctions and new creations—above all, of the comparatively recent and 
miraculous appearance of manon earth; but new geological facts and theories— 
the multiplying proofs of the great antiquity of man—and withal, the accumulat- 
ing arguments in support of some kind of ‘*‘ evolution” by natural law, are so far 
lengthening the series of causes and effects as to make it inconceivable in 
extent and practically infinite. 

4, See Hume’s Hssays, An inquiry concerning the Human Understanding, sec, 
4. Comp. sec. 7. For Stuart Mill’s modification of Hume’s ‘‘invariableness of 
sequence,” (to obviate Reid’s criticism, see Hssays on the Intel. Powers, essay 
6, ch. 6.) by the addition of ‘‘unconditionalness,” see Mill’s Logic, bk. 8, ch. 5, §5. 


5O EXISTENCE OF GOD, 


just this ‘‘invariableness’’? and nothing more’. To which 
it is sufficient to reply that, 

(a.) The idea of causation’ is not derived from external 
experience alone, that is, by induction from observed uni- 
formity of sequence, but originates in the mind with the 
first conscious exercise of volition,? and becomes at once as 
clear and fixed in the mind of a child as in that of a man. 

(6.) The thinking mind of a personal being, thus neces- 
sarily in possession of the idea of cause, is compelled by its 
own laws of thought to demand a cause for every change it 
witnesses, and instinctively to seek a noumenon behind every 
phenomenon’. 

(c.) Causality thus becomes an axiom’ in thought, which, 
in spite of all speculation to the contrary, forces iter its 
recognition in all our thinking. 


1. Comte not only insistson “ our ignorance of anything beyond phenomena”’ 
and repudiates ‘‘every inquiry for causes and modes of production,” but main. 
tains that ‘‘force” is a mere figment of the imagination. See Comte’s Positive 
Philosophy, translated and condensed by Harriet Martineau, passim, and spe- 
cially Intro. ch. 1, and bk. 6, ch. 18.—Moleschott,, Vogt and Buchner recog- 
nise the existence of force, but find in it an explanation of all phenomena; for 
blank atheism, see Buthner’s Kraft und Stoff, (Force and Matter.) 

2. On the idea of causation and theories of its origin, see Cousin, Hlements 

of Psychology, ch. 4.—Sir Wm. Hamilton, Lectures on Metaphysics, p. 532, ff. 
Philosoph. Discussions, app. 1.—Mill, Hxzamination of Ham., ch. on causation. 
Mansel, Prolegomena Logica, ch. 5—Lowndes Int. to Phil. of Primary Beliefs, 
pt. 2, ch. '7.-Calderwood, Phil. of the Infinite, ch. '7.--Bowen, Metaphysical and 
Ethical Science, pt. 1, ch. 4.—McCosh, The Intuitions of the Mind, pt. 2, bk. 8, 
ch. 2, sec. 8; and his Hxamination of Mill’s Phil., or Defence of Fund. Truths, 
‘.ch. 18.—Brougham, Wat. Theol., pt. 1, sec. 3, note 3._-Baptist Quarterly, 
April, 1869, art. by Prof. Chace. 
8, Bain, The Senses and the Intellect, pp. 98, 267.—Jas. Martineau, Hssays 
Phil. and Theol., ‘Nature and God,” p. 139, ff., Amer. ed. —Prof. Bowen, Meta. 
and Hthical Setar p. 87, ff.—Sir John Heeenal Treutise on Astronomy, 
- beginning of ch. 7, and in the Fortnightly Rev., vol. 1, p. 485, ff. 

4. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, bk. 2, ch. 2, sec. 9, §3.—McCosh, Intai- 
tions of the Mind, pp. 258-262, Amer. ed.+~Calderwoed, Phil. of the Infinite, 
p. 363, ff.—Dr. Poriad Brown, (On Cause and Affect, ) admitted that a belief in 
causation is intuitive, but maintained with Hume, that by cause we can mean 
nothing more than uniformity of sequence. E 

5. See an article by James Martineau in Contemporary Rev., July "70, vol. 
14, p. 636, ff. 


ne 


EXISTENCE OF GOD. ay | 


(d.) The idea of cause, thus necessarily originating in the 
mind and controlling its thoughts, gives its possessor no rest, 
in his search for causes, till it brings him to the infinite per- 
sonal Will, from which all force, personal and physical, 
has emanated’. 

Mere external observation of the facts of physical science 
may of itself supply no proof of a First Cause, but rational 
minds cannot observe their own laws of thought in the con- 
templation of cosmical phenomena, and not be reminded 
of a primal and Personal Force*; and the wider the 
range of phenomena observed, and the closer the inspec- 
tion of the laws of thought in observing them, the more 
convincing the evidence of a Supreme Power and Reason 
lying behind and originating the universal whole®. ‘‘ The 
belief in God is primarily based on mental and not on phy- 
sical phenomena’.”’ 

2. The Teleological, or Argument from Design. This is 
the oldest argument of all—is the most frequently used— 
and is the most readily appreciated by the common mind. 
It may\.be stated thus: adaptations to ends are marks of 
design—are evidences of purpose; the world abounds in 
adaptations to ends; therefore the world must have been 
purposed, or there is a personal Intelligence, God, by whom 
it has been fashioned. 

The validity of the argument has been assailed on a vari- 
ety of grounds’; formerly by a denial of its major premise 


1. See Sir John Herschel, on The Origin of Force, in Fortnightly Review, 
vol. 1, p. 435-442.—Martineau, Hssays, v. 1, 188 ff. 

2. See Herbert Spencer, First Principles, pt. 2, c..6, § 60. 

3. Even Baden Powell, who, in his Order of Nature, goes beyond Hume and 
Mill, declaring, p. 476, that ‘‘ when we have merely an inductive truth then we 
can have no other real idea of causation than ‘ relation’ or ‘ concurrence,’” and p. 
232, “that the supernatural can never bea matter of sctence or knowledge,” is 
obliged to recognise a ‘‘ Supreme Reason in Nature” and to admit that ‘‘it belongs 
properly to the function of reason to acknowledge universal reason—of intellect 
to recognize infinite intelligence, as pre-eminently harmonious with its own 
operations, by which the indications of universal mind are discovered,” &c. p. 223. ° 

4. See Sir Wm. Hamilton, Lectures on Metaphysics, lect. 2. Comp. Mansel, 
Limits of Religious Thought, lect. 4, note 4. 

5. See British Quarterly, art. Theism, July, 1871. 

° 


a2 EXISTENCE OF GOD. 


alone; but latterly by a denial of both premises. Thus 
Hume declared the notion of design to be derived from ex- 
perience, and pronounced it illogical to reason from objects 
known to have been made, to the making of worlds of the 
origin of which we have no experimental knowledge’ ; to 
which Reid, and the Scotch metaphysicians generally, re- 
plied, that the inference of design in a cause from marks of 
fitness in the effect, is a first principle or primary belief of 
the mind®. Chalmers, at a later day, admitted the idea 
of design to be derived primarily from experience, yet 
maintained that the idea, once received, becomes, by ever 
widening experience and generalization, a necessary thought 
of the mind ; and being thus a necessary thought, it just as 
inevitably accompanies us in our contemplation of a world, - 
as of an object which we know from experience to have 
been made’. 


Again, both premises have been denied on the double 
ground, first, that adaptedness to given ends does not prove 
purposed adaptation’, and secondly, that adaptedness to 
ends in nature is the simple product of natural law—new 
organs and new species being evoked amid the wants of 


new and altered conditions ; according to Lamarck, by inhe- 


rent ‘‘appetency ;’ according to Darwin, by ‘‘ natural selec- 


tion ;’ and according to Owen, by ‘‘derivation,’’ ‘‘through 
innate tendency to deviate from parental type®.’ But any 
such explanation of adaptedness must either account for 


1. See his Dialogues concerning Natural Religion. 

2. See Reid, Works, Essays on the Intel. Powers, ess. 6, ch. 6; or Hamil- 
ton’s ed., vol. 1, pp. 456-461. 

3. Nat. Theol., vol. 1, bk. 1, ch. 4. 

4. Physicists, from Bacon (see his Vooum Organum, lib. 1, aphor. 48, 96. 
Advancement of Learning, b. 2, vol. 1, p. 198, Montagu ed., Carey & Hart, 
1844,) down to our own day, have quite too frequently clamored against the 
inquiry for final causes as unscientific and misleading. On the contrary, see 
Whewell, Hist. of Induc. Sciences, b. 17, c. 8, sec. 2, and additions to 3d 
edition, b. 17. 

5. See Vestiges of the Nat. Hist. of Creation.—Darwin, Origin of Species 
and Descent of Man.—Owen, Comparative Anatomy and Physiology, vol. 8, 
ch. 40.—Wallace, Contributions to Theory of Nat. Selection, 


s 


a 
/ 
* 


) 
(2) 


EXISTENCE OF GOD, 


it as the result of fortuitous occurrences, or as the product 
of a foreseeing and purposing mind ; suppositions, the first 
of which, even if admissable in single cases, becomes repug- 
nant to every law of thought when applied to the complex- 
ity of our Cosmos, and the second of which alone commends 
itself to the rational mind. Prof. Owen, who even holds to 
spontaneous (nomogenous) generation, who rejects what he 
calls Cuvier’s theory of adaptation by ‘‘ miraculous crea- 
tion,’’ and finds the origin of adaptations in secondary 
causes, is obliged to recognise an archetypal ideal running 
through the animal kingdom from the lowest vertebrates up 
to man; to recognise in all ‘‘a manifestation of creative 
power ;’ and to regard secondary cause as ‘the servant of 
predetermining, intelligent Will’.”’ 

The argument from design, therefore, so far from being 
overthrown by physical science, remains intact, as proof of 
the existence of a Supreme Mind, and is yet to find a useful 
ally inathreatened enemy. All that is essential in the argu- 
ment, in either premise, addresses itself, to-day as ever, to 
the intelligence of man, proclaiming to him the existence of 
that Supreme Intelligence who conceived and in his own 
way fashions all things’. 

3. The Ontological, or Argument from the Idea of the 
most perfect Being. The germs of the argument are found 
in Augustine’, but it was first wrought into definite and 
logical form by Anselm‘, with whom it was substantially 
as follows: There isin the mind of man the idea of the most 
perfect Being—of a Being who, as the most perfect con- 
ceivable, must be self-existent, or have a necessary exist- 
ence ; but a self-existent or necessarily existing Being, can- 

1. See Comp. Anat. and Phys., vol. 8, pp. 787-88, 796, 808. 

2. On this argument see the treatises on Nat. Theology by Derham, Wolff, 
Paley, Reimarus, Brougham, Chalmers, and others; the Bridgewater treatise of 
Whewell on Astronomy and Gen. Physics._-Hugh Miller, Foot-Prints of the Crea- 
tor.—Hitchcock, Geol. and Christianity._McCosh, Divine Government, and other 
works.—Tullock, Theism.—Buchanan, Modern Athetsm.--Agassiz, On Classifi- 
cation.—Wharton, Theism and Scepticism.—Duke of Argyle, Reign of Law. 
Ulrici, Gott and Natur., absch 5.—Lotze. Mikrokosmus, B. 4, kap, 1. 2. 

3. De Lib. Arbitrio, lib. 2, chh. 8-15. 

4. Proslagion, chh. 2-4,—trans. Bib. Sac., July 1851, vol. 8, p. 529, ff. 


54 EXISTENCE OF GOD. 


not, without contradiction, be conceived of as non-existent ;. 
the most perfect Being, therefore, is a real existence. 

Descartes!, on the basis of his theory of innate ideas, reasoned 
that, since we have the idea of an infinitely perfect Being, 
and this idea could have ‘come only from a perfect Being, 

such a Being must exist. Cudworth, though he criticised 
Descartes’ mode of stating the argument, “adopted it?, as 
Stillingfleet had previously done®. It was also used by. 
Maco in his Theologia Nat. But the most noted use of it 
after Anselm, was made by Samuel Clarke’, who began 
with the proposition that something must haye existed from 
eternity ; proceeded to a second, that an unchangeable and 
independent Being must have existed from eternity—a Being 
who, necessarily existing, cannot without contradiction be 
conceived of as non-existent; and made the whole argu- 
ment finally to turn on the assumptions that eternal dura- 
tion and infinite space, the non-existence of which is incon- 
ceivable without a contradiction, must be attributes of a 
substance or essence, which he concludes to be God. Wil- 
liam Gillespie’, in a compact and Ingenious argument, from 
the ideas of infinite extension and infinite duration, avoids 
what he regards as a petitio principii im the second propo- 


is Medidationes de prima Philosophia, 3, 5. 

2. See Cudworth, /ntell. System, ch. 5, sec. 1, or, for the same, with Mosheim’s 
eae of Cudworth, see Harrison’s Eng. edit., vol. 8, pp. 41-55, 

3. Origines Sacrae. 

4. Pt. 1, c. 1, § 24, ff. comp. pt. 2, sec. 1, c. 1, 

5. A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God. The farce of 
Clarke’s argument becomes a little more apparent, if we may re-arrange its mate. 
rials somewhat after the: following order: Something must have existed from 
eternity, and thus be self-existent, 7. e. be necessarily existent ; what necessarily 
exists cannot without contradiction be conceived of as non-existent; the world 

can without contradiction be conceived of as non-existent and thus cannot be 
self-existent ; but it is a contradiction not to suppose that something now exist- 
ing has necessarily and eternally existed; eternal duration and infinite space 
cannot without contradiction be Conon of as not existing; but duration and 
space cannot be substances, and must therefore be nroperties or attributes of 
some eternal Essence or Substance, which is God. 


6. The necessary Existence of Gad, first published in 1838, and a new eats 
Edinburgh, 1848, 


pe 
r 


at 


EXISTENCE OF GOD. 
sition of Clarke’s argument, but does not otherwise differ 
essentially from Clarke. 

The fatal error of the argument has always been its 
assumption, amounting to a petitio principii, that our sub- 
jective conceptions, however necessary as modes of thought, 
must have a corresponding objective reality. Between the 
conceivable and the real, the admitted possible and the 
demonstrably actual, there is a chasm which no logic can 
bridge. Our modes and conditions of thought can never be 
shewn to be the adequate measure of realities or modes of 
Being that transcend our experience’. 

4. The Historical Argument. History has been supposed 
to testify in several ways to the being of God: 

(a.) By shewing the universality of a belief in some kind 
of a Deity*—a belief which it is thought can be accounted 
for only by the fact of the Divine existence ; 

(0.) By shewing, through the Philosophy of History, a 
convergence of aims and a comprehensive unity of purpose 
in the rise and progress of nations—a species of argument 
almost identical with the teleological 

(c.) By exhibiting the uniform nt influence of 
Theism, as compared. with the disastrous consequences of 
every instance of a practical national atheism. 

The argument. often adduced from the biblical histories 
and their recorded miracles, or from a historical Revelation 
as a whole, contains so manifest a pefitio principti as to be 
hardly worthy of serious criticism. In truth, the historical 
argument, in any form, is drawn from premises so uncer- 
tain as to add but very little weight to the general evidence 
for the existence of God. 


1. See Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, pt. 2, div. 2, b. 2, ch. 8, sec. 4; or 
pp. 364-70, trans. Bohn. 

2. See Aristotle, de Colo, 1, 3.—Cicero, De Nat. Deorum, 1, 17, 18.—John 
Howe, Living Temple, pt. 1, ch. 2. As to the truth of this universality there 
has of late years been much dispute. See Moffatt’s Miss. Scenes and Labors 
in Southern Africa, 1842, ch. 16. Comp. Livingstone, 7ravels and Researches 
in Southern Africa, ch. 8. Indefence of its truth, see Calderwood, Phil. of 
the Infi., app. B. Against it, see Sir John Lubbock, Prehistoric Times, 2d ed., 
ch. 15. pp. 564-68. 


36 EXISTENCE OF GOD. 


5. The Moral Argument, founded on the Moral Nature of 
man. The argument may take various forms, according to 
its premises. Thus, | 

(a.) The human soul spontaneously forms to itself an ideal 
existence higher than its own, and instinctively seeks to rea- 
lize its ideal. It craves the knowledge of some one on 
whom it can entirely rely, and whom it can completely imi- 
tate ; and this feeling is the strongest in the best men. But 
there is no point at which the soul in its aspirations and 
cravings can find its ideal and its repose, till it finds them in 
its all-pertfect archetype, its Supreme Being, God. 

(6.) Man is so constituted as necessarily to make moral 
distinctions. There is a power or faculty within him by 
which he decides and must decide, some things to be right 
and others to be wrong’. The decisions of this faculty, 
moreover, are always according to some absolute authority 
or law, and its decisions are always uncompromisingly im-. 
perative. An authority—a law—thus controlling man’s 
will, must itself be the expression of a superior, a Supreme 
Will. But if there be in man a moral faculty, if that 
faculty always represents and enforces moral law, and moral 
law represents authoritative will, then thereisa God. ‘If 
our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and 
knoweth all things.’’ Nor is this argument invalidated by 
any defensible theory of the nature and functions of con- 
science®; for whether we ascribe its decisions to our own im- 


1. Kant, in his Metaphysik der Sttten, represents the action of conscience as 
like ‘‘ conducting a cause before a court ;” and adds, ‘‘now that he who is the 
accused by his conscience should be figured to be just the same person as his 
judge, is an absurd representation of a tribunal; since in such an event the 
accuser would always lose his suit. Conscience must therefore represent to 
itself always some one other than itself as Jupéx, unless it is to arrive at a con- 
- tradiction with itself.” See trans., Metaphysics of Hthics, by Semple, Edinburgh, 
1869, pp. 245, 246.—See also, Newman, Grammar of Assent, pt. 1, ¢. 5, §1. 

2. ‘*Moral laws not merely presuppose the existence of a Supreme Being, 
but also, as themselves absolutely necessary in a different relation, demand or 
postulate it.” Critique of Pure Reason, Bohn, p. 889. Comp. Muller, Doct. of — 
Sin, b. 1, p. 1, c. 2, § 8. | 

d. The Evolutionist theory of morals, which sees in conscience only the trans- 
mitted and cumulative effect of pleasurable or painful sensations, (see Bain’s 


EXISTENCE OF GOD. 7 ay | 


mediate intuitions, or regard them as the reflex of an 
external discipline, the soul, forced by an inherent necessity 
to make moral distinctions and to recognize an authority 
higher than itself, finds in consciousness an unmistakable 
testimony to the existence of Him who is at once the soul’s 
author, and its ultimate standard of right and wrong. 


(c.) Human society is a commingling of the virtuous and 
the vicious, of right and wrong, with a frequent triumph of 
the latter. This confusion has always been one of the 
world’s perplexing riddles’. But man is so endowed with 
an ineradicable sense of right as to demand a final enforce- 
ment of Justice—as to look for the interposition, and conse- 
quently to believe in the existence of a Supreme Judge and 
Disposer, who shall administer Justice to all men at the last?. 


But of all the arguments that can be adduced in proof of 
the existence of God, no one can be said to be a demonstra- 
tion, nor can all combined suffice to convince a determined 
atheist. The evidence of the divine existence is not so much 
logical as moral; itis adjusted rather to the ‘“‘eye of the 
soul’’ than to the “logical faculty ;’ if that eye be dark- 
ened God is not seen in any evidence he may give of his 
being. The validity of the evidence is not so much to be 
tested by syllogisms as by analysis of the moral con- 
sciousness. 


If it be asked, what then is the value of these formal 
proofs, we answer, all depends on the use to be made of 
them. To one who already believes in the existence of 
God, they have value as corroborative evidence and correc- 


The Emotion and the Will, p. 1, c. 15, and Herbert Spencer’s letter to J. Stuart 
Mill, quoted in Bain’s Mental and Moral Science, p. '722.—Darwin’s Descent of 
Man, v. 1, p. 1, c. 8.—Sir John Lubboek, The Origin of Civilization and Prim. 
Cond. of Man, p. 270, ff.) breaks down hopelessly when tested either by facts or 
by critical analysis. See Mivart’s Genesis of Species, c. 9.—R. H. Hutton’s 
criticism of Spencer in Macmillan’s Magazine, July, 1869, and The Contempo- 
rary Rev., July, 1871 

1. See the book of Job; Jeremiah, 12: 1.; Psalm, 73. Plutarch, De Sera 
Numinis Vindicta, Hackett’s ed. with notes. 

2. See Hase, Hutterus Redivivus, § 56, 2. 


58 ORIGIN OF OUR CONCEPTIONS OF GOD. 


tive knowledge’; to honest enquirers, though insuflicient to 
convince when taken simply, yet unitedly they are well nigh 
_irresistible ; but in the conflict with theoretic atheism they 
cannot be regarded as decisive. Nor is an extended and 
formal use of them in the pulpit desirable. Ordinarily, the 
better method in religious instruction is to imitate the Scrip- 
tures and the earliest Christian fathers in assuming that God 
is, and in relying on the moral consciousness of every man 
fer the evidence of his existence. So immediate is the. 
response of the moral nature of man to the teachings of 
Christ, that the existence of God may be regarded as one of 
the axioms of his religion’. But we should not, as consist- 
ently we cannot, ignore the various kinds of evidence for 
the Divine existence on which the several classes of argu- 
ments we have now glanced at are based. They thrust 
themselves on our notice and should be used to stimulate 
attention to the revelations which God has made of himself, 
and to irradiate the consciousness to which we appeal. See 
Pss., 8. 19. 104. Acts, 14: 17.17: 24. Ro., 1219, 20.) 2:14. 


$ 11—Origin of our Coneeptions of God. 


This inquiry is two-fold ; relating primarily, to our forms 
of thought, and secondarily, to the contents of our thoughts*. 
The first are necessary and universal, springing from our 
own mental constitution and modes of being; the second 
are derived from the external world, from our moral nature, 
from the Scriptures, etc. 

1. The Forms of our Conceptions. It is impossible for us 
to think of God at all, except under modes of thought deriv- 
ed from our consciousness. This is true of the most rudimen- 


1. See Mansel, Limits of Religious Thought, lect. 2, pp. 115, 116. Am. ed. 

2. See Baring Gould’s Origin and Development of Religious Belief, p. 2, 
Christianity, chh. 1—6. 

3. For a noticeable confounding of these, see McCosh, Divine Government, 
ch. 1, sec. 1. 


ORIGIN OF OUR CONCEPTIONS OF GOD. 59 


tary conception of him as First Cause. We are conscious 
of thought, purpose, power ; of the moral emotions of justice 
and benevolence, of love and aversion ; and we cannot con- 
sult these sources of our knowledge of God, without giving 
to our ideas of him such forms of conception as ground 
themselves in our own activities and emotions. It is in 
view of these necessary forms of our thoughts of God, that 
we can understand, 

(a.) The anthropomorphisms and anthropopathisms of 
the Scriptures ; 

(6.) Why it is that a people’s character and its Deity or 
deities are always correlative ; 

(c.) Why all the-Old Testament theophanies were through 
angelico-human forms and modes; why the Logos, to give 
us distinct and effective conceptions of the Divine nature 
and character, must be incarnate ; and why, becoming in- 
carnate, he should be recognized as divine, because he was 
the perfect archetype of an image already existing (how- 
ever obscured) in the mind of man. ‘‘In Him was Life, 
and the Life that was in Him was the light of men ;’’ 

(d.) Why itis that, though our most exalted and spiritual 
conceptions of God can be but ennobled modifications of 
ourselves, any attempt at imaging him to the senses is 
forbidden. The mind’s conceptions of God as Spirit are ever 
refining and becoming transfigured to the mind’s eye, but 
images of whatever kind, wanting the essence of life and 
rigidly fixed, are soon exhausted, and instead of lifting the 
mind upward ever drag it downward. 

II. The Contents of our Conceptions. These are 
derived partly from the world around us, partly from the 
world within us, partly from the Scriptures, and partly 
from our experience as the reflex of Scripture. 

(a.) From the world around us. On every hand we 
observe changes or phenomena, whence we infer the exist- 
ence of force or power ; from the necessary conception of a 
beginning of changes or phenomena, we infer creative force ; 
from the aggregate of phenomena, unlimted power. But 
from the. mere existence of phenomena we can infer the 


60 ORIGIN OF OUR CONCEPTIONS OF GOD. 


existence of nothing more than creative force. On closer 
inspection of phenomena we find them adjusted to one 
another and to given ends. Adjustment betokens an intel- 
ligent, purposing, skilful or wise, force ; and intelligence and. 
wise purpose both necessitate and justify the conception of 
personality. We observe in society that the moral actions 
of men are followed by moral consequences, correspondent to 
the moral qualities of their acts, and these consequences 
thrust on the mind the conviction that the creative force of 
the universe is not only a purposing and wise intelligence, 
but an overruling Being whose government is at the same 
time just and benevolent. Ro., 1: 18-20. 

(6.) Correlated with the world around us is the world 
within us, or our moral nature. Awakened to activity, this 
moral nature, by its primary affirmations, makes deliverances 
through the moral consciousness which enter necessarily 
into our conceptions of God. The conviction in man is 
ineradicable, that if there be a God he must in some sense 
be that archetypal existence of which we are the antitypes. 
The trustworthiness of these deliverances of consciousness 
must, therefore, be admitted, if we are to have any founda- 
tion on which to stand in our thoughts of God. But the 
deliverances are not absolutely self-generated and independ- 
ent; they are elicited by awakenment and tuition, either 
fyom the world of nature about us, or, from that product of 
the supernatural world Known as, | 

(c.) The Sacred Scriptures. To this source, more than to 
any or to all others, every unprejudiced mind must admit 
that mankind have been indebted for all just and worthy 
conceptions of God. It not only supplies a corrective and 
supplement to both the preceding, but from its teachings 
respecting God, definitely understood, there. can be no 
appeal. Cognate with the Scriptures as a source, is, 

(d.) Christian Experience. This experience is the practi- 
cal testing of the New Testament teaching. The doctrines 
of the Apostles were, to a great extent, statements of their 
experience of the contents of the Gospels; and Christian 
experience with us is a like reproduction, or practical test- 


PERSONALITY OF GOD. | 61 


ing in ourselves, of the contents of both the Gospels and the 
Apostolic epistles. We acquire in our experience a new 
sense for the apprehension of what is written; this new 
sense gives to its possessor, though unlearned, an advan- 
tage in the knowledge of God over the most cultivated in 
whom it is wanting. The knowledge of learning may be 
the broader; that of experience will be the profounder. 
But as experience, to be trustworthy, must be strictly a 
reflex of Scripture, this source can only be subordinate and 
subsidiary to that of the Bible. Finally, 

(e.) A corrective and regulative principle in all our think- 
ing of God is the idea of perfection. Whatever may be the 
origin of the idea, it seems to be necessarily in our possession 
We cannot conceive of imperfection without the alternative 
conception of perfection, nor think of the finite without the 
correlative thought of the infinite, whether of time, space, 
or being’. The idea of perfection evidently underlies the 
Scriptural conceptions of God, though there was a manifest 
growth in the clearness and accuracy of the idea itself 
between the periods represented in the beginning and close 
of our canonical books; and that idea should be the con- 
trolling one, whatever the process by which our present 
conceptions of God are completed’. 


$ 12—Personality of God. 


If God exists, it must be either as personal or as imper- 
- sonal—either as self-conscious intelligence and self-deter- 
mining will, or as one and identical with the universe. His 
personality, as taught in Scripture, has been denied by 


1. See Cousin, Introduction to the Hist. of Philosophy, \ects. 4, 5.—Hamil- 
ton, Phil. Discussions, ‘‘ Phil. of the Conditioned,” pp. 36, 37. Harpers, 1853. 
—Ulrici, Gott und Natur, p. 612. 

2. The two general sources above named will be found to correspond very 
nearly and respectively to the well known distribution by the older theologians 
into via eminentiz and via causalitatis ; the last special source, to their via nega- 
tionis. See Hollaz, Hxam. Theol., de Deo.—Turretine, Insti. Theol., locus 3, 
ques. 2, §8.—Reinhard, Dogmatik, § 31, 3.—Bretschneider, Dogmatik, § 51. 


e s 


62 PERSONALITY OF GOD. 


positivists, who know no God but law, orat best but physi- 
cal force; by pantheists, who recognize no God but the 
universe, or at best but the universal reason of man ; both, 
though starting from antipodal points in their reasoning, 
reach a common conclusion in the denial of a purposing, 
personal God. Both are practically atheistic; the first by 
deficiency, the second by excess. 

The idea of personality originates in our conscious- 
ness of self—of ego as distinguishable and distinct from all 
that is non-ego ; analysis of the idea shews that its contents 
or elements consist of intelligence, will and conscience’. 
Thus personality consists of free moral reason, of self-deter- 
mining intelligence under the dominion of moral law ; and 
free moral intelligence can only be thought of as personal’. 
God, therefore, the infinite intelligence, self-conscious and 
self-determined, must be conceived of as personal—as per- 
sonal will, acting with absolute freedom and absolute recti- 
tude’. We should believe in the personality of God, 

1. Because of the naturalness and necessity of the idea. 
It is thrust on us, as we have seen, by consciousness—by 
marks of design in the external world—by conscience—by . 
the laws of our moral being ; every reason for believing in 
a first or creative cause at all, compels us to think of that 
cause as personal; and unless we are so constituted as to 
be necessarily self-deceived, God is a personal being. 

2. The conception of personality lies at the basis of any 
just conception that we can have of physical law*. The pri- 
mary idea of law is that of a rule of action. As metaphor- 
ically used by physical science, the term law can properly 
denote only an order of sequence in physical phenomena, a 


1. See Miller, Doctrine of Sin, vol. 1, bk. 1, pt. 1, ch. 2, §2.—Mansel, Limits, 
lect. 8: Prolegomena Logica, p. 128, Am. ed.—Mark Hopkins, Lectures on 
Moral Science, lect. 7.—Delitzsch, Bib. Psychol., 4, §1.—McCosh, Intuitions, | 
p. 2, b. 2, sec. 5. | 

2. Hopkins, The Law of Love and Love as Law, div. 1, c. 7. 

3. Muller, Doctrine of Sin, b. 3, p. 1, c. 4, §§ 1,2.—Calderwood, Phil. of 
the Infinite, pp. 68, 408. 

4 The Duke of Argyle, The Reign of Law, c. 2.—Jas. Martineau’s Hssays, 
Amer. ed., v. 1, p. 188, ff.—Comp. Wallace, Wat, Selection, last ch. 


PERSONALITY OF GOD. 63 


rule according to which physical force, under given circum- 
stances, alwaysacts ; but to the reason, possessed as it necessa- 
rily is of the idea of causation, the conviction is irresistibly 
carried that the law which controls the action of physical 
force is an expression of a purposing, personal intelligence. 


3. Denial of the personality of God involves us in self- 
contradiction : (a.) A cause cannot be one with its effect ; 
that is, a cause cannot be its own effect, nor an effect its 
own cause. But man is manifestly an effect, and if, accord- 
ing to development theories, pantheistic or positivistic, the 
only God possible is the conscious personal reason of man, 
then God is simply an effect; and, since he asself-developing 
force is the author of all things, he is an effect which is its 
own cause ; (0.) Finite and infinite are opposites, which by 
no possibility can ever be changed the one into the other ; 
yet, according to pantheism, the infinite is ever becoming 
finite, and the sum total of finites in fact constitutes the 
infinite. 

4, Denial of the Divine personality leads inevitably to 
the most fearful consequences’. Morality becomes inerely 
prudential and utilitarian ; virtue and Vice are transformed 
from immutable opposites into stages of progress 3 no arche- 
typal ideal is left to the race ; no stimulus remains to the 
finer and nobler sentiments of the soul; the moral cement 
of society is dissolved and moral chaos sooner or later is 
the result. Moral consequences are not a decisive proof of 
the truth or the falsity of a doctrine ; but it is incredible that 
that should be true, which, if acted on, would lead necessarily 
to the overthrow and extinction of all that is beautiful or 
good in the individual and in society”. 


1. See Burke’s Reflections on the French Rev.—Alison’s Hist. of Hurope, v. 1, 
chh. 10—14.—Luthardt, The Fundam. Truths of Christianity, last half of lec. 3. 

-2. On the general subject of the Personality of God, see Saisset’s Modern 
Pantheism, specially p. 2, medita. 4.—Fisher’s Hssays on the Supernat. Origin 
of Christianity, ess 18.—Princeton Rev., Oct., “41, art. 3.—Bib. Repos., July, 
"42, art. 9. 


64 UNITY OF GOD. 


§ 13— Unity of God. 


The Unity of God has been thought by some to be easily 
established as one of the doctrines of Natural Theology. 
The following considerations may be adduced in its support: 


1. Though there are sufficient reasons for believing in one | 
God, there is no evidence of the existence of more than one. 


2. If there be more Gods than one, then these must either 
be unequal or equal: if unequal, then one must be greater 
than the other, and thus be the one Supreme God: if equal, 
then they must be equal in every conceivable perfection, and 
thus, since there cannot exist two infinites of the same kind, 
they must be one and the same Being ; that is, there can be 
but one God.! 


3. There is manifest unity of design in the constitution of 
the world: the laws of each kingdom, whether mineral, vege- 
table or animal, are not only harmonious in themselves, but 
constitute in their totality an independent, harmonious 
whole. The more minute and extended our research into 
the departments of Nature, the more convincing the evidence 
of a unity of aim in them all, and, consequently, of a unity 
in the origin of all. 

4, A unity of ends shews itself in the moral government 
of God—a unity so clearly marked and complete as to sug- 
zest inevitably a unity of will that originated and still directs 
the whole. These ends, indefinitely numerous and complex, 
are found on examination to be successively subordinate to an 
ever ascending and ever diminishing number of higher ends, 
and to indicate a unity of purpose which suggests to 
rational minds the existence of a single, personal Will. 

5. The laws of the moral nature of every individual man 
are in strict harmony with those of every other man, as well 
as with those of society and of the race ; and the conscience of 


1. See Turretine, locus 3, ques. 3.—Clarke, Demonstration, prop. 7.—Gilles- 
pie. Necessary existn. of God, pt. 1, prop. 4; pt. 2, prop. 4; pt. 8, props. 1, 2. 


UNITY OF GOD. 65 


every man responds to the demands of each and all of these 
laws as to the will of the one Creator of all’. 


6. Modern science intimates very clearly that every spe- 
cies of physical force is resolvable into one common force— 
that all are but modes of one and the same force’—and that 
all force, in our last conception of it, must be Personal 
Force*’—thereby pointing also to the unity of the Creator. 


DuauismM. The Manichean* notion of an eternal principle 
of evil is contradicted, 

(a.) By the nature of evil. Evil has no independent 
existence, but is simply a qualification or perversion of the 
good. Moral evil being unnatural, 7. e. opposed to the soul, 
exists only as a moral disease, a derangement or distortion, 
of the soul. Evil as absolute is inconceivable. 

2. By the spirit of evil. Moral evil is always divided 
against itself, and never as pure evil harmonizes or even 
confederates. Mixed evil may confederate when the linger- 
ing relic of good within, or the pressure of good without, 
is strong enough to constrain it®. ; 


3. By the testimony of conscience. When good and 
evil are alike pictured to the conscience, the first is instinct- 
ively and invariably recognized as authoritative over the 
second. 

But the evidence from natural religion for the Divine 
unity has never been decisive enough to preclude the neces- 


1. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, Transcend. doct. of method, ch. 2, sec. 2, 
Bohn, p. 493.—Newman, Grammar of Assent, pt. 1, c. 5, §1; pt. 2, c. 10 § 1. 

2. See Grove, The Correlation of Physical Forces.—Carpenter, On the Corre- 
lation of the Physical and the Vital Forces. | 

3. Wallace, On Natural Selection, c. 10.—Jas. Martineau, Hssays, ‘*‘ Nature 
and God,” pp. 189—141. 

4. As to the disputed question respecting Persian or Zoroastrian dualism, 
whether Zoroaster was theologieally, or only philosophically, a dualist—see 
Haug’s Essays on the Language, Writings and Religion of the Parsees ; and Lec- 
ture on an original speech of Zoroaster. Comp. Max Muller,. Chips, vol. 1, es. 6, 
and es. 8, II. 

5. See Miller, Doctrine of Sin, vol. 1, bk. 2, ch. 5, § 2. 

5 ‘ 


66 UNITY OF GOD. 


sity of a reiterated proclamation of it by the inspired writers 
of Scripture. The possibility of demonstrating the existence 
of one, personal, Supreme Being from any light of Nature, 
is more than doubtful. There were frequent lapses of the 
Jewish people into idolatry and polytheism, until after the 
Babylonian captivity, when the doctrine of the Divine unity 
was instilled into their minds by the stated reading of the 
Scriptures on the Sabbath ; and the unaided Gentile mind was 
ever oscillating between the pantheism of the philosophers* 
and the polytheism of the multitude, Rom., 1 : 19-25. Acts, 
17: 23. It is extremely doubtful if the Greek and Roman 
classical writers had any definite conceptions of the Divine 
unity*. This truth, which to enlightened minds is now. 
apparently so self-evident, has received recognition among 
men only after those reiterated declarations and that 
enforcement by a most protracted and painful discipline, of 
which the Holy Scriptures contain the details. 


The Scriptural declarations of the unity of God are both 
numerous and various: Deut., 4: 35, 39. 6: 4. 382: 39. 
Is., 43: 10, 11. 44: 6,45: 5, 6-14, 46: 9. Johnedymee 
Ro., 3: 29, 30. 1 Cor., 8: 46. Gal., 3: 20. Eph., 4: 6. 
Di eis ges Sense ce 


1. The special question of the monotheism of the Penteteuch as involved in 
the use of the plural Elohim, and the interchangeable use of Elohim and 
Jehovah, belongs to Exegesis and to special Introductions. See Max Miler on 
‘‘henotheism” by intuition and ‘‘monotheism” by revelation, Chtps, Semitic 
Monotheism, pp. 348, 369, Am. ed. 


2. In reading some of the histories of Ancient Philosophy, such as that of Ritter, 
—see vols. 2, 3, trans. by Morrison; comp. Archer Butler, Lectures, 2d series, 
lecs. 5 and 6,—one is led to conclude that Plato and Aristotle held clearly and 
firmly to the Unity of God; but it is an open question just how much they, or 
any other Greek or Latin classical writers, meant by the singular O¢éc and deus. 
The Christian fathers and Cudworth,—See Intellectual System, bk. 1, ch. 4, 
Harrison’s ed. vol. 2, p. 65-105,—believed the use of the singular was an 
instinctive recognition of the One Supreme Being; others believe they used 
the singular to denote a genus divinum, just as homo denotes a genus humanum, 
—See DeGroot, Insti. Theologie nat., 1845, p. 62. Comp. Bib. Sac., vol. 18, 
pp. 666-7. 


THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD AND HIS ESSENTIAL BEING. — 67 


$14—The Attributes of God and his Essential Being. 


The attributes of God are our modes of conceiving of him ; 
modi concipiendi existentiam divinam'. The old dispute 
between the Nominalists and the Realists,? and afterwards 
between the Socinians and Trinitarians, whether theattributes 
were to be distinguished from the essence of God realiter, 
(essentialiter,) as the Socinians affirmed, or only virtualiter, 
(formaliter,) as the Trinitarians affirmed,’ has, in our day, 
under the Hamiltonian principle of the relativity of human 
knowledge, re-appeared in a modified and advanced form, 
and, conjoined with the question of the trustworthiness of 
our knowledge of God, has touched vital points in the doc- 
trine of God. Rightly to understand this twofold contro- 
versy, and clearly to apprehend the truth that underlies it, 
we must remember, 

1. That the origin of our ‘conceptions—the attributes, of 
God, is very nearly identical with the origin of thought 
itself. All thought, or conception, originates ina perceived 
distinction between ourselves and the objects of our thought. 
From a conception of our relation to space, time and the 
external world spring our conceptions of the qualities or 
attributes of ourselves and of others. These conceptions, 
divested of their finiteness, we, by necessity ,of thought, 
ascribe to God when assured of his existence, and call them 
his attributes. 

2. The process through which we satisfy ourselves of the 
existence of God, and ascertain his attributes—arrive at our 
conceptions of him—is the same in kind, if not in directness, 
with that by which we satisfy ourselves of our own exist- 


1. Conceptus essentize divine inadequati—see Quenstedt, Theologia, c. 8, sec. 
1, thesis 8,—Comp. Turretine, locus 3, ques. 5. It is noteworthy that the word 
‘<proprietates,” used by Turretine and other Calvinist writers, to designate the 
divine attributes, is restricted by Lutherans to a designation of the relations of the 
three persons of the Trinity. See Bretschneider’s Dogmatik, § 51 

2. Petavius, De dogmat. Theol.,v. 1, chh. 8—18. 

3. See Turretine, liber 8, questio 5, and Lutheran theologians quoted in Hase’s 
Hutterus Redivivus. Comp. Bretschneider, System. Hntwickel., p. 562. 


65 THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD AND HIS ESSENTIAL BEING. 


ence, or of that of any other person. And if the testimony 
of consciousness respecting the real nature of ourselves or of 
others, Known to us only in relations, be trustworthy, there 
is no good reason why the knowledge of an infinite Being 
derived in like manner from relations, should be set aside ; 
especially since, 

3. The very relations through which an infinite Being may 
notify us of his existence, must necessarily report to us some- 
thing of the nature of his being. One cannot know that 
God is, and not, by the very process of knowing, to some 
extent ascertain what kind of a being he is. Within every 
conception we may have of him must be concentrated a 
meaning which necessarily carries us behind and beyond 
the relations, to the Being related. Thus, for instance, spir- 
ituality may be predicated of God asan attribute ; but when 
the Bible, on the ground of this conception or attribute 
assures us that ‘‘ God is spirit,’’ the mind is carried beyond 
mererelation, to some apprehension, however feeble, of essen- 
tial being, So also when we are told that *‘ God is love,”’ the 
mind is carried beyond the mere conception of love as rela- 
tive, to the idea of love as absolute, or to the simple essence 
of God. This notion of essence must be exceedingly dim 
and ill defined. But we can conceive of the Supreme Being 
as originating the relations through which he becomes 
knowable to.us, and we can conceive of him as removing 
those relations, himself remaining unconditioned by their 
presence or absence. In other words, we can conceive of 
God as centering in his essence not only the potentiality but 
the essentiality of all that we attribute to him. 

4. In the Being to whom we are thus carried back, we 
necessarily believe. On the necessity of this belief special 


1. The question of the relation of the substance or essence of matter to its 
qualities, differs from that of the relation of attributes to the essence of 
a personal being, by just so much as matter differs from spirit, and the intelli- 
gent volitional power of a personal being from the mechanical force of matter. 
We may know equally well, by one concrete act ofthe mind, both the substance 
and the qualities of matter, which are inseparable, but we apprehend being 
only by its modes or relations which are variable and totally distinct from 
itself, 


THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD AND HIS ESSENTIAL BEING. 69 


stress is laid by the advocates of the relativity of our knowl- 
edge of God. But our belief in any being, God included, 
so far from being contrary to, must be connate, if not com- 
mensurate, with our knowledge of him. An unthinkable 
Being must also be an unbelievable one. He may not be 
comprehensible, but to be believed in, must in some clear 
and positive sense be knowable. 


5. On the other hand, the essence of God is not to be 
regarded as identical with any one, or with all, of his attri- 
butes, but as the common subject of them all. Attributes 
do not represent distinguishable properties in the Divine 
Essence. Not only is all our knowledge of God relational in 
its origin, but God is cogitable to us only as he is cognizable 
to us, and he is cognizable to us only as related. What- 
ever our notion of essence, both our terminology and our 
laws of thought hold us rigidly to the relations in which 
alone he is conceivable to us. To suppose that we treat of 
essence, therefore, when we treat of attributes, is to confound 
God with our conceptions of him. An ‘‘ absolute attribute’”’ 
is a contradiction of terms, and the epithet ‘‘essential®’’, as 
applied to one class of attributes to distinguish them from 
another, is unmeaning. 


6. Any argumentation which will show that our concep- 
tions of God can only be relatively true to us, and not posi- 
tively true in themselves, will equally avail to overthrow the 
trustworthiness of all our Knowledge, and can end only in uni- 
versal scepticism. Our conceptions are inadequate but not 
therefore untrue; they are limited, because we are finite, but 
not therefore untrustworthy or false.® 


1. See DeWette, Deogmatik, §34. 

2. Breckinridge, God Obdjectively Considered, c. 19. Wemay attempt by a few 
comprehensive attributes to state our fundamental conceptions of God, but to 
attempt by these, as distinguishable from other attributes, to describe the essence 
of God, (see. Nitzsch Chr. Lehre, §§61-64,) is to make a distinction without 
pointing out a difference. 

8. On this whole question, see Augustine, De Civitate Dei, lib. 8, ch. 6, 
and lib. 11, ch. 10.—Thos. Aquinas, Swmma Theologica, dis. 8, ques. 12.—Ger- 
hard, Loci, tom. I.—Quenstedt, Theologia, ch. 8, secs. 2 and 3.—Schleiermacher, 
Geschicte der Phil., p. 166.—Turretine, Theologia, locus 3, ques. 5.—Limborch, 


TO ATTRIBUTES. 


$ 15.— Attributes. 


Various classifications of these have been adopted!; but 
that would seem to be the most natural and accurate which 
proceeds according to some order in the relations through 
which the attributes are presented to us’; and this order 
would seem to be determined by the chronological necessi- 
ties of thought. Thus there must have been space before 
the universe could have existed ; and time, which is but a 
measurement of duration rendered possible by succession, 
must have begun with the very beginning of the phenomenal 
universe—space and time thus suggesting the attributes of 
Immensity and Eternity. Then came the successive adjust- 
ments of the Cosmos in preparation for the appearance of 
man, or those displays of divine resources whence the attri- 
butes of the infinite Architect; last of all came man, or 
those revelations of moral law whence the attributes of the 
moral Ruler. We begin with: 


I. God’s relation to space, or his attribute of IMMENSITY. 
By this is meant the illimitableness of his personal being. 
God cannot be conceived as occupying space, and if not 
spatial, then is he uUlimitable in his personal presence, 
or has the attribute of Immensity. Space does not contain 
God, but he, as the all-originating, all-sustaining cause, is 

j 

Theologia, lib. 2, cap. 2, Twesten, Dogmatik, beginning of 2d theile. Nitzsch, 
Chr. Lehre, §§61-66.—Breckinridge, Knowledge of God Objectively Considered, 
ch. 17.—Dick, Theology, vol. 1, p. 157.—Sir Wm. Hamilton, Phil. Discussions, 
Phil. of the unconditioned.—Mansel, Limits of Relig. Thought.—H. Spencer, 
First Principles, pt. 1.—Calderwood, Philos. of the Infinite.—Lowndes, Phil. 
of Primary Beliefs. Also, various criticisms of Hamilton and Mansel in the 
Quarterlies, both Foreign and American, during the years 58, ’59 and 60. 

1. For Lutherans, see Hase, Hutterus Redivivus § 60; the classifications of 
the older Reformed theologians were not dissimilar to those of the Lutherans- 
Ebrard, Dogmatik, classifies as ‘‘metaphysical (ontological), and ethical.” For one 
of the most pretentious, and at the same time complex and unscientific, of classifi- 
are see Breckinridge, The Knowledge of God Objectively ae Ce dine 

2. Comp. Nitzsch Chr. Lehre, §§ 65-74. 


s 


ATTRIBUTES. 71 


its author.! The Scriptures, which abound in descriptions 
of Divine Omnipresence’ in the Universe, do not distinctly 
assert, though they plainly imply, according to Jewish 
modes of thought, the divine Immensity in space. Job, 11: 
7-9. 1K.; 8: 27. 


Il. Relation of God to time, or his attribute of ErERNITy. 
By this is meant that God neither began, nor can cease, to be. 
The attribute has been justly defined as duratio principio et 
jine carens.® Starting with the facts of orderly succession, 
whence the idea of time, the mind, by the act of regression, 
travels backward through cycles of the past to the beginning 
of phenomenal changes, and then, by the opposite act of pro- 
gression, travels onward through anticipated cycles of the 
future, finding at the last stage of thought, in either 
direction, an existing Godhead, which, by the necessity of 
thought, it pronounces eternal: Ro. 1: 20.4. By some such 
act of regression and progression the writers of Scripture 
seem to have apprehended and to set forth the eternity of 
the being of God: Pss., 90: 2; 93: 2; 102: 25-27. Comp. 
Rev., 1: 8; 4: 8. See also the designation of God as the 
/ mine eternal,” ‘or King of the ages: 1 Tim., 1: 17. Ina 
similar manner, by contrasting God with the perishable 
generations of men, he is styled ‘‘ uncorruptible’’ and ‘‘im- 
Prete... J > 20, 4b lim,, 1: 17; 6:96. 

Kternity is necessarily one of the Divine attributes. God 
must either have a necessary and independent existence, ora 


1. ‘‘ Deus ipsius spatii auctor est.” Hase, Hutterus, p. 188; comp. Nitzsch, 
Chr. Lehre, §\69, and Schleiermacher, quoted by Nitzsch.—Sir I. Newton says, 
Deus durat semper et adest ubique, et existendo semper et ubique durationem 
et spatium constituit. 

2. Immensity is not synonymous with omnipresence, though often con- 
founded with it; the former expresses the immeasurableness of the Divine 
Essence in space, and the latter the personal presence of God in all parts of 
the universe. 

d. See Quenstedt, Limborch and others. 

4. The ‘‘power and Godhead” spoken of in this passage are ‘‘seen” to be 
“eternal,” not from the creation as such, but from the necessity of thought ; 
as creative power must have existed before the creation, so it must have 
existed before the beginning of time, and thus be eternal. Comp. also Gen., 1: 
4, and John, 1: 1. 


ree ATTRIBUTES. 


dependent and derived existence ; if derived, then the deri- 
vation must have been either from himself, which is incon- 
ceivable, or from another, which is inconsistent with God- 
head: but if he has a necessary existence, then an eternal, 
since a necessary and eternal existence are identical thoughts. 

IMMUTABILITY is commonly treated of as an attribute dis- 
tinguishable from Eternity, and is usually predicated of the 
modes of the Divine existence—of the nature and purposes 
of God, eternity being restrictedly applied to the Divine 
existence, or the being of God as such ; but an eternity of 
being is inconceivable, which does not, by the very condi- 
tions of its independence of time and change, also necessitate 
the conception of eternity of nature and purpose; in other 
words, the proper attribute of Eternity, in the comprehen- 
sive Scripture sense of it, includes the more limited concep- 
tion of Immutability. See James, 1:17. _ . 

But though eternity, inclusive of immutability, be thus 
predicable of God, we are not thereby necessitated to con- 
ceive of him as impassive and indifferent to change in us ; 
this would rob him of his Fatherhood and his sympathy 
with his creatures, as well as subvert the foundations of 
morality by making him indifferent to right and wrong 
among men. Our safe-guard is in the Scripture method of 
distinguishing between the Divine mode of being and our 
own: Ps., 90: 4; 2 Pet., 3: 8. 

Iil. The attributes of God derived from his relation to the 
material universe. The Universe or Cosmos, with the neces- 
sary idea of causation in mind, was doubtless the source of 
the conceptions of the power, knowledge, wisdom, presence, 
&c., of God, and it is from the study of this source that, 
under the guidance of the Scriptures, these conceptions can 
be completed and justified. | 

In the enumeration of the attributes of this class, we might 
either begin with some one from which the others should 
be logically deduced, in which case we should select Omni- 
presence ; or we might adopt a supposed natural and 
chronological order of observation, in which case we should 
begin with Omnipotence. The first conception naturally 


ATTRIBUTES. La 


suggested by the Cosmos to the mind of a beholder, would 
seem to be that of power, the second, the two-fold one of 
knowledge and wisdom; then, on reflection, that of omni- 
presence, and so on, from the more to the less apparent. 
We shall begin with, 

1. The OMNIPOTENCE of God. By thisis meant the power 
of God to do absolutely all things not contrary to himself". 

The conception of Omnipotence arises from the conception 
of the Universe as the creation of God ; if all power in the 
Universe is dependent on his creative will for its existence, 
it is impossible to conceive of any limit to his power except 
that laid on it by his own will. But this is only negative 
proof; absolute Omnipotence is not logically demonstrable, 
though readily enough recognized as a just conception of 
the infinite God, when propounded on the authority of a 
positive revelation. 

The metaphysical conception of absolute Omnipotence is 
only indirectly given in the Scriptures. God as the origi- 
nator of the universe,,is its absolute controller, and to the 
biblical writers this control is a supremacy of power than 
which nothing greater is conceivable. As historically taught 
in the Scriptures, it seems to have been progressively appre- 
hended. With Abraham, God was Almighty or all-suffi- 
-cient to fulfill his promises, Gen., 17:1; 18: 14.5; with the 
Jews, he was the Lord whose ‘‘mighty power’ and 
‘right hand’’ had delivered them, Deut., 4: 37; Ex., 15: 
6; with the Prophets, ‘‘the Almighty,’’? with whom ‘‘ noth- 
ing was too hard :’’ Jer., 32: 17, 27; with the New Testament 
writers, the One to whom ‘‘nothing is impossible,’’ Matt., 
domo uuke IS: 27° 12:387 5 Phil.) 3 :62r. 

2. OMNISCIENCE. All possibilities and all actualities—all 
that has been, that is to be, or that might have been—must 
be alike known to God. If he be the Creator of all things, 
then no event can spring from any force, physical or per- 
sonal, which is unknowable to him; for the creative act 


1. The question whether omnipotence includes the power of working oppo- 
sites—of creating and not creating at the same instant—is a mere juggle of 
words, representing nothing real or conceivable. ; 


74 ATTRIBUTES. 


must have embodied a definite creative purpose, and that 
purpose must have been commensurate with all the capa- 
bilities of the powers created. To suppose the contrary, is to 
suppose God to act blindly, or to exercise a power the con- 
sequences of which he does not understand ; neither of which 
is consistent with any intelligible notion of a Supreme Being. 

If the knowledge of God be infinite, then it is not con- 
tingent, but absolute,—is not inferential or deductive, but 
is eternal ; is not experimental or relative, but is essential, 
or pertains to the essence of beings and things. 

That the knowledge of God is thus infinite in degree and 
perfect in kind, is clearly taught in the Scriptures, both by 
what is implied in their idea of God, and by what is dis- 
tinctly asserted. As Judge of the whole earth, (Gen., 18: 
25,) he knows all the past acts of his creatures, and what- 
ever may have qualified their innocence or guilt, (1 Sam., 2: 
3); as Ruler, whose ‘‘ kingdom ruleth over all,’’ he sees the 
end from the beginning, directing all with plan and purpose 
unchanging. The same is implied in the vast scheme of 
prophecy that runs like an unbroken web throughout, not 
only the fourteen centuries of biblical history, but the cen- 
turies of all time. The Scriptures directly assert Omni- 
science: Pss:, 94: 11; 189.: 1-6% Ez, 11:5; dhuke, 16ssios 
Heb., 4: 18; 1 John, 3: 20. 

Nor is the attribute of Omniscience properly open to the 
objection of inconsistency with the free agency, and thus 
with the accountability, of man. The absolute certainty of 
events, which is all that. Omniscience determines respecting 
them, is not identical with their necessitation’. A finite 
understanding can predicate absolute certainty of nothing 
which is not seen to be necessary ; to the Omniscient Mind, 
in which there is no succession, no events are contingent ; 
causes with their conditions and effects, are alike and always 
known as indissolubly one. His knowledge and purposes 
both being eternal, one cannot be conceived as the ground 
of the other, nor can either be predicated, to the exclusion of 


1. See Augustine, De Libero Arbitrio, lib. 2, cap. 4.—Muller, Doctrine of 
Sin, 20.78, p. 2;-c. 2. 


ATTRIBUTES. 75 


the other, as the cause of things,’ but, correlative and co- 
eternal, they must be co-equal quantities in thought. 

Conjoined with the infinite knowledge of God is his infi- 
nite skill in the use of it,? or his infinite Wispom. This 
attribute reveals itself to us primarily and literally in the 
constitution and course of nature, and metaphorically in the 
Divine dealings with man in Christianity. The Scriptures 
dwell largely on it in both Testaments; chiefly on the first 
or literal sense in the Old Testament: Ps., 104: 24; Prov., 
8: 22-31; Jer., 10: 12; and on the metaphorical in the 
New: 1 Cor., 2:7; Eph:, 3: 10; Col., 2: 3; perhaps both 
Senses are included in Rom. 16: 27. : 

3. OMNIPRESENCE. By this is meant the presence of God 
in all parts of the universe. Theologians have not been 
unanimous in their explanations of the mode of this pres- 
ence. With Reinhard, Morus and Knapp, omnipresence is 
not the presence of the Divine personality in all places, but 
the presence of the Divine purpose, through the omniscient 
use of infinite power*—Omnipresence thus being a mere 
compound of Omnipotence and Omniscience. But it is an 
essential, personal, and not a figurative presence, of which 
the Scriptures speak—a presence which we can _ neither 
elude nor shut.out from our own inmost being. Ps., 139: 
peers): 24. ACIS, li: 27, 28. 


1. That conception of God in theology or philosophy which makes his knowl- 
edge, rather than his purpose, the ground of his action, solves no problem; 
whether the origin of evil or the relation of human freedom to Divine Sov- 
ereignty. Thos. Aquinus, whoasserts, Summa Theologica, sent. 1, dist. 38, ques: 
1, art. 1, Scientia Dei est causa rerum, is obliged to add, non omnium scitorum 
a Deo, causa est Deus; quia, mala que sunt a Deo scita, non sunt ab ipso.— 
Turretine, Jnstitutio Theol., locus 3, ques. 12, (18,) says, Preecipuum fundamen- 
* tnm scientiz divine circa futura contingentia—est—pDEOoRETUM solum. Milton 
wisely says of our first parents, Paradise Lost, b. 3: 

‘¢ Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault, 
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.” 

2. For a good statement of the distinction between wisdom and knowledge, 
see Cowper’s Task, bk. 6, near the beginning. 

8. Reinhard, Dogmatik, § 36, defines omnipresence as, illud attributum Dei, . 
quo ubique et semper immediate efficax esse potest. Comp. Storr & Flatt, Bid. 
Theol., § 30, illus. 11.—Doederlein, Institutio Theol., § 98. 


16 ATTRIBUTES. 


The interpretation, furthermore, of the Scripture represen- 
tations of God’s special presence with his people, (Gen., 17: 
1) 18.,°482.0; Eph. 4096 Jas. 48) Rev. jai oiias 
expressive of mere influence of truth or moral sympathy, 
is too frigid and unnatural to be true. God, who is alike 
personally present in all parts of his dominions, makes that 
presence, by some method to us inexplicable, specially 
appreciable to those who seek him. 


4. SprrituaLity. This attribute, by which is meant that. 
God is a Spirit, is suggested, like Omnipresence, only on re- 
flection. If the physical universe justify our conceptions of 
the power, Knowledge, and presence of God, the question, 
whether he be material or spiritual, is also at once suggested. 
This question, thrust on us by the very process through 
which we justify our belief in the Divine existence, has 
been in part anticipated in treating of the Personality of God, 
and it only remains for us at this point, simply to assure 
ourselves, on the authority of Scripture, that God, every- 
where present in the Cosmos, is a Spirit totally distinct 
from matter, independent of it, and the almighty Creator 
and Controller of it. 


IV. Attributes discoverable from the relations of God to 
moral beings, commonly known as his Moral Attributes. 
These have been variously subdivided and named, and vari- 
ously arranged in the order of treatment. Almost every attri- 
bute of the class has been selected by one or another, as his 
ground conception. As a consequence or a cause of this, 
we have the most diverse systems of theology. In later 
years, theologians in this country have been ranging, them- 
selves under one of two classes : those who make the JustTicE 
of God‘! to be their fundamental moral conception of him, 
and those who give this position to BENEVOLENCE*. But 


1. Hodge, Hssays, ess. 4 and 8.—Princeton, Hssays, 2d series, ess. 4, 6, 7.— 
Breckinridge, Knowledge of God.—Shedd’s Discourses and Essays, The Doct. 
of Atonement.—Hodges’ Outlines. 

, %. Beman and Barnes, On the Atonement.—Taylor, Moral. Government.— 
Finney’s Lects. on System. Theol.—Prof. Park, The Atonement.—Bushnell, 
Vicarious Sacrifice. 


ATTRIBUTES. rare 


that Horiness should be our fundamental conception and 
consequently furnish our point of departure, would seem to 
be evident, from observing that, 


1. It is of the Holiness of God that conscience first 
reminds us, after we have once become assured of his exist- 
ence and of his relations to us. Conscience approves or 
condemns us, according to our supposed worthiness or 
unworthiness of him whose creatures and children we are, 
whose image we bear, and to whom, as the supremely best 
Being, our allegiance is due. Even the conscience of a 
heathen upbraids him, not because he is in danger of punish- 
ment, but because of his unlikeness to, or antagonism with, 
the ideal character of his deity. | 

2. Holiness is that attribute of himself which, above all 
others, God in the Bible seems desirous to give an effective 
conviction of to men. He styles himself pre-eminently, 
‘‘the holy one ;’’? he enforces his moral precepts to Moses 
with the declaration, ‘‘ for I the Lord your God am holy,’’ 
Lev., 19: 2; 20: 25,:26; 22: 31-883; and the reason 
assigned in the New Testament for our being holy, is the . 
holiness of God, 1 Pet., 1: 15, 16. Angelic declarations of 
the Divine holiness accompany special revelations, Is., 6: 3; 
Rev., 15: 4; and an implied or express declaration of it 
runs throughout the Bible. 

8. Holiness is that conception which underlies, pervades 
and gives significance to, the whole ritualistic system of 
Judaism’, as well as gives meaning, consistency and com- 
pleteness, to the redemptive work of Christ. Even the assur- 
ance that, ‘‘God so loved the world that he gave his only 
begotten son,’’ &c., Joh., 3: 16, rests on the idea of the 
Divine holiness as an immutable basis, which made possi- 
ble and requisite that stupendous exhibition of the Divine 
benevolence. 


1. It is the underlying idea of sacrifice in the Scriptures, that he who offers 
it is unclean—unholy in the sight of him to whom it is offered, and needs by it 
to be cleansed or made holy. See Kurtz, The Sacrificial Worship of the Old 
Testament. 


Whe: ATTRIBUTES. 


4, The one all-inclusive aim of biblical Christianity, is the 
holiness, (Eph., 4: 24, Heb., 12: 14 ;)—the righteousness, 
(Ro., 9: 10,)—the godliness, (Ti., 1: 1,)—the salvation’, 
(1 Pet., 1: 9,) of man; but personal holiness will be the 
one absorbing and attainable aim of man, only as he recog- 
nizes it to be the one pre-eminent attribute of God. Tribu- 
tary to this recognition, the whole Jewish economy gives 
prominence to the Divine Holiness ; and every agency and 
instrument employed in Christianity is denominated holy: 
the temple is holy, the Scriptures are holy, faith is most 
holy, Jesus, the Saviour, is the Holy One and the Just, and 
the renewing Spirit, through whom all blessings are bestowed 
and all the saved are sanctified and made holy, is pre-emi- 
nently the Holy Spirit. 


5. Every other attribute of this class, when analyzed, 
brings us more or less directly to Holiness as its underlying 
thought. The last analysis of justice, mercy, benevolence, 
blessedness, veracity, glory, majesty, is holiness: Ps., 47: 
85 Amos,)4 + 23) Pa, 893.86; Exy:15: l1so The traete ears 
nation of all God’s revelations to men, be they punitive, 
complacential or merely apocalyptic, is in the spontaneous 
attraction or repulsion between the holy nature of God and 
the holy or unholy natures of men. 


6. From the infinite Holiness of God every other moral 
attribute may be synthetized or logically deduced ; that 
genetic conception being once clearly established, every 
other of the class necessarily follows. 

We will begin with, 


1. The Hortness of God. Theologians have not been 
uniform in their explanation of what is to be understood 
by this attribute. The earliest Protestant writers, both 
Lutheran and Reformed, did not treat of it as an attribute? ; 


1. The ground idea of all these terms is essentially one, the difference between 
them being formal, rather than real. 

2. Protestantism originated in a dispute with Romanism over the material 
principle of justification; the poles of its thought were righteousness and 
grace; the holy fatherhood of God, John, 17: 11, with its earliest authors, 
failed of due recognition. 


ATTRIBUTES. 7 Le 


the Lutherans being the first to recognize it as such,' and 
the great majority of the Reformed either identifying it with 
justice in its comprehensive sense,* or making it to be the 
sum of all the Divine perfections.* 

But Holiness is just as distinctively and separately predi- 
cated of God in the Scriptures as is his power, or his know1- 
edge, or his justice, or any other attribute ; and there is no 
more reason why its meaning should be made to usurp that 
of all others of its class, than there is why any other single 
attribute should be regarded as a composite of many, or of 
all others. Its relative importance in Scripture, as com- 
pared with others, is apparent enough, but relative import- 
ance is one thing, and relative meaning is another. 

Holiness in man, furthermore, for which all revealed reli- 
gion has been given him, cannot be different in kind from 


1. Quenstedt, Theologia, and Baier, Compendium Theo. pos. Comp. Bud- 
deus, lib. 2, cap. 1, § 36. 

2. Heidegger, Medulla Theol., locus 8, $52: Sanctitas, justitia vel bonitas, 
per quam in omnibus dictis et factis a seipso, immutatabili essentize necessitate 
sic sanctus, justus et bonus est, ut nihil divinitate et veritate sua indignum dicat 
vel faciat.—Burmann, Synopsis Theol., lib. 1, cap. 15: Justissime voluntatis 
Dei beneplacitum sanctitas ejus est; que in eo consistit, quod actiones ipsius 
exacte cum ejus voluntate conveniunt.—VanMastricht, Z’heol., lib. 2, cap- 19, 
§6, defines it as bonitas moralis, excellentia moralis, but so explains as to make 
God in omnibus suis cogitatis, dictis et factis, exacte conformis isti sanctitati, 
quam in lege sua expressit.—Limborch, Theologia, lib. 2, cap. 12: Sanctitas est 
rectitudo seu puritas naturse divinee, qua Deus nihil nisi quod rectum ac bonum 
est vult ac facit.—Turretine, Theologia, locus 3, ques. 9: Justitia universalis, 
per quam Deus in se justissimus est et sanctissimus. 

3. Pictet, Theologia, lib. 2, cap. 8: Justitia designat Sanctissimum divinarum 
Virtutum Complexum, sicque confunditur cum sanctitate Dei.—Stapfer, Institu. 
Theol., vol. 1, cap. 3, § 548: Quicquid perfectionis cogitari potest complectitur, 
et quidem perfectiones solas, exclusa omni imperfectione, et hoc sensu Deus 
vocatur sanctus; §551: Sanctitas Dei versetur in complexu omnium perfec- 
tionum. Comp. Wyttenbach, Zentamen Theol. locus 3, §§ 382, 333 ;—Ridgely, 
Body of Div., ques. 7, §16,—Dick, Lects., lec. 27,--Hodge, Outlines, attrib. 
Holiness. 

Zacharie, in his Biblische Theol., § 240, defines the Holiness of God as ‘‘ his 
venerableness ”—thus confounding an effect with its cause; Storr and Flatt, 
Bib. Theol., as *‘incomparableness’””—identifying it with the infiniteness of 
all the Divine perfections; Knapp, Chr. T’heol., bk. 1, pt. 1, sec. 29, as ‘‘ moral 
perfection ”—an indefiniteness of idea which admits of his declaring justice and 
holiness to he ‘‘ one and the same thing,” 


SO ATTRIBUTES. 


the holiness of God: Lev. 11: 44; 1 Pet., 1: 15, 16; butit 
is self-evident that holiness in man is not in proportion to 
the other perfections of his being—to his power, his knowl- 
edge, his wisdom, though it is in proportion to his rectitude 
of will—and cannottherefore be the sum of all his perfections. 

Appealing to Scripture, it becomes at once apparent, from 
the use of the word guadhosh, in the Old Testament, Lev., 
19: 25%Is., 62: 12, and idyeog, Mphiy) Winc4 5 52275) dete 
15, 16; Rev., 4: 8, in the New, that holiness is moral 
purity, not only in the sense of absence of all moral stain, 
but of complacency in all moral good; or, in the words of 
(uenstedt, it is, ‘‘swmma omnisque labis expers in Deo 
puritas, puritatem debitam exigens a creaturis. Theolo- 
gia, cap. 8, sect. 1, thesis 34. Thus Holiness, however closely 
akin to justice or righteousness, is not identical with it; if 
holy, God must be just, but his being just does not neces- 
sitate his being holy. If holy every other moral attribute 
follows; but these moral attributes do not constitute holi- 
ness. Itself is as distinct an attribute as any other. 

2. The JusticE of God. This attribute sustains a relation 
to holiness not unlike that of act to disposition. It is the 
outward or active exhibition of the Holiness of God in its 
relations to the character and conduct of his creatures'. The 
first, is an attribute of his being as such; the second, an 
attribute of his being, in its active relationship as Father 


and Ruler of all. 
Justice, in the abstract, was well defined by Cicero, De 


Finibus, lib. 5, cap. 28, as in suo cuique tribuendo ; but 
ustice, as exhibited in the legal sanctions—in the rewards | 
and penalties—according to which the Divine government 
of the world proceeds, is the complacential or reactionary 
relation of God as a holy being tomen as holy or unholy. 
Thus, justice is not merely the attribute of a Lawgiver, but 
is the animating spirit of all Divine action,——is the infinite 
holiness of God revealing itself as infinite rectitude of act. 
It is not the attribute of a merely benevolent and wise being 


1. Quenstedt, 8, 1, 35, Justitia Dei est summa et immutabilis voluntatis, 
divine rectitudo, a creatura rationali, quod rectum et justum est, exigens. 


ATTRIBUTES. ytd 81 


whose decisions are determined by ends to. be sought, but of 
an infinitely pure nature whose standard of right is it itself, 
Moral sanctions have their ground, not in mutable ends, but 
in the immutable, holy nature of an infinite Being. 

But if the attribute of Divine Justice be as thus described, 
there is no ground in truth for that conception which makes 
it to be the combined exercise of wisdom and benevolence, 
or of wisdom and goodness! Such a conception can be 
maintained only on the theory that justice exists for certain 
ends, rather than as the expression of eternal right, and of 
the inexorable demands of related moral natures. Its exer- 
cise is undoubtedly benevolent, as compared with injustice, 
or with no justice, but accompanying benefits reveal neither 
the grounds of its existence nor the qualities of its nature. 

There is, furthermore, no good reason for the division of 
justice into various kinds, so common with the older and 
more scholastic theologians, and on which so great stress 
has been laid by modern writers.? Justice can be nothing 
else than simple justice, whatever the objects to which it is 
applied, or the ends which it may subserve. The distine- 
tions between justice commutative and distributive, or 
between justice public and distributive — vindictive — puni- 
tive, are distinctions de modo and not de re. The distine- 
tions, moreover, assume that justice is the product, or 
expression, of the wise and benevolent will of God, rather 
than the revelation of the demands of his immutably holy 
nature— assumptions that can be consistently held only on 
the Cartesian theory that the ground of right and of moral 
obligation is in the wise will, rather than in the immutable 
nature, of God. 


1. Leibnitz, Causa Det Asserta per Justitiam Hjus, § 50: Bonitas cum sapientia 

conjuncta justitiam constituit; cujus summus gradus est sanctitas.—Wolff, Theol. 
 WNat., § 1067: Bonitas sapientiz attemperata est justitia.—Stapfer, § 565, Justitia 
vulgo definitur, quod sit studium suum cuique tribuendi; § 566: Aliter etiam 
definitur; esse bonitatem, que administratur cum sapientia, sive bonitatem sapien- 
tie attemperatam. See also the same in Wyttenbach, locus 3, § 312. Comp. 
Nitzsch, §§ 79 and 80.—Reinhard, Dogmatik, § 37, p. 129. 

2. See the younger Edwards, Three Sermons on the Atonement, Works, vol. 2, 
and almost all modern treatises on the Atonement. 


6 


82 ATTRIBUTES. 


The Mercy of God is easily and naturally developed as. 
the counterpart and correlative of justice, with which the 
Scriptures so frequently conjoin it. A pure Being seeks the 
purity of others, and in so doing shows his mercy. The 
Benevolence of God, which is only a generic and more com- 
prehensive conception than mercy, is derived from a compre- 
hensive survey of all the divine provisions for our welfare 
and happiness,—a survey which is easily made. A 
Being, furthermore, who is infinitely holy, just, merciful 
and benevolent, must also have the attributes of infinite 
Blessedness, Veracity, and Glory. But these attributes can 
easily be unfolded in the heht ‘of what has been said, and 
need not here be formally discussed, 

In respect to all the attributes of God, it should always 
be borne in mind that: 

1. Whatever our analysis or classification, every attribute 
has its special significancy for man. It is to him that God 
reveals himself, and through whatever medium the revela- 
tion comes, its single object 1s to communicate to rational 
and moral beings as complete and harmonious conceptions 
as possible of the entire Godhead. 


2. Of all the attributes, the moral are incomparably most 
important. Every other attribute is of moment only as 
connected with moral issues. It 1s for moral results that. 
God reveals himself to man, and pre-eminently for these that 
God in his word reiterates so frequently and emphatically 
the moral character of both himself and man. 


3. In treating of the attributes we can never be too careful 
not to exalt one at the expense of another. Hach is always 
qualified by every other. ‘There can be no conflict between 
them. God is indivisibly one and perfect, and cannot con- 
tradict himself. 

4, There is a comprehensive conception of God as the 
One infinitely perfect, personal Being, the Source and Arche- 
type of all other beings, to which every other conception 
should be made to conform.' 


1. One-sided conceptions of God lie at the foundation of all one-sided systems © 


of theology. The New Testament presents to us an infinitely perfect Being. 


re eS oe 


THE ETERNAL PURPOSES OR DECREES OF GOD. 83 


$16—The Hternal Purposes or Decrees of God. 


The will of God is either revealed or unrevealed, condi- 
tional or absolute. The first, is made known to us in Script- 
ure and Nature, and demands our obedience; the second, 
becomes apparent incidentally in Scripture, and necessarily 
in thought, as underlying and conditioning the first. The 
latter is unchanging, and its ends constitute the eternal 
purposes of God. The whole scheme of creation, whether 
contemplated as process or as consummation, is simply the 
embodiment and completion of immutable purposes. These 
purposes, so far as accordant with the known Divine will, 
may be referred to its efficient causation, but so far as 
contrary to that will, and finally made subservient to it 
only by overruling wisdom and power, they must be 
ascribed to the free volitions of co-ordinated agents; but 
both the process, in which the free volitions of others mingle, 
and the ends which are God’s alone, are alike the fulfill- 
ment of his absolute and eternal decrees. His decretive 
permission’ of the free and opposing activities of his crea- 
tures, is as much a part of his eternal purposes, as are the 
ultimate and eternal ends to which the universe of beings 
and of matter alike contribute. He “ worketh all things 
after the counsel of his own will,” Eph.,1: 11. That all 
things are thus wrought, may be inferred : 


1. From our necessary conceptions of God— 


_(a.) From his infinite knowledge. He knows all events, 
past, present and future; knows them not as possibilities, 
but as certainties; not as certainties dependent on his eff- 
cient causation alone, but as certainties which so include all 
contingent causes and volitions as to subserve them to his 


1. Earnest as was Calvin’s rejection of the distinction of permissive decrees (see 
Institutcs, b. 1, c. 18, 88 1, 2; b. 3, c. 28, § 8), it was adopted by most of the Cal- 
vinistic writers; see Wollebius, Van Mastricht, Pictet, Turretine, Stapfer, and oth- 
ers; but ‘‘ permissive” should not be confounded with the Lutheran and Arminian 
‘* conditional.” 


84 THE ETERNAL PURPOSES OR DECREES OF GOD. 


own unchangeable will. His infinite knowledge and eternal 
decrees are co-eternal and inseparable. 


(0.) From the perfection of his nature. His will, which 
is synonymous with his purposes or decrees, is only an 
expression of his nature; and must, like his nature, be per- 
fect, that 1s, incapable of change. 


(c.) From his absolute sovereignty. If sovereign, all 
wills must be subject to his will; but if his will varies with 
the contingent will of his creatures, or has been accommo- 
dated to it, he is not supreme or sovereign; if not unchange- 
able or eternal in his purposes, then he is not an absolute 
sovereign, but is more or less controlled by finite wills, or 
by a fate or a chance, which, at times and in some respects, 
is greater than he. But God, to be God, must be sover- 
elgn, and, as such, immutable or eternal in his plans and 
purposes. 

2. The doctrine of decrees may be inferred from the inter- 
dependence of all known causes, events, and beings. No 
force, phenomenon, or being, exists in and for itself alone. 
The Universe is a boundless system of complex but harmo- 
nious interdependencies. ‘The natural and the supernatural, 
the physical and the spiritual, the mechanical and the vital, 
everywhere so interlock and co-act, that fixed and definite 
results are invariable. Such a system is inconceivable ex- 
cept upon the basis of foregone and immutable purposes. 


3. The existence of divine decrees may be inferred from 
the existence of natural law.’ The very idea of law is that 
of invariableness or certainty; and as every part of the 
Cosmos must be in co-relation with every other part, so 
every special law must be as invariable or immutable as is 
the universal order of which it 1s a part. But natural laws 


1. Writers of all shades of opinion of the Positivist school—Buckle, Bain, Mill, 
Herbert Spencer,—express great contempt for the doctrine of the eternal purpose 
of God, and yet consign us without mercy to the iron necessity of physical forces 
and natural laws. Disgust towards the theological controversies about predestina- 
tion and free will is, with some of them, irrepressible, but they never tire in their 
controversial defence of the blind necessitarianism of law. 


THE ETERNAL PURPOSES OR DECREES OF GOD. re) 


are only God’s fixed mode of governing—the mere sequences 
of his will. And.as every thing in the universal domain of 
God (beings as well as bodies), must be subject to its own 
invariable laws, to the will of the unchangeable Being whose 
will the laws are, so everything in the universe, to its 
minutest occurrence, must be certain or according to the 
changeless laws, purposes, decrees, of the universal Ruler. 


4. The doctrine of decretive purpose is very plainly and 
variously taught in the Scriptures; not in reiteration and 
absolute statements, such as are made of the universal truths 
that relate to human duty, but always imphedly in these 
universal truths, and often formally on special occasions, and 
in explanation of specific events. 


(a.) It is implied in the prophecies, including predictions, 
which run throughout the Scriptures, and were recorded 
at various intervals during many centuries. Prophecies are 
foretold purposes, which, to be fulfilled, must be fixed and 
unalterable. The Omniscient Spirit, the author of Script- 
ure, Which is at once historic and prophetic, has united the 
past and the future, m the written word, by the single clasp 
of the eternal purpose of God. 


(6.) Particular events, foretold long beforehand, are ex- 
plicitly declared to have occurred in accordance with decre- 
tive will. ‘The death of Christ is specially mentioned as one 
Or these: Acts, 2: 23. Comp. Luke, 22: 22. Acts, 4: 28; 
ees 20. , Comp. Ro.,.16:.25; Eph. 3:9. 


(¢c.) That decretive purposes underlie and determine God’s 
method of dealing with our race, is taught both in connected 
passages of Scripture, like the ninth chapter of Romans and 
the first chapter of Ephesians, and in single texts, as in Is., 
14:24; 46:10; 1 Cor., 2: 7. 


(d.) Individual salvation is said to be in accordance with 
a predetermined and eternal purpose: Ro., 8: 29, 80. Soe 
Khon 9: 11, 12; and Eph., 1: 5. Eph., Ooiotins 92 Lire 
1: 9. But in this special form the doctrine of ‘eternal 
purpose becomes the specific doctrine of Election, which 


86 THE ETERNAL PURPOSES OR DECREES OF GOD. 


will be more properly discussed under the general topic of 
Soteriology.t 

Oxsxctions: The doctrine of decrees has been rejected by. 
many,” not-so much because unsupported by Scripture, as 
on account of the supposed impossibility of reconciling it 
with other recognized truths. To avoid the misappre- 
hended mischief of admitting the doctrine, the passages of 
Scripture supposed to teach it have sometimes been sub. 
jected to constructions that are forced and interpretations 
that are unnatural. The most common and weighty objec- 
tions are: 

1. Its inconsistency with the character of God. If all 
things are by the decree of God, it is said, then moral evil 
is by the same decree, and God is more or less directly its 
author. But the objection rests upon the assumption, that 
decreed ends can be secured only by compulsion; that 
eternal purposes necessitate efficient causation on the part 
of the purposer; whereas each purpose, though including 
and implying absolute knowledge of all contingencies and 
events, does not necessitate, or even imply, compulsion as a 
condition of its existence. Between decree as expressive 
of the immutable, immediate, causative will of God, and 
decree as the immutable, mediate, permissive will of God, 
the distinction is clearly defined and wide. 


2. Its inconsistency with human accountability. In this 
objection it is assumed that the eternal purposes of God 
cannot be invariably secured without some constraint of 
man’s will and some consequent infrmgement on its free- 


1. Calvin narrowed his whole treatment of the doctrine of eternal purposes to 
the single conception of personal election—individual predestination,—and re- 
stricted his treatment of it to the closing portion of the third book of ‘his Institutes 
—in which he was followed by Richard Watson in his Jnstetutes. See also the 
Thirty-nine Articles of the Anglican Church, and N. W. Taylor’s Revealed The- 
ology; bat most later Calvinist writers treat of Decrees under the general doctrine 
of God, and, in strange disregard of logical relations, include in their treatment a 
minute discussion of predestination. 

2. By all Arminians, including most modern Methodists, and the Free Will Bap- 
tists, by Lutherans, by Socinians, including modern Unitarians, and by the major- 
ity of modern Episcopalians, both English and American. 


THE ETERNAL PURPOSES OR DECREES OF GOD. 8T 


dom. But it certainly is conceivable, that the infinite com- 
pass of the Divine decrees may afford scope enough for the 
largest possible range of human wills, without an infringe- 
ment of either on the domain of the other. For aught we 
know to the contrary, the eternal purposes may have been 
so quadrated with human wills as to have provided for their 
largest conceivable freedom; indeed, the very constitution of 
man’s spiritual nature may have been so grounded in the 
eternal purposes as to make the freedom of his will an 
essential factor in their ultimate fulfillment. The purposes 
may be unalterably fixed, every act of man may invariably 
contribute to their fulfillment, and yet every act be as 
voluntary and as free as if there existed no decrees to be 
fulfilled. 

3. Its encouragement to moral negligence and license, by 
assuring one that whatever he does is by Divine determina: 
tion. The objection might have weight if the Divine pur- 
poses were ever propounded to man as his rule of action. 
But his rules of action, which are the known laws of God, 
are always addressed to his volition, and he obeys or dis- 
obeys as he chooses. No act of his can be regarded as 
decreed till he has chosen to perform it, and by his choice 
has made it his own.' 

But in answer to all objections, it should be remembered 
that a doctrine is not to be rejected because it may be mis- 
understood, or may have been perverted; nor because we 
may be unable, in every respect, to harmonize it with every 


1. The literature covering the points involved in these objections and answers 
began to accumulate in the time of Augustine, and received large additions from 
‘the principal writers in the middle ages. The reformers, who adopted the Augus- 
tiniau view of predestination, were followed in due time by Supralapsarians, 
Infralapsarians, and the Synod of Dort—the two sides of the dispute, even to our 
own day, never failing of their supporters. Sometimes the controversy has been 
waged in comprehensive treatises on Theodicy, as by Leibnitz, on the predestina- 
rian side with great ability, in the last century, and by Bledsoe on the opposite 
scheme in the present; sometimes incidentally, as by many modern writers on 
Metaphysics; but most commonly, in later years, the controversy has been brought 
within a narrow compass in special treatises on the Will, as by Edwards, Day, 
Tappan, Whedon, Hazard, and others. See also Luthardt, Lehre vom freien Willen. 
Among later theologians, Emmons has been the most earnest defender of the doc- 
trine of decrees. 


88 OREATION. 


other doctrine. The only question to be asked is, does 
Revelation teach it and reason justify it? If it be both 
scriptural and rational, it is idle to set it aside, or for any 
reason to attempt to evade it. 


= <> 


S$ 17— Creation. 


Creation is strictly a biblical idea and follows naturally, if 
not necessarily, from that of a personal God. The attempts 
to support the idea by metaphysical argumentation and by 
an appeal to physical science, are differently regarded by 
different minds. Let us glance at these three kinds of 
evidence. 

1. The Scriptures explicitly teach the doctrine of crea- 
tion, reiterating it with equal clearness in both the Old 
Testament and in the New. From Genesis to Revelation 
it is, in one form or another, a perpetually recurring 
thought. See Gen., chaps. 1 and 2; Neh., 9: 6; Ps, 102: 25; 
121:'2;146:'6> Is, 42: 5% 45: 12: Acts, 14:15 sieve 
6; 14: 7. But whether the Scriptures teach the absolute 
origination of matter, its creation out of nothing, is an open 
question.’ The texts ordinarily cited as proving it may, 
without violence, be so interpreted as to suit the views of 
advocates of either side. No decisive evidence is furnished 


1. ‘‘ The formula ‘ creation from nothing’ is not found in Scripture. Heb. 11: 
3, means that the visible did not proceed from other things,than appear. Ro., 
4:17, ‘he rules over what is not, as what is.’” Julius Miller, Analysis of Proof 
Texts, trans. by Dr. H. B. Smith, § 34.—‘‘ We have been led from God’s word as 
well as works, to conceive of Nature as God’s initial work.” ‘‘It is true the 
Hebrew word used in Gen., 1: 1, for create, does not signify, necessarily, creation 
out of nothing; yet, such an inference cannot be resisted without doing violence 
to the spirit of the text, and the fundamental laws of human belief.” Prof. J. D. 
Dana, in Bib. Sac., vol. 18, pp. 99, 103.—‘‘ There is no Hebrew word or root to 
convey the precise idea of creation out of nothing; there is none such in the old 
Shemitic language; and the reason is, there is no such idea (working, at least) in 
the old Shemitic mind. The root dara is ever a new thing, not new matter.” Prof. 
Tayler Lewis, Bid. Sac., vol. 18, p. 475. See his The Siz Days of Creation. See 
also Max Miiller, Chips, vol. 1, pp. 184-5, English ed., pp. 181-2, Am. ed. 


CREATION. |. ° 89 


in the Hebrew word dara, “ created,” in Gen., 1: 1, and yet 
from the phrase “in the beginning,” which precedes it, and 
the words, “the earth was without form and void,” which 
follow it, the thought of origination would seem to be most. 
naturally conveyed. So also the most natural interpreta- 
tion of Heb., 11: 38,) would seem to be that which makes. 
it expressive of creation out of nothing, though another 
sense is not impossible. Ro., 4: 17, from the uncertain 
meaning of “calleth,” cannot be appealed to with any con- 
fidence. In 1 Cor. 8: 6, it may be doubted if the phrase- 
“by whom are all things,” has any bearing on the creation 
of matter out of nothing, since it may have been intended 
only to affirm that the universe as it now is, had its origin 
in the creative power and will of God. 

2. Metaphysical argument has been resorted to with 
confidence, both by those who affirm and those who deny 
the eternity of matter Metaphysical reasoning, however, 
on this subject, as on all others, grounds itself necessarily in 
the conditions of thought, and these again in the conditions. 
of our being. And inasmuch as matter, already existent and 
fixed in its laws, conditions all human existence and thought, 
metaphysical argumentation can throw no light whatever on 
its origin. But because the origin of matter is inconceiv- 


1. ‘‘ The words certainly contain the idea of a creation of the world out of noth- 
ing.” Meyer, Commentar uber d. Heb. 


2. The phrase, ‘‘all things,” 7@ wdvra, as used by Paul, is synonymous with 
‘‘the heavens and the earth” in the first verse in Genesis. 


3. There is good reason for believing that all the ancient philosophers supposed 
matter to be eternal. See Plato, 7imeus,§9. Aristotle, Physics, 8,1. See Cud- 
worth, Intel. System, note by Mosheim, vol. 1, p. 801; also Archer Butler, Lectures: 
on Ancient Phil., series 8, lect. 1. Comp. Fichte’s Werke, vol. 5. For opposite 
conclusions by some modern writers, see Turretine, 7/eol., 1. 5, q. 8. —Cudworth, 
Intel. Syst., vol. 8, ch. 5, sec. 2.—Clarke, Being of God. Dick, Theol., on Creation. 
The argument of Moleschott, Vogt and Bichner for the eternity of matter on the 
ground of indestructibility and indissoluble unification with force, are in fact meta- 
physical (See Biichner, Kraft und Stof’, chaps. 1 and 2); and whoever will compare 
their argument with the words of Cicero, Academica, lib. 1, cap. 6, beginning *‘ De 
natura autem ita dicebant, ut eam dividerent in res duas,” will find a curious coin-. 
cidence. 

4. On the difficulties in metaphysical reasoning on this question, see Sir Wm. 
Hamilton, Phil. Discus., Am. ed., pp. 574-5, and Lects. on Metaphysics, lect. 40.—- 
Calderwood, Phil. of the Infinite, pp. 355-861. Comp. Cousin, Introd. to the Hist. 
of Phil., lect. 5. ‘* God cannot but create.” 


90 OREATION. 


able, we are not therefore warranted in concluding it to be 
eternal, unless we be first warranted in the assumption that 
the laws of thought in us are commensurate with the laws 
of action and being in God. © - 


If it be a law of our minds, as it undoubtedly is, that 
we must attribute all phenomena to adequate causes,’ then 
it is impossible for the mind to contemplate the organic 
forms of matter, and not recognize in them the embodied 
thought of creative will. 


8. Evidence from Physical Science. It must here be 
premised that the question of creation, in the sense of origi- 
nation of matter, lies beyond the reach of physical science. 
Its sphere is the observation of processes, and never of origt- 
nations. Of the phenomena with which it busies itself, it 
knows no beginning and no ending; attempting to speak of 
their origin, or of their termination, it ceases to be science, 
and becomes either faith or speculation.” As invalidating 
its supposed evidence for the eternity of matter it may be 
stated : 

(a.) Matter is to us indestructible, but indestructibility 
is not identical with eternity—does not warrant the inference 
of eternity. This can be inferred only from the assumption 
that physical force, the invariable concomitant of matter, 1s 
identical with creative force, which is the very thing to be 
proved. 

(b.) The elements of matter are not only indestructible, 
but are compounded in such quantities and numbers—the 
forces evolved are so adjusted to each other-—that a stability 
of equilibrium exists,.a stability that would be overthrown 
by the disturbance of a single force, or the loss of a single 
element; such stability forces on the mind the idea of 
adaptation and design, and thus the belief in creation. 


As regards the bearing of evidence from natural science on 
the a ee of organisms, physicists are themselves at vari- 


1. See above, pp. 50, 51; also Porter, The Human Intellect, § 590. 

2. Biichner, in the preface to the first edition of his Kraft und Stoff, claims to 
have built on an ‘ empirical basis furnished by modern science,” and yet the first 
-Chapters of the book, on which all that follows rests, are purely speculative. 


CREATION. — - 9] 


cance; one class maintaining that facts establish a belief in 


“ special creations ;”! another, that facts warrant the theory 
of “ evolution,’ “whereby phenomena progress continu- 
ally from a state of comparatively indefinite and incoherent 
homogeneity to one of comparatively definite coherent hete- 
rogeneity ;”” the latter class subdividing itself again into 
“ heterogenists” and “ pan-spermists,”’ the former of whom 
hold to the spontaneous generation of low forms of life, and 
the latter to the existence of living germs or ova, but both 
alike maintaining that either from spontaneous products or 
from living germs come all existing organisms by evolution 
cand natural selection. 

Spontaneous generation, however, towards a belief in 
which there is at present a strong tendency among cer- 
tain physicists, does not necessarily preclude the idea of a 
creative will,t which works by natural law and by secondary 
«causes. As against the idea of spontaneous generation, in 


1. See Dana’s articles in Bib. Sac., vol. 18, and Agassiz’s Contributions to Nat. 
_HHist., vol. 1, pt. 1, ch. 1. Such were the views of these naturalists a few years 
»since, but Dr. Childs in his Hssays on Physiological Subjects, p. 152, tells us, ‘‘ it is 
impossible to deny than an evolution theory is gaining ground daily among scien- 
‘tific men.” 

2. Darwin, Wallace, Lyell, Huxley, Lubbock, Herbert Spencer, and many other 
maturalists, German and American. Prof. Owen, repudiating ‘‘ evolution” by 
‘natural selection,” finds an origin of species in ‘‘ derivation” through ‘‘ an in- 
‘nate tendency to deviate from parental type.” Comparative Anatomy, vol. 8, § 426, 
427, 

3. MM. Pouchet and Pasteur have become identified with these two theories; 
the former claiming by his experiments to have demonstrated ‘‘ heterogeny,” and 
‘the latter by his, to have demonstrated ‘‘ pan-spermism.” Darwin, under the 
' term *‘ pangenesis,” gave in his adhesion to the latter theory, as apparently did 
Huxley and Spencer. Dr. Beale, a distinguished microscopist, in his recent book 
‘on Protoplasm, declares as the result of his investigations, p. 75, ‘‘ It must then be 
regarded as a fact, that living beings spring from pre-existing living beings, and 
‘that there is no such thing as spontaneous generation.” On the side of the former, 
numerous naturalists, English, French, German, Italian and American have 
‘arrayed themselves. See Child’s Hssays, p. 104, and Owen, Comp. Anat, vol. 3, 
SS 426-428. 

4, Prof. Owen, in common with Huxley, scouts the idea of ‘‘ life” or the “vital! 
principle” as an ‘‘entity,” regarding it as only a ‘‘mode” of ‘‘ physical and 
chemical force,” and yet recognizes a ‘‘ CAUSE which has endowed His world with 
power” capable of,convertibility into ‘‘forms or modes of force,” including “the 
vital mode.” See vol. 8, p. 819. 


92 CREATION. 


the sense of a purposeless, mechanical production of life by 
undirected forces, it must be remembered, 

(a.) That the forces of inorganic matter are antagonistic 
to those of organic or living. Organic matter forsaken of life: 
begins at once to decompose and “become inorganic. 

(6.) The molecular waste accompanying the exercise of 
physiological functions requires constant reparation from 
the organific or vitalizing principle of life, which, even if act- 
ing through the Peolarieat and chomalitorensl of nature, 
is manifestly distinct from, independent of, and dominant. 
over them. 

(c.) So far as observation goes, the forces of nature are: 
plainly enough seen to be efficient in the increase of bulk, in 
the acceleration of momentum, and in the change of the com- 
binations of elements, but they have not yet been proved to- 
be equal to the production of even the lowest forms of life. 

(d.) An organism embodies an idea, exists on a plan, 
is always related to a wider plan of which it is a part. Idea. 
and plan necessitate the conception of a purposed existence, 
and consequently of a creation.’ 

Most of the advocates, however, of “heterogeny,” (“ epi- 
genesis,”) and ‘“ pan-spermism,’ ’ alike recognize in the unt- 
versal order and adaptations of nature the evidence of an 
original creative mind, and are opponents, not of the idea of 
creation itself, but only of the special and immediate, or 

“miraculous,” creation of existing forms of life. Of the 
beginnings of lfe—of creation in the sense of origination, 
whether of matter or of its organic forms, physical science: 
confessedly knows nothing.? Of the processes of nature it 1s. 
competent to speak, and acainst its teachings respecting these: 
there is no need that theology should set itself in hostility.* 


1. ‘‘ It cannot be said that life works wth physical and chemical forces, for there 
is no evidence that this is so. On the other hand it is quite certain that life over- 
comes, in some very remarkable and unknown manner, the influence of physical 
forces and chemical affinities.” Dr. Beale, Protopiasm; or Life, Matier and Mind, 
2d. ed. p. 117. 

2. For accumulated evidence on this point, see Agassiz, Contributions to the Nat. 
Mist. of the U. 8. of A., vol. 1, pt. 1, ch. 1, sec. 32. 

3. See Tyndall, Hragments of Science, pp. 91-98; 119-122. * 

4. See Mivart, The Genesis of Species, ch. 12, specially pp. 279 and ff. 


FINAL CAUSE OF THE CREATION. 93 


$ 18—Hinal Cause of the Creation. 


If the Cosmos has been created, then there must have been 
‘some final cause for its creation. Rational beings act for 
rational ends. 

It is expressly stated in the Scriptures that God “made 
all things for himself,” “for his pleasure,” Prov., 16: 4; 
Rev., 4: 11; that he continues to act in his government of 
the world “for his own sake,” Is., 37: 35; 48; 25; 48:11; 
eo Oo! Pao O09 21s Is 489° Ezek. 20: 9: 
and, in varying forms of phraseology, “for his glory,” 1 Pet., 
eho... 9-23. Comp. Ps, 145:.10, and:72; 19... Christ 
recognized the glory of God! as the final cause of all things 
in the opening words of his last prayer with his disciples— 
“ Wather glorify thy name,” John, 12: 28, and in the closing 
words of the prayer in the garden—‘ Thy will be done.” 
‘The Apostle Paul makes the same recognition, in represent- 
ing the glory of God as the end to be sought in every act of 
‘the Christian, 1 Cor., 10: 81; as the end actually accom- 
plished by the Christian church; Eph., ch. 1, and 38: 10; 
Phil., 1:11. Comp. Eph., 3: 20, 21; as the end which even 
the “wrath” and wickedness of man are made to subserve, 
Ps,, 76: 10. Comp. Acts, 4: 26-28. God 1s glorified by 
being made known to rational beings, and his glory is in 
proportion to the completeness of the manifestation of his 
character. | 
_ But that the highest welfare, and consequent happiness of 
his creatures,” is included in God’s supreme end in the crea- 


1. The ‘‘ glory of God” denotes either the infinite perfections of his being, or 
‘that manifestation of his perfections by which he is made to be correctly appre- 
hended. It is in its latter sense only, that the glory of God can be said to be the 
final cause or ultimate end of God’s actions. He is glorified only as he is correctly 
represented and justly apprehended. The old, but now neglected distinction be- 
“tween essential and declarative glory, is still worth preserving. 

2. The assertion that the creation of God was for the highest happiness of all 
his creatures, manifestly cannot be sustained. Both Scripture and fact contra- 
-dict it. The highest happiness of all is not secured. To suppose this to have 
‘been either the sole or the highest end, is to suppose God to have failed in his pur- 


94 FINAL CAUSE OF THE OREATION. 


tion, is evident: from the subordination of universal nature- 
to the good of man; from the direct aim and actual achieve 

ment of Christianity foretold in the angelic song at the buth 
of Christ, Luke, 2:14; and from the incompleteness of the- 
divine olory without the welfare and happiness of man. 

Thus the final cause of the creation, according to the Script- 
ures, 1s unquestionably in God himself, but this cause is. 
not exclusive of human happiness. It is a matter of indiffer- 
ence, therefore, whether we say that God created all things. 
for his own clory, securing thereby the highest good of his. 
creatures; or that he created all things for the highest good 
of his creatures, accomplishing thereby his own supreme. 
glory as the final cause of all. The whole creation may have- 
been destined for the highest happiness of which intelligent. 
creatures are capable, yet this highest happiness is possible. 
only in the glory of an all. originating Creator. 

It is no valid objection to the evidence adduced, that it. 
relates not so much to the creation as to the divine govern-. 
ment, and specially to the work of redemption. The crea- 
tion and government, inclusive of redemption, proclaim one. 
and the same God and Father of all, Ro, 10: 17,18; the 
ideas of origination and government of the universe are not 
to be disjointed; whatever is evidence of the final cause of 
the one must be also of the other. 

Nor is it unworthy of God to make himself his own end. 

(a.) It 1s both unworthy and criminal for a finite creature: 
to make himself his own end, because it is an end that can 
be reached only be degrading self and wr onging others; but,. 

(o.) For an infinite Creator not to make himself his own 
end, would be to dishonor himself and to wrong his crea- 
tures; since, thereby, 

(c.) He must either act without an end, which is irrational, 
or from an end which is impossible, without wronging his 
creatures; because, 


pose, and consequently to be neither omnipotent nor all-wise; but to suppose God 
to have been his own infinite end, this end including the highest happiness of the- 
largest number of his creatures, consistent with the rational conditions of moral 
happiness, is to suppose that which accords with both what we see around us and 
with what we are told in the Bible. 


CONSERVATION AND GOVERNMENT. 95 


(d. ) The highest welfare of his creatures, and consequently 
their happiness, is impossible except through the subordi- 
nation and conformity of their wills to that of their infinitely 
perfect Ruler;' and, 

(é.) Without this highest welfare and happiness of his. 
creatures, God’s own end itself becomes impossible, for he is. 
glorified only as his character is reflected in, and recognized 
by, his intelligent creatures.” 


nt. 


$19 


According to the Scriptures the same power that created 
the Universe still sustains and controls it. This double 
office of divine support and divine guidance resolves itself 
into Conservation and Providence. 


1, Conservation. The Scriptures teach that there is noth- 
ing in nature, animate or inanimate, that is self-sustaining. 
The inspired writers, fixing their attention on the source 
of all power, recognize no intermediate or secondary causes,. 
but ascribe a continuous upholding of the universe to 
direct divine agency. All things are upheld by the im. 
mediate power of God, Heb., ay Comp. Neh., 9: 63: 
Seber O—-7. > In Col.,.1:.17, all things are said to “con- 
sist,” that is, to continue to be, “in Him,” through or by 
| whom they are just before said to have been created. Every 
animate object is said to be dependent on the upholding wi 
of God for the continuance of its life. Ps. 104: 27-8( 
Luke, 12: 6, 7, 22-28. Comp. Acts, 14: 17. 


1. Modern theology is disposed to drop inquiries into the final cause of the uni-~ 
verse and to concentrate attention on the nature and destiny of man; but no one: 
can fail to observe the uniform exaltation of God’s sovereignty in the Scriptures, 
or to foresee the type of piety that in due time must result from any departure: 
from this scriptural teaching. 

2. See Jona. Edwards, Sr., ‘‘ Zhe Hnd for which God Created the World,” Works, 
vol. 2. Princeton Essays, 2d series, es. 2 


‘96 CONSERVATION AND GOVERNMENT. 


Physical science, fixing its eye on phenomena, sees in 
them nothing but ‘the mechanical action of physical force." 
In the co-existence of matter and force, it finds the secret of 
the constitution of nature; in the correlation and conserva- 
tion of force, the conservation of the Universe of both matter 
and mind. 

The Christian theist, accepting the biblical statement that 
God is the upholder of all things and the continuator of all 
life, sees in the mechanical action of physical forces the 
fitting instruments through which he works; in the uni- 
formity of his working, discerns the fixedness of his pur- 
poses and the stability of his government. 

The Scriptures represent the destiny of man as an essen- 
tial thought in the conservation of all things, and the 
volitional power, with which man is endowed, as a force 
which is often in collision with the immediate designs of the 
almighty Preserver; hence, 

2. The Providence of God, or that controlling oversight 
and government, by which all events, phenomena of matter 
as well as of mind, are made to occur according to his previ- 
sion and pr earrangement, Divine Providence is implied: 

(a.) In every worthy conception that we can have of a 
personal God ; 

(0.) In any “and every conception that we can form of a 
divine creative purpose ; 

(c.) In the manifest coordination of forces, and the harmo- 


nious conjunction of ends which are subserved in the various 


departments of nature. 

(d.) It is affirmed by the mental and moral constitution of 
man; in the mental, as discerning a purpose in the stability 
and order of the Universe, and in the moral, as enforcing 
obedience to the will of the supreme Disposer. 

(e.) It is explicitly taught im the Scriptures—not in iso- 
lated texts, but as an ever present truth in every part of the 


1. See Grove, The Correlation of Physical Forces; Carpenter, The Correlation of 
the Physical and the Vital Forces; or both these and various other papers in The 
Correlation and Conservation of Forces, by Prof. Youmans.—Owen, Comp. Anat., 
vol. 3, §§ 427, 428.—Dr. Holmes, Mechanism in Thought and Morals hema 
Fragments of Science, essays 1-4, 6; and writings of Huxley, Bain, Spencer and 
Others. 


SPECIAL PROVIDENCE. 97 


Scriptures. The very idea of a supernatural revelation, 
such as the Bible gives to men, implies a Divine govern- 
ment which that revelation makes known and helps to ad- 
minister. The Bible, accordingly, is full of declarations of 
God's use of natural phenomena in the furtherance of his 
designs, and of his active oversight and control of both 
nations and individuals. The relation of the divine gov- 
ernment to minute events and to the personal guidance of 
individuals, belongs to the doctrine of 

3. A Special or Particular Providence’. By this is meant 
a providence which provides, with minutest particularity, for 
every event that can occur in the operations of nature, and 
a special adjustment of every event to the minutest require- 
ments of every living being. Such providence has been 
supposed to be inconsistent with the acknowledged immuta- 
bility of physical laws, but is vindicated by the following 
considerations. , 

(a.) Ifthere be a general providence, there must bea special. 
The general necessarily includes the particular; a whole is 
made up of parts. That would be an impracticable govern- 
ment which should beso general as to take no cognizance 
of particular events and acts. 

(6.) If there has been such codrdination of ends in the 
history of individuals, of nations and groups of nations, as 
warrants confidence in a philosophy of history, then there 
must have been a special providence in those incidents and 
conjunctures of minute events, in the lives of both individuals 


1. Any distinction between particular and special which restricts the latter to 
those events only which have an evident moral design, is especially objection- 
able, as assuming to interpret both the design and the method of special provi- 
dences, see, e. g. Bib. Sac., 12, p. 196, ff , andso to interpret as to put them de facto 
in the category of miracles, see Mozley, Bampton Lect., On Miracles, p. 9, ff. 
Trench’s Notes on the Miracles, Preliminary Essay, American edit. p. 19. 
The strongest objection in many minds to the doctrine of a special providence 
lies in this assumption of a Divine design which man can interpret, and which 
can be brought about only by a special interruption and deflection of the ordi- 
nary courses of nature, see Tyndall, HYragments of Science, Am. ed., p. 47, ff. 
But to suppose that a special providence and a miracle involve the same means 
and ends, is strangely to misunderstand and misinterpret both of them. See 
next article. 


7 


98 SPECIAL PROVIDENCE. 


and nations, on which momentous and far-reaching events 
have been made to turn. 

(c.) Special Providence is taught in the Scriptures, em- 
phatically, and by a great variety of methods: 

(aa.) Asa history, the Bible, from the first of the patri- 
archs to the last of the apostles, is a continuous record of 
special providences., 

(66.) A special providence is implied in the minute agree- 
ment of alarge part of the New Testament history with the 
Old Testament prophecies and predictions. 

(ce.) It is implied in the innumerable injunctions to put 
our trust in God and to pray to him for guidance and gifts. 
Prayer becomes an absurdity if there be no special provi- 
dence ; even granting its chief benefit to be its reflex infin- 
ence, that influence is lost if special attention and aid to 
individuals be regarded as impossible. 

(dd.) It is explicitly stated. ‘‘ A man’s heart deviseth his 
way ; but the Lord directeth his steps.’’ ‘‘ The lot is cast 
into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the 
Lord.’ Prov., 16: 9, 38. See also Pss., 37: 28, 31-33. Pss., 
91 throughout. Pss., 1389: 16. Mat., 6: 25-33.; 10: 29-81. 
Acts, 17: 24-28. Ro., 8: 28; 11: 36. 

What the Scriptures thus teach, science cannot disprove’. 
. And inasmuch as from science we learn that mind and 
matter, phenomena and life, are so conjoined that the con- 
nection can be ignored in no complete history of either 
individuals or nations, we must conclude that God’s special] 
providence surveys universal nature, foreseeing, pre-adjust- 
ing and controlling every event, purpose and act, even to 
the minutest. , 

The question still remains: How can providence be spe- 
cial and law be immutable; by what method can God 
accomplish his will and the order of nature still be main- 


1. ‘“‘The phenomena of matter and force lie within our intellectual range, 
and as far as they reach, we will, at all hazards, push our inquiries. But 
behind, and above, and around all, the real mystery of this universe lies involved, 
and, as far as we are concerned, is incapable of solution,” Tyndall, Fragments 
of Science, Amer. ed., p. 93. 


SPECIAL PROVIDENCE. 99 


tained? A question which it is so well-nigh impossible to 
answer satisfactorily, were not well raised, had not the doc- 
trine of special providence been assailed with objections 
which rest exclusively on assumed theories of its method— 
theories which rest in turn on preconceived notions of God’s 
relation to the material Universe.’ But this relation is 
both unknown and unknowable ;? science, necessarily limit- 
ed to the mere observation of phenomena, knows nothing 
of it; and the Bible, its object requiring only the ascription 
of phenomena to the will of God, throws no light on it 
whatever. Our only safety, therefore, ina question lying so 
entirely outside the range of both revelation and observa- 
tion, is in refusing to trust implicitly in any theory. 


1. One of these is the Epicurean or Deistic notion of a Universe created, 
but abandoned by its Creator to the action and reaction of its own forces, 
another, is that of the Positivists, who, regarding matter and force as coéxistent 
and indivisible, recognize no God but natural law; another still, is that of the 
Pantheists, who, identifying God with Nature, can discern in the world’s processes 
only evidences of a self-evolved intelligence. 

2. Even Christian writers, however, have persisted in theorizing.on it. Thus 
with one class, physical phenomena are the products of God’s direct personal 
efficiency, law denoting nothing more than his uniformity of action :—a theory 
which is objectionable, as being pantheistic; asdegrading to God, since many 
physical forces are subject to the manipulations of man; as contrary to the 
analogy seen in God’s method of accomplisaing moral ends through second 
causes ; and as contrary to the observed fact that physical force is the necessary 
product of matter under given conditions ;—but it is a theory which had its 
medieval and earlier Protestant advocates; was adopted by Emmons; has 
been maintained and ascribed to most of the earlier Reformed theologians by the 
pantheist Schweizer, in his Glawbenslehre d. Ref. Kir., §§ 52, 60-63; with 
such modification as their use of it in the defence of miracles required, has 
been defended by Tulloch in his Theism, Amer. ed., p. 93., and by the Duke of 
Argyle in his Reign of Law, 4th Eng. ed., pp. 122, 128; and recently has 
found emphatic expression with the naturalist Wallace in the concluding chap- 
ter of his Contribution to the Theory of Nat. Select. Another class, recogniz- 
ing the efficiency of second causes in both matter and mind, supposes such a 
concursus of the Divine energy with these as not only imparts to them their 
own efficiency but secures its subserviency to the Divine will :—a theory resting 
on purely verbal distinctions, without a shadow of fact to appeal to, and con- 
tradicted by what we know of the physical world from observation and of 
ourselves from consciousness ;—but a theory which was accepted by Augustine 
and Aquinas, was elaborately explained and defended by nearly all the principal 
Protestant writers of the 17th and 18th centuries, and perhaps more than any 
other, underlies the existing popular theological conception of aspecial providence. 


100 SPECIAL PROVIDENCE. 


But as repudiators of the doctrine of providence have pro- 
pounded theories which exclude alike all thoughts of 
prayer, of divine interposition, superintendence, or foresight 
even, counteractive theories have very’ naturally and prop- 
erly been propounded by Christian writers. Of these we 
enumerate the following as among the most noteworthy of 
those now defended. 

The oldest and most prevalent, is that which supposes 
God to arrest the ordinary course of events and, by interpo- 
sition, to produce extraordinary results, whereby his special 
ends are accomplished. Of the holders of the theory, some, 
regarding matter as inert, and ascribing all phenomena to 
God’s immediate agency, mean by specfal providence only 
special methods of divine working’; others, believing in the 
existence and the efficiency of physical forces, attribute spe- 
cial occurrences to the direct interposition of divine power, 
either in the suspense, deflection, or re-combination, of exist- 
ing forces*, or in the origination and introduction of new 
and special causes®.—But interpositions of the kind contem- 
plated in this theory, and equal to the production of all the 
events that may justly be regarded as special providences, 
would result in an instability and uncertainty in the order 
of events which would be fraught with inconceivable dis- 
order and mischief. 

In reaction from the preceding theory, another has been 
propounded, which, asserting the invariableness and invio- 
lability of physical laws, and attributing all physical phe- 
nomena, excepting authenticated miracles, to, the unalterable 
laws of matter, insists that special interpositions must be 
confined to the influence of the Spirit of God on the spirit of 
man*.—This theory accepts the teachings of Scripture as to 


1. See the first class of theorists mentioned in note two on preceding page. 

2. See the second class of theorists, note two, preceding page. 

3. See Mansel on Miracles, in Aids to Faith, § 15. Heis treating only of 
miracles, it is true, but they who thus explain special providences regard these 
providences as a species of lesser miracles. See Mozley, Bampt. Lect., p. 9. 

4, See Prof. Geo. I. Chace’s Discourse before the Porter Rhetorical Society 
of Andover Theo, Sem., Aug., 1854, on The Relation of Div. Proy. to Physical 
Laws. Comp. Art. 7, July No., of the North American Rev., for 1855.— 


SPECIAL PROVIDENCE. 101 


the facts of a divine providence, and of God’s immediate 
action on the hearts of men; but, to adjust these to the 
invariability of physical laws, it transfers the sphere of 
divine agency from the obscure region of matter to the ob- 
scurer realm of spirit, restricting it to the latter alone. Its 
only advantage over the first theory is, that it removes the 
difficulties to be accounted for still farther from the scope of 
man’s knowledge. But if we infer uniformity of law in one 
unobserved field, we are equally bound to do the same in 
another. Ifthe inviolability of physical laws be requisite 
to the pursuits of man and the stability of society, the inva- 
riableness and inviolability of the laws of mind are none the 
less indispensable in the acquisition of virtue and the intel- 
lectual and moral progress of the race. Matter, in the com- 
pound nature of man, is subject to mind; why the mate- 
rial universe should be excluded from subjection to the 
authority and control of God, it 1s difficult if not impossible 
to show. } 

A third theory, recognizing the immutability of all laws, 
physical and moral, and yet discerning in every phenomenon, 
however insignificant it may apparently be, the evidences of 
divine purpose and plan, supposes the Creator to have pro- 
vided, by prevision and prearrangement, for every emer- 
gency that can arise, and to have adjusted, at the outset, the 
working of all forces to the bringing about of every event, at 
the desired moment, as directly and specially as if he should 
interfere on each occasion by his almighty power.—The most 
formidable objection to this theory is the apparent counte- 
nance it lends to the doctrine of necessitarianism. But if it 
presupposes the free actions of moral and accountable agents 
to have been explicitly taken into the account and to have 
constituted. an integral part of the plan, it cannot easily 


Baden Powell, who regards miracles as ‘‘ objects not evidences of faith” says, 
‘‘No extent of physical investigation can warrant the denial of a distinct order 
of impressions and convictions affecting that portion of our compound consti- 
tution which we term the moral or spiritual. That impressions of a spiritual] 
kind may be made on the internal faculty of the soul, isan admission which can 
contravene no truth of our constitution, mental or moral,” Order of Nature, 


ess. 2, § 3, 


102 ; SPECIAL PROVIDENCE. 


be shown to be false. It contlicts neither with reason nor 
with Scripture; but on the contrary accords with our neces- 
sary conceptions of the omniscience and eternal purposes of 
God. If it be supposed to be inconsistent with the duty of 
prayer,' a little reflection will show it to be no more so than 
is human freedom with divine sovereignty, or individual 
responsibilty with decretive purposes. 

The attempts of scholastic theologians, both medieval 
and later, to adjust God’s active providence to the free 
activity and responsibility of man, through conceptions of 
various kinds of concursus,* can never satisfy, for they 
rest on theories of God’s relation to both matter and mind 
of which we know absolutely nothing.? The most that we 
can attain to with certainty, by the aid of Scripture and 
consciousness, is, that our acts are our own, to the extent 


1. Dr. Chalmers, in his Wat. Theol., b. 5. ¢.2, §§ 22-28, suggests, in expla- 
nation of the consistency of prayer with the immutability of physical laws, that 
possibly prayer forms a subtle cause in the production of events; or, that there 
may be a divine interposition with the operation of physical causes in a region and 
at a point too elevated and remote to admit of our observation. Both his supposi- 
tions seem to proceed upon the assumption, that those events alone are answers 
to prayer, and are specially providential, which are aside from the ordinary 
operations of nature and are in fact miraculous: his first theory, if logically 
carried out, can be maintained only on the sub-theory, either of fatalism, or of a 
causative force in the human will independent of God: and the second, is open 
to all the objections that can be alleged against the first general theory above 
noticed. 

2. See Thos. Aquinas, Swmma, p. 1, questiones 103,104, where, without the 
word, we plainly have the idea; as representative of Protestant writers, see 
Quenstedt, Theologia, de Providentia, sec. 2, ques. 8.—Turretine, locus 6, ques- 
tiones 4-7, in whom we have concursus physicus and concursus moralis, medi- 
atus and immediatus, preevius and predeterminans, simultaneus and concomi- 
tans, etc.—See also, Miller, Doctrine of Sin, vol. 1, pp. 226-82. 

3. Any explanation that can be given of God’s relation to the forces of 
nature, whether physical or vital, must be purely hypothetical; dogmatic 
assertion respecting them is mere presumption. Matter and physical force 
are indissolubly one, and every form of life has been endowed by its Creator 
with the power of self-perpetuation through the production of seed after its” 
own kind; but what may be the relation of the activities of these forces to the 
Divine efficiency, in the conservation and progressive movement of the world, 
or what the connection of human volitions with the Divine Will, it is worse 
than idle to inquire. Weonly know that God rules over all, and that all forces 
and wills, in the end, are made to subserve his immutable purposes. _ 


MIRACLES. oe 1038 


that we alone are responsible for them, and that our respon- 
sibility is not annulled by the sustaining providence through 
which we act. 

It is to be remembered, finally, that theories in explana- 
tion of God’s inscrutable plans.and methods, are never to be 
proposed as trustworthy bases of human action. They are 
to be resorted to only in self-defence, and as furnishing a 
ground on which to rest our replies to objections furnished 
by counter theories. Ifthedoctrine of a minute and special 
provision forevery event in nature, and of a particular care 
for every one of our race, be clearly established, it is unrea- 
sonable to make our acceptance of the doctrine dependent on 
our comprehension of the method by which the providence 
is exercised. A devout man sees the divine hand in each 
event of his life, and, seeing it, can no more doubt the special 
guidance of his steps, than he can the existence of the Being 
in whom he trusts. His own experience is a sufficient an- 
swer to all objections to the fact, and his inability to explain 
the process only drives him to a more implicit trust in the 
invisible Father who cares for and guides him!. 


$ 20—Miracles. 


Miracles are introduced at this point, not because they 
properly belong here, but, partly, because many dogmatic 
theologians have persisted in treating of them in this con- 
nection, and, chiefly, because in their treatment they have 
made special providences and miracles {6 differ only in the 
incidental circumstances that accompany them. <A just 


1. Opposed to the doctrine of providence, see Comte, Positivism, translated 
and condensed by Harriet Martineau.—Buckle, History of Civilization in Hng.— 
Draper, Intel. Development of Hurope; and the writings of J. Stuart Mill, 
Bain, Spencer, Tyndall, and others. -In support of the doctrine, see McCosh, 
The Divine Government, Physical and Moral, specially book second.—Bush- 
nell, Nature and the Supernatural, specially ch. 9.—Ulrici, Gott und Natur., 
abs. 5, §3. For a comprehensive historical statement of the doctrine as held 
by Calvinistic writers, see Ebrard, Dogmatik, §§ 280-83. 


104 MIRACLES. 


idea of miracle will show that it agrees with special provi- 
dence only in the single particular, that both proceed from 
the immediate will of God; butin point of design, they are 
evidently dissimilar, and in method of production it is 
assumption to assert that the causative agency is the same 
jin each’. Providence, for aught that we know to the con- 
trary, may always turn on appointed conjunctions of natu- 
ral causes, and miracles on the introduction of ‘‘ special 
causes.”’? At any rate we should be careful not to vindicate 
providence at the expense of miracles. 

DEFINITION. Our knowledge of miracles is from the 
Bible alone; itis only from this knowledge, to the exclu- 
sion of all a prioré principles and theories of God’s relation 
to nature, that our definition must be constructed. And 
inasmuch as it is with the reality and evidential value of 
the miracles that accompanied the first age of the Christian 
religion that this age is most directly concerned, our 
recourse should be at once to the New Testament. Of the 
four well-known principal terms there employed in the 
designation of miracles, the two most important*, and the 
two which are essential to be taken into account in a defini- 
tion, are o7péeov, which points out their design, and duvayec, 
which indicates their source or cause. Within these two 
terms, when taken in the connections in which they oceur, 
we have all the materials requisite for a definition. From these 
materials we gather, that a miracle is a phenomenon aside 
from due course of nature and adduced as a special sign 
from God in authentication of one’s claim to be divinely 
sent ; or, in fewer words, a special sign from God authenti- 
cating the claim 6f one of his messengers. To define a 
miracle as ‘‘an event which only the intervention of the First 


1. According to Mozley, Bamp. Lects., p. 9. ‘* A special providence differs 
from a miracle in its evidence, not in its nature; it is an invisible miracle, 
which is indirectly traceable to some remarkable concurrences in the events 
before us.” The former furnishes ‘‘mere surmises of a Divine origin;” the 
Jatte: “ gives proof” in ‘‘the most complete and decisive kind of coincidence.” 

2. It is one of the fatalities of theological nomenclature that the Latin trans- 
lation (miraculum,) of the most insignificant of the four, (répac,) should have 
come to stand for the meaning of all the others. 


MIRACLES. 105 


Cause is adequate to produce';”’ or, as ‘‘an event, in the 
external world, brought about by the immediate efficiency, 
or simple volition of God*,’”’ is to omit from the definition 
that which is the chief characteristic of the miracle, viz. its 
significancy or purpose, and is to confound miracles with 
all other extraordinary and inexplicable occurrences. Defi- 
nitions which, like these, do not recognize both the efficient 
and the final cause of the miraculous event are faulty by 
deficiency, omitting what is absolutely essential to its com- 
pleteness; and a definition which, like the last named, 
assumes to state the relation of the event to natural law 
and second causes, is faulty by excess, being encumbered by 
anotion wholly foreign to itself. Definitions that, on the one 
hand, omit the final cause of the miracle, lead very naturally 
to that confusion of ideas which makes an extraordinary 
providence to be a subordinate kind of miracle’; and those 
which, on the other hand, encumber the miracle with arbi- 
trary notions regarding the method of its production, need- 
lessly expose it to the objections of cavilers. 

PossiBtLity. Science may. be competent to show the 
impossibility of a miracle according to a certain conception 
of it, by shewing that the conception involves a theory of 
nature which is plainly contrary to facts, as for instance, 
the impossibility of a miracle which, in any proper sense of 
the word, either violates or suspends a law of nature. But 
if science assumes to declare it to be impossible for the 
author of nature to notify us of his presence and will, by any. 
variation from his established order of natural phenomena, 
it assumes to assert what it can never prove—it takes its 
stand on unsupported theories. If natural law be mere uni- 
formity of sequence under uniformity of conditions, then no 
one can prove that when the conditions are varied, by the 


1. See Fisher, Hssays on the Supernat. Origin of Christianity, p. 477. 

2. See Dr. Hodge, Systematic Theology, vol. 1, p. 618. Mozley, in his Bampt. 
Lect. On Miracles, which have been so much lauded in England, defines more 
correctly, p. 6, as a ‘‘ visible suspension of the order of nature for a providential 
purpose,” though here as elsewhere in the Lectures, he confounds providential 
with revelational purpose. 

3. Comp. Trench, On Miracles, Preliminary Essay, pp. 18, 19. 


106 MIRACLES. 


introduction of a personal or interposing will’, there may 
notalso, withoutthe slightestinterference with the uniformity 
of law, be a miraculous variation in the phenomenal results. 
The personal will of man, even limited as it is to the use of 
second causes, is perpetually producing phenomena that are ~ 
quite aside from the established order of nature ; it surely is 
not impossible for the infinite power of the personal God to 
make such use as he chooses of the forces, physical and 
vital, of which he is himself the Creator, or, even, if need 
be, to modify their action altogether by the putting forth of 
a new and overriding force of will. 

PROBABILITY. A miracle, in itself considered, must be 
confessed to be strongly improbable. Its prima facie im- 
probability is an essential element in its evidential force. 
The extreme disinclination of men to believe in any current, 
or ecclesiastical miracle, is evidence of a deep-seated convic- 
tion that the ordinances of nature are unchangeable—that 
‘the world is established that it cannot be moved.” If 
God, for sufficient ends, does interpose, the interposition 
becomes all the more startling, and the ends the more con- 
spicuous. And furthermore, if it be worthy of God to inter- 
pose in behalf of his rational creatures by a supernatural 
revelation of truth, there is no improbability in the supposi- 
tion that such a revelation would be accompanied with 
supernatural phenomena. If we bear in mind how indis- 
soluble is the union of the physical and the spiritual in our 
own personal! constitution, as well as in all our earthly 
relations, it is hardly conceivable that there should be com- 
munications from the Divine mind to the minds of men, 
without some such notifications of the fact as should proceed 
from the Divine power and address themselves to both the 
understandings and the moral intuitions of men. 

Creprpiuity. This resolves itself into the two-fold 
inquiry, whether miracles were credible to those who wit- 


1. Any controversy about the impossibility of miracles either with an atheist, 
or with a pantheist, or with any one who denies the personality of God, is idle ; 
the question in dispute with such an one lies far back of this of miracles. To 
introduce him at this point, is to bring him into a court which has no jurisdic. . 
tion over his case. 


MIRACLES. 107 


nessed them, and whether they can now be made credible 
on the report of the witnesses. The abstract question of the 
credibility of the miracle as such, may be ruled out as purely 
speculative, and of no account beside the simple question of 
fact, whether miracles were believed in by those who saw 
them, and can now be accepted on the strength of their testi- 
mony. According to that testimony the miracles of Christ 
were scrutinized and criticised ; the issue was, that by some 
they were rejected, and by others accepted. But there is 
nothing, either in the intimated grounds of acceptance and 
rejection, or in the subsequent conduct of the two parties, 
which warrants us in believing that the rejection was the 
result of careful examination and the acceptance the dictate 
of superstition. On the contrary itis very apparent that the 
main cause of rejection was superstition and bigotry, and 
the decisive reason for acceptance the recognized power of 
God. The credibility of these miracles to us, aside from the 
antecedent probabilities of the case, must depend on the 
trustworthiness of the witnesses who have reported them to 
us. Butif we accept the New Testament as genuine and 
authoritative, then we can reject its testimony in support of 
miracles only on the ground either of the credibility, or of 
the knavery of its writers—grounds which are absolutely 
untenable to any reasonable mind that knows anything of 
their writings. 

REAL OFrFicr. This is very distinctly implied in the idea 
which the Scriptures give us of the miracle. It is a certifi- 
cation by supernatural phenomenon, of one’s claim to be a 
messenger from God. But the certification is not a demon- 
stration. Miracles were not,. and, from the nature of the 
case, could not be, in any strict sense of the word, proofs of 
a divine mission. The conviction produced by them always 
depended, primarily on the congruity of the miracle with 
the character of the worker of it; and, secondarily, on the 
congruity of the miracle with the character of the witness of 
it. Noamountof miracle could convince a good man of the 


1. Hence the noticeably progressive types, and symbolical significancy, of 
miracles at different periods of the biblical history. 


108 MIRACLES. 


divine commission of a known bad man, nor on the other 
hand could any degree of miraculous power suffice to silence 
the doubts of an evil minded man. The miracle is a certi- 
fication to him only who can perceive its significancy. Its 
office is to relieve uncertainty and satisfy honest doubt; but 
to remove prejudice, to convict disbelief, and to subdue will- 
fulness is no part of its function. Before these states of mind 
our Lord refused to exercise his miraculous power, Mark, 
6: 5, 6. Luke, 11: 29, but for those whom it could help he 
exercised it freely. 

The office of the miracle in relation to the truth taught, 
was not unlike its office, in relation to the divine mission of 
the teacher. Itcould no more be a proof of one than it could 
of the other. Ifthe miracle could certify the commission of 
the messenger, it could so far forth certify the truth of his 
message, as that message was congruous with the known 
mind of God. No degree of miracle could certify the divine 
authority of a doctrine which contradicted the intuitive per- 
ceptions of truth, or an instinctive sense of right. Doctrines 
address themselves to the moral consciousness; miracles to 
the bodily senses. The latter can only by implication cer- 
tify the divine authority of the former. Doctrines vindicate 
their authority by moral evidence, and that evidence is in 
their own witnessing in the heart’. 

As respects the present value of biblical miracles, two 
extremes of views have their advocates. According to the 
one, the external evidences of Christianity are its strongest 
defence, and of these its miracles are the chief; according to 
the other, its internal and moral evidences are its main sup- 
port, and its miracles, so far from yielding defence, are one 
of its exposed points which requires special fortification. 


1. Those writers who maintain that miracles could now be wrought but for 
insufficiency of faith, utterly misconceive both the office of the miracle and its 
relation to the faith of him who wrought it. Miraeles occurred only at those 
epoch-making periods when new messengers, bringing new truths, needed 
miraculous attestation, the very communication to them of truth from God 
being accompanied with assurances that, in answer to their appeals the power of 
God should miraculously vindicate their claim to be heard, Ex., 3: 11, 20. 
Mark, 16: 17,18; but truth once heard and obeyed thenceforward authenti- 
cates itself. 


ANGELS. hie 109 


The truth seems to be, that miracles were for the special 
benefit of those who witnessed them. Their value as evi- 
dence to others, is weakened in proportion as the evidence 
of the fact of their occurrence is made dependent on testi- 
mony’. As an integral part of the Gospel history they must 
stand or fall with that history; as evidence to us of the 
Divine origin and authority of the Christian Religion they 
are inferior to the existence and contents of the Religion 
itself. Even the resurrection of Christ, that climax in the 
series of his miracles, is to-day dependent, as evidence 
of the divine origin of the Christian Church, on the exist- 
ence of the Church itself. Doubtless there had been no 
Church, had there been no resurrection of its founder; and 
yet the Church attests the fact of the resurrection, quite as 
much as the resurrection attests the divine origin of the 
Church. 


$ 21—Angels. 


Are they real beings, or are they creatures of the oriental 
imagination? The latter view, defended by rationalists, and 
apparently supported by natural science, which is supposed 
to know of nothing but matter and its self-adjusting forces, 
presents itself to many minds in our day with great plausi- 
bility. It is necessary, therefore, that we consider, 

1. The evidence of their existence. This is primarily 
Scriptural, and is both abundant and decisive. Corrobora- 
tive evidence is not wanting. 

(a.) There is a descending series of existences, from man 
downward, from which by analogy it may be inferred that 
there must also be an ascending series, from man upwards. 


1. Hume’s objection to the value of miracles as evidence, on the ground of our 
confidence from experience, in the uniformity of nature, and of our want of con- 
fidence, from experience, in the trustworthiness of human testimony, is valid only 
against the notions, first, of miracles as violations or suspensions of the laws of 
nature, or secondly, of miracles as demonstrative proofs of a divine messenger 
and message. Against the idea and office of miracles as presented in the Scrip- 
tures, his objection is futile. 


110 ANGELS. 


It is hardly to be supposed that man should be at the head 
of so vast a series as exists below him, himself dependent, 
and yet there be no order of intelligences above him. 


(6.) Their existence may be argued from the infinite perfec- 
tions of the Creator. Whatever may be conceived as prompt- 
ing, in the mind of the Creator, the creation of intelligent 
beings at all, must be conceived as equally prompting the 
creation of orders and numbers superior to any found on this 
earth. The final cause of the existence of man, must have 
been still more fitting as a final cause for the existence ofa 
higher order of beings than man: the higher the intelligence 
of the creature, the more readily the final cause must be 
accomplished. | 

(c.) The existence of lesser deities in all heathen mythol- 
ogies, and the natural disposition of man, everywhere and 
in all ages, to believe in the existence of beings superior to 
himself and inferior to the supreme God, is a presumptive: 
argument in favor of the reality of their existence. 

(d.) Independent, but corroborative, of the abounding tes- 
timony of theScriptures as a whole, may be specially men- 
tioned the teachings of Christ, who frequently and distinctly 
recognized the existence of angels, Mat:, 12: 10: 24: 36. 
26:31; 26 --63.5 -Mark,:12:.26.. Luke, 20% 36) andsimes 
not in accommodation to a popular prejudice, but in the 
presence, and in direct contradiction, of the Sadducees who 
denied their existence. Comp. Mat., 22: 30, with Acts, 23: 8. 

2. Classes—contrasts and resemblances. There would seem 
to be, according to the Scriptures, two general classes ofangels; 
thefirst, Knownas ‘‘the angels of God,” ‘‘the holy angels,”’ 
‘‘the elect angels ;’’ the other, as ‘‘the devil and his 
angels,’ Mat., 25: 41. Rev., 12: 7, as ‘‘ spiritual wicked- 
ness,” or more properly, ‘‘ wicked spirits,’’ Eph., 6: 12%. 


1. As examples of the way in which even honest men may deal with Scrip-. 
ture, when a pet theory dictates, see DeWette, Dogmatik, th. 2, § 49, and Bush- 
nell, Nature and the Supernatural, pp. 128-182. The former, holding that 
the essence of sin is in the predominance of sensuousness, affirms that 
‘the doctrine of evil angels should be wholly rejected, since the idea of a purely 
evil spirit is self-destructive ;” the latter, holding moral evil to be a neces- 


ANGELS. ee 111 


The first class is so often referred to, especially in the New 
Testament, that a citation of texts is unnecessary: the 
second is spoken of in 2 Pet., 2: 4. Jude, 6, as ‘‘ the angels 
that sinned,’ ‘‘that kept not their first estate.’? Comp. 
1 Tim., 5: 21. Whether the ‘‘demons’’ of the Gospels. 
were fallen angels, is a disputed question, though there 
seems a preponderance of evidence that they were. The 
words of Christ, ‘‘if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided 
against himself,’’ Mat., 12: 26, taken in connection with 
Luke’s designation of demoniacs as those ‘‘ oppressed of the 
devil,’ Acts, 10: 38, and John’s declaration that Christ ‘‘ was 
manifest that he might destroy the works of the devil,”’ 
1 Ep., 3: 8, make it certain that demons were the ‘‘devil’s 
angels,’ and strongly probable that they were the fallen 
angels spoken of by Peter and Jude. 


The two classes, thus standing in moral antagonism with 
each other as ‘‘ holy’ and ‘‘ wicked,”’ are also presented in 
Scripture as sustaining contrasted relations with our race, 
and as busied in the performance of the most opposite 
offices. One ministers to man as protectors and helpers’, 
fei te. Acts, 12% 7-15., Luke; 22; 43. Acts; 27:23. 
Comp. 2 Kings, 6; 17, and Ps. 34: 7; the other seduces, 
1 Tim., 4: 1. Acts, 5: 3, pursues, and, if possible, destroys 
him, 1 Pet. 5: 8. Eph., 6: 12. Their opposite offices and 
spirit were specially manifest during the personal history of 
Christ on earth ; the one ever ready to aid him, the other 
to oppose, Mat., 4: 1-11. 26; 53. Luke, 22; 48. The 
very appellatives, ‘‘tempter,’’ ‘‘satan’’ or adversary, 
‘devil’ or accuser, and ‘‘ unclean spirits,’ are descriptive 
of the nature and employment of the fallen angels. 


sary ‘‘condition privative” of all finite beings as such, believes that ‘‘ good 
angels have all been passed through and helped up out of a fall, as the redeemed 
of mankind will be.” 


1. It isa mooted question whether the New Testament teaches that individuals 
have their guardian angels. Calvin denied, but Stuart, Alford, Meyer, Stier, have 
affirmed that it is so taught in Mat., 18: 10, and Acts, 12: 15. Hackett and 
Gloag maintain that, in the latter text, ‘‘the idea appears, not asa doctrine of 
the Scriptures, but as a popular opinion, which is neither affirmed nor denied.” 


iY ANGELS. 


The points of resemblance between the two classes are 
numerous. (a@.) Both are spirits, Heb., 1: 14.—Mat., 8: 16. 
10: 1. 12; 48-45. Mark, 9; 25. Luke, 10: 20. Eph., 2: 2. 
6: 12. (6.) Both are beings of superior intelligence and 
interested in human affairs—one as the sympathizing help- 
ers of man, the other as his malignant enemies. Luke, 15: 
LO} Eph:, 93:1 910.ghHeb. (12.5) diy ak eb.g ile 12.) Com aac 
24:)° 36,71. Pet.,, 5% 8, 9.:1-Tim:, 4%.) 1) Rev., \iGsyete 
(c.) Both have a power superior to man’s’, 2 Pet., 2, 11. 2 
Thess., 1: 7.—Acts, 10: 38. Col., 2:15; and a certain kind 
of power over man, Luke, 1: 20. Acts, 12: 7-11.—Luke, 
13/:..16,, Acts), :10¢ 38. 1%:Pet;(52.8.. deJ ohn) :02 aoe 
their power over man appears to be always limited by the 
laws of his nature, and specially by his moral disposition ; 
it being to saints only that good angels minister, Heb., 1: 
14. Ps., 34: 7, and only to men ready to be tempted, that. 
the machinations of Satan are dangerous, Eph., 4: 27.1 Pet., 
5: 9. James, 1: 14. (d.) Both classes are numerous, 
though the good seem greatly to surpass the evil in num- 
bets, Ps., 68: 17.-Dan., 7: 10. Mat:.,. 26; 53... Heb., 12: 
Jude, 14. Rev., 5: 11. Comp. the Old Testament phrase, 
‘Lord of hosts.’’—Mark, 5; 9-18. Luke, 8: 30. Eph., 6: 
12. Col., 2: 15. (eé.) Both are graduated into ranks, Eph., 
1; 21.°3.:.10. 1 Pet.,.3:22!_Mat., 25: 41. Cole 2a 
and each has at its head one who is superior to all the others 
of the class, Gen., 16: 7. 22: 11. Ex., 23: 20, 21. Josh., 5: 14, 
15.6 3.2. 1s,, 63:9; Dan.; 10221, 12s: 1) Malls 3:12 ee 
12: 31..2.Cor., 4: 4. Eph.,2: 2. Heb., 2: 14... W hateves 


1. Whether angels can affect the working of natural laws, either in the phy- 
sical world or in human society, has been answered with two extremes of view: 
the one denying to them any power except under law, the other ascribing to them 
an agency and efficiency little less than omnipresent and all-controlling. The 
truth is, we know nothing of the mode of their connection with man, or with 
nature, and can predicate nothing of their existing relations to this world with 
any degree of certainty. 

2. Even supposing ‘‘the angel of the Lord,” ‘‘the captain of the Lord’s 
host,” ‘‘the angel of his presence,” ‘‘Michael,” ‘‘the messenger of the cove- 
nant,” mentioned in these texts, to have been our Lord Jesus Christ in his pre- 
existent state, neither his divinity nor his ‘‘ proper Deity” are thereby compro- 
mised. As mediator he could still stand at the head of the angelic hosts. 


ANGELS. fick 118 


may be the obsctrity of Scripture as to the leadership of the 
unfallen angels, there would seem to be no good ground 
for doubt as to its conception of the headship of the fallen 
powers. Satan is their ‘‘prince’’ and leader. 

PERSONALITY OF SATAN. In respect to Satan, three 
explanations have their advocates—the one, that the con- 
ception of him as personal, together with the whole doctrine 
_of angelology, was borrowed by the Jews from the dualism 
of the Persians, during the Babylonian captivity—another, 
that the name is an oriental personification: of the principle 
of evil—and the third, that Satan is a real existence, a per- 
sonal being who, sometime in the past, lapsed from an origi- 
nal sinlessness. The sufficient answer to the first explanation, 
is the existence of all that is fundamental in the biblical 
angelology, Satan included, in those portions of Scripture 
which were undoubtedly written before the Babylonian 
exile. As respects the second explanation, the considera- 
tions that show its untenableness will, at the same time, make 
apparent the truth of the third or last.—That the name 
Satan is not a personification, but designates a real being, 
seems evident from the following considerations : 

(a.) This is implied in the various titles given him in the 
Scriptures. Heis ‘‘the tempter,’’ ‘‘the adversary,’’ ‘‘ the 
accuser,’ ‘‘a murderer,’’ ‘‘the god of this world,’’ ‘‘ the 
prince of the power of the air,”’ etc., all of which are much 
more naturally understood as descriptive of a personal being 
than as personifications. 

(b.) It is incredible that the sacred writers, with all their 
diversities of training and mental habits, should have per- 
sisted, through more than fourteen centuries and under the 
most diverse civilizations, in adhering to a personification 
without so much as once dropping it or giving even a pass- 
ing hint of its use. 


1. Dr. Bushnell, in his Nat. and the Supernat., pp. 134-5, affirms that ‘‘Satan 
is not the name of a particular person, neither is it a personation (?) of temp- 
tation, or of impersonal evil * * * but isa name that generalises bad persons 
or spirits, with their bad thoughts and characters, many in one,” ‘‘it designates 
the all or total of bad minds and powers.”—What else than personification is 
here meant, is not so apparent as it should be. 


114 ANGELS. 


(c.) The Scriptures ascribe attributes ‘and purposes to 
Satan, which by no laws of language are properly predi- 
cable of a principle. To substitute the phrases, ‘‘ principle 
of evil,” or ‘total of bad minds and powers,’’ in the pas- 
sages where Satan, or evil spirits are spoken of, would make 
strange confusion of thought, and in most of them down- 
right nonsense. See, for example, the 3d ch. of Gen., Mat., 
4°; 1)" John, 83/44) 14 :°30.2) Cor.) 11% 8,14) Toe 
6: 11,:12)'1 Pet., 589.01 John; 3°08. Rev.,- 2: 20miare 
12 oe ee OO: | 


(d.) Christ distinctly recognized the existence of Satan as 
a person,! Mat., 18: 19, 38. 25: 41. Mark, 4: 15. Luke, 
10: 18. 22: 31. John, 8: 44.14: 30; and must have done 
so, either from ignorance, or from accommodation to a vul- 
gar prejudice, or from actual knowledge of truth in the 
case. The supposition of ignorance is inconsistent with the 
spirit and scope of his other teachings ; that of accommoda- 
tion, is contradicted by his frankness in dealing with other 
and less significant errors, such as the Pharisees’ faith in 
the efficacy of ceremonies, or the Sadducees’ denial of a future 
life,? 

(e.) The temptation of Christ in the wilderness is involved 
in inextricable difficulties, except on the supposition that 
Satan is a real being®. The temptation consisted not merely 
ofends proposed, but of considerations suggested in supportof } 
them. And the considerations must either have been evolved 
from the mind of Christ by reflection—in which case they 
were not so much an evidence of temptation to evil as they 
were of a susceptibility, and even predisposition, to evil—or 
they must have been suggested from without by a personal 
being ; and this personal being must either have been a 
Jew, such as, at the outset of the temptation, Jesus possi- 
bly may have supposed him to be, or the personal Satan, 


1. See C. F. Schmid, Bidlische Theologie d. N. T., Lehre Jesu, § 28, p. 204. 

2. See Neander, Life of Christ, § 108. 

3. See Neander, Life of Christ, §§ 46, 47.—Ullmann, Sinlessness of Jesus, pt. 
3, ch. 8, sec. 3. Supplement, ch. 2. 


‘ ANGELS. ae 115 


which from Mat., 4: 9, 10, it is evident that Jesus dene 
saw that he was. 


(7.) The progressive enmity and rage of Satan against 
God, Christ, and man, discoverable in Scripture between his 
first appearance at the temptation of Adam in the garden 
and his final overthrow as depicted in the Apocalypse, 7 
10, cannot be so satisfactorily explained on any other sup- 
position as on that of his personality. 


To what extent our race is at present exposed to evil 
influences from Satan and other evil spirits, is a question on 
which it is easy to err. The manifestly natural inference, 
from various Scripture teachings, is, that he is still active 
among men ; see, Mat., 13: 39. Mark, 4: 15. Luke, 22: 31. 
Peter a 2) Cor. (2311) 414) Rphy 4327) 6: 12-1811 
Pet, 5: 8; but, that if we ‘‘resist him he will flee from us,”’ 
James, 4: 7. 1 Pet., 5: 9%. 


1. On the Doctrine of Angels, see Bretschneider, Dogmatik, §§99-111.— 
Twesten, Vorlesungen tiber Dogmatik, vol. 2, p. 305, ff.; or in English, Bid, 
Sac., vols. 1 and 2.—Mayer, bib. Repos., vol. 12, pp. 856-388. Prof. Stuart, 
‘‘Sketches of angelology,” Bibliotheca Sacra, pt. 1, art. 2, (a preliminary vol. 
of the periodical.)—Arbp. Whately, Revelations of Scripture concerning good 
and evil Angels.—Hofmann, Schriftbeweis, vol. 1.. Zweite Lehrstiick. 


The question whether the demoniacal possessions of the Gospels were real or 
imaginary, has a more than speculative interest. The possessions, in themselves 
considered, might not unreasonably be ascribed to popular superstition ; but no 
such explanation can be reconciled either with a Divine authority in the teach- 
ings of Jesus, or with any kind of inspired guidance of the evangelists in writing 
the Gospels. Accepting the Bible as the Book of God and Jesus Christ as a 
‘Divine Teacher of absolute truth, we must admit the reality of the demoniaca] 
possessions. And it is no valid objection to their reality, that they do not now 
occur. Nor, again, is it a reasonable objection to the supernatural origin of the 
demoniacal phenomena that what in them was due to second causes, was per- 
haps sometimes ascribed to supernatural agency—that, in fact, men in every 
age have been superstitiously disposed to ascribe occult diseases, which may 
have a purely natural origin, to supernatural causes—any more than it is now 
a sound objection to the reality of the divine efficiency in nature, that many 
natural phenomena were once ascribed to the immediate agency of God which 
are now traced to the purely mechanical forces of nature. No one may possi- 
tively and safely assert what even now is, or is not, the connection of super- 
natural beings with those mental and physical diseases, whose seat is in a moral 
obliquity of will. 


116 DOCTRINE OF MAN. 


ANTHROPOLOGY, 


OR 
DOCTRINE OF MAN. 


§ 22—_Creation and Hirst Estate of Man. 


1. CREATION oF Man. It is the teaching of Scripture 
that man came into being by the immediate power of God. 
There is a noticeable difference between the biblical phra- 
seology descriptive of the origin of man, and that descrip- 
tive of the origin of other forms of organic life. In the latter, 
the mandates to ‘‘the waters”’ and ‘‘the earth”’ to “‘ bring © 
forth,’’? seem to point to the use of some kind of creative 
agency with which nature had been endowed; man alone is 
the immediate creature of God, and the bearer of his image, 
Gen., 1: 26, 27. Is., 45: 12. Mark, 10: 6. Acts, 17: 28. 

Nor is this teaching of Scripture contradicted, as yet, by 
any trustworthy authority of physical science. The con- 
clusions of science may require us to modify our conceptions 
of the mode of man’s creation, but they cannot disprove the 
fact of his creation; they may compel us, contrary to the 
Jewish apprehension, to recognize the intermediation of 
second causes, but they can determine nothing respecting the 
presence of the personal agent who gives to second causes 
their efficiency. The most that the Darwinian theory, or 
that any other theory, of evolution, has yet accomplished, 
is to show the possible method of the Divine procedure in 
the creation of man; it throws no light whatever on the 
causative power that used the method and wrought the 
result. . Science, here as elsewhere, can observe phenomena, 


1. According to the Jewish interpreter, Maimonides, God by his mandate 
caused the earth to bring forth of itself, but when man was to be made, he said 
to Nature ‘‘let us make man in our image.” See note by Tayler Lewis, in pat g 

Commentary on Genesis, p. 178. 


CREATION OF MAN. Lae gy 


and trace processes, and discern means, it can catch no 
glimpse of the invisible energy and creative Will that directs 
and controls in them all. | 

But in ascertaining the Scriptural conception of the origin of 
man, itisnecessary that the two accounts of his creation in Gen. 
1: 26, 27, and in 2: 7, becompared. It is in the latter passage 
and inthe words, ‘‘ the Lord God breathed into his nostrils the 
breath of life and man became a living soul,”’ that, according 
to the commentators’, we have an account of the origin of the 
‘‘immortal principle’’—the indestructible spiritof man. And 
yet, from Gen., 1: 30, and 7: 22, itis evident that no such 
meaning can be attached to the phrases ‘‘breath of life” — 
anan living soul”? Comp, Is., 2: 22. 1 K.,; 17: 17. Job, 
27: 3. Physiology, furthermore, gives no warrant to the 
thought that the origination of the soul is subsequent to the 
organization of the body. The truth seems to be, that in 
Gen., 1: 27, we have the origin of the personal spirit, which 
alone bears the image of God, and whose origin is there spe- 
cially distinguished from that of the sentient existence of all 
other animals; whereas in Gen., 2: 7, we have an account 
of the origin and composition of man as a material organ. 
ism, and of that Divine act by which, respiration being made 
to begin, he came to a sentient or psychical existence®. The 
first passage relates specially to the origination of what we 
call the human soul or spirit ; the second, to the formation of 
that physical structure or organism, which the soul, as a 
divinely empowered second cause, wasenabled to take to 
itself out of earthly elements*—the same elements that enter 
into the organization of other animal as well as vegetable 


1. See, besides the older authors, the later Commentaries on Genesis by Mur- 
phy, Bush, Keil & Delitzsch, and Lange; also Delitzsch, Bid. Psychologie, 2, §3, 
and Heard, Tripartite Nature of Man, ch. 3. 

2. That this passage contains any allusion to the origin of the ‘‘ indestructi- 
ble spirit” of man, is more than doubtful; its ‘“‘breathing into the nostrils,” if 
any exact interpretation must be given to the words, would more properly express 
the mechanical act of inflating the lungs, through which, respiration beginning, 
man awoke to the consciousness of a sentient and personal existence. 

3. It is noteworthy also that dara is the verb used in the first passage, and 
yatear in the second. 


118 CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 


structures. Theresiduum of this organism, when decom- 
posed, is simply ‘‘dust,’’ and hence the propriety of the 
biblical statement that the body of man was formed ‘‘ of the 
dust of the ground.’’ Gen., 2: 7. Comp. Job, 10: 9. Kec., 
Ge. AAC Ol wl Oriel T 

2. THE CONSTITUTION OF Man. It is plain from the 
Bible that while man in himself is a unity, he is also a com- 
pounded being. He has at least a two-fold nature by which 
he is allied to two worlds, sustaining at once relations to 
the brute below him and to the angel above him. He is the 
only being, so far as we know, who forms in himself a tan- 
gential point between the two worlds of spirit and of matter. 

Of how many parts is man’s nature composed? Is it 
dichotomous, consisting simply of soul and body ? or is it 
trichotomous, consisting of spirit, soul, and body? Look- 
ing casually at Gen., 2: 7. Ecc., 12: 7. Ps., 104: 29, one 
would be led to say that man consists simply of body and 
soul—that the triple phrase spirit, soul, and body, is 
intended simply to be exhaustive. And the impression that 
dichotomy is the teaching of Scripture derives some support 
from the great latitude of meaning in which the word d¢uyqy, 
soul, is used throughout the New Testament, denoting, 
sometimes merely natural life, sometimes the sentient or 
sensuous nature, sometimes the immortal or indestructible 
principle in man’. But if we look more closely at Luke, | 
1: 46, 47. 1 Thess.,"5: 23. Heb., 4: 12. Comp. 1 Cor., 2: 14) 
we find some ground for supposing that Luke, Paul and 
the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, recognized in the 
nature of man three component parts. 

On the supposition of trichotomy, the further question 
arises, whether the gvy7, as distinguished from the zvedua 
denotes the sensuous existence which is the product of the 
union of the zvevya and the s@yva; or whether, as Nean- 
der? supposes, the zvevua denotes the soul in its elevated 
and normal relation to God and divine things, and the ¢guyy, 
the same soul in its lower relation to sensuous, and perhaps 


—_—— 


1. See Robinson’s Lewicon of the N. T. 
2. Planting and Training of the Chr. Ch., p. 394. 


IMAGE OFGOD. =~ 119 


sinful, objects of this world; or with Delitzsch’, that the 
guy; is an-emanation from the zvedya, and is distinct from it 
in substance but not in nature; that the ¢vy7 springs 
from the essence of the zvevua, but is not identical with it in 
substance—just as the Son and the Spirit are of one essence 
with the Father, and yet are different hypostases?; that ‘‘ the 
pneumea is the inbreathing of the Godhead and the psyche 
is the outbreathing of the pnewma.”’ 

That some kind of trichotomic division of the nature of 
man was in the minds of several of the writers of the New 
Testament, particularly of Luke and Paul, there would seem 
good reason for believing; but just what their conception 
was, itis plain cannot with certainty be determined. To 
propose any theory of it, therefore, to which our theology 
is to be conformed, would be to build upon a basis of con- 
jecture’®. 

3. THE IMAGE OF GoD in which man was created ; in what 
did it consist? Was it, as the Socinians’ and Arminians® 
affirmed, man’s dominion over this lower world? But this 
is to mistake an effect for its cause, or to confound a func- 
tion with its organ. | 

Shall we with the older Protestant theologians’ find it in 
the moral perfection or holiness of man? This answer 
would seem to be supported by the New Testament use of 
the phrase ‘‘image of God.’’ Christ is called the image of 


1. Bib. Psychol., 2, § 4. 

2. The Rev. J. B. Heard in his Tripartite Nature of Man, though acknow]l- 
edging in the Preface his ‘‘deep and constant obligations” to the Bib. Psycho- 
logie of Delitzsch, makes ‘‘body, soul, and spirit” to represent ‘‘the bodily 
organism, the intellectual faculties, and that higher spiritual consciousness by 
‘which we know and serve God,” and these ‘‘are not separable natures, but 
separate manifestations of the one nature.” ‘‘The Trinity is three persons in one 
nature or substance—the trichotomy is three naturesin one person.” pp. 119, 120. 

3. For illustrations of theories applied, see Heard’s Tripartite Nature of 
Man.—Essays on The Scriptural Anthropology, by Dr. G. D. Boardman, in 
the Baptist Quarterly, vol. 1. 

4. See Faustus Socinus, Prelectiones Theologicae, ch. 8, in Bibliotheca Fra- 
trum Polonorum, vol. 1. 

5. See Limborch’s Theologia, lib. 2, cap. 24, § 2. 

6. Calvin, Turretine, and Calvinists generally, and Gerhard, Quenstedt, and 
most Lutherans. 


120 4 IMAGE OF GOD. 


God, 2 Cor., 4: 4. Heb., 1: 3. Col., 1: 15; Christians are 
said to be ‘‘conformed ”’ 1 the image of Christ and bathe! 
to the image of God, Rom., 8: 29. 2 Cor.,.3: 18. Col., 

10; and Christians are enjoined to rye after pret 
resemblance to the Divine character, Mat., 5: 48. Eph., 4: 
99-94. But examination of these texts, as well as of the 
general teachings of Scripture, shows that it was not in his 
moral perfection that man’s likeness to God consisted ; 
on the contrary, it is evident that, 

(a.) It was not the mere restoration of a lost image which 
the work of Christ proposed, but the carrying of man for- 
ward towards the realization of an ideal perfection to which he 
- was destined, but with which he was not at the first endowed 
—it was, in fact, the production of a new and higher type 
of manthanthe original, 1 Cor., 15: 47-49. 1 Pet., 1: 15,16. 
1 John, 3: 1-3. 

(6.) Moral perfection was not implied in the words ‘ very 
good,’’? which were spoken of the whole creation as well as 
of man, but simply, fitness to the ends had in view in the 
création. 

(c.) Moral perfection, moreover, as the possession of a free 
agent, cannot be the work of direct creation, but must be 
the product of discipline and of volitional action. 

(d.) It is not taught in the Scriptures that the distinctive 
image in which man was at first created, was lost in the fall. 
So fe from this being implied in Gen., 5: 1-3, a comparison 
of the first of those verses with the ee naturally. suggests a 
transmission of the originalimage. Itis in other texts clearly 
intimated that the original image still survives. See Gen., 
9:6, Acts, 17: 28, 29. James,.3;: 9. Comp. 1 Cor ieee 


In what then consists the image or likeness of God in 
man? Doubtlessin that assemblage of qualities which con- 
stitutes the immutable distinction between man and the brute 
creation—in other words, in his personal existence as a 
rational, moral being’. And with this interpretation agree 
both the account of man’s creation in Gen., 1: 26, 27, and 


1. See definition of personality, p. 62. 


CONDITION OF MAN. | 121 


the dominion over the lower creation, with which, in con- 
sequence of his divine likeness, he was entrusted’. 

4. THE ORIGINAL CONDITION OF Man. On this point the 
Scriptural data are few and of uncertain import. Upon 
these data have been put interpretations the most diverse and 
even opposite®?; and the light that, at present, falls on them 
from the Natural History of the race, does not contribute 
towards a conclusive determination of their meaning. 

Man as the completed work of God was pronounced, in 
common with all the rest of the creation, ‘‘ very good,’’— 
that is, he was in all respects fitted for every relation he was 
to sustain, and qualified for every office he was to perform. 
Each instinct and attribute or endowment, of heart, mind 
and body, was in perfect harmony with all the others, and 
exactly fitted to its functions. As amoral being, he must 
have been innocent and sinless; as a rational intelligence, 
either an infant, and thus needing watch-care and nurture’, 
or gifted with some degree of maturity, and accordingly 
with ideas and some kind of language which are neces- 
sarily co-existent. 

Two extremes of theory as to man’s primal condition now 
challenge attention: one, the traditional orthodox theory 
of Protestant theology*, which ascribes to Adam a state of 
perfect holiness ; the other, the so called scientific, which 


1. See Augustine, De Trin., 12, 7.—Miuller, Doctrine of Sin, vol. 2, pp. 
850-54, Urwick’s trans.—Nitzsch, Chr. Lehre, § 891. Comp. Hofmann, Schrift- 
beweis, vol. 1, p. 248, ff. According to Delitzsch, Psychologie, 2, § 2, ‘‘The 
Scripture nowhere says that the fallen man possesses the image of God in living 
reality.” ‘‘ Personality is only the basis of the contents of the image, but is not 
the image itself.” 

2. See Wiggers’ Augustinism and Pelagianism, ch. 8. Comp. Romanist 
and Protestant views, Mohler, Symbolism, bk. 1, pt. 1. 

3. No animal is so helpless at its birth as man; none so dependent on the 
nurture which intelligence alone can provide. See Argyle, Reign of Law, 
quotations from Guizot, pp. 28, 289, 290. 

4. For the Catholic doctrine of a supernaturale donum—donum superadditum, 
by which Adam was endowed with original righteousness,, see Bellarmine, De 
Controversiis, lib. 1, c. 4, 6.—Méhler, Symbolism, bk. 1, pt. 1, §1.—Roman 
Catechism, pt, 1, ch. 2, ques. 18. For the Pelagian view, see Augustine’s De 
Gestis Pelagti, ch. 11.—Wiggers as above.—F. Socinus, Pre@lect. Theo., ch. 2. 
—Sheldon’s Discourses on Sin and Redemption. 


122 THE FALL OF MAN. 


makes man to have arisen from the lowest barbarism, and 
to have been originally not only a congener of the ape, but 
the offspring of still lower animals. But it is equally doubt- 
ful whether a just interpretation of Scripture warrants the 
theological view on the one hand, or the real facts of science 
the scientific view on the other. That man, according to 
the Bible, was immature and untried at the outset, and 
consequently at the best only sinless, seems clearly enough 
implied in the garden that was prepared for him; nor is 
there anything in the New Testament implying that his first 
estate was more than that of innocence. And since civiliza- 
tion, in any just conception of it, can be only the product of 
human experience, his civil and social condition must have 
been of the humblest. But on the other hand, the suppo- 
sition of an original savage condition, but little if any 
removed from the level of the more intelligent brutes, is a 
mere conjecture, unsupported by any decisive evidence’, 
besides being wholly contrary to the Scriptures. 


§ 28—TLhe Hall of Man. 


The New Testament never directly asserts that man was 
originally a sinless being, but everywhere takes for granted 
as an admitted and well known fact, that he is not now 
what he was at the beginning. See John, 8: 44. Ro., 5: 
122145 1 jCorsyinlbw 215.22) 92 Cor, 11> 321 Tim 
Comp. Heb., 2: 7. The doctrine of a fali from primitive 
innocence-was not called in question by those for whom the 
New Testament was specially written. The Gospel, further- 
more, is a provision for the race as it now is, and a provi- 
sion available to those only who are conscious of their need 
of it, and have faith in its power to deliver them ; consequently, 


1. Reasoning from metaphysical premises and a priori principles, on either side 
of this question, will no longer suffice; it must be settled, if at all, by a wide 
range of facts. Nor will it suffice to treat it as Sir John Lubbock has done in 
his recent book, The Origin of Civilization and the Primitive Condition of 
Man ; a crude mass of unsifted testimonies, such as he has raked together with- 
out discrimination, be it ever so vast, cannot furnish grounds for safe induction. 


THE FALL OF MAN. | 123 


Christ and his Apostles were always more intent on awak- 
ening-a sense of guilt and need, than on reiterating the 
admitted fact of a lapse. 

And that human nature has thus lapsed from its original 
moral state—that every one comes short of the realization 
of the typical ideal which lies at the basis and constitutes 
the groundwork of his personal existence, is universally and 
unequivocally proclaimed in the moral consciousness of the 
race. All languages and religions’ testify, in one way or 
another, not only to a non-attainment of the ideal stage of 
which we are capable, but to a non-compliance with those 
constituent laws of being without which there could be 
no human personality and no human responsibility. The 
fact of sin, in other words of a lapse of our nature from a 
primeval status, is one of which our nature, by its very con- 
stitution, .is forced perpetually to remind eelt 

Butin this original state there could have been no knowledge 
of moral evil as such, nor of good as the contrast of evil. 
Originally faultless as the work of God, all man’s sponta- 
neities must have been right, and yet to develop these sponta- 
- neities into consciously elective and determinative principles 
of character—to secure personal worthiness to individuals, it 
was necessary that there should be volitional action. It 
was necessary that what was man’s by gift of creation, should 
become his by personal appropriation ; that the capabilities. 
of his nature should be developed into actualities of char- 
acter. And in order to this it was requisite there should be 
_tentation or trial. This tentation of the primitive man, 
(temptation in the good sense of the word,) was just as 
necessary to his maturity, and was just as much a cause of 
gratitude or joy with him, as trial now is with every truly 
christian man. See James, 1: 2. Buttemptation in its bad 
sense, and a fall from innocence, were no more necessary to 
the perfection of the first man, than a marring of any one’s 
character is now necessary to its completeness. 

It is at this point that. we encounter the chief difficulties in 
the doctrine ofa fall, and discover the most plausible grounds 


1. See Hardwick, Christ and other Masters, vol. 1, pt. 2, § 2. 


124 THE FALL OF MAN. 


for a denial ofthe fact. Itis perfectly intelligible that free per- 
sonality involves the power of choice between opposites, and 
that one condition of perfection of being, may have been the 
possibility of sinning. But any explanation that can be 
given of its possibility, leads directly and necessarily to an 
inquiry for explanation of its actuality ; and any explana- 
tion that can be given of it as fact, must in the end prove to 
be its justification. Sin explained is sin defended. 

Four distinct methods of explanation have been attempted : 

1. That which finds a solution in the original compound- 
ing of man as matter and spirit—as body and soul, and 
traces the origin of moral evil to the antagonism between 
flesh and spirit. It supposes the beginning of sin to have 
been in the succumbing of the spiritual nature to the 
sensuous. But the explanation rests upon a Manichean 
notion that sensuous activities are in themselves sinful’; it 
overlooks the fact that the spiritual may dominate the sen- 
suous completely and yet sin still rule in the soul; it does 
not recognize the truth, that some of the most damning sins of 


man have no connection with his bodily or sensuous nature ; 


and the explanation finds no support in Paul’s metaphor- 
ical use of cap§ as Synonymous with sin, a close scrutiny of 
his use giving no warrant to the conjecture that he ascribes 
the origin of moral evil to the triumph of the senses over 
the spirit? | ; 

2. Another theory is that which, building on the analogi- 
cal argument from contrast sin nature, makes moral evil to 
be a necessary condition of development for both the indi- 
vidual and the race*. Its error is in confounding tentation 
or trial with temptation or seduction to evil. It falls into 


1. This was specially true of the older monastic advocates of the theory ; but 
with its abler and later defenders, like DeWett and Rothe, it is only in the pre- 
ponderance of sensuousness that sin begins. 

2. Neander, Planting and Training of the Ch., p. 885, and ff.—Muller, 
Doctrine, &c., bk. 2,ch.2, §5. Comp. Tholuck, Stud. wu. Keit., 1855, h. 8, ab. 1. 

3. See Muller, Doct. of Sin, bk. 2, ch. 4. This theory as expounded by Hegel, 
is applied in extenso by Baring Gould in his Origin and Development of Relig. 
Belief. Comp. Birk’s Difficulties of Belief, ch. 2, and Mozley, Bampt. Lects., 
lect. 4. who declares evil to be “a necessary contingency attaching to trial, a 
necessary fact for discipline.” 


7 
4 


THE FALL OF MAN. © 125 


the radical vice in argument of supposing that man’s expe- 
rience, by which all his logic is limited, has been the only 
one possible for him ; in other words, it assumes necessita- 
rianism, and can be maintained only on the ground either of 
dualism or of pantheism ; and its conclusion makes moral 
evil to be one stage of virtue, and the fall to have been up- 
ward rather than downward’. | 

3. A third theory, traces evil to the metaphysical imper- 
fection of man as a limited or finite being. Finiteness of 
existence is conceived of as in itself privatively evil—as a 
privation of good ; and the choices of finite intelligences are 
regarded as being, on account of their finiteness, imperfect, 
and, as such, evil. This is virtually the explanation of 
Leibnitz in his 7’heodicz*, and of Bushnellin his Wature 
and the Supernatural. But it is difficult to see how moral 
evil can be due to the limftations, either of the nature or of 
the choices, of the creature, and not thereby be traceable 
either to the will, or to some limitation in the sovereignty, 
of the creature’s Creator’. The evil, moreover, of finiteness, 
whether of a person or of an act, is merely a metaphysical 
conception—an abstraction in thought, whereas the moral 
evil that is supposed to spring out of it, is both apprehended 
_by the conscience, and dealt with by moral laws, as some- 
thing which is intensely real and is the culpable product of 
direct volition. 

4. A fourth explanation of the origin of evil ascribes it, 
directly or indirectly, to the will of God. This is the view, 
In one aspect or another of it, which has generally been 
taken by Calvinistic theologians; a few of whom have 


1. Thisis actually maintained by L. A. Sawyer, in his Reconstruction of Bid. 
Theories, chh. 7, 8. 
2. Théodicée, pt. 1, §§ 34, 64. 


3. Ch. 4. 
4. Dr. Bushnell’s “ condition privative,’ which he supposes to attach to all 
creatures, angels and men, “ involves their certain lapse into evil,’”’—* the cer- 


tainty of their sin is involved in their training as powers ;” and he supposes the 
same “condition privative” to be “a bad possibility that environs God from 
eternity, waiting to become a fact and certain to become a fact whenever an 
opportunity is given. See Nat. and the Supernat., pp. 107, 134. Comp. 
Henry James, The Nature of ‘Hoi, p. 71 and fff. 


126 THE FALL OF MAN. 


ascribed its origin to the more or less immediate efficiency 
of God’; others to his mediate’ agency ; while the great 
majority have supposed the divine connection with the 
existence of moral evil to be only that of permission ; but all 
have united in regarding it as one of the means by which, 

in the divine economy, the character and glory of God are 
specially manifested?. 

Against the notion of a divine efficiency in the origin of 
evil, stands the most indubitable evidence that God is an 
infinitely holy and just Being; he cannot have been the 
author of that which is absolutely opposed to himself. 
Nor is divine authorship defensible on the ground of the 
necessity of divine support in human action. To sustain a 
finite and free being in existence, and thus make his activi- 
ties possible, is not to necessitate his actions, nor to approve 
them, nor yet to determine their-moral qualities. The scho- 
lastic theory of a divine concursus throws no light on the 
relation of God to evil, unless, distinguishing between the 
material and the formal of an action, and ascribing the latter 
alone to man, we make him responsible for the mere shell 
of his acts, and God for that which alone makes them to be 
acts at all. 

Nor yet is the objection removed by ascribing its origin 
to God’s mediate agency. The distinction is merely verbal. 


1. The earlier Reformed theologians denied that God was the direct author of — 


the fall and yet maintained that it was divinely decreed—that God “ willed” 
it—that he permitted it, non invitus vel nolens sed volens. Calvin, Jnsti. 3, 
28, 7, says, Deum Adame casum arbitrio suo dispensasse.—Beza, Ques. et Resp. 
libellus, 1, 103, says, Omnia, ut ipse Deus ab eterno decrevit, efficacissimo causas 
omnes intermedias disponens, ut ad destinatum finem necessario, quod ad 
ipsum decretum attinet, ferantur—Hmmons, Sermon, on Nature of Sin, Works, 
vol. 2, ed. ’60, p. 688, says, “there is but one true and satisfactory answer to 
the question which has been agitated for centuries, Whence came evil ?—and 
that is, tt came from the great First Oause of all things.” Comp. pp. 263, 441 
and vol. 4, pp. 272, 366, 382. See also, Am. Theol. Rev., Jan. 62. 

2. The word “mediate” may not inappropriately represent the Reformed 
distinction implied in a permissio non otiosa sed negotiosa vel efficax, which 
was at the same time non efficiens. See Schweizer, Glaubenslehre d. Hoan, 
ref. Kir.,§ 50, and Ebrard, Dogmatik, SS 265, 337. 

3. Wollebius, Zheol., 67, Peccatum Deus noluit et voluit; noluit quatenus 
peccatum est, voluit quatenus est medium patefaciendz glorie, misericordiz 
et justitie. See als, Sam’l Hopkins, Works, vol. 1, pp. 90, 100, vol. 3, 735, 736. 


———— a 


THE FALL OF MAN. ~ 127 


It matters not whether the divine will be effected by an imme- 
diate first cause, or by a mediate second cause; or whether 
the mediate cause be one, or a ten thousandth, remove from 
the Divine Being himself. He is the direct author of what- 
ever he really causes, whether that causation be immediate, ’ 
or be transmitted through the created agency of inter- 
mediate beings. 

Nor yet again are the difficulties attendant on this expla- 
nation really removed by the theory of a permissive author- 
ship. Ifthe permission were on account of the good ends 
which moral evil might be made to subserve, it is impossible 
to understand how this can consist with the divine character, 
or how it can be right for God to do evil that good may come, 

any morethanfor man. Ifthe permission were unwillingly 
(invite) yielded, it is impossible to understand how this can 
consist with the infinite attributes of Godhead. And no 
aid is rendered to our understanding of the matter, by’ an 
attempt to distinguish between the will and the wisdom of 
God,—the former being regarded as opposed to, and the 
latter as cooperating in, the introduction of moral evil: a 
God thus divided against himself is not the God of the Bible. 

But on the other hand, God was the Creator of man; 

was theauthor of that free-will, through abuse of which man 
fell; and though the bestower of gifts is no way responsible 
for abuse of them, yet the Creator made his creature capa- 
ble of falling if tempted, and placed him where he was not 
only to be tried by divine tests, but to be solicited to evil 
_by an overmastering tempter. The result could not have 
been purposed, nor yet unforseen, nor yet again beyond 
the power of Godto prevent’. The origin of evil is an 
insoluble mystery’. 


1. The majority of later writers on Theodicy,—like Young, in his Mystery 
of Hvil and God, see pt. 8, c. 1, sec. 4. Birk’s Difficulties of Belief, ch. 2, and 
Bushnell,—are disposed to repudiate indignantly the conception of a Divine per- 
mission of evil, and to refer its existence to a volitional power in man, which, 
Omnipotence could not control. The question, however, is, whether a different 
constitution and conditioning of man at the outset, were possible for Omnipo- 
tence, and not, whether constituted and conditioned as man was, Omnipotence 
could have prevented his fall. 

2. The attempt of Origen, De Principtis, 1, 2,8,of Julius Miller, Zhe Chr. 


128 CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL. 


Our only resource then is, while we admit the inexplica- 
bility of the existence of moral evil, to affirm, with the 
Scriptures, that, as the work of God, man was sinless and 
endowed with free-will; as such, he could have resisted 
- temptation and moved ever onward in normal development. 
Uninfluenced from without, he might, or rather, so far as any 
analysis of his actions is for us possible, he must have 
remained an unfallen being. 

How, even under temptation, he could have so willed. 
against his nature, as by volition to. have changed the 
nature itself, is absolutely inconceivable. But that he was 
capable of such volition, and, by its exercise fell from his 
original sinlessness, is plainly taught in the Scriptures, 
and the reproaches of the individual conscience for personal 
obliquities, even amid the darkness and ruin of the fall, 
seem to be conclusive evidence of the same great fact. 


$$ $$ $$$ a 


§ 24— Consequences of the all ; or Man as he now is. 


The consequences of the fall of man are sometinies dividéd — 
into those which resulted immediately to our first parents, 
and those which have resulted to their descendants ; but 
whatever befel the progenitors of the race, their descendants 
have inherited. By the fall, there was lost an original 
righteousness which, but for its loss, would have been the 
birthright of every one of the race, and in its stead there 
were incurred certain positive evils which, to every one, have 
been a heritage of woe. : 

The distinction between penalty and consequences, —guilt 
and liability, so much insisted on in modern theology, can 
be maintained only, by limiting our knowledge of moral law 
to the mere statutes of the Bible; by restricting human 


Doct. of Sin, v.2,b.4,¢.4, and of Edward Beecher, The Conflict of Ages, passim, to 
push the origin of sin back into a preéxistent state, admits its inexplicability 
by assuming that its origin must have been in a previous state of being, of 
which we can, necessarily, neither know anything nor form any justifiable 


conception. 


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL. 129 


guilt to the violation of those statutes; and by so distin- 
euishing between Nature and Revelation as most unwar- 
rantably to separate them. Butif God be the author of the 
constitution and course of nature, if the office of the formal 
revelation of the Bible be to supplement and to supplant 
the earlier revelation of Nature, then all painful conse- 
quences of wrong acts must be as distinctly penal as if they 
had been formally threatened. 

What were the consequences of the Fall? Turning to the 
Scriptures, we find that the special consequence of disobe- 
dience, of which, according to Gen., 2: 17, particular fore- 
warning had been given, and which, in Ro., 5: 12,14, and 
1 Cor., 15: 22, is said to have been incurred, is. death. ° 
Adam and death are so intimately and constantly asso- 
ciated in the New Testament as to teach, beyond a doubt, 
that death has been the chief consequence of his fall. But 
the word death has at least two meanings in the Scriptures; 
the first, that of separation of the soul from the body’; the 
second, the soul’s separation from God*. In which sense 
of the word has death, as the great penalty for sin, been a 
consequence of the fall? Preéminently, though not exclu- 
sively, we think, in thelatter; and for the following reasons: 

1. The penalty was explicit ; ‘‘in the day that thou eatest 
thereof, thou shalt surely die.’’ But man did not die, in 
the literal sense of the word, on the day of his transgression, 
nor until very many years thereafter ; according to Gen., 3: 
8, 16-19, he did die, in the second or metaphorical sense of 
the word, immediately—on the very day of his transgres- 
sion. Nor is it anything else than puerile trifling with lan- 
geuage, to say that Adam began to die on the day of his 
transgression, by becoming mortal—by having the seeds of 
disease planted within him. 

2. Science confirms the view. Geology assures us that 
death, as cessation of animal life, existed in this world 


1. “ Decessus animi a corpore.”—Cicero. 

2. Eternal death, the ‘‘second death” of Rev., 2: 11. 20: 6, 14. 21: 8, hag 
been very generally regarded as a third meaning ; but instead of a third mean- 
ing, the epithets ‘‘second” and ‘‘eternal” seem rather to convey the idea of a 
continuance of spiritual death in another and timeless existence. 


130 CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL. 


untold ages before man’s appearance in it—thus furnishing 
a most decisive argument against the supposition that tem- 
poral death was the chief penalty threatened’; and Physi- 
ology, teaching that all vital organisms, both vegetable and 
animal, have their stages of inception, growth, maturity, 
decay and dissolution, destroys the supposition that the 
body, without some great change or transformation, could 
have been immortal. Just what provision for arresting ’ 
the tendency to decay and dissolution in the body of man, 
may have been intended in the paradisiacal ‘‘tree of life,”’ 
it is impossible to say. 

3. Merely physical death would have been wholly inade- 
quate as a punishment for the enormity of sin*. So far from 
being a penalty, it is often sought as a refuge from inevitable 
ills. Multitudes have seized itasa blessing. Almost every 
passion in the human heart has conquered the fear of it’. 
Ceesar, according to the historian Sallust’, thought it an 
insufficient punishment for Catiline. 


4. The contrasts in the New Testament pokeean the per- 
sons and the natures of Christ and of Adam, imply the 
latter to have been naturally mortal. See, for instance, 
1 Cor., 15: 45-49. The antitheses, in these verses, between 
myevpatexoc and ghoyexds, ézovodveog and yoixos, plainly imply a 
natural perishableness in the body of man. 

5. The contrast between Adam and Christin Ro., 5: 12-19, 
and in similar passages, requires that death, as a conse- 
quence of the fall, be understood preéminently in its figura- 
tive sense. The blessings Christ bestows are preéminently 
spiritual, and so are the curses or penalties that he removes. 
He that believes on Christ, is never to taste death—to see 
death ; for him, Christ has abolished death. 


1. The notion that the existence of death in the world prior to the appear- 
ance of man, was a proleptic penalty, an ‘‘ anticipative consequence” of sin, is 
one of those expedients for meeting a difficulty from physical science, which 
so often and so justly invoke on theology the sneers of scientific men. 

2. See Hopkins, Works, vol. 1, pp. 187, ff. 

3. See Lord Bacon’s Essay on Death. 

4. Catilina, § 51. 


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL. Et 


6. Christ saves no one, and promised to save no one, from 
physical death, though he came to destroy death, the con- 
sequence of sin, by destroying sin itself. The salvation he 
bestows on every believer is commensurate with the ruin of 
the fall, but not to the extent of relieving any one from 
temporal death. Had temporal or literal death been the 
specific penalty for sin, then the literal death of Christ 
should have destroyed the penalty, otherwise the salvation 
he procures is not the restoration of something lost, but the 
bestowment of something wholly additional to man’s original 
eifts. ‘ 

7. With the idea of spiritual death as the penal conse- 
quence of sin, agrees the constant New Testament use of the 
word ‘‘death’’ assynonymous with the Divine displeasure— 
with the whole range of penal consequences of moral evil ; 
and of the word ‘‘life,’? as synonymous with the Divine 
approval—with that comprehensive blessedness which is the 
reward of fidelity to God. 

Yet itis not to be denied that, according to the Scrip- 
tures, natural death, as it now occurs, is, in some sense, a 
consequence of the fall of Adam’. Nor have we any Knowl- 
edge by which it can be conclusively shown that death, -in 
its present form, would have been the inevitable lot of man, 
had he never sinned. We know not what changes may 
have taken place in man’s surroundings in this world ; 
what provision there may have been in ‘‘ the tree of life’’ 
for transforming his body and for imparting to it that sub- 
limated, spiritualized, condition which was requisite to its 
immortality, and now is attainable only through the process 
of dissolution and resurrection. Nor yet, onthe other hand, 
is there anything in the Scriptures positively requiring our 
belief in the natural immortality of the body of Adam ; inti- 
mations to the contrary, as we have seen above, seem to be 
clearly and variously given. 


1. There are single texts in the writings of Paul, e. g. Ro., 5: 12, in which 
the chief meaning of @4vatoc as a penalty for sin may be literal death, just as 
there are other passages, e. g. 2 Cor., 4: 10,11, 12, in which the predominant 
meaning of (07, as the reward of righteousness, is literal life. Compare the 
use of wy in the Gospel of Matthew. For the different interpretations of 
favatoc, in Ro., 5: 12, see Schaff’s ed. of Lange, Com. on Ro. 


132 CONSEQUENCES OF THE: FALL. 


Our conclusion, then, must be that, according to the 
Scriptures, man was constitutionally mortal, though provi- 
sion was made for his immortality ; by the fall he became 
necessarily and painfully mortal; by the death and resur- 
rection of Christ, a blessed immortality is conditionally 
restored to him ; but the death which came upon him as a 
penal consequence of transgression, and which now lends 
to death its punitive qualities, was that confusion and cor 
ruption of the moral elements of his being, which has alien- 
ated him from God and made him the prey of remorse’. 

FREEDOM OF WILL was also lost, as a consequence of the 
fall. Will is the central principle of personality—‘‘is con- 
scious self-determination, the self-determination of an ego ;” 
as innate faculty, itis potentiality of being ; as elective force, 
itisthe soulin movement. Freedom of will has been conceived 
of, (a.) asthe absence of outward constraint ; (0.) asa state of 
equilibrium or equipoise ; (¢c.) as a necessary condition of 
rational existence ; (¢d.) as a harmonious working of all the 
faculties of one’s being. Outward constraint and a state of 
equilibrium are inconceivable as belonging to any state of 
moral being: the former conception is excluded by the very 
idea of will’; and the latter’ is conceivable as possible only for 
a being whois not moral—isa state ofindifference, from which 
there could be escape only by the aid of external causes, 
or by an irrational arbitrariness of self-determination, either 
of which destroys the very idea of volition and morality. 
There remain, then,.as descriptive of freedom of will in the 
ideal man, the twofollowing conceptions,—one, that of a 
power of mental self-determination, which is necessarily 
coéxistent and commensurate with the faculty of discrimi- 
nation; the other, that of the concurrent. and harmonious 


1. On this whole question see Calvin, Jnsti., bk. 2, ch. 1, s. 5.—Hopkins, 
Works, vol. 1, pp. 212, ff—Bellamy, Works, vol. 1, pp. 227, ff—Bretschneider, 
Dogmatik, § 122.—Hitchcock, Religion and Geology.—Tayler Lewis, Genesis and 
Geology Muller, Chr. Doct. of Sin, bk. 4, ch. 2,§ 6.-Delitzsch, Bib. Psychol., 8, §2. 

2. “ Voluntas que potest cogi et cogitur, non est voluntas sed noluntas.”— 
Luther. 

3. For a discussion of this notion of freedom, see Edwards’ Inguiry into the 
Freedom of the Will, pt 2, sec. 7. 


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALE. 138 


action of all the powers that properly make up the human 
personality. The one still survives in all men; the other 
was lost in the fall. The first is involved in the very idea 
of personality. Intelligence, conscience and will, which 
together constitute personality, can coéxist only on condi- 
tion of the freedom of each in its own sphere. An intelligent 
will, if its choices are to be subject to the review of con- 
science, must be a free will. This freedom, sometimes 
denominated ‘‘formal,’’ in contradistinction from ‘‘real’,”’ 
freedom, is, therefore, necessarily conceived of as the inva- 
riable endowment of personality in any state of being. 

Both conscienceand Scripture recognize formal freedom as 
an inalienable birth-right, for the possession and exercise of 
which man is still responsible. The economy of law, 
whether of Judaism or of Nature, implies its continued exist- 
ence. Those alternatives of choice so frequently presented 
in the Old Testament history, Deut., 80: 15,16; Josh., 24: 
15, 21, 24; 1 Kings, 18: 21, and in the present daily expe- 
rience of all men, appeal to it as still existing. The New 
Testament also represents salvation as conditioned on our 
voluntary acceptance of it, Matt., 7: 7; 11:12; Luke, 11: 
5-13; Heb., 3: 8, even while it represents our choice to be 
only a compliance with the suasions of the divinely con- 
straining Spirit, John, 6: 44; Ro., 9: 16; Phil., 2: 48; and 
declares the gospel to be ineffectual with some, because, in 
the exercise of their own free will, they choose to reject it, 
Mathers: 37: John, 5: 40; Acts, 7: 51. But the free- 
dom thus recognized by Scripture and conscience, is a free- 
dom to discern and toelect, but notto appropriate, the right ; 
is a possession so much encumbered, that, without super- 
human aid,it can be of little avail to us; the recognition of 
it is for the purpose of teaching us, that, though still con- 
sciously free to choose between good and evil, we actually 
appropriate evil in the end, unless the veal freedom of our 
nature, now lost, has been restored to us’. 


1. As Delitzsch expresses it, man as he now is, is wahlfrei aber nicht 
machtfrei. 

2. Fischer, Der Untersuchung ib. d. Spekula. Begriff d. Fretheit.—Miller, 
vol. 2, bh. 3, pt, 1, c. 1.—Luthardt, Lehre vom freien Willen, § 2. 


1L34 CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL. 


There yet remains to be considered the last and pro- 
foundest meaning that has been attached to the phrase, 
Freedom of the Will. This conceives of man as an ideally 
perfect being, in whom all the functions of his nature are 
in absolute accord. What his will demands, all the higher 
powers of his nature approve; and what these higher 
powers command, his will spontaneously elects'. He instine- 
tively chooses the good, and his whole nature conspires 
towards the realization of his choice. Such an one must be 
the possesor of real freedom—a freedom which is the noblest 
distinction and the crowning glory of a personal existence ; 
and such is the freedom, the freedom ofa perfectly well- 
balanced nature, which the unfallen or ideal man must be 
supposed to have possessed”. But from this original estate 


1. The seventh chapter of Romans describes the condition of one in whom 
reason and conscience have begun to resume their rightful authority, but in 
whom the once enslaved will, now partially released, has not yet been com- 
pletely set free. . 

2. If it be said that this is only a freedom to act out one’s nature, and that 
a thoroughly bad man would be just as free in his activities as a thoroughly 
good man would be in his, it must be remembered that the basis of all per- 
sonal being is in itself good, and that no amount of wickedness can so com- 
pletely corrupt the reason and conscience, that they will not at times come 
into violent collision with the erring will. It is this collision that reveals to 
the bad man the enslavement of his will. 

Much confusion on this whole subject will be avoided, if we bear in mind 
the evident distinction that exists between will as the central determining 
power of the individual, (arbitrium,) and that by-play of the will’s elective 
force, (voluntas,) which may be toward a good or bad object, according as its 
movement may have been at the dictate of.a higher or of a lower impulse of 
our nature. The eddies of a stream should not be confounded with its general 
current. Stapfer says: “ Per vocem arditrit auctores latini denotant potentiam 
ac voluntatem eligendi. Per lidertatem vero intelligimus facultatem anime 
nostre ex pluribus contingentibus sponte eligendi id, quod optimum judicat. 
Si ergo duas has nationes simul sumamus, liberum arbditrium eam denotat 
anime rationalis facultatem, qua, si omnia ad agendum adsint requisita, potest 
agere vel non agere, hoc vel illudagere. Siergo homini in statu corruptionis 
liberi arbitrii vires superesse negamus, hoc volumus: Eam anime ipsius deesse 
facultatem, in spiritualibus nonnisi ad bonum sese determinare illudque agere 
potest. [Notandum hic non negari homini voluntatem, sed ejus facultatem 
nonnisi ad bonum sese determinandi; unde si nonnulli veteres ecclesis doctores 
homini etiam irregento liberum arbitrium tribuerent, ipsi non hanc voluntatis 
facultatem, sed nonnisi ipsam hominis intellexerunt voluntatem”—]. Jnstitut. 


CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL. 135 


both conscience and Scripture now declare man to have 
deeply fallen; John, 8: 34; Ro., 3: 11-18; 6: 165 7:14; 
Eph., 2: 2, 3. His moral being isina state of anarchy ; his 
affections are corrupted; his understanding is darkened ; 
his will rebels against the higher powers of hissoul; he is in 
bondage to the spirit of evil that has usurped the control of 
him. He has lost his posse non peccare, and must now be 
described as nun posse non peccaré. 

The office of CoNScIENCE was also affected by the Fall. 
The word conscience is ordinarily used in two senses ; the 
one denoting a faculty, the other a function. As a faculty, 
conscience is that original endowment? by which man neces- 


Theol., vol. 4, cap. 16, §34. Comp. also idem, vol. 1, cap. 8, §§ 721, 7238, 724. 
& Quando intellectus hominis sibi aliquid ut bonum representat, appetitus oritur, 
qui si intellectum ducem sequitur et rationalis est, nominatur voluntas. Quo-. 
niam itaque voluntas sequitur representationem intellectus, et idtantum appetit, 
quod intellectus sub specie boni cognoscit, hinc cogi non potest. Et cum cogi 
nequeat, anima velad volendum vel nolendum seipsa determinat.” For a differ- 
ent use of voluntas and arbitrium, see Shedd, Discourses and Hesays, pp. 241-248. 

1. The interminable controversies that have agitated the church on the ques- 
tion of free-will, have been between the advocates of the exclusive truth of 
either a real or of a formal freedom; anda manifest solution of the whole 
problem would bereached, if by any means it could be demonstrably shown that 
both are true and reconcilable with one another, The controversy. has been 
the same, whether between Augustine and Pelagius, and their successors through 
the middle ages, or between Luther and Erasmus, or between Calvinists and 
the Arminians among all the subdivisions of the Protestant churches, or in this 
country between Jonathan Edwards and his innumerable critics; on the Augus- 
tine side, the existence of a formal freedom was, until later years, almost 
ignored, New England writers half recognizing it in their factitious distinc- 
tion between natural and moral ability; onthe Pelagian and Arminian side, by 
exclusive appeal to consciousness, the biblical idea of real freedom has been 
persistently overlooked. See Luthard, above refered to. The literature on the 
subject is commensurate with that on Psychology and Theology. The standard 
treatise in English, on the Augustinian side, is Edward’s Inquiry, to which unsatis- 
factory replies have been written by Tappan, Bledsoe, Wheedon and others. 
One of the latest and ablest of American writers on the anti-Edwardean side, is 
Hazard, Freedom of Mind in Willing. See also his Two Letters on Causation 
and on Freedom of Mind in Willing, addressed to J. Stuart Mill. 

2. The notion that the conscience was not an original endowment of the 
unfallen man but was a product of his fall,—see Gewissen, by Schenkel, in 
Herzog, Real Encyclopid., vol. 5, specially p. 186—can be entertained only on 
the assumption, that the exclusive office of conscience is the ministration of eon- 
demnation and not of approval as well. 


136 CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL. 


sarily pronounces judgment on the moral quality of his 
actions ; as a function, it is that self-approval or self-con- 
demnation, of which every one, in view of his actions is 
more or less conscious. The faculty, like every other ori- 
ginal endowment, is inalienable ; its functions may be more 
or less disturbed, according to one’s moral tastes, enlighten- 
ment and habits. 

The evidences of a ae functional disturbance in the 
action of conscience, are too clear and too numerous to be set 
aside. It is only too evident that its actual decisions are 
strangely erroneous. The faculty, which in a normal and 
ideal state of existence, should, and undoubtedly always 
would, render right decisions, and invariably guide in the 
right path, now often renders false judgments, and posi- 
tively misleads. Itmatters not what may be our explanation 
of these erroneous decisions; whether we may suppose 
the judgments to be intuitive, and that the intuitional 
perceptions have been darkened ; or whether we may sup- 
pose the judgments to be in accordance with certain imagi- 
nary obligations, which the whole mind has been schooled 
into regarding as divinely authoritative’, the fact of erroneous 
rulings by the conscience is none the less real ; and the fact 
of a functional disturbance in its action, seems none the less 
indisputable. Whatever may be the skill of the conscience 
in deciphering the unwritten, but obscured, law of the heart, 
Ro., 2: 14, 15, itis only when that law has been reéngraved 
on the heart, Heb., 8: 10, and the conscience by reénlight- 
enment has been rescued from its deadly mistakes, Heb., 9: 
14, that the traces of the fall begin to be effectively removed, 
and the extent of the injury it has suffered in the fall to” 
become really apparent. 

So also there has been lost to our race a freedom from the - 
perverting influence of evil example ; a wrong tendency has 


1. On the opposing theories of intuitional and derivative judgments of the con- 
science, see Whewell, Hist. of Moral Phil. in Hing. Introduct. Lect.—Garbett, 
Bampt. Lects., The Dogmatik Faith, lect. 7.—Leckey, History of European 
Morals, ch. 1. Compare also the views of Dr. Rudolph Hofmann, in his Dée 
Lehre von dem Gewissen, and Martin Kehler in his Die schriftgemiisse Lehre 
vom Gewissen. 


SIN. a Ly 


been given, both by example and by corruption of will, to the 
whole current of human life; human society has become 
organically evil. The whole world now lieth in wickedness— 
under dominion of the evil one, and all men are enslaved, 

until reéndowed with the ‘ ne of the children of God ; 2? 
1 John, 5: 19. John, 6: 44. Ro., 8: 21. 


$ 25—Sin. 


1. Derrnition. Theologians have differed so widely in 
their definitions of sin't that we must betake ourselves at 
once to the Bible. We there find that the two words most 


1. Thomas Aquinas: Peccatum est actus voluntariusmalus * * * actus 
devians ab ordine debiti finis contra regulam nature, rationis vel legis eterne. 
—Summa, pars 1, ques. 71. 

Melancthon: Peccatum est defectus, vel inclinatio, vel actus, pugnans cum 
lege Dei.— Loci, de peccato, 

Calvin: Concupiscentia, totum hominem non aliud ex seipso esse quam 
concupiscentiam. * * * Peccatum est adversus Dei voluntatem rebellio.— 
Instz., lib. 2, c, 8, sec. 59. 

Quenstedt: Peccatum esse illegalitatem seu discrepantiam a lege Dei; non 
omne peccatum sit voluntarium.—Theologia, pars 2, p. 968. 

Van Mastricht: Peccatum esse aliquid privativum quod consistat in sola 
avouia ; seu absentia rectitudinis moralis, in a ecto ESTAS 1 SB OHI rectitu- 
dinis moralis, adesse debite.— Theol., lib. 4, ¢. 2, § 21. 

Buddeus: Abstracte spectatum, aetectis conformitatis cum lege divina ; 
concrete spectatum, subjectum illud, cui defectus ille seu privatio inest.— 
Theol., lib. 3, c. 2, § 2, note. | 

Pictet: Discrepantia a lege et privatio rectitudinis que deberet inesse 
creature rationali 

Stapfer: Si peccatum, sive malum morale, definire velimus, dicimus; illud 
esse absentiam relationis actioni debitz inesse.—Jnstitutiones, vol. 1, § 842. 

Reinhard: Quevis absentia convenientiz cum lege divina.—Dogmatik, § 77. 

Westminster Assembly’s Catechism: Any want of conformity unto, or 
’ transgression of, any law of God given as a rule to the reasonable creature. 

Nat. Emmons: All sin consists in the free, voluntary exercise of selfishness, 
—cannot be transferred from one being to another. me on Native Deprav., 
vol 4, 1st ed., pp. 502, 508. “Sin consists in sinning.” 

Moses Stuart: A voluntary transgression of a known law, by a rational, free, 
moral agent.—Bib. Repos., 2d series, vol. 1, p. 279. 

Prof. E. A. Park: Sin consists in the choice or preference of that which the 
conscience requires us to refuse, or in the voluntary refusal of that which the 
conscience requires us to prefer.— Bib. Sac., vol. 8, p. 626. 


138 SIN. 


commonly employed to denote sin, in its generic sense, are, 
in the Hebrew, son, and in the Greek, duaprdva, both 
of which signify, primarily, to miss, or come short of, one’s 
aim. The underlying thought in these words, as used in 
the Scriptures, is, doubtless, that of a voluntary departure 
from known divine requirements ; and the same thought is 
the controlling, if not exclusive, one, in all the other Hebrew 
terms relating to sin, as well as in the corresponding Greek 
words in the Septuagint. To the J ene uae sin, ordi- 

narily,—possibly not always, see Ps., 19: 12. Ps., 51: 5, 
10,—was a transgression of the Mosaid ne But ae same 
Greek words which, in the Septuagint, denote violations of 
positive enactments, have in the New Testament, another 
and profounder meaning. No longer restricted to the nar- 
row sense of mere offenses against positive precepts, they 
often imply transgressions of the hidden laws of being, of 
-which the precepts are merely representative. This is 
specially true in the Pauline use of the generic word duaptea ; 
and the same reach of meaning is only less apparent in his 
use of the words dda, doééeca, and in John’s use of dvoma, 
lep., 38: 4. Thus Paul in his argument for the universal 
sinfulness of our race, in the passage beginning Ro., 1: 17, 
and ending 3: 20, assumes in 2: 12, comp. 5: 13, that 
there is sin, and also its penalty, even where there is no 
published statute ; that the sinning heathen were the trans- 
eressors of the laws of their own being, and that their own 
consciences had notified them of their guilt, Ro., 2: 14, 15. 
Paul tells us also that the positive Mosaic law was given 
for the special purpose of accomplishing what the natural 
law of our being could not accomplish, viz. : to bring to light 
and condemn the latent but deadly power of moral evil—a 
power that, having seated itself in the human heart, can. 
be effectually evoked and destroyed only by, the aid of a 
written law, Ro.. 3): 20/ 7: 711,18. Gal., 3: 19: 

Now sin, which thus rules as a deadly force in man, is 
represented in Scripture as shewing itself in single acts, 
which are denominated sins, transgressions, iniquities, ete.; is 
also depicted asa principle which reigns in the soul with the 


o~ 


SIN. ne: 189 


uniformity of law, John,°8: 34. Ro., 5: 21. 6: 12-14. 7: 
8, 9, 11, 13., and determines the guilt of the soul’s actions, 
Ro., 7: 17, 23, 25. 8: 2.; and finally, is said to be at once 
an effect and cause of a corrupt state of the heart, and to 
constitute in itself a permanent state of guilt, Matt., 15: 18, 
19. Luke, 6: 45. Ro., 5: 12, 21. 6: 6. 7: 14-17, 24. Eph., 
2: 3. 

Sin, then, may be comprehensively defined as follows: 
as an act, it is a transgression of God’s law; as a principle 
that determines the guilt of acts, itis opposition or hostility to 
God ; as a state or nature, itis moral unlikeness to God’. 

2. The EssENcE of sin; in what does it consist? By this is 
meant to inquire, whatit is in sin which makes it to be 
(esse) sin. The question is not identical with that of the 
origin of sin, though closely akin to it’. If the origin of an 
act or a state were in itself alone, then its cause and its 
essence might be one; but the principle of life and its cause 
are not more clearly distinct from each other than are the 
essence and the cause of sin. No answer that can be given 
to the inquiry respecting the origin of sin, can be of any 
service to us in dealing with sin itself ; but on our answer to 
the inquiry into its essential nature must depend our con- 
ceptions of both the remedy that has been provided for it, 
and themethod by which that remedy may be made available. 

A. Is the essence of sin in Sensuousness? 7. é. is itin the 
soul’s voluntary surrender of itself to the dominion of the 
senses, and so, finally, to the control of the bodily impulses 
and appetites? To the affirmative of this question, it must 
be admitted that certain words and phrases in the epistles 
of Paul lend apparent support. He contrasts odof and 
mvévua, the capuxoe, (adoxvoe), and the mvevpartexoe ; he desig- 
nates sinful desires as éxeuucae sapxoc, comp. 2 Pet., 2: 18. 
1 John, 2: 16; and he uses soyva and pédy to denote the 


1. Nichts ist gedankenloser, als behaupten. Sunde sei jedesmal nur einzelne 
That, und das Wort duapria kénne nur dese eigentlich bedeuten. Nitzsch, Chr. 
Lehre, § 106, anmerk. 2. 

These two questions are not always kept sufficiently distinct by Miller in bk. 
2 of his Doct. of Sin. 


140 SIN. 


jnstruments of moral evil in man; the impression is natu- 
rally received, that he looked upon the love of sensuous 
gratification as the very soul and centre of all sin. But 
careful examination reveals the falsity of the impression. 

(a.) The terms oap¢ and zvévya, inthe Pauline phraseology, 
do not represent an antagonism between the body and the 
soul of man, but between fallen human nature and the Holy 
Spirit, Gal. wae si RO Seal tsa ora io iil. 

(6.) The essence of the sin of wicked spirits could not 
have been regarded by him as consisting in sensuousness ; 
and some of the most defiling sins which he enumerates, 
and of which our nature is capable, have no relation what- 
ever to the sensational nature, Gal., 5: 20, 21. 1 Cor,, 3: 3, 4. 

(c.) There were sufficient reasons for Paul’s selection of 
his terms to symbolize the hidden power of sin, without sup- 
posing that his choice was determined by any theory 
respecting the essential nature of sin’. All our words 
descriptive of mental and moral acts and states, those of 
the most literal as well as those of the most metaphorical 
meaning, have been derived from sensational experiences, 
and nothing was more natural than that the nomenclature 
of an orientalist, in describing the subtle power of evil, 
should have been suggested by that portion of our two-fold 
nature in which that subtle power most conspicuously 
Shows itself. Sin, furthermore, in the Apostles’ day made 
special display of itself in the grossest forms of sensuality, 
and it was through the extermination of these, in the per- 
sons of the first converts to Christianity, that the power, 
and thus the divine origin, of the Gospel, was most readily 
apprehended by outward observers. More than all, the 
great source of the Apostle’s power, asa herald of the 
Gospel, was in the efficient agency of the Holy Ghost ; 
mvévua and its derivatives, were, therefore, already and neces- 
sarily in hand, and, as the only possible antitheses to these, 
he had no alternative but to take gaps and its codrdinate terms. 


1. See Schaff & Riddle’s ed. of Lange, Com. on the Romans, pp. 2384, 238. 
2. For an explanation of this choice, see Neander, Planting and Training, 
p. 385, ff. 


SIN. hes 141 


(d@.) An argument, finally, against the notion that the 
essence of sin consists in sensuousness, is found in the mis- 
chievous consequences to which it naturally, and by logical 
necessity leads. If the vital force of sin lies in the usurped 
dominion of the bodily senses over the spirit of man, then, 
the conclusion is, the more completely the body is sub- 
dued the more complete is the victory over sin; hence the 
maltreatment of our physical nature, with the vain hope of 
high spiritual culture, but with the sure result of fostering 
some of the subtlest and most damning sins that lurk in the 
human heart. <A lingering notion, that both the source and 
vital energy of sin are in the body rather than in the soul 
of man, still perpetuates an asceticism which too often cuts 
off the superficial excrescences of sin only to cherish the 
more carefully the deadly virus that hides within’. 

B. Isthe essence of sinin Unbelief*? <A few texts of Scrip- 
ture seem at first glance to require an affirmative answer. 
Men are condemned for not believing on Christ, John, 3: 
18. 16: 9; evil men, in New Testament phraseology, are 
‘‘unbelievers;’’ and the ground of the final condemnation 
of the wicked, it is intimated, will be their unbelief, Heb., 
6: 18, 19.' 4: 11. Rev., 21: 8 A’ very little reflection, 
however, in connection with a brief examination of the 
Scriptures, suffices to show that unbelief is not the real 
procuring cause of man’s condemnation, but only its 
secondary and intensifying cause. Christ Jesus came into 
the world to save men who were already and justly con- 
demnable on account of their own personal unworthiness. 


1. The theory that the seat of sin is in the sensational nature, and consists in 
sensuousness, was generally adopted by the older rationalists, was continued 
by Bretschneider, Dogmatik, § 120, and by Usteri, Hntwickelung Paulinischen 
Lehrbegriffs, abs. 3, B. ; has in later years been defended by Baur of Tubingen, 
by Hofmann, Schriftbeweiss, ed. 52, p. 471, by Rothe, Theol. Hthik, and even 
by Meyer, 4thed. Com. ii Rémer, see ch. 5: 14 chh. 6-8, passim. Opposed to this 
theory are Neander, Planting, &c.; Julius Muller, Doct. of Sin ; Philippi, 
Com. i Rémer.; Schmid, Bib. Theol. d. N. T., pp. 499, 502; see also the Dog- 
matik of Thomasius and of Ebrard, the Chr. Lehre of Nitzsch, and the Bid. 
Psychol., 3, §1, of Delitzsch. Ong. Tholuck, erneuerte Umtersuch. &c. Stud. 
it Krit. 1855, hft. 3. 

2. Unbelief, not in the sense of no-belief, but of disbelief. 


149 SIN. 


Their unbelief was only the natural product and sure crite- 
rion of an already existing sinfulness. Their unbelief 
reveals, and at the same time heightens, their sinfulness, 
but can in no proper sense be regarded as the ground of 
LiemileOs tL) 2s: 320) 

If unbelief were the essence of sin, then belief should be 
the essence of personal righteousness. But the life princi- 
ple of righteousness is lov, and faith is only the medium 
ave hd which righteousness exists and is matured—‘‘ by 
grace are ye saved,’’ made fit to be saved, dca mtorewc—and 
so unbelief, in the broad sense of the term, is the medium 
through which sin exists, thrives, and reathes its consum- | 
mation. 


Nor does any analysis that we can make of sinful acts shew 
their damning quality to consist in unbelief. .A man’s life, 
including his acts, is always determined by his moral affec- 
tions ; and these are already in control of him, and deter- 
mine his belief or unbelief whenever it comes into exercise. 
And so of the first transgression, of which an account is_ 
contained in the beginning of the biblical records, no con- 
ception that we can form of it, will warrant the assumption 
that either its origin’, or its essential guilt, lay in unbelief. 
The assurance of the tempter to Adam was, that the words 
of God were not true, and that the threatened penalty would 
not be executed. But it does not necessarily follow, that 
distrust of God and belief in the tempter originated and 
animated the transgression. The tempter’s assurance in 
Gen., 3: 4, and promise in verse 5, doubtless originated the 
thought that led to the sin; but the beginning of the guilt, 
and the animating principle, the esse, of the transgression, 
were not in unbelief, but in the desiring and the resolving, to 
know what the Satanic thought had suggested. Adam dis- 
believed God because he had first desired what Satan had 
promised. Both his will and his confidence were the 
offspring of his desire. The essence of his sin wag not in 


1. Infidelitas radix defectionis fuit, hinc emersit ambitio et superbia.—Cal- 
vin, Jnstitutiones, lib. 2, cap. 1, § 4. 


SIN. io 148 


his unbelief, but in that of which his unbelief was the natu- 
ral product, and the sure criterion’. 

©. Is the essence of sin in Selfishness? 7. é., in an inordi- 
nate self-love and self-seeking. The inquiry implies that a 
certain degree of self-loveis allowable. A certain degree is 
also made necessary by the instinct of self-preservation ; and 
the repeated injunctions of Scripture to make our self-love 
the standard of our love to others, Matt., 22: 39. Ro., 13: 9. 
Gal.,5: 14. James, 2: 8. Comp. Eph., 5: 28, 33, gives due 
sanction to some measure of self-regard. But all love, to 
self or others, is legitimate, only as itis subordinate to, and 
purified by, an intelligent and all-inclusive love to the com- 
‘mon Father of all. All love becomes sinful, selfish, idola 
trous, in proportion as its object is isolated from God. The 
degree of self-love that becomes sinful—becomes selfishness, 
is that which substitutes self-will for the will of God. He 
has reached the culmination of wickedness who ‘‘ opposeth 
and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is 
worshipped,”’ 2 Thess., 2: 4. That the vital power of sin 
is in selfishness, seems evident from the following con- 
siderations : 

1. Whatever there is in sensuousness, or in unbelief, 
apparently warranting the conclusion that in these lies the 
essence of sin, leads directly to the further conclusion that 
its seat is in selfishness alone. Sensuous indulgence is itself 
always selfish; and selfishness is always the parent of 
unbelief”. 

2. It is evident from the nature of virtue and of its 
rewards, that the central principle of virtue is in unselfish- 
ness. ‘True virtue consists in seeking and attaining to right 


1. The pantheistic notion that the essence of sin consists in deficiency or 
defect, Spinoza, Hthices, p. 4, prop. 20, is widely different from the supposition 
that it consists in unbelief. Unbelief is something positive and quantitative ; 
deficiency is mere nihility, and in itself, inconceivable. It is nothing surprising 
that with the holders of such a theory, power shouldbe identical with virtue, 
and religion should consist in ‘‘ Hero Worship.” 

2. The love of the world, the Weltliebe, in which certain German authors 
find the essence of sin, is, when analyzed, found to be only one form of 
selfishness. 


144 SIN. 


ends. Virtue sought for any reason centering 1n ourselves, 
or in any other object than itself, isnever acquired. Itself 
is its own reward. ‘The benefits it confers are never secured 
if sought for their own sake. Unselfishness is the soul of 
virtue, and selfishness is the vitalizing principle of every 
vice and of every variety of sin. 

3. The two fundamental principles of true religion are, a 
supreme regard for the Supreme Being, and a regard for 
our fellow beings equal to that which we cherish for ourselves. 
On these two hang all the law and the prophets, Matt., 22: 
36-40. Mark, 12: 29-31. The one principle thatis directly 
opposite to these, is supreme regard for self; on this prin- 
ciple hang all irreligion and sin. 

4, The examples and the teachings of both Christ and his 
Apostles imply that the essence of all sin is in selfishness. 
(a.) Christ, who came into the world for the express pur-— 
pose of saving men from sin, by living and dying for them, 
declared the ruling principle of his life and death to have 
been supreme regard for the will of God, John, 5: 30. 8: 
50. 14: 31, and that the same ‘unselfish regard for his will, 
and thus for that of the Father, is the one organific principle 
around which all personal righteousness is formed, Matt., 
16: 24, 25. Mark, 8; 34, 35. Luke, 9: 23, 24. John, 12: 25. 
(6.) The Apostles counted not their own lives dear unto 
them, Acts, 20: 24, and taught the duty of self-sacrifice for 
the good of others, 1 John, 3: 16. Throughout their epis- 
tles they teach, that love to God and men is the essential 
and determinative principle in the personal salvation which 
they were sent to proclaim—a salvation from the dominion 
of selfishness, Ro., 14; 8:1 Cor., 8; 13. 1) Johny 4iiiee ae 
5: 1-3; that unselfishness 1s the distinguishing character- 
istic of good men, and selfishness, of bad men, Ro., 14: 7. 
Phil.,.2: 3-8. 1'Cor., 10 :,24,.93..9 Tim., @e done 

5. Universal experience teaches, that we first become fully 
aware of our own sinfulness, by becoming aware of a con- 
flict between the requirements of moral law, Ro., 7: 7, 8, 
and of our own selfishness, and that it is the same indwell- 
ing principle of selfishness which stands ready, at any given 


KINDS OF SIN. | 145 


moment, to betray its possessor into overt acts of transgres- 
sion, James, 1; 14. 

Oye iie See ricnt of so many theologians i in the recogni- 
tion of selfishness as the essence of sin—even of theologians, 
the fundamental principles of whose systems are at the widest 
remove from each other, isa strongly corroborative evidence 
that their view is both taught in the Scriptures, and con- 
firmed by the facts of consciousness. Swperbia, in which 

Augustine’, Aquinas’, Calvin’, and others, have found the root 
of sin, is only another name for selfishness,—is in fact one of 
the most immediate manifestations of selfishness, and is 
very naturally identified with it. All modern theologians of 
the Augustinian type of doctrine’, and, in this country, of 
the most divergent schools’, unite in referring sin to the prin- 
ciple of selfishness. 


S$ 26—Kinds of Sin. 


ACTUAL AND ORIGINAL Sin. We have already seen, in 
determining our definition of sin, that we must distinguish 
between sin as an act and sin as a state of being. About 
this distinction there would seem to be no reasonable ground 
for dispute : but whether the sinful state of individual men 
shall be regarded as primarily a cause or an effect of sinful 
acts—whether, in short, sin can have any other origin than 
that of individual volitions, has been, especially in this » 


1. De Civitate Dei, 1. 14, c. 18, 14. Anehir., c. 45. 

2. Summa, pt. 2, ques. 84, art. 2. 

3. Institu. Chr. Relig., 2.1. 4. 

4, See Muller, Doct. of Sin, bk. 1, pt. 1, Chia. 

5. Old School and New School are agreed on this point. See also, Bellamy, 
Works, vol. 1, pp. 1388-150. Hopkins, Works, vol1, pp. 235-241. Emmons, 
Works, 1st ed., vol. 4, ser. 39. The younger Edwards, Works, vol. 2, Essay On 
Self-love. Prof. Finney’s Lects. Syst. Theol., Eng. ed., lect. 33.—N. W. Taylor, 
Revealed Theol., 2. 1. 

10 


146 KINDS OF SIN: 


country, a much mooted question’. It will be necessary 
that we examine somewhat carefully, into the distinction 
between actual and original sin. 

The existence of ACTUAL SINS is recognized by all parties. 
The only query that arises, is the unimportant one relating 
to the justness and value of those distinctions among actual 
sins, of which dogmatic theologians once made so: much 
account. Thus we have (a.) the Romish distinction between 
sins venial and sins mortal,—between sins which are repara- 
bilia and those which are irreparabilia®. Its error is in its 
conception of sin as an objective act, separate from the 


1. Jonathan Edwards had made true virtue to consist in the ‘‘love of being 
in general,” and had propounded in his treatise On Original Sin a doctrine of 
identity, and in his treatise On Freedom of the Will, a distinction between 
natural and moral ability, which Sam’l Hopkins carried to conclusions that in 
turn were developed by Emmons into his ExerciseScheme. Emmons recognized 
no sin but action, to which Smalley strenuously objected,—see his Works, vol. 
1, ed. 1803, pp. 179-190, 420 ff.—Leonard Woods, (Hopkinsian,) of Andover. 
—see Works, vol. 4,—engaged in a controversy with tlenry Ware of Cambridge 
and the Unitarians (Pelagians) and with N. W. Taylor of New Haven (New 
School or Semi-Pelagian,)—see his Concio ad Clerum, and the Sermons of Dr. 
Fitch of N. H. Opposed to Taylor, see Lects. of Bennet Tyler of E. Windsor, 
Drs. Alexander and Hodge, controverted the views of both Andover and New 
taven.—See Stuart and Hodge, Comms. on Romans,—Barnes’ Comm. on 
Romans,—Stuart, articles on Sin, in £2. Repos., 2d series, vols. 1, 2,—Prince- 
ton Rev. ; Uhr. Specta.; and Spt. of the Pilgrims, 1829- 1838. _Prof, Finney, 
Sermons and Lects. on Syst. Theol—Dr. Shedd, Assays and Discourses, and 
History of Docts.—Controversy between Dr. Hodge and Prof. Park ; Hodge’ S 
Essays and Bib. Sac., vols. 7 and 8. See also several eS in the New 
Englander, since 1866, by Prof. Fisher. 

Dr. Taylor affirms that ‘‘Sin is predicable only of that state of mind which 
we call preference or choice,” and maintains that ‘‘ moral character consists in 
a man’s governing purpose,” —that, ‘‘strictly and properly speaking, the goy- 
erning principle itself constitutes moral character,”—Revealed Theol., 2, 1. 
Prof. Finney asserts that men ‘‘ become morally depraved by yielding to temp- 
tation to self-gratification. Indeed it is impossible they should become 
depraved in any other way,”—Leots. on Syst. Theol. » Eng ed., lect. 41. Comp. 
Prof. Park, B7d. Sac., vol. 8, p. 626, ff. 

2. Aquinas, Saran pt. 2, ques. 88, art. 1. The Senet reparari non 
potest per aliquod principium intrinsecum, sed solum per virtutem divinam. 
What Aquinas means by principium is explained in pt. 2, ques. 72, art. 5, 
where he says, principium totius ordinis in moralibus est finis ultimus—unde 
quando anima deordinatur per peccatum usque ad aversionem ab ultimo fine, 
scilicit Deo, cui unitur per charitatem, tunc est peccatum mortale ; quando vero 
fit deordinatio citra aversionem a Deo, tunc est peccatum veniale. See also 
Bellarmine, De Controversiis, contro. 2, lib. 1, cc. 2, 3. The older theologians 
while rejecting the Roman distinction still retained the term mortal as appli- 
cable to the sin against the Holy Ghost, and quote also 1 John, 5: 16. 


KINDS OF SIN. ee a 147 


actor, and for which an objective quantitative equivalent is 
to be paid ; whereas, every sinful act is alike mortal, James, 
2: 10, because proceeding from a sinful heart, which itself 
is to be changed if the penalty of its acts is to be escaped, 
Matt., 12: 35. 28: 26. (0.) Sins of ignorance and of knowl- 
edge :—a distinction plainly taught in the Scriptures, Luke, 
Paeee John, 153 22) 24. Acts, 17: 30, 1 Tim., 12:13, and 
by our own instinctive sense of justice; but a distinction 
which neither rests on, nor warrants, the notion that impu- 
nity attaches to sins of ignorance, and guilt to sins of knowl- 
edge alone. All sins, by the divinely ordained laws of 
being, bring their own penalties ; but there is, in the very 
nature of the case, an element of remorse in sins of know]l- 
edge which cannot exist in sins of ignorance. (c¢.) Sins of 
infirmity and of malice. The justness of this distinction 
depends on the origin and nature of the infirmity. Natural 
incapacity to distinguish between right.and wrong, excul- 
pates just so far as it incapacitates for natural penal conse- 
quences; but for an infirmity which is the effect of prior 
sins of malice, the guilty subject of itis alone responsible, as 
well as for all the subsequent and multiplied sins of malice 
—the Apostle’s ‘‘sin unto iniquity’’—which flow from it’. 

ORIGINAL Sin. By this is meant a sinfulness which 
belongs to us by virtue of our descent from Adam—a sin- 
fulness which we bring with us into the world as possessors 
of human nature. The truth of the doctrine has been denied 
by Pelagians’, Socinians’, and Rationalists* generally, ,on 


1. Various other distinctions have been made, some of which are practi- 
cally convenient, though very few, if any of them, represent any real or 
essential difference. Thus we have sins of omission and commission, while in 
fact a duty omitted is always a sin committed; sins against God, our neighbor, 
and ourselves, while, in strietness of speech, every sin is equally a sin against 
God, antagonism to his will being itself essential to the very idea of sin; 
sins of disposition and of act, which together represent mere stages in the 
progress of sin; and actual and reigning sins, which simply distinguish between 
isolated and habitual acts. For still further distinctions, see Bretschneider, 
Dogmatik, theil 2, kap. 4, §119. 

2. See Wiggers, Augustinism and Pelagianism, trans. by Emerson. 

3. See Cat. Racov., ques. 423.—F. Socinus, Prelect. c. 4.—Ware, Letters to 
Woods, and most Unitarian literature since. 

4. See Wegscheider, Insti. Theol. §§ 115-118. 


148 ORIGINAL SIN. 


the ground that the fall of Adam could have affected neither 
the status nor the nature of his descendants in any other 
way than by the evil of his example; by semi-Pelagians 
and Arminians', and by the later New England or so-called 
New School theologians’ of this country, on the ground 
that sin is only and always a voluntary act, and that though 
an original vitiosity of nature, which is the source of actual 
sin, has doubtless been derived from Adam, yet this vitiosity 
can, inno Scriptural or just sense of the word, be called 
sinful. This was also the view of Zwingle’. 

On the other hand, the doctrine of original sin has been 
maintained by all theologians of the Augustinian type, 
both Romanist and Protestant. The grounds on which it 
has been, maintained have varied with varying theories of 
Adam’s relation to his descendants. Thus Augustine’, 
Anselm’, Aquinas’, and the Reformers’ except Zwingle, held 
that, through the Adamic unity of therace, human nature 
by the first sin of Adam was corrupted in his person, and that, 
as all mankind were potentially, though not personally, in 
him, so from him has descended to every individual of the 
race a vitiosity and a guiltiness of nature®. Since the mid- 
dle of the 17th century the defence of original sin has 


1. See Confessio Remonstrantium c.'7, and Apol. pro Confess. Remon., c. 7. 
in Episcopius, Opera, 2.—Limborch, Theol. Chr., lib. 3, c. 4—John Taylor, 
The Script. Doct. of Orig. Sin. 

2. See Emmons, Works, ‘‘ Systematic Theol.” pts. 10 and 11—N. W. Taylor, 
Rev. Theol., pt. 2, “ Human Sinfulness.”—Prof. Finney, Lects.on Syst. Theol., 
lects. 27, 88-41, Eng. ed.—Stuart, and Barnes, Comms, On Ro., ch. 5. See 
other writers referred to p. 146. i 

3. See Zwinglii Fidei Ratio. 4, in Niemeyer’s Collectio Confessionum, and 
De Peccato Orig. Declaratio, Zwingle’s Works, vol. 3. . 

4. See specially, De Peccatrowm Merittis, lib. 1, cc. 10, 15. lib. 13, c. 14. De 
Civitate Det, lib. 18. 8. 14. De Nuptiis et Concupicentia, lib. 2, c. 5. See other 
references in Wiggers, Augustinism, &c., Emerson’s trans. 

5. In his De Libero Arbitrio, and De conceptu virg. et orig. peccato. 

6. Summa, pt. 2, quests. 81-88. 

7. See Niemeyer, Collectio Confessionum.—Hase, Libri Symbolict.—Melanc- 
thon, Loct, c. 6.—Calvin, Insti., lib. 2, c. 1-8, 

8. Hereditarum vitium, is with these writers synonymous with hereditaria 
corruptio, and with peccatum originale. Aquinas, Swmma, pt. 2, ques. 81, 
Art. I, uses with emphasis the phrase peccatum nature. 


ORIGINAL SIN. 3! 149 


almost universally been made to rest on sharply defined 
theories of imputation. With mediate imputationists', ori- 


ginal sin is the guilt of Adam imputed to his descendants 
on account of a depravity of nature which they in some 


way inherit from him; with immediate imputationists, 
original sin is the punishableness of Adam imputed by cov- 
enant to his descendants, who, though in themselves inno- 
cent, become, in consequence of the imputation, personally 
depraved and thus deservedly punishable. The imputation 
is regarded as strictly in compliance with the terms of a 
covenant with Adam, according to which the merit or demerit 
of his actions should descend to his posterity. 


$27— Conflicting Views of Original Sin. 


The views respecting original sin now prevalent, espe- 
cially in this country, may be stated as follows: 1. A broad 
denial of any depravity or guilt in human nature, inherited 
or imputed. 2. A recognition of hereditary depravity, buta 
distinct denial of its guilt. 3. The affirmation and mainten- 
ance of the punishableness and guilt of human nature, on 
the nominalistic ground of a covenanted transfer of Adam’s 
punishableness, and thence, by consequence of the corrup- 


1. Placseus, (died 1655,) with whom the phrase mediate imputation originated, 
(Turretine ascribes to him the origin of both the terms, mediate and imme- 
| diate, as applied to imputation, see Institutio Theol., locus 9, questio 9, §§ 4-6,) 
taught that Adam’s guilt is imputed to his posterity in consequence of their 
actual inheritance of his depraved nature: Stapfer, and Jona. Edwards, taught 
that there was an impttation of the guilt of both Adam’s first act and of his 
depraved nature, because it was foreseen that the depraved nature would by 
natural generation be inherited. Placseus fixed the eye on the guilt of the sin- 
ful nature only ; Stapfer and Edwards on the guilt of the first sin and the sinful 
nature induced by it. See Stapfer, Jmstit., vol. 4, c. 17, §'78.—Edwards, On 
Orig. Sin, at the beginning of the treatise, and near the close of pt. 4, ch. 3. 
Comp. Anselm quoted by Schaff in his edition of Lange, Comm. on Ro., p. 192. 
Immediate imputation, as elaborated by Heidegger and Turretine in opposition 
to the mediate imputation of Placzeus, makes hereditary depravity to be strictly 
a CONSEQUENCE of the imputed guilt of Adam’s first sin. This is also the Prince- 
ton doctrine, see Princeton Hssays, Dr. Hodge’s Controversy with Prof. Park, 


150 ORIGINAL SIN. 


tion and guilt of his nature, to his posterity. 4. The affirma- 
tion and maintenance of hereditary depravity and personal 
guilt, on the realistic ground of the organic unity and com- 
munity of human nature—the solidarity of the race—which 
nature and race were both potentially in Adam and have 
been actually derived from him. A brief glance at these 
different views will assist us in reaching some definite con- 
clusions of our own. 

I. There are several grounds on which the first view—that 
of the old Pelagians and modern rationalists, is now main- 
tained’, viz.: (a.) that human nature is just as pure and 
sinless to-day as it ever was, that in fact it has constantly 
improved rather than deteriorated :—a position which fails 
duly to recognize the manifest hereditary predisposition of 
tribes and nations towards degeneracy, and especially fails 
to take into account those moral and intellectual appliances, 
by which, whatever their origin, the race has, under given 
circumstances, been gradually elevated. (6.) That individual 
men are responsible for their own acts alone :—an assump- 
tion that arbitrarily isolates the individual from the mass, 
and does despite to the analogy of that natural law by 
which, when a community ora nation suffers, every indi- 
vidual member suffers with it. (¢.) That the idea of innate 
depravity reflects on the character of God :—an objection 
which is just as valid against the supposition of an innate 
sinlessness, aS it is against that of an innate depravity of 
nature. Every one, to absolute certainty, commits actual 
sins; it matters not whether the acts proceed from a nature 
or from external conditions, for both these must alike precede 
individual volitions. (d.) That innate depravity is inconsist- 
ent with the free-agency of man :—an objection which forgets 
that free agency, in the only sense in which it can here be 
used, is freedom to do as one pleases, and that to do as one 
pleases, is to give free play to one’s moral affections what- 
ever they may be; the only trouble is, that one’s affections 
are evil instead of good. (e.) That native depravity is not 


1. See the writings of the American Unitarians; of Athanase Coqueril ; and 
the treatises of the German rationalists on Dogmatik, from Wegscheider 
down to our own day. 


ORIGINAL SIN, vege 151 


taught in the Scriptures :—an argument which rests, not so 
much on a misinterpretation of single texts—an interpreta- 
tion contrary to the conviction of a vast majority of com- 
mentators—as it does on a misunderstanding of the whole 
scope and tenor of the Scriptures’. 

II. Some of the principal grounds on which New School 
men reject the doctrine of original sin, are the following : 
(a.) That all sin, in order to be sin, must be voluntary, 
whereas native depravity is involuntary and cannot there. 
fore be sinful’ :—But this is to distinguish arbitrarily, and 
most unwarrantably, between volition and nature, volitions 
being in truth only the nature in movement—the nature ex- 
pressing itself; it is to refer volitions to an imaginary 
state and sphere which precede the existence of all moral 
character in the volitional agent, whereas no state, nor act, of 
consciousness, and no degree of subtlety in analysis, will 
warrant us in any attempt to distinguish between nature and 
the personal self. (6.) That there can be no sense of respon- 
sibility, no consciousness of guilt—no remorse—for inborn 
sin, and consequently no guilt, no just punishableness on 
account of it:—But it certainly will not be maintained that 
there can be no punishment without remorse; without 
consciousness of ill-desert it may be that punishment is im- 
possible; and doubtless the two ingredients, conscious ill- 
desert and remorse (the reproach of conscience,) together 
constitute, in personal suffering, the consummation of pun- 
ishment. But more than all, this objection overlooks the 
fact that every person of moral intelligence, in dealing with 
himself, goes behind his acts to his heart—to his moral 
nature, from which self is indistinguishable, and for which, 
as the guilty source of his wrong doing, he necessarily holds 
himself responsible. (c.) That a hereditary predisposition 
to sin, which is common to all men, is calamitous, but 
cannot be in itself penal; or, if it be penal cannot in 


1. For one of the latest popular attempts to evade the force of Scriptural 
teaching on the doctrine of original sin, see the general argument in Matthew 
Arnold’s St. Paul and Protestantism. 

2. See specially Profs. Stuart, Taylor, Finney, and Park, as before referred to. 


| 


152 ORIGINAL SIN. 


itself be also punishable; penalty, it is claimed, is inflict- 
ed, and in fact can be inflicted, only for wrong personal 
acts, whereas the first sin of Adam can in no just sense be 
said to have been the act of his descendants, and the moral 
disorder or depravity which his act has entailed on his pos- 
terity, can be attributed only to the sovereign purpose of 
God :—Two assumptions underlie this argument: first, that 
the only moral laws to which man is amenable, and the only 
penal sanctions to which he is exposed, are those contained 
in the formal statutes of the Bible, thus overlooking the un- 
doubted truth that all moral consequences are just as clearly 
the fulfilled sanctions of moral laws, as if the sanctions had 
been written out under the accredited hand of a prophet ; 
the other assumption is, that every individual of the race is 
an independent personality, whose volitions, responsibilities, 
and moral qualities, originate, centre, and- terminate, in 
himself alone, whereas every individual, after granting the 
utmost of independency that consciousness can demand for 
him, is yet but an intermediate link in that indissoluble chain 
of volitionary forces, mutual dependencies, and personal 
characters, which, in the aggregate, make up the unity and 
the identity of human nature and the human race. (d.) That 
the idea of hereditary sin as both penal and in itself pun- 
ishable, impugns the character of God; if Adam’s sin is 
punished by hereditary depravity, which is itself sin, then 
God is the author of sin :—But it is impossible to show that 
this objection is any more valid against a hereditary deprav- 
ity which is sinful, than it is againsta hereditary depravity 
which is sinless. The authors of the objection admit that 
human nature was vitiated by the fall—that this vitiation is 
transmitted, in the divine constitution of things, by natural 
descent, and that this vitiation, though in itself sinless and 
uncondemnable, leads invariably to actual sins’. The differ- 
ence between being the author of a constitution of things by 
. which individuals are born with a vitiated and condemnable 
nature, and the author of a constitution of things by which 
every one is born with anature which, though not necessarily, 


1. See Taylor, Rev. Theol., 2, 8.—Finney, Lects., lect. 39. 


: 


ORIGINAL SIN. te 153 


yet invariably, without a solitary exception in the race, 
leads to actual and condemnable sins, is more metaphysical 
than real. God can be made the author of sin in the one 
case and not in the other, only by a pure fiction of a power 
of contrary choice—a power which no mortal exercises, and 
which no one can be shown to possess. (e.) That the doc- 
trine of innate sin is contradicted by our innate sense of 
justice :—The objection would be valid if nature and person- 
ality were two distinct entities ; but moral nature is only a 
mode of personal existence, and can no more be separated 
from the personal self, either in consciousness or by logical 
analysis, than can one of its natural affections or any of its 
inborn faculties. Our innate sense of justice repudiates 
responsibility for whatever is alien to us, but a moral 
nature of some kind, so far from being alien, is that substra- 
tum in which personality inheres, and without which it has 
no existence. (/.) That innate sinfulness is not really taught 
in the Scriptures :—This is a matter of biblical criticism, 
which is not to be disposed of by a single dictum, and on 
which a diversity of opinions may be recognized as reason- 
ably entertained; but it must be admitted, that a great 
majority of the most competent commentators, differ as 
they may in the interpretation of the Scriptural accounts of 
the fact, recognize, nevertheless, in the accounts themselves 
the doctrine of a hereditary sinfulness of nature. See 
Schaff’s edition of Lange’s Commentary on Ro., 5: 12-21, 
and Philippi, Meyer, Alford, Wordsworth, on Romans, and 
Harless on Eph., 2: 3. 

IIL. The third of the views named as now prevalent, and 
the one which claims to be preéminently orthodox, is that 
of a’ covenanted imputation of guilt, and a consequent 
inherited corruption of nature’,—a system first fully elabo- 
rated by Heidegger? and Turretine*®, and compounded of the 


1. See Princeton Essays, 1st series—Hodge, Comment. on Ro., ch. 5; and his 
Essays and Reviews ; also Outlines of Theol.—Princetin Review, various arti- 
cles from 1829 to the present time.—Dr. Thornwell in the South. Pres. Rev. 

2. See Meiulla Theol., locus 10; also drawn by him, Formula Concensus 
Helvet, arts. 9, 10 in Niemeyer’s Voliect. Con. 

3. Institut., locus 9, ques. 9. 


154 ORIGINAL SIN. 


covenant or federa! system of Cocceius and the immediate 
imputationism which Heidegger and Turretine adopted in 
opposition to the mediate imputationism of Placeus. The 
theory is open to various and insuperable objections. (a.) It 
is too artificial and mechanical to be true, and is wholly 
unsupported by analogy in the constitution and course of 
nature. God’s method in nature is by a concatenation of 
direct and invariable causes and effects; no effect is ever 
made to follow from other than its own unvarying cause ; 
the notion of ‘‘counting’’ or ‘‘imputing’’ an effect without 
an adequate cause, is absolutely without the shadow of sup- 
port from analogy ; and bears the unmistakable stamp of 
artificiality. (6.) The notion of imputation by covenant, 
when analyzed, is found to be in fact nothing but sovereign 
purpose. The thought of an intelligent contract on the part 
of Adam in behalf of his posterity, is simply preposterous ; — 
the only meaning that can be attached to the word cove- 
nant, in this connection, is a constitution of things in accord- 
ance with which God has dealt with the human race; and 
the origin of this constitution must have been in the sover- 
eign purpose of the Creator. But if God, by sovereign act, 
imputes guilt to the innocent, as this theory asserts, then, 
(c.) The theory confounds justice with sovereign power. 
Itmakes the ‘‘ Judge of alltheearth’’ anarbitrary ruler, who 
treats the absolutely innocentas if they were really guilty ; 
the omniscient and holy God who sees all things as they 
really are, and 1s himself the Source and Standard of justice 
to the Universe, is made to subordinate justice and immnu- 
table right to the demands of a legal fiction. (d.) One of 
the essential elements of this theory is a sheer assumption 
respecting the origin of the human soul. It isassumed'that 
each soul is immediately created—an assumption, which is 
supported neither by psychology, nor by physiology, nor 
by Scripture; an assumption which makes a dualism of 
human nature, and is contradicted by all analogy as derived 
from propagation in both the vegetable and the anjmal 
kingdoms’. (ée.) This theory can justify itself only by giv- 


See infra § 29, Origin of the Soul. 


ORIGINAL SIN. Ws 155 
ing a literal and exact meaning to purely metaphorical 
terms. ‘To Jews, who held to the Abrahamic promise (cov- 
enant) on the one hand, and to the Mosaic law on the other, 
nothing was more natural than the federal and forensic 
imagery adopted by Paul. But to transform these meta- 
phors into a scientific basis for dogmatic theology, is to mis- 
interpret Scripture, as well as to misrepresent the facts of 
nature. And this misinterpretation and misrepresentation 
is all the more apparent, when it is observed that the meta- 
phors are transferred from their appropriate Scriptural rela- 
tion and arbitrarily applied to Adam and to Christ’. It is 
evident that the word covenant, thus applied, can be only a 
strained metaphor, and mean nothing more than a sovereign 
mode of procedure—a ‘‘ dispensation ’’—an ‘‘ economy ’’— 
which God for infinitely wise reasons has adopted? ; and the 
whole fabric of a legal, a covenanted imputation, whether 
of sin, or of righteousness, proves to be purely fictitious. 


1. The sheer arbitrariness of the ‘‘ Covenant system ” becomes specially appa- 
rent in the hopeless disagreement of the holders of it respecting the contracting 
parties in the ‘‘ covenant of grace.” Thus with Cocceius, the originator of the 
system,—see Summa Doctrine de Federe, &c., cap.1, 5,—and with Burmann, 
one of the ablest of the immediate followers of Cocceius,—see Synopsis Theo- 
logie locus 8, c. 2. locus 11, c. 12-15—the covenant of grace was between 
God ‘and the elect, the office of Christ being merely that of a mediator; 
with Witsius, the covenantof grace was, primarily, aneternal covenant between 
God the Father and Christ the Son, and secondarily, a covenant between God and 
the elect—see Oeconomia Hederum, bk. 2, c. 1-3, and bk. 38, c. 1-3; while with 
the advocates of the covenant-imputation scheme—see Turretine and Hodge— 
the contracting parties, in the ‘‘ covenant of works,” were God and the first 
Adam, and, in the ‘‘ covenant of grace,” God andthe second Adam. A system so 
uncertain in its fundamental principles, can be neither Scriptural nor philosophical. 

2. Itis perfectly certain that Jonathan Edwards did not hold the doctrine of 
immediate imputation, and there is no decisive evidence that he held to the 
mediate imputation of Placzeus. He believed in ‘‘a real union between the 
root and the branches of the world of mankind established by the Author of 
the whole system of the universe ;” ‘‘ the full consent of the hearts of Adam’s 
posterity to the first apostasy. And therefore the sin of the apostasy is not 
theirs, merely because God imputes it to them; but it is truly and properly 
theirs, and on that ground God imputes it to them,” Original Sin, pt. 4, c. 3. 
This looks very much like the Augustinian doctrine of organic unity. Samuel 
Hopkins, the immediate disciple of Edwards, rejected imputation in toto. See 
his System of Doctrines, Works, vol. 1. specially pp. 218, 280. 


156 ORIGINAL SEN. 


And, finally, (7.) The rigid theory of covenant-imputation 
has no real Scriptural basis. The texts cited in its support 
are irrelevant’. 

IV. According to the fourth view, human nature is a 
common nature, of which every individual of the human 
race is a partaker, and is a nature which received a bias 
toward evil, and itself became depraved and condemnable, 
in the person of the first of the race from whom all are 
descended ; all men are sinners in the sight of God in con- 
sequence of aninborn sinful nature. This view, with proper 
explanation of the words sinful and sinners’, seems of all 
others most defensible. It may justly be claimed that 
analogy, history, physiology, psychology and Scripture, all 
lend it support. But a proper discussion of this view 
~ requires that it be resolved into the three following questions: 
Has human nature been morally vitiated ? If vitiated, is its 
vitiosity transmissible by natural descent ? If the vitiosity 
exists and be transmissible, is it also in itself punishable, 
guilty, and sinful ? 

1. That human nature has been morally corrupted, seems 
evident: (a,) From the predisposition, the strong bias 
towards evil, which history and observation alike shew to be 
the invariable characteristic of every human being. Nor is 
the truth of the universality of the bias, in any way affected 
by the capacity for marked virtues which may sometimes 
accompany it. The underlying vitiosity is sure, sooner or 
later, in one way or another, to reveal itself. (06.) The 
moral consciousness of the best men, in allages and among 
all nations, has testified with uniformity to the inward viti- 
osity of their common nature—a vitiosity, to the existence 
of which even in the meanest men, their. conduct, if not 


_ their consciousness has always given the clearest testimony. 


(c.) The evidence from history, observation, and experience 
has led heathen historians, philosophers, and poets, to state, 


1. See Schaff’s ed. of Lange, Comm. on Ro., note on pp. 178, 79. 

2. The word sin, as we have already seen in § 25, is applied to a state of 
man as well as to his acts. His nature, which determines his acts and their 
moral qualities, must be either good or bad,—he could not be a moral being if it 
were not—and as such must be, in a sense, either holy or sinful. 


ORIGINAL. SIN. 157 | 


in the most decisive manner, their belief in the depravity of 
human nature’. (d.) The Scriptures teach the depravity of 
human nature: (aa.) In the extended passages, like the 
first three chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, andtin-the 
single texts, like Gen., 8: 21. Job, 14: 4. Ps., 148: 2.8Kiph., 
2: 3, which assert the universality of the depravity of man : 
(0b.) In the sharp and uniform contrast which, throughout 
the Bible, is kept up between mankind as a whole and 
those of the race whom God has brought under the dominion 
of his truth and Spirit: (cc.) In the reiteration, both by 
Christ and his Apostles, of a necessity of moral regeneration 
on the part of every one of the race who would enter into 
the kingdom of God. 

- Nor is this body of evidence invalidated by our inability 
to account for the method by which the depravation of 
human nature has been brought about. The mystery that 
may attach to a fact cannot justly be allowed to affect the 
incontestable evidence of its reality. 

2. Is this depravity of human nature hereditary? Con- 
troversy has made the question two-fold, viz. : is depravity 
innate,—inborn ; and, if innate, is it hereditary—transmitted 
by natural descent ? 

A. That the depravity of man is innate, is proved, (a.) by 
whatever will prove anything to be innate. Universality, 
' spontaneousness and absolute certainty of development, are 
regarded as demonstrative proofs of innateness. This is 
true of all those mental and moral faculties of man which, 
taken together, constitute the distinguishing attributes of 
man. Moral evil isso uniformly and spontaneously revealed 
in the hearts of all men from their earliest years, that, with- 
out the intervention of a miracle, its development in every 
individual of the race, may be predicated with absolute 
certainty. (0.) Its innateness is evident from analogy. 
Vegetable life never reveals, never contains, more than lies 
in the germ of the seed from which it springs. The moral 
qualities of the acts of a man can reveal nothing more 


1. See Cicero, Tus. Dispu., lib. 3, c. 1, and other citations by Tholuck in his 
Lehre von der Siinde, pp. 48, ff, 72, ff—Knapp, Theol., pt. 1, art. 9, sec. 74. 


158 ORIGINAL SIN. 


than lies in the man himself, His moral acts are nothing 
else than the unmistakable signs and products of his moral 
nature, Mat., 15: 18,19. (¢.) The Scriptures plainly teach 
that man is born with.a corrupted nature. Whatever may 
be our rendering of Job, 14: 4, no other meaning can be 
extracted from it than that a corrupted nature is by every 
one, in some way, derived from his parents. David, in Ps., 
51: 5, declares his nature to have been even sinfully cor- 
rupt from the instant of the origination of his existence. In 
John, 3: 6, Christ puts literal birth and spiritual birth in 
such antithesis as leaves no doubt, when the whole connec- 
tion of his words is taken into the account, that he meant to 
represent all men as corrupt by birth, and as needing to be 
born again. In Eph., 4: 3, Paul declares himself, in com- 
mon with all men, as by nature, ¢. e. by birth, under the 


wrath of God—a declaration which could of course be true — 


only of men as being by birth corrupt, and as thereby justly 
provoking the divine displeasure. | 
B. Butif depravity be innate, is it also hereditaet ¢ Tothis 
inquiry, both New School men and immediate imputationists 
reply, as respects the soul, in the negative, but, as respects 
the body in the affirmative ; both regard the physical nature 
of man as alone transmitted by natural descent, and the soul 
of every one of his descendants as an immediate creation 
of God; both regard the soul as spotless, till thrust into » 
conjunction with the vitiated physical nature, the New 
School regarding this treatment of the soul as the sovereign 
act of God, and the imputationists as an act required by the 
terms of the covenant with Adam; but neither of them 
reconciles his dualistic nature of man with that identity 
of body and soul, in both responsibility and ultimate des- 
tiny, so manifestly taught in every part of Scripture; and - 
neither of them offers any protection against the thought of 
injustice toward the innocent, which their theories inevitably 
thrust on the mind. It is, of course, depravity in the soul. 
which defiles and is punishable; but if the soul be an im- 
mediate creation of God, and its. relation to Adam and his 
nature be only through the accident of the body, whether 


ORIGINAL SIN. 159 


by sovereign appointment or by covenant, then there is an 
appearance of arbitrariness and injustice about the whole 
procedure, which cannot but compel the conviction that 
neither of their theories can be true. The more rational 
view is, that depravity is hereditary ; that the root of our 
sinful nature—of both the body and the soul which, as 
coeval quantities, together constitute the human being— 
was in the progenitor of our race; that in his fall we all 
fell, because we were all potentially—germinally, in him, 
and because of his entire nature we, by natural descent, 
are all partakers. 

That depravity is hereditary, is evident from the follow- 
ing considerations: (a@.) If it be innate, then, in the absence 
of positive testimony to the contrary, the supposition of its 
being hereditary is, as we have seen, more reasonable than 
any other. (6.) The evidence from analogy, if it lend 
any support, as it certainly does, to the theory of innate- 
ness, must be admitted to contribute equally in support 
of the theory of its being hereditary. The formative prin- 
ciple which determines the type of every species of plant or 
animal, reposes in the first of the series, and is transmitted 
in the life-germ of its seed, through an indefinite number of 
successions. (c.) As a matter of fact, we know, that the 
moral, as well as the intellectual and physical traits or 
qualities of men, are transmitted through successive gene- 
rations of nations, tribes and families; and, inasmuch as 
_ the same traits of depravity have universally shewed them- 
selves through countless successions of generations, the 
evidence is decisive that depravity is hereditary. (d.) This 
doctrine seems to be variously and explicitly taught 
throughout the Scriptures. (aa.) It is clearly implied in 
Job’s declaration of impossibility, that any other than 
an impure nature could be derived from human nature, 
Job, 14: 4; and the contrast which Christ points out in 
John, 3: 6; between the nature which all men have by 
birth, and that renewed nature which every one must have 
in order to enter into his kingdom, implies that the deprav- 
ity from which he saves, is inherent in the race, and is 


160 ORIGINAL SIN. 


transmitted by inheritance. (00.) It is plainly taught in 
the Pauline parallelism between Adam and Christ, Ro., 5: 
12-17. 1 Cor., 15: 21, 22. The most natural interpretation of 
these passages, and the one adopted by the best authorities, 
is that which makes them to affirm that, as from Adam we all 
have derived, by natural descent, a corruption of nature that 
has brought on us death and all our woe, so from Christ, 
by spiritual descent, we derive that renewal of nature, 
through which we receive the blessings of eternal life. 
(ce.) More specifically, in Ro., 5: 12, Paul, having spoken 
of Adam’s transgression, and of death as its consequence, 
expressly declares that ‘‘all men died, ¢¢@ w zdyte¢ jyaprtor, 
1. e., because—inasmuch as, all men sinned.’’ The inter- 
pretation of these words, required both by grammar and 
their logical relation, undoubtedly is, in the language of 
Meyer in his Kommentar, that ‘‘all men died, because, 
when Adam sinned, all sinned,” i. e., in Adam’s act of 
transgression and its consequences all men participated, 
because, as Meyer again expresses it, ‘‘all sinned in and 
with him.’’ The only way in which, according to Scripture 
and the facts of nature, we can have become participators in | 
Adam’s nature and its penal consequence, death, is by 
natural inheritance. See, also, the Commentaries on the 
Romans, by Phillipi, Alford, Wordsworth, and Lange’ as 
edited by Schaff. 

3. We come now to the final inquiry, whether depravity, 
granting it to be innate and inherited, 1s also punishable and 
sinful. In answering this inquiry, the following simple, and 
perhaps self-evident, principles must be borne in mind: 
(a.) The government of God rests on the basis of immutable 
right, and renders to all men according to the realities of their 
being and not according to legal fictions, nor according to a 
State policy that determines its means and methods by its 
ends. (0.) All the invariable consequences of acts must be 
regarded as the sanctions of the laws involved in the acts— 
all suffering being, in a clear and definite sense, the penal 


1. With the doctrine of this interpretation, though differing in their gram- 
matical rendering, agreed Augustine, Calvin and Melancthon. 


ORIGINAL SIN. 161 


consequence of a violation of some law. (c¢.) The words 
sin and guilt, when applied to an inherited nature, must 
necessarily have a restricted meaning as compared with 
that which attaches to them when applied to our voluntary 
actions. In the consequences of all voluntary wrong acts 
there is mingled the element of remorse, which can never 
enter into the penal consequences of a state or of a nature. 
The word sin, therefore, necessarily cannot have the same 
depth and breadth of meaning in the phrase “ sinful nature,” 
that 1t has in the phrase “sinful act.” The question, how- 
_ ever, 1s not in respect to extent of meaning, but whether the 
word “sinful” is applicable to nature at all. 

That natural depravity is in itself justly condemnable 
and punishable, because it is in a sense sinful and guilty, 
seems evident from the following considerations: (a.) All 
men do suffer, as a matter of fact, on account of an inborn 
depravity, and it is more consonant with an innate sense 
of justice that the suffering should be deserved, than that it 
should be undeserved. Nor does it relieve this sense of 
justice to remind us that native depravity is itself a penalty, 
and cannot, therefore, be punishable. ‘The law of the for- 
mation of human character, as in universal nature, is that 
effects in turn become causes, through an endless series; 
the law of character always is, “sin unto iniquity” or 
“vighteousness unto holiness.” (0.) The inborn nature of a 
new born being must be either good or bad; if good—a 
belief which even the ancient heathen rejected—then, as 
Plato says, nothing more is needed in making good men, 
than protection of infants and gentle eduction of the good that 
hes within them; but if bad, as overwhelming evidence shows 
it to be, then it is condemnable; if condemnable, then pun- 
ishable; and if punishable, then it is ill deserving, or in a 
qualified sense, is sinful and guilty. Nor is this conclusion 
justly evaded by an attempted distinction between nature 
and person; these are indissoluble, neither consciousness, 
nor logic, nor Scripture warranting any conception of one as 
separate from the other.. (c.) The objection that conscience 
brings no charge of guilt against inborn depravity, however 


162 ORIGINAL SIN. 


true it may be of the nature in its passive state, is seen, 
when the nature is roused to activity, to be unfounded. 
This faculty, on the contrary, lends support to the doc- 
trine it is supposed to overthrow. When the conscience 
holds intelligent inquisition upon single acts, it soon dis- 
covers that these are mere accessories to crime, while the 
principal is hidden away beyond the reach of consciousness. 
In following up its inquisition, it in due time extorts the 
exclamation of David, Ps., 51; 5, “ Behold, I was shapen 
in iniquity ; and in sin did my mother conceive me.” Con- 
science traces guilt to its seat in the inherited nature. Nor 
does it obviate this conclusion to affirm that conscience 
brings its accusation only against the will which has appro- 
priated the nature; no clear conception can be formed of 
nature, which does not he behind and direct the will; still 
less, is any conception possible of the will, as standing at — 
some imaginary point, behind his own nature, and appro- 
priating it—in other words, as lifting itself out of itself, by 
its own volition. (d.) The Scriptures seem very distinctly 
to teach the sinfulness of our hereditary nature. David 
declares in so many words, Ps., 51:5, that he was born in 
sin. In Ro., 5:12, it is expressly said that the death of all 
the race, (infants included,) is in consequence of the sin of 
all the race, (infants included). The best accredited inter- 
pretation of dyrec Zyaproy 1s, as we have seen, that which 
understands the sinful act of Adam to have been the act of 
the race, all sinning in and with him, because, when he 
sinned, all were potentially within him. In Ro., 5:19, the 
phrase “all were made sinners,” describes the state to 
which the disobedience of Adam reduced his descendants, 
just as the antithetic phrase, “were made righteous,” 
describes the state to which the obedience of Christ exalts 
his followers. The sin is as real and personal in the one 
case, as is the righteousness in the other. According to 
Eph., 2:3, all men are “by nature children of wrath,” 2. e. 
all men are objects of the divine displeasure—are punish- 
able in the sight of God, in consequence of what they are 
by birth. That dice here means “by birth,’ seems evi- 
dent from the connection, as well as from the use of the 


TOTAL DEPRAVITY. 163 


same word in Ro., 2:14; Gal. 2:15; 4:8. Such also is 
the view of Harless, Ellicott, Hodge, and others. From the 
foregoing considerations it seems impossible to evade the 
conclusion that we are all born into the world with a con- 
demnable nature, a nature which in some true and Scrip- 
tural sense of the word, is styled sin.” 


Totat Depraviry. By this is meant that, without 
Divine assistance, all men are totally incapable of any 
affection, volition, or act, which is acceptable to God. This 
was all that Augustine, or the Reformers, or any orthodox 
Lutheran, or Reformed Confession, affirmed on the point. 
The popular theology of the pulpit, in this country, has 
sometimes conceived of a total depravity of character 3—of 
all men as equally depraved, and of every man as being as 
depraved as it is possible for him to bet The chief dispute, 
however, about total depravity in this country, is over the 
question whether every power of the soul is so depraved as 
to be in all its exercises displeasing to God, or whether the 
seat of depravity is in the affections alone and reveals itself 
only in the soul’s elective preferences. It is noticeable that 
Old School theologians, by whom the first view is defended, 
are disposed to eschew the modern phrase, total depravity ; 
while New School men, defending the latter view, are spe- 
cially emphatic both in their use of the phrase and in their 
support of the doctrine. The doctrine, in any view that we 
can take of it, must rest on a theory of the will, or on one’s 


1. See also many pertinent illustrations of the same use from classical authors 
in Harless, Commentar %. Hph.—Hllicott, and Hodge, Comm. on Eph. 

2. ‘Every person born into the world has a sinful nature and a sinful heart, 
which, though it have not broken out in acts of sin, yet constitutes him a sinner, 
so that he may be said to ‘have sinned.’ It appears to me that our Church, (the 
Anglican), takes this view of the subject, and so, follows closely on the teaching 
of St. Paul,’ Edward Harold Brown, Bishop of Ely, An Huposition of the XX XTX. 
Articles, art. 9, sec. 2.§ 4. 

3. See also the loose language of N. W. Taylor, Rev. Theol., Part 2, lect.1, ‘‘men’s 
first moral character wholly sinful.” 

4, “‘ Every selfish being is, and must be at every moment, just as wicked and 
blameworthy, as with his light he could be,” Prof. Finney, Lects. on Syst. Theol., 
close of lect. 38. 


164 SALVATION OF INFANTS. 


classification and analysis of the active power of the soul. It 
is more than doubtfulif anything further can be justly meant 
by the doctrine, than was intended by Augustine and the 
Reformers in their conception of moral inability. 


$ 28—Salvation of Infants. 


If every one inherits a depraved and condemnable, sinful, 
nature, the status of infants, and their destiny if dying in 
infancy, necessarily become subjects of inquiry. The Seript- 
ures have not left us wholly in the dark as to the answers 
that should be given. 

1, It is evident, from the Scriptures, that the moral status 
of infants, as infants, differs widely from that of adults. 

(a.) Frequent and emphatic distinction is made between 
the condition of infants and adults, and great stress is laid 
on ability to distinguish right from wrong, as an indispen- 
sable condition of personal responsibility. Deut., 1: 39; 
Jonah, 411) Ro. 19:01." Comp. Is. 7: 16; Diehea ema 
In all these texts it is distinctly implied that infants are not 
responsible agents—are not amenable to law for their con- 
duct, and must therefore be regarded as standing on differ- 
ent ground from that occupied by adults. 

(b.) The Bible addresses men as rational beings, appeal-- 
ing to their reason and conscience, and requiring them to 
choose between right and wrong, between the will of God 
and their own selfish desires. Infants are incapable of such 
choice, and are not therefore so addressed; yet infants have 
the endowment of rational beings, though their reason is 
insufficiently developed to make them capable of choice 
and so of responsible action. It would be inconsistent with 
any conception of a worthy divine purpose in their creation, 
to suppose them to be annihilated in death ;' and it would 


1. Dr. Emmons believed that there is a period in which infants are not moral 
agents, but that they ‘‘become moral agents as soon as they become natural agents.” 
Hence he says, “if children die before they become moral agents, it is most 
rational to believe that they are annihilated.” Works, Sermon on Native Depravity, 
1st ed., vol. 4, p. 510. Ed. Cong. Board of Pub., vol. 2, p. 615. 


SALVATION OF INFANTS. 165 


be inconsistent with the soul’s constitutional laws of devel- 
opment to suppose them consigned to an eternal infancy ; 
we are compelled, therefore; to believe that salvation is 
conferred on them, if conferred at all, by some method 
aside from that adopted in the divine dealing with adults. 

(c.) Salvation is conditioned on faith. But infants are in- 
capable of faith, and incapable, simply because they are 
infants. The condition is impossible, not by their own 
fault, nor by that of their first parent, but by the nature of 
things. We are consequently compelled to believe that 
salvation, if provided for them, must come by a method 
aside from that employed in the case of adults. 

2. Both Scripture and reason require us to believe that 
infants, as such, are in a salvable condition, and that if 
they die in infancy they are saved.’ 

(a.) The blessing of infants by our Lord, and his reference 
to them as examples of the state of mind requisite to entrance 
into his kingdom, imply their salvation. Matt., 18:14; 19: 
14; Mark, 10:14; Luke, 18:15-17. The primary refer. 
ence in the first of these texts is, doubtless, to resemblance of 
disposition ; but there is also, in some of them, a deeper and 
underlying meaning. ‘The point of comparison is not, in 
either of them, between the sinlessness of infants and a needed 
sinlessness of those to be saved, but between the helpless- 
ness of infants, in their trust and submission in relation to 
their parents, who are their nattiral protectors, and the 
corresponding characteristics in adults i relation to God, 
their heavenly Father and only protector from evil; but 
the profounder meaning underlying the whole is, that 
infants are really to be saved. Suffer little children, says 
Christ, whose salvation is certain, (‘of such is the kingdom 


1. This, as is well known, was most earnestly denied by Augustine ; has always 
been denied by the Roman Catholic church; is most distinctly, by implication, 
denied in the Baptismal service of the Anglican and American Episcopal prayer- 
books ; is very clearly denied in the Westminster Confession, where it says, ‘‘Hlect 
infants, dying in infancy are regenerated through the Spirit; so also are all other 
elect persons * *; others not elected * * never truly come to Christ, and, 
therefore, cannot be saved.” The London Baptist Confession of 1689 agrees pre- 
cisely with the Westminister. See ch. 10. 3. 


1660/1", SALVATION OF INFANTS. 


of heaven,”) to come unto me, who alone can save them. 
The whole significancy of his blessing them is lost, if we 
suppose, either that they are not to be saved, or that their 
salvation is not procured for them by Christ. 


(6.) The parallel between what Adam and Christ have 
respectively done for the race, and upon which Paul so 
much insists, seems also necessarily to imply the salvation 
of infants. The blessings which Christ procures for the 
race, it is imphed, are fully commensurate with the curse 
which Adam has brought on it; and inasmuch as the curse 
falls alike on every one by birth, but may be alleviated or 
intensified by every one who comes to years of responsi- 
bility, according as his nature, which brings the curse, rules 
or is ruled by his reason and conscience, so the blessings 
are procured for all alike, but may be lost or secured accord: 
ing to the attitude of every one towards Christ, who alone 
procures them; to infants, as the curse came without their 
election, soin like manner comes its removal. - 


(c.) It accords with our innate sense of justice that evil, 
which has been involuntarily incurred, should also be 
removed by a remedy which is provided equally without 
the volition of the sufferer. _ 

3. The most perplexing part of this subject relates to the 
method of infant salvation,—to the inquiry how the salva- 
tion which Christ provides can be made available for them. 
The diversity of answers that have been given, shows plainly 
the obscurity in which the question of method has been left 
in the Scriptures. Our answers to the question will depend 
on our views of the Church, and of the method by which 
the redemption of the world is to be accomplished. 


_If infants, however, are to be saved, it is plain that there 
must be with them, as with adults, a renewal of their 
moral natures—a gracious change of ‘their moral affections, 
But by what means is this change effected? By infant bap- 
tism, 18 the answer of all Churchmen : by baptismal regene- 
ration, says the high-church party; by infant baptism, as 
the sign and seal of covenanted mercies, says the low- 
church party; that is, with the high churchman salvation is 


SALVATION OF INFANTS. 167 


conferred by an external act, which is specially efficacious if 
performed by a divinely consecrated person, and is not inefii- 
cacious when, in case of extremity, it 1s performed by any 
one; with the low: churchman, the act of itself saves no one, 
and can become finally effectual only on condition of proper 
Christian training; while between the extremes of high and 
low, a vast intermediate body cherish the lurking conviction 
that baptism somehow secures, and the want of it somehow 
perils, the salvation of the infant. 

It is an old, deep-seated and wide-spread notion, that 
infant baptism ‘of itself removes original sin, and puts the 
infant, at once, in a salvable condition. With Romanists, 
and all other consistent high-churchmen, baptism regene- 
rates, and there is no salvation without it;’ but baptized 
infants, dying in infancy, let their baptism have been by 
whomsoever of the faithful it may, are saved by it. A dis- 
cussion of the theory of the church on which this explana- 
tion rests will come up hereafter; but to the question how 
an external act, performed on an unconscious infant, can so 
affect it as to change its moral affections, no intelligent 
answer, supported either by Scripture or by common sense, 
ever has been, or can be, given. Among low-churchmen Me 
the various orades and sects, there pre evails, in regard to 
infant salvation, a great variety of views; at one extreme of 
which is the Pelagian notion of the inherent fitness of 
infants to be saved—a fitness which baptism recognizes and 
seeks to forefend against coming sin ;” at the other extreme, 
is the conception of an innate depravity, which no bap- 
tism can remove, but which, in infants that die, is changed 
by an immediate act of the creative Spirit of God? Of the 


1. This was the unqualified teaching of Augustine, durus pater infantum; see 
Wall, Hist. Bapt., p. 2. c. 6.—Bingham, Antig. Chr. Ch., b. 10, c. 2, s. 24; it has 
always been held by the Roman Catholic church,—fide Catholica tenendum est 
parvulos sine baptismo decedentes, absolute esse damnatos, et non sola celesti, sed 
etiam naturali beatitudine perpetuo carituros, Bellarmine, De Amiss. Grat., lib. 6, 
c. 2; and such beyond dispute was the belief of the original authors of the formula 
of Baptism now used in the Episcopal Prayer-book. 

2. See Life of F. W. Robertson, vol. 1, letters 76, 78. Comp. Miss Beecher’s 
Appeal to the People. | 

3. The Princeton Divines. 


168 SALVATION OF INFANTS. 


Pelagian view, nothing need here be added to what has been 
said in the preceding article; and as respects the last named, 
since the Scriptures give no intimation that the Spirit ever 
changes the heart of any one, without the instrumentality of 
truth in the form of conscious thought, the notion of super- 
natural, spiritual, regeneration of infants, must be regarded 
as a sheer assumption. Nor does any church theory that 
attempts to mediate between the two extremes above named, 
rest on any other than an imaginary foundation; the Script- 
ures are profoundly silent on the method of imfant 
salvation. 

In a question on which, as on this, the Scriptures are thus 
silent, it would be safest perhaps to refuse to theorize at 
all; but to the demand, that if hereditary depravity be 
real, and infants are saved, some kind of explanation should 
be given of a possible method of their rescue, the following 
answer is not wholly unreasonable. Two things must be 
borne in mind: first, that 1t is Christ and his work which 
always serve as the means, and a right appreciation of 
Christ and his work which always constitute the turning 
point in the moral renewal of an adult; and secondly, that, 
in the conversion of children, the transition is often so rapid 
and quiet as to escape the notice of even the observing, while 
with adults there is more or less of moral convulsion, in 
proportion to their former course of life. The difference 
between the process of regeneration in an adult and in a 
child is one of degree and not of kind. It is the same 
Christ that saves in the one case as in the other; the rela- 
tion established between the saved and his Saviour is of 
the same kind with one as with the other. To destroy the 
germ of evil in the heart of an infant, it must, somewhere 
and somehow, as well as children and adults, be brought to 
a knowledge and love of Christ; in order to this knowledge 
and love, while as yet the evil is undeveloped into habit, 
Christ needs only to be seen; and if Christ, who while on 
earth said, ‘suffer little children to come unto me and for- 
bid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven,” shall 
receive the little ones to himself on their entrance into 


ORIGIN OF THE SOUL. 169 


another life, 1 certainly is neither inconceivable nor improb- 
able, that the undeveloped evil of their natures should give 
place at once to an implanted and all-controlling love for 
him, whom to know is life eternal. This explanation, 
though conjectural, accords strictly with the known divine 
method of procedure in our renewal, and is not, like the 
notion of a saving eflicacy in baptism, palpably contrary to 
both Scripture and reason; neither is it vague and mystical, 
resting on theories of arbitrary mercy and an artificial atone. 
ment, like the assurance, now so common even from pro- 
fessed Calvinists, that “in the universal sufficiency of the 
atonement, and by the infinite mercy of God, all children, 


dying in infancy, whether baptized or not, shall be saved.” 


$ 29—Origin of the Soul. 


Out of the doctrine of the native sinfulness of man arises 
inevitably the inquiry, what is the origin of the human 
soul? ‘The question was raised at a very early period in 
the history of the church; three widely different answers 
have had their advocates. One answer is, that all souls 
have existed elsewhere, and in this world enter on a new 
state of probation—the theory of Preéxistence;’ another 1s, 
that each individual soul is an immediate creation of God— 
Creationism ;3 and a third is, that the soul as well as the 
body is propagated, that is, is derived ex traduce from the 
parent, and thus, by successive descents, from the first of 


' 1. If this may be true of infants, why not also of adults? The inborn depravity 
of an adult, having by voluntary action become incorporated into his personal 
character, has put him into a different condition from that of an infant, and a con- 
dition from which only the recreative power of the Spirit, through the process of 
conviction, faith and repentance, can rescue him. 

2. Defended by Origen among the fathers, and, in later years, by Edward 
Beecher, in his Conflict of Ages, and, under a modified form, by Julius Miller, in 
his Doct. of Sin. 

3. The general belief of Calvinists. 


170 ORIGIN OF THE SOUL. 


the race—Traducianism.!' The last of these seems the most 
defensible, and on the following grounds : 

(a.) The soul, if preéxistent, must come into the world 
either with a pure or a corrupt nature. But to suppose a 
pure soul to be thrust into a body that inevitably corrupts 
it, does not comport with the attributes of God: or to sup- 
pose, as the advocates of this answer really do, that every 
soul having fallen in a previous state of being, and forgotten 
both that state and its results, 1s here put on a new state of 
trial, is not to suppose an improvement in its probationary 
conditions, but a cumulation of its calamities, by burdening 
an already perverted will with a corrupted and corrupting 
physical organism. In lke manner, souls, if immediately 
created, must have come from the hand of their Creator 
either corrupt or pure. ‘The first supposition is not to be 
thought of; and the last, hke that of a preéxistent soul 
thrust, in its purity, into a depraved body, does not consist 
with the character of God. Nor does this latter supposi- 
tion derive any support from the HEdwardean theory of the 
identity of human nature. hat theory supposes all matter 
to be of itself inert, and all causation in nature to be the 
immediate creative efficiency of God—the identity of the 
child’s nature with that of its parent, or of the nature of the 
same person at any two given instants of time, being the 
direct result of the sovereign will of the Creator; but the 
theory, besides being unsupported by Scripture, and contra- 
dicted by consciousness as well as by every known fact in 
nature, actually encumbers what it was intended to relieve; 
consistently maintained it cannot stop short of all the worst 
conclusions of pantheism. 

(%.) Traducianism seems to be supported by the analogy 
of nature. Hvery species of animal, or of vegetable, life, is 
endowed with a seminal principle whereby, it multiplies 
individuals of the same species. It matters not to what the 
origin of a given species of animal may be attributed, whether 


1. Defended by Tertullian among the fathers,—probably believed in, though 
not avowed, by Augustine, see Wiggers, August. and Pelag., p. 281,—adopted by 
many Lutherans, and now being rapidly recognized alike by physiologists, psy- 
chologists, and theologians, as the true view. 


ORIGIN OF THE SOUL. Lk 


to a law of natural development, or to an immediate crea- 
tive power; let only the first of the species be in existence, 
and we have a procreative power adequate to the produce. 
tion of every individual of the series that may follow. So 
also of man, whether his origin was by development or by 
creation, let only the first of the race be in existence, and so 
far as the analogies from vegetable and animal life throw any 
light on the question, there exists in him a self-perpetuating 
power equal to the mediate creation of all that have descended 
from him. Nor is the force of the argument evaded by an 
alleged distinction between the spirit (vous, zvévua,) and the 
animal life (¢vy7,) of man. If by this distinction be ex- 
pressed the notion that spirit and animal life are two sepa- 
rate entities, either one of which exists without the pres- 
ence of the other, then it 1s a notion to which neither Script- 
ure, physiology, nor consciousness lend the shadow of 
support. Any attempt to reason in support of Creation- 
ism on the basis of such a _ distinction, brings us 
TO) A— 

(c.) Third argument against Creationism, and in support 
of ‘Traducianism, viz: that the former resolves the constitu- 
ent elements of man’s being into an antagonizing dualism, 
while the latter recognizes and builds upon the manifest 
unity of the human personality, Nothing is plamer than 
that the spirit and body of man are component parts of one 
whole, neither of which is complete without the other. A 
belief in the creation of the spirit, either at the moment of, 
‘or at some period subsequent to, the origination of the 
material from which the bodily organism springs, has no 
other foundation than that of the imagination. The doc- 
trine of the resurrection of the body is stripped of more 
than half its meaning by such a difference of origin. But if 
we recognize the manifest codrdination and combination of 
all the elements of man’s being into the simple entity known 
as his personality ; if we bear in mind the powerful sway of 
the spirit over the body, and, in turn, the almost resistless 
influence of the bodily functions over the spirit’s activities, 
the conclusion seems inevitable that the body and spirit of 


12 ORIGIN OF THE SOUL. 


man are one and indivisible in their origin, in the develop- 
ment of their powers, in the exercise of their functions, and 
in their ultimate destination. 


(d.) Traducianism is the only legitimate conclusion from 
the unvarying uniformity of moral nature in the race—the 
identity of human nature—in every age and under all con. 
ceivable conditions of life. No other adequate explanation 
can be given of this identity than that which regards it as a 
uniform secondary creation through natural generation. 

(¢.) The propagation of intellectual and moral traits in 
families, tribes and nations, through successive generations, 
cannot be so naturally accounted for as on the theory of 
Traducianism. ‘To attribute these to the physical constitu- 
tion of man, is to admit the validity of one of the chief 
arguments of materialists, is to compromise the benevolence 
of God, and to excuse the culpability of sin, by transferring 
its source and seat from the personal will to the physical 
organism. 


(7.) It is worthy of notice, also, that the Scriptures, after 
the statement of the creation of man, contain no intimation 
whatever of the origination of the soul as something distinct 
from the origination of the body, while on the other hand, 
they constantly refer to men as “ begotten,” leaving the 
inevitable impression that their spirits, as well as their 
bodies, are originated by generation. The words in Eee., 
1s ben shall the body return to the earth as it was; 
and the spirit to God who gave it,” and the phrase, “ Father 
of our spirits,’ are none the less sionificant on the theory of 
a secondary creation ‘by natural ‘eeneration, than on the 
theory of immediate and miraculous creation. It is observ- 
able also, that all those texts before cited as teaching a 
hereditary and sinful depravity, also necessarily teach, by 
implication, and thus the more emphatically, the doctrine 
of ‘Traducianism. 

(g.) The Bible represents God as instituting, at the close 
of the periods of original creation, a Sabbath or period of 
rest. If this Sabbath still continues,— and there is no rea- 
son to believe the contrary,-—then souls are not immediately 


a 


INABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY. 143 


created, but come into being by the agency of natural 
generation." 

The objections to the doctrine of Traducianism are chiefly 
of two kinds: the materialism supposed to be involved in 
it, and the absolute impossibility of forming any kind of 
conception of the method of the soul’s generation, or even 
of its relation to its own body. Materialism, however, is 
involved in it, only on the supposition that the soul is the 
product of matter, rather than, as we have every reason to 
believe is the truth in the case, that the body is the organ- 
ized product of the soul. The supposed distinction between 
a vital principle as the organific power of the body, and a 
rational soul as an independent personal entity, can adduce 
in its support no decisive physiological facts, and only far- 
fetched meanings of Scripture. And the impossibility of 
understanding the method of the soul’s origination, is no 
more valid against the fact of its generation” than the impos- 
sibility of understanding the relation of the soul to the body, 
or of understanding the soul’s processes of thought, are 
valid as objections against the reality of the soul’s existence 
or of its mental processes.” 


S$ 30 — Lnability and Responsibility. 


If depravity be hereditary and total, if by birth we bring 
with us into the world a nature Sars is of itself condemna- 


1. The argument of Delitzsch in support of Traducianism, Bid. Psychologie, 2, 
‘§ 7, from the Biblical account of the creation of Eve, is valid only on his theory 
of the origin of the soul of Adam by the inbreathing of God—a kind of Divine 
emanation — to which other parts of the Scriptures lend no support; no breath of 
life, it is said, was breathed into the nostrils of Eve, therefore her soul was derived 
from Adam. Delitzsch does not succeed in relieving his argument from the objec- 
tion that, if it be valid, the origin of Eve was not by descent—by traduction—but 
by subdivision. 

2. See Froschammer, in Contemporary Review, March, ’71, p. 562, ff. 

3. In support of Traducianism, see Froschammer, Ueber den Ursprung der 
Menschlichen Seelen.—Delitzsch, Bib. Psychol., 2, § 7.—Baird, Hlohim Levealed, ch. 
11.—Shedd’s Hist. of Chr. Doctrine, bk. 4, c. 1. 


174 INABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY. 


ble, and out of which there invariably proceed condemna- 
ble acts, can we be said to be responsible moral. agents ? 
Can we with any propriety be summoned on penalty to a 
service, to which we are by nature disinclined, and of which 
we are naturally incapable? Is it safe to teach any kind of 
inability to do what God requires ? 

To these inquiries an emphatic negative is given by all 
that mixed class of persons! who assume that an inalienable 
endowment of every man is a real freedom of will, to the 
extent of a power to the contrary, and that in the very 

nature of things ability must be commensurate with respon- 
sibility ; ‘while, on the other hand, an equally emphatic 
affirmative is given by all those who affirm that, real free- 
dom of will having been lost by transgression, the real abil- 
ity of man falls far short of actual responsibility ; that all 
men have lost the original freedom and ability, but that the 
personal guilt of every one is proportioned to actual oppor- 
tunities for personal enlightenment. Which of the two 
answers shall we adopt? | 

Three sources of information are open to us on this ques- 
tion, viz: the Scriptures, Consciousness, and Experience. 

1. Nothing is more evident than that the Scriptures, in 
every part of them, address us as free moral agents who are 
strictly responsible for all that we do; and ‘it is scarcely 
less apparent, that the same Scriptures everywhere assure 
us that, if left to ourselves, we are incapable either of 
pleasing God or of s satisfying our own consciences. We 
find Christ asserting most explicitly, “no man can come 
unto me, except the Father who hath sent me, draw him,” 
and so asserting, when he was urging faith in himself as the 
one all-inclusive requirement of God, John, 6: 44. Comp. 
verses 29, 35. ‘The apostolic declarations of ‘this inability 
are no less explicit, and they abound in their writings. Ro., 
SHREW OTe Ot Srl Oph Ory Tel eo Mops uur! 


1. Pelagians and semi-Pelagians of all times, including the Unitarians; Armin- 
ians of various shades, including the Methodists (see Doctrines of Methodism, by 
Whedon, 520. Sac., April, ’62); many Lutherans; Broad Church Anglicans; many 
New School Congregationalists and Presbyterians, 


INABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY. ns: 


2. What the Scriptures thus affirm respecting our free- 
agency, consciousness corroborates; and what respecting 
our responsibility, conscience reiterates, Consciousness and 
conscience alike assure us of our possession of that for- 
mal freedom in our choices which constitutes the distin- 
guishing and inalienable birth-right of our personal being; 
and experience none the less conclusively assures us of the 
truth of those other declarations of the Scriptures, that with- 
out divine aid our choices of the right are inoperative; 
that conscience and reason, with all their authority, are too 
often impotent before the hidden power of evil that rules 
in the will. 

The two testimonies of consciousness and experience should 
be carefully distinguished. ‘The spheres in which they are 
competent witnesses are very widely separated. Conscious- 
ness is as wholly incompetent to testify of mability, as is 
experience to testify of personal responsibility. Our ina- 
bility is our disinclination, our dislike of what God enjoins; 
and that dislike is seated in the central and controlling 
power of the soul. The dislike acts spontaneously, is the 
power which directs the will, is one of the constituent ele. 
ments of the will itself; the will in its generic sense—the 
sense here contemplated—is only the heart’s revelation of 
itself, is the moral nature in movement. Consciousness can, 
therefore, take no cognizance of the dislike as a force which 
is In any manner separable from the spontaneous action of 
the will itself. Hence the most enslaved will can never 
make its slavery cognizable in consciousness, as any thing 
distinct from its own volitionary force. The inability 18 
simply the free spontaneous disposition of the soul to do 
wrong. Its primary choices of right, in obedience to the 
dictates of reason and conscience, are consciously free voli- 
tions, and its ultimate choices of wrong, in obedience to the 
dictates of the heart, are in consciousness equally free 
volitions. Experience, on the contrary, knows nothing of 
freedom of will, except at second hand from consciousness. 
But to the truth of the Scripture declarations of moral in- 
ability its witness is ample and decisive. We may with 


176 INABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY. 


conscious freedom choose an undesired moral end, but experi- 
ence proves that an undesired moral end is an end unattain- 
able. We may freely elect what our reason and conscience 
approve and our heart rejects, but experience shows that our 
heart controls us—that our moral inability is certain to 
thwart us at the last. 


3. The testimonies of Scripture, consciousness, and expert- 
ence, in respect to inability and responsibility, can be safely 
adduced only as an indivisible whole. Confining ourselves 
to one set of Scripture texts and the data of experience, we 
must come, in the end, if we are logically consistent, to 
supralapsarianism in doctrine, and fatalism in practice; 
accepting exclusively another set of texts and the data of 
consciousness, we enter on a line of argument which, logi- 
cally followed out, has no proper terminus short of a lm1- 
tation of omnipotence and a delfication of man. Our only 
safety is in always regarding the total teachings of Scripture, 
and the united testimonies of consciousness and experience, 
as reciprocally interpretative, and mutually complemental. 
From their united evidences the conclusion is inevitable that 
the ability of man is not equal to his responsibility. 

Naturat AnD Morat lyasirrry. Does the supposed dis- 
tinction between the two kinds of ability require a modifica- 
tion of the foregoing conclusion? Since the time of the elder 
Jonathan Edwards, great importance has by many been 
attached to this distinction as furnishing a solution to the 
whole problem of an ability which is incommensurate with 
responsibility. All men, it is said, have a natural ability, 
which is fully equal to their moral obligations; but to the 
fulfillment of their obligations they are morally disinclined, 
and their disinclination is their moral inability; they cannot, 
because they will not, fulfill their obligations. 

Now, so far as the phrase, natural ability, corresponds to 
the formal freedom, of whose existence both Scripture and 
consciousness so clearly assure us, and the phrase, moral 
inability, corresponds to that want of real freedom, of which 
the same Scriptures so emphatically remind us, just so far 
the distinction is well founded and throws light on the ques- 


eee ee ee 


, 


INABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY. 177 


tion of responsibility. Butsuch are not the meanings most 
commonly attached to the phrases. Whether Edwards’ and 
his faithful expounder, Andrew Fuller’, would have accepted 
the views or not, it is evident that many, who since their day 
have most vaunted the phrases, have had wider meanings in 
mind. With them, will is something independent of the 
moral affections, lying behind them and capable of control- 
ling them; natural ability, with power to the contrary, 
can exist only as the will is independent of, and stronger 
than, the heart, i. e. as the willis something different from, 
and stronger than, the will itself. 

The distinction between natural and moral ability is 
objectionable on a variety of grounds : 

(a.) Itis a purely metaphysical distinction which has no 
basis whatever of reality, is unsupported by consciousness 
and unattested by experience. Ability is something the pos- 
session or want of which can be proved only by experience, 
but inthe very nature of the casea natural ability to the degree 
ofa power to the contrary can never be tested byexperiment. 

(6.) The distinction is irrelevant and wholly fails to meet 
the difficulty it was intended to remove. The Divine require- 
ments are not such as natural ability is sufficient to fulfill, 
but are precisely those of which, in ourselves, we are 
morally incapable. If our natural ability be equal to the 
requirements, it is idle to speak of any kind of inability in 
the case ; and if there bea moral inability which only super- 
natural grace can overcome, then it 1s worse than idle to 
talk of natural ability. 

(c.) The distinction is harmful, and proves itself, whet 
logically carried out, to be mischievous, by its tendency 
to encourage self-confidence and self-complacency. 


1. ‘* We are said to be naturally unable to do a thing when we cannot do it 
if we will, because what is most commonly called nature does not allow of it, 
or because of some impeding defect or obstacle that is intrinsic to the will, 
either in the faculty of understanding, constitution of body, or external objects.” 
‘¢Moral inability consists in the opposition or want of inclination.” Edward’s 
Freedom of the Will, pt. 1, sec. 4, § 3. 

2. Natural inability is ‘‘the want of rational faculties, bodily powers, and 
external advantages.” Andrew Fuller, Gospel Worthy of all Aeceptation, pt. 
8, or vol. 2, p. 376. A. B: P. So. ed. 

12 


178 INABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY. 


(d.) It introduces into theology a disastrous confusion 
of thought, by requiring the word natural to be used in an 
arbitrary and uncertain sense. 

(e.) It can adduce no support from the Scriptures. The 
Bible no where tells man that he is naturally, that is of 
himself, equal to all his moral obligations, but, in enjoining 
his duties, every where assures him that his ‘‘ sufficiency is 
of God.”’ 

(7.) To awaken in man a pungent and effective conviction 
of his coéxistent responsibility and inability, 1s the initia- 
tory step in his salvation. His salvation is already begun 
when, convinced alike of his inexcusableness and helpless- 
ness, he accepts the divinely proffered relief. The most direct 
means to produce the conviction is not to tell him of a 
natural ability to do all that is required of him. 

(g.) The very essence of true piety, in beings who have 
been rescued from the dominion of moral evil and are being 
developed under the tuition and example of Christ, consists 
in a two-fold sense of personal inability and an unfailing 
Divine sufficiency. Thatsense can neither be awakened by, 
nor coéxist with, a conviction of natural ability wie is 
commensurate with obligation. 

All parties agree in a Tee Ton of free-agency and of the 
responsibility of man for his volitions; but as respects the 
volitions themselves, these are on the one side regarded as . 
the free acts of the self-determining, originating will, and on 
‘the other as the free acts of the personal self which always 
chooses according to its moral nature; the former holding 
that the moral nature is determined by the choices, and the 
latter that the choices are determined by the moral nature. 
The controversy is purely a metaphysical one; is common 
alike to philosophy! and theology ; and in the nature of the 
case can never be decided. Any system of theology that 
builds on the conclusions of either party to the controversy, 
is justly open to the suspicion of somewhere doing violence 
to the facts either of consciousness or of experience. 


1. See Hamilton’s Notes to his edit. of Reid’s Works ; on the Active Powers, 
ess. 4, and Note U, vol. 2. 


ORIGIN AND NATURE OF THE PLAN OF SALVATION. 179 


SOTERIOLOG Y. 


$ 81—Origin and Nature of the Plan of Salvation. 


Man as we have seen, is by nature and by practice at 
variance with his Creator, Ro., 5: 10. 8: 7; as a conse- 
quence, ruin and spiritual death have befallen him, from 
which, of himself, he is incapable of escape, Ro., 7: 14, 
24, 25. To rescue him from his disobedience and ruin, a 
supernatural deliverance was provided, and the Divine 
method of its application was historically revealed; to 
accomplish his redemption, Jesus Christ came into the. 
world, John, 18: 37. 1 Tim., 1: 5, and was ‘‘ appointed 
heir of all things,’’ Heb., 1: 2. 

The historical beginning of the immediate work of redemp- 
tion may be referred, according to our point of view, either 
to the birth of Jesus, to the beginning of the prophecies of 
his coming, to the special calling of Abraham, or to the 
very beginning of man’s disobedience ; but the origin of the 
thought and plan of human redemption was not in time. 
Salvation by Jesus Christ was not an afterthought of the 
creation ; an expedient to remedy an unexpected,disaster. 
The scheme of redemption and the scheme of creation were 
coeternal purposes, 1 Cor., 2: 7. Eph., 1: 4: 3: 9, 11. 
Heveselo >. 8: 

The nature of the plan thus originated, and the method 
of its execution, can be determined only by careful scrutiny 
of the facts embodied in the history of its introduction and 
progress among mankind. Attempts to determine before- 
hand what this plan must be, or to compress it, with all the 
fulness and freeness of its spirit, within a system shaped by 
an underlying human philosophy, must result in the pro- 


180 PREPARATION FOR THE COMING OF CHRIST. 


duction of a scheme too narrow and rigid and artificial, to 
corespond with the, Divine reality. A scheme that shall 
embody that reality, in anything like the freedom of its 
actual method, must accept the simple teachings of the 
Bible as paramount in authority to any metaphysical Pos 
tulates ane to all systems of psyc hology. 


$ 32—Preparation for the Coming of Christ. 


This preparation may be viewed in two aspects, which, 
though wholly distinct, are yet closely related. The one 
presents the origination and convergence of natural causes 
that facilitate the introduction and diffusion of Christianity 
among men; the other shews these natural causes grown 
into formidable obstacles which supernatural power alone 
could overcome, and, in overcoming, could transform into 
higher than original uses. And it will become noticeable as 
we go on, how preparation in the first sense became, under 
an overruling Providence, preparation in the second sense ; 
how obstaclesapparently insurmountable were made in turn 
not only to develop the supernatural resources of the reli- 
gion they threatened to obstruct, but in the end were com- 
pelled effectually to advance it in its work. : 

Preparation in the first sense was of three kinds; and to 
reverse, in the enumeration, the order of both their impor- 
tance and their beginning, may be said to have consisted : 
partly, in providing for the spread of the gospel among 
peoples and nations the most dissimilar and. alien ; partly, 
in demonstrating to the human mind its need of a super- 
natural Deliverer; and partly in training a single ration to 
be the medium af conveying the blessings of that Deliverer 
to mankind. 

The first kind of preparation was secured by the wide 
extension of the Roman Empire, and the subjection of many 
hostile nations to a single government and to one system of 
laws; and by the wide diffusion, even to Judea on the one 


7 


PREPARATION FOR THE COMING OF CHRIST. 18] 


hand and to Gaul on the other, of the Greek language', which 
of all the tongues spoken among men, was the best fitted 
for the service it was to render. 


The second and the third were secured by the ide | 


different modes of procedure adopted by the Divine Ruler, 
in his government of the world under its two great divisions 
of Gentiles and Jews’, the worshippers of false gods and the 
worshippers of Jehovah. ; 

Thus the second kind of preparation was accomplished, 
by exhibiting the helplessness of gentileism or heathenism 
through the futility of the best products of its philosophy? 
and its natural religion*. The unaided mind of man could 
go no further in its attempts to solve the problems of the 
universe than it had gone in Greek philosophy ; its highest 
achievement was the discovery of needed help from above® 
and the erection of an altar tothe unknown God. Other 
nations, also left to themselves, shewed in their several 
ways, by their idolatries and vices, Ro., 1: 21-32, their 
need of Divine interposition ; and by so shewing, prepared 
the way for making interposition effectual, Acts, 17: 29-81. 
gon) ls 2). 

A third means of preparation for the introduction of the 
gospel, was in the Divine method of dealing with the Jew- 
ish nation®. God selected Abraham and gave him a distinct 
and comprehensive promise; setting at work within him 
that fundamental principle of Christianity, and of all true, 
or Christian, character, faith, Ro., 4: 15-22. Gal., 3: 6, 7, 


1. See Hug’s Introduction to the N. T., pt. 2, ch. 1. § 10.—Conybeare and How- 
son, Life and Hpisties of Paul, vol. 1, p. 15.—Dominicus Diodati, a Neapol- 
itan, in a treatise published in 1767, and entitled De Christo grece loquente 
Exercitatio, defends the position firmly, that Christ and his Apostles must have 
both read and spoken Greek. See specially pars 2 and pars 8, cap. 1. 

2. See Neander, Planting ana Training, bk. 6, ch. 1, § 3.—Schaff, Hist. 
Apost. Ch., §§ 89-58. 

3. Déllinger, The Gentile and the Jew, bk. 5, vol. 1. bk. 8, vol. 2. 

4, Déllinger, bk. 2-4, 6, vol. 1. bk. 7, vol. 2. 

5. See Ackermann, Christian Hlement in Plato, pt. 2, ch. 5, 6. 1 

6. See Kurtz, Hist. of the Old ean ey vol. 1.—Dean Stanley, Hist. of the 
Jewish Ch., lects. 1, 2. 


& 


182 PREPARATION FOR THE COMING OF CHRIST. 


He made him the first recipient of the Gospel and its bless- 
INS Gals 3c) Oy 9) 

To secure in the descendants of Abraham a right apprecia- 
tion and acceptance of the gospel, there were instituted, 
through Moses, those minute requirements, moral, ritual, 
ceremonial, civil, which together constitute the Jewish 
vorog or Law’, Gal. 3: 28, 24. 4: 8-5. The law thus given, 
so far from annulling the promise or Gospel announced to 
Abraham, (compare dcaéyxn, exayyehia, vouoc and evayyédcov) 
was only one stage in the revelation of it, and an exhibi- 
tion of that side of it which is always apparent to the unbe- 
lieving and the disobedient, Gal. 3: 17-24. The same eter- 
nal principle of law, whether embodied in the written word 
of the Bible, or in the ethical convictions of mankind, still 
prepares the human heart for the reception of its Deliverer. 

Contributory to the same end was the office of the 
Prophets*. The vouoc of Moses, by its inexorable demands, 
shut men up to a consciousness of ill desert, and thus to 
the necessity of looking for a Savior. The prophets, abat- 
ing not a jot of the demands of the law, whether of cere- 
mony, of sacrifice, or of claim on the heart, only pointed 
the more earnestly to the Savior whom they saw in the dis- 
tance. The prophets were the proclaimers of the Gospel to 
the men of their day. They kept the people’s eye on the 
Abrahamic promise, or the Gospel side of the voyoc, as Moses 
himself had done in his promise of the great Prophet who 
should afterwards come, Deut., 18: 15-19. Acts, 3: 22-25. 
And hence Christ in Matt., 5: 17, speaks of the law and the’ 
prophets as a united testimony which he had come to fulfill, 
comp. Ro., 10: 4; and hence also Christ pronounced John 
the Baptist the greatest of prophets, Matt., 11: 11. Luke, 
7: 28, not because John foretold more than any other con- 
cerning the Redeemer, but because more distinctly than any 


1. See Kurtz, Hist. of the Old Cov., vol. 3, pt. 1, sect. ama Hist. 
Jewish Ch., lect. 7. 

2.. See Fenectenber g, Christology, vol. 1, c. 5.—J. A. Alexander, The Harlier 
Prophecies of Isaiah, Introduction.—Wines, Commentaries on the Laws of the 
Anc. Heb., ch. 9.—R. Payne Smith, Bampt. lects., Prophecy a Preparation for 
Christ. 


PREPARATION FOR THE COMING OF CHRIST. 183 


other he was permitted on the one hand to proclaim, and 
in his own person exemplify the inexorability of the voyoc, 
and on the other to announce, and even point out person- 
ally, the Deliverer so long expected. 

But the three foregoing classes of preparatives for the 
introduction of Christianity became, through the perversity 
of man, the most formidable obstacles to its progress. The 
Roman power, by uniting the most distant and_ hostile 
nations in a single empire, made it possible for Christianity 
to be carried into all the world, but it also put to death the 
Founder of Christianity, as wellas his chief apostles and 
thousands of the early disciples. Philosophy, which.had so 
filled the heart of Plato with yearning for the Divine aid it 
had assured him would some time be granted, became to 
the Greek a touch-stone by which the Gospel was rejected 
as foolishness, 1 Cor., 1: 22, 23. The Jewish ocadyxn, or 
Old Testament dispensation, with its precepts and promises 
on the one hand, and its prophetic visions of the future on 
the other, so engrossed the attention of the Jew that he for- 
got ‘‘the further looking hope”’ without which half the 
meaning of his religion was wanting. He was too much 
pleased with the shadow to see any beauty in the substance ; 
the type usurped in his mind the place of the antitype. 
And to this hour, what was intended to be transient and pre- 
paratory he persists in regarding as permanent and ulti- 
mate. He sees in the language of his prophets, not a higher 
and more spiritual religion,—not a foreshadowing of the 
‘teachings of Jesus,—but only asplendor that is yet to come 
to the religion which his fathers received as an eternal pos- 
session from Moses. Salvation by a crucified Christ is to 
him a fatal stumbling block. 

Manifestly, then, if Christianity was to accomplish its 
work among men, some power superior to natural causes 
and able to overrule and subordinate their action must 
interpose ; that power accompanied the introduction of the 
Gospel. The Roman arm could lay in the grave the Foun- 
der of Christianity, but it was impotent to hold him; 
unwittingly and involuntarily it fulfilled the Divine behests. 


184 PREPARATION FOR THE COMING OF CHRIST. 


It could slaughter Christians, but by slaughtering multi- 
plied their numbers. Unable to arrest the progress of the 
Gospel, the more it endeavored to hinder, the more the 
Divine energy of the Gospel was illustrated and its progress 
hastened. Greek philosophy could look down with scorn 
on the thought ofa crucified Saviour, but in his Gospel was 
a power and a wisdom before which philosophy was com- 
pelled to bow. The higher its pretensions, the more earnest 
was the search in it forthe light and life which the heart 
craved; and the more complete the recoil from it to the 
Gospel which alone could satisfy’. Judaism could spurn 
the Messiah, but could not suppress the testimony of the 
Scriptures to his Messiahship ; it could denounce him as a 
destroyer of Moses and the prophets, but.it could not turn 
aside the irresistible evidence that the prophecies of its © 
prophets found in him a marvellous fulfillment ; that the 
eternal principles of its moral law were by him expounded 
with a clearness and enforced with a pungency to which 
Moses and the prophets were alike unequal. Thus the 
religion that was intended of God to prepare his chosen 
people for the reception of his Son when he should come, 
but was made the chief ground for his rejection, became, 
and in its sacred Scriptures must ever continue to be, a 
standing testimony to the Divine origin of the religion of 
Jesus. The Old Testament and the New together constitute | 
an indivisible whole; each is unintelligible without the 
other; the law and the Gospel, which they represent, are 
the complements each of the other. 
Foremost among the methods of preparation was the 
Jewish dcabyxy. Through Heathenism came a knowledge of 
the wants and helplessness of the race; through Judaism, 
the distinct annunciation of a coming Deliverer, and of hope- 
less condemnation without that Deliverer’s aid. The office 
of Heathenism was accomplished by the unaided powers of 
man; that of Judaism, by a many-sided and supernatural 
enforcement of Law; and hence o voyo¢g is sometimes used 


1. See Neander on the Relation of the Grecian to the Christian Ethics, trans. 
Bib. Sac., vol. 10, pp. 476, f£., 789, ff. 


PREPARATION FOR THE COMING OF CHRIST. 185 


as synonymous with the whole Jewish economy". (Rom., 
fee eee). i, L2. 10: 12) 

The Scriptures nowhere make those distinctions commonly 
maintained by theologians between law of nature and posi- 
tive law; between laws civil, ceremonial, ritual and moral. 
All are alike parts of The Law; but evidently it is the idea 
of moral obligation and its fulfillment that runs through, 
and gives unity to, them all. Every other species of law 
contained in the Scriptures was manifestly for the special 
elucidation and enforcement of eternal moral law. The 
whole round of Jewish rites and ordinances was, on the 
one hand, but a rigid and minute enforcement by symbolical 
requirements of what was taught in the moral law, and on 
the other, a typical proclamation of that Redemption which 
the ritual law and the moral law (the ten commandments, ) 
were alike designed to usher in upon the world, Heb., 9: 
8-12. 10: 1-8. Comp. Acts, 15:10. Nor were the various 
statutes of Judaism that accompanied the moral law, capri- 
ciously enacted, or arbitrarily enforced ; they were real, 
obligatory, authoritative and capable ofenforcement, because 
they were grounded in realities and supported by the inex- 
orable necessities of nature and condition. 

If the nature and office of law, especially of the Old Tes- 
tament vouoc, and of its relation to Christianity and the Salva- 
tion it offers, be as described, then a somewhat careful 
analysis and examination of the nature and offices of law 
seems at this point to be requisite. 


1. The government of the world under the two great divisions of Heathen- 
ism and Judaism, and thespreparation of mankind thereby for the introduction 
of Christianity, represent all that can justly be included under the phrase ‘‘Cov- 
enant of Works,” of which Feederal theologians have always made so mnch 
account. God’s method of dealing with mankind is always to treat them aceord- 
ing to their knowledge and opportunities, and that method is. his covenant 
(d:abyxn) with man; and when by special revelation, as to the Jews, his will 
and their duties are minutely made known, the special relations thus created are 
most aptly represented by the emphasized metaphor of a “ covenant.” 


* 


186 MORAL LAW. 


S$ 33—WMoral Law. 


I. Tue IDEA OR DEFINITION oF Law. For popular use, the 
definition of law as ‘‘a rule of action,” is sufficiently accu- 
‘rate; or more comprehensively, as well as more accu- 
rately, ‘stated, law is that in personal existence, a due 
recognition and observance of which, is requisite to the full 
perfection of its being; and moral law is a principle of 
action, afullcomplhiance with which by the personal willisin- 
dispensable to the realisation of the ideal type of moral being. 
The first definition conceives of law as a statute, as a formal, 
external requirement, and as a restraint upon the will of a 


subject by the will of a sovereign ; the second conceives of — 


law as a part of the very nature of the being to be regulated 
—as a constituent principle of essential being!. Law as 
applied to physics, is used metaphorically, and, compre- 
hensively defined, denotes a rule according to which a given 
class of phenomena is observed to occur. Inseparably con- 
nected with the idea of moral law, is our conception of 

II. Irs Ortein*®. This is not adequately represented when 


1. Lex est ratio summa, insita in natura, que jubet ea que facienda sunt, 
prohibetque contraria. Eadem ratio quum in mente hominis confirmata et con- 
fecta, Lexest. * * * Lexest neque hominum ingeniis excogitata, nec scitum 
aliquod populorum, sed eternum quoddam, quod universum mundum regeret, 
imperandi prohibendique sapientia. Lex non tum denique incipit lex esse, 
quum scripta est, sed tum, quum orta est. Orta autem simul est cum mente 
divina. Quamobrem lex vera atque princeps apta ad jubendum et ad vetandum, 
ratio est recta summi Jovis. Cicero, De Legibus, lik. 1, cap. 6. lib. 2, cap. 4. 

Lex est mensura et regula actuum agendorum. Est queedam ordinatio 
rationis ad bonum commune, ab eo, qui curam communitatis habet, promul- 
gata. * * Aternus divine legis conceptus habet rationem legis «eterna, 
secundum quod a Deo ordinatur ad gubernationem rerum ab ipso preecognita- 
rum. Thos. Aquinas, ps. prima secunde, ques. 90, art. 1, 4. ques. 91, art. 1. 
See the well known words of Hooker in his Heclesias. Polity, bk, 1, ch. 16, 8.— 
Kant, Metaphysic of Hthics, Trans. by J. W. Semple, p. 169 ff—Grotius, De Jure 
Belli ac Pacis, lib. 1, c. 1.—The Duke of Argyle, The Reign of Law, ch. 2. 

2. This is one of the points at which the paths of the moral philosophet and 
of the theologian intersect. The inquiry into the ground of moral obliga- 
“tion may in Ethics be made a further reaching question than. is legitimate in 
theology ; but the inquiry in both domains is identical, so far as it relates to the 


| 
. 


MORAL LAW. 187 


referred to the sovereign will of God'. To this explanation 
there are grave objections. Ifit be true, then: (a.) The dis- 
tinction between right and wrong may be arbitrary, or, had 
God so willed, good might have been evil and evil good. 
(6.) God may, or may not, himself be what he requires us 
to become, and, so far as his law throws any light on the 
qnestion, he may be directly the opposite of holy in his 
own moral nature. (c.) Had he chosen to give us no law, 
then, so far as we know, since conformity to law is holi- 
ness and nonconformity to law is sin, we should have been 
equally incapable of holiness or of sin. (d.) It is fatal to 
this explanation that, in vindicating the law of God as holy, 
just and good, we always refer to something else than itself. 
as a standard or test, i. e., to something which is indepen- 
dent of his will as expressed in law, and something by 
which the will itself is vindicated. It is evident that 
God, though a sovereign, always acts for wise reasons ; that 
his laws are not arbitrary enactments—not mere decrees 
irrespective of the nature and necessities of man; and that 
thus, something must lie behind and determine his will. 
Nor does it relieve this explanation from objection to affirm 
that the divine will enacts laws for benevolent ends? ; if ends 


motives to moral conduct which spring from the will ofa personal God. 
There may be conjectural grounds of moral obligation in Ethics, which can fur- 
nish no such motives; but the sanctions of moral law, without which it does 
not exist, force on the mind the inquiry into its origin, and as a consequence, 
into the nature and ground of its authority. 

1. The doctrine of Hobbes that law rests on power—‘‘ where there is no 
common power there is no law; where no law, no injustice,” See his Leviathan, 
pt. 1, ch. 18. Works, p. 115. Molesworth’s ed., and Leviathan passim,—was at 
bottom this theory of law. But the ascription of law to the mere will of 
God, clearly propounded by Ockham, defended by Descartes in his Medita- 
teons, and afterwards advocated by Waburton,—see his Divine Legation of 
Moses, bk. 1, sect. 4. (Comp. the notes of Edmund Law to his translation of 
Archbp. Kings’ Origin of Hvil, pp. 254, 259, 274, ed. 4, Camb., 1758,)—has had 
many advocates among theologians and has influenced many a theological sys- 
tem. See this theory of law refuted by Cudworth, Jmmutable Morality, pt. 1, 
ch. 3. 

2. This was virtually what Paley did in his famous definition of virtue. The 
first half of the definition made virtue to consist in ‘‘obedience to the will of 
God;” and the second half in doing that will ‘‘for the sake of everlasting hap- 


188 MORAL LAW. 


determine the laws, then these and not the will of God, are 
their source, and contain the ground of obligation. 

2. The origin of law is not found ina regard for the hap- 
piness ofman’. His happiness is doubtless dependent on the 
administration of a wise and just government, but there is no 
proof that the government exists for that end alone or for 
that end chiefly. Beneficent to man as all the laws of God 
undoubtedly are, no theory in explanation of their origin can 
be adequate, which refers them to the happiness of man as 
their final cause ; and for the following reasons: (a.) If this 
explanation were the true one, the very end which the law 
contemplated would itself be unattainable. He who seeks 
happiness for its own sake never finds it ; itis he only who, 
for righteousness sake, is willing to dose his life—his happi- 
ness, that eventually finds it. (0.) The mind, immediately 
and without calculation, recognizes the obligation of moral 
law, and no amount of regard for self-interest can stifle the 
sense of obligation when its commandsare once understood. 
It is inconceivable that the requirements of moral law could 
be reversed, or in any degree deflected from our innate sense 
of right. The origin of law therefore must have been in 
some anterior necessity of being quite independent of the 
incident of happiness. (c.) The end for which the law was 
made should evidently be the end we seek in endeavoring 
to fulfill it; but if the law was made for our happiness as 
its end and addresses its motives to our self-love, then 
supreme selfishness must be the highest virtue and disinter- 
ested benevolence an absurdity. 

3. Was the origin of law in the nature of things? To the 
affirmative of this question many writers, repelled by inhe- - 
rent difficulties from both the preceding solutions, have felt 


piness.” This explanation of law underlies several forms of the New School 
theology. For a revival of it ina new shape, see Pres. Hopkins’ Lects. on Moral 
Science, and The Law of Love and Love asa Law. Itis virtual Utilitarianism. 

1. Of all the theories this has been favored by more and by abler political 
and ethical writers, in Eng. literature, than any other; in theology it has 
received comparatively but little favor. For a somewhat comprehensive but 
unphilosophical survey of these writers, see Leckey, Hist. of Hurop. Morals, 
vol. 1, ch. 1.—Comp. Whewell, Lects. on the Hist. Moral Phil. in Hng. For 
one of the ablest’ of later writers, see Austin, Lects. on Jurisprudence. 


MORAL LAW. We 189 


themselves compelled to assent. To the phrase ‘‘ nature of 
things,’ however, two widely different ideas have been 
attached by different writers. The one class understand by 
it an ‘‘ eternal fitness of things';’’ the other, an existing and 
created relation of the Creator to his rational creatures, and 
of rational creatures to one another. By the first class, 
moral law is conceived of as something uncreated and eter- 
nal, lying behind and controlling the authority of God 
himself; by the.second class, moral law is conceived as 
something made to meet the requirements of created rela- 
tions ; the views, therefore, of the second class are identical 
with that explanation of law which refers it directly and 
simply to the sovereign will of God, and need not here be 
further discussed. But the supposition of an eternal fitness 
of things which itself constitutes moral law, and to which 
the will of God is subject, is equally objectionable with 
either of the preceding explanations. (a.) It assumes that 
our finite conditions of thought are identical with the infi- 
nite conceptions of God ; that our circumscribed experience 
is adequately representative of the divine activity in the 
origination of the scheme of his creation. (6.) This theory, 
consistently applied, would overthrow the very foundations 
of the Divine authority, and destroy the vital principle of all 
true piety. (aa.) It would strike a fatal blow at the argu- 
ment from conscience for the existence of God,—it would not 
be the existence of God, but an. eternal fitness of things 
of which conscience would assure us. (00.) By thrusting 
-anabstraction into the place of God, an abstraction before 
which God himself is supposed to bow, it would reduce 
religion and piety from a loving service of the archetypal 


1. See Samuel Clarke’s Boyle Lects., Demonstration of the Being and Attri- 
butes of God, prop. 12, §6, and bound in the same vol., his Boyle Lects. 
Concerning the Unalterable Obligations of Nat. Religion and the Truth 
and Certainty of the Christ. Relig., prop. 1-8. Clarke’s Lects. were directed 
against the views of Hobbes; and Cudworth, whose ‘‘Immutable Morality” was 
written for the same object, had preceded him in placing the ground of moral 
obligation in ‘‘the nature of things.” See his Immutable Morality, bk. 1, chh. 
1, 2, or Works, Harrison’s ed., vol. 3, p. 525, ff. 

2. See Dr. Wayland’s Hlements of Moral Science, bk. 1, ch. 3, sect. 1. 


190 _ MORAL LAW. 


Father of our race to a cold and monotonous contemplation 
of a mere idea. And (cc.) if there be anything superior to_ 
the infinite God, it would seem to be the dictate of wisdom 
to worship it as supreme; but it would be a worship that, 
intelligently offered, would end sooner or later in fatalism. 

4. The real source of moral law was the moral nature of 
God; and inasmuch as the original, typical man was 
created in the Divine image, the law is also a summary of 
the constituent principles of the unfallen nature of man. 
Moral law, therefore, was not made, neither arbitrarily nor 
for definite ends, but was simply revealed. It embodied in 
code what from eternity had been embosomed in God. The 
revelation and codification may have been for - beneficent 
ends, but the law itself was as eternal as God, and must 
remain, regardless of ends, as immutableas his immutable - 
nature. That this is the true view is evident: 

(a.) From the power which moral law, especially as it is 
expounded in the ethical teachings of Jesus, possesses over 
the moral nature of man. No sooner are its claims under- 
stood, than consciousness acknowledges and conscience 
enforces them. Inthe moral law, as the portraiture both of 
the character of God and of the ideal personal self, is recog- 
nized, at once, the type of what we originally were, of what ' 
we were designed to beand must become or perish. Thus 
law, as objective statute, is able to enforce itself, because it 
embodies the immutable principles of the subjective being ; 
just as civil’ laws become living and perpetual statutes in 
proportion as they represent the constituent principles of 
the society they regulate. , 

(6.) The actual product of law, as itis fulfilled in the per- 
sonal character, is a resemblance to God—a reproduction of 
that Divine image presented in the person of the typical and 
ideal man Jesus; and it is such because objective moral 
law embodies the subjective principles of the moral being of 
both God and man. ; 

(c.) All there is of truth in either of the other explana- 
tions of the origin of law, is traceable directly to the nature 
of God. The will of God is the source of moral law, if by — 


MORAL LAW. | 191 


* 


will be understood the Divine nature expressing itself; the 
law of God obeyed secures the happiness of man, simply 
because the one condition of his happiness is resemblance 
to the characer of God and a corresponding harmony with 
his will; and moral law is congruity with the nature of 
things, ‘sh oeerite the origin of the nature of things was in the 
éternal nature of God; the moral universe is constituted as 
it is, and our intuitive moral convictions are what they are, 

because the universe, ourselves included, is the reflex of 
the unchanging moral nature of its Creator. 


(d.) That the source of moral law is the moral nature of 
God, is evident from the nature of rewards and penalties. 
These do not consist of arbitrary bestowments and inflictions, 
but of natural and inevitable consequences—of Peeutt yt 
states and conditions of being, which are as natural and uni. | 
form as are,the laws whose violations or fulfillments they 
invariably follow. A good man’s reward consists, pre- * 
éminently, in his conscious harmony with the infinitely 
holy God, and a bad man’s penalty in the consciousness of 
his hopeless antagonism with a Being whom his conscience 
upbraids him for opposing. The mutual attraction of good 
men is itself blessedness, and the mutual reaction and repul- 
sion of the bad and the good is to the bad a perpetual 
wretchedness ; and this is so, because the moral laws whose 
sanctions are thus enforced are only the transcripts of the 
immutable principles of moral being. 


 (é.) The true source and ground of moral law must be 

the ultimate ground of the Divine authority. But the ulti- 
mate ground of the Divine authority is neither in the power 
nor in the sovereign will of God. His sovereign will and 
power brought us into being, but in creating us rational 
beings in his own image, he thereby endowed us with rights 
which he infinitely respects. He never rests his right to 
our service on his sovereign pleasure and power to enforee 
it; in other words, moral law which proclaims his right is 
not an expression of arbitrary will but of the unchangeable 
requirements of moral being. Nor again is the ultimate 
ground of the Divine authority in the benevolence of God. 


192 i MORAL LAW. 


Gratitude should be to us a motive to obedience,—ingrati- 
tude is a base sin—but the bestowment of gifts can be no 
- ground for authority ; it does not comport with our ideas of 
honor, either in man or in God, to lay us under obligation 
for the purpose of afterwards controlling us. But it does 
comport with our ideas of all that is noble and ‘divinely 
authoritative to think of a Being whose infinitely holy nature 
controls alike the exercise of his power, will, benevolence, 
and every other attribute; this gives to his government 
over men an authority which conscience and reason imme- 
diately recognize, whatever may be the opposition with 
which the will may resist it. The moral nature which thus 
lies at the foundation of the Divine authority, manifestly 
must also have been the source of his moral law. 

Nor is the position that moral law thus represents the — 
moral nature of God, identical, as it has sometimes been 
asserted to be, with the position that the gronnd of all law 
is the sovereign will of God. The will of God, in its com- 
prehensive or generic sense, is undoubtedly the expression 
of the Divine nature, and, in that sense of the word will, 
the two positions are plainly identical ; but that is not the 
meaning of the word will when it is objected to as being the 
source of moral law; the great objections are, that to 
sround law in the sovereign pleasure of God is to make 
might the basis of right—that is, it conceives of will as sov- 
ereign and not as the expression of nature; and, above all, 
it is said to rob law of the highest motive that can be adduced 
for obeying it. But the highest motive to obedience that 
man can know, must be, the motive by which he can realize the 
typical ideal of his being, and thus please and honor the 
Being who is at once his Creator, Archetype and Ruler ; and 
that motive is clearly furnished in the moral law as grounded 
in the moral nature of God. 

‘Thus moral law, viewed in its relation to God, is a tran- 
script of his character ; viewed in its relation to man, it is 
an outline delineation of ideal or perfect humanity. As 
objective requirements and written statutes, moral laws 
state preceptively the universal facts of moral life, the eter- 


MORAL LAW. 198 


nal truth pertaining to both God and man, the fundamental 
facts of moral being, the laws written on the heart of man- 
kind, Ro. 2: 14, 15. Even positive laws represent some 
latent but inexorable necessities of state, condition, circum- 
stance, or habit. No law of God seems ever to fare been 
arbitrarily enacted, or simply with a view to certain ends to 
be accomplished ; it always represented some reality of life, 
which it was inexorably necessary that those who were. to 
be regulated should carefully observe. . ; 
iat OFFICES OF Law. ‘These are manifold, and differ 
according as law is viewed objectively as statute, or subjec- 
tively as principle’; they have also, in the past, been. the. 
‘subject of Perera but useless controversies”, The offices 
may be stated as follows: be: 
1. The Law, as objective statute, had no independent 
office, Ro., 5: 20. Gal. 3. 19; was not given that men 
should be saved by obedience to it, Gal., 3: 21; but was 
strictly pedagogic, 3: 238, 24, its special office ceasing for 
those who were led by it to put their trust in.the Being who 
in his own person Heya every one of its requirements, 
eyed 1 13,.005 26,5: | 
2. But the ne as Gitte es principle of being, embodied 
in the eternal nature of God and reémbodied in the created 


1, See Neander, Planting and Training, bk. 6, ch. 1. The Pauline: Doctrine. 

2. The Antinomian controversy originated by J ohn Agricola, a contemporary 
of Luther, (see his sentiments condemned in the Formula .Concordia, 6, de 
tertio usu legis,—comp. Confessio Helvet, 12,) has always continued in the church, 
though carried on at different periods with different degrees of zeal. The Ser- 
mons of Tobias Crisp in England, in defence of ‘Antitomishion! at the begin- 
ning of the 17th century, (see his Christ Alone Haalted, ed. by Gill, 1791, 2 
vols., and his Christ Made Sin, late ed., 1832, 2 vols.,) drew many to his side, 
and called forth a host of opponents, who continued to refute him long after 
he was dead. The results of the sharp controversy about the offices of the law, 
between the extreme Calvinists and the Arminians, represented by Toplady on 
the one side, and by Fletcher of Madely Chapel, on the other, (see their Works,) 
still linger in the popular theology of Methodism. Both the earlier Antino- 
mian and the later Arminian controversies, however, turned on a theory of the 
Atonement andof a Covenant with Christ, that he should suffer only for the sins 
of the elect. No writer has rendered more effective service in the overthrow 
of popular Antinomian ideas, among English apa Christians, than 
the plain ane unlettered Andrew Fuller. 

3 


194 MORAL LAW. 


nature of man, is as immutable as God; and, in its 
demands on man, is as immovable as the throne of God, 
Mat., 5: 17, 18. 

8. Since Law, as subjective principle, is immutable, and 
Law, both as subjective principle and objective representa- 
tion requires an obedience which none have ever succeeded 
in rendering, Ro., 3: 20. Gal., 2: 16. 3: 10-12, 21, it follows 
that, without divine interposition, there remains for us noth- 
ing but hopeless condemnation. To make aware of this 
condemnation, is one office of the published law, Gal.,3:10, 13. 

4. Since the dealings of God with the race in prepar- 
ing for the introduction of Christianity, were not unlike his 
dealings with an individual in preparing him for a personal 
reception of his Redeemer, it follows that the present office 
of written or published Law cannot differ essentially from — 
its office in the Mosaic dispensation. As thelaws embodied 
in the moral nature of man, and variously represented and 
illustrated in the enactments of the Jewish religion, pre- | 
pared the way for Christ to come to the race, so the same 
Law, embodied in the individual and still more clearly illus- 
trated and enforced by the teachings of Christianity, now 
prepares the way for Christ to take up his abode in the 
individual heart. As the Theocracy, with its Law in varied 
forms, prepared the way for the kingdom of God in the visi- 
ble Church, so the kingdom of God in the Church, with 
Law still more clearly and effectually enunciated, now pre- 
_ pares the way for the spiritual rule of God in the heart of 
the believer. But in doing this, the published Law 

5. Reveals the presence and nature of Sin, Ro., 7: 7-14. 
Without the Law, sin may lie dormant in the soul, unrecog- 
nized by conscience, Ro., 7: 7-10, and yet be none the less 
destructive or punishable, Ro., 5: 18, 14; the Law reveals 
the presence of sin, and by dragging it into the te of con- 
sclousness Teoh: its exceeding sinfulness, Ro., 7: 18. 

6. Another office of the Law is, to show us oun own help- 
lessness, and so to conduct us tothe Deliverer without whose 
offices every office of the Law becomes abortive, Ro., 7: 24. 
8: 8. Gal, 2: 16. 3: 21, 24. Christ, in all his teaching 


MORAL LAW. 195 


and enforcement of Law, said nothing implying that he 
regarded man as capable of so obeying Law, that, by his own 
obedience, he can attain to the true end for which he is 
created, Mat., 5: 3-10. 19: 16-26. 

7. Every man, whatever the stage of his progress in the 
Christian life, or the completeness of his character, always 
needs the monitory and disciplinary office of the written Law; 
partly, to make him aware of the defects of the most exalted 
virtues and the deficiencies of the completest character, and. 
partly, through his progressive perception of the breadth and 
subtlety of the Law’s requirements, to lift him ever upward 
in his apprehension of that perfection of being of which he 
is capable’. No finite creature can ever cease to be subject 
to Law. None can ever outgrow his need of objective norms 
or statutes, by which the movements of his will are to be 
regulated. Every one, at the successive stages of his pro- 
gress, may outgrow his sense of the restraining power of the 
mere letter of special Laws, but he outgrows this sense of 
restraint, only because he penetrates more deeply into, and. 
his heart becomes more completely in harmony with, the 
very spirit of the Law itself; his obedience becomes spon- 
taneous. The more profoundly Christian he becomes, the 
more strictly observant is he of Law. Christianity, so far 
from abolishing Law, incorporates it into the very being of 
the Christian, Heb., 10: 16%. Ro., 3: 31. 

8. There can, Hercrore pr Aperly be no such contrast 
between the preaching of the Law and the preaching of the 
Gospel as is often popularly represented. To preach the 
Gospel properly to the disobedient, is to preach the Law. 
By just so much as the Gospel is a clearer revelation of the 
character of God than the Law was, by just so much is the 
Gospel, to the disobedient, a severer condemnation than 


1. See Tholuck’s Predigten in dem akadem. Gottesdienste, etc. vol. 4, p. 54, 
ff., or trans. by Prof. Park in German Selections, p. 115, ff.—Calvin’s Institu., 
fae, c.7,.§°12. 

2. Observe the significancy of the New Testament phrases 6 véyuos rov Beov, Ro., 
8: 7—rov yptotov, Gal., 6: 2—rov rvetpatoc, Ro., 8: 2—rov vodc, Ro., 7: 28— 
wicrews, Ro., 3: Bre adiian TéAELOV TOV THE Hie Geniver James, 1: 25. 


196 THE PERSON OF JESUS CHRIST. 


the Law ; and to those who in the spirit of loving obedience, 
are consciously striving to conform themselves to the will 
of God, the Law is a source of satisfaction and an object of 
love. Law and Gospel are only the two sides of the one 
object, the highest glory of God as including the highest 
welfare of man}. 


$ 34—The Person of JSesus Christ. 


It is evident that throughout the sacred Scriptures the 
central object of thought is Jesus Christ, and it is this 
thought which, amid all the intellectual diversities of the 
writers, secures to their writings the unity of design and the | 
harmony of execution which so clearly distinguish them. 
It may be granted that the conceptions of the earlier writers 
were vague, and, of all the writers, were sometimes formed 
from opposite points of view, but their conceptions were 
never contradictory. It was always one and the same. 
Christ, though in manifold offices and in the most dissimilar 
estates. But it is particularly evident that the sacred wri- 
ters, specially of the New Testament, are accustomed to 
speak of him in language which cannot be consistently 
interpreted on the supposition, either that he was not prop- 
erly man, or that he was not incomparably more than a 
mere man. There are many passages which are unintelli- 
gible except upon the supposition that he possessed a two- 
fold nature, and that, by virtue of his two-fold nature, he 
sustained relations of equal intimacy with the absolute 
Godhead on the one hand, and with our oppressed and 
tempted humanity on the other, Luke, 1: 35. John, 1: 14. 
10;2°30,' 14:01, 9. Ro., 1:°3))4092%0) Phil, 2: 62) 
2:14. 5: 7,8. From the earliest age.of the Church until 
now, the coéxistence and relation of the two natures, a 


1. See Calvin’s Jnstitu., b. 2, c. 7, § 11.—The Symbol, Repetitio Anhaltina, 
Niemeyer, Collect. Confess., sects. 5, 6.—Vinet’s Sermon on Law and Gospel in 
Turnbull’s Montaigne: the endless Study, &c. 


THE HUMAN NATURE OF CHRIST. 197 


Divine and a human, in the person of Christ, have been 
subjects of most earnest discussion ; the discussion still con- 
tinues with fresh vigor; and, as our view of the redemptive 
work of Christ must depend not a little on our conceptions 
of his person, these conceptions should be most carefully 
formed. | | 


SS, 
$ 35—The Human Nature of Christ. 


There are numerous passages of Scripture in which Christ 
is simply and specially styled man’, John, 8: 40. Acts, 17: 
Peter i pie)! 1 Cor.yv15 :'2ke1..Tim., 2:5... Comps ts: 
537.3. Dan., 7: 13. -Men-are-called his brethren, Heb., 2: 
17. He was subject to the ordinary laws of human growth, 
both in body and mind, Luke, 2: 52.. He is spoken of as 
having been subject to all the temptations, trials, wants and. 
sufferings of humanity. He was susceptible of the emotions 
of joy, grief and displeasure like other men, Luke, 10: 21. 
John, 11: 35. Luke, 22: 42,44. Mark, 11: 15; and finally 
suffered a violent death, like any ordinary man’. 


? 


1. The distinction between being ‘‘man” and ‘‘a man,” is too great to be 
overlooked. Had there been a man Jesus whose origin was by supernatural 
generation, then it might be proper to speak of him as aman; _ but the super- 
natural origin of the manhood of Christ removes him from the company of 
mere men as they now are, though not from a community of human nature as 
it may and ought to be. 

2. The proper humanity of Christ is not that side of his person which just 
now needs vindication. One of the good results of Unitarian criticism, as well 
as of all the long list of modern attempts to write the Life of Christ, has been 
to give a reality to the human life of our Lord, which brings him into actual 
brotherhood with mankind. That Romish notion which lifts him so far away 
from us as to require the intervention of Mary and the saints to reach him, is 
happily fast yielding to juster and more Scriptural views; all, similar Church 
notions of a needed priesthood to give efficacy to the sacraments, must yield in 
due time to the clear and biblical teaching that Jesus Christ is ever with us, and 
in himself is immediately accessible to every human heart. ' Liddon, in his 
Bampton Lects, on The Divinity of our Lord, with all his churchism, is com- 
pelled to give emphasis to our Lord’s true humanity, though entirely too much 
after the traditional modes of conception. 


198 DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 


§ 36—The Divimty of Christ. 

Jesus Christ was also more than man. Itis impossible to 
read any continuous portion of the New Testament and not 
see very clearly, that He was a unique person; and itis 
equally impossible to read the New Testament as a whole, 
and not discern that all its writers agree in regarding Him, 
not only as more than human, but as distinctively and 
truly Divine’. 

The evidence for the Divinity of Christ, which is chiefly 
though not exclusively Scriptural, is yet so ample and 
varied in its details, that only.-specimens of its various 
kinds can here be presented’. We will begin with that 
which is the basis of all the others, viz. : 

1. The Testimony of Christ concerning himself. 

(a.) As respects his preéxistence. He speaks of himself as 
‘coming down from heaven,’’ and ‘from God,’’ when he 
‘‘came into the world,’ John, 6: 38. 8: 42. 16: 28; as 
‘ascending up where he was before,’’ John, 6: 62; as being 
restored to ‘‘the glory which he had with the Father before 
the world was,’’ John, 17: 5. Mere preéxistence however, 
does not necessarily imply proper Divinity ; but when Christ 
says, ‘‘ before Abraham was, Iam,’’ John, 8: 58, the ‘“‘I 
am’’ affirms an eternal preéxistence, and eternal preéxist-- 
ence is consistent only with real Divinity. 

(6.) Christ designates himself as the Son of God, and as 
Lord. He seems to have preferred to call himself the Son of 
Man ; but he also refers to God asin an exclusive sense his 
Father, and to himself as, in an equally exclusive sense, the 


1. The Arian distinction between the ‘‘ Divinity ” and the ‘‘ Deity” of Christ, 
upon which certain modern Unitarians are disposed to lay so much stress, need 
not interfere with our use of the words Divine and Divinity, in the clearly 
established sense of Godhead. 

2. For this evidence in detail, see J. Pye.Smith, Scripture Testimony to the 
Messiah, 2 vols.—Scriptural Hvidence of the Deity of Christ, by D. B. Ford, 
Bib. Sac., July, 1860.—Stanley Leathes, Boyle Lects. for 1868, 1870, Zhe Wit- 
ness of the Old Testament to Christ; and Witness of St. John to Christ. 
—Liddon’s Bampton Lects, Divinity of our Lord. 


DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 199 
Son of God’. It is abundantly evident that by the title 
Son of God, the Jews understood him to ‘‘make him- 
self equal with God,’’ and to ‘‘make himself God,”’’ 
John, 5: 18. 10: 33; and it is just as evident that he 
uttered no word in correction of their interpretation of his 
language*. He also applied to himself the title Lord, Mat., 
22: 43. Mark, 12: 35-37, and emphatically recognized the 
propriety of its application by others, John, 13: 13. Luke, 
6: 46. But the Septuagint Scriptures had made the Jews 
familiar with this title as a special designation of God, 
and as the translation of the word Jehovah’. It is impossible 
to escape the conclusion that there was a purposed signifi- 
cancy, voth in the use of the term in the Septuagint and 
in its appropriation by Christ; and that we are thereby 
assured of the identity, in essential nature, of both Jehovah 
and our Lord Jesus Christ. } 

(c.) The relations he sustained to God in the exercise of 
his power, both towards his disciples and others, imply his 
Divinity. In John, 10: 28-30, he declared that no one 
should pluck his sheep out of his hand, and gave as his rea 
son for their absolute security the omnipotence of God, 
immediately adding, ‘‘I and my Father are one.’’ As 
Meyer says, the Arian understanding of a mere ethical 
harmony as taught in the words ‘‘are one’’ is unsatisfac- 
tory, because irrelevant to the exercise of power, but that 
the orthodox supposition of a oneness of essence, though 
not contained in the words themselves, is, by the necessities 
of the argument, presupposed by them. In John, 5: 17, he 


1. ‘*The two titles ‘Son of God’ and ‘Son of Man,’ therefore, bear evi- 
dently a reciprocal relation to eachother. And we conclude as Christ used the 
one to designate his human personality, so he employed the other to point out 
his Divine; and that as he attached a sense far more profound than was com- 
mon to the former title, so he ascribed a deeper meaning than was usual to the 
latter.” —Neander’s Life of Christ, § 59. 

2. See Archbp. Whately, Kingdom of Christ delineated, essay 1. 

3. It is of course well known that the Jews, in aspirit of misguided reverence, 
refused to pronounce the original of the word which is now translated Jehovah ; 
that they transferred to it the vowel points of the word Adonai or Lord; that 
the Septuagint translated it by «ipsos, (Lord,) and that in the New Testament 
this latter term is Christ’s most common designation. 


9200 DIVINITY OF CHRIST. ‘ 


says, ‘“‘ My Father worketh hitherto and I work ;” and he 
justified his healing on the Sabbath by affirming, as is evi- 
dent from the connection, his oneness and equality with the 
“Father in the exercise of Divine power. Comp. John, 5: 21. 
~(d.) He asserted his possession of the prerogatives of God- 
head. (aa.) He ¢laimed authority over the Sabbath which 
God had instituted, and the observance of which, accord- 
ingly, God alone could eae Comp. Gen., 2: 2. 3, ge 
“Mark, 2: Bite is bike, 6:5. (00.) He one: sins, Mat., 

6. Mark, "9 ro. uke, 0. 20-24) 7 728 oe ae 
Divine Being against whom sin is ooytentreas and with the 
Divine Bethe alone, therefore, is the prerogative of forgive- 
ness, Ps., 32: 5. (cc.) He, without rohatces and even with 
approval received worship which belongs only to God, 
Ex., 20: 2,°3. Is:, 42: 8. Mat., 4: 10.. Not all the expres- 
sions in the Gospels rote to the conduct of others 
towards Christ, which may properly be translated by the 

‘word worship, need necessarily signify the offering of reli-_ 
gious homage, but there are passages in which homage seems 
5 be clearly implied, as in Mat., 14: 33. 28: 9. Luke, 23: 

ao ohn, 8: 38.20 : 28. . The fast of these passages, con- 
taining the exclamation of Thomas, as Alford conclusively 
shews, cannot. justly have any other meaning. 

(é.) He declared his possession of all power in heaven and 
on earth, Mat., 28:18; power to lay down his own life and to 
take it again ie will, John, 10: 183; power to give life to the 
spiritually dead, J ohn: ayaa ve dasatian or ‘‘authority’’ to exe- 
cute judgment, Fohit, §: 27; power to bring forth all the 
-dead.from. their. graves, J To 5 : 28; power to send forth 
angels;:Mat.; 13:41 5; and ‘finally, to ae to his Apostles 
and the Church the Holy Ghost, or the third person in the 
Trinity, John, 1425.16. Acts, Js 498. 

(7.) Christ represents himself as the final judge of man- 
kind, which:aecording to Jer., 17: 10, is a prerogative of 
@ealieall: Mate D1 412-16": 97, 24: 31. Johnson 

(g.) The tone of authority with which he everywhere 
speaks ; his use of the first person in referring to the Mosaic 
institutes, in enforcing moral law, and in protlen ate his 


* 


DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 201 


own kingdom, are inexplicable except upon a supposition 
of his proper Divinity: 

II. Testimony of the New Testament writers respecting 
the Divinity of Christ. This differs from the testimony of 
Christ concerning himself, inso far as we may be able to 
distinguish between the account which Christ gave of him- 
self and the revelations otherwise made of him through those 
who were divinely employed to write about him. | 

1. These writers ascribe to Christ the attributes of Deity. 
(a.) His Eternity is distinctly taught by John in the first 
verse of hisGospel. Whenthe Universe, ortime, began to be, 
the unincarnate Logos was; that is, his existence being 
timeless, must have been eternal. The same thought is ex- 
pressed in 1 John, 1: 1°; and in modified phraseology in 
Rev., 1: 8, 11, 18.—Paul, also, in Col. 1: 17, declares Christ 
to have existed before the Universe; that is, to have been 
eternal in his existence. The Epistle to the Hebrews applies 
directly, and without qualification, to Christ, certain Old 
Testament declarations of the eternity of Jehovah, 1: 10-12. 
Comp. 18: 8. (6.) Omnipotence, or absolute control of the 
Universe, of both matter and beings, is ascribed to Christ 
Pyeevovn 1 a0) and “Peter, Eph.,* ti21,0 22." Phils 3: ot. 
1 Pet., 3: 22. (¢.) Omniscience is ascribed to him by Paul. 
and John, Col., 2: 3. Rev.,2:: 23. 

2. The works and prerogatives of Deity are attributed to 
Christ”. (a.) Heis Creator of the Universe, John, 1:3. Col., 1: 


1. ‘The expression ax apy is not substantially different from the expression 
év dpxy#, (John, 1: 1°); at apy#co is used here by John, because, bearing in 
mind his own having seen and touched the-Incarnate Lord, he transfers him- 
self into the subjective position of his own experience, and from that point of 
view. would declare that He, whom he had beheld, had already been from the 
beginning. In the Gospel, c. 1: 1, on the other hand, John begins odjectively 
to unfold the eternal being of the Logos, and therefore can write only, ‘‘In 
the beginning was the Logos. ”—Ebrard’s Commentary on Ist John. 

2. The traditional argument for the Divinity of Christ from his miracles is 
manifestly worthless. His miracles were simply designed to prove his Divine 
_ mission and thus his Messiahship. He reiterated that he could ‘‘ do nothing of 
himself,” John, 5: 19—‘‘the Father, that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works,” 
14: 10. The words of Jesus at the grave of Lazarus, John, 11: 41, 42, “Father 
I thank thee that thou hast heard me. And I knew that thou hearest me always; 


« 


909 ' DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 


16. Heb., 1: 2,10. (6.) The author of all life, natural and 
spiritual, John, 1: 4. (¢.) The sustainer of all things, Col., 
1:.17. Heb., 1: 3. (d.) The universal judge, Acts, 10: 42. 
Ro., 14: 10: 2 Tim., 4: 1. 1)Pet., 4: 5. (e.) The perfecter 
of the final cause of the creation, Eph., 1: 10. Col., 1: 20. 

3. The titles of the Supreme Deity are given to Christ. 

(a.) He is expressly called God: ‘*The Word was God,”’ 
John, 1: 1, that is, the Logos was consubstantial, but not 
identical, with the Father. ‘‘This is the true God and 
eternal life,’ 1 John, 5: 20. To refer these words to God, 
the Father, seems unnatural, since he had twice before, in the 
preceding sentence, been called ‘‘ the true;’’? to apply them 
to Christ is strictly in accordance with John’s prevailing con- 
ception of him*. The words of Thomas, ‘‘my Lord and my 
God,’’ John, 20: 28, are also evidently understood by the 
Evangelist to have been a devout recognition of the God- 
head of Jesus. In Ro., 9: 5, we have the words, ‘‘of 
whom (the Israelites,) as concerning the flesh Christ came, 
who is over all, God blessed forever.’’ The evident anti- 
thesis between the first and the second of these clauses, forces 
on us the conviction that Christ is here called God. To 
understand the last clause as a doxology to God, is not only 
to destroy the antithesis, but to suppose an unnatural and 
un-Pauline abruptness of thought®.—There are other texts 


but because of the people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that 
thou hast sent me,” shew conclusively that his miracles, wrought by the power 
of God the Father, were proofs, not of his own Divinity, but of his divine 
mission from the Father. 

1. The use of Ocd¢ without the article, so far from being an argument 
- against this interpretation, makes it to,be the only defensible one. Bee Meyer, 
Tholuck, and Alford in loco. ‘ 

2. The opposite reference of these words to God the Father and to Christ, is 
maintained by different writers with equal firmness., Julius Muller, who 
throws out John, 1: 2 from his collection of the proof texts in which Christ is 
called God, as ‘‘doubtful on critical grounds,” accepts 1 John, 5: 20, as one 
of the unquestionable proofs. Neander, DeWette, Winer, and Meyer refer 
the last clause unhesitatingly to God the Father. As to the use of the article in 
1 John 5: 20, and its omission in Johnjl: 2, Ebrard says: ‘‘ in declaring what 
any one is, the predicate must have no article; in declaring who any one is, the 
predicate must have the article.”—Commentary 1st Epistle John. 

3. This is another of the texts'in which Miller regards it as ‘‘ certain” that 
Christ is called God. With this interpretation agree Tholuck, Stuart, Hodge, 
and Alford. DeWette and Meyer regard the last clause as a doxology to God. 


DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 203 


in which Christ has been supposed to be called God, but 
about which there has been good ‘ground for doubt as to 
the accuracy of the interpretation or else of the textual 
reading. Thus in Acts, 20: 28: ‘‘the Church of God 
which He purchased with His own blood,’’ the question is, 
whether the true reading is ‘‘Church of God”’ or ‘‘ Chureh 
of the Lord.’’ The majority of the manuscripts have 
favored the latter reading; but it is now ascertained that 
both the Vatican and the Sinaitic, two of the three oldest and 
most authoritative of the manuscripts, have the reading 
‘“Church of God.’’ The phrase ‘‘Church of God”’ further- 
more is common with Paul, whereas ‘‘ Church of the Lord’’ 
occurs nowhere else in his writings. This text, therefore, 
is certainly not wholly without weight in the argument for 
the Divinity of Christ.—1 Tim., 3: 16. ‘‘God was manifest 
in the flesh.’’ Hallowed as these words may be in our minds, 
and naturalas they may appear in their connection, they must 
at least be set aside in this argument as a doubtful reading, 
the great majority of the best manuscripts sustaining the 
reading, ‘‘who was. manifest in the flesh'’’—Titus, 2: 13, 
‘‘the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour’ 
Jesus Christ.”” The point of dispute in this passage is 
whether the rendering should be ‘‘the great God and our 
Saviour Jesus Christ,’’ or ‘‘ the great God even our Saviour 
Jesus Christ.’’ In support of the first of these renderings, is 
pleaded Paul’s habitual distinction between the Father and 
the Son, and his use of the copulative conjunction in the asso- 
ciation of their names ; while in support of the latter it is 
maintained that the word ‘‘appearing’’ is neverapplied to 
the Father, but often is to the Son; and that the epithet 
‘‘oreat’’? as applied to God would be feeble and unmean- 
ing while specially pertinent and significant as applied to 
the Son. Aside from theological considerations the pre- 
ponderance of evidence seems to be in favor of the latter 


1. Inthe Vatican codex, as is well known, the Pastoral Epistles are wanting ; 
the Sinaitic undoubtedly reads 6-; and the Alexandrian is doubtful. On the 
reading of the last named codex, see Scrivener, Introduction to the Criticism 
of the New Testament, ch. 9, § 20, or pp. 453-454. 


204 DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 


rendering, and Christ seems in this text to be clearly called 
the great God". | 

(6.) Christ, furthermore, is called Lorn, in the preéminent 
sense of that term, by all the New Pectaivent writers’, a title 
with which the Septuagint had made the Jews familiar as 
the Greek term for Jehovah, and which throughout the 
New Testament is used in designation of God the Father. 
Old Testament texts in which Jehovah is thus translated Lord, 
are frequently quoted and applied to Christ. Comp. Mark, 
132; 3, with Mal., 3:1. Is., 40: 3.—Johnh, 12: 38, 41, with 
Is., 6: 1-8.—Ro., 10: 18, with Joel, 2 :.32.—Ro., 14: 11, with 
Is., 45: 23.—Heb., 1: 10, with Ps., 102: 25. The free and 
unrestricted use which James in his Epistle makes of the 
word Lord, in designation alike of both God and of Jesus 
Christ, is noticeable even to superficial readers; and‘is all 
the more worthy of notice from his felatvonship to Christ 
and from the strong hold on him which his Jewish habits 
of mind seem always to have retained.—N ow it is incon- 
ceivable that the New Testament writers, with their deep 
and settled convictions of the absolute unity of the God- 
head, should have so applied the title Lord, without quali- 
fication, to God the Father and to Christ alike as to 
occasion this ambiguity, unless it was in obedience to 
incontestable evidence that Christ and God the Father 
were, in some way, so related in the essence of their 
personalities as to warrant the ascription of supreme Lord- 
ship and Divinity alike to both. 

(c.) Other common titles are also applied indifferently to 
God and to Christ. Thus both are called Saviour, (2wryp, ) 


1. See this exegesis defended by Ellicott and Alford, De Wette and Meyer 
defend the other view. This text is not a solitary instance in which the 
rendering is doubtful, see Eph., 5: 5. 2 Thess., 1: 12. 2 as 1: 1. Jude, 4, 
and others. In all such texts as 1 Thess., 3: 11. 2 Thess., : 16, in which the 
phrase 6 Oe0¢ Kai Tarhp huav occurs, tere can be no i a éhiat the rendering 
of «ai should be even. 

2. On the use of the word xipior in the New Testament, particularly by 
Paul, see article by Moses Stuart, in the Bid. Repository, vol. 1, pp. 738, ff. 
Stuart says, ‘‘ that in nearly all of the two hundred and forty-six instances in 
which ktpioc is used by Paul, to designate Christ or God, independently of quo- 
tations from the Old Testament, it is applied to Christ, p. 770. 


DIVINITY OF, CHRIST. 205 


eopmp., Luke; 1.:.4%.-1-Timiy Ls by2a-8.-4: 102 Titus, 233; 
2:10. Jude, 25, with Luke, 2: 11. Acts, 5: 31, andthe New 
Testament passim ; Judge (Kperys), comp. Heb., 12: 23 and 
Pss., 7: 11. 50: 6, with Acts,-10:.42. 2.Tim., 4: 8. James, 
5: 9; td ddlga xa 70 6, comp. Rev., 1: 8, 11,18 with each 
other and with 21: 6.. That this community of titles may 
be in part accounted. for by the community of ends for 
which God the Father and Christ. the Son codperate, and 
thecommunity of offices which they fulfill in the world, is 
undoubtedly true ; but the offices and ends are not separa- 
ble from the essential nature of their persons, and are com- 
mon only because of their possession of a common Divine 
essence. 

4. The Divinity of Christ is implied in his special designa- 
tion as ‘‘the Son of God.’’ Not only was this, as we have 
seen, the understanding of the contemporaries and enemies 
of Christ, but the Apostles and other sacred writers evidently 
understood that Christ, as the Son of God, was also of the 
same essential nature—consubstantial—with the Father. 
That an eternal sonship, or that an eternal generation was 
either implied by Christ himself, or believed in by the 
Apostles, there seems to be no good reason for believing ; 
these conceptions, derived in part from a too literal inter- 
pretation of Scripture, and in part from the Neo-Platonic 
philosophy’, are foreign to the thought of the New Testa- 
ment. According to that thought, on the contrary, Christ 
became both ‘‘the Son of Man”’ and ‘‘the Son of God” by 
becoming incarnate; before his incarnation he was the 
eternal Logos, ‘‘ with God” and. ‘‘in the form of God.’’- 
Becoming incarnate, he was first proved to be ‘‘of the seed 
of David according to the flesh,’’ and then, by his own 
words and works as wellas by the Almighty ‘‘ power”’’ that 
raised him from the dead, was ‘‘ declared to be the Son of 
Pata RO 1:3, 4, 55 With such evidences of Christ's 
relationship to the Godhead before them, it was no 


1. See Neander, Hist. of Chr. Dogmas, trans. by Ryland, vol. 1, pp. 146-148. 
—Hist. of the Chr. Church, trans. by Torrey, vol. 1, pp. 568, 588-590.—Gieseler, 
Ficcle. Hist., § 61. 


DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 


wonder that the New Testament writers should speak of 
him as ‘‘the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the 
Father,’ John, 1: 18; as ‘‘the brightness of God’s glory 
and the express image of his person,’’ Heb., 1: 3; or that, 
moving backward beyond the beginning of his incarnation, 
they should say of him, he ‘‘ was with God and was God,”’’ 
John. 1: 1; and should speak of him as one, ‘‘ who, being 
in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with 
God,” Phil., 2: 6. To read what is thus said of Christ, 
and at the same time to hold to that first and fundamental 
truth of all true religion, the unity of God, there must be a 
recognition of some kind of community of essence between 
God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, and a consequent 
belief in the Divinity of Christ. 

5. It is evident from the New Testament, that its writers, 
in common with all the first Christians, paid divine honors 
to Christ in religious worship. According to the Scriptures-— 
see among other texts Ex., 20: 2, 3. Is., 42: 8. Mat., 4: 
10—God alone is to be worshipped. But according to a 
great variety of Scripture teachings, Including the author- 
ity of Christ himself, he is entitled to worship. (@.) All 
the angels were expressly commanded to worship him, 
Heb., 1: 6, and it is declared to be the purpose of God that 
every created intelligence in the Universe shall bow the knee 
to him in homage and service, Phil., 2: 10, 11. comp. 
Eph., 1: 20-22; comp. also, Ro., 14: 10, 11, where the 
same language is employed to express God’s purpose to 
bow every knee to himself in homage, thus showing that 
the same worship is to be offered to God the Father and to 
‘Jesus Christ his Son. (0.) There are many instances in 
the New Testament of actual worship offered to Christ after 
his resurrection and ascension ; immediately after his resur- 
rection, by the Apostles, Mat., 28:.9, 17; by the same, 
immediately after his ascension, Luke, 24: 52; at the 
choice ofan Apostle to fill the place of Judas, Acts, 1: 24°; 
Stephen at his martyrdom died ‘‘calling on” the Lord 


1. For the reasons for believing that the «vpce here addressed is the Lord 
Jesus Christ, see Hackett, Comm. on the Acts. in loco. 


DIVINITY OF CHRIST. We ar) 


Jesus, the connection shewing plainly that xvpce ’ yao was 
the object of his address’. So universal was the custom 
of offering prayer and worship to Christ among the first 
Christians, that the earliest designation by which they were 
known was as ‘‘callers on the name of the Lord,’’ oras 
worshippers of Jesus Christ, Acts, 9: 14, 21. 22: 16. 1 
Cor.,1: 2. The chanting of a hymn to Christ as God, it 
will be remembered, was one of the chief characteristics of 
the early Christians mentioned by Pliny in his well known 
letter to Trajan’. ‘ 

It may be objected that the worship, which, according to 
the foregoing evidence, should be offered to Christ, is not 
supreme adoration, but a species of subordinate homage ; 
such as the Arians and some of the earliest, as well as cer- 
tain of the latest and living, Unitarians® have taught, should 
be paid to him. But to this it must be replied, that God 
and Christ are, throughout the New Testament, so asso- 
ciated as to make it evident that what is offered to the one 
is also equally to be offered to the other. (a.) In the epis- 
tolary salutations, blessings are equally invoked from both, 
eee Cor, le. 2:Cor., 7 bs 2. ph. 1.32. Gal. 1: 
3. 2 John, 3. (6.) Both are invoked as disposers of events, 
sometimes the name of the Father standing first, 1 Thess., 3: 
J1, 12, and sometimes that of the Son, 2 Thess.,.2: 16, 17. 


1. ‘‘Asthe dying Saviour said to the Father, ‘Into thy hands I’commend 
my spirit,’so the dying Stephen said now to the Saviour, dé&a 76 rvedud pov.” 
—Hackett. 

2. See Plinit Hpis., lib. 10, epis. 97—essent soliti stato die, ante lucem, conve- 
nire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem— 

3. Faustus Socinus, as is well known, believed and taught that Jesus Christ was 
to be truly worshipped, (see Bidbliothe. Hrat. Polo., t. 1, de Justifi., p. 601,) and 
the same is most clearly taught in the Catachesis Racoviensis, see questiones 183, 
184. 211, 236, 237. So emphatically is the duty of worshipping Christ taught 
in this Catechism that, in the answer to ques. 246, they are denied to be Chris- 
tians who refuse to adore him. But in answer to ques. 245 we are told that 
between the worship due to God as supreme and to Christ as subordinate, there 
is discrimen permagnum. The reasons assigned for the difference are, nam 
adoramus et.colimus Deum, tanquam causam primam salutis nostre ; Christum 
tanquam causam secundam; aut, ut cum Paulo loquamur, Deum tanquam 
eum ex quo omnia, Christum ut eum per quem omnia, see Cat. Racov. seu 
Liber Socin. primarius, ed. G. L. Oederus. 


208. DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 


(c.) Doxologies are addressed, sometimes to God alone, 1 
Tims: dt, L7...6.:,.15. Heb,,’133+20. 1. Pet.) Lin Bae eee 
12, sometimes to both the Father and the Son, Rev., 5: 13. 
7: 10, and sometimes to Christ only, Ro., 9: 5. 2 Pet., 3: 
18. Rev., 5: 12. (d.) Benedictions are pronounced, in 
which, sometimes God alone is mentioned, Ro., 15: 33. 2 
Cor. 18: 11. Phil. 4: 20, sometimes both Christ and God 
are mentioned, 2 Cor., 13: 14, and very often Christ only is 
named, Ra, 16: 20, 24. Phil., 4:23. Gal., 6: 18) 1 Theses 
5: 28. 2 Tim., 4: 22. Rev., 22: 21. (e.). In Baptism there 
is assumed the same allegiance to the Son as to the Father, 
Mat., 28: 19. (f.) It is, as we have seen, the divine pur- 
pose thatall men should honor, or worship, the Son even 
as they honor the Father, John, 5: 23, and that supreme 
homage should be paid him by. the whole universe of 
created beings, Heb.,.1: 6, Phil., 2: 10; this supreme 
homage is represented as spontaneously offered by all the 
inhabitants of heaven, Rev., 5: 11-13.—The only legitimate 
conclusion from all these facts is, that Jesus Christ is to be 
supremely adored with the same kind of divine worship as 
that which is offered to God the Father. 

If. Certain portions of the Old Testament also, according 
to interpretations of them by writers of the New, plainly 
teach the Divinity of Christ. The interpretation may differ 
from that of pre-christian times and still be true. Itis of 
the very nature of prophecy that succeeding ages should 
discern profounder meanings in the language of preceding 
times than could have been apparent when it was first 
employed ; and it is specially the office of the Omniscient 
Spirit to explain the significancy of symbols, which, under 
its guidance the writers of preceding centuries had adopted. 
It need not surprise us then that Christ, in Luke, 24: 27, and 
his disciples in all their writings, should enable us to see in 
the Old Testament the preéxistent or divine Logos in his 
manifold offices preparing the world for his own coming in 
the flesh. 

Thus, throughout the Old Testament are recorded instances 
of the appearances and messages of a special divine person- 


DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 909 


age, who is styled the Angel of Jehovah. This Angel 
speaks sometimes in the name of Jehovah and sometimes in 
his own name; and the sacred writers, in continuing their 
narratives of events connected with his appearances, not 
unfrequently speak of him simply as Jehovah, thus show- 
ing that while they distinguish between Jehovah and his 
special Angel, they nevertheless attribute, without discrimi- 
nation, the same prerogatives and offices to each. There are 
many accounts in the book of Genesis of these appearances 
to the Patriarchs, see Gen., 18: 14, 17, and 19: 1, 24. 
Meomimeealso LG cnc-13. 212 17, 18.) 22:5 11,13. 485 16: 
This Angel appeared also to Moses, Ex., 3: 2—16, and 
accompanied him in his journeyings with the Israelites, 14 : 
19. 23: 20; to Joshua, 5: 14, and to Gideon, Judges, 6: 
11,12. In Is., 68: 9, the Angel of Jehovah, who thus 
guided the Israelites, is called the ‘‘ Angelof his presence’;”’ 
and according to 1 Cor., 10: 4-9, this Angel who guided 
and bore with them, was Christ. John in his Gospel, 12 : 
41, tells us that Jehovah, whom Isaiah saw in his vision in 
the temple, 6: 1-8, was the Lord Jesus Christ. Interpret- 
ing the Old Testament under this ight of the New, the most 
natural explanation of the Angel of Jehovah is, that he was 
the preéxistent Logos’. | 

So also in many of the Psalms, and in Messianic passages 
of the prophets, declarations are made respecting the pre- 
dicted Messiah, which can be consistently interpreted only 
on the supposition of his real Divinity. From many of these 
passages quotations are made in the New Testament, when 
Christ’s divine nature is referred to, as from Pss., 2. 22. 45. 
72. 110. Is., chh. 7-9. Micah, 5: 1-5. Dan., 7: 9-14?; and 
are evidently made as authoritative proofs of Divinity. 


1. In Mal., 8: 1, the same Angel seems to be referred to, as ‘‘the Messenger 
(Angel) of the Covenant.” 
2. See on this subject, Hengstenberg, Christology, vol. 1, ch. 3.—J. Pye 
Smith’s Script. Test. to the Messiah, bk. 2, ch. 4, sects. 38, 34. For conflicting 
Patristic opinions respecting the Angel of Jehovah, see Liddon, Bampt. Lects, 

p. 55, ff. 

3. On these texts, see Hengstenberg, Christology ; on the Psalms, the Com. 
mentaries of Hengstenberg, Tholuck, J. A. Alexander, Perowne; on Isaiah, 
the Commentary of J. A. Alexander. 


210 DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 


IV. There is also a class of arguments, aside from the 
direct teaching of the Scriptures, which are not without 
their weight ; they are‘derived in part from the conscious- 
ness and the literature of the Church, and in part from the 
philosophy of Christianity as a remedial scheme. They may 
be stated briefly as follows: 

(a.) To become a Christian, is to be born into a conscious- 
ness of relations to God, Christ, self and fellow-beings, 
which is distinctively Christian’; a consciousness which 
began in the person of Christ, was reproduced by Christ in 
his disciples, and to this hour has continued by transmis- 
sion to be the common and invariable possession of all true 
believers in him. The affirmation of this consciousness is, 
and always has been, that Jesus ‘‘is the Christ, the Son of 
the living God;’’ that ‘‘ this (He) is the true God, and eter- 
nal life.’’ The believer has no surer test of the genuineness 
of his Christian life than his participation in this common 
consciousness of loyal regard for Christ. 

(6.) The Divinity of Christ has been one of the most con- 
spicuous doctrines in the uninspired Literature of the 
Church, and can be conclusively proved to have existed 
from the first until now. The occasional dissentients from 
the doctrine have been just numerous and demonstrative 
enough to shew the universality and tenacity with which it 
has been held. The beginnings of this literature were with 
men who lived while some of the inspired writers of the 
‘ New Testament still lingered on earth; the supposition 
that the doctrine could, at some point, have been foisted 
into the general belief, or could have had some other origin 
than in the person and words of Christ himself, is without 
foundation. The doctrine is common alike to the creeds, 
the hymns’, and the homilies of the Church, and common to 


1. The first formal appeal to ‘‘the Christian consciousness,” in the sense and 
for the purpose here intended, was made by Schleiermacher, (see his Chr. 
Glaube, passim) ; and whatever may be our estimate of the value of his Christ- 
ology as a whole, there can hardly be any just ground for disputing the validity 
of the argument. See also Neander, Life of Christ, § 2, note. 

2. See Schaff’s Christ in Song: Hymns of Immanuel, selected from all ages, 
with notes. 


DIVINITY OF CHRIST. OTL 


every stage in the historical growth of each. The germ of 
all creeds was doubtless in the primitive confession of faith 
in Jesus as the Messiah!, which involved the whole doctrine 
of his divinity ; and the origin of all Christian hymns? was 
in those doxological expressions with which the first Chris- 
tians, in imitation of the Psalms, gave utterance to the spon- 
taneous praise of their Redeemer—a praise which carried in 
it from the first a distinct recognition of his truly Divine 
nature. 

(c.) If Christ be nota Divine Being and entitled to divine 
homage, then the agencies and the process of individual sal- 
vation are in the highest degree unphilosophical. Consti- 
tuted as man is, itis impossible that he should be brought 
into relation with Christ as his personal Saviour, and not 
find his sense of gratitude and every noble impulse of his 
nature prompting him to devout worship and to the surren- 
der of his whole being in unselfish service. If this worship 
and service be undesigned and contrary to the will of the 
Supreme Being’, then Christianity is itself an insoluble 
enigma and strangely unphilosophical in method. 


1. On this first confession of faith, see Neander, Planting and Training, bk. 
1, ch. 2, at the beginning, or pp. 20, 21.—Comp. Schaff, Hist. Apos. Ch., § 142; 
who says, ‘‘ the first confession of Peter, Mat., 16: 16, and then the baptismal 
formula, 28: 19, would very naturally be taken as the basis of this confession, 
and from it grew in the course of the second and third centuries, in a truly 
organic way, and from the consciousness, not of an individual but of the whole 
church, the so-called Apostles’ Creed.” p. 568. 

Ri Ont the origin of the hymns of the Church see Schaff, Hist. Apos. Ch., § 141: 

‘¢Tn all probability the epistles in several instances contain fragments of such 
primitive songs; as is indicated by the poetical, and sometimes by the metrical 
form of expression, see for example, Eph., 5: 14. 1 Tim., 3:16, (especially 
if, according to the best authorities, we here read oc; for this reading is most 
naturally explained on the supposition of the passage being a fragment of a 
hymn, which, in six parallel stanzas in melodious rhythm, contain a Christology 
in nuce ; 2 Tim., 2: 11, (where the yap indicates a quotation, and the parallel 
and rhythmical structure of the passage a poetical quotation); and Jas., 1: 17, 
(where the words from aoa to réAsiov, form a hexameter).” p. 564. Compare 
Liddon’s Bampton Lectures, lect. 6, pp. 327, 3828; lect. 7, p. 385, ff. 

3. Respecting the worship of Christ in the authorized services of the Anglican 
church, see Dean Stanley, Hssays on Church and. State, 833-335, and Liddon’s 
Bampt. Lects., The Divinity of Christ, note D, lect. 7, p. 514. 


A bd THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. 


$37—The Lwo Natures of Jesus Christ. 


If Christ united in himself the natures of both man and 
God, the question at once arises, what was the relation of 
these, the one to the other? The question was one of the 
first to be propounded in Christian Theology, and yet is 
being rediscussed in our day with all the interest of a new 
inquiry. But, from the very nature of the case, no full and 
final answer to it can ever be reached. The mode of the 
union of the two natures will necessarily remain an inscrut- 
able mystery; neither Scripture nor consciousness can 
supply the requisite data for its solution. The most that 
we can now do is, by recounting some of the commoner 
errors into which inquirers have fallen in the past, and are 
always in danger of falling, to guard ourselves against them, 
and then by careful notation of all the facts and teach- 
ings of the Scriptures on the question, to assure ourselves 
how very slender is the sum of all our knowledge respect- 
ing it. At various.periods there have been those who not 
content with the silence of the Scriptures, have sought to 
make them testify, either in accordance with some traditional 
notion orin obedience to some supposed principle of ontology 
or fact of psychology, to one or another of the following 
theories’. 

(a.) That of the Humanitarians, or of those who have 


given undue preponderance to the human side of Christ, 


regarding him as the promised Messiah, but as merely a 
man. This error was probably first maintained by the 
Ebionites*, and has since been taken up by the Socinians 
and by the great body of modern Unitarians. It can be 
more effectually defended by any other method than by an 
appeal to the Scriptures. | 


1. On these theories, see the Church Histories of Neander, Guericke, Schaff : 
—Shedd, Hist. of Chr. Doctrine, bk. 8, ch. 5, § 1; Walch, Historie der Ketz- 
ereten, Spaltungon, etc. 

2. See Dorner, On the Person of Christ, diy. 1, vol, 1, First Period, ch. 2. 1. 
or p. 188, ff. 


pd 
THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. 213 


(6.) That of those who have given undue prominence to 
the Divine side of Christ; who have recognized in him the 
Divine Logos ina merely human form, orat most as tenanting 
ahuman body. Under this are to be reckoned the Docetic’ 
sect of the Gnostics, as well as the Monarchians, Patri- 
passians, Sabellians, and the Manicheeans, of the earlier 
centuries ; and here belong all those sporadic cases of error, 
in which certain persons, like Justin Martyr and Apolli- 
naris of the early church, holding to the trichotomy of 
human nature, supposed that the Divine Logos supplied 
the vovde or zvedua in the man Jesus. 

(c.) Subordinationism, or the theory of those who recognize 
in Christ a true humanity, but only a subordinate and 
created Divinity. Here belong the Arians and Semi-Arians 
of all time, as well as some of the latest Unitarians. 

(d.) Monophysitism, or that theory which supposes such 
a union of the human and divine as was equivalent to a 
commingling of the two natures. Here belong the Kuty- 
chians, and some of the older Lutherans’. 

(e.) Nestorianism, or that theory which, propounded by 
Nestorius with a view to recognize the completeness of 
both natures, was carried by his followers to the extreme of 
making Christ to consist of two conjoined ees fh as and 
not of two united natures. 

Thus the relation, both quantitative and qualitative, of 
the two natures in Christ, was in the earlier centuries what 
it still is, a guestio vexata. One cause, and not a slight 
one, of diversity and sometimes absurdity among the earlier 
views, was in a confounding of person with nature, the 
assumption that Christ, if human, must either have pos- 
sessed a distinct human personality as distinguishable from 
a Divine personality, or else that the two natures and thus 
two personalities were so united that a single nature, and 
so a single personality, was the result. The same cause 
produces like results in our day ; there still exists, as ever, 
a swinging between the extremes of monophysitism and 


1. Dorner, 757d, ch. 2. 2, p. 218, ff. 
2. Dorner, diy. 2, vol. 2, pp. 53, ff. 209, ff. 266, ff. 


914 THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. 


dyophysitism ; between the conception, on the one hand, 
of two natures commingled into one, or on the other, two 
natures so distinct and individualized as to make a double 
personality. While the great body of leading theologians 
have only held by implication, some have distinctly asserted, 
with John of Damascus in former’, and with Ridgely? in 
later days, that there were necessarily two wills as well as 
two natures in Christ, though the human was ever in sub- 
ordination to the Divine. It was one of the formulas of the 
Damascene, that ‘‘as in the Trinity there are three persons 
with one will manifested in diversity of acts, so in the per- 
son of Christ there were two wills manifested in unity of 
acts.”’ 

One of the chief sources of error in this doctrine, is in the 
assumption that if two natures, the Divine and the human, 
were united in Christ, some definite conception of the mode 
of the union is both possible and necessary. Hence the 
appeal to analogies, like that of the heated iron, and spe- 
cially to that oldest and most commonly used, the consti- 
tution of man. The formula is, that ‘‘asthe reasonable soul 
and body is one man, so God and man is one Christ®.”’ If 
by this is merely meant that, as what is peculiar to the 
body and what to the soul of man are alike said to belong 
to the unit man, so what is peculiar to the Divinity and 
what to the humanity of Christ, are said alike to belong to 
the one person Christ, then as a commonplace illustration 
itis unobjectionable; for more. than this it is unsafe and 
misleading. There is no analogue in the case, unless Mono- 
physitism, or at least Apollinarism is true. The attributes 
of both body and soul unite to constitute the one human 
nature; whereas in the person of Christ it is two distinct 
natures which, possessing each its own unchangeable and 
incommunicable essence, united to constitute, not a third 
nature, but a single and unique personality. 


1. See Dorner, Hist. of the Doot. of the Person of Christ, div. 2, vol. 1, 
pp. 216, ff. ! 

2. See his Body of Divinity, vol. 1, p. 394, or questions 36, 37. 

3. See Anselm, Cur Deus Homo, lib. 2, c.7. Comp. Formula Concordia, 8, 
19; the Athanasian Creed, and the XXXIX Articles. 


THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. 215 


In respect to the relation of the two natures, the Confes- 
sions of the Lutheran and the Reformed Churches have 
widely differed. The Lutheran theory of consubstantia- 
tion necessitated the theory of a communication of the 
Divine attributes to the human’, in order to provide for the 
ubiquity of the body of Jesus ; while the Reformed church 
insisted, that of the two natures each was in itself perfect 
and distinct, though both were united in the formation of 
the single personage Jesus Christ. Butamong both Luthe- 
ran and Reformed, there has prevailed great diversity of 
opinions in the interpretation of their confessions. This is 
specially true of the Lutherans, some of whom in later years 
have, in their scientific Dogmatics, departed widely from the 
sharply defined views of their Confessions’. 

The doctrine received as orthodox, alike by Lutherans and 
the Reformed, declares that both natures, the Divine and the 
human, were so united in the person of Christ, that each 
was preserved in the fulness of its essential perfections. He 
was very God and very man. This we may also regard as 
the general Creed of Christendom. But in verifying this 
doctrine from the Scriptures we shall find, 

(a) That the personal Logos was not so associated and 
conjoined with a personal Jesus as to produce a kind of 
double personality ; but that the pre-existent Logos became 
flesh (John 1: 14), was made in the likeness of men (Phil. 
2: 7), and took on him the seed of Abraham, (Heb. 2: 7); i. e. 
the preéxistent Logos assumed, by supernatural generation, 
from the Virgin Mary, a true human nature, though not, as 
distinct from himself, a human personality. Nature, as com- 


1. ‘‘Communicatio idiomatum” was the ‘phrase of Luther; ‘‘communio — 
idiomatum” and ‘‘communicatio naturarum” represented the extremes of 
views in subsequent discussions. See HYormuba Concordie, 8, See Hein. 
Schmid, Dogmatik evan. Luth, Kirche, §§ 32, 83. Comp. Krauth, Zhe Conserva- 
tive Reforma., and its Theol., pp. 476-481. 

2. Thomasius, in his Christi Person und Werk, and Hofmann, in his 
Schriftbeweis, both theologians of Erlangen, are notable examples. The trea- 
tises of Liebner and Gess, (see the latter, reproduced by Reubelt in his Sertp- 
ture Doct. of the Person of Christ, Andover, 1871,) belong to the same general 
school of Kenotists. See also, article by Tholuck, trans. in the Amer. Pres. 


Rev., Oct., 1869. 


DY OMS THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. 


& 


pared with person, is that substratum or condition of being 
which determines the kind and attributes of the person, but 
is clearly distinguishable from the person itself. Christ 
assumed human nature, but he did not assume a human 
person ; and the two natures were so conjoined as to con- 
stitute a single personality. 

(6) In taking human nature he took the common nature 
of the race; not the nature of the unfallen Adam ; nor yet 
a new-created nature different alike from Adam’s and our 
own; but the nature of those whom he came to save. He 
came to save our fallen 1ace who ‘‘are partakers of flesh 
and blood,’’ i. e., of human nature, and ‘‘ he also himself 
likewise took part of the same,’’ Heb. 2:14. Ourrace and 
nature were sinful, and God ‘‘ sent his own son in the like- 
ness of sinful flesh to condemn sin in the flesh'’,” Ro. 8: 3; 
and yet in his own person he was absolutely sinless, and 
could save others from sin only because he was sinless. But 
if the human nature of Christ was not our nature with the 
exception of its hereditary depravity, which in his case was 
cut off from transmission by the supernatural method of 
assuming it’, then his temptation in the wilderness loses all its 
significancy for man, and the assurance that he was tempted 
in all points like as we are, yet without sin, becomes 
unmeaning. No truth is more plainly, continuously and 
variously taught in the New Testament than the perfect sin- 
lessness’, the unapproachable moral perfection of Jesus 


1. It is alike destructive to the force of duoiworr in this passage to give it either 
the sense of absolute identity with, or the Docetic interpretation of mere resem- 
blance to, simple flesh. See De Wette, Commentar, in loco; comp. Alford. 

2. Sin is properly predicable only of personality ; the hereditary depravity of 
man is derived by the natural descent of personal life from Adam; Christ did 
not derive a personal human life ex traduce from Adam, but took our human 
nature by a supernatural act which cut off its hereditary guilt though not the 
hereditary consequences of its guilt. The notion that Christ in taking our 
nature must have taken a ‘‘ sinful nature,” (see J.G. Reiche, Hrkl. d. Briefe an 
d. Rim., Ro., 8: 8, and Ed. Irving, The Doctrine of the Incarnation, Sermon 3, 
Collected Writings, vol. 5, p. 114, ff.,) is utterly without Scriptural support. 
For more rational, though not entirely satisfactory, views see, Robt. J. Wilber- 
force, The Doct. of the Incar. of our Lord Jesus Christ, ch. 38. 

3. See Ullmann, The Sinlessness of Jesws.—Schaff, Moral Character of Jesus. 
—Dorner, Sinless Perfection of Jesus, trans. in Amer. Pres. Rev., April, 1863. 


THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. O17 


Christ ; and his sinlessness was all the more conspicuous and 
marvellous that it was maintained under the load of a fallen 
nature, and in the midst of a sinful race, with whom he had 
so closely identified himself. 

(c) Jesus, notwithstanding the nature he had assumed, 
and the race with which he had allied himself, could pre- 
serve his sinlessness, because the basis of his personality was 
his Divine nature and not the human. In becoming incar- 
nate he assumed human nature in its completeness and yet 
so assumed itas completely to control it; whereas, in the 
birth of individual men, human nature simply assumes the 
form of personal life which it completely controls. Christ 
was conscious of the infinite purity of his own person, 
because his consciousness was grounded in the Divine nature 
which underlay and conditioned his whole personal being. 

(d.) If the Divine Logos assumed true human nature, he 
must have assumed it under all those limitations and laws 
of being by which alone it could remain human nature. 
The attributes of the Divine nature were thus circumscribed, 
' restricted, and limited in their exercise by the limiting con- 
ditions of the human nature! with which it had allied itself ; 


1. It is on this point that the modern Christology deviates most widely from 
‘that of the older Protestant Confessions. These Confessions, both Lutheran 
and Reformed, regarded the Divine in the person of Christ as having concealed 
itself within the human, (see infra, p. 223,) but the new Christology supposes it 
to have been limited by the conditions of the human. This latter view, (with 
of course considerable diversity of opinion in the explanation of details, see 
Dorner, diy. 2, vol. 8, period 3,) is now held alike by leading Lutheran and 
Reformed theologians. Among the Lutheran, see Hofmann’ Schriftbeweis, 1 
Abtheil, v. 2.—Thomasius, Christt Person u. Werk, vol. 2, § 47, ff.—Marten- 
sen, Dogmatik, §§ 129-147.—Delitzsch, Bid. Psychol., 5, § 1.—Gess, Christi 
Person und Werk, and the same as trans. and modified by Reubelt, Scrip- 
ture Doctrine of the Person of Christ, Andover, 1871; and for many others, see 
Dorner, Person of Christ, div. 2, vol. 8, period 3, sec. 2, and note 86.—Among 
the Reformed, see Ebrard, Dogmatik, vol. 2, §§ 361-390; and Lange, Dogmatik, 
p. 780.—See also, Nitzsch, Syst. Chr. Lehre, § 127.—J Muller, Analysis of 
Proof Texts, trans. by H. B. Smith, §$ 73-75. As holding this view may be 
mentioned, Oosterzee of Holland; Pressensé of France; Bishop Ellicott and 
Dean Alford of Eng., and many others, 

This view of the relation of the Divine to the human in the person of Christ, 
is not to be set aside on the mere charge of being speculative, and pantheistic. 
Whatever may have been its connection with any school of, pantheistic phi- 


218 THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. 


so in like manner the attributes of the human nature, by its 
union with the Divine, were all enlarged in scope and inten- 
sified in action; the attributes of each nature being modi- 
fied by the new conditions assumed, while the essence of 
each was retained in its integrity. Hence the indications in 
Scripture of a knowledge and power which were evidently 
superhuman in origin, (Mat., 9: 4. 12: 25. Luke, 6: 8. 
John, 1: 48. 2: 25. 6: 8, and Mat., 9: 6, 8. John, 10: 18,) 
and yet of a knowledge and power which were always 
restricted in their exercise by the limiting conditions of the 
finite human nature, Mat., 24: 36. Mark, 18: 32. John, 
5: 19, 30. . 

(e.) The two natures united in the person of Christ con- 
stituted a single Theanthropic personality. This personality 
appears in the New Testament in two ever-shifting lights, 
corresponding to its two unmixed natures and their 
unblended but interpenetrating and mutually modified 
attributes ; but always as one and the same person with one 
consciousness and one will. Those opposite sayings of his 
in the Gospels, and declarations respecting him in the 
Epistles, which present him now in a Divine and now ina 
human aspect, are not to be referred, the one to the man 
Jesus and the other to the Divine Logos, as if the conscious- 
ness and will of one nature were sometimes in the ascendancy, 
and sometimes those of the other. On the contrary, Jesus 
Christ was a single person, one Divine-human being, the 
Godman, who, with one undivided consciousness and a 
single unvarying will, contemplated, sometimes his earth- 
ward relations and humiliations, and sometimes the pre- 
éxistent position he had temporarily forsaken, but to which 
he was soon to return. It was but one and the same indi- 
visible person and will that said, ‘‘I and my Father are 
one,’ and ‘‘my Father is greater than I:’’ ‘‘no one (ovde¢¢) 


—_——— 


losophy and with the Christology of Schleiermacher, it must now be tried by 
biblical tests. On the Christology of Schleiermacher, see Dorner, div. 2, vol. 
3, pp. 165-218, and for the wide difference therefrom in the views of later 
writers, see the same volume. For a clear statement of the pantheistic and the 
Schleiermacher Christologies, see also, D. F. Strauss, Chr. Glaubenslehre, vol. 


2, §§ 64-66. 


THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. 219 


takes my life from me, but I lay it down of myself,’’ and 
‘‘Omy Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me :”’ 
who could say with authority to the dead, ‘‘ come forth,”’ 
and himself in dying agony exclaim, ‘“my God, my God, 
why hast thou forsaken me?’ A variable union of the 
Divine with the human, or a union consisting of mere 
superintendence of the human by the Divine, or any other 
union than that of a.combination of the two natures into 
one indivisible and mysterious person, is neither warranted 
by Scripture, nor reconcilable with any clear and rational 
conception of personality. 

Now it is solely from the teaching of the New Testament 
that we arrive at the knowledge of the coéxistence of two 
natures in the person of Christ; but from this teaching it 
becomes evident, that the Divine Logos in becoming man 
did not cease to be Divine, and that the human, in being 
united to the Divine, did not cease to be human. The 
assurance of this rests exclusively on the facts of the 
Gospels and the interpretation of these by the Apostles ; 
no trustworthy a@ priori argument’ can be constructed in 
support of the doctrine of the two natures. But now that 
the doctrine of the incarnation is established, and the fact of 
the Godman is accepted, it is easy to discern, 

THE GROUNDS OF THE NEED OF HIS TWO-FOLD NATURE. 

A. There was need of a Divine nature: 

(a.) To vindicate Christ’s claim to be an object of trust to 
men. Every mere man had shared in the common ruin of 
the race and cannot become an object of trust to his fellows. 
Human philosophers had failed alike to fathom the depth 
of human sin and to provide a remedy for its curse, 1 Cor., 
1: 21. The wisdom and power of Christ were demonstra- 
bly shown to be equal to the salvation of himself, and by 


’ 1. The belief of many modern Germans that the incarnation did not have 

‘¢its sole ground in sin,” but sprung also from ‘‘ an eternal and abiding necessity 
in the wise and free love of God,” (see Dorner, Person of Christ, div. 2, vol. 3, 
p. 236, ff,) rests on a species of a priori argument founded on the relation of 
man to God, and on the nature of piety. It would be difficult to shew that the 
like method of argument from a priori premises will not equally avail to prove 
sin to have been anecessary part of the scheme of the creation. 


220 THE TWO NATURES OF JESUS CHRIST. 


his exaltation and the founding ofhis church, have been prov- 
ed to be equal to the salvation of every one that trusts in him. 

-(6.) The end to which Christ devoted himself both 
- required, and was worthy, the interposition of the Godhead. 
The end required Divine interposition, for man unaided had 
shewn himself incapable of attaining it; and if it were wor- 
thy of God to create man in the Divine likeness, it is not 
unworthy the Creator to interpose for-the rescue of man by 
assuming his likeness. 

(c.) The interposition of Godhead for our rescue by 
assuming human nature, is in strict accordance with every 
other part of the scheme of man’s redemption. Christianity, 
as a Divine philosophy and a power of endless life, is depen- 
dent on its fundamental truth of Emmanuel, or God with us. 

B. Christ needed a human nature: | 

(a.) To accommodate himself to our necessary modes of 
thought. All our conceptions of God are necessarily 
grounded in our own experiences—are necessarily anthro- 
pomorphic and anthropopathic. Christ accommodated 
himself to this necessity. 

(6.) To personate and illustrate the moral law. Moral 
law consists of the ethical principles embodied in the moral 
nature of God. Christ embodied these principles in his 
own person and made them vital and real to men. * 

(c.) To fit him to mediate between the infinite Creator 
and finite creatures. As a Priest he was to represent and 
transact for man, which he could do only by allying him- 


_ self with them through assumption of their nature, 1 Tim., 


2: 5. Heb., 2: 16, 17; and as the Redeemer from sin, he 
could destroy its power in the heart of man only by becoming 
in human nature a sacrifice for sin, and, in that same nature, 
an object of universal trust, by rising from the grave when 
the penalty of sin had been paid. 

(d.) To fit him to be a sympathising friend and an imit- 
able example. Christ fitted himself by his experience of 
human trials and sorrows to sympathise with us, Heb., 2: 
10. 5: 7-9; and in his whole life gave an example which 
we can appreciate and never exhaust by our imitation. 


THE TWO STATES OF CHRIST. PPT 


(e.) To fit him to be our judge, by carrying the conviction 
into our hearts that he, not only as Divine knows our 
responsibilities, but as human understands and can rightly 
estimate all that in our weakness may extenuate our guilt, 
John, 5: 27. Comp. Dan., 7: 18. 12: 2. Mat., 25: 31, 32. 


$ 38—The Two States of Christ. 


Christ is pictured in the Messianic prophecies, and his- 
torically presented throughout the New Testament, in two 
strikingly contrasted conditions. The prophets foresaw and 
described him as subject to the greatest indignities and as 
seated on the most exalted of thrones. Some of the Jews, 
unable to reconcile these contrasts, were disposed to believe 
in two Messiahs. In the mindsof the contemporaries of 
Jesus, one strong objection to regarding him as the Mes- 
siah was founded on his humble condition. It.is worthy of 
notice how much his humiliation was intensified by the 
rejection of him which it had caused; and it will be worthy of 
notice, when we come to speak of his exaltation, that the 
reason assigned for it was the very humiliation to which he 
had been subjected, Phil.,.2: 9. Heb., 2: 9. 

A. THr HUMILIATION OF CHRIST. 

All that will need to be said on this point may be included 
under the two-fold inquiry: To what did the humiliation 
pertain, and in what did it consist? The answer to the first 
half of this inquiry must also, by necessary inference, sup- 
.ply an answer to the second ; and our answers to both will 
be determined by our understanding of the relation of the 
two natures in the constitution of the person of Christ. If 
with the Lutherans' we hold that the Divine nature in the 


1. In the Formula Concordise, ch. 8, (see Hase, Libri Symbolict) a unio et 
communicatio divine et humane nature is continually affirmed and it is said 
that these two natures in unam personam conveniunt et commiscentur. And 
according to the same Formula, not only is Christ’s human nature now endowed, 
atthe right hand of God, with an inalienable Divine majesty, but eam majesta- 
tem statim in sua conceptione, etiam in utero matris habuit ; sed ut Apostolus, 


222 THE TWO STATES OF CHRIST. 


person of Christ communicated itself and its attributes to 
the human, then the humiliation must have pertained to the 
human nature alone, and consisted in the non-revelation 
and non-recognition of that nature’s infinite endowments’. 
If with the Reformed confessions we hold that both natures 
in the person of Christ retained in their entireness the attri- 
butes and essence of each, unaffected by the union’; then 
we may also hold that the NRE nature humbled itself, but 
if we are consistent, we must, with some of the Reformed, 
suppose the real humiliation of Christ to have pertained to 
the human nature,* and to have consisted in all that he 
endured as man ; and with the more discriminating of the 
Reformed theologians, we should also distinguish between the 
exinanition* (condescension) and the humiliation of Christ, 
regarding the former as consisting in a merely temporal 
concealment of the Divine glory*, and the latter as consist- 
ing of an humble condition in life and of the privations, 
duties and sufferings to which the human nature abased 


(Phil., 2: 8,) loquitur, seipsum exinanivit, eamque, ut D. Lutherus docet, in 
statu sue humiliationis secreto habuit, neque eam semper, sed quoties ipsi 
visum fuit, usurpavit. Hase, Lidrz, p. 767. 

1. See Quenstedt, Theologia, pars. 3, ch. 3, mem, 38. —Buddeus, Institutiones, 
lib. 4, cap. 2, § 20.—Reinhard, Dogmatik, §§ 97, 3. 

2. See Confessio Belgica (Niemeyer, Collectio, &c.) art. 19.—Repetitio Anhal- 
tina, cap. 8. 1.—Westminster Confession, ch. 8, § 2. 

3. Leonh. Ryssenius in his Summa Theol., which he tells us, on the title page, 
was compiled from the most distinguished theologians, specially Francis Tur- 
retine, says, exinanitio spectat ad naturam humanam que mutationis capax est, 
passione depressa.—Quoad divinam autem naturam, exinanitio ei tribuitur quoad 
occultationem et inhibitione gloriw. See quotation in Schweizer’s Glaubens- 
qehre, § 91. 

4, Exinanition, derived from ‘‘exinanivit,” the vulgate translation of 
éxévwoe, Phil., 2: 7, is made to denote that state of inequality with God which - 
was assumed in the incarnation; and humiliation, from trans. of érareivwoe, Phil., 
2: 8, ismade to denote the abasement of the man Jesus even to the death of 
the cross. In exinanitione est non esse instar Dei; cum incipiret esse in simili- 
tudine hominum, idque propter servitutem et obedientiam. In humiliatione 
vero plus est, nempe obedientem se praestare usque ad mortem, mortem vero 
crucis. Heidegger’s Corpus T heolog., locus 18, § 3. See also Ridgeley’s Body 
of Div., ques. 46-48.—Dick’s Theol., lect. 60. 

5. Glorizv et majestatis sus divine ad tempus occultatione, is the common 


representation. 


THE TWO STATES OF CHRIST. 223 


itself. Orif we hold that in the incarnation, the Divine 
Logos assumed the limiting, depotentiating conditions of the 
finite human nature, then we must believe the humiliation 
to have pertained primarily, and chiefly, to the Divine 
nature, and secondarily, to the human as a constituent part 
of the theanthropic personality ; and to have consisted in 
taking human nature, and specially in taking human nature 
as he found it, and for the offices which he performed in it. 

The difference between the Lutheran and the Reformed 
conceptions of the humiliation of Christ isin fact more 
apparent than real’. According to the Lutheran view the 
Divine in Christ imparted of its essence and attributes to 
the human, but the Divine thus imparted was not exercised 
and consequently was not recognized*; according to the 
Reformed view the Divine was humbled and its humiliation 
consisted in its concealment, swb velo carnis imbecille’ ; in 
either case the humiliation turned on the concealment of the 


1. The real difference between the Lutherans and the Reformed pertained to 
the relation of the two natures of Christ in his heavenly rather than in his 
earthly estate. Thus certain Lutherans believed in an eternal preéxistent 
God man hood; and all Lutherans maintained, and still maintain, that Christ’s 
exalted human nature is as ubiquitous as his Divine, and that the Godman 
exalted and glorified now belongs to the Trinity; whereas the Reformed 
insisted that the Adyor doapxos alone was preéxistent, and that the exalted human 
nature of Christ is now localized and restricted in its attributes, while the 
Divine alone is omnipresent. The Lutherans insisted that humana natura est 
capax divine: the Reformed that finitum non est capax infiniti. On the views 
of the German Reformed Church in this country, see J. W. Nevin, The Mysti- 
cal Presence, Phila., 1846, and an article by E. V. Gerhart, in Bid. Sac., Jan., 
1863: on those of the Lutheran Church, see Krauth, Zhe Conservative Refor- 
mation and its Theology, Phila., 1871. 

2. Exinanitio est ea Christi conditio, in qua attributorum divinorum usu, dum 
inter homines viveret, carere voluit—Reinhard’s Dogmatik, p. 870. Comp. 
Gerhard’s Loci, ed. Cotta, tom. 8, p. 562, § 29. On the controversy between 
the Kenotists of Giessen and the Kryptists of Tubingen, which turned on the 
question whether the Divine attributes were laid aside or only concealed during 
the incarnation, see Dorner, div. 2, vol. 2, pp. 282-802. 

3. Wyttenbach, Tentamen Theol. Dog., vol. 2, locus 8, § 897.—Turretine 
says that exinanition should be properly attributed to personality only, adding, et 
ad utramque naturam referri, sed magno discrimine. Ad naturam humanam 
quidem quod realem depressionem—; ad divinam vero tantum ratione occulta- 
tionis, et manifestationis, relate ad carnem tanquam velum, quo tegebatur, et 
unde sese prodebat. Theol., locus 18, ques. 9, § 7. 


224. THE TWO STATES OF CHRIST. 


Divine, on the non-exercise of its attributes before men, and 
the humiliation really pertained to the human and consisted — 
in whatit endured. The underlying assumption which deter- 
mines both the Lutheran and the Reformed view is, that the 
Divine nature of Christ must, as such, have been immutable 
and impassible, and that the obedience and suffering to 
which Christ as a Divine person humbled himself, and by 
which he redeems us, were only the obedience and. suffering 
of his human nature. But on this assumption no clear 
conception can be formed of what the humiliation of the 
Divine could have consisted in; and, in proving the human 
to have been humiliated, it becomes necessary to dwell on 
those particulars in the life of Christ, such as his humble 
birth, poverty, subjection to law, the mere accidents of life, 
which only revealed a dignity which could not be humil- 
iated. The error of supposing it to be humiliating to obey 
law is too radical’, and the practical mischief attendant on 
representations of humble birth and the lack of riches as 
humiliating, is too evident to require a special refutation of 
the theory of which they are an essential part. 

If now, turning from the earlier Protestant creeds to the 
Scriptures, we inquire, under the light of modern exegesis, 
for their teaching on the question before us, we shall find 
that they represent the humiliation of Christ to have per- 
tained mainly, though not exclusively, to his Divine nature; 
and to have consisted in His assumption of human nature 
with all the limitations and environments which it necessi- 


1. That Christ was humiliated by his obedience to the law, is one of those 
Romish medieval notions which was made necessary by the Church theory of 
an inexhaustable store of merit accumulated by Christ while on earth and to be 
drawn on by the priesthood for the benefit of believers., The notion itself rests 
on the assumption that law was by the arbitary appointment of God, an assump- 
tion to which neither Scripture, science, nor common sense lend a shadow of 
support; and can be maintained only on the ground that the Lawgiver is not 
bound by his own law, a sentiment worthy of Hobbes, or a defender of abso- 
lutism, but not of a believer in the immutability of God and of moral law. 
The sentiment of Frederick the Great was incomparably more just, when his 
sturdy subject and neighbor, the miller, whose windmill he attempted to remove, 
having beaten him in a law-suit, the thwarted monarch exclaimed, ‘“‘thank God, 
there is law in Prussia.” 


THE TWO STATES OF CHRIST. . 995 


tated, and in voluntarily bearing in that,nature allfthe pen- 
alties that hung over it. Thus, in Phil. 2: 6-8, we are told 
that Jesus Christ existed before He was born into this 
world, and that in his preéxistent state he wasin the ‘‘ form 
of God,’’ i. e., that he possessed in himself the infinite 
attributes of Godhead ; that though thus in himself equal 
with God the Father, he did not regard his equality as a 
thing to be eagerly insisted on, but voluntarily abandoned 
(exchanged) it for the ‘‘ form,” i. e. for the state and. attri- 
butes ‘ of a servant,’ in other words, for the actual condi- 
tion of man, the servant of God; and that having become 
. man, he continued his descent until it was terminated, in the 
fulfilment of the object of his incarnation, by his death on 
the cross. Now in the passage thus briefly paraphrased, 
it is evident that he, whose two states of being, a preéxistent 
and an earthly, are contrasted in the first half of it, con- 
tinues to be the one who is spoken of in the last half of it ; 
there is not the slightest intimation of a change of persons, 
or that he who ‘‘took upon him the form of a servant,’’ and 
in taking it ‘‘emptied himself’ of the ‘‘form of God,’’ is 
not the same person who, ‘‘being found in fashion as a 
man, humbled himself,’ ‘‘even unto the death of the cross.”’ 
On the contrary, the manifest gradations of descent implied 
in the words, ‘‘form,’’ ‘‘likeness,’’ ‘‘fashion,’’ ‘‘ emptied 
himself,’ ‘‘ humbled himself,’ show plainly that He-who 
made the first measureless stride in passing from Deity to 
humanity, was the same being that continued to take all the 
successive and lesser steps, even to the last?. 

So also in 2 Cor., 8: 9, when we are told of ‘“our Lord 
Jesus Christ that, though he was rich yet for our sakes 
he became poor,”’ the contrast manifestly is between the 
preéxistent, proprietary Lord of the universe and the limited, 
dependent Christ; and the poverty to which he subjected 
himself must have consisted in the assumption of human 
nature, a state of being in which the attributes of. Divinity 
were necessarily restricted in their exercise. 


1. This is substantially the view that is critically educed from the passage, in 
the Commentaries of Meyer, Ellicott, Alford, and Lange as edited by Hackett. 


15 


296 THE TWO STATES OF CHRIST. 


In like manner when John, after having affirmed in the 
proem of his Gospel the proper Divinity of the preexistent 
Logos, tells us, 1: 14, that this Logos was made flesh, he 
manifestly means that we shall understand all the remain- 
der of his Gospel to be descriptive of the career of this 
incarnate, humbled, suffering Being, whom he had pre- 
viously described as the Creator of the Universe. It is in 
strict harmony with this impression of his Gospel as a 
whole, that he represents our Lord as praying to be restored 
to the state and glory which he abandoned in becoming 
incarnate, John, 17: 5. 

Thus it seems to be evident that the humiliation of Christ, 
to which the Scriptures direct our attention, is his humilia- 
tion as a Divine person; and that they set forth this 
humiliation as consisting in the assumption of the finite 
conditions of human existence, and especially in his identi- 
fication of himself with a race so resting under the Divine 
displeasure that he could not unite himself with it without 
an assumption of the penal consequences of its guilt. And 
it seems but a necessary inference from the teaching of 
Scripture as a whole, that the preéxistent Logos, in work- 
ing out our redemption in the flesh, must, in some way to 
us inexplicable, have participated' in the trials and suffer- 
ings of the human nature he had assumed, even from the 
cradle to the grave—in his temptations, his deprivations, - 
and in his agony both in the garden and on the cross, 
John 122/727. Phil. 2:08.) Comp..buke 2420 26: 

This view of the humiliation of Christ’ seems to accord 
better than any other with certain facts recorded respecting 


1. The old question whether Christ suffered in his human nature only, or in 
his Divine nature as well, was revived in this country afew years ago with 
considerable zeal, but moderate ability and less learning. The discus- 
sion opened witha book, The Sujfferings of Christ, by ‘‘A Layman,” 1845, 
(Geo. Griffin, a lawyer of New York,) on the affirmative side of the question, 
was continued by a reply on the other side in another book, The Sujferings of 
Christ, by Dr. Bennet Tyler, of E. Windsor, Ct., 1847. Several articles also 
appeared in the Quarterlies. For one of the last, though not the ablest of these, 
see Bib. Sac,, April, 1850, or vol. 7, p. 205, ff. Dr. Bushnell, adopting the. 
Schleiermacherian-Sabellian theory of the Trinity, took the affirmative side, to 
the degree of Patripassianism, in his Christ in Theology, Hartford, Ct., 1851. 


THETTWO STATES OF CHRIST. Dot 


him in the Gospels, and with his relation to us as our 
Saviour. 

(a.) It accords more readily,than any,other, with the 
account of his temptation in the wilderness. If the attri- 
butes of his Divine nature were unrestricted in their exer- 
cise; if his Divinity was not conditioned by the humanity 
with which it was united, then no intelligible conception 
can be formed of that temptation. Ommiscience cannot be 
tempted ; and his human nature had no existence aside 
from the Divine, which had assumed it. 

(o.) No rational account can be given of Christ’s prayers, 
on any other explanation of his humiliation than the one 
here stated. The supposition of an unlimited and uncon- 
ditional Divinity praying, is preposterous: and it is 
unnecessary to dwell on the absurdity of supposing the 
human nature of Christ to have prayed. without the cogni- 
zance and participation of the Divine. 

(c.) On no other, can the propriety of our praying to 
Christ as a sympathizing Saviour, be satisfactorily explain- 
ed. We certainly do not pray to the human nature of 
Christ alone, but tothe Divine-human Person, Jesus Christ. 
It also is, surely, the Divine-human Person who sympathizes 
with and saves us; and it is nothing less than solemn 
trifling to say that the Divine in Christ, though free from 
all our experiences, can be touched with feeling of our infir. 
mities, because even what pertained exclusively to the 
human on the ground of the association of the two natures 
in his person, is equally predicable of the Divine. 

(d.) Christ is set before us in the Scriptures as an exam- 
ple, as well asa Saviour. But if the functions of the Divine 
in his person were not fimited by the laws and conditions 
of the human, then the plane of his existence must have 
been so far removed from ours as to preclude the possibility 
of imitation. 

B. EXALTATION OF CHRIST. 


In immediate connection with the humiliation of Christ is 
mentioned in Scripture his exaltation, Phil., 2: 9,10. Eph., 
~4:9,10. When he had reached the lowest depth in his 


s 


2298 THE TWO STATES OF CHRIST. 


descent, then was his course suddenly reversed, and there 
began that ascent which carried him to absolute supremacy 
over every order of created beings in the Universe, Eph., 
TM eOOR 2 I Heb. 2s vee: 
The principal points to be noticed in his exaltation are, 


1. That as in the humiliation it was chiefly the Divine 
that was humbled in taking human nature and in descend- 
ing in that nature to the lowest depths of suffering, so in 
the exaltation it was the Divine in conjunction with the 
human, which in its descent it had rescued, that was exalted 
to the highest conceivable dignity. It was the eternal Logos, 
become, by the incarnation, the God-man, who in the exal- 
tation was restored to that glory which he had with the 
Father before the world was, John, 17: 5. Comp. 6: 62. 


2. As the Divine came into the world in order that by 
revealing the Godhead to our race and allying itself with 
our nature, it might save us, John, 14: 9, 16, 27, 28. 1 Tim., 
1: 15, so the human in Christ has been raised as the first- 
fruits and pledge of the final exaltation and glory of the 
redeemed, Acts, 26: 23. 1 Cor, 15: 20. Col., 1: 18. Comp. 
John, 14: 3. 17: 24. 

3. This twofold Being, the God-man, was exalted in his 
twofold nature to be the sole dispenser of the blessings 
of salvation, the sympathizing friend and guide of indi- 
viduals, as well as the Head of the whole Church and the 
object of supreme worship throughout the universe, Matt., 
25 :,.31-38. 27:18. Heb:, 3: 15. 1 John, 6: 145, \Piviae 
LO Col eda: 

4. This same Being, Jesus Christ, will come in his two- 
fold nature to judge the world, and to distribute to the 
righteous and the wicked their final awards, Acts, 1: 11. 
Matt., 16: 27. 2 Cor., 5: 10; one essential qualification for 
his judgeship being his possession of human nature, John, 
Sere teen ls, 17 ole 

5. There is no good reason for supposing that this God- . 
man, Jesus Christ, will not continue forever to be the 
communicator, (Logos, Word,) between the infinite God and 
his finite creatures. The delivering up ofthe kingdom, and the 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. 229 


subjection of Christ to him that put all things under him, 
1 Cor., 15: 24, 28, whatever these may mean, must mani- 
festly relate to a surrender of office and not to a severance 
of natures. 


S$ 89—The Holy Spirit. 


When our Saviour was hbout to withdraw from the earth 
he promised to his disciples a substitute for his personal 
presence, John, 14: 16. 16: 7,—a continuator and per- 
fecter of the work he had inaugurated, John, 15: 26. 16: 18, 
14. Ever associated, accordingly,: with the name of Jesus . 
Christ in the salvation of men is the appellative Holy Spirit. 
It was this Holy Spirit that, in fulfillment of promise, inter- 
preted to the Apostles the meaning of Christ’?s words, the 
significancy of the facts of his life, and especially of his 
death which had so overwhelmed them, Acts, chh. 1, 2. 
It is appropriate, therefore, that before proceeding to a con- 
sideration of the work of Christ, we should inquire, What 
does the appellative Holy Spirit denote? an efflux, an influ- 
ence of the Divine Being, or a personal existence ? 

I. PERSONALITY oF THE Hoty Spirit. The proof of 
this is found in the Scriptures only ; but in collecting it we 
must not start with the assumption that the word Spirit in 
Scripture, like the words God and. Christ, must always, if 
at ald, designate a person. There are passages in which it 
occurs, sometimes by itself, and sometimes in such phrases 
as, ‘‘Spirit of God’’ and ‘‘my Spirit,’’ particularly in the 
Old Testament, where it may denote simply Divine agency, 
Gen., 1: 2. Job, 33: 4. Gen, 6: 3; just as in the New 
Testament there are numerous texts in which the phrase 
‘‘the Spirit,’ and one, Ro., 8: 9, in which ‘‘the Spirit of 
Christ’? may denote, not a personal being, but that state of 
heart in man of which the personal Spirit is the author. This 
secondary meaning is natural, possibly necessary. God 
is a Spirit ; and according to a well known grammatical law, 


230 THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


by which the name of an agent is transferred to his agency, 
or to his work, the phrase ‘‘Spirit of God’’ may be appro- 
priately, if not necessarily, used to designate the power of 

God; and ‘‘the Spirit,’ ‘‘the Spirit of Christ,’’ to denote 
the spiritual results produced by the Holy Spirit in the 
hearts of men. 

That the Holy Spirit is a person! seems evident from the 
following considerations : 

1. The Spirit is offen spoken of throughout the Scerip- 
tures in such way as to require the supposition either of a 
bold personification or of a personal being. But the sup- 
position of a personification, agrees neither with the fre- 
quency of its use nor with the calm tone of the narrative 
where it occurs. See its use in Isaiah, Ezekiel and Joel ; 
in John, chh. 14 and 15. Ro., ch. 8. 1 Cor., chh. 2 and 12; 
also, Heb., 9: 14. 3 

2. The title zapdziycoc employed by our Lord, though. 
most strikingly and comprehensively appropriate as a desig- 
nation of a person, would have no pertinency as a personi- 
fication of an abstract influence, or of a subjective state. 

3. Christ’s comparison of himself with the Holy Spirit, 
as his successor and representative in the world, necessi- 
tates the conception of a person. Christ was unquestionably 
personal, and he calls the Holy Spirit, in comparison with 
himself, ‘‘another Paraclete,’? John, 14: 16; he glorified 
God and says the Holy, Spirit shall glorify him, John, 16: 
13-16. 

4. The New Testament ascribes to the Holy Spirit those 
acts, offices and attributes which belong only to personality. — 
(a.) The Spirit teaches, guides, by his own knowledge 
reveals, and himself efficaciously helps us, Mark, 13: 11. 
Luke, 12: 12. John, 14 ¢ 26216 > 18, Acts, 20:23. iGonsaee 
10-18. Ro., 8: 26: (6.) of his own will prompts to action, 
and ‘‘ severally as he will” distributes of his gifts to men, 
Acts, 8: 29. 10: 19, 20. 1-Cor., 12: 4-11: (¢) possessés 
and exercises power, 1 Cor., 2: 4, miraculous, Ro., 15: 18, 


1. His personality was virtually rejected by the Arians as it has since been by 
Schleiermacher ; and has been positively denied by the Socinians. 


THE HOLY ‘SPIRIT. 231 


19, regenerating, renewing, John, 3: 5-8. Titus, 3: 5, jus- 
tifying and sanctifying, 1 Cor., 6: 11: (d.) possesses 
and exercises authority, commanding the ordination of 
Apostles, Acts, 13: 2, 3, and controlling the ministration of 
the Apostles and first preachers of the Gospel, Acts, 8: 29. 
EieecO: 16% 6,.7,, (é-) can be grieved, Eph:, 4:30, .and 
@iended, Acts, {3 .2, 4,:9:..Gomp., Matt., 12:,31,: 32. 

4, There are numerous passages in the New Testament 
in which the Holy Spirit is named in intimate connection 
with God the Father and Jesus Christ his Son; no inter- 
pretation of these passages is so natural and so strictly in 
~ accordance with the acknowledged laws of language as that 
_which regards the Holy Spirit, equally with the Father 
and the Son, as a person. In Luke, 3: 22, the Father 
and the Son are both revealed to the senses of man and the 
Spirit takes bodily form. In the baptismal formula, Matt., 
28: 19, the Spirit is so associated with the Father and the 
Son, that the only natural conclusion, without notice to the 
contrary, is that the Spirit is a person. In John, 14: 17, 
the Spirit is spoken of as ‘‘seen,’’ ‘‘known’’ and as 
‘‘dwelling with’’ us, and in.1): 26. 16: 7, 8, as being 
‘sent’? and as ‘‘coming,’’ all of which imply personality. 
In Ro., 8: 26, the Spirit is said to help our infirmities and 
to intercede for us with inarticulate groanings, while in 
Jude 20, 21, we are enjoined to keep ourselves in the love 
of God by praying in the Holy Spirit and by looking for 
the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ; all of which require 
us, if we regard God and Christ as persons, to recognize the 
Spirit alsa. as a person. In Eph., 2: 22, the Church is said 
to be built together in Christ for an. habitation of God 
through the Spirit, (¢v //vedyare); the natural inference from 
this, as well as from other parts of Paul’s writings is, that 
the Spirit is here also a person’. | 

II. Tae Divinity oF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Supposing it to 
be satisfactorily shewn that the Holy Spirit is a person, the 
question still remains, What evidence is there that he is a 


1. On the personality of the Spirit, see J. Pye Smith, Sertptwre Testimony to 
the Messiah, yol. 2, appendix, 3. 


32 THE HOWY SPIRIT. 


Divine Person? What is the proof of his proper Divinity ? 
The proper Divinity of the Holy Spirit may be inferred from 
various considerations : | 

1. If the personality of the Spirit be admitted, his Divin- 
ity follows as a necessary consequence. The entire ground 
of the denial of his personality rests on the assumption that 
his various designations denote the mere presence and 
power of God ; the frequent association of the Spirit with 
the names of God and of Christ clearly shewing, it is claimed, 
that the Spirit is only the invisible energy of God. But if 
the Spirit be a person, then the very designation of him as 
the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Christ requires, that we 
shall regard him as a Divine person’. 

2. His Divinity may be inferred from the frequent bibli- 
cal ascriptions to him of the attributes and prerogatives of 
Deity. Of these attributes he has: Omnipotence, Matt., 
12: 28. 1Cor., 12: 11; Omniscience, 1 Cor., 2: 10; Om- 
nipresence, 1 Cor., 12: 1-11. Of Divine prerogatives, he 
exercised absolute authority in commanding the creation 
and consecration to himself of new Apostles, Acts, 13: 2; 
in directing to what persons and to what regions the Gospel 
should be carried by the Apostles and others in the first 
days of the Church, Acts, 10: 19, 20. 8: 29. 16: 7;-in the 
re-creation of the hearts of believers, John, 3: 5-8. Titus, 
3: 5; in settling the affairs of the first churches, Acts, 15: 
28; in the appointment of pastors of churches, Acts, 
20% ).28) 

_ 3. The Divinity of the Holy Spirit may be inferred from 
his association with the Father and the Son in the formulas 
of baptism and of benediction, Matt., 28: 19 and 2 Cor., 13: 
13. Baptism is an assumption of allegiance to a Supreme 
authority, and the benediction is an invocation of Divine 
blessing ; ifallegiance is due to the Holy Spirit equally with 


1. If to this argument it be replied that the phrase Spirit of God, in order to 
denote a person, must be the genitive of object rather than of subject, and so 
the Divinity of the Spirit be no more implied than that of an angel who is called 
the angel of God, a sufficient answer will be, that in that case the Spirit, if not a 
Divine person, would most naturally have been called the messenger (angel) 
of God. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. 233 


the Father and the Son, and these be also conjointly asso- 
ciated in the bestowment of Divine blessings, the conclusion 
is inevitable, that the Spirit is a Divine personality. 

4. If Christ be a Divine person, then the Holy Spirit, 
the Paraclete and his successor, whose presence in the 
Church was so much preferable to his own bodily con- 
tinuance with his disciples—whose offices in completing the 
work of human redemption would be so much more effec- 
tive than his own as humbled and incarnate on earth—must 
assuredly also be Divine. 

III. OrFIicES OF THE Hoty Sprrit’. What these may 
have been prior to the coming of Christ, must, for the most 

part, remain a matter of conjecture. One office, according 
to the New Testament undoubtedly was, the inspiration of ~ 
the Prophets in their utterances ; all beyond thisis uncertain. 
If we assume that the phrase Spirit of God in the Old Tes- 
tament always denotes the Holy Spirit, then we must include 
among his offices, the fashioning and garnishing of the 
material universe, and the bestowal of all the endowments, 
ordinary and extraordinary, of man. To these views it may 
not be sufficient to say, that no Old Testament writers in 
the texts cited in support of them, could have supposed: he 
was distinguishing between the personal Spirit and the per- 
sonal God, since the same is equally true of the Old Testa- 
ment accounts of the appearances of the preéxistent Logos ; 
but just how these ante-Christian oflices of the Spirit can be 
reconciled with the creative offices of the preéxistent Logos, 
to which the New Testament so constantly refers, is by no 
means apparent. The ante-Christian relation of the Holy 
Spirit and the preéxistent Logos in the work of creation is 
too obscure to warrant, in respect to it, any explicit 
dogmatic statements. 

But in respect to the economic offices of the Holy Spirit in 

the Christian dispensation’, the New Testament Scriptures 


1 See Julius Hare, Mission of the Comforter. 

2. On the office of the Spirit in the supernatural origin of Jesus, see Pearson, 
On the Creed, art. 3, under the words ‘‘by the Holy Ghost.” Moses Stuart 
maintained that cvevya dyiov in Luke 1: 35, does not mean the Holy Spirit, but 
a holy spirit, see Bib, Sac., vol. 7, 8138. 


234 THE TRINITY. 


are very explicit. Of these the first undoubtedly was to 
guide the Apostles and first Christians in organizing the 
Church, and to supply it with a completed body of truth for 
its guidance in all future time. To the Apostolic Church 
the Holy Spirit was an indwelling Power, an inspiring Life 
anda guiding Wisdom. See the promises of Christ in John, 
chh. 14-16, and the whole book of the Acts. 

Another office of this indwelling Spirit in the Church, 
was and still is, to communicate of his own divine life to its 
individual members (‘‘ through sanctification ofthe Spirit,’ ) 
and by the aid of that truth which himself had provided, to 
build up the collective brotherhood of the Church into a 
living temple and a habitation of God. The Spirit was given 
to the Church once for all, and his shrine is now neither in, 
the heavens nor in the, Bible, but in the hearts of all true 
children of God, Ejph., 2: 22’. 

It is also the office of the Holy Spirit, in the exercise of 
which the two preceding offices are presupposed, to subdue 
the world, through the ministries of the Church, to the 
authority of Christ; to renew the hearts of men, and, by 
planting in them the germs of righteousness which are 
afterwards to be developed into maturity of character, ~to 
carry forward that work for which all his offices exist, viz. : 
that of finally establishing in the earth a universal reign of 
righteousness. | 


$ 40—The Trinity. 


The question here arises, if Jesus Christ and the Holy 
Spirit be Divine persons, how can their Divinity be recon- 
ciled with the Unity of God. Is the Godhead simply and 


$e 


1. It seems plain from Christ’s promise of the Spirit in the Gospel of John, as 
well as from the whole scope of the New Testament, that the Holy Spirit 
dwells permanently, in the Christian Church, performing in the hearts of 
believers on earth, offices corresponding to those which Christ performs for 
them with the Father in heaven. It is an unwarranted petition, therefore, 
which asks God to ‘‘ pour out,” or ‘‘send down,” his Spirit from heayen. 


THE TRINITY. 235 


absolutely one, or triune? <A consideration of the doctrine 
of the Trinity, at this point, becomes a necessity. But the 
numerical Unity of God must at the outset be regarded as 
one of the most clearly established of biblical truths. 
Numerically, and in essence, God must be regarded as abso- 
lutely one; but if Christ and the Spirit be Divine, then, in 
the mode of his existence, God must be hypostatically or 
personally triuné.—In the discussion of the doctrine we 
shall notice: 1. The objections alleged against it, and its 
inherent difficulties. 2. The proofs of the doctrine. 3. The 
relations of the three persons in the Godhead. 4. The 
practical bearing and significancy of the doctrine’. 

J. OBJECTIONS AND INHERENT DIFFICULTIES. 

A. Objections’. (a.) The Trinity of the Godhead, it is 
said, is nowhere directly affirmed in the Bible, whereas its 
Unity is asserted most explicitly, emphatically and with 
reiteration in both Testaments. The absence of direct and 
explicit statements, however, is no real objection to the doc- 
trine, provided it be otherwise plainly taught. The preva- 
lence of polytheism and the constant exposure and proneness 
of the Jews to it, may explain the repeated affirmation of 
the Divine unity, while on the other hand, the religious 
economy under which they lived required no revelation of 
the Trinity; but when the economy of redemption was 
made known in Christianity, then the facts presented in 
the historical process of its introduction more clearly and 
emphatically revealed its existence than any words could 


1. The literature of this doctrine is more ample perhaps than of any other in 
the whole range of Christian theology. Beginning in the early Patritsic period, it 
rapidly swelled into large proportions. Out of the vast mass that has accumulated, 
the student of systematic theology will do well to consult, Augustine, De Z’rini- 
tate.—Baur, Die Chr. Lehre von der Dreieinigkeit.—Meier, Geschicte der Trini- 
titslehre.—Bull, Defensio Fidei Nicene.—Waterland, Works, several tractates. 
—Pearson, On The Creed.—John Howe, Calm and Sober Inquiry. For a full 
exposition of the Lutheran treatment of the doctrine, see Twesten, Dogmatik, 
y. 2, (trans. Bib. Sac., vol. 8, p. 499, ff. and p. 760, ff.) 

2. These may be gathered from the Bibliotheca Fratrum Polono. and from 
the scattered writings of modern Unitarians. Andrews Norton’s Statement of 
Reasons, is occupied chiefly with arguments against the validity of the Scripture 
proof of a Trinity, and specially, of the Divinity of Christ, 


236 THE TRINITY. 


have done, though special texts necessarily implying it are 
by no means wanting. 

(6.) Itis alleged that the doctrine of the Trinity was of 
slow growth ; can be traced in its gradual formation’; can 
be shewn to be the product of Platonism’*. But substitute 
some other philosophy for Platonism, and the objection is 
just as valid against any other sharply defined doctrine of 
Christianity as it is against that of the Trinity ; the objec- 
tion confounds the intellectual forces and philosophical 
method by which a doctrine was developed, with the biblical 
data on which it rested. That the Christian doctrine of the 
Trinity was not the product of Platonism, is evident from the 
very early existence of the anti-trinitarian Jewish sects, the 
Ebionites and the Nazarenes’—sects which preceded the 
introduction of Platonists into the Church and were mani- 
festly antagonistic to the great body of believers. 

(c.) It is declared to be an absurdity to say that one God 
is three persons and that three persons are one God. And 
it would be absurd to say that one man is three individual 
men and that three individual men are one man. But it is 
by no means so clearly absurd to say that one God, who in 
himself is to us in every way so inscrutable, may exist as 
three distinct and distinguishable subsistencies, and yet in 
his essence be absolutely and indivisibly one. The absur- 
dity lies wholly in the meaning attached to terms—in giving 
to the term person (hypostasis) the same meaning it has 
when applied to individual men. The source of the diffi- 
culty isin the inconceivability of the mode of a triune exist- 
ence; the absurdity itself lies wholly in the attempt to 
reduce a mode of existence which transcends all our knowl- 
edge, to the level of our finite experiences. 


1. For a restatement of this traditional objection, see New Discussions of 
the Trinity,—a vol. containing a collection of essays and reviews called forth 
by the withdrawal of Dr. @ow Bishop) Huntington from the Unitarians, 
pp. 82-85. 

2. See Lamson, The Church of the first three Centuries, written for the express 
purpose of verifying this often repeated assertion.—James Forrest, Some 
Account of the Origin and Progress of Trinitarian Theology. —Norton, 
Statement of Reason, sect. 4. 

3. See Neander, Church Hist., vol. 1, sect, 4, Judaising sects, 


THE TRINITY. as 7 


(d.) The idea of Trinity, it is said, destroys the idea of 

God’s absolute being, making him to be compounded,—to 
consist of parts, and thus to be dependent. The objection 
is founded on the assumption that distinction is separation. 
But the persons in the Trinity of the Godhead, though dis- 
tinct and distinguishable, are not separate nor separable. 
Thus Christ, while distinguishing between himself and the 
Father, says, ‘‘I and my Father are one;’’ and the Apos- 
tles continually refer the same acts indifferently to the 
_ Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Peter speaks of the 
sin of Ananias as equally a lie to the Holy Ghost and a lie 
to God, Acts, 5: 3, 4. 
_(e.) The doctrine of the Trinity, it is asserted, is alike 
opposed to the real Divinity of Christ and to his real 
humanity’. And against theories of the Trinity, which rest 
in turn on certain theories of the person of Christ, the 
objection is undoubtedly valid. Thus, as against the theory 
of eternal generation, or against that of a commingling of ~ 
the two natures in the person of Christ, the objection has 
weight; but as against the historical fact that a Divine 
Hypostasis of the triune Godhead has so assumed real 
humanity as not thereby to surrender his Divinity, the 
objection is futile. , 

(7.) The doctrine of the Trinity, it has been said, ‘‘ injures 
devotion,’ and is unfavorable to piety. This. objection 
founds an argument against the doctrine precisely where 
Trinitarianism rests one in its support. ‘frinitarians assert 
that the doctrine promotes piety, by bringing God near to 
man in the incarnation; and they appeal to the Christian 
consciousness and to Church history in support of their 
assertion. Which side isin the right, can be ascertained only 
by a careful analysis of the elements of devotion and piety, 
and by ascertaining, through an appeal to historical facts, 
who are the most devout and distinguished for their piety, 
the Unitarians or the Trinitarians. The argument, how- 
ever, 1s too invidious to be pressed by either party in the 
discussion of the doctrine as a living issue. 


1. See New Discussions of the Trin., p.85. 
2. See Channing’s Works, vol. 3, pp. 73-75. 170-172. 


938 THE TRINITY. 


(g.) This doctrine, it is said, robs God the Father of the 
Supreme adoration due to his name, by encouraging the 
worship of the Spirit and the Son as distinct persons. The 
objection would be well-founded, if the economic offices of 
the Son and the Spirit did not distinctively and always lead 
to the Supreme adoration of God the Father. The Holy 
Spirit in us, isa ‘‘ Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, 
Father,’? Ro., 8: 15; and we ‘‘contess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of God the Father,’’? Phil., 2: 11. 


B. Difficulties. Some of these inhere in the nature of 
the subject ; others have been added by attempts to formu- 
late the doctrine authoritatively in sharply-defined phra- 
seology. 

(a.) There is a want on our part of all experimental 
knowledge of any trinity of being, from which the Seripture 
doctrine can be comprehensible to us, and from which we 
can with safety reason analogically in its support. 

(6.) From our want of experience comes poverty of lan- 
guage, and the impossibility of finding terms hy which to 
designate the distinctions in the Godhead. The terms 
dzoataces (from Heb., 1: 3,) and zpoowzov, employed by the 
Greeks, and the words swbsistentia and persona, used by 
the Latins, were objectionable on account of their ambi- 
cuity, which was occasioned in part by their preoccupancy 
with other meanings, and in part by their being used in 
very different, and even opposite, senses by different writers 
in speaking of the same distinctions in the Godhead’. 

_ (¢.) There is extreme difficulty in giving any statement of 
a Tri-unity, which shall not verge upon Tritheism on the 
one hand or upon mere Modalism on the other’. 


1. On the senses in which these Greek and Latin terms were used by the Fathers 
and on the relations of these senses among different authors and at different 
periods, see Suicer, Thesaurus Heclesiasticus.—Petavius, Dogmata Theologica, 
v. 2, de Trinitate—Dean Stanley, Contemp. Rev., Aug., 70, p. 140, ff., and 
Rey. Francis Garden, Con. Rev., Nov., 71, art. 2. Comp. Shedd, Hist. Chr. 
Doet., vol. 1, bk. 3, ch. 8, § 5. 

2. It was very natural that Calvin should be charged with Sabellianism, 
(modalism, ) and John Howe, at a later day, with Tritheism. 


THE TRINITY. 939 


(d.) There is extreme difficulty in giving any meaning to 

the titles of the three persons of the Trinity which shall 
consist with Trinity itself. Our actual knowledge of the 
Trinity is derived from the historical revelation in the New 
Testament of the several offices of the Father, Son and 
Spirit, in the economy of redemption. To suppose these 
economic titles to be exactly descriptive of immanent and 
eternal distinctions, is to conceive, not of a Trinity, but of 
graded personal distinctions in the Godhead ; to regard the 
distinctionsas purely economic and representative of nothing 
immanent or ontologic, is to conceive, not of a Trinity, but 
of an absolute and exclusive Unity. 
_ (é.) To these inherent difficulties, others were gratuitously 
added by patristic speculations, specially in the Greek 
Church, and particularly by Origen; and by the attempts 
of ecclesiastical councils to determine by authority just 
what meaning should be attached to terms employed in 
the discussion of the doctrine, and just what the Church 
should believe in respect to the doctrine itself. In the pro- 
gress of time, the meanings of terms once fixed by authority 
have so completely changed as greatly to enhance the ori. 
ginal difficulty of any clear statement of the doctrine. 

II. Proors or THE DocTRINE OF THE TRINITY. 

A. From the New Testament. 

1. We have already seen from the clearest and amplest 
evidence, that Jesus Christ is a Divine Being as well as 
human; that the Holy Spirit is also both personal and 
Divine; the distinct personality of the Father and the 
numerical unity of the Godhead being universally admitted, 
we must necessarily admit the doctrine of a Trinity. 

2. Christ in the Gospels constantly speaks of God as 
specially his Father, and addresses him as distinct from 
himself, and as Supreme, John, 12: 28. Mat., 26: 39; the 
Rather repeatedly acknowledges the Son as distinctively his 
well-beloved Son, and audibly responds to his petition, 
John, 12: 28; and the Father and the Son, unitedly, send 
the Spirit as distinct from themselves, Luke, 24: 49. John, 
14: 26. 15: 26. At the baptism of Christ, Matt., 3: 16, 17, 


940) | WHE: TRINITY. 


he was audibly recognized of God as his well-beloved Son, 
and the Spirit visibly descended and rested on him. We 
have already seen that Christ and the Holy Spirit are 
throughout the New Testament so associated in the offices 
of redemption as to leave no doubt of their co-equal 
title to worship and honor, and so of their proper Divinity ; 
the inference is inevitable, that the titles Son and Holy 
Spirit do neither represent merely different manifestations 
of one personality, nor three separate Beings, but three 
different subsistencies or personal distinctions in God, and 
thus require in us a belief in the Tri-unity of the Godhead. 

3. In the accounts which,.the Apostles give of the differ. 
ent relations into which we are brought to the Father, Son 
and Spirit in the process of individual redemption, a Trinity 
seems to be very clearly taught. The difference in these 
relations is sometimes strongly marked by the different pre- 
positions employed in speaking of them. Thusin Eph., 2: 
18, itis to the Father (zpo¢ rov zarepa) that, in redemption 
we are brought, through Christ, (é¢ avrov,) in or by one 
Spirit, (¢v sve Mvevpace.) A similar distribution, though with 
change of cases and persons, occurs in verse 22 of the same 
chapter. In 4: 4-6 of the same Epistle, we have one Spirit 
by whom we are called ; one Lord in whom we believe ; and 
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, 
and inusall. In 1 Cor., 12: 4-6, there are diversities of 
gifts but the same Spirit, and differences of administration 
but the same Lord, and diversities of operation but the 
same God, who worketh all in all. In Jude, 20, 21, we are 
exhorted to keep ourselves in the love of God by praying 
in the Holy Ghost, and by looking for the mercy of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. The most natural conclusion from 
these texts' is, that the unity of God must somehow consist 
with a tri-personality in the mode of his being. 

4. The Trinity is plainly taught in the formula of bap- 
tism appointed by Christ, Matt., 28: 19; in the formula of 
benediction sometimes employed by the Apostles, 2 Cor., 


1. Many similar texts are scattered throughout the New Testament ; as exam- 
ples, see Ro., 15: 30. Acts, 7: 55-60, 


THE TRINITY. 241 


13: 14, and in the opening words of his first Epistle by 
Peter. In the formula of baptism, Christ puts himself and 
the Holy Spirit on an equality with the Father, as severally 
administering in the work of our redemption, and as alike 
and equally to be honored and obeyed by us. To be bap- 
tised into the name of the Father, the Son and the Spirit, is 
to take on a vow of allegiance to each; and, in the bene- 
diction, equal Divine blessings are invoked from each, . 
though from each severally according to his office in the 
Christian economy. 

B. Proofs of the Trinity from the Old Testament. 

It has been warmly disputed whether the Trinity is taught 
in the Old Testament. The Jews, however, from whom we 
have received the Old Testament. can be clearly shewn to 
have known nothing of the doctrine. 

(a.) The Unity of God was one of the most fundamen- 
tal truths of their religion ; and into this truth there plainly 
entered no other idea than that of unity of personality. 

(6.) No Jewish author, subsequent to the writers of the 
Old Testament canon, presents any conception of such 
hypostatical distinctions in the Godhead, as the New Tes- 
tament so conspicuously sets forth. The Logos of Philo 
was unquestionably impersonal, and most clearly distin- 
guishable and different from the hypostases of the New 
Testament. And even such impersonal and ideal distine- 
tions as Philo made, were confessedly Platonic and not 
Jewish in origin’. 

(c.) The irrepressible indignation of the Jews at Christ's 
assertion of his equality and oneness with the Father, 
Monae o> 18. 8: (58; 59., 10: 30, 31,). shews; the, (utter 
absence in their minds of all germinal conceptions, out of 
which the doctrine could have grown. 


1. On the Logos of Philo, see Cudworth, Intellectual System, Harrison’s ed., 
pp. 320-333, and the notes :—Grotius, De Veritate, lib. 5, sec. 21:—Bull, Defen- 
sio Fidet Nicene, pt. 1, ch. 1, sec. 16 :—Semisch, Justin Martyr, vol. 2 »— 
Ritter, Hist. Ane. Philosophy, vol. 4, ch. 8:—Chr. Review, Oct., 59:—Dorner, 
On the Doctrine of the Person of Christ, vol. 1, Introduction:—Déllinger, The 
First Age of the Church, bk. 2, ch. 2:—Davidson, Introduction to Study of 
New Testament, vol. 2, Gospel of John: 

16 


949 THE TRINITY. . 


(d.) The first Jewish christians were strongly indisposed 
to accept the Deity of Christ. There are traces of this indis- 
position in the Apostolic Epistles, Col., 2: 8, 9. 1 John, 2: 
22, 23. 5:9; which afterwards embodied itself in the hereti- 
cal sects of the Ebionites and the Nazarenes, one of whose 
principal characteristics was a denial of the Deity of Christ. 

(e.) The doctrine of the Trinity is still rejected by all 
Jews, as foreign alike to their Scriptures and all their tra- 
ditions. 

There are many passages, however, in the Old Testament 
from which, under the borrowed light of the New, some 
incidental proof of the Trinity may be gleaned. To this 
class of passages belong all those texts, (quoted under the 
Divinity of Christ,) in which the mediating Angel is so 
clearly distinguished from, and yet so closely identified | 
with, Jehovah himself. Here also belongs Is., 6: 1-8, in 
which, according to John, 12: 41, the prophet, when he 
saw Jehovah, saw the preéxistent Logos. A hypostatical 
distinction between God and the preéxistent Logos, seems, 
from these texts, to be a necessary conclusion. Bearing 
this distinction and conclusion in mind, and reading in Is.,. 
61: 1, comp. Luke, 4: 16-21, of the Spirit, God, and Christ 
as distinct and yet co-active, we find for the doctrine of the 
Trinity, which is elsewhere revealed, a kind of indirect, and 
perhaps not wholly worthless argument. 

An argument is often drawn from the Hebrew plural, 
Elohim, for the name of God, and from the use which is some- 
times made of plural pronouns, when God is represented 
as speaking of himself, Gen., 1: 26. 3: 22. 11: 7. Is., 6: 
8. But these plural forms are too easily explained as the 
common language of sovereignty’, (pluralis majestaticus, 
excellentie,) for much stress to be safely laid on the argu- 
ment; or if we reject this explanation, there is still too much 
uncer tainty 3 in respect to the crigin and significance of ine 
word Elohim’ to rest an argument on its use. 


1. See Gesenius, Hed. Grammar, § 106.—Green, Heb. Grammar, § 201. 

2. On the origin and significancy of Elohim, see Hengstenberg, Genuineness 
of the Penteteuch, p. 271, ff., trans. He makes the plural to express ‘‘ intensity 
of idea,” and to denote ‘‘infinite riches and inexhaustible fullness.” J. A. 


THE TRINITY. - 243 


The triple blessing of Jacob in Num., 6: 24-26, Jehovah 
bless thee :—Jehovah be gracious unto thee: Jehovah give 
thee peace, too nearly accords with the several offices of the 
three persons in the Christian benediction, not to be sugges- 
tive of the Trinity. So also the triple repetition of the 
word holy, in Is., 6: 3, may have a significancy to one who 
is already a believer in the Trinity. But these are very 
slight premises from which to construct an argument. The 
most that we can with certainty affirm is, that the Trinity 
having been revealed in Christianity, there are various forms 
of speech in the Old Testament, where God is spoken of, or is 
represented as speaking, which seem to lend it support. And 
when we remember that all divine truth, as by an invariable 
law, has been revealed by successive types and progressive 
stages, we can readily understand how the doctrine of the 
Trinity may have underlain the Old Testament revelation, 
unperceived by its writers; how it may have first been 
recognized in the economic revelation of Christianity, and 
only been clearly enunciated in the necessary evolution 
of Christian doctrine. 


C. Other than Scriptural proofs of the Trinity. 


1. The doctrine receives confirmation from Christian ex- 
perience. In the first awakened sense of accountability and 
guilt on the part of man, there is an apprehension of 
God as the Creator, Ruler, and Judge, but of God as 
remote, inaccessible, and justly displeased with us. But 
in the renewal and reconciliation wrought in us by the 
Gospel, God reveals himself in Christ Jesus as a sym- 


Alexander regards it as used by ellipsis, (God of Gods,) see his Commentary on 
the Psalms, comment on Ps., 29: 1.—De Wette held, (see his Introduction to 
the Oli Testament,) that it had a polytheistic origin; that Jewish monotheism 
in emerging from polytheism brought along with it the language of older reli- 
gions. Ewald, who formerly agreed with DeWette, has in later days regarded 
it as a kind of collective noun which embodies all ideas of the Divine in one 
comprehensive term, but a term which approaches more nearly to an abstract 
than to a concrete conception. If any one still thinks an argument may be 
founded on the plural of Elohim, or of the pronouns, let him try the passage in 
Ps., 45: 7, 8, where, according to Heb..1: 8, the Father as Elohim, addresses the 
Son as Elohim, and where both terms, if either, must furnish ground for 
inferring a Trinity. 


244 THE TRINITY. 


pathizing Deliverer who rescues us, and in a special sense 
makes us his children ; to receive Christ as our Saviour, is 
to find in him God as our Father. And were this all, 
Christ, though divinely interposing in our behalf, and 
though containing in himself aJl the fullness of the God- 
_ head bodily, would still be to us an objective and external 
Being. Subsequent scrutiny of the inward process of our 
renewal and of its results reveals, the presence of an inward 
and invisible Power who, according to the Scriptures, led us, 
John, 15: 13, and moulded us according to his own will, 
Ro., 8:14) -1. Gor.,..2: 10.2 Thess.) -2:: 18, Pete 
and dwelling in us as his temples ever helps us in the 
Christian life, Ro., 8: 16. A triune God thus accomplishes 
in man, through the three-fold but harmonious offices of the 
Father, Son and Spirit, the one comprehensive work of his 
moral renewal and final salvation. 

2. Another method of argument in support of the Trinity 
has been called the philosophical, but is strictly psycholog- 
ical, It has taken various forms, but always assumes as 
its premises, either certain conditions of perfection of being 
in man, or the supposed process in the origination of self- 
consciousness, and the acknowledged conditions of its.con- 
tinuance in man.—Thus in the use of the first form, it is 
claimed that one requisite to perfection of being is Self- 
consciousness and self-diffusion—a reflection of one’s own 
image and an interchange of thought. This condition was 
not provided for in the D ivine Being by created intelligences, 
since they began to be in time and were created by the 
Logos. If the Logos, therefore, was not an eternal subsis- 
tence or hypostasis, and if there was no communion of the 
Father and the Son through the eternal Spirit, then, until 
the Peon of the Creation, the Godhead was wanting in 
perfection of being’.—In the use of the second class of 
premises, an argument has been constructed somewhat as 
follows: Without an ‘‘I’’ there can be no ‘‘thou,”’ and 
vice versa ; the two terms being always correlative. Had 


1. For a specimen of this form of the argument, see J. Pye Smith, Seript. 
Testimony, vol. 2, append. 4. 


THE TRINITY. 245 


Deity been from eternity an abstract unity, he could not 
have been an ‘‘I’’—could not have been conscious of his 
own personality, and thus could never have come to the act: 
of creation ; hence the necessity ofa ‘‘thou,”’ or the ‘‘image””’ 
of Heb., 1: 8, as a condition of consciousness. Had there 
been, furthermore, only Father and Son, these would have 
been distinct and separate—a dual Deity. But God must 
know himself as Father and Son,:and this, self-kKnowing 
and communion of the Father and Son is the Holy Spirit. 
God, therefore, if self-conscious must be triune'.—Panthe- 
ism in its use of the premises of this second argument finds 
a ‘‘thou’’ in the external creation, which reaches its high- 
est product in the ideal Christ; and the only Holy Spirit 
which it knows is the totality of life amon men’. 

III’ RELATION oF PERSONS IN THE TRINITY. © 

Accepting now the doctrine of the Trinity as clearly 
established, there still remains the question of the mutual 
relations of the persons. What, then, shall we understand 
to be indicated by the titles Father, Son, and Spirit ? 

The first answer distinctly given, though not generally 
adopted, was that of the Patripassians; which doubtless 
had its origin in Jewish monotheism, and which finally 
took that definite form of Modalism known as Sabellianism. 
This conceives the three titles, Father, Son, and Spirit, to 
be merely the names of the three modes under which the 
one Divine Essence has manifested itself to man? 

The next answer, in reaction against Patripassian Modal- 
ism, was that of Subordinationism, (originated by Justin 
Martyr and distinctly enunciated by Origen,) which finally 
took the form of Arianism, making the Son to have been 
created out of nothing; to be subordinate to the Father 
and only in an inferior sense God.—Semi-Arianism, which 


? 


1. Seethis argument as stated by Tholuck, Bib. Sac., vol. 1, pp. 564-5.— 
Comp. Martensen, Dogmatik, §56. See the same, as elaborately stated in 
carefully selected phraseology by Shedd, in his Hist. of Christian Doctrine, 
vol. 1, pp. 365-368 ;—The Jour. of Spec. Phil., Jan., 72, art. 8. 

_ 2. See David Friedrich Strauss, Ohr. Glaubenslehre, vol. I, pp. 483-501. 

3. This view is advocated by certain living Unitarians; by James Freeman 

Clarke, in his Orthodoxy: Its Truth and Errors, ch. 16, §§ 4, 5. 


246 THE TRINITY. 


makes the Son to have been created out of nothing though 
of like substance with the Father, (oocovazoc,) grew out of 
the struggles of Arianism with the decrees of the Council 
of Nice.—The older and Origenistic form of Arianism was 
during the last century revived. and ingeniously defended 
by Samuel Clarke, who made the Son to have been derived 
from the Father, and to bea kind of secondary and subordi- 
nate Deity’. Arianism, as represented in the Council of 
Nice, evaded the question of the Divinity of the Spirit ; 
Semi-Arians denied his Divinity; but Clarke recognized the 
Spirit as proceeding from the Father through the Son, and 
so like the Son, as being in a subordinate sense Divine’. 
Thus Clarke’s Trinity is that of three graded Deities. 

The answer that was first formally and widely adopted by 
the Church is found in the Nicene Creed, and has had of 
all answers incomparably the largest number of adherents’. 
According to this answer, the Son is consubstantial, .(of the 
same essence, osoovaroc,) with the Father, was eternally and 
necessarily generated from the Father. The Nicene Creed 
declares a belief in the Holy Spirit, but says nothing of his 
consubstantiality with the Father and the Son’, 


1. See Clarke, Scripture Doctrine of the Trinity, pub. in 1712, §§ 12-14. 

2. See ibid, §§ 40-48. | 

3. The Nicene Creed has prevailed throughout Christendom; was formally 
adopted in the standard Confessions of both the Lutherans and the Reformed ; 
and in the XXXIX Articles; and was virtually incorporated in the Westmin- 
ster Confession. See.also Calvin, Jnsé7., c.138.—Bull, Defensio Pid. Nicene.— 

Waterland, Works.—Princeton Hssays, 1st series, art. Sonship of Christ. 
4, This point of consubstantiality was inserted in the Nicene Creed when it 
received its final revision at the council of Constantinople, A. D. 381. The 
phrase ‘‘and the Son,” (filioque,) in this Creed as it now stands in both the 
Roman and the Episcopal services, was neither in its original form nor as it 
was amended at Constantinople. It is admitted to have been added at a later 
day in Spain. According to the famous Edmund 8. Foulkes, in his Letter to 
Archbp. Manning, entitled The Church’s Creed, or The Crown’s Creed? it was 
first introduced by an obscure Spanish king named Reccared, A. D. 589; was 
adopted by Charlemagne, who in vain urged Pope Leo III to introduce it into 
the Roman use; and was finally adopted at Rome by Benedict VIII, in com- 
pliance with the wishes, or dictation, of Henry II, when he visited Rome to be 
crowned emperor in 1014. See pp. 9-15, ed. New York: Pott & Amery, 
Cooper Union, 1869. 


THE TRINITY. 247 


Another view has been, that the Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit designate purely temporal relations ; the Son having 
been cteated an extraordinary person, with supernatural 
endowments, and the Holy Spirit denoting a Divine influ- 
ence or energy, bestowed on Christ and subsequently con- 
tinued to the heralds of his religion. Such was the original 
Socinian view, and it is still held by some of the more con-. 
servative of modern Unitarians'. It insists on the absolute 
unity of the Godhead, though it recognizes a kind of created 
divinity, distinguishable from proper Deity, in Christ, on 
account of which he is appropriately worshipped ; and thus 
while rejecting the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity, it holds 
to a species of economic Trinity, but of actual Duality. 

Another was that propounded by Schleiermacher, who 
claimed it to have been the real view of Sabellius, making 
- the terms Father, Son, and Spirit to denote distinctions in 
the Godhead, but only in God as revealed, and not in God 
asabsolute and unrevealed, and even prior to the incarnation’. 

Another answer still, is that which regards the titles 
Father, Son, and Spirit as borrowed from relations that 
began in the work of human redemption, but as representing 
real and immanent distinctions in the Godhead, which had 
existed from eternity, and consequently were neither 
derived by generation nor by creation. 

Which, now, of the foregoing explanations shall we 
adopt? The choice, we think, lies between the Nicene and 
the last named. Of these two, the former can plead great 
antiquity, the authority of successive councils, and of the 
confessions of all the great subdivisions of Christendom ; 
the latter, however, though a growth of later years, is the 
product of a better understanding of the Scriptures. 


1. See F. A. Farley, Unttarianism Defined. ‘‘A being may be Divine, with- 
out being the Supreme God, and such is Christ. Unitarians believe in his 
Divinity. They regard, honor and revere him, as the Lord and Head of his 
Church ; second only to the Supreme Jehovah, &c.” p. 66. Comp. Catechesis 
Racoviensis, quests. 181-184. 

2. See the Essay containing the views of Schleiermacher, translated with 
comments by Moses Stuart, in Bid. Repository, vols. 5, p. 265, ff. and 6, p. 1, 
ff. This view was also adopted by Dr. Bushnell in his Christ in Theology, 


248 THE “TRINITY: 


As respects the Nicene statement of the relation of the 
persons in the Trinity, it must be admitted that no clear 
conception can be formed of eternal generation which does 
not necessarily imply derivation, subordination, and soa 
degree of inferiority ; and inferiority is certainly inconsis- 
tent with proper Deity, and so with any true and proper 
Trinity’. Nor is the objection removed by the assurance 
that the Origenistic conception of an ‘‘ eternal generation”’ 
was in the minds of the Nicene fathers, in the construction 
of their creed; an eternal generation is necessarily an 
eternal subordination and dependence’. 

The texts commonly adduced in support of the eternal 
Sonship of Christ do not in fact prove it. Thusin Ro.. 1:. 
4, which is confidently cited in this service, the comparison 
is between the two natures of the historical Christ, and not 
between the preGxistent relations of the Divine nature and 
the earthly relations of the human. The Apostle simply 
intends to affirm, that as the historical Christ was a lineal 
descendant of David, so by the resurrection he had been 
miraculously attested to be also a Divine being. To regard 
this text as teaching eternal Sonship, requires that ooco@evto¢g 
shall be understood as equivalent in meaning with zpoopco- 
Gévtoc, predestinatus,—an error of the Vulgate and Augus- 
tine, which all critical exegetes now reject. In John, 1: 18, 
Christ is designated ‘“‘the only begotten Son, who is in 
the bosom of the Father.’? This language, it is claimed, 


1. Prof. Moses Stuart has perhaps stated this more earnestly and clearly than 
any other writer. See Bib. Repository, vol. 6, p. 80, ff.—Stuart’s Miscellanies, 
p. 54, ff.—Bib. Sac., vol. 7, p. 818, ff. 

2. This seems to be fully admitted, even by the most orthodox of the Anglican 
writers. Pearson says, “the communication of the Divine essence by the 
Father, is the generation of the Son; and Christ, who was eternally God, not 
from himself‘but from the Father, is the eternal Sonof God.” ‘‘ The similitude, 
in which the propriety of generation is preserved, is that which consisteth in 
the identity of nature; and this communication of the Divine essence by the 
Father to the Word, is evidently a sufficient foundation of such a similitude,” 
Exposition of the Creed, art. 2. Hooker says, ‘‘the Father alone is originally 
Deity, which Christ is not; whatsoever Christ hath common unto him with his 
heavenly Father, the same of necessity must be given, but naturally and eter- 
nally given,” ecle. Polity, bk. 5, ch. 54, 2. 


THE TRINITY. — ', 249 


taken in connection with the preceding account of the pre- 
éxistent Logos, teaches conclusively the eternal Sonship of 
the Logos. But this interpretation entirely overlooks the 
fact that Christ is carefully styled Logos, until in verse 14 
it is distinctly affirmed that he became incarnate, and 
thenceforward, the title Logos having been dropped, the 
designation ‘‘Son’’ is uniformly employed by John through- 
out his Gospel. The Evangelist having introduced the Logos 
into the world inv. 14, merely emphasizes, in v. 18, the 
truth that he, who from eternity had been with God, (p0¢ 
tov Oeov,) in becoming incarnate, became known to men as 
the only begotten Son of God, and is now‘ in the bosom (6 @» 
_ et¢ tov x0Arov) of the Father. The entire Gospel of John is 
_ an exhibit of historical evidence, not of the eternal Sonship, 
but of the Divine dignity and nature of the historical per- 
sonage, Jesus of Nazareth. In Col., 1: 15, Christ is called 
‘the image of the invisible God, the first-born of every 
creature,’ (zewtotoxog mdons xtioswc.) The argument for 
eternal Sonship turns on the epithet ‘‘ first-born ;’’ if born 
before the ‘‘whole creation,’’ or before ‘‘ every creature,’’ 
then, the inference is, he must have been eternally genera- 
_ ted! But priority of existence is certainly not identical with 
eternity of existence. And besides, if zewroroxo¢g implies 
Sonship in the sense of derivation of essence, it must also, 
as Arians affirm, imply origination or beginning of existence. 
The reference here, moreover, is not to the relation of the 
preéxistent Son to the Father, as claimed by defenders of 
eternal Sonship, but to the relation of the now exalted and 
clorified? Christ to the invisible Father on the one side, — 
and to the created universe on the other. As respects 
the invisible God, Christ is his visible image; as re- 
spects the created universe he existed before it, (zotwrdro- 
xoc,) and was in fact, v. 16, himself the Creator of every 


1. We prefer, with Meyer, to regard John as here haying in mind the present 
and exalted Christ, than with DeWette and Alford, to regard him as using the 
timeless present. 

2. Both Meyer and Alford shew conclusively that Paul here has in mind the 
Person of Christ as he now is, and not merely either the preéxistent or the 
historical Christ. 


250 THE TRINITY. 


conceivable portion of it, animate and inanimate. In like 
manner, to cite the first chapter of Hebrews as proving eter- 
nal Sonship, because Christ is there called the Son of God, 
even when his superiority to angels is set forth, is to 
overlook the fact that the comparison is between the angels 
and the Christ incarnate and historical, and not between them 
and the Christ preéxistent. Thetruth is, that Christ in the 
Scriptures is called the Son of God, because of his super- 
natural origin in the incarnation, Luke, 1: 35; because of 
his resurrection, Acts, 18: 33. Ro., 1: 4, and of the subse- 
quent Divine attestation of his Supreme majesty, Heb., 1: 
1-4, 

There remains to us, then, the last named of the foregoing 
explanations of the personal relations in the Trinity, viz: 
that the titles Father, Son and Holy Spirit, though derived 
from the historical facts of the Christian economy, do never- 
theless represent eternal ontologic distinctions in the God- 
head. This view discards all theories of the relations and 
rests content on the simple facts of the case. Thus it is 
evident that, 

1. The Scriptures give us no information respecting these 
relations, except just so far as the ultimate end of Chris- 
tianity makes necessary. They reveal a Trinity only just 
so far as they reveal the several steps in Christ’s objective 
work of man’s redemption, and in the subjective process of 
making this redemption available. In treating of this sub- 
ject, as of all others, the terminology of the Scriptures seems 
to have been suggested by historical phenomena rather than 
by the eternal principles lying beneath and henae the phe- 
- nomena. Hence 

2. The names and Pre era of the persons in the 
Trinity are strictly economic. Derived from relations exist- 
ing in time, they cannot be assumed to be exactly descrip- 
tive of the unknown relations of eternity, without some 
special authority of Scripture. That authority is wanting. 
If the titles ‘‘Son’’ and ‘‘Christ’’ are applied to the pre- 
éxistent Logos, it is because they are supplied at the point 
of departure by terminology derived either from the histor- 


THE TRINITY. : 251 


ical phenomena or the contextual thought. As preéxistent, 
Christ is the Logos, a title, the origin and meaning of 
which is not given in Scripture and can only be conjectured’. 
Comp. John, 1: 1-5 with 1: 14, 18. 13: 14. Phil., 2: 6-8* 
2.Cor.,.8:: 9. 

3. But it cannot be denied, that all our necessary concep- 
tions of God must have some underlying and essential basis 
of eternal reality. We are not so constituted as to be neces- 
sarily deceived, though we may beso constituted as necessa- 
rily to have very imperfect conceptions. The phraseology 
of the New Testament is such as to have suggested to the 
universal Church the doctrine of original, personal distinc- 
tions in the Godhead, corresponding to the titles, Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit; and it is inconceivable that Christi- 
anity can be a true revelation from God and these distinc- 
tions in the Godhead not exist. 

4. There must, therefore, be some ontologic or immanent, 
and consequently eternal, distinctions in the Godhead on 
which are grounded the economic titles and the conceptions 
of personality which they suggest. With these preexistent 
distinctions correspond all those representations of Christ 
as the Sent of God, andthe One by whom God made the 
worlds, Heb., 1: 2. In the Godhead, then, we must infer 
that there were from eternity hypostatical distinctions which 
made it fit and necessary that, in the economy of redemp- 
tion, one of these should be Father, another Son, and 
another Paraclete or Holy Spirit. But what these distinc- 
tions were, what their modus existendi, and what their 
commonrelation to the absolute oneness of the Divine essence, 
the Scriptures do not inform us, and it is idle to inquire’. 


1. To reason from the title Logos in support of the derivation and subordina- 
tion of the preéxistent Christ, is to repudiate his hypostatical preéxistence and, 
withal, to assume that there was a point at which the Logos began to exist in 
the consciousness of God. 

2. On the phrase év jop¢7 Ocod and its meaning, sed Lightfoot, Commentary 
on Phil., and pp. 108, 130, 131. 

3. Notwithstanding the absence of all trustworthy data from which to rea- 
son in respect to the relation of persons in the Trinity, attempts are still made 
to construct the doctrine from the postulates of speculative philosophy. Mar- 


252 THE OFFICES OF CHRIST. 


IV. PRACTICAL BEARING OF THE DOCTRINE. 


Whatever may be our explanation of the relations of the 
persons in the Trinity, we cannot fail, as Christians, to per- 
ceive the significance and appropriateness of the several 
offices which the persons represent. As dependent and 
accountable creatures, as alienated and condemned, as per- 
verted and prone to err, we cannot but recognize the offices 
of the merciful heavenly Father, of the interposing Saviour, 
and of the indwelling and sanctifying Paraclete ; each and 
all alike condescending to our condition and wants, and 
cooperating in our individual salvation. The office of each 
is stamped on every page of the New Testament; and the 
ministrations of each have contributed to the making up of 
every Christian's experience. Every normal Christian con- 
sciousness responds at once to the truth of the economic 
Trinity as taught in the New Testament’. Christianity, both 
as a history and a life, rests on the doctrine of the Trinity. 
Deny that doctrine, and we rob the Gospel of the power by 
which it reclaims men; we reduce Christianity to a religious ~ 
philosophy, and enter upon a line of thought which can logi- 
cally end only in sweeping away all that is supernatural in 
its records, its methods and its results. 


+ +> —____ 


§ 41—The Offices of Christ. 


As Mediator between God and man, Christ has been com- 
monly known under the three-fold offices of Prophet, Priest 
and King—corresponding to the three great offices of 
Prophet, High Priest and King, in the kingdom of Israel. 


tensen is an example of this among theologians, see his Dogmatik, §§ 56, 57; for 
an attempt at an exclusively philosophical demonstration, see The Journal of 
Spec. Philosophy, Jan., 1872, p. 36-42. 

1. Even James Freeman Clarke in his Orthodoxy: its truths and errors, 
admits that ‘‘there is an essential truth hidden in the idea of the Trinity. 
While the Church doctrine in every form which it has taken, has failed to 
satisfy the human intellect, the human heart has clung to the substance con- 
tained in them all,” p. 436. 


THE OFFICES OF CHRIST. 258 


The titles are not merely figurative, but descriptive of the 
real and distinct offices of Christ in teaching, redeeming and 
controlling his people’. But by this division is not meant 
that the earthly life and works of Christ can be distributed 
into periods and series of acts, in which he was now exclu- 
sively Prophet, and now Priest, and now King. The three 
offices were for a single end, and in fulfillment of that end 
were always conjointly exercised. He taught that he might 
redeem, and he redeemed that he might control, perfect and 
employ; but in becoming Redeemer, he did: not cease to 
be Prophet, and in exercising the function of King, he does 
not cease to act as our High Priest, Mat., 28: 18. Acts, 2: 
33. 8: Bl. 


In his Propuerrtc office we are doubtless to understand 
that Christ is the communicator to man of the mind and will 
of God. Intimations of this office are very likely intended 
to be given in the title Logos, by which he is designated in 
the Gospel of John. It was he who made known the will of 
Jehovah to the patriarchs ; who, according to Peter, 1 Ep., 
1: 11, spoke through the Old Testament prophets; who, 
fulfilling in his own person the prophecies of preceding 
prophets, inaugurated new methods, and proclaimed new 
truths in religion; who, having returned to his original 
estate in heaven, still continued to be the instructor and 
prophet of his church, Acts, 2: 33. Gal., 1: 12; and who, 
judging from the past and from the measureless interval 
between finite man and the infinite God, will continue to be 
the eternal prophet and communicator between them. 


Of the Priestiy office of Christ it will be necessary that 
we treat moreat length. It is chiefly in this character that 
Christ is presented to usin the New Testament. Though 
the title Priest is specially applied to him only in the Epis- 
tle to the Hebrews, yet the idea involved in it is common to 


1. Too much stress is, of course, not to be laid on these tities; they are 
metaphors which should not be literally interpreted; they nevertheless repre- 
sent real offices of Christ which no other terms can so fitly signify, and are 
therefore not to be set aside. 


254. THE OFFICES OF CHRIST. 


the whole New Testament'. The Epistle to the Hebrews 
having been designed to exhibit the superiority of Chris- 
tianity to Judaism by a comparison of the two economies, 
there was special pertinency in its designation of Christ as 
the High Priest; but another and broader design of the 
whole New Testament being to exhibit Jesus Christ as one 
who saves men by transacting for them in things pertaining 
to God, which is the essential idea of a priest, the idea of 
his priesthood necessarily underlies the whole structure of © 
New Testament thought. In fact the whole circle of biblical 
ideas revolves around the central conception of one who, as 
the Son of God and the Son of Man, should appear on 
earth to transact for men with God, and who by his offices, 
particularly in that of suffering, even unto death, should 
prove himself to be the Saviour of the race. It was in recog- 
nition of the sacrificial sufferings of Christ as the crowning 
thought in the whole structure of prophetic ideas, that 
John the Baptist, who up to his time was at once the pro- 
foundest and most authoritative interpreter of Old Testa- 
ment teaching, entitled Christ, at the very outset of his 
Messianic career, as the Lamb of God that taketh away the 
sins of the world. It was in recognition of the same 
thought, that Christ declared himself to have come into the 
world that he might ‘‘give his life a ransom for many ;’’ 
and, when all had been finished, represented his sufferings, 
death and resurrection as fulfilling the Scriptures, and pro- 
curing remission of sins for the race, Luke, 24: 44-47 ;.and 
that all the Apostles, both in their preaching as recorded 
inthe Acts and in their Epistles as addressed to the churches, 
set forth Jesus Christ the crucified and risen, as the One by 
whom we are reconciled to God, are recreated in heart, and 
made heirs of eternal life. The whole New Testament, in 
short, was written forthe simple purpose of exhibiting, in 
one form and another, the great truth, that Jesus Christ, by 
his priestly offices in our behalf, particularly by the offer-: 


1. Christ was not born a priest, but was a “ High Priest after the order of 
Melchizedek ;” that is, he was a kingly priest who had no lineal predecessor or 


~ guecessor. 


THE ATONEMENT. 255 


ing of himself as a sacrifice for the race on the Cross, has 
become an Omnipotent Saviour to every one that will trust 
in him. 

Of the Kinesuip of Christ there is abundant testimony 
in the Scriptures. The glory of his kingdom is the theme 
of exultant praise with prophets, psalmists and apostles 
alike ; it is to be a Kingdom without limit of extent, dura- 
tion or of magnificence. But of the nature of his kingly 
office and of his kingdom it will remain for us to speak 
more fully and precisely, when we come to treat of the con- 
stitution and government of the Christian Church. It is in 
the Church that Christ preéminently reigns, and it is through 
the instrumentality of the Church that his empire is to be- 
come universal, and its glory to be specially manifest. 


> 94 


: § 42—The Atonement. 


The priestly office of Christ has been exercised in making 
what in modern theological terminology, especially in that 
of the English language, is called the Atonement for sin. 
The word atonement has been used with great latitude of 
meaning; to denote what the schoolmen meant by satisfac- 
tion and what the Scriptures mean by propitiation and re- 
conciliation ; a two-sided word, representing, in respect to 
God, the expiation of guilt, and, in respect to man, his 
at-one-ment with God. This last named is its meaning in 
the single instance in which{it occurs in our common Eng- 
lish version of the New Testament; Ro. 5: 11. The term, 
therefore, when employed in designation of Christ’s priestly 
office, must manifestly be understood to include, like his 
priesthood, all that he accomplished for us in his life as well 
as all that he procured for us by his death. The atonement 
of Christ was his whole objective work on earth, securing 
in those that believe in him their subjective renewal, and so 
their final salvation. : 


256 THE ATONEMENT. . 


Nothing is more plainly or more emphatically taught in 
the Scriptures than that Jesus Christ died on the cross to 
procure for man his salvation from sin and its consequences. 
The saving efficacy of the death of Christ is. the one idea 
that gives organic unity to the various writings which com- 
pose our New Testament Scriptures ; and it is the appropri- 
ation of this idea in his individual life which makes a man 
to be distinctively a Christian. But as respects the method 
by which the death of Christ avails for our salvation, great 
diversity of views has existed even among those who are 
entirely agreed as to the fact. These views have taken 
definite form in what are known as theories of the atone- 
ment. No full and intelligent discussion of the doctrine of 
the atonement is now possible without an understanding of 
the origin and the nature of these theories. Any attempt 
to formulate a doctrine of the relation of Christ’s death to 
man’s salvation necessarily involves a theory of method. 
The oldest Church doctrine of satisfaction, claimed by its 
advocates to be exclusively orthodox, is preéminently the- 
oretic; whatever the modifications to which it may have 
been subjected since its origin with Anselm in the eleventh 
century, it is still as purely a theory as any that has ever 
been propounded in its stead. 

All existing theories of the atonement are reducible to 
three general classes. The old Patristic theory, that the 
death of Christ was a ransom paid to the devil, is now ex- 
tinct, and here need be referred to only as a theory which, 
in a history of doctrines, cannot be classified with any now 
existing. It conceived of the human race as in bondage to 
the devil, and,though unjustly enslaved, as not to be res- 
cued without a fair equivalent in the way of ransom. The 
misconception was natural to an age in which captives taken 
in war were uniformly enslaved, and were released only on 
payment of aransom. God would not, even in the rescue of 
his own children, do violence to the supposed rights, how- 
ever unjustly acquired, of their captor and owner. It is 
useless to deny that the Church Fathers held this theory ; 
and something worse than useless to attempt, however hon- 


THE ATONEMENT. 257 


estly, by a forced interpretation of the figurative language of 
Scripture which they use, to impute to them the satisfaction 
theory of Anselm. But, dropping the Patristic theory asa 
thing of the past, all existing theories of the atonement may 
be arranged under one or the other of the three following 
classes: The Satisfaction (substitutionary) or Anselmic the- 
ory ; the Moral Infinence, or Socinian theory ; the Govern- 
mental (rectoral) or Grotian theory. It will be necessary to 
examine these theories somewhat carefully, and they may 
be taken in the chronological order in which they originated 
and are here enumerated. 
I. Tue SATISFACTION OR ANSELMIC THEORY. 


This originated in an attempt—the first then made—to give 
a philosophical and systematic explanation of the relation 
of Christ’s sufferings and death to the salvation of men. It 
conceives Christ to have suffered literally in our stead, and as 
our substitute to have made satisfaction or expiation for sin 
unto God. 'The theory was originated by Anselm, in the elev- 
enth century’, and under various modifications, has very gen- 
erally, by Protestants, been regarded as the orthodox theory. 
The Anselmic form of it, reduced’to modern modes of state- 
ment, would be somewhat as follows. The infinite justice of 
God, which is identical with God himself, required that sin 
should be punished ; sin had robbed God of his honor ; man 
as a sinner had contracted a debt to God which no being, 
unless equal in dignity to God himself, could ever repay ; 
the God-man, Jesus Christ, by his two-fold nature was com- 
petent to pay for man to God a full satisfaction; him- 
self sinless, by his voluntary sufferings, even unto death in 
the stead of sinners, he expiated, or.made a sufficient atone- 
ment for, their sins; by thus making full satisfaction, he 
vindicated the character of God as both just and merciful 
in the remission of sins. The chief points of the theory are, 
that absolute justice required either the eternal punishment 


1. Anselm began the writing of his Cur Deus Homo, in which this theory 
was elaborated, in England, but completed it in Italy, during his first exile, in 
the summer of 1098. <A translation of this tractate may be found in vols. 11 and 
12, or in the numbers for Oct. ’54 and Jan. ’55, of the Bib. Sacra. 


Ay 


258 THE ATONEMENT. 


of man or some adequate compensation for their release ; and 
that an infinitely holy Being, who was duly related to both 
God and man, and was at the same time free from al] obli- 
gations on his own account, volunteered to put himself in 
the place of men, and make in their stead a full satisfac- 
tion for their sins’. | 

The Anselmic theory was rejected by Abelard’, for ground- 
ing the atonement in justice instead of benevolence, and for 
taking insufficient account of the power of Christ’s sufferings 
and death in procuring a subjective change in man ; criti- 
cised by Bonaventure® and Aquinas’, for making the neces. 
sity of thedeath of Christ to be absolute rather than relative ; 
opposed by Duns Scotus’, as limiting the sovereign power of 
God by grounding the necessity of the atonement in the 
immutable necessity of the Divine justice; and was finally 
modified by its scholastic defenders to accord with their 
notions of an efficacy in the mass, and particularly in the 
cood works of the redeemed. Protestantism restored to the 
Anselnic theory its conception of an exclusive sufficiency 
in the objective work of Christ, and, by acceptance of the 
Augustinian doctrine of predestination and prevenient, irre- 
sistible grace, provided for the subjective reconciliation of 
man through the renewing of the Holy Ghost and the active 


1. That Anselm regarded the death of Christ as a vicarious punishment, as the 
Protestant holders of his theory have done, there is no good reason for believ- 
ing; on the contrary it seems evident that he regarded it as a voluntary sacri- 
fice in compensation for which the guilty were released and justified. See Cur 
Deus Homo, lib. 2, cap. 18, 19.—also, Bellarmine, De Christo, 4, 8.—Neander, 
ITist. Chr. Dogmas, Bohn, vol. 2, p. 517, understands Anselm to teach ‘ the 
necessity of a satisfactio vicaria activa;” and says, ‘‘ we do not find in his 
writings the doctrine of a satisfactio passiva; he nowhere says that Christ had 
endured the punishment of men ;” comp. Ch. Hist., v. 4, p. 500.—Baur, Ohr. 
Lehre von d. Versihnung, p. 156, ff.—Dr. Shedd, Hist. Christian Doctrine, 2, 
282, thinks these authors have misunderstood Anselm. 

2. See Neander, Hist. of Dogmas 2, 518, 519, Bohn.—Peter Lombard, (died, 
1164,) in his Liber Sententiarum, 3, 19, ignores Anselm’s view and restores 
the old Patristic theory of a compensation to the Devil,—a notion which, 
among theologians, seems to have ended with Lombard. 

3. Senten., lib. 8, dis. 20. 

4, Summa, pars 8, ques. 46-49. 

5. In Senten. Pete. Lomb., 3. 19, 20. 


THE ATONEMENT. 259 


principle of faith. Romanism, true to the later scholastic 
teaching, still continues to encumber the atonement with 
notions of efficacy in the mass and good works as procuring 
causes of redemption ; while Protestantism, starting with 
the theory of Anselm, has been subdivided into the sup- 
porters, either of a theory which is essentially Anselmic ; or 
ofa theory founded on principles advanced by Abelard, 
(the moral influence theory) ; or of another, the fundamen- 
tal principles of which were first defended by Duns Scotus, 
(the governmental theory). 

As respects the nature and mode of the substitution and 
satisfaction of Christ, the Protestant‘holders of the Anselmic 
theory have not always beenagreed. They have been unan- 
imous in accepting the Augustinian doctrines of predestina- 
tion and grace, but, have divided on the questions whether 
the fulland identical penalty due the redeemed was actu- 
ally transferred to Christ; or whether Christ was made 
by imputation to endure such penal sufferings as were 
equivalent, in degree and merit, to what were actually 
deserved by the redeemed. Those who answered the first 
of these questions in the affirmative, holding rigidly to 
Anselm’s view of sin as a debt, regarded the atonement as 
a strictly commercial transaction, in which Christ discharged 
the identical obligations of the redeemed ; those taking the: 
other side, insisted that Christ made a judicial or forensic 
satisfaction to the justice and law of God, by rendering an 
equivalent forall that justice and law would have required 
of the saved. The commercial view is, in our day, almost 
wholly abandoned ; the forensic is still maintained with 
vigor and confidence. 

The special form of the forensic theory which now claims 
to be exclusively orthodox, and with which in this country 
we are specially concerned’, builds on the Coccejan theory 
of covenants, and affirms that Christ, by an agreement with 
the Father, took, in his death, the place of the redeemed, 
and in their seael suffered: a ate which, from fie 


1. See Princeton Hssays ; Hodge’s Hssays and Systematic Theology ; Hodge’s 
Outlines, &c.—Comp. Symington, On the Atonement.-—Witsius, Turretine, Dick. 


260 THE ATONEMENT. 


infinite dignity of his person, was fully equal to the deserts 
of their infinite guilt. The wrath of God towards sin was 
transferred to his Son from the persons of those for whom 
the Son died ; and human guilt was thereby expiated and 
Divine justice satisfied. The death of Christ, according to 
this explanation, is supposed to avail for so many only as 
were included in the covenant’. 

But this literal forensic view of substitutionary satisfaction 
is justly open to several grave objections. 

(a.) It gives a literal meaning to the words covenant, sacri- 
fice, propitiation, atonement, and redemption, terms which, 
as applied to the redemptive work of Christ, are manifestly 
metaphors, though metaphors laden with the most weighty 
of meanings ; meanings, also, which carry us beneath the 
machinery of government to the moral natures of Him who 
rules and of them who are ruled. But to give to these 


1. Dr. Shedd, (see his Discourses and Hssays, ‘‘'The Doctrine of the Atone- 
ment,”) quietly ignoring the notion of Covenants, revives what he understands 
to be the pure Anselmic theory, bnttressing those points, however, the weak- 
ness of which has been expossed in various controversies. His fundamental 
positions are, that the justice of God and the human conscience implacably 
demand the punishment of sin; that Divine law and justice, and the human 
conscience, are absolutely unyielding, but that the Divine attribute of mercy can 
be exercised or not, as God wills; that God is his own propitiator—‘‘ the substi- 
tute is the punisher himself.” —Discourses and Hssays, 280. He assures us that, 
‘so far as the guilt of an act,—in other words, its obligation to punishment,—is 
concerned, if the transgressor or his accepted substitute, has endured the inflic- 
tion that is set over against it, the law is satisfied, and the obligation to punish- 
ment is discharged,”—p. 307. It seems to occur to him that this mode of 
reasoning involves a coutradiction of his fundamental postulate of immutable 
justice, and so, in a foot note on the phrase ‘‘ accepted substitute,” he tells us 
that ‘‘ the primal source of law has no power to abolish penalty any more than 
to abolish law, but it has full power to swhstitute penalty.” What this ‘‘ primal 
source,” which he calls ‘‘it,” may be, is not quite so apparent as is desirable in 
such an argument. It isnot very clear what ‘‘ power” an abstraction can have 
to change the sanction of an immutable law. ‘The truth is, that any explana- 
tion, or defence, which can be given of a literal forensic substitution, necssarily. 
involves in the end a contradiction of the idea of absolute justice upon which 
the whole theory rests; and Dr. Shedd’s conception of an absolute justice in 
God which his voluntary mercy could satisfy or not, shuts us up to the alterna- 
tive, either of a one-sided nature in God, or of an atonement which is stripped of 
every vestige of grace. An atonement made necessary to balance the character _ 
of God, could not be a gratuity to men. 


THE ATONEMENT. 961 


metaphors a literal meaning, is to reduce the free moral 
government of God to a mere scheme of legal fictions—an 
empty mechanism of technical terms. 

(6.) The method of a literal, formal, juridical transfer of 
moral penalty from the guilty to the innocent, is absolutely 
inconceivable. Moral penalty consists of mental and moral 
suffering, and to suppose that such suffering could either 
be voluntarily taken by one person from another, or be in 
any way actually handed over from the consciously guilty 
to the consciously innocent, is to suppose that which con- 
tradicts the very idea of penalty. The possibility of mental 
anguish as penal, is conceivable only as the correlative of 
some kind of consciousness of ill-desert. 

(c.) The idea of a formal, juridical transfer of the penalty 
of sin to Christ, contradicts our innate sense of justice. The 
conviction is universal, immediate and ineradicable, that 
all wrong doing should be punished ; the demands of this 
conviction are not satisfied by a theory of literal, objective, 
personal substitution of the innocent for the guilty, and 
can be fully satisfied only when penalty is so inflicted upon 
the guilty, in conjunction with his Deliverer, as that, by its 
infliction, he shall be rescued from his sin; but it is not 
satisfied in the unqualified escape of the guilty. 

(d.) This theory contradicts the established order of - 
moral sequence everywhere traceable in society and in per- 
sonal character. According to that order, the penal conse- 
quences of violated law, moral, mental and physical, are 
invariable and inevitable; and the only method by which 
these consequences may be escaped, is in that remedial or 
redemptive process through which the effects of a law vio- 
lated are overborne and finally eradicated by the beneficent 
working of a new law observed. 

(¢.) This theory is self-contradictory. It first insists 
that the punishment of sin, or, since sin has no existence 
aside from a personal being, the punishment of the sinner, 
is made absolutely necessary by the immutable justice of 
God ; and then itmaintains that, through an eternal, decretive 
purpose, this immutable justice of God is satisfied by atrans- 
fer of penalty from the guilty to an adequate representative 


262 THE ATONEMENT. 


and an accepted substitute ; that is, immutable justice is so 
far mutable as to admit of a commutation both of persons 
and punishments. 

(f.) This theory, by its abandonment of the strictly com- 
mercial view,—the conception of an exact guid pro quo in 
the sufferings of Christ, and by its admission that his suffer- 
ings are merely equivalent to the actual penalties deserved 
by the saved, forsakes the only ground on which it can rest. 
Its fundamental postulate is that of the immutability of the 
Divine justice ; the substitution of any other postulate, espe- 
cially that of an equivalency of sufferings, is fatal to the 
theory itself*. | 

But that we are saved through the sufferings and death 
of Christ as our representative and personal substitute 
before God, there seems to be the clearest evidence, both in 
the Scriptures and in Christian experience. As a more 
satisfactory explanation, however, of the method and nature 
of his substitution than is afforded in the theory of Anselm, 
we prefer that which is suggested by the simple facts of the 
Scriptures. According to these facts, our Lord in assum- 
ing human nature became subject to its laws, limitations, 
exposures and penal liabilities’. Having taken our nature 
for the express purpose of interposing in our behalt, of 
becoming the representative of the human race before God, 
he actually suffered the woes which have come, or, without 
his interposing help, must come, on every one of the race. 
He bore these as the true penal sufferings for sin. They 
were not transferred by literal imputation, from the race, 
or from any individual of the race, to him, but as one of the 
race, as its interposing and recognized representative, he 
bore them, and in bearing triumphed over'them. And ¢ 
every one who has fellowship with him as a sufferer for sin, 
and faith in him asa personal Saviour from its power, it is 
divinely given to share in his triumphs. 

Between a holy God and a sinful race there is a mutual 


1. A recent author, of considerable learning and ability, Prof. Geo. Smeaton 
of New College, Edinburgh, has sought to defend, by critical exegesis, this form 
of the Anselmic theory, in two vols., entitled The Atonement as taught by 
Christ, 1868, and The Atonement as taught by the Apostles, 1870. 

2. Seep. 216, ff. 


THE ATONEMENT. 263 


and ceaseless antagonism. The result of this antagonism is 
to man, through the action of his conscience and the effects 
upon his moral nature, the painful and inevitable penalty of 
his rebellion. JesusChrist, having taken our nature, stepped 
between us and God as our representative and High Priest, 
bearing in his own person that Divine displeasure which 
goes forth upon the race with which he had allied himself. 
Identifying himself with the race, he took upon himself the 
penal burdens under which the race was suffering. He had 
assumed human nature for the very purpose of its rescue, 
and by virtue of his two-fold relation to the holy God and 
the sinful race, he could bear, and in bearing could exhaust, 
the full penalty of guilt under which human nature was 
struggling. As the well beloved Son of God, his communion 
with God was complete and uninterrupted ; as the Son of 
Man his union and sympathy with mankind, whom he 
sought to save, was equally complete and continued. As 
infinite in his Divine nature and attributes, and at the 
same time as shut-in by the circumscribed conditions of the 
eullty race whose nature he had assumed, he could at once 
consciously bear, in their fulness, our penal woes, and so bear 
as to exhaust and survive them. Unaided man, perverted 
in his moral affections, sinks helplessly and hopelessly 
under the ever accumulating weight of his sins and their 
consequences ; our Lord, by his Divine will, could not only 
hold his human nature steadily: to the fulfillment of every 
duty, even to the minutest, but could also endure and sur- 
vive all that that nature had brought on the race. By his 
resurrection from the dead he gave fullest assurance to the 
Universe, that the whole penalty of sin had been exhaustively 
paid, and paid for every one who should believe on him. 
It should be borne in mind, however, that we need not 
understand the sufferings of our Lord to have been identi- 
cal with those which every, or in fact any, individual saved 
by him would have endured. There is doubtless an ele- 
ment in the penal suffering of every individual transgres- 
sor, which can be borne by no other than the transgressor 
himself. Indeed it is not possible to conceive how a con- 
sciousness of personal guilt, or the feeling of remorse, 
can coéxist with conscious personal innocence, The dis- 


264 THE ATONEMENT. 


tinctive penalty, therefore, which our Lord bore, must have 
been that, and that only, which les upon the nature he had 
taken and the race with which he had united himself. 
Having taken that nature, he was compelled either to hold it 
firmly to the fulfillment of its offices, and to redeem it by 
bearing its penalties, or be borne by it hopelessly downward 
into irretrievable ruin. As one of mankind, Christ, if he 
would save the human nature he had assumed, must have 
suffered what he did, whether all the race or none of the 
race were to be saved by him. 

A sense of personal guilt, however, for voluntary acts 1s 
an essential element in the penalty of sin; and though this 
sense of guilt is a personal possession which cannot be con- 
ceived of, either as being literally transferred, or as being 
voluntarily assumed by one for another, yet there is a 
clearly intelligible sense in which it may be said to have 
been imputed to Christ, and Christ may be said to have 
borne it. Thus, when a sinful man, burdened with a sense 
of ill-desert, finds himself consciously and peacefully trust- 
ing in Christ as his Saviour, so complete is the extinction 
of his feeling of remorse, that Christ may justly be said to 
have borne it in his stead. When the believer is enabled so 
to appropriate to himself the sacrifice of Christ, that hemay 
be said to have eaten Christ’s flesh and to have drunk 
Christ’s blood, then is his sense of guilt so overborne 
and extinguished, by a new and more powerful conscious- 
ness of release from the dominion of sin and of reconcilation 
with God, that Christ may be said with propriety and em- 
phasis to have borne all his punishment and to have expi- 
ated all his guilt. 

It is by some regarded as not inconceivable that our Lord 
may have been conscious of personal ill-desert. F. W. Krum- 
macher,.even while holding to a rigid theory of forensie, 
objective imputation of guilt, maintained that our Lord 
‘‘took the consciousness of our guilt upon him in another 
and more intimate manner than that of a mere objective 


representation'.”> And when we remember how imma- 


1. See his Suffering Saviour, p. 120, trans. Boston ed.-comp. Luther, On Gala- 
tians, ch. 8.—Tobias Chrisp’s Christ alone Hxalted, Gill’s 6 ed., Sermons, 17-22, 


THE ATONEMENT. 265 


nent and universal in the race is the feeling of guilt before 
God, it is not wholly impossible that, in partaking of our 
nature, the Saviour may have also been made a partaker of 
this common feeling. But how this feeling could have been 
awakened by the juristic imputation of sin, and made. to 
consist with a consciousness of perfect sinlessness, is beyond 
the power of human comprehension or conception. 

Should it be said that, it is inconceivable how a personally 
innocent being like Christ could at all suffer spiritual 
anguish or moral penalty for sin, or how God could forsake 
his Son in the hour of extreme need, the most we can say is 
that, as a matter of fact stated in the Scriptures, Christ did 
suffer indescribable anguish, and that God did not interpose 
for his rescue. That his sufferings were on account of any 
personal sins of his own, is an impossible supposition ; that 
they were produced by any objective, positive personal 
infliction, must be regarded as wholly unsupported and 
inconceivable ; that they were unreal and only enacted for 
effect, is absolutely inadmissable ; our only alternative is to 
regard them as the most awful and mysterious experiences 
of mental anguish ever witnessed on this earth. It was 
anguish that, gathering strength throughout the fe time of 
the ‘‘ Man of Sorrows,’’ seems in its final outburst to have 
terminated his earthly existence’. Anguish thus overwhelm- 
ing and fatal to such a Being, could have sprung only 
from the nature he had assumed and the task of its redemp- 
tion which he had undertaken. To redeem, and by redeem- 
ing to purify and thus rescue the nature, he must bear its 
penalties; and to bear its penalties, he must, in iso- 
lation and utter loneliness, without an angel to strengthen or 
God to comfort him, penetrate and pass through the gloom 
of spiritual death. And the spiritual death which he 
endured was, excepting the absence of remorse, the spiritual 
death of all lost men. | 

We need not tarry here to inquire into the grounds of 
this inexorable necessity for the penal sufferings of him 


1. See Stroud, 7’he Death of Christ, pt. 1, c. 4. The author’s belief is, that the 
death of Christ was produced by a literal bursting of the heart from extreme 
anguish. 


266 THE ATONEMENT. 


who was to be the Saviour of men. This will constitute 
a distinct topic of inquiry when we shall have first deter- 
mined by adequate evidence, both the fact and the nature of 
the atonement itself. Of one thing, however, we may be 
certain, and that is, that no analogical argument of any 
avail against the necessity of penal suffering in the Saviour 
of men, can be drawn from what is proper in man to what 
may be supposed to be fitting in God. With man the for- 
giveness of a personal injury is a first duty. Man’s con- 
victions and perceptions of justice and its relation to ill- 
desert, though instinctive and ineradicable, are yet so 
subject to distortion from prejudice and the spirit of vin- 
dictiveness, that non-forgiveness of personal wrong is person- 
ally fatal to the heart that cherishes it. Weare accordingly 
forbidden, in our individual capacity, even to judge, not to 
say punish, one another. But with God, justice is his infi- 
nite holiness in its relations to the moral characters of his 
creatures ; all his judgments are right, and his requirements 
established in infinite rectitude. | 

Neither need we be perplexed by the inquiry, how on any 
conception of substitution, especially of that here given, 
there can be scope for the exercise of: the Divine mercy, or 
how sins can be said to be forgiven and salvation to be by 
grace. With the conception of a literal, formal substitution, 
it must be admitted that the ideas of forgiveness and grace 
are not strictly in harmony. For if Christ really paid our 
debts and bore our actual, personal penalties, then we have 
a right to what he has procured for us; grace and mercy 
are relevant terms only as pertaining to what Christ has 
wrought for us in his own person ; salvation is bestowed on 
individual believers asa simple act of justice/ But if, on 
the other hand, Christ by his obedience and sufferings has so 
fulfilled all the moral law, and borne all the penalties to 
which the race are liable, that every individual trusting in 
him shall find all his own personal obligations fulfilled, all 
his personal sins and their consequences taken away, and 
himself put upon a career that shall bring him into a full 
participation in the triumphant exaltation of his Saviour 


THE ATONEMENT. 267 


and Lord, then is there abundant reason for speaking of the. 
grace and mercy of God inthe salvation of every one. The 
triune Godhead busy themselves in the reclamation of a 
man from the dominion of moral evil; and the change that 
is wrought first announces itself in consciousness by that 
sense of release or of forgiveness which always accompanies 
the breaking up and overthrow of any hated habit of soul ; 
and which is itself both a foretaste and a pledge of the 
divinely communicated power ofanendless life. Here then we 
have the abounding grace of God in Christ, first reclaiming 
a man from his sins, by imparting to him an abhorrence of 
moral evil and the feeling of deliverance from its hated 
dominion, and thus of forgiveness on account of it ; and 
then starting him on that career of Christian living, which, 
through the exhaustless resources of Divine grace, shall 
gradually erase from his character the penal traces of his 
former estate, and thus carry him endlessly onward and 
upward. 

That the foregoing explanation of the redemptive work of 
Christ is the true one, must be inferred alike from the plain 
teaching of the Scriptures and from all those principles of 
moral law, divine government, and human virtue, which it 
would seem that all believers in the Divine authority of the 
Christian Religion should accept as true and fundamental. 


1. This explanation accords more fully than any other 
with the facts of Christ’s life, sufferings and death as 
recorded in the New Testament. The facts were, that he 
came into the world for the purpose of human redemption ; 
that in pursuit of his purpose he lived a spotless life, which 
wns finally terminated after a most mysterious and awful 
mental agony. This agony could not have been on account 
of anything himself had done ; it is impossible to conceive 
it as having been externally inflicted ; our only alternative 
is to regard itas having had its origin in the nature he had 
taken, and inthe burden of woes he had assumed in becom- 
ing mant. 


1. For various attempted explanations of the cause of Christ’s agony, see 
Prof. Smeaton’s Doctrine of the Atonement as taught by Christ, p. 116, ff. 


268 THE ATONEMENT. 


2. This explanation agrees with what we have seen to be 
our necessarily fundamental conception of God as a Holy 
Being’; and grounds the actions of God as ruler of men in 
the immutable purity of his nature and its inexorable require- 
ments, rather than in a policy formed in view of ends to be 
secured by his government. 

3. The view above taken of the expiatory work of Christ, 
regards the Justice of God as simply the necessary relation 
of his holiness to the actions of men—the out-coming of his 
holiness towards men as holy or sinful*; it recognizes no 
distinctions in kinds of justice, but insists that, in the nature 
of the case, justice must ever be the simple rendering to each 
one of his real deserts. A sinful person or a sinful race is, 
by the nature of sin and its penalties, separated from the 
holy God,—indeed the very essence of the penalty of sin is 
in the consciousness of this separation; Christ took the 
nature and the penal liabilities of our race, and in bearing 
the penalties he was consciously separated from, or. for- 
saken of, God. 

4. This view rests on just and Hatonenie conceptions of 
Moral Law and Divine Government®. Itconceives moral law 
to be, not the creation of absolute will, but a revelation of 
the constituent principles of moral being,— of the unvarying 
sequences of relations and acts; it regards the Divine 
government as a formal, objective recognition and procla- 
mation of subjective, organic laws; it accounts the public 
enactments of moral law as only and partially representa- 
tive, and by no means exhaustive, of the laws of moral being 
or of its relations ; and it finds the final cause of legal sanc- 
tions, not in their reformatory uses, but in the very nature 
of human happiness, which can exist only in a complete 
observance of the laws of the moral nature which the 
sanctions represent. 

5. The view of Christ’s redemptive work here advocated, 
contemplates Sin, as not so much a violation of published 
statute as of inherent law of the moral nature; and its 
penalty, as an inevitable sequent attaching necessarily and 


1; See pp. Palead(s? 2 pp. 80,81. 3. p. 186, ff. 


THE ATONEMENT. 269 


by transmission to the nature itself which it corrupts,—a 
nature which Christ assumed and whose penalty he encoun- 
tered, endured, and exhausted ; it looks upon sin as deserv- 
edly punishable for what it is in itself, and not merely on 
account of its mischievous consequences. Christ took on him 
a nature in which sin had left its traces; in that nature he 
transacted with God, both for the nature itself and for the 
race which it represented ; by these very acts of interposi- 
tion he necessarily assumed the penal woes of the race, of 
which he had become one and for which he transacted. 


6. This view harmonizes fully with the Christian idea of 
Virtue’. According to that idea, virtue consists in supreme 
love of the infinitely holy One—of God as the infinitely best 
Being ; the ground of moral obligation lies in the infinitely 
holy nature of God, He, by theeternal necessities of hisown 
nature as God, and as the archetypal Father of the race, 
being the source of all law, authority and justice ; and vir- 
tue is obligatory, not because it promotes our happiness and 
welfare, but because the requirements of the infinite holi- 
ness of God, inits relation to his creatures, are as unchange- 
able as God himself; virtue being right and obligatory, not 
because it promotes our happiness, but promoting our hap- 
piness because it is right. According to the view of Christ’s 
expiatory work which is here advocated, his death was in 
obedience to a supreme regard for the infinitely holy God 
which hesitated at no conceivable degree of self-sacrifice ; 
his sufferings and death were the product of that antago- 
nism which exists between the infinitely holy God and his 
unholy creatures ; and the one all-inclusive’ aim of Christ, 
both in his teachings and example, is to impart to his disci- 
plesa purity of heart and a personal righteousness without 
which they can have neither peace with God nor happiness 
in themselves. 

7. The vicariousness of the sufferings of Christ as herein 
explained, is supported by the Prepositions employed in 
many passages of the Scriptures which speak of his atoning 


1. pp. 187-192. 


270 THE ATONEMENT. 


work for man. In not a few of these passages, it may be 
freely admitted that the chief, and in some instances the 
exclusive, reference is to the subjective effect of Christ’s ; 
redeeming work in the heart of believers, while in others, it 

is equally clear from the connection that the chief and pri- 
mary reference is to that objective, voluntary substitution of 
himself as a sufferer, through which our subjective redemp- 
tion has become possible. Thus in a very large class of 
texts, like Ro., 5: 6, 8.8: 32. Eph.,°5: 2. 1 Thess., b2a0) 
Tit., 2: 14.17 John, 32°16. 1-Pet., 2:21. comp eater 
which Christ is said to have done, or to have suffered, what 
he did, ‘‘for us,’ dzép 7u@v, the preposition ozéo may 
undoubtedly be rendered ‘‘in behalf of,’’ and the idea con- 
veyed be rather that of the final object of his death than of 
the method by which it avails for our salvation. The — 
same may be true of the preposition zeoz in Gal., 1: 4, and 
of both dzée and zep: in 1 Pet., 3: 18. But in Gal, 3: 18, 
where Christis said to have been ‘‘ madea curse for us,’’ even 
bzéo seems to convey the idea that the curse was in con. 
sequence of his standing in our place as our representative ; 
and in 1 Tim., 2: 6, where itissaid, Christ ‘‘ gave himself a 
ransom for all,’’? dyredvtpov, coming in connection with bz¢p 

seems necessarily to impart to it something of the idea of 
substitution. And that this is the correct interpretation, 
seems almost certain when we hear our Lord, Matt., 20: 28, 
say of himself, that he ‘‘came to give his life a ransom for 
many,’’ the true meaning of dyze zodAdv undoubtedly being 
‘instead of many.;’’ that is, to as many as will avail them- 
selves of Christ as a Saviour, his death will be found to have 
been instead of their ee eae on the meaning of 
aves shukes ibs die Cor, G11". 

8. The ralaion which Ee N ew Testament writers every- 
where recognize as subsisting between the Jewish sacrifices 
and the death of Christ, plainly require ‘us to regard the 
latter as vicarious. Many of the Jewish sacrifices were 
unquestionably expiatory and vicarious, in the sense that 
the offerers of them, placing their hands on the heads of the 


1. See Winer’s Grammar of the New Testament, ch. 5, §§ 47-52. 


THE ATONEMENT. 271 


victims, presented them in sacrifice to God as substitutes 
for the penalties which they themselves deserved’, Lev., 1: 
eee Steals oO, LO 21) 192.023.5027, .28) Kx. 
Doe eWeuteel OG: Dd, 6 comp. 9 7 13; 22... But. sacrifices 
atoned, in the sense of satisfying the penalties of sin, for 
those only who had complied with the required imposition 
of hands on the victims they offered; and even then, the 
penalties removed were only such as pertained to external 
life, and never to the inner life of the soul. What Jewish 
sacrifices, continually repeated, thus accomplished ceremo- 
nially and externally for the Jew, the sacrifice of Christ, 
offered once for all, accomplishes actually and within the 
heart for the Christian. The first was merely a type of the 
Peeeareation,,.9-)9,. 26. 10.1, 4. UCor.,.5.7 7. Eph, 62 2. 
ee. 225, 24. Hebe Apa Ta 7 12. 

9. A belief in the none: of Christ’s death, as here 
explained, is apparently supported by many of the Messianic 
prophecies of the Old Testament. That the Prophets saw a 
suffering Messiah, seems evident from Pss., 16, 22, 40, from 
Is., chh. 42, 49, and Dan., 9 : 24-26; that the design, as wellas 
the time of the sufferings, engaged the attention of the pro- 
phets, isevidentfrom 1 Pet., 1: 10,11; and that they regarded 
the sufferings as vicarious, would seem to be plainly taught in 
the fifty-third of Isaiah. That such is the New Testament 
explanation of the significanecy of Christ’s death, is evident 
from the words of John the Baptist, last and greatest of the 
prophets, John, 1: 29, and of Christ himself, Matt., 20: 28. 
Luke, 24: 44-47, as well as of his Apostles, Acts, 10: 43. 
26: 22, 23. 

10. If the significancy of Christ's sufferings and death 
was not in their being vicarious for all those whose faith 
brings them into saving fellowship with him, then it is 
impossible to understand the remarkable prominence every- 


1. See Jahn, Bib. Archeology, § 378. Itis of the very idea of a sacrifice that 
the victim shall be presented directly to God and in the presentation shall be 
destroyed. See ibid, § 873.—Magee, On Atonement and Sacrifice, specially 
illus. and explanatory diss. No. 38.—Kurtz, Sacrificial Worship of the Old 
Testament, specially bk. 2, pt. 1.—Tholuck, das Alte Test. im N. Test.—‘‘ Opfer- 
cultus des A. T.” in Herzog’s Realencyclopddie. 


YH pe THE ATONEMENT. 


where given by the Apostles to the cross of Christ, that sig- 
nificant symbol of all his sufferings, and to our faith in him 
as the One who has died for us, that sine gua non in the 
salvation of every one. No onecan read the addresses of 
the Apostles in the Acts, or their Epistles to the churches, 
without observing how invariably they refer to the cross of 
Christ as the procuring cause of the salvation we derive 
from him. But if Christ saves us by his example of self- 
sacrifice, as the holders of the moral influence theory affirm, 
or by assuring us of the Divine mercy in which we are to 
trust, as the governmentalists assert, then why the incessant 
reference to the cross? Why was so much prominence given 
to that single event in the career of Christ which was so spe- 
cially offensive to both Jew and Greek? Why was not the 
watchword in the preaching of the Apostles, either the exam- 
ple of Christ, or the mercy of God ¢ Or if Christ be a literal 
covenanted substitute for the elect only, then why the stress 
which is laid on faith, without which salvation is possible for 
no one? The truth seems to be, that without the interposition 
of a suffering and triumphant Redeemer, to whom we come as 
our only, but all-sufficient, Helper, there is no release from 
the dominion of sin, (no purging of the conscienee from 
deadly works, Heb., 9: 14,) and no transforming power in 
the heart by which it may attain to deliverance (‘‘remis- 
sion of sins’) from the habits and penalties of evil. | 
11. The vicarious nature of Christ’ ssufferings, seems to be 
clearly implied in the figurative language employed in the 
descriptions of his work for man. Thus he is called a. 
lamb, a ransom, a redeemer, a propitiator, a sacrifice, a 
reconciler, a deliverer, &c. The underlying conception in ° 
all these metaphors, is that of a Mediator who has interposed 
in our behalf, by putting himself in our place. Of the meta- 
phors themselves, there are two principal classes ; the one 
borrowed from the transaction of buying off a captive or 
slave; the other, from the offices of a friend who seeks to 
reconcile two alienated parties by making reparation for the 
offender. Many of the passages in which the metaphors 
occur, may, doubtless, be satisfactorily explained as refer- 


THE ATONEMENT. ° 273 


ring to the subjective influence of Christ’s work in the heart 
of the believer; but this is notan exhaustive explanation of 
all. Important and prominent in the Scriptures as is the 
idea of subjective redemption, it is always coupled more or 
less closely with the idea of an objective ransom. Indeed 
‘the subjective redemption is effected solely through the 
inward assurance of, and experimental acquaintance with, 
the objective interposing Ransomer who places himself 
between us and the objective wrath of God, Eph., 1: 7. 1 
meee 0. Heb.{ 9212.13 12) 1 Pet; 1: 18; 192 Christ 
is also entitled our passover, 1 Cor., 5: 7,—he isthe slain 
lamb by whose blood we are sheltered from the sword of 
the avenger; that is to say, Christ, by his life and death, 
becomes, to every one who in loving sympathy and faith 
obeys him, not only a Deliverer from the dominion of sin 
now, but from its penalties hereafter forever. 

Thus Christ is a Saviour to all who will be saved by him; 
and a Saviour, not by any formal imputation of our sins to 
him, or of his righteousness to us, but solely through that 
control which he exercises over us whenever we come to 
understand him as the One who has borne all our woes, 
and so borne them as both to make full satisfaction to God 
and to impart to all, who will lovingly trust in him, an 
everlasting salvation. 

II. THE MORAL INFLUENCE OR SOCINIAN THEORY. 

This theory may be called Socinian, not because there are 
no traces of its existence in the medizval period, or in the 
earlier Protestant literature, but because Socinus' first re- 
duced it to a formula and attempted a logical defence of it. 
In medizeval times, it existed rather as a sentiment in devo- 
tional writings than as a dogma in theology, and formed a 
part of the pantheistico-mystical ideas of God which were 
then not uncommon. It regarded salvation as consisting in 
a union of man with God—it dwelt more on the attractive 
power of Christ than on the redemptive efficacy of his death. 


1. Prelectiones Theologica, 16-29.—Bibliotheca Frat. Polono., vol. 1, pp. 
566-600.—See also a collection of tractates ina volume entitled The Atonement, 


published by the Amer. Unitarian Association, 


274. * THE ATONEMENT. 


In the first days of Protestantism, nothing was more natural | 
in the general revolt against the authority of Church dogmas 
than a disposition to reduce the whole doctrine of the 
atonement to a simple subjective process. But the doctrine 
of redemption by an expiatory sacrifice was too deeply rooted 
for the disposition to prevail. | 

Socinus held that in the salvation of man, nothing more 
is needed than to win him from the dominion of moral evil 
to the love and practice of righteousness; that the work to 
be wrought by Christ was the reconciliation of man to God ; 
that God needed no other propitiation than the repentance 
of man, and that to bring man to repentance and piety 
nothing more is needed than the moral teachings and the 
spotless character of Jesus of Nazareth. Christ died, not as 
a sacrifice for sin and a propitiation to God in expiation of 
human guilt, but asa martyr to the truth. Christ now 
saves men solely by the persuasive power of his truth and 
his example. God is a sovereign who can enforce or remit 
the penalties of his laws as he wills; but the dominant 
principle of his moral nature is auton cain: by ye his 
will is always controlled. 

This general theory, slightly modified to bring it into har- 
mony with the Divinity of Christ, is in reality embodied in 
that conception of the redemptive work of Christ, which 
supposes it to have consisted in the origination of a new 
species of religious life in the earth,—in the awakenment of 
a distinct consciousness of the presence and power of God in 
the individual soul and among men. As thus modified it is 

not inappropriately termed the Life Theory. Themodifica- 
tion originated with Schleiermacher'; variously phrased, 
it has been held by many of his disciples’, as well as 


$e 


1. His theory is explained in Der Christliche Glaube, &c.,2, §§ 125-129, or 
ause. 2. 1038, ff. 139, ff. 

2. Both Nitzsch and Neander, however, make special recognition of an expia- 
tory office in the death of Christ; the former in his Christliche Lehre, § 135; 
emphasising expiation, (‘Aaouoc, 1 John, 2: 2,) as the counterpart of reconcilia- 
tion, (kataAAay7) ; the latter, in his Planting and Training, pp. 412-418, giving 
prominence to the Scripture idea of an objective, punitive wrath of God towards 
moral evil, which must be borne and removed before there can be a reconcilia- 
tion between God and man. 


THE ATONEMENT. * , 275 


by others who have differed widely from his general 
views ; and to persons who are devout in spirit but ration- 
alistic in understanding, has been specially welcome as 
enabling them to retain their faith ina Divine Redeemer, 
even when they had lost their faith in the inspired authority 
of the records of his life. 

Here aiso should be classed all those explanations of 
Christ’s atoning work as consisting in an exhibition of the 
self-sacrificing condescension of God, and as being effective 
in winning man to righteousness through appeal to his sym- 
pathies and by awakening within him the love of gratitude 
to his Deliverer. Such are the explanations of the atone- 

ment made by Maurice’, F. W. Robertson* and others of the 
- Broad Church party in England’; by John Young* of Scot- 
land ; and by Dr. Bushnell’ of this country. They suppose 
the incarnation, sufferings and death of Christ to be effective 
in. rescuing from moral evil, solely by means of the moral 
power which they exert over the minds and hearts of men. 

Now, it will be seen at a glance, that the three schools of 
thought above classified as holding the Moral Influence 
Theory, while differing in their accounts of the practical 
appropriation of Christ’s work for men, are agreed in the re- 


1. Doctrine of Sacrifice, and Theological Hssays: essay ‘7. 

2. Sermons. : 

3. Extremists of the party, repudiate the doctrine of the atonement as 
founded in a perversion of Jewish phraseology, and as unauthorized by the 
teaching of Christ. Asasample, see Jowett, The Hpistles of St. Paul to the 
Thessalonians, Galatians and Romans, vol. 2, p. 547. On Atonement and Satis- 
faction. 

4. The Life and Light of Men, An Hssay: by John Young: London and 
New York, 1866. The author’s view may be summed up in the three state- 
' ments: spiritual laws are immutable; the attribute of mercy is superior to that 
of justice in God ; and sin is destroyed in the heart by the self-sacrificing love 
of God in Christ. The principles of the book involve the doctrine of the final 
restoration of the wicked,—a conclusion to which the author is said to have 
subsequently come. 

5. The Vicarious Sacrifice, grounded in principles of universal obligation. 
The author in his Introduction, p. 32, calls his, ‘‘the moral-power view.” Its 
fundamental principle is, the self-sacrificing love of God. Justice, law and 
penalty are very flexible in this author’s hands. Dr. Bushnell is heartily 
endorsed by James Freeman Clarke in his, Orthodoawy: its truths and errors, 
ch. 10, § 13. 


2'76 THE ATONEMENT. 


jection of the thought of expiation. With Socinus, Christ 
saves by the power of his truth and example ; with Sc hleier- 
macher, by a divine life transmitted through the Church ; 
with Robertson, Bushnelland Young, by the persuasive influ- 
ence of self-sacrificing love ; but with all alike, itis the moral 
influence alone of Christianity and Christ that saves us, and 
not an expiatory sacrifice to God in the death of Christ on 
the cross. 

But in respect to this theory it must be observed, 

1. That the change to be wrought by Christ is evidently, 
as the theory claims, in man and notin God. The appear- 
-ance of Christ on earth was of itself proof of the earnest 
desire of God to bestow salvation on man. It is possible 
also to exhaust the meaning of a large proportion of the 
Scripture representations of Christ’s work for men, by re- 

stricting their application to the subjective process of” 
recreating the moral affections ; but to rest a theory on this 
class of representations alone, is to build on one half of the 
biblical truth ; is to overlook all that large class of Serip- 
ture passages which dwell on the relation of Christ's life 


and death to the moral law and the moral nature of God. - 


Gal. 3 :.1383 1. Pet. 2: 243° Ro.3: 25,5529) pie 
Heb. 9: 34. Of that side of the work of Christ which these 
passages set forth, the moral influence theory can give ‘no 
satisfactory account. 

2. The fundamental postulate upon which this theory 
rests, viz: that the mercy or the benevolence of God is 
more central in his nature, and more determinate in his 
action, than his justice, can be defended only by assuming 
that justice, law and penalty, are strictly decretive ; for if 

controlled by his benevolence they must be creations of his 
will. But law, as we have seen, is not a creation—it is a 
revelation of constituent principle ; and justice is not some- 
thing purposed—it is the natural and unvarying product of 
the holiness of God coming into relation to other beings. 

3. This theory fails of a due recognition of that deep- 
seated, universal and innate sense of ill-desert, which in all 
times and everywhere has prompted men to aim at some 


$ 
: 
7 
a 
4 
4 


THE ATONEMENT. Qiet 


kind of expiation of their guilt. For this sense of guilt and 
its requirements, the moral influence theory makes no ade- 
quate provision, either in Christ or in those whom Christ 
saves. Supposing Christ’s redemptive work to consist 
merely in winning man to the practice of righteousness, it 
takes no account of penalty, either as the sanction of law, 
as the reaction of the Divine holiness against sin, or as the 
upbraiding of the individual conscience. 


_4, The theory, fully stated, is self-contradictory. It re- 
jects expiation as not only a heathenish idea which is un- 
worthy of God, but as something which it is impossible that 
one being should render for another. It insists that every 
-one must, in the strictest sense of the words, receive for him- 
self from God, according to his own deeds; and yet that 
God is ready to grant forgiveness of sins to every one on 
condition of repentance. It first insists on the inevitability 
of moral sequences in the conduct of every moral agent; 
and then insists that, on a given condition, the penal se- 
quences of transgression may be arrested by almighty fiat. 
A similar contradiction shows itself historically between the 
rigid legalism of the earlier Unitarians of both England and 
this country, and the laxer notions which have prevailed 
among their descendants in later years. The self-contradic- 
tion of the theory as manifest in the Unitarian handling of 
it, is none the less apparent in the form into which it has been 
manipulated by its later advocates ; in any mode of stating 
it, law and penalty are unwieldy factors; no office can be 
ascribed to the sufferings and death of Christ at all com- 
mensurate with the importance which is everywhere ascribed 
to them in the New Testament. 


5. This theory can make no adequate provision for the 
repentance which itself prescribes as the indispensable con- 
dition of forgiveness. Repentance certainly is not the pro- 
duct of the immediate volition of the repentant; the spotless 
example of Christ repels rather than attracts,an evil-minded 
man ; impersonating law, it speaks nothing but condemna- 
tion to every one not already in harmony with it. It may 
awaken the conviction of ill-desert, which is only one, and 

| a 


— 


278 THE ATONEMENT. 


the lesser, element of repentance ; but the new mind, which 
is the other and distinctive element of repentance, it is not 
within the power of a mere example to produce. Each in- 
dividual must recognise in Christ his personal Saviour from 
moral death, or the love of gratitude, that transforming 
principle which brings us into sympathy with Christ, and 
thus gives to hisexample a moulding power over our hearts, 
will never be awakened. But Christ, believed in as one who 
has died in our stead, becomes to us thereby a loved example 
and a sympathising friend, into whose likeness we are pro- 
eressively transformed. 


6. This theory, finally, reverses the Scriptural relation 
of the Divine forgiveness and an amended life. According to 
that relation, forgiveness is on Christ’s account and not on 
account of any amendment of ours; our amendment is, as 
before stated, the product of the new relations into which 
we are brought, and of that loving trust which has been set 
at work within us. In technical theological phraseology, 
justification, inthe Scriptures, always precedes sanctification, 
and never the reverse. 1 Cor. 6: 20; Eph. 2: 10; Titus 2: 
14;  Heb..9: 14; 1 Pet..1: 18-20. There is no form in 
which the moral influence theory can be put that does not 
reverse this Scriptural relation’. 


UL. THe GOVERNMENTAL OR GROTIAN THEORY. 
This was propounded in professed opposition to that of 


Socinus, but in fact mediated between the Anselmic and the 
Socinian theories. The Socinian originated, and has con- 


1. Dr. John McLeod Campbell, (recently deceased,) in his book entitled, The 
Nature of the Atonement and its Relation to Remission of Sins and Eternal 
_ Life, and for which he was expelled from the Scotch Established Church, repu- 

diates the idea of ‘‘penal suffering” and makes the atonement to have con- 
sisted in Christ’s ‘‘expiatory confession” to God of the sin of man, whose 
nature he had taken and whose brother he had become, pp. 146, 147. ‘‘The 
necessity of the atonement was moral and spiritual,” pp. 186-7. His, is essen- 
tially the moral influence theory, though he avows ‘‘much more sympathy” 
with the Anselmic theory ‘‘ than with the teaching that makes rectoral justice 
or public justice the foundation of its reasoning. For of this I feel quite cer- 
tain, that no awakened sinner, into whose spirit the terrors of the Lord have 
entered, ever thinks of rectoral justice, but of absolute justice, and of absolute 
poy only,” p. 144. 


. 


>) ° 


ee OD Fe eae ee ee ey ae Eee 


Oe a 


Y oe 8 


THE ATONEMENT. 279 


tinued its existence, solely in reaction against the rigid satis- 
faction theory of Anselm. Grotius, professing to defend 
the orthodox or Anselmic theory against Socinus’, so far 
changed its legitimate grounds of defence as to originate a 
new and middle theory. 

As stated by Grotius, this theory started with the funda- 
mental conception of God as a Sovereign Ruler*; as Sover- 
eign, he could enforce, or, if for good and sufficient reasons 
Hie chose, he could relax the penalties of his laws*; but the 
stability of his government, and the welfare of the gOov- 
erned required that his laws, if violated, should be vindi- 
cated and some kind of penalties inflicted, though not 
necessarily inflicted on the transgressors themselves‘; as 
Sovereign Ruler, he has the right, in view of a sufficient 
penal example, to acquit and forgive the guilty’. Grotius 
regarded the sufferings of Christ, not as a real satisfaction, 
or as an exact equivalent for the sins of the redeemed, but 
as an accepted or a practical equivalent, on account of which 
penalty could be safely remitted’. The theory, as modified 
by other Arminians, laid stress on the death of Christ as a 
sacrifice to God’. Grotins had made the effect of Christ’s 
death to be, not retroactive and towards God, but prospec- 
tive and towards the Divine government and the governed ; 
they regarded the death as a “saidrifice which God accepted 
in the place of the penalty of the saved. With the excep- 
tion of the idea of sacrifice, however, the theory known as 
the Arminian was essentially the Grotian. The Arminian 
modification has perpetuated itself among Wesleyan advo- 
cates of the theory. 


1. The title of his book was Defensio Vide: Catholicw de Satisfactione 
Christi, adversus Faustum Socinum. 

2. Defensio, cap. 2.—3. Ibid, cap. 8-4.—4. Lbid, cap. 4-6.—5, Ibid, cap. 7, 8. 

6. According to Grotius, the death of Christ was not an expiatory sacrifice to 
God, but a penal example, in view of which there could safely be a relaxatio seu 
dispensatio legis. Anselm had defined justice as non aliud quam ipse Deus, 
(Cur Deus Homo, lib. 1, cap. 18); Socinus had said that justice is non qualitas 
Dei, sed effectum tantum volnntas ipsius ; Grotius evaded the question of jus- 
tice, by conceiving God as only a Ruler whose positive laws can be relaxed and 
their penalties remitted in consideration of a satisfactory equivalent,. 

7. Limborch, Theologia Chr., lib. 3, cap. 22, § 1. . 


280 THE ATONEMENT. 


This theory, as revived and re-stated in this country by 
the younger Jonathan Edwards’, a little less than a century 
ago, turned on various distinctions in justice, and main- 
tained that the death of Christ made satisfaction to demands 
of general or public justice, but not to the distributive jus- 
tice of God. The Edwardean exposition of the theory, with 
slight and varying modifications of it by different authors, 
has determined its distinctively American type’... Its funda- 
mental conception of God is that of an infinitely benevolent 
Being, whose creation and government of the world was 
determined by the highest welfare of his creatures. Law 
was enacted and its penalties enforced, only because required 
by the welfare of man: all penalties would be remitted if 
the best interests of man would permit. The sufferings of 
Christ were merely a governmental expedient for securing 
the greatest amount of happiness ; the need of the atone- 
ment was in the necessities of the government, and the neces- 
sities of the government were determined by the highest 
happiness of the governed. 

There is no one sect by whom the theory is exclusively 
held or by whose name it can be designated. Its advo- 
cates are found among all existing denominations ; many 
holding it, notas distinguishable from any other theory, but 
simply because, through popular literature and the preach. 
ing of our time, they have become familiar with the general 
conception of it; while others, again, have been led to adopt 


1. The Necessity of Atonement and the Consistency between that and Free 
Grace in Forgiveness. Three Sermons. Works, vol. 2. 

2. The rise of ‘‘ the Edwardean theory,” and its progress in the hands of vari- 
ous authors till about the close of the first quarter of the present century, may 
be found in a volume entitled, The Atonement, Discourses and Treatises by 
Edwards, Smalley, Maxcy, Hmmons, Griffin, Burge, and Weeks, with an 
Introductory Essay by Prof. Edwards A. Parks. The theory has been adyo- 
cated by Prof. Finney, in his Systematic Theology ; by Dr. Taylor, of New 
Haven, in his Moral Government of God ; and by Drs. Beman and Barnes in 
special treatises. 

Among English advocates of the theory, in its American form, may be men- 
tioned Andrew Fuller, in various parts of his Works ; J. Pye Smith, Four Dis- 
courses on the Sacrifice, &c.; Geo. Payne, Theo. Lectures; T. W. Jenkyn, On 
the Extent of the Atonement ; Ralph Wardlaw, Discourses on the Nat. and 
Hixtent of the Atonement. 


THE ATONEMENT. 281 


it, because on the one hand it seemed to embody some of 
the best features of the moral influence theory, and at the 
same time on the other to reject some of the more objec- 
tionable features of the theory of satisfaction. 

But the govermental theory, in any form yet given to it, 
is open to many and grave objections. It more than any 
other rests on certain assumed principles, both ethical and 
theological, and, by virtue ofits ethical principles, more than 
any other affects the type of the piety of its holders. The 
grounds of objection to it are found alike in its fundamental 
principles and in its practical effects. 

1. It is erroneous in its fundamental conceptions of God. 
-(a.) It merges the attributes of God as a Being and as the 
Father of the race in his duties and functions as a Ruler ; 
subordinating his convictions and nature as God to his 
policy as Governor of the Universe. (6.) Like the Socinian 
theory, it makes the ground principle in the nature of God 
to be his benevolence rather than his infinite purity or 
holiness. But both Scripture and conscience, as we have 
seen, make holiness to be that fundamental principle. God 
has provided an atonement, not so much because he seeks 
the happiness of men, as that, being in himself infinitely 
pure in nature, he seeks the reconciliation of men to himself 
by imparting to them a corresponding purity, and thereby 
the only possible condition of happiness. 

2. It rests on false views of justice. (a.) It arbitrarily dis- 
tinguishes between kinds of justice, asif diversity of objects 
to which justice is applied, necessitated a difference of kind 
in the principle itself; as if public justice did not, as well 
as justice distributive, demand a rigid rendering to each 
one according to his just deserts ; as if justice could ever be 
otherwise than exact right’. (6.) It makes the justice of 
God to be the mere requirement of his wisdom and benevo- 
lence, rather than a revelation of his infinite purity or holi- 


1. Even J. McLeod Campbell, with his moral influence theory, affirms; 
‘*Rectoral justice so presupposes absolute justice, and so throws the mind back 
on that absolute justice, that the idea of an atonement that will satisfy the one, 
though it might not the other, is a delusion.”—The Nature of the Atonement, 
p- 81. 


282 THE ATONEMENT. 


ness in its relation to the moral conduct and character of 


his creatures; punishment being regarded as ‘a politic 
chastise ment for state purposes, rather than as a necessary 
‘‘reaction of the Divine holiness’’ against sin. 
3. This theory involves erroneous views of sin. (q@.) It 
regards sin merely as a violation of statute or published 
law, and its penalty as an objective infliction, which it is 
elective with God to impose or withhold as his wisdom or 
benevolence shall dictate ; whereas sin and its penalty are, 
by the very laws of moral being, related to each other as 
invariable and necessary antecedent and consequent. (0.) It 
subtracts from the heinousness of sin, conceiving it to be 
odious to God and requiring the sufferings of Christ, not 
because in itself hateful and punishable, but because of its 
injuriousness to the Divine government and consequently 
to the welfare of the governed. But the Bible and the 
human conscience everywhere represent sin as something 
that in itself is loathsome and abominable, and therefore 
damnable. It is punishable because abhorrent to God and 
to all right-minded beings, and not simply because it is 
contrary to the Divine government and the public welfare. 
4. This theory rests on ungrounded views of Law and 
Divine government. (a.) It conceives of Law as an objec- 
tive rule of action which God has prescribed in view of cer- 
tain ends to be obtained or avoided,—a rule which he can 
suspend or enforce as his wisdom or benevolence shall dic- 
tate!; whereas Law is simply a revelation of immutable 
reality, each special requirement being a verbal statement 
of the constituent principles of the being of God and man and 
of the inevitable relations of the one to the other. Asa 
necessary consequence of this misconception of law, arises, 
(6.) an unwarrantable distinction which this theory makes 
between God and his government, or since government is 
only another name for law, between God and hislaw®. The 
government or law of God, is, as we have seen, only a repre- 


1. Lex non est aliquid internum in Deo, aut ipsa Dei voluntas, sed voluntatis 
quidam effectus. At voluntatis divine effectus mutabiles*esse certissimum est, 
Grotius, Defensio, 2d ed., 1617, p. 52. 

2. See pp. 190-193. 


THE ATONEMENT. 283 


sentation of invisible but actual and immutable verities or 
realities. Whatever, therefore, honors the law honors God, 
and whatever dishonors one dishonors the other. What- 
ever was the effect of Christ’s death on the one, was the 
effect of Christ's death on the other. And as the law of 
God can no more change than God himself, so we must 
admit, if the penalty of the law was borne by Christ, then 
has the wrath of God himself been also borne by him; and 
if Christ has made atonement to the law or government of 
God, he must also have made atonement to God himself. 
(c.) The theory erroneously implies that the published 
enactments of God—his objective government—are exhaus- 
tively representative of Divine law. It is true, as the theory 
maintains, that the death of Christ honors legal pen- 
alty', and in so far as it does this, may be regarded as in 
support of the Divine government, Ro., 7: 6. 8: 3, 4. 10: 
4. Gal., 3: 13. 4: 5. But there is also a displeasure of 
God, in other words there are laws of God, underlying 
these enactments and farther reaching than their published 
sanctions, Ro., 2: 4, 6,8, 9. 8: 5, and of which the pub- 
lished enactments and sanctions are but expressions that 
are necessarily imperfect, because falling far short both in 
degree and number of the realities they represent, Heb., 10: 
28-31. The theory is thus false by deficiency in one of its 
radical principles. (d.) The theory also conceives the 
design of legal sanctions, and the end for which the Divine 
gsovernment is maintained and administered, to be strictly 
reformatory,—a conception totally inconsistent with any 
just ideas of the nature and design of law; destructive of 
the significancy and solemnity of penalty ; and fatal to all 
true virtue. ‘To conceive of punishment as merely reform- 


—_- —_—. 


‘1. Beman, in his Christ the Only Sacrifice ; or the Atonement in its relations 
to God and Man, maintains that Christ’s sufferings were not penal, but substi- 
tuted for the penalty, which, in the forgivness of sin, is not abolished, but 
only suspended. Barnes, in his treatise, The Atonement in its relations to Law 
and Moral Government, while perpetually denying that Christ suffered the 
literal penalty due to sinners, and affirming that his sufferings were substituted 
for their penalty, leaves us in the dark as to what the sufferings of Christ really 
were, or how they accomplish their design. The theory in his hands is rigidly 
forensic, without the basis of immutable justice to rest on. 


284 THE ATONEMENT. 


atory, and to suppose such’a conception to be exhaustive 
of its meaning, is to degrade rational creatures and to regard 
morality as a purely mechanical production'.”’ 

5. The governmental theory of the atonement involves a 
false theory of virtue. (a.) It conceives the essence of virtue 
to consist in the love of being in general? ; a supposition 
made necessary by its assumption that benevolence is the 
ground principle in the moral nature of God. (6.) To be 
logically consistent, it must conceive the foundation of moral 
obligation to be in the absolute will of God, or possibly in 
the nature of things, or anywhere rather than in the nature 
of God. (¢.) The theory, furthermore, logically applied, 
leads inevitably to the Utilitarian theory of morals. If 
Christ’s death was merely for governmental ends, and the 
chief or highest end of law and government be the good of the 
creature, then, since Christ’s life and sufferings were the 
highest ideal and standard of virtue, utility is virtue’s 
surest criterion ; human happiness becomes the final cause 
of all things, and the greatest happiness principle is funda- 
mental in morals. 

6. The governmentalists can give no satisfactory expla- 
nation of the facts of Christ’s person and_ sufferings. 
(a.) They can give no clear and consistent account of the 
relation of the two natures of Christ to his redemptive | 
work. Differ as they may in their expositions of the gov- 
ernmental theory, they all agree in the recognition of the 
Divinity of Christ; but in attempting to explain its offices 
in the atonement, they run into one or the other of two . 
absurdities. Denying as they do that the death of Christ 
was in satisfaction of the penal. justice of God, they must 
either regard his Divine nature as participating in his suf- 
ferings, and thus the sufferings themselves, since, as Divine 
he must have been fully aware that these were only for 
state purposes, be reduced toa mere dramatic exhibition 


1. See Neander, Planting and Training, p. 416, note. 

2. This is the one principle in the teachings of Jonathan Edwards,— who him- 
self undoubtedly held the Anselmic theory—which, carried out by Hopkins and 
the younger Edwards, was finally developed by the latter into ‘‘the Edwardean 
theory.” 


THE ATONEMENT. | 285 


for public effect ; or else they must regard the sufferings of 
Christ as confined exclusively to his human nature’, and 
accordingly fail of finding any sufficient office for the 
Divine in the work of our redemption, and so, of giving any 
satisfactory account of its presence in the person rot Christ. 

The suppositions, on the latter alternative, that the presence 
of the Divine nature in Christ was necessary, either to sus- 
tain the human and preserve it from sinking hopelessly in 
its agony, or by its presence to give dignity and worth to 
the sufferings of the man Jesus’, are scarcely worthy of 
refutation. Granting the suppositions to be reasonable, no 
intelligible conception can be formed of the way in which 
the Divinity of the person of Christ could either sustain in, 
or give dignity to, sufferings in which it had no participa- 
tion ; and what is more, no proper account can be given, 
either from Scripture or reason, of the superior worth and 
efficacy of the sufferings and death of Christ as compared 
with the triumphant sufferings and death of thousands of 
martyrs, through which they were carried solely by the 
Divine aid derived from the promises of Christ and the min- 
istrations of the Holy Spirit. Nor is there any good ground 
whatever for the statement sometimes made, that an infinite 
and Divine nature was reqtired in the Mediator, who was to 
make atonement for the sin of man, because sin, com- 
mitted against an infinite God, must be infinite in the degree 
of its guilt; as if any act of a finite creature could, by any 
possibility, become in any respect infinite. On the govern- 


1. A suffering Deity, is an unmanageable element in both the Anselmic and 
the Grotian theories; and so the advocates of both very generally affirm that 
only the human nature of Christ suffered. Falling back on the distinction’ 
between nature and person, the difficulty is commonly evaded by asserting, 
strangely enough, that the Divine-human person, the God-man, snffered, but 
only as man—the two natures in his personality so coéxisting that one needed 
not to participate in the emotions and passions of the other. Dr. Hodge, 
defending this definition, Systemat. Theol., says: ‘‘An indignity offered to a 
man’s body is offered to himself ;” and then ventures the astonishing statement, 
that, ‘‘if this principle be not correct, there was’ no greater crime in the cruci- 
fixion of Christ than in unjustly inflicting death on an ordinary man.” The 
human nature of Christ, then, differed from that of ordinary men only in being 
conjoined with a divine nature! 

2. Dr. Pond in the Bid. Sac., vol. 7, pp. 207, 208, 212. 


286 THE ATONEMENT. 


mental theory, moreover, the notion of an infinite guilt in 
finite acts is absurd, unless the government to be vindi- 
cated is itself infinite. 


7. If the sufferings and death of Christ were merely for 
governmental ends, it is difficult if not impossible to see how 
the Socinian charge of cruelty and injustice on the part of 
God can be repelled. It is assumed by governmentalists 
that there was nothing in the Divine Being inconsistent with 
the unconditional forgiveness of sin. The sole obstacle was 
in public justice; in the requirements of government and in 
the general welfare of the governed. An exhibition of 
God’s wrath towards sin was necessary in order to make it 
safe for him to exercise his clemency in forgiving it. It is 
not pretended that a due exhibition of the Divine wrath is 


not made in the punishment of guilty men ; but the suffer- — 


ings of the Son of God, it is claimed, were a fitter example of 
his wrath than could have been presented by any degree of 
suffering in any number of finite sufferers ; that is, the only 
reason for the unspeakable agony of Christ was its fitness to 
an end, which, according to the theory itself, God had both 
the power and right to accomplish without the suffering of 
any one, or which he could, at least, have accomplished 
with the same kind, though not with precisely the same 
degree, of fitness by the sufferings of actually guilty men. 


8. Ifto the last named objection, it be replied that the 
necessity of Christ’s death was not grounded in the immut- 
able nature of God, nor in the conscience of man, but in the 
need of a fitting spectacle to move the hearts of men to pen- 
itence, then the governmental theory is thereby transformed 
into the theory of moral influence, without the power which 
that theory supposes for moving the heart ; the agony of the 
garden and the cross, are resolved into a mere species of 
scenic representation, suited to affect the hearts of 
beholders-—a supposition which at once robs Christ and his 
sufferings of all power to accomplish the very ends for 
which it is claimed that he and his sufferings have been 
presented to men. It is unnecessary to dwell on the type 
of religion which such a theory must inevitably produce, 


a 


THE ATONEMENT. ; 287 


or on the stress which it lays on emotions and agencies in 
the propagation of Christianity. | 

9. This theory is objectionable, as requiring different coun- 
sel to be given to-an inquirer after the way of life from that 
which the New Testament gives. The Apostolic direction 
to the inquirer is, to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
to believe on him, Zz. e. heartily to trust in him, as one on 
whom the believers’ iniquities have been laid ;.as one who, in 
his own body, has borne our sins, and by whose stripes every 
one who will trust in him may be healed. But the holders 
of this theory, to be consistent, must, as many of them do, 
point the inquirer to Christ, notas to a personal Redeemer, 
but as to one who by his sufferings has made it consistent 
for God to exercise his compassion in listening to the sup- 
plications, and in forgiving the sins, of the penitent. Who- 
ever will be saved, is to trust in the mercy of God for his 
salvation, though he is to recognize his indebtedness ‘to 
Christ for assurance of mercy: advice which, to say the 
least of it, does not savor of the gospel as preached by Christ 
and his Apostles. 

10. The governmental theory manifestly rests on the 
uncertain foundation of other mere theories of justice, law, 
government and virtue, and not on the broad basis of Scrip- 
ture and the answering facts of Christian consciousness and 
Christian experience’. Its biblical argument is only an 
attempt to show that the Scriptures will admit of the inter- 
pretation it puts upon them. It bears in itself the unmis- 
takable traces of human ingenuity, and of, a careful study 
of human governments and of the speculative principles of 
ethical philosophy ; but it is at the widest remove from the 
free method of that infinite Life which everywhere breathes 
through the New Testament, and from the conformity to 
fact and reality which everywhere shews itself in the teach- 
ing of the Apostles. 


1. The most noticeable features of all the treatises on this theory, from that in 
which it was first elaborated down to the latest in its support, are the extreme 
care with which the theories of law, justice, and virtue, on which it necessarily 
rests, are stated and defended, and the unsatisfactoriness of the arguments 
from the Scriptures, 


288 NECESSITY OF THE ATONEMENT. 


$ 48— Necessity of the Atonement. 


The possibillity of release from the power and penalty of 
sin, by the atoning sufferings and death of a Saviour, is pre- 
éminently a doctrine of Divine revelation. Without the 
demonstrable fact of such release, we could know nothing of 
its possibility ; and without the express assurance of reve- 
lation, little, if anything, of its necessity. But now that 
both the fact and the necessity of an atonement by Christ 
have been revealed, various considerations combine to make 


its necessity specially apparent. The various senses in- 


which it was necessary' may be specified as follows : 

1. It was necessary as a fulfillment of those prophecies 
and types relating to the death of Christ, which so greatly 
abounded in the Old Testament Scriptures. Thus the New 
Testament declares, in the most positive terms, a necessity 
that Christ should die in fulfillment of what had been fore- 
told of him, Matt., 26: 54. Mark, 8: 31. Luke, 24: 7, 26, 
44. John, 3: 14. Compare the language of our Lord in the 
garden, Matt., 26: 39; also, Heb., 8: 3. 9: 22, 23. The 
words det and avdyxy, used in these passages, express, as 
unequivocally as any Greek words can, an inexorable neces- 
sity. But this, after all, was only a necessity which had 
been intelligently and purposely induced. Behind all was 
a profonnder and farther-reaching necessity, which, through 
the Holy Spirit, controlled both Moses in his institution of 
the ritual and the Prophets in their utterances. Thus, 

2. A necessity of the atonement is found in its complete 
fitness as means to the ends it accomplishes. These ends 
are, to honor God by enforcing moral law and its penalties, 


1. It will be remembered that the chief objections to the Anselmic theory 
by medizeval critics, turned on its postulate of an absolute necessity of the 
atonement founded in the inexorable demands of absolute justice,—see p. 258, 
and Baur, Die Chr. Lehre von da. versihnung, pp. 189-269.—Shedd, Hist. of 
Ihr. Doct.; dk.5, ch. 2.—Oxenham, The Catholic Doct. of the Atonement, ch. 4. 
The same question respecting absolute and relative necessity underlies all mod- 


ern controversies about the atonement. On the different kinds of necessity, see 


Fleming’s Vocabulary of Philosophy. 


9 ts) aes se ae 


NECESSITY OF THE ATONEMENT. 289 


and to save men by securing their personal righteousness. 
Christ by his lifeand death fulfilled the law, obeying it both 
in the letter and in the spirit, as wellas endnring its 
utmost penalty ; and he secures a corresponding obedience 
to law on the part of those who are saved by their trust in 
him. In proportion to its fitness as means to ends was 
there a necessity for the atoning work of Christ. But 
the necessity of fitness to ends, points to another and a 
higher necessity, 

3. In the Government of God. ' There can be no govern- 
ment without law, and no law without penalty; and a 
remission of penalty by fiat, or a universal pardon, would 
not only be fatal toany government, but inconsistent with 
any fundamental and just conception of law. Ifthe Divine 
government is to exist, its laws must be enforced; the 
exactly just penalties of its laws must be allowed to take 
their course. It is the imperfection of human governments 
that their clumsy laws can deal only with overt and clearly 
detected acts, and that the penalties of their laws can be 
adjusted with only proximate, and often with painfully 
deficient, degrees of accuracy to actual deserts ; but in the 
infinitely perfect government of God, moral laws carry with 
them their own inevitable sanctions, which God never arbi- 
tarily arrests either by fiat or by force. There is a neces- 
sity, therefore, in the Divine government, that penalty 
should fall either on guilty man alone, or on some Deliverer 
competent to interpose effectually in his behalf. 

4. The death of Christ in atonement for sin, was made 
necessary by having been included in the original plan of 
the creation. The fall of man and the consequent sinfulness 
of the race, were as distinct to the Divine mind before man’s 
creation, as they have ever been since. Man, therefore, 
must either have been knowingly created of God to a des- 
tiny of sin and hopeless ruin, or the mediatorial and atoning 
death of Christ must have stood from eternity in the Divine 
mind, as a central thought and an essential provision in the 
eternal purpose of the creation itself’. Hence the Apostolic 


a eS 


1. Lord Bacon, in his ‘‘Confession of Faith,” says—‘‘neither angel, man, 


290 NECESSITY OF THE ATONEMENT. 


declarations of an election of the redeemed ‘‘vefore the 
world was,’’ Eph.,1: 4. 1 Pet., 1: 20. Rev., 13: 8. What 
was thus an integral part of an eternal purpose, must have 
occurred by an inevitable necessity. 

5. The necessity of the atoning death of Christ, may also 
be inferred from the fact of its occurrence. Both the gov- 
ernment of God and the original scheme of the creation, 
which that government protects and fosters, must have been 
founded in infinite right. But the death of Christ was an 
integral part of that scheme, and so itself was grounded in 
infinite right. And whatever is infinitely right in the 
Divine mind, is infinitely imperative. The reason of God 
is infinitely perfect, and, as such, whatever proceeds from 
it must be regarded as proceeding from infinite necessity. 
But as both the government and the immutable purposes 
of God can be adequately explained only by reference to 
his eternal nature, so, 

6. A final ground for the necessity of the death and the 
atonement of Christ can be found only in the immutable 
nature of God. In his nature we find alike the origin of 
the original moral nature of man and of all moral law, as 
well as of all moral sanctions. The whole scheme of the 


creation itself, including its final cause, together with the’ 


laws and methods by which that cause is to be realised, 
are simply the revelations of the eternal nature of God. 
Whether as Creator or as Fatherand Ruler of his creatures, 
he is infinitely holy ; and his infinite holiness in its relation 
to man is infinite rectitude or justice, and carries by its own 
natural action, to every rational being, strictly according to 
his deserts. God as holy, necessarily repels all sinners 
from his presence, and by the very act of repulsion pun- 
ishes them. Whoever, therefore, should assume our nature 
and take his place among us as one of our race, and take it 


nor world, could stand, or can stand, one moment in God’s eyes without behold- 
ing the same in the face of a Mediator; and therefore, that before him, with 
whom all things are present, the Lamb of God was slain before all worlds; 
without which eternal counsel of his, it was impossible for him to have 
descended to any work of creation.” ‘‘ Theological Essays,” Works, Monta- 
gue’s ed., Pha., vol. 2, p. 407. 


REQUISITES IN THE ATONEMENT. 291 


for the express purpose of redeeming us from sin and recon- 
ciling us to Ged, would be under the inexorable necessity of 
so confronting the Divine repulsion as to remove itor he 
could not achieve our redemption. Nor does it avail to 
attempt to distinguish between the justice and the mercy of 
God. The nature of God is not divided against itself. Jus- 
tice and mercy are not separable principles in the Divine 
Being, though for convenience sake they may, in the limi- 
tations of our thought, be spoken of as separate ; but what- 
ever honors the one, necessarily honors the other. God is 
always justly merciful and mercifully just. The all-inclu- 
sive necessity of the atonement is in the infinite perfections 
of the Divine nature’. 


§ 44— Requisites in the Atonement. 


If the death of Christ was an actual and necessary atone- 
ment for sin, the question still recurs, What do the Scrip- 
tures teach to have been requisite in Him who would 
undertake, as our Representative and Redeemer, td trans- 
act for us with God: and particularly in Him who is to 
become ‘‘the Power of God and the Wisdom of God’’ to 
all those who are to be personally saved by him. It is 
evident that, 

1. He must sustain, both in nature and office, a two-fold 
relationship ; being at once the God-Man in his person and 
the communicator between God and man in his office. The 
notion that an infinite guilt attaches to the sin of man 
because it is committed against an infinite Being, and that 
therefore only a Being of infinite dignity and worth 
can atone for it, is one of those traditional absurdities 


1. Every attempt to find an ultimate basis of necessity for an atonement short 
of the immutable nature of God, leaves unanswered the question, why a plan of ° 
the creation should have been adopted in which that necessity was involved? 
and no answer can be given which does not, by direct and inevitable steps, 
bring us to the eternal nature of him whose-immutable counsels are what they 
are because his eternal nature is what it is. 


292 REQUISITES IN THE ATONEMENT. 


that may be allowed to drop without argument’; but if 


Christ Jesus our Lord is to treat with the two parties, God. 


and man, who are concerned in the work of an atonement, 
then must he be capable of sympathy with both, and con- 
sequently be a partaker of the natures of both. 

2. Our mediating High Priest must also prove himself 
competent and fit for his office ; must endure the trials and 
temptations to which the race, for whom he acted, are 
exposed, coming forth from them unstained and triumphant ; 
and must be subject to that perfect law of God of which he 
was himself the only complete expounder in words, and 
the only absolutely perfect example in life. A test of his 
own faultless obedience, both in vanquishing temptations 
and in the fulfillment of all practical duties, were alike 
requisite to make him a faultless, and so an inexhaustible, 
pattern for all men everywhere, and to prove that the suf- 
ferings he endured were not the penal consequences of his 
own wrong doing. Had he suffered for his own malefac- 
tions, and had any suspicion of personal guiltiness attached 
to him, in vain had he invited men to come to him as a 
Saviour. It is just because’ of the assurance we have that 
his sufferings and death were the penalties of the nature 
he had assumed, and of the race with which he had iden- 
tified himself, and not of anything himself had done, that 
he becomes the Author of eternal life to all who will humbly 
and lovingly receive it from him, Heb., 5: 8, 9. 7: 26-28. 

3. The representation and mediation must be voluntary 
on the part of the sufferer who makes an atonement. Com- 
pulsory assumption of our nature and its penalties, would 
have been gross injustice ; and an assumption volunteered 
under a sudden gush of generous emotion, might have 
resulted not only in injustice but in utter failure and disas- 
ter. But we know that Christ contemplated from eternity 


1. The notion that the qualities of a finite act can be infinite—that its quali- 
iies are derived from the person towards whom the act is directed rather than 
from the motives that prompt it, needs no refutation. The notion itself, one 
of the bastard thoughts of medieval metaphysical theology, has maintained its 
position in respectable society solely by the service it has been regarded as 
capable of rendering. 


REQUISITES IN THE ATONEMENT. 293 


what he undertook ; from the first step of his boundless 
descent in taking our natnre, to the end of his great agony, 
all was voluntarily, patiently, and steadfastly endured 
on our account, Ps., 40: 6-8. John, 10: 17-18. Phil., 2: 
6, 7. John, 12: 27, 28. 18: 4,5. Comp. Tit., 2: 14. 


4. Our Redeemer must harmonize, both in his person and 
plans, with the Divine sounsels and methods ; and he must 
do no violence to the laws of the mental and moral nature of . 
man. To deliver man from the penal consequences of sin, 
be these consequences the positive inflictions of Divine 
wrath, or the merely natural effects of transgression, it was 
necessary that. the Saviour should be at once wholly accept- 
able to God and fully acquainted with man. The salvation 
of man by an atoning sacrifice was, as we have already 
seen, an integral part of the original scheme of the creation. 
Thus Christ transacted for God as wellas for man ; and to 
succeed in his offices, he must be in his person and plans 
approved of God, as well as able to act for mankind. The 
approval of God was both audibly certified from heaven, 
and visibly set forth in miracles; his competency to act for 
the race may be gathered from what he has actually accom- 
plished for it. | 

5. He who is to make an atonement for sin, which shall 
at the same time be an at-one-ment of man with God, must 
give proof of his ability to bear our penalty, and, in bearing, 
to survive it. Without proof of this he never could secure 
to himself that trust on the part of his disciples, which 
transforms them mto the likeness of their Lord. The proof 
was given in his resurrection from the dead. Without his 
resurrection, it would not have been known whether he had 
conquered sin and death, or had himself been overwhelmed ; 
without it, he never could have become that objective 
eround of trust, from which alone he could exert a subjec- 
tive and transforming power in the heart. He, therefore, 
‘who was delivered for our offences, was raised again for 
our justification,’’ Ro., 4: 25,—was ‘‘declared’’ to be the’ 
Divinely appointed Deliverer, Ro., 1: 4. Acts, 18: 33, and 

capable of fulfilling the promises he had given. 


294 REQUISITES IN THE ATONEMENT. 


6. It was requisite that man’s Redeemer should honor 
God and his law, as much as if the fall penalty of trans- 
gression had rested on the redeemed themselves. It was 
necessary that God should be ‘‘just,”’ as well as ‘‘the jus- 
tifier of him who believeth in Jesus,’’ Ro., 3: 26. Justice 
in God could. no more be arbitrarily relaxed than the essen- 
tial being of God could be changed. It was, accordingly, 
necessary not only that Christ should honor God and his 
moral law by a life of spotless purity, but also that, by vir- 
tue of the union of his people with himself, he should 


enable them to bear, and so to bear as that, through the | 


saving faith and the expulsive power of the new affections 
he awakens in them, they should survive and escape from, 
the penal consequences of their sins. 


7. The substitution which takes place in the intervention 
of Christ for the salvation of men, must be of such a nature 
as to secure an actual personal righteousness on the part of 
the redeemed ; in other words, the substitute must himself 
be security for the good conduct of those whose place he 
takes. The moral sentiment of all men would cry out 
against any scheme which should absolve men from the 
obligations of moral law, or of personal responsibility to 
God. In fact, that would be but half a redemption, if 
indeed a redemption at all, which should propose to deliver 
man only from a present sense of ill-desert and the penal- 
ties of past offences, and make no provision against the 
resumed control of his evil affections. But Jesus Christ has 
provided for every necessity. Having pat himself in our 
place and died that we might live,—having purchased us 
with his own blood, he by his gracious Spirit enables us to 
eat his flesh and drink his blood and thereby to be partakers 
of the life everlasting. He implants within us, and by his 
never ending mercies, and the indwelling Spirit, keeps alive, 
the love of gratitude, that purest, most abiding and most 


transforming of the principles that can rule in the heart. — 


‘Setting that principle into active exercise, he binds to him- 
self, by ties stronger than the love of life, ‘‘a peculiar people 
zealous of good works,’’ whose personal character he is 


EXTENT OF THE ATONEMENT. 295 


ever moulding into growing resemblance to his own. And 
with this requisite in mind, it is noteworthy how manifold 
are the provisions in Christianity for supplying it. No page 
of the New Testament is wanting in warnings and safeguards 


against moral evil, or in motives and stimulating thoughts 
towards moral good. 


$ 45—Lixtent of the Atonement. 


Our view of this will depend necessarily on our concep- 
tion of the atonement itself. If Christ was appointed as 
substitute to pay simply the debts of the elect, bearing 
strictly and literally their penalties, then his sufferings and 
death could avail only, and only by rigid expiation avail, 
for the sins of the elect'. Or if Christ was the covenanted sub- 
stitute to bear a punishment which, though not strictly 
identical with that due to the elect, was yet equivalent to it, 
then we may conclude the atonement made by Christ to 
have been sufficient for all men, but efficient for those only 
who were predestinated to receive of its benefits’. Or if 
Christ’s death was simply for governmental ends, then its 
sufficiency as a means, which is all that can here be meant, 
may be regarded as unlimited ; but its availability must be 


1. Bucanus, Jnstitutiones, locus 23, ques. 22, says ‘‘although Christ might 
have been a sufficient price for the sins of all men, yet he died actually and 
effectually for the sins of his own elect only.” See also quotations from Van 
Til and Wendelius in Ebrard’s Dogmatik, § 48 and vol. 2, p. 284. Wendelius is 
quoted as saying, Christus non pro omnibus et singulis hominibus, sed pro solis 
electis divine justitie satisficit. 

2. This view, held by the vast majority of Calvinist authors, differs from the 
preceding by its conception of a divinely purposed limitation of efficiency, as 
distinguished from a divinely purposed limitation of sufficiency. It supposes 
that the death of Christ, from the infinite dignity of his person, could have 
availed for the sins of all men, if it had so pleased God. Turretineassenting to 
this distinction says, (Institutio, locus 14, ques. 14, §9,) that the death of Christ 
sufficientissiman fuisse ad redemptione omnium et singulorum, si Deo visum 
fuisset illum adtotum mundum extendare. With Turretine agree Symington, 


On the Atonement, and Howard Malcom, The Hatent and Efficacy of the 
Atonement. 


296 EXTENT OF THE ATONEMENT. 


conceived as depending, according to one’s theory of the will, 
either upon the self-determined choice of the redeemed, or 
upon the sovereign elective purpose of God’. Orif wesuppose 
the whole object of Christ’s life and death to have been the 
persuasion of men, by moral influence, to lives of piety and 
obedience to God, the idea of an atonement proper being 
abandoned, the question of its extent also necessarily ceases. 

But if, setting aside all formal theories of the atonement, 
and recurring to the simple facts of the Gospels and. the 
plain language of the New Testament, we find that the suffer- 
ings and death of our Lord were the natural and inevitable 
consequences of the nature he had assumed, and of the posi- 
tion he had taken, in becoming one of our race, and find, 
more than all, that he came into the world for the very pur- 
pose of suffering as he did, that thereby he might release 
from like mental sufferings all who would be saved by him, 
then the conclusion is inevitable that the sufferings were an 
actual atonement for sin, and that he made in his own per- 
son a real satisfaction to moral law and to God. What our 
Lord thus accomplished was justas much for the benefit of 
one as of another of the race. Its real availability for the 
personal salvation of any one, must depend on those 
agencies by which the heart is brought into relation to 
Christ himself. Its efficacy for all who choose to avail 
themselves of its benefits, is as universal as the race; the 
specific appropriation of its benefits in individual salvation, 
is as limited as is the action of the sovereign grace of God in 
the hearts of men. It is only by confounding atonement as 
the endurance of penalty (satisfaction to God) with atone- 
ment as reconciliation with God, that there can be any con- 


troversy whatever in respect toits extent. The best solution ~ 


of the question is in careful definition. 


1. Consistent advocates of the governmental theory, regard the atonement as 
unlimited both in efficiency and sufficiency, the limitation being only in the 
appropriation of its benefits, and the appropriation being determined either by 
free will, (Bushnell and Young, for example,) or by sovereign grace, (Edwards 
and Jenkyn.) Andrew Fuller advocates the governmental theory, but strangely 
enough attempts to combine with it the notion of a limitation of design in the 
death of Christ, Works, A. B. P. So. ed., p. 378, ff., 692, ff. 


JUSTIFICATION, 297 


$ 46—JSustification. 


Thus far in the treatment of the work of human redemp- 
tion, our attention has necessarily been confined to that 
part of it which was achieved by the sufferings of Christ. 
‘‘Christ died for our sins;’’? but his death simply made 
possible for us a salvation which can become actual only 
through a subsequent process, one of the successive steps of 
which is known as justification. | 

This doctrine is the counterpart to that of the atonement; 
our views of that will necessarily determine our views of 
this. But all parties, whatever their diversities of view, 
areagreed in recognizing justification as attainable solely 
through faith in Christ ; the chief point in dispute turns on 
the relation to Christ into which faith is supposed to bring 
the believer, and on what it is in that relation which con- 
stitutes the real ground of the believer’s justification. 

The word justification, it must be borne in mind, is a 
strictly forensic term, and carries along with it the asso- 
ciated ideas of law, condemnation, and acquittal. It had its 
origin in the Jewish conviction that the destiny of mankind 
was to be determined strictly by their compliance or non- 
compliance with the published law of God. It was in com- 
bating this conviction that the Apostle Paul, in his Epistles 
to the Romans and Galatians, elaborated the doctrine of jus- 
tification, by setting forth faith in Christ crucified as the 
only, and the divinely appointed, method of salvation for 
allmen. The doctrine conceives man to be amenable to 
law, and to have justly incurred its penalty from which 
Christ alone can procure his release and vindicate his right 
to be absolved. 

Of the views of justification now generally prevalent, may 
be mentioned: first, that of the principal Protestant Con- 
fessions, and which regards the meritorious life and death 
of Christ as the sole ground on which God pronounces 
cuilty men acquitted and justified; the righteousness of 
Christ is supposed to be transferred and accounted as the 


298 JUSTIFICATION. 


personal righteousness of the saved; their salvation being 
given them on Christ’s account exclusively, and in no 
respect on account of any thing that in themselves they have 
become or can do. This view makes a broad distinction 
between justification and sanctification; the former being 
regarded as the act of God conferring salvation, the latter 
as the act of God preparing for the salvation he has 
conferred. 

A second view, and widely different from the first, is that 
which the Roman Catholic Church formally adopted at the 
Council of Trent, and which has since been often explained 
and defended by the writers of that Church. It repudiates 
the Protestant distinction between justification and sancti- 
fication, claiming that the two terms are only different 
names for one and the same thing®; and insists that the 
believer is, through the sacraments, brought into such rela- 
tion to Christ as to become in himself personally righteous 
or sanctified, and to possess in himself, as well as in his 
good works, a meritorious ground for the bestowment of 
Divine blessings.—It was but a slight modification of the 
Roman view which the Anglican Tractarians maintained, 
when they affirmed that ‘‘ good works done before justifica- 
tion, do dispose men to receive the grace of justification,”’ 
and that good works done after justification are rewarded of 
God, ‘‘according to their degrees of excellence®.”’ The lineal 
descendants of the Tractarians, the Ritualists of to-day, are 
in full accord with the Romish view. 


ub Confeesio Augustana, art. 3, in Hase’s Libri Symbolict, p. 10. ye 
Confessionis, Hase, p. 67.—Formula Concordia, 3; or Hase, p. 682, ff.—Con- 
fess. Helvetica post., art. 15.—Confess. Gall., art. 18 Westritnees Confess., 
c. 11, § 1.—The XXXIX Articles, art.11. Comp. Calvin, Znstz., 3, 11, 2. 

2. See Canones Concilii Trid., sess. 6, cap. 7.—Mohler, Symbolism, ch..3. 
Catholic writers prior to the Reformation, as is well known, held distinctly to 
the office of good works in procuring justification with God. See Baur, Chr. 
Lehre von d. Versihnung, pp. 350, 351.—Preuss, in his edition of Winer’s Com. 
parative Darstellung des Lehrbegriffs, says p. 93, Nach evangelische Lehre ist 
die Rechtfertigung ein Akt (u. zwar ein Akt Gottes), nach rémischer ein prozess. 
—Die Rechtfertigung nach ev. Lehre est ein richterlicher Akt, nach rOmischer 
die Mittheilung oder Eingiessung einer Substanz. 


3. See Tract No. 90, § 3, or p. 16. Comp. the ee i to Newman’s Lec- 
tures on Justification, 2d ed. 


JUSTIFICATION. 299 


Differing from both the preceding views, is that of the 
Unitarians, who maintain, according to their underlying 
conceptions of moral law, either, that every one is treated 
strictly according to his personal worth, being acquitted or 
condemned at the last just ashe deserves; or that, in the 
clemency of God, sin is forgiven and salvation bestowed 
wherever there is a disposition of heart warranting the exer- 
cise of the Divine mercy. 


Differing from all the preceding views seems to be the 
plain teaching of the New Testament. According to that 
' teaching, justification, so far as it is conceived of as a juri- 
dical act, rests beyond doubt, exclusively on the procuring 
efficacy of what Christ has wrought for us. In ourselves 
alone, every one of us is guilty and hopelessly condemned ; 
in Christ, through faith in him, sin is blotted out for us 
both as a powerand a penalty. Thus it is Christalone that 
saves us; our justification is solely on his account; meta- 
phorically expressed, his righteousness is imputed to us, 
and through faith in him and in his sacrifice of himself for 
us, we are accounted righteous; but the literal fact is, that 
our relation to him as a living personal Saviour imparts to 
us a new religious life and a personal righteousness, with- 
out which salvation is impossible, and which in reality are 
the constituents elements of the salvation itself. Christ 
alone has conquered sin; and by bearing its penalty, death, 
and triumphing over it, has acquired the power of con- 
ferring a like victory upon all who, through loving trust 
in him as their personal Saviour, will receive it at his 
hands. Thus the Scriptural doctrine of justification will 
be found in its completeness to consist of three distinct but 
inseparable ideas : 


(a.) Its ground idea is, that all men, in themselves consid- 
ered, are justly under condemnation—-are personally disposed 
to evil, and perpetually falling into acts of transgression ; 1n 
short that without supernatural help they are a lost race ; 
but that Christ Jesus by his interposition has furnished a 
common ground on which God can render the needed help 
to man, and man, through the divinely communicated power, 


300 JUSTIFICATION. , 


can help himself. In Christ, man finds himself pardoned— 
his sense of guilt removed ; and God gives him assurance of 
a full acquittal from all his offences. 

(6.) And always associated in the Scriptures with the idea 
of acquittal is that of approval; the forgiven sinner is 
taken into the Divine favor ; the acquitted offender 1s made 
a son and heir of God. Justification, in the Pauline con- 
ception of it, includes the bestowment of the highest con- 
ceivable blessings. 

(c.) But forgiveness and promotion, to the morally unwor- 
thy, would prove, instead of blessings, the direst of curses. » 
A third concomitant of justification, therefore, is the actual 
production of a personal fitness—not aself-justifying worthi- 
ness of character—but a personal suitableness, to be justified. 
The redemption which Christ has procured for us, takes — 
effect in our personal justification only by the implanting 
of a germ of personal righteousness. Forensic justification, 
with Paul, includes that moral change by which the justi- 
fied becomes personally just in Christ. 

Now it is to ke observed that the doctrine of justification, 
though made up of the three distinct thoughts above men- 
tioned, may be comprehensively defined as God’s merciful 
treatment of the ill-deserving ; but to be fully understood, 
it must be contemplated not only as God’s act for man, but 
also as God’s act in man. It must be viewed in its relation 
to God, or on the Divine side of it; and none the less in its 
relation to man, or on the human side of it. Looked at 
exclusively on either side, we see but half the truth. With 
our eye fixed only on the objective work of Christ, our sal- 
vation becomes a purely juridical act, irrespective of the 
moral character of the saved; confining our attention to 
the subjective change of the redeemed, no satisfactory expla- 
nation can be given of its connection with the penal suffer- 
ings of Christ. But with our minds on both the death of 
Christ, the objective procuring cause of our salvation, and — 
the moral renewal or subjective effect of that cause in the 
hearts of the redeemed, we may comprehend the Pauline 
idea of justification. Viewed on the Divine side of it, it is 


JUSTIFICATION. 301 


simply God’s act of reckoning to us a righteousness which 
is not our own; considered as the act taking effect in us, 
in other words, as being an act in reality, it is the imparta- 
tion to us of a vital principle, which, however feeble in its 
beginning, waxes, in due time, into an actual righteousness. 
Justification, in the comprehensive sense of the term as Paul 
uses it, is God’s method of so dealing with men, through 
Jesus Christ, as to make them personally just. 


But these two sides of the Scriptural doctrine of justifica- 
tion have not always been keptin mind. Those who have 
agreed in attaching great importance, and even a literal 
interpretation, to the forensic imagery, have not agreed in 
their estimate of the subjective change which it implies. 
Partisan theologians have persisted in fixing their eyes 
exclusively on one side or the other. Roman Catholics and 
Socinians, looking only at the human side, discover, as they 
think, a collateral ground for justification, in the merito- 
rious works of the justified ; and ultra Protestants, looking 
only at the Divine side, see nothing but the unconditional 
act of justification on Christ’s account. The Catholic con- 
founds the accompanying effect with the procuring cause ; 
the unguarded Protestant honors the cause to the exclusion 
of the effect. The former identifies and confounds justifi. 
cation, which is an act, with sanctification, which is a pro- 
cess; the latter so distinguishes these as not only to make 
them chronologically separate but casually distinct. The 
truth is that actual justification never exists without actual 
regeneration. Evidences of the existence of the latter cer- 
tify the existence of the former. Justification, as a method 
of salvation, always includes the impartation of a new 
divine life to the justified, Ro.,5: 18. 6: 17, 18. 

That the explanation now given of justification accords 
with the Scriptural conception of it, may be seen from a 
brief examination of the words which the Scriptures employ 
in their account ofit. These words are, in the Hebrew, the 
verb pi¥, and the noun p7¥; in the Greek, the verb 
dcxazow, the nouns dexaiworc, Caatwpa, dcocoobvy, and the 
adjective d:xacos. Both the Hebrew words are used, some- 


302 : | JUSTIFICATION. 


times in the sense of declaring or counting one tobe right. 
eous, and sometimes in the sense of making or causing one 
to be righteous. Thus the verb in Is., 5: 23, and the noun 
in Gen., 15: 6, are used in the first sense; and the same 
words in Is, 53: 11 and 64: 14, are used in the second 
sense. 

In the New Testament, the Greek verb dcxacow is com- 
monly, if not uniformly, employed to denote God’s act for 
us rather than in us, and the noun: dexatweors, which occurs 
but rarely, is always restricted to this meaning. Butin the 
use of the words dexatwua, dixacog, and dtxacoovvy, there is 
no uniformity. Each and all are used, as the convenience 
of the writer may require, to express either a procured or 
animparted righteousness. Thus in the use of dcxatwya, the 
translators of our English Bible have recognized distinc- 
tions in meaning, translating it justification in Ro., 5: 16, 
and righteousness in Ro., 5: 18, and Rev., 19: 8. The 
adjective d:xacos, is employed to designate, sometimes those 
who are simply declared to be just, and sometimes those 
who are actually made in themselves righteous, —an instance 
of the first use occurring in Ro., 1: 17, and several 
instances of the second, in Matt., 18: 48. 25: 46. Ro., 2:13. - 
5: 19. But the most important word is dexacoobvy, which in 
our English Bible is always translated ‘‘ righteousness.”’ 
The most cursory examination will suffice, however, to show 
- that the righteousness spoken of, is sometimes that which 
is procured for us and presented to us in the person and 
offices of Christ, and sometimes that which, through our 
trust in Christ, becomes personally our‘own. Thus, it is in 
the first of these senses that the word is used by Paul in 
Ro., 4: 11, 13:6: 17,21. 2-Cor., 3:9. Gal., 2: 2 wana 
the second, in Ro., 6: 16,,18. 8: 4. 1 Cor., 1: 30. Comp. 
Matt., 25: 46. Luke, 1: 75. James, 3: 18. The first mean- 
ing is very nearly synonymous with that of dexa:wor, and 
indicates the righteousness made possible for us through 
faith in Christ ; the second is very nearly synonymous with 
oacotns, (see Luke, 1: 75. Eph., 4: 24,) and denotes the 
personal righteousness which it is the object of the Gospel 


JUSTIFICATION. 303 


to secure in us. So also there are various passages in which 
both meanings are so plainly centered in the single word, as 
to make it quite possible to translate correctly either by 
‘‘justification’’ or by ‘‘righteousness.’’ As examples see 
Copeman lo 174212010: 3): 2) Cor.,.38 Op Gall 2: 213: 
21. 5: 5. In like manner in Ro., 1: 17, which announces 
the theme of the whole Epistle, the phrase dexacoavvy eon, 
undoubtedly denotes both the righteousness which God 
requires of us and that which he has provided for us and 
desires to communicate to us through our Lord Jesus Christ. 
The Epistles to the Romans and the Galatians, which alone 
discuss the forensic idea of justification, were written 
expressly to prove that man by his own unaided efforts never 
could fulfill the Divine requirements,—never could attain to 
an actual personal righteousness ; but that, in and through 
Jesus Christ, Divine law could be fulfilled, and an actual 
personal righteousness be acquired. 

Now in the words thus employed in treating of justifica- 
tion, there is evidently the presentation of two sides of one 
idea. That idea is the salvation of condemned man; and 
its two sides are what is done for him by Christ, and what 
is wrought in him by the Holy Spirit; the first making his 
salvation possible, and the second making itactual. Of both 
these offices, God the Father is the originator, and Christ his 
Son the agent. The salvation isa pure gratuity ; no one can 
save himself; Christ alone can save any one. | 

But to all this the popular method of Jewish thought 
was wholly opposed. To the Hebrew mind, the Mosaic 
economy was a finality, and salvation was possible only by 
compliance with the immutable statutes of God. To show 
the impossibility of being thus saved by law, and the 
necessity of being saved, if at all, by the grace that is in 
Christ, Paul wrote his epistles to the Romans! and the 


1. Itis of course not forgotten here that the question is still an open one, 
whether the Church at Rome was composed mainly of Jewish or of Gentile chris- 
tians. Neander, (Planting and Training, p. 268, ff.) decided for Gentile 
predominance, and Tholuck, Philippi, (Commentaries on the Romans) and Hof- 
mann, (Scriftbewets, vol. 1, p. 543-552,) agree with him; Baur, of Tubingen, 
(Tiibinger Zeitschrift fiir Theologie, 1836, pt. 8, and Paulus, der Apostel Jesu 


304 JUSTIFICATION. 


Galatians. The object of the Apostle determined both the — 
nature and the scope of his argument; and itis only by 
remembering the former that we can understand the latter. 
The Israelite, believing that by the law, including its ritual- 
istic as well asits moral precepts, every one was to be finally 
judged, and Paul’s - object being -to show him that, 
judged by his law, no human being could be saved, the 
forensic form of conception was already furnished to the 
Apostles hand; both his argument and his terminology 
naturally and necessarily followed. 

The truth seems to be, that when Paul addressed himself 
to those who trusted in their own legal righteousness, he 
presented salvation as attainable alone through trust in 
another; he preached the dogmatic doctrine-of justification 
through faith in Jesus Christ; but when he addressed him- 
self to Gentiles and others who were conscious of their need — 
of a helper, the forensic imagery is not employed. Scarce a 
trace of it appears in his discourses as recorded in the Acts, 
and it is noticeably absent from the other epistles than those 
addressed to the Galatians and the Romans. But when he 
writes to the Judaisers and the churches tinctured with 
their notions, he takes them on their own forensic ground, 
and nothing can be more distinct than his enunciation of 
objective, judicial justification as possible for any one solely 
on account of the gracious work of Jesus Christ ; and noth- 
ing can be more unequivocal than his maintenance of the 
doctrine that no one can be saved except through faith in 
Jesus Christ the crucified. 


Christt, p. 875, ff.,) declared for Jewish and Baumgarten-Crucius, (Hist. of the 
Ch. in the Apos. Age, Clark,) agrees with Baur. The argument as between 
Neander and Baur has been well summarised by Jowett in The Epistles of St. 
Paul, &c., Intro. to the Epist. to the Romans, vol. 2, p. 4, ff. But the Epistle 
to the Romans is itself the best possible evidence that, so far as its forensic con- 
ception of justification is concerned, it was specially addressed to Christians of 
Jewish extraction and of a Jewish style of thought; but so far as the grand 
sweep of his argument is concerned, 1t covers the premises of both the Jew and, 
the Gentile. Routing the Jew from his legal standing ground, the Apostle 
proves that the eternal Moral Law, which the Jew and Gentile alike regarded 
as obligatory, (Ro. 2: 14-18,) can find its fulfillment only in the man whose 
trust is in Christ. 


JUSTIFICATION. 305 


Thus justification, regarded as a judicial act and from a legal 
point of view, is solely on Christ’s account. Every man, in 
himself considered, is always and in his best estate condemn- 
able, and in justifying any one on Christ’s account God is said 
to justify the ungodly, Ro., 4: 5. But God does not justify 
the ungodly as such, in his ungodliness. He cannot approve 
sin; the procuring cause of his judicial act of approval is 
wholly aside from anything in the justified, yet as an act 

completed and made known, it is always simultaneous with, 

and inseparable from, a change i in their affections and con- 
duct. So in respect to Paul’s doctrine of justification, 
forensically speaking, it is a “free gift” bestowed in reward 
for the obedience of Christ, Ro. 5: 15; comprehensively 
stated,’ it is being made “alive unto God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord,” Ro., 6: 11,—it is having “the righteous. 
ness of the law fulfilled in us,” and it is being enabled to 
“walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, ” Ro, 8: 4. 


In support of the explanation now given of the Pauline 
_ doctrine of justification, is the Apostle’s uniform connection 
of justification with faith. But faith with the Apostle is 
not mere intellectual assent to a dogma, but a loving, con- 
trolling trust in the personal Christ; it is much more a state 
of the heart than it is an act of the mind. To be justified 
by faith, therefore, is to be made possessor of “the right- 
eousness which is through the faith of Christ, the righteous- 
ness which is of God by faith,” Phil, 3: 9. Hence the 
absurdity of the “eternal justification” once so much 
insisted on by the Antinomians. Doubtless there was in the 


1. Justification in its exclusive forensic sense is laid down in all the earlier 
leading Protestant Confessions, and has been elaborately expounded and defended 
by the chief Protestant theologians, Lutheran and Reformed. Owen, Wateriand, — 
and Edwards followed in support of the same view. Emmons’ notion that justifi- 
cation consists in pardon alone, is this view logically applied. Augustine was 
much nearer the truth when he maintained that, in being justified, justi efficimur. 
See quotations from Augustine in Wiggers, Augustinism and Pelagianism, p. 201. 
See also Neander’s understandi:g of Paul’s doctrine, Planting and Training, pp. 
417-421, 480. As an illustration of a mind struggling against the rigid theory of 
an exclusive juristic justification, and discerning much of the truth, yet hampered 
with the cords of Romanism which finally held it firmly, see Newman’s Lectures on 
Justification. 


306 JUSTIFICATION. 


Divine mind an eternal purpose of justification in the case 
of every individual saved, Ro., 8:29, 80. The infinite pre- 
science of Godimplies it. But predestinating purpose is not 
justification, and is not to be identified with an act in time. 
It can only result in utter confusion of thought to speak of 
man as justified from his sins before he had committed them, 
and as saved before he was born.t 
Justification, in the fullness of Paul’s meaning, is God’s. 

method of making men just, or nehteous, through faith in 
Christ and by the renewing of the Holy Ghost. It compre- 
hends the whole of that gracious work which the triune 
God accomplishes through the instrumentality of truth in 
the hearts of believers. Contemplated only in the literal 
meaning of the narrow forensic image, it is God’s act on 
Christ’s account; unfolded in its broad, Pauline compass of 
meaning, it is God’s method of giving personal righteous- 
ness to men;* and Paul’s unfolding of it in the Epistle to. 
the Romans, brings under survey the whole Divine plan of 
salvation from its inception in the eternity of the past, to 
its completion in the eternity of the future. Its causal con- 
nection with the Divine will and the whole Christian econo. 
my is thus clearly laid before us. Weare made to see, that: 
its originating cause 1s God, 3:25; 8:33; its procuring or 
meritorious cause, 1s the obedience, both active and passive, 
of Jesus Christ, 8:24, 25; 5:19; 8:34; its immediate or 
creative cause, is the Holy Spirit, 5:5; 8: 1-4; its mediate 
or instrumental cause, 1s Christ, in his person and work, 
38:22; 9:83; its formal or conditional cause, is faith, 3 : 26, 
98; 5:1. The evidence of its existence is the inward 
witnessing of the creative Spirit with the spirit of the 
believer, 8:16; and its immunities are present peace with 
God, 5:1, and an assured hope of every conceivable blessing 
hereafter, OF Qewsired, 


1. Crisp says, ‘‘the Lord hath no more to lay to the charge of an elect per- 
son, yet in the height of iniquity, and in the excess of riot, and committing all 
the abomination that can be committed; * * than he hath to the charge of 
a saint triumphant in glory,” Sermons, vol. 1, ser. 28. 

2. What Paul means by justification John expresses in the words, ‘‘the blood 
of Jesus Christ cleanseth (ka@apife:) us from all sin,” 1 Epis,, 1:7,—‘‘ from all. 
unrighteousness,” v. 9. Comp. Heb., 9 :14. 


JUSTIFICATION. 307 


From the view now given of justification it is easy to see 
its connection with other doctrines of grace,—with effectual 
calling, regeneration, repentance, faith, and all the others. 
No one of the whole series of Divine acts and human states 
represented by these doctrines can exist except in connection 
with every other; all are but parts of one whole, constitut- 
ing so many aspects under which the one renewed man 
may be variously contemplated. It is unscriptural, as well 
as contrary to reason, to speak of a man as justified while 
yet unregenerate, or as repentant while yet unbelieving. The 
truth is, that to be justified 1s also to be regenerate, and to 
be regenerate is also to be repentant and believing. The 
objective act of justification never exists without the subject- 
ive change of regeneration, and regeneration never exists 
without repentance and faith." 


1. It is a strange disregard of logical relations exhibited by many who insist 
most strenuously on the pure objectivity of the Pauline doctrine of justification, 
and yet persist in treating of regeneration before they treat of justification. That 
this order should be adopted by a sacramentalist with whom regeneration is a 
state into which it is the prerogative of the Church to introduce him, would 
be natural; but how any one who regards regeneration as the direct work 
of the Spirit should adopt such an order is unintelligible, except upon the 
supposition of a latent feeling that, after all, justification, in the scriptural 
sense of it, does include a subjective change. Nitzsch, in his Chr. Lehre, very 
noticeably treats of Justification, with other doctrines, under the heading ‘“ Of 
Regeneration,” § 145-151. 

The ordo salutis by which is meant the several steps through which the 
Holy Spirit is supposed to take us in accomplishing our salvation, (defined by 
_ Reinhard, Dogmaiik, § 188, as modus impetrande salutis sempiternze, a reli- 
gione christiana preescriptus,) has been a disputed question. The first Protestant 
theologians gathered all around the offices of faith; but their successors soon 
began to analyse and classify more accurately. Lutherans and Reformed 
naturally differed widely on the question of order. Lutherans have also disputed 
over it among themselves; beginning uniformly with vocatio they have differed 
as to both the facts and the designations of the subsequent steps. The order of 
Quenstedt seems the most natural and just of all: vocatio, regeneratio, conversio, 
justificatio, pcenitentia, unio mystica, sanctificatio. See Hase, Hutt. Rediviv., 
locus 18, § 111. The Reformed have been much more uniform. Wendelius 
may be taken as a fair representative; who says: gratia, qua Deus nos regen- 
erat et sanctificat, ab orthodoxis theologis secundum scripturas quintuplex 
constituitur, préeparans, operans, codperans et perficiens. 


308 CALLING AND ELECTION. 


S 47—Calling and Hlection. 


To make man avail himself of the salvation provided for 
him, and to apply to him the method of justification which 
has now been considered, it is necessary that an influence 
go forth from God to draw him and to change his moral 
affections. No one avails himself of what has been divinely 
provided, unless he be divinely constrained, John, 6:44. To 
be thus constrained is, according to frequent language of the 
New Testament, to be “called” of God. This calling has 
been distinguished as general or outward, and as special 
or inward; the former being regarded as effectual only 
when accompanied by the latter. 

The distinction between a general and a particaie call 
is as clearly established, notwithstanding the objections — 
often made to it, as is the distinction between natural and 
revealed religion, though the distinctions are not commensu- 
rate one with the other. But it certainly is unreason- 
able to restrict all calling from God to the formal proclama- 
tion of the truths of a written revelation! The will of God 
made known to us in his moral laws, through whatever 
channels and by whatever processes, is a call from God to 
his service. The Scriptures abound in their recognitions of 
ineffectual calling through the sources of natural religion,— 
through the works of creation, Ps. 19:1-6; Ro, 1:20; 
of providence, Matt., 6 : 26, 30; Ro., 1:18, and ‘of conscience, 
De Aone comin by verbal messages, Prov. 1: 24- —30; Jer., 
eno, 95: 26: 5; Matt., 20:16; Luke, 14: 16-24; Ro., 10: 
18. The whole Jewish religion and nation were also 
employed of God to warn and call the surrounding Gentiles 
to his service and the blessings of his grace; and the Chris- 


1. The restriction has been maintained, however, by Calvinists and Lutherans 
alike; the former insisting, in strict harmony with their doctrine of Divine sover- 
eignty, that salvation is attainable solely through a formal reception of the Gospel 
of Christ, and without this no heathen can be saved except by miracle ; the latter 
affirming, in spite of their gratia universalis, by which the salvation of all men is 
possible, that the vocatio is always per verbum. 


CALLING AND ELECTION. 309 


tian church is now made to address, with greater distinctness 
a more intelligible call to the surrounding world.’ 

But by the phrase inward or effectual call, it will at once 
be seen that something very different is meant from a mere 
revelation of Divine will by the voices of nature, or even by 
the messages of prophets and apostles. It includes these 
and a great deal more. There is not only an outward warn- 
ing and offer of salvation, but an inward preparation and 
constraint of the heart to receive it. In a mere outward 
call, addressed to all men in common, it may not be given 
to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, Matt., 138: 
11 ; comp. 11: 25-27; but in the effectual call 1t 1s given to 
_know the hidden wisdom of God, 1 Cor., 2:11, 14. All men 
are blind and in darkness; but in the effectual call their 
eyes are opened, Acts, 26:18; comp. Ps. 119:18. The 
hearts of men are predccupied with self, and closed against 
God; the effectual call opens the heart to attend to the 
truth, Acts, 16:14, and gives “the light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God,” 2 Cor., 4:6. Men are dead in tres- 
passes and sins; in the effectual call there is a re-creation of 
the moral affections and the impartation of a new life, Eph., 
2:1, 5,10. “Many are called but few are chosen.” 

Whether the difference between the general and the spe- 
cific call is one of kind, or of degree only, it is not easy to 
determine. It need not be necessarily inferred that in the 
first no other influence is exerted on the heart than that 
which emanates from the inherent force of truth, while in the 
latter the truth is accompanied and made effectual by the 
creative energy of the Holy Spirit, Tit., 3:5. According 
to the Scriptures, the Holy Spirit himself, whose office it is 
to convict the world of sin, of rmghteousness, and of judg- 
ment to come, does act on the hearts of many who are not 
effectually called; may be resisted and finally repelled, Acts, 


7 


1. To carry the distinction between the general and the particular, the common 
and the special, methods of Divine dealing with men farther than is here done, and 
to distinguish between common and special grace in the operations of the Spirit 
through the ordinary ministrations of the Gospel, is to build up an artificial 
scheme, and to lay unnatural stress on the merely incidental phraseology of the 
Scriptures. 


310 CALLING AND ELECTION. 


7:51; while in the call which saves men, the Spirit not 
only enlightens and convicts, but also renews and enables to 
become the sons of God, John, 1:12; Ro. 1:16. The 
difference, therefore, cannot be clearly proved to be in kind. 
Is it one of degree? Judging from certain texts, in which 
the power of God is specially dwelt on as exerted on the 
believer, the difference would seem to be in the degrees of 
Divine energy put forth, 1 Cor, 1:18; Eph. 1:19; 3:7, 
20," 

But there is also another class of texts in which the differ- 
ence between efficacious and common grace is apparently 
made to lie in the dispositions of the called, rather than in 
the degrees of energy with which they are acted on. Thus, 
it was to those already disposed to “receive” Christ, that 
power (ability) was given to become the sons of God, John, © 
1:12; itis to him who already hath that special grace is 
eranted, Matt., 18: 12-15; and it is implied in the blame, 
which in the New Testament is everywhere attached to a 
rejection of Christ, that the true cause of blameworthiness is 
the heart of the unbeliever, and not the absence of a power 
which he cannot control. Yet these texts throw no light 
on the origin of the predisposition of heart, which they are 
supposed to set forth as the requisite condition to the bestow- 
ment of supernatural and efficient grace. Seemingly, it is 
implied that this requisite condition is the product of free 
will; but how will can originate a new disposition, or how 
it can be other than the expression of the disposition itself, 
is inconceivable. If, on the other hand, the predisposition be 
inborn, or inbred, or the product of a latent gratia prave- 
niens et preparans, then, however blameworthy might be 
the want of it, its presence could be no cause for commen- 
dation. Both the salvation and the condition of its bestow- 
ment would be by grace. 


1. Col., 2:12, is also often cited as proving that saving faith is the product 
of the immediate power of God. DeWette, Hodge and others so interpret. 
But Meyer, Alford and Ellicott maintain that t7¢ évepyeiac Tov Oeov, is not a geni- 
tive of cause but of object, and that the rendering should be, ‘‘through faith in 
the operation of God who raised him (Christ) from the dead.” 


CALLING AND ELECTION. a el 


But the Scriptures do indubitably teach that, in becom- 
ing Christians, men are moved, controlled, and transformed 
by a pore: of will superior to their own, John, 3: 5, 6; 
mitten soc. hess... J: 0: James, te 13’ and that in thus 
transforming them the Divine will simply executes its own 
eternal purpose, Ro., 8: 28-30. Christians are everywhere 
spoken of in the New Testament i the chosen, the elect, of 
God, Mark, 18: 20; 1 Peter, 2 Oe oi ness iis oi. 9 and 
the implication everywhere i is, that the choice is determined 
by no merit in the chosen, but solely by the good pleasure 
or sovereign purpose of God, Jon, Pose LO pha ile ag: 
It; Phil, 3: 12; 2 Thess, 1: 11. Thus the doctrines of 
effectual calling and of personal predestination .are the 
counterparts of each other; “whom he did _ predestinate, 
them he also called.” What he had in eternity purposed, 
in time as a sovereign he performed,’ Ro., 9: 11, 23; 2 Tim., 
1: 9. Whom he eternally predestinated to be saved by 
Christ, them he has historically chosen out, or elected, from 
the rest of mankind. 

Election is God’s sovereign use of efficacious grace in the 
salvation of a portion of mankind in contradistinction from 
the whole. Election differs from predestination as a com- 
pleted purpose differs from a purpose which is only in the 
mind; and as a doctrine it differs from that of effectual 
calling, only as a bare statement of fact differs from an 
explanation of its causes. Election simply denotes God’s 
soverelon choice of one man, rather than of another, to be 
saved; effectual calling (efficacious grace,) expresses the 
sovereion method by which this choice takes effect. Effect- 
ual calling, therefore, is only a fuller statement, and a kind 
of explanation, of the fact of election. The discussion of 
one necessarily involves that of the other. 


1. From one point of view, the Augustinian doctrine of irresistible grace is 
unquestionably true. What God has purposed he infallibly accomplishes. But 
this is only the divine side of the question. On the human side of it, both Scrip- 
ture and consciousness assure men that they do resist the Holy Ghost, and that if 
not saved, the fault will be exclusively their own. Nor is the apparent contradic- 
tion removed by the assumptiun that only common grace, 7. ¢., grace not intended 
to be efficacious, can be successfully resisted; it is an attempt to evade a Scripture 
difficulty by an unscriptural distinction. 


Sie CALLING AND ELECTION. 


The objections to the doctrine of effectual calling and 
election have, through successive generations, proceeded 
from the same general causes and rested on the same gene- 
ral principles. Pelagians, Scotists, Lutherans and Armin- 
ians, while differmg widely among themselves as to their 
positive views of grace, have been agreed in their opposi- 
tion and objections to the doctrine of a grace efficacious." 

1. One deep, common source of objection has been in the 
conviction that if elective and efficacious grace be assented 
to, the doctrine of reprobation must also be admitted. And 
if by reprobation be meant merely the condemnation of the 
non-elect for their own personal unworthiness, the aban- 


1. Pelagianism regards all men as possessed of an inherent power to save them- 
selves, but looks upon the assistance rendered by revealed truth and the gracious. 
guidance of the Holy Spirit, as greatly facilitating the process. Man’s right use 
of the natural power of his will secures the Divine favor and assistance. See 
Miinscher, Dogmengeschicte ed. by Von Oélin, vol. 1.—Wiggers, Augustinism and 
Pelagianism, ch. 19.—Neander, Hist. of Dogmas, and Hist. of the Church, vol. 2, p- 
578, ff.—Shedd, Hist. Chr. Doct., bk. 4, ch. 4, vol. 2, p. 98, ff. For corresponding 
Socinian views see Cat. Racov., qu. 428-480. 

The Scotists opposed the Thomists. The latter, notwithstanding their notions. 
of sacramental efficacy, held the Augustinian doctrines of sin and grace; the for- 
mer, resting all their doctrinal conceptions on the postulate of the absolute will of 
God, made grace to be necessary, not because of any need in man, but because of 
the sovereign will of God. See Neander, Hist. of Dogmas, vol. 2, p. 590.—Herzog, 
Rtealencyclopddie, art. Duns Scotus. | 

Both Luther (De Servo Arbditrio) and Melancthon (first ed. of his Loci Communes),. 
as is well known, at first took high Augustinian ground on the doctrines of sin and 
grace. But Melancthon adopted a theory of the will which admitted a conception 
of man as coactive in the work of grace (synergism). Under his guidance the 
Lutheran church diverged from its earliest confession, the Augsburg, which con- 
tained nothing contrary to the Calvinists; but the Formuia of Concord (art. 11, 
Hase, Libri Symbol., p. 617, ff.) distinguishes between predestination, which is 
active toward the elect only, and foreknowledge, which alone is active in the case 
of the lost. With this agree the Lutheran theologians. Grace is of course resist- 
ible; and the Calvinistic distinction between the external and the internal call is 
rejected. See Winer, Comp. Darstellung, p. 89.—Schmid, Dogmatik d. evan.-luth. 
Kirche, § 44.—Heppe, Dog. d. deutschen Protest. im 16 Jahrhundert, locus 11, vol. 
2, pp. 1-49. Comp. Bid. Sac., July, 68, p. 454, ff. 

Arminians, of all shades, have always maintained that election rests on the fore- 
knowledge of God; that the salvation of every man depends on his own free will; 
and consequently that grace is resistible. See Winer, Comp. Darstel., p. 88.—Lim- 
borch, Theol. Chr., lib. 4. Comp. art. on ‘‘ The Doctrines of Methodism” in Bid. 
Sac. for April, ’62, p. 265, ff. 


| 


CALLING AND ELECTION. SES 


donment of them to their own chosen fate,’ the objection is 
of but little account. Tor certainly the whole race might, 
without injustice to any one, have been left to the conse- 
quences of their own wrong doing ; and it 1s no injustice to 
any one that some of the race are not thus left. But repro- 
bation, in the sense of absolute predestination to sin and 
eternal damnation,” is neither a sequence of the doctrine of 
election nor the teaching of the Scriptures. That the Scrip- 
tures do teach the absolute sovereignty of God in the admin- 
istration of his government of the world, there can be no 
doubt — history and observation teach the same; that his 
sovereignty does so control both the elect and the non-elect 
as to make the salvation of one and the damnation of the 
other absolutely certain, is also taught with equal plain- 
ness; but that this sovereignty includes the eternal predes- 
tination of the non-elect to the choice of evil, in the same 
sense that it does the predestination of the elect to the choice 
of good, the Scriptures nowhere teach. It 1s not taught 
even in Ro., 9: 16-24. When it is there said of God that 
“whom he will he hardeneth,” it is not meant that whom 
he will he predestinates to wickedness, but that when he 
chooses so to deal with men as to intensify and expose their 
wickedness, and thereby reveal the character of both him- 
self and his government, he does it as a sovereign and 
gives no account of his proceedings. No thought is more 
frequent or more variously reiterated in the Scriptures than 
that God will have all men to be saved and to come unto 
the knowledge of the truth, 1 Tim., 2: 4; comp. John, 2: 2. 


2. The doctrine of effectual calling is objected to as throw- 


1. Infralapsarianism. 2. Supralapsarianism. 

3. Few truths are more conspicuously set forth in the New Testament than that 
of God’s sovereign and minutely providential government of mankind. The indi- 
vidual acts and destinies of good men and of bad men alike, are all of divine 
appointment, 1 Cor., 4:9; 1 Thes., 3:8; 5:9; 1 Pet., 2: 8; Jude, 4. It is useless 
to attempt to prove or disprove, by minute criticism of certain texts, that God does 
not eternally predestinate the wicked to their wickedness. The thought itself is 
contrary to the whole spirit of Christianity and of the New Testament. And 
it seems equally idle to attempt to distinguish between the election of nations and 
of individuals, admitting the first but denying the second: the providence of God 
is particular as well as general. 


314 CALLING AND ELECTION. 


ing discredit on the sincerity of God in the outward calling. 
If the former alone can save men, how can the latter be sin- 
cerely made? God cannot trifle with men. 


(a.) The objection proceeds upon the assumption that the 
outward call is made upon men without object, whereas 
there is the same purpose in it that there is in the revelation 
of moral law in God’s natural government of the world and 
in his supernatural communications by prophets and 
apostles. The proclamation of moral law with its accompa- 
nying assurances of rewards and penalties, is intended to 
restrain from evil, to prompt to good, and, above all, to 
awaken that moral consciousness of needed succour without 
which the offices of the Holy Spirit in effectual calling are 
impracticable. Outward calling, therefore is in the highest 
degree sincere and in earnest. 


(6.) Salvation is positively promised in outward calling to 
every one who will comply with the Divine requirements — 
to obey is to live; and the Holy Spirit’s assistance 1s assured 
to every one who will ask it, Luke, 11: 9,13. It is inered- 
ible that the promise and assurance are insincere. 


(c.) Those who reject the outward call are everywhere in 
Scripture earnestly warned and represented as chargeable 
with great guilt for their disobedience, Prov., 1: 29-381; 
Matt., 11: 20-24;. John, 3:19; 5: 40; 16: 9. 

(d.) All men are conscious of choosing freely in their com- 
pliance or non-compliance with the offers of God as pre- 
sented in outward calling, and all men know that with 
themselves alone remains the responsibility of their choice. 
The consciousness of guilt in incurring the penalties of non- 
compliance is universal, bespeaking alike the sincerity of 
God and the criminality of man. 


3. The doctrine of effectual calling has been opposed on 
the ground of its injurious influence. 

(a.) The doctrine, it is said, warrants the conception of 
God as arbitrary and partial. But absolute sovereignty and 
arbitrariness are not identical. Men are arbitrary, when 
they act in defiance of law; God is absolute sovereign when, 
in the execution of his infinite purposes, he acts from con- 


CALLING AND ELECTION. 315 


siderations immeasurably beyond the reach of our knowl- 
edge. Reasons unknowable and unintelligible to finite 
minds may lead infinite wisdom to confer blessings on some 
which are not conferred on others, and yet no one be 
wronged, nor God chargeable with partiality. Finite minds 
may be partial, not infinite wisdom. It surely is God’s 
right, and it is just in him, to bestow his own gifts where 
his perfect wisdom and will may dictate. 


(6.) Effectual calling, it is claimed, involves necessita- 
rianism.! If no one can choose, it is said, under the influ- 
ence of the motives of common grace, to accept salvation, 
unless constrained to do so by a sovereign personal act of 
God on the soul, then it is not man who chooses, but God; 
and man in becoming a Christian ceases to be a free moral 
agent. While it is true, however, that in man’s becoming a 
Christian the initiative is not with himself but with God, 
John, 15: 16; while it is also true, that God so efficiently 
“works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure” 
that we are called ‘his workmanship ;” yet the Divine power 
so acts, and the Divine will is so fulfilled, in our becoming 
Christians, that we are as conscious of the freedom of our 
own volitions and actions as if all had proceeded from our- 
selves alone. The Divine influence on our wills, whatever 
it may be, is always so strictly accordant with our own 
mental and volitional processes as to render it impossible 
to detect the slightest infringement on their freedom. Not 
a choice made in the entire series that results in our spirit- 
ual transformation can be recognized as constrained. When 
the change has been completed, taught by the Scriptures, 
we can plainly see that God’s hand has led us, and God’s 
power has moulded us. But surely that is no loss of free- 
dom of which none can ever become aware, and only an 
imaginary compulsion to which no one can ever convince 
himself that he is subject. 


And withal, grace efficacious no more infringes on the 


1. The third and fourth of the famous ‘‘ Lambeth Articles” read: ‘‘ the num- 
ber of the predestinated is fixed, and cannot be lessened or increased; they who are 
not predestinated to salvation shall be necessarily condemned for their sins.” 


316 CALLING AND ELECTION. 


freedom of the will than does any other species of grace. 
Be the grace common or special, efficacious or not, its aim 
is to bring man and the right objects of his choice into such 
congruity that he shall choose them heartily and they shall 
move him effectively. If the aim be accomplished, the 
grace is of course efficacious and not otherwise; the point 
in dispute 1s, whether the efficacy depends on the will of 
man or on the will of God. But manifestly, grace, accord- 
ing to any conception that we can have of it, is God’s will 
seeking to control the will of man; and if the Divine will 
be accomplished through the consciously free will of man, 
it matters not whether the gracious influences that constrain 
him be weak or strong, special or common—the Divine 
will is fulfilled, and the fulfillment is by man’s free, volun- 
tary act. 


(c.) Nor is there any just ground for the charge, that 
belief in efficacious grace is destructive of a sense of respon- 
sibility, and so of the activity that springs from it. The 
truth is, no man has any right to suppose himself the recipi- 
ent of efficacious grace, unless there is a voluntary codpe- 
ration of his will with the Divine —— unless he is conscious of 
an inward and earnest direction of the whole force of his 
moral nature towards a fulfillment of Divine requirements. 
Nor on the other hand can any one, with any degree of 
justice, conclude that because there can be no salvation 
without efficacious grace, therefore nothing is to be done 
till this grace has demonstrably begun to work within him. 
If, as we have already seen, no one be reprobated, in the 
sense of being predestinated to unbelief, and the freedom of 
no one’s will is invaded in effectual calling, then certainly 
no one has any right to infer that a grace, which may be 
efficacious if he will but accept it, is not proffered him every 
moment of his existence. 


This doctrine in fact can prove injurious only when thrown 
out of its due relations to the other truths of Christianity. A 
dislocated or distorted truth is always one of the most dan- 
gerous of errors. The doctrine of effectual calling may be 
so apprehended as to be grossly false, and so believed as to 


REGENERATION, 317 


be seriously mischievous ; but the doctrine itself, in its true 
relations and proportions, 1s neither harmful nor of little 
importance. Any system of doctrine from which it is left 
out, will necessarily be one-sided and minister ruinously to 
the prideof man. The typeof piety to which it contributes 
no formative influence, manifestly 1s not the type of the 
New Testament. History vindicates both its power for 
good and the interpretation of Scripture which claims for it 


the authority of God. 


$ 48—Leegeneration. 


_ The moral change wrought in man when he is effectually 
called and justified in Christ, is technically known in theo- 
logy as Regeneration. Even Protestant theologians, how- 
ever, have not been agreed as to what the term should sig- 
nify. With all the Reformers its meaning was vague and 
unsettled. Luther and Calvin seem to have identified it 
with sanctification.’ Orthodox Lutherans, with mixed ideas 
of justification by faith and of sacramental efficacy in salva- 
tion, have perpetuated a loose and uncertain use of the 
word.” ‘The first Calvinist writers persisted with Calvin in 
an identification of Regeneration with Sanctification; others 
confounded it with conversion;? but after the Fcede- 
ralist school had made a distinct doctrine of it, Cal- 


1. Luther’s Catechismus minor, art. 8, Hase Libri Symbolici, p. 371.—Calvin’s 
Institutiones, lib. 3, § 9. Uno verbo pcenitentiam interpretor, regenerationem, 
cujus non alius scopus nisi ut imago Dei que per Ade transgressionem fcedata, et 
tantum non obliterata fuerat, in nobis reformetur. Comp. Turretin, Jnstitu., loci 
16, 17,; Pictet, Theol. Chr., bk. 8. 

2. See Formula Concordie, 8, Hase, Libri, p. 583, ff.—Bretschneider’s Dog- 
matik, § 178.—Heinrich Schmid, Die Dogmatik d. evan.-luth. Kirche, § 46. 

3. See Ebrard’s Dogmatik, § 451. This identification with conversion has been 
common with later Calvinist writers: see below. 

4, Cocceius, Summa, Doctrine de Fadere et Test. Dei, cap, 7, § 223, says, Al- 
terum, quo adducimur ad fcedus, est regeneratio efficax Spiritus vite in Christo, 
que et conversio dicitur.—Witsius Hceonomia Hoederum, makes a distinct doctrine 
of regeneration and gives to it an entire chapter, vol. 1, b. 3, c. 6. 


318 REGENERATION. 


vinists came gradually and very generally to treat of it 
as such. Special importance is now attached to it as one 
of the essential doctrines of Soteriology.’ In treating of it, 
we may conveniently consider, first, What it is; second, 
The agent and instrument by which it is wrought ; third, Its 
necessity : and fourth, The evidences of its existence. 

I. What is reveneration ? The word regeneration (wadey- 
yeveota.) OCCUTS but once in the New Testament, Titus, 3:5, in 
the sense now attached to it in systematic theology, VIZ. : 
that subjective change of which “the washing” Ge 
is the visible representation, just as the y renewing ” is 
the invisible effect of the inwardly working “ ie 
Ghost;” in the only other passage where it occurs, Matt., 
19:28, it denotes the final restitution or restoration of the 
moral order of the universe which will accompany the final — 
consummation of the Messiah’s kingdom. But other words 
from the same root are used, and the idea conveyed by the 
term regeneration 1s of very eae Et recurrence in the New 


Testament. With Peter, 1 Epis., : 23, James,) i) ies 
and pont his Gospel, Oech pie 6: 1 Epis. 2:29: 3: 
Dan u begetting” and “ birth” are favorite metaphors 


while Baul’s chosen imagery is that of a “renewing” and 
a recreation, Ro., 12:2; Titus, 3:5; 2 Cor, 5:17; Gal, 
at bay Eph. Dy 10 ; 4:24 The Pauline i imagery is equally 
explicit j in its expr ession of the truth that man in becoming 
a Christian and the .possessor of eternal life, becomes the 
subject of a radical moral change. 

As respects the nature of “this moral change, 1t 1s now 
agreed on all hands, among those who believe in its exist- 
ence as a distinct and determinable event in the life of man, 
that it is not a change either in the substance of the soul or 


1. It is very noticeable how generally, almost universaliy, the Protestant 
preachers of our day direct their attention to the subjective change of heart, re- 
generation, rather than to the objective change of status, justification, which must 
take place in every one who would be saved. Even the Churchism of Lutherans, 
German Reformed, and Episcopalians, takes on the popular style. For some 
curious comments by several German Reformed clergymen on this style, see 
Tercentenary edition of the Heidelberg Catechism, Historical Introduction, p. 1138, 
ff., Scribner, 1868. 


REGENERATION. 319 


in the nature or number of its original endowments and 
faculties. Whether the change be regarded objectively 
as an act of God, or subjectively, as an event, in man, it is 
clear that no new faculty is given, no old one is lost or 
modified." But as respects the positive nature of the 
change, there has been a diversity of views. To the first 
Protestant theologians, not then free from Romish notions 
of churchly and sacramental efficacy, it was only a state into 
which man was brought by the Church’s means of grace. 
But with the decay of confidence in priestly functions 
came clearer apprehensions of the work of the Spirit 
in the heart, and of the nature of regeneration. In due time 
followed the recognition of the biblical truth, that to be a 
Christian is to be born of the Spirit and not of any priestly 
power. Since the great religious revivals under the elder 
Edwards and the Tennents in this countr y, and under White- 
field and the Wesleys in England, the doctrine of spiritual 
regeneration has been fully established. 

Within the past three-quarters of a century, however, 
considerable diversity of view has existed in this country 
as to what the spiritual change consists in. By one class it 
has been vaguely said to consist in the implantation of a 
principle of holiness,—no one, of course, ever being able to 
tell just what was to be understood by an implanted prin- 
ciple. By Emmons,’ true to his “exercise scheme,” it was 
said to consist in the exercise of the gracious affection of 
love—in the Holy Spirit’s “production of love” in the 
heart; z. ¢., there is no change in the regenerate man him- 
self, but only in the products of the “ Divine efficiency ” in 
him; or if there be any change in the man himself, then 
Emmons’ definition confounds regeneration with the first 
gracious act of the regenerated, and mistakes the evidence 
1. Christian faith is sometimes said to bea “new sense” which is given in 
regeneration. The language is inaccurate; no new sense is given; all men 
have faith in some object or end of life ; but the terminus in quo of the Christ- 
ian’s faith is so entirely new, and the results are so remarkable, that the epithet 
‘‘new ” is very naturally, though not the less erroneously, applied to the essence of 
faith itself. 


2. Works, vol. 5, sermon 51, 1st ed.; or sermon 62, vol. 3, p. 90, ff., 2d ed., 
Cong. Board of Pub. 


a) REGENERATION. 


of the existence of a state for the state inself—an effect for 
its secondary cause. With Dr. Woods, who advocated the 
“taste scheme,” it is a change “in man’s moral disposi- 
tion, in his governing inclination or propensity —in his 
taste: "1 this, like the explanation of Emmons which it 
opposes, involves a psychological theory, and fruitless spec- 
ulations on the relation of the moral taste to the will. Dr, 
Hodge regards regeneration as an immediate and absolute 
creation of God—the origination of “the principle of the 
spirit of life” just as literal and real as the origination of 
the principle of natural life;* but this explanation does 
strange violence to language which is unquestionably figura- 
tive, overlooking the undoubted truth that the change 
accomplished in regeneration is an exclusively moral one. 
The truth seems to be, that no satisfactory psychological 
explanation of the change in regeneration is possible, 
because, if for no other reason, the change can be known to 
us only i in its fruits, the source of which is in the will; and 
the action of the will is of all psychological problems the 
most insoluble. 

The most that we can determine from Scripture, as inter- 
preted by itself and such help as consciousness and experi- 
ence may render, is, that regeneration consists in a divinely 
wrought change of the moral affections; a change so great 
that he in whom it is accomplished is said to have become 
a new creature—a new man. ‘The central controlling force of 
one’s spiritual being becomes radically changed; his moral 
aims wholly reversed. What the change in the soul itself 
may be, it is idle to attempt to say. The most wecan safely 
affirm is, that the soul’s directive, ruling power, the will, 
the heart, is so thoroughly changed’ Gal. 5:15; Eph. 4: 
24, that a new man, with absolutely new moral acts, is the 
result.! 


1. Works, vol. 2, p. 539. 

2. Systematic Theology, vol. 2, p. 700, ff. 

3. Ebrard Dogmatik, § 453, vol. 2, p. 826, says: Nicht an der Peripherie des 
Menschen, sondern am Centrum, wo Seelisches und Geistiges ihren untrennbar 
gemeinsamen Focus haben, wird die Wiedergeburt vorgenommen, damit von 
diesem Centrum uns nicht eine neue ¢tovc allein, noch eine neve Gesiunung allein, 
sondern ein ganzer neuer Mensch sich bilde. 


REGENERATION. od 


While man in all the original faculties of the soul contin- 
ues the same being after regeneration as before, he is neither 
the same in his power over his faculties, nor in the actual use 
which he makes of them.’ In these respects he has been re- 
newed. There has been a thorough change in the products of 
his being. Whereas he was once selfish, afraid of God and 
an enemy to him, he now distrusts himself, trusts in God and 
loves him supremely. 

Regeneration then, defined with a view to its cause or au- 
thor, is God’s re-creation of man’s moral affections; defined 
with a view to its effect in man, it 1s a radical change in the 
moral tastes, in the dispositions, in the heart, @. ¢., in the rul- 
ing power, or will, of the soul. 

The word conversion is sometimes used assynonymous with 
regeneration. Thisis manifestly incorrect, except on the prin- 
ciple that by an allowable figure of speech an effect is some- 
times put for its cause. A man is not properly said to be 
converted until after he is regenerated. Conversion is much 
more nearly synonymous with repentance than with regener- 
ation. Regeneration is by an act of God on the soul, but the 
consequence or result of that act 1s a turning about or a con- 
version of the regenerate. Regeneration expresses a change 
in view of its sovereign cause, conversion in view of its com- 
pletion in men. In regeneration man is passive, but in con- 
version the will of man, turned, purified, and harmonized with 
the will of God, is itself by divine energy made efficient and 
co-operative. This distinction should not be obscured. Los. 
ing sight of it, men have sometimes ascribed to regeneration 
what is true only of conversion, have attributed to man an 
agency in regeneration which has no foundation in fact, and, 
as a necessary consequence, have led inquirers to place a de- 
pendence on instrumentalities and on exertion of their own, 
which has resulted in self-deception and serious mischief. 
In answer to the question, what is regeneration? we should 


1. We must guard against any definition of regeneration which implies a change 
in man’s being or increase of mental power. Regeneration does not necessarily 
clarify the mind. If, however, it produces a harmonious working of man’s facul- 

ties which before worked in discord, regeneration may be said to add to his ability. 


21 


329 REGENERATION. 


not say that the change is in the character,’ but that it is in 
the disposition, heart or will. Regeneration j is not a remaking 
of a man conceived of as a rational existence, but of a man con- 
ceived of as a thinking, choosing, responsible, moral being. 

II. By whom and by what means is regeneration produced ? 
The first part of this inquiry has been “partially anticipated 
and sufficiently answered in the views that have been taken 
of effectual calling and of the motive of regeneration itself. 
Regeneration has been described asa change in man, of which 
change God is the author. We need here only ‘glance ati 
additional evidence of such authorship, noticing briefly the 
connection of the author with the use of instrumentalities, 

In proof of the divine authorship of regeneration it may 
be said : 

1. Man cannot regenerate, 2. ¢., radically change, himself. 
He may change in many respects his outward deportment ; 
he cannot, @. é., will not, of himself change his moral disposi- 
tions or tastes. It cannot be said that by the mere use of the 
means of grace man can attain to the needed change; by the 
use of these he may awaken transient emotions, but he cannot 
change the controlling principle of his soul. That principle 
is selfishness. Sin 1s essentially a substitution of self in the 
place of God. Selfishness must itself use the means of grace 
if they are used by the sinner, and by the use of these selfish- 
ness must either be strengthened or weakened. But what 
strengthens cannot destroy, and what resists and weakens and 
threatens to destroy would, without the sovereign controlling 
grace of God, be instinctively abandoned. Such we find to 
be the case. When unrenewed men attempt by the mere use 
of the means of grace to regenerate themselves, they end either 
in Phariseeism or in skepticism. 

2. The metaphorical designations of the state of man pre- 
vious to his regeneration teach the doctrine. According to 
these man is blind and dead. But blind men do not give 


1. The statement that regeneration is ‘‘change of character” may imply too 
much, for this change involves a growth of the disciplinary habits of life, and can- 
not be affected by a sudden process. It is nearer the truth to say that regeneration 
is giving to a man germinally absolute character, or that it is the impartation to a 
man of organific force which ultimately reconstructs his character. 


REGENERATION, oon 


themselves vision, and dead men do not raise themselves from 
their graves. 

3. The metaphorical terms which designate the act itself, 
such as regeneration, renewal, re-creation, distinctly declare 
the change to be wrought by some power outside of man’s 
own will. The changed man is said to have been born again, 
to have been raised from the dead, to have been renewed, as 
the workmanship of God to have been created anew, Jno., 8: 
7; Eph., 2: 6,10; Rom, 12:2; Col. 3:10. These are fig- 
ures of speech which, if language has meaning, must denote 
the putting forth upon man of a controlling power from with- 
out and above. 

4. In the Scriptures God is represented, though sometimes 
in one person of the Trinity and sometimes in another, as the 
all-producing agent in regeneration. Sometimes the change 
is ascribed to both God the Father and Son, as in Jno., 5: 21; 
sometimes to God only, Rom., 4:17; Eph., 2: 4,5; some- 
times to Christ only, 1 Cor., 15: 45; sometimes to the Spirit 
only, Jno., 3: 5,6; Titus 3:5. These, as well as many other 
passages, clearly indicate the divine authorship of the change. 
The work of regeneration is apparently ascribed indiscrimi- 
nately to any one, or to all the persons of the Trinity ; but the 
reasons for this are sufficiently evident. The whole Godhead 
is engaged in regeneration, so that, when the work is ascribed 
to God only, it is so ascribed as an act springing from the 
one will of God the Father; and when ascribed to Christ, it is 
to Him as the occupant of the mediatorial office, without 
which there could neither be redemption nor regeneration ; 
and when ascribed to the Holy Spirit, it is to him as the im- 
mediate agent in the heart of man by whom the creative act 
takes place. But if we take into account with this last con- 
sideration, the fact that Christianity 1s the dispensation or 
ministration of the Spirit, Jno., 14: 16-18; 1 Cor., 2: 12-14; 
2 Cor., 3; and still further that both God the Father and 
God the Son are said to accomplish their purposes and will 
in man by the Spirit, 1 Cor., 6:11; 2:Thess, 2:13; 1 
Peter 1:11; Jno., 14: 16-18 and 16: 13, 14; 1 Cor, 2: 10- 
14, there will be seen to be a special propriety in ascribing 
the work of regeneration directly and preeminently to the 


324 REGENERATION. 


Holy Spirit. We accordingly find in the Scriptures that 
evidences of regenerate life are called “fruits of the Spirit,” 
Gal., 5: 22; Eph., 5: 9; cf Rom,, chap. 8; that the regenerat- 
ing change is ascribed to the direct agency. of the Spirit, 
Jno., 8:5; Titus 3: 5;1 Cor, 6:11; 2 Thess, 2: 13;3igiie tem 
iy OR ae that Christians are called meee or spiritual, 
with special reference both to the agent and the nature of the 
change that has been wrought in them. 

Use of Means. In regard to the employment of means in 
regeneration it should be said: 

1. The Scriptures distinctly and emphatically teach a direct 
influence of the Holy Spirit on the heart of man in regenera- 
tion, Luke, 24: 453 dejvoeEe Acts, 16:14. Compare also Rom., 
8: in, LO 2Gek los 18) Eph., 1:18; 2 Thess., 2: 13. Paul 
also distinctly recognizes this influence on the heart in affirm. 
ing the dependence of the apostles on the Holy Spirit for 
the increase or success of the word spoken Py them, 1 Cor., 
3: as Myer oper: Eire 222 

It is not to be overlooked that the Seri iptures with equal 
Tanne affirm that the Spirit in his work makes use of the 
instrumentality of truth or, in the concrete, of Christians. ‘The 
Spirit might, for aught we know to the contrar y, accomplish 
his purpose by an absolute and immediate act of creation ; but 
such act would have been contrary to all known laws of 
psychology. It has been ordained that faith should come 
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Rom., 10: 13-17; 
ef. Luke, 8: 15; 1 Cor., 15: 1,2; 1-Thess., 2: 13, 16 vandisaw 
men are said to obey the truth through the Spirit, and to be 
born again by the word of God, 1 Peter, 1: 22, 23, and to be 
begotten with the word of truth, Jas., 1: 18; ef. 1 Cor., 4: 15; 
das. de 213) Romy 62k %: Christ prays that his disciples may 
de sanctified thr ough the truth. 

3. We may conclude that according to the Scriptures the 
Spirit first moves directly on the heart to incline it, and to 
bring it under the power of truth; and then by some process 
of the nature of which neither revelation nor consciousness 
informs us, brings our minds and revealed truth, or Christ, into 
such juxtaposition and contact, through an accompanying di- 
vine energy, as to transform our moral taste, or create within 


REGENERATION. 325 


us new hearts, awakening within us the emotions of penitence, 
and planting within us the germ of a new life. Results are 
thus arrived at which the truth alone however, employed by the 
unaided will, could never produce; and which the Holy Spirit, 
without the instrumentality of tr uth, might not so easily, or 
in a way, so strictly accordant with our mental and moral 
constitutions, accomplish. There is doubtless in revealed truth, 
2. é., in the person and work of Christ, a divine adaptation to 
this its great end, being only the embodiment, or picturing, of 
the most momentous realities, such as the character of God 
and the destiny of man. Revealed truth furnishes the Spirit’s 
fittest instrument. Powerless of itself to renew, it becomes, in 
the hands of the Spirit, a Meaaee for the slaying of his enemies, 
Hph., 6:17; Heb., 4: 12, energy for their regeneration (see 
Peter and James before quoted), and a sanctifying power for 
their edification, Jno., 17: 17; cf. Jno., 8:31, 22. 

Action of the Holy Spir it upon the Human Spirit. In 
relation to the question whether the Spirit’s power be not 
always exerted on the truth rather than on the soul, the 
answer has been sufficiently indicated, v7z., that the Spirit 
first puts forth his energy on the spirit of man to render him 
capable of being affected by the truth, then, by the truth as 
an instrument, transforms him into the likeness of Christ, 
Rom., 6: 17. ‘Tn support of this view notice: 

1. The difficulties to be overcome and the change to be 
wrought by regeneration are not in the truth but in the 
human soul. It is man, who is alienated from God, and not 
the truth which is obscure. The truth is obscure because 
the heart of man isdarkened. Truth is of itself fitted to both 
the intellect and the heart, and can by no change in itself be 
ee fitted or made more effective. 

It is by no means so intelligible how the Spirit can in- 
Abie the truth, as it is how the Spirit can influence the soul. 
Truth is an embodiment in words of the exact idea of some 
reality or fact. A declaration or doctrine can be true only 
as it accords with reality; and so, revealed truths are only 
representations of truths before unknown. How the Spirit 
can so affect these truths as to change their relation or intel- 
ligibility to men does not appear. A truth cannot be made 


326 REGENERATION. 


to be more than true; but an influence of the Holy Spirit on 
the spirit of man, though mysterious, may be easily conceived 
of and seems not improbable. Spirit, as such, has natural 
affinity with spirit. ‘Truth is fixed and immutable, but man 
is changeable and may be modified both in his perceptions of 
truth and in his regard for it. 

III. Necessity or need of regeneration. To show this 
necessity after what has been said of its nature and cause, 
little or nothing more is needed than the briefest indication 
of proofs. It is taught: 

1, By explicit declaration in the Scriptures, Jno., 3: 5, 7; 
Rom., 8: 6-8; Gal., 6:15. In the first of these verses, éav 
un tes vevynb7 asserts the universality of the need in order to 
salvation; and in the second verse we find the word dez, one of 
the most decisive of the Greek language in expression of 
necessity. Inthe passage from Romans the race is divided into 
two classes corresponding to the regenerate and to the unre- 
generate, the first of which alone can please God. According 
to the passage from Galatians only a “new creature” can be 
saved. 

2. By imphecation from the aa representation in the 
Scriptures of the natural man as wholly offensive to God, as 
destitute of spiritual life, and as irretrievably ruined without 
an inward renewal, ¢. ¢., a regeneration and a reconcilation with 
God. 

3. By whatever in the Scriptures teaches that man, so far 
from regenerating himself, is entirely dependent in his renewal 
on the ~ power and the grace of God. If God’s interposition 
is requisite there must be imperative need of it. All those 
texts which speak of the power of God on the heart of the 
believer are applicable here. 

4. By absolute need of regeneration in the sinner in order 
to his being effectually influenced by the. motives of the 
gospel. Without such motives there can be no Christian 
character, and without that character no evidence or certainty 
of salvation. 

d. By the impossibility, without such a change, of man’s 
enjoying either in this life or the next the distinctive bless- 
ings of the gospel. Neither the society of Christians as such, 


REPENTANCE AND FAITH. | 897 


nor the joys of heaven as holy, can be relished, or even en- 
dured without pain, by the unregenerate. 

IV. The evidences of regeneration. Strictly speaking there 
can be no evidence of regeneration. Regeneration must first 
become conversion before it can be tested. The regenerate 
himself cannot become conscious of his change until his will, 
having been turned, has begun to move in the new line of 
action; neither can an observer detect regeneration without 
those outward manifestations which only the converted man 
canexhibit. But regeneration regarded as conversion may be 
abundantly tested. The tests are numerous, explicit, and 
scattered throughout the New Testament. They are so gen- 
erally and clearly understood by Christians that their specific 
mention is unnecessary. A single caution is important. No 
single test for self-application by the believer should be so 
earnestly and constantly urged as that which springs from the 
consciousness of a present inward relish alike for the personal 
character, the blessedness, and the employments of Christians. 
The indispensable necessity of active piety must be often re- 
iterated, since it is only by our fruits that we can be known 
either to ourselves or to others. But the subjective evidence 
for the believer himself must be frequently and carefully 
analyzed. 


$ 49— Repentance and Haith. 


These are inseparable in Christian experience from regener- 
ation, ‘This is therefore the place for their consideration. 
They are also so associated in the Scriptures and in the pro- 
gressive life of the believer as to make it proper that they be 
treated together. Repentance and faith were announced by 
Christ and his apostles as the first indivisible requirement of 
God. Paul in his address to the Ephesian elders summed 
up the substance of the gospel as repentance toward God and 
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Repentance also, what- 
ever view we may take of it, can have no place in the heart 


328 REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 


without faith, through which alone are apprehended the truths 
that instrumentally produce repentance. 

Repentance is put before faith, inthe Scriptures, not because 
of any precedence it has either in the way of causation or in 
the order of time. If either is entitled on these grounds to 
precedence it must be faith. But since repentance is that 
which is most readily detected by the observer, and since it is 
that which is most distinctly cognizable to the believer him- 
self, it is naturally and appropriately placed first. There is 
no sufficient reason for the reversal of the scriptural order. 

Two wordsin the New Testament are translated repentance. 
The first and least used of these, verapuésopoe, expresses a change 
of mind in respect to some special act for which there is seen 
to be reason for regret and a change, Matt., 21; 29; 27:3; 


2 Cor., 7: 8; cf. Heb., 7:21. The other word, peravoéw, de-— 


notes a change of mind, not so much in its mode of contem- 
plating single acts, as in its general current and the course of 
its hope toward God. It denotes a change in the habits of 
the repentant. This last and more common word is the one 
always used to express what is usually denominated evangel- 
ical repentance. 

Evangelical repentance will be found to consist of two 
things, or to contain two elements. There is first a sorrow, or 
yrief, arising from a view of sin as something to be abhorred 
and to be forsaken. There can be no repentance until the 
thing to be repented of has been seen in a light that startles 
aud distressesus. This sorrow, itis true, is in one or two places 
in Scripture, particularly 2 Cor., 7:9, 10;, Acts, 2: 37, 38, 
presented asif it were the cause of repentance; but in the first 
of these texts sorrow is so presented only to guard against 
the danger of regarding sorrow, a single element of repentance, 
as the whole of repentance. In the second of these texts, the 
sorrow implied in being pricked in the heart was only that 
state of mind commonly known as conviction for sin, and was 


not Asn xara Gedy, grief toward God. In both these passages — 


there is a marked distinction between that preliminary grief 
consequent upon a perception of ourselves as sinners, and the 
matured repentance of one who has seen and. received Christ 
as his personal Saviour; and this distinction should be con- 


: 
| 
| 


REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 329 


stantly and carefully made. There is no little danger that it 
be lost sight of and that two things very distinct be, as they 
doubtless are, often confounded. 

Hence, we mention as a second element in repentance, a 
view of Jesus Christ as our personal and merciful Saviour. 
Repentance is, as we have said, sorrow before God as one 
whom we see to be justly offended at us, but always a sorrow 
accompanied with an active trust in Christ as an appointed 
deliverer. Thus perdvoce signifies not only a change of mind 
but of conduct in consequence of anew belief, and a surrender 
to a new power; a belief and surrender possible to him only 
to whom has been given a new heart, Matt.,3: 2,11; 4:17; 
Marke li its: Acts, 2:38; 2 Cor., 7:10, 

Thus repentance consists of sorrow and an amendment of 
life, grief and an abandonment of that which has caused the 
grief. It 1s what the etymology of the word denotes, an 
after-mind, a changed mind in the sense of a changed life. 
The first element of sorrow arises from a view of sin as some- 
thing to be repented of, a view occasioned always and only 
by a perception of God as hating sin and as holy. Hence the 
phrase “godly sorrow.” Accordingly the second element of 
repentance is a prompt and hearty abandonment of that life 
which has caused us our sorrow. There is a moral revulsion 
of the soul from the whole spirit and aim of our past life. 
The two elements are clearly and forcibly exhibited as the 
constituent parts of repentance in the parable of the prodigal 
son, Luke, 15: 17-19. 

The necessity of repentance, to which only mere allusion 
need here be made, is not founded in any supposed punitive 
or purifying power of godly sorrow. Thesin of the believer 
is fully and freely forgiven for Christ’s sake, in and by the 
power of Christ. The necessity of repentance is found in its 
relation to that practical reform of life to which the whole of 
Christianity aims, and which is wrought through faith in the 
heart of the believer. Sin must be seen and felt by the be- 
hiever to be loathsome, before he will forsake it and betake 
himself to the service of God. 

Repentance, as already indicated, is inseparable from faith. 
As there can be no repentance without a perception of sin as 


Bsy REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 


abhorrent, and of God as abhorring it, so there can be no such 
perception without confidence in God and in the truth of his 
word. We must first believe what God has said to us, and 
have some view of himself as he is, before we can feel that 
godly sorrow or repentance which God requires, which invar- 
lably accompanies true regeneration, and which by his gospel 
he aims to produce in us. 

We come then to a consideration of Faith. In treating of 
faith it is first to be noticed that the word zéorec in the Script- 
ure has several distinct meanings. Sometimes it means 
fidelity or faithfulness, Matt., 23: 23. Paul not infrequently 
so uses the word, Gal., 5: 22; 2 Tim., 2: 22; Titus, 2: 10. 
Sometimes the term stands for the object of faith, z. ¢., for the 
gospel or Christianity, Acts, 6:7; Rom., 16; 26; Gal, 1: 23; 
3:25; Jude, 8. Sometimes it expresses the general idea of 
faith as belief m God’s existence and in the trustworthiness 
of his declarations, Mark, 11: 22; Heb., 6: 1; Jas., 2: 19. 

We have here especially to do with faith that accompanies 
and conditions salvation — withit as an invariable concomitant 
of repentance. What is this faith? In the most elementary 
conception of it, faithis simply crediting the divine declarations 
as true. This view of faith is illustrated throughout the four 
gospels. In Heb., 11: 1, we have a definition of faith in its 
generic sense, of faith in the completion and perfection of the 
idea of faith. The historic illustrations of faith adduced by 
the writer of that epistle are examples, however, not so much 
of the degree of faith which the definition contemplates, as of 
the principle which it contains. Hach worthy. there mentioned 
accepted the promise made to him and acted on it, and thus 
exhibited the principle of faith to the degree of which he 
was especially capable. 

Another and more specific use of the word is that in which 
it denotes a confiding trust in Jesus as the Redeemer of the 
soul; and of this saving faith there are various stages or de- 
grees, from the outcry “Lord, save or I perish,” up to the con- 
fident assertion, “I knowin whom I have believed.” It is 
this last stage of faith which the writer of the epistle to the 
Hebrews refers to as his definition. This Petra of faith 
for growth is recognized in Col., 1: 23; 2 Thess, 1:3; 2 


REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 831 


Peter, 1:5. Thus the grand idea of faith is confidence in 
what God has said. To this fundamental meaning of the 
word, whatever may be its special significance or degree of 
strength, reference must always be had. 

A complete definition of faith,’ therefore, requires a recog- 
nition of the assent of the understanding, or intellect, to all the 
divine declarations, and a consent of the heart to all the divine 
requirements. And faith specifically in the New Testament 
or Christian sense is a hearty, living trust in Jesus Christ as 
our personal Redeemer. 

Theologians* have generally recognized three other dis- 
tinctions of faith, not founded on the meaning of zorec now 
-mentioned, such as faith temporary, miraculous, and historical. 
The first of these rests on the temporary improvement of the 
stony ground hearers in the parable of the sower, Matt., 13: 
20; the second rests on our Saviour’s declaration that faith 


1. Among definitions of faith are the following: 

John Howe, ‘‘ Faith isa vivid, lively, operative assent, insuring an appropriation 
of God in Christ as ours.” 

Wm. Bates, ‘‘ Divine faith is a firm hold of the mind to things on the authority 
of divine revelation.” 

Samuel Hopkins, ‘‘ Saving faith is an understanding, a cordial receiving of divine 
testimony, concerning Jesus Christ and the way of salvation by Him, in the heart, 
according to and conforming with the Gospel.” 

Reinhard, two kinds, ‘‘ Generalis et Specialis.” 

The younger Edwards, ‘‘ Faith is a firm belief of the report and doctrine of the 
Gospel and of the character, offices and sufferings of Jesus Christ as a Saviour, and 

a cordial complacency in Him as a willing sacrifice and revealer of the way of 
salvation through him, Assent of the understanding and consent of the will.” 

Vinet, ‘‘ Inthe act of faith, for it is an act and not a state, the soul is in some sense 
creative. If it does not create the truth, it draws it for itself, appropriates and 
realizes it.” 

Neander, ‘‘ Faith presupposes a revelation from God in direct relation to man, 
and faith is the reception and vital appropriation of this divine revelation by virtue 
of a receptivity for the divine in the human disposition. The object of knowledge 
presupposes a certain tendency or disposition in order to its being known and un- 
derstood.” 

_Chalmers, ‘‘ Faith, whether in a proposition or a person, is the reckoning him or it 
to be true, and is nothing more.” 

Wayland, ‘‘ Faith is a temper of the mind.” 

Wm. R. Williams, ‘‘ Faith is but a hearty assent to the whole testimony of God.” 

2. Gerhardt, Turretin, Dick. 


382 REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 


could remove mountains, Matt., 17: 20, and Paul’s allusion to 
such faith, 1 Cor., 18: 2; and the third rests on James’ use of 
the word ziarec in his epistle, 2: 17, 19, 24. 

Of these distinctions the first, of temporary faith, rests on no 
use of the word zéorec whatever, but is purely arbitrary. To 
speak of a temporary faith would seem to be but little, if any, 
less inaccurate than to speak of a temporary repentance. Sor- 
row under the apprehension of danger may, as we have seen, 
be confounded with repentance, and so may the apprehension 
be easily confounded with faith. 

The distinction of faith as miraculous, it is true, rests on a 
use of the word zorec that would seem to imply the existence 
of a distinctive faith in the worker of miracles, Matt., 17 : 20; 
1 Cor., 12:10; cf. 12:9. That something else than the ex- 
istence of that faith, which is the common possession of all 
Christians and an invariable requirement of salvation, is in- 
tended, is evident. What that something is which xtotec 
alone could express, 1t may not be easy to determine. But 
evidently the miraculous power itself was not in the faith of 
him through whom, or on whom, the miracle was wrought, 
but in the divine energy which worked through the agent 
on the subject. Possibly miracles were impracticable with- 
out a special kind of faith; possibly the degree of faith re- 
quired in the performer was different from that requisite in 
him who would receive salvation at the hands of Christ, or in 
the ministering servant who would proclaim to the recipient 
hearer the words of life; yet it is by no means clear that the 
change in respect to miracles since the days of the apostles 
has any connection whatever with a change either in the kind 
or the degree of faith. Miracles have ceased, not because of 
any change of faith, but on account of a change in the mani- 
festations of the power of the Holy Spirit. They have ceased 
not for a lack of trust or confidence, but because, in the econ- 
omy of God, they are no longer needed.1 We may therefore 


1. It has been supposed that sufficient faith could produce ability to perform 
miracles. According to the Scriptures faith had some connection with miracles. 
But it was not faith that wrought the miracles, either the strength of faith in the 
worker or in the recipient. The miracle was primarily the work of God. Faith 
called forth the miracle as the attestation of the messenger. 


: 
: 
| 
b 
. 


REPENTANCE-AND FAITH. Baa 


set aside the distinction of miraculous faith as irrelevant in 
the discussion of faith as a requisite of salvation and the in- 
separable accompaniment of repentance. 

As to the distinction of historical faith, two remarks will 
suffice. ‘The mere conviction of God’s existence and veracity, 
which is what James means in the texts alluded to, is a part 
of the generic idea of faith already specified and needs no 
distinct recognition. The common meaning, and the only 
proper one, of historical faith, which is the mere assent of the 
understanding to the credibility of the Scriptures as God’s 
word, is in no respect a scriptural use of the word and is here 
irrelevant. 

If now, rejecting the three theological distinctions last men- 

tioned, we recur to the first mentioned as the scriptural repre- 
sentation of faith, it will be seen that there are three distine- 
tions which are both scripturally warranted and theologically 
appreciable. The first is the general, or generic, idea of faith 

as a belief in God and his known declarations; the second a 
specific idea of faith as an active trust in Christ for the salva- 
tion of the soul; and the third the assured and loving confi- 
dence of the established Christian whose will has become one 
with Christ... But since faith in its more general sense can 
avail nothing without faith in its limited and specific sense ; 
and since faith in its specific sense must always, sooner or later, 
eventuate in a full and all comprehending confidence in God 
and invisible things, we may properly give chief attention to 
that faith which justifies or saves. 

- Yet it must not be understood that faith in the third sense 
specified is of little consequence. So important is it that 
Christianity itself, contemplated in its practical relations, might 
not inappropriately be styled faith versus sense; and the need 
of the believer’s attaining to the largest possible measure of 
faith can hardly be too strongly urged. Reasons enough are 
adducible in evidence of the original propriety of so constitut- 
ing man and adjusting his relations to invisible things and a 
future existence as tomake his whole line of conduct dependent - 
on his faith. It may be easily shown that faith as a controlling 


1. Calvin’s Institutes, Book III., Chap. II., Sec. 15, and the word mAnpodopia which 
Calvin comments on. 


334 REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 


power of the soul is more effective than any of the senses; that 
invisible things are too refined and vast to warrant'a revela- 
tion of them through the senses; and that whatever will war- 
rant the use of the principle of faith at all will warrant the 
strengthening of it to the highest degree. The New Testa- 
ment is full of considerations and inducements urging to the 
maturity of its strength.’ 

But we must give particular attention to faith in the more 
limited sense of belief in Christ. This may be styled either 
saving or justifying faith, according as it is contemplated in 
respect to its ultimate end, or as a means to the attainment of 
that end. Thus faith is spoken of in its relation to salvation, 
the end of the believing, in Heb., 10: 39; 1 Peter, 1: 9; ef. 
Mark, 16:16; and the same faith 1s contemplated in its rela- 
tion to justification as means to an end, Gal., 2: 16; 3: 24; 
Eph., 2: 8; Rom., 8: 28;5:1. The distinction now indicated 
is not, however, always maintained in the gospel, nor need it 
always be in theology. ‘The end of believing is the salvation 
of the soul, and the only way of obtaining that salvation 1s by 
faith in Jesus Christ. The means without the end avail noth- 
ing, and the end without the means is unattainable. It is ac- 
cordingly of but trifling importance here how we designate our 
faith, whether we refer to its instrumentality or to its results, 
whether we call it justifying faith or saving faith. 

It is to be noticed that the phrase “justifying faith” is some- . 
times used with a marked specialty of meaning. It is the 
meaning derived from viewing each individual’s salvation as 
a forensic act of God, an act by which the divine Being, in 
consequence of, or in consideration for, the sufferings of Christ, 
discharged from a final condemnation every repentant believer. 
It was in this ight that redemption was viewed by Paul when 
arguing with the self-righteous Jews, and this is the view 
which should always be taken of the matter in arguing with 
those who are disposed to aim at salvation by their own works 
rather than by trusting in Christ. But this is not the one 
danger of all men at all times. It may be more common than 
any other, yet it is not the only and the all inclusive danger. 


1. Dick’s Lectures on Theology; Lecture on Faith. 


REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 335 


Salvation from the present power of sin and its future conse- 

quences is needed by all, and to make all conscious of this 
need is the aim of the gospel. The phrase “saving faith,” 
which is more comprehensive than “justifying faith” and in- 

cludes it, may therefore most commonly be used. The depend- 
ence of our salvation upon the condition of faith is too con- 

stantly taught in the Scriptures to require a citation of texts. 

No one will deny this dependence; but of the connection of 
faith with salvation, or of the way in which a believer is saved. 
by his faith, the views of men are neither harmonious nor alto- 
gether clear and well defined. 

There are two extremes, to the one or the other of which 
men are disposed to diver ge. ‘lhe one is that which directs 
attention to faith chiefly, if not exclusively, in the objective 
view of it; which insists on the necessity of faith not for any 
inherent fitness to its end, but because God has appointed it, 
and which so exalts faith as a condition of salvation as unduly 
to depress the condition of an amended and a holy life. The 
other extreme in regard to faith is that which, losing sight of 
the divine appointment, fixes its eye on the subjective, des- 
cants on the fitness of faith as a principle, and of Christ and 
his atonement as objects of faith, to move the heart and win 
the affections ; and which so represents faith in its relation to 
a change of heart as not to make faith a medium through 
which that change is wrought by the renewing Spirit, but 
confounds faith with love, as a mere effect or phase of con- 
founding justification and sanctification. 

Within these two extremes lies the true doctrine of salva- 
tion by faith. There is doubtless truth in either extreme so 
long as it is held in union with the other. Itis literally and 
unqualifiedly true that we are justified by faith in Christ irre- 
spective of any meritorious work or character of our own. 
But it is equally true that the appointment of God is not 
arbitrary, and that we are not justified by faith which does 
not result in a radical transformation of our characters and 
consequently of our works. But these two views have not 
always been kept in union. There has been a constant dis- 
position to regard one as the opposite of the other; and it has 
been with one or the other of these exclusively 1 in mind that 


336 REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 


men have been wont to find an irreconcilable discrepancy be- 
tween the teachings of Pauland James. Thus Luther rejected 
the epistle of James from the canon. 

The truth seems to have been that, while Paul confined his 
attention to faith as a medium of justification in opposition to 
the legalism of the Jews, James on the other hand directed 
his attention with equal singleness of aim to the effects of 
faith as the inseparable concomitant and indispensable evi- 
dence of the faith that justifies. Beyond reasonable doubt 
what each relied on was real and trustworthy. Paul argued 
the necessity of faith as God’s appointment in opposition to 
those who substituted for it a scheme of their own. James 
argued against those who, accepting the necessity of faith as 
divinely appointed, quite forgot the good works or fruits of 
that faith, so essential to genuimeness. But, if any suppose 
that Paul’s argument was intended either to deny the necessity — 
of good works or even to intimate that they are not indispen- 
sable to him who would be saved, let such an one consult 
Rom., 2: 6-13; Gal., 6: 4, 7-9; or if any suppose that James 
differed from Paul as to the necessity of faith, let him consult 
Bass, we Gea 

If now the two views of faith before indicated, the object- 
ive and the subjective, be carefully distinguished, and yet 
neither of them be set in opposition to the other, and if they 
be not separated from each other, we shall follow the teach- 
ings of Scripture. ‘The necessity of faith in the objective sense 
of it, as an invariable condition of salvation irrespective of 
anything done by the sinner, is constantly taught both by 
Christ and his apostles, and the maintenance of this doctrine, 
as opposed to the Socinian and papal theories, 1s of the great- 
est practical importance. 

Of the particular bearing of justification by faith in its sub- 
jective relations it is desirable to speak more at length. This 
special aspect, it 1s to be confessed, has failed to receive from 
Protestant theologians such attention as both practical godli- 
ness and a due deference for the Scriptures require. The new 
creation of the soul, which is always inseparable from faith 


1. See Neander’s Commentary on James, also Neander’s Planting and Training; 
Article on the alleged disagreement between Paul and James, Bib. Sac., Vol. IX. 


REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 337 


and is a necessary condition of salvation, has been in danger 
of being thrust from its true position and that marked prom- 
inence which the Scriptures give it. 

The importance of attention to faith regarded subjectively, 
appears from the following considerations : 

1. The nature of saving faith. A faith that saves is not 
merely our assent to the truth of the Scripture; 1t is more 
than a bare acknowledgement of Christ as a Saviour of men; 
it is a distinct apprehension of Christ in his mediatorial and 
atoning office, a confiding personal trust in him as the soul’s 
Redeemer; in other words, the subjective appropriation of 
Christ as an objective Saviour. 

2. Faith is not the instrument of justification but its med- 
ium. The instrument of justification is the doctrine of a cru- 
cified and risen Saviour, in other words, a living Christ. Faith 
in the original conception and meaning of it, (though not in 
the fullness of the scriptural idea), is to the soul what vision 
is to the body. But a conviction or an emotion wrought in 
man by the sight of an object 1s not so strictly said to be caused 
by vision as by the object which the vision reveals to man. 
So faith is not the instrument but the medium of salvation, 
the medium through which the famishing soul discovers the 
Saviour whose flesh it is to eat and whose blood it is to drink. 
In the meaning of the fullness of Scripture, faith is both see- 
ing and appropriating. Thus without the subjective element, 
faith has no subjective or renewing effect. 

3. Faith does not distinctly and appreciably precede regen- 
eration, but accompanies it. It is not an instrument, a cause, 
or an effect of regeneration, but an invariable concomitant or 
condition of its process. Regeneration, as we have already 
seen, 1s God’s sovereign act, accomplished through the agency 
of the Holy Spirit and the instrumentality of truth. To sup- 
pose that justifying or sovereign faith is an effect of regener- 
ation, or that, according to Andrew Fuller, it must arise from 
a disposition of the heart and can come only from a holy heart,! 
is to suppose not only that a man may be regenerated without 

1. Andrew Fuller’s Works: The Gospel Worthy of all Acceptation, Vol. II., 
p. 400, Philadelphia Ed. Cf. Emmon’s Works, Sermon on The Order of Gracious 
Exercises in the Renewed Heart, Vol. III., Edition, Cong. Board. of Publication. 

22 


338 REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 


the instrumentality (¢. ¢.,;without truth which can effect him on- 
ly through faith, may be created anew otherwise than in Christ 
Jesus); but that, being regenerated, he may yet be under con- 

demnation, and the wrath of God may still be on him until his 
new disposition shall lead him to faith in Christ. But that 
faith accompanies regeneration, and the latter does not occur 
without the former, is evident when we remember that we are 
begotten, @. ¢., regenerated, “ by the word of truth,’— language 
which can have no other meaning than that we are changed 
by the instrumentality of truth applied through the medium of 
faith. That such is the true relation of faith and regeneration 
seems to be taught clearly in Jno., 38:5, 6, 10-15. This 
is clearly exhibited in 2 Peter, 1:38; cf.1Jno.,5:1. Ifsuch 
is the true relation of faith to the heart, then the subjective 
view should not be lost sight of. 

4. The objects of faith are fitted to influence our hearts and 
to change our moral affections. These objects are the triune 
God and the things revealed and pronounced of him in the 
Scriptures. A clear view of God, as in Isaiah, chap., 6, or 
of Christ, as in Luke, 5: 8, may overwhelm the soul with a 
sense of its unworthiness. By faith in the divine promises 
we are made partakers of the divine nature, 2 Peter, 1: 4. 
The fitness of Christ crucified to move the heart is fully ap- 
parent. The same is true of his promises. 

That the special design of Christ’s death in its relation to 
men was to effect a change, in other words that the great: 
instrumentality in man’s regeneration is the doctrine of Christ 
crucified, is declared in all the Scriptures: 1 Peter, 2: 24; 2 
Cor., 5:14, 15;°Gal.; 6:14; Jno., 8: 14-16; Rom 375; 
5:5,6; 1 Cor. 2:2. If we examine carefully these several 
texts (and their number might be greatly increased), there 
will be recognized in the truths they teach a fitness not only 
to the production of one particular species of emotions and 
affections, but of all that are called Christian. Thus we are at 
one time said to be saved by faith, at another by hope, be- 
cause the objects of faith are such as to awaken in the believer 
an earnest longing, a constraining hope, to possess them. So 
also the faith that saves is said to accomplish its end in work- 
ing by love, and we are said to believe with the heart unto 


REPENTANCE AND FAITH. 339 


righteousness. A faith that thus works should be contem. 
plated in its subjective relations. 

5. Faith is a work of the Spirit in man, Eph., 2: 8; 6: 28; 
2 Thess., 1: 8, 2:18. Consequently faith must be studied 
in its subjective relations. Faith in Christ has been said to 
consist of two parts, perceiving and trusting, or assenting and 
consenting. We cannot perceive Christ as our Saviour until 
the Holy Spirit helps our spiritual vision which sin has ob 
scured ; the eye of our understanding (heart) must be en- 
lightened, Luke, 24:45; 1 Cor, 2:14, 15; Eph. 1:18. 
Nor can we trust in Christ until the Spirit, reproving us of 
sin, has forced us into a consciousness of living death, Rom., 
7: 24, and thus has compelled the surrender of ourselves to 
him; nay, till the Spirit by his own active power has, through 
a sight of the Crucified, given us a desire, a constraining love, 
for him, and thus has brought us to an active trust in him as 
our personal Redeemer. He who would so preach Christ as 
to lead to such a faith in Christ must ever so present Christ 
the object of faith, as to move man, the subject of faith. 

6. The evidences of faith to an individual are all subjective, 
and should remind us of a need of a subjective view of faith. 
The fruits of the Spirit, and hence of faith, are such as reveal 
themselves in the spirit and temper of the heart, 1 Thess., 
tp eet ehess.,, 3.3, 4;.Gal., 5): 22, 23, 

7. Saving grace brings us into a personal union with Christ 
and hence should be viewed subjectively. ‘The often recurring 
phrase, ¢v Xpcor@, and its correlative, “ Christ in us,” cannot be 
satisfactorily explained by the interpretation which makes 
them to consist in the mere influence of truth. Such explana- 
tion does not accord with the intimacy of relationship be- 
tween Christ and his disciples so often dwelt upon and so 
variously illustrated by Christ and the apostles, Jno., 15: 5; 
Rom., 8:1; Gal., 2:20; Eph., 38: 17-197 


1. Thos. Scott, on the Necessity of Repentance 


340. SANOTIFICATION. 


$ 50 — Sanctification. 


Sanctification, dycacudc, in the New Testament sense denotes 
sometimes consecration to God in the sense of objective dedt- 
cation to him, Matt., 23: 17; 24:15; Jno., 10: 86; sometimes 
in the sense of inward purification or personal holiness, 1 
Thess., 5: 23; 1 Jno., 8: 8, and sometimes perhaps in com- 
bination of both these senses, Jno.,17: 17; 2 Thess., 2: 13; 
1 Peter1: 2. Thesecond is the sense which we have specially 
to consider. 

Sanctification may be treated as a wholly distinct doctrine, 
or as synonymous with and supplementary to some other, as 
justification or regeneration. To those who conceive of justi- 
fication in an exclusively forensic sense, the first method will 
seem the only legitimate one. Those who conceive of justifi- 
cation as subsequent to regeneration and conversion adopt the 
latter plan.’ ; 

But supposing justification to denote not only the judicial 
act of God, but to include a conception of a divinely pro- 
vided condition of spiritual renewal, a making just, sanctifi- 
cation is distinguished from justification only as expressive 
of difference in degree. Both imply the agency of God, and 
represent that agency in different stages of its application, or 
operation. In the two-fold and inseparable act of justification 
and regeneration there is implanted in the soul the germ of a 
new life. Sanctification is the nurturing of that germ into 
flowering and fruitage. It means what Peter calls growing 
in grace. 

The duty of sanctification, whether regarded as a subject- 
ive culture of the heart or the objective consecration of our 
whole being to God, is uniformly and emphatically inculeated 
in the Scriptures. No inconsiderable part of the preacher’s 
task is to unfold and apply the motives and the means of 
sanctification. The edification of the body of Christ is the 


1. Moehler’s Symbolism, Book I., Chap. III., Sec. 14. Emmon’s Works, Vol. 
IIL., p. 150, Edition, Cong. Board of Publication. 


SANOTIFICATION. 341 


most direct way of evangelizing the world, Eph., 4: 11-138; 
Matt., 5: 14-16. 

It has been a question of some dispute to determine to 
what degree of sanctification a man is capable of attaining in 
the present hfe. In considering the question, it is requisite 
to distinguish between perfection as maturity of Christian 
character, 1 Cor., 2: 6; Eph. 4: 13; perfection as the con- 
summation of the divine work within us, Col., 1: 28; 2:10; 
and perfection as exact fulfillment of all divine requirements, 
or absolute holiness. The first of these is possible as well as 
obligatory; the second is certain, because involved in the 
divine purpose; the attainment of the third is disputed. Of 
those who affirm it, some distinguish between the possible 
and the actual, insisting only on the possibility and so on the 
obligatoriness of it,’ while others assert the obligatoriness 
of actual achievement. Of those thus asserting, some main- 
tain this obligation on the ground that, since sin is only a 
voluntary transgression of known law, the will is capable of 
being trained into voluntary obedience to known law; others 
hold that there has been a modification and lowering of obli- 
gation, of the requirements of law, by our adoption into the 
family of God ;? others assert that in consequence of our fall, 
and in simple justice to our enfeebled condition, the divine 
requirements have been lowered to our actual necessities.’ 

The one idea of perfection held amid all these shades of 
opinion is that of perfect fulfillment of all God’s present 
requirements. The one fundamental and fatal error in the 
whole is an utter misconception of law. The entire published 
law of God is not exhaustive of all our obligations; much 
less is our imperfect and limited knowledge of that law, as 
published, commensurate with our obligations or responsi- 
bilities. Just so far as we fall short of a complete realization 
of a perfect ideal of our being do we come short of God’s 
requirements, and so fall short of perfection, 


1. Mahan on Christian Perfection, and Reply to a Review, Biblical Repository, 
Oct., 1840. 

2. The view of prominent Methodists. See Wesley on Perfection ; also Peck, 
Scripture Doctrine of Christian Perfection. 

3. Finney. 


342 THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST. 


But here it may be asked, do not the Scriptures contain 
explicit commands to make ourselves possessors of the highest 
conceivable perfection? Matt., 5: 48; doubtless, and for many 


plain reasons. Hvery man ought to be perfect j in his native 


sphere, and is condemnable if he is not. But neither the 


command to be perfect, nor man’s guilt in failing to comply | 


with the command, can be conclusive proof that we do keep, 


or ever have kept, or ever can keep it. Ability is not com- — 


mensurate with obligation. The commands of God have not 
all been given with the expectation that we would keep 
them, Gal., 3:21; but that we should ever be kept mindful 
of our fallen, helpless condition, and so led to our Almighty 
Redeemer, Gal., 3:29-24, And even an infinite standard 1s 
set before us because, ceaselessly progressive as we are, an 
infinite standard is required ; and because, still more, an im- 
perfect, even in the sense of a limited or deficient, standard, 
for beings whose moral tastes have been perverted, would 
inevitably be imitated in its defects rather than in its excel- 
lencies, 

In reference to existing controversies, there should be 
extreme caution lest, in opposing the doctrine of perfection, 
we lower beyond warrant the true ideal of Christian charac- 
ter. All controversies tend to extremes. Every “new man” 
ought to be perfect as a moral being, and he is condemnable 


if he is not. The command is to be perfect (in one’s native 


sphere) as God is perfect. 


$ 51.—The Kingdom of Christ. 


Thus far we have contemplated Christ, the Saviour, only 
in the offices of prophet and priest. But his office of king is 
equally prominent in the Scriptures. 

The second and the one hundred and tenth Psalms, Isaiah, 
92.6.7 Dan. 9:25; Zech. (147.93 Ezek, 3Y¢) 240m their 
prophecies: Christ in his triumphal procession into Jerusa- 
lem, and in his admission to Pilate at the trial; Paul in his 


THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST. 348 


Peeve One eee kl 29-1 Pim.) be Vas 6 To. 
and the writer of Rev., 17: 14; 19: 16; all alike seem intent 
upon proclaiming Christ’s kingly supremacy and his rightful 
authority. 

The idea of a kingdom of Christ was not new to the Jews 
at Christ’s advent. Their theocracy was a type of it. The 
Messiah’s reign was the “kingdom to come” or “the world,to 
come,” Heb., 2: 5; and, though misunderstood in its nature, 
was not unlooked for at its advent. Thus the annunciation, 
in the Gospel, of Christ’s coming, was the announcement that 
the Kingdom of God, or of Heaven, was at hand. It was 
sometimes spoken of as the reign of ‘God in the soul, Luke, 
Pees: O1-)+Mark, 10:15; Jno.,; 3: 3-5; sometimes as 
the collective body of people, the invisible church, Matt., 13: 
24-30; Mark, 4: 30-32; Luke, 13: 18-21; and sometimes 
as a dominion to be completed in another state of existence, 
Matt., 13: 48; Mark, 14: 25; Luke, 22: 29, 30. The same 
divisions are also recognized by the apostles. For examples 
of the first, see Rom., 14: 17; 1 Cor., 4: 20; of the second, 
1 Thess., 2:12; Heb., ee 28; of the third, 1 Cor., 6: 9, ve 
Galion; 21; Wph:, 5: - 2 Tim., 4:1; 2 Pet. Le Jas, 

Between ‘the a odatn of God, i in the several stages, ae me 
church of Christ, there is imphed an intimate and ne ae 
connection, Gal. 4: 26; Heb., 12: 22-24; Rev., 2. 
Indeed, the ideas of the church, ‘in their compr eee sense, 
are, as above indicated, fr equently blended. The church of 
Christ is to us the only visible exhibition of this kingdom. 
Christ is the Head of the Church and King in Zion.’ 


1. The author taught Church Polity and Pastoral Theology in connection with 
Systematic Theology. At this point in the course he was accustomed to give 
instruction concerning: The Constitution und Government of the Church; The 
Origin of the Church and its Name; Councils; Officers of the Church and their 
Appointment; Induction to the Pastoral Office; The Authority of the Pastor; The 
Authority of the Church; The Ordinances and Institutions of the Church. 

Three contributions of Dr. Robinson to subjects related to Ecclesiology have 
been printed, viz: The Relation of the Bible to the Church, Madison Avenue 
Lectures, pp. 887-419, Am. Bapt. Pub. Soc’y, also revised and reprinted as a 
pamphlet; Ritualism in the Church of England, Bapt. Quarterly, Jan. 1869; The 
Yale Lectures on Preaching, delivered in Jan. and Feb. 1882, and published by 
Henry Holt & Co., 1883. — Ep. 


344 DEATH, AND STATE OF THE SOUL AFTER DEATH. 


ESCHATOLOGY. 
$ 52.—Doctrine of Last Things dependent upon Levelation. 


Christianity reveals the coming of a period when the pur- 
poses of God in the creation and redemption of man shall be 
consummated. ‘That period is called “the time of the resti- 
tution of all things,” Acts, 3: 21; and “the appearing of the 
Lord Jesus Christ,” 2 Tim., 4: 1. 

Thus far, in treating of Christian Theology, we have given 
attention only to those doctrines which treat of God, of man, 
and of the salvation which God provides and bestows on 
man. ‘There remains the doctrine which treats of man’s 
transfer to another state of existence, and of those events 
which are to occur hereafter and to determine the final and 
fixed conditions of men. The doctrines hitherto discussed 
rest on historical and admitted facts. ‘The doctrines of eschat- 
ology rest on simple declarations of Scripture, most of which 
pertain to events yet to be, and hence are, in a sense, prospec- 
tive. We may, therefore, here expect greater diversity of 
views, and on some points be unable to speak with any 
degree of positiveness. 


$ 58.—Death, and the State of the Soul immediately after 
Death. 


Death, as separation of the soul from the body, is certain to 
all, but possible only once. To a believer, to whom its power 
has been abolished, death is simply a transition to a higher 
state. ‘To the unbeliever it is the conclusion of hope and the 
consummation of evil. 


1, ‘ Discessus animi a corpore.”—Cicero, Tusc. Disp., 1, 9,18. 


EE _ 


DEATH, AND STATE OF THE SOUL AFTER DEATH. 3845 


There are three classes of views relating to the state of the 
soul after death: 

1. That according to which the soul is ushered immediately, 
consciously, and irrevocably into a state of blessedness or 
woe; supposed to be taught by Christ’s words to the thief 
on the cross, Luke, 23: 48; by the parable of the rich man 
and Lazarus, Luke, 16; and by Paul’s language to the Corin- 
thians, 2 Cor., 5: 6-8; and to the Philippians, Phil., 1: 21-23; 
see also Acts, 1: 25. This seems to be the true Scriptural 
view. 

2. A second view is that souls at death enter into an inter- 
mediate state, indicated by the words Sheol, Hades, and 
Gehenna, found in the Hebrew, the Septuagint, and the New 
Testament. Romanists, with their ambus patrum, limbus 
intantum, purgatory, ete., many English churchmen, and 
individuals of all sects, hold to this theory. Some hold toa 
conscious intermediate state, on the ground of the parable of 
the rich man and Lazarus, and on the doubtful language of 
Peter that Christ went and preached to the spirits in prison, 
1 Pet., 3:19; others hold to an unconscious intermediate 
state, chiefly on the ground of the metaphorical use of the 
term death, as asleep, and of the inconceivableness of mental 
consciousness without an organism or a brain. 

3. A third view is that of annihilation. It regards death 
as an extinction of being. ‘The dissolution of the body is the 
dissolution of the soul.! That eternal life which Christ gives 
is not alone spiritual life and blessedness, but literal immor- 


1. The doctrine of the annihilation of the wicked at death has been largely sup- 
planted, either by the view that, after a period of positive, conscious punishment 
after death, the wicked will be judged and annihilated ; or by the view that the 
powers of the wicked will be gradually enfeebled, until they cease to exist. 

In recent years Edward White, author of Life in Christ, has been regarded as the 
ablest advocate of the doctrine of conditional immortality, or the ultimate annihila- 
tion of the wicked. That doctrine has been opposed by C. M. Mead, The Soul Here 
and Hereafter; W.G.T. Shedd, Doctrine of Endless Punishment, and Dogmatic Theo- 
ogy; Fyfe, The Hereafter, (T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh), 

Among many other recent works on Eschatology are Farrar, Hternal Hope ; 
and in reply to Farrar, Pusey, What is of Faith as to Hverlasting Punishment? Dor- 
ner on The Future State, edited by Newman Smyth, and System of Christian Doc- 
rine; G. F. Wright, Relation of Death to Probation.—Ep. 


346 DEATH, AND STATE OF THE SOUL AFTER DEATH. 


tality. This view interprets the death and destruction 
denounced against sin as annihilation, and pronounces it 
alike inconsistent with the omnipotence, righteousness, and 
benevolence of God that sinners should be punished with 
unending woe.! 

Without examining arguments in detail, suffice it to say: 

(a.) The theory overlooks the broadly marked scriptural 
distinction between body and soul, and rests on the material- 
istic assumption that man is dependent for his consciousness 
on his present bodily organization. 

(J.) The interpretation of the eternal life which Christ 
bestows on the redeemed as literal immortality is totally 
unwarranted. That life is, in all its elements, simply and 
exactly the opposite of the death from which the saved are 
rescued. As the unbelieving are dead in sin, so the believing 
are made alive in Christ. The believer now hath, not will 
have, eternal life. : 

(c.) The supposition that perpetuation of existence is the 
chief end, or even a subordinate end, of Christ’s teachings 
and sufferings, is totally irreconcilable with the whole serip- 
tural representation of the design of his death, as well as the 
method by which that design is made available for us. Its 
principle of interpretation introduces interminable discord 
into the New Testament. 

(d.) If the everlasting destruction of the wicked be anni. 
hilation, then the epithet everlasting, and all other adjectives 
affixed to it representing destruction, are strangely tautolog- 
ical, It is incredible that such tautology should pervade the 
whole New Testament. 

(¢.) It isa most unwarrantable assumption that any of the 
attributes of God are compromised by the doctrine of an 
unending consciousness of suffering in the punishment of sin. 
The doctrine no more reflects on the omnipotence of God than 
does the existence of sin. The supposition of its inconsist- 
ency with divine righteousness rests on the false assumption 
that punishment is in some sense arbitrary, rather than the 
natural result of the constituent laws of moral being; and 


1. Dobney, Future Punishment. 


THE FINAL PERSONAL COMING OF CHRIST. 347 


that its perpetuity depends on the divine will, rather than 
on the immutability of moral law. 

The supposition that the divine benevolence is compro- 
mised, is possible only on the theory that punishment is 
reformatory, and chiefly so to the transgressor, instead of 
being the just desert of wrong doing; and it proceeds on the 
radical error that love, the sole principle whence springs all 
true reforms, is the product of suffering. 

(7.) Such texts as Matt., 24: 45-51; Mark, 4: 24; Rev., 
20 : 9-20, cf. 14: 11; are totally irreconcilable with the idea 
of the annihilation of the wicked. The only natural inter- 
pretation of Matt., 25:46, and Luke, 16: 26, is that the 
righteous and the wicked alike live forever, though in wholly 
different conditions. 


§ 54.—The Pinal Personal Coming of Christ. 


The Scriptures, in both Testaments, abound in prophetic 
announcements of divine manifestations which are to be con- 
cluded by a final consummation in the personal and permanent 
appearance of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. The 
announcements are made in such phrases as, “the end of the 
world,” “coming,” “appearing,” “revelation,” “the day of 
' the Lord,” “the last day,” “the great day,” “that day.” 
The prophecies themselves cover a vast extent of time, and 
apparently relate to a great number of religious epochs. The 
observance of what may be called prophetic perspective 
makes it extremely difficult, if not simply impossible, fully 
to interpret the prophecies until after their fulfillment. We 
know that the phrase “end of the world” was applied by 
the apostle to the end of Judaism and the introduction of 
the gospel, 1 Cor., 10:11; Heb., 9: 26; and was also used 
by our Lord to denote the period of his final appearing, 
Matt., 13: 39; 24:8, 6, 14. We know that the phrase, 


1. Hovey, The State of the Impenitent Dead. 


348 THE RESURRECTION. 


“coming of the Son of Man,” is in the twenty-fourth chapter 
of Matthew referred, both to the destruction of Jerusalem, 
and to the literal end of the mediatorial dispensation and 
of the present cosmical constitution. And we know also that 
Peter applied to the Pentecostal miracle the language of 
Joel, which cannot be regarded. as exhausted by anything 
less than that final catastrophe in this world’s affairs which is 
now ordinarily denoted by the phrase “ end of the world.” 

We need not wonder, therefore, that though there is a 
very great degree of unanimity among theologians regarding 
the fact of the final personal coming of our Lord, there yet 
exists great diversity of views regarding the preliminaries 
and adjuncts of that coming. 

The most that we can venture to say with ‘confidence 3 18, 
that, prior to the personal coming of Christ, the gospel will 
have achieved its widest and ablest possible results under 
the dispensation of the Spirit. The Jews, as a nation, will 
have been made partakers of the blessings of Christianity, 
which itself will have comeinto a deadly and final conflict with 
error and irreligion; then Christ will suddenly, unexpectedly, 
but unmistakably, appear; and his appearance will be fol- 
lowed by a simultaneous resurrection of both the righteous 
and wicked dead, with an instantaneous change of all the 
living, and by a final and an irrevocable dismission of the 
righteous and the wicked to their final and irrevocable estate. 


$ 55.—The Lesurrection. 


Attendant on the final coming of Christ is to be the re- 
surrection of the dead, the completion of that yoo RS which 
the raising of the Lord from death, Jno., 5: 21, 25; Eph., 
be 14, is at once both the beginning and the sidan Jno., 

Seo SHED TO Oscar: eLile 

The resurrection is not, however, the mere development of 
the existing forces of Christianity, but is attributed directly 
to supernatur al intervention, and to the exercise of a divine 


THE LAST JUDGMENT. 349 


power at the final coming of Christ, Phil., 3:20, 21; 1 Thess., 
4:16; and this divine power will call forth from the grave 
both the righteous and the wicked, Dan., 12: 2; Jno., 5: 29; 
Acts, 24: 15. 

The assurance of a resurrection is based, in the Scriptures, 

on the fact of the resurrection of Christ, Rom., 8:11; 1 Cor., 
15: 12-20; Col., 1:18. That Christ himself was raised 
from the dead was made certain by apostolic testimony, 
“ witness of the resurrection ;” by Paul’s argument in 1 Cor., 
15: 8-8; and by the existence of the Christian church, which 
cannot be accounted for except from the actual resurrection 
of Christ.’ 
_ Objections to the resurrection have originated chiefly in 
misconception. ‘The resurrection is the action of that organ- 
ific principle which reconstructs to itself a body out of avail- 
able elements, but not necessarily out of the identical particles 
of matter which previously composed the human body, 
1 Cor., 15: 85-38. “Flesh and blood cannot inherit the 
kingdom of God,” 1 Cor, 15:50. The body raised will be 
a purified, a spiritual, and an incorruptible body. Itis not the 
planted kernel, as Paul reminded the objector of his day, 
which itself springs up again, but God giveth to it a body as 
it pleaseth him, and to each kernel its own body, 1 Cor., 
Toro. 


§ 56.—The Last Judgment. 


This is closely allied to the doctrine of the coming of 
Christ. The judgment began with our Lord’s first advent, 
Luke, 18: 84,35; Jno., 3: 18, 9: 39; has been continued in 
the successive manifestations of power and of grace In salva- 
tion, Jno., 5: 21-27; 2 Cor., 2:16; and will be completed, as 


1. See on Christ’s resurrection, Neander, Life of Christ; also Hase, Life of 
Jesus. 
_ 2. There will be the restoration of an organism; of what kind we do not know. 
The language of Scripture is figurative imagery ; but imagery is not fiction. 


850 FINAL STATE OF THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE WICKED. 


confirmed and irrevocable decision, at our Lord’s last appear- 
ance, Matt., 25: 81-83; 1 Cor, 4:5; Rev., 20: 11-13. 

All judgment is committed to Christ, because in him, as 
the God-man, the human heart recognizes through conscious- 
ness of mutual ties, the touchstone, or discriminating force 
of the Judge, by whom, through the natural operation of our 
own conscience, we are consigned to our own sphere of bless- 
edness or ‘woe, Jno., 5; 22-97; Acts, 17:31 3) Rev eae 
6:12-17. The last isa text which, relating to the eventsinthe 


historical progress of the church, is only a stronger proof of 


the effect of Christ’s presence at the final judgment. 

By this, however, we would not mean to imply that there 
will not also be, at the conclusion of our world’s affairs, some 
sort of formal, visible, and universally recognized adjudica- 
tion of the two great divisions of our race to their ultimate 
and opposite destinies; but that the instinctive cooperation 
of conscience will necessitate, expedite, and sanction the great 
and irresistible discrimination or judgment to which all will 
be subjected. 


§ 57.—Linal State of the. Lighteous and the Wicked. 


All who accept the New Testament as revelation from 
God, agree in the recognition of a state of future blessedness 
as awaiting all true disciples of Christ. There is also a very 
good degree of unanimity in regarding this state as to be 
realized in a definite locality. Christ’s promise of many 
mansions, and his declaration that where he is his disciples 
are also to be, as well as the apocalyptic description of Heaven, 
are supposed to indicate decisively a place. Where this place 
is, or is to be, is uncertain. While a few minds have con- 
cluded from such texts as Rom., 8: 18-238; 2 Pet., 3: 10-13; 
Rey., 21: 1-5; that this world, purified of evil and renovated, 
is to be the abode of the righteous, others find nothing in 
Scripture determinative of locality. Concerning the nature 


FINAL STATE OF THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE WICKED. 35! 


of future blessedness, we must suppose that whatever is in 
itself pure and noble, and is ennobling to a rational and im- 
mortal being in this life, will form an ingredient of his hap- 
piness in the next; though, in so saying, we would not exclude 
the provision of new and positive sources of satisfaction of 
which we can now form no adequate conception. 

As respects the punishment of the wicked, this, like the 
blessedness of the righteous, will to a great extent be the 
natural result of those principles, unrestrained, that have ruled 
the heart in this life, though not to the exclusion of positive 
penalties supernaturally inflicted. There is also a place, or 
locality, to which the wicked are to be restricted. There is. 
no evidence whatever that the punishment of the wicked is 
to be corporal, 7. ¢., referable to the nervous system, in any 
degree. 

As regards the duration of future punishment, if the Script- 
ures teach an eternity of blessedness of the righteous, they 
also teach, with equal explicitness, the eternity of the wretch- 
edness of the finally impenitent. 

The phraseology respecting duration is strictly parallel in 
all those passages which relate to the two classes and their 
final estates. ‘The Scriptures are wholly irreconcilable with 
the whole scheme of universalism, or ultimate restoration.! 
To maintain either of these doctrines 1s not so much to misin- 
terpret special texts, as to contradict the whole New Testa- 
ment, and to subvert the whole system of Christianity. And 
they can be maintained speculatively only on the theory of 
pantheism.” Jt is futile to rest a defense on the basis of 


1. Moral penalty is grounded in moral constitution. Penalty is eternal, 7. ¢., 
remains so long as a man himself remains. Maurice held to restorationism. This 
contradicts the whole New Testament and subverts Christianity. Is it impossible, 
in the endless resources of God, that there may be some restoration:for the lost ? 
We do not know. It is sufficient for us to say that God is infinitely just. Regen- 
eration in this world is accomplished through persons, not through abstract truth. 
Here, when all are wicked, all intensify each other. Evil reacts and intensifies. 
itself. Is it impossible that God may establish some means by which this may be 
overruled ? Wedo not know. It is utterly idle and useless to speculate about it. 

2. The author regarded the dogmatic assertion of the salvation, or ultimate res-. 
toration, of all men, as irreconcilable with the Scriptures, and logically connected 
with pantheism. He believed in continued personal existence after death, and in the 


352 FINAL STATE OF THE RIGHTEOUS AND THE WICKED. 


divine power, since mere power without those appliances 
possible only through the presence of righteousness, can never 
produce personal virtue. It is equally idle to rest on the 
divine justice, since the duration of future punishment is not 
so much determined by the divine decree, is not so much an 
arbitrary purpose, as it is the natural and unchangeable result 
of the principle of evil which, in its reacting, reduplicating 
power, makes itself the eternal and self-avenging heritage of 
the lost. 

The divine benevolence is not impugned by the doctrine of 
eternal punishment. That is the most beneficent and benev- 
olent government which most effectively suppresses evil, and 
fosters and promotes the good; and that government is one 
which shuts up sin to the inworking and outworking of its 
own deadly but deathless energy, while it secures to its oppo- 
site the self-renewing and self-perpetuating principle of holi- 
ness, the infinite reign of an immortal blessedness. 


continuity of personal character. As a theological instructor, he neither adopted 


nor favored the effort to attain that ‘‘ higher unity” into which some, induced by . 


metaphysical speculation, attempt to resolve the radical antagonism of good and 
evil. He repeatedly indicated, as in the text, the logical relation and alliance be- 
ween doctrinal theories which are not supported either by revelation or experience, 
and what seemed to him to be a false philosophy. 

Among his significant oral statements in the class-room, are the following: ‘‘The 
tendency of the time is to make religion a philosophy. Theology has to do with 
revealed facts.” ‘‘ Beware of a complete eschatology. It is easy to construct a 
system which shall tell us all about ‘last things ;’ but such systems are worthless 
when made.”’ ‘‘ The New Testament is intended for our present use and our pres- 
ent needs; the future is God’s alone, and he will take care of it. Avoid eschato- 
logical theories. Time is too short to waste on such questions as have no foundation 
of Scripture.” ‘‘A man must interpret Scripture, not according to some philo- 
sophical theory, but according to the common sense meaning of words.” —Eb. 


23 


Pa, HIN EON 


HXPEHERIMHNTAL THHOLOGY. 


AN INAUGURAL ADDRESS 


Delivered at Rochester, N. Y., July 13, 1853, 


By Rev. E. G. ROBINSON.’ 


_ Tue service that has brought us together on this occasion must 
turn the first thoughts of most of us to one, who a twelve-month ago 
was in-life and among us, but who to-night sleeps with the dead. 
_ And, surely, it is fitting, that in passing to the reflections of this 
hour, we take his resting place in our way. The thoughts that are to 
engage us will take a sober coloring from eyes that have but glanced 
at the tomb, especially the tomb that conceals from us so much of 
intellect and piety. It might be profitable even to linger here in our 
meditations ; it would strengthen our courage to look steadily at the 
example of one, who, while compelled, his life long, to defend him- 
self against the attacks of disease with the one hand, could yet, with 
the other, accomplish so much for the Master. 

But he needs no memorial at our hands; and least of all, in’ this 
place where genius and sanctified friendship have already presented 
one inimitable in its beauty and eloquence. Indeed, he had engraved 
a memorial for himself on the spirits of his pupils. He had erected. 
to himself a monument in every mind that had felt the power of his 
influence. The monuments of his worth, and witnesses of his toils, 
are here, and are scattered throughout our land. His works will be 
still praising him. 

But to stand in his vacant place, and take up his work where he 
left it, is certainly no idle undertaking. You know how sad and 
solemn is the task laid on him who is made to lift, with untried hand, 
the staff that dropped from the hand of such experience. Your sym- 


'NotE.—This address was originally printed as a pamphlet by Lewis Colby & Co., 
122 Nassau street, New York. In the spring of 1853, Dr. Robinson became the 
successor, as Professor of Biblical Theology, at Rochester, N. Y., of Rev. John §. 
Maginnis, D. D., to whose death, in October, 1852, reference is made in the open- 
ing sentences of this address. The discourse, commemorative of Dr. Maginnis, 
was delivered by Rev. William R. Williams, D. D., of New York.—Eb. 


355 


356 EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 


pathies and prayers, I am confident, may be relied on for the future ; 
for the present, your kindly attention is bespoken, while a delineation 
is attempted of the need and the advantages in our day of ‘what, for 
the want of a better phraseology, may be denominated Hxperimental 
Theology. 

We have theologies, systematic and biblical; and theologies, 
philosophical, historical, dogmatic and practical. We hear, with ac- 
knowledged propriety, of our need in theological studies, of systematic 
arrangement; of biblical exegesis; of a philosophical spirit; of a 
knowlege of history and a regard for practical piety. It is with equal 
propriety, I trust, that we dwell at this time on our need, in the stud 
of Theology, of earnest regard to that experimental knowledge of the 
doctrines of Christianity, which, if Christianity is to be of any prac- 
tical avail to us, must always be found in the heart of the believer. 

Theology has been denominated a science, and so denominated, 
perhaps, with correctness. The work of the theologian, as such, is 
scientific. It is to prove the doctrines he teaches to be true, and if 
he will, to classify and arrange them in a system. But there is dan- 
ger lest the scientific spirit of the theologian should degenerate into 
the mere spirit of science; lest the doctrines of Theology should come 
to be regarded, not as containing those great truths without which 
there is no help for man in this life or the next, but as mere dogmas 
to be tested by logic, and adopted or rejected as they survive or fall 
in the trial. Against this danger, protection may be found in ever 
keeping in mind the relation of Theology to the heart. Every 
doctrine of Theology has such relation, which can not be overlooked 
with impunity. Let, then, our need of ever bearing this relation in 
mind be the topic that shall now engage our attention. 

1. This need, we think, may be seen first, by a recurrence to the 
mode by which Christian doctrines have been revealed to men. 
These were not taught dogmatically from heaven. For aught that 
we know, they might have been reduced to strictest forms of logic, 
and been given to the race, as was the decalogue, an unchanging 
creed for all times. But such was not the divine plan. Christ him- 
self did not so teach. Even he in whom dwelt all the fullness of 
the Godhead bodily, who was God manifest in the flesh, though he 
spoke as never man spake, restricted himself for the most part in his 
teachings to the exposition and enforcement of those truths, which 
were already so familiar to men as to be styled by him, the “ earthly 
things” of his religion. To those profounder and more mysterious 
truths, the “heavenly things” of his system, it is true, he made 
allusions not infrequent, but allusions in parables and in forms of 
speech unintelligible to the hearers at the time of their utterance. 
Not until the Spirit had come to guide into a knowledge of all truth, 
and the apostles had inwardly felt what they had failed to under- 


EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 357 


stand, was that language made intelligible. To the apostles, then, 
was it reserved to complete a revelation; to give to man an exposi- 
tion of the profounder and more mysterious doctrines of the cross. 

To inquire into the reason for reserving to mere apostles a revela- 
tion of truths so momentous, when God himself had once tabernacled 
among us, and spoken to man from the lips of a man, would be to 
turn too widely aside from the object before us. Of one thing, how- 
ever, we may be certain, the doctrines of the apostles were not, what 
the Deists of a former age and the Rationalists of all ages have 
asserted, the mere inventions of men. Such a notion is refuted by 
the very doctrines themselves; is utterly irreconcilable with the whole 
spirit and tenor of the apostles’ lives. But it is not impossible, per- 
haps I should say, is not improbable, that the apostles were appointed 
to be the revealing mediums of the last and most important truths 
from heaven to man, because it was indispensable that all truth 

designed to be practical, as was Christianity, should first be presented 
to man in its concrete or actual form, and afterward in its abstract or 
verbal formula. Every truth designed to be practical must have the 
basis of fact; must, in a word, be but the description or definition 
of a fact. Thus, God revealed himself to the patriarchs and to 
Moses—became actual or real to their senses, and then came the truth 
of his existence. Jesus Christ, who was the incarnation of the doc- 
trines he taught, first lived and died, and then came the doctrines of 
his divinity, atonement and intercession. 

And so of those truths and doctrines which are descriptive of the 
great spiritual facts of man’s inward experience, and are designed to 
be perpetually reproduced in the experience of men; all these did 
God first make to be actual or real in mere men like the apostles. 
They, gifted with the spirit of inspiration to preserve them from 
error, as well as favored by the personal instructions of Christ him- 
self, have given us the doctrines which they experienced, and which 
must be reproduced in the experience of all true believers. 

Thus, the origin of those doctrines revealed through the apostles, 
was in the highest sense supernatural or divine; while, at the same 
time, the mode of their evolvement was equally natural or human. 
Doctrines were not revealed through them as passive, unconscious 
beings. The Holy Spirit did not play on them as the musician plays 
on his instrument, eliciting sweet music by breath and dextrous fin- 
gering of keys. Nor yet, did the apostles arrive at their doctrinal 
conclusions by the deductions of reason. Their doctrines were in no 
sense the results of ratiocination. They were not reasoned out, but 
felt out. They were the thoughts of God made actual to their souls 
by experience. They were the bringing forth into light, and cloth- 
ing in the language of men, the most solemn and deliberate convic- 
tions of their hearts. Thus, the doctrines of the apostles became the 


358 EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 


exponents of their experience, signs of the hidden power in their 
souls, daguerreotype images of inward emotions caught by the intel- 
lect and set in the frame-work of human language. Such was the 
origin of the doctrines of John, of Peter, and of Paul. 

But the doctrines of the apostles, we have intimated, were to be re- 
experienced in the hearts of believers; were, so to speak, to be reorig- 
inated in the consciousness of all who should receive them. They 
were to be felt out by each individual believer, not as independent 
truth, but as the only revealed truth from God to man. Christians 
were first to derive their creeds from the Bible only, and then test the 


truth of their creeds, the validity of their experience and the genuine- 


ness of their emotions, by recurrence again to that same authority, 
the Bible. What the inspired apostles felt and wrote as doctrines, 
the Holy Spirit designed to be the unchanging type of all Christian 
experience, his own chosen instrument in the work of both the 
renewal and the sanctification of man, to the end of the world. The 
Holy Spirit, taking the mysterious and half-understood words of 
Christ, and making clear to the consciousness of the apostles the 
divine depth of their meaning and power, enabled them to write ont, 
in language, an exposition of that meaning and power, in the doc- 
trines which they have left us. And in all time since, the same 
Spirit, no longer inspiring men to originate new truth, but dwelling 
in them as a sanctifying presence, re-enacts in the believer, by the 
words of the apostles, what he wrought out, at the first, through the 
apostles’ experience. So that a Christian’s experience, if it be gen- 
uine, will not only be in harmony with the word of God, but will be 
a reproduction of that word. His creed, should he attempt to 
express it, will be, so far as it goes, just what the Scriptures show us 
to have been the creed of the apostles. 

Thus, a man’s veal creed will always be just what he has expe- 
rienced, and no more. The formulee of his faith will be just what his 
intellect has gathered from his heart. If his heart bears the image of 
Christ, so will his creed. Creeds that are creeds, always mirror the 
hearts that believe them. What are our creeds but attempted repre- 
sentations, by symbols, of a common experience? And what are 
Systematic Theologies, but attempted classifications of these mirrors 
or types of an age? | 

The forms of Christian doctrines, it is true, may vary with the ages, 
and have sometimes been in the same age discordant and antagonistic. 
The difference of philosophy, and the difference of constitutional 
temperaments and of intellectual endowments, are all traceable in the 
different forms of Christian doctrine. The philosophy of a man al- 
ways gives its coloring to the lenses through which he looks in upon 
the interior of his soul. The same truth may spring forth from dif- 
ferent hearts, with form and feature so unlike as to escape recognition 


EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 3859 


among the most scrutinizing. But, be form and feature what they 
may, the prevailing doctrines of an age are always exponents of the 
prevailing experience; and, while the theologian is to test the truth 
of all doctrines by Scripture, it is none the less his duty, making allow- 
ance for the influences of his age, to keep steadily before him the re- 
lation of the doctrines to the heart. 

2. Again, another reason for ever bearing this relation in mind is 
discernible, I think, in the weight which always attaches to the evi- 
dence of experience in our decisions on the truthfulness of doctrines. 
To have experienced the power of a doctrine in the soul, is to have 
passed through the twilight of doubt into the field of open day and of 
clear vision. 

The truths of exact science, of all philosophies, address themselves 
solely to the intellect. It is on the intellect alone that they exercise 
their power. But the truths of Christianity are addressed to the af- 
fections as well as to the intellect. The heart is the seat of their 
throne in the soul. No one of them becomes practically believed— 
becomes an actualized reality—till the heart has felt its power. But 
when that power has been felt, the soul has reached the highest point 
in the scale of evidence. A direct revelation from heaven could 
hardly add weight to the proof of its truth. He has “tasted the good 
word of God and the powers of the world to come.” Instead of hear- 
ing of God only by the hearing of the ear, the eye now sees him. 
The soul, in exultation exclaims, “I know in whom and in what I 
have believed.” 

Thus the last, best, and always conclusive evidence of the truth of 
@ doctrine is, that we have felt its power. Reason as we may from .- 
the exposition of particular texts, or from scriptural induction, the end 
of all controversy, to a real Christian, about the proper Divinity of 
Jesus Christ is, that he has been up, alone, in silence and amid the 
awful gloom of conscious guilt, to the mount where, with Moses and 
Elias in full view, he has seen his Saviour transfigured before him. 
It. was then and there, that the listening ear caught, in the calm atmos- 
phere of a heavenly peace, the assuring words, ‘This is my beloved 
Son in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.” 

It is true that in ascending the mount of transfiguration there may 
be many a dark and bitter hour. Darkness always lies about its base. 
The letter always killeth; it is the Spirit only that giveth life. The 
first work of the doctrine of Christ is to lay the soul low in the grave 
where Christ lay, crucified with him; that “like as Christ was raised 
up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should 
walk in newness of life.” 

And such is the office of every distinctive truth of Christianity. 
All are humiliating and crucifying. There is not one, but in its first 
stern grapple with the soul, forces the exclamation, “ Lord, help or I 


360 EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 


perish.” But when the doctrine has completed its triumph, and the 
vanquished soul, all trembling and helpless, sinks beneath its power,. 
then it is that, as with Jacob of old, “the day breaketh,” and the soul 
in astonishment exclaims, “I have seen God face to face, and my life 
is preserved.” Such is the experience of him who has felt the power 
of a Christian doctrine. And such, too, must ever be the experience 
of one who would know Christian doctrines in the plenitude and sav- 
ing efficacy of their power. And such, still more, is the experience, 
which the theologian, in this age of Christian instability, of changing 
creeds and spurious charity, should ever aim to produce, bearing” 
steadily in mind the connection that subsists between his theology and 
the heart. 

3. The real authority of doctrinal formule or creeds, is another 
reason for carefully attending to this connection. I say veal author- 
ity, becanse a false has often been attributed to them, and because all 
authority has sometimes been denied them. At one time, creeds have 
been foisted into the place of God’s word. LBigots, all forgetful of 
the truth that, | 


‘‘ Who would force a soul, tilts with a straw 
Against a champion cased in adamant,” 


have branded men as heretics for non-submission to them, and con- 
signed them to torture, death and damnation eternal. And then 
again, on the other hand, shallow impertinence, with impudence 
equaled only by its ignorance, has fulminated its denunciations of all 
creeds and formularies, as of the devil, and to be burned. Yet creeds 
have an authority; an authority not difficult to define, and easily 
traced to its seat. | 

A Christian doctrine, it will be admitted, has authority with him 
who believes it. It is an authority derived, as we have before seen, 
from the double source of God’s word and his own experience. And 
it is an authority that is ever gaining weight. Every fresh recur- 
rence to the word of God strengthens it. Every new experience 
heightens it. 

Experience, it is true, has not like the Bible, an authority of its. 
own. Indeed, it has no authority at all, except what it borrows from 
the Bible. To secure for itself a hearing, it must first prove itself the 
offspring of an authenticated doctrine. But, once in existence, it 
gives weight, in return, to the authority of the very doctrine which 
first gave it its own. 


In our first acquaintance with a doctrine we may be quite uncon- — 
scious of the infinite might that reposes in it. But it is of the word ~ 


eternal; it is a thought of God, and like God is infinite. The more 
intimate our acquaintance with it, and the profounder our experience 
of its power, the more profoundly we reverence it, and the more im- 
plicitly we obey it. I say obey it, because a doctrine is but a precept: 


j 
‘ 
i] 
‘ 
YJ 
j 


EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 361 


in the style of a proposition; and a precept is but a doctrine in the 
form of a command. ‘The one may be translated into the other by a. 
change of phraseology—the doctrine into precept and the precept into: 
doctrine; but the soul of the truth in each is ever and imimutably the 
same. It is the same spirit now commanding and now asserting. It 
is the same spirit of truth, alike pervading and alike active in every 
part of the system. ach particular truth, whether in doctrine or 
precept, is but a disintegrated fragment of an infinite whole, which 
surrounds and envelopes us in our finiteness, like infinite space. But: 
let one truth come in contact with the soul; let its secret power be 
felt, its hidden light be seen, and a clue to the whole system is laid 
hold of ; a door is at once opened into the very presence chamber of 
the Eternal. To have experienced that power is to have heard the: 
voice of Jehovah. And thenceforward the representative of that ex- 
perience—the doctrinal formula—stands before the soul speaking on 
the authority of the Most High God. Such may be the authority of 
a doctrine to an individual soul. 

But doctrines are gathered into creeds, which become the exponents. 
of the faith of a sect. And these creeds become invested with a spe- 
cies of authority which no reflecting man will be in haste to impugn.. 
That which may have guided giant minds and heroic hearts safely 
amid the perils of life, and been to them a pillar of fire in the night. 
of their distresses, will not be flippantly spoken of, or lightly esteemed. 
by the earnest and the thoughtful. Yet varying creeds can never 
take the place of the unvarying word which endureth forever. That, 
only and always, is the ultimate appeal. By that let all creeds be 
tested. If they stand not the trial, it is because there is no truth in 
them. But if the Scriptures sustain them, let their truth be acknowl- 
edged, though they belie our experience. ‘Let God be true and 
every man a liar.” Let the theologian abandon his creed, and exam- 
ine anew his experience in the light of the Scriptures. Let him study 
his Theology in connection both with God’s word and his own ex- 
_ perience. 

4, Again; another reason for carefully attending to Experience in 
the study of Theology, is found in the personal peril of him who 
overlooks it. The doctrines of Theology all have, what may be called, 
their moral power. It is the possession of this power which distin-. 
guishes Theology from all human science. It is a failure to recognize 
this distinction which constitutes the peril. Philosophy may be stud- 
ied for the sharpening of the intellect, or for the settling and arrang- 
ing of principles. We may resort to physical science for knowledge, 
or for amusement. We are at liberty to enter any field of mere hu- 
man inquiry, and toil as long and laboriously as we will, for public or 
private ends, and no law of science need be broken; no tie that binds. 
us to man be sundered; no element of our own moral constitution be: 


362 EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 


disturbed. But the domain of Theology belongs solely to God. It 
is his garden. Its trees are trees of his planting; and “all the 
trees of the Lord are full of sap.” Every revealed truth of God is a 
principle of life. His words are spirit and life; and they are ad- 
dressed to spirits, and have to do with life. They are designed to 
affect our moral natures; to transform and make them meet for the 
presence of God; and constituted as we are, that which is intended 
to bless will bless, or it will curse; and the greater the blessing un- 
improved, the greater the curse incurred. Theology must be to him 
who studies it, either a savor of life unto life, or of death unto death. 

5. Another inducement for ever keeping in mind the influence of 
our Theology on the heart, may be found, I apprehend, in the dissat- 
isfaction with old forms of faith, so strikingly displayed in our day, 
by the numerous desertions to one or the other of those antipodal par- 
ties, the Papists and the Spiritualists. Is not the real explanation of 
these religious apostasies, these ecclesiastical gallopades, to be found 
in the utter oversight and neglect, in the beginning, of the spiritual 
significancy—the actual influence on the heart—which the creeds they 
abandon were designed to represent? Is it not, indeed, an intolerable 
conviction of the shameful disagreement between their actual expe- 
riences and the import of their creeds, which impels to the desertion ¢ 
Animated with the vain hope of relief from change, they cast away 
one creed, and hastily seize another,— 


‘«They change the place, but keep the pain.” 


And surely, it is a most noteworthy sign of these our times, that so 
many men, from stately bishops to flippant shop-boys, are ready to 
join in the insane ery of “dead orthodoxy,” “dead orthodoxy,” and 
forthwith betake themselves with shameless haste, the one to a 
church so exacting in its demands as to deny the right of private 
judgment, and the other to a multitude whose only bond of union is 
an agreement to discard all authority in religion, and sit each an 
obedient listener to the lying oracle in his own bosom. To evangeli- 
cal religion, the numerous affinities of the papists and the infidels 
make them one in their common hostility. Both reject the Bible as 
an ultimate authority. Both assert an irreconcilable disagreement 
between the requirements of the Scriptures, and the existing piety of 
the Protestant church. To both these classes of enemies our sufhi- 
cient reply is to be sought, not so much in the reiteration of “ the 
Evidences,” as in a growing conformity of life to the doctrines we 
profess to believe. We must prove to them by the superior type of 
our piety that “ their rock is not as our rock, our enemies themselves 
being judges.” We must live our religion rather than talk of it. 
And while the papist mumbles his prayers and kisses his crucifix, and 
the atheist raves his maudlin blasphemies, let us not forget that the 


eae 


EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 363 


disease which destroyed them is contagious and mortal. Let us 
guard against its first infections, remembering how much easier it is 
to forestall a disease than to attempt its removal when seated. 

The cause of these changes and apostasies, as we have intimated, 
lies in the neglect, in theological studies, of that very thing which is 
now engaging our attention. Against the first approach then of 
that cause we cannot guard with too watchful a jealousy. It may 
be entirely overlooked and forgotten. One may proceed in his inves- 
tigations and reflections in Theology, just as the student in Natural 
History proceeds, when he shuts himself up to the study of the dried 
specimens before him, quite forgetful of the functions of life which 
they all once performed. Closely examining the structure of each 
doctrine, and determining its species and genus, and carefully affix- 
ing its label, he may arrange his theological cabinet with artistic skill 
and imposing effect. But his studies are ever among the dead. He, 
- on the contrary, who would have this study become to him, what it 
should, an engrossing and life-giving pursuit, will behold in each doc- 
trine he examines a form where reposes, or once reposed, a power 
that can comfort, or could comfort, it may be, the hearts of weary 
millions. He will examine every doctrine with a view to its influ- 
ence on the heart. The very atmosphere around him will be refresh- 
ing ; his own heart ever redolent of life. The all-quickening Spirit 
will dwell in him and, through him, proclaim again, with life-giving 
power, the same truth which he dictated of old in the days of inspira- 
tion. 

6. And here let me mention, as yet another reason for the study of 
Theology in the manner I have described, the influence of the Holy 
Spirit on the heart; his influence both in the beginning of the heart’s 
renewal and in its progressive conformity to the mind of Christ. It 
is the office of the Holy Spirit to enlighten the eye of the under- 
standing that we may see the beauty of the truth; to open our hearts 
that we may receive the truth in the love of it; to renew a right 
spirit within us, that is, give us new spiritual tastes; to help our in- 
firmities, making intercessions for us with groanings which cannot be 
uttered ; to make us temples for himself to dwell in; to sanctify us 
unto God that, at last, we may be presented faultless in the presence 
of his glory with exceeding joy. It is of the Spirit that we are born ; 
by the Spirit that we believe; by the Spirit that we hope; by the 
Spirit that we pray; by the Spirit that we love; by the Spirit that 
we grow in grace; and it is by the Spirit that we are to enter, at last, 
into rest. 

It is true, that the Scriptures speak of the word of God as the in- 
strument through which the Spirit accomplishes his work. It is by 
that word that the Spirit begets the believer to a new life, and by it 
that he sanctities him. But the active agency, the power, is alone 


364 EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 


with the Spirit. The glory of our salvation can no more be attributed 
to the word of God only, than the glory of a Praxiteles or a Canova. 
can be ascribed to the chisel or mallet with which they wrought into 
beauty their immortal creations. 

Yet the word of God has its office, and an office which cannot be 
too much magnified by him who first does homage to the all-creating 
Spirit. The word of God is the sword with which the Spirit slays. 
us; it is also, according to Paul, a form or mold into which he deliy- 
ers us when he creates us anew; itis a transcript of the divine Mind, 
a locket-picture of the Deity, which the Spirit holds before us, chang-- 
ing us into the same image from glory to glory. i 

But while we thus recognize the position and the priceless value of 
the truth; while we admit, as we have done, its eminent fitness to: 
man’s moral nature, and its exact adaptation to the office which it 
fills; yet never should we forget its utter inability to save us, except. 
in the hands of the eternal Spirit. Never should we cease to remem- 
ber that the word can become effective for us, and its divine beauty be 
revealed to us, only in the heart, the Spirit’s inner sanctuary. And, 
assuredly, we should not forget that what is true of the word of God, 
is equally true of our theologies, and our theological doctrines. It. 
is the heart which the Spirit sways and sanctifies by the doctrines, 
and it is with an eye to its influence on the heart that the doctrine 
should be studied. 

7. But the doctrines of the Bible are to be proclaimed to the race ;, 
let, then, what may be regarded as the divinely appointed mode for 
the diffusion of the gospel among men, supply us with another and 
our last argument for an Experimental Theology. What that mode 
is, may be learned, in part, from the work which Christianity proposes. 
to accomplish for us, and in part, from the examples of Christ and 
his apostles as they proceeded in the beginning to effect it. 

Christianity proposes the salvation of men. ‘ Christ Jesus came: 
into the world to save sinners ;” but not to save them irrespective of 
their fitness for salvation. He came to make men “ meet for the in- 
heritance of the saints,” to make them new creatures in himself. 
His mission was to establish a new spiritual lineage, and found an 
empire in the souls of men that should run through time and eternity. 

And how did Christ proceed in his work? Did: he begin by pro- 
pounding the more mysterious doctrines of the gospel, and by laying 
down a code of laws which men must comprehend and subseribe to, 
before becoming his disciples? Did he not rather first gather about. 
him, from the most uncultivated district of his native land, a band of 
men into whom he breathed, out of his own bosom, the spirit of his 
religion, and whom he afterwards sent forth to multiply his disciples. 
in other lands? Was it not by direct personal contact and out of the 
Spirit that “ God gave not by measure unto him,” and that himself 


EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 365 


after his ascension, so copiously poured forth at the Pentecost, that he 
imparted to his apostles the self-disseminating life of his church for 
every age and among every people? 

Christ Jesus came to our earth, it is said, to suffer and die that we 
might live. But why lingered he for three weary years and a half 
after he had entered on his official work? Was it to multiply dis- 
ciples? Many an illiterate servant of his has won for him more, and 
in far shorter time than he won for himself. Was it not, rather, to 
introduce a new life among men by direct spiritual contact with him- 
self, the fountain of all life; to beget, like a second Adam, by his 
quickening Spirit, a spiritual race that should be perpetuated by his 
Spirit to the end of the world ? 

With what tenderness and patience did Christ’s love hover over 
the apostles! With what untiring assiduity was infused into their 
bosoms that inner life of the soul which has been the unchang- 

ing inheritance of the church in all time since! That life the apostles 
conveyed to their successors, who again transmitted it to others, and 
these to others still; a true spiritual lineage—the only apostolic sue- 
cession known in the Bible, thus being kept incorruptible among the 
people of God. 

And in this way has the gospel always been propagated. It has 
been by contact of soul with soul. And in this way must its propa- 
gation continue. He who would seek the salvation of the dead in 
sin, must do as did Elisha by the dead son of the Shunammite; “ put 
his mouth upon his mouth, his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon 
his hands.” The “shrine” of the Spirit is in man, not in the Bible 
or in books. The Bible and books may be instruments in the Spirit’s 
hands, but not its chief instruments, nor such as it will employ without 
the use of an intermediate agency. It is man whom the Spirit uses 
for the exertion of his power on man. It is by the spirit of man 
that he will act on the spirits of men. Hence the command, “Go, 
preach.” 

_ The press has its service to render in the kingdom of Christ, but a 
service that is always subordinate to that of the living ministry. We 
hear much in our day of the power, the “ omnipotence,” of the press ; 
‘we hear much ascribed to the press which can be warranted neither 
by Scripture, by facts, nor by common sense. The world is not to be 
converted by steam presses. Space (as the hyperbole is) may be “ an- 
nihilated ” by steam, but not human depravity. You may cover the 
whole heathen world with printed pages of the Bible, and of religious 
tracts and treatises, and yet, without the presence of living Christians, 
the nations be as ignorant of practical redemption by Jesus Christ, as 
they are at this moment while hurrying amid the dew and sunlight 
of their early morning, with offerings to idols which their own hands 
have made. There were Bibles and religious books enough in 


366 EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 


Geneva when Haldane first visited it, but no life in the church there 
till he carried it. And it may be questioned whether those among 
the heathen who are said to have become new creatures in Christ 
from the mere reading of the Bible, have not had presented to them 
in some form, either in person or by oral description of living wit- 
nesses, the realized idea of the living Christian man. But it is beyond 
a question true that no people has ever yet been evangelized by any 
instrumentality whatever, short of the personal agency of the living 
ministry ; without the presence of the only shrine of the acting, speak- 
ing, sympathizing Holy Spirit. It isnot the word that is the light or 
the salt of the earth, but the church. 

And need I tarry here to inquire if this office of the church is as 
clearly perceived and as vividly realized in our day, as its relation to 
Christ and the world would require? May I not ask if that motto of 
Protestants, so often on our lips—the Bible the Religion of Protest- 
ants—is not in danger of degenerating into another—the Bible the 
Church of the Protestants? May I not ask if Bible Societies, and so- 
cieties for the publication of tracts and books, useful and indispensable 
as they may be, are not in danger of being put in the place of the 
ehurech? God forbid that one syllable be uttered by me to lessen our 
reverence for the Bible. But God equally forbid that we be left to 
the foolish attempt to transfer from ourselves to the Bible those 
offices which the Bible can perform only through the spirits of men. 
I love the Bible more than language can express. I reverence it more 
than I can tell, as the only inspired word of the one living and true 
God; but it is because I thus love and reverence it, that I would not 
see it thrust unaccompanied into the world, with the vain expectation 
of its fulfilling that command which has been addressed to the church 
only, “Go yx, and preach the gospel to every creature.” 

It is, then, by the contact of a living church with the dead world, 
that the world is to be saved. And especially is it by the voice of 
the church in the proclamation of the gospel from the tongue of her 
living ministry, that the world is to be aroused from its death-sleep 
and made acquainted with its Redeemer. Such is the divine appoint- 
ment. The all-quickening Spirit, appropriating and sanctifying to 
himself every attribute of the soul he renews, employs each and all 
in the furtherance of his purposes; but his chosen method is, to 


make his way from heart to heart through that mightiest instrument. 


of man—his “‘chief glory,” the tongue; yet not the tongue as the 
servant of his own reason, and the herald of his own imaginings, but 
the faithful expounder of the teachings of Christ. 

It is not by the arguments, nor by the eloquence of man, that the 
Spirit does his work. It has not often been that the mighty men of 
eloquence have been the mighty men of God. God, in olden time, 
gave not his glory to graven images, neither now does he give it to 
ideal idols. He will not suffer the glory of his grace to be dimmed. 


a 
oF 
} 

‘ 
; 
: 
‘ 


EXPERIMENTAL THEOLOGY. 367 


Eloquence delights in the outward and the objective. It revels in 
the dramatic and the picturesque. It assails the outer man, and car- 
ries by storm, and with ease, its entire line of defense; but to unlock 
the door of the inner sanctuary, and kindle a new fire on the altar of 
the heart, is not within the range of its power. The converting Spirit. 
is not in the fire, nor the wind, nor the earthquake, but in the still 
small voice. 

The tongue which the Spirit most honors and ever delights to em- 
ploy, is his whose heart knows by experience the power and saving 
efficacy of the doctrines he preaches. It is not the tongue which, 
parrot-like, glibly prates other men’s thoughts and experiences, or 
echoes the contents of ‘ Pulpit Encyclopedias,” and “ Assistants,” and 
“Manuals.” If there be any one practice among preachers more 
belittling to the mind, more disgraceful to the ministerial profession, 
_ and more dishonoring to the office of the Holy Spirit, than any other, 

it is that of relying in preparations for the pulpit, on those misnamed 
“ Assistants,” which the greed of compilers and publishers is so lib- 
erally supplying, and the shameless indolence of too many pastors is 
so readily seizing. Preaching, if it is to avail anything, must come 
from the depths of the heart. No man can preach a doctrine effect- 
ively, till in himself he has felt its power. He must know whereof 
he affirms; he must believe that he can not but speak. The pent-up 
fire must blaze out in spite of himself. The doctrines of his creed 
must possess and sway him as an irresistible, though invisible agency. 
With such an experience, preaching can not but be effective. And 
how can such experience be so readily attained, and the gospel thus 
effectively diffused, as by the study of Christian dectrines in the man- 
ner that has been advocated ? 

And where, let me ask, in conclusion of these thoughts, shall the 
fittest place and most favoring circumstances for this mode of study 
be found, if not ina Theological Seminary? Shall it be in the active 
ministry, where the ever-widening fields and ever-whitening harvest 
beckon the reaper to redouble his energy ; in the pastoral office, whose 
never-ending duties leave little leisure, to inexperienced minds, for 
that calm study of the Bible and its doctrines, so requisite to minis- 
terial success? Is it not rather in the place, where, with congenial 
minds to sympathize, and associations and duties to stimulate, the 
youthful preacher can study, not so much for the sermon of the com- 
ing sabbath, as for the great work of his whole after lite? 


URINE RX, 


PAGE 
Dee eretercC|DIeuG OL (OSpelas ss obs ee ee ea en TSize 
SMMINIRISCUGCOU fice a he ee hd Ug ueed deo. eK WSR es 173-178 
Peasmmenis oricinal state, 121; our relation to 202054502 oo Soe bo elke 148 
Advent, second, of Christ, see Coming. 

MERC AL TLS. oer. sn aE Me OD Sa ee Rh AN ee 19 
RTO BOO UINLUTOntnT. (UN: 2 cee See i iN ee ee 15, 18 
1 CECT CATO 00 AEN RS cpa SUA OR Ed een EGR UULer RL Tae 19, 20 
Angels, 109-115; evidence of their existence, 109; classes of, 110; their powers, 112 
Pemnimilaton-at death J.0.22 2.2.2.2. Bt et ON id oars OT Ae Rs est Wat ty A easy 345-347 
Anselm, 27; on existence of God, 58; his theory of atonement____.________-_- 257 
RTE ee ree he Roo i re eee OU eae lu A 116-178 
SR OEE USI SE USSD ie Een a ne a Cn) Sc a 198, 3805 
bo LEE Ts Pe ae Oe na ED ee a ee Ly tye 134 
a IO OE at Sod ie Ip aR ae st ae eR LAE. OMAR Rg oe 198, 245 
ESE SESS ETERS M2 Scie cl cole RR 7c gee ee a EE 16 


Atonement, 255-296; use of term, 255; the unifying idea of Scripture, 256; the- 
ories of its method, 256; Patristic theory, 256:—Anselmic theory of, 257-262; 
stated, 257; Schoolmen’s views of, 258; Protestant modifications of, 258, 259; 
Romish modifications of, 259; present ‘‘ orthodox” form of, 259; objections 
to, 260-262; takes metaphorical terms literally, 260; involves an inconceivable 
transference of moral penalty, 261; is contradictory to our innate sense of 
justice, 261; and to the established order of moral sequence, 261; is inter- 
nally inconsistent, 262:— Seriptural view of, 262-278; substitutionary, 262; 
Christ becomes representative member of human race, 262; suffers not by 
imputation but association, 262; bears Divine displeasure which rests on race 
with which he is one, 263; qualified for this by two-fold nature, 2638; his suf- 
ferings not identical with those of the sinner, 268; bore the race penalty, 
263; guilt in a sense imputed to him, 264; may have shared in race feeling of 
guilt, 265; endured spiritual death, remorse excepted, 265;.no analogy be- 

_ tween exercise of human and divine forgiveness, 266; exhibits Divine grace 
and mercy, 267; accords with the facts of Christ’s life and death, 267; agrees 
with our conception of God as holy, 268; accords with true idea of God’s 
justice, 268; rests on just views of Divine government, 268, of sin and pen- 
alty, 268, and of virtue, 269; is supported by the prepositions used in Script- 
ure, 269; by its relation to Jewish sacrifices, 270; by the Messianic prophe- 
cies, 271; by the prominence given to the Cross in apostolic preaching, 272; 
by the figures employed, 272; presents Christ as a true Saviour, 273:—Joral 
Influence, theory of, 273-278; first formulated by Socinus, 278; stated, 274; 
as taught by Schleiermacher, 274; by others, 275; objections to, 276; con- 

fines itself to subjective process in sinner, 276; makes benevolence central 


24 369 


310) INDEX. 


attribute in Divine nature, 276; fails duly to regard man’s desire after Be 
piation, 277; contradicts itself, 277; makes no adequate provision for re- 
pentance, 277; reverses scriptural relation of Divine forgiveness and 
amended life, 278:— Governmental Theory, 278-287; a mediating theory, 278; 
as stated by Grotius,, 279; as modified, 279; its American type, 280; objec- 
tions to, 281-287; founded on false conceptions of God, 281; false views of 
justice, 284; false views of sin, 282; false views of Law and Divine govern- 
ment, 282; a false theory of virtue, 284; fails to explain facts of Christ’s life 
and sufferings, 284; exposes Divine character to a charge of injustice, 286; 
requires unscriptural counsel to be given inquirer, 287; rests on theory and 
not on Scripture and Christian experience, 287:— ts Necessity, 288-291; asa 
fulfillment of type and prophecy, 288; in its fitness, 288; in government of 
God, 289; because included in plan of creation, 289; from its occurrence, 
290; from the immutability of God, 290 :— Its Regquzsites, 291-295; the Re- 
deemer must sustain two-fold nature and office, 291; must endure the race- 
trials, 292; must act voluntarily, 292; must harmonize with the Divine coun- 
sels, 293; must survive penalty, 293; must honor God and His law, 294; must 
secure for sinner subjective righteousness, 294:— /ts Haetent, 295, 296; our 
views of, affected by conceptions of the atonement, 295; efficacious for all 
who chooseto avail themselves:of ‘it:._. 22-220 5242.42) 2 296: 

Attributes of God, see God. 

Augustine, on the witness of the church, 6; his view of predestination, 87; 
controversy with Pelagius, 185; on infant salvation, 165; his doctrine of 


irresistible grace: 207A PE a ee Re 311 
Authorityof ‘the Chureh. 02. Se a2 G2 ie. ee ae 5. 
Bacon on the ‘‘abrupt in Divinity,” 22; ‘‘confession of faith” of, 289; on 

Christ'as a mediator es. ete le ee woeeudee! Joes a ee 290. 
Baptism etl) i eee ee La ee eee ee 232, 318. - 
Baptist theological writers. 22.25. 52 --222 ce 5 32. 
Bealevon lifes eh Tee ae ee op hea Mace: 
Bible, see Seripture. 

Biblio-historicaltheolo eye? ses eo. Bee ee ee J ae 35. 
Body, of man, created, 116; likely part of a trichotomy, .....-...-..----...- 116. 
‘Breath of life,” ite:meaning soc bose bec Cee Ae 117° 
Bushnell, ‘‘ the: moral power view. 422552°.--. 2!) a2). 275 
Calderwood on existence of God ___-_--. an el Rie ee wae gi er 


Calling and election, 308-317; what, 3808; necessary, 808; kinds of call, 308; in- 
effectual calling, what, 308; effectual call, what, 309; difference between the. 
calls, 8309; counterpart of predestination, 311; relation to election, 311; objec- 
tions to doctrine of, 812-317; involves doctrine of reprobation, 312; discredits 
sincerity of outward call, 314; is injurious in influence, 314; involves neces- 


sitarianism, 315; the doctrine in its place important --..-.-._-._-...--..-.- 317° 
Calvin rejects permissive decrees, 83; his treatment of the decrees.....-.._--- 86. 
Canons) defined me joo he oh cieb e  e  e . 16- 
Gartesiau ground Oofrightcusll cia 2. 26 per iin dee: a Se 81 


Causation, idea: of, established so. 0204. ana i oe See ee 49, 50» 


INDEX. aT 


PAGE 
Pe muryanenicivoroimi tee; VONMON 00 Le hte Ont a ee at 83 
Chalmers, Dr. Thomas, on Natural Theology, 8; on design __.__.___._______- 52 
re marne sau wornves, PuiOQUC, Le PLCS Ree ee a Oe 246 


Christ, the unifying center of Scripture, 195:—Human Nature of, 197; man” 
not ‘‘a man,” 197:—Divine Nature of, 195-211; evidence for, 198-211; testi- 
mony to himself, 198; testimony of New Testament writers, 201; the titles 
given to him, 202; the designation ‘‘ Son of God,” 205; receives religious wor- 
ship, 206; taught in Old Testament, 208; argument from consciousness and lit- 
erature of Church, 210; from process of individual salvation, 211:—tewo Na- 
tures of, 212-221; their relation an early question, 212; humanitarian view, 
212; Docetic view, 213; Subordinationism, 213; Monophysitism, 213; Nesto- 
rianism, 213; comparison of person and nature, 213; two wills, 214; analogies 
misleading, 214; differences in confessions of Lutherans and Reformed 
churches, 215; each nature intact, 215; Logos assumed a nature, not a per- 
son, 215; took nature of race, 216; basis of his personality shown, 217; hence 
sinless, 217; the Divine circumscribed within limitations essential to preserve 
human nature, 217; a single Theanthropic personality, 218; Divine nature 
needed, 219, 220; human nature needed, 220:—two States of; his contrasted 
conditions in Messianic prophecy, 221; humiliation of, 221-227; idea of, 
affected by view of the persons, 221; distinguished from exinanition, 222; 
error of impassibility of the Divine nature, 224; accidents of life cannot 
humiliate, 224; obedience to law cannot humiliate, 224; Scriptural view of 
humiliation, 224-227; its congruity with certain facts in Christ’s life, 227; 
exaltation of, 227-229; how it affects his Divine nature, 228; how his human 
nature, 228; involves his judgeship of the world, 228; and eternal union of 
natures, 229:—the Offices of, 252-255; prophetic, 258; priestly, 253; kingly, 
255; assumed human nature, its laws, limitations and liabilities, 262; a king, 
342; his final personal coming, 347; his Kingdom, see Kingdom. 

Christianity, circumstances favorable to its diffusion, 180-183; these converted 


Remmrroranced 2 8ig fn i Pepe MP Reha s AS MN Ried OM mh er Re oy he 183 
Rear a brOnatO endo | eo ts ee ee ee 343 
Cicero, his definition of justice, 80; on eternity of matter, 89; his definition 

Senenmneers (Ameer rere rs ge LS ee an ce Reet. Tom 344 
Clarke, Dr. Samuel, on existence of God, 54; an Origenistic Arian____.__-.-- 246 
Classification of theological truth required -_--..---..------.------- AS A Ss 18 


Coming of Christ, first, see Christianity, second, predicted, 347; its time, inde- 
terminable, 348; what is perhaps known concerning, 348; Resurrection con- 


Meron iin it, 349: J udgment then completed: 2... -22-.--... 2222 ee 390 
nPMEE Sere ref. 1 UTACE 6 oe ca. bei 2 ee eae nd pee eee eae 309 
Peemaunio and communicatio idiomatum 12-22-5252 25522.1 22202222. ee 215 
(A USEGEIELS 4s Si IS Ee a RM ie el 0 iene Da eae eel Ra nN 50 
PRIERTIim ee aoe mm Ge eer Se Sa os bo eee pe Sue eek em Soe ake 102, 126 
Teme net een hn oe! a ae ke ee See ee eS Se Stone 16 
Semee eres 155; functionally disturbed’___. 22 22.22.2212 ee 136 
Consciousness and conscience, their spheres in determining moral ability -.... 175 
ME TUInIeSeetiPistian ha 4 eh le! SoS Rt tse ee eee OL eee ae 210 


MTEC A ia Sere ee hs ee eo Te ay semen 2 teen oe ea a eee 16 


372 - INDEX. 


PAGE 
Conservation of Universe _---- wa oe ee nee bee eee neers 1215 95 
Consubstantiality 2200s) sec 3s ee ne cee phe er lena 246 
Contingency absent from omniscient mind’ )..-J2:.2-22. J... 2 eee 74. 
Conversion, its relation to regeneration -..---___-------- bone ten Oa 321 
Cosmological argument... o0/0n oo yie Se ees 48 
Covenant of works, what-_---- PO ete oh Ge eee ee es 185 
** Covenant System,, its, arbitrdrinessi.¢2.- 0 ot ee eee oe 2 155 
Creation, embodiment of an eternal purpose, 83; taught in Scripture, 88; final 
CAUSE) OLMe cucu se ous eo ene ek oa ees Ee en 93 
Dana-on creation out-of nothing, 27015. 5.0 be ee 88 
Darwin, Charles;.on:new. species _. 7221... eo ee ee 82 


Death, its two meanings, 129; physical, before Fall, 129; eternal, 129; 
‘*second,” 129; synonymous with Divine Aieotcaeure 181; physical, in a- 
sense consequence of Fall, 181; what, 344; state after, views relating to, 


345; notiannihilation: 22)... Weer el oe Lee Oo ee a 345 
Declaration: defined | cise cee ee es ee 16 
Decrees of God, 83; efficient and permissive, 88; from what inferrible, 83; 

taught in Scripture, 85; objections to;_0..-+_- abel -2. ee 87 
Demoniacal possessions 4255.6 oo okie sls ek ee ee aie ce i er 115 
DCMONS oes ee ns ON arate Ae he La ee Oe ae ee pyar) ah | 


Depravity, total, 163-164; views of Augustine and Reformers, 163; recent 
views, 163; the chief dispute in America, 163; doctrine rests on psychology. 164 


Development, Newman's theory of |. 22.2.2 212.255.4205 ee 4 

Design, ground of idea, 52; its presence in world, denied, 52; still an argu- 
mente ue ees ee ee Ta a ae 3) 

Deus, does not.involve unity 3-220 4) e8i 2h Ue 66 


Devil, see Satan. 
Divinity of Christ, see Christ. 


T)udtismn Mike clk, SUC Ok he okie ie et gee ge je 65. 
Dyophysitism, 222. oases a 214° 
Heclesiology.-o2 5 sea ae ee) oh es ee ae te 343 
Edwards, Jonathan, his theory of identity of human nature - “jenn ol Sr 170 
WUMICACLIOUS PTACE 2-2 oe Sk a Rae Le eee 309 


Election, what, obi relatioh to predestination, 311; relation to effectual call- 
ing, 311; Rpiection: to, 812-817. See Hffectual Calling. © 

Elohim, term discussed Jedi is Se do pele aaa ale oles ake mie’n 2 Ain er 242 

Esehatology =? ced t Sus Det 8 ci oe eee ee ee cae 344-352 

Efernal Sonship:.. 2 eee Poe Ceo ee 246 

Ethics, in relation to Theology, 11-138; _WwWas a part of theology, 11; how the 


theologian may treat-it. <2 fee eee ee ae 12.18 
Eutychians --_-- Gee bap eg eee bin foodie oe ACS AR ec Daa See eee ane ea 213 
Evil, not eternal, 65; has no independent existence, 65; is divided against 

ifself,65; good -authoritativejover it.u.s 20202 322). wee toe. eo Rees. 
Everlastingnéss of; penalty cc 9 oo a te ee 851 


Evil, moral, man in original state ignorant of, 123; attempts to explain its 


INDEX. 373 


PAGE. 
origin, 124; Bushnell on, 125; Divine efficiency in, 125; Calvin on, 126; orig- 
Sm etme sc worl oUciWeetntGre el See Se ee See Sa 128 

EE Eas 4 COLES oo ig eB a rs a i SOE a 110 

Evolution, 91; theory of, gaining ground, 91; a eee method of Divine 
Pieeedurowiso Ol Morals. 28 so ee a 1 ee aes ed A 2 real 56 

Exaltation of Christ, 227; elevates the human, 298; a pledge of the Christian’s 
RESUS op (08 Ue toa gi A ae ae aI is 2 a le goo OL es a a 228 

‘« Exercise scheme” of PALO NS cage ues 5 UL eee |e waa MR aE VEN CY 319 


Existence of God, 46; how treated by Scriptures and early Apologists, 46; 
-why we should attempt a vindication of idea of, 46; Calderwood on, 47; 
Mewosn on, 47: Classification of arguments for. lo. 2. 2.222 a 48 


Faith, fellowship with Christ as sufferer for sin, 262; the Pauline view of, 305; 
its various meanings, 330; saving, what, 330 . the usual theological distinc- 
tions in, 381; three warranted distinctions in, 333; the reasonableness of its 
et MP aOMPa LON oo 2 ee en ek ee a ee Ue B50. 
Faith as belief in Christ, 334; that saves, 334, 337; two extremes in regard to, 
330; salvation by, true doctrine of, 835; teachings of Paul and James upon, 
336; in its subjective relations, 336; not bare assent, 337; not instrument but 
medium of justification, 337; accompanies regeneration, 337; its objects fitted 
to influence the heart, 838; work of Spirit, 8839; evidences of, 389; secures 
iowewati Christy 22 22. 2k Lenape sae) ye Maree Renae Verbs Aes . 339 
Fall, 127-187; assumed in Scripture, 122; witnessed to in all religions, 128; ten- 
tation necessary for man, 128; explanation of, its justification, 124; explained 
by antagonism of flesh and spirit, 124; as a necessary condition of develop- 
ment, 124; as a result of finite being, 125; as originating in will of God, 125, 
127; as stated in Scripture, 128:—Jts Consequences, 128-137; painful conse- 
quences penal, 129; death a consequence, 129; death is soul’s separation 
from God, 129-181; natural death a consequence, 131; freedom of will lost, 
132; conscience functionally disturbed, 186; freedom from influence of evil 


EEE CUteer mee pe fe ee se i ea aS 136 
Filioque, ae Cn! Ties ite al GARR ea ee ahs Ua le ge Due I PRR OE ee Re eG A AY . 246 
Final causes, inquiry for, opposed by physicists, 52; neglected by modern the- 

REED Per OUT ice 5 be eh ee rare 48 
“Fitness of things eternal,” phrase discussed....-.......---------.-------- 189 
Forces, physical; not cause of life, 92; all that science deals with -...-------- 96. 
SIMIC ee ea retro da Ca Sow eng a chia etn ay Mati 5 
Foreknowledge and election, 312; Melancthon’s view of__------------------- 312 
Forensic theory of atonement, see Atonement. 

Peemrneverivanednrrs tS 250. 2. lise He phe WAS eit 16 

memerascucy, attested by consciousness....- 24.2 Aa oe lle. 175 

Freedom of will, see Wei. 

LEDS. ee ( St aR a tna eg eek Le rang ete eke ai emery Seana, PO Pe al 300 

MMTESMERIE STINET tReet). oe) ce AE bet ei oe A eb at ot” Sask To 357 

RePTS MECLOTTIOT. OL 1G DON 8 2s aoe tees oe eee ergo ao ie 246 
Be ODeeDOntANnCOUS 52a ue S 3c eet cae BS en eae oe mae 2 


Sepemineey iliam, on existence of God .2)2-22- 222 52.2 Useless ope eee 54. 


374 INDEX. 


‘* Glory of God” phrase explained_--._---.---- te BY a ode 
God, existence of, 46-58; assumed in Scriptures and early apologies, 45; history 
of argumentation for, 46; use of such argumentation, 46, 47, 57; classification 
of arguments, 48; Cosmological argument, its nature, 48; and its weakness, 
49; Teleological argument, its statement, 50; objections thereto, 52; Onto- 
logical argument, stated, 53: criticised, 55; Historical argument, various, 55; 
Moral argument, various, 56; not demonstrable, 57; origin of conception of, 
58-60; as to forms, 58; as to contents, 59:— Personality of, 61-63; by whom 
denied, 62;, how it originates, 62; arguments for, 62; unity of, 64-66; argu- 
ments for, 64:—Attributes of, what, 67; relativity of knowledge as it affects, 
67; classification of, 70; Immensity, 70:— Eternity, 71; Immutability, 72; 
Omunuipotence, 738; Omniscience, 73; Omnipresence, 75; Spirituality, 76; 
Holiness fundamental moral attribute, 76; Holiness, 78; Justice, 80; nota 
combination of attributes, 81; its scholastic divisions, 81; Mercy, 82; Benev- 
olence, 82; Blessedness, 82; Veracity, 82; Glory, 82; his attributes significant 
to man, 82; moral attributes most important, 82; attributes harmonious, 82; 
a comprehensive conception of, 82; his purposes or decrees, 83; will of, re- 
vealed and unrevealed, 88; image of, 119; not even permissibly the author 
of sin, 127; source of his authority, 191; numerically one, hypostatically 
CHPES See ud es FS OA ht PUNE rer ae eet ee 
Government of ‘God 06; proofe-of . 1. a's sete eee er 
Grace Pits division. 310; sirresistible sa 5 a. Se ee ee eee eee 
Gratia'preveniens! io. Vo i ee ee a ee ee 
Grutitude, its’ place:imregeneration fs! Lee Pe 
Guilt how expiated by Christ, 204; had Christ a consciousness of? 264; not 
duly recognized in moral influence theory of atonement, 276; never in- 


‘Hamilton, Sir W., on science, 1; on identity of difficulties in theology and phi- 

losophy; 18% on theology oes. 222020 SRE ee 
‘* Hardens,’ "how God --722-. goed Pe ske ec shealsws ot eee 
Heaven. ple ga wes a bie eee eh ee Ee Siesale  e 


Hermeneutics, Biblical, its relations to Theology._---.--.---. p+. 2 
RTODDES O01 DAW ns eS oer as ter ete ae cee ee ke hee 
Holiness, fundamental moral conception of God, 76; reasons for believing this- 
Hope, saved iby, hows22". 2 gash ee 
Hume, his criticism of Teleological argument, 52; and of: arguments from 

miraclesticy 5. Sho ee ee ee 
Humiliation of Christ, 221; in what it consisted, 221; Luther and Reformed 

views, 222; scriptural view- -_--- ot tyeces oaette See ont eS 
Hymns, earliest Christian 2. 29298 £20. 222 er. Se 2 


Idea of God, its origin, 47; requires justification. _.: -L.2_2.-_2.0 2 
Identity of human-nature,; Hdwards’ theory of -2_-.--25..2..4. 22.20. 
Teiorancés sins of 22 cyte se Bee Be ee Oe ek ee 
Image of God, what c s2e0ct oso ES RE ee 


INDEX. Bd 

PAGE. 
Imputation, 149; mediate, 149; immediate, 149; covenanted, 153; objections 

Se ee WATHM CV IC WeOnser ee hos, i) he Sond ee Ss Lee 155 
Inability, denied by some, 174; affirmed by. others, 174; the teaching of Script- 
ure on, 174; the teaching of conscience and consciousness on, 175; natural 
and moral, 176; distinction, metaphysical, 176; irrelevant, 177; harmful, 


177; confusing, 178; unscriptural, 178; dulls sense of dependence_-_-_______- 178 
emerson nrist’ lor. theories Of oo. Soles ad ee et 212 
Ponivedual, not aw independent personality ..222..2.-220 022222 kell e- 150, 152 


Infants, salvation of, 164-169; moral status of, 164; not annihilated at death, 
164; nor consigned to eternal infancy, 165; are in a salvable condition, 165; 
method of their salvation, 166; relation of baptism to, 166; a possible ex- 
PE renee emma sf. ee Ye othe seen ee. SRR 168 

perry iver: 3 6808 WO ited bs Oh MS Bie Ee TG 158 

Inspiration, the plenary view with its subdivisions (the mechanical, and dynam- 
ical), 38; criticised, 34; the naturalistic theory, 34; criticised, 35; theory of 
partial inspiration, 55; objections to, 85; revealing and superintending, 37; 
cannot distinguish between divine and human in, 87; Scripture intelligible 
as a whole, 37; yet authoritative in each age, 38:—New Testament claims, 38; 
‘proved by its teaching, 40; its unity in variety, 40; separation from preceding 
literature, 40; its style, 40; the Christianity proceeding from it, 41; superior- 

, ity to all literature; non-apostolic portions, share in, 41; claim of Scripture 
to, not invalidated by alleged defects, 42:— Old Testament claims, 48; proved 
by historicity, 43; proved by references of Christ and others in New Testa- 
ment, 43; claimed by its authors, 48; proved by its predictive nature, 44; 


objections enumerated, 44; erroneous, crude, unintelligible, immoral-_-----.- 45 
pemeemInO (eCrTist sos eis feel hs eee Peele oe 220, 228 
MIRO mately veniam ok Ne ee EL Be 345 
EMIT SCIOUCETOC Powe ho Ge ge eS a ee 75 
Semerrirrcon version, alld return. -.... 22s. foe 2b. ee goa 348 
John the Baptist, how greater than previous prophets----_-_- Te oe eel ee se eee 182 
John of Damascus--_-_..__.- ing Pha nie Bae: ok: REL eee Ahan eo ana ad 32 Toa St ed a 27, 214 
a NS 0 a es ne a Ss lie AM ga 231, 349 
PU NC Tremere  O OAe s eoe 266 


Justification, chief points in dispute concerning, 297; view of in Protestant 
confessions, 297; Romish view of, 298; Unitarian view, 299; as taught in New 
Testament, 299; regards men as acquitted from condemnation, 299; as ap- 
proved, 300; a production of personal fitness, 300; a definition of, 300; its 
two sides not always kept in view, 301; an examination of scriptural terms 
which describe it, 8301; opposed to Jewish thought, 303; variously presented 
by Paul, 303; how a ‘‘free gift” yet ‘‘in us,” 3805; hence connected with 
faith, 305; ‘‘ eternal,” absurd, 305; Pauline view of, 306; how goin describes 


it, 806; its connection with other doctrines ----- oh eee erate ee tee 307 
Kant, on idea of GaUsear O00 +1 ON CONSCIGNCE Ya tir err eects LD SE ota ee 56 
Kingdom of Christ, 842, 843. Subject of type and prophecy, 343; various 

memes of, 943.) relation-to church.. 22.0.) e004. «420-02 eae cece ae 343 


Bemmeicororrod, 7a; and wWisdOM.._..., 8. cu. nose ee eee cote ne mene 75 


epee | a INDEX. 


PAGE 
Lamarck.on “Cappetency ij. 2 coe ie a a i 52. 
‘*T.amb slain: before foundation of world:?= 022 2.22). 3. 2 eee 290 


Law, Jewish, 182; its design, 182; an obstacle to Christianity, 182; prophets’ 
relation to, 182; the distinctions of theologians as to, not phen in sir | 
ure, 185; moral law underneath all, 185; not arbitrary .:.-.--..._/23282e 185: 

Law, moral, 186-196; definition, 186; an external requirement, 186; a constit- ' 
uent of essential being, 186; its origin not the sovereign will of God, 187; 
something behind which determines will, 187; is not enacted for benevolent 
ends, 187; origin not found in regard for happiness of man, 188; not in eternal 
fitness of things, 189; z¢s source the moral nature of God, 190; is a summary 
of constituent principles of unfallen human nature, 190; was not made but: 
revealed, 190; embodies in code what had been embosomed in God, 190; this 
view contains whatever is true in other views, 191; its rewards and penal- 
ties, natural and inevitable consequences, 191; underlies even positive 
MWS ceili th beg ee eo NR ay ee ie eal er See ee 198, 194. 

Law, its offices, 193; aniectine strictly pedagogic, 198; subjective, a principle 
in nature of both God and man, 194; makes us aware of our condemnation, 
194; prepares the way for Christ into heart, 194; reveals nature of sin, 194; 
needed in all stages of Christian life, 195; Law and Gospel not con- 


trasted bcs i Ph goer Te es, Fe ee eee. 196 
Life, not the result.of purposeless force, 92; of Adam-_-..-.....--422- epee 182. 
Life, synonymous with Divine approval_.__........-...----- ‘ivin cee 131. 
A Lae CR COry fiche EE Wl lel eee aie 2 AS EN oe ne feills wo 274. 
Limbus infantum, ¢000 ck. oe ae a a 345, 
Logos.of . Philos seu. so Ri IM ee 241 
‘Lord vapplied.to Christ sot. owe) ORGY hs Ante ee er LL 204. 


Man, his creation, 116-122; an immediate creation according to Scripture, 116; 
science deals with the mode not the fact of man’s creation, 116; must com- 
pare two accounts of, 117; ‘‘ breath of life,” its meaning, i117; trichotomous, 
apparently, 118; ‘‘image of God” not moral perfection, 120; was his personal 
existence as a rational moral being, 120; his condition, two extreme theories, 
121:—VHali of, 122-128; assumed in Scripture, 122; attested by universal moral 
consciousness, 1238; tentation necessary, 123; fall, attempts at explanation, 
124:— Consequences of Fall, 128-187; penalty and consequence, 128; Death, a 
special consequence, 129; two meanings proved, 129; Death inflicted, ‘‘soul’s 
separation from God,” 129; confirmation of this view, 180; physical death, 
in some sense consequence of the Fail, 181; freedom of will lost, 182; con- 


science also Aitected Moun va ad oe Se ea) > ane ee oe oe 135. 
Manicheeism--____ oS nae is, AT VaR BA oh Pasig RNS OS MES SAY, oes ea Lae ae 124. 
Mary, the Virgin; why worshipped.) 205120000022 197 
Matter, eternity ‘of 2200. 8 AO Pe ee a a ee 89: 
Morcy “ot iGod/witva ti 3 OE AO te Oe se ee at pe 82 
Mechanical theory‘of Inspiration2<s.. oc. 2 2.-- 2251s: 33. 
Metaphysics, relation'to Theology. 24.40 oo fe 13. 


Miracles, 103-109; how differ from special roptienaes 1038; Edawieden of, 
from Bible alone, 104; definition of, 104; possible, 105; probable, 106; not 
strictly proofs, 107; afford satisfaction to honest doubt, 108; their cessation. 333 


INDEX. BtT 
PAGE... 
PUI MSU soe cee shah nu eine ak SL ay ate ey Rh ee ae 245 
MGrAL ability tee Ne nk ee GOR RUSE SEY MNES SLE SES ER DER ONL OURS Oo 176. 
PIOralraleriDiivesOL GOGl Juuso ee VAC uty ae bay Sa Aare Se AAR 76 
Pe Oreepericcuon not to be created 15025. ae oa 120 
Mosuc economy, 182,194; founded on: holiness:_... .22-..--- 0222 ll elle rack 
meirauecieuces, relation to Lheology 22. e880 ole fide ee) ees 14 
(SEES NPS eal 2 os oi RU 2 NARA ete YORU es ea PR 52 
rn ee nO Ny ee ree ait a! ahh 34 
NE REGAL AWN RMB Ne Ss he el Bae) es ke Cel A ed ans 216 
Dmmcrmncn ings Onrase, Ciscussed fa yi eee po Te ee a vere Ba 189 
Wecessitarianism, not involved in effectual calling. ..-.:.222:52 2-222. le Elle 315 
Ree eciwruccining oOo. Trinity oo eee ee ee Me ee he 246, 248 
Nominalism, in conception of divine attributes, 67; in explanation of connec- 
Pe veoy a Ontbann i TACe (oe ee lee aM eo Ba 149 
Se reo netinspireoniOf 2.025 bowel lclh ceed bl oe 2 ea ee 43. 
MY eee oo ee a ee ea 73 
Dem oie ere A ey ek ko ies at epee 33 
Dm eminent ont 1 Ye So otk el be og 307 
Beare eviunaitempted. explanation. 2c 2202. ae Glut el enue Lael eh wee 124 
Original sin, 147; conflicting views of__.-..._..____-- SURE et O DR Ten ns 2 149. 
Meme eineGry-OL derivation 0) sew oes boul ee lee ele lel cee ee 52. 
Pere ercienuition Of ViIwMer of oles ue doe ete lee cee ce 187 
RCE Mere ie eee mci beh ik ete Oo Lee hee 91 
GS UR ERES 08 SN) CORSON AK 6 Pe a cnn eR CR ee Va ede ke 91 
EI ee Ac ee eee i ea) a gare aa | 62 
EOS the 2 lS oe COO ee ee Re 230 
Peta eemepiration{:i.2..-.6.-.--b 5. iS eet tide ae dae A eS ls 2 RE ee 30» 
MIDE Ra Ge i i Ny ace he ae a 312. 
Penalty and consequence not distinct, 128; based on moral constitution ---.-- 301 
MMIC AL DAGIN POOUS. 64 Jou a OO ee Le 134 
Personality, what constitutes, 183; origin of idea, 62; its contents-----.------ 62. 
DRE EC SCUIC CMe el. ts ON ee a EG ees By oy 178 
BEE EES K ING SOOO MeN |. 6s 0.5. oS aoe cnt ede! eee ees 161 
VERSES ENN Sh 00 AI ee DU Re 2 pe RA SRM ay Ag, Pe Ve 30. 
Peycueism, among Jews, 66; among Orientals__-..-._-4-..----2.----27----- 66 
ty ATEN. TN Sa a es nee in ck URW ete). a en ee SO ee 50, 84 
EMER niACu le ¥.) me he, ek Sete er eas eit ba a 115 
Predestination, 311; counterpart of effectual calling, 311; how it differs from 
PS Of non -clect;; WHAb 22525. eee beatae ook ce ee ees 313. 
MEETERTaM tts bility. of law.=.°) . 0 ice oebe ae eke eo ete oe eee 100 
BEEP MCE LOT BOUT iee ot Bol sacl eee | ert et ec ek ae ely 169 
MITE: Sets li Pete ees )) ty a he's es es oo PN as ae ee 253. 
MEIEPTIPTEIE UNCON. 2 voce yu oe el ee Ok ae fe nc ae ads ue 182, 


Providence, special, 97-108; defined, 97; vindicated, 97; taught in Scripture, 98, 


378 INDEX. 


PAGE. 
consistent with fixed order of nature, 98; three theories of, 100; not explained 
by concursus, 102; use of ‘such theories, 108; how differ from miracle ______ 103 
Punishment, 80; not arbitrary, 191, 290, 351; not merely reformatory, 284; 
everlasting. cur set lec e ce ee ol ee NC, eo 351 
“Juakerism ooo tee os sd oo ice sree Se ee eA Oh 82 
Race, human, origin of, 116; original condition of..._.._...........------2- 121 
KRansomer:Ghrist; thes... -2 ie ee ee 269 
Rationalism, German, its origin in past, 10; teaching about human nature... 150 
Realism, in conception of Divine attributes, 67; in relation of race to Adam, 
150;.159; relation of Christ to. rage (22 eee 216, 262 
Reclamation of ‘man,:how accomplished__._..22.2.-2.21 1/2.) 2 a 267 


Regeneration, connected with justification, 307; sacramentalist view of, 307; 
defined, 317; New Testament usage, 318; how it affects soul, 318; in what it 
consists, 319; ‘‘ exercise scheme,” 319; ‘‘ taste scheme,” 820; not synonymous 
with conversion, 821; by whom produced, 322; by what produced, 324; ac- 
tion of Holy Spirit in, 325; necessity of, 8326; evidence of 

Religion, defined, 1; principles implied in, 2; Schleiermacher’s definition of, 2; 
Nitzsch’s definition, 2; Lechler’s definition, 2; derivation of term, 2; a 


Read not provided for in moral influence theory, 277; inseparable eirorkite 
regeneration, 327; connected with faith, 327, 329; why mentioned before 
faith, 828; the Greek words meaning, 328; its elements, 329; necessity of_._ 329 


Representative of race, Christ; the..i¢2... 25 Soe. Se 262 
Reprobation, its right acceptation, 312; an unscriptural meaning of _____-_- 315, 316 
Repulsion;from God; punishment... 02/2) ee 290 


Responsibility, and ability not commensurate, 174; scriptural teaching regard- 
ing, 174; testimonies of consciousness, conscience and experience regarding, 
175; testimonies of consciousness and experience to be distinguished, 175; 
testimonies of Scripture, consciousness and experience must be taken to- 
gether, 176; Edwards on ‘‘ moral inability,” 177; Fuller on ‘‘ moral inability,” 


17/7; sense of responsibility: a step in salvation 2%. _.-.- 220: 05.02 oe 178 
Restorationism, unscriptural, 351; from a speculative point of view connected 
with pantheism, dogmatic assertion Of 2220... 22.525. sso ae dol 
Resurrection of Christ, assurance that penalty of sin has been paid, 263, 293; 
pledge;of. exaltation of' believer. .o2. (2! 22 2c oan se 228 
Resurrection of men, attends final coming of Christ, 348; abe to supernatural 
intervention, 348; assurance of, on what based, 849; objections to_.-..-.---. 349 
Revelation, Christianity a, 8; distinguished from superintendence, 37; an or- 
ganic growth, 87; progressive! 2 20. s.c27 4252/2) De age ose eee. oe 44 


Righteousness, original lost in the fall, 128. in man, its organific principle, ee 
no formal imputation of, 269; personal, secured to redeemed, 294, 299; 


justification objective and subjective, 301; legal, denounced by Paul_------ " 804 
Ritualists, their views of justification. -¢...-..1_..._..2.2522 Ss ee 298 
‘Roman empire, favorable to extension of Christianity -....._...-..----------- 180 


2 


INDEX. 379 


PAGE 
Romans, Epistle to, its design, 303; to whom addressed ____._...__________-- 304 
@cuies 01 interpretation. .2..-5...-..--.-. EAE ora) 2 2. os gan oes Cee 15 
eS otitis 5. Mm rcs ct eek” CREM hls se ee Met Romar sup Ng 245 


Salvation, first step in, 178; not an afterthought, 179; plan of, co-eternal with 
creation, 179; a priori reasonings concerning, of no value, 179; cannot be 


Peeenceewithin Nima system a5... oF OA Se ee 180 
‘Sanctification, its meanings, 340; its relation to justification and regeneration, 
340; its obligations, 840; degree possible in this life__.___.....____-.- ___- 341 
‘Satan, the idea of his personality how accounted for, 118; is a real being, 113; 
POH His power Over races 212). . 2092). SDL 115 
Bere siewecry, OL atonement... 02 foley. Ube LY ile A 257 
eee tire en ees, ee Loe lie ee! ATMS ke aR JO ae 334, 337 
Pnmueewortiay Olsattention __ 1.22220 oS Le ees 19 
Piemeenwean icitect source of theology___-.2.. 2... 22. .24.2- 200022 .4 Lue 2! 3 
tr eer aloes ee ie coe ll e e e 312 
nM IGCUMOWNE mr. oS eo dele Ee 132 
PP CaeCRUCLOL MIN. Jr io lel. lees PLU 143 


‘Sin, theories of its origin, 124; not a result of body, 124; not a stage in devel- 
opment, 124; not due to limitations, 125; not due to Divine efficiency, 126; not 
mediately due to God, 126; not due to Divine permission, 127; its origin in- 
scrutable, 127; pre-natal origin, 128; death penalty of, 129; loss of freedom 
of will in, 182; produces functional disturbance of conscience, 136; defined, 
137; not sensuousness, 189; not unbelief, 141; is selfishness, 143; is Welt- 
liebe, 148; is superbia, 145; actual, 146; Romish distinctions concerning, 
146; of ignorance and knowledge, 147; infirmity and malice, 147; other dis- 
tinctions, 147:—Original, 147-163; defined, 147; denied, 147; asserted, 148; 
views of, stated, 149; Pelagian view, 150; New School view, 151; orthodox 
view (covenant system), 151; view of Jonathan Edwards, 155; the true view, 


156; is innate, 157; is hereditary, 158; is punishable_...__.........-.-.-_-- 160 
sonsnip,eternal, not proved from Scripture.._._-....2.24.-2.--00 220222282 248 
TI sca SRS ee pea) Mea ae ea Aeon em eR A POS 179 
‘Soul, its origin, not immediately created, 154; theory of pre-existence, 169, 

~ 170; Creationism, 169; Traducianism, 170; soul of Eve __-.---.-.--------- 171 
‘Sovereignty of God, scriptural, 318; not arbitrariness _._......--.--..-.----- 314 
DME MEMT NAOT VOL NeW ..224655- 52s Ss 2el ete eee eee Alte oe 
ipitieeaces not always denote a person __ 1. 2 --2.0le.h Lee ee ele 229 


Spirit, Holy, his personality proved, 230; his divinity, 231; his offices prior to 
coming of Christ, 233; his offices in Christian dispensation, 2338; acts on 


hearts not effectually called, 309; may be repelled ---.-.--..-------------- 309 
SIREETEIRMI Sree Cr Tiny ae a oe te pe Se a eo tet e 76 
MEM ne el rinity:...2. 202.2 sat Se ed 218, 245 
UPC TEM (ECU LIN Gomera = 2 PUES fis Sy tes eh Ce ee 262, 266 
Sufferings of Christ, originated in nature he had taken__.....--.------------ 267 
TEED) ALO here gs. Sire eo th ee Le eee ee 285 
rere font ai fC eee!) eee oe Foe SU eee Vie Ae ae See 145 


RPTL S TOT kOe ree el Pa yh te a nine eee ae 313 


380 INDEX. 


PAGE. 
Symbolic writings, their value).op elle ee Le ee 16 
Synergism aut sooo le ees A ee eee cee aes nce ete ee a 312: 
Teleological argument is. ce. Se eee ne to 51 
Tentation not temptations. eo 222 2 peo a ee 123. 


Theology, defined, 1; commensurate with religion, 1; a science, 1; may have 
specific names, 1; has to do directly with revealed truth, 8; presupposes a cer- 
tain amount of prior religious knowledge, 3; all other sciences indirect sources 
of, 3; a progressive science, 4; auxiliary sources which may be denominated 
the church, 4:—Relations, 7-17; numerous non-biblical, 7; theologies and 
mythologies, 7; to natural theology, 8; to ethics, 11; to metaphysical philos- 
ophy, 18; to natural sciences, 14; to Biblical hermeneutics, 15; to theological 
literature, symbolic, and dogmatic, 15; to practical theology, 17:—Aims and 
Uses, 17-20; to ascertain truth, 17; to classify, 18; to ascertain distinctions 
between and shades of meaning in doctrines, 19; to indicate relations between 
doctrine and life, 20; Limitations, 20-22; to us as finite beings, 21; in lack of 
typical terms, 21; in our ratiocinative faculties, 21; in our knowledge of 
ourselves, 21; through the silences of Scripture, 22:—Requisites of, 22-26; gen- 
eral knowledge, 22; experimental acquaintance with its truths, 23; thorough 
acquaintance with Scriptures, 23; love of truth, 24; prayerful spirit, 24:— 
Methods of Inquiry in, 24-26; what must be determined in, 24; method his- 
torically set forth, 25; synthetic method preferable, 26:—bibliography of__27-32: 
Rheories in theology, their places... 272 0).0 eel, ee 103. 
Thomists je) i op. uae or a te i 312- 
Traducianism, supported by analogy of nature, 170; maintains “unity of human 
personality, 171; harmonizes with the variety of moral nature in race, 172; 
accounts for propagation of moral and mental traits, 172; its scriptural 
foundation, 172; creation is now arrested, 170; not materialistic, 173; not 


more inscrutable than other processes which are believed in _......-.------ 178. 
“Free, of Life’. a probable means of immortalityo22 eens eee eo 
Trichotomy, some ground for in Scripture, 118; its parts distinguished, 119;  * 

Heard: on eee sees cL ee he, ee 119» 


Trinity, objected to that it is not directly taught in Scripture, 235; its dogma 
said to be of slow growth, 236; it is declared absurd, 236; makes God to 
be compound, 237; opposed to the nature of Christ, 237; injures devotion, 
237;robs the Father of supreme adoration, 288; no experimental knowledge 
of, 238; suffers from poverty of language, 238; difficulty of correct state- 
ment, 288; difficulty in giving meaning to terms, 239; burdened with specu- 
lations, 239; proofs of, from New Testament, 239; Jews utterly ignorant of, 

241; possible references in Old Testament, 242; extra-scriptural proofs, 2438; 
psychological proof, 244; are the titles in, but names of modes of revelation 

to man, 243; Son subordinate to Father, 245; the view of the Nicene creed 
concerning, 246; but an aggregation of temporal relations, 247; Schleier- 
macher’s view, 247; consists of immanent relations designated by terms aris- 

ing from work of redemption, 247; no information regarding relations in, 

200; the names in economic, 250; a basis in eternal reality, 251; modus 
existendt of persons within, not matter for inquiry, 252; practical bearing of 252:, 


INDEX. 381 


; PAGE. 
Bimeaeram elemientiin Saving taibhe 22 2 2 eS ee ae 305, 337 
Sumniie tie,inairument in regeneration. .— 2/2.) 2 5k oe ee 324 
Mery Gt uody or Jesus, luutheran doctrine of 22° 2252-2220... (2 215 
Union of two natures in Christ, theories of, 212; no analogy explains, 214; 
vindication of general creed of Christendom concerning ___-__..__.._..____- 215 
ep rere reer ber elon Sg es een 252. 64 
ieerieo explanation Ofvorigin of “moral law. 22.2). 2. e. ee Lleol 186 
Virtue, Paley’s definition of, 187; a false view of -.........-_-__- Ae Wisp oe 284 
Reummmmone 2 iaAtlre Wnovement ose so oo ee bee hee oe, LOL 
ERA Ceet weap Ae das wo hoe aes ae see 134 
See ener em ee Lo eet es ee ue 148 


“Will, what, 132; its freedom consists in, what, 182; what portion lost in the 
Fall, 183; forma] freedom of, attested by conscience and Scripture, 183; only 
attaches real freedom by supernatural help, 133; real freedom of, described, 
134; as arbitrium and voluntas, 184; the controversies concerning, 125; vari- 
ous views as to effect of Fall on, 176; the witness of conscience and con- 
sciousness to formal freedom of, 175; formal freedom of, equivalent to nat- 


SE ie eto Se es Sa gee oie we ea 176 
‘Will of God, not origin of moral law, 187; no ground of God’s authority____- 191 
I err eee eee fo ee ee 75 


mvotnmnuriied. perfaps abode of righteous_-_._...:5-.2---.2---..221.-.-2- 350 


CORRIGENDA. 


Nore.—Owing to the haste with which most of this book was printed, during the Semi-- 
nary year, 1871-72, there are numerous defects, such as imperfect punctuation, omission of 
the hyphen at the end of lines, inverted letters, misplaced breathings and accents in the 
Greek words, etc. Many such errors, not likely to confuse or mislead the reader, are not. 
here noted. The list is restricted to the more needful corrections. It has been found 
impracticable to verify all the references in the notes of the pages printed in 1871-72 with- 
out undesirable delay in the issue of the book, 


——— 


Page 2, note 1, line 5, from end, read: Ebrard, Dogmatik, vol. 1, p. 18. 
«« -2, note 1, line 3 from end, read: 2: 28 instead of 11: 28. 
7, line 1, read: ‘‘ Conybeare.” 
‘¢ 7, note 1, line 2, read: pt. 2 instead of pt. 11. 
8, note 2, line 1, read: vol. 1 for vol. 2. 
8, note 5, line 4, read: 398, 399, instead of 298, 299. 
‘« 10, note 1, line 4, read: ‘‘ vornehmsten.” 
** 11, note 3, lines 6, 8, read: ‘‘ was,” instead of ‘‘ were.” 
‘¢ 18, line 5, read: ‘‘ Christian.” 
‘“* 14, note 3, line 2, read: pt. 3 instead of pt. 2, and line 8, read: pt. 4, c. 8. 
‘‘ 17, note 1, line 4, read: ‘‘ Darstellung.” 
** 18, line 9 from bottom, and page 224, note 1, line 2, read: ‘‘ medieval.” 
“«* 20, last line, read: ‘‘ errors.” 
‘« 25, line 14, read: ‘‘ Prof. at Helmstadt.” 
*« 25, note 3, last line, read: ‘‘ Hncy.”’ 
*¢ 27, 2, line 3, read: “Exdoore axpiBnc tH¢ 6pFodd6Eou TioTEwc. 
* 27, 2, line 7, read: ‘‘ Ceesarea.”’ 
«* 28, (c.) line 1, read: ‘‘ Locor.” 
** 28, (h) line 1, read: ‘‘ Buddeus.”’ 
/ « 29, B. (a.) line 2, read: ‘‘ Melancthon’s.” 
** 80, (d) lines 2, 7, (e) lines 2, 4, (f) line 10, (h) line 1, read: ‘‘@” instead of ‘‘@”” 
in the Latin words of the titles. | 
* dl, (j) line 6, read: ‘‘ Ethico”.., 
** 32, (r) line 2, read: ‘‘ Christcatholische.”’ 
“oz, (s) line 6, read: ‘‘ Test.” and ‘' Prof.” 
‘* 32, (s) line 7, read: ‘‘ Hntwicklungsgeschichte.” 
‘* 32, (s) last line, read: ‘‘ Sénlessness.” 
‘* 32, last line, read: ‘‘ Dogmengeschichte” and ‘‘ Geschichte.” 
‘* 36, note 3, line 2, read: ‘‘ Hpistles.” 
‘* 39, line 16, insert ‘‘1.” before ‘‘ That the Gospels,” etc. 
** 47, note 5, line 1, insert pt. 3 before bk. 2. 
“* 49, note 2, read: p. 26, ff., instead of p. 36. 


3893 


. 


Oot CORRIGENDA. 


Page 58, note 2, last line, read: ‘‘ und.” 

‘« 57, note, line 1, read: ‘‘ Hmotions.”’ 

‘¢ 65, line 10, read: ‘‘1.” instead of ‘‘(a.).” 

«69, note 3, last line, read: ‘‘ Geschichte.” 

«+ 70, note, line 1, read: ‘‘ Zweiter Theil.”’ 

‘¢ 107, line 22, read: ‘‘ credulity,” instead of ‘‘ credibility.” 

** 119, line 1, read: ‘‘ Delitzsch.!” 

‘¢ 124, line 4 from bottom, read: ‘‘from contrasts in nature.” 

‘« 124, note 1, line 2, read: ‘‘De Wette.” 

‘¢ 126, line 6 from bottom, read: ‘‘ form” instead of ‘*‘ formal.” 

*¢ 126, note 3, last line, read: ‘‘also.” 

‘¢ 188, line 9, read: ‘‘real;!” page 133, last line, read: ‘‘us,?” and transpose 
the notes at the foot of the page to correspond with the change in the 
text. 

“«* 1384, note 2, line 9 from bottom in quotation from Stapfer, read: ‘‘ notiones” 
instead of ‘‘nationes.” 

“¢ 185, note 1, line 7 from end, read: ‘‘ Luthardt,” ‘‘ referred.” 

‘« 185, note 1, line 4 from end, read: ‘‘ Whedon.” 

“* 186, note 1, line 38, read: ‘‘ Dogmatic.” 

‘« 186, note 1, ‘‘Lecky” (also, page 188, note 1, line 4). 

*« 139, note 1, line 1, place comma instead of period after ‘‘ behaupten,’ 
following line, read: ‘‘ diese” instead of ‘‘ dese.” 

«« 140, line 25, read, ‘‘A:postle’s.” / 

“* 141, note 1, line 5, read: ‘‘ Schraftbeweis.” 

‘* 141, note 1, line last but one, read: ‘‘ Untersuch.” 

‘¢ 142, line 5 from bottom, omit comma after ‘‘ resolving.” 

‘« 148, note 1, line 2, read: ‘** Hthica.” 

“* 148, note 2, line 3, read: ‘‘ Comms. on Rom.” 

“* 148, note 4, line 1, read: ‘‘ Peccatorum.” 

‘* 162, line 17, read: ‘‘its”’ instead of “his.” 

** 180, line 2, read: ‘‘ correspond.” : 

“* 186, line 3, instead of ‘‘or more comprehensively,” read, ‘‘du¢ more compre- 
hensively.” 

** 198, note 2, line 7 from end, read: ‘‘ Madeley.” 

“« 194, line 9, read: ‘‘ To make men aware,” etc. 

‘¢ 907,.note 8, line 8, read: ‘‘ Catechesis.” 

** 212, note 1, line 3, read: ‘‘ Spaltungen.” 

“* 215, note 1, line 8, read: ‘‘ Concordia.” 

‘< 249, line 2 from bottom, read: zpwrérokoc. 

«258, line 1, read: ‘‘of men,” instead ‘‘ of man.” 

** 258, line 11, read: ‘‘ Bonaventura.” 

‘* 264, note 1, line 2, read: ‘‘ Crisp.” 

‘*« 279, note 6, line 5, read: ‘‘ voluntatis.” 

“« 288, note 1, line 4, read: ‘‘ Versdhnung.” 

** 290, note, last line, read: ‘‘ Phil.” instead of ‘‘ Pha.” F 

“C295, note 2, lines 7, 8, read: ‘‘ sufficientissimam,” ‘‘ redemptionem,” ‘‘illam,” 
‘** extendere.” 


b) 


and in 


CORRIGENDA. 385 


Ee 301, line 18 from bottom, read: ‘‘ causally ” instead of ‘‘ casually.” 


304, note, line 1, read: ‘‘ Baumgarten-Crusius.” 
312, note 1, line 5, read. ‘‘ Dogmengeschichte.” 
319, note 1, line 3, read: ‘‘a quo” for ‘‘in quo.” 
325, line 12 from bottom read twice: ‘‘ obscured” for ‘‘ obscure.” 
348, line 16, read: ‘‘ best” for ‘‘ ablest.” 

350, line 10 from bottom, insert ‘‘ one” after ‘‘as. 


” 


REFERENCHS’ TO SCRIPTURE. 


43, line 8 from bottom, read 26 for 25. 

78, line 3, read 10: 10 for 9: 10. 
110, line 11 from bottom, read 18: 10 for 12: 10. 
158, line 14, read 2: 8 for 4: 3. 
198, line 8 from bottom, read 8: 21 for 3: 18. 


- 197, line 9, read 5: 15 for 15: 5. 


201, line 15, read 17 for 11. 
205, line 5, read 17 for 11. 
218, line 8, read 6: 6 for 6: 8. 


* 228, line 12 from bottom, read 28: 18 for 27: 18. 


228, line 12 from bottom, read 4: 15 for 3: 15. 
244, line 10, read 16: 13 for 15: 18. 

251, line 4, read 14: 13 for 18: 14. 

271, line 3, read 4: 1-12 for 4: 1-13. 

3138, line 2 from bottom; read 1 John for John. 
320, line 2 from bottom, read 6: 15 for 5: 15. 


< 
w 
3 
cs 
a 
ny 
kK 
= 
om 
a. 


eee 


ey T 


Vee. 


— 
= 
ah Ae 


oe 


‘ : 
. , f , © ‘ ? 
* * < ~ . 
- See th . be f ' 7 iy * 
. r W es ’ 
2 Le x ‘ 
. 5 5 
. 1 c ‘ AS 
E me t \ fi 1 ‘ anny 
, prs i 
X 1: ‘ 4 
= Mae . how * oe 
: ‘ 5! 
~ ak . 
. - ‘ 
ay 2 Risen ss ‘ ‘ & i “’ 
> ? 2 


me MAVNONNN UU 
my 1 1012 01016 8765 


