m 


^4./ K4.S...O  I 

^o-Ztyi^t^/i't .=y^.  


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


PRIUMPHS   OF   GRACE, — FULTON   STREET 
PRAYER    MEETING. 


!IffiIST  EVER  ¥ITH  TOTJ, 


BY 


REV.  OCTAVIUS  WINSLOW,  D.D. 


ILLUSTRATED  BY  EXPERIENCES 


DRAWN    FROM    THE 


Iragjr  Hwting,  m)s  i'uDi  m^i  f ffs^ital  fife. 


"7^     -■- 


NE"W  YORK: 
BOARO    OF    PUBLICATION 

OF   THR 

REFORMED      PROTESTANT      DUTCH      CHURCH, 

Synod's  Rooms,  No.  103  Fulton  Street: 

18  6  3. 


67^f 


^^^' 


rg 


6' 


Entbked  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1863,  by 
REV.    THOMAS    C.    STRONG, D.D. 

On  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Publication  of  the  Reformed  Protestant  Dutch  Church  In  North 
America,  in  the  Clerk's  OflSce  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States 


for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York. 


Z  J  ^   ^  J' 


HOSFORD    4    KETCHAM, 

STATIONERS    AND    PRINTERS, 

57  and  59  William  St.,  N.  Y. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.  PAGE. 

I.  The  Farewells 5 

IL  Christ  a  Presence 22 

III.  Christ  a  Guide 40 

IV.  Christ  a  Shield 49 

V.  Christ  a  Teacher 62 

VI.  Christ  a  Saviour 71 

VII.  Christ  in  Service 81 

VIII.  Christ  in  Suffering 89 

IX.  Christ  in  Retirement 95 

X.  Christ  in  Bereavement 102 

XL  Christ  in  Sickness 110 

XII.  Christ  in  Temptation 119 

XIII.  Christ  in  Adversity.  ... 127 

XIV.  Christ  in  Death 135 

(3) 


CHRIST  EVER  WITH  YOU. 


ILLUSTRATED      BY     EXPERIENCES 

FROM   THB 

lultffn  ^txnt  ^xmx  lifting. 


The  writings  of  Rev.  Octavius  Winslow,  D.D.,  are 
known  and  appreciated  over  the  whole  Christian  world. 
The  author  is  known  to  be  highly  gifted  and  thoroughly 
evangelical,  and  an  able  minister  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  iittle  work,  "  Christ  is  ever  with  You,"  was  pub- 
lished at  the  beginning  of  this  year,  and  in  the  first  quar- 
ter of  the  year  thirty-five  thousand  copies  had  been 
printed  and  circulated — a  good  proof  of  the  appreciation 
of  the  work  on  the  part  of  the  Christian  public.  Tlie 
merits  of  the  work  justify  the  means  we  use  to  give  it 
increased  value  and  circulation. 

"We  have  broken  the  text  of  the  author  into  chapters, 
and  interspersed  them  with  illustrations  drawn  from 
American  Christian  life.  These  experiences  have  been 
gathered  from  the  Fulton  Street  Prayer  Meetings  and 
from  the  army  and  navy.  We  thus  add  a  feature  to  the 
book  which  will  make  it  more  interesting  and  useful  to 
the  youth  and  children  of  our  Sabbath  schools,  to  the 
general  reader,  and  to  our  noble  and  heroic  men  on  ship 
and  shore,  who  are  engaged  in  the  service  of  their  coun- 
try. "We  send  this  little  volume  forth  with  the  prayer 
that  it  may  be  made  the  means  of  winning  many  souls  to 
the  love  and  service  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ. 


CHAPTER  I. 


THE   FAREWELLS. 


^HERE  were  two  farewells  of  our 
Lord  on  earth,  and  they  formed  two 
of  the  most  touching  and  instructive 
epochs  of  His  history.  As  the  sun, 
setting  amid  a  flood  of  liquid  gold, 
invests  the  whole  heavens  with  variegated 
tints  of  beauty  long  after  the  majestic  orb 
has  run  its  race,  so  there  clustered  around 
the  two  earthly  sunsets  of  Christ  the  most 
divine  assurances,  the  most  precious  promises, 
the  most  brilliant  hopes  that  ever  shed  their 
light  and  glory  upon  the  pathway  of  the 
Christian  Church;  and  which  will  linger 
upon  its  spiritual  sky  in  deathless  splendor 

1*  (5) 


6  CHRIST     EVER   WITH   YOU. 

until  He  come  again  in  ELis  glory  to  set  no . 
more  for  ever. 

The  first  farewell  of  Christ  was  when  He 
parted  from  His  disciples  on  His  return  to 
heaven.  To  them  it  was  a  time  of  inexpressi- 
ble grief.  To  part  with  Christ  was  to  part 
with  their  all.  Yet  He  would  not  leave 
them  comfortless;  nor  will  He,  beloved, 
ever  so  leave  you.  Blended  witli  His  de- 
parture was  the  most  precious  promise  and 
the  most  costly  gift  Heaven  could  bestow  or 
the  Church  receive — the  promise  and  gift 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  Comfortei',  Teacher, 
and  In  dweller  of  the  Church  \  '-^  If  1  depart^ 
I  will  send  the  Comforter P  Wliat  an  hour 
of  blessing  was  this!  What  a  glorious  setting 
of  the  Snn  of  righteousness!  What  spiritual 
benedictions,  what  resplendent  hopes  gather, 
like  a  glowing  halo,  around  the  sinking  of 
this  Divine  Orb  !  And  still  the  glow  lingers. 
And  still  the  settino^  ravs  tins^e  with  unfaded 


CHKIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  7 

light  and  glory  the  gloomy  clouds  which 
often  drape  in  woe  earth's  pilgrimage.  We 
have  abiding  with,  and  dwelling  in,  us  the 
Holy  Ghost  the  Comforter,  sent  of  Christ,  to 
lead  us  to  Christ,  to  testify  of  Christ,  to 
assimilate  us  to  Christ,  and  to  sanctify  us  to 
dwell  Avitli  Christ  for  ever.  Oh,  could  the 
personal  departure  of  our  Lord  have  been 
blessed  and  graced  with  an  assurance  more 
transcendantly  great,  precious,  and  glorious 
than  this? 

Our  Lord's  second  farewell  was  when  He 
closed  the  sacred  canon  of  Scripture,  fencing 
it  with  the  most  solemn  warning,  and  sealing 
it  with  the  most  illustrious  promise.  And, 
as  the  threatening  of  woe  to  them  who  should 
either  take  from,  or  add  to,  the  perfect  Word 
of  God,  resounded  solemnly  on  the  ear,  it 
was  succeeded  and  softened  by  words  which 
will  live  and  linger  in  the  sweetest  cadence 
until  the  promise  they  contain  shall  be  ful- 


8  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

filled:  ''Behold^  I  come  quicMy T  Then 
shall  all  that  is  dark  in  providence  and  grace, 
be  lucid,  and  all  that  is  discrepant  be  har- 
monized; the  bliss  of  the  saints  will  be  com- 
plete, the  mystery  of  God  will  be  finished, 
and  God  will  be  all  in  all.  O  believer  in 
Jesus!  long  for  that  day  that  shall  bring  the 
Beloved  of  your  soul  arrayed  in  all  His 
Father's  and  Plis  own  glory.  He  will  come 
quickly,  suddenly,  unexpectedly, — His  ad- 
vent surprising  both  the  Church  and  the 
world — the  one  slumbering  in  the  light,  and 
the  other  in  the  dark.  But  let  us  who  are 
of  the  day  be  sober,  watchful,  hastening  unto 
His  coming,  prepared  as  a  bride  for  her 
husband — loving  and  desiring  Him  with  a 
single,  ardent,  wakeful  affection.  ^^Come^ 
Lord  Jesus^  come  quicMy!'^^ 

But  it  was  in  connection  with  His  first 
farewell  that  Christ  spake  the  memorable 
and  precious  words — "Zt?,  /  am  with  you 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  9 

al'wayP  It  is  not  to  a  future,  but  to  an 
ever-present  Christ  with  His  saints,  that 
these  pages  will  direct  your  thoughts.  What 
the  Lord  has  laid  up  for  us,  by  what  road 
He  will  lead  us,  what  lessons  He  will  teach 
us,  by  what  discipline  of  trial  He  will 
mature  us  for  present  service  and  prepare  us 
for  future  rest,  we  will  not  be  too  curious  to 
divine.  Enough  that  it  is  all  in  the  covenant, 
and  in  His  hands  who  administers  the  cove- 
nant. And  whatever  new  lights  and  shadows 
may  be  pencilled  upon  life's  picture,  though 
our  song  be  of  mercy  and  of  judgment^  we 
will  patiently  wait  and  calmly  trust  its 
gradual  and  timely  unfolding,  assured  that 
allt)ur  trials  will  be  shrouded  blessings,  and 
all  those  blessings  will  be  bright  stepping- 
stones  aiding  our  progress  in  the  divine  life, 
our  nearness  to  God,  and  our  meetness  for 
heaven.  Embarking  upon  a  new  stage  of 
your    pilgrimage,    I    propose    placing    the 


10  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOTJ. 

pilgrim's  true  staff  in  your  hands,  upon 
which,  if  you  lean  in  childlike  faith,  you  will 
be  firmly  upheld,  safely  led,  securely  kept, 
divinely  strengthened,  cheered,  and  com- 
forted every  step  of  your  journey.  It  was 
left  by  our  Lord  for  the  use  of  His  one  and 
whole  Church,  when  He  exchaijged  the 
scene  of  His  humiliation  for  the  throne  of 
His  glory.  He  himself  placed  it  in  the 
hands  of  His  apostles,  who,  now  that  their 
pilgrimage  is  closed,  have  transmitted  it  to 
us.  In  the  name  of  Christ,  I  now  put  this 
divine  staff  in  your  hand,  and  bid  you 
firmly  grasp  it  and  set  out  anew  for  heaven. 

"  Lo,  I  AM  WITH  YOU  ALWAY,  [all  days^  EVEN 
UNTO  THE  END  OF  THE  WORLD." 

Let  me  for  a  moment  concentrate  your 
thoughts  upon  Him  whose  promise  is  thus 
pledged:  '•/  am  with  youP  Were  you 
assured  of  the  personal  presence,  ever 
attending,  ever  clinging,  ever  abiding,  of  a 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  11 

• 

beloved  friend  selected  from  a  wide  and 
choice  circle ;  and  were  that  one  friend  the 
most  wise,  the  most  powerful,  the  m.ost  true, 
the  most  loving,  confiding,  and  sympathizing, 
would  you  not  be  content  to  link  with  him 
alone  all  your  future  lot — to  make  him  the 
confidant  of  your  bosom,  the  partaker  of 
your  every  joy,  the  sharer  of  your  every 
sorrow?  That  Friend  is  Christ!  He 
occupies  the  preeminent  position  of  being 
ever  near  to  His  people;  everywhere,  and  at 
the  same  moment.  His  presence  is  the 
atmosphere  that  enfolds  them,  the  shield 
that  encircles  them,  the  sun  that  guides  and 
cheers  their  path  to  the  celestial  city,  where 
His  glorified  presence  fills  each  soul  with 
inefi*able  happiness,  heaven  with  its  sweetest 
song,  and  eternity  with  its  transcendant 
splendor.  When  Jesus  left  our  earth.  He 
entwined  the  personal  interests  of  His  mem- 
bers around  His  heart,  and  bore  them  with 


12  CHEIST    EVER  WITH   YOU. 

Him  to  heaven ;  leaving  the  gracious  promise 
that,  though  personally  and  visibly  with- 
drawn from  the  scene  of  tlieir  joiirneyings, 
trials,  and  conflicts.  His  spiritual  pi-esence 
should  ever  and  everywhere  engirdle  them, 
until  like  Himself  they  should  exchange 
earth  for  heaven.  "Lo!  mark!  behold!  I 
the  Incarnate  God,  I  who  opened  my 
bleeding  heart  for  your  redemption  on 
Calvary,  I  who  am  your  dearest  Friend, 
your  Elder  Brother, — I  am  with  you  always, 
in  all  places,  and  at  all  times,  unto  the  end 
of  the  world."  Saint  of  God!  this  is  the 
promise  of  promises,  the  richest  pearl  of  all 
the  promises,  exceeding  in  its  mightiness 
and  preciousness,  while  it  is  the  substance, 
sweetness,  and  pledge  of  all  the  rest.  Christ 
is  ever  with  you,  and  were  this  the  one 
and  only  assurance  of  the  Word  of  God  upon 
which  He  had  caused  your  soul  to  hope,  you 
may    gratefully    and     truthfully     exclaim. 


CHRIST    EVER  WITH  YOU.  13 

"  Lord !  it  is  enough !  with  this  staff  I  will 
travel  onward ;  and  if  through  fire  and 
through  water  Thou  dost  lead  me,  upheld  by 
Tliy  power,  and  soothed  by  Thy  sympathy, 
I  will  press  forward  until  Thou  shalt  bring 
me  into  a  wealthy  place." 

Christ's  presence  with  His  people  was 
once,  though  not  now,  corporeal.  He 
was  bodily  in  the  midst  of  His  Church.  Oh, 
it  is  a  marvelous  truth,  the  belief  of  which 
imparts  a  conviction  of  verity  to  the  whole 
Gospel,  that,  eighteen  hundred  years  ago, 
the  incarnate  God  actually  tabernacled  upon 
this  earth,  trod  its  soil,  sailed  upon  its  lakes, 
drank  of  its  springs,  admired  its  flowers, 
bedewed  it  with  tears,  and  consecrated  it 
with  blood.  That  babe  of  Bethlehem  smiling 
in  its  mother's  arms — that  mechanic  of 
Nazareth  shoving  the  plane  and  plying  the 
saw — that  young  man,  pale  and  thouglitful, 
standing  at  Pilate's  bar, — that  victim  of  woe 
2 


14  CHKIST    EVER   WITH   TOU 

impaled  upon  tlie  central  cross — listen,  O 
heavens,  and  be  astonished,  O  earth — was 
'Hhe  fulness  of  the  Godhead  todilyP^  It  is 
written  by  the  pen  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
let  no  profane  hand  dare  attempt  its  erasure 
— '^The  Word  was  made  fleshy  and  dwelt 
among  us.^^  Yes!  your  flesh,  O  believer! 
laden  with  infirmity,  sorrow,  and  woe.  And 
He  wears  it  still  in  a  spiritual  and  glorified 
form,  and  is  with  you  in  suff'ering  and 
weakness  and  infirmity,  ever  sympathiziag, 
ever  sustaining.  Try  your  spirit,  whether  it 
be  Christ-taught,  Christ-loving,  Christ-trust- 
ful, by  its  firm,  realizing  faith  in  tliis  cardinal 
and  precious  truth,  for,  ^^ every  spirit  tJiat 
confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the 
fie^h  is  of  Gody 

In  addition  to  this,  there  is  Christ's 
representative  presence  with  His  people  in 
the  embassy,  fulness,  and  preaching  of  the 
Gospel.    The  Gospel  is  glad  tidings  of  Christ, 


chuist  ever  with  yotj.  15 

it  is  the  message  of  His  grace,  the 
proclamation  of  His  love  to  lost  sinners. 
The  Gospel  is  Christ  first,  Christ  last,  Christ 
midst,  Christ  without  end.  Christ  is  the 
prophet  of  the  Gospel,  teaching  His  people 
His  doctrines.  Christ  is  the  priest  of  the 
Gospel,  bearing  and  making  atonement  for 
their  sins.  Christ  is  the  Icing  of  the  Gospel, 
reigning  in  the  hearts  of  loyal  and  loving 
disciples.  Thus,  Christ  is  present  wherever 
and  whenever  the  good  tidings  of  that  Gospel 
are  preached,  to  ''hind  up  the  hroTcen-hearted^ 
to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captive^  to  give 
heauty  for  ashes^  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning^ 
the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of 
heaviness^  to  comfort  all  that  m^on^rnP 
Remember,  O  thou  neglectful,  unbelieving 
hearer  of  Christ's  Gospel,  that  it  is  not  the 
minister  you  slight  nor  the  message  you 
scorn — it  is  Christ  Himself.  ''We  beseech 
you  IN  Christ's  stead" — as  though  Christ 


16  CHKIST    EVER   WITH   YOIJ, 

Himself  were  pleading  with  tears  and  blood 
''  ie  ye  reconciled  to  God."  O  blessed  yet 
solemn  thougbt,  that,  whenever  my  ears  are 
saluted  with  the  joyful  sound,  infinitely 
sweeter  than  angels'  chimes,  it  is  Christ's 
voice  I  hear,  it  is  Christ's  presence  I  feel,  it 
is  Christ's  love  that  thrills  and  warms 
my  soul,  it  is  Christ's  invitation  to  my  weary 
spirit,  Christ's  words  of  sympathy  to  my 
sorrowful  heart,  Christ's  promises  of  grace 
and  strength  and  hope  to  my  depressed  and 
desponding  mind.  Oh,  welcome,  thou  divine 
and  precious  Gospel!  bringing  with  thee 
Christ's  presence  with  a  realizing  power  so 
personal,  so  conscious,  and  so  soothing  to 
the  soul. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

We  can  bid  farewell  to  things  most  near 
and  dear  to  us  for  the  sake  of  Christ.     The 


CHEIST    EVER  WITH  YOU.  17 

following  was  related  in  the  Fulton  Street 
Meeting,  by  a  gentleman  from  Boston.  It 
reveals  the  power  which  the  love  of  Christ 
has  over  the  heart  of  the  young  believer : 

He  heard  a  French  sailor  relate  his  own 
religious,  experience  very  briefly.  He  came 
into  Boston  from  off  a  French  ship.  He  was 
so  bad,  and  wild,  and  undutiful,  that  his 
father  had  sent  him  to  sea.  He  belonged  to 
a  rich  family,  and  was  "  heir  apparent "  to  a 
large  property.  He  was  well  educated  and 
intelligent.  He  went  some  time  ago  to  a 
prayer  meeting  in  Boston,  where  the  place 
was  so  crowded  that  he  turned  to  go  away. 
But  as  he  turned  some  one  beckoned  him  to 
come  forward  to  a  seat  on  the  pulpit  stairs, 
which  he  took.  That  little  gesture  of  a 
stranger's  hand  was  God's  instrument  of  the 
man's  conversion.  He  said  that  if  he  had 
gone  he  should  probably  have  never  come 
again.  He  felt  it  to  be  a  great  kindness. 
2^ 


18  CHEIST    EVER  WITH   TOF. 

He  could  understand  but  little  English,  but 
he  continued  to  attend.  He  found  that  the 
meetings  were  "all  about  Jesus."  The  more 
he  heard,  the  more  he  wanted  to  know,  and 
the  truth  soon  found  its  way  into  his  heart. 
He  found  that  he  was  a  sinner  doomed  to 
die,  but  that  through  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  his  sins  would  be  washed  away.  At 
length,  in  one  of  the  prayer  meetings  in 
North  Street  Chapel,  he  experienced  a  con 
sciousness  of  sins  forgiven.  He  wrote  home 
of  the  great  change.  His  father,  who  was  a 
Eoman  Catliolic,  in  his  wrath  disinherited 
him  at  once.  But  the  son  continued  to 
write  home  and  tell  them  of  his  love  of 
Christ.  He  kept  sending  forward  his  letters, 
and  praying  for  his  parents ;  and  as  a  result 
he  soon  had  the  unspeakable  joy  of  finding 
that  his  father  and  mother,  and  one  sister, 
had  been  converted.  They  have  since  writ- 
ten him  the  most  urgent  letters  to  come 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  19 

home,  assuring  liim  of  a  most  hearty  wel- 
come, desiring,  above  all  things,  to  see  him 
once  more.  ''And  he  has  resolved  to  go," 
said  the  gentleman  giving  this  relation.  "  I 
heard  him  make  his  last  address  to  that 
prayer  meeting.  It  was  touching  in  the 
extreme,  as  with  eyes  streaming  with  tears, 
he  said,  '  It  was  on  this  floor  I  was  kneeling 
when  Jesus  spoke  peace  to  my  soul.  I 
here  look  on  those  who  first  told  me  of 
Jesus,  who  first  begged  me  to  come  to 
Jesus,  who  first  rejoiced  with  me  when  I 
had  found  Jesus.  And  oh  !  how  my  heart 
is  grieved,  that  I  am  come  to  bid  you  all 
farewell,  to  see  your  faces  no  more.  The 
very  boards  in  this  fioor  are  dear  to  me, 
no  place  is  so  dear  to  me  as  this.  Will  I 
ever  forget  these  dear  brothers,  these  dear 
sisters?  No — no — no — my  heart  tells  me 
no.  Oh !  I  am  grieved  that  I  have  to  go 
away    from    you.'      And    then    his    voice 


20  CKBIST    EYES    WITH  TOTI. 

became  almost  inaudible,  and  his  fine  intel- 
ligent face  became  overcast  with  sadness; 
but  all  at  once  he  seemed  stirred  with  a 
new  sensation.  He  smiled  and  said,  'It 
will  be  only  a  little  parting  and  for  ever 
meeting.  I  shall  soon  see  you  all — every 
one  —  and  we  shall  see  Jesus,  whom  I  love. 
And  we  shall  sit  at  His  blessed  feet,  under 
the  smiles  of  His  glorious  countenance.  Oh ! 
if  I  had  lano:ua£:e.  Oh  I  if  I  could  tell  it,' — 
as  he  stood  gazing  up  into  heaven  —  *but  I 
cannot  tell  how  I  love  Him,  and  how  I  will 
praise  Him.'  And  then  looking  on  the 
wall,  whereon  hung  the  card,  in  large 
letters,  •  Stand  up  for  Jesus.' — 'Tes,  I'U 
stand  up  for  You,  blessed  Jesus,  though 
thev  mob  me,  though  they  strive  to  kill 
me.  I  will  stand  up  for  Jesus,  I  will 
never  be  afraid,  I  will  never  turn  my 
back,  I  will  confess  Him  everywhere,  I 
love  Him,  and  I  know  He  loves  me.     All 


CHEIST    EYEK   WITH   TOTJ.  21 

power  is  committed  to  His  hands — He  will 
take  care  of  me.  No  power  shall  pluck  me 
out  of  His  hands.' '' 

And  he  sat  down  amid  a  flood  of  tears, 
with  all  the  audience  weeping  around  him. 


CHAPTEE  II. 


CHRIST   A   PRESENCE. 


|UT  it  is  the  spiritual  presence  of 
^Christ  thus  promised  and  pledged  to 
His  people:  ''Lo^  I  am  with  you 
""'dlwayP  This  promise  of  Jesus,  as 
precious  as  it  is  marvelous,  is  predi- 
cated upon  His  essential  Deity.  Were  He, 
as  some  represent,  human  only  and  not 
absolutely  divine,  what  confidence  could  we 
have  in  this  promise?  What  comfort  would 
it  impart,  what  hope  would  it  inspire,  what 
protection  would  it  aflord?  Where  is  the 
created  being,  be  he  man  or  angel,  who 
could  in  truth  speak  in  language  so  lofty 
and  sublime  as  this  ?  "Zt?,  /  am  with  you 
alway^  even  to  the  end  of  the  world ^'^  Would 

(22) 


CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOF.  23 

it  not^  be  the  utterance  of  the  boldest 
blasphemy  in  him  thus  to  speak,  and  would 
it  not  be  the  veriest  delusion  in  us  thus  to 
believe?  But  because  our  Lord  Jesus  was 
God,  He  spake  with  authority,  Godlike  and 
divine.  ''Z  am  with  you  alioayP  Oh, 
sublime  thought !  there  is  not  a  world,  a 
being,  a  spot  in  the  universe,  however  re- 
mote, insignificant,  or  obscure — there  beams 
not  a  star,  there  flames  not  a  sun,  there 
breathes  not  a  spirit,  there  exists  not  an 
empire,  Avhere  Christ's  government  does  not 
rule,  Christ's  power  is  not  felt,  Christ's  glory 
is  not  displayed.  Could  the  believer  take 
the  wings  of  the  morning  and  fly  to  the 
most  distant  planet,  or  touch  the  utmost 
limit  of  space,  there  the  smile  of  Christ's 
love  would  illumine  him,  the  accents  of 
Christ's  voice  would  cheer  him,  the  atmo- 
sphere of  Christ's  presence  would  encircle 
Mm,    the    power  of    Christ's    omnipotence 


24  CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOTJ. 

would  uphold  him — he  would  feel  the  right 
hand  of  Christ  gently  laid  upon  his  spirit ; 
and  in  the  awful  stillness  and  fathomless 
depth  of  that  profound  solitude,  he  would 
exclaim,  "  Thou  art  itear,  0  Lord!  " 

We  repeat  the  inquiry  for  the  purpose  of 
pursuing  it  more  fully:  'Whose  presence  is 
thus  promised  and  pledged?  It  is  the 
presence  of  Christ.  The  Christ  of  God. 
The  Christ  who  is  God.  '^Immanuel^  God 
with  us,^^  The  Christ  who  made  all  worlds, 
created  all  beings,  governs  all  empires, 
controls  all  events.  The  Christ  who  replen- 
ishes earth  with  beauty,  heaven  with  glory, 
eternity  with  song.  The  Christ  before  whom 
angels  and  archangels,  principalities  and 
powers  bend,  and  at  whose  name  every  knee 
shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  confess  that  He 
is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father. 
The  Christ  whose  glory  is  divine,  whose 
beauty  is  peerless,  whose  wealth  is  boundless, 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH  YOIT.  25 

whose  love  is  as  infinite  as  His  being.  The 
Christ  who  took  your  veritable  nature, — that 
same  infirm,  suffering  nature  which  now 
wearily  you  wear, —  and  in  that  nature  bore 
and  put  away  for  ever  your  sins,  uplifted 
and  for  ever  removed  your  curse,  paid  all 
your  great  debt  to  Divine  justice,  sorrowed 
for  you  in  the  garden,  suffered  and  expired 
in  your  stead  on  the  cross,  rose  from  the 
grave,  irradiating  it  with  the  hope  of  the 
"  first  resurrection,"  ascended  up  to  heaven, 
lives  and  intercedes  for  you,  representing 
your  person  and  presenting  your  prayers 
and  praises  with  ineffable  acceptance  and 
delight  to  His  Father  and  your  Father,  to 
His  God  and  your  God.  The  Christ  who 
loves  you  with  an  affection  whose  depth  no 
line  can  sound,  whose  constancy  no  change 
can  chill,  whose  care  of,  whose  sympathy  for, 
whose  watchfulness  over,  you  flings  as  to  the 
torrid  zone  the  warmest,  tenderest  love  that 
3 


26  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

ever  pulsated  in  a  human  breast.  The  Christ 
who  acknowledges  Himself  your  Brother, 
has  proved  Himself  your  Friend,  and  who 
assures  you  that  as  the  head  is  in  union  with 
the  body,  and  the  vine  is  one  with  the 
branch,  so  is  He  ever  with,  ever  one  with, 
ever  close  to  you  in  an  invisible,  yet  real 
and  conscious  presence,  from  which  neither 
life  with  all  its  changes,  nor  death  with  all 
its  solemnities,  shall  be  able  to  sever  you. 
Such,  child  of  God,  is  the  Being  who 
breathes  these  gentle,  assuring  words  into 
your  ear — ^'/  am  with  you!^'^  O  honored 
saint  of  God !  O  favored  disciple  of  Jesus ! 
who  has  such  a  one  ever  at  your  side.  The 
Divinest  in  the  universe  to  love  you,  the 
Mightiest  in  the  universe  to  shield  you, 
the  Loveliest  in  the  universe  to  delight  you, 
the  Dearest  in  the  universe  to  soothe,  cheer, 
and  gladden  you.  Tell  me,  if,  of  all  you 
have  ever  loved,  or  who  have  loved    you. 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  27 

the  one  who  was  given  to  your  youth  to  love 
you  more  tenderly  than  all,  yea,  the  being 
who  loved  you  yet  more  deeply,  tenderly, 
and  unchangeably  still  —  who  loved  you  as 
a  mother  only  could, —  is  there  one  of  all 
these  whose  presence  ever  with  you,  you 
would  prefer  to  Christ's?  The  question 
grieves  you,  you  shrink  from  the  comparison, 
and  with  uplifted  eye,  moistened  with  tears, 
yet  beaming  with  affection,  you  exclaim, 
from  the  profoundest  depths  of  your  soul, 
"  Whom  have  1  in  heaven  hut  Thee  ?  and 
there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  ieside 
Theer 

But  we  must  remind  you,  before  we 
proceed  further,  that  the  presence  of  Christ 
with  His  people  involves  equally  the  pre- 
sence of  the  First  and  Third  Persons  of  the 
ever-blessed  and  glorious  Trinity.  It  is  a 
triple  staff  we  place  in  your  hand,  in  grasp-, 
ing  which,  your  faith  leans  upon  infinity  in 


28  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

its  threefold  manifestation.  "We  can  have 
nothing  to  do  truly,  spiritually,  and  savingly 
with  one  Person  of  the  Godhead  without  an 
equal  faith  in,  and  love  to,  the  others. 
When  Christ  pledges  His  presence  with  you. 
He  unites  with  it  the  Fatherhood  of  God, 
its  boundless  sources  of  love,  wisdom,  and 
strength.  Christ  came  to  make  known  the 
Father's  mind,  to  reveal  the  Father's  love, 
to  bring  home  to  heaven  the  Father's  family, 
predestinated  to  the  adoption  of  children. 
^'^No  man  hnoweth  the  Father^  tut  he  to 
whom  the  Son  will  reveal  him^  ''He  that 
hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father P  That 
great  God,  that  eternal  Father,  who  thus 
spoke  to  His  Church,  speaks  equally  to  you : 
^'Fear  thou  not  j  for  I  am  with  thee :  he  not 
dismayed ;  for  I  am  thy  God:  I  will 
strengthen  thee  j  yea^  I  will  help  thee;  yea^ 
I  will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  My 
righteousness,^^   "  When  thou  jpassest  through 


CHRIST    EVER  WITH   YOTJ.  29 

the  waters^  I  will  he  with  thee  j  and  through 
the  rivers^  they  shall  not  overflow  thee :  when 
thou  walhest  through  the  fire^  thou  shalt  not 
he  hurned ;  neither  shall  the  flame  Mndle 
upon  thee.  For  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God^  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel^  the  Saviour.'*^  Oh, 
seek  to  realize  this  precious  truth  in  all  your 
journeying:  the  presence  of  Christ  is  the 
assurance  that  your  Heavenly  Father  is  with 
you.  Christ's  voice  speaking  to  you  in  love, 
is  the  echo  of  the  Father's  voice.  Christ's 
smile  of  delight  beaming  upon  you,  is  the 
brightness  of  the  Father's  smile.  Christ's 
precious  promises  sustaining  and  soothing 
you,  are  the  ^'exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises "  of  God,  which  are  ''all  yea  and 
amen  in  Christ  Jesus^  unto  the  glory  of  God 
the  Father^  It  is  a  truth,  equally  as  re- 
vealed and  equally  as  precious,  that  the 
presence  of  Christ  with  His  people  involves 
also  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Oh 
3^ 


30  CHRIST    EVER   ^VT^B.   YOU. 

that  we  had  a  more  spiritual,  vivid,  grateful 
apprehension  of  the  Divinity,  personality, 
and  gracious  vrork  of  the  Spirit,  our  Spiritual 
Quickener,  our  Divine  Comforter,  our  In- 
dwelling Sanctifier,  our  Infallible  Teacher. 
"  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  is  one  of  the 
vital  articles  of  our  Creed  ;  is  it  equally  the 
deep,  experimental,  sanctifying  sentiment  of 
our  heart  ?  Do  I  firmly,  practically  believe 
in  the  Divine  personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
in  His  official  relation  to  my  salvation, 
in  His  absolute  necessity  in  regeneration, 
in  His  tender,  changeless  love  as  my  Com- 
forter, in  His  indispensable  necessity  as  my 
Teacher,  and  in  His  gracious,  sanctifying 
power,  as  ever  abiding  with,  and  dwelling 
in,  me?  Such  is  the  magnitude  and  extent 
of  the  promise  of  Christ,  ^'lam  with  yoxcP 
We  repeat,  it  involves  the  love  of  the  Father 
who  adopted  you,  the  grace  of  the  Son 
who  died  for  you,    the  power  of  the  Spirit 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  31 

who  quickened  you,    the    Triune- Jehovah, 

"That  triple  bolt  that  lays  all  wrong  in  ruin." 

Before  I  refer  to  the  circitmstanees  in 
which  you  may  anticipate  a  full  realization 
of  this  precious  promise,  let  me  remind  you 
of  the  offices  of  Christ  it  involves,  the 
materials  of  this  triple  staff  which  Jesus 
places  in  your  hand. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  in  my 
name  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them.  "We 
must  have  Christ  ever  near. 

A  gentleman  said  he  had  been  several 
times  of  late  on  board  the  North  Carolina,  to 
assist  in  the  conducting  of  the  daily  prayer 
meetings,  which  have  been  lately  revived, 
and  he  had  good  news  to  tell. 


32  CHEIST    EVER  WITH  YOU. 

Some  months  ago,  everj  pious  seaman, 
who  was  on  board  of  this  old  ship,  had  been 
drafted  and  sent  off  to  some  other  ship  in  the 
naval  service,  so  that  none  remained  to  sus- 
tain the  prayer  meeting,  and  the  consequence 
was  it  was  given  up.  The  number  on  board 
also  was  very  small.  It  was  thought  best 
to  wait  till  the  ship  filled  up  with  men,  and 
then  it  would  be  proper  to  make  an  effort  to 
renew  the  meetings.  Since  the  business 
men's  prayer  meeting  convention,  the  desire 
had  been  much  stimulated  to  go  on  board, 
and,  with  the  leave  of  the  Captain,  resume 
the  daily  meetings.  So  a  few  pious  seaman 
from  the  shore  made  known  their  wishes  to 
the  commander,  and  he  readily  assented  to 
the  request,  to  hold  them.  The  hour  ap- 
pointed was  at  "  two  bells  of  the  dog  wateh/^ 
which  is  five  o'clock,  p.  m. 

At  the  very  first  meeting  the  spirit  of  God 
seemed  to  come  down  with  power.    Toward 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH    YOU.  33 

the  close  of  the  meeting  twenty-four  men 
arose  and  requested  to  be  made  the  subjects 
of  prayer.  At  the  next  meeting  thirty-six 
arose  for  prayer,  at  the  next  fifty;  and  the 
last  cA^ening  sixty  signified  their  desire  to  be 
remembered  in  prayer.  It  is  now  a  very 
solemn  time  on  the  old  ship. 

STORY   OF   A   sailor's   CONVERSION. 

I  was  in  Boston,  said  a  gentleman,  a 
clergyman,  and  heard  a  sailor  tell  his  re- 
ligious experience.  Now  that  prayer  has 
been  requested  for  these  men  of  the  sea,  I 
want  to  speak  of  that  man's  account  of  his 
own  conversion.  He  ran  away  from  home 
when  young  and  went  to  sea.  He  had  a 
pious,  godly  mother,  whom  he  had  not  seen 
for  seventeen  years.  He  often  had  letters 
from  his  mother,  begging  him,  when  he 
came  into  port,  to  come  and  see  her,  but  he 
never  would  go.     He  was  often  under  a 


34:  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

promise  to  go,  but  when  tie  came  home  from 
his  long  India  voyages,  with  one  hundred 
dollars,  or  two  hundred  dollars  in  his  pocket, 
drawn  as  back  pay,  he  would  go  ashore  and 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  land  sharks,  and 
there  he  would  be  tossed  about  among  them, 
until  his  raoney  was  gone,  and  then  he 
would  go  to  sea  again  to  be  gone  for  another 
long  voyage.  All  this  time  his  mother  kept 
on  praying,  and  writing  to  him,  and  still 
begging  him  to  come  and  see  her,  when  he 
should  come  ashore.  This  mother  had  been 
in  the  habit  of  praying  with  him  when  he 
was  a  little  boy,  but  he  had  long  since  for- 
gotten her  prayers. 

So  he  had  gone  on  in  a  career  of  wicked- 
ness for  seventeen  years,  disappointing  all 
the  fond  hopes  of  hie  pious  mother.  One 
night  he  said  his  ship  was  overtaken  by  a 
terrible  hurricane,  so  that  it  seemed  as  if  the 
sails  would  all  be  blown  away.      He  was 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  35 

ordered  to  go  aloft  to  endeavor  to  take  in 
the  sails  to  save  tliem.  It  seemed  to  him 
that,  in  spite  of  all  he  could  do,  he  should 
be  blown  off  into  the  raging  billows.  In 
that  terrible  gale,  when  it  seemed  as  if  dis- 
traction and  death  were  yawning  beneath 
him  to  swallow  him  up  quick,  he  said  he 
thought  he  heard  his  mother's  voice  crying 
for  mercy  for  him.  The  thoughts  of  his 
poor,  praying  mother  came  rushing  over  his 
soul.  He  listened,  and  still  he  thought,  in 
the  midst  of  the  howling  tempest,  he  heard 
the  prayer  of  that  same  blessed,  but  neglect- 
ed mother,  praying  God  to  save  her  son. 
Then  and  there  it  was,  said  this  sailor,  when 
I  was  hanging  on  for  my  life,  to  keep  from 
being  blown  overboard,  all  my  mother's 
prayers  when  I  was  a  little  boy,  came  up  to 
my  mind.  I  seemed  to  hear  them  all  over 
again. 

He  said  as  soon  as  he  could  come  down 


36  CHEIST    EYER   WITH  YOIT. 

from  aloft,  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of 
his^  sins,  he  ran  down  into  the  forecastle, 
and  there  fell  on  his  knees  and  cried  to  God 
for  mercy.  He  confessed  what  a  vile  sinner 
he  had  been,  and  he  asked  God  to  hear  his 
poor  mother's  prayers  and  his  own  cries  for 
mercy,  and  forgive  him. 

He  hoped  he  that  night  obtained  forgive- 
ness. From  that  time  all  his  manner  and 
his  plans  of  life  were  changed.  He  came 
into  Boston,  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus. 
The  land  sharks  could  not  get  hold  of  him. 
He  had  saved  up  his  wages,  two  hundred 
or  three  hundred  dollars,  and  he  said  he 
was  going  right  home  to  see  his  dear  mother, 
who  for  these  seventeen  long  years  had 
been  praying  for  him ;  and  whatever  he 
could  do,  or  his  money  could  do,  all  should 
be  done  to  make  that  dear  faithful  mother 
happy. 


CUEIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  37 


THE  YOUNG  MAN  WHO  WAS  BORN  AGAIN  AT  SEA. 

He  rose  at  the  very  close  of  the  meeting. 
^'I  must  speak,"  said  he.  '^This  meeting 
must  not  close  until  I  tell  you  how  merci- 
fully the  Lord  has  dealt  with  me.  I  was, 
as  I  hope,  converted  at  sea  less  than  a  year 
ago.  I  am  a  stranger  in  this  meeting,  but 
I  learn,  from  the  exercises,  something  of 
those  who  compose  it.  There  stood  a  gen- 
tlemen, a  little  time  ago,"  pointing  to  a 
part  of  the  room,  "who  requested  you  to 
pray  for  the  young  Roman  Catholic  Italian, 
who  comes  in  here  to  learn  what  he  shall 
do  to  be  saved.  And  near  me  is  the  man 
who  speaks  of  an  awakened  young  man, 
near  to  death,  who  wishes  to  be  prayed 
for.  And  then  one  of  the  requests  for  prayer 
asks  us  to  pray  for  an  awakened  young 
lady,  now  in  the  room.  And  another  said 
a  little  time  ago,  do  pray  for  my  infidel 
4 


38  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOTT. 

young  friend,  who  says  lie  has  been  an 
unbeliever,  but  the  foundation  on  which  he 
has  stood  has  all  been  removed,  and  he  finds 
him  sinking  to  perdition. 

"  Oh!  hear  me  I  say — I  have  been  through 
all  this.  As  you  hear  me  now  for  the  first — 
and  will  never  more — remember  that  I  say 
to  every  one,  who  is,  as  I  was,  a  sinner : 
come  to  Jesus.  There  is  nothing  like  going 
to  Him,  nothing  in  the  place  of  going  to 
Him,  nothing  but  going  to  Him.  So  it  was 
with  me,  away  in  mid  ocean,  and  so  it  must  • 
be  with  you  in  the  Fulton  Street  Prayer 
Meeting.  I  find  just  such  spiritual  wants 
press  down  upon  the  soul  here  as  every- 
where else,  when  men  are  out  of  Christ.  I 
must  ask  you — I  must  entreat  you  to  take 
sanctuary  in  Him  and  be  saved.  That  is  all 
I  want  to  say." 

There  was  an  urgency  and  earnestness  in 
the  appeal  which  moved  the  hearts  of  all 


CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  39 

present.  Men  forgot,  for  the  moment,  that 
the  hour  for  closing  had  fully  come,  and, 
prompt  to  the  minute,  the  leader  arose,  and 
asked  the  meeting  to  sing  one  stanza  — 

"  I  lay  my  sins  on  Jesus, 

The  spotless  lamb  of  God ; 
He  bears  them  all  and  frees  us 

From  the  accursed  load. 
I  bring  ray  guilt  to  Jesus, 

To  wash  my  crimson  stains 
White  in  his  blood  most  precious 

Till  not  a  spot  remains." 


CHAPTER  m. 


CHKIST   A   GUIDE. 


\HRIST  is  with  us  as  a — Guide. 
jHow  deep  our  need  of  Him  as  such, 
and  how  endeared  does  it  make  Him ! 
So  blind  are  we,  so  dark  our  future, 
so  perplexing  our  present  path,  the 
very  next  step  might  be  a  false  one — taking 
us  into  a  wrong  direction,  entailing  untold 
anxieties  and  sorrows,  or  hurling  us  from  a 
precipice  into  total  ruin.  Yes,  we  need  just 
such  a  leader  as  Christ.  What  Alpine 
traveler  would  attempt  the  ascent  of  a  steep 
glacier,  or  cross  the  dangerous  pass  unatten- 
ded by  an  experienced  guide  —  one  who 
knew   the   route,   whose   skilful   eye   could 

(40) 


CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOU.  41 

detect  the  treacherous  crevice,  and  whose 
nervous  arm  could  fence  the  narrow,  winding 
way?  Our  path  to  eternity  demands  just 
such  a  one  as  the  prophet  foretold  Christ 
should  be.  ^'I have  given  Him^^  says  God, 
^^foT  a  Leader  and  Commander  to  the 
peopled  His  own  gracious  words  corroborate 
this  statement  when  speaking  of  Himself  as 
the  Shepherd  of  His  flock,  who  '^goeth 
BEFORE  the'iu^  and  the  sheep  follow  Him^  for 
they  hiow  His  voiced  Oh,  what  a  privilege 
— in  every  path  of  doubt,  in  every  circum- 
stance of  danger,  where  human  judgment  is 
either  warped  or  beclouded,  and  your  own 
hesitate  and  falters — to  have  at  your  side 
such  a  wonderful  Counselor,  such  a  divine 
Guide  as  Christ !  As  such  He  is  ever  with 
you.  He  will  guide  you  with  His  eye  of 
providence,  and  with  His  hand  of  power, 
and  with  His  heart  of  love.  He  knows  the 
way  that  you  take,  for  He  has  ordained  it. 
4^ 


42  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

He  knows  every  crook  in  your  lot,  for  He 
has  appointed  it.  He  will  roll  away  the 
stone  of  difficulty,  will  level  mountains  and 
fill  up  valleys,  make  the  crooked  path 
straight  and  the  rough  place  smooth  ;  this 
will  He  do  unto  you,  and  not  forsake  you. 
Oh,  be  honest  and  upright  with  Him !  Go 
to  Him  first,  consult  Him  first,  acknowledge 
Him  in  all  your  ways  before  you  consult  a 
human  oracle — let  Christ,  in  all  the  minute 
details  of  your  life,  have  the  ^re-eminence. 
Learn  to  lay  your  own  judgment  at  His  feet. 
^^The  meek  will  He  guide  in  judgm^ent^  and 
the  meek  will  He  teach  His  ^cay-^ — mot  our 
way — but  ''His  way."  We  must  first  sur- 
render our  way  and  will  before  He  will 
teach  us  His.  The  "  meeic  "  He  will  guide  : 
the  childlike,  trustful,  unquestioning  disciple, 
that  humbly  locks  his  hand  in  Christ's  and 
says,  "Lord,  lead  me  and  guide  me,  not  in 
my  own  way,   but  in  Thine^     Oh,  take  a 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  43 

firm  grasp  of  this  triple  staff,  and  you 
shall  travel  safely,  surely,  through  all  your 
unknown  future.  Be  honest  and  sincere 
only  to  know  and  to  walk  in  the  Lord's  way, 
the  way  in  which  He  would  have  you  to  go; 
and  then  will  He  fulfil  His  most  gracious 
promise,  "Z(9,  I  am  with  you  alwayP 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Christ  must  be  our  guide  in  the  midst  of 
the  utmost  peril  and  dangers.  Many  a 
soldier  on  the  battle  field  is  consoled  with  the 
belief  that  Christ  is  his  guide  though  leading 
him  to  death,  and  through  death  to  glory. 

The  following  notes  were  written  in  pencil 
by  Samuel  F.  "Willard,  of  Madison,  Conn., 
captain  in  the  fourteenth  Connecticut  regi- 
ment. They  were  addressed  to  his  wife, 
and  within  an  hour  after   the  last  record, 


44  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

which  was  found  on  his  person,  was  made, 
he  had  fallen  on  the  battle  field.  On  Sun- 
day morning,  September  14th,  he  wrote : 
"To-dav  we  started  on  our  Ions:  march  on 
hard  bread  and  cofi'ee  alone  ;  marched  till 
four  o'clock.  We  are  now  in  line  of  battle 
in  the  Middletown  Yalley  —  right  in  sight 
there  is  an  artillery  engagement — nothing 
very  serious." 

Middletown  Valley,  Sept.   15,  1862. 
Monday  Morntxg. 

These  may  be  my  last  words  ;  if  so,  they 
are  these : 

I  have  full  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  my 
Saviour ;  I  do  not  regret  that  I  liave  fallen 
in  d-efence  of  my  country  ;  I  have  loved  you 
truly  and  know  that  you  have  loved  me, 
and  in  leaving  this  world  of  sin  I  go  to 
another  and  better  one,  where  I  am  confident 
I  shall  meet  you.     I  freely  forgive  all  my 


CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOU.  45 

enemies,  and  ask  them  for  Clirist's  sake  to 
forgive  me.  If  my  body  should  ever  reach 
home,  let  there  be  no  ceremony ;  I  ask  no 
higher  honor  than  to  die  for  my  country ; 
lay  me  silently  in  the  grave,  imitate  my 
virtues,  and  forgive  all  my  errors. 

I  prefer  death  in  the  cause  of  my  country, 
to  life  in  sympathy  with  its  enemies. 

And  now,  my  precious  wife,  good-bye. 
May  the  grace  of  God  sustain  you,  and  we 
will  meet  at  last  in  heaven. 

Signed  in  the  valley  on  the  battle  ground 
near  Boliver  Heights,  Md. 

Samuel  Francis  Willard. 

Tuesday  Morning,  Sept.  16,  1862. 

The  Division  moved  yesterday  at  about 
10  A.  M.,  passed  through  the  region  of  the 
battle  on  the  previous  day  —  dead  rebels  on 
every  side.  Our  surgeons  administered  to 
the  wants  of  many  of  the  wounded  rebels. 


46  CHKIST    EVER    WITH   YOU. 

Saw  hundreds  of  wounded  rebels  as  we 
passed  through  different  villages,  in  barns, 
houses,  hospitals.  It  was  a  very  sony  sight 
for  our  boys — rebels  were  strongly  intrench- 
ed on  the  mountain  and  held  a  good  position, 
but  fled  as  the  army  approached.  Generals 
McClellan  and  Burnside  passed  in  front  of 
the  army — immense  cheering.  Rebel  pris- 
oners being  brought  in  all  the  time^  poorly 
dressed  but  fine  looking  fellows  —  act  as 
though  they  were  glad  to  be  taken  in. 

Tuesday  Morning, —  later 

The  battle  has  commenced,  one  man  killed 
within  twenty  rods  of  me  by  a  shell.  My 
faith  is  in  God  ;  if  I  die,  I  die  in  the  faith  of 
my  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who 
died  that  I  miglit  live.  We  are  now  to  go 
into  battle.  God  save  my  men,  God  save 
me,  God  save  the  United  States  of  America, 
God  bless  you  my  own  dear  wife,  and  may 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  47 

% 

we  meet  at  last  in  heaven  where  there  will 
be  no  war  or  sin. 

Camp  near  Peters ville,  Md., 
Wednesday  Morning,  17  th. 

We  are  on  the  eve  of  a  great  battle. 
Yesterday,  there  was  an  artillery  engage- 
ment close  by  us,  and  we  were  dodging 
shells  and  balls  for  about  three  hours.  One 
man  was  killed  within  fifteen  or  twenty  rods 
of  me.  Several  others  were  wounded.  We 
have  an  immense  army  here ;  Mc  Clellan 
and  Burnside  are  in  command ;  I  can- 
not say  more ;  we  are  ordered  off  with 
eighty  rounds  of  cartridges ;  cannon  are 
booming  on  every  side  ;    my  faith  is  in  God. 

I  passed  the  battle  ground  Monday,  saw 
tlie  dead  and  dying  on  every  side ;  I  pray 
God  we  may  be  successful  and  that  you 
may  see  me  again. 

And  just   there    the   pencil  notes   close 


48  CHEIST    EVER  WITH   YOU. 

suddenly.  An  hour  later  he  lay  dead  on 
the  field  of  victory,  and  this  pencil  story 
remains  to  tell  how  he  died. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


CHRIST   A    SHIELD. 


S  a  Shield  and  Deliverer^  Christ  is 
ever  with  His  people.  Our  estimation 
of  this  truth  will  be  proportioned  to 
our  intelligent  apprehension  of  the 
number  and  potency  of  our  enemies — 
the  costliness  and  preciousness  of  the  treasure 
thus  divinely  protected.  With  what  un- 
slumbering  vigilance,  with  what  divine 
power,  with  what  changeless  love  does  the 
Lord  Jesus  shield  the  work  of  grace  in  the 
soul  of  His  people !  Who  keeps  that  spark 
alive  in  the  ocean?  Who  guards  this  vine- 
yard of  red  wine  night  and  day  lest  any  hurt 
it  ?    Who  preserves  faith  from  faltering,  love 

5  (49) 


50  CHRIST    EVER    WITH   YOU. 

from  chilling,  hope  from  dying?  Who 
strengthens  the  work  when  it  is  feeble, 
raises  it  when  it  droops,  restores  it  when  it 
relapses,  keeps  it  in  the  cold  of  winter  and 
the  drouglit  of  summer,  and,  when  the  frosts 
and  winds  of  autumn  would  nip  and  scatter 
its  foliage,  clothes  il  with  the  freshness  and 
bloom  of  spring?  Oh,  it  is  Jesus,  encircling 
with  His  all-protecting  shield  the  work 
which  His  death  accomplished  and  which 
His  Spirit  wrought.  Trembling  believer  in 
Christ !  cast  not  away  this  holy  confidence, 
for  it  hath  great  recompence  of  reward. 
The  work  of  grace  in  your  heart  shall  never 
die;  the  kingdom  of  righteousness,  peace, 
and  joy  in  your  soul  is  indestructible.  '^They 
shall  never  jperisJi^'*  is  the  declaration  of  the 
Shepherd  who  bought  you  with  His  blood. 
Watched  over  by  Christ,  you  are  kept  by 
the  power  of  God.  And,  although  the  tide 
of   spiritual    affection    may   ebb,    and   the 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH  TOIT.  51 

shadows  of  twilight  fall  thickly  upon  your 
soul,  and  you  be  ready  to  regard  your 
conversion  a  mistake,  your  religion  a  de- 
lusion, and  your  hope  a  fallacy  —  thus 
casting  away  your  confidence,  yet,  there  is 
One  who  knows  His  own  work,  recognizes 
His  own  image,  reads  His  Spirit's  writing  in 
the  soul,  and  must  Himself  cease  to  be  ere 
He  allows  those  living  embers  of  love  He 
has  enkindled  upon  the  altar  of  your  renewed 
heart  to  die.  The  rain  may  descend,  the 
winds  may  blow,  the  flood  may  surge — 

'*  But  the  inextinguishable  flame  burns  on, 
And  shall  for  ever  bum." 

And  then  there  are  external  assualts  from 
which  alone  Christ  can  shield  us.  Innumer- 
able and  invisible,  sleepless  and  restless, 
working  with  a  power  almost  almighty,  and 
every  where  with  an  ubiquity  almost  omni- 
present,   ever  plotting    our  ruin,    are  the 


52  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

spiritual  enemies  of  our  soul,  and  the  sworn 
foes  of  our  faith.  The  world,  and  its  fascin- 
ations; Satan,  and  his  devices;  tlie  flesh, 
and  its  tendencies ;  error,  and  its  disguises, 
are  all  confederate  against  the  child  of  God, 
opposing  his  every  advance  in  holiness.  But 
Christ  is  our  ever-present  shield,  near  at  the 
moment  of  assault,  and  skillful  to  parry  and 
disarm  it.  ''Fear  not^  Abram^  I  am  thy 
shield^'^  are  words  addressed  to  all  who  have 
like  precious  faith  with  him.  Listen  to  Paul 
when  defending  Christianity  before  Nero: 
''At  my  first  answer  no  man  stood  vnth  me^ 
hut  all  menfo7'sooh  me.  .  .  Notwithstanding 
the  Lord  stood  with  me^  and  strengthened 
m^."  Severed  from  the  protection  and 
sympathy  of  man,  he  was  all  the  more 
conscious  of  the  presence  and  love  of  God. 
This  is  the  manner  of  the  Lord  with  us. 
The  stage  shall  be  swept  of  the  human  to 
give  place  to  the  Divine.     When   the  last 


CHRIST    EVER  WITH  YOU.  53 

human  prop  bends,  and  the  last  spark  of 
creature-hope  expires,  hail  it  as  the  harbinger 
of  Christ's  nearness,  that  the  more  signal 
may  appear  His  loving  deliverance,  and  the 
more  complete  and  undivided  His  glory. 
Oh  yes!  the  Lord  encompasses  you.  En- 
circled by  danger,  you  are  also  encircled  by 
Christ.  When  you  embark  in  His  cause  on 
foreign  service,  enter  the  carriage  of  a 
railway,  launch  upon  the  treacherous  sea, 
bend  your  steps  of  mercy  to  the  bedside  of 
infection,  travel  the  lone  and  dreary  road, 
be  your  experience  what  it  may,  let  your 
mind  be  kept  in  perfect  peace,  trusting  in 
this  truth:  the  ever-present  protection  of 
Jesus.  The  unhealthy  clime  shall  be  harm- 
less, the  sickening  malaria  innocuous,  the 
perilous  transit  safe,  curtained  within  the 
pavilion  of  your  Saviour's  love.  Swelling 
above  the  tempest,  louder  than  the  voice  of 
many  waters,  or  whispered  in  the  still 
5^ 


54  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

solitude,  softer  than  the  JEolian's  breathing, 
shall  be  heard  the  words  of  Jesus,  ''Fear  not^ 
I  am  with  thee  ;  he  not  dismayed^  I  am  thy 
Ood^'^  Lord,  it  is  enough !  My  heart  trusted 
in  Thee,  and  I  am  helped  ! 

Christ  is  with  His  people  as  the  Head  and 
Depository  of  all  their  spiritual  sitpplies. 
The  resources  of  the  believer,  although  not 
from  himself,  and  often,  like  Hagar's  well, 
veiled  from  the  eye,  are  yet,  like  that  well- 
spring  of  water,  flowing  at  the  very  side  of 
the  needy  saint.  Destitution  may  reign  far 
and  wide,  and  the  plaintive  cry  ascend  from 
many  a  famished  lip,  "Who  will  show  us 
any  good?" — yet  his  soul,  fed  with  the 
hidden  manna  and  quenclied  from  the  river, 
the  streams  of  which  make  glad  the  city  of 
God,  is  kept  alive  in  famine  and  in  drought, 
and  is  like  ''a  watered  garden^  and  lihe  a 
spring  of  water  lohose  waters  fail  notP  And 
what  explains  this  mystery?    The  nearness 


I 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  55 

at  his  side  of  a  full  Christ,  overflowing  with 
a  redundancy  of  grace,  love,  and  sjmipathy, 
suiting  every  circumstance,  answering  every 
call,  supplying  every  demand.  New  exi- 
gencies may  occur  in  his  daily  history,  new 
demands  made  upon  his  mental  and  physical 
powers,  trials  of  a  new  form  may  transpire, 
infirmities  but  just  discovered,  sorrows 
hitherto  untasted,  temptations  before  un- 
known, all  marking  a  new  epoch  in  his 
history,  a  new  phase  of  Christian  experience, 
and  all  clamorous  for  the  grace  that  is  to 
sustain,  the  sympathy  that  is  to  soothe,  the 
wisdom  that  is  to  guide.  And  shall  they 
ask  in  vain?  Never!  Christ  is  with  us, 
furnished,  given,  and  pledged  to  supply 
amply  and  fully  all  the  necessities  of  His 
people.  ''And  of  His  fulness  have  all  we 
received^  and  grace  for  grace^'^  that  is,  grace 
following  grace,  grace  answering  every  call 
for  grace,  more  grace,  grace  outmeasuring 


Ob  CHEIST    EVER    WITH   YOU. 

all  past  supply,  all  present  want,  ''  exceeding 
ahundantly  cibove  all  that  we  can  ask  or 
think,^'^  O  blessed  truth !  in  the  world's 
insolvency,  the  believer  has  a  safe  bank ;  in 
the  world's  famine,  he  has  a  full  granary ; 
in  the  world's  drought,  he  has  springs  of 
water;  in  the  world's  heat,  he  has  his 
pleasant  and  grateful  shade.  And  all  this  is 
concentrated  in  Christ ;  for  Christ  is  all.  O 
favored  saint!  to  have  a  full,  overflowing, 
redundant  supply,  so  near ;  exiled  from  all 
other  resources,  other  supports  failing,  other 
springs  drying,  other  shades  vanishing  as  in 
a  night,  and  he,  perchance,  sitting  him  down 
to  die  in  hopeless  grief,  lo !  words  fall  upon 
his  ear  softer,  sweeter  than  angels'  chimes, 
^'I  am  with  you  alway  j  with  you  in  this 
lone  place  and  at  this  trying  moment,  to 
unseal  your  eye  to  the  boundless  fulness  that 
it  pleased  the  Father  should  dwell  in  Me  for 
you,  the  Father's  child." 


CHRIST    EVER  WITH  YOH.  57 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

"Hold  thou  me  up  and  I  shall  be  safe." 
In  a  certain  regiment  fifty-seven  men  were 
men  of  prayer.  Before  a  great  battle  they 
all  fell  on  their  knees  and  asked  Christ  to 
take  care  of  them.  All  survived  while 
hundreds  of  the  regiment  were  killed. 

WHAT    SET   HIM   TO   THINKING. 

"Glad  to  see  you.  I  shall  never  forget 
the  medicine  you  gave  me  below  Frederick." 

This  was  said  by  my  ambulance  driver,  a 
young  man  who  had  been  directed  by  the 
surgeon  to  go  with  me  on  a  tour  of  distri- 
bution. I  did  not  recollect  him  for  the 
moment.  He  seemed  happy  as  we  started 
off,  and  inclined  to  converse.  "I  didn't 
think  much  of  religion,"  said  he,  "before  I 
came  to  this  war,  but  I've  had  a  great  many 


58  CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOTJ. 

serious  thoughts  here.  I  mean  to  lead  a 
different  life." 

"  What  set  you  a  thinking  ? " 

"Ball's  Bluff  was  one  place." 

"Were  you  there?" 

"Yes,  all  day  fighting.  I  tell  you  it  was 
solemn  work ;  my  comrades  falling  dead  on 
either  side  of  me.  I  felt  that  I  wanted 
religion." 

"That  set  you  a  thinking?" 

"Yes,  it  did;   and  another  thing  was   a] 

young  man  by  the  name  of  W ,  a  brave 

fellow  and  a  Christian,  when  on  the  morning 
of  the  battle  he  knelt  down  in  front  of  our 
tent  and  prayed.'' 

"Tell  me  about  that,"  said  I. 

"We  had  been  detailed  from  our  regiment 
as  orderlies  of  General  Lander,  and  occupied 
a  tent  together.  We  were  not  obliged  to  go 
to  the  battle,  but  hearing  that  our  company 
were  going,  we  could  not  stay  away,  and 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  59 

both  obtained  permission  to  fall  in.     Off  we 

hurried.    W ran  back  for  his  cartridge 

box,  and  then,  as  if  he  had  forgotten  some- 
thing else,  dropped  upon  his  knees  at  the 
door  of  the  tent,  and  began  to  praj  most 
earnestly.  I  never  heard  such  a  prayer  as 
that.  I  took  my  hat  off,  but  did  not  kneel. 
The  captain  of  his  company  ( not  a  Christian) 
stood  by  and  shook  his  head  at  the  boys  to 
have  them  keep  still,  saying,  in  a  low  tone, 
as  he  pointed  to  the  one  praying,  '  That 's  a 
good  boy ; '  and  General  Lander,  when  he 
heard  of  that  prayer,  remarked :  '  Tliat  is 
the  hind  of  soldiers  I  want.  That  hoy  is 
worth  his  weight  in  Gold,^  We  went  to 
the  figlit,  and  neither  of  us  was  hurt.  God 
helped  us  through." 

MUSIC   AND   LIGHT   ON   THE   BATTLE   FIELD. 

A  brave  and  godly  captain  in  one  of  our 
western  regiments  told  one  of  us  his  story, 


60  CHRIST    EVER  WITH   YOTT. 

as  we  were  removing  him  to  the  hospital. 
He  was  shot  through  both  thighs  with  a  rifle 
bullet:  a  wound  from  which  he  could  not 
recover.  While  lying  on  the  field,  he  suf- 
fered intense  agony  from  thirst.  He  sup- 
ported his  head  upon  his  hand,  and  the  rain 
from  heaven  was  falling  around  him.  In  a 
little  while  a  little  pool  of  water  formed 
under  his  elbow,  and  he  thought  if  he  could 
only  get  to  that  puddle  he  might  quench  his 
thirst.  He  tried  to  get  into  a  position  to 
suck  up  a  mouthful  of  muddy  water,  but  he 
was  unable  to  reach  within  a  foot  of  it. 
Said  he,  "I  never  felt  so  much  the  loss  of 
any  earthly  blessing.  By-and-by  night  fell, 
and  the  stars  shone  out  clear  and  beautiful 
above  the  dark  field ;  and  I  began  to  think 
of  the  great  God  who  had  given  his  Son  to 
die  a  death  of  agony  for  me,  and  that  He  was 
up  there — up  above  the  scene  of  suffering, 
and  above  those  glorious  stars;    and  I  felt 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOIT.  61 

that  I  was  going  home  to  meet  Him,  and 
praise  Him  there ;  and  I  felt  that  I  ought  to 
praise  God,  even  wounded  and  on  the  battle 
field.  I  could  not  help  singing  that  beautiful 
hymn, 

*When  I  can  read  my  title  clear 
To  mansions  in  the  skies, 
I'll  bid  farewell  to  every  fear, 
And  wipe  my  weeping  eyes.' 

And,"  said  he,  "  there  was  a  Christian 
brother  in  the  brush  near  me.  I  could  not 
see  him,  but  I  could  hear  him.  He  took  up 
the  strain ;  and  beyond  him  another  and 
another  caught  it  up  all  over  the  terrible 
battle  field  of  Shiloh.  That  night  the  echo 
was  resounding,  and  we  made  the  field  of 
battle  ring  with  hymns  of  praise  to  God !  " 


CHAPTEE  Y. 


CHRIST    A    TEACHEK. 


HRIST  is  with  His  people  as  —  a 
Teacher.  There  exists  no  office  of 
Christ  that  is  not  openly  impugned 
and  denied  in  the  present  day  :  and 
not  one  more  so  than  His  jprojphetic  office. 
The  instruction  that  canseth  to  err,  every- 
where and  alarmingly  abounds.  The  teach- 
ing of  men  is  exalted  above  the  teaching  of 
Christ,  and,  as  a  consequence,  Infidelity  and 
Popery  are  rife,  and  the  people  are  wonder- 
ing after  the  false  prophet  and  the  beast. 
This  is  a  day  in  which  the  Lord's  true  people 
must  exhibit  their  loyalty  to  Christ  in  his 
prophetical  office :  as  the  sole,  divine,  author- 

(63) 


CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOU.  63 

ized  Teacher  of  the  Church.  To  Him,  as  our 
Teacher,  must  we  only  look,  and  His  teach- 
ing must  we  only  follow.  There  is  no  safety 
but  at  Christ's  feet ;  accepting  no  doctrine 
and  observing  no  practice  but  what  comports 
with  the  teaching,  example,  and  simplicity 
of  his  word.  If  true  and  faithful  disciples, 
to  Christ  we  must  closely  and  exclusively 
adhere.  We  have  but  one  master,  Christ ; 
to  Him  we  stand  or  fall.  Beware,  in  re- 
ligious sentiments,  of  the  fascination  and  in- 
fluence of  ecclesiastical  authority,  cultivated 
intellect,  and  polished  bearing :  all  this  is  of 
man,  and  partakes  of  the  infirmity  and  sin- 
fulness of  man.  Untaught  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  unsanctified  by  God's  grace,  we 
have  seen  the  most  brilliant  and  eminent 
gifts  prove  but  as  decoy  lights,  glimmering 
along  the  bleak,  fatal  shores  of  Infidelity  and 
Eomanism,  alluring,  and  then  wrecking,  up- 
on their  rocks,  quicksands,  and  shoals  the 


64:  CHKIST    EVER  WITH   YOU. 

too  confiding,  unsuspecting  mind,  "  handl- 
ing the  word  of  God  deceitfully^  Oh,  be 
Christ's  true  disciple:  loyal  to  His  person 
and  faithful  to  His  truth !  It  is  the  word  of 
Christ  that  quickens  you,  sanctifies  you, 
comforts  you.  Nor  can  you  part  with  one 
doctrine  of  Christ  without  inflicting  the  most 
serious  injury  upon  your  soul,  and  shading 
His  glory.  ^^  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell 
in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom.'^'^  The-  more 
experimentally  you  know,  and  the  more 
simply  you  walk  in  Christ's  truth,  the  holier 
and  the  happier  will  you  be.  Oh,  how  in- 
creasingly glorious  to  your  eye  and  precious 
to  your  heart  will  Christ  become !  You  will 
more  and  more  clearly  see  that  all  truth 
centers  in  Christ,  and  that  Christ  is  the 
substance  of  all  truth ;  that  to  know  Christ 
is  to  know  the  truth ;  and  to  know  the  truth 
is  to  be  freed  from  the  blinding  influence, 
erroneous   teaching,  and   ghostly  authority 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  65 

of  man.  Blessed  Jesns !  thou  Divine  Prophet 
of  Thy  Church !  "  happy  are  Thy  men,  happy 
are  these  Thy  servants,  which  stand  con- 
tinually before  Thee,  and  that  hear  Thy 
wisdom." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Christ  must  be  made  of  God,  to  us  wisdom 
in  the  midst  of  ignorance.  He  must  be  our 
Teacher,  for  He  can  teach  without  any  man 
at  all.  The  following  are  cases  of  this  divine 
illumination : 

AN   ANXIOUS   ROMAN   CATHOLIC. 

It  was  a  young  man.  His  eyes  were  red 
with  weeping.  He  had  attended  these 
meetings  for  a  few  days.  He  came  at  first 
without  the  knowledge  of  his  friends.  He 
became  anxious  about  his  soul,  almost  from 
6^ 


66  CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

the  first  time  of  his  coming  to  the  prayer 
meetings.  His  friends  found  out  his  state 
of  mind — that  the  poor  young  man  was 
anxious  to  know  what  he  should  do  to  be 
saved — and  they  hurried  him  out,  at  night, 
into  the  streets. 

"Last  night."  said  he,  "I  had  to  walk 
the  streets  all  night,  to  keep  myself  warm ; " 
and  he  looked  down  at  his  worn-out  shoes. 

The  Saviour,  we  told  him,  "had  not  where 
to  lay  His  head."  His  eyes  filled  with  tears. 
We  conversed  with  him,  counseled  him, 
prayed  with  him,  and  he  went  out  to  seek 
employment,  saying,  "I  shall  be  in  the 
prayer  meeting  to-morrow." 

ANOTHER. 

He  came  wishing  to  know  where  he 
could  go  to  sign  the  temperance  pledge. 
He  had  a  family.  He  had  formed  drinking 
habits,   though   not  a  drunkard;    but   his 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  67 

conviction  was,  that,  to  be  consistent  in  seek- 
ing an  interest  in  Christ,  he  ought  to  begin 
by  abandoning  strong  drink.  He  is  earnestly 
seeking.  He  is  at  our  meetings  every  day, 
and  begins  to  give  pleasing  evidence  that 
he  has  experienced  the  "great change." 

ANOTHER. 

Tliis  is  the  case  of  a  lady.  She  put  into 
the  meeting  the  following  request  for  prayer: 

"A  lady  (Roman  Catholic)  who  came 
to  this  meeting  at  first  out  of  mere  curiosity, 
but  who  heard  at  this  meeting  such  things 
as  she  has  never  heard  before,  would  be 
"oery  thankful  if  the  Fulton  Street  Prayer 
Meeting  will  pray  for  her  all  this  week,  that 
she  may  be  taught  how  to  believe  on  Christ. 
She  does  not  think  she  is  a  Christian,  but 
desires  to  be  one.  She  will  attend  every 
day." 

She  was  inquired  of  if  her  priest  would 


68  CHRIST   EVER   WITH   YOIT. 

allow  her  to  attend  these  prayer  meet- 
ings. 

"Mj  priest,"  she  replied,  "cannot  hinder 
me.  The  step  is  my  own.  It  is  taken  with 
great  deliberation.  I  act  under  the  dictates 
of  my  own  conscience.  I  must  do  what  I 
am  convinced  my  own  welfare  requires.  I 
believe  these  are  Christians.  I  believe  this 
is  prayer." 

"  What  has  wrought  such  a  great  change 
in  your  feelings  and  opinions  ? " 

"The  wide  difference  between  the  mem- 
bers of  my  own  Church  and  those  who  come 
here  to  pray,  is  enough  to  induce  me  to 
inquire  what  it  means.  These  are  praying 
people.  My  people  are  cursing,  swearing, 
prayerless  people.  I  believe  these  are 
Christians.  I  fear  that  very  few  of  my 
Church  are  Christians ;   I  think  some  are." 

"Are  you  concerned  about  yourself?" 

"  So  much  so  that  I  am  very  miserable. 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  69 

I  did  not  close  my  eyes  in  sleep  last  night, 
by  reason  of  my  anxiety." 

"Can  you  give  up  all  hope  from  your 
own  merits,  or  any  meritorious  acts  which 
you  may  perform — all  expectation  of  pardon 
on  account  of  penances  or  absolution,  and 
rest  solely  on  the  merits  of  Christ's  atoning 
sacrifice  for  all  your  hope  of  justification 
with  God?" 

"I  can,  and  do  so.  I  know  I  must.  But 
I  do  not  have  peace." 

"  Is  there  any  thing  you  are  unwilling  to 
give  up  ? " 

"No,  nothing.  I  am  willing  to  give  up 
Church,  my  former  religion,  every  thing 
else,  if  I  can  only  have  forgiveness  of  sin, 
and  peace  and  joy  in  believing  in  Christ, 
such  as  you  Protestants  have." 

"You  must  not  make  a  merit  of  even 
giving  these  up.  You  must  simply  tnist 
your  soul  in  the  hands  of  Christ,  as  a  Saviour, 
with  confidence  and  love." 


70  CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOU. 

Can  any  doubt  that  this  poor  Catholic 
lady  has  been  led  of  the  Spirit,  thns  far? 
She  does  not  doubt  it.  She  says  none  but 
Divine  power  could  have  led  her  to  the 
ground  on  which  she  now  stands. 


CHAPTER   YL 


CHRIST    A    SAVIOUR. 


HEIST  is  with  us  as — a  Saviour. 
Oh,  how  the  heart  thrills  and  the  eye 
beams  at  the  mention  of  the  name 
of  Jesus  !  What  we  chiefly  need  is, . 
not  wisdom  to  guide,  or  power  to  shield,  or 
sympathy  to  soothe,  or  might  to  strengthen ; 
it  is  SALVATION — the  soul  saved  —  a  Saviour 
to  save  us  to  the  uttermost.  We  want  guilt 
atoning  blood,  soul-justifying  righteousness, 
sin-subduing  grace ;  a  Saviour  that  has  done 
all,  suffered  all,  paid  all,  and  leaves  us 
nothing  to  do  but,  believe  and  be  saved. 
This  is  Jesus.  My  reader,'  salvation  is  the 
finished  work  of  Christ,  and  the  free  gift  of 

cn) 


72  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

God;  and  nothing  less  and  nothing  more  is 
required  of  you  than  that,  with  a  penitent 
and  believing  heart,  you  trust  in  the  blood 
and  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  God 
has  laid  all  your  sins,  all  your  curse,  and  all 
your  condemnation  upon  Christ;  and  all 
that  He  asks  of  you  in  return  is,  a  believing, 
loving,  obedient  reception  of  His  Son.  Oh, 
then,  grieve  not,  dishonor  not  the  Saviour 
by  doubting  His  willingness  or  ability  to 
save  yoii! 

Let  us  employ  the  few  remaining  pages  in 
suggesting  some  of  those  more  peculiar  and 
pressing  ciTcumstances  in  our  history  in 
which  the  presence  of  Christ  may  be  es- 
pecially anticipated  by  the  child  of  God,  the 
believing  apprehension  of  which  will  impart 
nerve  to  the  hand  that  grasps  this  strong 
and  beautiful  staff. 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOTT.  73 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Christ  is  the  all-sufficient  and  only  Saviour 
and  Redeemer  for  all  those  who  will  truly 
put  their  trust  in  Him.  He  saves  to  the 
uttermost  all  who  come  to  God  by  Him. 

COMmG   TO   CHRIST   AT   ONCE. 

"Are  you  the  Missionary  of  this  old 
Church  ? "  said  a  plain,  intelligent,  energetic 
looking  man,  as  he  came  up  into  the  upper 
lecture  room  in  Fulton  Street. 

"I  am,"  said  the  Missionary. 

"Well,  I  wanted  to  see  you  and  talk  with 
you  a  moment." 

"What  do  you  want?"  said  the  Missionary. 
The  man  stood  with  his  chin  quivering,  and 
his  eyes  suffused  with  tears,  as  he  answered ; 
"I  want  to  become  a  Christian." 

"You  do?"  said  the  Missionary.     "Why 
do  you  want  to  become  a  Christian  ? " 
7 


74:  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

"I  am  a  farmer,"  said  the  man,  "well  to 
do  in  the  world.  I  have  every  thing  in  the 
world  that  a  man  needs,  but  I  have  no 
religion."  And  he  looked  like  a  despairing, 
lost  man,  who  knew  he  was  lost. 

''What  roused  up  your  attention  to  the 
need   of  religion  ?  " 

"  I  read  in  the  revival  article,  in  the  Chris- 
tian Intelligencer,  a  scrap  headed,  'not  till 
the  next  communion.'  It  told  how  the  poor 
man  kept  saying,  when  urged  to  come  to 
the  Church  and  make  open  profession  of  his 
attachment  to  Christ,  'Not  till  the  next 
communion : '  till  one  day  when  he  was 
called  for,  at  his  room,  it  was  found  that  he 
was  gone.  And  when  inquiry  was  made 
for  him,  the  unfeeling  answer  was  made  that 
he  died  right  here,  dropped  down  dead,  one 
day,  and  we  cleared  him  out  to  Greenwood. 
I  read  it,  and  it  struck  terror  to  my  mind. 
I  thought,  what  if  I  should  be  stricken  down 


CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOU.  75 

in   tlie    same    way,    all    unprepared    as    I 
am." 

"And  what  wonld  become  of  you?" 
"I   should  be   lost,"  said  he,  with  deep 
feeling,   "lost.     I  know  I  should   go  right 
down  to  hell,  for  I  am  a  great  sinner." 
"How  was  it  that  you  came  in  here?" 
"I  am  a  farmer  in  Hunterdon   County, 
New  Jersey ;   I  had  heard  of  these  prayer 
meetings  here,  so  I  thought  I  would  come 
here  at  once.     I  was  in  the  meeting  yester- 
day.    And  I  must  go  home  to-day ;    and  I 
cannot  go   till   I   am  a  Christian." 

The  Missionary  closed  the  door  and  thus 
precluded  interruption,  and  said,  "I  do  not 
see  but  you  must  become  a  Christian  now. 
Are  you  willing  to  submit  to  Christ  now, 
to  believe  on  Him,  and  trust  Him  and  His 
finished  righteousness  for  all  your  hope  of 
salvation  ?" 
"Yes." 


76  CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOIT. 

"To  repent  of,  and  forsake  all  sin,  and 
devote  yourself  forever  to  Him  ?  " 

"Yes." 

"To  pray  with  me  now,  to  go  honie  and 
pray  in  your  family,  and  under  all  circum- 
stances lead  a  Christian  life  ? " 

"Yes." 

Tlie  Missionary  led  in  prayer.  The  farmer 
followed,  in  a  prayer  of  earnest  humility, 
penitence,  self-renunciation,  and  unreserved 
consecration  to  the  service   of  God. 

He  went  into  the  prayer  meeting  which 
was  just  about  to  open.  After  it  was  over, 
he  went  on  his  way,  rejoicing  in  the  hope 
that  his  sins  had  been  forgiven,  and  resolved, 
on  a  new  life  of  devotedness  to  God.  From 
the  time  of  his  first  awakening,  he  gave  his 
attention  to  the  subject  of  personal  religion 
with  an  earnestness  which  asked  for  no 
delay.  "  Such  a  prayer  as  that  man  made," 
said  the  Missionary,  in  relating  these  facts, 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  77 

"I  scarcely  ever  heard ;  and  I  felt  in  mj  own 
soul,  that  that  man  had  found  an  interest  in 
Christ,  and  had  made  the  surrender  and 
the  consecration  which  he   professed." 

Some  one  touched  the  writer  as  he  was 
leaving  the  prayer  meeting.  He  turned 
and  saw  the  face  of  a  well-known  Christian 
brother ;  and  close  at  hand  stood  a  young 
lady,  dressed  in  deep  mourning,  with  whom 
lie  had  been  conversing — standing  there,  a 
child  of  sorrow.  The  big  tears  wei'e  slowly 
rolling  down  her  cheek,  and  then  she  would 
wipe  them  away,  as  if  she  had  been  half 
unconscious  of  their  fallintr. 

Here  is  a  lady,  said  the  gentleman,  to 
whom  I  wish  you  to  say  a  few  words.  She 
says  she  is  "uncertain  what  to  do."  I  soon 
saw  that  slie  was  in  spiritual  trouble. 

"Why  are  you  uncertain  what  to  do?" 
we  enquired. 


7^ 


78  CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

"1  do  not  understand  tlie  next  step  to  be 

taken,"  said  she. 

"Where  are  you  now?"  we  asked. 

''1    have    been    coming    daily    to    these 

meetings  for  four  weeks,  and  all  that  time  I 

have  felt  anxious  about  my  soul,  but  all  I 

do   does    not   seem  to   make  my  case   any 

better." 

'''And  what  do  you  try  to  do?" 

"I  have  striven  to  convince  myself  that 

I    am  a   sinner:    as    I    know    I    am.     But 

though  I  know  it,  as  a  truth,  I  do  not  feel 

about  it  as  I  should." 

''How    would  you  feel    about  it    if  you 

could?" 

"I  would  have  deep  conviction." 
"What  is  your  present  impression  about 

yourself? " 

"That  I  am  a  great  sinner;  that  is  all." 
"  And  what  would  you  have  more  ? " 
"  That  is  what  I  do  not  understand.     My 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  79 

next  step  should  be  for  deeper  conviction. 
But  what  further  can  I  do  ?  " 

''Tour  mistake  is  a  very  common  one. 
Your  next  step,  and  only  step,  is  to  go  to 
Christ,  just  as  you  are.  Go  to  Him  at 
once.  You  can  do  nothing.  Hitherto  you 
have  been  relying  upon  yourself.  Renounce 
all  this  as  a  dishonor  done  to  Christ,  as  a 
Saviour,  and  go  to  Him  for  all  the  help 
you  need  hope  for,  or  desire." 

"Is  that  all?" 

"  That  is  all.  You  must  repent  now  and 
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Go  to 
Him,  who  says  to  you,  'Him  that  cometh 
unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out.'  All 
you  have  to  do  is,  with  true  penitence,  to 
believe  in  His  mercy." 

"  Oh,"  said  she,  as  if  a  new  light  had 
dawned  upon  her  mind,  "  is  that  my  next 
step  ? " 

"  Not  your  next  step,  as   if  you   had  al- 


80  CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

ready  taken  one  or  more  riglit  steps  in 
religion.  Going  to  Christ  is  yonr  first 
step.  He  does  not  say.  Come  to  conviction, 
come  to  a  deeper  sense  of  sin.  But  He  says, 
Come  unto  Jff^." 

"  Oh !  what  a  self-righteous  creature  I  am. 
I  see  it  all  now.  I  have  been  refusing  Christ, 
while  all  this  time  I  thought  I  was  pre- 
paring to  come  to  Him."  She  said  this, 
evidently  disappointed  in  herself. 

"Will  you  go  to  Jesus,  now?"  was 
hastily  asked. 

She  looked  up  with  a  smile,  and  great 
resolution  depicted  in  her  intelligent  face, 
as  she  answered, 

"I   WILL." 

She  will^  indeed,  if  the  Spirit  was  truly 
making  her  "willing  in  the  day  of  His 
power."  There  and  then  we  parted.  The 
sequel  is  yet  to  come. 


CHAPTEE    YII. 


CHRIST     IN     SERYICE. 


HRIST  is  with  you — in  service. 
The  religion  of  Jesus  is  an  active, 
self-denjdng  religion.  The  Divine 
Master  has  left  the  scene  of  His  own 
toil,  but  He  has  given  to  every  disciple  his 
work.  Each  has  his  mission  :  something  to 
do  for  souls,  something  to  accomplish  for  the 
Saviour,  some  glory  to  bring  to  God.  Real- 
izing in  some  degree  what  a  debtor  to  the 
Lord  he  is,  what  he  owes  to  the  love  that 
chose  him,  to  the  blood  that  ransomed  him, 
to  the  grace  that  called  him,  to  the  Saviour 
that  gave  Himself  a  sacrifice,  the  believer 
exclaims   from    the   depth   of    his    grateful 

(81) 


82  CKRIST    EVER   WITH   TOU. 

heart,  '^  Lord^  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to 
do  f  "  And  now,  to  labor  for  Christ  is  his 
highest  desire  and  ambition ;  be  the  service 
home  or  foreign,  pleasant  or  self-denying, 
distinguished  or  obscure,  to  rule  an  empire 
or  to  sweep  a  crossing.  In  this  service  for 
Christ,  Christ  is  with  you.  Unseen  and 
unheard.  He  is  close  at  your  side,  guiding 
your  judgment,  strengthening  your  faith, 
nerving  your  heart,  sustaining  and  cheering 
your  spirit,  honoring,  blessing,  and  reward- 
ing your  labor.  Oh,  think  not  that  Christ 
can  quit  you  for  a  moment,  active  and  toil- 
ing for  Him.  He  knows  all  your  difficulties, 
marks  your  discouragements,  is  cognizant 
of  your  infirmities,  sees  your  faintings  and 
deficiencies,  how  onerous,  delicate  and  hum- 
bling the  task.  Think  you,  while  engaged 
in  a  service  of  love  for  His  name,  the  sweat 
upon  your  brow,  the  pressure  of  your  mind, 
anxiety  and  exhaustion  absorbing  life  itself, 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  83 

foes  threatening,  friends  chiding,  your  own 
heart  often  misgiving,  that  Christ  will  leave 
you?  Oh  never!  ^^ Lo^  lam  with  you 
alway'^'^  —  all  days  —  are  the  words  with 
which  He  seeks  to  strengthen  and  cheer  you 
on  in  your  work  of  faith  and  labor  of  love 
which  you  show  for  His  dear  name. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Christ  must  ever  be  with  us  in  all  the 
duties  of  life.  We  must  have  His  presence 
as  a  power  in  our  hearts.  '^ Ever  with  you" 
has  cheered  thousands  of  hearts  in  the  midst 
of  arduous  labors  in  His  service. 


As  soon  as  the  prayer  was  concluded,  an 
old  British  veteran  arose,  and  began  to  speak 


84:  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

with  a  strong  Scotch  accent.  He  said  he 
was  glad  to  hear  that  young  chaplain  to  the 
army  ask  for  prayer.  For  his  part  he 
believed  in  prayer;  he  rejoiced  in  prayer; 
he  lived  in  prayer.  He  had  known  the 
power  of  prayer.  He  had  felt  it.  He  knew 
God  heard  and  answered  prayer.  Oh !  how 
wondrously  does  He  answer !  What  displays 
of  His  grace,  said  he,  have  I  seen  in  answer 
to  prayer.  When  General  Havelock  was 
chaplain  of  a  company,  I  was  a  non-com- 
missioned officer  in  the  same  company.  I 
knew  him  well.  He  was  not  then  a  pious 
man.  He  began  even  then,  however  to 
manifest  those  qualities  which  afterwards  so 
distinguished  him.  It  was  not  until  he  rose 
to  a  higher  grade  that  the  great  change  took 
place.  Then,  he  was  for  the  salvation  of  his 
men,  out  of  every  kind  of  evil:  present  and 
to  come.  At  first  he  began  with  temperance. 
Then  he  went  on  to  religion.      He  was  a 


CHRIST 


iSyer  with  yoxt.  85 


noble  commander,  brave  as  be  was  good. 
He  dared  to  do  right,  no  matter  who  opposed. 
When  his  chaplains  were  gone,  or  disabled, 
he  would  be  his  own  chaplain.  He  had 
heard  him  preach  the  Gospel  many  a  time. 
He  was  a  power  in  the  camp  :  that  you  may 
well  believe.  The  men  all  respected  him. 
They  knew  he  was  a  thorough  soldier :  fear- 
less  as  a  lion,  as  well  as  a  Christian.  Many 
eyes  would  be  wet  when  Havelock  was 
speaking.  There  was  such  earnestness  and 
tenderness  at  times.  At  other  times  he 
would  make  your  very  hair  stand  on  end. 
It  was  not  strange  that  many  were  con- 
verted. Their  hearts  melted  under  his  ap- 
peals and  great  numbers  turned  to  the 
Lord.  When  they  received  Jesus,  and 
great  numbers  did,  and  professed  their  faith 
in  Christ,  then  he  went  one  step  further, 
and  baptized  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Oh ! 
8 


86  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

what   solemn   times   I  have  seen   away  in 
India  among  these  men. 

Some  of  the  officers  became  his  enemies. 
They  wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  of 
the  British  forces  in  India,  complaining  of 
General  Havelock,  and  saying  that  he  did 
things  nnbecoming  an  officer,  and  took  upon 
himself  to  do  what  he  had  no  right  to  do. 
The  Chief  in  command  appointed  a  Com- 
mission of  Inquiry.  They  came  and  made 
a  thorough  examination  into  the  conduct  of 
the  General  and  ^the  condition  of  the  men. 
They  found  Havelock  a  most  rigid  discipli- 
narian—  thorough  in  discipline  as  he  was 
fervent  in  prayer,  and  they  found  no  portion 
of  the  army  in  so  good  a  state  as  the  soldiers 
of  Havelock.  They  said  to  him,  after  all 
their  examination,  "Go  on  with  your  tem- 
perance; go  on  with  your  praying;  go  on 
with  your  baptizing;  the  better  these  Chris- 
tian men,  the  better  the  soldiers."     They 


CHRIST    EVER  WITH   YOU.  87 

reported  to  the  Chief  in  command  that  they 
found  no  snch  soldiers  as  the  praying  saints, 
as  they  called  them,  of  General  Havelock. 
If  there  were  men  wanted  for  any  post  of 
duty  and  of  danger,  Havelock's  saints  were 
the  men. 

I  have  been  in  many  a  hard-fought  battle, 
the  old  soldier  added,  and  our  men  never 
went  into  battle  without  prayer.  They  com- 
mitted themselves  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
then  they  were  ready  for  life  or  deatli. 

Our  armies,  said  the  old  veteran,  should 
be  praying  armies.  We  Tnust  have  prayer. 
Prayer  prevails  with  God.  How  was  it  with 
Joshua  and  the  kings  and  prophets  of  Israel? 
What  men  of  prayer  they  were,  and  how  the 
Lord  heard  and  answered  them.  Let  us 
pray  for  the  men  in  arms;  pray  for  the 
chaplains. 

The  old  warrior  spoke  with  great  earnest- 


88  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOr. 

ness,  and  the  tears  rolled  down  many  a  face 
as  lie  gave  his  personal  experience  and 
hearty,  honest  testimony  to  the  jpower  of 


CHAPTER  YIII. 


CHRIST     EST   SUFFEEIKG. 


HEIST  is  with  yon  in — suffering. 
Himself  a  sufferer ;  oh,  suffering 
never  looked  so  lovely,  martyrdom 
never  wore  a  crown  so  resplendent, 
as  when  the  Son  of  God  bowed  His  head 
and  drank  the  cup  of  woe  for  us !  Himself 
a  sufferer,  is  there  a  being  in  the  universe 
who  could  take  His  place  at  your  side  in  all 
the  scenes  of  mental,  spiritual,  and  bodily 
suffering  through  which  your  Heavenly 
Father  leads  you,  comparable  to  Christ? 
What  are  your  sufferings  contrasted  with 
His?  And  what  was  there  in  the  unpar- 
alleled greatness  and  intensity  of  His  to  dis- 

8^  (89) 


90  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

qualify  Him  from  entering  with  the  warmest 
love  and  deepest  sympathy  into  yours  ?  Suf- 
fering for  His  sake,  or  suffering  His  will.  He 
is  with  you  to  sustain,  to  mitigate,  to  sanc- 
tify. It  is  given  to  you  not  only  to  believe, 
but  also  to  suffer  for  Christ.  Removed  from 
the  active  sphere  of  your  Christianity ;  the 
sphere  and  the  service  which,  perhaps,  you 
too  fondly  idolized ;  He  has  placed  you  in 
the  school  of  passive  endurance,  a  position 
to  you  the  most  irksome  and  trying.  Look 
into  the  burning,  fiery  furnace  of  the  three 
children  of  Israel :  "Z(9, 1  see  four  men  loose^ 
walking  in  the  midst  of  the  fire^  and  they 
have  no  hurt ;  and  the  form  of  the  fourth  is 
nice  the  Son  of  God,''  (Dan.  3:  25).  ^So  is 
Christ  with  you  in  suffering.  You  shall  pass 
through  the  furnace,  the  flames  but  destroy- 
ing your  bonds  and  setting  you  free  from 
some  dominant  sin,  some  potent  spell,  some 
slavish  fear,  bringing   you  more  fully  into 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  91 

the  happy,  holy  realization  of  your  adoption, 
pardon,  and  acceptance  of  God.  Treading 
that  furnace  at  your  side,  controlling  its 
flames,  tempering  its  heat,  is  the  same  Son 
of  God  who  trod  it  with  them,  and  who  says 
to  you,  "Z(9,  /  am  with  you  alway  " 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

The  blessed  Saviour  is  never  more  with  His 
people  than  in  suffering.  He  himself  has 
been  a  sufferer  and  He  knows  how  to  pity 
His  people  when  they  suffer,  and  if  best  for 
them,  He  can  send  them  quick  relief. 

An  old  sea  captain,  with  great  emphasis, 
exhorted  men  to  have  faith  in  God,  as  a 
hearer  and  answerer  of  prayer.  He  urged 
faith  as  certain  of  a  blessing  in  some  form 
or  other,  and  often  in  the  very  form  in  which 
it  was  looked  for.     He  mentioned  an  illus- 


92  CHRIST    EVER   TVTTH   YOU. 

tration  in  his  own  history.  After  he  became 
pious,  and  while  he  yet  commanded  a  ship, 
he  was  blown  off  from  the  coast  of  America, 
ont  to  sea,  in  a  gale.  He  had  his  wife  and 
two  children  on  board.  All  hands,  passen- 
gers, officers  and  crew,  were  put  on  short 
allowance,  and  very  short  at  that,  a  mere 
morsel  of  meat  to  each.  When  they  had 
been  out  thirty  days,  and  had  not  seen  a  sail^ 
he  brought  up  all  the  provision  he  had,  and 
spread  it  on  a  cotton  bale,  and  fell  down  on 
his  knees  by  the  side  of  it,  and  prayed  God 
that  He  would  make  that  like  the  widow's 
cruise  of  oil  and  barrel  of  meal,  that  He 
would  not  allow  it  to  be  spent,  that  He 
would  vindicate  His  own  name  as  the  hearer 
of  prayer,  and  send  them  quick  relief.  He 
cast  himself  implicitly  upon  the  promise  of 
God.  And  while  he  was  yet  on  his  knees, 
he  felt  such  a  sweet  assurance  that  his 
prayer   was  heard    and   already   answered, 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  98 

that  he  went  down  into  the  cabin  and  told 
his  wife  that  they  should  have  succor,  and 
that  speedily.  She  could  scarcely  believe  it. 
They  had  been  now  thirty-four  days,  and 
had  not  seen  a  sail,  and  no  prospect  of 
seeing  one.  His  wife  stood  in  a  state  of 
incredulous  amazement. 

"  What  makes  you  think  we  are  to  have 
succor  ?  "  said  she. 

''Because  I  have  been  asking,  and  God 
has  assured  me  that  it  is  coming,  and  close 
at   hand." 

"While  I  was  yet  speaking,  there  was  a  cry 
on  deck,  and  from  the  lookout,  aloft,  ''Sail 
ho,"  "Sail  ho."  I  ran  on  deck;  "Where 
away?"  said  I,  and  was  answered;  and 
within  ten  minutes  from  the  time  I  arose 
from  my  knees  in  prayer,  there  was  a  ship 
under  full  sail,  bearing  down  for  us,  and 
when  it  came  near,  I  saw  them  lower  the 
"boat,  and  put  into  it  four  barrels.     The  boat 


94  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOII. 

was  cast  off  aDd  pulled  away  for  my  ship. 
You  would  hardly  have  expected  that  such 
a  little  cockle  shell  of  a  boat  could  live  in 
such  a  sea.  But  she  rode  like  an  egg.  When 
the  officer  came  on  deck,  I  enquired  of  him 
what  he  had  in  his  boat. 

"Two  barrels  of  meat,  and  two  barrels  of 
bread,"  he  answered. 

"What  made  you  bring  them  here?" 
said  I. 

"God  put  it  into  my  heart.  I .  thought 
you  must  be  short  of  provisions,  sir,  and  so 
I  brought  them  along." 

So  within  an  liour  from  the  time  I  was 
praying  for  food,  I  had  two  barrels  of  meat 
and  two  barrels  of  bread  added  to  my  stores, 
and  we  were  all  saved. 

He  said  that  he  could  give  many  like 
examples  from  his  own  history,  but  the  five 
minutes  rule  would  forbid. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


CHRIST     m     EETIEEMENT. 

H  RIST  is  with  you  in  —  retwemeni 
and  solitude.  It  was  in  this  path  of 
loneliness,  consecrated  to  contempla- 
tion and  prayer,  that  our  blessed 
Lord  was  the  most  effectually  trained  and 
girded  for  His  mission  of  love.  He  fre- 
quently and  habitually  sought  retirement. 
Sequestered  from  the  world,  withdrawn  from 
His  disciples,  He  would  thread  the  mountain 
defiles  and  seek  in  its  deep  ravines  and 
hidden  recesses  the  solitary  place  for  prayer. 
Entering  that  lonely  garden  ''  over  the  IrooTc 
Kedron^''  amidst  its  hallowed  shades,  its 
leafy  grottoes,  and  its  solemn  stillness.  He 

(95) 


96  CHEIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

spent  the  night  preceding  His  crucifixion  in 
agonizing  prayer,  imploring  strength  from 
His  Father  for  the  morrow.  How  simple 
and  concise,  yet  how  pregnant  with  mean- 
ing, the  narrative  of  Christ's  habits  of  soli- 
tude; '^  And  in  the  morning^  rising  up  a 
great  ichile  lefore  day^  He  went  out  and 
departed  into  a  solitary  place ^  and  there 
prayedr  How  holy  and  instructive,  and 
how  melting  the  pathos  of,  this  spectacle! 
Child  of  solitude !  whose  social  position,  or 
whose  mental  idiosyncrasy,  or  whose  refined 
and  sensitive  nature,  or  whose  bodily  infirm- 
ities separate  you  from  your  fellows,  cloister 
you  from  the  world,  oh,  deem  not  your  path 
untrodden  by  your  Lord!  He  walked  it 
before  you,  and  He  will  delight  to  come,  and 
by  the  soothing  of  His  love,  and  the  suc- 
courings  of  His  grace,  and  the  manifestations 
of  His  glory  re-tread  again  those  foot  prints 
He  has  left  upon  your  shaded  way,  cheering 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   TOTT.  97 

and  comforting  you  with  His  presence.  Oh, 
you  cannot  be  alone:  alone  with  Christ! 
Blessed  loneliness,  hallowed  solitude,  shared 
and  sweetened  and  sanctified  by  Jesus ! 
Around  that  sleepless  pillow,  by  that  couch 
of  pain,  in  that  room  of  stillness  Christ's 
presence  hovers.  Holy  the  lessons  He  will 
now  teach  you,  sweet  the  truths  He  will 
now  unfold  to  you,  soothing  the  words  He 
will  now  speak  to  you,  unutterable  the  bless- 
ings, into  the  experience  of  which  He  will 
now  briijg  your  soul.  It  has  pleased  Him, 
perhaps,  to  deny  you  home  and  friends  and 
means,  thus  severing  and  separating  you 
from  all  but  Himself.  Be  it  so.  He  still  is 
yours.  In  separation  and  solitude  He  will 
unfold  to  you  the  secret  of  His  covenant, 
the  secret  of  His  love.  And  now  your  soul, 
unclasping  her  pinions,  rises  nearer  to  heaven, 
nearer  to  God.  Disengaged  from  the  world, 
severed  from  the  creature,  cut  off  from  re- 
9 


98  CHKIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

sources,  Christ  will  have  more  of  your  heart, 
and  YOU  will  have  more  of  His,  than  ever. 
Solitude  shared  with  His  presence  and 
sunned  with  His  smile,  supplies  more  imme- 
diately traced  to  His  hand,  will  increase 
your  knowledge  of  God,  strengthen  your 
drooping  faith,  deepen  your  personal  holiness, 
give  development,  symmetry,  and  perfection 
to  your  entire  Christian  character;  and, 
when  you  emerge  from  it,  thus  trained  and 
disciplined,  you  will  go  forth  to  active  duty, 
^^ds  a  hridegroom  coining  out  of  his  chamher^ 
rejoicing  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  raceP 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Many  a  soldier  has  gone  back  to  his  fond 
mother's  instructions  in  his  last  moments. 
The  last  words  have  often  been  the  j)rayers 
which  a  mother  taught  him. 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  99 


THE   soldier's   PRAYER. 

It  was  the  evening  after  a  great  battle. 
All  day  long  the  din  of  strife  had  echoed  far, 
and  thickly  strewn  lay  the  shattered  forms 
of  those  so  lately  erect  and  exultant  in  the 
flesh  and  strength  of  manhood.  Among 
the  many  who  bowed  to  the  conqueror 
Death  that  night,  was  a  youth  in  the  first 
freshness  of  mature  life.  The  strong  limbs 
lay  listless,  and  the  dark  hair  was  matted 
with  gore  on  the  pale  broad  forehead.  His 
eyes  were  closed.  As  one  who  ministered  to 
the  sufferer  bent  over  him,  he  at  first  thought 
him  dead ;  but  the  white  lips  moved,  and 
slowly  in  weak  tones  he  repeated, 

"  Now  I  lay  me  down  to  sleep, 
I  pray  the  Lord  my  soul  to  keep ; 
If  I  should  die  before  I  wake, 
I  pray  the  Lord  my  soul  to  take ; 
And  this  I  ask  for  Jesus'  sake." 


100  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

As  he  finished  he  opened  his  eyes,  and 
meeting  the  pitying  gaze  of  a  brother  soldier, 
he  exclained,  ''My  mother  taught  me  that 
when  I  was  a  little  boy,  and  I  have  said  it 
every  night  since  I  can  remember.  Before 
the  morning  dawn  I  believe  God  will  take 
my  soul  for  '  Jesus '  sake ; '  but  before  I  die, 
I  want  to  send  a  message  to  my  mother." 

He  was  carried  to  a  temporary  hospital, 
and  a  letter  was  written  to  his  mother,  which 
he  dictated,  full  of  Christian  faith  and  filial 
love.  He  was  calm  and  peaceful.  Just 
as  the  sun  arose,  his  spirit  went  home,  his 
last  articulate  words  being, 

"  I  pray  the  Lord  my  soul  to  take ; 
And  this  I  ask  for  Jesus'  sake.'* 

So  died  William  B of  the  Massachu- 
setts volunteers.  The  prayer  of  childhood 
was  the  praj^er  of  manhood.  He  learned  it 
at    his    mother's    knee    in    his    far  distant 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH  YOU.  101 

northern  home,  and  he  whispered  it  in 
dying,  when  his  young  life  ebbed  away  on 
a  southern  battle  field.  It  was  his  nightly 
petition  in  life,  and  the  angel  who  bore  his 
spirit  home  to  heaven,  bore  the  sweet  prayer 
his  soul  loved  so  well. 

God  bless  the  saintly  words,  alike  loved 
and  repeated  by  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor, 
wise  and  ignorant,  old  and  young,  only 
second  to  our  Lord's  prayer  in  beauty  and 
simplicity.  Happy  the  soul  that  can  repeat 
it  with  the  holy  fervor  of  our'dying  soldier. 


9* 


T 


CHAPTKR  X. 

CHRIST     m     BEREAYEMENT. 

f/Ph  HRIST  is  with  you — in  the  hour 
of  bereavement.  He,  too,  drank  of 
this  cup.  He  offers  you  not  a  lieart 
unacquainted  with  your  grief.  He 
had  much  to  do  with  death  when  on  earth. 
He  sympathized  with  its  sorrow,  awoke  its 
slumbers,  robbed  it  of  its  prey,  became  its 
Victim,  and  then  its  Victor.  He  has  per- 
mitted this  bereavement  to  visit  you.  Not 
without  His  will  and  His  purpose  of  love, 
has  He  smitten  you  with  this  woe,  visited 
you  with  this  loss.  Has  your  Heavenly 
Father  written  you  a  widow,  an  orphan, 
childless,  friendless  ?     Has  He  removed  the 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   TOTJ.  103 

joy  of  your  heart,  the  light  of  your  home, 
the  hope  of  your  family,  the  strong  and 
beautiful  staff  upon  which  you  leaned  for 
support?  Is  your  door  darkened  with  the 
funeral  that  bears  from  its  threshold  all  that 
was  so  fondly  loved  and  precious?  Oh, 
deem  not  yourself  forsaken,  desolate,  and 
bereft !  Christ  was  never  nearer  to  you  than 
now.  The  Christ  who  bedewed  the  turf  of 
Lazarus'  grave  with  tears  of  bereaved  affec- 
tion for  the  dead,  and  of  sacred  sympathy 
with  the  living,  is  spiritually  at  this  moment 
by  your  side.  He  offers  you  a  heart  touched 
with  your  grief,  throbbing  with  a  love  that 
more  than  compensates  for  the  affection  now 
cold  in  death ;  an  arm  that  shall  be  equal  in 
its  strength  and  support  to  your  emergency; 
a  shield  that  will  encircle  your  person,  your 
position,  and  your  interests,  infinitely  more 
potent  and  safe  than  that  which  at  one  fell 
stroke  God  has  laid  low.     Christ  sensibly, 


104  CHKIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

manifestly  with  you  now,  oh  wish  not  to 
displace  Him  by  recalling  the  treasure  from 
which  you  have  parted.  It  is  recorded  of 
the  amiable  and  pious  Fenelon,  that  in  the 
eulogy  he  pronounced  over  the  Dauphin,  I 
his  illustrious  pupil  and  friend,  as  the  corpse 
shrouded  with  the  pall  was  placed  in  the] 
church  before  the  pulpit,  where, 

"Lovely  in  death,  the  beauteous  ruin  lay!" 

he  uttered  these  words :  "  There  lies  the 
hope  of  his  father !  the  delight  of  his  court ! 
the  object  of  the  nation's  joyful  anticipation ! 
But  so  convinced  am  I  of  his  happy  state, 
that,  if  the  turning  of  a  straw  would  bring 
him  back,  I  would  not  turn  that  straw." 
Weeping  mourner !  bereaved  Christian !  in 
the  bright  sunshine  of  hope  which  bathes 
the  coffined  remains  of  "one  so  dear,"  read 
you  this  holy  lesson  of  cheerful  acquiescence 
with  the  will  of  your  Father,  and  express 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  105 

yonr  perfect  satisfaction  in  the  eternal  hap- 
piness of  the  departed  one  now  sweetly 
sleeping  in  Jesns,  If  the  turning  of  a  straw 
would  recall  him  from  the  realms  of  glory, 
would  you  be  willing  to  turn  that  straw? 
This  new,  deejDer,  and  darker  sorrow  shall 
brine:  Jesus  with  it.  Its  ano:uish  will  be 
solaced  by  His  love,  its  loneliness  will  be 
shared  by  His  presence,  its  gloom  will  be 
brightened  with  His  smile,  its  calamity  will 
be  sanctified  by  His  grace,  and  all  its  new- 
born exigencies  will  be  met  by  His  boundless 
resources  of  wisdom,  power,  and  love.  '^Zo, 
/  am  with  you  always 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Christ  is  specially  with  His  people  in 
bereavement.  In  the  sad  hour  when  the 
heart  is  full  of  desolation,  His  voice  is  heard 


106  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOtT. 

saying,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled." 
We  may  be  despoiled  of  the  heart's  richest 
treasures,  and  yet  Jesus  may  fill  it  with 
His  richest  consolations. 

"mother,  I  WANT  TO  SAY  MY  PRAYERS." 

A  pious  man,  and  a  physician,  said:  "Yon 
will  all  remember  that  I  was  in  this  meeting 
a  few  days  ago,  and  told  you  of  my  losing  a 
little  boy  eight  years  old.  Since  I  was  last 
here,  we  have  lost  another  still  younger. 
The  oldest  was  a  child  remarkable  for  his 
intelligence  in  the  things  of  religion.  He 
seemed  to  have  a  full  comprehension  of  the 
way  of  salvation,  through  repentance  to- 
wards God  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  He  had  long  expressed  the  hope 
that  he  might  be  a  minister  and  a  missionary 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  To  this  work  a  father's 
and  a  mother's  heart  had  consecrated  our 
bright  little  boy,  if  it  should  please  the  Lord 


CHKIST    EYEK   WITH   YOU.  107 

to  spare  him.  But  it  was  not  so  to  be.  In 
a  most  unexpected  moment  that  cliild  took 
his  leave  of  us,  rejoicing  in  the  going,  and 
soared  away  to  be  forever  with  Christ.  For 
we  could  not  doubt  that  the  dear  boy  was  a 
real  Christian,  made  so  by  the  washing  of 
regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

''The  last  child  sickened  with  the  same 
disease.  His  case  was  very  painful,  for  he 
suffered  intensely.  It  was  evident  very  soon 
that  death  had  marked  him  for  his  prey. 
We  have  always  taught  our  children  to 
pray,  even  before  they  could  speak  their 
words  plainly.  We  have  not  been  among 
those  who  believe  that  children  can  be  saved 
otherwise  than  by  the  washing  away  of  all 
corruption  and  moral  defilement  in  the , 
blood  of  Christ.  So  we  could  teach  them  to 
pray  in  all  sincerity,  '  God  be  merciful  to  me 
a  sinner.'     We  could  teach  them  that  they 


108  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOIT. 

must  never  expect  to  go  to  heaven  by  reason 
of  their  own  innocence ;  bnt  they  must  be 
saved  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  They  must 
be  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  must 
be  rendered  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light.  So  we  believed;  so  we 
prayed ;  so  we  taught  our  children  to 
pray. 

"When  this  little  boy  was  in  his  death 
hour,  he  looked  up,  with  a  most  wishful 
look,  a  pleading  look,  as  if  he  feared  he 
might  be  denied,  and  said : 

"'Mother!  I  want  to  say  my  prayers.' 
She  knew  the  heart  of  her  little  boy,  and 
immediately  answered: 

"  '  My  dear  child,  you  shall  say  your 
prayers.' 

"  '  Not  here,'  said  the  little  sufferer,  'but 
on  my  knees.' 

"  He  was  lying  on  her  lap.  She  raised 
him  on  his  knees,  when  he  clasped  liis  arms 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  109 

around  her  neck,  and  laying  his  head  upon 
her  shoulder,  poured  out  his  heart  in  prayer 
to  God.  He  was  so  week  and  feeble  that  he 
could  only  say  a  word  at  a  time.  At  length 
his  prayers  were  finished,  and  he  unclasped 
his  little  arms  and  fell  back  upon  her  lap. 
A  smile  of  heavenly  sweetness  stole  over  his 
face,  he  drew  a  few  inspirations  —  slow  — 
slower — and  he  was  gone.  Oh!"  said  the 
pious  father ;  '^  the  blood  of  Jesus,  that 
cleanseth  from  all  sin,  never  appeared  so 
precious  to  me  as  it  did  then.  I  looked  upon 
my  dear  little  boy  as  one  whom  I  might 
hope  had  been  redeemed  and  saved  through 
the  merits  of  that  blood. 

"  I  want  to  urge  all  fathers  and  mothers 
here,  to  consecrate  their  young  children  to 
Jesus.  Teach  them,  oh !  teach  them,  to 
trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  saved  by  His 
blood." 


10 


CHAPTER  XL 


CHRIST     IN     SICKNESS. 


HEIST  is  with  you  —  in  sickness, 
JS5])  There  are  some  trials  wln'ch  in  an 
especial  manner  bring  Christ  near  to 
us.  There  is  a  secret  in  all  sorrow, 
there  is  a  deep  one  in  this.  To  whom  can 
the  sufferer  confide  it?  Tlie  disease,  perhaps, 
perplexes  the  judgment  or  bafiies  the  skill  of 
the  physician.  The  nervous  irritability,  the 
cerebral  sensitiveness,  the  extreme  weakness, 
the  acute  agony  which  renders  the  con- 
cussion of  the  gentlest  footfall  too  powerful 
for  the  frame,  may  be  but  little  understood 
by  the  most  considerate,  tender  watchers  at 
your  side.     They,  perhaps,  but  little  know 

(110) 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  Ill 

what  heroic  fortitude,  what  patient  endur- 
ance of  spirit  lie  concealed  beneath  all  this 
uncomplaining  suffering,  what  an  incessant 
conflict  is  waging,  and  by  what  a  super- 
human struggle  the  mastery  is  obtained  of 
the  mind  over  the  body,  and  of  God's  grace 
over  both.  How  difficult  it  is  to  suppress 
irritation,  and  how  hard  to  express  gratitude, 
when  even  the  smile  of  love  and  the  tear  of 
compassion  can  awaken  no  responsive  feel- 
ing, where  all  is  pain,  uneasiness,  and 
despondency!  But  Christ  is  with  you!  You 
may  not  always  be  sensible  of  it.  As  the 
drapery  of  your  bed  and  the  deep  shadows 
of  your  room  may  conceal  from  your  view 
the  nearness  of  a  loved  friend,  so  your 
physical  infirmities  may  absorb  all  thought 
and  consciousness  but  that  of  sufferins:  and 
languor,  depriving  you  of  the  sensible  enjoy- 
ment of  the  Lord's  presence.  Notwith- 
standing, He  is  at  your  side,  watching  you 


112  CHEIST    EYER   WITH   YOi:. 

with  sleej)le3s  love,  succouring  with  His  own 
grace  the  spiritual  depression  of  your  soul, 
and  mitigating  with  His  own  power  the 
anguish  of  vour  bodilj  sufferings.  Think  of 
the  human  and  tender  considerateness  of 
Christ  I  He  knows  your  fi-ame,  and  remem- 
bers that  you  are  dust,  and  exacts  and 
expects  not  from  you  more  than  you  are 
capable  of  experiencing.  Blessed  sickness ! 
that  leads  the  mind  more  fully  into  the 
conscious  presence  of  Christ,  that  pillows  the 
restless  head  upon  His  changeless  love,  that 
realizes  the  encircling  of  HIb  arm  of  power 
beneath  the  sinking  frame,  that  attunes  the 
discordant  will  into  sweeter  and  more  perfect 
harmony  with  His,  that  gently  moulds  the 
soul  to  His  own  meek  and  patient  spirit! 
Oh,  holy  lessons,  precious  truths,  costly 
blessings  learnt  and  experienced  on  a  bed  of 
sickness  and  of  suffering !  And  were  this  the 
only  one,  the  clinging,  soothing,  sustaining 


CKRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  113 

presence  of  Christ  with   the   sick   one   He 
loves,  it  were  enough. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

We  will  give  one  single  example  which 
illustrates  the  presence  of  Christ  in  sickness. 
We  naight  give  many  drawn  from  the  scenes 
in  hospital.  The  following  is  from  a  lady 
who  has  devoted  all  her  energies  and  her 
very  life  in  attending  on  suffering  soldiers 
in  Hospital : 

I  very  cheerfully  comply  with  your  request 
to  write  to  the  children  of  the  Sabbath  school. 
I  would  thank  them  for  the  books  and  tracts 
I  have  received  through  their  generosity. 
I  take  great  pleasure  in  distributing  ihese, 
since  I  know  how  they  have  been  furnished. 
I  think  they  are  doing  a  good  work  in  two 
ways:  First,  I  think  they  may  be  very 
10* 


114:  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

useful  here  among  tliese  soldiers  who  are 
much  in  need  of  all  the  good  influences  that 
may  be-  brought  around  them ;  and  beside 
this,  I  think  they  are  teaching  the  children 
at  home  to  be  unselfish,  and  to  care  kindly 
for  the  wants  and  interests  of  others.  This 
alone  I  consider  a  great  and  good  work,  but 
1  hope  this  may  be  the  little  seed  that  will 
grow  into  a  great  and  beautiful  tree,  to  bud 
and  blossom,  and  bear  fruit  for  themselves 
and  others,  thoughout  their  whole  lives. 

I  would  like  to,  relate  some  incidents  which 
lately  occurred  here,  showing  what  Chris- 
tianity will  do  for  a  man. 

On  the  30th  of  last  August,  a  great  many 
wounded  men  were  brought  into  Alexandria: 
so  many  that  the  hospitals  were  filled,  and 
the  wounded  were  lying  crowded  on  the 
sidewalks  about  hospital  doors.  Among 
the  rest  was  a  Virginian,  but  a  true  hearted 
Union  man.     He  was  wounded  very  badly 


CHRIST    ETER   WITH   YOIT.  115 

in  the  thigh,  and  suffered  very  much,  so 
much  so  that  he  moaned  and  cried  out 
continually.  You  will  think  every  one  felt 
sorry  for  him,  but  not  so.  All  the  other 
wounded  men  around  him  had  just  as  much 
as  they  could  do  to  bear  their  own  pain,  and 
they  had  no  patience  with  this  man  who 
disturbed  them  night  and  day  with  his  cries. 
They  would  frequently  mock  and  make  fun 
of  him.  T  would  sometimes  ask  them,  for 
my  sake,  to  forbear ;  and  I  would  go  to  him, 
and  try  to  comfort  him,  so  that  he  should 
not  feel  that  every  one  was  against  him. 

But  a  better  Comforter  than  .1  was  there ; 
God's  Holy  Spirit  was  in  his  heart,  and 
instead  of  feeling  anger  or  annoyance  at 
those  who  mocked  him,  he  only  prayed  more 
earnestly  that  God  would  enable  him  to  bear 
his  pains  with  fortitude.  This  prayer  was 
most  surely  answered,  for  he  soon  became 
one  of  the  most  patient  and  uncomplaining 


116  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

men  in  the  whole  hospital.  A  placid, 
gentle,  submissive  expression  rested  on  his 
countenance,  that  was  really  most  touching 
to  behold.  He  never  manifested  the  least 
unkindness  towards  those  who  made  fun  of 
him,  but  on  the  contrary,  he  was  always 
anxious  to  share  any  delicacy  he  had  with 
them,  and  would  often  ask  me  to  send  out 
and  buy  peaches  and  grapes  for  him  "to 
give  round  to  the  boys,"  as  he  called  them. 
He  was  often  deranged  at  night,  and  would 
sing  and  pray  most  of  the  night;  but  they 
all  felt  so  kindly  to  him  noWj  that  this  did 
not  disturb  .them,  and  they  spoke  of  him  as 
kindlj^  as  if  he  had  been  a  brother.  When  he 
knew  there  was  no  hope  that  he  could  live, 
I  asked  him  whether  he  was  willing  to  die, 
if  it  was  God's  will  he  should  not  recover. 
He  answered,  "Yes,"  with  as  pleasant  and 
peaceful  a  smile  as  if  I  had  asked  him  if  he 
wanted  to  go  home;    and  home  I  trust  he 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  117 

has  gone  :  to  the  dear  heavenly  home  of  his 
Father  above,  where  His  children  shall  ever 
rejoice  in  His  love.  After  he  died,  I  looked 
around  to  see  if  I  could  find  any  thing  that 
I  could  send  home  to  his  sister,  of  whom  he 
often  spoke  with  great  affection.  I  found  a 
little  book  at  the  head  of  his  bed  that  a  kind 
Christian  friend  had  given  him.  "Words 
of  Jesus,"  was  the  title.  I  almost  cried  for 
joy  when  I  thought  how  glad  that  sister 
would  be  to  get  this  book,  that  had  been 
such  a  treasury  of  comfort  to  her  poor  afflict- 
ed brother  in  his  last  moments.  I  enclosed 
a  lock  of  his  hair  in  a  letter,  and  sent  the 
little  book,  hoping  and  praying  that  these 
words  of  Jesus  might  be  very  precious 
words  to  her,  comforting  and  sustaining  her. 


A   gentleman   said    he    just    came   from 
Massachusetts,  where  he  had   gone   at  the 


118  CHRIST    EVER  WITH   YOU. 

request  of  a  daughter,  made  when  near 
heaven,  that  he  would  take  her  to  her  native 
place  for  burial.  She  died,  said  he,  as  we 
call  it,  a  few  days  ago,  in  Philadelphia.  Just 
before  she  died,  she  asked,  "Father,  is  Jesus 
in  the  room  ?  " 

"Why  do  you  ask,  my  daughter?  I 
inquired,"  said  the  father. 

"  Because  it  seems  to  me  He  is  here,"  she 
replied. 

"  And  you  love  Him  ? " 

"Yes;"  just  whispered  with  a  sweet 
smile  beaming  on  her  face ;  and  in  five 
minutes  she  was  gone.  I  had  not  a  doubt 
Jesus  was  in  the  room,  and  I  delighted  my- 
self in  staying  in  that  room  to  which  the 
blessed  Saviour  had  come  to  take  His  lovino^ 
and  rejoicing  disciple  home.  It  was  a  place 
of  all  on  earth  most  blest, 

"  Quite  on  the  verge  of  heaven." 


CHAPTER  XII. 

CHRIST   m   TEMPTATION. 

5^^j%/  HEIST  is  witn  you  in — tempta- 
'  tion.  The  hour  of  temptation  in  the 
believer's  experience  is  one  in  which 
lie  may  especially  and  safely  rely 
upon  the  nearness  to  him  of  the  Lord.  Tried 
Himself  in  this  crucible,  as  none  ever  were. 
He  is  prepared  by  all  the  appliances  of  His 
power,  all  the  restraints  of  His  grace,  and  all 
the  sympathy  of  His  love,  to  succor  and 
deliver  them  that  are  tempted.  Tempted  in 
all  points  as  you  are,  He  knows  how  to  foil 
the  adversary,  to  quench  the  dart,  and  to 
enable  you,  the  single  and  the  weak  one,  to 
put  to  flight  ten  thousand  foes.     Tempted 

(119  ) 


120  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

believer !  your  faith,  in  the  truth  of  the 
Bible,  your  confidence  in  the  God  of  the 
Bible,  your  loyalty  to  the  Saviour  of  the 
Bible,  your  acceptance  of  the  salvation  of 
the  Bible,  your  comfort  from  the  promises 
of  the  Bible,  jouv  enjoyment  of  the  hope  of 
the  Bible,  assailed  and  tampered  with  by 
Satan,  fear  not!  Greater  is  He  who  is  with 
you  than  they  who  are  against  you.  '  ''The 
Lord  hioweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly  &iit 
of  temptation^  Take  heart,  then,  tempted 
believer!  you  shall  come  forth  from  the 
fiery  furnace,  from  this  painful  discipline,  of 
which  all  the  saints  of  God  are  partakers, 
with  your  faith  more  firmly  grounded,  your 
love  more  deeply  rooted,  your  heart  more 
thoroughly  purified,  your  hope  of  glory  more 
unclouded,  and  that  Divine  Intercessor  for 
His  tempted  ones,  all  the  more  precious  to 
your  heart,  who  says,  ''Satan  hath  desired  to 
have  you  that  he  might  sift  you  as  wheat^  hut 


\ 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  121 

Ihave  prayed  for  thee  that  thy  faith  fail 
not.^^  O  thou  Satan-tempted  soul,  "Z^?,  / 
am  with  you  alway!  " 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Many  a  man  has  found  his  life  a  failure. 
He  sought  but  never  found  what  he  seeks. 
All  a  man  can  desire  may  be  found  in  Christ. 

One  day  after  the  leader  had  read  the 
thirty-fourth  Psalm,  in  which  occurs  this 
promise :  "  They  that  seek  the  Lord  shall 
not  want  any  good  thing ; "  as  so3n  as  a 
proper  opportunity  occurred,  a  young  man 
arose  and  said : 

"There  was  a  time  when  the  question  of 
my  salvation  was  just  reduced  to  a  matter 
of  dollars  and  cents.  The  naked  question 
was  whether  I  could  afford  to  become  a 
Christian.  I  had  been  for  a  long  time  under 
11 


122  CHEIST    EVER    WITH    YOU. 

conviction  of  sin.  I  knew  I  must  perisli  if 
I  should  die  as  I  then  was.  I  tliought  I 
was  anxious  to  be  a  Christian.  I  had  been 
an  ambitious  youno:  man,  ambitious  to  be 
rich  ;  I  had  fair  prosj)ects  of  becoming  so. 
I  saw  at  once  I  must  make  great  sacrifices 
if  I  became  a  Christian.  I  must  give  up  all 
my  cherished  plans  and  schemes.  Giving 
up  all  these,  I  knew  not  how  much  more 
was  involved.  I  saw  that  I  might  be  poor 
all  my  days,  instead  of  being  rich,  and  how 
poor  was  more  than  I  could  tell.  The  ad- 
versary assailed   me  just  in   this  way. 

"  Tou  are  doing  very  right  to  give  atten- 
tion to  the  subject  of  religion.  It  is  a  very 
important  subject.  But  you  are  doing  very 
wrong  to  make  the  sacrifice  you  must  to 
become  a  Christian ;  it  is  unreasonable. 
Tou  cannot  afi'ord  it.  1S<0  one  has  a  right 
to  throw  away  his  blessings,  health  is  a 
blessing,  and  you  are  discussing  the  question 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOTT.  123 

of  being  poor  all  your  days,  when  you  have 
every  advantage  for  becoming  rich.  Be 
religious  if  you  will,  but  by  all  means  be 
rich  ;  and  tlien  with  a  contented  mind  you 
can  afford  to  be  religious. 

"At  the  same  time  the  words  of  Jesus 
rung  in  my  ears  and  knocked  at  my  heart : 
^He  that  will  not  forsake  all  that  he  hath 
cannot  be  my  disciple.'  '  If  any  man  will 
come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself  and 
take  up  his  cross  and  follow  me.'  'How 
hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.' 

"The  devil  said,  you  do  not  quote  the 
Scriptures  correctly.  It  is  hard  for  tliem 
who  trust  in  riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  You  can  have  riches  and  not 
inrust  in  them.  You  are  not  called  to  make 
a  beggar  of  yourself  all  your  life  long  in 
order  to  go  to  heaven.  This  would  be  very 
unreasonable;   and  you  are  never  required 


124:  CKRIST    EVER   WITH    YOF. 

to  do  any  thing  unreasonahle  to  get  to  liea- 
ven.  Be  religious  if  yon  will,  but  by  all 
means  be  reasonable.  Do  not  make  a  fool 
of  yonrself  and  in  your  folly  throw  your 
blessings  away  from  you. 

''I  know  that  Christ  required  me  to  give 
up  all  for  him.  I  knew  that  I  could  not 
have  my  own  way  in  the  matter  of  salvation. 
There  I  hung,  just  on  that  hinge;  balancing 
the  question  whether  I  would  be  rich  and  be 
without  salvation,  or  whether  I  would  be 
poor  and  have  salvation. 

"It  was  a  dreadful  struggle,  and  Satan 
helped  me  into  trouble  all  he  could  and 
made  it  seem  hard.  I  thought  I  was  willing 
to  give  up  all  dishonest  and  wrong  ways  of 
getting  riches.  But  why  should  I  be  called 
upon  to  give  up  honest  ways  of  seeking 
and  obtaining  the  good  things  of  this  world 
for  the  sake  of  Christ  ?  That  was  the  point 
of  the  struggle. 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  125 

"It  was  when  I  was  in  just  that  state  of 
perplexity  that  my  eyes  fastened  upon  that 
tenth  verse  of  the  thirty-fourth  Psalm  : 
'They  that  seek  the  Zord  shall  not  want 
any  good  tiling^  I  said  to  myself,  what 
more  do  I  want  than  that?  What  more 
could  be  promised  ?  Here  is  something 
more  and  something  better  than  uncertain 
riches — uncertain  about  gaining  them  — 
uncertain  about  retaining  them  after  all. 
But  if  I  seek  the  Lord  1  shall  not  want  any 
good   thing. 

"1  needed  just  that  passage  at  that  time, 
and  God  by  his  Spirit  helped  me  to  believe 
in  his  faithfulness  to  fulfil  his  own  word. 
On  that  text,  as  on  a  hinge,  my  heart  turned 
to  seek  the  Lord,  and  I  gave  up  cheerfully 
all  my  fancied  wealth  for  the  sake  of  a  sav- 
ing interest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The 
load  of  guilt  was  gone,  and  I  felt  that  I  had 
salvation  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb. 
11* 


126  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

The  struggle  was  over,  and  my  peace  flow- 
ed as  a  river. 

"  Some  unconverted,  awakened  sinner 
here  may  ask  me,  'How  about  that  promise?' 
1  will  answer.  When  my  heart  began  to 
trust  God  I  forgot  all  about  the  promise. 
I  had  all  my  heart  desired  in  Jesus  Christ. 
But  God  did  not  forget  that  promise  though 
I  did.  Of  this  world's  goods  I  have  had 
all  I  could  have  asked  and  even  more.  But 
best  of  all,  /  have  heen  made  alive  unto 
Christ  forever,  I  am  going  home  to  die  no 
more.  For  me  it  is  not  death  to  die.  I 
thank  God  for  that  thirty-fourth  Psalm ;  it 
led  me  to  trust  God  through  Jesus  Christ." 

"  Oh  make  but  trial  of  his  love, 
Experience  will  decide 
How  blest  are  they,  and  only  they, 
Who  in  his  love  confide." 


CHAPTER    XIII. 


CKRIST   IN   ADVERSITY. 


'  N  the  temporal  calamities  and  adver- 
sities of  this  life,  the  vicissitudes  of 
'  commerce,  the  depression  of  trade,  the 
pressure  of  want,  it  is  equally  our 
privilege  to  plead  in  prayer  and  faith  this 
appropriate  and  precious  promise  of  the 
Saviour,*  and  invoke  His  interposition, 
succor,  and  aid.  Our  Lord,  when  on  earth, 
never  showed  Himself  indifferent  to  the 
temporal  necessities  of  man.  We  read  that 
He  had  compassion  on  the  multitude  because 
they  had  nothing  to  eat,  and  in  the  exercise 
of  His  sympathy,  and  in  the  interposition  of 
His  power,  fed  thousands  with  bread.     He 

(127) 


128  CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOIT. 

is  still  the  same.  Have  your  commercial 
transactions  met  with  a  reverse?  your 
enterprises  with  an  untoward  and  unlocked 
for  check?  Are  you  actually  under  the 
pressure  of  want  ?  your  wife  and  your  little 
ones  crying  for  bread?  Go  in  prayer,  my 
brother,  and  plead  in  childlike  faith  this 
gracious  promise  of  Jesus — ^^Lo^  I  am  with 
you  alway^^  and  you  shall  not  plead  in  vain. 
Ah  yes!  He  has  sent.  He  has  permitted  this 
calamity  but  to  show  you  how  near  He  is  to 
you,  how  He  will,  as  of  old,  tenderly  com- 
passionate your  need,  and  then,  in  the 
boundlessness  of  His  divine  resources, 
abundantly  supply  it.  See  Christ,  and 
Christ  only,  in  your  present  distress.  Bow 
uncomplainingly,  cheerfully,  to  His  will. 
Lean  confidingly,  unwaveringly,  upon  His 
arm.  Trust  His  goodness,  faithfulness,  and 
power.  And,  oh,  if  this  temporal  calamity, 
this  worldly  sorrow,  but  draw  your  soul  to 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  129 

Christ,  if  now  you  are  aroused  to  prayer,  are 
led  to  turn  to  God,  to  seek  spiritual  blessing, 
the  "bread  of  life,"  without  which  you 
perish,  the  "  true  riches  "  of  grace  on  earth 
and  of  glory  in  heaven,  through  eternity  you 
will  praise  the  Saviour  for  the  overwhelming 
calamity  which  saved  your  soul  as  by  fire. 
Turn  you  now,  amid  crushed  hopes,  wrecked 
fortune,  the  biting  and  the  cries  of  want,  to 
Him  whose  providence  can  cause  the  barrel 
of  meal  and  the  cruse  of  oil  not  utterly  to 
fail,  and  whose  grace  can  so  sanctify  your 
affliction  and  chasten  your  sorrow  as  to  make 
this  present  adversity  the  sweetest,  holiest, 
costliest  blessing  of  your  life. 

Yes!  Christ  is  with  you  alway,  all  days; 
in  the  inexperience  and  temptations  of  your 
youth,  to  counsel  and  keep  you;  in  the  cares 
and  anxieties  of  manhood,  to  sustain  and 
soothe  you  ;  and  in  the  feebleness,  infirmity, 
and  loneliness  of  old  age,  to  be  your  stafi'  and 


130  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

comfort.  Christ  is  with  yon  in  widowhood, 
to  vindicate  joiir  rights  and  cheer  your 
desolation  ;  in  your  lone  orphanage,  to  be  to 
you  as  a  father  and  a  friend ;  and  in  all  the 
adversities  and  vicissitudes  of  life,  its  chang- 
ing scenes  and  dying  friends;  in  the  total 
absence  of  the  kind  sympathy  for  which  you 
yearn,  the  affection  for  which  you  pant,  the 
counsel  and  protection  which  you  need, 
Christ  will  in  your  experience  make  good  to 
the  letter  His  precious  promise,  ''Zo,  lam 
with  youP  Oh  !  to  have  His  presence  with 
you  in  these  circumstances,  you  can  well 
afford  to  part  with  all  others. 

You  are,  perhaps,  anticipating  a  trial,  and 
like  the  disciples  in  the  transfiguration,  you 
fear  as  you  enter  into  the  cloud,  the  por- 
tentous shadow  of  winch  is  darking  and 
closing  around  you.  But  how  groundless 
were  their  fears !  and  equally  so  are  yours. 
Christ  was  with  them  in  the  cloud,  and  a 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH    YOU.  131 

Father's  voice  issued  from  its  bosom.  Nev,er 
were  they  more  honored  or  more  safe.  The 
same  Christ,  the  same  almighty,  loving 
Friend  is  with  you  in  the  cloud  which  now 
you  so  much  dread.  Oh,  trust  your  tremb- 
ling soul  to  Him  !  Is  it  the  heart's  Wrench 
you  fear?  Is  it  mental  despondency  you 
dread?  Is  it  bodily  suffering  from  which 
you  shrink  ?  Is  it  temporal  loss  you  antici- 
pate ?  ^^I  am  with  you  alway^''  is  the 
soothing,  assuring  promise  with  which  Jrsus 
would  have  you  meet  it.  He  will  strengthen, 
sustain,  soothe,  and  comfort  you  with  His 
blissful  presence  at  the  moment  of  the  trial. 
Trust  Him  now?  He  never  yet  belied 
Himself,  never  broke  this  precious  promise 
in  a  solitary  instance.  ''As  thy  day^  so  shall 
thy  strength  heP  "As  thy  dajM "  His 
presence  will  dissipate  the  gloom,  quell  the 
fear,  hush  tlie  murmur,  deaden  the  suffering, 
and   thus  encircled  by  His  arms,  He  will 


132  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

bear  you  through  it,  to  the  eternal  praise 
and  glorj  of  His  name.  Friend  of  sinners! 
Lord  of  saints  !  my  trembling  spirit  shrinks, 
I  fear  as  I  enter  into  this  cloud !  Be  Thou 
sensibly  near.  Let  me  feel  Thy  hand,  hear 
Thy  voice,  realize  Tliy  presence,  then  shall 
I  fear  no  evil,  for  Thou  art  with  me.  Thy  rod 
and  Thy  staff  will  support  and  comfort  me. 
"Z(9,  I  am  with  you ;  I  will  he  with  you. 
Fear  notP  Enough,  my  gracious  Lord ! 
I  will  now  enter  into  the  cloud  ;  I  will  gird 
me  for  the  trial,  and,  supported  by  Thy 
grace,  and  soothed  by  Thy  love,  will  glorify 
Thee  in  the  fire. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

In  all  our  distresses  and  adversity  Christ 
is  ever  with  us.  The  following  is  an  ex- 
ample drawn  from  humble  life  : 

In  the  Fulton  Street  Prayer  Meeting  a 


CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOU.  133 

few  days  since,  a  pleasant  and  venerable- 
looking  stranger,  arose  and  said,  "While 
walking  up  Broadway  yesterday,  having  lost 
my  spectacles,  I  looked  around  to  see  where 
I  could  purchase  a  new  pair.  Finding  a 
stand  near,  I  stopped  to  select  a  pair. 
IsToticing  that  the  dealer  was  an  intelligent 
man,  who  had  evidently  seen  better  days,  I 
entered  into  conversation  with  him. 

"  ^How  long  have  you  been  engaged  in 
this  business,  sir? ' 

" '  Only  a  short  time,  sir.  I  have  not 
always  been  so  poor.  I  formerly  lived  in 
Charleston,  South  Carolina,  and  was  in  good 
circumstances,  but  myself  and  family  were 
compelled  to  fly  to  save  our  lives.  We 
barely  succeeded  in  getting  on  board  of  a 
vessel  about  sailing  for  New  York,  and 
secreting  ourselves  in  the  hold.  We  had  no 
time  to  save  any  thing,  not  even  money 
enough  to  pay  our  passage.' 
12 


134  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU. 

"  ^But  how  have  you  lived  since  yon  came 
here  ?  You  cannot  make  enough  at  this 
business  to  support  your  wife  and  children?' 

"  '  God  has  cared  for  us  thus  far,  sir.  We 
had  no  money  to  pay  rent,  but  we  found  a 
cellar  up-town  that  we  get  for  nothing,  and 
my  wife  and  I  make  enough  to  keep  us  in 
food  and  clothing.  AVe  are  very  thankful, 
very  thankful  to  God,  sir,  that  we  came 
here.' 

"  ^  How,  sir,  can  you  be  thankful  that 
you  were  compelled  to  give  up  all  your 
property,  leave  a  pleasant  home,  and  live  in 
a  cellar?' 

"'Oh,  sir,  it  is  because  we  have  found 
Jesus  Christ  since  we  came  here,  or  rather, 
He  has  found  us^  and  we  are  more  happy 
and  content  than  when  we  lived  in  our 
pleasant  southern  home ;  for  though  we  do 
live  in  a  cellar,  Jesus  Christ  is  with  us.^ " 


CHAPTEE    XIY. 


CHRIST     IN     DEATH. 


HEIST  IS  with  you — in  the  hour 
and  article  of  death.  Never  did  a 
believer  in  Jesus  die  alone !  Alone 
he  may  be  as  to  all  human  aid  and 
Christian  sympathy.  But  he  cannot  be 
really  and  actually  alone ;  for,  if  ever  Christ 
fulfills  this  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promise:  '^ I ar)i  with  you  alway^''  it  is  when 
His  blood-bought,  ransomed  saint  enters  and 
passes  through  the  shaded  valley^.  He  is 
with  you  to  speak  the  promises,  to  mete  out 
the  grace,  to  stifle  fear,  to  repel  the  tempter, 
to  apply  the  blood,  to  strengthen  faith,  and 
to  waken  the  echoes  of  the  silent  valley  with 

C186) 


136  CHRIST    ETEE    W ITH   YOTJ. 

the  music  of  His  voice :  ''/  am  with  you.^^ 
''  Amid  the  prostration  of  earthly  hopes, 
when  unable  to  glance  one  thought  on  a 
dark  future,  when  the  stricken  spirit,  like  a 
wounded  bird,  lies  struggling  in  the  dust, 
with  broken  wing  and  wailing  cry,  longing 
for  pinions  to  fly  away  from  a  weaiy  world 
to  the  rest  and  quiet  of  the  grave ;  in  that 
hour  of  earthly  dissolution,  He  who  has  the 
keys  of  death  at  His  girdle,  nay,  who  has 
tasted  death  Himself,  and  better  still,  who 
hath  conquered  it,  draws  near  in  touching 
tenderness,  saying,  '  Lo,  I  am  with  you.  I 
am  with  you  to  cheer  ycu,  to  comfort  you, 
to  support  and  sustain  you.  I,  wlio  once 
wept  at  a  grave,  am  here  to  weep  with  you ;  I 
will  be  at  your  side  in  all  that  try ing  future ; 
I  will  make  my  grace  sufficient  for  you,  and 
my  promises  precious  to  you,  and  my  love 
better  than  all  earthly  aflection.  Tlie  one  is 
changeable :  the  one  must  perish ;  I  am  the 
12* 


CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOTT.  *137 

strength  of  your  heart  and  your  portion  for 
ever.'  "     Blessed  Lord ! 

"Abide  with  me  from  morn  till  eve, 
For  without  Thee  I  cannot  live  ; 
Abide  with  me  when  death  is  nigh, 
For  without  Thee  I  cannot  die." 

Oh !  seek  much,  living  and  dying,  of  the 
sensible  presence  of  Christ.  Let  this  be  the 
grand,  essential  character  of  your  religion : 
a  religion,  the  essence,  the  sunshine  of  which 
is,  the  conscious  presence  with  you  ever  of 
Jesus.  Walk  daily  at  His  side.  Cultivate 
confidential  transactions  with  Him.  Suffer 
no  sin  to  grieve  Him,  no  distrust  to  wound 
Him,  no  coldness,  shyness,  or  distance  of 
fellowship  to  lessen  one  throb,  to  suppress 
one  desire,  to  congeal  one  current,  or  to  pre- 
vent one  act  of  your  love.  As  His  disciple 
and  follower,  separate  yourself  from  the 
world,  and  bear  His  cross  after  Him  boldly 


139  CHRIST    EVER   AVITH   YOU. 

and  uncomj)i*omisinglj,  yet  meekly  and 
heroically.  Be  liappy  in  all  His  dealings 
^vitli  you ;  all  that  He  sends  or  withholds, 
gives  or  removes ;  for  He  hath  said,  '^Z  will 
7iever  leave  thee^  nor  forsake  th^e^  No !  He 
will  be  with  you  until  He  brings  you  home 
to  glory.  Precious  presence  of  Christ  on 
earth !  it  is  the  dawn  of  glory,  the  earnest 
of  heaven,  the  foretaste  of  celestial  bliss,  the 
fii'st-fruits  of  the  golden  harvest  of  eternity ! 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

The  writer  knew  the  parents  and  grand- 
parents of  this  dear  young  man,  among  his 
personal  friends.  The  happiness  of  this  de- 
voted Christian  youth  might  be  expected 
from  his  life.  Christ  was  with  him  in  the 
dying  hour. 

Among  the  many  noble  young  men  who 


CHRIST    EYER   WITH   YOU.  139 

have  given  their  lives  for  the  cause  of  human 
iii4ependence5  we  may  class  Jasper  Stone 
Laughlin,  who  died  in  the  twenty-third  year 
of  his  age,  at  the  West  End  Military  Hos- 
pital, Cincinnati,  Ohio,  May  16th,  1862,  He 
was  an  only  son,  born  in  McConnellsville, 
Ohio,  of  pious  parents,  where  he  spent  nearly 
all  his  life,  with  his  mother  and  sister ;  his 
father,  who  was  a  Ruling  Elder  in  the  Pres- 
byterian Church,  having  died  when  Jasper 
was  yet  a  child.  It  may  trulj^  be  said  of  liim 
that  ''None  knew  him  but  to  love  him." 
In  the  summer  of  1858,  he  stood  up  for 
Jesus,  and  united  with  the  Presbyterian 
Church.  Such  was  his  Christian  deport- 
ment, that  in  1861  he  was  elected  and 
ordained  a  Puling  Elder  in  tlie  same  Church 
in  which  his  father  lived  and  died.  His 
place  was  never  vacant^  when  at  home,  in 
the  Sabbath  school,  the  prayer  meeting,  the 
public  gatherings  of  God's  people. 


140  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOTJ. 

In  the  fall  of  1861,  under  a  deep  sense  of 
duty  to  his  country  and  his  God,  after 
prayerfully  considering  the  whole  matter, 
and  obtaining  the  consent  of  his  widowed 
mother,  he  volunteered  under  Captain  T.  M. 
Stevenson,  Seventy-eighth  Regiment  O.  Y.  I., 
Colonel  Leggett.  He  carried  his  religion 
with  him.  His  Bible  and  Hymn  Book 
were  his  daily  companions.  His  captain  in 
writing  about  him,  since  his  death,  says : 
"He  was  beloved  by  every  one  of  his 
regiment.  His  conduct  was  so  lofty  and 
noble,  his  life  so  spiritual  and  heavenly 
minded,  that  the  greatest  despisers  of  religion 
were  cowed  before  his  very  appearance. 
Once  he  said,  'I  never  before  felt  the  power 
and  importance  of  religion  as  I  do  here.  Cut 
off  from  home  and  the  public  means  of 
grace,  I  feel  the  necessity  of  leaning  upon 
the  Saviour,  and  committing  myself  entirely 
to  a  kind  and  good  providence.'  " 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  141 

His  regiment  was  at  the  surrender  of 
Fort  Donelson,  and  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh 
during  the  second  day.  After  having  passed 
through  that  fearful  struggle,  and  enduring 
many  hardships,  he  was  found  to  be  failing  in 
health;  so  much  so,  that  Capt,  Stevenson 
determined  to  send  him  home.  When  the 
hope  was  held  up  before  him  that  he  would 
soon  be  conveyed  to  his  mother  and  sisters, 
he  replied :  "  I  am  going  to  a  far  better  home 
than  any  on  earth.  Tell  my  mother  and 
sisters  that  I  die  happy.  I  am  entering  the 
upper  kingdom  only  a  few  days  before  them. 
They  rejoiced  when  I  came  into  the  lower 
kingdom,  how  much  more  should  they  re- 
joice to  have  me  enter  the  upper  kingdom. 
Tell  them  to  sing^  Joyfully' when  they  hear 
of  my  high  promotion  from  the  army,  and 
the  high  service  of  my  country,  to  the  bright 
climes  of  bliss!"  After  he  was  placed  on 
the  boat  at  Pittsburgh  Landing,  May  7th, 


142  CHUIST    EVER   WITH   TOTJ. 


41 


lie  seemed  to  rally,  and  expressed  himself 
as  being  quite  comfortable.  On  the  evening 
of  the  9th,  however,  he  felt  that  he  was 
drawing  near  his  ''time  to  die,"  and  being 
asked  })j  his  attending  physician  if  he  had 
any  message  to  send  to  his  friends,  he  dic- 
tated the  following  letter : 

"Dear  Mother  and  Sisters:  I  am  just 
entering  the  glorious  portals  of  eternity! 
Jesus  has  not  yet  made  his  appearance,  but 
J  Icnow  that  He  will.  Do  not  regret  that 
you  permitted  me  to  volunteer.  The  happi- 
ness of  the  present  moment  makes  up  for 
all  the  suffering  I  ever  endured.  I  soon 
expect  to  see  dear  father,  grand-parents,  and 
above  all,  Jestts  !  One  of  the  greatest  objects 
of  my  gratitude  is,  that  God  has  granted  me 
the  privilege  of  sending  you  this  message 
from  the  chambers  of  glory.  I  never  en- 
joyed myself  so  much  as  while  in  the  army. 
You  ought  to  be  proud  that  you  have  a  son 


CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOU.  143 

to  fall  in  so  glorious  a  cause  as  that  of  human 
independence.  Tell  our  Church  to  be  faith- 
ful unto  the  end,  and  get  the  glorious  crown 
of  life.  Tell  my  dear  pastor  to  continue  in 
his  faithful  labors :  that  I  know  the  blessing 
of  God  will  follow  them.  Thank  Mr. 
Chambers,  the  Baptist  minister,  for  the 
interest  he  took  in  me  at  the  good  old  Union 
Prayer  Meetings. 

*  Joyfully,  joyfully,  onward  we  move '  — 

will  be  sung  by  me  in  nobler  strains,  in  a 
short  time,  and 

*  Nearer,  my  God,  to  thee, 

Nearer  to  thee : 
Ev'n  though  it  be  a  cross 

That  raiseth  me, 
Still  all  my  song  shall  be, 

Nearer,  my  God  to  thee, 
Nearer  to  thee  —  I  would  be,   and   still 
nearer  to  thee.' " 


144  CHRIST    EVER   WITH   YOIT. 

He  was  conveyed  to  the  West  End  Mili- 
tary Hospital  in  Cincinnati,  where  he  was 
brought  under  the  kind  care  of  relatives  and 
friends.  Dr.  Dodge,  who,  spent  much  time 
with  him,  in  a  letter  says: 

"  He  was  perfectly  rational  as  long  as  he 
had  strength  to  articulate.  Realizing  fully 
that  his  work  on  earth  was  done,  he  departed 
with  a  confident  assurance  of  meeting  the 
Saviour.  The  memory  of  his  example  and 
faith  in  tlie  Saviour  will  never  be  efi'aced 
from  the  minds  of  scores  of  sympathizing 
friends." 

His  remains  were  brought  home,  and 
interred  by  the  side  of  his  father. 

"  Soldier  of  Christ,  well  done  : 
Praise  be  thy  new  employ : 
And,  while  eternal  ages  run, 
Best  in  thj  Saviour's  joy." 


4> 


SLl 


