Tee ae H 
O EE 
ee 
as 


rk 
Fee Seay ee vd 


os ~ 
-ipada OPT p~ 


e~ 


BAPTIST 
THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY 


KANSAS CITY, KANSAS 


SAURCH ORDER. 


TEREA TILO: 


BX 


J. L. DAGG, DD: 


Se a 
That thou shouldst set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain 
elders in every city.—Tırus i. 5. 
The rest will I set in order when I come.—1 Cor. xi. 34. 
TSA ee 


PHILADELPHIA: 
BIBLE AND PUBLICATION SOCIETY, 


530 ARCH STREET. 


LIBRARY 
CENTRAL BAPTIST SEMINARY 
KANSAS CITY *, KANSAS 


a gl ee 


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1871, by 
BIBLE AND PUBLICATION SOCIETY, 
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C. 


260 


PAS 


PREFACE. 


In the Preface to the “ Manual of Theology,” published 
last year, it was said :—“ This volume contains nothing 
respecting the externals of religion. The form of godliness 
is important, as well as its power, and the doctrine respect- 
ing it is a component part of the Christian system; but I 
have been unable to include it in the present work.” The 
defect here acknowledged, the following treatise on Church 
Order, including the ceremonies of Christianity, is intended 
in part to supply. | 

In all religious investigations, the Holy Scriptures are 
our chief source of knowledge. This is especially true 
in regard to positive institutes, which derive all their obli- 
gation from the revealed will of the lawgiver. The pre- 
sent work, therefore, relies wholly on the Bible for proof 
of its positions, so far as they relate to subjects on which 
the Bible professes to give instruction. But the volume 
of inspiration was not given to teach us the meaning of 
words, or the facts of ecclesiastical history after the times 
of the apostles. When these subjects come under inves- 
tigation, I have made such reference to human authority 
as the case seemed to require. It has been my aim, how- 
ever, so to lay the facts before the mind of the reader, as 
to give full scope for the exercise of private judgment, 
and a consciousness that he is not bowing to the decisions 
of any fallible master. 

In most of the investigations attempted in these pages, 
the sacred volume sheds its light on our path, and enables 
us to tread the way with confidence ; but, at a few points, 

i 


Big a Tg | 


iv PREFACE. 


the light seems to shine with less clearness. Here, the 
inquiry becomes appropriate, whether the very silence of 
Scripture is not instructive? We may infer that whatever 
is not clearly revealed, must be of less importance; and 
that, difference of judgment respecting it ought not to 
divide the people of God. 

The objections and opposing arguments which this work 
encounters, are such as appear to me most likely to em- 
barrass an inquirer. They are generally expressed in my 
own language; but, in the discussions on baptism, I am in 
a few instances indebted for the language, as well as the 
thoughts, to the Lectures of Dr. Woods. In controverting 
the opinions of Baptist authors, I have, in some instances, 
thought it best to present these opinions in the form of 
direct quotation. 

The preparation of this treatise has yielded less religious 
enjoyment to the Author, than was experienced in writing 
the “ Manual.” The subject has less to do with the heart, 
and furnished fewer occasions for those-emotions in which 
religious enjoyment consists. But the work has been pro- 
secuted under a calm conviction of duty; and if it shall 
tend to produce, in those who read it, a scrupulous adher- 
ence to the precepts of Christ, with expansive love to all 
who bear his image, the Author’s labor will not be in vain. 
With a hope that it may contribute somewhat to this 
result, it is commended to the blessing of him whose will 
it attempts to unfold. 

Gratitude requires that I should acknowledge my obli- 
gations to the Rey. G. W. Samson, of Washington City, 
and the Rev. A. M. Poindexter, of Richmond, Va. These 
brethren have kindly made suggestions, from which the 
work has received valuable improvements; and Mr. Sam- 
son has directly contributed the chief article in the 
Appendix. 


July 31, 1858, 


CON TE, Nets: 


INTRODUCTION. 
PAGE 
Obedience to Christ . Š . . ° . mre 
CHAPTER I. 
Baptism : ° . . . . . . 13 
Sec. 1. Perpetuity of Baptism x . . : TNE 
2. Meaning of Baptize . : . 5 . al 
Tables of Examples , . e . y 2s 
Remarks on Table I. . . . è 31 
Relation between banro and Barriga. 5 PE 
Deduction from Table II. . . i k 34 
Confirmation of the Result : x r © 80 
Burial in Baptism . . . . . 38 
Arguments for another meaning . à 5 . 44 


1. For partial immersion, 44; 2. 3. For purification, 46, 50; 
4, For a peculiar sense in Scripture, 51; 5. For a peculiar 
sense in religious ceremony, 54; 6. 7. From cireumstan- 
tial evidence, 58, 60; 8. From Baptism of the Spirit, 65. 


Arguments against the requirement of literal obedienee 66 


1, From feet-washing, 66; 2. From the command by which 
the Supper was instituted, 67; 3. Unsuitableness of Im- 
mersion, 67. 

(v) 


vi | CONTENTS. 


Src. 3. Subjects of Baptism , . e 
4. Design of Baptism 
5. Connection of Baptism’ with Church Order 


CHAPTER II. 


wcal Churches, . e . 
Sec. 1. Moral O 5 . . 
Assembly . . a ' 
Members . . . . 
Organization e . . 
Independence . . . . 
Divine Rule - . . 
Design ° 
2. Ceremonial Qualification for E n 
3. False Professors , : . . 


CHAPTER III. 


The Church Universal č ; . 
Src. 1. Membership S . . 


The generic church . . . 

2. Visibility . . 

3. Unity . : . 

4. Organization `% : . : s 
The Visible Church anii 130; The Baptized Church, 136. 

5. Progress and Duration š . 

6. Relation to Christ’s Kingdom, . 

7. Relation to Local Churches . ` 


CHAPTER IV. 


Infant Membership 
Sze. 1. Direct Arguments for Ine on banat 


1. The Epistles, 144; 2. Matt. xix. 14, 146; 3. 1 Cor. vii. 14, 
155; 4. Congregation of the Lord, 156; 5. Abrahamic 


Covenant, 164, 


PAGE 


68 
70 
73 


74 
74 
74 
79 
80 
83 
84 
93 
95 
97 


- 100 


100 
101 
121 


. 125 


128 


- 137 


139 


- 142 


144 


- 144 


CONTENTS. vii 


PAGE 
Sec. 2. Arguments for Infant Baptism . ‘ , i 183 
1. Faith required of adults only, 184; 2. On the same ground 
as female Communion and the Christian Sabbath, 184; 3. 
Infants included in all nations, 186; 4. Infants may be dis- 
ciples, 187; 5. Commission to proselyte, 190; 6, Baptism 
takes the place of circumcision, 191; 7. Baptism is analo- 
gous to circumcision, 194; 8. Baptism of households, 195; 
9. Ecclesiastical history, 199. 
CHAPTER V. 
Communion = 5 : ; : : 6 . 203 
Sec. 1. Perpetuity of the Lord’s Supper . : . : 203 
2. Design 7 5 3 6 5 : T209 
3. Communicants . : A s ° A 212 
4, Open Communion. 5 . ; 5 . 214 
Arguments.—1. First Communicants, 214; 2. Commission, 
215; 3. Primitive example, 216; 4. Order of the things 
signified, 217; 5. Brotherly love, 217; 6. The true Church, 
218; 7. Exclusion a punishment, 219; 8. Toleration, 219; 
9, Pulpit Communion, 223; 10, The Lord’s Table, 224. 
CHAPTER VI. 
Washing of Feet 5 ° s è 7 ` 226 


CHAPTER VII. 


Public Worship. ê . . . ° . . 232 
Sec. 1. Time.—Christian Sabbath 5 P $ 232 
2. Mode . s í 2 4 k 5 1a PRE 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Ministry  . . . < . . : 2 241 
Sec. 1. Ministry of the Word ° . . . . 241 
A distinct class . 


Their Work r z 
Their Call 2 s 
Objections : . 


Vili CONTENTS. 


Src. 2. Administration of Baptism . 
3. Apostolic Succession . e 

4. Church Officers . e . 
Bishops . ° . 

Deacons - . . 


CHAPTER IX. 


Discipline . : . ; . 
Src. 1. Admission of Members . . 
2. Spiritual Improvement . 
3. Excommunication . < 
CHAPTER X. 
Miscellaneous Topics X e 


Sec. 1. Expedience of the Scriptural Order 
2. Fellowship between Churches 


3. Imposition of Hands . e 
4. Rebaptism Žž . “ = 
May be necessary e . 
Who must decide . . 
First Case. 3 A 
Second Case è 
CONCLUSION. 


Duty of Baptists . . . . 


APPENDIX. 


Situation of Enon 3 Š è 
: Place of the Eunuch’s Baptism . 
Immersion in Cold Climates W 


PAGE 


254 
257 
263 
263 
266 


268 
268 
270 


273 


275 
275 
279 
281 


- 282 . 


282 
282 
283 
284 


: 299 


308 


CP E RR O 


Pp 


CHURCH ORDER. 


INTRODUCTION. 


OBEDIENCE TO CHRIST. 


To love God with all the heart is the sum of all duty. Love 
must be exercised according to the relations which we bear. When 
a parent loves his child, he feels bound to exercise parental autho- 
rity over it for its benefit ; but the love of a child towards a parent 
requires obedience. So love to God produces obedience; for it is 
impossible to love God supremely without a supreme desire to please 
him in all things. Hence this one principle contains, involved in 
it, perfect obedience to every divine requirement. 

The loveliness of the divine character is not abated, by being 
exhibited in the humble nature of man, in the person of Jesus 
Christ. In him the glory of the Father appears, claiming our 
supreme affections; and he is invested with the Father’s autho- 
rity, to which perfect obedience is due. The divine perfections 
are rendered more intelligible to us by his mediation; and, in 
proportion to the clearness of the discovery, the obligation to love 
and obey becomes increased. 

A powerful motive, to love and obey Christ, is drawn from the 
love which he has manifested in dying for us. Paul felt this in 
an overpowering degree, when he said, “ I am crucified with Christ, 
nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the 
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son 

(9) 


10 INTRODUCTION. 


of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.”! The same 
overpowering impulse to love and obedience, is brought to view in 
another declaration of this apostle: “The love of Christ con. 
straineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, ther 
were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live should 
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for 
them, and rose again.” ? When our love to the Saviour grows cold, 
we should repair to his cross, and fix our thoughts on the exhibi- 
tion of love there presented. And when we feel our hearts melt, 
the recollection that the suffering Saviour is God over all, must 
produce a full purpose to yield to him the obedience of all our 
powers during our whole existence. From the cross we come forth 
to be Christ’s, resolved to glorify him with our bodies and our 
spirits, which are his. 

Jesus said to his disciples, “ If ye love me, keep my command- 
ments.” This claim of obedience is cordially admitted by every 
true disciple. When the first emotion of love to Christ throbbed 
in the heart of the persecuting Saul, he inquired, “ Lord, what wilt 
thou have me to do?” 

The first disciples were required to serve their Lord and Master 
by strenuous efforts to spread his religion through the world; and 
the same obligation devolves on us. He came to be the Saviour 
of the world; and, notwithstanding the humility of his appearance, 
and the feebleness of the instrumentality which he chose, the reli- 
gion of the despised Nazarene must prevail over the earth, and 
bless every nation of mankind. The conquest of the world has 
not yet been achieved, but the work is before us; and, if we are 
loyal subjects of Zion’s King, we must give ourselves to its accom- 
plishment. 

The means which our King employs, for diffusing the blessings 
of his reign, are not such as human wisdom would have adopted. 
It has pleased the Lord, “ by the foolishness of preaching, to save 
them that believe.” It has seemed good to infinite wisdom, that 
the religion which is to bless mankind, should be propagated by the 
simple instrumentality of the Christian ministry and the Christian 
churches. If we seek military force, or legislative enactments, to 
accomplish the work, we turn away from. the simplicity of Christ, 


aa a N Ee end See. Le! 


1 Gal. ii. 20. 2 2 Cor. v. 14, 15. 


ee 


p~ 
OBEDIENCE TO CHRIST. 254 11 


and convert his kingdom into one of this world; and, whenever 
human wisdom has attempted, in any particular, to improve the 
simple means that Christ ordained, the progress of truth and 
righteousness has been impeded. 

Much that has existed, and that now exists, among the professed 
followers of Christ, cannot be contemplated by one who sincerely 
loves him, without deep distress. Different creeds, and different 
ecclesiastical organizations, have divided those who bear his name 
into hostile parties, and Christianity has been disgraced, and its 
progress retarded. The world has seen hatred and persecution 
where brotherly love ought to have been exhibited; and Christ has 
been crucified afresh, and put to open shame, by those who claim 
to be his disciples. . 

For these evils, what shall be the remedy ? Shall we look to the 
wisdom of this world, to devise the cure? Human wisdom did not 
originate the institutions of Christianity ; and it is now unable to 
give them efficiency. We must return to the feet of our divine 
Master, and again receive his instructions. Let us, in the spirit 
of obedient disciples, inquire for the good old paths, that we may 
walk therein. No individual can accomplish everything; but it is 
his duty to do what he can. Let each one show that he possesses 
the spirit of Christ, and carefully obey all the commands of Christ. 
If he cannot cure the existing evils, he will, at least, not increase 
them; and the influence of his example may produce salutary 
effects beyond his most sanguine hopes. 

The true spirit of obedience is willing to receive the slightest 
intimations of the divine will. All the truths of Revelation are 
not equally clear; yet none of them may be disregarded because 
of difficulty in their investigation. If some most needful to be 
known, are presented prominently on the inspired pages, and 
written in characters so large that he who runs, may read; there 
are others which are discoverable only by diligent search. Yet the 
truths, thus discovered, are precious gems dug from an exhaustless 
mine; and even the very labor of discovery brings its own reward 
in the mental and spiritual discipline which it furnishes. The dili- 
gent student of the Scriptures derives an abundant recompense for 
` his toil, not only from the enlarged and clearer views of divine 
truth to which he attains, but also from that constant exercise of 


1é INTRODUCTION. 


humility and faith, for which he finds occasion at every step of his 
progress. 

As the truths of revelation differ in the clearness with which 
they are exhibited, so our faith embraces them with different 
degrees of strength. A man who does not investigate for himself, 
may receive, with unwavering confidence, and maintain, with obsti- 
nate pertinacity, every dogma of his party: but he who uses his 
own powers in the search after truth, will find some things to be 
received as undoubted articles of faith, others as opinions to be 
held with various degrees of confidence, according to the strength 
of evidence with which they have been severally presented to the 
mind. By not furnishing overpowering evidence on every question 
of faith and practice, the divine wisdom has given scope for the 
moral dispositions of men to exert their influence. A careful 
inquiry respecting the minutest portions of duty, and a fixed deter- 
mination to observe the will of God in every particular, may 
exhibit proofs of obedience more strong and decisive, than would 
be possible, if all truth and duty were discovered by intuition. 

Our obedience to Christ should be universal. The tithing of 
mint, anise, and cummin, is of less moment than the weightier 
matters of law, judgment, mercy, and faith; but it is not there- 
fore to be disregarded. Christ taught that both were to be 
observed. “These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the 
other undone.”’"? Church order and the ceremonials of religion, 
are less important than a new heart; and in the view of some, any 
laborious investigation of questions respecting them may appear to 
be needless and unprofitable. But we know, from the Holy Scrip- 
tures, that Christ gave commands on these subjects, and we cannot 
refuse to obey. Love prompts our obedience; and love prompts 
also the search which may be necessary to ascertain his will. Let 
us, therefore, prosecute the investigations which are before us, 
with a fervent prayer, that the Holy Spirit, who guides into all 
truth, may assist us to learn the will of him whom we supremely 
love and adore. 


annem ern e a A ESE, 


1? Matt.. xxiii. 23. 


A S 


m Jak a aed Se a oda 


CHAPTER I. 


BAPTISM. 
Szcrion I—PERPETUITY OF BAPTISM. 


WATER BAPTISM IS A CHRISTIAN ORDINANCE OF PERPETUAL 
OBLIGATION. 

The commission of Christ to his apostles reads thus: “ Go, teach 
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of ‘the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things 
whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you alway, 
even unto the end of the world.’ It is not expressly stated in these 
words that water must be used in the baptizing which is enjoined ; 
but so common is the use of water, that a command to immerse, 
wash, or sprinkle, naturally implies the use of it, unless something 
in the circumstances of the case, or connection of the word, suggests 
the use of some other liquid. The word baptize is often used in 
Scripture where water is implied without being expressly men- 
tioned. The apostles had been accustomed to the administration 
of water baptism. They had been chosen to be Christ’s attend- 
ants and witnesses, from the baptism of John ;? and, in all proba- 
bility, many of them saw their Master baptized in the Jordan. 
They had witnessed John’s baptism in other cases; and some, if 
not all of them, had been baptized by him. After Jesus entered 
on his ministry, it was said that he “made and baptized more 
disciples than John.” Water baptism must be intended here ; and 
we are expressly informed that the disciples, and not Jesus himself, 
administered it. This they did while they were under the imme- 
a ELS cele a ee a ee ee 


1 Matt. xxviii. 19, 20. ? Acts i. 22. 8 John iv. 1. 
(13) 


14 BAPTISM. 


diate direction of their Master, and were his personal attendants. 
His ministry, and their baptisms, were confined to the nation of 
Israel. The commission quoted above enlarged the field of their 
operation. The presence of their Master was promised, though 
his body was about to be removed from them; and the command 
to teach or make disciples, and to baptize, would naturally be inter- 
preted by them according to the use of terms to which they had 
been accustomed. In their subsequent ministry, they preached and 
baptized; and the record, called the Acts of the Apostles, contains 
frequent mention of baptisms. In these, no reasonable doubt can 
exist that water was used : and sometimes it is expressly mentioned. 

The commission was given, just before Christ ascended to heaven, 
and was designed for the dispensation which was to follow. The 
apostles, before proceeding to execute it, were commanded to tarry 
in Jerusalem until they should be endued with power from on high. 
This promised power was given when the Holy Spirit was poured 
out upon them on the day of Pentecost. It is clear, therefore, 
that, in the view of the Lord Jesus, water baptism was not incon- 
sistent with the spiritual dispensation which the day of Pentecost 
introduced. 

Besides its literal use, the word baptize is sometimes employed 
figuratively, when spiritual influence, or overwhelming sufferings, 
are intended. In such instances there is always something in the 
context, or circumstances of the case, directing to the proper inter- 
pretation. When there is nothing that directs to a figurative inter- 
pretation, we are required, by a well known law of criticism, to 
take the word in its literal sense. According to this law, we are 
bound to interpfet literally the language of plain command used 
in the commission; and, if “baptizing” must be taken literally, 
no doubt can exist that the use of water was intended in the com- 
mand. 

Since the ascension of Christ, no change of dispensation has 
occurred by which the commission Gould be revoked. The promise 
which it contains, of Christ’s presence until the end of the world, 
implies its perpetuity. Under this commission the ministers of 
Christ now act, and by it they are bound, according to the mani- 
fest intention of his words, to administer water baptism. 

In different ages of Christianity some persons have denied the 
obligation of water baptism. The modern sect, called Quakers, 


—_ ee, ee a S 


PERPETUITY OF BAPTISM. 15 


are of this number. The objections which they urge deserve our 
attention. 

Objection 1.—The proper rendering of the commission, is, “ bap- 
tizing into the name of,” &c. The name of God signifies his power, 
or some influence proceeding from him. The baptism ¿nto spiritual 
influence cannot be water baptism. 

We admit the correction of the translation, but not the inference 
drawn from it. The same Greek preposition is used in other pas- 
sages which forbid the inference now drawn. Jobn said, “ I bap- 
tize you unto [into] repentance.” Repentance is a spiritual duty: 
but baptism into repentance is not, therefore, a spiritual baptism ; 
for the words of John fully quoted, are: “ I baptize you with water 
into repentance.” In another passage it is said, “ John preached 
the baptism of repentance for [into] the remission of sins :” and 
Peter, on the day of Pentecost, commanded, “ Repent and be bap- 
tized for [into] the remission of sins.” The remission of sins is a 
spiritual blessing, but it does not follow that baptism into the remis- 
sion of sins must be a spiritual baptism. John’s we know was 
water baptism; and when those who received Peter’s command are 
said to have been baptized, the sacred historian employs the simple 
language of plain history: “Then they that gladly received his 
word were baptized.”! These examples prove that the use of the 
preposition into, is not inconsistent with the literal interpretation 
of the commission. 

Objection 2.—The baptism of John is, in the Scriptures, carefully 
distinguished from the baptism of Christ; the former being with 
water, the latter with the Spirit. The apostles were to act for 
Christ, and the commission authorized them to administer his bap- 
tism. Parallel texts may be found, in which the apostles are said 
to impart spiritual gifts. 

Although John had predicted, that Christ would baptize with 
the Holy Spirit; yet the disciples made by Christ during his per- 
sonal ministry, were baptized with water. This was administered 
by his disciples, and doubtless with his sanction. The careful 
mention by the evangelist that Jesus did not himself baptize, 
shows that baptism with the Holy Spirit is not in this case intended. 
John’s words, “ He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost,” describe 
spiritual baptism as Christ’s peculiar personal work, and we do not 
Pet) oe i ee 


1 Acts ii. 41. 


16 BAPTISM. 


find any passage of Scripture which speaks of the apostles, or any 
other ministers of Christ, baptizing with the Holy Spirit. Such 
baptism as they had been accustomed to administer, in the presence, 
and by the authority of Christ, the commission required them to 
administer. 

It is true that Paul was sent to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, 
and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of 
Satan unto God; but these things are mentioned as the effects of 
his mission, and not as things directly commanded. The duty 
commanded, was to preach the gospel. The blessing of God on 
his ministry rendered his mission effectual to open the eyes of 
the Gentiles, and to confer the spiritual benefits mentioned in 
the special commission which he received. But the baptizing men- 
tioned in the commission given to the other apostles, is a com- 
manded duty, and the command must be understood according to 
the literal import of the words. 

Objection 3.—Paul teaches that there is one baptism. Now, 
there is a baptism of the Spirit; and if water baptism is a per- 
petual ordinance of Christianity, there are two baptisms, instead 
of one. 

Paul says, “One Lord, one faith, and one baptism.” As he 
uses the words Lord and faith in their literal senses, so he uses the 
word baptism in its literal sense. In this sense there is but one 
baptism. John the Baptist foretold that Christ would baptize with 
the Holy Spirit : and Jesus said to his disciples, “ Ye shall be bap- 
tized with the baptism that I am baptized with.” Both these bap- 
tisms were known to Paul. These figurative baptisms were two in 
number; while the literal baptism was but one. He must, there- 
fore, have intended the latter. 

Objection 4.—Peter has defined the true Christian baptism, both 
negatively and positively. It is (“not the putting away of the filth 
of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God), by 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ.”! The first clause denies that it 
is water baptism; and the second affirms that it is spiritual bap- 
tism. ‘This is confirmed by the fact that it is said to save, which 
water baptism cannot do. “Moreover, the words “ the like figure,” 
should be rendered the antitype. When spiritual things are com- 
pared to literal, the literal are the type, and the spiritual the anti- 
type. Hence, as baptism is called the antitype, spiritual baptism 


must be intended. 


11 Peter iii. 21. 


— ee A 


PERPETUITY OF BAPTISM. a be 


Water baptism, as a Christian rite, is not administered to cleanse 
the flesh, either literally or ceremonially. It figuratively repre- 
sents the burial and resurrection of Christ, on which the believer 
relies for salvation. The answer of a good conscience is obtained 
by faith in the finished work of Christ, represented in the rite. In 
the language of Scripture, a thing is said to be that which it repre- 
sents: thus, “ The field zs the world.” “ This ¿s my body.” “This 
cup ts the new testament.” So Paul was said to wash away his 
sins in baptism, because it represented their being washed away: 
and so in this passage, baptism is said to save, because it repre- 
sents our salvation, which is effected by the burial and resurrection 
of Christ; not by the removing of any corporeal defilement. 

The criticism on the word antitype is inaccurate. The antitype 
is that which corresponds to the type; but it is not necessarily 
spiritual. The earthly sanctuary is, in one place, called the antitype 
of the heavenly, ‘‘ which are the figures [antitypes] of the true.’’* 
In this passage “ the holy places made with hands” are the antitype ; 
and heaven is the type to which the antitype corresponds. ‘This 
relation between the type and antitype, reverses the order which 
the objection assumes to be universal. 

Objection 5.--The Jews had divers baptisms, which Paul calls 
“carnal ordinances imposed on them till the time of reforma- 
tion.”? An ordinance is not rendered carnal by the time when it 
is observed; but by its own nature. The Jewish baptisms were 
commanded by God, and were significant of spiritual things. 
Water baptism cannot have higher authority, or be more signifi- 
cant; and is, therefore, a carnal ordinance in its own nature, and 
not suited to Christ’s spiritual dispensation. It belonged properly 
to John’s dispensation, and was designed to be superseded by 
Christ’s spiritual baptism, according to the words of John, “ He 
must increase, but I must decrease.’ i 

In speaking of the Jewish ceremonies, Paul says, ‘* Which stood 
in meats and drinks, and divers baptisms, and carnal ordinances.” 
This passage does not confound baptisms, with carnal ordinances, 
but seems rather to distinguish between them. Nevertheless, as 
the Jewish baptisms sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, there 
may be a propriety in denominating them carnal. Christian bap- 
tism is not administered for this purpose; and, therefore, is not 


pee ee eee 
1 Heb. ix. 24. 2 Web. ix. 10. 8 John iii. 30, 
2 


18 BAPTISM. 


carnal in the same sense. But, whatever it may be called, if 
Christ instituted it for the observance of his followers, we dare not 
account it unsuitable to his dispensation. The Jewish dispensa- 
tion abounded with ceremonies; but amidst them all, a spiritual 
service was required ; for even then the sacrifices of God were 
a broken spirit.! The ceremonies were wisely adapted to pro- 
mote spirituality, rather than to hinder it. Our more spiritual dis- 
pensation needs fewer helps of this kind: but we are yet in the 
body, and God has judged it fit to assist our faith by visible repre- 
sentations. To reject their use, is to be wiser than God. 

Water baptism was not superseded by the baptism of the Spirit. 
While Peter was preaching to Cornelius, and those who were in 
his house, the Holy Ghost fell on them. ‘The apostle did not con- 
sider this a reason for omitting water baptism; but, on the con- 
trary, argued the propriety of administering it, from this very 
fact: “ Can any man forbid water, that these should not be bap- 
tized which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we?”? Con- 
trary to all his previous views, the Holy Spirit had guided the 
apostle to preach the gospel to these uncircumcised gentiles, and 
to admit them to Christian baptism. If this rite had been designed 
for Jews only, or to be superseded by the baptism of the Spirit, 
Peter committed a mistake in commanding these first Gentile con- 
verts to be baptized with water. It is true that he had been mis- 
taken before, in confining his ministry to the circumcised; and it 
may be argued, that he may have been again mistaken in com- 
manding water baptism to the uncircumcised. But the Holy 
Ghost was now correcting the first error, and it is wholly improb- 
able that in doing this, he should have led him into a second, The 
propriety of admitting gentile converts had not been determined, 
as it afterwards was, by a council of the apostles; but Peter fol- 
lowed the teaching of the Holy Spirit, and the subsequent council 
justified his act. Now, if he had again mistaken the mind of the 
Spirit in commanding the use of water baptism, it is unaccount- 
able, and inconsistent with the perfection of the Scriptures, that 
neither he nor the council, in reviewing the transaction under the 
influence of the Holy Spirit, discovered the mistake ; and that no 


tl ee ee 


1 Ps. li. 17. 2 Acts x. 47. 


PERPETUITY OF BAPTISM. 19 


correction, such as was made of the former error, is anywhere to 
be found in the inspired writings. 

When John spoke the words, “He must increase, but I must 
decrease,” the Jews had said to him, “Rabbi, he that was with 
thee beyond Jordan, behold the same baptizeth, and all men come 
to him.”! The baptism which they reported must have been water 
baptism, and so far as John’s words applied to it, they must denote 
that water baptism, instead of ceasing under Christ's dispensation, 
would be greatly extended. 

Objection 6.—Paul states in Ist. epistle to the Corinthians, 
“ Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel ;” and he 
thanked God that he had baptized so few of them. Now, as he 
was not a whit behind the chief of the apostles, water baptism 
would not have been omitted in his commission, if it had been 
designed to be a perpetual ordinance; and if it was as much his 
duty to baptize as to preach, he would not have thanked God that 
he had baptized so few. He would as soon have thanked God 
that he had preached so little. He baptized some, as he circum- 
cised Timothy, accommodating himself to the weakness of men; 
but he was thankful that such acts of accommodation had been 
seldom needed. As he was the chief opponent of the prevailing 
judaizing tendency, he was thankful that, in the matter of bap- 
tizing, he had yielded to it in so few instances. 

In this quotation from Paul, the word baptize stands alone, 
without the mention of water. The objection very properly assumes 
that water baptism is meant; but, in so doing, it confirms our 
rule, that the word baptize, when alone, implies the use of water. 
If the word, when standing alone in such a sentence, could mean 
the baptism of the Spirit, and if Paul and the other apostles had 
been commissioned to administer this baptism, he could not haye 
declared with truth, “ Christ sent me not to baptize.” 

Paul claimed to be an apostle, not of men, neither by man, but 
by Jesus Christ. An apostle is one sent, and Paul was sent by 
Jesus, who said “to whom I now send thee.” He claimed to be 
an apostle in the highest sense, because he had received his com- 
mission directly from Christ: “Am I not an apostle? have I not 
seen Jesus Christ ?’’? Now, in the commission which he received 
directly from Christ, he was not commanded, either to be baptized 
himself or to baptize others. He received the gospel which he 


1 John iii. 26. 2 PCortixs L 


20 BAPTISM. 


preached without human instrumentality; but he did not so receive 
baptism. He submitted to it, at the command of Ananias, who 
was not himself one of these originally commissioned to administer 
it. In this act, Paul acknowledged the obligation to perpetuate 
the ordinance, and the right of Ananias to administer it by 
authority derived from the other apostles. At Antioch he was 
set apart with fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands, for minis- 
terial labor; and, whether this was done with reference to the 
missionary service on which he immediately entered, or whether it 
was his first ceremonial investiture with the ministerial office, we 
learn; from what was done, that his direct commission from Christ, 
was not designed to set aside the Church order which had been 
previously established by the other apostles. Both in receiving his 
own baptism, and in being set apart to the work to which the 
Holy Ghost had called him, Paul acted as an ordinary Christian. 
His apostleship for preaching the gospel was directly from Christ, 
and not by man; but his baptism, and his authority to baptize, 
were received by man, and in a way which respected and honored 
the established order of things among the disciples of Christ. 
While he said with truth, “ Christ sent me not to baptize,” it was 
nevertheless true, that the baptisms which he did administer were 
not unauthorized. He considered the administration of the ordi- 
nance not his proper apostolic work; and since the Corinthians 
had divided themselves into parties, claiming Paul, Apollos, and 
Cephas, for their leaders, he was thankful that so few of them 
could claim him as their leader on the ground of having received 
baptism from him. ` l 

Paul did not baptize out of mere accommodation to the weak- 
ness of others. Because of the Jews who were in that quarter, he 
circumcised Timothy, whose mother was a Jewess; but when the 
judaizers desired to have Titus also circumcised, who was a Greek, 
he steadfastly and successfully opposed them. As a minister of 
the uncircumcision, he watchfully and zealously defended the gentile 
converts in the enjoyment of liberty from the Jewish yoke of 
bondage. But not a word can be found in all that he said or 
wrote, claiming for them freedom from the obligation of Christian 
baptism. On the contrary, he uses considerations derived from 
their baptism, to urge them to walk in newness of life. The rule 
of interpretation, confirmed by the very objection which we are 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. yA 


considering, requires us to understand literal baptism to be meant, 
when it is said, “ So many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, 
were baptized into his death;’’ and again, when it is said, “ As 
many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on 
Christ.”? A public profession of Christ was, in the view of Paul, 
the design of this ceremony, involving an acknowledged obligation 
to be his, and to walk in newness of life. All that Paul taught, 
like his own example, tends to establish the perpetuity of Christian 
baptism. 


Section IIL—MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 


To BAPTIZE IS TO IMMERSE. 

We have seen that the commission which Christ gave to his 
apostles, instituted baptism as an ordinance to be observed by his 
disciples to the end of the world. It becomes important, therefore, 
to ascertain the meaning of the word “ baptizing,” by which this 
duty is enjoined. 

The commission has come down to us in the Greek language; 
and the word translated “ baptizing”? is a participle of the Greek 
verb Bazzo. Our present inquiry is, what does this Greek verb 
mean ? 

In the ordinary process of translating the writings of a Greek 
author, when we wish to ascertain the meaning of some word that 
he uses, we satisfy ourselves, for the most part, by consulting a 
Greek lexicon.’ rune 

The laws of interpretation require us to take the primary 
signification of words, unless there be something in the context, or 
nature of the subject, inconsistent with this signification. As there 


1 Rom, vi. 3. ? Gal. iii. 27. 

3 The Lexicons of Donnegan, and of Liddell and Scott, are in common use 
and high repute. They give the meaning of the word as follows :— 

Donnegan.—“ To immerse repeatedly into a liquid; to submerge, to soak 
thoroughly, to saturate ; hence to drench with wine Met., to confound totally ; to 
dip in a vessel and draw.—Pass. Perf. BeBarrvouar, to be immersed, &c.” 

Liddell and Scott.— To dip repeatedly, to dip under. Mid. to bathe ; hence 
to steep, wet; metaph. of BeBanroevor, soaked in wine; to pour upon, 
drench, etspopars opanuace Beb. over head and ears in debt. Plut. wecpaxcoy 
BaxrSouevov, a boy overwhelmed with questions. Heind. Plat. Euthyd.—to 
dip a vessel, draw water—to baptize. N. T.” 


22 BAPTISM. 


is no such difficulty in the present instance, our first decision, if we 
follow the lexicons, must be in favor of the sense to immerse. 

When, from any cause, the decision of lexicons is unsatisfactory, 
the ultimate recourse is to Greek authors who have used the word 
in question. We search out the various examples of its use; and, 
by an examination of these, we learn in what sense the authors 
used the word. Since use is the law of language, the sense in 
which Greek authors used a word is its true meaning. ‘The lexi- 
cons themselves yield deference to this law, and cite examples 
from authors in proof of the significations which they assign to 
words. 

Our search of Greek authors, for the use of Barzio, is greatly 
facilitated by the labors of learned men who have preceded us in 
the investigation. 

Professor Stuart! has collected, from different Greek writers, a 
number of examples in which Barrio, and its primitive, Barre, 
occur, with a view to determine the meaning of the words. To his 
collection, which he considered sufliciently copious for the purpose, 
I have added many other examples, from a similar collection by 
Dr. Carson, and a few others, from a smaller collection by Dr. 
Ryland. All these are included in the following tables, which 
may, therefore, be regarded as a fair exhibition of the use made 
of these words in Greek literature. The examples are so classified 
as to render the examination of them easy. In rendering the 
words in question, I have not closely followed the learned men of 
whose labors I have availed myself, but have aimed at a more 
literal and uniform translation. This is always put in italics; and 
the reader may consider the spaces, occupied by the italicized 
words, as so many blanks which he may fill with any other ren- 
dering that he may think better fitted to express the author’s 
meaning. Let it be regarded as a problem to be solved, how these 
several blanks shall be filled, so that the supply may fit every 
example, and, at the same time, be consistent, throughout the table, 
as the meaning of the same word. 

In a few of the examples the italicized words are marked with 
an asterisk. In these cases they are renderings, not of the verbs 
+i CTSNET o weer eer esd Sper emai 


1 Dissertation on the question, “Is the mode of Christian Baptism pre- 
scribed in the New Testament?” 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 28 


themselves, which are placed at the head of the tables, but of sub- 


stantives or adjectives derived from them, and involving the same 


signification. In the English prepositions which are construed 
with the verbs, I have sometimes followed Professor Stuart, when, 
without his authority, I should have been inclined to adopt other 
renderings. This remark applies especially to the use of “ with,” 
in Class III. of Table II. A different rendering would correspond 
more exactly with the idea of immersion; but it has been my wish 
to give immersion no advantage to which it is not clearly entitled. 


TABLES OF EXAMPLES. 


TABLE I. 


EXAMPLES OF BANTƏQ. 


CLASS I. 


TO DIP LITERALLY AND STRIOTLY. 
© 


§ 1. For the purpose of imbuing or covering.—1. He took a 
thick cloth and dipped it in water.’ 2. Dipping sponges in warm 
water.2 8. And a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip it in the 
water, and sprinkle it upon the house.* 4, Send Lazarus, that he 
may dip the tip of his finger in water.* 5. Cakes dipped in sour 
wine.’ 6. Dip thy morsel in the vinegar.® 7. One of the twelve 
that dippeth with me in the dish.” 8. Who déppeth his hand in the 
dish. 9. And when he had dipped the sop? 10. Dipping hay 


a 


12 Kings viii. 15. 2 Hippocrates, 5 Num. xix. 18. 
t Luke xvi. 24. 5 Hippocrates. 6 Ruth ii. 14. 
7 Mark xiv. 20. 8 Matt. xxvi. 23. ? John xiii. 26. 


24 BAPTISM, 
into honey, they give it them to eat.! 11. Venus dipped the ar- 
rows in sweet honey.2 12. He put forth the end of the rod that 
was in his hand, and dipped it in a honeycomb.? 13. Ye shall 
take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood which is in the 
basin.* 14. The priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and 
sprinkle of the blood.® 15. The priest shall dip his finger in the 
blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it. 16. He dipped his finger 
into the blood.” 17. And shall dip them and the living bird in 
the blood. 18. And he shall dip it into the blood.” 19. The 
Greeks dipping the sword and the Barbarians the spear-head [in 
blood.] 20; Having dipped a crown into ointment." 21. The 
priest shall dép his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand. 
22. Dip the probes in some emollient." 23. Dipping the rag in 
white sweet-smelling Egyptian ointment. 24. Dipping the rags 
in ointment.“ 25, By reason of heat and moisture, the colors 
enter into the pores of things dipped into them. 26. They dip 
it [into the dye-stuff.1°] j 

§ 2d. For the purpose of filling, or of drawing out, the verb some- 
times taking the sense to dip out.—27, The youth held the capa- 
cious urn over the water, hasting to dip it.” 28. Take a vessel, 
ancient servant, and having dipped it into the sea, bring it hither.8 
29. The bucket must be first dipped and then be drawn up again. 
30. The lad directed his large pitcher towards the water, hasten- 
ing to dip it.” 31. He dipped his pitcher in the water. 39. In- 
stead of water, let my maid dip her pitcher into honeycombs.” 
33. Bubbling water dipped up with pitchers. 34, To-day, ye 
bearers of water, dip not [from the river Inachus].* 35. Dip up 
the sea-water itself. 

$3. For the purpose of cleansing.—86. The Egyptians consider 
the swine so polluted a beast, that if any one in passing touch a 
swine, he will go away and dip himself with his very garments, 


1 Aristotle. ? Anacreon. 3 1 Sam. xiv. 27. 

* Ex. xii, 22, 5 Lev. iv. 6. ê Lev. iv. 17. 

1 Lev. ix. 9. 8 Lev. xiv. 6. ® Lev. xiv. 51. 
1 Xenophon. n Ælian. 1? Lev, xiv. 16. 
8 Hippocrates, 1 Hippocrates, 15 Aristotle. 

16 Plato. 1 Theocritus. 18 Euripides. 
29 Aristotle, ” Theocritus. "2 Hermolaus. 
2 Theocritus. * Euripides. * Callimachus. 


3 Nicander. 


a 


$ 
x 
F 
x 

4 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. Zo 


going into the river.’ 387. It shall be dipped into water: so shall 
it be cleansed. 88. First they dip the wool in warm water, 
according to ancient custom.® 

§ 4. For the purpose of hardening.—39. The smith = a 
hatchet into cold water.4 40. Iron dipped.’ 

§ 5. For other purposes.—41. Bring the torch, that I may take 
and dip itë 42. They cannot dadare great changes, such as 
that, in the summer time; they should dip into cold water.” 43. 
If the crow has dipped his head into the river. 44. The feet of 
the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the 
water. 45. Of which the remedy is said to be a certain stone 
which they take from the sepulchre of a king of ancient times, 
and having dipped it in wine, drink.” 46. If any one dips any- 
thing into wax, it is moved as far as he dips." 47. Having melted 
the wax, he took the flea, and dipped its feet into the wax.” 48. 
With his own hand, he shall dip his sword into the viper’s bowels.” 
49. He dipped his whole chin into the belly of the ram.™ 50. The 
one dipped his spear between the other’s ribs, who at the same 
moment [dipped his] into his belly.” 51. Taking his sounding 
scimitar from the dead, he dipped it into the flesh.’ 


CLASS II. 
TO DIP INA LESS STRICT SENSE. 


§ 1. In appearance.—52. If the sun dip himself cloudless into 
the western flood.” 53. Cepheus dipping his head or upper part 
into the sea." 

§ 2. In effect.—54. From the dew of heaven, his body was. 
dipped [as wet as if it had been dipped.]" 55. Having dipped 
[wetted or filled as if he had dipped] the hollow of his hand, he 
sprinkles the tribunal.” 56. He was clothed with a vesture re dipped 
[colored as if it had been dipped] in blood.” 


1 Herodotus. 2 Lev. xi. 32. 3 Aristophanes. 

t Homer. 5 Plutarch. € Aristophanes. ` 

T Aristotle. 8 Aratus. ? Josh. iii. 15. 
10 Aristotle. 1 Aristotle. 12 Aristophanes. 
18 Lycophron. 14 Philippus. 13 Dionysius of Halicarnassus. 
16 Euripides. 1" Aratus. 18 Aratus. 


19 Dan. iv. 33, v. 21. 2 Suidas. Rey. Xix. Lo. 


26 BAPTISM. 


CLASS III. 
TO COLOR, 


$ 1. By dipping.—57. The color of things dyed is changed by 
the aforesaid causes! 58. The dyers,* when they are desirous to 
dye wool so as to make it purple; . . . and whatever may be dyed 
in this manner, the thing dyed becomes strongly tinctured. If any 
one dye other colors. That they may receive the laws in the best 
manner, as a dye,* that their opinion may be durable. And those 
streams cannot wash out the dye,* although they are very efficient 
to wash out.? 59. Some dyed with hyacinth, and some with pur- 
ple. 60. Thou hast well dyed thy sword against [in close conflict 
with] the Grecian army.* 61. For the wife has deprived each 
husband of life, dyeing the sword by slaughter.’ 

§ 2. Without regard to mode.—62. When it drops upon the 
garments, they are colored.’ 63. Nearchus relates that the Indians 
color their beards.” 64. He endeavored to conceal the hoariness 
of his hair by coloring * it. 65. The old man with the colored hair.® 
66. Does a patron affect to be younger than he is? Or does he 
even color his hair? 67. This garment, colored by the sword of 
Aigisthus, is a witness to me.” 68. He fell, without even looking 
upward, and the lake was colored with blood." 69. Garments of 
variegated appearance, colored* at great expense. 70. A colored* 
bird.” 71. Lest I color you with a Sardinian hue.” 72. Then 
perceiving that his beard was colored, and his head. 73. The 
physiologists, reasoning from these things, show that native warmth 
has colored the above variety of the growth of the things before 
mentioned. 74. Using the Lydian music or measure, and making 
plays, and coloring himself with frog-colored [paints.]® 


rene een ects eee 


1 Aristotle. ? Plato. 5 Josephus. 

* Sophocles, 5 Alschylus. € Hippocrates. 

1 Arrian. 8 Ælian. 7 ? Nicolas of Damascus. 
10 Æschylus. 1 Homer, 12 Aristophanes, 


8 Plutarch, 1 Diodorus Siculus. 15 Aristophanes, 


MEANING OF BAPTIZRE. rag 


CLASS IV. 
METAPHORICAL USE. 


$ 1. Allusion to dipping.—T5. Let him dip his foot in oil.! 76. 
Thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies.? 77. Thou 
hast dipped me deeply in filth.8 78. They are all dipped in fire.‘ 
T9. Dipping up pleasure with foreign buckets.’ 

§ 2. Allusion to coloring.—80. Dyer, who dyest all things, and 
dost change them by thy colors; thou hast dyed poverty also, and 
now appearest to be rich. 81. For the soul is colored by the 
thought : color it then by accustoming yourself to such thoughts.” 


TABLE II. 


EXAMPLES OF BanTIza. 
CLASS I. 
TO IMMERSE LITERALLY AND STRICTLY. 


§ 1. Sinking ships.—1. Shall 1 not laugh at the man who im- 
merses his ship by overlading it? 2. Such a storm suddenly 
pervaded all the country, that the ships that were in the Tiber 
were immersed.® 3. When the ship was about to be immersed. 
4. For our ship having been immersed in the midst of the Adriatic 
Sea." 5. The wave high-raised immersed them. 6. They were 
immersed with the ships themselves. 7. How would not his ship 
be immersed by the multitude of our rowers. 8. They were either 
immersed, their ships being bored through.“ 9. Those from above 
immersing them [ships] with stones and engines.” 10. They im- 


1 Deut. xxxiii. 24, 2 Psalms lxviii. 23. 5 Job ix. 31. 
t Moschus. 5 Lycophron. ê Helladius. 
1 Marcus Antoninus, 8 Hippocrates. ° Dion Cassius. 
10 Jesephus. u Josephus. © Josephus. 


13 Dion Cassius. 1 Dion Cassius. 1 Dion Cassius. 


28 BAPTISM. 


mersed many of the vessels of the Romans.! 11. The ships being 
in danger of being immersed? 12. Many of the Jews of distinc- 
tion left the city, as people swim away from an immersing [sink- 
ing] ship.* 13. Whose ship being immersed.* 14. As you would 
not wish, sailing in a large ship adorned and abounding with gold, 
to be immersed.’ 

§ 2. Drowning.—15. He would drive him from the bank, and 
immerse: him headlong, so that he would not be able again to lift 
up his head above water. 16. He may save one in the voyage 
that had better be immersed in the sea.” 17. The boy was sent 
to Jericho by night, and there by command, having been immersed 
in a pond by the Galatians, he perished.’ 18. Pressing him down 
always as he was swimming, and immersing him as in sport, they 
did not give over till they entirely drowned him.? 19. The river 
being borne on with a more violent stream, ¢mmersed many.” 20. 
Killing some on the land, and immersing others into the lake with 
their boats and their little huts." 21. The dolphin, vexed at such 
a falsehood, immersing him killed him.” 22, Many of the land 
animals immersed in the river perished.¥ 

§ 3. For purification.—23. Naaman immersed himself seven 
times in Jordan.“ 24. He that immerseth himself because of a 
dead body.” 25. He marveled that he had not first immersed 
before dinner.® 26. Except they immerse, they eat not.” 27. 
Divers immersions.8* 28, She went out by night into the valley 
of Bethulia, and immersed herself in the camp at the fountain of 
water.” 29. He who is immersed from a dead [carcass] and 
toucheth it again, what does he profit by his washing?” 80. The 
immersion* of cups and pots, &c.?! 

§ 4. Other cases—381. The person that has been a sinner, 
having gone a little way in it [the river Styx], is immersed up to 
the head.” 82. He breathed as persons breathe after being 


ald tes erie ke poet 


1 Polybius. 2 Æsop. 3 Josephus. 

* Diod. Siculus. 5 Epictetus. ê Lucian, 

1" Themistius. 8 Josephus. ® Josephus. 

1 Diodorus Siculus, 1 Heliodorus. 2 Æsop. 

8 Diodorus Siculus. 1t 2 Kings v. 14. 15 Ecclus, xxxiv. 30 
16 Luke xi. 38. n, 11 Mark vii. 4, 18 Heb. ix. 10. 
9 Judith xii. 7, 2 Keclus, xxxiv. 25. * Mark vii. 8, 


#2 Porphyry. 


~~“ ee on) ee 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 29 


aummersed.' 33. Then immersing himself into the Lake Copais.? 
34, Immerse yourself into the sea.’ 35. They marched a whole 
day through the water, ¢mmersed up to the waist. 36. The bitu 
men floats on the top, because of the nature of the water, which 
admits of no diving; nor can any one who enters it immerse him- 
self, but is borne up.° 87. But the lakes near Agrigentum have 
indeed the taste of sea water, but a very different nature, for it 
does not befall the things which cannot swim to be immersed, but 
they swim on the surface like wood.® 38. If an arrow be thrown 
in, it would scarcely be immersed." 39. As when a net is cast 
into the sea, the cork swims above, so am I unimmersed.** 40. 
When a piece of iron is taken red hot out of the fire and immersed 
in water, the heat is repelled.2 41. Thou mayest be immersed, O, 
bladder! but thou art not fated to sink.” 42. Having immersed 
some of the ashes into spring water, they sprinkled." 43. I found 
Cupid among the roses; taking hold of him by the wings I im- 
mersed him into wine.” 44. The sword was so immersed in blood 
that it was even heated by it.% 45. He set up a trophy, on which, 
immersing his hand into blood, he wrote this inscription.“ 46. 
They are of themselves immersed and sunk in the marshes.” 47. 
He immersed his sword up to the hilt into his own bowels." 


CLASS If. 
TO IMMERSE IN A LESS STRICT SENSE. 


§ 1. In appearance.—48. But when the sun immerses himself 
in the water of the ocean.” 

§ 2. In effect.—49. Certain uninhabited lands which at the ebb 
are used not to be immersed [covered over as if they had been 
immersed], but when the tide is at the full, the coast is quite inun- 
dated.’ 50. And were all immersed [surrounded on all sides as if 
they had been immersed] unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea.” 


1 Hippocrates. ? Plutarch. 3 Plutarch. 

t Strabo. 5 Strabo. € Strabo. 

T Strabo. 8 Pindar. ° Heraclides Ponticus. 
1 Plutarch. ; u Josephus. 12 Anacreon. 
18 Dionysius. 4 Plutarch. 18 Polybius. 
16 Josephus. 1 Orpheus. 18 Aristotle. 


19 1 Cor. x. 2. 


30 BAPTISM. 


CLASS III. 


METAPHORICAL USE. 


§ 1. For drunkenness.—51. I am one of those who immersed 

yesterday [who drank wine freely]. 52. Having immersed 
Alexander with much wine.2 53. Seeing him in this condition, 
and immersed by excessive drinking into shamelessness and sleep.* 
öt. They easily become intoxicated before they are entirely im- 
mersed.* 55. Immersed with wine. 56. Immersed by drunk- 
enness. 57. He is like one dizzy and tmmersed.? 
*  §2.\ For afflictions. —58. Perceiving that he was altogether 
abandoned to grief and immersed in calamity. 59. Since the 
things you have met with have immersed you. 60. Iniquity 
immerses me. 61. I have an immerston* to be immersed with. 
62. Immersed by misfortune. 63, Else what shall they do who 
are immersed for the dead? 64, Are you able to be immersed 
with the immersion* that I am immersed with ?4 

§ 3. Other uses.—65. The mind is immersed [drowned like 
plants by excessive watering] by excessive labor. 66, Immersed 
with business. 67. Immersed with innumerable cares—having 
the mind immersed on all sides by the many waves of business, 
immersed in malignity.” 68. Immersed into sleep.’ 69. He 
[Bacchus] immerses with a sleep near to death.” 70. When mid- 
night has immersed the city with sleep.™ 71. Immersed with 
sins.” 72. But the common people they do not immerse with 
taxes.” 73. They immersed [sunk as a ship] the city. 74, 
This as the last storm immersed [sunk as a ship] the tempest- 
tossed young men.* 75. Being immersed in debts of fifty millions 


1 Aristophanes, * Plato. 3 Josephus. 

* Philo Judzeus, 5 Chrysostom, ° Justin Martyr, 

7 Lucian. 8 Heliodorus. ® Heliodorus. 

10 Isa. xxi. 4, 1 Luke xii. 50, ™ Heliodorus. 

18 1 Cor, xv. 29. M4 Mark x. 38. % Plutarch, 

16 Plutarch, * Chrysostom, 18 Clemens Alexandrinus. 
19 Evenus, ' 2 Heliodorus, * Justin Martyr, s 


” Diod. Siculus. * Josephus. * Josephus. 


MEANING OT BAPTIZRE. 31 


of drachmex.! 76. He shall immerse you in the Holy Spirit.2 77, 
In one spirit have we been immersed into one body.’ 


REMARKS ON TABLE I. 


The chief difficulty in classifying Table I., respects Class III. 
Under it I have placed all the examples in which the sense to color 
is given to the word, either by Professor Stuart, or Dr. Carson. 
Many of these examples might have been placed in Class I., § 1; 
and others'in Class II., § 2. 

To color.—Some learned men have maintained that the verb 
never signifies to color, without regard to mode. It is possible to 
explain the examples in which it appears to have this signification, | 
like Ex. 56. Here the translators of the English Bible supposed 
the word, though denoting color, to be used with a reference to its 
primary meaning. But when we consider how many words from 
the root BAP were used for things pertaining to the dyer’s art; and 
how frequently the verb pazre was used to denote to color s it seems 
most probable, that when employed for this purpose, it suggested 
to the minds of the Greeks in their familiar use of it, the idea of 
color directly, without that process of thought which was neces- 
sary to deduce this meaning from its primary sense to dip. 

To smear.—Professor Stuart has assigned smear, as a secon- 
dary sense of the verb, and cites in proof from the Greek classic 
writers, Ex. 60, 61, 74. To the first two of these the rendering 
to smear is quite inappropriate. The warrior in battle does not 
redden his sword by smearing over it the blood of his enemies, but 
by plunging it into their bodies. In the other example, the 
rendering is less objectionable; but even here caution is necessary 
lest it mislead us. The verbs dip, plunge, immerse, wash, wet, 
pour, sprinkle, and smear, are construed with reference to two sub- 
stances: one a solid, and the other a liquid. The first five have 
the solid for their direct object: to pour has the liquid for its 
direct object. We say to dip the hand in water, and to pour water 
on the hand; but not to dip water on the hand, or to pour the 
hand. with water. The last two verbs, to sprinkle and to smear, | 
admit both constructions. We say, to sprinkle the floor with 


1 Plutarch. 2 Matt. iii. 11; Acts i. 5. 51 Cor. xii. 13. 


On BAPTISM. 


water, and to sprinkle water on the floor; to smear the body with 
paint, and to smear paint over the body. In both these construc- 
tions, they always denote an application of the liquid to the solid, 
agreeing in this particular with the verb to pour. The verb barro 
is always construed with the solid as its direct object. Through- 
out the table of examples, there can be found but one exception, 
which will be noticed hereafter. Even when it signifies to color, 
the verb takes for its object the solid, and does not signify that 
the color is produced by applying the coloring matter, as is done in 
the process of smearing. Hence, the rendering to smear is liable 
to mislead us into the belief that banro, like to smear, may signify 
an application of the liquid to the solid. The verb never signi- 
fies this process. It may signify the effect of it, but never the pro- 
cess itself. 

To dip out.—The exception above referred to, is Ex 35. In 
this, which is Nicander’s comment on the preceding example, the 
verb takes the liquid for its direct object, and assumes the sense 
to dip out. In the metaphoric use of the word, Ex. 79 conforms to 
this construction. It is worthy of remark that the English verb 
to dip is used in the same way, taking the liquid for its direct 
object, contrary to its usual construction; thus: He dips water from 
the pool. We never say, He plunges, or immerses water from the 
pool. In this sense of abstracting a part of the liquid from the 
rest, the verb azro, when it takes the solid for its direct object, 
may be construed with the genitive of the liquid, either with, or 
Without the preposition axo. This remark will explain Ex. 13, 15, 
21; to which Professor Stuart has given the sense to smear, because 
the verb is construed with aro. They do not signify to smear with 


blood or oil by applying it; but to dip into it so as to bring away- 


a part of it from the rest. 


RELATION BETWEEN Banro AND Barrio. 


Our search is for the meaning of faarifo. This is a derivative 
from Barro; and because some aid in ascertaining its meaning, 
has been expected from the primitive word, examples in which this 
occurs, have been introduced in the preceding collection. 

Some lexicographers have regarded Barro as a frequentative, 


© 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 33 


and have rendered it to immerse repeatedly. Robinson says it “is 
frequentative in form, but not in fact.” Professor Stuart has ex- 
amined this question at length, and decides “that the opposite 
opinion, which makes Baxrfo a frequentative (if by this it is de 
signed to imply that it is necessarily so by the laws of formation, 
or even by actual usage), is destitute of a solid foundation, I feel 
constrained, on the whole, to believe. The lexicographers who 
have assigned this meaning to it, appear to have done it on 
the ground of theoretical principles as to the mode of formation. 
They have produced no examples in point. And until these are 
produced, I must abide by the position that a frequentative sense 
is not necessarily attached to Barto; and that, if it ever have 
this sense, it is by a specialty of usage of which I have been able 
to find no example.” The termination fo, is, with greater pro- 
bability, supposed by others to add to the primitive word the 
signification of to cause, or to make, like the termination ize in 
legalize, to make legal; fertilize, to make fertile. According to 
this hypothesis, if azra signifies to immerse, Banrifw signifies to 
cause to be immersed. This makes the two words nearly or quite 
synonymous. But, however nearly two words may agree with 
each other in their original import, it seldom happens that they 
continue to be used in practice as equally fitted for every place 
which either of them may occupy. We must, therefore, examine 
the usus loquendi, to ascertain the peculiar shades of meaning 
which they acquire. In studying the preceding table of examples, 
the following things may be observed :— 

1. banro more frequently denotes slight or temporary immer- 
sion, than Bazza. Hence, the English word dip, which properly 
denotes slight or temporary immersion, is more frequently its ap- 
propriate rendering. In nearly one-half of the examples in which 
Bazzo occurs in the literal sense, it signifies the immersion which 
attends drowning, or the sinking of ships. 

2. Barro appears, in some cases, to be used in the secondary 
sense to color, without including its primary signification to im- 
merse. No example occurs in which faxrdo has lost the primary 
meaning. A similar fact may be observed in the use of the English 
words older and elder. The words have the same primary mean- 
ing; or, rather, they are different forms of the same word: yet, 
while older has inflexibly retained its primary meaning, elder has 


3 


34 BAPTISM. 


adopted a secondary signification, in which it denotes an officer 
Without regard to age. 

3. Baxrw sometimes signifies to dip up: Banrıča never takes this 
sense. 

? DEDUCTION FROM TABLE II. 

Though lexicographers frequently assign numerous significations 
to a word, they regard one as the primary or radical meaning from 
which all the rest are derived. If meanings have no relation to 
each other, they do not belong to the same word: hence to lie, 
signifying to be recumbent; and to lie, signifying to speak false- 
hood, though agreeing in orthography and pronunciation, are 
accounted different words, because their significations are inde- 
pendent of each other. No one imagines that there are two Greek 
verbs, Barro. We must, therefore, seek for one primary or radi- 
cal meaning, and endeavor to aecount by it for all the uses to 
which the word is applied. 

An important distinction needs to be made between the proper 
meaning of a word, and the accidental signification which it may 
obtain from the conneetion in which it is used. This distinction 
may be illustrated by the following passage :—‘‘If I wash myself 
with snow water, and make my hands never so clean; yet thou shalt 
plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.’’? In 
this sentence the word plunge, besides its proper meaning, obtains 
the signification to defile, from the connection in which it is used. 
This accidental signification is the most prominent and important 
idea conveyed by the word; yet it is not, strictly speaking, any 
part of its meaning. We may substitute defile for it, and the gene- 
ral sense of the passage will be conveyed; yet to plunge and to 
defile are different things. We must not conclude that we have 
ascertained the meaning of a word, when we have found another 
word which may be substituted for it in a particular sentence. 

Since the lexicons give immerse for the primary meaning of 
Bazzo, let us try the meaning in the examples in which the word 
occurs, that we may ascertain whether this signification will suffice 
to account for all the uses to which the word is applied. 

In the several examples, in which the word is applied to -inking 
ships, it obtains the accidental signification to cause to sink to the 


- 


1 Job ix. 30, 31. 


| 
| 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 85 


bottom. On this account it has been explained, in such connections, 
by the word prege, to throw into the deep. But the fact that i im- 
mersed ships sink to the bottom is not affirmed by the word Barrio. 
It is a natural consequence of their immersion. There is no neces- 
sity for supposing it to be included in the meaning of the word. 
The same distinction must be made in the examples which relate 
to drowning. The drowning is a consequence of the immersion, 
and is not included in the meaning of the word baxra. In several 
of the examples the immersion denoted by the word is clearly dis- 
tinguished from the effect produced by it. ‘So in § 8, we must dis- 
tinguish between the immersion and the purification resulting from 
it. The immersion only is properly denoted by the word. All the 
other examples in Class I. perfectly agree with the sense to im- 
merse; and some of them clearly require it. From Ex. 86, 37, 
38, 39, it appears that substances which float on water are not 
baptized. This proves conclusively that the mere application of 
water to a part of the surface does not satisfy the meaning of the 
word. Ex. 41 proves that sinking to the bottom is not necessary 
to its meaning; but the other examples just referred to, prove that 
descent below the surface is indispensable. 

The examples in Class II. require the meaning to immerse. The 
same is true of the examples in Class III. The propriety and force 
of the metaphorical allusions cannot be understood, if the word does 
not signify to immerse. 

After thoroughly examining the collection of examples, we find 
that they fully establish the meaning to immerse. Christ, in giving 
the commission, must have employed the word in its usual sense. 
The commission is given in the language of plain command, and 
every other word in it is used in its ordinary signification. We 
are not at liberty to seek for extraordinary meanings, but are 
bound to take the words according to their ordinary import, where 
no reason to the contrary exists. What they mean, according to 
the ordinary rules of interpretation, is the meaning of Christ’s 
command; and, if we do not receive and observe it in this sense, 
we are disobedient to his authority. Six 

Let us now re-examine the collection of examples, trying any 
of the other significations which have been proposed, as, to wash, 
to purify, to wet, to sprinkle, to pour. The experiment will soon 
convince us that none of these is the proper meaning of the word. 


36 BAPTISM. 


Immersion, and nothing but immersion, will always satisfy its 
demands. 


CONFIRMATION OF THE RESULT. 


The correctness of our deduction is confirmed by the circum- 
stances which attended some of the baptisms recorded in the Bible. 
The forerunner of Christ is called “the Baptist,” because he admi- 
- nistered this rite. He was sent to baptize, and it must be supposed 
that he understood the meaning of the word. Now, if a small 
quantity of water will suffice, why did John resort to the Jordan 
for the administration? The reason must have been that which 
the inspired historian has expressly assigned for his baptizing in 
Enon, near to Salim; namely, “because there was much water 
there.” The people were baptized by John in the Jordan. In 
this.river our Lord was baptized, and his own example explains 
the meaning of his command. 

The baptism of the Ethiopian eunuch is very circumstantially 
described. The style in which he travelled forbids the supposition 


that he had no drinking vessel, in which a sufficient quantity of | 


water might have been brought into the chariot to wet the hand 
of the administrator. But, if they chose not to perform the rite 
in the chariot, there was certainly no need for both of them to go 
into the water, if the mere wetting of Philip’s hand was sufficient. 
Why did they both go into the water? and why did the sacred 
historian so particularly state this fact? “They both went down 
into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and they both came up 
out of the water.” These circumstantial facts are described in lan- 
guage which no one ought to misunderstand, and which no one 
ought to overlook, who desires to know his duty. 

The Greek language continued to be spoken for many years 
after the times of the apostles. During all this period they, to whom 
the word Barro was vernacular, understood it to signify immerse; 
and immersion has always been the practice of the Greek church 
to the present day. ‘The Greeks must have understood the mean- 
ing of their own word. The Latin fathers also understood the 
word in the same way; and immersion prevailed in the western as 
well as in the eastern churches, until near the time of the reforma- 
tion. Affusion was allowed instead of immersion, in case of sick- 
ness; but it was accounted an imperfect baptism. The testimony 


ee TTA S 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 387 


to these several facts I prefer to give in the words of Professor 
Stuart :— 

“In the writings of the apostolic fathers, so called, 7. e., the 
writers of the first century, or, at least, those who lived in part 
during this century, scarcely anything of a definite nature occurs 
respecting baptism, either in a doctrinal or ritual respect. “It is, 
indeed, frequently alluded to; but this is usually in a general way 
only. We can easily gather from these allusions that the rite was 
practised in the church; but we are not able to determine, with 
precision, either the manner of the rite or the stress that was laid 
upon it. 

“In the Pastor of Hermas, however, occurs one passage (Coteler. 
Patr. Apostol. I., p. 119, sq.), which runs as follows: ‘But this 
seal [of the sons of God] is water, in quam descendunt homines 
morti obligati, into which men descend who are bound to death, but 
those ascend who sare destined to life. To them that seal is dis- 
closed, and they make use of it that they may enter the kingdom 
of God.’ 

“ I do not see how any doubt can well remain, that in Tertullian’s 
time the practice of the African church, to say the least, as to the 
mode of baptism, must have been that of trine immersion. 

“Subsequent ages make the general practice of the church still 
plainer, if, indeed, this can be done. The Greek words xaraôvo and 
xaradvors were employed as expressive of baptizing and baptism, 
and these words mean going down into the water, or immerging. 

“ The passages which refer to immersion are so numerous in the 
fathers, that it would take a little volume merely to recite them. 

“But enough. ‘It is,’ says Augusti (Denkw. VIL, p. 216), 
‘a thing made out,’ viz., the ancient practice of immersion. So, 
indeed, all the writers who have thoroughly investigated this sub- 
ject conclude. I know of no one usage of ancient times which 
seems to be more clearly made out. I cannot see how it is pos- 
sible for any candid man who examines the subject to deny this. 

“That there were cases of exception allowed, now and then, is, 
no doubt, true. Persons in extreme sickness or danger were allowed 
baptism by affusion, &c. But all such cases were manifestly re- 
garded as exceptions to the common usage of the church.” 


388. BAPTISM. 


BURIAL IN BAPTISM. 


The s‘gnificancy of baptism requires immersion. Paul explains 
it: “ Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus 
Christ, were baptized into his death’? Therefore we are buried 
with him by baptism into death; that, like as Christ was raised up 
from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also shoul 
walk in newness of life.”1 And again: “ Buried with him in bap- 
tism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the 
operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead.”? Peter 
alludes to the same import of the rite, when he says: “The like 
figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us (not the put- 
ting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good con- 
science toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.” 3 

The faith which we profess in baptism is faith in Christ; and the 
“ceremony significantly represents the great work of Christ, on 
which our faith relies for salvation. We confess with the mouth 
the Lord Jesus, and believe in the heart that God has raised him 

from the dead.* His burial and resurrection are exhibited in bap- 
- tism, as his broken body and shed blood are exhibited in the supper. 
In both ordinances our faith is directed to the sacrifice of Christ. 
Under the name of sacraments they have been considered outward 
signs of inward grace; and, in this view of them, they signify the 
work of the Holy Spirit within us. But faith relies, for acceptance 
with God, on the work of Christ. It is a perverted gospel which 
substitutes the work of the Spirit for the work of Christ as the 
object of our faith; and it is a perverted baptism which represents 
the faith that we profess, as directed, not to the work of Christ, 
the proper object of faith, but to the work of the Holy Spirit in 
our hearts. . 


Objection 1.—There is an antithesis between the burial and 
resurrection which are here mentioned. The resurrection is moral, 
being to newness of life; and the same appears in the parallel 
passage in Colossians, where it is said to be “ by the faith of the 


= operation of God.” If the resurrection is moral, the antithetic 


` burial cannot be physical. 
ee 
1 Rom. vi. 3, 4. 2.00]. ii, 12, 3 1 Peter iii, 21. 
4 Rom. x. 9. 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 89 


If consistency of interpretation requires the burial to be moral 
the baptism must also be moral. The Quakers suppose that the 
baptism first mentioned in the passage is moral: ‘So many of us 
as were baptized into Christ.” But Pedobaptists admit that physi- 
cal baptism is intended in this clause. Now, in passing from 
physical baptism at the beginning of the passage, to moral resur- 
rection at its close, there must be a point in the progress where 
we pass from what is physical to what is moral. Where is that 
point? some have imagined that it stands between the clause last 
quoted, and that which immediately follows, “were baptized into 
his death;” they suppose that “to be baptized into Christ,” i 
physical; but that to be baptized into his deathis moral. The 
passage in Galatians has been quoted as parallel: ‘For as many 
of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.” 
The first clause in this verse, they say refers to physical baptism; 
and the last to moral. But this is an erroneous interpretation. 
To put on Christ, is to put on his religion by outward profession, 
the profession which is made in baptism. The baptism and the 
profession are alike, in implying a moral change in the subject, 
only so far as he is sincere. Some are physically baptized, who 
do not morally put on Christ; but this, though unquestionably 
true, is directly contradicted by the passage, if the proposed in- 
terpretation of it is correct. So in the passage under consider- 
ation, it is affirmed that the same persons, and the same number 
of persons that are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his 
death. This could not be true, if the first baptism is physical, and 
the second moral. Between these two clauses, therefore, there is 
no place for a division between what is physical and what is moral. 

We extend our examination further to find a place for the 
division, and we find it plainly marked by the word “should;” 
even so we also should walk in newness of life. Here the obliga- 
tion to suitable morals is deduced from what goes before. This 
obligation is deduced from the physical baptism with which the 
passage begins, and everything i in the passage, until we arrive at 
the word “should,” is closely connected with this physical bap- 
tism, and explanatory of it. These intermediate links of explana- 
tion are necessary to connect the moral obligation at the close, 
with the physical baptism at the outset of the passage. If these 
intermediate links were moral, the proper position for the word 


40 BAPTISM. 


“should,” would be in the first sentence—thus, so many of us as 
are baptized into Christ, should be baptized into his death 

In the parallel passage referred to in Colossians, the expression 
is “ Buried with him in baptism.” The word baptism stands with- 
out adjuncts. It is not baptism into death; but simply baptism. 
If the word baptism, thus standing alone, can signify something 
wholly moral, it will be difficult to reject the Quaker interpreta- 
tion of these passages, and of “ baptizing” in the commission. 
In the preceding verse, circumcision is mentioned; but that we 
may know physical circumcision not to be intended, it is expressly 
called “the circumcision made without hands ;” and “the circum- 
cision of Christ.” No such guard against misinterpretation 
attends the mention of baptism; and when it is recollected that 
Christians are not bound to receive physical circumcision, but are 
bound to receive physical baptism, we must conclude that physical 
baptism is here intended. The completeness of Christians requires 
the moral change denoted by circumcision, and also the obedience 
rendered in physical baptism. In all who are thus complete, this 
physical act is performed “in faith of the operation of God.” 
This passage does not, like that in Romans, deduce moral obliga- 
tion from baptism; and, therefore, the word should is not intro- 
duced: but it affirms the completeness of true believers in their 
internal moral change, and in their very significant outward pro- 
fession of it. 


Objection 2.—Everywhere else in Scripture, water is an emblem 
of purification; and it violates all analogy to suppose that in bap- 
tism it is an emblem of the grave, which is the place of putridity 
and loathsomeness. 


That water in baptism is an emblem of purification, is clear from 
the words “ Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins.” 
But that water is an emblem of nothing but purification, cannot be 
affirmed. In numerous passages it is an emblem of afllictions, of 
deep afflictions, without any reference to purification. When the 
Saviour said, “I have a baptism to be baptized with ;” an immer- 
sion is intended, not into a means of purification, but into sufferings 

and death. 
= The grave is a place of putridity and loathsomeness, but not 
until the corruptible body is deposited in it; and when it leaves the 
grave, the corruptible will put on incorruption. Even the grave, 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 41 


therefore, is a place of regeneration and purification; and, instead 
of bearing no analogy to the purifying water of baptism, the 
analogy is striking. 

Some of the Scripture allusions to baptism, are made to it as a 
purifying rite, but this is not true of all. An exception is found 
in 1 Cor. x. 2. On this Professor Stuart remarks: “ Here, then, 
was the cloud which first stood before them, and then behind 
them; and here were the waters of the Red Sea, like a wall on 
their right hand and on their left. Yet neither the cloud nor the 
waters touched them. ‘They went through the midst of the sea 
upon dry ground.’ Yet they were baptized in the cloud and in 
the sea. The reason and ground of such an expression must be, 
so far as I can discern, a surrounding of the Israelites on different 
sides by the cloud and by the sea, although neither the cloud nor 
the sea touched them. It is, therefore, a kind of figurative mode 
of expression, derived from the idea that baptizing is surrounding 
with a fluid. But whether this be by immersion, affusion, suffu- 
sion, or washing, would not seem to be decided. The suggestion 
has sometimes been made, that the Israelites were sprinkled by 
the cloud and by the sea, and this was the baptism which Paul 
meant to designate. But the cloud on this occasion was not a 
cloud of rain; nor do we find any intimation that the waters of 
the Red Sea sprinkled the children of Israel at this time. So 
much is true, viz., that they were not immersed. Yet, as the 
language must evidently be figurative in some good degree, and 
not literal, I do not see how, on the whole, we can make less of it, 
than to suppose that it has a tacit reference to the idea of sur- 
rounding in some way or other.” This author urges the objection 
which we are considering, as his “principal difficulty in respect 
to the usual exegesis ;’’ yet we have here, according to his own 
exposition, an allusion to baptism, without any reference to purifi- 
cation. Another such reference is found in 1 Peter iii. 21, and 
again in the words of Christ before quoted, “I have a baptism to 
be baptized with.” 

Objection 3.—Very little resemblance can be found, between a 
man’s being dipped in water, and Christ’s being laid in a sepul- 


chre hewn out of a rock. The supposed allusion requires resem- 
blance. 


Positive proof of allusion must be attended with difficulty; be- 


42 BAPTISM. 


cause, if it be mere allusion, it is always made without express 
affirmation. The proof of allusion must therefore be circum- 
stantial; yet there may be circumstances which exclude all 
rational doubt of its existence. 

If there is no resemblance between immersion and Christ’s 
burial, the passage before us contains no allusion. If the resem- 
blance is so slight, that but few persons are able to perceive it, the 
probability is, that the supposed allusion exists only in the fancy 
of those who imagine they see it. But if men have generally 
believed that allusion exists in the passage, the fact goes far to 
prove, that there is resemblance. r 

Have men generally believed in the existence of the supposed 
allusion? It is not necessary to examine the writings of authors 
attached to every different creed, and differing from each other in 
their views of baptism. Professor Stuart tells us their opinion in 
few words: “ Most commentators have maintained, that owerapzwev 
has here a necessary reference to the mode of literal baptism, 
which they say, was by immersion; and this, they think, affords 
ground for the employment of the image used by the apostle, 
because immersion (under water) may be compared to burial (under 
the earth). It is difficult, perhaps, to procure a patient rehearing 
for this subject, so long regarded by some as being out of fair dis- 
pute.” Now this general agreement of commentators, answers the 
objection which we are considering, far more successfully than any 
efforts of ours to point out the resemblance, which these commen- 
tators have perceived. The fact that it is seen is the best proof 
that it exists. The Scripture nowhere affirms that Paul, in this 
passage, alluded to a resemblance between immersion and Christ’s 
burial; and, therefore, “the common exegesis” cannot be sus- 
tained by positive proof from Scripture; but it finds proof, the 
best proof that the nature of the case admits, in the fact that men 
generally have seen and felt the allusion. 

Although positive proof of the common exegesis cannot be found 
in Scripture, a circumstantial proof may be drawn from the passage 
itself, amounting to little less than fall demonstration. After 
making mention of baptism into Christ’s death, Paul, before he 
refers to Christ’s resurrection, goes out of the usual course to speak 
of Christ’s burial. This was not necessary for the morai instruc- 
tion which he designed to convey, if nothing but moral conformity 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 43 


to Christ’s death was intended. It was not necessary for the pur- 
. pose of finding an antithesis to the resurrection of Christ. The 
Scriptures usually speak of Christ’s rising from the dead, not from 
the grave: and his death is the common antithesis to his resurrec- 
tion. An example occurs in the present chapter, “If we have 
been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also 
in the likeness of his resurrection.” In Colossians, after the pas- 
sage “‘ Buried with him in baptism,” the antithesis is again made, 
between the death (not the burial) of Christ, and his resurrection: 
“ Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ, from the rudiments of the 
world, why, as though living in the world, &e.’’! “If ye then be 
risen with Christ, seek those things which are above,” &c. “For 
ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.’’? Why did 
the apostle step out of the usual course, in two different passages 
to mention the burial of Christ? and to mention it in connection 
with baptism? It cannot be accounted for if the common exegesis 
be rejected. i 

The objection states that little resemblance can be found between 
immersion and Christ’s burial: and the same might be said with 
respect to the resemblance between a loaf of bread, and the body © 
of Christ. A well executed picture of the crucifixion, such as may 
be seen in Catholic chapels, has much more resemblance to the 
bedy of Christ, than is furnished by a picce of bread; yet, consi- 
dering all the ends to be answered by the Eucharist, the divine 
wisdom has determined that we should keep Christ’s death in 
memory, not by looking at a crucifix, but by the eating of bread. 
In like manner, some means might have been devised for repre- 
senting the burial and resurrection of Christ, supplying a nearer 
resemblance than is furnished by immersion in water. But when 
we consider that baptism not only represents the burial ‘and resur- 
rection of Christ, but also our fellowship with him in both, and the 
consequent removal or washing away of our guilt, nothing could 
more conveniently, aptly, and instructively accomplish all these 
ends at once. 


1 Col. ii. 20. te 2 Col. iii, 1,—3. 


44 BAPTISM. 


ARGUMENTS FOR ANOTHER MEANING. 


Argument 1.—There are many reasons for supposing that 
BanzGo, being a derivative from Bazro, has a less definite and less 
forcible sense than the original. And yet even aaro does not 
always signify a total immersion. This is perfectly evident from 
Mat. xxvi. 23: “He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish.” 
Mark has it ‘o euBarouevos, he that dippeth himself. Now, what- 
ever liquid the dish contained, it cannot be supposed, that Judas 
plunged his hand all over in that liquid; much less that he dipped 
his entire person. 

What the “many reasons” are, for supposing that Bazzıķo has a 
less definite and less forcible signification than Bazzo, the argument 
does not inform us. The mere fact that it is a derivative, furnishes 
not the slightest proof; for derivatives may be amplificative or 
intensive. To assume that they must be diminutive, would be 
utterly fallacious. The termination čo, whether it be frequenta- 
tivé, or causative, is not diminutive. Our examination of the pre- 
ceding tables has shown, that the primitive generally denotes a 
slight and temporary immersion; but that the derivative, in nearly 
one-half of the examples in which it is used, literally signifies total 
and permanent immersion. This fact is decisive against the sup- 
position, that Barrie is less definite and forcible. 

But if the less forcible primitive barro had been used in the 
commission, no sufficient reason would exist, for supposing any- 
thing less than dipping to be intended. The meaning even of this 
word, is clearly to dip. The numerous examples of its use which 
have been adduced, establish this point; and even the very 
example brought forward in the argument, proves it. Judas 
dipped his hand in the dish. He did not wash, purify, wet, 
sprinkle, or pour his hand; but he dipped it. To dip, therefore, 
according to this very example, is the meaning of barro; and if 
this word had been employed in the commission, the command 
would have been, “ Go teach all nations, dipping them.” Dipping 
was commanded in many of the ceremonies prescribed in the Old 
Testament, and the word Bazro expresses the duty enjoined. No 
one imagines that it signifies, in these cases, to sprinkle or pour. 
Had this word been used in the commission, Christian worshippers 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 45 


would be less obedient than the Israclites, if they satisfied them- 
selves with any thing less than dipping. 

But it is alleged, that the word does not always denote total 
immersion. On re-examining the Table of Examples, we find that 
frequently, in the use of Barro, less frequently in the uso of 
Banrcfo, the immersion is not total; but, in no case, does this arise 
from any defect in the meaning of either verb. When a teacher 
directs his pupil to dip his pen in the ink for the purpose of writing, 
no one understands that an immersion of the whole pen is intended. 
When we read, “Send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his 
finger in water, and cool my tongue ;’” every one understands that 
the whole of the part designated, the tip of the finger, is to be 
immersed. The difference in the two cases does not arise from 
any difference in the meaning of the verb dip. It is the same 
word in both cases, and has the same meaning; but the purpose 
for which the act is to be performed determines the extent to 
which the immersion is to proceed. If the pupil should stupidly 
mistake the teacher’s design, the command would be explained, 
“Dip the nib of the pen in the ink;” and this is all that the first 
command meant. . The greater definiteness of the last command, 
does not arise from any greater definiteness given to the verb dip. 
It is definite in the last case, and was equally definite in the first ; 
but in the first, by a very common figure of speech, the whole pen 
was put for a part. The teacher relied on the nature of the case 
to limit the meaning of his command, and language is always sufli- 
ciently definite, so long as there is no danger of being misunder- 
stood. We say that a pen is dipped, when in strict language the 
nib only is dipped; but the nib is totally immersed, and hence, in 
its proper meaning, to dip signifies total immersion. In all cases 
where the command is to dip, so far as depends on the meaning 
of the word, total immersion must be understood; and if we had 
received the commission in English, Go teach all nations, dipping 
them, it might safely be left to the common sense of mankind to 
determine whether partial or total immersion was intended. 

The middle voice of Greek verbs is used, when an agent acts 
tor his own benefit. This sufficiently explains Mark’s use of 
suBanxcouevos in the example cited in the argument. What Judas 


a 


1 Luke xvi. 24. 


, 


46 BAPTISM. 


dipped in the dish, is said by Matthew to have been his hand. A 
hand may be totally immersed in the cavity of an empty dish, or 
of a dish containing solids; but the probable meaning in the present 
case is, that something which the hand held, was dipped in a liquid 
which the dish contained. The hand, by a figure of speech, is put 
for what it held; and the dish, by a like figure, is put for what it 
contained : but amidst these figures, the word dip retains its literal 
and proper meaning; and nothing was literally and properly 
dipped, except what was totally immersed. 

If the reader will again look through the examples in which 
Pazza occurs, he may observe that, with very few exceptions, 
they are all cases of total immersion. Among the few exceptions, 
there are three (Ex.’s 31, 35, 49) in which the immersion is partial 
by expressed limitations: “up to the head;” “ up to the waist ;’’ 


“up to the hilt.” The fact that these limitations are expressed, 


demonstrates that without them, the word would signify total 
immersion. This is the word which is used in the commission, 
without any limiting clause, and without anything either in the 
context, or the nature of the subject, to suggest that partial im- 
mersion was intended. Because an example may be found, in 
which, from the nature of the case, the immersion denoted is par- 
tial, we are not justified in inferring that partial immersion is 
here intended. The humble and teachable disciple desires to 
know and do what his divine Master meant that he should do; 
and the language of the command is as definite, as if it had been 
expressed in English, “Go, teach all nations, immersing them.” 
It does not read totally immersing; but if any one will refuse total 
immersion until he finds this expressly written, we must leave him 
to his own conscience, and to the judgment of Him who gave the 
command, 

Argument 2.—Banrığo does indeed signify to immerse but it 
also signifies to wash, and under this last meaning, ceremonial 


purification is included. The Syrian leper was commanded to 
wash in Jordan; and the act of obedience to this command, is 


expressed by banro. A dispute between the Jews and John’s 
disciples about his baptism, is called “a question about purify- 
ing.” * The Hebrew purifications were performed in various Ways; 


chiefly by sprinkling consecrated water. Among their rites, 


ee 
1 John iii. 25. 


a ee 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 47 


“divers baptisms” are mentioned.! The word divers is the same 
that is applied to spiritual gifts in Rom. xii. 6, and signifies, of 
different kinds. Now, the baptisms could not be of different 
kinds, if they were all performed by immersion. Moreover, one of 
these kinds is expressly stated in the context to be “ sprinkling.’ 
Further, the Pharisees are said to have baptized themselves, after 
returning from market, when nothing more than the washing of 
hands is intended. They are also said to have held the baptism 
of pots, cups, brazen vessels, and tables; or, as the last word 
should have been translated, of beds, or the couches on which they 
reclined at meals. That all these purifications, and especially of 
the beds, were performed by immersion, is wholly incredible. 


If to immerse, and to wash or purify, are two different senses 
of BaxriSwo, the question arises, in which of these senses did Christ 
use the term in the commission? We are not at liberty to take 
either of them at our pleasure. When a teacher commands his pupil 
to “ dip the pen in the ink,” the pupil may, by turning to Johnson’s 
Dictionary, find that the word dip has four senses; and that one 
of these is to wet, to moisten. This sense is exemplified by a quo- 
tation from Milton: 


“ A cold shuddering dew dips me all o'er.” 


With so high authority for this interpretation of dip, the pupil 
may conclude to wet or moisten the pen, by putting the ink into 
it in some other way: and he may adopt this conclusion with the 
less hesitation, because all the purpose for which he understands 
the command to have been given, will be as well accomplished. 
But when he has filled his pen in some other mode, has he obeyed 
his teacher’s command? Every one knows that he has not. But 
why? Does not the word dip signify to wet or moisten? We an- 
swer, it does not usually signify this; and the usual sense, is that 
in which the teacher employed the term. So Christ used the word 
Bane in its usual sense; and we as truly disobey his command, 
if we do not obey it in the sense which he intended, as if we substi- 
tuted some other command in its place. What the usual sense 
of the word was, the examples which have been adduced fully 
establish. 

But does paxrga signify to wash? Lexicographers say that it 


a_i 


1 Heb. ix. 10. 2? Ver. 13. 


48 BAPTISM. 


does, just as Johnson says that to dip signifies to wet or moisten. 
Words acquire secondary or accidental significations, from peculiar 
connections, or tropical usage; and these are enumerated by lexi- 
cographers as distinct meanings. Nor are they to be censured for 
this. Their design is, to give a view of the language, and not a 
mere collection of primary meanings. Our care, however, should 
be, when strict accuracy is required, to distinguish what is merely 
accidental in the signification of a word, from what is its true and 
proper meaning. To immerse and to wash, cannot both be the 
primary meaning of Panto. The last meaning cannot account 
for the use of the word, in the various examples in which it occurs; 
and the other meaning, to immerse could not well be derived from 
it. On the other hand, to immerse, accounts fully and satisfac- 
torily for every use of the word. It must therefore be the 
primary sense; and so lexicographers have decided. The second- 
ary sense, which is unknown to a large part of the examples, is, 
in strict criticism, merely the purpose for which the immersion 
happens to be performed. When the immersion is designed for 
the purpose of washing, or of ceremonial purification, the accidental 
signification to wash or purify is ascribed to the word: but its 
proper meaning remains unchanged, just as the proper meaning 
of banro, in Job ix. 80, remains unchanged, by the accidental 
signification, to defile, which it acquires. In sound criticism, such 
accidental significations of words are not, strictly speaking, any 
part of their meaning, as was stated on p. 34. They are ideas, 
not expressed by the words, but suggested by the connection in 
which they are used. 

A further proof that Barre does not signify to wash, to purify, 
to wet, to sprinkle, or to pour, may be drawn from the fact, that 
the copiousness of the Greek language supplies distinct words to 
express all these several ideas. If Jesus designed to command 
any one of these acts, why did he not use the proper word for 
denoting it? Why did he employ a word which properly denotes 
a different act, and which, therefore, could not convey his meaning, 
or must convey it very doubtfully ? 

The Syrian leper was commanded to wash in Jordan, and, for 
this purpose, he immersed himself in the river. The word Bane, 
denotes the immersion; and informs us, not only that he obeyed 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 49 


the command, but also how he obeyed it. He did not wash, by 
sprinkling a few drops on his face. 

We are informed that ‘there arose a question between some of 
John’s disciples and the Jews about purifying.”! What the pre- 
cise question was, we are not told; and it is impossible to de- 
termine, what its relation was to John’s baptism. But the passage 
contains no proof, that to baptize and to purify are identical. 

Paul says of the Hebrew worship: “ Which stood in meats, and 
drinks, and divers baptisms, and carnal ordinances.” It is true, 
as stated in the argument, that the same word “ divers” is applied 
to the gifts mentioned in Rom. xii. 6; but these “ gifts” were all 
gifts. They were gifts of various kinds; but the variety did not 
cause any of them to cease to be gifts. In like manner, the divers 
baptisms, or immersions, mentioned in this passage, are all im- 
mersions. Their variety does not change them into something 
different from immersions. The immersion of divers persons and 
things, at divers times, under divers circumstances, and for divers 
kinds of uncleanness, constitutes divers immersions, without the 
supposition that some of them were performed by sprinkling. 
Had the phrase been, divers sprinklings, instead of divers immer- 
sions, no one would have inferred that some of these sprinklings 
were performed by immersion. 

But it is alleged, that Paul has informed us in the context, that 
some of these divers baptisms were performed by sprinkling. 
This is a mistake. Paul mentions in the context, “ the sprinkling 
of the ashes of an heifer, sanctifying to the purifying of the flesh.” 
He classifies the various rites under four heads: 1. Meats. 2. 
Drinks. 3. Divers immersions. 4. Carnal ordinances, or ordi- 
nances concerning the flesh. Under the last of these heads, the 
sprinkling which sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, was mani- 
festly included. The assumption that it was one of the divers 
baptisms, is unauthorized and erroneous. 

In maintaining that sprinkling and immersion are divers bap- 
tisms, the argument opposes the position usually taken by the 
advocates of sprinkling. Jewish baptisms were divers; but Chris- 
tian baptism Paul declares to be one: ‘‘ One Lord, one faith, one 
baptism.” In explaining this passage, the advocates of sprinkling 


1 John iii. 25. 


50 BAPTISM. 


allege that sprinkling and immersion are merely different modes of 
the same rite; but different modes of one baptism do not consti- 
tute divers baptisms. If sprinkling is really a different baptism, 
how can the use of it be reconciled with the unity of the Chris- 
ltian rite? 

The word azro, in Mark vii. 4, does not signify the mere 
washing of the hands. This act is expressed in the preceding 
verse, by vzro, the proper word for denoting it. Instead of con- 
founding the meaning of the two words, the sense of the passage 
requires that they should be carefully distinguished. The act 
which one of them denotes, was performed on ordinary occasions ; 
but the act denoted by the other, was performed on extraordinary 
occasions: “when they came from the market.” Some under- 
stand an immersion of the things brought from the market; some, 
an immersion of the arm up to the elbow; and some, an immer- 
sion of the whole body. I suppose the last to be the true mean- 
ing ; but, for our present purpose, there is no necessity of deciding 
between these interpretations. According to either of them, the 
word retains its usual signification to immerse. 

What has been said on this passage, will assist in explaining a 
similar one in Luke: “ When the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled 
that he had not first washed [baptized] before dinner.’’! Jesus had 
been mingling with a crowd of people, who had “ gathered thick” 2 
around him; and the danger of ceremonial defilement was as if he 
had come from the market. Hence, the Pharisee expected him 
to use immersion before dinner, as necessary to the proper sanctity 
of a religious teacher. 

The immersion of beds, the argument rashly pronounces incre- 
dible. Dr. Gill, in his comments on the passage, has proved that 
such immersions were practised, by quoting at length the regula- 
tions of the Rabbins respecting them. To pronounce the state- 
ments of the Bible incredible, unless the words be taken in an 
unusual sense, is not honorable to divine inspiration. 

Argument 3.—The Jewish rites were of two kinds; some, 
atoning ; others, purifying. The Christian sacraments are a sum- 
mary of the Jewish rites: the eucharist corresponding to those which 
were atoning, and baptism to those which were purifying. If both 
of them took the place of the atoning rites, by referring to the 
nap 

1 Luke xi. 38. * Ver. 29 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 51 


work of Christ, the Christian system would be defective, in having 

no ceremony to represent the purifying work of the Holy Spirit. 
But if baptism represents this, it is sufficient to perform it in any 
mode that will represent purifying; and especially by sprinkling, 
which is the mode that was commonly employed for this purpose. 


It is better to learn the design of the Christian rites, from the 
Holy Scriptures, than from our own reasonings, as to what ig 
necessary to render the Christian system complete. The supper 
represents the atoning work of Christ, and it, at the same time, re- 
presents our feeding on Christ by faith, which is produced by the 
influence of the Holy Spirit. Because the supper represents the 
atoning work of Christ, we have no right to confine it to this single 
purpose, and refuse to eat and to drink, because these acts do not 
represent a part of Christ’s work. Baptism represents our purifi- 
cation from sin; but it, at the same time, represents our fellowship 
with Christ in his burial and resurrection; and if we so perform it 
as to make it serve one of these purposes only, we do what no one 
claims the right to do with respect to the other Christian ceremony. 
We mutilate an ordinance of Christ, and render it unfit to fulfil all 
the purposes which his wisdom had in view. 


Argument 4.—The language of the New Testament, although 
written in Greek letters, is not the Greek of classic authors; but 
modified by peculiarities of Hebrew origin. On this account, it 
avails but little, in ascertaining the sense of Baxro in the New 
Testament, to collect examples of its use by profane authors. 
The examples in which the word has reference to purification, Cl. 
I. § 3, are numerous in the Greek Scriptures. As the primitive 
Pazzo loses the original sense to dip, when it takes the secondary 
sense to color; so Bazza was used by the Hebrews in the sense 
to purify, without regard to the primary sense to immerse. By 
profane writers, the word was usually construed with the preposi- 
tion «s; but, in the Scriptures, it is usually construed with the pre- 
position «, and sometimes with the dative without a preposition, 
This peculiarity of construction may be regarded as proof, that the 
sense of the word is not identical with that in which it is employed 
by Greek classic authors. ` 


We cheerfully admit that the Greek of the New Testament con- 
tains many Hebrew idioms. It is also true, that some of the 
words are used to denote things which were unknown to writers 
unacquainted with the religion of the Hebrews; and these words 
must therefore be used in a peculiar sense. But notwithstanding 


52 BAPTISM. 


all this, the language of the New Testament is Greek. This lan- 
guage, because of its general prevalence, was wisely selected to be 
the vehicle of the New Testament revelation.. The Holy Spirit 
made the revelation for the benefit of mankind, and not for the 
Jews exclusively. The selection of a language which was generally 
understood among the nations, was in accordance with this design; 
provided the words were generally employed in their known signi- 
fication. But if the words were used in senses to which men were 
unaccustomed, the prevalence of the language was a strong objec- 
tion to its use. Men would unavoidably be misled, by taking 
words which were familiar in the customary sense. 

Borro did not denote something peculiar to the Hebrew reli- 
gion or customs, but an act which had no necessary connection 
with religion, and which was as well known in every heathen land 
as it was in the land of Judea. If a peculiar use of it could be 
proved to have prevailed in Judea, it might still be questioned, 
whether, in a revelation designed for all nations, the Holy Spirit 
would have conformed to this peculiar usage. But no such proof 
exists. Not a single passage can be found, either in the Septua- 
gint, or the New Testament, in which the word departs from its 
ordinary signification. When it denoted immersion, performed for 
the purpose of ceremonial purification, the meaning of the word 
was precisely the same, as if the immersion had been performed 
for any other purpose. BRazro frequently occurs in the Old Testa- 
ment in commands which enjoin religious observances. Yet no 
one concludes that this word had a Hebrew sense different from 
that which it obtained among the Gentiles; and the supposition 
that BaxrSo had a peculiar Hebrew sense, is destitute of founda- 
tion. 

The language of Christ, “ I have a baptism to be baptized with,” 
cannot be explained, on the supposition that the Hebrew mind 
attached the sense purify to the word baptize. To render the 
phrase intelligible and expressive, we must admit the classical 
sense immerse. 

Josephus was a Jew, and wrote soon after the time of Christ. 
From his use of the word, we may learn what it signified to the 
mind of a Jew. Table II. contains several examples from this 
author, in not one of which does the supposed Hebrew meaning to 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 53 


purify appear; but the meaning in all is precisely the same as in 
the Greek of gentile authors. 

That the Hebrews attached the ordinary meaning to the word, 
may be learned from Jewish proselyte baptism. All admit that 
this was immersion. Many have maintained that this baptism was 
practised as early as the time of Christ. If it was, the fact 
decides what the word meant in that age and country. But if, as 
is more probable, the practice did not originate till the second 
century, the proof is still decisive, that the Jews had not been 
accustomed to a different sense of the word. 

The use of immersion for the purpose of purifying, was not con- 
fined to the Hebrew nation. One design of bathing, a process 
which classic Greek sometimes expresses by Barrio, is the cleans- 
ing of the body. The dipping denoted by Barre, in Ex. 36 and 388, 
is clearly for the purpose of cleansing. The peculiarity in the 
Hebrew use of these words is, that the immersion which they signify, 
was performed for the purpose of religious purification. This 
resulted from the religious character of the nation, and not from a 
peculiar sense of the terms. Immersion, when performed for reli- 
gious purification, does not cease to be immersion. 

We admit that Barro has a secondary sense to color, as well as 
the primary sense to dip; but both these senses are found in 
classic, as well as sacred literature. The case, therefore, furnishes 
no analogy which can give countenance to the supposition, that to 
purify is a secondary sense, in which the primary sense of Baxrito 
is lost. No one pretends that this secondary sense is found in 
classic Greek. 

The alleged peculiarity of construction in the New Testament, 
does not prove that the word has a different meaning in Scripture, 
from that which prevailed in uninspired writings. As, in English, 
we say to dip into, or to dip in; so, in Greek, Barrio is construed 
with either ss or «æ. Both these prepositions agree perfectly with 
the sense to immerse. Were one of them invariably used in the 
Scriptures in construction with the verb, the circumstance would 
furnish no valid argument for a peculiar meaning in the sacred 
writing. Though «v is commonly used, es is also found;! and the 


OS eee 


1 In classic Greek also, both constructions are found. Ex. 45 has evs; Ex, 
17 has ev. ' 


54 BAPTISM. 


example in which it occurs, Mark i. 9, so connects the sacred use 
of the word with the classical, as to deprive the argument for a 
peculiar meaning, of the plausibility which an invariable use of one 
construction might be supposed to give it. The fact that both con- 
structions appear in the inspired writings, supplies additional assu- 
rance that the meaning of the verb is not peculiar. We feel that the 
Greek language is the same, whether we read it on the sacred or the 
classic page. Dr. Campbell, in his notes on Matt. iii. 11, says :— 
“In water—in the Holy Spirit...... Vulgate in aqua....in 
Spiritu Sancto. Thus also the Syr., and other ancient versions. 
. ... I am sorry to observe that the Popish translations from 
the Vul. have shown greater veneration for the style of that ver- 
sion than the generality of Protestant translations have shown for 
that of the original. For in this the Latin is not more explicit 
than the Greek. Yet so inconsistent are the interpreters last men- 
tioned, that none of them have scrupled to render ev ro Iopdavy in 
the sixth verse, in Jordan, though nothing can be plainer, than 
that if there be any incongruity in the expression in water, this in 
Jordan must be equally incongruous. But they have seen that 
the preposition ¿n could not be avoided there without adopting a 
circumlocution, and saying, with the water of Jordan, which would 
have made their deviation from the text too glaring. The word 
axeew, both in sacred authors, and in classical, signifies, to dip, 
to plunge, to immerse, and was rendered by Tertullian, the oldest 
of the Latin fathers, tingere, the term used for dyeing cloth, which 
was by immersion. It is always construed suitably to this mean- 
ing.” 

Argument 5.—If it were the case that Barro clearly signifies 
to dip, or immerse allover in water, when applied to other subjects, 
it would by no means certainly follow, that it has this signification, 
when applied to the Christian rite of baptism. The word supper 
in English, and devov in Greek, have a very different sense, when 
applied to the eucharist, from what they have in ordinary cases, 
Hating a morsel of bread does not constitute a, supper, in the ordi- 
nary sense; but it is called a supper, in this religious rite. Now, 
if the word which denotes one Christian rite, has a sense so very 
different from its usual sense; why may it not be so, with the 
word which denotes the other Christian rite? Why may it not 


signify, instead of a complete dipping or washing, the application 
of water in a small degree ? 


This argument claims, that words may have a peculiar sense in 


a ee a te ae ES 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 65 


religious rites. It does not claim this for Greek words only ; for 
it does not object to supper as a proper rendering of Seevov. It 
` claims that these words, both the Greek and the English, have a 
sense unknown elsewhere, when they are applied to the eucharist. 
There is, therefore, no necessity in controverting the argument, to 
transport ourselves to the foreign territory of the Greek language ; 
but we are at liberty to meet it, and try its validity, on English 
ground. It does not object that immerse is an improper render- 
ing of Bazzo; but it claims that these words, when applied to a 
religious rite, may have a meaning which they possess in no other 
case. We are consequently at liberty, in trying the validity of the 
argument, to use the word immerse as a correct translation of the 
Greek verb. 

The whole argument rests on what is supposed to be a peculiar 
use of a single word, Sevov; and it deserves special consideration, 
that there is but a single instance of this peculiar signification, 
even with respect to this word. The instances are exceedingly 
numerous, in which other words are used with reference to reli- 
gious rites ; and even devov is frequently used with reference to the 
paschal supper. In all these instances it is invariably true, that 
words when applied to religious rites, have the same signification 
as in other cases, and are subject to the same rules of interpreta- 
tion. If sx» in 1 Cor. xi. 20, is an exception, it is a solitary 
exception. It is certainly the part of true criticism, in determin- 
ing the meaning of Barrio, to follow the general rule rather than 
the single exception. Besides, we have frequent use of Barra 
with reference to religious rites. The Jewish priests seem never 
to have thought, that, when Moses enjoined dipping in religious 
rites, he meant a diminutive dipping, or one that might be per- 
formed by sprinkling; and no one has suggested, that these priests 
mistook the meaning of their lawgiver. Is it not infinitely more 
probable, that Saxo follows its kindred word Barro, in obeying 
the general rule, than that it follows a very different word in a 
solitary deviation from all rule and analogy ? 

If on a single instance we may establish a rule, that words, 
when applied to a religious rite, may have a meaning which they 
obtain nowhere else; who will limit the application of this rule, 
and tell us, how many of the words which apply to religious rites, 
obtain an extraordinary meaning, or how far their meaning dif- 


56 BAPTISM. 


fers from that which they obtain elsewhere ? Perhaps the words, 
which, in the institution of the supper, are rendered eat and drink, 
although they have this meaning everywhere else, signify, when 
applied to a religious rite, nothing more than to handle and to look 
upon. Who will determine for us? Has the legislator of the 
Church committed to any one a lexicon of ritual terms, by which 
his simple-hearted disciples may find out what he meant? Or has 
he given to any persons on earth authority to decree what cere- 
monies they may think proper, by assigning to all the ritual terms 
of Scripture what sense they please ? 

That the terms used in reference to religious rites, may some- 
times have a figurative rather than the literal meaning, a secondary 
sense rather than the primary, may be admitted. But this is what 
happens in all other speaking or writing, and the same rules of 
criticism are to be applied in this as in other cases. We must 
prefer the literal and primary signification, if nothing forbids it. 
We understand the word 7s, in the phrase “This is my body,” to 
signify represents ; because the literal primary signification would 
make the sense absurd and false. But this word has the same 
signification, when not applied to a religious rite, in the phrase, 
‘The field ¿s the world?” For the same reason, the phrase “ Ag 
often as ye drink this cup,” is to be interpreted according to a 
common figure of speech, as often as ye drink the liquor con- 
tained in this cup. The same literal sense of the terms, and the 
same rules of figurative interpretation, are found here, as in all 
other cases. 

The premises stated in the argument, cannot, in any view of 
them, justify the conclusion that baptism may be administered by 
using a small quantity of water. The proper conclusion would 
rather be, that we ought to change our mode of administering the 
eucharist. If we do not literally and fully obey the divine com- 
mand when we restrict ourselves in this ordinance to a morsel of 
bread and a few drops of wine, we do wrong so to restrict our- 
selves; and we ought rather to correct the error than establish it 
as a precedent. 

It deserves to be noticed, further, that Banta and Senvov are 
not applied to the two religious rites in the same manner. One 
of them is found in the words of Christ’s command; the other ig 
not, but is, at most, merely a name which the rite has received. 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 57 


Our conduct, in obeying the commands of Christ, must be regulated, 
not by the names which His institutions may receive, but by the 
= words of his commands. Believers are said, in Scripture, to be 
buried with Christ in baptism, at least twice as often as the 
Eucharist is called a supper. Baptism may, therefore, be called a 
burial; but no one would infer hence that the body should be left 
for a long time under the water, as in a real interment. Baptism 
represents a real burial, in which the body of Christ continued 
three days in the grave. The eucharist represents the free and 
abundant communion in which the Lord sups with His people,! 
in which a great supper is spread,’ and which will be perfected at 
the marriage supper of the Lamb. Yet Christ did not say, ‘Go, 
teach all nations, burying them ;” nor, “Take a supper in remem- 
brance of me.” His command in the latter case is, “ Hat this 
bread and drink this cup ;” and he did not institute this ordinance 
as a supper, but “after supper.” Now, if the command is eat, 
drink, could this command be obeyed any otherwise than by eating 
and drinking? Would it suffice merely to apply the bread and 
cup to the lips? In like manner, when Christ said, “Go, teach all 
nations, immersing them,” can the command be obeyed in any 
other way than by performing a real immersion? In the eucha- 
rist, he commanded to eat bread and drink wine, but not to take a 
full meal; and we know, from the circumstance that this ordinance 
was instituted immediately after the disciples had taken a full meal, 
that a full meal was not intended. The Corinthians, when they 
converted this ordinance into a full meal, did truly eat and drink, 
yet they did not fulfil the command more strictly and literally 
than we do; while, on the other hand, they departed from the 
example, and manifest intention of Christ, and were censured for 
so doing by the Apostle Paul. 

We have suggested that the eucharist may possibly be called a 
supper, because of the spiritual feast which it represents. So one 
of the Jewish feasts was called the Passover, because of what it 
commemorated. But, after all, it is not certain that the eucharist 
is, in Scripture, called a supper. The eucharist is several times 
mentioned in the New Testament, but is never called the Lord’s 
Supper, unless in this instance; and many learned men are of 


a ee a a a 
1 Rev. iii. 20. ? Luke xiv. 16. "Roy. xix. 9. 


58 BAPTISM. 

opinion that, what is here called by this name, is not the eucharist 
itself, but the Love Feast which was anciently celebrated in con- 
nection with it. Perhaps it denotes the perversion which the Corin- 
thians made of the eucharist. The phrase is without the definite 
article in the original text, and might be rendered “a supper of 
the Lord.” Paul does not deny that the Corinthians had made a 
supper of it, but he denies that it was a supper of the Lord—a 
supper which the Lord had instituted, or which he approved. What 
proof, then, is there, that the Holy Spirit has ever called the 
eucharist by the name Lord’s Supper? We have no objection to 
the name in itself considered; but, when so much is made to 
depend on it, the authority for it needs to be examined. If a 
universal law of Biblical interpretation, respecting ritual words, is 
to be established on a single fact, the fact should be well ascer- 
tained. 

Everywhere throughout the New Testament, the words baptize 
and baptism are applied to one of the Christian rites; if the word 
supper is ever applied to the other, it is but in a single instance, 
and it may be that it is there applied to it as converted by abuse 
into a full meal. The word baptize was used in Christ’s command, 
and directly expresses the act commanded. The word supper was 
not used in the command; and, if it be used as a name of the 
institution, is not directly descriptive of it. The two cases have 
no analogy between them to sustain the argument. 


Argument 6.—The circumstances attending the baptisms of the 
New Testament, do not, in any case, prove that they were adminis- 
tered by immersion. 

They who urge this argument have alleged that, in the account 
of Christ’s baptism, the phrase “ went up straightway out of the 
water,” ought to have been translated, “ went up straightway from 
the water.”! The emendation of the translation leaves us with- 
out proof, they say, that he went into the water to be baptized. 
We admit, in this case, the correction of the translation. This 
clause, we concede, does not prove that Christ was in the water. 
But we have proof of this, in another verse of the same chapter: 
“ And were baptized of him in Jordan.’? The testimony of Mark 
to the same point, is very decisive. His record of the transaction 


— ee 


1 Matt. iii, 16, ? Matt. iii, 6. 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 59 


may be properly translated thus: ‘And was immersed by John 
into the Jordan,””? 

In the account of the eunuch’s baptism, the phrases, “they 
went down into the water,” and “ they came up out of the water,” 
have been subjected to a similar criticism. It has been alleged 
that these may be translated with equal propriety, “they went 
down ¢o the water,” and “ they came up from the water.” This 
we deny. The preposition axo used in the former case, is not 
found here, and our translators have, in the present case, rendered 
the prepositions es and ex according to their usual import. The 
opponents of immersion do not deny this, or maintain that they 
must be translated otherwise; but a departure from their ordinary 
signification ought not to be supposed without necessity. That 
these prepositions signify into and out of, in the common use of 
them by Greek authors, might be proved by innumerable citations ; 
but, instead of these, the following extracts from Robinson’s Lexi- 
con ought to suffice :— 

“Axo is used of such objects as before were on, by, or with 
another, but are now separated from it (not in it, for to this ex 
corresponds).” “Ex [is] spoken of such objects as before were in 
another, but are now separated from it.” 

This decides that our common version gives the true sense of the 
passage, in the rendering, “ they went up out of the water.” It 
follows that they must have been ¿n the water when the baptism 
was performed; and that they must have gone down into the 
water for its performance. 

It has been argued that, if going down into the water proves 
immersion, Philip was immersed as well as the eunuch; for they 
both went down into the water. If we maintained that going down 
into the water signifies going beneath its surface, this argument 
would be applicable; and it might also be argued against us that 
the clause which the inspired historian has added, “he baptized 
him,” is superfluous. But we understand the immersion to be 
denoted by this last phrase ; and which of the two persons was im- 
mersed, the context clearly shows. But while the phrase, they went 
down into the water, does not express the immersion, it proves it. 
No other satisfactory reason, for going into the water, can be 


~ SS Se, 2 ee CS ct 
1 Mark i. 9. 


60 BAPTISM. 


assigned. But in truth this circumstantial proof is not needed. 
The phrase, “he baptized him,” states expressly what was done. 

In the passage, “ John was baptizing in Enon, near to Salim, 
because there was much water there,” ! it has been alleged that 
the proper translation is many waters; and it is argued that the 
waters were many small springs or rivulets, not adapted to the 
purpose of immersion, but needed for the subsistence and comfort 
of the crowds that attended John’s ministry. 

The word rendered water properly denotes the element, and not a 
spring or rivulet. It was used in the plural, as we use the word ashes 
to denote the element, and not separate collections of it. In the 
phrase “ ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire and into the water,” 2 
fire is singular, and water is plural in the original text. If the latter 
word was put in the plural form, to denote the different collections 
of the element into which the afflicted youth fell at different times, 
the word fire would, for the same reason, need to be plural. Hence 
the phrase many waters does not signify many small springs or 
streams. When Isaiah said, “ The nations shall rush like the rush- 
ing of many waters ;” 3 when David said, “The Lord on high is 
mightier than the noise of many waters, yea, than the mighty waves 
of the sea;’’* and again: “ He drew me out of many waters ;” 5— 
when John said, “ His voice was as the sound of many waters ;” ê the 
supposition that many little springs or rivulets are intended, is in- 
admissible. The same phrase, many waters, is used for the river 
Euphrates.” It follows, therefore, that the proposed change of 
translation, can be of no avail to lessen the evidence of the pas- 
sage in favor of immersion. As to the allegation, that the water 
was needed for the subsistence and comfort of the people; we 
answer, that this, whether true or not, is not what the historian has 
stated. “John was baptizing, because there was much water.” 
Water was needed for baptizing ; and the connection of the clauses 
shows that the place was selected with reference to the adminis- 
tration of the rite. 


Argument T.—In several cases the circumstances which attended 
baptism forbid the belief that it was administered by immersion. 


This is a dangerous argument. If the Holy Spirit affirms that 


er rc eT ne eR A Ml ash Aol gid. tile 
1 John iii. 23, 2 Mark ix. 22, 8 Isaiah xvii. 13. 
Pg, xciii. 4, 5 Ps, xviii. 16. s Rey. i. 15. 
1 Jer. li. 13. 


a TN 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 61 


persons were baptized, and if to baptize signifies to immerse, it 
becomes us to receive his testimony ; and, if any difficulty respect- 
ing the probability of the fact presents itself to our imagination, 
we should ascribe it to our ignorance. If an ordinary historian 
relates what cannot be believed, when understood according to the 
established laws of language, we do not invent new laws to relieve 
his veracity; but we pronounce his statement incredible. They 
who urge this argument, should beware lest they impugn the vera- 
city of the Holy Spirit. 

Tt has been imagined that there was not sufficient water to be 
obtained in Jerusalem for the immersion of three thousand on the 
day of Pentecost. Jerusalem was the religious capital of a reli- 
gious nation, whose forms of worship required frequent ceremonial 
purifications. These purifications were not performed exclusively by 
the sprinkling of consecrated water ; but in various cases, the defiled 
person was required to wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water. 
Provision for such bathing was needed throughout the land. At 
Cana, an obscure town of Galilee, a poor family unable to supply a 
sufficient quantity of wine for a wedding feast, had six water pots 
of stone containing two or three firkins apiece, for the purpose of 
purifying.” Such provision was specially needed at Jerusalem, the 
centre of their worship. Here their sacrifices were to be offered, 
and here the whole nation were required to assemble for their 
appointed feasts; and these they were forbidden to celebrate, if 
in a state of defilement. In preparation for these feasts, we know 
from the express testimony of John, that the people went up to 
Jerusalem “to purify themselves.”? Some provision, therefore, 
must have existed, accessible to the people, and sufficient for their 
use, at these great gatherings. The privilege which was open to 
the whole multitude out of every nation under heaven at this pen- 
tecostal feast, belonged equally to the apostles, and to the three 
thousand who were baptized; for all these were Jews, fully enti- 
tled to enter the temple, and unite in all the public services of the 
nation. If any of the rulers were inclined to hinder them, they 
as yet feared the people; for when these baptisms were performed, 
the administrators and subjects had “favor with all the people.” 


ER F rr ee a 


1 Lev. xiv. 8, 9; xv. 5, 8, 11, 22; xvi. 26, 28. 2 John ii. 6. 
3 John xi. 55. 


62 BAPTISM. 


If, therefore, any one persist in asking where water was found to 
immerse so many, we ask in turn where was water found sufficient 
for the purifying of the assembled nation ? 

In Jerusalem, as it now is, there are large cisterns of water on 
the grounds attached to private dwellings; and we may suppose 
that, when the city was in its ancient prosperity, such reservoirs 
were far more numerous. It is probable that access to these, as 
to rooms for keeping the Passover, was often obtained by the as- 
sembled worshippers, Of the converts who were baptized on the 
day of Pentecost, it is likely that many resided in the city; and 
if the use of private tanks was needed for baptism, their tanks 
were doubtless at the service of the apostles. There were also 
public pools, of which Chateaubriand, who visited Palestine about 
the beginning of the present century, gives the following account :— 

“ Having descended Mount Zion on the east side, we came, at 

its foot, to the fountain and pool of Siloe, where Christ restored 
sight to the blind man. The spring issues from a rock, and runs 
in a silent stream. The pool, or rather the two pools of the same 
name, are quite close to the spring. Here you also find a village 
called Siloan. At the foot of this village is another fountain, 
denominated in Scripture Rogel. Opposite to this fountain is a 
third, which receives its name from the blessed Virgin. The 
Virgin’s fountain mingles its stream with that of the fountain of 
Siloe. . 
“ We have now nothing left of the primitive architecture of the 
Jews at Jerusalem, except the Pool of Bethesda. This is still to 
be seen near St. Stephen’s Gate, and it bounded the temple on 
the north. It is a reservoir, one hundred and fifty feet long, and 
forty wide; the pool is now dry, and half filled up. On the west 
side may also be seen two arches, which probably led to an aque- 
duct that carried the water into the interior of the temple.” 

The dimensions of the Pool of Bethesda, as given by Maundrell, 
are one hundred and twenty paces long, forty broad, and eight 
deep. Even the smaller dimensions given by Chateaubriand, indi- 
cate a sufficient supply of water in this single pool for the whole 
pentecostal baptism. A doubt has been recently raised, whether 
the excavation measured by these travellers, is identical with the 
ancient Bethesda: and attention has been directed to a neighbor- 
ing intermittent fountain, the water of which, instead of flowing 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 63 


equably, sometimes rises by a sudden movement, and, after a time, 
. 8ubsides to its former level. This has been thought to agree with 
John’s account of the ancient pool: “For an angel went down at 
a certain season into the pool, and troubled the water.”! The 
hypothesis is liable to strong objections, which our purpose does 
not require us to present. Nor is it necessary for us to defend the 
correctness of the tradition, which points to this excavation as the 
ancient Bethesda. Much water was needed in the city ; and, 
when so many tanks were dug at great labor and expense, it is 
altogether probable that a cavity, which could hold a large supply 
of the needed element, was not permitted to remain useless. If it 
contained water, the pool, by whatever name called, may have 
been the baptizing place on that memorable day. 

But the Pool of Bethesda was not the only reservoir sufficiently 
capacious for the immersion of three thousand. The facilities for 
travelling which the present times afford have rendered visits to 
the old world frequent; and men now living, have greatly increased 
our knowledge of its geography and antiquities by their investi- 
gations. The learned Dr. Robinson has twice explored Palestine, 
with a special view to biblical illustration; and the result of his 
researches has been given to the world in a large work abounding 
with valuable information. The Rev. George W. Samson has also 
visited the same country within a few years, and has directed 
particular attention to the question now before us, in a short but 
excellent work entitled, “ The Sufficiency of Water for Baptizing 
at Jerusalem, and elsewhere in Palestine, as recorded in the New 
Testament.” In this work, the present condition of the pools at 
Jerusalem, six in number, is described; and the dimensions of five, 
according to the measurement of Dr. Robinson, are given in feet 
as follows :— 


Pool of Bethesda . s : 5 N 

Pool of Siloam j à s z ‘ k A 

Old or Upper Pool in the Highway of the Fuller’s 
Field . k 3 A X A ; 5 ‘ 

Pool of Hezekiah . í A 5 


Lower Pool of Gihon . 3 ; js a 


64 BAPTISM. 


The depth cf the Pool of Hezekiah varies, its bottom being an 
inclined plane, and the sides of the Lower Pool of Gihon, which 
covers more than four acres of ground, are sloping. In these any 
convenient depth of water for baptizing might be readily obtained. 
When facilities for immersion were so abundant we can have no 
plea for inventing a new meaning for the word which the sacred 
historian has employed in recording the baptisms at Jerusalem. 
If we were unable to offer any probable conjecture with respect to 
the supply of water, we ought still to receive the testimony of the 
Holy Spirit according to the proper import of his words, and to 
believe his statement to be true; but the investigations which have 
been made remove all difficulty. 

It has been further imagined, that there was not time for the 
immersion of so many; but this difficulty is not one which ought 
to impair the credibility of the narrative. Many, if not all of the 
seventy whom Christ had commissioned, were probably present on 
the occasion; and the apostles had undoubted authority to com- 
mand their services in the administration of the rite. With so 
many agents, the work required but little time. In modern re- 
vivals, the number of persons immersed on profession of faith is 
sometimes large; and, from observing the time required, some 
have maintained that the apostles themselves could have baptized 

„all the converts on the day of Pentecost. Sprinkling, if performed 
with the solemnity due to a religious rite, would require not much 
less time than immersion. We may therefore believe the sacred 
narrative, without inventing a new meaning for the word baptize. 

It has been supposed that the baptism of the Philippian jailer 
and his household could not have been by immersion ; because it 
took place at night, and in the prison. As to the time; the per- 
secution which had been raised against Paul and Silas, and the 
relation which the jailer sustained to the government of the city, 
rendered it more convenient to administer the immersion at night 
than to postpone it till the next day. As to the place; there is 
no proof that it was administered in the jail. Paul and Silas had 
been brought out, and had preached the Word to the jailer, and 
“ to all that were in his house.” After the preaching, they must 
have left the house for the administration of baptism ; for it is 
expressly stated that the jailer afterwards “ brought them into his 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 65 


house and set meat before them.”* Where the rite was performed 


we are not told. There may have been, as is common in the East, 
a tank of water in the prison enclosure; and we know, because 
the inspired historian has so informed us, that there was a river? 
near at hand. There was, therefore, no want of water. 

Argument 8.—Jesus said to his disciples, “John truly bap- 
tized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost 
not many days hence.” This promise was fulfilled on the day of 
Pentecost. The Spirit was then poured out upon them; and since 
Christ called this baptism, we have proof that pouring is baptism. 

The Holy Spirit is not a material agent; and all representations 
of his operation, drawn from material things, are necessarily imper- 
fect. To immerse in the Spirit, and to pour out the Spirit, are 
figurative expressions, and the things which they signify are con- 
ceived to bear some resemblance to immersion in water, and to the 
pouring out of water. But the resemblance is in our conception, 
and not in the things themselves; for between what is spiritual and 
what is material, there cannot, strictly speaking, be any likeness. 
Different figures may be employed to represent the same thing, and 
if the figurative expressions pour out the Spirit, and baptize with 
the Spirit, referred to precisely the same thing, it would not follow 
that the figures by which they represent it are identical. But if 
the figures are not identical, they can furnish no proof that to pour 
is to baptize. 

God had promised by the prophet Joel, ‘I will pour out of my 
Spirit ;’’* and Christ had promised his disciples, “ Ye shall be im- 
mersed in the Holy Spirit.”"* Both the promises were fulfilled on 
the day of Pentecost; but the two promises exhibit the influence of 
the Spirit then communicated, in different aspects. In one it is 
viewed as proceeding from God, and is likened to water poured 
out; in the other it is viewed as affecting all the powers of the 
apostles, surrounding and filling them, as water surrounds and 
imbues substances which are immersed in it. The figures, there- 
fore, not only differ from each other, but are employed to repre- 
sent different things. Hence, they can furnish no proof that to 
pour is to baptize. 


1 Acts xvi. 34, 2 Acts xvi. 13. 5 Actsi, 5. 
t Acts ii. 17. 5 Acts i. 5. 


5 


66 BAPTISM. 


ARGUMENTS AGAINST LITERAL OBLIGATION. 


Argument 1.—Baptism is a mere ceremony, and, in the sight 
of God, is of far less importance than moral duties. In institut- 
ing it, Christ did not design to bind his followers to the very letter 
of his command; but intended that they should be at liberty to 
accommodate the mode of their obedience to circumstances which 
might arise, provided they accomplished the end which he had in 
view. He commanded his disciples to wash the feet of one another. 
This command was given at a time when the washing of feet was 
a usual act of hospitality; and we now rightly judge, that since 
this usage has passed away, we ought to fulfil the command in 
some other way. So he commanded to immerse, when immersion 
for the purpose of purification was in almost daily use; but to us, 
whose ordinary ablutions are partial, another mode of represent- 
ing purification is better adapted. This has been the judgment 
of the pious; and God’s abundant blessing on them, shows that 
they have his approbation. 

Baptism is indeed a ceremony ; but it is a ceremony of God’s 
appointing. In moral duties arising from the relations which we 
bear, and founded on reasons which we are able to comprehend, 
the duty must vary according to the varying relations, and there 
is scope for the exercise of enlightened reason; but positive insti- 
tutes are founded on the mere will of the lawgiver, and with 
respect to them, to obey or disobey is the only question, and the 
only variety. A ceremony of positive institution may possibly be 
in itself of little moment; but obedience in performing it, is of 
great value in God’s sight; and disobedience to mere ceremonial 
requirements, he has in some cases punished in an exemplary 
manner. If he abundantly blesses many who neglect the baptis- 
mal command, the fact proves his great goodness, and not their 
Innocence. 

They who, acknowledging a departure from the letter of Christ’s _ 
command, satisfy themselves with the belief that they attain all 
the ends of baptism, though they be not immersed, assume that 
they fully comprehend the subject, and all the ends which the law- 
giver had in view. Is not this arrogating too much? It ig 
certainly safer to believe that Christ is wiser than we are, and to 
render implicit obedience to his precepts. If baptism represents 
the burial and resurrection of Christ, as well as the washing away 
of sin, they do not attain all the ends of baptism who neglect im- 


MEANING OF BAPTIZE. 67 


mersion. We have reason to believe that positive institutes were 
In part given, to test and to promote the spirit of obedience. 
They who fail to comply strictly with the divine precepts, not only 
fail to accomplish these ends which infinite wisdom had in view, 
but counterwork the designs of the lawgiver. 

The command to wash one another’s feet, is not parallel to that 
which enjoins baptism. The latter, the advocates of sprinkling 
acknowledge to be of perpetual obligation, a Christian ceremony 
of positive institution; but the former they do not so regard. 
This is not the proper place to enter on the inquiry, whether the 
washing of feet was designed to be a ceremony of perpetual obli- 
gation. In our judgment it was not. If it can be made to appear 
that we have judged wrong, it will be our duty, not to make our 
error an argument for disobedience, but to amend our practice, and 
conform strictly to every divine requirement. ` 


Argument 2.—When Christ instituted the eucharist, he com- 
manded, “this do.”* Yet no one imagines that we are bound to 
do all that he did on that occasion. He met in an upper room, 
and at night; and he reclined while eating. We do not sup- 
pose ourselves under obligation to imitate him in these particulars ; 
but only to do so much as is necessary to the moral ends of the 
institution. By the same rule of interpretation, we are not bound 
to a literal compliance with the command of baptism. 


No reason exists for supposing that the pronoun “this,” in the 
command ‘‘ this do,” refers to the place, the time, or the manner, 
in which Christ ate the last supper. It evidently refers to the 
acts of eating bread and drinking wine; and precisely what it 
does signify, is what we are bound to do; and precisely what the 
word baptize signifies, is what we are bound to do in obeying the 
command which enjoins baptism. To relieve ourselves from the 
obligation of strict obedience, on the plea that the moral ends of 
Christ’s institutions may be attained without it, is to legislate for 
Christ. 


Argument 3.—Christ designed his religion to be universal, and 
adapted to every climate of earth, and every condition and rank 
among men. Immersion is not suited to cold climates—is fre- 
quently impossible to the infirm and sick—is repulsive to the deli- 
cate and refined; and the invariable observance of it cannot have 


SS Se ee oe we ee 
1 Luke xxii, 19, 


68 BAPTISM. 


been required by him who said, ‘‘ My yoke is easy, and my burden 
is light.” 

Our simple reply to this argument is, that it is Christ’s com- 
mand. We dare not, by our fallible reasonings from general prin- 
ciples, attempt to determine the will of our divine lawgiver, when 
we have in our possession his express command on the very sub- 
ject. Christ knew all the climates of the earth, and all the con- 
ditions and ranks among men, and he has adapted his religion to 
these as far as appeared best to his infinite wisdom. If the infirm 
and sick cannot obey, there is an end of responsibility in their 
case. If the delicate and refined will not, they must leave the 
pleasure of obedience to those, who think it no humiliation to tread 
where they find the footsteps of their Lord and Master. Though 
Christ’s yoke is easy, it is still a yoke; and pride and false deli- 
cacy may refuse to wear it; but love can make it welcome and 
delightful. 


Section III—SUBJECTS OF BAPTISM. 


THOSE ONLY ARE PROPER SUBJECTS OF BAPTISM WHO REPENT OF 
SIN AND BELIEVE IN CHRIST. 

Repentance and faith are associated graces in the hearts of the 
regenerate, each of them implying the existence of the other. 
Sometimes one of them is particularly mentioned as a qualification 
for baptism, and sometimes the other. They manifest themselves 
by confession of sin; by profession of dependence on Christ, and 
subjection to his authority ; and by holy obedience. 

John the Baptist required repentance, with its appropriate fruits, 
in those whom he admitted to baptism. It has been denied that the 
rite which he administered was identical with Christian baptism ; 
but, for our present purpose, nothing more is necessary than to 
satisfy ourselves, that John did not require more spiritual qualifica- 
tions for his baptism, than were required by Christ and his apos- 
tles. If he proclaimed repentance to be necessary because the 
kingdom of heaven was at hand, it could not be less necessary 
after the kingdom was established. That John did require repent- 
ance, as a qualification for baptism, the following Scriptures testify : 
“Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand...... 


SUBJECTS OF BAPTISM. 69 


and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.”1 
- “Bring forth, therefore, fruits meet for repentance; and think 
not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father.” ? 

During the personal ministry of Christ, he made and baptized 
disciples. “ There he tarried and baptized.’”’> “The Lord knew 
how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more’ 
disciples than John.”* Those only were baptized by Christ, who 
were made disciples ; and discipleship implies repentance and faith. 

The commission which Christ gave to his apostles, connects faith 
and discipleship with baptism as qualifications for it: “ Go, preach 
the gospel to every creature. He that believeth, and is baptized, 
shall be saved.”® “Go, make disciples of all nations, baptizing 
them.” 6 

In executing the commission of Christ, the apostles and their 
fellow-laborers required repentance and faith as qualifications for 
baptism. Several passages in the Acts of the Apostles clearly 
indicate this: “ Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the 
name of Jesus Christ. .... Then they that gladly received 
the word were baptized.”? “When they believed Philip preach- 
ing the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of 
Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.’’® “ And 
the eunuch said, See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be 
baptized? And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, 
thou mayest.”® “Can any man forbid water, that these should 
not be baptized which have received the Holy Ghost as well as 
we.” 1 “Whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the 
things which were spoken of Paul. And when she was baptized,” ™ 
“ He was baptized, he and all his straightway . . . . and rejoiced, 
believingin God with all his house.” 2 . , . “Many of the Corinthians 
hearing, believed and were baptized.” !3 

In the Epistles of the New Testament, baptism is mentioned in 
such connections as prove that all the baptized were believers in 
Christ: “ Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into 


eS eS iS Sane ee a See ee 


2 Matt, iii, 2. 6, 2 Matt. iii. 8, 9. 8 John iii. 22. 

t John iv. 1. 5 Mark xvi. 15, 16. € Matt. xxviii. 19. 
T Acts ii. 38, 41. 8 Acts viii. 12. ? Acts viii. 36, 37. 
1 Acts x. 47. u Acts xvi. 14, 15. 12 Acts xvi. 33, 34. 


13 Acts xviii, 8. 


70 BAPTISM. 


Jesus Christ were baptized into his death.”! ‘Buried with him 
in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through faith.’’? 
“ Ye are all the children of God by faith; for as many of you as 
have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.” “ Baptism 
doth now save us, . . . . the answer of a good conscience toward 
Codis 

All these quotations from Scripture harmonize perfectly with 
each other, and incontrovertibly establish the truth, that repent- 
ance and faith are necessary qualifications for baptism. This is 
universally admitted with respect to adult persons; but a special 
claim is urged in behalf of infants, and the practice of administer- 
ing the rite to them has prevailed very extensively. The arguments 
in its defence will be examined in the Chapter on Infant Member- 
ship. 


Section IV.—DESIGN OF BAPTISM. 


BAPTISM WAS DESIGNED TO BE THE CEREMONY OF CHRISTIAN 
PROFESSION. 

The religion of Christ was intended for the whole world, and it 
is made the duty of his followers to propagate it. Men are re- 
quired not only to receive, but also to hold forth the word of life. 
The lepers who found abundance of food in the Syrian camp, could 
not feast on it by themselves while their brethren in the city were 
famishing ; and, if any one thinks that he can enjoy the blessings 
of religion, and shut up the secret in his own breast, he mistakes 
the nature of true Christianity. The light kindled within must 
shine, and the Spirit of love in the heart must put forth efforts to 
do good. 

Profession is, in general, necessary to salvation. With the 
heart, man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth, con- 

fession is made unto salvation. Divine goodness may pardon the 
weakness of some, who, like Joseph of Arimathea, are disciples 
secretly through fear; but it nevertheless remains a general truth, 
that profession is necessary. Christ has made the solemn declara- 
tion, “ Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in 
this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son 
ee ay eer ae not nena Sees PL. 
1 Rom. vi. 3. ? Col. ii. 12, 3 Gal. iii. 26, 27. 
t 1 Peter iii. 21. 5 Rom. x. 10. ; 


DESIGN OF BAPTISM. 71 


of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with 
. the holy angels.””? 

Profession is the appointed public outset in the way of salvation 
The apostles exhorted, “ Save yourselves from this untoward gene- 
ration.””* The world lies in wickedness, and under the curse of 
God. They who would be saved, should escape from it, as Lot 
escaped from Sodom. God calls: “ Come out from among them, 
and be ye separate.” 3 This call is obeyed, when converted persons 
Separate themselves from the ungodly, and publicly devote themselves 
to the service of Christ. They then set out in earnest to flee from 
the wrath to come. The resolution to flee must first be formed in 
the heart ; but the public profession may be regarded, in an import- 
ant sense, as the first manifest step in the way of escape. 

The profession of renouncing the world, and devoting ourselves 
to Christ, might have been required to. be made in mere words 
addressed to the ears of those who hear; but infinite wisdom has 
judged it better that it should be made in a formal and significant 
act, appointed for the specific purpose. That act is baptism. The 
immersion of the body, as Paul has explained, signifies our burial 
with Christ; and in emerging from the water, we enter, according 
to the import of the figure, on a new life. We put off the old man, 
and put on the new man: “ As many of you as have been baptized 
into Christ, have put on Christ.” 4 

The place which baptism holds in the commission, indicates its 
use. ‘The apostles were sent to make disciples, and to teach them 
to observe all the Saviour’s commands; but an intermediate act is 
enjoined, the act of baptizing them. In order to make disciples, 
they were commanded, “ Go, preach the gospel to every creature.” 
When the proclamation of the good news attracted the attention 
of men, and by the divine blessing so affected their hearts, that 
they became desirous to follow Christ, they were taught to observe — 
his commandments, and first to be baptized. This ceremony was 
manifestly designed to be the initiation into the prescribed service ; 
and every disciple of Christ who wishes to walk in the ways of the 
Lord, meets this duty at the entrance of his course. 

The design of baptism is further indicated by the clause “ bap- 


a ee 


1 Mark viii. 38. 2 Acts ii. 40. 32 Cor. vi. 17. 
* Gal. iii. 27, 


12 BAPTISM. 


tizing them into the name of the Father,-and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghost.” The rendering of our version, “in the name 
of,” makes the clause signify that the administrator acts by the 
authority of the Trinity; but the more literal rendering ‘‘ into 
the name of,” makes it signify the new relation into which the act 
brings the subject of the rite. He is baptized into a state of pro- 
fessed subjection to the Trinity. It is the public act of initia- 
tion into the new service. 

The design of baptism proves its importance. The whole tenor 
of the gospel forbids the supposition that there is any saving efficacy 
in the mere rite: but it is the appointed ceremony of profession; 
and profession, we have seen, is, in general, necessary to salvation. 
As the divine goodness may pardon disciples who fear to make 
public profession, so it may, and we rejoice to believe that it does 
pardon those, who do not understand the obligation to make cere- 
monial profession, or mistake the manner of doing it. But God 
ought to be obeyed; and his way is the right way, and the best 
way. Paul argues from the baptism of believers, their obligation 
to walk in newness of life. The ceremony implies a vow of obedi- 
ence, a public and solemn consecration to the service of God. The 
believing subject can feel the force of the obligation acknowledged 
in the act, and Paul appeals to this sense of obligation: “ Know 
ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were 
baptized into his death?”* Though it is an outward ceremony, it is 
important, not only as an act of obedience, but as expressing a 
believer’s separation from the world, and consecration to God, in a 
manner intelligible and significant, and well adapted to impress his 
own mind and the minds of beholders. i 

The faith which is professed in baptism, is faith in Christ. We 
confess with our mouths the Lord Jesus Christ, and believe in our 
hearts that God has raised him from the dead.2 If the doctrine 
of the resurrection be taken from the Gospel, preaching is vain, and 
faith is vain. So, if the symbol of the resurrection be taken from 
baptism, its chief significancy is gone, and its adaptedness for the 
profession of faith in Christ, is lost. Hence appears the impor- 
tance of adhering closely to the Saviour’s command, “ immersing 
them.” 
en T A es E E see Pati rene a a 

1 Rom. vi. 3. 2 Rom. x. 9. 


DESIGN OF BAPTISM. 73 


The obligation to make a baptismal profession of faith, binds 
every disciple of Christ. Some have converted the Eucharist into 
a ceremony of profession; but this is not the law of Christ. Bap- 
tism was designed, and ought to be used, for this purpose. If 
infant baptism be obligatory, the duty is parental; and if it be a 
ceremony in which children are dedicated by their parents to the 
Lord, it is a different institution from that in which faith is pro- 
fessed. He who has been baptized in infancy, is not thereby 
released from the obligation to make a baptismal profession of 
faith in Christ. If it be granted, that his parents did their duty 
in dedicating him to God, he has, nevertheless, a personal duty to 
perform. The parental act of which he'has no consciousness, can- 
not be to him the answer of a good conscience toward God. Had 
it left an abiding mark in the flesh, an argument of some plausi- 
bility might be urged against the repetition of the ceremony. But 
the supposed seal of God’s covenant is neither in his flesh, nor in 
his memory, and his conscience has no Scriptural release from the 
personal obligation of a baptismal profession. 


Section V.—CONNECTION OF BAPTISM WITH CHURCH 
ORDER. 


It will be shown hereafter, that in a Church, organized like the 
primitive churches, none but baptized persons can be admitted to 
membership. On this account, the present chapter on baptism has 
been introduced, as a necessary preliminary to the subsequent dis- 
cussions on church order. 


CHAPTER II. 


LOCAL CHURCHES. 
Szction I—MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 


A CHRISTIAN CHURCH Is AN ASSEMBLY OF BELIEVERS IN CHRIST, 
ORGANIZED INTO A BODY, ACCORDING To THE HoLy SCRIPTURES, 
FOR THE WORSHIP AND SERVICE oF Gop. 


ASSEMBLY. 


The word church, when it occurs in the English New Testament, 
is, with one exception, the rendering of the Greek word sxxrņoa. 
The Greek word, however, sometimes appears in the original text, 
when it could not, with propriety, be translated church. No one 
would render Acts xix. 32, “For the church was confused oP or 
verse 39, “ It shall be determined in a lawful church ;” or verse 41, 
“ He dismissed the church.” It is hence manifest, that the two 
words do not precisely correspond to each other in signification. 

The meaning of an English word, is ascertained by the usage of 
the best English authors, By such writers, the word cuurcH is 
often employed to denote religious societies, consisting of persons 
who, because of the wide extent of territory which they occupy, 
never assemble in one place for divine worship. The principles on 
which these societies are formed, are various; their modes of 
zovernment differ from each other; and they do not agree in the 
doctrines which they profess. If we should refuse to call any one 
of these societies a church, the usage of the best English writers 
might be cited against us; and the usage of such men is the law 
of the language. 

But the disciples of Christ have another law, to which they 
appeal when they seek direction in forming and organizing 
churches. This law is contained in the Holy Scriptures. The 
question then is not, what does the English word church mean, or 


(74) 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 75 


to what religious societies may the name be applied; but what is 
a church, according to the teaching of the inspired word. 

The Greek word sxxaņora denotes an assembly; and is not 
restricted in its application to a religious assembly. But every 
reader of the New Testament discovers, that the first Christiang 
were formed into religious assemblies, to which epistles were 
directed; and which acted, and were required to act, as organized 
bodies. The word is ordinarily used, in the New Testament, to 
denote these assemblies; and it is only with this use of the term, 
that we are at present concerned. 

The Greek word denotes an assembly ; and, in this particular, 
differs from the English word church, which is often used to signify 
the house in which men assemble for religious worship. The word 
“churches,” in Acts xix. 87, denotes the temples in which the 
heathen gods were worshipped; but this is the exception before 
referred to, in which the Greek word sxxaņora does not appear in 
the original text. This word never denotes the house in which 
the worshippers assemble. The word owayoyn was used, not only 
for the assembly, but also for the house in which the assembly 
met; and hence, we read “ He hath built us a synagogue.”! But 
the word «xxaqou differs from it in this particular. The passage of 
Scripture which most favors the opinion, that the word was applied 
to a material edifice, is, ‘‘ Have ye not houses to eat and to drink 
in? or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have 
not??? Here an antithesis has been supposed, between the pri- 
vate dwellings of the Corinthian Christians, and their house of 
public worship. But this interpretation weakens the force of the 
passage. The word “despise,” like the word “shame” which 

follows, has persons for its object; and the injurious treatment 
which it implies, would be far less criminal, if it affected merely 
the material edifice in which the church assembled. 

The word sxxaņowa, as used by classic Greek authors, signified an 
assembly. It was used to denote the assembly of the citizens in the 
democratic towns of Greece, met to decide on matters appertaining 
to the State. With this use of it, precisely agrees that which is 
found in Acts xix. 89: “It shall be determined in a lawful 
assembly.” The multitude there convened, were not a lawful 


1 Luke vii. 5. 2 T Cor, xi.-22: 


76 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


ecclesia. But we learn from the last verse of the chapter, that the 
word was not restricted in its use to a lawful ecclesia, for it is ap- 
plied to the very company congregated on this occasion. “He ` 
dismissed the assembly.” In the Septuagint, it is the word usually 
employed to denote the assembly of Hebrew worshippers, called 
the Congregation of the Lord; but it is also applied to assemblies 
not organized for religious purposes or business of state.! On 
the whole, therefore, when we meet with the word, we are sure of 
an assembly, and of nothing else, so far as depends on the word 
itself. 

When we turn to the New Testament, and examine the use of 
this word in its application to the followers of Christ, we find it 
for the most part so employed that an assembly is manifestly 
denoted. “ If he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church,” 
“but if he neglect to hear the church,” &¢.2 The church in 
this passage, is an assembly, addressed by the party complain- 
ing, and addressing the party offending. Frequently the churches 
have their place of meeting specified, and are hence called the 
church at Jerusalem;* the church at Antioch ;* the church at 
Corinth ; the church at Ephesus, &c.,6 and when mention is made 
of the Christians in a district of country, so large as to render 
their habitual and frequent meeting for the worship of God 
impracticable, the term church is not applied to them in the singu- 
lar number. Hence, we read, “ the churches throughout all Judea, 
Galilee, and Samaria ;”? the churches of Galatia ;* the churches of 
Macedonia ;* the churches of Asia.” It is clear, from these pas- 
sages, that the term in the singular number, denoted the separate 
local assemblies in those districts or countries, and not the whole 
number of Christians inhabiting a kingdom or province. This is 
further confirmed by the fact, that the meeting of the Christians 
in the city of Corinth, is called the meeting of the whole Church, 
if the whole church be come together into one place." If they had 
been called the church at Corinth, merely as belonging to a class 
of persons widely scattered through Achaia or the whole world, to 


EE Se) A 


1 Ps.xxvi.5; Judith vi. 16; xiv. 6. ? Matt. xviii. 17. 
3 Acts viii. 1. * Acts xiii. 1. 51 Cor. i. 2. 
5 Rey. ii. 1. T Acts ix. 31. 8 Gal. i. 2; 1 Cor. xvi. 1. 


? 2 Cor. viii. 1. 10 1 Cor. xvi. 19. 11 Cor, xiv. 23. « 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. Tk 


whom, contemplated in the aggregate, the name church was given; 
the phrase “ the whole church” would necessarily denote the entire 
aggregate; and it could not be said with truth that the whole 
church was assembled, when only the Christians in the city of 
Corinth formed the assembly. 

Further proof that the word denoted a particular or local 
assembly, appears in this, that the churches are mentioned as dis- 
tinct from one another. ‘ They ordained elders in every church.”’! 
Also in this, that the churches were compared with each other : “For 
what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches?”? “No 
church communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, 
but ye only.”3 « As distinct bodies, they sent and received salu- 
tations,” * and held intercourse by messengers.’ 

By the proof which has been adduced, it is fully established 
that the word church, in such names as The Church of England, 
The Church of Scotland, The Presbyterian Church, The Episcopal 
Church, The Methodist Church, does not correspond in signification 
with the Greek word :xzaņora. These churches never assemble in 
one place, because their members are dispersed over too large an 
extent of territory. They are, therefore, not churches in the New 
Testament sense of the word. It is true that some of these 
churches have supreme judicatories in which the power of the 
whole body is supposed to be concentrated ; and in these the whole 
church is conceived to be assembled : thus, the Presbyterian Church 
has its General Assembly. But whenever the General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church is mentioned, the very title indicates 
that the Assembly is one thing, and the Church another. The 
Assembly may be seen in some spacious room, transacting the busi- 
ness of the Church; but no one will affirm that the Church itself 
is literally there ; and no one calls the Church itself an assembly. 
The people of the United States are conceived to be assembled in 
Congress; and the people of the several states in their several 
legislative assemblies; but no one understands this to be literally 
true, and no one calls the people of the United States or of any 
single state an assembly. But whenever the word exxanova is used, 
we are sure of an assembly; and the term is not applicable to 
bodies or societies of men that do not liter 


1 Acts xiy. 23. 
* Rom. xvi. 16; 1 Cor. xvi. 19. 


78 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


In defending the Presbyterian form of church government, it 
has been argued that the term ecclesia is applied in the New 
Testament to denote all the Christians in a large city, when their 
number was so great that they could not all assemble for worship 
in one place. In a large city of the present day, a single de- 
nomination of Christians may have many churches assembling at 
their several places of worship at the same hour. The same 
division of the worshipping assemblies, is supposed to have existed 
in ancient times; and yet, it is remarked, we never read in the 
New Testament of several churches in one city; and it is inferred 
that- the word sxxaqjom in the singular number, included in these 
cases all the separate worshipping assemblies. 

Dr. Dick! urges the argument just stated, and refers particularly 
to the church at Jerusalem, and the church at Antioch, as bodies 
too large for all the members to assemble in one place. It is 
unfortunate, however, for the argument, that these very churches 
are expressly declared in the Holy Scriptures to have assembled. 
Although the disciples in Jerusalem were numbered by thousands, 
yet, when their number “had multiplied,” ? the apostles gathered 
the whole multitude together, and directed them to choose out 
from among themselves seven men to have charge of the distri- 
bution to the poor. And when Paul and Barnabas returned to 
Antioch, after having performed a tour of missionary labor, it is 
left on record that they gathered the church together, and rehearsed 
what the Lord had done by them. Against these express declara- 
tions of the sacred historian, the conjecture that the number of 
disciples in these cities was too great to permit them to assemble 
in one place, is entitled to no consideration. 

It is further argued by Dr. Dick, that all the disciples in Jeru- 
salem could not have assembled in one place, because of the perse- 
cution to which they were exposed. But an important fact is here 
overlooked. For a considerable time after the day of Pentecost, 
the Christians had “ favor with all the people.”* The rulers were 
opposed to them; but the favor which they had among the people 
stayed the hand of persecution. While this state of things lasted, 
they remained one church, one assembly. But when persecution 


ee eee ee eee 


1 Theology, 3 96, 98. ? Acts vi. 1, 2. 3 Acts xiv. 27. 
t Acts ii. 47. 


oS sa 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 79 


Scattered them, they were compelled to hold their assemblies in 
several places, and they are no longer regarded as constituting one 
church; but the historian, with strict regard to accuracy of language, 
calls them “ churches.” 1 

If the word exxanove in the singular number, could denote several 
distinct assemblies in a large city, no good reason can be assigned 
why it might not also denote the assemblies of Christians through- 
out a province or kingdom. But it is admitted that when applied 
to these, the word is always used in the plural form. All this ex- 
actly accords with what was before stated—that the word always 
assures us of an assembly, 


e MEMBERS. 


Whether the assembly denoted by the word exxdqova Was religious 
or political, lawful or unlawful, the word itself does not determine. 
We must look beyond the word itself, to learn the character of the 
members who composed the churches of the New Testament; and 
the purpose for which they were associated. 

The character of the persons who composed the New Testament 
churches, may be readily learned from the epistles addressed to 
them. They are called “ The elect of God ;”? “Children of God 
by faith;”3 “Sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints ;” 4 
‘Saints in Christ Jesus 3” “ Followers of the Lord 6 “ Beloved 
of the Lord.”’? No doubt can exist that these churches were, in 
the view of the inspired writers who addressed them, composed of 
persons truly converted to God. 

We may learn the same from the Acts of the Apostles. The 
first church admitted to membership those who repented and 
gladly received the word ;8 and the Lord added to the church daily 
such as should be saved. Some have preferred to translate the 
passage last cited, “ The Lord added to the church such as were 
saved.” The former rendering does not so fully determine that the 
persons added had already undergone a saving change. Neither 
rendering, however, gives the precise sense of the original, which, 


Senate ee ER iy | 


1 Acts ix. 31. 2 Qol- ii, 12, 3 Gal. iii. 26. 
STO: 1.2: R Phil il: 61 Thes: i. 6. 
72 Thes. ii. 13. 8 Acts ii. 39, 41. ? Acts ii. 47. 


80 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


by the use of the present participle, describes the salvation as 
neither future nor past, but in present progress. Men who had 
entered the way of salvation, and were making progress therein, 
were added to the church in Jerusalem, and all the members of the 
church were persons of like character, for the multitude were “ of 
one heart.”! When persecution scattered this first church, its dis- 
persed members formed other churches precisely like the parent 
church in the character of the members. None were admitted 
but as believers in Christ. 

What has been said must not be understood to imply that none 
but true believers ever entered the primitive churches. We know 
from the Acts of the apostles, that Ananias, Sapphira,? and Simon 
the Sorcerer,’ had a place for a time among the true disciples of 
Jesus; and we know from the apostolic epistles, that false 
brethren were brought in unawares into the churches.* But we 
are clearly taught that they were considered intruders, occupying 
a place that did not properly belong to them, and were ejected 
when their true character became apparent. Although, even in 
apostolic times, such men obtained admittance into the churches, 
they crept in unawares,° and, therefore, if we would tread in the 
footsteps of the apostles, we cannot plead their authority for ad- 
mitting into the churches any who are not true disciples of Christ. 

In our definition of a church, we have called it an assembly of 
believers in Christ. This definition tells what a church is accord- 
ing to the revealed will of God, and not what it becomes by the 
criminal negligence of its ministers and members, or the wicked 
craft of hypocritical men who gain admittance into it. When we 
study the word of God to ascertain what a church is, we must re- 
ceive the perfect pattern as presented in the uncorrupted precepts 
of that word, and not as marred by human error and crime. 


ORGANIZATION. 


A church is an organized assembly. The organization cannot 
be certainly inferred from the mere name. This is supposed to 
signify, properly, an assembly legally called together or summoned; 


1 Acts iv. 32. 2 Acts v. 1. 3 Acts viii. 13. 
* Gal. ii. 4. 5 Jude 4. 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 81 


and the derivation of the word from exxancw, to call out, accords 
with this meaning. A legal summons implies obligation to obey it; 
and the persons who were under this obligation must be supposed 
to have been bound, not only to assemble, but also to co-operate 
with one another in the business for which the assembly was con- 
voked. Although the term was sometimes applied to an assembly 
not legally convened, or a loose and disorderly assembly, yet it 
commonly signified an assembly of persons bound to act together 
as a body for some specified object. This is true of the New Tes- 
tament churches. 

The church at Jerusalem is clearly distinguished, in the sacred 
narrative, from the loose multitude that heard Peter’s sermon on the 
day of Pentecost. Many of these became “added to the church;” 
but the church, it is manifest from the record, was a distinct and 
separate body, and their union and co-operation are plainly exhi- 
bited in the sacred history. 

A passage in the first epistle to the Corinthians shows that the 
church at Corinth was a distinct assembly, not including others 
who might chance to be present in their meeting: “If the whole 
church be come together into one place, and all speak with tongues, 
and there come in those that are unlearned or unbelievers.”! Had 
the church been a loose or unorganized assembly, these visiters 
who came in would have formed a part of it. But the distinction 
between them and the church is marked and clear. Moreover, the 
phrase, “ If the whole church be come together,” manifestly im- 
plies that there was a definite number of persons who were expected 
to convene, and who, when convened, constituted the entire body. 
This would not be true of an unorganized assembly. Let it be 
further noted, that the word sxxaqjou is here used to denote the 
body, not as actually assembled, but as a body of which it was 
possible for some of the members to be absent when others were 
present. Sometimes the word was used to denote an actual assem- 
bly, as in the passage, ‘“ When ye come together in the church” 2— 
that is, in the assembly or public meeting: but in the phrase, “ If 
the whole church be come together,” the term manifestly applied 
to the church, not as a body actually assembled, but as organized. 
Their organization had doubtless a reference to their assembling 


11 Cor. xiv. 23. 2 1 Cor. xi. 18. 


82 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


for the purpose of carrying the design of their organization into 
effect; and the name exxaņsta was given to the body because of its 
actual assembling, or because the members were obliged to assem- 
ble by the terms of their organization. 

This distinction in the use of the term, as sometimes denoting 
an organized body, and sometimes an actual assembly, appears also 
in the Septuagint. The Congregation of the Lord was an ecclesia, 
whether actually assembled or not; but, in the phrase, “in the 
day of the assembly,” the term exzaqo is used to denote the 
actual assembly that stood before Mount Sinai. This is the meaning 
of the word in 1 Cor. xiv. 34, “ Let your women keep silence in 
the churches’’—that is, in the assemblies, or public meetings. It 
is added: “ For it is a shame for a woman to speak in the church.” 
This shame does not attach to her as a member of an organized 
body, but as being in a public assembly. 

The English word church always refers to an organized body; 
but it does not necessarily imply an actual assembly, being very 
frequently applied to bodies that never actually assemble. On this 
account, it is not an accurate rendering of «xxayo.a, when this term 
denotes an actual assembly without reference to organization. Dr. 
Doddridge has very properly rendered Acts vii. 88: ‘This is he 
that was in the assembly in the wilderness.” If this principle of 
translation were applied throughout the New Testament, and the 
word church were admitted only when an organized body is in- 
tended, something would be gained in respect of perspicuity. 

We have not argued the organization of the primitive churches 
from the mere use of the Greek name ecclesia. The name was 
appropriately used to denote an organized assembly; but this was 
not its exclusive signification. Other considerations which have 
been adduced, prove that the local churches of the New Testament 
were, in general, organized bodies ; but a doubt exists with respect 
to the churches or assemblies in private houses, of which four 
cases are mentioned.! In those times, houses had not been erected 
for the special accommodation of Christian assemblies; and meet- 
ings for religious worship were doubtless often held in private 
houses. That in some cases a regularly organized church may 
have held its stated meetings in a private house, is by no means 


1 Rom. xvi. 5; 1 Cor. xvi. 19; Col. iv. 15; Philem. 2. 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 83 


Improbable. But we cannot affirm that every Christian assembly 
to which the word ecclesia was applied, was a regularly organized 
church. We may admit that the word assembly would be a more 
suitable rendering in these cases of meeting in private houses; and 
yet the proof is abundant that the churches commonly spoken of 
in the New Testament were organized assemblies, 


INDEPENDENCE. 


Each church, as a distinct organization, was independent of every 
other church. No intimation is anywhere given that the acts of 
one church were supervised by another church, or by any ecclesi- 
astical judicatory estaĝlished by a combination of churches. In 
the direction given by Christ, for settling a difficulty between two 
members, the aggrieved brother is commanded to report the case 
to the church, and the action of the church is represented as final. 
The church at Corinth excommunicated the incestuous person, by 
its own act and without reference to a higher judicatory. As if to 
settle the question of church independence, Paul, though possess- 
ing apostolic authority, and though he commanded the act to be 
done, yet required it to be done by the assembled church, as the 
proper agent for performing the work. Again, when the same 
individual was to be restored, the action of the church became 
necessary, and this action completed the deed. In the book of 
Revelation, distinct messages were sent to the seven churches of 
Asia. The character and works of each church are distinctly and 
separately referred to; and the duties prescribed are assigned to 
each church separately, and that church alone is required to per- 
form them. 

The only case in which there is an appearance of appeal to a 
higher judicatory, is that which is recorded in Acts xv. This was 
not a case of appeal to a higher judicatory established by a com- 
bination of churches, but to the single church at Jerusalem, with 
the Apostles and Elders; and the decree, when issued, went forth 
with the authority of the Holy Ghost. 


84 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


DIVINE RULE. 


After we have proved that the primitive churches were organized 
societies, an important question arises, Whether we are under 
obligation to regulate the church order of the present time in con- 
formity to ancient usage. Was that usage established by divine 
authority, and designed to be of perpetual obligation; or was the 
whole matter of order and government left to human prudence? 
If the primitive churches consisted wholly of baptized believers, 
are we now at liberty to receive unbelievers and unbaptized persons ? 
If the primitive churches were independent organizations, are we 
now at liberty to combine many churches in one organization? If 
the ancient pastors were all equal in authority, are we now at liberty 
to establish gradations in the pastoral office, and give one minister 
authority over others ? 

It must be admitted, that the Scriptures contain very little in 
the form of direct precept relating to the order and government of 
churches.. But we have no right to require that everything 
designed for our instruction in duty, should be made known to us 
only in the way of direct command. Judicious parents give much 
instruction to their children by example; and this mode of instruc- 
tion is often more intelligible and more useful than precept. It 
was made the duty of the apostles to teach their converts what- 
soever Christ had commanded, and to set the churches in order. 
If, instead of leaving dry precepts to serve for our guidance, they 
have taught us, by example, how to organize and govern churches, 
we have no right to reject their instruction, and captiously insist 
that nothing but positive command shall bind us. Instead of 
choosing to walk in a way of our own devising, we should take 
pleasure to walk in the footsteps of those holy men from whom we 
have received the word of life. The actions of a wise father deserve 
to be imitated by his children, even when there is no evidence that 
he intended to instruct them by his example. We revere the 
apostles, as men inspired with the wisdom which is from above ; 
and respect for the Spirit by which they were led, should induce 
us to prefer their modes of organization and government to such 
as our inferior wisdom might suggest. 

But the Apostles designed that their modes of procedure should 
be adopted and continued. Paul commended the church at Corinth, 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 85 


because they had kept the ordinances as he had delivered them. 
Some things which needed further regulation, he promised to set in 
order when he came; evidently implying that there was an order 
which ought to be established, Titus, whom he had instructed, he 
left in Crete,’ to ordain elders in every city, and to set in order 
the things that were wanting. To Timothy, he said: “The things 
which thou hast heard of me, the same commit thou to faithful 
men who shall be able to teach others also.” 2? As matters of church 
order formed a part of his own care and action, and a part of what 
he had committed to Titus, so we must believe that they formed a 
part of that instruction which he had given to Timothy, to be 
transmitted by him to gther faithful men, and by them to their 
successors. : 

The commission which the Lord gave to his apostles, required 
them to teach the observance of all that he had commanded. Many 
discourses which he delivered, previous to his crucifixion, are 
mentioned in the four gospels, without being recorded at length ; 
and he doubtless delivered many others of which no mention is 
made. In the interviews which he had with the apostles after 
his resurrection, we are informed that he discoursed with them on 
the things pertaining to the kingdom of God; and that this sub- 
ject was so prominently before them, as to induce the inquiry, 
“Lord, wilt thou at this time again restore the kingdom to Israel ?’’4 
They were the chosen and commissioned agents for establishing 
his kingdom, having been appointed by him to “sit upon twelve 
thrones, judging the twelve tribés of Israel.” 3 They were to pro- 
ceed on the work assigned them, and were now waiting in Jerusa- 
lem, until they should be endued with power from on high for its 
successful prosecution. But what directions he gave them, in the 
interesting conversations that have not been committed to record, 
we have no other means of knowing than the precepts and exam- 
ples which they have left. His parting command and promise were, 
“ Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you; and lo! I am with you alway, even unto the end of the 
world.” This plainly implies that commands had been given to 
them, which were to be observed to the end of time; and that these 


a Oe DE ee Fs 


Titus i. 5. 2 2 Tim. ii. 2. 8 Acts i. 3. 
4 Acts i. 6. 5 Matt. xix. 28. 6 Matt. xxviii. 20. 


86 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


were to be learned from their instructions. The organization and 
government of the churches, which were to hold forth the word of 
life, and be the golden candlesticks, among which the glorified Jesus 
was to walk,’ were matters intimately pertaining to his kingdom; 
and it cannot be supposed that he gave no instruction respecting 
them. Whatever he had commanded on these points, the commis- 
sion required that they should teach men to observe; and the 
accompanying promise of his presence till the end of the world, 
clearly demonstrates that the observance was to be perpetual. We 
arrive, therefore, at the conclusion that, whatever the apostles taught, 
whether by precept or example, had the authority, not only of the 
Holy Spirit by which they were guided into all truth, but also of 
their Lord who had commissioned them. 

It may be objected, that the example of the apostles is clearly 
not always to be followed; as, for instance, the conduct of Paul in 
shaving his head at Cenchrea,? in purifying himself at Jerusalem,? 
and in having Timothy circumcised. But how do we know that 
these acts of Paul are not to be imitated? We learn it from the 
instruction and example of the same great apostle. He has taught 
us to distinguish between acts of personal obligation and acts per- 
formed from regard to the weakness and prejudice of others. He 
became all things to all men. To the Jews he became a Jew, that 
he might gain the Jews. He had Timothy circumcised, because ` 
of the Jews which dwelt in that quarter: and the other acts which 
have been cited were performed in the same accommodation to 
Jewish prejudice. But when it became necessary to defend the 
rights and privileges of Gentile converts, he boldly asserted their 
rights, and strenuously opposed the circumcision of Titus.’ If, with 
an humble and teachable spirit, we study the instructions as well 
as the example of the apostles, we shall find it scarcely possible 
to err in deciding which of their acts were accommodated to par- 
ticular circumstances, and which of them are proper examples for 
our imitation. If any doubt should remain in any particular case, 
it would be highly rash and criminal, on account of it, to throw 
away the benefit of apostolic example entirely. 

When we have made our deductions from the instruction and 
Sng eS SR AE OE 
1 Rey. i. 20. 2? Acts xviii, 18. 3 Acts xxi, 26. 

* Acts xvi. 3. 5 Gal. ii. 3. 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. . 87 


example of the apostles, we may use them with great profit to 

_ interpret the brief directions which the divine Master himself gave. 
Twice only, so far as the record states, did he use the word church, 
during all his personal ministry. In one case, he gave a promise 
of stability and perpetuity: « Upon this rock I will build my 
church ; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it”! From 
this promise we might infer, even if we had not apostolic instruc- 
tion on the subject, that the church was to be built of durable 
materials, of living stones, of real saints. In the other case, the 
Master gave a precept to his disciples, with reference to personal 
difficulties that might arise among them: “If thy brother shall 
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him 
alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother. But if he 
will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the 
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And 
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the church; but if he neglect 
to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a 
publican.”? What kind of persons are concerned in the supposed 
difficulty? They are brethren. The direction was given to the 
disciples, and the very offender is called “ thy brother.” The 
direction was not designed for a case of injury from persecuting 
Scribes and Pharisees, but for a case of difficulty between Christian 
brethren. The second step in the process is thus described : “Take 
with thee one or two more.” Who are the persons to be taken? 
Not persecuting Scribes and Pharisees; not strangers who will 
have no interest in adjusting the difficulty ; but beyond all doubt, 
they were to be other brethren. In the third step it is directed, 
“ Tell it to the ecclesia,” the assembly. What assembly? The 
assembly of Israel, the. Congregation of the Lord, collected from 
all places to keep their feasts at Jerusalem? The assembly of 
Jewish worshippers met in a synagogue? Jesus did not direct his 
disciples to refer their matters of grievances to such arbitrators. 
Evidently the ecclesia consists of the same kind of persons as 
those concerned in the preceding steps of the process. It is the 
assembly of the brethren. The constituents are Christian disciples, 
and none other. It is the assembly, and not an assembly that 
might be accidentally convened. The distinctness of the assembly, 
AAS ENOT E ATA CL EOE A BRS IT co) Beat) atte 

1 Matt. xvi. 18. 2 Matt. xviii. 15, 16, 17. 


88 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


and to some extent its organization, are here implied. Tell it to 
the assembly ; an assembly actually convened, and capable of being 
addressed ; and not a society scattered through a province or king- 
dom. “If he will not hear the church.” The ecclesia not only 
hears, but decides; not only decides, but announces its decision. 
Here organization is clearly implied, and also right of jurisdiction: 
“ Let him be to thee as an heathen man and a publican.” This 
proves the decision to be final, and without appeal to a higher 
judicatory ; otherwise the offended brother would be bound to await 
the issue of such an appeal. Thus we discover, that this admir- 
able passage contains, in its brief dimensions, an epitome of the 
doctrine concerning church order and discipline, which was more 
fully developed afterwards in the instruction and example of the 
apostles. If the divine authority of their instructions were doubt- 
ful, these words of Jesus give them his sanction. 

While we find proof that the church order established by the 
apostles, was designed to be perpetuated to the end of time, we do 
not find either precept or example for the regulation of every 
minute particular in the doings of a church. Marriage is a divine 
institution; and the rules given respecting it are obligatory, 
though much is left to the judgment and pleasure of the parties. 
So the regulations prescribed in the word of God for the organi- 
zation and discipline of churches, are all obligatory, though some 
things are still left for human prudence to determine. 


Objection 1.—A community of goods existed in the church at 
Jerusalem. This was the first church, and was established under 
the supervision of all the apostles. If primitive usage were obli- 
gatory on all succeeding time, a community of goods would be an 
indispensable part of church order. ! 

We are informed, concerning the members of the first church, 
“ Neither said any of them that aught of the things which he pos- 
sessed was his own, but they had all things common.” ? But in this 
no intimation is given, that any church regulation was established 
obliging all to give up their private property. The surrender was 
spontaneous on the part of those who made it. It is not said that 
the church or the apostles called the possession of each member 
public property; but the accounting of it public property is 
ESSN e 

) 1 Acts iv. 32, 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 89 


attributed entirely to the owner himself. That each member had 
a full right to retain his property, is evident from the words of the 

“apostle Peter to Ananias, “ While it remained, was it not thine 
own?! The crime of Ananias and Sapphira, was not that they 
kept back a part of their possessions, but that they lied about it. 
The clear recognition of their right to retain possession of the 
whole, is an explicit declaration from the apostle Peter, that 
a community of goods had not been established by apostolic 
authority. 

If it could be proved that the apostles established a community 
of goods in the church at Jerusalem, we should be compelled to 
class the act with thosegacts of Paul before noticed, which were 
the result of peculiar circumstances. In the churches which were 
afterwards organized, we know that the distinction of rich and 
poor existed, and that the members were expected to contribute 
according to what they had. The possession of private property 
is unquestionably implied; and the apostles, who had the care of 
all the churches, if they had designed to make a community of 
goods a permanent arrangement in the churches, would not have 
permitted a necessary part of church order on a matter of great 
importance to be wholly neglected. 

The circumstances of the church at Jerusalem were peculiar. 
From that church the gospel was sounded forth through all the 
world. It was regarded by Paul as having a claim on the carnal 
things of churches subsequently formed, in return for the spiritual 
things communicated. The liberality of that church in its contri- 
butions to sustain the cause of Christ was extraordinary, because 
the circumstances were extraordinary ; and an extraordinary claim 
to remuneration for having impoverished themselves in support of 
the cause was founded on it. Paul commended the liberality of 
the churches of Macedonia, because “to their power, and beyond 
their power” they had contributed to the Lord’s cause.? Jesus com- 
mended the liberality of the poor widow who threw all her living 
into the Lord’s treasury. So the liberality of the church at 
Jerusalem was pleasing to the apostles, and also to the Lord; and 
the more pleasing, because it was a free-will offering, and not ex- 
torted by any church order which the apostles had established. 


1 Acts y. 4. 12 Cor, vill. 1,3. 


90 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


Obj «ction 2.—The church order which you profess to deduce 
from the Scriptures, does not agree with that which, according to 
ecclesiastical history, prevailed in the times that followed the age 
of the apostles. There is reason, therefore, to suspect that your 
deductions are erroneous. 


In attempting to learn from ecclesiastical history what usages 
prevailed in the apostolic churches, there is danger of error from 
two causes: the writers of ecclesiastical history were uninspired 
men, and therefore fallible; and the churches of the times after 
` the apostles, may have departed from the order first instituted. 
Neither of these causes of error can mislead us in the course of 
investigation which we have pursued. The writers on whom we 
rely were inspired; and the churches concerning which we have 
inquired, were the first and purest, organized by the apostles under 
the infallible guidance of the Holy Ghost. Moreover, we have the 
assurance of inspired authority, that the Scriptures are sufficient 
to render the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every 
good work. If every duty appertaining to church order cannot be 
learned from the Scriptures, they have not the sufficiency and per- 
fection which Paul ascribed to them. If ecclesiastical history can 
make any suggestion that will assist us in fairly interpreting the 
Scriptures, we may thankfully accept its aid. But if it goes be- 
yond the Scriptures, it leaves divine authority behind it; and if it 
opposes the Scriptures, we must reject it, lest we make void¢he 
law of God through our traditions. 

But ecclesiastical history says nothing that can lead us to sus- 
pect the accuracy of our deductions from Scripture. On the con- 
trary, the nearer we ascend with it to the time of the apostles, the 
more exact is the agreement which it exhibits between the order 
of the churches, and that which we have ascertained from the 
Scriptures to have been established by Christ and his apostles. 

The following quotations from Gieseler’s Ecclesiastical History, 
will suffice to show the gradual progress of infringement on the 
original church order, with respect to the independence of the 
churches, the equality of the pastors, and the right of the people 
to elect their church officers. The historian considers it a progress 
of improvement, rendering the churches “better organized and 
united ;” but we think it a progress towards popery :— 

“The influence of the bishops increased naturally with the in- 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 91 


creasing frequency of synods, at which they represented their 
churches. Country churches which had grown up around some 
city, seem with their bishops to have been usually in a certain 
degree under the authority of the mother-church. With this ex- 
ception, all the churches were alike independent, though some were 
especially held in honor on such grounds as their apostolic origin, 
or the importance of the city in which they were situated.” —A. D. 
117, 193. 

“ We have seen that the sphere of individual influence amongst 
the bishops was gradually enlarging, many churches in the city and 
its vicinity being united under one bishop, a presbyter or a country 
bishop presiding over then& But we have now to speak of a new 
institution, at first found chiefly in the east, which had the effect 
of uniting the bishops more intimately amongst themselves. This 
was the Provincial Synod, which had been growing more frequent 
ever since the end of the second century, and in some provinces 
was held once or twice a year. * * * By these associations of 
large ecclesiastical bodies, the whole church became better organ- 
ized and united.”—A. D. 193, 3242 

“ When once the idea of the Mosaic priesthood had been adopted 
in the Christian church, the clergy soon began to assume a supe- 
riority over the laity. * * * * The old customs, however, were not 
yet entirely done away. Although the provincial bishops exer- 
cised a very decided influence in electing a metropolitan, the church 
was not excluded from all share in the choice.” —A. D. 193, 324.8 


Objection 8.—God has in other cases unfolded his plans of 
operation gradually; and it is at least probable, that, in planting 
the church, the principles of church order were incorporated in 
the organization seminally, to be developed afterwards in the pro- 
gress of Christianity. It is, therefore, improper to take for our 
model, the first embryo of the church. 


God has been pleased to unfold the plan of his grace gradually. 
The first revelation of it in the garden of Eden, was exceedingly 
obscure; but, like the dawn of day, the light continued to in- 
crease, until at length the Sun of righteousness arose, and the full 
revelation of the gospel was given to mankind. This progress 
was made by new light from heaven. From time to time were 


Oe N, 
TP. 102. sP 152. 5 Pp. 156. 


92 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


added new revelations from God, through inspired men, whom he 
commissioned to make known his will. Now, if the principles of 
church order, inculcated by Christ and his apostles, were left too 
imperfect for our guidance, the analogy suggests that the addi- 
tional disclosure which is needed, ought to come down from above. 
But the objection does not claim, and no one will pretend, who does 
not claim infallibility for the church, that the progressive change 
made in church order, was directed by inspired men. What Christ 
and the apostles planted, could not possibly receive any further 
improvement, unless God gave the increase; and since we have no 
proof that the increase was from God, we may fear that men 
marred the Lord’s work, instead of mending it. 

In the developments which God makes of his plans of operation, 
the progress is ever towards perfection: but in the change of 
church order, to which the objection refers, the progress termi- 
nated in the revelation of the Man of Sin. All the steps in the 
progress tended to this full disclosure. If the wisdom which 
directed it was from above, we ought to follow its entire guidance. 
The doctrine of church infallibility must be admitted, and we must 
take it in all its consequences. The doctrines and practices of the 
Roman church, however contrary to the word of God, must be 
taken as developments of the seminal truth which the Bible con- 
tains. If we are not willing to go all this length, where shall we 
stop? Is there a point in the progress of the church, at which it 
attained its highest perfection, and from which jt sunk into the 
depths of the papal apostasy ? If so, how can we ascertain which 
this point was? If the word of God does not tell us, and if we 
have no infallible church to tell us, we are left in the dark on this 
important subject. The only escape from this darkness, is, by 
flight to the sure word of prophecy, to which we do well to take 
heed as unto a light that shineth in a dark place. 

But were the changes of church order which took place, a de- 
velopment of principles inculcated by Christ and his apostles? If 
Christ forbade hig disciples to call any man master, and consti- 
tuted them all brethren—is prelacy, or the Roman hierarchy, a | 
development of the principle which he inculcated? If he made 
final the decision of an ecclesia of the brethren, to which an injured 
brother might tell his grievance—is the establishment of appellate 
tribunals a development of his principle? If he established a con- 


MORAL CHARACTERISTICS. 93 


verted church-membership—is not the admission of unconverted 
members, a corruption rather than a development of his principle? 
The progress of the divine development is towards that ultimate 
state, in which the wicked will be completely and for ever separated 
from the righteous. His destruction of the old world by a flood, 
from which righteous Noah was preserved, was a step in this de- 
velopment. After corruption and idolatry had again prevailed, 
another step was taken, in the call of Abram from his kindred, 
and the removal of him to a different land in which his descend- 
ants were to be a separate nation, maintaining a purer religion. 
Another separation was made, when John the Baptist preached, 
“Think not to say within ‘yourselves, we have Abraham to our 
father ;’’ “The axe is laid unto the root of the trees;’’ ‘“ Whose 
fan is in his hand,” &c. From that time, a converted church- 
membership was established, which was to be separate from the 
world, though not removed out of the world. The next step will 
be, its complete and final separation. Now, after Christ, with his 
forerunner and apostles, has established a converted church-mem- 
bership, the admission of unconverted members is a step, not in 
the direction of God’s progressive development, but in a direction 
backward. Instead of leading to a more perfect state, it leads 
back to that state which it was a grand aim of John’s ministry to 
alter. 

Objection 4.—The mode of church organization and government, 
which you profess to have deduced from the Scriptures, is not 
wise, and, therefore, cannot be from God. 

The consideration of this objection will be reserved for Chapter 
X., Section I. 


DESIGN. 


Every man, as an accountable creature, is bound to worship and 
serve God; but to render this worship and service apart from all 
his fellow-ereatures, would not accord with his social nature. 
Many acts of devotion and obedience may be performed more ad- 
vantageously and more acceptably, by companies of men, than by - 
each man separately. Prayer is acceptable to God, though poured 
forth from a solitary heart excluded from all the world, and un- 
known to all the world: but a special promise is recorded in the 


94 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


word sf God, for the encouragement of united prayer. Union 
tends to strengthen our faith, and warm our devotions; and the 
united petition rises with more acceptance to the ear of him who 
hears and answers prayer. Churches are companies of men who 
assemble for united prayer. The first church prayed fervently 
and effectually, when the number of their names was one hundred 
and twenty ;' and they continued in prayer when their number 
was increased to thousands.2 When Peter was in prison, prayer 
was made for him by the church.> Praise also is acceptable to 
God, though offered in secret; but when Paul and Silas sang 
praises unto God in the prison,‘ their companionship strengthened ` 
their hearts, and gave increased sweetness and power to their 
music. United praise entered largely into the worship of the an- 
cient temple; and the members of Christian churches are enjoined 
to speak to one another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual 
songs, singing and making melody in their hearts to the Lord. 
The duty and acceptableness of church praise, may be inferred 
from the words, “In the midst of the church will I sing praise 
unto Thee.” The commemoration of Christ’s death in the break- 
ing of bread, is an ordinance committed to the churches. The 
disciples at Troas, and at Corinth, assembled for this purpose. 
By the union of Christians, greater efficiency is given to efforts for 
the spread of the gospel. Hence from the churches sounded out 
the word of the Lord. Association in public assemblies, gives 
opportunity for the spiritual instruction, which Christ commanded 
in the commission given to his ministers; and for the members of 
the church to promote each other’s spiritual interests by mutual 
exhortation. Accordingly Paul enjoins: “Forsake not the as- 
sembling of yourselves together, but exhort one another; and. 
so much the more, as ye see the day approaching.”’ These are 
among the important purposes, for which it is the will of God 
that believers in Christ should form themselves into churches. 

1 Acts i. 14, 24, ? Acts ii, 42; iv. 24. 3 Acts xii, 5. 

* Acts xvi. 25, 5 Eph. v. 19. $ Heb. ii, 12. 

1 Heb. x. 25. < 


CEREMONIAL QUALIFICATIONS. 95 


Szcrron II.—CEREMONIAL QUALIFICATION FOR MEM- 
BERSHIP. 


BAPTISM Is A PREREQUISITE TO MEMBERSHIP IN A LOCAL CHURCH, 


The considerations presented in chapter 1, section 4, determine 
the proper position of baptism in the course of Christian obedience. 
Tt stands at the head of the way. In this act, the believer gives 
himself to God, before he gives himself to the people of God, to 
walk with ‘them in church relation. The duties connected with 
church-membership are included among the commands which are 
referred to in the commissiq, and which are to be taught after 
baptism. The members of every Christian church must profess 
subjection to Christ. They cannot walk together in obedience to 
his commands, unless they are agreed on this point. As profession 
is necessary to church-membership, so is baptism, which is the 
appointed ceremony of profession. Profession is the substance, 
and baptism is the form; but Christ’s command requires the form 
as well as the substance. In reading the Scriptures, it never enters 
the mind that any of the church-members in the times of the 
apostles were unbaptized. So uniformly was this rite administered 
at the beginning of the Christian profession, that no room is left 
to doubt its universal observance. The expression, “ As many of 
you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ,” 1 might 
in some other connection suggest that all had not been baptized. 
But it follows the declaration, “ Ye are all the children of God by 
faith in Jesus Christ,” and is added to prove the proposition; but 
it could not prove that all:were in the relation specified, if the 
phrase, “as many as,” signified only some. The same phrase is 
used by Gamaliel, where all are intended: “ And all, as many as 
obeyed him, were scattered.”? The same phrase, with the same 
meaning, is used in Rom. vi. 3: “So many of us as were baptized 
into Christ, were baptized into his death.” Paul argues from this, 
the obligation of all to walk in newness of life. It follows, there- 
fore, that all the members of the Galatian churches, and of the 
church at Rome, were baptized persons; and the same must be 
true concerning all the primitive churches. We conclude, there- 
fore, that the authority of Christ in the commission, and the usage 


poesia a TE oe ee at ll a a 
1 Gal. iii. 27. 2 Acts v. 36. 


96 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


established by the apostles, give baptism a place prior to church- 
membership. l 

Many unbaptized persons give proof that they love God, and are 
therefore born of God, and are children in his spiritual family. 
If they belong to Christ, it may be asked, why may they not be 
admitted into his churches? That there are such persons among 
the unbaptized, we most readily grant; for such persons, and such 
only, are entitled to baptism. To every such person, an apostle 
of Christ would say, “ And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be 
baptized.” We have not the authority of apostles, but we have 
the words of Christ and the apostles in our hands; and we owe it 
to our unbaptized Christian brother, to tell him, by their authority, 
his proper course of duty. . 

Objection 1—Many good men do not understand the words of 
Christ and the apostles as we do, and consequently do not obey in 
this particular; yet they give satisfactory evidence, in other ways, 
that they love God, and conscientiously obey him. Paul says: 
“ Him that is weak in the faith, receive ye; and he urges, as a 
reason for receiving him, that “God has received him.” Now, if 
we have satisfactory proof that God has received an unbaptized 
Christian brother, we are bound to receive him. 

We admit the obligation to receive such a brother, but not in 
any sense that requires an abandonment or neglect of our own 
duty. We ought not to despise the weak brother. We ought 
not, by our knowledge, to cause the weak brother to perish. We 
ought to receive him into our affections, and endeavor to promote 
his best interests; but if he, through his weakness, disobeys God 
in any particular, our love for him degenerates into weakness, if it 
induces us to disobey also. We owe nothing to a weak brother 
which can render it necessary for us to disobey God. If a weak 
brother feels himself reproved when we yield our personal obedience 
to the Lord’s command, we are not at liberty to neglect the com- 
mand, for the sake of keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond 
of peace. As I am bound to exercise my affection for a weak 
brother in such a manner as not to neglect my duty, so is a church. 
Every church owes its first obligation to Christ, and is bound to 
regulate its organization and discipline in obedience to Christ’s 
command, If, by strict adherence to the divine rule, we cannot 
secure the co-operation of a weak brother, we must do our duty, 
and leave the result to God. Nothing in the law of church organiza- 


FALSE PROFESSORS. 97 


tion forbids the receiving of a brother into membership, who is 
weak in the matter of eating herbs, the case to which Paul refers. 
But if a church be required, for the accommodation of a weak 
brother, to give up the principles of organization learned from 
Christ, and adopt others, she owes it to Christ, and to the weak 
brother himself, firmly to refuse. 

Objection 2.--If baptism is a prerequisite to church-membership, 
societies of unbaptized persons cannot be called churches; and the 
doctrine, therefore, unchurches all Pedobaptist denominations. 

Church is an English word ; and the meaning of it, as such, must 
be determined by the usage of standard English writers. Our 
inquiry has been, not what this English word means, or how it may 
be used. We have sought to know how Christ designed his churches 
to be organized. This is a question very different from a strife 
about words to no profit. In philological inquiries, we are willing 
to make usage the law of language; and we claim no right, in 
speaking or writing English, to annul this law. But our inquiry has 
not been philological. We have not been searching English stand- 
ard writers, to know how to speak; but the Holy Bible, to know 
how to act. Even the Greek word ecclesia was applied to assem- 
blies of various kinds; and we are bound to admit the application 
of it to an assembly of unbaptized persons, solemnly united in the 
worship of God. But we have desired to know how an ecclesia, 
such as those to which Paul’s epistles were addressed, was organ- 
ized ; and we have investigated the subject as a question of duty, 
and not of philology. The result of our investigation is, that every 
such ecclesia was composed of baptized persons exclusively. 


Section II]. —FALSE PROFESSORS. 


The disciples of Christ, in obeying their Master’s command to 
love one another, are liable to mistake the proper objects of the 
love enjoined. Men who have not the Christian spirit, frequently 
assume the Christian name; and, since none but God can search 
the heart, such men frequently obtain admittance among the fol- 
lowers of Christ, and are for a time reckoned true disciples. For 
wise reasons, some of which we are able to comprehend, Christ 
did not pray that his people should be taken out of the world. 
Though the relation which they sustain to the men of the world is 

T 


98 LOCAL CHURCHES. 


often ar occasion of painful trial, it gives an opportunity for duties 
that are profitable to themselves and to mankind, and honorable 
to God. In like manner, their relation to false professors, gives 
occasion for the exercise of patience and forbearance, and of care- 
ful self-examination. 

Local churehes possess external organization; and in this 
organization, human agency is employed. Men unite in it, on the 
principle of mutual recognition of each other as disciples of Christ. 
Since God has not endowed the members of a church with the 
power to seareh the heart, it is possible for persons, whose hearts 
have not been sanctified by the Holy Spirit, to obtain admission 
into a local church. It is not Christ’s law that such persons should 
be received; but they obtain admittance through the fallibility of 
those to whom the execution of the law has been intrusted. 

Since every church on earth has probably one or more false 
professors in it, and since Christ has not authorized the admission 
of false professors, it may be questioned whether, strictly speak- 
ing, there is a Christian ehurch on earth. But it may be ques- 
tioned, with equal propriety, whether any individual man should 
be called a Christian, since no man is fully conformed to the law 
of Christ. Some, on the other hand, have thought that because 
no church on earth is perfectly free from false professors, it is 
folly to aim at a perfect church. But we may, with equal pro- 
priety, charge any individual man with folly who is striving after 
personal perfection. The duty of every individual is, to press 
toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus; and the duty of every church, and of every church- 
member, is, to strive in every lawful way for chureh perfection. 
Though full perfection may not be attained, yet approach to it 
sufficiently rewards our continual effort; and, apart from all re- 
spect to reward, we are obliged to this course, by the command 
of Christ. 

It may be objected, that if the Lord had designed the churches 
to be free from false professors, he would not have committed the 
management of them to fallible men. We may grant that it was 
not God’s-purpose to preserve the churches free from false pro- 
fessors by the exertion of his omnipotence. Had this been his 
purpose, it would not have failed to be accomplished. But, as in 
other parts of God’s moral government, responsible agents are 


FALSE PROFESSORS. 99 


employed who have laws prescribed, which as free agents they may 
or may not obey. The fact that the law is not obeyed, disproves 
neither its perfection nor its obligation. 

But the objection may be presented in another form. The fail- 
ure of a church to keep out false professors, does not necessarily 
arise from moral delinquency in its members; it may be wholly 
owing to the unavoidable fallibility of human judgment. Since 
their failure is not criminal, it is not a violation of divine law ; 
and, therefore, the divine law does not provide for a perfectly pure 
church. b 

The objection in this form would be embarrassing, if the church 
which admits a false professor, were the only party concerned in 
the transaction. But the false professor himself is a party, and 
the most responsible party. He does not love Christ; and this 
want of love not only unfits him for a place in the church, but is 
criminal. He is certainly in fault; and it too often happens that 
the members of the church are also in fault. Were they less con- 
formed to the world, the distinction between Christians and men 
of the world would be more apparent, and fewer cases of mistake 
in the reception of members would occur. Churches are often 
criminally careless, both in the reception of members, and in the 
discipline of them when received. If the piety of churches were 
very fervent, men of cold hearts could not remain happy among 
them, and could not continue to have their true character con- 
sealed. 

The possession of love to Christ is required of every one who 
seeks admission into a Christian church. The members who admit 
him are required to demand a credible profession made in obedi- 
ence to Christ’s command. Beyond this they cannot go, and here 
their responsibility ceases. But in every case in which a false pro- 
fessor is admitted, the law of Christ is violated by one or both of 
the parties. 


CHAPTER III. 


THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


Section I—MEMBERSHIP. 


THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL IS THE WHOLE COMPANY OF THOSE WHO 
ARE SAVED BY CHRIST. 

Whether the term church is used in the Scriptures to denote 
the whole body of Christ’s disciples, is simply a question of fact. 
Were we to regard it as an etymological question, we might doubt 
whether a word, which always assures us of an assembly, could be 
used to denote a body that has never assembled on earth since the 
time of the first persecution, which scattered the disciples from 
Jerusalem. But some reason for such an application of the term 
may exist; and, if we ascertain the fact that it is so applied, the 
reason for this peculiar use will afterward become a proper subject 
of inquiry. 

The following are examples in which the word is used with this 
wide signification: ‘Gave him to be the head over all things to 
the church.” ‘Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus 
throughout all ages, world without end.”’? Let any one attempt to 
interpret these and similar passages, on the supposition that the 
term church always denotes a body of Christians assembling at 
one place—as the church at Rome, at Corinth, or at Ephesus— 
and he will become fully convinced, that the interpretation is inad- 
missible. In some of the passages the extension of the term to 
the whole body of believers, is perfectly apparent. In others, 

„though it is not so apparent that the entire body is intended, yet 


1 Eph. i, 22. 2 Eph. iii. 21. 
(100) 


MEMBERSHIP. 101 


this signification perfectly harmonizes with the use of the term, 
the context, and scope of the passage. 

We shall hereafter investigate the question, whether the term 
church, in this wide signification, includes those who profess faith 
in Christ, but are not true Christians. Such false profession has 
become very common in modern times; but we are inquiring into 
the use of the term in apostolic times, when fewer motives to false 
profession operated. Even in those ancient times, some intruded 
themselves into the brotherhood, who were false brethren, brought 
in unawares. But the intrugion of such persons was not authorized 
by the head of the church; and in our effort to ascertain what the 
church is, we should seek to know what it is as Christ instituted 
it, rather than what it is as man has misconceived or corrupted it. 

After having ascertained the fact that the word is used in the 
extended sense, the next inquiry which presents itself respects the 
reason or propriety of this use. 

Some have thought that this use of the word is not properly 
collective, but generic. When we say, gold is heavier than sand, 
the terms gold and sand are used generically. Were they used 
collectively to denote all the gold and all the sand in the world, 
the proposition would not be true; for there is a far greater weight 
of sand in the world, than of gold. But the comparison is made 
between the two kinds of matter, without regard to the quantities 
of them that exist. In the generic use of names to denote the 
various kinds of unorganized matter, the noun is not preceded by 
an article: thus—fire, air, earth, and water, as names of elements, 
are used without an article. So man is used generically without 
an article; and we do not say, the man, unless some particular 
man is meant. When the names of other organized bodies are 
used generically, the definite article the generally precedes them: 
thus we say, the horse is more tractable than the mule; the cedar 
is more durable than the oak. So the phrase, the church, is sup- 
posed by some to be used generically to denote the kind of organiza- 
tion existing in local churches. 

It is an argument in favor of this opinion, that the idea of an 
assembly is thus fully retained in the signification of the word. 
Each local church is an assembly. 

This generic theory is advocated by Mr. Courtney, a fictitious 
character in “ Theodosia Ernest,” a popular work recently pub- 


103 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


lished, which maintains, in general, the true doctrine of Scripture 
on baptism and church organization. The arguments of Mr. 
Courtney, on the question now before us, are the best that I have 
met with; we shall, therefore, proceed to examine them. 

The question is not, whether the phrase, the church, may be 
grammatically used in a generic sense; but whether the Scriptures 
do so employ it. This also is simply a question of fact. We must 
examine the passages in which the word extends its signification 
beyond a single local church, and endeavor to determine, whether 
in these cases it is generic or not. 

“ Upon this Rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell 
shall not prevail against it.” 1 

This is the first text which Mr. Courtney examines in relation 
to this question. He regards the church which was to be built, as 
a visible organization; and maintains that no visible organization 
more extensive than a local church, was instituted by Christ. He ` 
hence infers that a local church is the thing here intended; and 
that the term obtains an extended signification, by being used 
generically. To this argument, we oppose two objections: 1. There 
is no proof that the church referred to ‘in the passage, is a visible 
organization in the sense of Mr. Courtney. The opposing force 
denoted by the phrase “the gates of hell,” is not such an organiza- 
tion; and the text contains no proof that the church differs from 
it in this particular. 2. The passage does not admit a consistent 
interpretation, on the supposition that the word “ church” is to be 
taken generically. 

It is agreed by all, that this text does not refer to any particu- 
lar local church—as the church at Jerusalem, at Corinth, or at 
Rome. The promise of perpetuity was not designed to apply to 
any one of these churches. One of them may be totally scattered 
by persecution; another may waste away by gradual decay; and 
a third may be so overrun by corruption as to become a synagogue 
of Satan, and no longer a church of Christ. By the universal con- 
sent of interpreters, the proper application of this text extends 
beyond any one local church, and somehow embraces the followers 
of Christ throughout the world; but how the word church obtains 
the extended signification, is the question. Most interpreters have 


meee a a 


* Matt. xvi. 18, 


MEMBERSHIP. 103 


supposed that it is used as a collective name for the whole body 
of Christ's people; but some, with Mr. Courtney, suppose it to be 
merely a generic use of the term—and our present inquiry is con- 
fined to this point: Is the word church, in this passage, a collec- 
tive or a generic term? 

When collective terms are used to denote the subject of any 
affirmation, what is affirmed may respect the entire body signified 
by the term, or it may respect the individuals composing that body. 
On this distinction, a well known rule of grammar is founded: “ A 
noun of multitude, or signifying many, may have a verb or pro- 
noun agreeing with it, either in the singular or plural number, yet 
not without regard to the import of the word, as conveying unity 
or plurality of idea.” When we say the crowd is large, because 
the verb is in the singular number, the largeness is predicated of 
the crowd as a whole; and the meaning is, that there are many 
persons in it: but when we say the crowd are large, the largeness 
is predicated of the individuals who compose the crowd; and the 
meaning is, that it consists of large men. On the same principle 
the pronouns which refer to collective nouns, may be either singu- 
lar or plural according to the sense. We may say the crowd is 
large, but we fear not to meet it; or the crowd are large, but we 
fear not to meet them. The pronoun ?¢ refers to the crowd as a 
whole; and the pronoun them to the individuals who compose it. 

With regard to generic nouns, our grammars do not give, and 
the usage of language does not authorize any such rule. In every 
well constructed sentence in which they are found, the verbs and 
pronouns which agree with them are always singular; and the 
things affirmed respecting them always relate to the individuals, 
and not to the genus or species as a whole. We say “the oak is 
large,” but never “ the oak are large ;” and the largeness which this 
sentence predicates of the oak, relates to the dimensions of each 
single tree, and not to the number of individuals contained in the 
species. 

To illustrate the use of generic terms, appropriate reference is 
made in Theodosia to the passages in the book of Job, which speak 
of behemoth, leviathan, and the war horse. All these passages 
may serve also to exemplify the rule laid down in the preceding 
paragraph. The verbs and pronouns are all singular; and the 


104. THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


things affirmed all relate to the individual animals, and not to their 
several species considered collectively. 

Let us now apply this rule to the interpretation of the text under 
consideration. On the supposition that church is here a generic 
term, the rule determines the sense to be, that each individual church 
is built on the rock, and each individual church has the promise 
that the gates of hell shall never prevail against it. But this, as 
Mr. Courtney himself has admitted, cannot be the meaning of the 
passage. 

But is the rule universal? May there not be exceptions, in which 
the affirmations that refer to generic terms, relate to the species 
as a whole, and not to the individuals? That there are exceptions, 
is admitted. A sentence may be so constructed that, if interpreted 
according to the rule, it makes no sense, or a sense known not to 
have been intended by the writer: we are, therefore, compelled to 
account it an exception. Sucha sentence Mr. Courtney has given 
us: “ The jury is ‘built’ upon the ‘rock’ of the constitution, and 
the councils of tyrants can never ‘prevail against’ or overthrow 
it.” This sentence does not conform to the rule. It was con- 
structed for the purpose of furnishing a parallel to the words of 
Christ: but we may well doubt whether Mr. Courtney himself would 
ever write such a sentence in the ordinary course of composition. 
Besides, it does not appear that the sentence expresses what is 
required by its supposed parallelism to the words of Christ. The 
promise of perpetuity to the church had not failed, when corruption 
overspread all the earth, except in the valleys of Piedmont, or the 
mountains of Wales. But if tyranny had banished the mode of 
trial by jury from all the earth except in a single obscure court, 
would any writer say, The jury is built, &., and the councils of 
tyrants have not prevailed against it? Any one who should speak 
or write thus, would depart from all the usual forms of language. 

Another difficulty still remains, arising from the use of the pro- 
noun my: “I will build my church.” Although the phrase, the 
horse, may be used generically, the phrase, my horse, is never so 
used; and the presence of the pronoun is very unfavorable to the 
interpreting of “my church” as generic. Mr. C. thinks that the 
juries in the dominions of Queen Victoria, acting by her authority, 
may be generically called her jury: but if her Majesty, in an 
address to Parliament, should say, “ My jury is built on the rock 


ss 


MEMBERSHIP. 105 


of the constitution, and the councils of tyrants can never prevail 
against it,” we may well doubt whether her language would be 
understood. 

In the interpretation of Scripture, unusual forms of expression 
are never to be supposed without necessity; and the most natural 
interpretation, that interpretation which most nearly conforms to 
the usus loquendi, is always to be preferred. The difficulties which 
attend the interpretation of the text under consideration, when the 
phrase, my church, is taken generically, vanish when it is under- 
stood to be a collective term, including the whole body of Christ’s 
people in every age and country. 

The rule which has been given respecting generic nouns might 
be illustrated by innumerable examples. It is said of leviathan: 
“The arrow cannot make him flee.”’ The intrepidity here 
attributed to him, is attributed to each individual animal of the 
species. It belongs to the whole species, yet not to the whole as 
an aggregate body, but to every individual. We may say, “ The 
hyena is ferocious; and no human skill has ever tamed him.” The 
ferocity here attributed to the hyena belongs to each individual of 
the species; and the taming of any one hyena would falsify the 
assertion. On the same principle, the declaration of Christ, The 
gates of hell shall never prevail against it, cannot be true, if the 
pronoun “it” refer to church as a generic noun; for not only one, 
but many, very many, individuals of the genus have been prevailed 
against. 

Scarcely any rule of language is without exception. Men consult 
convenience in speaking or writing; and, when they have no fear 
of being misunderstood, they allow themselves much liberty in the 
use of words and forms of speech. If any one choose to try his 
skill in inventing sentences which will not conform to the rule that 
we have stated, he may succeed; but he will find, on careful ex- 
amination, that there is some peculiarity which allows the departure 
from rule. Mr. C. has very properly regarded the generic noun 
as “representative.” One individual is contemplated and spoken 
of, as representing every individual of the genus. If a noun, 
generic in its form, is so used as not to retain the “representative” 
character, but to denote the entire genus directly, and without 


1 Job xli, 28. 


106 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


representation, it becomes in fact a collective noun. It is possible 
to construct sentences of this kind, which will be apparent excep- 
tions to the rule; and if the text under consideration be an excep- 
tion of this kind, the word church, instead of being generic or 
representative, is collective. If the term “ church” signifies a 
local church, considered as a representative of all local churches, 
the promise that the gates of hell shall never prevail against it, 
must belong to every local church. But this is not true; and, 
therefore, the generic interpretation of the passage is inad- 
missible. 

“ Because I persecuted the church of God.” 1 “ Beyond measure 
I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it.” 2 « Concerning 
zeal persecuting the church.” 3 

These passages cannot be relied on for proof, that the significa- 
tion of the word church ever extends beyond the limits of a local 
assembly. During the time of Saul’s persecution, the only church 
in existence, so far as we have information in the sacred history, 
was the church of Jerusalem. Of this church he made havoc, and 
to this church the three texts above quoted may be understood to 
refer. But when it has been ascertained from other Scriptures, 
that, in some manner, the word obtains a more extended signifi- 
cation, the possibility is suggested that it may have a wider signi- 
fication in these texts. Paul does not say that he persecuted the 
church which was at Jerusalem. Although this was the only church 
in existence at the time of his persecution, many others had 
been planted before he wrote these words. Had his mind, in 
speaking of his persecutions, been fixed on the church at Jerusa- 
Jem as a local assembly, it would have been natural to distinguish 
it from the numerous other local churches that had afterwards 
originated. When Paul wrote, the church at Jerusalem was no 
longer the church, but only one of the churches. Tt is, therefore, 
probable that he used the phrase, the church, in its wide significa- 
tion; and the question again comes up, How does it obtain this 
extended signification? Is it as a collective or as a generic term? 

When Christ met Saul on his way to Damascus, he said to hin, 
“ Why persecutest thou me? Iam Jesus whom thou persecutest.”” 
The meaning of this language may be learned from the words 


norms ne 


1 1 Cor. xv. 9. * Gal. i, 13. 5 Phil. iii. 6. 


MEMBERSHIP. 107 


which, we are informed, he will use on the last day, ‘ Inasmuch 
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, 
ye have done it unto me.”! His charge was brought against 
Saul, because he persecuted his followers, the members of his 
mystical body. This persecution is explained elsewhere : “ Many 
of the saints did I shut up in prison. And when they were put to 
death, I gave my voice against them. And I punished them oft 
in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being 
exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even to strange 
cities.” * The saints were the objects of Saul’s persecution, and 
not an institution of Christ called the church. It was not the 
institution that he put into prison, condemned to death, and com- 
pelled to blaspheme, but “men and women;” were the objects of 
his hatred and fury. He did not persecute the institution, either 
as the individual institution in Jerusalem, or as a genus, of which 
this individual institution served as a specimen and representative. 
But he persecuted the saints; and the term church denotes the 
saints in no other way than as a collective noun. As a generic term, 
the word church could not denote the object of the persecution. 
As in the former case, so in this, Mr. O. constructs a sentence 
which he considers parallel to the words of Paul. ‘Iam a cotton 
planter, and yet I am not worthy to be called a cotton planter, 
because, some twenty years ago, I was bitterly opposed to Whitney 
and the cotton-gin.” Here the name cotton-gin is clearly generic. . 
The object of dislike is the machine or organ, and not the wood and 
iron which composed it. Just so, if the persecution of Saul was 
directed against the church generically understood, it was against 
the church as an organization, and not against the men and women 
who were members of it. But the exceeding madness of Saul was 
against the persons, not against their ecclesiastical organization. 
In the sentence, “I persecuted the church and wasted it,” 
there is a peculiarity which deserves to be noticed. As the object 
of persecution, the term church conveys plurality of idea; for the 
persecution fell on the individual members, and not on the body 
as a unit: but as the object of the wasting, unity of idea is pre- 
sented ; for it was the body, and not each individual member, that 


was laid waste. This two-fold use i hae OS is 


1 Matt. xxv. 40. 


108 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


known concerning collective nouns, and recognised in the rule of 
gramar-before cited; but it ill accords with the usage respecting 
generic nouns. A cotton planter might hate and oppose the cotton- 
gin as a genus; but how he could lay it waste generically or repre- 
sentatively is not clear. No good writer would say, he destroyed 
the snake and the tree in the island, using the terms snake and tree 
generically ; but, to express the meaning in language which usage 
approves, he would say, “he destroyed the snakes and the trees in 
the island.” Other sentences may be constructed in which the 
uncouthness of such generic use of nouns may be less apparent, 
but it is never in accordance with prevalent usage. Common sense, 
which Mr. Courtney very highly and very justly commends, seeks 
to interpret language according to common usage; and it will 
naturally and readily understand Paul to mean that he wasted the 
church by persecuting its members; and, therefore, conceived of 
the church as a collection of men, and used the name by which he 
designated it as a collective, and not as a generic noun. 

The distinction between an organization, and the individuals 
composing it, is very strongly drawn by Mr. C. when he inveighs 
against various ecclesiastical organizations of the present day, and 
charges them with being rebels against Christ; but, at the same 
time, explains, that he does not make this charge against the in- 
dividual members. If common sense will keep this distinction 
steadily in view, when interpreting the texts under consideration, 
it will clearly perceive, that the object of Paul’s hatred and per- 
secution was not the organization, but the men and women, whom 
he regarded as worthy of death; not because of the organization, 
but because of their being Christians. 

“ To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in 
heavenly places, might be known by the church the -manifold wis- 
dom of God.’’! 

“Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout 
all ages, world without end. Amen.’’2 

Mr. Courtney thinks the term church used generically in both 
these passages. According to his custom, he constructs sentences 
which he regards as parallel. The first is: “In order that unto 
kings and princes, in their palaces and on their thrones, might be 


—— a_a L ŘŘŘŮÁ 
1 Eph. iii. 10, ? Eph. iii. 21, 


MEMBERSHIP. 109 


` made known through the engine [steam-engine] the manifold skill 
of the inventor.” As the skill of the mechanic is exhibited in the 
construction of the steam-engine, so the wisdom of God is exhibited 
to the admiration of angels in the institution of the church; that 
is, of local churches as a genus. This he understands to be the 
import of the first passage. 

Paul’s mind, when he penned this chapter, was filled with grand 
subjects—the unsearchable riches of Christ, the love of Christ 
which passeth knowledge, and the manifold wisdom of God. In 
the beginning of the epistle, he had spoken of the great scheme of 
salvation, in which God “has abounded toward us in all wisdom 
and prudence.” This wonderful scheme, in which Christ is exhi- 
bited as the wisdom of God, and into which the angels, those 
bright intelligences that have long contemplated the wisdom of 
God in creation and providence, desire to look, that they may 
learn the higher wisdom displayed in redemption; this wonderful 
scheme, in all its glorious provisions, was still before the mind of 
Paul when he wrote the third chapter of the epistle. The whole 
context proves this. It was the wisdom of God in the redemption 
and salvation of the universal church, that, in his view, engaged 
the attention of angels. How does the sublimity of the thought 
vanish, in Mr. Courtney’s interpretation of the passage! It re- 
presents the angels as learning the manifold wisdom of God, from 
the institution of local churches, and their adaptedness to the pur- 
poses for which they were designed. These bright spirits leave 
their celestial abodes, and come down to contemplate a local church 
of the right order, and admire the manifold wisdom of God in the 
contrivance of such a machinery; and its superiority to the eccle- 
siastical organizations of human contrivance. Lest my reader 
may suspect that I misrepresent Mr. Courtney’s interpretation of 
the text, I will quote his words :— 

“ The idea in the first of these two passages is, that the angels 
of God, who are elsewhere called principalities and powers, might 
look at this wonderful contrivance of Jesus Christ for the execu- 
tion of his laws, and the promotion of the comfort and piety of his 
people, and see in it evidences of the wisdom of God. It was a 
divine contrivance, and characterized by infinite wisdom. Nothing 
else could possibly have done so well. Men have not believed this. 
Men have all the time been tinkering at God’s plan and trying 


110 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


to mend it. Men have set it aside, and substituted others in its 
place ; but to the angels it appears the very perfection of wisdom. 
And it was one object of God in having the church established, 
that his wisdom might, through it, be known to those heavenly 
powers-and principalities. But now, what was this plan? What 
was this church? It was, as we have seen, a local assembly, in 
which each member was the equal of every other, and by whom, 
in the name of Christ, and by authority from him, his ordinances 
were to be administered, and his laws enforced.” 

The sentence constructed as a parallel to the other text, is ag 
follows: “ Let the poetry of Shakspeare be honored in the theatre 
by managers and actors, even to the end of time.” We make no 
objection to this sentence, but its parallelism to the text fails in an 
important particular. Paul did not say, “ Be glory in the church 
to the end of time.” Local churches, like theatres, exist only in 
the present world; and when the end of time arrives, they will 
cease to exist. It is therefore impossible that this text should 
refer to local churches, either as a genus, or as individuals; for it 
speaks of glory in the church, world without end. 

Several passages in the New Testament speak of the church as 
identical with THE BODY oF CurRist. It, therefore, becomes im- 
portant in our present inquiry, to investigate the meaning of this 
last phrase. Mr. Courtney commences this investigation, by 
citing Romans xii. 4, 5: “ As we have many members in one 
body, and all members have not the same office, so we being many, 
are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.” 

From this passage, we learn that the body of Christ is not a 
conglomeration of all the local churches. They who hold this 
opinion, may defend it from the arguments of Mr. Courtney, as 
best they can. The members of Christ’s body are individual 
Christians, and not churches: but the question remains, whether 
it includes all Christians, or only some of them. Mr. C. thinks it 
perfectly clear that, in this passage, it signifies only the saints who 
were members of the church at Rome, to whom this epistle was 
addressed; and he quotes, as decisive on this point, the words, “I 
say to every man that is among you,” ! putting the pronoun “ you” 
in small capitals. But this is not the only pronoun which might be 
an kA a T 

a Veo. 


MEMBERSHIP. 131 


so distinguished in the passage. Paul says, “ Wr, being many, are 
one body in Christ,” ! including himself among the members of 
Christ’s body, to which the saints at Rome belonged. But Paul 
was not a member of the local church at Rome. When he wrote this 
epistle, he had never seen that church; but expected to see them 
for the first time, when he should make his contemplated journey 
into Spain.? It is hence clear, that the body of Christ included 
more than the members of that local church. The same may be in- 
ferred from ver. 13, “distributing to the necessities of saints.” The 
kind affections, which Paul enjoined on them to exercise, were not 
to be confined to the saints at Rome, as if they only were members of 
this body; but all saints were to be accounted co-members with them, 
and entitled to their sympathies. This appears also in the words, 
“given to hospitality.” Rome was the centre of the Roman 
empire, the great city of the world, to which men flocked from all 
nations; and the hospitality here enjoined, must be understood to 
have for its objects, not the members of that local church only, 
but all the disciples of Christ who might visit the metropolis. 

Mr. Courtney’s exposition of the phrase “the body of Christ,” 
is liable to a serious and fatal objection. It converts the beautiful 
figure which the Holy Spirit employs to represent the union be- 
tween Christ and his people, into a monster, having one head and 
many bodies. Every local church is considered a body of Christ; 
and he is therefore the head of as many bodies, as there are local 
churches in the world. In Paul’s view, Christ’s body is one, and 
not many, though consisting of many members. “ We, being many, 
are one body.” His doctrine contemplates one God, one Lord, one 
Spirit, one faith, one hope, one baptism, and also one body ;5 but 
the doctrine of Mr. C. destroys the last of these seven unities, and 
makes it, not one, but thousands. 

The doctrine of Mr. C. cannot be relieved from this objection, 
by the consideration that the churches, though many, are gene- 
rically one. The members of the church at Rome, were members 
of a particular, and not of a generic church. A generic church 
cannot have actual existence, any more than a generic horse, 
which is neither black, white, bay, nor speckled; but exists only as 
a mental conception. Mr. C. objects strongly to the opinion, that 


ea S 


BV ok 2 Rom, xv. 24, 3 Eph. iv. 4—6. 


112 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


the term church denotes the church universal, because, he alleges, 
that this universal body exists only in the imagination; but this 
misapplied objection falls with crushing weight on his own ideal 
church generic. 

“Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.” ? 
As the other body of Christ means, according to Mr. C., the 
church at Rome, this body of Christ means the church at Corinth. 
The same difficulty as before, recurs here. Paul considered him- 
self a member of the church here intended: “ By one Spirit are 
WE all baptized into one body.’’? And it appears,’ that he was 
not the only apostle whose membership was in this church: “ God 
hath set some in the church; first, apostles.” Peter had a party in 
this church, who said, “ We are of Cephas;’’* but no one has hence 
` inferred, that Peter’s church-membership was at Corinth—and 
there is as little proof that Paul and Apollos, though made heads 
of factions there, had membership in that particular locality. Paul 
does indeed say to the Corinthians, ‘‘ Ye are the body of Christ ;” 
but he says also, “ By one Spirit are WE all baptized into one 
body.” Paul contemplated the saints at Corinth, as members 
with himself and all the apostles, of that one body in which the 
one Spirit operated; and by whose operation, all, whether Jews or 
Gentiles, are brought into one body. So it is said in another place, 
“He hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us 
[Jews and Gentiles], to make in himself of twain one new man, 
and that he might reconcile both unto God in one body.”* This 
one body, this one new man, was not the local church at Corinth, 
or any other local church, or the church generic; but the univer- 
sal church, the body of which Christ is the head, and all his people 
are members. 

“ And gave him to be head over all things to the church, 
which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.” 6 
This passage declares the church, and the body of Christ, to be 
identical; and what is affirmed, by no means agrees with the sup- 
position that the body intended, is a local chureh, the church at 
Ephesus. Christ was not made head over all things, for the special 
benefit of this church; and this church was not the fulness of him 


11 Cor. xii. 27. 3V. 18. 3 V, 28, 
“1 Cor. 1, 12. 8 Eph. ii. 14, 16. 6 Eph. i. 22, 23. 


MEMBERSHIP, 113 


that filleth all in all. Nor can this passage refer to the church 
generic. The nouns in apposition, “ body and fulness,” forbid this 
interpretation. The word body is generic in the phrase “ the body 
without the Spirit is dead,” and the generic use of it in this case, 
is apparent to common sense; but common sense cannot compre- 
hend how the body of Christ can be generic. His literal body 
was not a genus; and to suppose his mystic body to be a genus, 
perplexes common sense, and obscures plain Scripture. The word 
“ fulness” is abstract; and to take it generically, requires a gene- 
ralization of abstractions which confounds common sense. Besides, 
if “the church” signifies the church at Ephesus, or any other local 
church, as a representative of the genus, it follows that each par- 
ticular church, however small, is the fulness of him that filleth all 
in all. This notion, therefore, multiplies not only the body of 
Christ, but also the divine fulnesses, to an extent equal to the 
number of local churches ; but the context leads to the true inter- 
pretation of the passage —an interpretation simple, clear, and free 
from all obscurity. The grand scheme of redemption and salva- 
tion by Christ, filled the expanded mind of Paul. The gathering 
together of all things in Christ, the riches of the glory of his in- 
heritance in the saints, and the admission of the Gentiles to be fol- 
low-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God, are 
subjects which engaged his thoughts, and burst forth from his full 
soul, in the sublime language in which he here writes. And who 
are the saints that constitute Christ’s inheritance, among whom 
the Ephesians had been admitted as fellow-citizens? Unquestion- 
ably not the church at Ephesus. They can be no other than the 
whole redeemed people of Christ, the whole household of faith. 
Jews and Gentiles were united under the gospel; constituted one 
fold, under Christ, the one shepherd; one body, of which he is 
the head; one family, gathered together in him; one house, over 
which he, the Son, presides. This body was not a local church. 
The epistle to the Hebrews was not addressed to a local church; 
and Paul says of all the Hebrew Christians, “ Whose house are we, 
if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm 
unto the end.”' Amongst these Hebrew Christians, believing 
Gentiles had been received into the same family as members of the 


1 Heb. iii. 6. 


114 1HE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


same household, To this united family, the entire household, the 
whole context alludes; and any interpretation which turns the 
thought from this great body, to a local church, is wholly unsuited 
to ‘the subject of the apostle’s discourse. 

In commenting on the last verse of the third chapter, we argued 
that the church there referred to cannot be local, either particular 
or generic, because it is to endure world without end. The same 
argument applies to the interpretation of the phrase, the body of 
Christ. If it signifies a local church, or the genus of local churches, 
it is not immortal and indivisible. If the church at Rome was the 
body of Christ referred to in Rom. xii., that body saw corruption. 
Every local church, and the genus of local churches, will cease to 
exist ; and the mystical body of Christ, according to this interpre- 
tation, will cease to exist, having yielded to dissolution. The pro- 
mise that the Lord would not suffer his Holy One to see corruption, 
was fulfilled in respect of his flesh; much more may we expect it 
to be fulfilled, in respect of his spiritual body. 

In the context, Paul refers to the church under other figures: 
“a building ;”’ “the whole building; “a holy temple.” These 
figures do not present to our view an edifice, or genus of edifices, 
temporary as local churches ; but a structure that, with the foun- 
dation on which it is built, will endure for ever. It is no objection 
to this view, that the indefinite article is used in the phrases, “a 
holy temple,” “a habitation of God.” Mr. ©. notices this last 
phrase, and seems to infer from it that God has many such habita- 
tions. But the inference is unauthorized. He who says that God 
is an infinite being, does not authorize the inference that there are 
many infinite beings. 

The fourth chapter of the epistle abounds with the same subject, 
and exhibits it clearly and impressively. Paul exhorts the Ephe- 
sians to keep the unity of the Spirit. This one Spirit was not 
confined to the local church at Ephesus; but actuated the saints 
everywhere. He adds: “For there is one body, and one Spirit; 
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling.’’! The oneness 
of the body, like that of the Spirit which vitalized and actuated 
it, was not confined to this local church, but included all who were 
called with “the one calling.” The church at Ephesus does not 


a Sa E Nl tr Ag rd ao 
rY. 4, 


MEMBERSHIP. 114 


appear to have included any of the apostles among its members: 
but the one body of which Paul speaks had apostles in it, with 
other ministers, who were designed by the head of the church for 
the perfecting of the saints, the edifying of the body of Christ. 
All the saints are included in this body; and the design was, that 
“all should come in the unity of the faith, unto a perfect man, 
unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.” Christ’s 
body is to be perfect and complete; and all the ministry, appointed 
and given by the ascended Saviour, was designed to effect this: 
but all the labor of these is not expended on any one local church. 
The conception of one head with many bodies never entered Paul’s 
mind; but, in his view, as the head is one, so the whole body is 
one. 

In the fifth chapter, we meet again with the same subject: “The 
husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the 
church ; and he is the Saviour of the body.’’! Here the church is 
again presented to view as the one body, of which Christ is the 
one head and Saviour; and there is no intimation that the church 
is more than one. Everything which follows in the chapter respect- 
ing the church, agrees with its unity: ‘“‘ Husbands, love your wives, 
even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it; that 
he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the 
word; that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not 
having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. * * * * * No man ever 
yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as 
the Lord the church: for we are members of his body, of his 
flesh, and of his bones. For this cause shall a man leave his father 
and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall 
be one flesh. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning 
Christ and the church.” ? 

Mr. Courtney thinks he finds a key to the interpretation of all 
this in the words first quoted: “‘the husband is the head of the 
wife.’ As the wife here referred to is not any one wife in par- 
ticular, but is to be understood generically, so, he thinks, the church 
is to be understood generically throughout the passage. But at 
verse 28, the generic form of speech is dropped, with respect to 
the wife, and the plural substituted: “so ought men to love their 


or 


1V, 23. 2 Eph, v. 25—32. $ V, 23. 


116 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


wives as their own bodies.” Yet the plural churches is nowhere 
found in the passage. When the husband is singular, the wife is 
singular; and when husbands are spoken of in the plural, wives 
also are mentioned in the plural. This accords with what is said 
elsewhere: ‘Let every man have his own wife, and let every woman 
have her own husband.”! When one of these correlative terms is 
used generically, the other is also used generically. When Christ 
and the church are named together, Christ is not generic, and yet 
the church is supposed to be. Christ, as the husband of the church, 
is one; but the church, as the wife of Christ, is, according to the 
interpretation, not one, but a genus—a whole family of wives ! 
This polygamy, introduced into the interpretation of Paul's words, 
is wholly discountenanced by the scope of the discourse, and par- 
ticularly by the clause, “and present it to himself a glorious 
church’’—one glorious church, and not a family of churches. 

But Mr. C.’s interpretation represents the object of Christ’s 
conjugal love as the institution. Though the churches are many, 
the institution is but one; and in this view, the notion of polygamy 
is excluded. But the institution, apart from the churches instituted, 
is a mere abstraction: and is the bride of Christ a mere abstrac- 
tion? Is it an abstraction that Christ loved and gave himself for, 
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water 
by the word? It was not an abstraction that he designed to per- 
fect and present to himself. He did not expend his love and suf- 
ferings to perfect the ecclesiastical institution. Nor was it his 
design to perfect the instituted churches, and present them to him- 
self as a glorious family of churches. The object to be presented 
is a church. The bride, the Lamb’s wife, is but one. Another 
consideration effectually excludes Mr. C.’s interpretation of this 
passage. The presentation of Christ’s bride to him is reserved for 
the future world, when the marriage supper of the Lamb will be 
celebrated. But then, according to Mr. C.’s interpretation, Christ 
will have no bride; for local churches, as individuals and as a genus, 
will not then exist. 

« And fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in 
my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church.” ? 

This passage agrees with Eph. i. 22, 23, in declaring that the 


—_—_——— —————————— -evlcC_wOC) }H3OUMm6»—»—— 


11 Cor. vii. 2. 2 Col, i. 24, 


MEMBERSHIP. 117 


church and the body of Christ are identical. What was said on 
the other text, is applicable to this. 

“ I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the 
church will I sing praise unto thee.” ! 

“ But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the 
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable com- 
pany of angels, to the general assembly and church of the first- 
born, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, 
and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the medi- 
ator of the new covenant.’’? í 

These two passages present much difficulty to the advocates of 
the generic theory. The first of them contains two parallel clauses, 
in which “my brethren” and “the church” are corresponding 
phrases, and signify the same persons. The brethren of Christ 
are the “many sons” whom he, as the captain of their salvation, 
is conducting to glory. He declares God’s name to the brethren, 
and in the midst of the church, the assembly of these brethren, he 
celebrates the praise of God. This is the church universal; for 
he says, concerning them, in presenting them to the Father, “ Be- 
hold, I and the children which God hath given me.” This cannot 
be consistently interpreted of a local church, either single or 
generic. 

The other text describes the same company, not on their way to 
glory, but already arrived in the heavenly city. To them all, as 
the brethren of Christ, and sharers of the glory which the Father 
had given him, and joint heirs with him of the inheritance, belong 
all the dignity and rights of first-born sons. Their names are 
enrolled as citizens of the New Jerusalem. Believers on earth are 
citizens of the same city: “ The Jerusalem which is above is free, 
which is the mother of us all.”’> Our citizenship is above. We 
are made “‘ fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of 
God.” Paul says, concerning the saints yet on earth: “ Ye are 
come to the church of the first-born.” All make one household, 
one church. Some having already arrived, and others on the way. 
The river Jordan separated two and a half tribes of ancient Israel, 
on the one side, from the remaining tribes who were on the other 


1 Heb. ii, 12. 2 Heb. xii, 22—24. 5 V. 10. 
‘V. 13, 5 Gal. iv. 26. 6 Eph. ii. 19. 


118 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


side; but they constituted one nation, and they united as one, in 
their festal assemblies, in the earthly Jerusalem. So death sepa- 
rates the saints below from the saints above ; but they are one—one 
company, one church; and the heavenly Jerusalem is the place of 
their joyful meeting in one glorious and happy assembly. This is 
the church in which there will be glory to God by Jesus Christ, 
throughout all ages, world without end. 

The text last considered shows clearly the propriety of applying 
the term ecclesia to the entire body of the saints. Though they 
do not meet in one assembly on earth, they belong to the assembly 
above, and are on their way to join it. They have been called out 
of the world, with the heavenly calling which is the summons to 
meet in the assembly. In obedience to this summons, they quit 
the world, count themselves no more of it, and are on their march. 
to the city of which they claim to be citizens, and to the company 
with which they are to be eternally united. As the church at 
Corinth were an ecclesia, considered as bound to assemble in one 
place, though not actually assembled; so believers in Christ, con- 
sidered as bound for heaven and on their way thither, are one 
ecclesia with the saints who have already arrived at the place of 
final meeting. 

Some have thought that the extended sense of the word is meta- 
phorical; like body, flock, fold, house, temple, applied to the same 
subject. They suppose it to mean the whole body of Christ’s dis- 
ciples, not literally assembled, but bearing a relation to each other, 
similar to that which the members of a local church bear to each 
other. But, on the general principle of interpretation, the literal 
meaning is to be preferred whenever the subject admits it. The 
other terms cannot be taken literally; but a literal assembly of 
Christ’s disciples is not only possible, but is expected by all of 
them, and is in part the hope of their calling. Besides, if we have 
not mistaken the sense of the passage last considered, this literal 
assembly is presented to view in it, and the relation which the saints 
on earth bear to the church above. To this may be added, that the 
term church is used as explanatory of the metaphorical phrase 
the body of Christ, a use to which it would be less adapted if the 
terms are alike figurative. But the question concerning the reason 


et Se ee eee 
1 Eph. iii. 21. - 


MEMBERSHIP. 119 


of applying the term to denote the universal church, is wholly 
distinct from the question whether a universal church exists. The 
first question may remain undecided, without affecting in the least 
the doctrine concerning the existence and nature of the universal] 
church. 

In the first use of the term ecclesia that occurs in the New 
Testament,! it denotes the church universal. No Jocal church at 
that time existed; and it is, therefore, improbable that the appli- 
cation of the term to the universal church, should be a metaphor 
derived from its local signification. When the first church at 
Jerusalem was formed, it included, for a considerable time, all the 
disciples of Christ, and was the universal church, as far as it was 
practicable for that body to be assembled on earth. The distinc- 
tion of local churches never existed until the church at Jerusalem 
was scattered: it is, therefore, improbable that the name of the uni- 
versal body was derived from that of the particular associations 
subsequently formed. Even the term, as contained in Christ’s 
directions,” was first applicable to the one church at Jerusalem, 
and was not applicable to the separate local churches until the first 
church had become dispersed. 

The most remarkable use of ecclesia as a classical word, is its 
application to the democratic assemblies of the Grecian cities. It 
is not to be supposed that the name given to those assemblies, 
implied in itself the powers of the assemblies or the qualifications 
to membership in them. It would be useless, therefore, to look to 
the mere word for information respecting the qualifications of 
church members, or the nature and design of ecclesiastical organi- 
zations. It denoted, in the political use of it, the assembly of all 
those who had the full rights of citizenship; and the place of 
assembling was in the city to which they belonged, These particu- 
lars agree well with the application of the term to the church 
universal, which includes all the citizens of the heavenly Jerusa- 
lem, whose place of meeting is in the glorious city. 

In the Septuagint, the word is applied to the body called in the 
Hebrew Scriptures the Congregation of the Lord. This use of it 
corresponds better with the Christian use in application to. the 
universal church, than to local churches. The Hebrew ecclesia 


1 Matt xvi. 18, 2 Matt. xviii. 17. 


120 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


was the assembly of all in the whole nation, who could lawfully 
unite in the worship of Jehovah according to the forms prescribed 
in the ceremonial law. The place of this general meeting was in 
the city Jerusalem. In this city the first Christian ecclesia assem- 
bled. It consisted of Jews, who were attached to their holy city, 
their temple, and the forms of worship to which they had been 
accustomed. At first they had no conception that gentiles were 
to be admitted to equal privileges in the Christian dispensation ; 
and they probably expected that Jerusalem was to be the great 
centre of Christian worship, as it had been for the people of Israel ; 
but persecution soon taught them their mistake. Driven from the 
city of their affections, and scattered abroad through the earth, 
they learned to look to another city in which they were to unite 
in the worship of God, beyond the reach of persecution. They 
regarded themselves as strangers and pilgrims in the earth, trayel- 
ling to the city prepared for them by God. As the Israelites, 
members of the Congregation of the Lord, had been accustomed 
to travel from all parts of the land which they inhabited, to appear 
before the Lord in Jerusalem, and to keep their sacred feasts in 
his presence; so the spiritual Israel are on their pilgrimage to the 
heavenly Jerusalem, to unite in the great congregation, and 
enjoy the bliss which God has prepared for them. The pious 
Hebrews, when journeying to their holy city, longed to appear 
before God in the great congregation; and often directed their 
prayers towards his holy temple. In this distant worship, little 
companies of them would naturally unite in the exercise of like 
affections, and for mutual encouragement and benefit. So the 
Christian pilgrims to the heavenly Jerusalem unite in temporary 
associations, for the worship of God and their spiritual good. 
Such are the local churches in which they unite on earth. 
Although the term church occurs much more frequently in the 
New Testament in its application to local churches, than to the 
church universal; yet it is apparent on the face of the sacred 
pages, that membership in this was far more important than in 
those. Little is anywhere said of membership in a local church; 
but the common recognition of Christians is as members of the 
church universal, the great brotherhood: “Of this way,’’? “the 
reece ee ee 


1 Acts xi. 2. 


VISIBILITY. ARAL 


sect everywhere spoken against,”! “having their names in the 
- book of life.”* Phebe is mentioned as “a servant of the church at 
Cenchrea,” but she is also recognised as “ our sister,” 3 and this 
relation to the great fraternity, the universal family, has every- 
where the chief prominence. 

Thus far we have had no occasion for the distinction which theo- 
logians have made between the church visible and the church invi- 
sible. We have supposed all who profess Christ to be true believ- 
ers. In apostolic times, the exceptions were comparatively few ; 
and, moreover, in those days, true believers did not delay to receive 
baptism, the appointed ordinance of profession. In this state of 
things, there was no practical necessity for the distinction referred 
to; and the apostle addressed the professors of religion who com- 
posed the churches, as true saints, members of the universal eccle- 
sia, citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, heirs of the incorruptible 
inheritance. 

In this state of things which we have contemplated, the church 
universal includes all the local churches; but yet it does not include 
them as organizations. We have before noticed, that the members 
of the universal church are individual Christians, and not local 
churches. Moreover, all the local churches taken together do not 
make up the church universal; for it includes the saints in heaven 
as well as those on earth. Besides, there may be saints on earth, 
as the Ethiopian eunuch, who belong to the family of saints, and 
have not yet been received into any local church. 


Section II—VISIBILITY. 


THE MEMBERS OF THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH ARE KNOWN BY THEIR 
PROFESSION OF CHRIST AND THEIR OBEDIENCE TO HIS COMMANDS. 

The religion of Christ was not designed for concealment. From 
its very nature, it cannot be hid. It inclines every one who pos- 
sesses it, to do good to all mankind, and to make known the gospel 
by which all mankind are to be blessed. At every point of con- 
tact with human society, Christian benevolence will exhibit itself. 


1 Acts xxviii. 22. 2 Phil. iv. 3. 3 Rom. xvi 1, 


122 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


Christ’s followers are described as lights in the world.! They are 
a candle which is lighted, not to be put under a bushel, but that it 
may give light to all who are in the house.? They are a city ona 
hill, which cannot be hid. They are commanded, ‘ Let your light 
so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glo- 
rify your Father which is in heaven.”* Their obedience to this 
command has distinguished them in all ages, and made them visible 
to the world. 

The disciples of Christ are bound to profess their attachment to 
him before the world. This obligation is taught in such passages 
as the following: “If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord 
Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him 
from the dead, thou shalt be saved.” 5 “ Whosoever shall confess 
me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is 
in heaven.” ê 

But something more than mere profession is necessary to dis- 
tinguish the true followers of Christ. Many say Lord, Lord, who 
do not the things which he has commanded. To such persons, 
however loudly they may profess his name, he will say, “ Depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity.”” He recognises those only as 
his followers who are obedient to his precepts; and he has taught 
us to recognise them in the same manner: “ By their fruits ye shall 
know them.’ “Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I com- 
mand you.”® A life of holy obedience to Christ is readily distin- 
guishable from the common course of this world; and where it is 
exhibited, men cannot fail to see it. 

The visibility of the church consists in the visibility of its mem- 
bers. Our Divine Master came, “a light into the world;” and all 
his followers are lights; some of them burning and shining lights, 
and others stars of less magnitude. But, as the constellations of 
heaven have no other light to render them visible than that which 
the several stars emit, so it is with the church. All its light is the 
light of its members, and all its visibility depends on their lustre. 

Writers on theology have distinguished between the church 
visible, and the church invisible ; but a church in this world to be 


re a nee ee ee S 


1 Phil. ii, 15, 2 Matt. v. 15. 3 Matt. v. 14. 
t Matt. v. 16. 5 Rom. x. 9. € Matt. x. 32. 
1 Matt. vii. 21, 23. 8 Matt. vii. 20. ? John xy. 14, 


| 


VISIBILITY. 123 


invisible must consist, not of children of light, but of those whose 
light is darkness. Were we to use these designations according to 
their proper import, we might call the saints in heaven the in- 
visible church, because they are removed beyond the reach of 
human sight; and the saints on earth, the visible church, because 
they still remain on earth to enlighten this dark world. But the 
saints above and the saints below, make only one communion, one 
church; and theologians, when they mean to distinguish these two 
parts of the one whole from each other, are accustomed to call 
them the church militant and the church triumphant. By the 
church invisible, they mean all true Christians; and by the church 
visible, all those who profess the true religion. The invisible 
consists wholly of those who are sons of light; and the visible in- 
cludes sons of light and sons of darkness in one community. We 
have seen that Christ does not recognise mere professors as his 
disciples, and that he has taught us not so to recognise them. A 
universal church, therefore, which consists of all who profess the 
true religion, is a body which Christ does not own. To be visible 
saints, a holy life must be superadded to a profession of the true 
religion; and they who do not exhibit the light of a holy life, 
whatever their professions may be, have no scriptural claim to be 
considered members of Christ’s church. 

Membership in a local church, is not always coincident with 
membership in the church universal. This appears on the one 
hand, in the fact that the pure light of a holy life may sometimes 
be so successfully counterfeited, as to deceive mankind. Paul has 
taught us, that Satan may transform himself into an angel of light ; 
and that it is no marvel, if his ministers do the same.! John 
says, “ They went out, that they might be made manifest that they 
were not all of us;’’* and we hence infer, that they were not mani- 
fest before. But this passage teaches us, that their profession of 
religion, and their successful imitation of the Christian life, were 
not enough. It was still true, “ they were not of us.” Simon, the 
sorcerer, was thought for a time to be a convert; but when his 
true character was disclosed, Peter decided, ‘Thou hast neither 
part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight 
of God.”* If mere profession rendered him a member of the uni- 


12 Cor. xi. 14, 15. 21 John ii, 19. 3 Acts viii 21. 


124. THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


versal church, his membership in it was not affected by the dis- 
covery that his heart was not right, so long as his profession was 
not renounced. If membership in the local church at Samaria 
rendered him a member of the universal church, the local church 
had not disowned him. When Paul would have the incestuous 
person at Corinth excommunicated from that local church, he did 
not pronounce the sentence of excommunication by his apostolic 
authority; but left it with the church to perform the act.! So 
Peter did not use his apostolic authority, to exclude the sorcerer 
from the church at Samaria; but pronounced on his relation to 
the whole community of the saints. It is hence apparent that 
membership in a local church may be superadded to profession in 
those who have no part in the matter. They of whom John says, 
“ They were not of us,” were for a time members of some local 
church; and so are many to whom the Saviour will say in the 
last day, “I never knew you.” 

On the other hand, men sometimes judge too unfavorably. The 
church at Jerusalem was unwilling, for a time, to receive the con- 
verted Saul as a true disciple; but the Lord Jesus had received 
him, and given him the place of an apostle in his universal church. 

Notwithstanding the errors which human judgment may commit 
in individual cases, it still remains true, that the light of piety is 
visible. Time often corrects these errors. The sorcerer, and 
John’s false professors, were made manifest; and the conversion 
of Saul to the faith which he once destroyed, became universally 
admitted. Doubtless there are cases which will not be understood 
till the last judgment; but it nevertheless remains a general truth: 
“ By their fruits ye shall know them.” Because some cases are 
doubtful, and some may be mistaken, it does not follow that sin 
and holiness are undistinguishable, or that the world and the church 
are undistinguishable. 

The epithet “ invisible,” applied to the true church of Christ, is 
not only incorrect, but it has led into mistake. Men have spoken 
of this church as a mere mental conception; and they have asked, 
whether Saul persecuted an invisible church. They seek a church 
possessing more visibility than proceeds from Christian profession 
and a life of piety; and they find it, as they think, in some form 


dhe rere ene 


11 Cor. v. 4, 5. 


UNITY. 125 


of organization, which they deem necessary to constitute the church. 
- Such an organized body, they call the visible church. But Saul 
did not inquire, whether. those whom he persecuted, as professed 
followers of Christ, and devotedly attached to his cause and doc- 
trine, were also members of some external organization. He per- 
secuted them as Christian men and women. But the existence 
of such men and women, like the persecutions which they suffered, 
was something more than a mere mental conception. Organiza- 
tion is not necessary to visibility; much less is any particular 
species of it. Rocks and mountains are as visible as plants and 
animals. 


Section III—UNITY. 


THE UNITY OF THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH IS SPIRITUAL. 


Material bodies are formed by an aggregation of particles 
which have an attraction for each other. In like manner, living 
beings are brought together into bodies, or societies, by various 
attractions which subsist among them. Bees, birds, and various 
species of animals, exhibit the social propensity; and it operates 
in man, as a part of his natural constitution. Together with this 
innate tendency to seek society, the interests and necessities of 
men bind them together in various forms of association. In these 
cases, the principles of association are natural; and a new nature, 
or a new heart, is not indispensably requisite. But the church is 
a society, in which this qualification is indispensable. Its mem- 
bers are bound to one another by an attraction which is unfelt by 
men of the world: ‘‘If ye were of the world, the world would love 
his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen 
you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.’’? 

The distinctive principle which separates Christians from the 
world, and binds them together, is produced in them by the re- 
generating influence of the Holy Spirit. ‘The fruit of the 
Spirit is love.” ‘‘ Beloved, let us love one another; for love is of 
God.’’?_ * Every one that loveth is born of God.’”’* “ We know 
that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the 


1 John xv! 19; " 4Gal. y. 22. 81 Jóbniv. 7. 


126 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


brethren.” The same spiritual influence that sheds abroad the 
love of God in the heart, produces love to all who bear the image 
of God: “ He who loveth God, loveth his brother also.’’2 Brotherly 
love was especially enjoined on the followers of Christ, by their 
divine Master: “A new commandment I give unto you, that ye 
love one another.” 3 All who feel the love of Christ constraining 
them, are drawn by its influence to love those whom he loved, and 
gave himself for. Not only is brotherly love enjoined, but it flows 
spontaneously from the new heart: “But as touching brotherly 
love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye yourselves are 
taught of God to love one another.” 4 

Love, which is sometimes called charity in our translation of 
the Bible, is declared to be “the bond of perfectness.”° It binds 
all the people of God together, and makes them one. It is the 
essential principle of that sympathy, so beautifully described in 
1 Cor. xii., as subsisting between the various members of Christ’s 
body. It is this that cements the living stones of the spiritual 
temple, which as it groweth together, maketh increase of the body 
unto the edifying of itself in love. This was the principle of 
union in the first church at Jerusalem, of which it is recorded: 
“The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and one 
soul.’ Persecution drove the members of this church from one 
another; but it could not sever the tie that bound them together, 
and made them one. The love of the brethren was never confined 
to a local church. After Paul had said to the church of the Thes- 
salonians, “Concerning brotherly love, ye have no need that I 
writé™anto you,” he adds, “and indeed ye do it towards all the 
brethren which are in all Macedonia.”? Their love extended be- 
yond the boundaries of their church, into all the region round 
about. Wherever a child of God, a disciple of Jesus, was found, 
this love embraced him as one of the spiritual brotherhood. 
“ Every one that loveth him that begat, loveth him also that is 
begotten of him.” 8 

The bond of perfectness which unites the people of God on earth, 
makes them one with the church in heaven, who are made perfect 


eee 


11 John iii. 14, 2 1 John iv. 21 3 John xiii. 34. 
* 1 Thes. iv. 9. 5 Col. iii. 14; 6€ Acts iv. 32. 
11 Thes. iv. 10. ; 8 1 John v. 1. 


UNITY. 127 


in love. This grace is not destroyed by death, nor does death 
deprive it of its cementing power. Faith and hope may cease, and 
the unity of faith and the unity of hope belong more properly to 
the church on earth; but love never faileth, and the unity of love 
binds and will for ever bind all the redeemed together, as it binds 
them all to Christ. 

The attraction of love, which draws all the people of God to 
heaven, causes them, while on their way thither, to unite with each 
other, as they have opportunity, in the worship and service of God. 
Even without a divine command not to forsake the assembling of 
themselves together, grace within would incline them to form such 
societies. It is said of the first Christians, on the memorable day 
of Pentecost, “ They were all with one accord in one place.”! And 
when their number was greatly increased by the ministry of the 
word, it is said, “ All that believed were together.”? The word 
“together” is a translation of the same Greek phrase that is rendered 
in the first verse “in one place.” The new converts were of one 
heart and one soul with the original one hundred and twenty ; and 
formed with these one society accustomed to meet for the worship 
of God. The unity of this assembly was disturbed by persecution ; 
but the tendency to assemble was not destroyed. The disciples 
were scattered from Jerusalem; and we immediately after read of 
the churches in Judea, Galilee, and Samaria. The same principle 
of unity pervaded the whole body; and by it, from the necessity 
of the case, local churches were multiplied. 

The brotherly love which characterizes and unites the followers 
of Christ, has not for its object all who profess the true religion. 
Christ did not enjoin such exercise of it; but instructed his disciples 
to beware of wolves in sheep’s clothing. These dangerous intru- 
ders into the fold were to appear as professors of the true religion ; 
otherwise, it could not be said that they wore the clothing of sheep. 
Paul, in his last interview with the elders of the Ephesian church, 
gave a similar warning: “I know this, that after my departing 
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 
Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, 
to draw away disciples after them.”* He elsewhere speaks of false 
brethren, brought in unawares. If these false brethren had not 


1 Acts ii 1. 3? Acts ii. 44, ® Acts xx. 29, 30. 


128 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


professed the true religion, they could not have found entrance, 
even for a short time. Such agents of mischief are not the proper 
objects of brotherly love. Even the beloved disciple, whose heart 
was so full of love, and who urged the duty of brotherly love with 
the utmost earnestness, commanded to try the spirits; and directed, 
concerning such mischievous professors, not to receive them, nor 
bid them God speed.? 

Again, all who profess the true religion do not exercise the 
brotherly love of true Christians. The wolves in sheep’s clothing 
were enemies of the flock. Among others who had not their deadly 
designs, it was still true, even in the apostolic times, that iniquity 
abounded, and the love of many waxed cold.’ In later times, the 
pages of what is ealled church history give accounts that contrast 
painfully with the beautiful exhibitions of brotherly love found in 
the Holy Scripture. Those who, according to their profession, 
ought to have laid down their lives for the brethren, have, in mul- 
titudes of instances, persecuted them unto death; and, while pro- 
fessing the true religion, have shed the blood of the saints. 

From what has been said, it follows clearly that the church, the 
body of Christ, does not consist of all who profess the true religion. 
To constitute membership therein, the profession must proceed from 
love in the heart; in which case it will be manifested externally 
by obedience to his commandments. Only so far as this evidence 
of true discipleship appears, are we required, or even authorized, 
to exercise brotherly love. 


Secrion IV.—ORGAN IZATION. 


THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL HAS NO EXTERNAL ORGANIZATION. 

Organization has respect to action, and is an arrangement and 
adaptation of parts fitting them to act together to a common end. 
A society is said to be organized when its members are brought 
into such connection and relation, that they can act together as one 
body. A family is a society in which persons are connected with 
each other in the relations of husband and wife, parent and child. 
They act towards each other in these relations for the common 


=r AEE Sanh RRs ania cise oer ee ak ee 


1] John iy. 1. 3 2 John 10. 3 Matt. xxiv. 12. 


ORGANIZATION. 129 


good of the family, and each family stands as a distinct whole in 
‘the community. The tie of affection which unites the members of 
the family, is an internal bond of union; but superadded to this, 
there is an external organization which makes them one family, 
even though the internal tie of affection were severed. A nation 
is a society organized for the purpose of civil government, and the 
common good of the whole. The members may all love their laws, 
institutions, and governors; and patriotism, an internal bond of 
union, may make them one. But an external organization is 
superadded which would constitute them one nation, even if patriot- 
ism failed. A local church is an assembly of believers organized 
for the worship and service of God. Internal piety is a bond of 
union ; but while piety and brotherly love would bind them equally 
to saints of other churches, they have an external organization 
which brings them into special relation to each other, and consti- 
tutes them one church. 

Believers in Christ may be regarded as composing one family. 
God is their Father, and all they brethren; but the relationship is 
spiritual. Believers in Christ compose a nation, a holy nation, 
over which Christ is the king. They obey his laws, and strive to 
gain conquests in his cause, but they fight not with carnal weapons; 
and the bond of their union to each other and to their king is 
spiritual. The members of a local church may be known by the 
record of their names in the church book; but the church of the 
first born are written in heaven, and no record on earth determines 
their membership. It may be known by their fruits of righteous- 
ness, but these are the fruit of the Spirit which dwells and ope- 
rates in each member, and by immersion in which they are formed 
into one body. 

In the preceding section, the unity of the church universal was 
proved to be spiritual. Unity may exist in material bodies with- 
out organization. A pebble is one, though its parts are not organi- 
cally united; but in living bodies the parts are organically united, 
and the organism is necessary to their vitality. The church is 
called the body of Christ: and the members operate on each other 
and co-operate with each other like the members of the human 
body; but the organism is spiritual. The qualification of every 
member to occupy his proper place and perform his proper duties, 
is ascribed to the Holy Spirit, who divides to every man severally 

9 


‘ 


130 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


as he will; and who operates in and through all. Christ is the 
head of this body, and every member is organically united to the 
head: but “he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit;” and, there- 
fore, the organization is spiritual. 

Theological writers have maintained the existence of what they 
call the Visible Church Catholic, consisting of all who profess the 
true religion. They regard this as distinct from the body of true 
saints, which they designate the Invisible Church. The propriety 
of this designation we have denied, on the ground that true reli- 
gion is visible in its effects. But the question as to the propriety 
of the names used to designate these bodies, is altogether different 
from the question whether these bodies actually exist. We have 
maintained the existence of what theological writers have called 
the Invisible Church, consisting of all who are spiritually united 
to Christ. Is there another body consisting of all who profess 
the true religion? N 

The possibility of uniting all who profess the true religion in 
one mental conception, and of designating them by a collective 
name, cannot be disputed. -In this way we conceive and speak of 
the vegetable kingdom, the animal kingdom, &e. If it were im- 
possible to unite all who profess the true religion in one mental 
conception, the doctrine that a visible church Catholic exists would 
be an absurdity; but this no one will assert. The existence of 
such a body in our mental conception is one thing, and the existence ` 
of it in fact is another. All who profess the true religion do not 
form one body by mere juxtaposition, as a number of men gathered 
together form one assembly ; but they are scattered abroad every- 
where over the face of the earth. The simple fact that they are 
alike in professing the same religion is sufficient for the purpose 
of mental classification; but to constitute them really one body, 
some species of organization is necessary. Do they compose an 
organized body ? 

The Holy Scriptures contain no proof that the followers of 
Christ, after the dispersion of the church at Jerusalem, ever acted 
together as one externally organized society. Previous to their 
dispersion, they were of one heart and one soul, and they were one 
by juxtaposition as a congregated assembly, and they united as 
one body in the outward services of public worship, and in such 
church action as the election of deacons. After their dispersion, 


ORGANIZATION. 181 


they continued to be of one heart and one soul ; and they continued 
. to act under the influence of one Spirit to one common end. Their 
spiritual union and their spiritual organization continued; but 
their external union and external organization ceased. They no 
longer constituted one assembly, and they never acted together as 
one society. They constituted separate local churches which acted 
independently in their distinct organizations, but never formally 
united in counsel or in action as one body. 

The only fact in sacred history which at all favors the opinion 
that the churches acted in general council, is recorded in the 15th 
chapter of Acts. The church at Antioch sent messengers to the 
church at Jerusalem to consult on a point of duty. After con- 
sultation, the church at Jerusalem, with the apostles and elders, 
sent forth a decree which the disciples of Christ everywhere were 
required to observe. There is not the slightest intimation that 
delegates went from the other churches, which were now numerous, 
and scattered through different countries. The whole church met 
in the council: not the entire body of those in every place who 
professed the true religion, but the church at Jerusalem. To this 
church the messengers from Antioch were sent, and before this 
church they laid the question. When the decision was made, it 
was announced, not as the decision of the universal church assem- 
bled in general council by its delegates, but as the decision of the 
church at Jerusalem with the apostles and elders. The decision 
of this church would have been entitled to respect, as the oldest 
and best informed of all the churches, and especially in the present 
case, in which the disturbers of the church at Antioch had claimed 
the authority of established usage in this, the mother church. But 
the decree of the assembled body was sent forth with an authority 
above that of any single church or council of churches: ‘It 
seemed good to the Hoty Guost, and to us.” The inspired 
apostles were present in this consultation, and their decision went 
forth with divine authority: ‘‘ Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth 
shall be bound in heaven.”” No ecclesiastical council can justly 
claim this synod at Jerusalem as a precedent for its action, unless 
it can also claim to act by inspiration, and send forth its decrees 
with the authority of the Holy Ghost. 


1 Acts xy. 28. 2 Matt. xviii. 18. 


132 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


No ecclesiastical organization of modern times can, with any 
show of propriety, claim to be the Visible Church Catholic. No 
one of them includes all who profess the true religion. Some of 
them may claim to be Tue CHURCH ; but most of them have more 
modest pretensions, and claim to be only branches of the church. 
Each branch, however, has its own organization, and all the 
branches do not unite in one organized whole. Were there a 
combination of all the separate ecclesiastical organizations into 
one body, and were this body to act as an organized whole, it 
would possess no authority from the Holy Scriptures; but no such 
combination does in fact exist. The state of the Christian world 
falsifies the doctrine. 

The bishop of Rome and his adherents, claim to be the Catholic 
or universal church. They are united by external organization, 
for the organization itself points out the head, the subordinate offi- 
cers, and the members of the body. These hold their several posi- 
tions, whatever may be their moral or spiritual qualifications. The 
organization is a strong one, as the history of its acts demonstrates 5 
and this history, stained with blood, equally demonstrates that the 
body is not energized by the spirit of peace and love. This 
external organization needed an external head, and the bishop of 
the imperial city became the acknowledged vicar of Jesus Christ. 
Sitting in the temple of God, and showing himself that he is God, 
he claims a headship which belongs exclusively to the Lord Jesus 
Christ. This assumption of power is founded on the doctrine of 
the visible church Catholic. Destroy the foundation, and nothing 
remains for the superstructure to stand on. We have, therefore, 
good reason to regard the doctrine with suspicion, and to examine 
carefully its claims on our faith. 

It will be instructive to notice how naturally the papal usurpa- 
tion arose out of this doctrine. On the supposition that Christ 
instituted a universal church of external organization, the decla- 
rations and promises which have respect to his spiritual church, 
would naturally be applied to this external body. It would appear 
incredible that he should leave this body to degeneracy and corrup- 
tion, after having promised to be with it always to the end of the 
world, and that the gates of hell should never prevail against it; 
and after having constituted and declared it the pillar and ground 
of the truth. If external organization connects the universal 


ORGANIZATION. 133 


church with the church of apostolic times, it will be difficult, if not 

impossible, to set aside the pretensions of the Romanists. We may 
argue that they have lost the doctrine and the spirit of the apostles, 
but if the church is a body of external organization, the continuity 
of the organization must determine the true church. Tf its failure 
_to preserve the truth and spirit of the primitive times has 
unchurched it; then these last attributes are the distinguishing 
characteristics of the true church, rather than external organiza- 
tion. Here, then, is the grand controversy between Christ and 
Antichrist. Jesus Christ has not two universal churches. He is 
not the head of two bodies, the husband of two wives. His true 
church is a spiritually organized body, and spiritually joined to 
him its only head. The body claiming to be the church on the 
ground of external organization is a substitute, and its head is a 
substitute for Christ. They first take the place of the true church 
and its true head, and afterwards oppose and persecute. They 
who see and deplore the mischief which the papal usurpation has 
wrought, should learn the secret of its power. The substitution of 
ecclesiastical organization for spiritual religion has wrought all the 
evil. Let the pernicious effects teach us to guard against the cause 
which produced them. 

The doctrine of the visible church catholic, is much favored by 
the use of the epithet visible. Things are predicated of the true 
church which cannot be true of an invisible body. Saul perse- 
cuted the church, and this he could not have done if the church 
had been invisible. We fully admit the visibility of the church, 
but we distinguish between visibility and organization. Herod 
persecuted the infants of Bethlehem; but it does not follow that 
those babes composed an organized society. The rage of the perse- 
cuting Saul was directed against the saints, and not against their 
ecclesiastical organization. To have disbanded their external 
organization, would not have disarmed his rage. This they might 
Fave retained, if they had blasphemed the name of Jesus and 
! nounced his doctrine. The truth and spirit of Christianity are 
hateful to the world; and without external organization, have been 
sufficiently visible to awaken the opposition and rage of persecutors. 

An argument for an externally organized universal church, is 
derived from 1 Cor. xii. 28: “ God hath set some in the church ; 
first, apostles ; secondarily, prophets; thirdly, teachers; after that 


14 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of 
tongues.” The universal church is here meant, and the offices 
enumerated imply that the body to which they belong is organized ; 
but the organization is not external. The church which includes 
all who profess the true religion, contains bad members, and bad 
officers, as well as good ones. Even in the primitive times, there 
were, among those who professed the true religion, false apostles 
and false prophets; pastors who devoured the flock; teachers who 
brought in damnable heresies ; and governments that lorded it over 
God’s heritage, and loved to have the pre-eminence. Considering 
the church as an externally organized society, these men were as 
truly officers in it as the most self-denying of its ministers. In the 
Roman church, the pontiff holds the supreme place, whatever may 
be his moral character. The priests hold the sacraments, and dis- 
pense their mysterious benefits, however unclean may be their 
hands. If a similar organization existed in apostolic times, the 
false apostles and other ungodly officers were truly members of the 
church. Now, did God “set”? such men in the church? Did he 
set them there “for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of 
the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ?” Such men 
were not the ministers of God, but ministers of Satan, transform- 
ing themselves into ministers of righteousness ; and the church 
which excludes them from its boundaries must have those bounda- 
ries determined, not by external organization, but by genuine piety. 
With this view, the whole context of the passage agrees. The 
qualifications for the officers enumerated are mentioned in the first 
verses of the chapter, and attributed to the Holy Spirit, dividing, 
not according to the vote of the church, but according to his own 
will. The members are brought into the body by immersion in the 
Spirit; and the sympathy which pervades the body is spiritual. It 
is no objection to this view, that some of the offices enumerated 
have respect to local churches, which are confessedly bodies of 
external organization. The man who labors in the pastorship or 
government of a local church, if called of God to his office, is a 
member of the true universal church, and qualified for his office by 
the Spirit that pervades and animates that body, and is required 
to labor with reference to the good of the whole. The local church 
to which he belongs, if organized according to the mind of Christ, — 
consists of real saints; and he labors to introduce no others into 


e 


ORGANIZATION. 135 


their fellowship. He officiates to them as members of Christ’s 
body, and does not bound his aims by the local organization. So 
Paul taught the elders of Ephesus to consider themselves laboring 
for the whole redeemed church: “ Take heed therefore unto your- 
selves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath 
made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath pur- 
chased with his own blood.” * So Peter taught the elders whom he 
addressed: “ Feed the flock of God which is among you. * * * * 
Neither as being lords over God’s heritage.”? Every faithful pas- 
tor shares in the universal pastoral commission given to Peter: 
“Feed my sheep—feed my lambs.” Though laboring for a part 
of the flock, he labors for the good of the whole. He who, in his 
official labors, limits his view to the local organization with which 
he is connected, and which is temporary in its duration, degrades 
his office; and so far yields to the antichristian spirit which substi- 
tutes external organization for spiritual religion, and a visible for 
an invisible head. 

The opinion has been held, almost as a theological axiom, that 
baptism is the door into the church. It is not the door into the 
spiritual universal church; for men enter this by regeneration, and 
are, therefore, members of it before they are fit subjects for bap- 
tism. It is not the door into a local church; for, though it is a 
prerequisite to membership, men may be baptized, and remain 
unconnected with any local church. But those who hold that there 
is a visible church catholic, commonly maintain that it receives and 
includes all the baptized. They differ among themselves respect- 
ing the extent and boundaries of the church, because they differ as 
to what constitutes valid baptism. Since Baptists admit nothing 
to be valid baptism but immersion on profession of faith, those 
of them who hold the doctrine of a visible church catholic, make 
this church substantially identical with the Baptist denomination. 
This Baptist modification of the doctrine was its earliest form. 
While immersion was the universal practice of the churches, and 
infant baptism had not yet prevailed; before sprinkling was sub- 
stituted for baptism, and babes for believers; the notion obtained, 
that the kingdom is the visible church catholic, and that men are 


1 Acts xx. 28. 41 Potery: 1, 3. 


133 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


Lorn’ into it by water. In this notion, Pedobaptism and Popery 
originated. 

Much mischief to the cause of truth has resulted from a misin- 
terpretation of the words of Christ just referred to: “ Except a 
man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom of God.”’? Not a word is said in this text about baptism 
and not a word in the whole discourse, of which this verse is a 
part, leads to the supposition that baptism was intended. But it 
is not necessary for our present purpose to enter into a discussion 
of this question. If we admit that the phrase “born of water” 
intends baptism, it is clear that this alone does not introduce into 


the kingdom ; for it is also an indispensable condition, that a man 


be born of the Spirit. We have, therefore,ethe boundaries of the 
church so narrowed, that it includes none but those who have been 
both regenerated and baptized. 

Persons who have been both regenerated and baptized, are the 
baptized part of the true universal church; but they do not of 
themselves constitute a church. They are not the generic church 
of Mr. Courtney. Each local church is liable to contain false pro- 
fessors; and, therefore, the genus of local churches does not con- 
sist of regenerated persons exclusively. They are not the visible 
church catholic of theologians. This body consists of all who 
profess the true religion; and, therefore, includes false professors 
as well as true Christians. Besides, these regenerated and baptized 
persons do not, in the sense of theological writers, compose a visible 
church. Their regeneration is a spiritual: qualification, and is not 
determined by outward ceremony or external organization. This 
baptized part of the true spiritual church is as invisible, in the 
technical sense of the term, as the entire body called the invisible 
church. No man can say with infallible certainty of any one, 
though baptized, that he is born of the Spirit. These regenerated 
and baptized persons do not compose the universal church of the 
Holy Scriptures; and the church that Christ loved and gave him- 
self for, includes many who, like the penitent thief on the cross, 
never received baptism. They will form a part in the general 
ecclesia of the heavenly city; and God will be glorified in them 
by Jesus Christ, throughout all ages, world without end. This 


ne ORR CT ON Rd te EES oh 


1 John iii. 5. 


wos 


PROGRESS AND DURATION. 187 


universal church is not limited to the baptized; and in no proper 
sense does the baptized part of it constitute an ecclesia. The true 
universal church includes the whole company of those who are 
saved by Christ; and their spiritual organization is not dependent 
on outward ceremony. 


Section V.—PROGRESS AND DURATION. 


THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL IS IN PROGRESS OF CONSTRUCTION, AND 
WILL BE COMPLETED AT THE END OF THE WORLD, AFTER WHICH IT 
WILL ENDURE FOR EVER. 

The words of the Saviour, “On this rock will I build my 
church,” prove that the building was not then completed. In 
another place, speaking of the church under the figure of a fold: 
& Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must 
bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, 
and one shepherd.”* The calling of the gentiles, and the intro- 
duction of them into the privileges of the gospel, are here in- 
tended. By the ministry of the word accompanied with the influ- 
ence of the Holy Spirit, great multitudes were converted in the days 
of the apostles. These converts are described by Peter as lively 
or living stones, built on Christ the living stone disallowed of men, 
but chosen of God and precious.” Paul uses the same figure; and 
both of these inspired writers speak of the edifice as a growing 
temple. The work is still in progress; and innumerable multi- 
tudes are yet to be gathered, who are to complete the glorious 
structure. On the last day, when all the redeemed shall have been 
brought in, Jesus will present them to the Father: ‘“ Behold, I 
and the children which God hath given me.’’* ‘This will be the 
church completed in number, sanctified and glorified, a glorious 
church, without spot, wrinkle, or any such thing. The church will 
remain throughout eternity: ‘‘ Unto him be glory in the church by 
Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end.” 5 

Some difficulty exists in determining the date at which the 
church of Christ may be properly said to have commenced. The 


1 John x. 16. 21 Peter ii. 4, 5. 3 Eph. ii. 21. 
* Heb. ii. 13. 5 Eph. iii. 21. 


188 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


same difficulty exists respecting the beginning of the gospel, and 
of Christ’s mediatorial reign. Mark dates the beginning of the 
gospel of Jesus Christ from the ministry of John the Baptist; 
but Paul says that the gospel was before preached unto Abraham? 
The reign of Christ is dated from the time of his exaltation at the 
right hand of the Father; yet saints were saved by his mediation, 
and he was David’s Lord, under the former dispensation. So 
Christ said, “on this rock will I build my church,” as if the work 
was still future; and yet the edifice is said to be built on the 
foundation of the prophets, as well as of the apostles.? The Scrip- 
tures represent a gathering of all things under Christ, both in 
heaven and on earth,‘ at the time of his exaltation in human 
nature to supreme dominion. The Old Testament saints who had 
been saved by the efficacy of his blood before it was shed, and who 
had desired to understand what the Holy Ghost signified when it 
testified to their prophets concerning the sufferings of Christ, and 
the glory which should follow, were waiting in heaven for the 
unfolding of this mystery. Moses and Elias evinced their interest 
in this theme, when, during their brief interview with the Saviour 
on the mount of transfiguration, they discoursed of the decease 
which he was to accomplish at Jerusalem.’ The angels had desired 
to look into this mystery, but the fulness of time for its disclosure 
did not arrive until the man Christ Jesus entered the heavenly 
court, and was crowned with glory and honor. Then the angels 
gathered around and worshipped the Son. Then the saints drew 
near, and adored him as their Lord and Saviour. The proclama- 
tion was made throughout the courts of glory, and every inhabit- 
ant of heaven rendered willing homage to the Mediator. The 
Holy Spirit brought the proclamation down to Jerusalem on the 
day of Pentecost, that it might go thence through all the earth. 
They who gladly received it, were received into his royal fayor, 
made citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, and members of the great 
ecclesia. 

In the words of Christ before cited, the church is represented as 
a building. The beginning of an edifice may be dated back to 
the first movement in preparing the materials. In this view the 


TEE SR EB ee Bee ee 


1 Mark i. 1, 2. ? Gal. iii. 8. 3 Eph. ii. 20, 
4 Eph. i. 10. 6 Luke ix, 31. 


RELATION TO CHRIST’S KINGDOM. 182 


church was begun, when Abel, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham first 
exercised faith. But in another view, the building was commenced 
when the materials were brought together in their proper rela- 
tion to Jesus Christ. To the Old Testament saints, until gathered 
under Christ with the saints of the present dispensation, Paul 
attributes a sort of incompleteness, which may be not unaptly 
compared to the condition of building materials not yet put 
together : ‘* These all, having obtained a good report through faith, 
received not the promise: God having provided some better thing 
for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.” 1 


Section VI—RELATION TO CHRIST’S KINGDOM. 


The doctrine of the Scriptures concerning the kingdom of Christ, 
has been investigated in the Manual of Theology, pp. 221-229. 
The result of the investigation, so far as our present subject is 
concerned, may be briefly stated as follows :— 

The kingdom of Christ is the kingly authority with which he, as 
mediator, is invested, and which he exercises over all things, for 
the glory of God and the good of his church. The peculiarities of 
this divine reign are, that it is exercised in human nature, and that 
it grants favor to rebels. An incomplete administration of it 
commenced, immediately after the fall of man; but the full de- 
velopment was not made till the man Christ Jesus was crowned 
with glory and honor, and seated at the Father’s right hand. The 
subjects of his reign are divided into two classes; the obedient, 
and the disobedient. To the obedient, all the blessings of his 
reign are promised; and the disobedient, he will ultimately gather 
out of his kingdom, and banish to everlasting misery. The obe- 
dient subjects of his reign, are the same persons that compose the 
church universal, which has been defined “the whole company of 
those who are saved by Christ.” For the benefit of this church, 
his kingly authority over all things is exercised. 

As theological writers have maintained that there is a visible 
church catholic, distinct from the spiritual universal church of the 
Scriptures ; so some of them have maintained that there is a visible 
kingdom of Christ, a society of external organization, into which 


1 Heb. xi. 39, 40. 


140 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


men enter by baptism. But the kingdom of Christ is not a 
society of men, bound together by external organization, like a 
family, a nation, or a local church. This view of it is not au- 
thorized by the Holy Scriptures. 

The kingdom of Christ is properly the kingly authority with 
which he is invested; and the phrase is used, by metonymy, to 
denote the subjects of his reign, and especially the obedient subjects 
on whom the blessings of his reign are conferred. But the tie 
which binds these obedient subjects to their king, and his reign, is 
internal. “Every one that is of the truth, heareth my voice.” 1 
These men constitute a holy nation, a nation bringing forth the 
fruits of the kingdom; but they are not made a nation by external 
organization. 

Jesus said, “ My kingdom is not of this world.” 2 We are not 
to understand this declaration to imply, that his reign had nothing 
to do with the men and things of this world. The other sentence 
just quoted, which was spoken in connection with this declaration, 
“ Every one who is of the truth, heareth my voice,” claimed the 
men who receive and love the truth as the subjects of his kingly 
authority. Having all power in heaven and earth committed to 
him, he rules in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants 
of the earth. Hence every relation among men, and all the 
duties arising from it, come under his authority. The family, the 
nation, and the local church, are all institutions in his kingdom, 
or under his reign; and the external organization of these institu- 
tions should be regulated according. to the will of the sovereign 
king; but the kingdom itself exists, independent of all external 
organization. 

Some passages of Scripture have been supposed to favor the 
opinion, that the kingdom of Christ is a society of external organi- 
zation, including good men and bad. The kingdom of heaven is 
compared to a net cast into the sea, which brought good fish and 
bad to the shore ;° to a sower, who sowed seed that fell in bad ground 
as well as in good ;* to a field, which contained tares as well as wheat.’ 
These parables are designed to illustrate important truths con- 
nected with the reign of Christ. The gospel of the kingdom was 


sa erences GS gl oie eee ele 


1 John xviii. 37. 2 John xviii. 36, 5 Matt. xiii. 47—50. 
* Matt. xiii, 3—8. 5 Matt. xiii, 24—30. 


RELATION TO CHRIST’S KINGDOM. 141 


to be preached to every creature; and the commission to preach 
it, was accompanied with the declaration, “ He that believeth, and 
is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believeth not, shall be 
damned.” However variously men may be affected by the word 
preached, and however difficult it may be to distinguish their true 
character, and separate the bad from the good in the present life. 
the separation will be made in the last day, and none will be a 
mitted to enjoy the blessings of the reign but obedient subjects 
To suppose an organized religious society, including good men an 
bad, to be intended by the net which enclosed good fish and bad, 
or the field containing tares and wheat, is to overstrain and mis- 
apply the parables. The Saviour does not so explain them. The 
field is the world, and not an organized society in the world. 
The command was given that the tares and wheat should be per- 
mitted to grow together until the harvest, which is the end of tha ` 
world. Then the King will sit in judgment on the whole world, 
and not on a particular society in it; and will separate the good 
from the bad, whom he has permitted to remain together in his 
kingdom. Then he will remove out of his kingdom all that offends ; 
and will say concerning his enemies, in the midst of whom he now 
reigns, “ Those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign 
over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.”2 Yet it is 
the will of the King that bad men and good should be permitted 
to remain together in the world; but instead of commanding that 
they should be permitted to grow together in religious association 
with each other, he commands his followers, “ Come out from 
among them, and be ye separate.”* Moreover, though the tares 
and the wheat grow together in the field, the tares are called the 
children of the wicked one; and the good seed, the children of the 
kingdom. The kingdom does not embrace the good and bad alike, 
as sustaining the same relation to it; but a society embraces all 
its members, irrespective of their moral character. 
Families, nations, and local churches, are societies of external 
organization; and they are organized for the present world. At 
the end of the world, all these organizations will cease. The king- 
dom of Christ is not of this world; but at the end of the world, 
when earthly organizations shall have passed away, he will gather 


1 Mark xvi. 16. 2 Luke xix. 27. 52 Cor. vi. 17. 


142 THE CHURCH UNIVERSAL. 


the wicked out of his kingdom; and the kingdom itself, freed from 
all rebellious subjects, will continue for ever. Then shall the 
righteous, who alone are the children of the kingdom, shine as the 
sun, in the kingdom of their Father. 


Section VII.—RELATION TO LOCAL CHURCHES. 


If none but true believers were admitted into the churches, there 
would be an exact agreement between the character of the member- 
ship in the local churches, and in the church universal. And if all 
believers professed their faith without delay according to the law 
of Christ, and united with the local churches, the aggregate mem- 
bership of the local churches, and that of the universal church, so 
far as it exists on earth, would be identical. Nothing but disobe- 
dience to the law of Christ gives occasion to distinguish between 
the church universal, and the great body of professing Christians 
united in the several local churches; and in a pure state of Chris- 
tianity, the distinction might be overlooked. When the church 
universal was spoken of in the times of the apostles, the thoughts 
of men were naturally directed to. the great body of professing 
Christians; and for all the ordinary purposes of speaking and 
writing, the distinction between this aggregate of professors and 
the true body of Christ was unnecessary. So when we speak of 
a wheat-field, we disregard the fact that tares may be here and 
there intermixed with the wheat. The name does not signify this 
intermixture, but is applied as if nothing but wheat were in the 
enclosure. In like manner, the name church was used in some 
cases for the aggregate of Christian professors, although in its 
strict signification, false professors are not included. 

The fact that the same name ecclesia that is applied to local 
churches, is also applied to the church universal, is liable to mis- 
lead into the opinion that, the membership must be strictly homo- 
geneous; and, therefore, the universal church must include false 
professors as well as the local churches. So the name brass, denotes 
the same mixture of metals, whether it is applied to a large mass 
or a small one. The cases, however, are not analogous.. The 
name brass denotes the metal without respect to its quantity, 
and is as applicable to a particle as to a mass. But the name 
ecclesia does not denote the material of which a church is com- 


RELATION TO LOCAL CHURCHES. 143 


posed, and is not applicable to a single member. It signifies the 
quantity rather than the quality. There may be an ecclesia of 
wicked men as well as of righteous. It applies to a local church, 
because the members of it actually assemble ; and it applies to the 
church universal, because the members of it will actually assemble 
in the presence, and for the everlasting worship of God. The 
mere fact that the same name is applied, gives no ground for the 
conclusion that the membership in the two cases is strictly homo- 
geneous. In the epistles to the local churches, the members are 
addressed as saints and faithful men in Christ. This was their 
character according to their profession, and what they ought to be 
according to the law of Christ. False professors who might 
chance to be among them, were not of them. When excluded, 
they were not deprived of rights which had belonged to them. 
Hence, the churches were addressed as if composed entirely of true 
Christians. 

Though unconverted persons are not entitled to membership 
according to the law of Christ, they nevertheless obtain admittance 
into local churches through human fallibility. Membership in the 
church universal is determined by God himself. When Paul de- 
scribed the Hebrew saints as come “to the church of the first 
born,” he described them as come also “to God, the judge of all.” 
The infallible judge determines membership in the great ecclesia ; 
but fallible men admit to membership in the local churches. 
Hence, a corrupt element finds entrance into local churches, and 
because of it they are not strictly homogeneous with the universal 
spiritual church. This ware of homogeneousness existed in some 
degree, even in the purest age of Christianity ; but it became much 
more manifest when corruption overspread the churches, and the 
evils attending it are now painfully felt by the lovers of Zion. 


CHAP TE Bidare 


INFANT MEMBERSHIP.: 


We have ascertained that believers in Christ are the only persons 
who have a Scriptural right to membership in the Christian churches. 
But this-right has been claimed for infants; and the number, talents, 
and piety of those who make the claim, entitle the arguments by 
which they defend it, to a careful and thorough examination. 


Section I—DIRECT ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT MEMBER- 
SHIP. 


Argument 1.—In epistles written to church-members, Paul 
addresses children; and, at the same time, exhorts the parents to 
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. It is 
clear, therefore, that young children were among the church-mem- 
bers to whom these epistles were written. If such children were 
in these churches, it cannot be doubted that they were in all the 
churches, and that they were admitted in infancy. 

Because children were addressed in an epistle directed to a church, 
it does not necessarily follow that they were members of the church. 
As parents were required to bring up their children in the nurture 
and admonition of the Lord, the same epistle that enjoined this 
duty on the parents, might appropriately contain a direct command 
from the Lord, requiring the children to obey their parents. In 
performing the duty enjoined on them, the parents would naturally 
and properly take their children with them to the public worship 
of the church, where the apostolic epistles would be read in their 
hearing. The fact, therefore, that an apostolic command was 
addressed to them, proves nothing more than that the apostle 
expected it to reach them, and claimed the right of commanding 
them in the name of the Lord. 


(144) 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 145 


But the probability is, that the children whom Paul addressed 
“Were members of the church. The command, “ Obey your parents 
in the Lord,” is so expressed, as apparently to imply that the 
obligation was to be felt and acknowledged by them, because of 
their relation to the Lord. The children to whom Paul addressed 
this command must have possessed intelligence to apprehend its 
meaning, and piety to feel the force of the motive presented in 
these words, “ For this is well pleasing unto the Lord.” 2 Timothy, 
from a child, had known the Holy Scriptures. Intelligent piety 
has, in all ages, been found in children who have not yet reached 
maturity; and such children have a Scriptural right to church- 
membership. 

The argument that the children were so young as to need the 
care and discipline of their parents to bring them up in the nurture 
and admonition of the Lord, does not prove that they were desti- 
tute of personal piety. Adult church-members need instruction 
and discipline adapted to their circumstances; and the instruction 
and discipline of wise and pious parents are of inestimable advan- 
tage to their pious children. 

The argument contains a fallacy which deserves to be noticed, 
in the assumption, that the children who were commanded to obey, 
and the children who were to be brought up in the nurture and 
admonition of the Lord, were the same. Masters were commanded 
how to treat their servants, and servants were commanded to obey 
their masters ; but it would be wrong to infer that no masters were 
so commanded but those who had pious servants, or that no ser- 
vants were so commanded but those who had pious masters. On 
the contrary, those servants who had believing masters are distin- 
guished from those whose masters were unbelievers; and yet the 
latter class were commanded to obey, as well as the former. The 
relation of master and seryant existed, in some cases, when both 
of the parties were members of the church; and, in other cases, 
when one party was in the church and the other party out of the 
church. No proof exists, that the relation of parent and child 
may not have been divided in the same manner. Parents were not 
commanded to bring up their children in the nurture and admoni- 
tion of the Lord because the children were church-members ; and 


a Ee ree Fa ee ee ee 


1 Eph. vi. 1. * Col. iii. 20. 
10 


146 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


children were not commanded to obey their parents because the 
parents were church-members. The supposition, therefore, that 
the children in the two cases were the same, is an assumption with- 
out proof. 

The inference that, if there were children in the primitive churches, 
they were admitted in infancy, and not because of personal piety, 
is illegitimate. It cannot be made to appear that they were desti- 
tute of personal piety; and, as this was the established condition 
of church-membership in all other cases, the fair inference is that 
their membership in the church stood on the common ground. 

Argument 2.—The King of Zion has expressly declared, in Matt. 
xix. 14, that the privileges of his kingdom belong to infants; and, 
among these privileges, that of church-membership must be 
included. Children are to be received in the name of Christ, or 


because they belong to Christ; ' and this must imply that they are 
members of his church. 


In interpreting and applying the phrase, “Of such is the king- 
dom of heaven,” an important question must be decided; whether 
the word “such” denotes literal children, or persons of child-like 
disposition. As the clause stands in our common version, it seems 
to import that the kingdom eonsists of such persons exclusively. 
Now, no one imagines that the kingdom is a community consisting 
of literal infants only; and, therefore, this rendering, if retained, 
greatly favors the other interpretation, according to which the 
whole community are properly described as persons of child-like 
disposition. The disciples of Christ are humble, confiding, teach- 
able, and free from malice and ambition ; and these qualities cha- 
racterize all who have a part in the kingdom. 

But the advocates of infant church-membership have proposed 
another rendering of the clause. : They remark that it corresponds, 
in grammatical construction, with the clause in Matt. v. 3: “Theirs 
is the kingdom of heaven;” but, since the word “such” has no 
genitive in English corresponding to the genitive “ theirs,” the 
sense must be expressed thus: “ To such belongs the kingdom of 
heaven.” After a careful consideration, I am inclined to think 
that this rendering gives the true sense of the passage. It makes 
it analogous to the clause in Matt. v. 3; while the other rendering 


Se eee 
1 Mark ix. 37. 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 147 


is, I think, without any analogy in the New Testament. The king- 
- dom does not consist wholly of its subjects; but it has also its king, 
its laws, its privileges, and its enjoyments. We have Scripture 
analogy for saying, that the subjects receive the kingdom, enter 
into the kingdom, inherit the kingdom, and have part in the king- 
dom; but none for saying that they compose or constitute the 
kingdom. Hence the rendering, “ To such the kingdom belongs,” 
is recommended to our adoption, as the best interpretation of the 
Saviour’s words. So much having been granted to the advocates 
of infant church-membership, we proceed to inquire into the true 
sense of the passage. 

In the parallel passage, “ theirs is the kingdom of heaven,” the 
persons intended are “the poor in spirit;’ and these include all 
the loyal subjects of the kingdom. If the parallelism between the 
passages is complete, the word “such” must, in like manner, in- 
clude all the loyal subjects of the Redeemer’s reign, and cannot 
therefore signify literal children. But if we take the word 
“such,” to signify a part only of those to whom the kingdom 
belongs, we shall still be compelled to consider the declaration as 
importing that the kingdom belongs to all such. Nothing in the 
words, nothing in the context, nothing in the nature of the subject, 
leads to the supposition that the kingdom belongs to some infants, 
and not to others. But the most consistent advocates of infant 
church-membership, do not admit all infants indiscriminately. If 
the word “such” was intended to signify any qualifications for 
membership, peculiar to these children, and not found in all chil- 
dren, no clue whatever has been left us, in the whole context, for 
ascertaining what these peculiar qualifications were. If Jesus had 
designed to instruct his apostles how to discriminate between the 
children to be admitted, and all other children, it is unaccountable 
that he should have given his instruction with so much obscurity 
and indefiniteness. 

The words demand an interpretation, which will make the term 
“such” include all who have a right to the kingdom, and no 
others; and this is precisely the interpretation to which the con- 
text leads. Immediately after uttering the words, Jesus explained 
them: ‘ Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a 
Jittle child, he shall not enter therein.” To be a little child, and 


pO 9 Ee eas Se g a aa a 
1 Mark x. 15; Luke xviii. 17. 


148 JNFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


to act as a little child, are different things; and the latter, not 
the former, is what the Saviour intended. His explanation shows 
this clearly; and that the explanation was made, we are expressly 
informed by Mark and Luke. Matthew has omitted it; but he 
has recorded, in the preceding chapter, a discourse of Christ on 
the same subject, giving the same instruction fully and clearly: “At 
the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the great- 
est in the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus called a little child unto 
him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto 
you, except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall 
not enter into the kingdom of heaven. And whoso shall receive 
one such little child in my name, receiveth me. But whoso shall 
offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better 
for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he 
were drowned in the depth of the sea.’’! Here, a child is made 
the representative of him who was to be greatest in the kingdom ; 
and the phrase, “one such child,” denotes one who possesses a 
child-like disposition. Jesus was accustomed to call his disciples 
“little children ;’? and he here calls them, ‘these little ones 
which believe in me.” In this discourse, no room was left for 
doubt as to the import of the phrase, “one such child,” and this 
discourse had prepared the minds of the disciples to understand 
his meaning, when he afterwards said, “To such the kingdom 
belongs,” even if no explanation had followed; but when he added 
an explanation, reiterating the very teaching which he had before 
given, no doubt ought to remain, that the same kind of qualifica- 
tion for his kingdom was intended—not literal childhood, but a 
child-like disposition. 

A further demand for this interpretation is found in the nature 
of Christ’s kingdom. Those who suppose literal children to be in- 
tended, assume that the kingdom is the visible church catholic ; 
and they understand that membership in this body is here affirmed 
to belong to infants. Our inquiries in the last chapter have 
brought us to the conclusion, that Christ’s kingdom is not identical 


2 Matt. xviii. 6. 

2 John xiii, 33. In the original text a different word is here employed, which 
seems to have been more appropriate for the expression of endearment. Its 
literal meaning agrees with that of the other term, and is properly given by 
our translators in the words “ little children.” 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 149 


with the visible church catholic of theological writers; and that 
such a body as this does not in fact exist. In Christ’s kingdom, 
there are two classes of subjects; the loyal, and the disobedient, 
To the former class exclusively, the kingdom belongs, according 
to the uniform teaching of the Scriptures; and the passage under 
consideration corresponds precisely with this teaching, if persons 
of child-like disposition be intended. But if the ‘kingdom belongs 
to literal infants, who are such by natural birth, it must be a dif- 
ferent kingdom from that of which Jesus discoursed to Nicodemus, 
when he said, “ Except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God.” 

Some persons understand the clause under consideration to 
import that the kingdom of glory belongs to little children; and 
they argue that if they have a right to the church in heaven, they 
ought not to be shut out from the church on earth. But infants 
have not an unconditional right to the kingdom of glory. If they 
die in infancy, they are made fit for that kingdom and received 
into it; but if they remain in this world till they grow up, they 
cannot obtain that kingdom without repentance and faith. Since 
the right of children to the kingdom of glory depends on the con- 
dition, either that they die in infancy or that they become penitent 
believers, no inference can be legitimately drawn from it that they 
have a present and unconditional right to membership in the 
church on earth. Children are not taken to heaven without being 
made fit for it; but churches on earth are organized for the worship 
and service of God, and infants are not fitted for these duties. 
Even the privileges of the church on earth they are confessedly 
unfit for. A right to baptism is claimed for them, but a right to 
communion at the Lord’s table is not; yet without this right, it 
cannot be said that the church or kingdom belongs to them. If by 
any mode of inference from the passage the right of infants to 
the church on earth can be established, it must include a right to 
communion at the Lord’s table. 

It has been objected to our interpretation of this passage, that 
the word “such,” properly denotes the kind or quality of the 
thing to which it is applied, and not the resemblance which some- 
thing else bears to it. In proof of this, such passages as the fol- 
lowing have been cited: “ Because they suffered such things.” 1 
O T a CT CTA 


1 Luke xiii. 2, 


150 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


“ With many such parables spake he unto them.’”! In the first 
example, such things means these very things; and in the second, 
such parables means these parables and others like them. In like 
menner it is argued, such children must mean either these very 
children or these children and others like them. Hence, it is alleged 
that an interpretation which excludes the children present from 
the import of the word “such,” is inadmissible. 

It is true that the word such denotes the kind or quality of the 
thing to which it is applied; but just so far as it does this, it de- 
notes also the resemblance which another thing bears to it, if that 
other thing is of the same kind or possesses the same quality. It 
denotes the kind or quality of the thing, and not the thing itself. 
In this particular, it differs from this or these. If the first of the 
above examples had read “ because they suffered these things,” the 
identical sufferings would have been signified, and not their kind 
or quality. Hence, such does not mean these. So in the other 
examples ‘such parables” does not mean these and other parables, 
for it denotes the kind and quality of the parables, and this the 
phrase these and other would not do. The fact that “such things” 
in the first example, denoted the identical sufferings which had 
just been mentioned, is not determined by the meaning of the 
word such, but by the connection in which it is used. Any other 
sufferings of like kind would suit the meaning of the word equally 
as well. So any parables of like kind equally suit the meaning 
of the phrase “such parables.” The fact that the sufferings and 
parables previously mentioned are denoted by the word such, or 
included in its meaning, is accidental. Such does not mean these, 
and does not include these in its meaning, unless by accident. 
However frequent this accidental use of the term may be, its essen- 
tial meaning refers to kind or quality, and not to particular things. 
When it is said, “ They which commit such things, are worthy of 
death ;”’* the particular things that had been mentioned are not 
necessarily intended or included; but any things of like kind are 
denoted. In the words of Paul, “I would to God, that not only 
thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and 
altogether, such as I am, except these bonds.’ The word such 
neither intends nor includes “I,” but merely denotes likeness ; 


ec S A EEN a TN 


1 Mark iv. 33. 2 Rom. i. 32. 8 Acts xxvi. 29, 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 151 


and that likeness is confined to spiritual endowments and privileges, 
and does not extend to the body or the external condition. So 
the word such in the case before us, does not intend or include the 
children present, but denotes a likeness to them; and that likeness 
does not respect the body or outward condition, but those mental 
qualities which made them fit representatives of converted men. 

If we were unable to distinguish between the essential meaning 
of the word such and its accidental use, we might still be preserved 
from an erroneous conclusion in the present case by a due regard 
to Matt. xviii. 5. In this verse the same word is used by the same 
speaker with reference to the same subject, and in like circum- 
stances, a little child being present as the children were present in 
the other case. Yet in this case, the word such does not intend or 
include the child present, but denotes those qualities in which that 
child was made a representative of converted persons. The verse 
preceding proves this: and the words which follow the use of the 
term such in the other case, prove the same. The analogy is com- 
plete, with the single exception that the explanation follows in one 
case, and precedes in the other. But it follows immediately as if 
uttered by the same breath, for it was spoken before Jesus 
laid hands on the children. If any importance can be attached 
to the order of time in which the explanation was given, it should 
be remembered that the whole of the discourse in the 18th chapter 
preceded the transaction recorded in the 19th, and prepared the 
minds of the disciples for understanding it. When all these facts 
are considered, we need not be staggered, though numerous 
examples be adduced in which such may appear to have a different 
meaning. ‘True criticism will regard the analogy of the cases 
rather than their number; and if the word has different meanings, 
will prefer that which is supported by an analogy so remarkable 
and complete.. But the truth is, criticism has no choice to make 
between different meanings of the word, for in every case the 
meaning of the word is the same. 

If the criticism which we have set aside were just, it would fail 
to justify the conclusion that has been drawn from it. In the pas- 
sage recorded in Luke ix. 47, 48, the word such is not used: “ Jesus, 
perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child, and set him by 
him, and said unto them, Whosoever shall receive this child in my 
name, receiveth me; and whosoever shall receive me, receiveth him 


152 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


that sent me: for he that is least among you all, the same shall be 
great.” Here the expression is, “this child;” but the meaning 
is not to be taken literally. The whole transaction was symbolical. 
The disciples had desired the highest place in their Master’s king- 
dom. It was their ambition to sit on his right hand and on his 
left. But Jesus set the little child by him, and constituted that 
child his prime minister and representative: ‘‘ Whoso shall receive,” 
&c. All this was symbolical; and was designed to teach the dis- 
ciples what they must be, to obtain the honor which they coveted. 
If criticism could convert the word such into these, and the clause, 
“of such is the kingdom,” into theirs is the kingdom ; there would 
be sufficient reason, even then, to regard the children as only sym- 
bols or representatives of converted or humble and child-like 
persons. i 

It has been further objected, that the clause, “for of such is the 
kingdom of heaven,” could not, according to our interpretation, 
contain a reason for admitting into Christ’s presence the children 
that were brought to him. We cheerfully grant, that the connec- 
tion of this clause with what precedes would be quite obvious, if it 
could be shown to declare the right of infants to church-member- 
ship ; and if it could also be shown that these infants were brought 
to Christ to be initiated into his church. This last has been sup- 
posed by some, but without any proof from the sacred narrative. 
The purpose for which they were brought to Jesus is thus expressed: 
“that he should put his hands on them, and pray;’’! “that he 
should touch them.”? If initiation into the church was the design, 
it is unaccountable that all the inspired writers should have failed 
to mention it, and that they should have described the act as per- 
formed with a different design. If it was usual for infants to be 
admitted to church-membership, the apostles must have known it i 
and their opposition, in the present case, is unaccountable. More- 
over, if these infants were brought to be initiated into the church, 
and if Jesus declared their right to the privileges of his church, it 
cannot be supposed that they were sent away without the benefit 
desired. But were they initiated? If so, by what rite? Baptism 
has been considered the rite of initiation ; but there is no evidence 
that these children were baptized. When Jesus made disciples, 


A a a S T 


1 Matt. xix, 13, ? Mark x. 13; Luke xviii. 15, 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 153 


they were baptized, not by himself, but by his disciples. There ig 
- no evidencethat he put these children into the hands of the disci- 
ples, with a command to baptize them; but, on the contrary, he 
took them into his own arms, not to baptize, but to bless them. 
On a careful examination of the passage, we discover that the 
conjunction ‘for’ connects the clause which follows with the com- 
mand, “ forbid them not.” This command was addressed to the 
disciples; and the reason which follows may be supposed to have 
been introduced for their sake, rather than for the sake of the 
children. He was displeased with his disciples, and designed to 
rebuke them. Now, to understand his rebuke, we must view it in 
connection with the fault of which the disciples had been guilty. 
They expected their Master to set up a temporal kingdom; and all 
his teachings to the contrary, and even his crucifixion at last, did 
not convince them that his kingdom is not. of this world. They 
were ambitious to have the highest place in his kingdom; and this 
sinful ambition remained, till they ate the last passover with him. 
He had recently set a little child before them, and used it as a 
representative of the chief favorite in his kingdom. This discourse 
they had not understood. Like other discourses designed to 
explain the nature of the kingdom, and of the qualifications for it, 
the instruction which it contained was not properly received until 
after Christ’s departure, when the Holy Spirit brought it to their 
remembrance. Ambition and worldly policy blinded their minds. 
How they understood the Saviour’s discourse, we cannot certainly 
determine; but they seem, like the advocates of infant church- 
membership, to have understood the word such to refer to age, and 
not to moral qualities. Hence, the words, ‘‘Whoso receiveth one 
such child,” placed little children before their minds as rivals for 
the highest place of dignity in the kingdom. Whether they feared 
that Christ would postpone the setting up of his kingdom until 
these young rivals should be of age, or whether they apprehended 
that he would, among the miraculous works which he performed, 
endow them supernaturally, even in infancy, for holding office in 
his kingdom, we have no means of ascertaining. But, whatever 
may have been their notions, they seem to have conceived a jealousy 
of these young rivals. The ministers of Eastern monarchs guarded 
the way of access to their sovereign. This right of guarding the 
way of approach to their Master, the disciples assumed on this 


154 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


occasion. Jesus, who never denied access to any that sought favor 
at his hands, was displeased with their conduct and the worldly 
ambition which instigated it. To them, and for their benefit, he 
said what may be thus paraphrased : “ Suffer the children to come 
unto me, and forbid them not. Do not, by this usurpation of 
power, think to exclude these dreaded rivals from my presence 
and favor; for to such as these the privileges and honors of my 
kingdom belong, rather than to those who, like you, are actuated 
by worldly ambition. Instead of driving these children away, 
imitate their spirit; for whosoever shall not receive the kingdom 
as a little child, shall not enter therein.” 

Whether we have succeeded or not in discovering the true con- 
nection of the clause with what precedes, the clause itself does not 
affirm the right of infants to church-membership. The proofs 
which have been adduced on this point are clear and decisive. 

What has been said, sufficiently explains Mark ix. 27, the other 
passage quoted in the argument. We admit that to receive one of 
such children`in the name of Christ, is to receive him because he 
belongs to Christ; but the passage does not teach that literal 
infants are members of Christ’s church. We have proved that the 
Saviour employed the phrase, such children, to denote persons of 
child-like disposition. Hence, the doctrine of infant church-mem- 
bership cannot be inferred from the passage. 

Some Congregationalists have held that children are members 
of the church universal, but not of local churches. This distine- 
tion may perhaps account for their admission to baptism, and 
exclusion from the Lord’s supper; but it accounts in such a way 
as to show clearly, that the privileges of the kingdom do not be- 
long to them. No one maintains that unregenerate infants are 
members of the spiritual church. If they are members of a uni- 
versal church, it must be the visible church catholic. Now, if 
such a body exists, it never meets or acts ; and the privileges of 
membership in it, to those who are denied membership in local 
_ churches—what are they? To the local churches belong the regu- 
lar worship of God, a stated ministry, the benefits of discipline 
and mutual exhortation, and the communion of the Lord’s table. 
The baptized children grow up, without the membership which 
entitles to these privileges, How, then, can it be said that the 
kingdom belongs to them ? 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 155 


Argument 3.—Paul declares, that the children of certain mem- 
_ bers of the-Corinthian church were holy. The word holy, or 
saints, was used by him to denote church-members, that is, per- 
sons consecrated to God. We have, therefore, ground for the con- 
clusion, that.these children were members of the church. 

The passage referred to, reads as follows: ‘For the unbelieving 
husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanc- 
tified by the husband: else were your children unclean; but now 
are they holy.” This passage, if the holiness of which it speaks 
signifies church-membership, will prove too much. The word 
“ sanctified,” which is applied to the unbelieving husband and un- 
believing wife, means made holy. These unbelievers, therefore, 
were also holy; and must, according to the interpretation, have been 
members of the church. The text is a process of reasoning; and the 
laws of reasoning require, that the term “holy” in the conclusion, 
should be used in the same sense as in the premises. If holiness 
implies church-membership, when predicated of the children, it 
must imply the same when predicated of the unbelieving husband 
and wife. But no one imagines that those unbelievers were mem- 
bers of the church; and, therefore, the holiness affirmed of the 
children, is not church-membership. 

If it be asked, what holiness could be predicated of these chil- 
dren, or of the unbelieving husband and wife, which did not include 
church-membership—the answer is at hand. The Jews accounted 
gentiles unclean, and thought it unlawful to enter their houses, to 
keep company or eat with them, or to touch them. The Jewish 
Christians retained this opinion, as is manifest from Gal. ii. 12. 
According to this opinion, they with whom familiar intercourse 
was lawful, were considered holy; and all others were unclean. 
The question had arisen among the Corinthians, probably from the 
influence of Judaizing teachers, whether familiar intercourse with 
unbelievers is lawful. 

In the fifth chapter of the epistle, Paul discusses this question, 
and decides that association in church-membership with such per- 
sons, was unlawful; but that ordinary intercourse with them must 
be admitted, or Christians “‘ must needs go out of the world.” As 
the principle which he opposed had produced a doubt among the 


1] Cor. vii. 14, 


156 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


Corinthians, whether it was lawful for Christians to live in familiar 
intercourse with unbelieving husbands or wives, Paul considers this 
case in the seventh chapter. He decides that, if this principle 
may disturb the domestic relations, it will separate parent and 
child, as well as husband and wife. If familiar intercourse with 
the unconverted is unlawful in one case, it is unlawful in the other 
also. This is the argument of the apostle; and it is precisely 
adapted to meet the difficulty. But this argument presupposes, 
that the children, like the unbelieving husband and wife, were not 
members of the church. The text, therefore, furnishes decisive 
proof, that infant church-membership was unknown in the time of 
the apostles.! 

Argument 4.--The writers of the New Testament used words 
in the sense in which they were accustomed to read them in the 
Scriptures of the Old Testament. The Greek word Christ, corre- 
sponded to the Hebrew word Messiah; and both words denoted 
the same person. The Greek word ecclesia, was not a newly-in- 
vented term; but it was the word by which the LXX. had rendered 
the Hebrew eahal, of the Old Testament, and must therefore be 
understood to denote the same thing, the Congregation of the Lord. 
Hence the church was not a new organization. It was the Hebrew 
congregation, continued under the new dispensation ; and, as chil- 
dren were included with their parents, in the former dispensation, 
the right of membership cannot now be denied to them. The 
identity of the church under both dispensations is further apparent 
in the fact, that the names Zion and Jerusalem, derived from the 
places where the Old Testament worshippers assembled, are given 
to the church of the New Testament. 

It is true that the Hebrew word Messiah, and the corresponding 
Greek word Christ, denoted the same person; but it cannot be 
hence inferred as a universal truth, that identity, either of person 
or things, always attends identity or correspondence of name. The 
Hebrew name Joshua is applied in Scripture to different persons ;? 
and the corresponding Greek name Jesus, is applied to persons 
different from these, and different from one another.? The English 
words assembly, convention, association, &c., are in common use 
as names of organized bodies; but the character of the organiza- 


Teee a eta ot E fy 


1 For a more extended examination of 1 Cor. vii. 14, see a tract entitled “A 
Decisive Argument against Infant Baptism,” published by the Southern Bap- 
tist Publication Society. ; 

2 Ex. xxiv. 13; Zech. iii. 1. 3? Matt. i. 21; Col. iv. 11. 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 157 


tion cannot be inferred from the name. The name Assembly 
„sometimes signifies the legislative body of a state, and sometimes 
an ecclesiastical judicatory. With this name the Hebrew and 
Greek words for congregation and church very nearly correspond 
in signification; but were the correspondence perfect, it could not 
be inferred that organized societies denoted by them must be 
identical. 

But the correspondence between the designations of the church 
and of the Hebrew congregation is not perfect. Two Hebrew 


words, bap and MY, were used to denote the Hebrew con- 


gregation, and neither of these is invariably rendered by the 
Greek word sxxaņora. In the sixth verse of Exodus 12, the chapter 
in which the Hebrew congregation first appears on the sacred page, 
both Hebrew words occur, and one of them the LXX have 
rendered wa790s, and the other ovvayoyz. In Numbers xvi. 3, both 
words occur, and both are rendered ovvaywyn. If any one should 
argue from hence, that whenever the New Testament writers use 
the words xanGos, and cvraywyn, they must mean the Hebrew congre- 
gation, he would err egregiously. The argument which would be 
so fallacious when applied to these words, cannot be valid when 
applied to exxanova. 

The single words which we have noticed, are, when used to 
designate the bodies to which they are applied, often accompanied 
with adjuncts. The Hebrew congregation was called the Congre- 
gation of the Lord or Jehovah, and the Congregation of Israel. 
It was a congregation instituted for the worship of Jehovah as the 
God of the Hebrew nation. The church is called the church of 
God, and the church of Christ. These full designations of the two 
bodies are by no means coincident; but we have proof that 
the two bodies are not identical, which is far more to be relied on 
than a want of coincidence in their names. 

When the New Testament church is first introduced in the sacred 
writings, Jesus calls it not the cahal or ecclesia of Israel, but my 
ecclesia. He moreover speaks of it as yet to be constructed: “ On 
this rock will I build my ecclesia.” It cannot be that he intended 
the cahal of Israel which was instituted in the time of Moses, and 
its organization completed in the most minute particulars. The 
next occurrence of the word ecclesia in the New Testament is still 
more remarkable: “Tell it to the ecclesia. If he will not hear 


158 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


the ecclesia, let him be, &c.’’ Can it be true that the New Testa- 
ment writer who recorded these words, understood the word 
ecclesia in the sense in which he had been accustomed to read it in 
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, as referring to the Hebrew 
cahal? Can it be that Jesus meant it to be so understood? Did he 
mean that his followers should refer their matters of grievance to 
the great congregation of Jewish worshippers, their enemies and 
persecutors, and be governed by their decision? Incredible! The 
next mention of the New Testament ecclesia is equally decisive: 
“The Lord added to the ecclesia such as should be saved.” The 
time was the feast of Pentecost, when the worshippers of the Hebrew 
cahal were assembled at Jerusalem. From this assembly the 
converts to the new religion were made; and when made, they 
were added to the ecclesia. No proof more decisive can be de- 
sired; that the ecclesia to which they were added, was not the cahal 
to which they had previously belonged. 

The argument from the name may be retorted with effect. When 
Jesus said, “Tell it to the church;” the Christian churches -in 
which discipline was to be exercised had not yet been organized. 
The master of the family was still present to manage the affairs 
of the household by his direct authority; but he gave the com- 
mand to be observed after his departure, as a perpetual rule of 
discipline. The unguarded manner in which he speaks of the 
ecclesia, furnishes proof of no inconsiderable force, that the word 
which he employed, was not at the time in familiar use as a name 
for the congregation of Jewish worshippers. Had it been, this 
application of the word would have been natural to the disciples, 
and some accompanying explanations would have been needed to 
guard them from mistake. When intending that which did not 
yet exist, of which they had no personal knowledge, and which 
never had existed, he would not, without explanation, have employed 
a term to denote it, with which they were familiar as the name of 
something that had long existed and was well known to them. 
The conclusion to which this argument tends, is strongly corrobo- 
rated by the fact, that although the word ecclesia occurs in the 
New Testament more than a hundred times, it never, with but one 
exception, denotes the people of Israel; and in this single excep- 
tion, “ He that was in the ecclesia in the wilderness,” ? it does not 


aad Seer ene aie BS SS a 
1 Acts vii. 38. w 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 159 


denote the people of Israel as an enduring organization, but refers 
_ to a particular time in their history, when they were assembled at 
Sinai to receive the law, and for this reason it should have been 
translated assembly. As an enduring body, they are called the 
house of Israel, the commonwealth of Israel, the people, the nation ; 
but the ecclesia they are never called. 

The passage, “In the midst of the ecclesia I will sing praise 
unto thee,” ' is quoted from the Old Testament, where the word 
cahal is used, and where there is an allusion to the Hebrew con- 
gregation; but as used by Paul, the ecclesia intended consists 
of the “many sons” brought to glory, who are mentioned in 
the context. The same ecclesia is afterwards spoken of, “ The 
church of the first born,” with an apparent allusion to the assembly 
of Old Testament worshippers. This allusion may be readily 
accounted for by the fact, that the worship of the Old Testament 
dispensation was “a shadow of good things to come.” Zion and 
Jerusalem were types of heaven, the future meeting place of the 
saints; and the congregation of Israel assembled for the worship 
of God, typified that future assembly in which the redeemed of the 
Lord shall come from the east, the west, the north, and the south, 
and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom 
of Heaven. This fully accounts for the use which the prophets 
have made of the names Zion and Jerusalem, in predicting the 
glory of the church. 

The Hebrew cahal was an actual assembly. Three times in the 
year the tribes were required to meet for public worship in the 
place where the Lord would put his name.? This obligation con- 
tinued as long as the ordinances of their worship were obligatory; 
and ceased when the handwriting of them was nailed to the 
cross of Christ. An intimation that the obligation to meet at 
Jerusalem was to cease, is given in the words of Christ to the 
women of Samaria: “The hour cometh, when ye shall neither in 
this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father.’”’? When 
men were no longer required to meet in Jerusalem, the cahal of 
Israel was dissolved. 

The distinction between the church and the Hebrew congre- 


a ee ee ed he i a dls wh Seth et elwe 
1 Habsi11,,£2! 2 Deut. xii. 5. 3 John iy. 21. 


160 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


gation, may be further elucidated by an attentive consideration of 
the design with which the congregation was instituted. 

Although, in the divine purpose, a sufficient sacrifice for sin had 
been provided from eternity, yet it did not seem good to Infinite 
Wisdom that it should be immediately offered, when sin first entered 
into the world. Four thousand years of ignorance and crime, God 
winked at, or overlooked as unworthy of his regard, or unfit for 
his purpose; and fixed his eyes on that period denominated “the 
fulness of time,” when it would best display the divine perfections, 
for the Redeemer to atone for transgression; and repentance and 
remission of sins to be preached in his name, among all nations. 
As, in the exercises of an individual Christian, the discovery of 
salvation in Christ is withheld, until an anxiety is excited in his 
breast that makes the discovery welcome; so in the history of the 
world, the Messiah makes not his appearance, until mankind have 
felt the necessity of such a deliverer; then he comes, the desire of 
all nations. It pleased God that a full experiment should be made 
of man’s power and skill to find a remedy for his moral disease, 
before God’s remedy for the healing of the nations should be 
revealed and applied. “ After that, in the wisdom of God, the 
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God, by the foolishness 
of preaching, to save them that believe.” 

The experiment which, in the wisdom of God, opened the way 
for the Redeemer’s entrance into the world, was of a two-fold 
nature; or, rather, there were two distinct experiments, demon- 
strating distinet truths. When the bolder enemies of God and 
religion make their appeal from the volume of inspiration to the 
volume of nature, and assert the sufficiency of the latter to enlighten 
and direct them in the search after God; we can refer to actual 
experiment, to ascertain how far fallen man, without the oracles 
of God, can advance toward the knowledge of the Divine charac- 
ter. With the light of nature, the bright beams of science, and 
the keen eye of natural genius, the wisest men of antiquity still 
felt in the dark, after the unknown God. 

When those who profess to receive the truth, deny the doctrine 
of grace, and maintain that man has sufficient native virtue, if pro- 
perly cultivated, to render him acceptable to God; that there are 


a aaa a a a N D a a 
1 Acts xvii. 27. 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 161 


influences of the Word or Spirit common to all men, which arọ 
Sufficient, without any additional special influence, to bring him to 
know and enjoy the Most High; we have in the wisdom of God, 
another completed experiment, which decides against this doctrine, 
with as much certainty as is anywhere to be found within the limits 
of experimental philosophy. In the sacred record is the history 
of a people, who had the advantage over every other people much 
every way. They were not left to read the volume of nature only ; 
but to them were committed the oracles of God. They were not 
left with unmeaning forms, and unauthorized rites of religion ; but 
they had ordinances of divine service, instituted on the authority 
of God. “To them pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the 
covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and 
the promises.” Nor were they without instructors in religion ; but 
holy men were raised up among them, who spake as they were 
moved by the Holy Ghost. Neither were they without motives to 
obedience; but a covenant was made with them, containing every 
threat which might deter—every promise that might allure. The 
experiment was made fairly and completely. Jehovah himself said, 
“ What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not 
done?”’ And what was the result? It was clearly demonstrated 
that man is totally depraved; that the best institutions, instruc- 
tions, and motives, with all common influences of the Spirit, what- 
ever such there may be, are altogether insufficient to restore his 
fallen nature; and that a direct special influence upon his heart, 
by the effectual working of Divine power, is indispensably neces- 
sary, in order to make him delight in the law of God, and render 
acceptable obedience to its holy requirements. See Heb. viii. 8, 
9, 10. 

That society of persons which was the subject of the last-men- 
tioned experiment, is frequently denominated the Congregation of 
the Lord. It appears to have been the orly divinely instituted 
society, organized for religious worship, that ever existed before 
the coming of Christ. That God designed by the Mosaic dispen- 
sation, of which this congregation was the subject, to give a clear 
demonstration of man’s depravity, may be inferred from the end 
which has actually been accomplished, and from such declarations 
of Scripture as the following: “ The law was added because of 
transgression until the seed should come. The law entered that 

a ' 


162 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


the offence might abound.” Since unto God all his works from the 
beginning are known, he well knew the imperfections of the Mosaic 
covenant, even from the time of its institution, and what would be 
the result of the experiment. He found fault with it long before 
its abrogation ; and so prepared it at first, that it typified and fore- 
told a better covenant that should succeed it, established upon 
better promises. 

The first account that the Scriptures give of the Congregation 
of the Lord, we find in the twelfth chapter of Exodus. When a 
new order of things was introduced ; when the year received a new 
beginning, and became, as it has been called, the ecclesiastical 
year; when God took his people by the hand, to lead them out of 
the land of Egypt;! when that code of laws for the regulation of 
religious worship, which the apostle means by the first covenant 
throughout his epistle to the Hebrews, began to be promulgated ; 
and the Passover, as one of the ordinances of divine service per- 
taining to the first covenant, was instituted; then, first, are the 
Israelites recognised as a worshipping congregation. Before this, 
the word of the Lord had come to individuals, and individuals had 
performed religious rites; but now, the word is sent to a whole 
congregation, and that congregation, by divine appointment, per- 
form a rite of divine worship simultaneously. Before this, the 
Israelites had indeed been distinguished from the rest of mankind; 
but not by the characteristics of a worshipping society. That 
there were persons among them who worshipped God in sincerity 
and truth, will not be disputed. But where were their public 
altars? Where was their sanctuary? Where were their public 
ministers of religion? Where were their appointed sacrifices? 
Where their statute book, the laws of their worship, the rules of 
their society, &c.? A worshipping society, without forms, and 
rites, and rules of worship, God never constituted. 

The seed of Abraham were destined to be the subjects of spe- 
cial dispensations, throughout all their generations. This appears 
no less in their history since the Christian era, and before their 
deliverance from Egyptian bondage, than in the intermediate time. 
But, during all this intermediate time, they were the subjects of 
that peculiar, experimental, preparatory dispensation, which we 
a i ne ea a 5 

1 Heb. viii. 9. . 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 163 


have been considering. They were constituted, and continued to 
be, the Lord’s peculiar cahal, his only worshipping congregation. 
But while the ordinances of. their worship were wisely contrived 
to be types and prophecies of Christ, at the same time that they 
afforded to the world that experiment, which appears to have been 
so important a part of their design; in like manner, an instructive 
intimation of the future exclusion of the Jews from gospel privi- 
leges, and of the admission of the gentiles, appears to have been 
given, in the character of the members who composed this sacred con- 
gregation. The great body of its constituents were the descendants 
of Abraham; but provision was made in its charter, that Israelites in 
some cases should be excluded, and that gentiles might be admitted.? 
Nothing like this can be found in the covenant made with Abraham 
and his seed, as recorded in the 17th chapter of Genesis. This 
covenant received into its arms every circumcised son of Jacob 
(in whom the seed was ultimately called), without any exception ; 
and thrust from its embrace every Gentile, without any distinction. 
It was, indeed, one of its stipulations that every Israelite should 
have all the males of his house circumcised; but there is no inti- 
mation that they were all thereby incorporated among the covenant 
seed, or that they had more right to the territory granted in the 
covenant, than had Ishmael, or the sons of Keturah. Jacob’s ser- 
vants were circumcised ; but they did not become heads of tribes 
in Israel, as they would have been, had circumcision endowed them 
with the privileges of the covenant seed. 

When the end for which any society was instituted has been 
accomplished, it is natural to expect its dissolution. The experi- 
ment for which the Congregation of the Lord had been organized, 
was completely made, when the Redeemer appeared, in the end of 
the world, “to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself.” The 
first covenant, established upon conditional promises, was proved, 
upon due trial, to be faulty, weak, and.unprofitable ; and the neces- 
sity of a better covenant, whose better promises should be all yea 
and amen in Christ Jesus, was clearly demonstrated: “ He taketh 
away the first, that he may establish the second.” When “There 
was a disannulling of the commandment going before,” in which 
was contained the charter of the Congregation of the Lord, the 


11 Chr, xxviii. 8; Mic. ii. 5. 2? Deut. xxiii. 1—8; Exod. xii. 43—47. 


164 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


society was dissolved. Deprived of the character of a worshipping 
congregation, it lost its existence. The wall that had enclosed it 
from the rest of mankind, was broken down, when its ordinances 
were nailed to the cross of Christ." 

We have not insisted on the obvious difference between the 
church and the Hebrew congregation, as to the character of the 
members composing them. The congregation consisted mainly of 
Israelites; and these were admitted without regard to moral charac- 
ter, if circumcised, and free from ceremonial defilement and bodily 
defect. Gentiles were admitted, on conforming to the law of cir- 
cumcision; but a Moabite, or Ammonite, could not be admitted 
until the tenth generation; and the most pious Israelite was pro- 
hibited, if he was-ceremonially defiled, or the subject of a particu- 
lar bodily defect.? In Christ Jesus, circumcision availeth nothing, 
but a new creature. Moabites and Ammonites are not excluded; 
but, in every nation, he that feareth God, and worketh righteous- 
ness, is accepted with him.* Ceremonial defilement and bodily 
defects constitute no obstacle to the fellowship of the saints. If 
the institution were the same, such radical changes in the member- 
ship could not well consist with the continued membership of in- 
fants. But the Mosaic institution has been abolished: “ For there 
is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before, for the 
weakness and unprofitableness thereof.” * ‘For if that first cove- 
nant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for 
the second.”*® ‘He taketh away the first, that he may establish 
the second.” 6 

Some advocates of infant church-membership, admit the tem- 
porary nature of the Mosaic institution; but maintain that there 
ran through it, and was contained in it, a spiritual and unchange- 
able covenant, which had been made with Abraham, and which 
is now in force. To this covenant, our attention will next be 
` directed. 

Argument 5.—The Lord promised Abraham, that in him all 
nations of the earth should be blessed; and entered into a covenant 
with him, constituting him the father of many nations, and engaging 
to be the God of him and his seed. Believers in all nations where 
the gospel is preached, are accounted the children of Abraham; 


1 Eph. ii. 14, 15. 2 Deut. xxiii. 1—3. 3 Acts x. 35. 
t Heb. vii. 18. 5 Heb. viii. 7. ® Heb. x. 9. 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 165 


and admitted into this covenant, and become members of God’s 
church. In this covenant, children have always been included 
With their parents; and their right to its privileges was recognised 
by Peter, on the day of Pentecost, in these words: “ The promise 
is to you and your children.” That believing gentiles were re- 
ceived into the same covenant which belonged to national Israel, 
is taught by these words of Christ: “ The kingdom of God shall 
be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits 
thereof.” 1 And still more clearly by Paul, under the figure of the 
good olive-tree, of which the people of Israel were the natural 
branches; but into which believing gentiles were grafted, so as to 
partake of the root and fatness of the olive-tree. In this way, the 
blessing of Abraham comes on the gentiles; and the covenant 
which secures the blessing, embraces their children with them. 


In order to estimate the force of this argument, it will be neces- 
sary to review some events in the life of Abraham. 

The first event that claims our attention, is thus recorded :— 

“Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy 
country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house, unto a 
land that I will show thee: and I will make of thee a great nation, 
and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt 
be a blessing; and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him 
that curseth thee; and in thee shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed.”’? In this narrative, all is to be taken literally. The 
command was meant, and understood, and obeyed, according to the 
literal import of the words. The promise has thus far been ful- 
filled in its literal sense, and is still in progress of literal accom- 
plishment. Abraham was personally blessed with eminent piety, 
and extraordinary tokens of the Divine favor. Though an humble 
man, dwelling in a tent, and not distinguished as a conqueror, 
statesman, or philosopher, he is one of the most renowned of all 
whose names have been transmitted to our times. The nation of 
Israel, descended from him, was great in number, and strength, 
and great in its influence on the world. To this nation, under 
God, mankind are indebted for the Bible, the gospel; and, above 
all, the Saviour of the world, who was, according to the flesh, of 
the seed of Abraham. This nation has given to the world the 
knowledge of the true God; which knowledge is ultimately to 
overspread the earth, and bless all nations. In this manner the 


ee ee 


1 Matt. xxi. 43. 2 Gen, xii. 3. 


166 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


pronuse made to Abraham, that in him all the families of the earth 
should be blessed, will be fulfilled. This promise was repeated to 
the patriarch, after the birth of his son Isaac, in these words: 
“ And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.’’? 
The source of blessing to mankind was originally in the person of 
Abraham, but was now transferred to the person of the son that 
had been born of him: and hence the language of the promise was 
changed, “In thy seed,” &c. The same promise was afterwards 
repeated to Isaac,” and to Jacob.* This promise is frequently re- 
ferred to in the Scriptures, and is called the covenant which God 
made with the fathers*—the word covenant being used according to 
its latitude of meaning, to denote a firm and stable promise; and it 
is once called, the gospel preached unto Abraham. No doubt can 
exist, that this important and distinguished promise included 
spiritual blessings; but the language is not spiritual in the sense 
in which this epithet is sometimes used, to mark what is not literal. 
Every word of this ‘gospel to Abraham,” is as literal as the 
gospel declaration of Paul: “ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and thou shalt be saved.” 

The second event which we shall notice, is stated thus :— 

“ And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward 
heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them; and he 
said unto him, So shall thy seed be. And he believed in the Lord; 
and he counted it to him for righteousness.” ê 

Here, again, all is to be understood in the literal sense. The 
posterity promised to the patriarch, were literal descendants, 
persons born out of his bowels.” The great blessing of justifica- 
tion, bestowed on this eminent believer, is spiritual in its nature; 
but the language in which it is described, is as simple and literal 
as that which is used in the New Testament, to denote the same 
blessing: “ By him, all that believe are justified from all things.” 

The third event which claims our consideration, gave existence 
to the covenant of circumcision. The record of this important 
transaction is found in the 17th chapter of Genesis :— 

“And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord 


Ew 


1 Gen. xxii. 18. 2 Gen. xxvi. 4. 3 Gen. xxviii. 14. 
* Acts iii, 29. 5 Gal. ili. 8. ® Gen. xv. 5, 6. 
OVA 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 167 


appeared to Abram, and said unto him: I am the Almighty God; 
walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my covenant 
between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly. And 
Abram fell on his face, and God talked with him, saying, As for 
me, behold my covenant is with thee.” 

Thus far all is to be taken as literally as any other historical 
record. 

“ And thou shalt be a father of many nations.” 

This has been supposed by some, to be more than was true of 
Abraham, in the literal sense; but they err. From Jacob, the 
grandson of Abraham, was descended the nation of Israel—the 
great nation intended in the promise, ‘I will make of thee a great 
nation.” From Esau, another grandson, sprang the Edomites, a 
great and powerful nation. From Ishmael, the son of Abraham 
by Hagar, twelve nations were descended.! These several nations 
were less great and powerful than the Israelites, or Edomites; 
but, nevertheless, each of them was called a nation, according to 
the use of the word in those times. Besides Isaac and Ishmael, 
Abraham had six sons by Keturah.2 If these were as prolific as 
the other two, the whole number of nations descended from Abra- 
ham was fifty-six. No reason, therefore, exists for abandoning 
the literal sense of the clause. We have no right to insist on such 
a sense for the word “nation,” as will correspond with its use in 
modern history. What it meant, when the covenant was made, is 
what it means in this clause; and in this sense, the promise has 
been literally fulfilled. 

“Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy 
name shall be Abraham.” 

This change of name has been thought to imply that there is ` 
something mystical in the covenant. The change was doubtless 
significant; but the supposition that it had any signification which 
militates against the literal construction of the covenant, is wholly 
unfounded. The posterity of the patriarch, including the many 
inspired prophets whom God raised up among them, the first 
preachers of the gospel, and the writers of the New Testament, 
were accustomed to use this new name Abraham to signify their 
literal ancestor. 


1 Gen, xxy. 16, 2 Vv. 1—3; 


168 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


“ For a father of many nations have I made thee. And I will 
make thee exceeding fruitful; and I will make nations of thee, and 
kings shall come out of thee.” 

The first of these clauses explains the change in the patriarch’s 
name. It was not in some mystical sense that God made him 
exceedingly fruitful; and, therefore, the phrase, “I have made 
thee a father of nations,” does not need a mystical interpretation. 
God “made Abraham fruitful,” not by some mystical appointment, 
but by literally multiplying his seed; and in this literal sense he 
made him the father of many nations. The promise, “and kings 
shall come out of thee,” was literally fulfilled; and this clause, a 
mystical interpretation of which no one has ventured to insist on, 
binds down the covenant to the literal construction. 

“ And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and 
thy seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting cove- 
nant.” 

All this is to be understood according to the meaning which 
common usage assigned to the words. A difficulty would attend 
the interpretation, if the term “ everlasting” always denoted un- 
limited duration; but this was not its only signification. The 
grant of the land of Canaan afterwards made in the covenant, 
could not extend beyond the duration of the present world; and, 
if the covenant was to continue in force to the end of time, or 
even till that state of things should cease, for which the covenant 
was designed to provide, the epithet “ everlasting” was properly 
applied to it. In various passages of Scripture the word is used 
in this sense. 

“ To be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.” 

These words were not designed to be a promise of spiritual 
grace, or eternal life, to all the descendants of Abraham. A new 
covenant predicted by the prophet Jeremiah, contained the stipu- 
lation: “I will be their God; and they shall be my people.” 1 
This promise secured spiritual grace; but it would not have been 
a new covenant if the same grant had been made in the covenant 
with Abraham. As contained in this covenant, the promise engaged 
a special divine care over Abraham and his descendants ; and par- 
ticularly over the nation of Israel, the seed to whom the grant of 
center a et BRETT a is a) 


1 Jer. xxxi. 33. 


a 


is Ea 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 169 


Canaan was made in this covenant. In this sense, the promise 
. Was literally fulfilled. He separated them from all other nations, 
and acknowledged them to be his people: “ You only have I known 
of all the families of the earth.” ! His providence over them, and 
his revelations to them, were all peculiar, In all his dealings 
with them, he acted in the relation of a God. He rewarded as a 
God, and punished as a God. He made himself known to them 
as a God, while other nations were permitted to remain in igno- 
rance of him; and as a God, while he granted to this nation means 
of grace and salvation unknown to the rest of the world, he used 
the nation as the channel for conveying spiritual blessings to all 
the nations of the earth. 

“ And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land 
wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for an ever- 
lasting possession.” 

All this was meant literally, and was literally fulfilled. The 
import of the word “ everlasting,” has been explained in the 
remarks on the phrase “everlasting covenant.” Whether the word 
everlasting, either in application to the covenant or to the posses- 
sion of Canaan, was limited to the dispensation that preceded the 
time of Christ, or extended into the present dispensation, and still 
stretches forward into future time, will be a subject of future 
inquiry. But whatever may be true on this question, the use of 
the word militates nothing against the literal construction of the 
covenant. 

“And I will be their God.” 

This promise, as has already been explained, was literally 
fulfilled. 

“And God said unto Abraham, thou shalt keep my covenant 
therefore, thou and thy seed after thee in their generations. This 
is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you, and thy 
seed after thee; every man child among you shall be circumcised. 
And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall 
be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. And he that is 
eight days old shall be circumcised among you; every man child in 
your generations, he that is born in the house or bought with 
money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed. He that is born 


——————— ee 


1 Amos iii. 2. 


170 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs 
be circumcised; and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an 
everlasting covenant. And the uncircumcised man child whose 
flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off 
from his people; he hath broken my covenant.” 

The precept enjoining circumcision was intended to be under- 
stood literally, and it was understood and obeyed literally. An 
important, very important part of God’s design in making this 
covenant, was to distinguish and separate the descendants of 
Abraham from the rest of mankind; and this design would have 
been frustrated if this part of the covenant had not been taken 
literally. The whole history of the Hebrew nation, and almost 
every page of the New Testament, testify in favor of the literal 
construction. 

“And God said unto Abraham, as for Sarai, thy wife, thou 
shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be. And 
I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless 
her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be 
of her.” 

The new name Sarah, like the new name Abraham, was signifi- 
cant; but neither of them signified anything contrary to the literal 
construction of the covenant. Abraham was the father of many 
nations, because he had sons by other wives; but his only son by 
Sarah was Isaac, the father of Jacob and Esau; and the only 
nations descended from Sarah, were the Israelites and the Edom- 
ites. It was promised that Sarah should be a mother of “ nations,” 
not of “many nations;” and this adaptation of the ‘language to 
what became literally true, proves that the covenant was made in 
the literal sense of the words. In the literal sense kings came out 
of Sarah; the kings of Edom, and the long line of kings in Israel 
and Judah. 

Our examination of the covenant has proved conclusively, that 
it was designed to be understood literally; but a question arises 
whether it does not admit another and more spiritual sense. 

The precepts which enjoined the ceremonies of worship to be 
observed by the Hebrew congregation, were all designed to be 
understood and obeyed literally. Literal bulls and goats were to 
be sacrificed; literal fire was to be used, and all the directions 
given were to be observed in their literal import. But the various 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 171 


ceremonies of this worship were shadows of things to come; and 
a large part of the epistle to the Hebrews is employed in explain- 
ing their spiritual signification. Persons and events of the Old 
Testament which appear in their proper connection as subjects of 
literal history, are in the New Testament made to represent 
spiritual things, and spiritual instruction is drawn from them. 
The history of Hagar, as given in the book of Genesis, is literally 
true ; but Paul calls it an allegory, and uses it to represent spiritual 
things. In the same manner the covenant of circumcision is made 
a source of spiritual instruction. The chief particulars in the 
covenant which are made representatives of spiritual things, are 
three: 

1. The literal descendants of Abraham are made to represent 
believers, who are called his children in a different sense of the 
word. The metaphorical use of the terms which denote the 
paternal and filial relations, is frequent in the Scriptures. One 
who appears at the head of a class of persons as a father appears 
at the head of his family or tribe, is called the father of that class; 
and the individuals composing the class, are called his children. 
Thus, “Jabal was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such 
as have cattle: and Jubal was the father of all such as handle the 
harp and organ.” ! These persons called fathers, were inventors 
of arts; and the class of persons who practise these arts are 
regarded as their children. So those who practise the piety of 
which Abraham was an illustrious example, and walk in the foot- 
steps of his faith, are called his children. In this tropical sense 
of the term, Jesus said to the wicked Jews, “ If ye were Abraham’s 
children, ye would do the works of Abraham.”*? Since the men 
whom Jesus addressed were children of Abraham in the literal 
sense, the distinction between the literal and the metaphorical 
sense is plainly marked; and the latter sense is made to depend 
on imitation of Abraham in the works for which he was eminent. 
Paul has distinguished between the literal Jew and the metaphori- 
cal Jew;* between the children according to the flesh, and the 
children of promise.4 The latter, he says, “are counted for the 
seed ;”’ that is, they are accounted the seed of Abraham when the 
covenant is viewed as an allegory. 


— 


1 Gen. iv. 20, 21. 2 John viii. 39. 5 Rom. ii. 29. 
t Rom. ix. 8. 


172 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


2. Circumcision is made to represent regeneration, the spiritual 
change by which men become new creatures. Hence it is said, 
“Tn Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor un- 
circumcision ; but a new creature.’"! A tropical use of the word 
circumcise to denote a moral change, is found in the Old Testa- 
ment: “The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the 
heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, 
and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.”? Paul distinguishes 
between the literal and the spiritual circumcision; thus, ‘‘ Neither is 
that circumcision which is outward in the flesh... .. Circumcision 
is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter.’”3 This 
circumcision of the heart is in another passage called the *‘ circum- 
cision of Christ.” While the literal circumcision which marked 
the literal seed of Abraham avails nothing in Christ Jesus, the 
spiritual circumcision marks those who belong to Christ, and who 
are, in the spiritual sense, the seed of Abraham. “If ye be 
Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the 
promise.” 5 

3. Canaan, the land promised to Abraham and his literal seed, 
is made to represent heaven, the future inheritance of those who 
have like faith with the patriarch. Abraham at the command of 
God left his native country, and sojourned in the land of Canaan ; 
but though the land was his by promise, he never obtained pos- 
session of it. Paul makes a spiritual use of this fact: “ Confessed 
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. But now they 
desire a better country, that is, an heavenly.” The literal Canaan 
was present to the sight of the patriarch, as a desirable possession 
secured by covenant to him and his seed; but the eye of his faith 
was directed to a better country, of which this was but a type. 
His spiritual seed are like him in faith, and their faith directs its 
eye to the same heavenly inheritance. 

The allegorical interpretation of the covenant is beautifully 
harmonious in all its parts. Abraham, the most illustrious example 
`of faith found in the Old Testament, appears at the head of a 
class of persons who are like him in faith; and he is hence called 


the father of the faithful. As he was marked by the circumcision 


I 


1 Gal. vi. 15. * Deut. xxx. 6, è Rom. ii. 28, 29. 
* Col. ii. 11. 5 Gal. iii. 29. ® Heb. xi. 13, 16, 


ee ee ee 


ee Fa oe 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 173 


of the heart, and distinguished thereby from the rest of mankind, 
80 are they. As he looked beyond the earthly possession granted 
to him, and sought a heavenly inheritance, so do they. 

The spiritual truths which the covenant represents in its alle- 
gorical use, were not brought into existence by the covenant, and 
are not dependent on it. They are above it, as the things which 
the Mosaic ceremonies typified are superior to the ceremonies ; or 
as a substance is superior to its shadow, and independent of it. 
In the third chapter of Galatians, Paul teaches that believers are the 
children of Abraham, and are blessed with him ; and he dates back 
their connection with him to a time that preceded the covenant of 
circumcision. He says, that “the law was four hundred and 
thirty years after.” Now, reckoning back four hundred and 
thirty years from the giving of the law, we arrive at the time when 
Abraham received the first promise. This preceded the covenant 
of circumcision by twenty-four years. This promise, first made 
with reference to Abraham himself, and afterwards renewed with 
reference to his seed, is the covenant to which this passage evi- 
dently refers. Hence, believers hold their connection with Abraham 
receiving the great gospel promise, and not with Abraham receiv- 
ing the covenant of circumcision; with Abraham as first dis- 
tinguished by the circumcision of the heart, and not with Abraham 
as afterwards distinguished by the circumcision of the flesh. Pree 
cisely the same view is presented in the fourth chapter of Romans, 
in which it is taught that believers are connected, not with the 
circumcised, but with the uncircumcised Abraham, in obtaining the 
blessing of justification. 

The judaizing Christians taught, “Except ye be circumcised 
and keep the law, ye cannot be saved.” This was the current 
doctrine of the Jews. They gloried in the covenant of circum- 
cision, and their connection with the circumcised Abraham; and 
for the purpose of securing a title to the earthly Canaan, literal , 
descent from Abraham, and the circumcision that is outward in the 
flesh, were sufficient. But Paul opposed the doctrine of the judaizing 
teachers, and opened a different view of the Holy Spirit’s teachings 
in the Old Testament. He taught that to secure the spiritual 
blessings which Abraham enjoyed, we must seek them in the way 
in which Abraham obtained them. He did not obtain the favor of 
God by circumcision and keeping the law; but enjoyed this bless- 


174 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


ing four hundred and thirty years before the law, and while he 
was yet uncircumcised. He received the blessing by faith; and 
every one who would be blessed with him, must seek it in this way. 
These arguments of Paul, in which he deduced the true doctrine 
of the gospel from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, were 
powerful in opposition to the judaizing theory. 

The covenant of circumcision in its literal sense, included in the 
covenant seed none but the literal descendants of Abraham. The 
patriarch and his sons were commanded to circumcise all the males 
of the household, including the servants born in the house, and 
those bought with money; but these servants did not thereby 
become incorporated with the covenant seed. None of the servants 
in the families of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, had this privilege 
conferred on them; and it cannot be supposed that the servants of 
their descendants were more highly favored than the servants of 
the patriarchs themselves. On the contrary, those servants, though 
circumcised, are expressly said in the covenant itself, to be “ not 
of thy seed.” When the Congregation of the Lord was instituted, 
provision was made for gentiles to be admitted to the privileges of 
its worship on conforming to the law of circumcision; but they 
were nevertheless strangers within the gate, and not a part of the 
covenant seed, or entitled to a part in the land of Canaan. 
Genealogical records were kept distinguishing the seed proper 
from the proselytes of the gate; and hence Paul was able to call 
himself “a Hebrew of the Hebrews ;” that is, a Hebrew by original 
extraction. 

As the covenant of circumcision in its literal sense, admitted 
none into the covenant seed but literal descendants of Abraham ; 
so in the allegorical sense, none are included in the spiritual seed but 
true believers. This is clear from many passages of Scripture :— 
“ So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. 
....If ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs 
according to the promise.”? The following passage is perfectly 
decisive on this subject, and shows conclusively that genuine faith 
is intended, and not the mere profession of it: “ Therefore it is of 
faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be 
sure to all the seed.” 3 


ee 
1 Gal, iii. 9. PEW aads * Rom. iv. 16, 


S PORERNE a i i il i 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. FO 


One among the promises made to Abraham was, “I will make 3f 
- thee a great nation.” In the covenant of circumcision, it was 
promised that he should be the father of many nations; and the 
nation of Israel was contemplated as one of these. The covenant 
in its literal sense, instituted no ecclesia or worshipping congrega- 
tion. A cahal for the worship of God, was instituted by Moses; 
and laws and ceremonies for that worship were instituted with it. 
The covenant then made with Israel had ordinances of divine 
service and a worldly sanctuary ; but he who looks for these in the 
covenant of circumcision will look in vain. It contains no sanc- 
tuary, no ordinances of divine worship, no priesthood, no assembly. 
We have shown that the cahal instituted by Moses has been dis- 
solved; and, if the covenant of circumcision still survives, it exists 
as it did before the days of Moses—a national covenant, made 
with the literal descendants of Abraham, admitting no others to 
be incorporated with the covenant seed, and making no provision 
for the public worship of God. Surely, the Christian church is 
not founded on this covenant. 

Since the covenant of circumcision instituted no ecclesia, and 
cannot admit gentile infants among the covenant seed, the doctrine 
of infant church-membership cannot be affected by the question, 
whether the covenant has been abrogated, or is now in force: and, 
for any purpose of our present inquiry, we are under no obligation 
to decide this question. Since this covenant existed before that 
which was made by Moses, the abrogation of the latter may have 
left the former just as it had previously been. In it, the land of 
Canaan was given for an everlasting possession; and the covenant 
is styled “an everlasting covenant.” We may hence infer, that 
the covenant will continue in force as long as the Israelites shall 
possess the land of Canaan. If the general expectation be well 
founded, that they will return to their land and repossess it, the 
covenant must be still in force. The facts that, since the abroga- 
tion of the Mosaic covenant, they have been called the people of 
God ;* that they have the promise of being restored again to his 
favor;* and are declared not to be cast off, because the gifts and 
calling of God are without repentance ;* confirm this view. To 
all this we may add the remarkable fact, that, when the apostles 


ta ee ee 


1 Rom. xi. 1 2. ? V. 23—30. A V29. 


176 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


declared converts from among the gentiles to be under no obliga- 
tion to be circumcised, they did not release Jews from this obliga- 
tion. Fora gentile to be circumcised, is an admission that the 
Congregation of the Lord is still in being, and the Mosaic law still 
in force; and for any one, whether Jew or gentile, to be circum- 
cised as a means of salvation, is to set aside Christ and render 
him unprofitable. But can any one prove that it is inconsistent 
with the gospel for a Jew to retain circumcision, as a token of his 
connection with Abraham, and his interest in that remarkable 
people, through whom he still expects God to display the riches 
of his grace in the most wonderful manner ? 

Is the covenant of circumcision in force, in its allegorical sense? 
This question is about as unmeaning as if it were asked, whether 
a portrait exists in the person of him whom it resembles. The 
portrait and the man exist independently of each other. The man 
may die, and leave the portrait; or the portrait may be destroyed, 
while the man lives. If the covenant of circumcision is in force 
at all, it is in force in that only sense in which it is a covenant— 
namely, the literal. No one would say that the ceremonial law is 
now in force, because the spiritual truths which the ceremonies 
prefigured abide for ever. Whether the covenant is abrogated, or 
is now in force, the spiritual instruction derived from it is the 
everlasting gospel. 

While the covenant, literally construed, gives no sanction to 
infant church-membership, the spiritual use which is made of it in 
the Scriptures incidentally decides that all the members of the 
primitive churches were believers. Paul says to the Galatians: 
“ Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.” 
ee “Ye are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ. 
If ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed.” These texts prove 
that the members of the Galatian churches were all accounted the 
children of Abraham, in the spiritual sense—that is, were true 
believers—and what was true of those churches, must have been 
true of all other churches instituted by the apostles. 

A portrait is not more distinct from the man whom it resembles, 
nor a shadow more distinct from the substance which casts it, than 
is the covenant of circumcision from the spiritual truth which it 
represents, in the allegorical interpretation of it. We ought never 
to confound things so distinct; but this is done by the doctrine of 


PT ee ee 


———- oF} 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. P 


infant church-membership. {t follows the literal sense, from Abra- 
` ham down to the introduction of the gospel, and accounts the lite- 
ral seed, during this period, to be the church: it then follows the — 
spiritual sense, and introduces gentile believers among the covenant 
seed: it then returns to the law of literal descent, and follows this 
for one generation, and then abandons it. By this unaccountable 
mixture of interpretations, the immediate literal descendants of 
those who are, or ought to be, according to their profession, the 
Spiritual seed of Abraham, are supposed to be brought within the 
covenant, and incorporated with the eovenant seed: but, alas! they 
are a seed which inherit neither the literal nor the spiritual pro- 
mises made to the patriarch. They do not inherit the literal pro- 
mises, because they are gentiles ; nor the spiritual promises, because 
these are secured only to believers. 

Tt remains that we examine the other texts of Scripture, which 
the argument that we are considering, cites in its support. 

“For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all 
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.” 

The word which is here rendered “ children,” denotes posterity, 
immediate or remote, without respect to age. The same word is 
used in the sentence, “Children shall rise up against their parents, 
and shall cause them to be put to death;”? and in the phrase, 
“children of the flesh,’’’ when used to denote all the natural pos- 
terity of Abraham. The promise here referred to appears, from 
the words which immediately precede, to be the promise of the 
Holy Spirit; but, whether it be this, or the promise made to Abra- 
ham as the argument supposes, it must be understood to include 
spiritual blessings. Three classes of persons are mentioned, to 
whom the promise is given; the Israelites of that generation, their 
posterity, and the gentiles: “you, your children, and all that are 
afar off.” To neither of these classes is the promise given without 
condition or limitation. When it is said, “Repent, for the pro- 
mise is to you,” the receiving of the promise is evidently suspended 
on the condition of repentance. The same condition applies 
equally to the other two classes. This is fully established by the 
limiting clause, “even as many as the Lord our God shall call.” 
The promise is not absolute to all who are externally called by the 


1 Acts ii. 39. 3? Matt. x. 21. 3 Rom. ix. 8. 
12 


178 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


gospel, but to those only who are effectually called to repentance. 
This limitation applies equally to all the three classes. Though 
the word “ children” may sometimes be used with exclusive appli- 
cation to infants, there is no reason to suppose that such use of it 
is made here, but the whole posterity are intended; and it cannot 
be that spiritual blessings were promised to all those, without con- 
dition or limitation. The mention of the posterity, in this case, 
was peculiarly appropriate. Peter had charged them with the 
crime of crucifying the Lord Jesus. When this crime was com- 
mitted, in calling on Pilate to crucify him, they had said: “ His 
blood be on us, and on our children.” This fact rendered the 
information suitable and welcome, that the same means of salvation 
that were granted to them, would be granted to their posterity. 

“ The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a 
nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.’”? 

The name of a type is sometimes applied to the thing typified. 
Regeneration is called circumcision; but, to show that literal cir- 
cumcision is not intended, it is called the circumcision of the heart, 
or the circumcision of Christ. Heaven is called a country, in 
allusion to the country promised to Abraham, which typified it; 
but, for the sake of distinction, the epithets ‘ better” and “ hea- 
venly’’ are applied: ‘‘a better country, that is, a heavenly.” 
The nation of Israel, marked by the literal circumcision, and heirs 
of the earthly Canaan, typified those who are circumcised in heart, 
and are heirs of the heavenly country. These last are on this 
account called a nation; but, to distinguish them from the nation 
which typified them, they are called “a nation bringing forth the 
fruits” of the kingdom; that is, the fruits of holy obedience to 
God as their king. Peter calls them “a chosen generation, a royal 
priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people.” They are not a na- 
tion, in the literal sense of the term, as the nation of Israel was. 
Earthly nations included infants, but this spiritual nation consists 
of those who bring forth the fruits of the kingdom; and who, 
according to Peter, “show forth the praises of him who hath called 
them out of darkness into his marvellous light.” These things 
cannot be predicated of infants. It follows, therefore, that, in this 
transfer of the kingdom, infants are not its recipients. 


1 Matt. xxi. 43. 


NRR 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 179 


The precise sense in which the kingdom is said to be taken from 
the nation of Israel, it is not necessary, for our present purpose, 
to determine. The government of that nation has been called a 
theocracy. God was their king; and various benefits resulted to 
them from being under his reign. To these benefits the text may 
refer ; and the sense may be, that the peculiar privilege of having 
God to reign over them, should no longer distinguish them from 
other nations of the earth; but this privilege would henceforth be 
confined to a spiritual people, to be selected out of all nations. 
But, as the phrase, “ kingdom of God,” was commonly used by 
Christ to denote the new kingdom which he was establishing, the 
reference may be exclusively to this. He was born “King of the 
Jews,” and was crucified with this title. He was sent, as he him- 
self declared, not to the gentiles, but to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel. The first proclamation of his reign was made to this 
people; and the beginning and first benefits of his reign were con- 
fined to them. Their rejection of his reign was made the occasion 
of its extension to the gentiles: “It was necessary that the word 
of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it 
from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we 
turn to the gentiles.”" The blessings of the Messiah’s reign were 
expected by the nation to be theirs, and the first offer and bestow- 
ment of them accorded with this expectation: but the peculiar 
privilege was taken from them when they rejected their king; and 
it is now enjoyed by those who obey him in every nation. These, 
and these only, bring forth the fruits of the kingdom; and, however 
the transfer to them may be understood, it cannot prove the church- 
membership of infants. 

The last Scripture cited in the argument has been much relied 
on, as proof that the Christian church is a continuation of an 
organized society which existed in the Old Testament dispensation. 
Under the figure of the good olive-tree, Paul is supposed to teach 
that the church sprang from Abraham, and that it has continued 
to the present time. 

In the passage which contains this figurative representation, the 
following things may be observed :— } 

1. The olive-tree underwent an important change when many of 


ee 


1 Acts xiii. 46. 


186 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


the natural branches were broken off. The reason for their sepa- 
ration is expressly given: “ Because of unbelief, they were broken 
off.” Since the unbelieving branches were taken away by this act, 
none were left but believing branches. These are the remnant 
before spoken of; “the remnant according to the election of 
grace: the seed intended when it is said, “ Except the Lord of 
Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been made 
like unto Gomorrha.” 1 

2. A second change took place when branches were engrafted 
from the wild olive-tree. The character of these branches is 
made known by the words with which Paul addresses them: “ Thou 
standest by faith.” We are hence assured that these also were 
believing branches. This accords with what is elsewhere taught: 
« That the blessing of Abraham might come on the gentiles through 
faith.” 

3. Another important change is still expected when the natural 
branches which were broken off shall be “ graffed in again.” The 
condition on which it will be done is expressly stated : “ They also 

shall be graffed in again, if they abide not in unbelief.” They 

are recognised as natural branches, and the olive-tree is called 
“their own;” but neither of these facts will sufice to effect their 
restoration. If they come in again, they must come as believing 
branches. 

These three comprehend all the changes which the olive-tree is 
said to undergo; and as a consequence of these, none but beliey- 
ing branches have a present, or can have a future connection with 
the tree. The design for which this figurative illustration was 
introduced, and the explanations which accompany it, clearly show 
that the natural branches were designed to represent the natural 
seed of Abraham; and the changes which the tree undergoes, are 
precisely such as substituted the spiritual seed for the natural, the 
children by faith for the children according to the flesh. The whole 
scope of the apostle’s teaching in connection with the passage, if 
attentively considered, leaves no reasonable doubt that this was the 
design of the figure. 

Types, parables, and allegories, are founded on similitude; but 
when spiritual things are likened to natural, the likeness is neces- 


1 Rom. ix. 29. 


a 


DIRECT ARGUMENTS. 181 


sarily imperfect. He who seeks to extend the likeness beyond its 
proper limit, is in danger of mistake. In the present case it would 
be unprofitable, and perhaps worse than unprofitable, to inquire 
what may be signified by the trunk of the tree, its leaves, and the 
various other parts of which botanists could tell us. In the sketch 
which the apostle’s pencil has drawn, imperfect indeed, but suffi- 
cient for all his purpose, we see nothing of the tree but its 
branches, its root, and its fatness, unless its fruit may be referred 
to in v. 16. The chief question before the apostle’s mind, related 
to the branches; and what these signify he has sufficiently informed 
us. What the root and fatness of the olive-tree signify, we are 
left to learn from the connection of the passage ; and from this we 
may infer that Abraham, and the promises made to him, are in- 
tended. 

Some have supposed that Christ is the root of the olive-tree ; 
and that the figure corresponds with that of the vine in the 15th 
chapter of John. The strongest argument in favor of this opinion, 
is furnished by the words, “ Thou bearest not the root, but the root 
thee.” Since Christ is the only name by which we must be saved, - 
the believing soul is borne or supported by him, and not by Abraham. 
But such support as this, is not intended by the word “ bearest’’ 
in this passage. The word is used with evident allusion to the 
figure, and signifies only what the figure signifies by the depend- 
ance of the branches on the root. The natural descendants of 
Abraham, who are the natural branches of the olive-tree, do not 
depend on their illustrious progenitor as the believing soul depends 
on Christ; and, therefore, such dependence is not implied in this 
passage. Paul, though he was the minister of the uncircumcision, 
was careful to teach the gentiles their indebtedness to the Jews, 
He urged the obligation of contributing to relieve the poor saints 
at Jerusalem by this consideration: “Their debtors they are. 
For if the gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual 
things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal,’’! So 
in the present case, he urges on the gentiles, “ Boast not against the 
natural branches; for if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but 
the root thee.” The religion which blesses the gentiles was ob- 
tained from the Jews. Jesus Christ was a Jew. The Old Testa- 
—_—_ S 


1 Rom. xy. 27. 


182 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


ment was a Jewish book; and the New Testament is the gospel 
written by Jews. In the comprehensive words of Christ, “ Salva- 
tion is of the Jews.” The promise to Abraham, “In thee shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed,” contemplated the Hebrew 
nation to whom the oracles of God were committed, and from whom, 
according to the flesh, Christ came, as yet in the loins of the 
patriarch. In this view, Abraham is presented in the figure as 
the root of the olive-tree; and the spiritual blessings are its fatness 
of which gentile believers partake. r 

An objection presents itself, that in the substitution of the 
spiritual for the natural seed, such a change is supposed as destroys 
the identity of the olive-tree, and the more so, because the fatness 
of which the two kinds of branches partake, cannot be the same. To 
this objection it is a sufficient reply, that figures cannot be expected 
to hold good in everything. But another reply may be given. 
The nourishment which proceeds from the root of a tree to its 
various parts, is assimilated to each according to its nature, and 
becomes woody fibre, bark, leaf, or fruit. Even the fruit may 
vary, though deriving nourishment from the same root; for that 
which is produced by a grafted branch will differ from that pro- 
duced by a natural branch. All this is found in a natural tree; 
and yet the change of its branches by grafting, and the variety of 
nourishment which the root yields, do not affect the identity of the 
tree in a general view of it. It can, therefore, be no objection to 
Paul’s figure, that it represents natural and spiritual branches as 
connected with the same root and deriving benefits of different 
kinds from it. This mode of meeting the objection is proposed 
merely to show that it has not a solid foundation to sustain it; but 
we cannot suppose that Paul, in sketching out this figure, had 
reference to abstruse principles of vegetable physiology. He 
informs us that the distinction represented by the two classes of 
branches existed in the days of Elijah, when God informed the 
prophet that he had reserved to himself seven thousand men who 
had not bowed the knee to the image of Baal. ‘ Even so,” he adds, 
“there is at this time a remnant according to the election of 
grace.” Besides the natural branches who were bowing to Baal, 
there then existed a remnant who were faithful and enjoyed 
spiritual blessings.. All these together, the advocates of infant 
church-membership tell us, composed the visible church of that 


i 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 183 


day, and were branches of the same olive-tree; and the same con- 
stitution of things, uniting natural and spiritual branches on the 
same trunk, they suppose continues to the present time. Accord 
ing to the view which we have taken, the great Husbandman has 
broken off the natural branches, and but one species of branches 
now remains. It follows, therefore, that the objection, whatever 
may be its force, is applicable rather to the opinion which we 
oppose, than to that which we defend. 

The question whether the passage teaches the church-member- 
ship of infants, may be approached aside from the objection which 
we have been considering, and from all perplexing inquiry as to 
what the root and fatness of the olive-tree signify. It relates 
wholly to the branches of the tree; and with respect to these, we 
have the unerring Spirit to guide our interpretation. His express 
teaching determines, that the branches now connected with the 
olive-tree, are all believing. Here a landmark is fixed, which must 
not be removed. If we leave the plain teaching of the Spirit, and 
follow the guidance of our own fancy, until we become involved 
in error, it must be our own fault. 

Infant membership is argued from the identity of the olive-tree; 
but, unfortunately for the argument, the changes which the apostle 
has described, infringe on the identity of the tree, exactly in the 
wrong place. All these changes respect the branches, and are 
made on one principle—the substitution of faith for natural de- 
scent; as the bond of connection between the branches and the 
root. Infant membership depends on natural descent; and the 
one principle on which all the changes are made, by taking away 
natural descent, leaves infant membership to hang on nothing. 


Secrron II.—ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 


The arguments which were considered in the last section, aim 
directly to establish the right of infants to church-membership. 
Other arguments, tending indirectly to establish the same point, 
have immediate respect to the docrine of infant baptism. 

The Holy Scriptures contain no precept or example for infant 
baptism; and the qualifications which they uniformly describe, as 
necessary to baptism, infants do not possess. With these facts 
before us, we are compelled to reject infants from the ordinance 


184 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


unless a special claim in their behalf can be well established. We 
shall now proceed to consider the chief arguments which have been 
used, in support of their claim. 


Argument 1.—Repentance and faith are as much required by 
the Scriptures, in order to salvation, as in order to baptism; but 
as infants may be saved without them, so they may be baptized 
without them. From the nature of the case, these qualifications 
are required of adults only. The commission does indeed place 
believing before baptizing, but it equally places it before being 
saved ; and it even declares, in express terms, “He that believeth 
not shall be damned.” If, therefore, we may infer from it, that 
infants ought not to be baptized, we may, with as much certainty, 
infer that they cannot be saved. 


This argument has no force, to establish infant baptism. Be- 
cause infants may be saved without repentance and faith, it does 
not follow that they are entitled to every privilege which may be 
claimed for them. The utmost extent to which the argument can 
go, is to weaken the force of the opposing argument; and this it 
does in appearance only. How are we to reconcile the declara- 
tion, “ He that believeth not shall be damned,” with the doctrine 
of infant salvation? The answer is obvious. When Christ com- 
missioned his disciples to preach the gospel to every creature, he 
meant every creature capable of hearing and understanding it. 
“ He that believeth not,” means—he that, having heard the gospel, 
rejects it. In this obvious meaning of the phrase, it affirms no- 
thing contrary to infant salvation. Adopting the same mode of 
exposition, in the preceding clause, it signifies—he that hears the 
gospel, believes it, and is baptized, shall be saved. The commis- 
sion does not say, whether infants will be saved, or whether they 
ought to be baptized; for the simple reason, that it has no refer- 
ence to them. The argument before us, drives us to this exposi- 
tion of the commission; but what does infant baptism gain by it? 
We learn from it, that, in the great commission which Christ gave 
to his apostles, by which baptism was established as a permanent 
institution to be observed among all nations to the end of time, he 
had no reference to infants. 


Argument 2.—Though the Scriptures contain no positive pre- 
cept for infant baptism, the same is true with respect to female 
communion, and the Christian Sabbath. The Lord’s Supper is a 
positive institute ; and yet we admit females to partake of it, with- 


i ah 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 185 


out a positive precept. The change from the seventh day of the 
_ week to the first, in the observance of the Sabbath, has no express 

command for it in the Scriptures, and is, in part, a repeal of the 
fourth commandment ; yet we admit it on satisfactory inference, 
Supported by the practice of the early churches. In like manner 
the observance of infant baptism may be vindicated, though not 
prescribed by positive precept. 

We do not exclude all reasoning with respect to positive insti- 
tutes. No one on earth can point to a positive precept in the Scrip- 
tures, requiring him in particular to be baptized. Paul was directly 
commanded to be baptized ; and so were those whom Peter addressed, 
on the day of Pentecost, and in the house of Cornelius. From 
these facts, we think it lawful to infer, that persons of like char- 
acter, and in like circumstances, ought now to be baptized. The 
commission did not directly command any one to be baptized: but 
it commanded the apostles to baptize; and from the obligation to 
baptize laid on one party, we infer the obligation of another party 
to be baptized ; and we infer the perpetuity of the obligation, from 
the fact that the commission was manifestly designed to be perpe- 
tual. Such inferences we hold to be legitimate and necessary ; but 
we maintain, that positive institutes originating in the will of the 
lawgiver, cannot be determined by mere reasoning from general 
principles. The obligation to baptize believers, can be referred to 
express divine command; and if an obligation to baptize infants 
exists, it cannot be made out by any process of reasoning from the 
parental and filial relations or general principles of morals; but 
must be referred, in like manner, to some divine command. We 
ask for this command. Whatever reasoning may be necessary, to 
unfold the command, and show that infant baptism is contained in 
it, we consent to undertake; but we must know that it is the will) 
of Christ, before we can observe it as an institution of his religion. 

The necessity for divine command is rendered the more urgent, 
because infant baptism interferes with the divine institution of 
believers’ baptism, and would, if universally practised, banish it 
from the earth. God commands a believer to be baptized ;—is he 
- released from the obligation by the fact that his parents had him 
baptized in infancy? Is he now chargeable with the sin of anabap- 
tism, if he obeys the divine command? For proof of all this, some 
divine authority for infant baptism is needed, as clear and certain 
as that by which believers’ baptism is established. 


186 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


For female communion, we have divine authority in the command 
of Christ, “this do,” “drink ye all of it.” The Scriptures inter- 
pret this command. Women were among the disciples mentioned 
in the first chapter of Acts, verse 8,—and all these, with the three 
thousand who were added, continued in the breaking of bread.! 
In the same number were included the widows, who were neglected 
in the daily ministration. Women were in the church at Corinth, 
when the whole church assembled to celebrate the Lord’s supper.? 
In the command, “ Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat,” 3 
the word rendered man, signifies a human being, of either sex. It 
is evident, from these facts, that female communion is practised on 
divine authority; and it, moreover, sets aside no other divine com- 
mand. If such authority for infant baptism can be produced, we 
ought to practise it: but even then we might question the propriety 
of its superseding believers’ baptism. 

But it is alleged, that the Christian sabbath does supersede 
the observance of the seventh day prescribed in the decalogue ; and 
therefore, presents a case analogous to the one before us. Is it then 
true, that our inferences can in any case set aside the express com- 
mands of God? We think not. The decalogue requires the observ- 
ance of the seventh day, regularly returning after six days of 
labor ; and not the seventh day of the week. As thus interpreted, 
the Christian practice literally conforms to it. If the seventh day 
in the commandment means the seventh day of the week, it is our 
duty to obey strictly ; and if we can learn, by legitimate inference, 
that the first day of the week ought to be observed, our course of 
duty is plain—we ought to observe both days: so, if infant baptista 
can be made out by legitimate inference, instead of permitting it 
to supersede believers’ baptism, we ought to observe both. We open 
our minds, therefore, to the inferential reasoning by which infant 
baptism is to be sustained. 

Argument 3.—Christ’s commission is, “Teach or make disciples 
of all nations, baptizing them.” Children form a part of all nations; 
and the commission, therefore, contains authority for baptizing 
them. 

The word “nations” in the original, is of the neuter gender, 
and the word “them” is masculine. It has been concluded, hence, 
Reh ee Boge oe er ee 

* Acts ii, 42, 71 Cor. xi, 5—20. 3 'V. 28. 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 187 


that the pronoun stands properly, for the masculine noun “ disciples” 

understood. _ But, without the aid of this criticism, the connection 
of the clauses shows that this is the true meaning. The sense is 
the same as in the passage, “ Jesus made and baptized disciples.” 
If the commission authorizes to baptize every one in the nation, 
adult unbelievers must be included, contrary to what allsadmit. 


Argument 4.—The commission requires to baptize disciples. A 
disciple is one engaged to receive instruction from a teacher. In 
secular matters, parents select teachers for their children, and make 
engagements for their instruction. In religion, they are under the 
highest obligation to place them in the school of Christ, that they 
may be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 
The commission requires, that these young disciples should receive 
the mark of discipleship. The propriety of considering them dis- 
ciples, may be proved by the passage, ‘‘ Why tempt ye God, to put 
a yoke on the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor 
we were able to bear ?”’' The yoke of circumcision is here referred 
to. And every one knows that this fell chiefly on infants. The 
import of the word used in the commission, and its applicability to 
infants may be proved by a passage in Justin Martyr, who wrote 
near the middle of the second century. Among those who were 
members of the church, he says, “ there were many of both sexes, 
some sixty, and some seventy years old, who were made disciples to 
Christ from their infancy.” The word he uses is «uadnrevdnouy, 
the same word that is used in the commission. It is evident, 
therefore, that Justin understood the command of Christ to make 
disciples and baptize, as applicable to little children. And he wrote 
only about one hundred years after Matthew, who records that 
command. This testimony is important, as showing the early 
prevalence of infant baptism, since these persons must have received 
the mark of discipleship within a few years after Matthew wrote. 
But it is cited here, to show the sense of the Greek word which 
Christ employed in the commission. 


In secular concerns, it is possible, though not usual, for parents 
to engage their children, from early infancy, to some teacher, by 
whom they may be afterwards instructed; but the usus loquendi 
will scarcely allow us to call them his disciples, until they begin to 
learn from him. 

In the Scriptures, we read of John’s disciples, the disciples of 
the Pharisees, the disciples of Jesus; and such is the current use 
of the term, that, in these several applications of it, the idea of 


1 Acts xy. 10, 


188 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


infancy is never suggested. We read, “The number of the dis- 
ciples was multiplied in Jerusalem.” * * * “And the apostles 
called the multitude of the disciples to them, and said, ‘ Wherefore, 
brethren, look ye out.’ * * ‘And the saying pleased the whole mul- 
titude: and they chose,” &c.! If the infants of all the believers 
in Jerusalem were disciples, they must have been included in the 
multitude here mentioned; but the things stated in the narrative 
forbid the supposition. Another passage in the same chapter shows 
that to be a disciple, and to have faith, are descriptive of the same 
person: “The number of the disciples multipled in Jerusalem 
greatly; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the 
faith.” * The same is proved by another passage in a subsequent 
chapter: “ Finding certain disciples, he said unto them, Have ye 
received the Holy Ghost since ye believed ?”? But we have still 
clearer proof on this subject ;—Christ himself expressly declared 
the qualifications necessary to constitute a disciple: “If any man 
come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and chil- 
dren, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he can- 
not be my disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and 
come after me, cannot be my disciple.” 4 Against such declarations 
of the divine Master, the inference from a merely possible use of 
the term in secular concerns, can be of no avail. 

But the argument alleges that we have Scripture example for 
the application of the term to infants. In the case referred to, 
Judaizing teachers had taught, “ Except ye be circumcised, and 
keep the law, ye:cannot be saved.” The yoke which they imposed 
on the gentile converts was not circumcision merely, but the whole 
burden of the legal ceremonies. Circumcision was not, in itself, 
the intolerable yoke referred to, ‘which neither our fathers nor we 
were able to bear.” These were circumcised in infancy, and did not 
afterwards account circumcision a grievous burden. But the bur- 
densome law received from Moses is manifestly the thing intended; 
and the burden did not fall on infants. The passage therefore 
contains no proof that infants were intended by the word disciples. 

The words of Justin Martyr, aro nabor, are incorrectly translated , 
from infancy. The name Pedodaptist, which is given to those 


`% 
———_—r eS eee eee — 


1 Acts vi. 1—5. fh ie * Acts xix. 1 2. 
t Luke xiv. 26, 27. 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 189 


who practise infant baptism, and which is derived in part from the 
Greek word xats, seems to countenance this rendering: but, in truth, 
nats does not signify an infant. It is used, in either the masculine 
or feminine gender, for one who has not reached maturity; and 
is applied to the young man who fell from the loft while Paul was 
preaching ;' and is used by Justin, in another place, for the boys 
or young men who were the objects of unnatural lust.2 A diminu- 
tive, zaor, formed from this word, is frequently used for infants ; 
but even the diminutive is applied to a person twelve years of age.’ 
In classic usage, the primitive word is rendered applicable to 
infants by a word added—vnmvos xaxs—an infant boy. If the word 
itself denoted infancy, this addition would not be necessary. Once 
in the second chapter of Matthew it is applied to infants; but it 
is remarkable that the diminutive, wa:dwov, is used nine times, in the 
same chapter, for infants. Why did the inspired writer adopt 
another word in this one case? We have the explanation in the 
note of Dr. Campbell on the passage: “ The historian seems pur- 
posely to have changed the term xad.or, which is used for child, no 
less than nine times in this chapter; as that word being neuter, 
and admitting only the neuter article, was not fit for marking the 
distinction of sexes; and to have adopted a term, which he nowhere 
else employs for infants, though frequently for men servants, and 
once for youths or boys.” This application of xa to infants may 
be illustrated by a familiar usage in our own language. The words 
boy and girl do not signify an infant; and yet we ask whether an 
infant is a boy or a girl, if we wish to know its sex. Justin had no 
need to distinguish the sex of the persons whom he referred to, 
for he says, “ There are among us persons of both sexes.” Had 
Justin designed to say that these persons had been made disciples 
in infancy, the Greek language had words to express the idea; 
but what he did say amounts to nothing more than that these per- 
sons, now sixty or seventy years of age, had become disciples of 
Christ before they had arrived at maturity. This was the pedo- 
a E 

Acts xx. 12, \ 

2 Povacxas Emorzevoay, xor noras SuepGerpor. Justin’s Works, London Edition, 
A. D. 1722, p. 10. 

3 Mark v. 39, 40, 42. “ Parkhurst’s Lexicon, under the word vynws. 


190 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


baptism which existed in the days of Justin; and to such pedo- 
baptism there can be no objection. 


Argument 5.—The commission may be rendered, “ Go proselyte 
all nations, baptizing them.” Christ was a Jew, and addressed 
these words to Jews. The Jews had been accustomed to make 
proselytes to their religion from among the gentiles. When these 
proselytes were received, they were circumcised and baptized, 
together with their children. Had Christ commissioned his apos- 
tles to proselyte the nations to Judaism, circumcising and baptizing 
them, they must have understood that children were to be circum- 
cised and baptized with their parents. Being accustomed to this 
mode of receiving proselytes, they would naturally conclude that 
their Master intended them to adopt it in executing his command. 


The proposed translation, ‘‘Go proselyte all nations,” is not 
correct ; for a proselyte and a disciple are not the same thing. 
If for the sentence, “Thou art his disciple, but we are Moses’ 
disciples,” we substitute, “ Thou art his proselyte, but we are 
Moses’ proselytes,” every one will perceive that an important 
change is made in the meaning. A proselyte to Judaism aban- 
doned his former religion; but when John and Jesus made disci- 
ples, these disciples did not cease to be Jews. Paul claimed to be 
a Jew,' and even a Pharisee,? after his conversion. The fishermen 
of Galilee were indeed Jews, but they knew little, in all proba- 
bility, of those efforts in which some of their nation compassed sea 
and land to make one proselyte; and they could not have under- 
stood their Lord to refer to those efforts in the commission under 
which they were to act. Some of them had been disciples of John; 
and all of them had been associated with Christ in making and 
baptizing disciples from among the Jews. Had they witnessed the 
admission of a proselyte from heathenism to Judaism, they knew 
well that the ceremonies which he underwent did not make him a 
disciple of Christ. They could not, therefore, understand the 
Saviour to refer to this process. The making and baptizing of 
disciples was a process to which they were accustomed, and by it 
they would naturally interpret the commission. Even if their 
Jewish prejudices had led to the supposed interpretation, it would 
have been unauthorized. These prejudices caused them to mis- 
interpret the commission in another particular; and, in consequence, 


SA A One ee noe E RR A 
1 Acts xxi. 39 + ? Acts xxiii. 6. 


ee 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 191 


‘ney did not, for some time, preach the gospel to the uncircumcised 
‘geatiles. It was their duty, in interpreting the commission, to 
fook more to the Saviour’s words, and less to their Jewish preju- 
dices: and the same obligation rests on us, and deserves the atten- 
tion of those who urge the argument which we are considering: 

The question whether the custom of baptizing proselytes to 
Judaism existed as early as the time of Christ, has engaged the 
attention of learned men, who have been divided respecting it. 
Prof. Stuart has given the subject an extended investigation, and 
finds no evidence that the custom existed before the destruction of 
Jerusalem. 


Argument 6.—Infants were admitted to church-membership by 
circumcision, the initiatory rite under the former dispenkation ; 
and baptism now takes its place, being the same seal in a new form; 
and therefore ought to be administered to infants. 

The arguments for the church-membership of infants were con- 
sidered at large in the preceding section of this chapter. In 
this discussion, it was shown, that the church is not identical 
with the great nation descended from Abraham, and distinguished 
by the mark of circumcision. Since baptism was designed for 
-those only who are spiritually qualified for membership in the 
church, no valid argument for the application of it to infants can 
be drawn from the fact, that the infant descendants of Abraham 
were marked by circumcision, as entitled to membership in the 
commonwealth of Israel. 

If baptism is merely a new form of the same seal, the subjects 
to whom it is to be applied remaining the same, it ought still to 
be applied to infants on the eighth day. This day was fixed by 
express divine command. No authority inferior to that which 
made the covenant, can abrogate or change this precept. More- 
over, the seal, as anciently administered, was not confined to 
descendants of the first generation; and baptism, if it is the same 
seal under another form, ought to be extended in its application 
to all the descendants of those who are admitted within the 
covenant. 

It is an argument against the identity of baptism and circum- 
cision, that baptism was administered to those who had previously 
received the seal in the other form, according to the command of 
God. They who were baptized under the ministry of John and 


192 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


of Jesus, were children of the covenant, and had been previously 
marked with the proper seal according to divine command ee 
covenant. Why was the seal necessary in another form? For 
some time after the ascension of Christ, the gospel was preached 
to the circumcised only; and no others were baptized. These 
persons were addressed as children of the covenant; and had the 
seal of the covenant in their flesh, affixed when that form of the 
seal was not only valid, but obligatory. Why was the repetition 
of the seal in another form necessary ? 

The command to circumcise, was positive; and every one who 
did not receive this token of the covenant in his flesh, was to be 
cut off from among God’s people. If the church is founded on the 
covenant of circumcision, it becomes a deeply interesting inquiry, _ 
whether any but circumcised persons can be members. The theory 
is, that baptism takes the place of cireumcision; but how can this 
theory annul the express command of God? We need authority 
for changing the form of the seal, as great, and as express, as that 
by which the original form was instituted; but we look for it in 
vain in the Holy Scriptures. Instead of finding an express pre- 
cept for changing the form, or an express declaration that it has 
been changed, we find decisive proof, that the inspired apostles did 
not understand baptism to be a new form of the old seal, They 
discussed the question, whether gentile converts ought to be circum- 
cised, and they decided in the negative; but they did not so decide, 
on the ground that baptism had taken the place of circumcision, 
and rendered the continued use of the old form unnecessary. 
This, according to the pedobaptist theory, was the true ground of 
their decision, being the true and only sufficient reason for laying 
aside the old form of the seal. That the apostles did not assign 
this reason, is decisive proof that they were strangers to the 
theory. With this evidence before us, how can we hold ourselves 
bound by the Abrahamic covenant, and expect the blessings which 
it is understood to promise, if we refuse its only divinely authorized 
seal ? 

In describing the completeness of Christians, Paul states, in 
one verse, that they are “circumcised with the circumcision that is 
made without hands ;” and in the next, that they are “ buried with 
Ckrist in baptism.” From the connexion in which these things, 


— LL D 
2 Col. ii. 12, 


s 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 198 


are mentioned, some have argued that baptism takes the place of 
circumcision: but the passage does not justify the inference. Literal 
circumcision is not the duty of gentile believers; and is therefore 
no part of Christian completeness. Literal baptism is a duty of 
all Christians; and is therefore necessary to their completeness. 
The adjuncts with which circumcision is mentioned in the passage, 
shows regeneration to be intended. This, in the order of Christ’s 
appointment, precedes baptism; and in this order Paul mentions 
both as distinct parts of Christian completeness. Nothing in the 
passage justifies the confounding of baptism with circumcision. 
Whatever analogy there may be between the two rites, their iden- 
tity is not taught in these verses. 

Argument T.— Without insisting on a strict substitution of bap- 
tism for circumcision, it may be assumed as unquestionable, that a 
striking analogy exists between the two rites. Both are initiatory, 
both are religious, both are outward signs of inward grace, and 
seals of the righteousness of faith. The parental relation is 
one of exceeding importance. God has distinguished it greatly 
in his Word, and uses it, in his providence, as a chief means of 
perpetuating his church in the world. This relation is the same in 
all ages, and the essential principles of religion are the same. As, 
therefore, the relation was marked by a religious rite in the former 
dispensation, the immutable principles of the divine government 
make it proper that it should be marked by a religious rite now. 
Whatever may be said of the Abrahamic covenant as a whole, the 
stipulation which it contains, that the Lord would be a God to him 
and his seed, includes spiritual blessings, and is substantially the 
covenant which God now makes with every believer. As the parent 
and the child were admitted into the covenant by the same religious 
rite formerly, so they ought to be admitted by the same religious 
rite now. In this sense, baptism takes the place of circumcision ; 
and ought, therefore, to be administered to infants. 

This argument is objectionable, on the ground that it rests the 
proof of a positive institute, on reasonings from general principles. 
If immutable principles require the parental relation to be marked 
with a religious rite, why was it not so marked from the beginning 
of the world? And why, when it became marked, was the relation 
to male descendants only, affected by the immutable principle? In 
the family of Abraham, the relation of the patriarch to all his 
descendants, remote as well as immediate, was marked by the rite 
then instituted: and if immutable principles require the relation to 


13 


194 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


be marked by a religious rite now, it ought to be applied to remote 
descendants. 

The promise to Abraham, to be a God to him and his seed, 
is contained in the covenant of circumcision, and is to be under- 
stood according to the tenor of that covenant. It extended to 
remote descendants, contemplated them as a nation, and brought 
the nation into a peculiar relation to God. It did not absolutely 
engage the spiritual blessing of justification which had been pre- 
viously bestowed on the believing patriarch personally. The cove- 
nant now made with believers is personal, and secures personal 
spiritual blessings. ‘This is the covenant that I will make with 
the house of Israel: after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my 
laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts; and I will be 
to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.” * The promise 
of this covenant is absolute, and secures the putting of the law in 
the heart. This, the promise in the Abrahamic covenant did not 
secure; and, on this account, the covenant established on better 
promises, is called a new covenant. So different is its nature, from 
the national covenant made with Abraham, that, if it were right to 
infer positive institutes from general principles, we could not, with 
propriety, draw the inference which infant baptism requires. 

The agreement between baptism and circumcision, as initiatory 
rites, is urged to no avail, if the bodies into which they initiate 
are differently constituted. They may both be called religious rites, 
because religion has to do with whatever God commands; but we 
need God’s command, to instruct us in the proper use of these rites. 
They have also been called sealing rites: but in what sense they 
seal, is involved in obscurity. Abraham received the sign of circum- 
cision,—a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had, yet 
being uncircumised. His receiving of circumcision seems to imply 
more than merely his being circumcised. It signifies that circum- 
cision began with him. This fact was viewed by Paul as a proof 
that he was already in the favor of God; and the apostle regards 
it as a confirmation or seal of what had been previously said. “ Abra- 
ham believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteous- 
ness.”” Paul does not say that circumcision was a seal to all to 
whom it was administered. The case of Abraham, and the faith 


——. 


2 Heb. viii. 10. 2 Gen. xv. 6. 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 195 


of Abraham, are all that his argument had in view, in the use of 
the word seal. 

Baptism is nowhere in the Scriptures called a seal. Believers 
are said to be sealed by the Holy Spirit; and the validity of this 
seal God will ever acknowledge; but many receive baptism who are 
not sealed by the Holy Spirit unto the day of redemption.! We 
need to understand in what sense, and by what authority, the two 
rites are called sealing, and what engagements they, as seals, con- 
firm, before we can argue, that because one of them was applied to 
infants, the other must, in like manner, be applied to infants. When 
we view the nature and design of the two rites in the light of the 
Holy Scriptures, we discover that circumcision was intended for the 
literal descendants of Abraham, but that literal descent from Abra- 
ham, without faith, gave no title to baptism. Whatever agreement 
may be traced between the two ceremonies in other respects, their 
difference in this particular destroys the analogy, at the very point 
where alone it can be of use to the cause of infant baptism. 

The argument proves too much. We have seen that it extends 
the application of the religious rite to remote descendants. Be- 
sides this, it applies it, not to infant children only, but to children 
of whatever age, provided they belong to the household. More- 
over, it requires that the relation of master and servant be marked 
in the same way. This also is an important relation, which God 
has used in extending his church; for servants have often been 
converted by being brought into pious families. The precept 
given to Abraham, extended to the whole household; and was 
given in very explicit language. The argument requires that 
every believer should put himself in the place of the patriarch, 
and consider himself bound by this command. At this point, the 
subject may be viewed advantageously in connection with the fol 
lowing argument. 

Argument 8.—The three households of Lydia, the jailer, and 
Stephanas, are said in Scripture to have been baptized. It is 
improbable that there were three entire households without any 
infants in them. The manner in which the facts are recorded, 
especially in the case of Lydia’s household, indicates that it was 


the prevailing custom to baptize the household, when the head of 
it became a believer. No intimation is given, that the members 


nenen 


1 Eph. iv. 30. 


196 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


of the household were all believers, and admitted to baptism on 
their personal faiths; but their baptism followed, of course, on the 
admission of Lydia herself into the church. Were such a state- 
ment published, in the journal of any modern missionary, every 
one would understand the missionary to be a pedobaptist. No 
one expects to read an account of household baptisms, in a history 
of Baptist missions. 
Mention is made in the New Testament, of several households, 
which appear to have consisted entirely of Christian believers." 
Such instances are not uncommon in modern times, even among 
Baptists: and, in times of religious revivals, whole households are 
not unfrequently baptized on profession of faith. The probability 
of such occurrences in the slow progress of modern missions in a 
heathen nation, is far less; and it would be unfair to estimate from 
a history of missions, the probability that whole households were 
converted at once, under the ministry of the apostles. A modern 
missionary sometimes labors for years, and scarcely reports a 
single convert; but, in primitive times, three thousand were con- 
verted in one day, and the Holy Spirit fell on the whole congre- 
gation assembled in the house of Cornelius. In this state of 
things, it is not surprising that three households should have been 
converted and baptized. We are told that the nobleman of Caper- 
naum ‘believed, and his whole house;’’* that Crispus “believed 
with all his house ;” 3 and that Cornelius ‘‘ feared God with all his 
house.” Here are three households, which consisted entirely 
of pious persons; and the probability that these three had infants 
in them, must be as great as in the case of the three households that 
were baptized. Besides, in the accounts given of these last house- 
holds, circumstances are mentioned which strongly indicate the 
absence of children. 1. In the case of the jailer’s household, ‘‘ they 
spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his 
house ;”° “he rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.” ° 
Who would expect to read such statements as these in the journal 
of a pedobaptist missionary, who, on receiving a convert from hea- 
thenism, baptized him with his infant children? 2. In the case of 
the household of Stephanas we are informed, “that they addicted 


19 Tim. iv. 19; Acts x. 2; Acts xvi. 34; 1 Cor. xvi. 15, 19; John iv. 53. 
2 John iv. 53, 3 Acts xviii. 8. * Acts x. 2. 
8 Acts xvi. 32. è V, 34. 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 197 


themselves to the ministry of the saints.”! It has been said that 
this was some years after their baptism, when the infants might 
have grown up. But, in most families, while some infants grow, 
other infants are added; and in replying to an argument de- 
pendant on probability, we are at liberty to assume, that the pro- 
bability of finding infants in the house of Stephanas was as great 
at one time as at the other. We may also notice, that the bap- 
tism of this household is not mentioned in connection with the 
baptism of the head. Paul baptized the household of Stephanas ;? 
but who baptized Stephanas himself, we are not informed. So far 
as appears, the two baptisms were performed at different times, 
and were independent of each other, 3. In the case of Lydia’s 
household we have the following facts : Lydia was “a seller of 
purple of the city of Thyatira.””3 No mention is made of husband 
or children. She had a house at Philippi, which she called “my 
house ;” and the business in which she was engaged, appears to 
have been under her own management. When Paul and Silas 
were released from prison, it is said, “ they entered into the house 
of Lydia; and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted 
them, and departed.”* The connection of the clauses in this 
verse, renders it probable, that the brethren here mentioned, be- 
longed to the house of Lydia, and were the persons baptized with 
her. This probability ought to be admitted, in an argument 
founded on probability; and it is at least as great, as that Lydia, 
the apparently Single proprietor and manager of her own house 
and business, should have had infant children. So far as to the 
argument about probability. 

The second part of the argument is, that the narrative states the 
baptism of the household as following, of course, on the faith and 
baptism of the head. But this, as we have seen, is not the case, 
with respect to the household of Stephanas and the jailer. All the 
weight of the argument rests on the single case of Lydia; and it 
is merely an argument from the silence of Scripture. We are not 
expressly informed that Lydia’s household were believers; but the 
silence on this point does not prove that they were not. It is stated, 
in another place, that “ Crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, 


ert el cee BEI SS RE SRA vil To Wy) 


11 Cor. xvi. 15. 71 Cor. i: 16: 3 Acts xvi. 14, 
av 40) 


138 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


believed, with all his house.’”” No mention is made of their bap- 
tism: but the silence of Scripture on this point, does not prove 
that they were not baptized. Faith and baptism are everywhere 
throughout the narrative so connected with each other, that the men- 
tion of both, in every instance, was unnecessary. The faith of the 
household is not mentioned in the case of Lydia; neither is it men- 
tioned in Paul’s address to the jailer :—‘‘ Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.” * Here the prom- 
ise of salvation is made to the household, without an express require- 
ment of faith from them,—the command, ‘‘ believe,” being in the 
singular number. We know, from the whole tenor of Scripture, 
that the jailer’s household were not saved on his faith; and we have 
the same reason for knowing that Lydia’s household were not bap- 
tized on her faith. 

If any one should maintain that, when households are said to 
believe and to fear God, infants may have been overlooked in the 
statement, because known to be incapable of religious affections, 
we admit the possibility of what is supposed, and we maintain, 
in turn, that the same may have been true with respect to baptism. 
In all the sacred volume, and in all the usage of primitive times, 
faith was a qualification for baptism; and it may be that, in the 
mention of household baptism, no account was taken of infants, 
because it was universally known that they were never baptized. 
Our cause admits this hypothesis; but is not dependent on it. 

A distinction ought to be made, between household baptism and 
infant baptism. The preceding argument, if it proves either, proves 
household baptism; and the same is true of the argument now 
before us. Children of various ages, even to adult years, and ser- 
vants, are included in the proper import of the word household. It 
was so, when the covenant of circumcision was made with Abra- 
ham ; for his son Ishmael, and his servants, were circumcised. It 
is so in the Acts of the Apostles: for in the household of Cornelius, 
& two household servants” are mentioned. 

It deserves to be carefully noticed, that almost every argument 
for infant church-membership and infant baptism, tends to prove, 
so far as it proves either, not the church-membership and baptism 
of infants, but of whole households. The covenant of circumcision 


EVES 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM, 199 


required the rite to be administered to the whole household. Under 
the Mosaic covenant, when a stranger was admitted, he was required 
to be circumcised with all his household; and the same law was 
applied to him, in the keeping of the passover, as to those born in 
the land. When proselyte baptism was practised, it was applied 
to all the household. No example of infant baptism can be found 
in the Bible; but the three examples which have been relied on to 
prove it, are all examples of household baptism. Now, according to 
a hypothesis stated in the last paragraph, it may be that the infants 
of a household may be overlooked, when something is affirmed of 
the household, which is incompatible with infancy; but it can 
never be supposed, that the term household signifies infants only, 
to the exclusion of older members. If household baptism has been 
proved, who will practise it? The admission of ungodly youths 
and servants to baptism and church privileges, when the father and 
master becomes converted, is so contrary to the spirit and tenor 
of the gospel, that no one ventures to advocate it. Yet this is the 
point to which almost every argument tends, which has been advanced 
in support of infant baptism. These arguments are numerous: 
and if each one could bring a ray of light, however feeble, we 
might expect the combined illumination to render the subject 
visible ; but we have traced the direction of the rays, and find that 
their concentrated force, whatever may be its illuminating power, 
falls elsewhere, and leaves infant baptism still in the dark. 


Argument 9.—Learned men have searched the writings of the 
Christian fathers, and have found evidence as abundant, and spe- 
cific, and certain, as history affords of almost any fact, that infant 
baptism universally prevailed from the days of the apostles, through 
four centuries. This ought to satisfy us, that the practice origi- 
nated in the apostolic churches. 


Other learned men have examined the same writings, and have 
arrived at the conclusion, that infant baptism was wholly unknown, 
until about the close of the second century ;—that it originated in 
Africa, and in the third century became prevalent there, but did 
not supplant the primitive baptism in the Oriental churches, until 
the fifth century. 

Amidst this conflict of opinions, derived from the same source, 
it is a happy privilege which we enjoy, to leave the muddy streams 
of tradition, and drink at the pure fountain of revelation. The 


200 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


aim of the present work is, to ascertain what the Scriptures teach 
on the subject of church order; and it does not accord with the 
design, to enter into an investigation of questions appertaining 
to ecclesiastical history ; but I will state, very briefly, what appear 
to me, so far as I have been able to investigate the subject, the 
chief facts to be gleaned from the early fathers, relative to the origin 
of infant baptism. 

No trace of infant baptism can be found, previous to the time of 
Justin Martyr. The passage of his writings, which is quoted on 
page 174, has been regarded as the first clear testimony on the sub- 
ject; but we have shown that this, when properly interpreted, 
means nothing more than that some persons, then sixty or seventy 
years of age, had been made disciples of Christ before they were 
fully grown. In another part of Justin’s writings, he purposely 
gives an account of the usages which existed among Christians, 
respecting baptism; and, in doing this, he describes the baptism of 
believers, without any intimation that infants were concerned in 
the rite. Had infant baptism been the universal practice, his pur- 
pose would have required a description of it. 

The primitive practice required each candidate for baptism to 
profess his faith personally. But a custom arose, of permitting 
the profession to be made by proxy: the candidate being present, 
and signifying his assent. This custom made it easy for very young 
persons to be admitted to the rite, and the opinion, which had now 
become prevalent, that baptism possessed a saving efficacy, pro- 
duced a tendency to extend the application of it to children. Ter- 
tullian, who wrote about A. D. 200, opposed this tendency; and 
insisted that, instead of granting baptism on the candidate’s asking 
for it, and making profession through his sponsors, the baptism 
should be deferred until he had become instructed respecting its 
nature and design. Thus far, it does not appear that the rite was 

ever administered to children incapable of asking for it ; but Cyprian, 

A. D. 250, interpreted the cries of new-born babes to be an asking 
for the grace which baptism was supposed to confer. The pro- 
priety of giving it to infants was now extensively admitted, but 
the practice was not universal. 

The late Neander, who is esteemed the greatest of ecclesiastical 
historians, says : “ Baptism was administered at first only to adults, 
as men were accustomed to conceive baptism and faith as strictly 


ARGUMENTS FOR INFANT BAPTISM. 201 


connected.” “Immediately after Irenæus, in the last years of 
. the second century, Tertullian appears as a zealous opponent of 
infant baptism: a proof that the practice had not as yet come to 
be regarded as an apostolical institution ; for, otherwise, he would 
hardly have ventured to express himself so strongly against it.’’} 
“For these reasons, Tertullian declared against infant baptism ; 
which at that time was certainly not a generally prevailing prac- 
tice; was not yet regarded as an apostolical institution. On the 
contrary, as the assertions of Tertullian render in the highest degree 
probable, it had just begun to spread; and was therefore regarded 
by many as an innovation.” ? 

Jacobi, a learned friend of Neander, says: “ Infant baptism was 
established neither by Christ nor the apostles.” « Many circum- 
stances conspired early to introduce the practice of infant bap- 
tism.” 3 

Mosheim, in his account of the Second Century, says: “The 
sacrament of baptism was administered publicly twice every year, 
at the festivals of Easter and Pentecost, or Whitsuntide, either by 
the bishop, or the presbyters, in consequence of his authorization 
and appointment. The persons that were to be baptized, after that 
they had repeated the creed, confessed and renounced their sins, 
and particularly the devil and his pompous allurements, were 
immersed under water, and received into Christ’s kingdom by a 
solemn invocation of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, according to 
the express command of our Blessed Lord. After baptism, they 
received the sign of the cross, were anointed, and, by prayers and 
imposition of hands, were solemnly commended to the mercy of 
God, and dedicated to his service; in consequence of which they 
received milk and honey, which concluded the ceremony. The 
reasons of this particular ritual coincide with what we have said in 
general concerning the origin and causes of the multiplied cere- 
monies that crept from time to time into the church. 

“ Adult persons were prepared for baptism by abstinence, prayer, 
and other pious exercises. It was to answer for them that spon- 
es a Ret ee, 

* History of Christian Religion and Church, pp. 311, 312 (Torrey’s Trans- 
lation. 

* Spirit of Tertullian, p. 207. Quoted from Christian Review, Vol. xvi. pp. 
517, 520, 

3 Kitt.’s Cyclopedia; Art. Baptism. 


202 INFANT MEMBERSHIP. 


sors or godfathers were first instituted, though they were after- 
wards admitted also in the baptism of infants.” 

The use of sponsors is retained in the Episcopal Church. The 
officiating minister addresses the child as if he were an intelligent 
candidate; and the sponsors give what is regarded as the answer of 
the child. In these forms, we may see the remains of primitive 
usage, the lifeless corpse of the ancient baptism, which was once 
animated with piety, and profession strictly personal. 


PAP BV; 


COMMUNION. 


or 


Section I—PERPETUITY OF THE LORD’S SUPPER. 


THE RITE USUALLY CALLED THE LORD’S SUPPER WAS INSTITUTED 
BY CHRIST, TO BE OBSERVED IN HIS CHURCHES TILL THE END OF 
THE WORLD. 

On the night which preceded the Saviour’s crucifixion, he ate 
the passover with his disciples. At the close of the meal, the 
ceremony called the Lord’s Supper was instituted. The account 
of the institution is thus given by Matthew: “ As they were eating, 
Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the 
disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the 
cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of 
it: for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for 
many for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not 
drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I 
drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.”! Mark’s account 
is in nearly the same words.? Luke’s narrative differs in several 
particulars. He mentions a previous cup, which seems to have 
concluded the proper paschal supper. At the distribution of the 
bread, he adds these words, omitted by the other evangelists: “ This 
do in remembrance of me.” In the giving of the second cup, he 
states explicitly that it was “after supper ;” and, by this expres- 
sion, distinguishes it from the preceding, cup, which was a part of 
the supper.’ In the eleventh chapter of the first epistle to the 
Corinthians, Paul gives an account of the institution, agreeing 
substantially with the accounts given by the evangelists. At the 


1 Matt. xxvi. 26—29. 2 Mark xiv. 22—24, 3 Luke xxii, 17—20. 
(203) 


204 COMMUNION. 


distribution of the bread, he adds the words: “ This is my body, 
which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.” And, 
at the giving of the cup, he adds: “ This cup is the new testament 
in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of 
me.” -To all this he subjoins, “ As often as ye eat this bread and 
drink this cup, ye do show the Lord’s death till he come. Where- 
fore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the 
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the 
Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this 
bread and drink of this cup. For he that eateth and drinketh 
unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discern- 
ing the Lord’s body.” 

From these several accounts taken in connection, we learn that 
after Jesus had concluded the last passover with his disciples, he 
used the bread and cup for a purpose unknown in that supper; and 
commanded the disciples to use them in the same manner, in re- 
membrance of him. The time during which this memorial of 
Christ was designed to be kept, we might infer from the words of 
the evangelist. Jesus directed the minds of the disciples from the 
feast which he then kept with them to a future feast, to be enjoyed 
together in the Father’s kingdom. During the interval this new 
institution was to be observed as a memorial of the past, and a 
pledge of the future. But Paul has drawn the inference for us, 
“ As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the 
Lord’s death till he come.” The time for the observance is here 
definitely marked out as extending to Christ’s second coming, 
Baptism was instituted to be observed “ till the end of the world,” 
and the supper has the same limit prescribed for its duration. 

The institution of the supper described by Paul, he states that 
he had received from the Lord Jesus, and had delivered to the 
Corinthian church. These facts show that Christ designed his 
apostle to inculeate the observance; and that the apostle was not 
negligent in this particular. He praised the church for keeping 
the ordinances as he had delivered them; but censured an abuse 
which had arisen among them in celebrating the supper. He does 
not, because of this abuse, dissuade from the further observance 
of it, but he labors to correct the abuse; and he renews the com- 
mand, “Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat.” The 


PERPETUITY OF THE LORD’S SUPPER. 205 


proof thus furnished is abundant and decisive, that the observance 
was designed to be established and perpetuated in the churches. 

We have further proof in the Acts of the Apostles. The church 
at Jerusalem continued steadfastly in the apostles’ doctrine and 
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers;' and the dis- 
ciples at Troas assembled on the first day of the week to break 
bread.” 

The Scriptural designation of the rite in the passages just cited, 
is the breaking of bread. The name Eucharist is often given to it, 
derived from the Greek word evzaptorew, and referring to the thanks- 
giving which preceded the distribution of the elements. This 
name is not used in the Scriptures. Some remarks have been made 
in another place (pp. 57, 58) respecting the name Lord’s Supper. It 
is not clear that we have Scripture authority for using this name to 
designate the rite. But, considering the rite as a memorial of our 
Lord’s last supper with his disciples, the name is significant—like 
the name passover applied to the rite which kept in memory the 
fact, that the destroying angel passed over the habitations of the 
Israelites. The name may also refer to the spiritual feast which 
believers enjoy with their Lord, who graciously sups with them. 
The name Trinity, and the name person, applied to the three-fold 
distinction in the Trinity, are used without Scripture authority, 
merely as convenient terms; and the names Hucharist and Lord’s 
Supper, may be used in the same way, but we must always be 
careful to found no article of faith on any use of terms for which 
we cannot produce divine authority. 

The Quakers object to the perpetuity of the supper, as they do 
to that of baptism. Their chief objections, we shall proceed to 
consider. | 

Objection 1.—The bread and the cup belonged to the passover ; 
and the evangelists state, that it was while eating this feast that 
the bread and cup were used, which constitute the Supposed new 
institution. The breaking of bread is frequently mentioned as 
customary in ordinary meals. We ought, therefore, to consider it 
as a common occurrence at table, and to interpret the words of 
Christ as a command that in all our eating and drinking we should 
remember him, according to what is said elsewhere, ‘“‘ Whether ye 
eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.” 3 


a a 


2? Acts ii. 42. 2 Acts xx. 7. ®1 Cor. x. 31. 


206 COMMUNION. 


The simplicity of the rite, is no valid objection against it; 
but rather a recommendation. Bread and the cup were in com- 
mon use; but they were not, on this account, less adapted to the 
purpose for which Christ employed them. Water is a common 
element, and immersion in it was common among the Jews; but 
these facts did not render immersion in water less fit for a Christian 
ordinance. The rites are new, not because new elements are used, 
but because they are used for a new purpose. The whole of the 
paschal services commemorated the deliverance from Egypt. The 
new institution was designed to commemorate a different deliver- 
ance, by the broken body and shed blood of Christ. No one will 
maintain, that the breaking of bread in ordinary meals, was de- 
signed for this purpose. So distinctly marked was this new purpose, 
that Paul says, “ He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, is guilty 
of the body and blood of the Lord.” If he did it, “not discern- 
ing the Lord’s body,” he overlooked the great design of the in- 
stitution, and was guilty. This fault the objection commits, in 
confounding the bread and wine of the eucharist with ordinary food. 

Objection 2.—The Acts of the Apostles mention only two in- 
stances in which the breaking of bread was observed by the disci- 
ples; and both of these manifestly refer to ordinary meals. The 
church at Jerusalem continued in the breaking of bread; and this 
is explained in the words, ‘ Breaking bread from house to house, 
did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart.”! The 
disciples at Troas met to break bread; and what is hereby meant, 
may be learned from what is afterwards said: “ When he therefore 
was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked 
along while, even till break of day, so he departed.”? This is 
clearly an ordinary meal, preparatory to Paul’s departure. We 
see, therefore, that the Acts of the Apostles record no instance of 
the eucharistic observance; and the silence cannot be accounted 
for, if the observance had been customary. 

No doubt exists that the phrase, breaking of bread, sometimes 
describes what occurred at ordinary meals. Jesus manifested him- 
self to the two disciples at Emmaus, in the breaking of bread, 
when they had sat down to an ordinary meal; and Paul broke 
bread to those who were with him in the ship, to terminate their 
long fast. In the second chapter of Acts, the phrase occurs twice. 
In the first instance, the connection shows that the eucharistic 
TEENEST RE e 

1 Acts ii, 46. 3 Acts xx. 11. 


a 


PERPETUITY OF THE LORD’S SUPPER. 207 


observance is intended. “ They continued in the apostles’ doctrine, 

„and fellowship, and breaking bread, and prayers.” In the 
second instance, the connection shows that ordinary meals are 
intended. The repetition, instead of proving the same thing to be 
intended in both instances, proves rather the contrary. Distinct 
facts are described. 

Did the disciples at Troas meet for an ordinary meal? Was 
this the meeting which the sacred historian so particularly men- 
tions? The character of primitive Christianity forbids the suppo- 
sition. These disciples were accustomed to meet for the worship of 
God; and the important design of their assembling together could 
not have been forgotten or overlooked on this occasion, when they 
had the presence of Paul. It was appropriate to mention the eucha- 
rist, as a part of public worship, in speaking of the purpose for 
which they assembled ; but to describe them as having assembled 
for an ordinary meal, is inconsistent with their character, and in- 
consistent with the occasion. If, as is most probable, the breaking 
of bread next morning, at the break of day, was an ordinary meal 
preparatory to Paul’s departure, it was a different breaking of 
bread from that which had brought the disciples together on the 
preceding day. 

These are the only two cases in which the observance of the 
Lord’s supper is mentioned in the Acts; but they are sufficient 
to prove the existence of the observance. The church at Jerusa- 
lem continued steadfastly in the breaking of bread. It could have 
been no commendation of them, that they continued steadfastly in 
eating ordinary meals; but their steadfast continuance in the divine 
institution, is historical proof that it was observed by the first 
church as a part of their public worship. This fact explains what 
is said about the disciples at Troas, and the two statements-make 
the historical evidence, in this book, as satisfactory as is neces- 
sary. The observance of the rite by the church at Corinth, 
makes the historical proof complete. 

Objection 3.—The Jewish worship consisted of meats, and 
drinks, and divers baptisms, and carnal ordinances ; but these are 
not adapted to the spiritual worship of the Christian dispensation. 
Paul teaches that “the kingdom of God is not meat and drink ; 
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.” The Lord’s 


5 ates a a N O) 


1 Rom. xiv. 17. 


208 COMMUNION. 


supper comes under the denomination of meats and drinks, and is 
therefore not appropriate to the new economy. Paul expressly 
commands, ‘“ Let no man judge you in meat or in drink ;” ! and 
urges believers to leave those things which perish in the using, and 
set their affections above. 

This objection substantially agrees with Objection 5 to the per- 
petuity of baptism; and what is there said in reply, is applicable 
here. The meats and drinks of the former dispensation were 
shadows of good things to come; but the body is of Christ. So 
Paul teaches, in connection with the text last quoted in the objec- 
tion; and, in this way, he explains what meat and drink he refers 
to. The Jewish ceremonies were typical of Christ to come; but 
the Lord’s supper is a memorial of Christ already come. It is, 
therefore, not included in the meat and drink intended by the 
apostle. The passover was included in these abrogated meats and 
drinks; which ceased to be obligatory after Christ, our passover, 
was sacrificed for us. At the very time when he was about to put 
an end to this old ceremony, he instituted the Lord’s supper; and 
it is, therefore, incredible that he meant this to expire with the 
other. Paul says, “ Let no man judge you in meat or in drink.” 
The abrogated ceremonies are now without divine authority; and, 
therefore, he calls these meats and drinks the commandments of 
men. But the bread and wine of the supper, are commandments 
of the Lord; and therefore Paul says, with reference to these: 
“ Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat.” 

The numerous and burdensome rites of the Old Testament would 
not be adapted to the more spiritual dispensation which we are 
under; but it does not follow that the two simple ceremonies, 
baptism and the Lord’s supper, are incompatible with it. We are 
yet in- the flesh, and need the use of such memorials. In the 
proper use of them, believers have found them greatly profitable, 
and well adapted to promote spirituality. Besides the benefit 
which they yield to the individual believer, these two ceremonies 
stand, like two monuments, reared up in the time of Christ, and 
testifying to the world concerning Christ and his doctrine. Their 
use, as evidences of Christianity and its cardinal doctrines, the 
Trinity and the atonement, is incalculably great, and displays the 
wisdom which instituted them. 


er aŘaaaamaaaaaaaaaaaaasaaaaaasaasasasaasasasasasasasasaseastaeas ae 


2Gol. ii. 16 


pp 


DESIGN. 209 


In addition to the direct arguments which have been adduced, 
some allusions are found in the New Testament, showing, in an 
interesting manner, that baptism and the Lord’s supper were con- 
templated as parts of Christianity. In the next chapter to that in 
which Paul corrects the Corinthian abuse of the supper, he says, 
“ By one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, and have all 
been made to drink into one Spirit.” ? The allusion to both the 
ordinances, is manifest. In another part of the same epistle, he 
speaks of baptism unto Moses, and of their eating and drinking in 
the wilderness, in a manner which shows an allusion to the two 
Christian rites.? 

Objection 4.—At the same supper in which Christ is supposed to 
have instituted the eucharist, he washed his disciples’ feet, and 
commanded them to wash one another’s feet. The command is 
equally as positive, as that which enjoined the use of bread and 
wine; yet Christians are generally agreed, that the command does 
not require to be obeyed literally. The thing signified by the out- 
ward form is what demands regard; and the same rule of inter- 
pretation ought to be applied to the eucharist. 

The command ought, in both cases, to be obeyed strictly, accord- 
ing to the design of Christ. If Christians generally fail to render 
strict obedience to Christ’s command respecting the washing of 
feet, we ought to begin a reform, and not make one neglect a pre- 
cedent and argument for another. In the next chapter we shall 
inquire into the obligation to wash one another’s feet. In this, we 
have ascertained, that Christ designed a literal use of bread and 
wine, and, this point being ascertained, our duty is determined ; 
whatever doubt and obscurity may remain respecting any other 
subject. 


Section II.—DESIGN. 


Tue Lorp’s SUPPER WAS DESIGNED TO BE A MEMORIAL OF Curist, 
A REPRESENTATION THAT THE COMMUNICANT RECEIVES SPIRITUAL 
NOURISHMENT FROM HIM, AND A TOKEN OF FELLOWSHIP AMONG THE 
COMMUNICANTS. 


The rite is commemorative. The passover served for a memo- 
rial of deliverance from Egypt; and, year after year, as the pious 


Ee eee ee 


11 Cor xii 13, 71 Cor. x. 2, 3, 4. 
14 


210 COMMUNION. 


Israelites partook of it, they were reminded of that marvellous 
deliverance, and were required to tell of it to their children. The 
passover was instituted on the night of that deliverance. The 
Lord’s supper was instituted on the night when Jesus was betrayed 
to be crucified; and serves for a memorial of his sufferings and 
death. When we remember him, we are to remember his agonies, 
his body broken, and his blood shed. In preaching the gospel, 
Paul determined to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him cruci- 
fied. So, in the eucharist, Christ is presented to view; not as 
transfigured on Mount Tabor, or as glorified at his Father’s right 
hand, but as suffering and dying. We delight to keep in memory 
the honors which they whom we love have received ; but Jesus calls 
us to remember the humiliation which he endured. To the lowest 
point of his humiliation, the supper directs our thoughts. 

The simple ceremony is admirably contrived to serve more than 
a single purpose. While it shows forth the Lord’s death, it repre- 
sents at the same time the spiritual benefit which the believer derives 
from it. He eats the bread, and drinks the wine, in token of 
receiving his spiritual sustenance from Christ crucified. The rite 
preaches the doctrine that Christ died for our sins, and that we 
live by his death. He said, “ Except ye eat the flesh of the Son 
of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.’’* These 
remarkable words teach the necessity of his atoning sacrifice, and 
of faith in that sacrifice. Without these, salvation and eternal life 
are impossible. When Christ said, ‘My flesh is meat indeed, and 
my blood is drink indeed,” ? he did not refer to his flesh and blood, 
literally understood. He calls himself the living bread which came 
down from heaven.’ This cannot be affirmed of his literal flesh. 
To have eaten this literally, would not have secured everlasting 
life; and equally inefficacious is the Romanist ceremony, in which 
they absurdly imagine that they eat the real body of Christ. His 
body is present in the eucharist in no other sense than that in 
which we can “discern” it. When he said, “ This is my body,” 
the plain meaning is, ‘‘ This represents my body.” So we point 
to a picture, and say, “‘ This is Christ on the cross.” The eucha- 
rist is a picture, so to speak, in which the bread represents the 
body of Christ suffering for our sins. Faith discerns what the 


1 John vi. 53. 2 John vi. 55. 3 John vi. 51. 


a a ee 


DESIGN. 211 


picture represents. It discerns the Lord’s body in the commemo- 
` rative representation of it, and derives spiritual nourishment from 
the atoning sacrifice made by his broken body and shed blood. 

A third purpose which this ceremony serves, and to which it is 
wisely adapted, is, to signify the fellowship of the communicants 
with one another. This is taught in the words of Paul: “The 
bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of 
Christ? For we, being many, are one bread, and one body: for 
we are all partakers of that one bread.”! A communion or joint 
participation in the benefits of Christ’s death, is signified by the 
joint partaking of the outward elements. ‘ What communion,” 
says he, “hath light with darkness ; and what concord hath Christ 
with Belial?” ‘Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table, and 
of the table of devils.”? In these words of Paul, to sit at the 
same table, and drink of the same cup, are regarded as indications 
of communion and concord. Believers meet around the table of 
the Lord, in one faith on the same atonement, in one hope of the 
same inheritance, and with one heart filled with love to the same 
Lord. 

A notion has prevailed extensively, that a spiritual efficacy 
attends the outward performance of the rite, if duly administered. 
Some mysterious influence is supposed to accompany the bread and 
wine, and render them means of grace to the recipient. But, as 
the gospel, though it is the power of God unto salvation, does not 
profit unless mixed with faith in those who hear it; much less can 
mere ceremonies profit without faith. In baptism, we rise with 
Christ through the faith of the operation of God; and in the sup- 
per, we cannot partake of Christ, and receive him as our Spiritual 
nourishment, but by faith: “That Christ may dwell in your hearts 
by faith.”3 The contrary opinion makes these sacraments as they 
have been called, saving ordinances, and substitutes outward cere- 
mony for vital piety. 


Ee a Tee ee naa acl adc se NL 


11 Cor. x. 16, 17, ?1 Cor, x. 21, 3 Eph. iii. 17, 


212 COMMUNION. 


SECTION III.—COMMUNICANTS. 


THE LORD’S SUPPER WAS DESIGNED TO BE CELEBRATED BY EACH 
CHURCH IN PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. 


Intelligence is necessary in order to the proper receiving of the 
supper. When infant baptism arose, infant communion arose with 
it. The superstitious notion that the sacraments possessed a sort 
of magical efficacy, prevailed extensively ; and parental affection 
desired for the children the grace of the supper, as well as that of 
baptism. The argument was as good for the one as for the other ; 
and infant communion had as much authority from the apostles as 
infant baptism. But the practice of infant communion is now 
generally laid aside. It is generally conceded, that infants are 
incapable of receiving the rite according to its design. . They can- 
not remember Christ, or discern the Lord’s body ; and they cannot 
perform the self-examination which is required previous to the com- 
munion. If the rite conveyed a magical influence, infants might 
receive it; but correct views have so far prevailed, as to restrict 
this ordinance to persons of intelligence. 

Faith is also a requisite to the receiving of the supper. If mere 
intelligence were a sufficient qualification, men who partake of the 
table of devils, might partake also of the Lord’s table. Paul 
decides that this cannot be, and therefore that none can pro- 
perly.partake of the Lord’s table but those who have renounced 
the devil, and devoted themselves to the Lord. The outward cere- 
mony cannot, of itself, yield profit to those who receive it. They 
cannot please God in it, without faith; and without faith they can- 
not derive spiritual nourishment from the body and blood of Christ. 

The rite was designed to be social. Of the three purposes which 
it serves, as enumerated in the last section, the third requires that 
it be celebrated by a company. It could not serve as a token of 
fellowship between the disciples of Christ, if it were performed in 
solitude. To perpetuate a social rite, society is necessary ; and the 
disciples of Christ, by his authority, organize the societies, called 
churches. As these are the only divinely instituted Christian 
societies, we might judge beforehand, that the supper would be 
committed to these, for its observance and perpetuation. ‘Shis we 
find to be true. Paul says to the church at Corinth, “I praise you 


COMMUNICANTS. 2138 


that ye keep the ordinances as I delivered them to you.” “I have 
received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you.”! He 
then proceeds to mention the institution of the supper, and speaks 
of it as observed by the whole church assembled. Of some other 
matters, he says, in this connection, “We have no such custom, 
neither the churches of God * but everything in his account of 
the Lord’s supper, accords with its being a church rite; and with 
this, all that is recorded of its observance at Jerusalem and Troas, 
perfectly harmonizes. The administration of the rite to a dying 
individual, as is practised by some, has no sanction in the Word of 
God. 

The rite should be celebrated by the church, in public assembly. 
It is said, “ As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do 
show the Lord’s death till he come.”* To show his death, requires 
that it be done in public. It should be held forth to the view of 
the irreligious, who may be willing to attend in the public assem- 
bly. In another part of the same epistle, Paul speaks of the effect 
produced on unbelievers who came into the public assembly of the 
church.* As it is right to hold forth the word of life to them, so it 
is right to show the Lord’s death before them, in the divinely 
appointed manner. 

By the Jews it was held unlawful to eat with the uncircumcised, 
Paul has taught us, that familiar intercourse with unconverted per- 
sons, is not unlawful to Christians; but he says, “If any man, that 
is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or 
a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one, no not 
to eat.’”’° In this prohibition, eating at the Lord’s table with such 
a wicked person, if not specially intended, is certainly included. 
Though such an one may have been called a brother, it was wrong 
for the church to retain him in fellowship, and continue to eat with 
him, in the peculiar manner by which fellowship was indicated. In 
the words of Christ, every such wicked person was to be accounted 
as an heathen man and a publican. 

In primitive times, the members of different local churches asso- 
ciated with each other, as members of the great fraternity. Paul 
was doubtless welcomed at the Lord’s table, by the disciples at 


e a cae eo oes ee 


2 1 Cor: xi. 2,23. aS 16: 3 1 Cor. xi. 26. 
“1 Cor. xiv. 24, 25. 51 Cor. v. 11. 


214 COMMUNION. 


Troas. This transient communion is now practised. The Lord’s 
supper is properly a church ordinance; but an individual, duly 
qualified to be admitted to membership in a church, may be admitted 
for the time as a member, and received to transient communion, 
without any departure from the design of the institution. 


Srcrron 4—OPEN COMMUNION. 


We have seen that the Lord’s supper has been committed to the 
local churches for observance and perpetuation; and that local 
churches, if organized according to the Scriptures, contain none but 
baptized persons. It follows hence, that baptism is a pre-requisite 
to communion at the Lord’s table. The position which baptism 
holds in the commission, determines its priority to the other com- 
manded observances therein referred to, among which church 
communion must be included. This is the doctrine which has been 
held on the subject by Christians generally, in all ages; and it is 
now held by the great mass of Pedobaptists. With them we have 
no controversy as to the principle by which approach to the Lord’s 
table should be regulated. We differ from them in practice, because 
we account nothing Christian baptism, but immersion on profession 
of faith, and we, therefore, exclude very many whom they admit. 
But there are Baptists, who reject the principle that baptism is a 
prerequisite to communion, and maintain that nothing ought to be 
a condition of communion, which is not a condition of salvation. 
They hold that all pious persons, baptized or unbaptized, have a 
right to the Lord’s supper. Their practice is called open or mixed 


communion, and the arguments in defence of it will now claim our 
attention. 


Argument 1.—The Lord’s supper, when instituted by Christ, 
was given to persons who had never received Christian baptism, 
and therefore baptism cannot be a prerequisite. 

The first supper was administered to the apostles. Some of 
these had been baptized by John; and, since the disciples made 
by Jesus in his personal ministry, were also baptized, we are war- 
ranted to conclude, that all the apostles had been baptized. If it 
be denied that John’s baptism, and the baptism administered under 
the immediate direction of Christ during his personal ministry, 


OPEN COMMUNION. 215 


were Christian baptism, we call for proof. Until the distinction 
is established, the argument has no foundation. 

But there is another way in which the argument may be met. 
We have every certainty, which the nature of the case admits, that 
the apostles were not baptized after the institution of the Lord’s 
supper. From this time to the ensuing Pentecost, when they 
entered fully on the work assigned them, their history is so given 
as to exclude all probability that they were baptized in this in- 
terval; and, if they were qualified to enter fully on their work,’ 
without another baptism, another baptism was unnecessary ; and 
was therefore never afterwards received. Mr. Hall, the ablest 
advocate of open communion, says: “My deliberate opinion is, 
that, in the Christian sense of the term, they were not baptized at 
all.” When Paul was made an apostle, before he entered on his 
work he was commanded to be baptized. From some cause, the 
other apostles were not under this obligation. We account for 
the difference, by the supposition, that they had already received 
what was substantially the same as the baptism administered to 
Paul. But, if we are mistaken on this point, it is still true that 
the eleven apostles were not under obligation to receive any other 
baptism; and their case, therefore, differed radically from that of 
persons who are under obligation to be baptized, and are living in 
neglect of this duty. The latter may be required, and ought to 
be required, to profess Christ according to his commandment, 
before they are admitted to church-membership and communion; 
but the eleven apostles, from some cause, whatever it may have 
been, were under no such obligation. The cases are not parallel; 
and, therefore, the argument fails. 

Argument 2.—The argument for strict communion, from the 
position of baptism in the commission, proves too much. If it 
proves that we ought not to teach the unbaptized to commune at 
the Lord’s table, it proves also that we ought not to teach them the 
moral precepts of Christ included in the words, “all things what- 
soever I have commanded you.” 

The apostles were commanded to preach the gospel to every 
creature. In executing their commission, it became their duty to 
instruct the ignorant and them that were out of the way. They 
adapted their instructions to every man’s character and circum- 


1 Hall’s Works, Vol. i., p. 303. 


216 COMMUNION. 


stances To the impenitent, they said: “ Repent, and be bap- 
tized.” To the unbaptized disciple, they said: “ Why tarriest 
thou? Arise, and be baptized.” The baptized disciple they taught, 
according to the requirement in the commission, to observe all 
things whatsoever Christ had commanded. The impenitent were 
not to be taught to observe all things which Christ had com- 
manded. The advocates of open communion deny that they have 
a right either to baptism, or the Lord’s supper; but why? The 
same moral precepts which are to be taught to the baptized dis- 
ciple, may be taught to the impenitent. We may, therefore, retort, 
that if they exclude the impenitent from baptism and the Lord’s 
supper, their mode of reasoning will prove too much, and will 
equally exclude them from instruction in the moral precepts of 
Christ. If it be just to argue from the order prescribed in the 
commission, that baptism belongs to those only who have been 
made disciples; that order equally proves, that the baptized only 
ought to be taught to observe all things that Christ had com- 
manded. Some things that Christ commanded might be taught 
to the unbaptized, and to the impenitent; but the full observance 
of all Christ’s commands, was to be enjoined on the baptized 
disciples. Had the commission read, “ Make disciples of all na- 
tions, and teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have 
commanded you,” baptism and the supper would have been in- 
cluded together among the things commanded, and no inference 
could have been drawn from the commission as to the proper order 
in which they should be observed. But the separation of baptism 
from all the other things which Christ had commanded, gives it a 
peculiar relation to the other things enjoined in the commission ; 
and the order in which it is introduced cannot but signify the 
proper order for our obedience. l 

Argument 3.—The fact that, in the primitive times, none but 
baptized persons were admitted to the Lord’s table, is not a rule 
to us, whose circumstances are widely different. Then, no con- 
verted person mistook his obligation to be baptized. Had he 
refused baptism, the refusal would have proved him not to be a 
disciple; and now nothing ought to exclude from communion, but 
that which disproves discipleship. 

The argument admits that, if all understood their duty, baptism 
would always precede the communion, as it did in apostolic times. 
How far it is our duty to tolerate disobedience to Christ’s com- 


P a ane 


ee eee at ee oe ee ee 


OPEN COMMUNION. 217 


mands, and produce a church order unknown in the days of the 
‘apostles, in accommodation to error or weakness of faith, is an 
inquiry which will come up hereafter. 

Argument 4.—The supper commemorates the death of Christ: 
baptism represents his burial and resurrection. The order of the 
things signified is the reverse of that in which they are observed. 
Hence, the order of observance ought not to be considered 
necessary. 

Baptism represents the burial of Christ, but not to the exclusion 
of his death: “ Know ye not, that as many of us as were baptized 
into Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore, we are 
buried with him by baptism into death.” The supper represents 
the death of Christ; but not to the exclusion of his burial and 
resurrection. Without the resurrection, the sacrifice would have 
been unaccepted, and the memorial of it useless. Moréover, the 
supper directs the thoughts to the second coming of Christ, and 
therefore supposes his resurrection. The same great facts of Chris- 
tianity are represented by both rites, though in aspects somewhat 
different; and, therefore, no valid argument can be drawn, from 
their objective signification, to determine the proper order of their 
observance. 

But while both rites direct our faith to the accepted sacrifice of 
Christ, they do not signify our relation to it in the same manner. 
Baptism represents a believer’s dying to sin, and rising to walk in 
newness of life. It signifies the change by which he becomes a 
new creature. The supper represents the believer’s continued feed- 
ing on Christ; and therefore presupposes the change which is 
denoted by baptism. It follows, that the subjective signification 
of the rites, so far as any valid argument can be drawn from it, 
determines the priority of baptism. 

If there were anything in the objective signification of the rite 
furnishing ground for an argument in favor of its preceding bap- 
tism, it would tend to establish that precedence as universally 
necessary, rather than occasionally justifiable. 


Argument 5.—Communion at the Lord’s table is a token of 
brotherly love. To refuse it to any true disciple of Christ, is con- 
trary to the spirit of brotherly love, and to the command of Christ 
which enjoined it. 


Christ has commanded us to love every true disciple; but not 


218 COMMUNION. 


to give to every one this particular token of love. Neither the law 
nor the spirit of brotherly love, can require us to treat our brethren 


otherwise than he has enjoined. We give them the love, and with- 


hold from them the token, in obedience to the same authority, and 
in the exercise of the same fraternal spirit. If a right participa- 
tion of the communion were the appointed means of salvation, and 
if baptism were necessary in order to this right participation, it 
would be the highest manifestation of brotherly love, to maintain 
firmly the practice of strict communion. Our firmness might cor- 
rect an error in our brethren, which, in the case supposed, would, 
if persisted in, be ruinous to their eternal interests. A false ten- 
derness might incline us not to disturb their misplaced confidence; 
but true Christian love would direct to a contrary course. Now, we 
are bound to perform every duty with the same careful regard to 
the divine will, as if salvation depended on it; and the true spirit 


of Christian love will incline us to guard our brethren against what. 


is sinful, as well as against what is ruinous. Hence, the argument 
from brotherly love utterly fails to justify the practice of mixed 
communion, if that practice can be shown to be contrary to the 
mind of Christ. 

Further, the argument from this topic must be inconclusive, until 
it be proved that brotherly love cannot subsist without a joint par- 
ticipation of the Lord’s supper. But there are surely many modes 
of testifying and cherishing the warmest affection toward erring 
brethren, without participating in their errors. We may be ready, 
in obedience to Christ, to lay down our lives for our brethren— 
though we may choose to die, rather than, in false tenderness to 
them, violate the least of his commandments. 


Argument 6.—A particular church differs from the church uni- 
versal, only as a part differs from the whole; and, since Pedobap- 
tist Christians are parts of the true church, they ought to be 
admitted to membership and communion in the particular churches. 

That particular churches differ from the church universal, only 
as a part differs from the whole, is assumed by Mr. Hall, in his 
defence of mixed communion. This assumption, made without 
proof, is the fundamental error of his scheme. It begs the ques- 
tion. We call the atmosphere of a place, that part of the whole 
atmosphere which chances to be at the place; and if a local church 
is, in like manner, that part of the universal church which chances 


OPEN COMMUNION. 219 


to be at the place, the question about communion is virtually de- 
cided. We cannot argue that the communion of a church shall be 
denied to any who have the full right of membership. 

We have seen elsewhere, that the universal church is not the 
aggregate of the local churches, and is not strictly homogeneous 
with them. Hence the assumption which is fundamental to mixed 
communion, is erroneous. 


Argument T.—To exclude a Pedobaptist brother from commu- 
nion, is substantially to inflict on him the punishment of excom- 
munication, the punishment inflicted on atrocious offenders. Such 
is not the proper treatment of a fellow disciple, whose error of 
judgment the Lord graciously pardons. 


When an advocate of open communion excludes from the Lord’s 
table an amiable neighbor, who does not give evidence of conver- 
sion, the exclusion is not regarded as a punishment. Neither 
ought our exclusion of the unbaptized; much less is it right to 
speak of it as the punishment inflicted on atrocious offenders. The 
churches have no scale of penalties adjusted to different grades of 
crime. When they excommunicate, they withdraw their fellowship, 
and this may be done for wrongs of very different magnitude. 
There is no necessity to class the error of pedobaptism with the 
most atrocious of these wrongs. The church which excludes a 
Pedobaptist from the Lord’s table, does not design to inflict a pun- 
ishment on him, but merely to do its own duty, as a body to which 
the Lord has intrusted one of his ordinances. The simple aim is, 
to regulate the observance according to the will of the Lord. 


Argument 8.—To reject from communion a Pedobaptist brother 
whom God receives, is to violate the law of toleration laid down 
in Romans xiv. 1-3. 


The application of this rule to the question of receiving unbap- 
tized persons to church-membership, has been considered, p. 96. 
The result of the examination was unfavorable to the admission 
of such persons ; and the reasons which exclude them from church- 
membership, exclude them from church communion. Regarding 
the Lord’s supper as an ordinance committed to the local churches, 
to be observed by them as such, the question, who are entitled to 
the privilege of communion, is decided by a simple principle. 
None are to be admitted but those who can be admitted to the 
membership of the church. 


220 COMMUNION. 


The argument does not claim that persons do right in communing 
while unbaptized, but it pleads for a toleration of their error. Since 
this is the plea which open communion Baptists chiefly rely on, it 
deserves a full examination. 

It is a difficult attainment in religion, to preserve one’s purity 
untarnished, while mingling with the men of the world, and exer- 
cising towards them all that benevolence and forbearance which the 
gospel enjoins. Our duty to mankind requires that we should not 
retire from the world, nor cherish a morose and misanthropic tem- 
per. In avoiding the error on this hand, there is danger of falling 
into the opposite one, and becoming too much conformed to the 
world. Vice is apt to appear less hateful in those whom we greatly 
love; and even the frequent sight of it, if we are not on our guard, 
will make its deformity less in our view. Hence arises a great need 
of much watchfulness and prayer, in those who practise that pure 
and undefiled religion, which requires them, on the one hand, to 
visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, and to go about 
doing good to all men; and, on the other hand, to keep themselves 
unspotted from the world. 

There is a still severer trial of Christian principle. We meet it 
in our intercourse with Christian brethren, who love our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and in general obey his commandments; but walk disorderly 
in some matters which are deemed of minor importance. If these 
brethren are supposed by us, to have more spiritual knowledge 
than ourselves, there is much danger, lest, through the confiding 
nature of Christian love, and the readiness to esteem others better 
than ourselves, we be betrayed into their errors. Had their viola- 
tions of duty been greater, a suspicion of their piety might have 
been awakened, and we might have been put on our guard. The 
man of God, who prophesied against the altar at Bethel, could not 
be induced, by the wicked king of Israel, to eat bread, or drink 
water, in the place; yet the old prophet, who came to him in the 
name of the Lord, found it easy to prevail. Had even he proposed 
some deed in itself highly criminal, the truth of his pretended 
message from God would have been suspected. But to eat’ bread 
and to drink water were things in themselves lawful; and the man 
of God too readily yielded to the old prophet, as his superior in 
the knowledge of the divine will, and ate and drank in violation 
of God’s prohibition. 


a a a O 


OPEN COMMUNION. 221 


If we ought to guard against being led into error by our inter- 
course with good men, when no wrong is suspected, much more 
ought we, when the existence of wrong is known. But toleration 
implies wrong; and, if mixed communion be defended on the plea 
of toleration, the very defence admits that there is wrong some- 
where. It becomes us, therefore, to take good heed, lest we be 
implicated in the wrong. The very names, toleration, forbearance, 
are commended to us by our sense of God’s forbearance and long- 
suffering toward us; and the motives for their exercise are irre- 
sistible when their object is a brother in Christ. Towards such an 
one, how can we be otherwise than tolerant and forbearing? Shall 
we persecute him? God forbid. . We would rather lay down our 
lives for him. Shall we indulge in any bitterness, or uncharita- 
bleness towards him? We will love him with pure heart fervently. 
Shall we, in any manner, prevent him from worshipping and serv- 
ing God according to the dictates of his conscience? The very 
thought be far from us. Even if he err, to his own Master he 
standeth or falleth. We, too, are fallible and erring; and we will 
fervently pray that the grace which pardons our faults may pardon 
his also. What more do toleration and forbearance require ? 

When a church receives an unbaptized person, something more 
is done than merely to tolerate his error. There are two parties 
concerned, The acts of entering the church and partaking of its 
communion are his, and for them he is responsible. The church 
also acts when it admits him to membership, and authorizes his 
participation of the communion. The church, as an organized 
body, with power to receive and exclude members according to 
rules which Christ has laid down, is responsible for the exercise 
of this power. 

Each individual disciple of Christ is bound, for himself, to obey 
perfectly the will of his Master. Whatever tolerance he may ex- 
ercise towards the errors of others, he should tolerate none in 
himself. Though he may see but a single fault in his brother, he 
ought, while imitating all that brother’s excellencies, carefully to 
avoid this fault. He may not neglect the tithing of mint, though 
he should find an example of such neglect accompanied with a per- 
fect obedience of every moral precept. 

In like manner each church is bound, for itself, to conform, in 
all its order, to the divine will. How much soever it may respect 


229 COMMUNION. 


neighboring churches, which may have made high attainments ın 
every spiritual excellence, it must not imitate them, if they neglect 
or corrupt any of Christ’s ordinances. No argument is needed to 
render this clear. . 

The members of a church, who understand the law of Christ, 
are bound to observe it strictly, whatever may be the ignorance 
and errors of others. For them to admit unbaptized persons to 
membership, is to subvert a known law of Christ. Though there 
be unbaptized persons surpassing in every spiritual excellence, and 
though the candidate for admission excel them all, yet the single 
question for the church is, shall its order be established according 
to the will of God, or shall it not. 

It may be asked, whether the persons whom we admit to member- 
ship and communion are not, in many cases, guilty of omitting 
duties more important than baptism. It may be so: and if a 
church sanctions these criminal neglects, it partakes in the guilt of 
them. Shall it, to escape the charge of the greater guilt, volun- 
tarily assume that which is less? If Christ has given a law for 
the organization of churches, we have no right to substitute ano- 
ther, because it would be, in our judgment, more accordant with 
the proper estimate of moral actions. If the members of the uni- 
versal church had been left to congregate into small societies, accord- 
ing to their spiritual instincts, if I may use the expression, and not 
according to a revealed law, these societies might be left to deter- 
mine, by moral excellence merely, who ought to be admitted. But 
since it has seemed good to the Christian lawgiver, to prescribe 
rules for church organization, these rules should be observed. Each 
church should aim, in its church order, to exhibit a model of per- 
fection to the world, though its several members may be conscious 
of imperfections in themselves. They should aim, as individuals, 
to come up to the full measure of their individual responsibility, 
and strive, each one, to exhibit a model of perfect obedience. If 
the organization and discipline of the church are not perfect, yet 
each member should aim to be perfect. If each member is not per- 
fect, this lessens not the obligation to render the organization and 
discipline of the church perfect. 

But may not each individual be left to his own conscience, and 
his own responsibility? He may be, and ought to be, so far as it 
can be done without implicating the consciences and responsibili- 


OPEN COMMUNION, 2928 


ties of others. If each were left wholly to himself, the discipline 
of the church would be nothing, and the power to exercise it would 
be attended with no responsibility. But the church is under an 
obligation, which cannot be transferred, to regulate its organization 
and discipline according to the word of God, which enjoins, on the 
one hand, to be tolerant and forbearing towards weak and erring 
brethren; and on the other hand, to keep the ordinances of God 
as they were delivered. 

The argument for toleration is founded on the words, “ Him that 
is weak in the faith, receive ye. * * * For God hath received 
him.” It is a full reply to this argument, that God’s receiving of 
the weak in faith furnishes the rule, as well as the reason, for our 
receiving of them. That God receives a man in one sense, can be 
no reason that we should receive him in a sense widely different. 
God receives an unbaptized weak believer as a member of his spir- 
itual church, and we ought to receive him in like manner. We ought 
to regard him as a brother in Christ, and a fellow heir of the same 
inheritance. His interests should be near to our hearts, and we 
should welcome him to all that spiritual communion which belongs 
to the members of Christ’s body. So, when God has received a 
baptized weak believer to local church-membership, we are bound 
to receive him in like manner, and allow him to sit with us at the 
table of the Lord; a privilege which, through the imperfection of 
church discipline, the vilest hypocrite may obtain. Unless we keep 
in view this important distinction, in applying this rule for tolera- 
tion, it will indeed admit the unbaptized weak believer to ceremo- 
nial communion, but it will, with equal certainty, admit the hypo- 
crite to that communion which is spiritual. 


Argument 9.—The advocates of close communion are accus- 
tomed to invite Pedobaptist ministers to preach in their pulpits. 
To hold this pulpit communion with them, and at the same time to 
deny them a place at the Lord’s table, is a manifest inconsistency. 


If we admit the conclusion of this argument, it does not prove 
close communion to be wrong. Some Baptists admit the validity 
of the argument; and avoid the charge of inconsistency by re- 
fusing to invite Pedobaptist ministers into their pulpits. Their 
views will be examined hereafter, Chapter X., section 5,1and we 
shall then attempt to show that what has been called pulpit com 


*Omitted in this edition. 


224 COMMUNION. 


munion, may be vindicated in perfect consistency with the princi- 
ples on which strict communion at the Lord’s table is maintained. 

Argument 10.—The communion table is the Lord’s; and to 
exclude from it any of the Lord’s people, the children of his family, 
is an offence against the whole Christian community. 

There is a table which the Lord has spread, and to which every 
child of his family has an unquestionable right. It is a table 
richly furnished with spiritual food, a feast of fat things, full of 
marrow, of wine on the lees well refined. This table the Lord 
has spread for all his children, and he invites them all to come: 
“ Eat, O friends; drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved.” Any 
one who should forbid their approach would offend against the 
community of God’s children. The guests at this table have spiritual. 
communion with one another; a species of communion which 
belongs of right to every member of the church universal. 

There is another table which the Lord has commanded his peo- 
ple to spread in each local church. It is not, like the other, 
covered with spiritual good things, but with simple bread and wine. 
It is not, like the other, designed for the whole family of the Lord, 
but for the particular body, the local church, by whom, in obedi- 
ence to divine command, it has been spread. Though human hands 
have set out the food, yet the table is the Lord’s, because it is 
designed for his service, and prepared at his command; and the 
will of the Lord must determine who ought to partake. He knows 
best the purpose for which he commanded it; and, whatever may 
be the feelings of the guests, they have no right to invite to his 
table any whom the Lord has not invited. 

We are aware that the practice of strict communion is considered 
offensive by a large part of the Christian community. We lament 
this fact ; and if the arguments which have been adduced in defence 
of our practice, have failed to produce a conviction of its propriety, 
we would still crave from our brethren the forbearance and tolera- 
tion for which they plead in behalf of the weak in faith. We 
conscientiously believe that we are doing the Lord’s will; and 
we would gladly invite every child of God to unite in our simple 
ceremonial observance, if we had the divine approbation. But we 
believe that the purpose for which the observance was instituted, 
and the divine will by which it ought to be regulated, require the 
restrictions under which we act. 


OPEN COMMUNION. 225 


Does not the offence taken at our course indicate that the offended 
party estimate ceremonial communion too highly? To the rich 
feast of spiritual good which the Lord has spread, we rejoice to 
welcome every child of God; and we gladly accept an humble seat 
with them at the bountiful board. When with open hearts and 
hands we give this welcome, why will they be offended, if we do 
not also give them a crumb of our ceremonial bread, and a drop of 
our ceremonial wine? If the elements possessed some sacramental 
efficacy, there would be an apparent reason for their complaint; 
but regarding them as a token of union in a church organization 
to which our brethren object, and into which they are unwilling 
to enter, the ground and consistency of their complaint do not 
appear. 

When Pedobaptists complain of our strict communion, we would 
remind them that they hold the principle in common with us, and 
practise on it in their own way. If they have aught to object, let 
it be at that in which we differ from them, and not at that in which 
we agree. The contrary course is not likely to produce unity of 
opinion, or to promote that harmony of Christian feeling which 
ought to subsist among the followers of our Lord. 

When Baptists object to strict communion, we would propose the 
inquiry, Whether they do not attach undue importance to the 
eucharist, in comparison with baptism. Mr. Hall calls the eucha- 
rist a principal spiritual function.’ In this view of it, he complains 
that the privilege of partaking in it should be denied to any. Is 
it more spiritual than baptism? If not, why should baptism be 
trodden under foot, to open the way of access to the eucharist? 
When both ceremonies were supposed to possess a saving efficacy, 
the proper order of their observance was still maintained ; much 
more should it be maintained, if both are mere ceremonies. If 
baptism were a mere ceremony, and the eucharist a principal spi- 
ritual function, the arguments for open communion would have a ` 
force which they do not now possess: but our brethren will not 
defend this position. 


eE E EE E Mod NN 
1 Yol. i, p. 322. 
15 


CHAPTER VI. 


WASHING OF FEET. 


WHEN JESUS REQUIRED HIS DISCIPLES TO WASH ONE ANOTHER’S 
FEET, HE DESIGNED, NOT TO INSTITUTE A RELIGIOUS CEREMONY, BUT 
TO ENFORCE A WHOLE CLASS OF MORAL DUTIES. 


The requirement on the subject is contained in the following 
words: “ If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet, 
ye also ought to wash one another’s feet.” 1 

Every word of Jesus Christ is important, and every command 
which he has left as a rule of our conduct ought to be punctiliously 
obeyed. The words quoted above may be regarded as a part of 
his dying instructions to his apostles. Every circumstance con- 
nected with the time and manner of their being uttered, tends to 
invest them with interest. No one deserves the name of his disci- 
ple, who could knowingly neglect a duty recommended by such 
unparalleled love and condescension. 

What, then, was the Saviour’s meaning? “If ye know these 
things,” says he,” “ happy are ye if ye do them.” We must know, 
in order to do; and if we mistake his design, how honest soever 
our intention may be, we shall not have fulfilled his command. If, 
on this memorable night, when he partook of the last passover with 
his disciples, and when he instituted the breaking of bread as the 
memorial of “Christ, our Passover, sacrificed for us,” he designed 
to institute the washing of feet as another religious rite, till his 
second coming, together with baptism and the breaking of bread; 
then, this institution should be observed with punctilious carefulness ; 
and no plea should be admitted from the neglect of it, to justify 


1 John xiii. 14. oh Pe ve 


IODA 


vap) 


ie sims 


WASHING OF FEET. PRA 


the neglect of any other divine command. But, if it was the 
Saviour’s design, not to institute a religious ceremony for the 
observance of his disciples, but to enjoin on them a whole class of 
moral duties of the very highest importance, it would be a lament- 
able mistake, if we should substitute for these duties a mere exter- 
nal rite which he never meant to institute. 

To ascertain the Saviour’s design, let the following things be 
attentively considered :— 

1. The particular duty enjoined is moral, as distinguished from 
those which are positive. 

Baptism and the Lord’s supper are positive institutes, because 
the obligation to observe them could not be inferred from any utility 
or apparent fitness in the things themselves. On the contrary, the 
washing of feet was not a mere ceremony, but a necessary act of 
hospitality which had been in use since the days of Abraham ;} 
and it is accordingly reckoned by the Apostle Paul, in connexion 
with other moral duties of like kind, as the proper foundation of a 
reputation for good works. “ Well reported of for good works, if 
she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints’ feet, if 
she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every 
good work.”? It is the utility of the act which gives it a place 
among the “ good” works here enumerated. In those days, when 
travelling was so generally performed on foot, and when the feet 
were shod with mere sandals; to wash the feet of the wayworn 
stranger was not a mere ceremony, but one of those “ good works 
which are profitable unto men,” and to be maintained “ for neces- 
sary uses.” 3 

2. The example of the Saviour recommends the act on the ground 
of its utility. 

When Peter wished his hands and his head to be washed, “Jesus 
saith uuto him, He that is washed needeth not, save to wash his 
feet.””. The two words here rendered wash, are different in the 
original: the former, denoting a washing of the whole body; and 
the latter, which is the word used elsewhere throughout the narra- 
tive, a partial washing, as of the hands or feet. The sense is—he 
shat has been bathed, needs only to wash his feet, which may have 


SS 


1 Gen. xviii. 4; xix. 2. 21 Tim. y. 10. 3 Titus iii, 8, 14. 


228 WASHING OF FEET. 


been defiled in walking from the bath.! The apostles had bathed 
themselves before sitting down to the paschal supper, and therefore 
did not need any washing except of the feet. On this need, small as 
it may appear, the Saviour placed the fitness and propriety of the 
act which he performed. He was willing to set an example of per- 
forming the least possible act of real kindness ; but he would not 
extend that act a whit beyond the line of necessity and utility. 
Beyond this line, it was no longer an act of kindness. But Jesus 
performed it as a good work for a necessary use; and since he 
therein gave to his apostles an example that they should do to each 
other as he had done to them,? it is manifest that he designed to 
enforce on them mutual service of practical utility. 

3. It was not a single duty which the Saviour intended to 
enjoin: _ 

This is apparent from verse 17: “If ye know these things, 
happy are ye if ye do them.” Duties were manifestly intended 
beyond the single act of washing of feet. Of these duties this act 
was a mere specimen by which they might know the rest; and 
knowing, practise them. 

A proof that the washing performed by our Saviour was a part 
and specimen of a whole class of duties, may also be derived from 
_verse 8: “ Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. 
Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with 
me.” The true import of this answer seems to be this: “Jf I 
may not wash thy feet, (so the word here used implies), J may not, 
on the same ground, render to thee any of the great benefits result- 
ing from my humiliation, in which I came not to be ministered unto, 
but to minister, and to give my life a ransom for many. If I may 
not perform to thee acts of condescending kindness, thou hast no 
part with me. As in this declaration, the washing of Peter's feet 


1 Some interpreters take the first word to mean, not a bathing of the whole 
body, but a washing of the hands and face, which the disciples are supposed 
to have performed before taking their places at supper. ‘“ He who washeth his 
face and hands is considered sufficiently clean, and needs no other washing 
unless this mark of civility, that his feet be washed by a servant. This 
civility I exhibit to you, thus acting the part of a servant.” This interpre- 
tation, though less satisfactory, because less conformed to the ordinary signifi- 
cation of the terms employed, will, nevertheless, serve equally well for sus- 
taining the argument above presented. 

2 John xiii. 15. 


WASHING OF FRET. 229 


was made by the Saviour a specimen and representative of all his 
acts of condescending kindness; so the washing of feet, enjoined 
upon Peter and his fellow-apostles, was intended to include all the 
acts of condescending kindness which they could perform towards 
their brethren. “A new commandment I give unto you, That ye 
love one another: as I have loved you, that ye also love one 
another: by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye 
have love one to another.” 1 

4. It is an argument of weight against regarding the washing of 
feet as a religious ceremony instituted in the church, that it does 
not, like baptism and the Lord’s supper, typify Christ. 

The Lord’s supper, in a lively figure, shows forth the death of 
Christ; and baptism, his burial and resurrection. These stand- 
ing ordinances of the Christian church lead the mind directly to 
the great Author of our salvation, and to the atoning sacrifice by 
which that salvation had been effected. These ordinances teach us 
the grand doctrine of redemption, in a language which infinite wis- 
dom has invented for the purpose. To this great doctrine these 
witnesses bear their testimony, in a voice, long and loud, through 
all the revolutions of centuries, and above all the tumults of heresy. 
What does the washing of feet teach us of Christ, or of redemp- 
tion by Him? Does it lead the believer away from himself, and 
all his own works of righteousness, to the atoning sacrifice or 
the justifying righteousness on which he must rely for salvation ? 
It might serve, as a religious rite, to remind those of a duty to be 
performed, whose faith rests upon such duty for righteousness ; but 
of him who is the end of the law for righteousness to every one 
that believeth, of his suffering and death as the means of our sal- 
vation, it tells nothing. 

5. The washing of feet was not practised as a religious rite by 
the primitive Christians. 

That baptism and the Lord’s Supper were so practised we have 
the clearest evidence, both from the Scriptures and the writings 
of the Christian fathers; but not so with regard to the washing of 
feet. It is not necessary to pursue this subject beyond the clear 
light of Scripture, into the comparatively dark field of investiga- 
vion which ecclesiastical history presents, as the testimony which 
tO eet E ae 


1 V. 34, 35. 


230 WASHING OF FEET. 


this less satisfactory source of evidence affords, though entirely 
consistent with the testimony of Scripture, is not needed, either 
for elucidation or confirmation. On opening the inspired history 
of the church, we read, at the very beginning, “ They that gladly 
received his word were baptized: and they continued steadfastly 
in the apostles’ doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, 
and in prayers.” Baptism is frequently mentioned in the subse- 
quent history, and in the 20th chap. Tth verse express mention is 
made that ‘the disciples came together to break bread.” But 
not a chapter, not a verse, in all the Acts of the Apostles, con- 
tains an intimation that any church, or any company of disciples, 
ever assembled to celebrate the washing of feet. In the Epistle 
to the Romans,‘ a reference is made to baptism, and an expla- 
nation given of its import. The first chapter of the next epistle 
(the first to the Corinthians), contains an account of several bap- 
tisms ; and the 11th chapter a very particular account of the insti- 
tution of the supper, and of abuses in its observance, which had 
already crept into the church of Corinth. But in these epistles, 
and in all those which follow, no allusion whatever is found to the 
washing of feet, as a rite observed by the churches. 

There is, indeed, one passage, and only one, in which the wash- 
ing of feet is mentioned; and this passage, 1 Tim. v. 10, furnishes 
decisive proof that it was not practised as a church ordinance, as 
were baptism and the Lord’s supper. To demonstrate this, we 
have but to substitute, in the passage, the mention of these acknow- 
ledged ordinances, and the incongruity of such a connexion will 
immediately appear: “ Well reported of for good works; if she 
have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she 
have been baptized, or received the Lord’s supper, if she have 
relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good 
work.” As it must be supposed of every widow in the church 
that she had been baptized, and had received the Lord’s supper ; 
no “if,” with respect to these ordinances, could be admitted, and 
no one widow could, on account of her having observed them, be 
more entitled to honor than any other. The same would have been 
true concerning the washing of feet, if this also had been a reli- 
gious rite in common use in the churches; and it would have been 
a manifest absurdity to state the fact of any church member hay- 


ee ey a Se 


Chap. vi. 


WASHING OF FEET. 231 


ing performed the rite, as a reason for regarding him or her as 
specially entitled to reputation for good works, or to honor from 
the church. 

There is, therefore, not only a total want of proof that such a 
religious rite was anciently observed, but there is (what few cases 
in controversy furnish) a proof of the negative, which is as clear 
and satisfactory as any such proof can be expected to be. 

These considerations show clearly that it was the Saviour’s de- 
sign to enforce a whole class of moral duties,.and not to institute 
a religious ceremony; and that he was so understood by his apos- 
tles. He who washes the feet of a saint, when those feet do not 
need washing, is as if he gave a cup of cold water toa disciple 
who is not thirsty. He may indeed make a show of voluntary 
humility, but he does not fulfil the command of Christ, nor imitate 
his example. He ought to remember that Christ declined to wash 
the hands and head of Peter; not because there would have been 
less show of humility in so doing, but because those parts did not 
need washing. He, therefore, who washes the feet of a saint when 
these feet do not need washing, instead of obeying or imitating 
Christ, does that which Christ refused to do. And he who washes 
the feet of a saint merely as a religious rite, without considering 
or caring whether the act which he performs is necessary and use- 
ful, is just as far as the other from obeying or imitating the Re- 
deemer. 

If, after a careful consideration of the subject, we have satisfac- 
torily ascertained that our Saviour designed his disciples should 
perform towards each other every needful act of condescending 
kindness, even the smallest and the most servile, let us be ready 
with promptness and pleasure to fulfil his will. If we know these 
things, happy are we if we do them. If we have the spirit of 
Christ, we shall be ready, when need requires, to lay down our 
lives for our brethren, or give them a cup of cold water, or wash 
their feet, or render them any other comfort. In so far as by any 
of these means we seek to promote the happiness of a disciple of 
Christ, our good deeds will be remembered; and the great Judge, 
in the last day, omitting all mention of our most labored religious 
ceremonies, will bring that act of kindness to mind, and will say, 
“ Inasmuch as ye did it to one of the least of these my brethren, 
ye did it unto me.” 


CHAPTER VII. 


PUD ECTECSWORSHI PEA 


Section I.—TIME. - 


THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK IS THE CHRISTIAN SABBATH, AND 
IS SPECIALLY APPROPRIATE FOR THE PUBLIC WORSHIP OF Gop. 

The computation of time by weeks, appears to have prevailed at 
a very early period. It may be traced back to the time of Laban, 
who said to Jacob: “ Fulfil her week.’’! A less visible trace of 
it may be seen in the account given of Noah, who waited “ seven 
days:’’ and afterwards “another seven days,”’? in his attempts to 
discover whether the deluge had subsided. The hebdomadal divi- 
sion of time existed very early in the gentile world; and no 
account of its origin is so probable, as that it was received from 
Noah, the father of the new world. No evidence appears, that 
Noah received it as a new institution from God; or that it origi- 
nated with him. The statement of Scripture is, “God rested on 
the seventh day: wherefore God blessed the seventh day, and 
sanctified it.”’* This is the origin of the institution. When the 
decalogue was promulgated from Sinai, it did not speak of the 
sabbath as an institution before unknown. The command, ‘ Re- 
member the sabbath day,” implies a knowledge of its existence ; 
and this is confirmed by the previous historical fact, that the fall 
of manna had ceased on the sabbath day. 

Since the sabbath originated at the creation, and was known 
before the giving of the law to the Israelites, it cannot be one of 
the abrogated Jewish ceremonies. The sabbath was made for 
man; and not exclusively for the Hebrews. The reason for it is 


—————— ee eae 


1 Gen. xxi. 27, * Gen. viii. 10, 12. 3 Gen. ii. 2, 3. 
RX. xx. Si (232) 


TIME. 233 


taken from God's rest on the seventh day, after six days’ work in 
_ creating the world; and not from anything that pertained specially 
to the nation of Israel. The institution is adapted to the nature 
of man, as a religious being, and the relation which he sustains to 
his Creator. — 

The decalogue was given as a law to the Israelites. Its preface 
shows this: “I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee 
out of the land of Eygpt.” It is further proved by the promise 
annexed to the fifth commandment: “ That thy days may be long 
, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.” But, though 

given to the Israelites, it was given to them as men. The cere- 
monial law was given to them, as the Congregation of the Lord ; 
and the judicial law was given to them as the Nation of Israel. 
But the decalogue was adapted to the relations which they bore to 
God and one another, as men. The same relations are in human 
society everywhere; and therefore the same obligations bind every- 
‘where. This part of the Mosaic code possesses universal and per- 
' petual obligation; and this part, God specially distinguished from 
all the rest. He pronounced it audibly from Sinai, and twice 
engraved it in stone, in token of its perpetuity. In writing to 
gentiles at Rome, and at Ephesus, Paul refers to the decalogue, 
as a law which they were bound to obey ;! and has thus decided 
that it was not peculiar to the Jews, or confined to the abrogated 
covenant. The ministration of the law in the letter, he distin- 
guishes from the ministration of the Spirit, and declares it to be 
done away when the veil is taken away from the heart;? but the 
change then wrought does not consist in making a new law, but in 
transferring the writing from the tables of stone, to the fleshly 
tables of the heart. 

Among the precepts of the decalogue, we find the command: 
“Remember the sabbath day.” As the whole decalogue binds 
us, so does this commandment. No man has a right to separate 
it from the rest, and claim exemption from its obligation. Chris- 
tians, therefore, must observe the sabbath; and, as a day which 
God has hallowed, it is specially appropriate for the public worship 
of God. 

Some Baptists, in a conscientious regard to the divine com- 


Se E Ee ee 
1 Rom. xiii. 8—10; Eph. vi. 2. 2 2 Cor. iii. 6—12. 


234 PUBLIC WORSHIP. 


mands, observe the same day for their sabbath that the Jews 
observe, and are thence called Seventh Day Baptists. But they 
mistake, as we conceive, the true import of the precept. They 
interpret it, as if it had been expressed ‘‘ The seventh day of the 
week is the sabbath,” and as if the Jewish division of the week 
were recognised and fixed; whereas the language is, “ Six days 
shalt thou labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh day is the 
sabbath of the Lord thy God.” The seventh day, is that which 
follows six days of labor; and the words of the precept express no 
more. From the nature of the case, the regular return of the 
sabbath, at equally distant intervals of time, must be expected to 
follow. We may have light thrown on the true meaning of the 
language employed, by comparing it with that which enjoined the 
observance of the sabbatical year. The comparison may be advan- 
tageously made for this purpose, by examining a passage in which 
the sabbatical day and the sabbatical year are both enjoined.? 
“ Six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits 
thereof; but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest, and lie still.” 
“ Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou 
shalt rest.” As the seventh year is not determined by a natural 
division of time into weeks of years; so the seventh day is not 
determined by a natural division of time into weeks of days. No 
one thinks of the seventh year otherwise than as the year which 
follows six years of regular toil in the cultivation of the earth, and 
as regularly returning at equal intervals. The precise similarity 
of the command enjoining the observance of the seventh day sab- 
bath, proves that the same method of interpretation must be 
applied to it. If an obligation exists to observe Saturday, or 
Sunday, rather than any other day of the week, it cannot be 
found in this precept of the decalogue, and must be made out in 
some other way. 

The decalogue, in its admirable adaptedness to the relations in 
human society, displays the wisdom of its Author. We may see 
this wisdom in the adaptedness of the fourth commandment to uni- 
versal observance. Since the rotundity of the earth has been 
demonstrated, it has become apparent, that a precept requiring 
the observance of the seventh day of the week, could not be 


1 Exodus xxiii, 10, 12. 


TIME. 235 


obeyed universally, unless some meridian were established by 
divine authority for the universal computation of time. A few 
years ago it was stated in some of our missionary intelligence, that 
a practical question of duty in the observance of the sabbath had 
arisen between some missionaries, who had met at their field of 
labor on the other side of the globe, having sailed to it by differ- 
ent routes, some by the eastern and others by the western. On 
comparing their computation, their sabbaths differed; and what 
was Saturday to one party was Sunday to the other. If the 
seventh day of the week had been commanded, these missionaries 
could not have obeyed without becoming sabbath-breakers to each 
other; and if no higher wisdom than that of Moses, who was 
ignorant of the earth’s true form, had dictated the decalogue, its 
admirable adaptedness to the condition and circumstances of men, 
in every age and country, and under every meridian, would not 
have been secured. 

Another objection to the interpretation which supposes the 
seventh day of the week to be prescribed, may be seen in the fact 
that it makes Scripture dependent on tradition. Had the observ- 
ance of the new moon, or of the full moon, been commanded, the 
means of ascertaining the time intended would have been within 
the reach of every one; but had the Scripture commanded to 
observe the seventh day of the week, who could know the day re- 
quired? No banner is hung out in the sky, to distinguish it from 
the other days of the week. The revolution and boundaries of 
the week are not determined, like the revolution of the seasons, by 
any natural phenomena. The precept, once engraven in stone, 
and now indelibly recorded in God's book, would stand before us, 
binding each individual conscience to obedience; and yet the pre- 
cept itself would give no clue by which to ascertain its true mean- 
ing. How could each individual know that he did not mistake the 
time, and profane the very day that God had hallowed? He has 
uo other means of knowledge than tradition. The right sabbath 
may have been handed down without mistake, from the time of the 
creation, or from the time of Moses; but what proof have we? 
None but tradition. God has wisely decided to make known his 
will to men by Scripture, rather than by tradition; but what is 
the advantage, if the meaning of Scripture must be determined 
by tradition ? 


236 PUBLIC WORSHIP. 


Another argument for our interpretation of the precept, may be 
drawn, from the word employed in the New Testament, to denote a 
week. It is the same word that is rendered sabbath, appearing 
sometimes in the singular form, sometimes in the plural. Take, for 
an example, the phrase ‘the first day of the week,” | which, liter- 
ally rendered, is, “the first day of the sabbath or sabbaths.’’ This 
may be explained, the first day according to the computation of 
the sabbath or sabbaths. But, however explained, it indicates 
that the sabbath determined the week, and not the week the 
sabbath. 

According to the view which we have taken of the fourth com- 
mandment, Christians obey it, as literally as the Jews. The latter 
derive their series of weeks by tradition from the time of Moses; 
we derive ours by tradition from the time of Christ. We see with 
pleasure, the beginning of our series, in the brief accounts of Scrip- 
ture, where the day on which Christians met for worship, is speci- 
cified. On the first day of the week our Lord rose from the dead. 
This day was filled with the tidings and proofs of his resurrection, 
and with the admiration and joy of the disciples, and was closed 
with a meeting of the disciples, in which Jesus appeared in person. 
In his account of this meeting, the evangelist is careful to repeat 
that it was on the first day of the week.? 

Another week rolled around, and a meeting of the disciples was 
held, in which Jesus was again present. A Jewish sabbath had 
_ intervened; and if it had been the Lord’s design to perpetuate this 

sabbath, as the day of public worship for his disciples, why did he 
allow it to, pass, and reserve the second joyful interview with his 
assembled people, to the ensuing day? The evangelist’s statement 
is, “ After eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas 
with them; then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in 
the midst.” * When the chief priests applied to Pilate to have the 
sepulchre guarded, they said, “ that deceiver said, while he was yet 
alive, after three days will I rise again. Command, therefore, that 
the sepulchre be made sure until the third day.” Here the phrase 
“after three days,” is equivalent to “until the third day.” If the 
phrase, “after eight days,” in the above quotation from John, be 


1 John xx. 1. 2 John xx. 19. s John xx. 26. 
t Matt. xxvii. 63, 64. 


TIME. . 237 


interpreted in the same manner, it will bring Christ’s second inter- 
view with his disciples just one week after the first, and therefore 
on the first day of the week. The feast of Pentecost occurred 
according to the law,’ on the day following the Jewish sabbath. 
It was therefore on the first day of the week, that the Holy Spirit 
was poured out, and three thousand converted under the preaching 
of Peter. 

The disciples at Troas met together to break bread ;? and the 
inspired historian is careful to tell us, that it was on “the first day 
of the week.” In writing to the Corinthians, Paul directed them, 
in making their religious contribution for the poor saints at Jeru- 
salem, “On the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by 
him in store, as God hath prospered him.”’* In describing the 
wonderful revelation which he received on the isle of Patmos, John 
says, ‘‘ I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day.” 4 By this phrase, he 
seems to designate the day on which our Lord arose, and which had 
been consecrated to his worship. 

As the Mosaic revelation displays divine wisdom, in its mode of 
exhibiting the fourth commandment; so does the Christian revela- 
tion, in its mode of recommending the first day of the week to our 
observance. The old covenant, with its priesthood, and forms of 
worship, had passed away, and there was a fitness in instituting a 
new form of worship to be introduced, and it was fit that the resur- 
rection of our Lord should begin the new computation, and be com- 
memorated by it. But while the first day of the week is expressly 
mentioned, had the observance of it been expressly commanded, 
the same difficulties would have originated, that would have attended 
the observance of the seventh day of the week. It would have 
rendered the Christian Scriptures dependent on tradition for their 
interpretation, and the Christian sabbath impossible to be observed 
throughout the world, in strict obedience to the requirement. As 

the matter has been left, the decalogue is transmitted to us, requir- - 
ing the consecration of one day in seven; and the New Testament 
teaches us, that no times are holy in themselves; and that the 
regard which the Jews demanded, for the day on which they kept 
their weekly sabbath, and for their-other holy days, so far from 


ee ee a 
1 Ley. xxiii. 16, 2 Acts xx. 7. 3 1 Cor. xvi. 2. 
“ Rev. i. 10. 


238 PUBLIC WORSHIP. 


being obligatory on Christians, is inconsistent with the nature of 
the Christian economy.' The proportion and the succession of 
time, as prescribed in the fourth commandment, are obligatory ; 
but no particular periods of duration have in themselves special 
sanctity. We are bound by the example of the apostles, to observe 
the first day of the week as the Christian sabbath; but not in such 
a sense as to fetter the conscience with insuperable difficulty, in 
such a case as that of the missionaries before mentioned. 

The worship, adapted to the day, requires to be social; and each 
individual Christian may unite with his brethren, in the worship of 
God, on the day set apart for it, with the full conviction that, in 
so doing, he is honoring the Author of Christianity, and strictly 
obeying the decalogue. 


Section II—MODE. 


PUBLIC WORSHIP SHOULD INCLUDE PRAYERS, SONGS OF PRAISE, 
AND THE READING AND EXPOUNDING OF GoD’s WORD. 

Prayer is a natural duty of man, confined to no particular con- 
dition of life, or dispensation of religion. It may be performed 
in private, in the family, in companies accidentally brought toge- 
ther, or designedly convened for the purpose; and in public assem- 
blies for divine worship, it ought always to make a part of the 
service. 

In public prayer, one of the worshippers leads the service, 
speaking audibly, as Solomon did at the dedication of the temple, 
and the rest unite in heart in the devotions and supplications. 
The leading part in the service may be performed by the ministers 
of the word. The first Christians continued steadfastly in the 
apostles’ doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread, and prayers. All 
these, including the prayers, were directed by the apostles; and, 
when the apostles were relieved from ministering to tables, it was 
that they might give themselves to the word of God and to prayer. 
Private prayer cannot be exclusively intended here; for the obli- 
gation to this belonged equally to the deacons elected, and to all 
the members of the church. But, though the ministers of the — 
word may, in general, most advantageously lead in public prayer, 


1 Col. ii. 16; Gal. iv. 10, 11; Rom. xiv. 5, 6. 


MODE. 239 


other male members of the church may do it with propriety and 
benefit. “Twill that men pray everywhere.”! The word ren- 
dered “men,” properly denotes persons of the male sex, and is 
distinguished from “ the women” mentioned in the next verse. The 
intimation plainly made, is, that females are not expected to lead 
in public prayer. This accords with the words of Paul: “It is a 
shame for women to speak in the church,” or public assembly, 
But there is great propriety in the separate meeting of females for 
prayer, and much benefit results to themselves and the cause of 
God. 

The Saviour gave a form of prayer to his disciples, for a help 
and general directory; but it is manifest that the disciples never 
understood that they were restricted to this form, either in private 
orin public. Prescribed forms of prayer are objectionable, because 
they restrain the emotions of the heart, discourage dependence 
on the Holy Spirit, tend to produce formality, and are not adapted 
to all circumstances and occasions. 

Praise may be mingled with the petitions and thanksgivings 
offered in prayer; and is then, like these, expressed in prose, and 
with the ordinary voice. But poetry and music are specially 
appropriate in the expression of praise. They were used in early 
times, and formed an important part of the temple worship. In 
the New Testament, we find frequent use of singing; and it ig 
“expressly commanded in several passages.” The phrase “ admon- 
ishing one another in psalms,” &e., being addressed to a church, 
sufficiently indicates that singing was designed to be a part of the 
church’s public worship. ` 

The book of Psalms was composed for the temple worship. It 
serves as a help and general directory in this part of the public 
service ; but there is no proof that our praises ought to be expressed 
in no words but those found in this book. We have no book of 
prayers in the Bible; and we learn from this that a book of pray- 
ers is not needed in our public worship; but we have a book of 
Psalms, because, in a service in which many are to speak toge- 
ther, they cannot speak the same things without previous prepara- 
tion. We learn hence the lawfulness of using hymn-books; and 
experience has proved their great utility. l i 
== 


LETI g, ? Col. iii. 16; Eph. v. 19; James v. 13. 


240 PUBLIC WORSHIP. 


Instrumental music formed a part of the temple worship; but 
it is nowhere commanded in the New Testament; and it is less 
adapted to the more spiritual service of the present dispensation. 

In public worship, we not only address God in prayer and praise, 
but we honor him by reverent attention to his word, in which he 
speaks to us. The reading of the Scriptures formed an important 
part of the synagogue service, and was sanctioned by the Saviour, 
when, in the synagogue at Nazareth, he read from the prophet 
Isaiah. In Paul’s direction to Timothy, ‘‘Give attendance to 
reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine,”’? as the exhortation and 
doctrine or teaching were to be parts of the public service to be 
performed for the benefit of others, there is no reason to suppose 
that the reading which is commanded was to be exclusively private. 
The public reading of God’s word appears to be at least included. 
In the days of Ezra, when the Scriptures were read, the sense was 
shown to the people.” When Christ read in the synagogue at 
Nazareth, on closing the book, he expounded and applied the pas- 
sage which had been read. The direction to Timothy required 
that exhorting and teaching should be added to reading. God is 
honored when his word is so expounded to the people, that they 
nct only hear the sound with the ear, but receive the meaning of 
it in their understandings, and feel its power in their hearts. God 
has graciously provided men who are able so to expound and 
exhort; and every church ought to seek the help of such gifts. 


11] Tim. iv. 13. i Neh. viii. 8. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


THE MINISTRY. 


Section IL—MINISTRY OF THE WORD. 


Tug MINISTERS OF CHRIST ARE A SEPARATE CLASS OF PERSONS, 
DISTINGUISHED BY A SPECIAL DIVINE CALL TO PREACH THE WORD. 


A DISTINCT CLASS. 


The ministers of Christ are, like ordinary Christians, separate 
from the world. They are partakers of the heavenly calling, by 
which men are brought out of the world, and made the servants of 
Christ. In all his epistles to the churches, Paul claims to be a 
fellow-saint with them, a member of the same spiritual family, and 
an heir of the same heavenly inheritance. Throughout the Scrip- 
tures, the ministers of Christ are spoken of as persons who love 
Christ, and are from the heart devoting themselves to his service. 
They must therefore be of the number who are “called to be 
saints.” 

The ministers of Christ are also separate from ordinary Christ- 
ians. They are one with ordinary Christians, as being called in 
one hope of their calling; but, besides the call to repentance and 
faith, which they have received in common with their brethren, 
they have been called to special service in the Lord’s cause. It is 
clear, from the Holy Scriptures, that there were, among the first 
Christians, persons to whom the work of the ministry was specially 
intrusted. Paul says, concerning these, God “hath given to us 
the ministry of reconciliation.” ! ‘Giving no offence, that the 
ministry be not blamed.”? ‘ Who hath made us able ministers of 


12 Cor. v. 18. 3 2 Cor. vi. 3. 
16 (241) 


949 THE MINISTRY. 


the new testament.” He speaks of himself, as counted faithful, 


and put “into the ministry ;”? and of the special grace given to 
him, that he should preach among the gentiles the unsearchable 
riches of Christ.? The bestowment by the Holy Spirit of special 
qualifications for special service in the Lord’s cause, is plainly 
taught in 1 Cor. xii., and Eph. iv. The inquiry, “ Are all apos- 
tles? are all prophets ?’’* &c., shows that the offices designated did 
not belong to the whole body of the saints. 

The separation of the ministry from the mass of ordinary Christ- 
ians, is not like the separation of Christians from the world. In 
the latter case, they cease to be of the world, and become strangers 
and pilgrims in the earth. But men who enter the ministry, do 
not cease to be saints. Saul and Barnabas were separated unto 
the work to which the Holy Ghost had called them; but this sepa- 
ration did not take from them a place among the saints and faith- 
ful in Christ Jesus. John speaks, concerning the whole company 
of the saints: “We are of God; and the tale world lieth in 
wickedness.”’> Here is a strong line of division, like that which 
separates land and water. But the ministry appears, among the 
people of God, like the mountains on a continent, forming a part-of 
it, and closely united with surrounding lands. Eminent spiritual 
gifts distinguish the ministers; but the same spirit that actuates 
them, pervades the whole body of Christ. All the disciples of 
Christ are bound, according to their ability, to advance the cause 
of their Master, and labor for the illumination and salvation of 
men: and the diversity of talent among the ordinary disciples, 
may be compared to the diversity of hill and valley in the ordinary 
face of the country. But ministers are distinguished, by their 
superior qualifications for service, from the ordinary mass of Christ- 
ians, like mountains rising above the common undulations of the 
surrounding landscape. 

The special qualifications which the Holy Spirit bestows, bind 
him on whom they are bestowed to use them in the service of 
Christ. They are given to fit him for this service, and they con- 
stitute a divine call for him to engage in it. They are not given 


12 Cor. iii. 6. 2 Latins aos § Eph. iii. 8. 
41 Cor. xii, 29. 5 1 John v. 19. 


MINISTRY OF THE WORD. 243 


to confer a privilege merely, but they are a solemn call to duty— 
` a call demanding the service of the whole life. 

The apostles, when called by Christ, immediately left their 
secular employments, and gave themselves ever afterwards to the 
service of their Lord. Paul, when called, conferred not with flesh 
and blood. The work of the ministry did not cease, when these 
holy men left the earth; but other persons have been fitted to carry 
it on, by the same Spirit that qualified them for the peculiar service. 
He bestows his gifts “for the perfecting of the saints, for the work 
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all 
come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son 
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the 
fullness of Christ.” 

The ministers of Christ are not a separate class of men in such a 
sense as to constitute them an organized society. They are fellow- 
laborers in the Lord’s service, but have no power over one another; 
and have no authority from Christ to combine themselves into an 
ecclesiastical judicatory to exercise power in any manner. They 
are all on a level as brethren; are the servants of Christ, and the 
servants of the churches. 


THEIR WORK, 


The special service for which the ministry is designed is the 
preaching of the word. The obligation to spread the knowledge 
of Christ is shared, to some extent, by all Christians. The effectual 
call of the Holy Spirit, by which any man is brought to repent- 
ance and faith, imposes on him an obligation to show forth the 
praises of him who hath called him out of darkness into his marvel- 
lous light; to let his light shine before men, that they, seeing his 
good works, may glorify his Father in heaven; and to hold forth 
the word of life. Every Christian is bound to do what he can for 
‘he conversion of others, and for spreading the knowledge of the 
truth. But special gifts are conferred on some, accompanied with 
special obligations. These constitute a special call to the ministry 
of the word. 

During the Saviour’s personal ministry he made many disciples : 


oe EE TORE eee aoe a 
1 Eph. iv. 12, 13. 


944 THE MINISTRY. 


but he did not intrust to them equally and indiscriminately the 
work of spreading the knowledge of his religion. He sent forth 
seventy with a special commission to preach the kingdom of God. 
He chose the apostles to be his immediate attendants and special 
witnesses, and gave them a commission—“ Go preach the gospel 
to every creature. * * * Go make disciples, teaching them,” &c. 
Preaching and teaching were prominent and important parts of the 
service required of them. When Paul was made an apostle, the 
commission to him, as explained by himself, was to preach the 
gospel: “ Christ sent me, not to baptize, but to preach the gospel.” 
The obligation which he felt to perform this service was beyond 
that imposed on ordinary Christians, and was exceedingly pressing : 
‘‘ Necessity is laid upon me; yea, wo is unto me if I preach not the 
gospel.’ With him, to preach the gospel was not to utter a pro- 
clamation in a brief sentence; but at Troas he preached to a late 
hour of the night. In his ministry teaching was conjoined with 
preaching, and included in it: ‘*Whereunto I am ordained a 
preacher and an apostle, a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and 
verity.’ 

The obligation of particular men to give themselves to the 
ministry of the word was intended to be a perpetual arrangement, 
and not confined. to the ministers appointed by Christ in person. 
Timothy was specially appointed to this service, and was com- 
manded, ‘‘ Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; 
reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine.’ 
“Make full proof of thy ministry.’* ‘Neglect not the gift that 
is in thee.” A special gift and a special obligation are here 
clearly recognised, and the duty to be performed is clearly preach- 
ing, in the comprehensive sense in which teaching is included. 
Paul had committed the gospel to Timothy ; nor was the succession 
to cease in him. “ The things which thou hast heard of me, the 
same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others 

also.” “Special ability and special obligation to preach and teach 
were to be perpetuated in men, separated to the service from the 
body of Christ’s disciples, 


1] Cor. ix. 16, sL Tims il, Te 8O'Tim. iv. 2. 
t 2 Tim. iv. 5. 6 1 Tim. iv. 14. 6 2 Tim. ii. 2. 


MINISTRY OF THE WORD. 245 


THBIR GALL. 


The ministers of the word receive a special call from God, 
directing them to the service. The Jewish priests were a separate 
class of people, distinguished from the rest of the nation by 
natural descent from Aaron. The Congregation of the Lord was 
perpetuated by natural descent; and if the Christian church 
had been a continuation of it, we might expect its ministry 
to be perpetuated in the same way. But the members of the 
church are separated from the rest of the world by a divine call; 
and it is suitable that the ministers of the church should be dis- 
tinguished in the same manner; accordingly, their designation to 
office is ascribed to God. “God hath set some in the church, 
first apostles,” &c., and the qualifications for the work are the 
special gift of the Spirit. ! 

The Holy Spirit calls to the ministry of the word none but true 
Christians, members of Christ’s spiritual body. The apostles were 
chosen to be the personal attendants of the Saviour, and special 
witnesses of his daily life and ministry. Though he knew, from 
the beginning, the hypocrisy and treachery of Judas Iscariot, he 
chose to have a traitor among his witnesses. The blameless cha- 
racter of the Redeemer extorted, even from this man, the testi- 
mony, “I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood.” 
This testimony is of great value to Christianity. Had Christ been 
an impostor, had there been a scheme to deceive the people, Judas 
must have known it. His testimony, confirmed by his return of 
the money with which he had been bribed, and by his suicide, 
banishes every suspicion dishonorable to the Saviour. It was 
therefore wisely ordered that Judas should be among the apostles. 
But he was not among them when the last commission was given, 
under which we now act. When the Holy Spirit calls men to the 
ministry, he bestows on them qualifications for the work—qualifi- 
cations both of head and heart. The qualifications of the heart 
include a sincere desire to glorify God, and save souls; a desire 
never felt by the unregenerate. Hence, the Holy Spirit never 
makes unregenerate ministers. When such men enter the sacred 
office, they, in the language of Paul, are ‘ministers of Satan.” 
a n a SS A ee oh igh oe or 

11 Corsa, 11, 


246 THE MINISTRY. 


As true ministers are members of Christ’s spiritual body, so 
their ministry is intended for its benefit :—“ for the perfecting of 
the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ.” Their office pertains to the spiritual, universal 
church, of which they are all members. The ministry of some of 
them may have a relation also to local churches, placed under their 
special charge; but they serve in these for the good of the whole 
body of Christ. l 

In Ephesians iv. 11, Paul enumerates the officers whom God 
set in the church: “Some apostles, some prophets, some evan- 
gelists,” &c. Of these the first three are not confined to local 
churches, but are ministers of the church universal. This is appa- 
rent, from the words of Paul: “ Who now rejoice in my sufferings 
for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, 
in my flesh, for his body’s sake, which is the church, whereof I 
am made a minister.” 1 

The apostles were, according to the import of the name, persons 
sent forth. The term is applied specially to those whom Christ 
sent forth in person, and who are called the apostles of Christ. 
Paul claimed to be an apostle in this sense: “ Am I not an apostle? 
Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord??? And again: “Paul, 
an apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ.” 3 
Paul numbered himself among the witnesses of Christ’s resur- 
rection, and the apostles were chosen to be witnesses of this fact. 
Peter, when he proposed the election of one to take the place of Ju- 
das, stated the qualifications necessary for an apostle in this manner: — 
“ Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the 
time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning ` 
from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken 
up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his 
resurrection.” * These qualifications cannot now be found in any 
man living, and therefore the apostolic office has necessarily ceased. 

The name apostle is applied, in another sense, to Barnabas,’ the 
companion of Paul, These two ministers had been sent forth by 
the Holy Ghost, from Antioch, to a special work. Barnabas is 
probably called an apostle, with reference to this fact ; and, in this 


1 Col. i. 24, 25. 2L Cor, tees ies | BE Be 
4 Acts i. 21, 22. 5 Acts xiv. 14. 


MINISTRY OF THE WORD. 247 


sense, the term corresponds in signification to our modern name, 
missionary. Paul and Barnabas had been sent forth as missiona- 
ries, on a tour of missionary service. 

Prophets were persons divinely inspired to make revelation from 
God, consisting sometimes in the foretelling of future events. 
This office was needed, before the volume of divine revelation was* 
completed. The absence of the prophetic gift in modern times, 
demonstrates tha® the Holy Spirit, who imparts every needful gift, 
accounts further revelation unnecessary. The absence of the “gift 
proves the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and the cessation of the 
prophetic office. 

Evangelists were persons employed i in the spread of the gospel. 
They appear to have labored in connection with the apostles, to 
extend the religion of Christ and plant new churches. They did 
not need RAE endowments for their work; and therefore 
their office continues to the present time. Every minister of the 
word, when he labors, not for the special benefit of a local church, 
but for the spread of the gospel, is doing the work of an evangel- 
ist." Timothy was required to do this, though remaining at Ephe- 
sus, and laboring for the interest of that particular church. 

A knowledge of gospel truth, an aptness to teach, and a heart 
moved by the desire to glorify God in the salvation of souls, are 
the evidences of a divine call to the work of the ministry. All 
these qualifications may exist, in a measure, in ordinary Christians; 
and a proportionate obligation accompanies them, to use them in 
the Redeemer’s service. No church, no minister of the gospel, 
can, under a proper influence, forbid the exercise of these gifts, 
where they exist. Moses repelled the suggestion to forbid some 
who prophesied; and said, “ Would God that all the Lord’s peo- 
ple were prophets.” ? An active, prudent employment of the gifts 
possessed by ordinary Christians, would promote incalculably 
the interests of religion; and the restriction of all labor for the 
spread of the gospel, and the promotion of piety, to a select few, 
is greatly detrimental to the cause of Christ. 

But it is still true, that there are some whose gifts for public 
usefulness rise high above the rest ; and, in bestowing superior qua- 
lifications, the Holy Spirit, who divides to every man severally as 


BO Dune IV 9, 2 Num. xi. 29. 


248 THE MINISTRY. 


he will, has indicated his will that the possessor of the qualifica- 
tions should use them for the work of the ministry, for the edify- 
ing of the body of Christ. 

The Holy Spirit works harmoniously in all the parts of his opera- 
tion. He diffuses one sympathy through all the body of Christ, 
so that the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee. 
When qualifications for service are imparted by the Spirit to one 
member, other members, under the influence of the same Spirit, 
welcome its service. Hence, every man who believes alone, that 
he is called of God to the ministry, has reason to apprehend 
that he is under delusion. If he finds that those who give proof 
that they honor God and love the souls of men, do not discover his 
ministerial qualifications, he has reason to suspect that they do not 
exist. The Head of the church has graciously provided, that in 
the ordinary course of things, men are able to obtain counsel in 
this matter, and are not compelled to act on their individual respon- 
sibility. If, in some extraordinary case, he calls some men to 
stand alone, as Elijah did, in defence of the truth, this gives no 
just plea to others to isolate themselves, and act on their own 
responsibility, when circumstances do not demand it. Elijah’s 
proof of a divine call to the prophetical office consisted wholly in 
his possession of the prophetical spirit; but Elisha had the addi- 
tional proof, that he had been anointed to the office by Elijah. Such 
proof, in ordinary cases, the Holy Spirit has provided for the 
ministers of the word; and the use of it is necessary to the success 
of the ministry and the order of the churches. 

When any one is introduced into the ministry, the highest 
responsibility, next to that which he himself sustains, devolves on 
the ministers with whom he is to associate as a fellow-laborer. On 
the ministers a peculiar responsibility rests, to pray that laborers 
may be sent into the harvest; and also to seek out and encourage 
gifts for the work, and thus continue the succession of laborers. 
It was made the special duty of Timothy, to look out faithful 
men, able to teach others, that he might commit the ministry 
of the word to them. It was to the ministers of the church 
at Antioch, that the Holy Ghost said, « Separate me Saul and 


Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called them ;”! and the. 


SS eee 


1 Acts xiii. 2, 


Ea ea as 


MINISTRY OF THE WORD. 249 


_ public designation of them to the work, appears to have been made 
. by these ministers, doubtless with the concurrence of the church. 
In this method of procedure, there is an obvious fitness. Tt was 
fit that Elisha should be anointed to the prophetical office by a 
prophet. Men whom the Spirit has filled with a burning desire to 
preach the gospel, and has qualified for the service, are the most 
suitable persons to look out aids in the service, and judge of their 
fitness. Hence the obligation was laid on Timothy, already a 
minister. Hence the duty imposed on Titus: “ For this cause left 
I thee in Crete, that thou shouldst ordain elders in every city.” 
Hence the instructions respecting the qualifications necessary for 
office, are given in the epistles to these ministers, rather than in 
those to the churches. 

The propriety of ministerial concurrence, in public designation 
to the ministerial office, appears from the nature of the case apart 
from apostolic example. But we have apostolic example to assist 
our reasoning. Saul and Barnabas were solemnly set apart by 
their brethren in the ministry, with fasting, prayer, and imposition 
of hands. In this case, he who was not a whit behind the chief 
of the apostles, bent before those who had no pretensions to apos- 
tolic authority, that he might receive the imposition of hands. 
What a sanction did his act give to the solemn ceremony, and to 
the established church order, of which it was a part! If such 
solemn services are appropriate in public designation to a particular 
service in the ministry, much more are they appropriate when any 
one enters the ministry itself. We learn from other Scriptures 
that such services were performed. Paul mentions the appointment 
of Timothy to the ministerial office in these words: “ Neglect not 
the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with 
the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.” 1 

It has been a question whether the concurrence of a single 
minister is sufficient in ordination. We have no explicit instruc- 
tion on this point. From the instruction to Titus, it appears that 
he alone was authorized to ordain elders in every city. Yet Paul, 
though a minister of superior authority, did not ordain Timothy 
alone. He was the chief agent in the work; and says, “ By the 
putting on of my hands ;’’? but yet he chose not to act alone, and 


1] Tim. iv. 14. ? 2 Tim. i. 6. 


250 THE MINISTRY. 


therefore he says in another place, “ By the laying on of the hands 
of the presbytery.” The concurrence of a presbytery might not 
be possible in every city of Crete, where the churches had been 
recently planted; but where it was possible, even Paul with his 
apostolic authority chose not to act without it. We have, there- 
fore, apostolic example confirming our reasoning on the subject, 
that where a presbytery can be obtained, its concurrence ought to 
be procured. The minister, who, from the direction given to Titus, 
takes it upon himself alone to ordain to the sacred office, assumes 
a power which Paul himself did not assume. 

The institution of local churches has divine authority, and ought 
to be respected by every disciple of Christ. It is the duty of every 
one to become a member of some local church, and walk with the 
other members in love and Christian obedience. Brethren so 
connected are bound to exhort one another to diligence in the 
duties for which they are severally qualified. The obligation of a 
member to labor in the ministry may be recognised by his church, 
and the church does not go out of its proper sphere when it exhorts 
to this duty. Paul directed the church at Colosse, “ Say to Arch- 
ippus, take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the 
Lord, that thou fulfil it.”1 He did not send the message to Arch- 
ippus as from himself, but instructed the church to perform this 
duty. Such exhortation to a minister is therefore proper to be 
given by a church; and it follows, that a church is not without re- 
sponsibility as to the question whether its gifted members are using 
their gifts as they ought. This responsibility makes the church a 
party in ministerial ordination. We have no express declaration 
that the church at Antioch concurred in the setting apart of Saul 
and Barnabas; but it may be inferred, not only from the tenor of 
the narrative, but especially from the fact that these missionaries, 
on their return, reported their doings to the whole church. 

All the parties concerned in ordination ought to seek the guid- 
ance of the Holy Spirit, and act under his influence. The highest 
responsibility rests on him who is entering the sacred office. He 
should act under a deep sense of his responsibility, and with a per- 
suasion, the result of prayerful, heart-searching examination, that 


he is moved by the Holy Ghost. The presbytery have the next 
n ERA Te A ae a 


1Qol. iv. 17. 


- m 


MINISTRY OF THE WORD. 251 


degree of responsibility. They should be persuaded that the Holy 


. Spirit has called the candidate to the ministry ; and be prepared, 


under this conviction, the result of due examination, to receive him 
as a fellow-laborer with them in the Lord’s service. The lowest 
degree of responsibility rests on the church; but even this is solemn 
and important. The same Spirit dwells in the ministry and in the 
churches; and every member is concerned in whatever concerns 
the spiritual body of Christ. A hearty concurrence of the church 
is necessary in the ordination; and, without it, a presbytery should 
never act. When a candidate has the threefold testimony, of his 
own conscience, of the presbytery, and of the church, he may pro- 
ceed to labor in the ministry, with an assurance that he is “sent 
forth by the Holy Ghost.” 

Every step in the process of ordination recognises the principle 
that a divine call is necessary to a proper entrance on the minis- 
terial office. The candidate, the presbytery, the church, all admit 
it, and act on it. This principle is of great importance to the pre- 
servation of a spiritual and efficient ministry; and it cannot be 
neglected, without immense evil to the cause of pure religion. 
When a father chooses the ministry as a profession for his son, or 
when the son chooses it for himself, as he would choose any other 
profession, the authority of God is contemned, and the holy office 


_ profaned. Ifa church should think that they need a minister, and 


should conclude to appoint one without regard to a divine call; and 
if a presbytery should aid them in accomplishing their purpose ; 
the church and presbytery together may make a minister; but he 
will be, if not a minister of Satan, at the best only a minister of 
men, and not a minister of Christ. 

The divine call is not only indispensable, but it is also complete 
in itself. The presbytery do not assemble to complete it, but to 
signify their concurrence in the persuasion that it exists. The 
earliest and the least hurtful form which the pernicious doctrine 
of baptismal regeneration assumed, regarded baptism as the com- 
pletion of regeneration. It did not make regeneration consist 
wholly in the outward ceremony ; but it regarded no one, whatever 
the Holy Sprit may have effected within him, as fully regenerated, 
until he had gone through the outward ceremony. A similar mis- 
take has been made respecting the Holy Spirit’s call to the minis- 
try. The call is supposed to be incomplete, until the outward 


Wow THE MINISTRY. 


ceremony of ordination has been performed. In both cases a dis- 
tinction should be made, between what the Spirit does, and what 
it is the duty of him to do on whom the Spirit operates. The 
Spirit regenerates; and it is the duty of the regenerated man to 
be baptized. The Spirit calls to the ministry; and it is the duty 
of the man so called, to enter on the work of the ministry through 
all the forms which are prescribed in the word of God. Why the 
Holy Spirit permits one whom he has regenerated to err so far as 
to neglect baptism; and why he permits one whom he has called 
to the ministry to err so far as to neglect both baptism and regular 
ordination; I as little understand, as I understand why God per- 
mitted sin to enter the world. The proof of all these facts is 
irrefragable ; and I am compelled to admit their existence, and 
believe that God will overrule them for his glory. 


OBJECTIONS. 


Objection 1.—The doctrine of a special divine call to the minis- 
try, savors of fanaticism. Such a call was suitable to the day of 
miracles, but now the grace of God, like his providence, operates 
by ordinary means. The Spirit resides in the church and minis- 
try ; and what they do, the Spirit does. To expect any other call 
of the Holy Spirit is fanatical. 

Had the objection simply maintained that the Holy Spirit uses 
means, in calling men to the ministry, the proposition would have 
been admitted. He uses the word as a means, in his call of men 
to repentance and faith; and he uses the same word in calling men 
to the work of the ministry. But the objection marks out another 
channel in which the spiritual influence is supposed to flow, namely, 
the church and the ministry ; but how can the necessary qualifica- 
tions for the ministry be derived through this channel? If the 
grace of God now operates by the use of ordinary means, we know 
that the word is the ordinary means which the Holy Spirit employs 
in illumination and sanctification; and the conclusion is rational, 
and not fanatical, that the superior illumination and sanctification . 
necessary for the work of the ministry, are the effect of the same 
means more successfully employed, or more abundantly blessed. 
The laying on of apostolic hands could confer spiritual gifts in the 
day of miracles ; but ordaining hands have now no gifts to confer. 


tu 


MINISTRY OF THE WORD. 2538 


It is the objection which carries us back to the day of miracles, 


and expects effects from causes inadequate to produce them. A 


ministry made by outward ordination, without a divine call, is a 
curse to the world. 

Objection 2.—If a divine call is indispensable to constitute a 
minister of Christ, since the call is invisible, we can never know 
who are true ministers. 

The supposed invisibility of religion is presented in various 
forms of objection. It makes the church invisible, and the minis- 
try invisible. But in what sense is religion invisible? The power 
of gravity is invisible, but we see its effects everywhere; and we 
feel it binding us to the earth. The influence of the Spirit is 
invisible, but its effects are seen and felt as certainly as the effects 
of gravity. The Spirit's call to the ministry is unseen; but the 
effects of it have been displayed in the successful conflict which 
the ministry has waged with the powers of darkness, and in the 
victories which it has achieved. The history of the world testifies 
that a divine power has wrought in the ministry of the word; and, 
wherever the gospel has been faithfully preached, every one has 
had an opportunity to observe such effects as demonstrate that 
the ministry of the word is the ministry of the Spirit. Why, 
then, need we, to render the ministry visible, suppose it to consist 
in outward form? ‘There is a proper form for the ministry to 
assume, but the form may be without the power; and the mere 
form does not constitute a minister of Christ. May we not be 
deceived in this matter? We may. Ministers of Satan have 
appeared as ministers of righteousness; and compliance with ex- 
ternal forms is a method by which they recommend themselves. 
We are commanded to try the spirits; and this cannot be done by 
a mere examination of ordination credentials. An obligation to 
discriminate otherwise than by ordination certificate, devolves on 
every church in the choice of its pastor; and on every pastor in 
inviting a minister to preach to the people of his charge. 


Objection 3.—If ordination does not make a minister of Christ, 
and does not prove a man to be a minister of Christ, it may be dis- 
pensed with as useless, 

This does not follow. Though it may not accomplish either of 
these purposes, it may, nevertheless, be of great utility; and if 
we were wholly unable to see any utility in it, yet, as the will of 


254 THE MINISTRY. 


God, we ought to observe it. Men may be Christians without bap- 
tism; and may profess Christ without baptism; but it does not 
follow, that baptism is useless. The Head of the church has, in 
his wisdom, made it the appointed ceremony for the Christian pro- 
fession, and so he has made ordination the appointed ceremony for 
a regular entrance into the ministerial office. As every converted 
man ought to profess Christ by baptism, so every one who has been 
called of God to the ministry, ought to enter on the work by ordi- 
nation. The proof of the obligation in the latter case, is not so 
clear from the Holy Scriptures, as in the former, but it is sufficiently 
clear to guide our practice. 


Sscrrion II—ADMINISTRATION OF BAPTISM. 


The apostles were commissioned to preach, to baptize, and to 
teach. If the office held by ordinary ministers were identical with 
that held by the apostles, there would be no difficulty in deciding, 
that it includes the administration of baptism. But the apostolic 
office has ceased, and the work assigned to the apostles has devolved 
on inferior officers. The apostles could not, in person, preach, bap- 
tize, and teach, in every country of the world, and in every age till 
the end of time; but the commission made it their duty to provide 
for the full performance of this work ; and their apostolic authority, 
guided by the infallible direction of the Holy Spirit, enabled them 
to make all necessary arrangements for carrying it into effect. Now, 
we cannot determine, from the commission itself, whether to preach, 
to baptize, and to teach, would be assigned, as distinct duties, to 
three distinct classes of officers; or whether they would be com- 
mitted, without separation, to one class. For information on this 
point, we are left to inquire into the instructions given by the apos- 
tles by precept and example. 

Some have argued, that, because preaching is a more important 

work than baptizing, the authority to preach necessarily includes 
authority to baptize. The greater, say they, must include the less. 
But this mode of argument is fallacious. The whole includes its 
parts, but the greater does not always include the less. A high 
dignitary of the realm may be guilty of usurpation, if he assumes 
the functions of an humble official. So, though preaching is a higher 
office than baptizing, it does not necessarily include it. 


ADMINISTRATION OF BAPTISM. 255 


We learn that the Holy Spirit has called men to preach the gos- 
_ pel, by the qualifications which he has conferred; but we can have 
no proof of this sort, that the Holy Spirit has called any one to 
the work of baptizing. Spiritual qualifications are not required; 
and, if we have no other means of knowing, it may remain doubt- 
ful, whether the work may not be done by any one whom the can- 
didate may select. 

Among those who have held that baptism possesses a saving effi- 
cacy, it has often been a matter of pressing importance, to obtain 
the administration of it, in case of sickness, when a priest was not 
at hand. It has been held, that, in case of necessity, the rite may 
be administered by laymen, and even by women. Some persons 
who are free from such superstitious reliance on the outward cere- 
mony, have held that any one who makes a disciple, may baptize 
him. According to this interpretation of the commission, it would 
be proper for a mother, whose instructions have been blessed to the 
conversion of her son, to be the administrator of his baptism. But 
this interpretation is inadmissible. If some of the work to which 
the apostles were specially appointed, may, to some extent, be per- 
formed by other persons, it does not follow, that these persons are 
invested in full with the apostolic commission. 

The commission specifies duties, for the performance of which 

the apostles were to provide. One of these was the administration 
of baptism. They were commanded, not to make disciples and 
teach them the duty of being baptized; but to make disciples and 
baptize them. The administration of the rite was to be their care; 
and, where they could not perform it in their own person, it was 
made their duty to provide for its performance. This reasoning 
“proves satisfactorily, that the administration was not designed to 
be left-to any one whom the candidate might select ; and it is con- 
firmed by the words of Paul: “ Christ sent me not to baptize, but 
to preach the gospel.” These words imply, that Christ had sent 
some persons to baptize. The duty was to be performed; and 
these words, taken in connection with the fact that John the Bap- 
tist and the other apostles were commanded to baptize, confirm 
the deduction that the work was to be done by agents provided. 

On the question, whether the administration of baptism is neces- 
sarily included in the commission to preach, or necessarily con- 
nected with it, the words of Paul just quoted, throw some light. 


256 THE MINISTRY. 


The word translated “sent,” is the verb from which the word 
apostle is derived; and, as used by Paul in this passage, it imports 
that Christ had not given to Paul an apostolic commission to bap- 
tize, but to preach the gospel. On comparing the commission 
given to him, with that given to the other apostles, the difference 
in this particular is apparent. This proves that the offices of 
preaching and baptizing were not inseparable. Had the greater 
included the less, the authority and obligation to baptize were in- 
cluded in Paul’s commission, and he could not have said with 
literal truth, “ Christ sent me not to baptize.” To understand the 
passage to signify nothing more than that baptism was a less im- 
portant part of the work which Paul was authorized to perform, 
does not satisfy the literal import of the words, and it is a de- 
parture, without necessity, from the literal interpretation, which is 
fully sustained by a comparison of Paul’s commission with that 
of the other apostles. Moreover, the literal import best agrees 
with the context, since, according to it, the fact alleged by Paul 
cut off, from those whom he had baptized, all plea to claim him on 
that account as an apostle for their party leader. If in baptizing 
‘hem, he had not acted as an apostle, the fact gave them no pre- 
text to claim him as a party leader in that high character. Had 
Paul's state of mind permitted him to preach on the next day 
after Jesus appeared to him, and gave him his commission, he was 
authorized to preach; but not to administer baptism. Yet he did 
afterwards baptize Crispus, Gaius, and the household of Stephanas; 
and he must have obtained authority to do this in some way. In 
what way? If not by extraordinary commission, it must have 
been in the ordinary way, in which others received authority to 
baptize. He received the command to be baptized himself, in the 


ordinary way, and he honored and obeyed the command. In the 


same way, he must have received the authority under which he 
acted, in the administration of baptism. 

Although baptizing is not necessarily connected with preaching 
and teaching; yet the manner in which it is conjoined with them 
in the commission, appears to indicate that the connection is suit- 
able. No separate class of officers is anywhere provided in the 
New Testament, for administering the rite, and yet, if we have 
reasoned correctly, the apostles were under obligation to provide 
for it. We are led to the conclusion, that this provision was made, 


el ee 


Ps a 


APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION. 257 


in the ordinary method instituted for transmitting the ministerial 
‘office. Paul had committed the office to Timothy, in the presence 
of many witnesses, by the laying on of his hands, and the hands 
of the presbytery. Timothy was, in like manner, to commit the 
office to others, and enjoin on them the same duties which Paul had 
enjoined on him. There was a fitness in the arrangement that this 
ceremonial induction into office, should add the ceremonial author- 
ity to baptize. It cannot be proved to be given, in the internal 
call of the Spirit. It was not given in the extraordinary commis- 
sion of Paul. . If Paul received it in the ordinary way, whether in 
his being set apart at Antioch, or in some similar service at some 
previous time, we have this point established :—the authority to 
administer baptism is conferred in the ordinary course of the minis- 
terial succession, when an individual, called by the Holy Spirit to 
the ministry of the word, is publicly set apart to this service. The 
process of reasoning by which we reach this conclusion, is less clear 
and direct than that which many other subjects admit; but it is 
sufficiently clear to determine our practice, in the absence of explicit 
instruction from the holy oracles. We have, moreover, the satis- 
faction of knowing that this course of procedure has been generally 
adopted in the churches which have conformed in their order most 
nearly to the Scriptures. 


Srcrion III—APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION. 


We have seen that baptism ought to be administered by an 
ordained minister of the word. A question, then, arises before every 
believer who desires to receive baptism, “how shall he know who 
is authorized. to administer it?” Some have thought, that the 
candidate may lawfully leave the whole responsibility of deciding 
this question with the administrator. But, if he knew the admin- 
istrator not to be authorized, it would be wrong to receive baptism 
at his hands; and it cannot, therefore, be right, to be indifferent 
to the question whether he is authorized. Moreover, the conscien- 
tious administrator is deeply interested in the question. He ought 
not to act without divine authority, and deceive the confiding dis- 
ciples, by giving to them for true Christian baptism, that which is 
but a human counterfeit. How does he know that he has been 
duly ordained to perform this work; that they who ordained him 

17 


258 THE MINISTRY. 


were duly ordained; and that the line of connection with those 
who originally received the commission from Christ, has been 
unbroken? Is there an obligation, binding on the conscience of 
every individual who seeks baptism, and still more binding on the 
conscience of him who administers it, to know that his right to 


administer has been derived by unbroken succession from the 


apostles ? 

There is an intrinsic improbability in the supposition, that the 
Scripture binds all who receive the gospel, in every country and 
every age of the world, to perform a specified duty ; and yet leaves 


that duty in the dark, so that no one can know what it is, except - 


by the light of tradition? In a former chapter we applied this 
consideration to the question, whether the consciences of men are 
bound by Scripture authority to receive the traditionary succession 
of the Sabbath, as of like authority with Scripture precepts. The 
examination then made, discovered that the divine precept is most 
wisely given, in a manner which secures all the ends of the obsery- 
ance, without binding the individual conscience with a responsibility 
to which it is unequal, and for which it has not the requisite 
knowledge. The precept does not bind men to observe the seventh 
day of an unknowable week; and it does not so bind them to the 
regular succession, that, if they have lost it by circumnavigating 
the globe, they can never regain it. If we find nothing in the 
Scriptures, when properly interpreted, binding our consciences to 
the tradition of the sabbatical observance, we may, from the anal- 
ogy, expect to find nothing binding our consciences to the apostolic 
succession. 

An humble disciple of Christ desirous to obey all his Lord’s com- 
mands, learns his duty from the Holy Scriptures, and sees in them 
the order established in the primitive churches. He looks around 
him to discover whether there are churches like the primitive 
churches, and ministers preaching and baptizing, like the primitive 
ministers. He finds them. The beginning and the end of the suc- 
cession appear. The middle of it he sees not; but he knows that 
the Head of the church has lived during all the intermediate time, 
and that he is the God of providence, and the giver of the Holy 
Spirit, by whose influence the chain of succession could be pre- 
served, He feels assured, that, if an unbroken succession is neces- 
sary for any purpose which the Head of the church has in view, 


APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION. 259 


he has preserved it. With this assurance, he proceeds in what appears 
to him to be the plain path of duty, the same path in which the 
ancient saints walked ; and he confidently expects that his obedi- 
ence will receive his Lord’s approbation. Is there anything in the 
Scriptures which can prove such reasoning fallacious ? 

Suppose that at some point in the line the apostolic succession 
was lost, was it impossible to re-establish the ancient order ; or, 
in other words, was it impossible ever afterwards to obey Christ’s 
commands? The Holy Spirit qualifies and calls persons to preach 
the gospel, and teach men to observe whitsvever Christ com- 
manded, and we have seen that this call of the Spirit is complete 
in itself. In the case supposed, how could persons called by the 
Holy Spirit teach men to observe Christ’s commands, if the ob- 
servance had become impossible ? Surely, the reasoning which 
infers the impossibility must be fallacious, or the failure of the 
succession has never taken place, to disturb the counsels of him 
who said, “ Lo, I am with you alway, even to the end of the world.” 
Now, whether it be that the chain has been throughout unbroken, 
or that the Head of the church has a method of restoring it, the 
effect is the same to us. It is ours to do our duty, according to 
the light which we possess. This mode of settling the question is 
sufficient for all practical purposes. 

As a question of mere theory it may be asked, whether a breach 
in the succession would render a new revelation necessary. To set 
aside any command of Scripture would require a new revelation. 
But to depart from the order which Christ has instituted is one 
thing, and to return to it after having wandered from it is quite 
another thing. For the latter we need no new revelation. The 
wisdom from above, given by the ordinary influence of the Spirit, 
is sufficient for such an emergency, without a miraculous inspira- 
tion. If holy men of God have had the responsibility thrown 
upon them of returning to the good old path after it had been de- 
serted, they doubtless sought wisdom from above to direct them, 
and the success of their efforts to regain the lost way, is a suffi- 
cient assurance to us that the Lord gave them the necessary wis- 
dom. 

But is there any wall built along the wayside to prevent the 
return of wanderers? So far as I can see, the whole difficulty is 
resolvable into the question whether ministers of the word, called 


260 THE MINISTRY. 


to the work by the Holy Spirit, may, in any case, perform the full 
duties of the office without the regular ceremonial induction into 
it. According to the view which we have taken, the call of the 
Spirit is complete in itself; but the same Spirit teaches the called 
to respect the order instituted for ceremonial induction into office. 
An obligation to respect this order, when it exists, imposes on 
them the duty of deferring the exercise of the ceremonial func- 
tions until they have been ceremonially inducted; but in the case 
supposed the church order does not exist, and therefore the obli- 
gation to defer does not exist. Their duty is to respect the order 
when it exists, and to restore it when it does not. The Head of 
the church designed that the ministers of the word should make 
disciples, baptize them, and teach them to organize churches, to 
celebrate the Lord’s supper, exercise discipline, and walk in all 
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. The ministers of 
the word are officers of Christ’s spiritual church, and derive their 
qualifications and call from the Holy Spirit. Like other men, they 
are bound _to observe what Christ_commanded, and therefore to 
regard established church order, (But if church order has become 
“prostrate, their call by the Holy Spirit requires them to restore it, 
and not to teach that it must now for ever be aca 

In the regular course of things, ordination stands at the begin- 
ning of the ministry, as baptism stands at the beginning of the 
Christian life; but there are several important particulars in which 
the two observances differ. 

Baptism is enjoined by express precept, ordination is not. 
Much of the order instituted by the apostles originated in expedi- 
ency. The appointment of deacons, recorded in Acts, chapter vi., 
is manifestly a case of this kind. Expediency has its obligation, 
as well as positive precept; and a question of expediency, decided 
by apostolic wisdom, binds us in like circumstances. The community 


even 
Fe ee eae 


apostles; but it cannot be inferred that it is obligatory in all cir- 
cumstances. Nothing in Scripture determines the number of the 
presbytery ; and if this may be determined by considerations of 
expediency, the same expediency may determine that ordination 


APOSTOLIC SUCCESSION. 261 


by a presbytery may, in some extraordinary circumstances, be 
dispensed with. 

All the disciples of Christ, in the primitive times, were required 
to be baptized; but all the ministers of Christ were not ceremoni- 
ally ordained. We have no proof that the apostles, or the seventy 
whom Christ sent forth, were thus ordained. No presbytery was 
convened in their case, but they were ordained or appointed by 
Christ in person. When he baptized disciples, he put the work 
into the hands of those who were afterwards to perform it. But 
his direct call conferred the ministerial office without human ordi- 
nation. We have in the New Testament a much larger number 
of unordained than of ordained ministers, if imposition of human 
hands is necessary to ordination. Saul and Barnabas were so 
ordained to a missionary service, and Timothy was so ordained to 
the work of the ministry, but who else ? 

Jesus honored the institution of baptism by receiving it from a 
human administrator, but he did not so‘honor ordination. Among 
the benefits resulting to ministers from ordination, an important 
one is, that they go forth into the work with the concurrent testi- 
mony of the presbytery and the church, recommending them to all 
as the ministers of Christ. Jesus was willing to receive the testi- 
mony of John, but of John as his baptizer, not as his ordainer. 
“ Tkat he should be made manifest,” said John, “therefore am I 
come baptizing.” + At the beginning of his ministry, Jesus received 
baptism from John in the Jordan; and when he had gone up from 
the water, and was standing on the bank, his august ordination took 
place. The Holy Spirit, by whom his human nature was qualified 
for the ministry on which he was entering, descended on him in 
visible form, and the voice of the Father audibly pronounced, 
“ This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” ? 

From this comparison, it clearly appears that ordination does 
not come to us enforced by like obligations to those of baptism. 
If our doctrine of strict communion be correct, baptism is a pre- 
requisite to membership in the local churches ; and, since the admin- 
istration of baptism properly belongs to the ministers of the word, 
the local churches are, in this particular, dependent for their exist- 
ence on the ministry. Local churches cannot originate the minis- 


Ss  ————— (‘ PF'. 
1 John i. 31. ? Matt. iii, 17. 


262 THE MINISTRY. 


try on which their own existence is dependent. The ministry 
originated before the local churches, and might have been perpetu- 
ated without them, if the Lord had so willed. The power from 
which the ministry originates is not that of the churches, but of 
the Head of the Church; and his call to office is the highest 
authority. John was ‘sent to preach and baptize, without being 
baptized or ordained; yet the evidence of his mission was clear, 
and the people believed it. Paul was commissioned to preach the 
gospel while he was unbaptized and.unordained; and the call was 
not conditioned on his being afterwards baptized and ordained. 
The call was complete and unconditional. He was under obliga- 
tion to be baptized, as all other converted persons are; and he 
discharged this obligation, as every called minister ought to do; 
but his call was complete while he was yet unbaptized and unor- 
dained. Se 

In the view which we have taken, the Christian ministry is an 
institution of surpassing importance. It does not grow up from 
the churches, but comes down from heaven. It is a gift sent down 
to mankind from the ascended Saviour. After stating that the 
exalted Redeemer “ gave gifts unto men,” Paul proceeds to enume- 
rate these gifts in the following words: “He gave some, apostles ; 
and some, prophets ; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and 
teachers.” * To these heaven-bestowed ministers, the Spirit, which 
qualifies them for their work, gives testimony. The churches re- 
ceive the testimony of the Spirit, and, in their turn, add their 
testimony ; and the ministry and the churches become joint wit- 
nesses for God to the world. Whether these two witnesses have 
lived during all the dark period of papal persecution, I leave for 
others to inquire; but if they were ever slain, I doubt not that 
the Spirit of God has reanimated them, and will enable them to 
continue their testimony to the end of the world. 


ee 
1 Eph. iv. 8, 11. 


CHURCH OFFICERS, 263 


Section IV.—CHURCH OFFICERS. 
BISHOPS. 


THE CHURCHES SHOULD CHOOSE, FROM AMONG THE MINISTERS 
OF THE WORD, BISHOPS OR PASTORS TO TEACH AND RULE THEM. 


Numerous passages of Scripture speak of persons who bore rule 
in the churches. ‘Obey them that have the rule over you.””? 
“The elders that rule well.”’? The term bishop signifies overseer, 
and implies authority to rule. Among the qualifications necessary 
for a bishop, one was, that he ruleth well his own house; and the 
reason assigned is, “ If a man know not how to rule his own house, 
how shall he take care of the church of God?” It is clear, from 
this passage, that the bishops were invested with an authority bear- 
ing some analogy to the authority which the head of a family 
exercises over his household. 

The question has been much discussed, whether the authority of 
a bishop is restricted to a single local church. Episcopalians main- 
tain that it extends to the churches of a large district called a 
diocese; and that the Scriptural title for the ruler of a single 
church, is presbyter or elder. Against this opinion, the following 
arguments appear conclusive. The single church at Philippi con- 
tained more bishops than one.* The elders of the church at Ephe- 
sus are styled overseers or bishops.” Peter addresses elders as 
persons having the oversight® of the flock, that is, the authority of 
overseers or bishops. In Paul’s epistle to Titus, after the ordina- 
tion of elders is mentioned, the qualifications of a bishop” are enu- 
merated; and the connection plainly indicates that elder and 
bishop were titles of the same office. 

The bishops were the pastors or shepherds of the flock committed 
to their charge. The bishops or elders of the church at Ephesus 
were required to “feed the flock.” The elders whom Peter ad- 
dressed were commanded to “feed the flock ;” and their office as 
shepherds is presented to view as subordinate to that of Christ, 
“the chief shepherd.” Since the churches are to be fed, not with 


1 Heb. xiii. 17. 3) Tim: vi 17. Pletime i. 4 5: 
# Phil. i. 1. 5 Acts xx. 28. 6 1 Peter v. 2. 
uTitus 150576 


264 THE MINISTRY. 


literal food, but with knowledge and understanding, the office of 
teaching is included in that of pastor. Hence a bishop was required 
to be “apt to teach.” In enumerating church officers, Paul men- 
tions both pastors and teachers. It appears from this that there 
were teachers in the primitive churches, who were not invested with 
pastoral authority. These were ministers of the word, authorized 
by the commission to teach the observance of all Christ’s commands, 
but not authorized to rule. The ministers of the word are officers 
of the universal church, but, as such, they have no authority to rule 
in the local churches. This authority belongs to the pastors or 
bishops. 

The ruling authority of a pastor is peculiar in its kind. Though 
bearing some analogy to that of a father in his family, or of a 
governor in civil society, it differs from these. Christ distinguished 
His rule from that of earthly kings by the absence of coercion: 
“If my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants 
fight.”" So the spiritual rulers under Christ have no coercive 
power over the persons or property of those under their authority. 
A well marked distinction between their authority and that which 
is exercised by civil rulers, is drawn in these words of Christ: “ Ye 
know that the princes of the gentiles exercise dominion over them, 
and they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall 
not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let 
him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let 
him be your servant.” Another peculiarity of their rule is that 
they cannot govern at their own will. This would be to act as 
lords over God’s heritage. Such power, if exercised by them, is a 
usurpation, and does not legitimately belong to their office. The 
only rule which they have a right to apply is that of God’s word; 
and the only obedience which they have a right to exact, is voluntary. 
The civil ruler is armed with the sword, and coerces obedience. 
Zion’s King has put no carnal weapons into the hands of church 
rulers, and all coercion is inconsistent with the nature of the autho- 
rity intrusted to them. No submission to the Lord is acceptable 
but that which is voluntary; and the same kind of submission which 
the ancient Christians rendered to the Lord, they rendered to their 
Se ee 


1 John xviii. 36. 2 Matt. xx. 25—27 


CIURCH OFFICERS. 265 


spiritual rulers :— They first gave their own selves unto the Lord 
and unto us-by the will of God.’”! 

The surrender of their property was voluntary. Peter’s address 
to Ananias and Sapphira proves that this was true, even in the 
general surrender which was made by the first church; and it is 
clear that the contributions afterwards made by the churches, were 
made not of constraint but willingly. They who claim or indi- 
rectly exercise a coercive power over the property of church-mem- 
bers, are taking the oversight for filthy lucre’s sake, and have 
no sanction from the authority of Christ, or the example of his 
apostles. 

Since the obedience of churches cannot be coerced, no one can 
begin or continue the exercise of spiritual rule over them, but at 
their will. Hence their bishops must be persons of their own 
choice. The apostles, though all collected at Jerusalem, and in- 
vested with full power from on high to do all that appertained to 
their office, did not appoint even the inferior officers of the church 
until after they had been chosen by the whole multitude of the dis- 
ciples. In this procedure they recognised and established the 
right of the churches to elect their own officers. Even the appoint- 
ment of an apostle to take the place of Judas appears to have been 
made by popular vote: and much more ought that of bishops over 
the several churches. The Greek word rendered ordain in Acts 
xiii. 48, signifies to stretch out the hand, and is supposed to refer 
to the mode of popular election by the lifting up of the hand; but, 
whether this criticism be just or not, the proof that church officers 
were so elected is sufficient without the aid of this passage. 

Because the bishops must labor in word and doctrine, as well as 
rule, the churches should elect them from the ministers of the 
word. As they have no right to coerce the churches, so the churches 
have no right to coerce their acceptance of office. The relation 
must be voluntarily entered into by both parties. This voluntari- 
ness on the part of ministers is necessary to the proper exercise 
of their office: “Not of constraint, but willingly; not for filthy 
lucre, but of a ready mind.”? The minister cannot coerce a sup- 
port from the church, but God has ordained that they who preach 
the gospel should live of the gospel.’ The duty of a church to 


a es 


12 Cor. viii. 5; 2 1 Peter v. 2. 21 Gorriz- 14, 


266 THE MINISTRY. 


support its pastor is clearly taught in the word of God; and with- 
out the performance of this duty on their part, they have no right 
to expect his services; and they, in a manner, put it out of his 
power to render them. 


DEACONS. 


DEACONS SHOULD BE CHOSEN BY THE CHURCHES, FROM AMONG 
THEIR MEMBERS, TO MINISTER IN SECULAR AFFAIRS. 

By apostolic direction, the church at Jerusalem chose from among 
themselves seven men, honest, and of good report, who were appointed 
to serve tables. This measure originated in the expediency, that 
the apostles might give themselves tc. the word of God and prayer. 
The same expediency requires that pastors should be relieved from 
secular burdens, and be left to the spiritual service of the church. 
We know that deacons existed in the church at Philippi;? and 
directions were given to Timothy respecting the qualifications neces- - 
sary for the deacon’s office. These facts authorize the conclusion, 
that the deacon’s office was designed to be perpetual in the churches. 
The mode of appointment should conform to the example of the 
first church. The persons should be chosen by popular vote, and 
invested with office by ministerial ordination. 

Some have thought that deacons, as well as bishops, are called 
elders in the Scripture. We read of bishops and deacons in con- 
nection, but never of elders and deacons ;—of the ordination of 
elders,? without the mention of deacons, when deacons were 
needed as well as bishops; and of contributions sent to the elders 
at Jerusalem,’ after the deacons had been appointed, who were the 
proper officers to receive and disburse them. It is argued, more- 
over, that the distinction which appears to be made, in 1 Tim. v. 
17, between preaching and ruling elders, naturally suggests that 
the ruling elders were the deacons of the primitive churches. 

In the Presbyterian church, a distinct class of officers exists, 
called ruling elders. The only Scripture authority claimed for 
this office, is the text last referred to. This text, however, does 
not distinguish between different classes of officers, but between 
different modes of exercising the same office. The word rendered 


eee 


2 Phil, i. 1. ? Acts xiv. 23. 5 Acts xi. 30. 


CHURCH OFFICERS. 267 


“ labor,” signifies to labor to exhaustion. Not the elder who merely 
rules, is accounted worthy of double honor, but the elder who rules 
well; and the special honor is not due to the elder, as merely 
invested with the office of ministering in word and doctrine, but 
as laboring therein—laboring to exhaustion. Thus interpreted, 
the text furnishes no authority for Presbyterian lay elders ; and no 
argument for supposing that deacons are called elders. 

The other arguments to prove that the deacons were included 
in the eldership of the primitive churches, are not without plausi- 
bility, but they are not conclusive; and they are opposed by the 
facts, that all the elders of the church at Ephesus are called bishops; 
that all the elders addressed by Peter are said to have the over- 
sight or episcopal office; and that the elders whom Titus was to 
appoint appear to have been all bishops, inasmuch as the qualifica- 
tions for the deacon’s office are not subjoined to those which are 
described as necessary for the other office. 

Among the qualifications of the deacons’ office, it is not required 
that they should be apt to teach; and they are therefore not 
appointed to act as public teachers of the word: but other quali- 
fications are mentioned, which indicate, that they are expected to 
be forward in promoting the spiritual interests of the church. An 
obligation to do this rests on every member; and deacons are not 
released from it by their appointment to minister in secular affairs. 
Instead of becoming immersed in secularity, they are expected, by 
the proper exercise of their office, to purchase to themselves a 
good degree, and great boldness in the faith.’ If deacons were 
everywhere active in holding up the hands of the pastors, as Aaron 
and Hur held up the hands of Moses, the prosperity of the churches 
would be greatly advanced, and the success of the gospel far more 
abundant. 


11 Tim, iii. 13. 


CH APTERLEX, 


DISCIPLINE. 


Section I—ADMISSION OF MEMBERS. 


THE CHURCHES SHOULD ADMIT BAPTIZED BELIEVERS TO MEM- 
BERSHIP. 

A properly organized church consists of disciples who have pro- 
fessed their faith in Christ by baptism. Hence, such persons 
only should be admitted to membership. Unity and brotherly love 
require that all should be lovers of Christ; and love ought to be 
manifested by obedience: but Christ is not obeyed, if his com- 
mand, directing the mode of Christian profession, is not obeyed. 

Each church for itself has the responsibility of admitting to its 
own membership. A single church may exclude from its own fel- 
lowship, as in the case of the incestuous member excommunicated 
by the church at Corinth; and the power to exclude implies the 
power to admit. The pastor has not the power ; nor is it possessed 
by any ecclesiastical judicatory except the church itself. The 
church is bound to exercise the power of admitting to membership, 
in subjection to the revealed will of Christ; and is, therefore, pro- 
hibited from receiving any who do not possess the requisite quali- 
fications. 

In order that the church may judge whether a candidate is 
duly qualified for membership, they should hear his profession of 
faith. He is bound to let his light shine before all men, to the 
glory of God; and it is specially needful that they should see it, 
with whom he is to be associated in fellowship as a child of light. + 
He is bound to be ready always to give an answer to every one 
that asketh the reason of the hope that is in him;! and especially 

nnn 
11 Pet. ii. 15. 


(268) 


ADMISSION OF MEMBERS. 269 


should he be ready to answer, on this point, those who are to 

‘receive him into their number, as called in one hope of their call- 
ing. He is bound to show forth the praise of him who has called 
him out of darkness into his marvellous light; and he should re. 
joice to say, “Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will 
declare what he hath done for my soul.’’? 

The churches are not infallible judges, being unable to search the 
heart ; but they owe it to the cause of Christ, and to the candi- 
date himself, to exercise the best judgment of which they are 
capable. To receive any one on a mere profession of words, with- 
out any effort to ascertain whether he understands and feels what 
he professes, is unfaithfulness to his interests, and the interests of 
religion. In primitive times, when persecution deterred from pro- 
fession, and when the Spirit operated in a more visible manner, 
the danger of mistake was less; but even then, all who professed 
were not received. John the Baptist rejected some from baptism, 
who did not bring forth fruits meet for repentance. They who are 
unfit for baptism, are unfit for church-membership. 

To preserve unity in the church, the admission of a member 
should be by unanimous vote. Harmony and mutual confidence 
are necessary to the peace and prosperity of a church; and, if 
these are to be disturbed by the admission of a new member, it is 
far better, both for him and the church, that his admission should 
be deferred, until it can be effected without mischief. 

Admission to membership belongs to churches; but admission to 
baptism belongs properly to the ministry. A single minister has the 
right to receive to baptism, on his own individual responsibility ; as 
is clear from the baptism of the eunuch by Philip, when alone. But 
when a minister is officiating as pastor of a church, it is expedient 
that they should unite their counsels in judging of a candidate’s 
qualifications; but the pastor ought to remember, that the respon- 
sibility of receiving to baptism is properly his. The superior 
knowledge which he is supposed to possess, and his office as the 
shepherd of the flock, and the priority of baptism to church-mem- 
bership, all combine to render it necessary that he first and chiefly 
should meet this responsibility, and act upon it in the fear of the 
Lord. 


1 Ps, lxvi. 16. 


270 DISCIPLINE. 


Section IIL—SPIRITUAL IMPROVEMENT. 


THE CHURCHES SHOULD LABOR INCESSANTLY, TO PROMOTE BRO- 
THERLY LOVE IN THEIR MEMBERS, AND INCREASED DEVOTION TO 
THE SERVICE OF Gop. 

The spirit of unity pervades Christianity, and tends to bring 
the disciples of Christ into association with one another. Under 
the influence of this tendency, churches are formed; and in them 
an opportunity is given for the display of brotherly love. By the 
display, Christ is honored, and the world become convinced that 
his religion is divine. For the sake of Christ, therefore, and for 
the sake of the world, every church should labor to promote 
brotherly love. 

The churches are the glory of Christ, not only in the brotherly 
love which they exhibit, but in their purity and devotion to the 
service of God. They are but smal] and temporary associations ; 
yet they may reflect the glory of Christ to the view of an admiring 
world, as pure dew-drops reflect the brightness of the sun. So to 
honor Christ, should be the constant effort of the churches; and 
to effect this, care should be exercised over the spirituality of 
every member. The pastor should devote himself, with incessant 
toil and prayer, to the spiritual good of his flock; the deacons 
should unite their efforts with his for the attainment of the great 
end; and the members should watch over one another, exhort one 
another, and provoke one another to love and good works. 

God has given the Christian ministry for the edification of his 
people; and every church ought to avail itself of this divine gift, 
and use it to the best advantage. For this purpose, the minister 
should be supported by cheerful contributions from the members 
of the church, that he may devote himself to the promotion of 
their spiritual interests. He should be encouraged in every possi- 
ble way to diligence and fidelity in his duties. His imperfections 
should be treated with tenderness; and if, at any time, he should 
become remiss in his work, or turn aside from it to secular pur- 
suits, the church ought, in gentleness and love, to address him 
with such language as Paul directed to be used to Archippus.} 


pe re S 


1 Col. iv. 17. 


SPIRITUAL IMPROVEMENT. a 


But such an address cannot be made with good effect by a church 
which does not sustain its minister, and free him from the necessity 
of worldly care. 

Punctual attendance on the ministrations of the word, is neces- 
sary to the spiritual improvement of the church. It is necessary 
to encourage the heart of the minister. He cannot be expected 
to preach with earnestness and persevering zeal, if his people 
manifest no pleasure in listening to the truth which he proclaims, 
Let him know that they drink in the word with delight, that their 
souls are refreshed by it, and that it greatly increases their fruit- 
fulness in holiness; with this knowledge, he will be stimulated to 
go forward in his work with boldness, and to endure all his toils 
with the sustaining assurance that his labor is not in vain in the 
Lord. 

Regular attendance on the ministrations of the word is neces- 
sary, that the hearers may grow in grace and in the knowledge of 
Christ. Food is not more necessary to the body, than spiritual 
nourishment is to the soul; and the word is the appointed means 
of spiritual nourishment. It is the sincere milk, which babes in 
Christ desire, and by which they are nourished; and it is the 
strong meat, which they can use profitably who have attained to 
mature age in the divine life. Nor can spiritual health be expected, 
if the spiritual nourishment which God has provided, be received 
at far distant and irregular intervals. A regular return of one 
day in seven has been wisely appointed by the great Author of 
our being, who knows our frame, and perfectly understands what 
is best for the promotion of our highest interests. They who 
neglect this provision of his benevolence, reject the counsel of God 
against themselves, and bring spiritual leanness on their souls. 

It is not enough to receive the spiritual food, but it ought to be 
mwardly digested. The truth which is heard on the sabbath, 
ought to be a subject of meditation through the week; and its 
influence should bring the actions, the words, the thoughts, even 
the very imaginations into obedience to the gospel of Christ. 
Thus the process of spiritual nutrition will be carried on, until the 
next sabbath brings another supply of the heavenly food. Thus 
the soul will grow in strength, and attain the stature of spiritual 
manhood. 

Besides the public ministrations of the word, other means of 


212 DISCIPLINE. 


promoting religious knowledge ought to receive the attention and 
support of the churches. The study of the Bible ought to be encour- 
aged, whether by individuals, by Bible classes, or by Sunday 
schools. It is a great fault if the work of instructing is entirely 
given up to the young. Let the heads which have grown gray in 
the service of the Lord, bow with pleasure to impart instruction to 
the opening minds of the rising generation, and sow in this pro- 
mising soil the seed which will produce a rich harvest, when the 
gray-haired instructor shall have gone to his eternal reward. Let 
the circulation of good religious books and periodical publications 
be promoted, and a spirit of religious inquiry be fostered in every 
proper way. Let men be taught, both by the words and the deeds 
of those who claim to be Christ’s, that religion is the chief concern. 

The health of the body requires exercise as well as food; so 
spiritual action is necessary for the health of the soul. Churches 
should exhort their members to be diligent in every good work, 
not only for the benefit of those around them, but also for their 
own spiritual improvement. In this course of active service, their 
own souls will become strong in the Lord, and their personal expe- 
rience will verify the words of Christ, “ It is more blessed to give 
than to receive.” The great work which demands the energy of 
all God’s people, is the spread of religion. Every church-member 
should labor for this by his personal efforts within the sphere of 
his individual influence, and, by co-operating with others, to extend 
the blessings of the gospel to every part of the earth. The pre- 
cise mode of co-operating, the word of God does not prescribe; as 
it does not prescribe the precise mode in which the church-mem- 
bers shall travel to their place of public worship. But the thing 
to be done is prescribed; and, if the heart is in the Lord’s work, 
it will employ its energies in devising the best method of accom- 
plishing it, and in laboring to effect the object with prayerful reli- 
ance on the divine blessing. The gospel is to be preached to 
every creature; and he who loves Christ ought to feel a holy 
pleasure in helping those to execute the will of Christ who are 
willing, at his command, to bear the word of salvation to the per- 
ishing. Union in religious effort, not only promotes the spiritual 
growth of individual Christians, but it also conduces greatly to 
the harmony of churches. When coldness in religion prevails, 
the members of a church are like pieces of metal, which are not 


EXCOMMUNICATION. 2738 


only separate from each other, but may be employed to inflict 
blows on each other; but when Spiritual warmth has melted them, 
` they flow together tr become one. Feuds and unprofitable con- 
troversies cease when men are actively engaged in the service of 
God, and when they strive to provake one iin to nothing but 
love and good works. | 
Prayer meetings are an important means of spiritual improve- 
ment. It has been said that the prayer meeting of a church is 
the thermometer by which its spiritnal temperature may be known, 
When Christians love to meet, that they may pour forth their 
united supplications to the throne of grace, the Saviour, in fulfil- 
ment of his promise, meets with them, and bestows blessings which 
infinitely transcend all earthly good, and are a beginning of 
heavenly bliss. 


Secrion III—EXCOMMUNICATION. 


THE RIGHT TO EXCOMMUNICATE BELONGS TO THE CHURCH, WITH- 
OUT ANY APPEAL. 

This is clear from the words of Christ: “If he will not hear 
the church, let him be to thee as an heathen man and a publican.” 
That it is not the province of a minister to excommunicate is clear 
from the instructions of Paul to the church at Corinth.! If minis- 
ters had a right to excommunicate, Paul, with his high apostolic 
authority, would have exercised the right himself, or would have 
directed to the clerical tribunal by which the right was to be exer- 
cised. But he instructed the church to do the work, and, there- 
fore, to the church it properly belonged. The punishment was to 
be inflicted, not by the officers of the church, but by the whole 
church assembled together with the power and presence of Christ, 
and the act performed is called the punishment inflicted by many.? 
Some, because the word rendered “many ” in the passage is in the 
comparative degree, have interpreted it by the majority ; but whether 
this be its import or not, it seems to imply that the sentence was 
passed by popular vote. 

The obligation to exclude unworthy persons from church-fellow- 
ship, is taught in various passages of Scripture. “Therefore put 


11 Cor, v, 4, 5. 22 Cor. ii, 6. 
18 


274 DISCIPLINE. 


away from among yourselves that wicked person.” ! ‘‘ A man that 
is a heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject.” 2? ‘Now 
we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh dis- 
orderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us.” 3 “If 
any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have 
no company with him, that he may be ashamed.’’* <‘ Now, I beseech 
you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences, con- 
trary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them.” 5 
In excommunication, regard should be had, not only to the glory 
of God, but to the good of the offender. This appears from the 
words of Paul: “For the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit 
may be saved.” The happy result of this excommunication, the 
only one which is particularly recorded in the history of the New 
Testament churches, is a strong encouragement to the exercise of 
faithful discipline. It has been remarked, that when discipline 
leaves a church, Christ goes with it. 
pa a 


21 Cor. v. 18 2 Titus iii. 10. 3 2 Thes. iii. 6. / 
42 Thes, iii. 14.” 5 Rom. xvi. 17. ~ ®1 Cor. v. 5.7 


CHAPTER. X. 


MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS. 


Section I—EXPEDIENCE OF THE SCRIPTURAL CHURCH ORDER. 


Our obligation to observe the positive precepts of religion 
is dependent entirely on the revealed will of the Lawgiver. It 
does not follow, however, that they are without reason, but only 
that the reason for them is beyond the discovery of human wis- 
dom. After the divine wisdom has instituted them, we may be 
able to discover their fitness to accomplish the purpose for which 
they were designed, and may become sensible that they are neces- 
sary to the order and harmony of God’s arrangements. In this 
manner the expedience of obeying positive precepts may some- 
times be clearly seen by the intelligent student of God’s will; but 
where we are unable to walk by sight, we ought to walk by faith 
in the way of God’s commandments, and to feel assured, in every 
instance, that to obey God in all things is always most expedient. 

Throughout the preceding discussions, we have endeavored to 
fix our eyes steadily on the divine precepts, and to strengthen our- 
selves in the purpose of obeying implicitly, even when no reason 
for the requirement is discoverable; but now, at the close of our 
investigations, it will be profitable to take another view of the 
church order which we have deduced from the Holy Scriptures in 
respect of its expedience. 

A fundamental doctrine, in the system of church order which 
we have deduced from the Scriptures, is, that genuine piety is ne- 
cessary to church-membership. If this doctrine had been stead- 
fastly maintained from the times of the apostles, the corruption 
which overspread the churches would have been prevented, and 
the papal apostasy would never have occurred. The admission of 


(275) 


276 MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS. 


unconverted members opened the door to every evil, and ultimately 
subjected the churches to the spirit that worketh in the children 
of disobedience. The reformation by Luther corrected many 
abuses, but this chief inlet of mischief it did not close. Hence 
the reformed churches do not exhibit the purity, devotion, and 
zeal which characterized the churches of primitive times. We 
need a more thorough reformation. We need to have the axe laid 
at the root of the trees, and this is done when none are admitted 
to church-membership but persons truly converted. The doctrine 
which excludes all others establishes the value and necessity of 
vital religion, and it is therefore of the utmost importance to the 
interests of the church, and of the world. 

Immense mischief has resulted from the ambition of the clergy. 
This raised the Roman pontiff to his high seat of power, and his 
adherents are actuated by the same spirit. To counteract its influ- 
ence, Christ commanded his disciples, “ Be ye not called Rabbi, 
for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren.’”? 
The doctrine of equality among the ministers of Christ is at war 
with clerical ambition, and a steadfast maintenance of it would 
have effectually barred out the Man of Sin, and it would now de- 
molish the Roman hierarchy, and teach haughty prelates the need 
of Christian humility. 

The ambition of the clergy needs a combination of the churches, 
to sustain it. The doctrine that every church is an independent 
body, and that no combination of the churches is authorized by 
Christ, opposes their schemes for ecclesiastical preferment. It 
makes the pastors or bishops equal, and allows no other preference 
than that which is due to superior piety and usefulness. 

The independence of the churches, and the democratic form of 
church government, appeal strongly to individual responsibility, 
and have, therefore, a powerful tendency to promote holiness 
among the lay members. Every man feels that the cause of Christ 
is in some measure committed to him. The church is not a body 
intermediate between him and Christ, and charged with the exclu- 
sive responsibility of glorifying Christ; but he himself is in part 
the church, and to him belongs the obligation of honoring his 
divine Master. This doctrine of individual responsibility unites 


—— 


1 Matt, xxiii. 8. 


EXPEDIENOR. PHY 


with the doctrine of a converted church-membership, to render the 
churches the glory of Christ. 

Enough has been said to direct the view of the thoughtful reader 
to the excellence of the Scriptural church order. In what remains 
of this section we shall consider some objections against the doc- 
trine of church independence. 


Objection 1.—The independent form of church government does 
not allow sufficient influence to the ministerial office. Learned 
divines may be outvoted by ignorant laymen; and pastors, who ought 
to rule their flocks, may have their peace and reputation destroyed 
by their churches, without any right of appeal. 


The objection supposes some other than moral power to be need- 
ful for ministers. A man whose piety and call of God to the min- 
istry are unquestionable ; who gives full proof to those among whom 
he ministers that he seeks their highest good, and who serves a 
people that esteem him highly for his work sake; has an influence 
over them which is almost unbounded. He comes to them in the 
name of God, and they perceive that his instruction and precepts 
are drawn from the word of God. He addresses them with refer- 
ence to the eternal world; and they realize that he and they are 
soon to stand together before God. The authority of God, and 
the momentous interests of the eternal world, give weight to every 
word which he utters; the powers of their minds bend under its 
influence. Such a minister as this has so swayed the hearts of 
Christian men, that martyrdom has had no terrors for them. They 
have defied the cruel rage of tyrants; and have faced popular 
fury undaunted. Is not this influence great enough for any min- 
ister to wield? Would the objection substitute for ita part of the 
tyrant’s power which it has overcome? ‘The apostles, on the day 
of Pentecost, were endued with power from on high; but it was 
not the power of coercion. God’s truth, and a holy life, have ren- 
dered the ministry invincible ; and the minister who asks for other 
power, mistakes the nature of his office. 

It is alleged, that a learned divine may be outvoted by ignorant 
laymen; and what then? Do truth and holiness lose their power, 
by being outvoted? The learned divine may be in the wrong; or 
he may arrogantly claim a deference to which he is not entitled. 
In this case, to give him governing power would be a sad remedy 
for the supposed evil. Perhaps he is in the right, and possesses 


278 MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS. 


the meekness and gentleness of Christ. In this case, he will teach 
us how to answer the objection now before us. He will choose in 
meekness to instruct those that oppose themselves, rather than pre- 
vail over them by authority. It may be that they mean well, but 
need information. The remedy is, to give them the information 
needed. This is far better, than to deny them the power of think- 
ing and acting. Possibly they may be evil and designing men. If 
so, they ought not to be in the church. It is certainly not wise to 
retain them in the church, and seek to render them harmless by 
depriving them of influence in the church; especially if we are 
obliged, at the same time, to make all the good lay members of the 
church equally powerless. ; 

Among the relations in human society, that of a godly pastor to 
the flock of his charge, is one of the most prolific in blessings. 
While he points to heaven in his instructions, and leads them in 
the way by his example, they listen with reverence, and imitate 
with the affection of children. It is not enough to say, that his 
happiness and reputation are safe in their hands. They area wall 
of defence around him; and a source of purest and sweetest 
enjoyment. But the benefits of this relation result from the moral 
tie that binds the parties. They spring out of brotherly love, 
which flows spontaneously from renewed hearts, and unites them 
in the service of their common Lord. Substitute for this the mere 
tie of official relation, and the garden of the Lord becomes a 
parched desert. When a pastor seeks defence from his people, by 
entrenching himself in official authority, or appealing to a higher 
tribunal, there is a radical evil which needs some other remedy. 

We concede that the independent form of church government is 
not adapted to ungodly pastors, and unconverted church-members. 
It is suited to those only, who are bound together in brotherly 
love, and are striving together to glorify God, and advance the 
cause of truth and righteousness. For such persons Christ insti- 
tuted it; and all the objections to which it is liable, find their 
occasion in the depravity of men. Church government was never 
designed to be a remedy for human depravity. It was designed 
for men whom the Holy Spirit has sanctified; and the wisdom 
which would adapt it to men of a different character, is not from 
above. 


Objection 2.—Designing men have it in their power to mislead 


FELLOWSHIP BETWEEN CHURCHES. 279 


the people; and the evil which results cannot be prevented, if 
. there is no high tribunal to which demagogues are amenable. 

The prevention and cure of this evil are not to be sought in the 
establishment of a high ecclesiastical court; but in the illumina- 
tion and sanctification of the people. Wisdom and benevolence 
unite in recommending, that men’s minds be fortified against 
seducers, by being well instructed in the truth; and the expedient 
of restraining the seducer by high ecclesiastical authority, does not 
secure the highest possible good. Besides, we have no assurance 
that the tribunal will be uncorrupt. The same power that claims 
to restrain a seducer, may restrain a reformer whom God has 
raised up to bring men back to the right way. It is far better to 
oppose error with the truth and the demonstration of the Spirit, 
than with ecclesiastical authority. 


Objection 3.—The independent churches have no bond of union 
and strength; and no means of preventing division. 


Love is the bond of perfectness, which unites true members of 
Christ. When this golden bond is wanting, a band of iron, forged 
by ecclesiastical authority, may fasten men to each other; but it 
will not be in the fellowship of the gospel. A want of fellowship 
in a church, is a disease preying on the spiritual strength of the 
body; and it is better that it should be seen and felt, until the 
proper remedy is applied, than that it should be concealed by an 
outward covering of ecclesiastical forms. When mere organiza- 
tion supplies the union and strength on which we rely, we shall 
cease to cultivate the unity of the Spirit, and to trust the power 
of truth. The objection, therefore, is unfounded. What it accounts 
a fault, is in reality a high excellence of the church order taught 
in the Scripture, and demonstrates that it originated in the wis- 


dom of God. 


Section II—FELLOWSHIP BETWEEN CHURCHES. 


A happy intercourse might subsist between the churches, if 
they were all walking in the Spirit, sound in faith, correct in order, 
and careful in discipline. Such a state of things existed, to a 
great extent, in apostolic times. Christian men passed from one 
country to another, and found, in every place, that those who 
professed the name of Christ were of one heart and one soul. 


280 MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS. 


The members of one local church were, in general, welcomed to 
the fellowship of every other church. 

But the relation between different local churches, is not such as 
to bind each church to receive the ministers and members of every 
other church. This obligation was not felt even in the days of the 
apostles. John commanded, “If there come any unto you, and 
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house; neither 
bid him God speed.” * These teachers of false doctrine were pro- 
bably members of some local church, which, like the church at 
Pergamos, tolerated error ;* but their membership did not entitle 
them to universal respect and confidence. Some have regarded 
each local church, as acting for the whole body of the faithful; 
and have inferred that its acts are binding on every other church. 
But this opinion is inconsistent with the true doctrine of church 
independence, and with the separate responsibility of individuals 
and churches. When churches do their duty, the recommendation 
of a minister or member from one church will, like the recom- 
mendation given to Apollos,’ introduce him to the affections and 
confidence of other churches; but no recommendation of an un- 
worthy person can bind the consciences of those who know his 
true character. Free intercourse and mutual confidence between 
the churches is very desirable, and every one should labor to 
promote it; but purity of doctrine and practice should never be 
sacrificed to effect it. 

For the promotion of Christian fellowship, every one should 
require more of himself than of his brother. We may lawfully 
tolerate in others what we cannot tolerate in ourselves, or cannot 
approve. Some degree of toleration must be exercised, if imper- 
fect Christians dwell together harmoniously in the fellowship of a 
local church. Such toleration the local churches are bound to 
exercise towards each other. Some things in the discipline of one 
church may not be approved by a neighboring church; but it 
does not follow, that their kind intercourse with each other must 
be disturbed. Each must act for itself, and not claim to bind the 
other. But when a church becomes corrupt in faith or practice, 
neighboring churches are bound to withdraw their fellowship. 
Se esr ey eT 

12 John 10, ? Rev. ii. 14, 15. 3 Acts xviii. 27. 


IMPOSITION OF HANDS. 281 


Segcrron III..IMPOSITION OF HANDS. 


The laying on of hands is sometimes mentioned in Scripture, 
when something is intended different from mere form or ceremony. 
Hands were laid on Queen Athaliah, that she might be put to 
death.! Nehemiah threatened to lay hands on those who violated 
the sabbath;? and in the same sense, it is said when they sought 
to lay hands on Jesus, they feared the multitude.? But imposi- 
tion of hands is also mentioned as a significant form or ceremony. 
It was used: 1. To represent the transfer of guilt to the victims 
which were offered in sacrifice. 2. To represent the transfer of 
authority, as from Moses to Joshua.” 3. As a form of benedic- 
tion, sometimes accompanied with prayer.® 4. To confer the Holy 
Spirit ;7 and 5. To ordain to the ministerial office.* 

The practice has prevailed in many churches, for the pastor to 
lay his hands on those who have been recently baptized, accom- 
panying the act with prayer to God on their behalf. No command 
of Scripture enjoins this ceremony. Hands were laid on those 
who had been baptized in the times of the apostles, to impart the 
Holy Spirit; but this was done by the apostles only; and when 
Cornelius, and they'who were with him, had received the Holy 
Spirit previous to their baptism, the apostle Peter omitted to lay 
hands on them afterwards, 

In solemn consecration to ministerial service, other hands than 
those of apostles were sometimes laid on the persons ordained. 
In the case which occurred at Antioch,’ the only apostle present 
was one of the persons on whom hands were laid. It follows that 
this was not done to impart the gift of the Holy Spirit, which 
appears to have been conferred by the apostles only. In the ordi- 
nation of Timothy, other persons besides Paul, who are called 
“the presbytery,” were concerned in the imposition of hands. 
These facts justify the conclusion, that the imposition of hands by 
ordinary ministers is, according to primitive usage, a proper cere- 
mony in ordination to the ministerial office. 


NN mmm 


1 2 Chron. xxiii. 15. 2 Neh. xiii. 21. 3 Matt. xxi. 46. 
4 Lev. iv. 4; xvi. 21. 5 Num. xxvii. 18—20. 
6 Gen. xlviii. 14; Mark x. 16. 7 Acts xix. 6. 8 Acts xiii. 3. 


®Acts xiii. 1, 2. 


282 MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS. 


The meaning of the injunction to Timothy, “ Lay hands sud- 
denly on no man,” is not perfectly clear. It is not probable that 
it refers to literal force. As directing the use of a significant 
form, its most probable reference is to ministerial ordination. So 
understood, the injunction furnishes strongly corroborative proof, 
that imposition of hands was the proper ceremony for setting apart 
to the sacred office. 


Section IV.—REBAPTISM. 
MAY BE NECESSARY. 


A believer who has, at some time, received sprinkling for bap- 
tism, is not freed from the obligation to be immersed, in obedience 
to Christ’s command. In this case the immersion cannot, with 
propriety, be called rebaptism. But if an individual should be 
immersed in infancy, according to the usage of the Greek Church, 
this fact would not release him from the obligation to be re-im- 
mersed, on his becoming a believer in Christ. On the cases which 
have been mentioned, no doubt or diversity of practice exists, 
among those who adhere strictly to the precepts of Christ. 

But other cases occasionally present themselves, the decision of 
which is attended with difficulty. The most common are the fol- 
lowing: 1. Men who were once baptized on profession of faith, 
and afterwards turned away from Christ, sometimes return with 
proofs of recent conversion. 2. Men who have been immersed by 
Pedobaptist ministers, or by unworthy Baptist ministers, sometimes 
present themselves for rebaptism, or for admission into a church. 
On these two cases, the question arises, is rebaptism necessary, 
according to the Holy Scriptures ? 


WHO MUST DECIDE. 


In deciding the question, the first responsibility devolves on the 
candidate. He is bound to make a baptismal profession of faith, 
according to the revealed will of Christ; and if he has not pro- 
perly complied with his duty, the obligation to obey rests on him. 


Bate heer es 


11 Tim, y, 22, 


REBAPTISM. 283 


A responsibility is brought on the administrator, to whom the 
candidate may apply for rebaptism. It is clear from the Scrip- 
tures, that, in ordinary cases, baptism was designed to be admin- 
istered but once; and the administrator, as a servant of Christ, 
is bound to decide, in the fear of God, whether the case before 
him justifies a repetition of the rite. 

Besides the two parties that have been named, and that have the 
immediate responsibility in the case, the church to which an indi- 
vidual of doubtful baptism may apply for membership, has the 
responsibility of judging whether his baptism has fulfilled the 
divine command. If baptism is a prerequisite to membership, the 
church is not at liberty to throw the entire responsibility of the 
question on the candidate or the administrator. 

It has sometimes happened, that ministers have differed in their 
views; and a candidate, whom one minister has refused to rebap- 
tize, has been rebaptized by another. In such cases, no breach of 
fellowship between the ministers occurs; nor ought it to be allowed. 
In like manner, a difference of opinion may exist between churches ; 
and one church may admit without rebaptism, when another church 
would require it. This difference should not disturb the kind 
intercourse between the churches. But if the individual who has 
been received without rebaptism, should seek to remove his mem- 
bership to the church that deems rebaptism necessary, the latter 
church has authority, as an independent body, to reject him. 

Though some difference of opinion on these questions does exist, 
and ought to be tolerated, yet every one should strive to learn his 
duty respecting them, by a diligent study of the Holy Scriptures. 
The directions of the inspired word are clear, so long as men keep 
in the prescribed way; but when they have wandered from it, no 
surprise should be felt if the method of return is not so clearly 
pointed out. Hence it arises that men who interpret the express 
precepts of Christ alike, may, in applying them to perplexing 
cases, differ in their judgment. In what follows I shall give my 
views, with deference to those whose investigations have led them 
_ to a different conclusion. 


FIRST CASE. 


The first case supposes that there was in the previous baptism a 
mistake respecting the qualifications of the candidate. 


284. MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS. 


Baptism was designed to be the ceremony of Christian profession. 
If, in the first baptism, the candidate believed himself to be a 
Christian, and received baptism on a credible profession of faith 
in Christ, no higher qualification can be obtained for a second bap- 
tism. They to whom the administration of the rite has been com- 
mitted, do not possess the power to search the heart. A credible 
profession of faith, sincerely made, is all that fallible men can ex- 
pect ; and, since the ordinance has been committed to fallible men, 
it is duly administered on sincere and credible profession. 

Some confirmation of this view may be derived from the case of 
Simon the sorcerer. Though baptized on profession of faith, it 
was afterwards discovered that his heart was not right in the sight 
of God. On making the discovery, Peter did not command him to 
repent and be baptized, as he commanded the unbaptized on the 
day of Pentecost: but his address was, “ Repent, and pray God, 
if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.” 1 
This address, by containing no command respecting baptism, favors 
the opinion that rebaptism in this case would not have been re- 
quired. 


SECOND CASE. 


The second case supposes that there was in the first baptism a 
want of due qualification in the administrator. 

In the discussion of this question we should guard against im- 
proper notions respecting the validity of baptism. The rite has no 
sacramental efficacy, dependent on its validity, as the possession 
of an estate depends on the validity of the title. Were it so, it 
might be a matter of great importance to be able to trace the flow 
of the mysterious virtue through a continuous line of authorized 
administrators from the days of the apostles. But the validity 
of baptism means nothing more than that the duty has been per- 
formed. If performed, there is no necessity of repeating it. 

The question, then, is whether the candidate has done his duty. 
The responsibility of deciding this question begins with him; but 
it does not end with him. The church of which he wishes to become - 
_ a member, must exercise judgment on the case. If the candidate’s 
satisfaction with his baptism would suffice, persons baptized in 


eee 
1 Acts viii. 22, 


REBAPTISM. 285 


infancy might obtain admission into our churches without other 
‘baptism. The church is bound to judge, and to regulate its judg- 
ment by the will of God. 

From the investigations in the preceding part of this work, we 
have learned that a candidate has no right to baptize himself, or 
select his own administrator, without regard to his being duly 
qualified according to the divine will. The proper administrators are 
persons called of God to the ministerial office, and introduced into 
it according to the order established by the apostles. To such 
persons the candidate was bound to apply; and, if he received the 
ordinance from any other, it was as if he had selected the adminis- 
trator at his own will, or had immersed himself. 

The possibility that a state of things may have at some time ex- 
isted, in which a regular administrator could not be obtained, does 
not militate against the conclusion just drawn. This subject has 
been considered in Chap. vrr. § 3.. Because when church order has 
been destroyed, something unusual may be done to restore it, we 
are not, on this account, justified in neglecting the regular order 
when it does exist. Every church is bound to respect this order, 
and a candidate who has failed to respect it in a former baptism, 
may, with a good conscience, proceed anew to obey the Lord’s com- 
mand, in exact conformity to the divine requirement. 

In order to the proper performance of baptism, a willing candi- 
date and a willing administrator are necessary, both of whom 
should render the service in obedience to Christ. By a wise pro- 
vision the social tendency of Christianity is shown at the very 
beginning of the Christian profession. The candidate cannot 
obey alone, but he must seek an administrator to unite with him 
in the act of obedience, and by this arrangement Christian fellow- 
ship begins with Christian profession. But that two may walk 
together in this act of obedience, it is necessary that they should 
be agreed. If the administrator and candidate differ widely in 
their views respecting the nature and design of the ordinance, they 
cannot have fellowship with each other in the service. Some Pedo- 
baptist ministers will administer immersion reluctantly, believing 
it to be an ineligible mode of baptism, scarcely consistent with 
refinement and decency. How can a candidate, who conscien- 
-tiously believes that there is no other baptism, have fellowship in 
the service with such an administrator? But this is not all. Pedo- 


286 MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS. 


baptist ministers do not, in general, administer the rite as an em- 
blem of Christ’s burial and resurrection. This important part of 
its design they entirely overlook. If an administrator of the 
Lord’s supper, mistaking the design of the ceremony, should 
break bread and distribute wine in commemoration, not of Christ, 
but of the deliverance from Egyptian bondage under Moses, what 
Christian could receive the elements at his hands? So, when an 
administrator mistakes the design of baptism, and overlooks its 
chief symbolical signification, every enlightened and conscientious 
candidate, who understands the nature and design of the ceremony, 
may well doubt the propriety of uniting with such a minister in a 
service about which they are so little agreed. 

The odium which has been attached to anabaptism deters many 
from a repetition of the ceremony; but the Scriptures nowhere 
brand it with reproach. He who would find an anathema against 
it, need not search for it in the Bible. The holy book furnishes 
satisfactory proof that when the rite has been once duly performed, 
there is no necessity to repeat it; but it furnishes no proof that 
God will be displeased, if one who has failed to come up to the full 
measure of his duty, should seek another opportunity to obey the 
livine command with scrupulous exactness. 


CONCLUSION. 


DUTY OF BAPTISTS. 


Tue church order which this treatise claims to have adduced from 
the Holy Scriptures, could not rely for support on human author- 
ity. The sect that maintains it, makes no imposing figure on the 
pages of ecclesiastical history, and does not hold such rank among 
the Christian denominations, as to recommend its peculiarities to 
the general acceptance of mankind. When the gospel was first 
introduced into the world, but few of the wise, the mighty, and 
the noble, appeared in its defence. God was pleased, with the weak 
things of the world, to confound the mighty, that no flesh should 
glory in his presence. The gospel is nota system of human devis- 
ing; and true faith receives it as the wisdom of God, however weak 
and contemptible the instruments of its promulgation may appear, 
The true disciple of Christ ought not to permit the odium of the 
anabaptist name to deter him from strict obedience to all his Lord’s 
commands. 

Although the truth of God does not need human authority, or 
the patronage of great names, it is nevertheless the Divine plea- 
sure to make it known to the world by human instrumentality ; and 
this instrumentality needs to be adapted to the purpose for which 
it is employed. If God has commissioned a sect everywhere spoken 
against, to make known truth which the wise and learned have | 
overlooked, that sect ought to understand the service to which they 
have been appointed, and ought to fulfil the prescribed duty firmly, 
faithfully, and in the fear of the Lord. As men designed for a 
peculiar service, let us, by earnest and constant enéeavor, seek to 
ascertain the will of him to whose supreme authority we yield all 
our powers, and let us diligently and perseveringly obey that will, 
whether men revile or praise. 

l (287) 


288 CONCLUSION. 


1. It is our duty to maintain the ordinances of Christ, and the 
church order which he has instituted, in strict and scrupulous con- 
formity to the Holy Scriptures. 

If the investigations of the sacred volume, which have been 
attempted in this work, have not been unsuccessful, the great body 
of Christ’s professed followers have wandered from the right way. 
They have established ecclesiastical organizations which are not in 
accordance with his will; and have corrupted the ceremonies of 
worship which he instituted. These errors have the sanction of 
age, and of men venerable for their wisdom. To maintain our 
peculiarities in opposition to such influences has the appearance 
of bigotry and narrow-mindedness; and, if they are peculiarities 
which God’s word does not require, we ought to relinquish them. 
But if we have attained to a knowledge of the Divine will, on 
points where the great mass of our fellow Christians have mistaken 
it, a duty of solemn responsibility is imposed on us, to hold fast what 
we have received, and defend the truth specially committed to our 
charge. 

The plea is often urged that there are good men in all the de- 
nominations, and that the various forms of religion, being alike 
consistent with piety, are matters of minor importance, and ought 
to be left to the preferences of individuals.. If we do not readily 
admit this plea in its full extent, we are perhaps understood to 
deny that piety can be found out of our own party, or to claim 
undue deference to our judgment in religious matters. But whe- 
ther men understand us or not, we are bound to obey God in 
everything. No command which he has given can be so unimpor- 
tant that we are at liberty to disobey it at our pleasure. When 
the finger of God points out the way, no place is left to us for 
human preferences. And when we know the will of God, we are 
not only bound to obey for ourselves, but also to teach others to 
obey, so far as they are brought under the influence of our instruc- 
tion. We may, without arrogant assumption, declare what we are 
firmly persuaded to be the will of God; and we must then leave 
every one to the judgment of him to whom all must give account. 
The man who can disobey God, because the thing commanded is 
of minor importance, has not the spirit of obedience in his heart; 
and the man who, knowing the will of God, forbears to declare it, 


DUTY OF BAPTISTS. 289 


because the weight of human authority is against him, fears men 
more than God. 

2. It is our duty, while rendering punctilious obedience to all 
the commands of God, to regard the forms and ceremonies of reli- 
gion as of far less importance than its moral truths and precepts, 

One of the earliest corruptions of Christianity consisted in mag- 
nifying the importance of its ceremonies, and ascribing to them a 
saving efficacy. With this superstitious reverence of outward 
forms, a tendency was introduced to corrupt these forms, and subs 
stitute ceremonies of human invention for the ordinances of God. 
To restore these ordinances to their original purity, and, at the 
same time, to understand and teach that outward rites have no 
saving efficacy, appears to be a service to which God has specially 
called the Baptists. We are often charged with attaching too 
much importance to immersion; but the notion that baptism pos- 
sesses a sacramental efficacy finds no advocates in our ranks. It 
introduced infant baptism, and prevailed with it; and it still lingers 
among those by whom infant baptism is practised. Our princi- 
ples, by restricting baptism to those who are already regenerate, 
subvert the doctrine of baptismal regeneration, and exhibit the 
ceremony in its proper relation to experimental religion. To 
give due prominence to spirituality above all outward ceremony, is 
an important service to which God has ealled our denomination. 

3. It is our duty to hold and exhibit the entire system of Chris- 
tian doctrine in all its just proportions. 

An important advance is made in the proper exhibition of 
Christian truth, when ceremony is rendered duly subordinate to 
spirituality. This gives an opportunity to adjust the parts of the 
system in their proper harmony. An additional security for the 
preservation of sound doctrine, is found in the converted church- 
membership which our principles require. ‘The church universal 
is the pillar and ground of the truth, because it consists of those 
who love the truth; and in proportion as local churches are formed 
of the same materials, they are prepared to stand as bulwarks 
against heresy. This service Baptist churches have been known 
to render to the cause of truth. The general agreement of Bap- 
tist churches, in doctrine as well as church order, is a fact which 
gives occasion for devout gratitude to God. Let it be our continued 
care never to distort the beautiful system of divine truth by mag- 

19 


290 CONCLUSION. 


nifying any part of it beyond its just proportion, or suppressing 
any part of the harmonious whole. 

Becuuse we differ from other professors of religion in our faith 
and practice respecting the externals of religion, we are under a 
constant temptation to make too much account of these external 
peculiarities. Against this temptation we should ever struggle. 
If we magnify ceremony unduly, we abandon our principles, and 
cease to fulfil the mission to which the Head of the church has 
assigned us. 

4, It is our duty to maintain lives of holy obedience in all 
things. 

Many persons have the form of godliness who are strangers to 
its power. They render obedience to ceremonial precepts, while 
they neglect weightier matters of moral obligation. But a punc- 
tilious observance of ceremonies has no necessary connexion with 
remissness in more important duties. In an affectionate family, 
the children who strive to please their parents, and gratify their 
wishes in the most trivial concerns, are expected to be most duti- 
ful in things of greatest moment. Such children of our heavenly 
Father ought Baptists to be. We claim to obey his will more fully 
in the outward forms of religion than any other people. Consist- 
ency requires that we should be more obedient also in matters of 
highest importance. It is highly offensive to God, if, while we 
neglect his most important commands, we attempt to please him 
with mere outward service. His omniscient eye detects the at- 
tempted fraud, and his holiness detests it. Even short-sighted men 
discover the cheat, and contemn our hypocrisy. ‘The reputation 
of religion suffers by our unfaithfulness, and men, who observe our 
conduct, become confirmed in unbelief, to their everlasting ruin. 
Persons who do not profess to obey God in all things, may, with 
less pernicious effect, neglect his holy precepts; but Baptists ought 
to be holy in all things. Our profession requires us to be the best 
people in the world; and it should be our constant effort to walk 
according to this profession. 

5. It is our duty to labor faithfully and perseveringly to bring 

all men to the knowledge of the truth. 
| We claim that we execute the commission which Christ gave to 
his apostles more fully than other Christian denominations. This 
commission requires us to preach the gospel to every creature; and 


DUTY OF BAPTISTS. 291 


we ought to be foremost in obeying it. This obligation has been 
` felt by some of our faith and order, and all of us ought to feel it. 
The English Baptists have the honor of being foremost in the 
work of modern missions; and the names of Carey, and his fellow- 
laborers, who were the pioneers in this difficult service, deserve to 
be had in lasting remembrance. The names of Judson and Rice 
appear among the foremost in the history of American missions; 
and the conversion of these men to the Baptist faith may be re- 
garded as a special call of God on American Baptists to labor for 
the spread of the gospel throughout the earth. On the Continent 
of Europe, Oncken and his noble band of associates, are, by their 
laborious and successful efforts in the Redeemer’s cause, but ful- 
filling the obligations which every Baptist should feel. Voluntary 
devotion to Christ, and immediate responsibility to him, are con- 
spicuous in our distinguishing peculiarities; and we ought to be 
conspicuous among the followers of Christ, by our labors or suffer- 
ings in his cause. 

6. It is our duty to promote the spiritual unity of the universal 
church, by the exercise of brotherly love to all who bear the image 
of Christ. 

Various schemes have been proposed by the wisdom of men for 
amalgamating the different Christian denominations. All these 
originate in the erroneous conception that the unity of the univer- 
sal church must be found in external organization. To effect the 
union sought for, compromises are required of the several parties, 
and the individual conscience must yield to the judgment of the 
many. All these schemes of amalgamation are inconsistent with 
the Baptist faith. We seek spiritual unity. We would have every 
individual to stand on Bible ground, and to take his position there, 
in the unbiassed exercise of his own judgment and conscience. 
There we strive to take our position ; and there, and there only, we 
invite our brethren of all denominations to meet us. We yield 
everything which is not required by thé word of God; but in what 
this word requires, we have no compromise to make. We rejoice 
to see, in many who do not take our views of divine truth, bright 
evidence of love to Christ and his cause. We love them for Christ’s 
sake; and we expect to unite with them in his praise through 
eternal ages. We are one with them in spirit, though we cannot 
conform to their usages in any particular in which they deviate 


292 CONCLUSION. 


from the Bible. The more abundantly we love them, the more 
carefully we strive to walk before them in strict obedience to the 
commands of our common Lord. And if they sometimes misun- 
derstand our motives, and misjudge our actions, it is our consola- 
tion that our divine Master approves; and that they also will 
approve, when we shall hereafter meet them in his presence. 


APPENDIX. 


SITUATION OF ENON. 


SINCE to baptize is to immerse, the declaration of Scripture that 
“John was baptizing in Enon,” is proof that the place afforded 
water in sufficient quantity for the purpose of immersion. Ad- 
ditional proof is furnished in the statement of the inspired writer, 
that John selected.this: place of baptizing, “because there was 
much water there.” In the remarks made on this subject in p. 
60, I did not think it necessary to enter into any inquiry respect- 
ing the geographical situation of Enon. This subject has been 
considered by the Rey. G. W. Samson, in the tract referred to on 
p. 63, and he arrives at the following conclusion:—“It was at the 
point upon the Jordan where the great thoroughfare from Western 
Galilee and Samaria crosses it, that John selected his favorable 
location for baptizing.” ‘The permanent record of the early 
Christians, sanctioned by the New Testament writers, and con- 
firmed by all subsequent observations, leaves no doubt that Enon - 
was at a passage of the Jordan.” In this part of the river, its 
course is very winding, its average width forty-five yards, and its 
average depth four feet. 

The tract of Mr. Samson has been published, in connection with 
several other valuable tracts, in a duodecimo of 194 pages, entitled 
“Baptismal Tracts for the Times.” The reader who desires to 
understand the baptismal controversy, will find some important 
topics discussed in this little volume with much ability. 

(293) 


294 APPENDIX. 


A different situation has been assigned to Enon, in a work which 
has just issued from the press—‘ The City of the Great King; or 
Jerusalem as it was, as it is, and as it is to be.” The author of 
this work, Dr. Barclay, a resident missionary in Jerusalem for three 
years and a half, thinks he has found the ancient baptizing-place 
within a few miles of the Holy City. He describes it thus:— 
“ Returning by a circuitous route to the place whence we had 
started, from the brow of Wady Farah, we descended with some 
difficulty into that ‘valley of delight’—for such is the literal 
signification of its name—and truly I have seen nothing so delight- 
ful in the way of natural scenery, nor inviting in point of resources, 
&c., in all Palestine. Ascending its bold stream from this point, 
we passed some half dozen expansions of the stream, constituting 
the most beautiful natural natatoria I have ever seen; the water, 
rivalling the atmosphere itself in transparency, of depths varying 
from a few inches to a fathom and more, shaded on one or both 
sides by umbrageous fig trees, and sometimes contained in natu- 
rally excavated basins of red mottled marble—an occasional varie- 
gation of the common limestone of the country. These pools are 
supplied by some half dozen springs of the purest and coldest 
water, bursting from rocky crevices at various intervals. Verily, 
thought I, we have stumbled upon Enon.” * * * « Although this 
conjecture—that Ain Farah was Aunon—must be set down to the 
account of a mere random suggestion of the moment, yet a more 
intimate acquaintance with the geography of the neighborhood has 
brought me to an assured conviction that this place is indeed no 
other than the ‘Enon near to Salim, where John was baptizing, 
because there was much water there.’ ” 


PLACE OF THE EUNUCH’S BAPTISM. 


The sacred writer who has recorded the Acts of the Apostles, 
has informed us that the Eunuch was baptized in “the way that 
goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert.”! The 
word “desert” seems to have suggested to some minds the idea, 
that the baptism occurred in an arid region, in which water of suffi- 
cient depth for immersion could not be found. Gaza, though once 


— a ee ee eee 


1 Acts viii, 26, 


APPENDIX. 295 


a populous city with massy gates,’ was now almost without inhabi- 
_ tants, according to the prediction of the prophets, “ Baldness is 
come upon Gaza:”? I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which 
shall devour the palaces thereof.”3 In Scripture language, the 
name desert or wilderness, is applied to a thinly inhabited country, 
even though including cities or towns distant from each other. It 
was, therefore, applicable, to the region in which Gaza was situ- 
ated, and into which the road of the Eunuch’s descent from Jeru- 
salem penetrated. 

Dr. Barclay describes a journey which he took from Jerusalem 
to Gaza. He found the way passing through a fertile country, 
well supplied with water. He sought for the place of the Eunuch’s 
baptism; but the disquieted condition of the country stopped his 
prosecution of the search. He says: “ We were the more anxious 
to visit El-Hassy, on account of information received recently 
from Sheikh of Felluge, and abundantly confirmed at Burrier, that 
in Wady-el-Hassy about two or three hours distant, at Ras Kus- 
sahbeh and at Moyat es-Sid, in the same wady, the stream of water 
is as broad as our tent (twelve feet), and varies in depth from a 
span to six or seven feet—occasionally sinking and reappearing. 
This was, doubtless (Moyat es-Sid), the certain water of which we 
were in quest; but we were constrained, however reluctantly, to 
abandon the idea of seeing it.” 

Mr. Samson’s description of the country through which the 
Eunuch journeyed, agrees with that of Dr. Barclay. Several 
places are noticed on the way, in which immersion may have been 
performed. Concerning one of these, he thus writes: ‘In front 
of the fortress by us is a fine gushing fountain of sweet water, and 
broad stone troughs in which we water our horses. This spot has 
been fixed on by Dr. Robinson as the Bethsur mentioned by 
Eusebius and Jerome as the place where the Eunuch was baptized. 
The ground in front of the fountain, and of the structure behind 
it, is so broken up and covered with stones, that it is difficult to 
determine what was once here. There is now a slightly depressed 
hollow, with a sandy or gravelly bottom. It is hardly conceivable 
that, in the days of Herod, the fountain-builder, this most favor- 
able spring should not have been made to supply a pool in this 


1 Judges xvi. 1—3. * Jer. xlvii. 5. 3 Amos i. 7. 


296 APPENDIX. 


land of such structures; and even now water sufficient to supply 
such a reservoir flows from the troughs, and soaks into the soil ; 
as, according to Jerome’s mention, in his day it seems also to have 
been absorbed. That an ancient ‘chariot’ road passed this way, 
the observant traveller will often perceive on his journey. Dr. 
Robinson twice between Hebron and Jerusalem, notices this; and 
we have traced even plainer evidences.” 


IMMERSION IN COLD CLIMATES. 


To the objection stated on p. 67, that immersion is not suited to 
cold climates, I have not attempted a formal reply. It gives me 
pleasure to present to the reader the following remarks on this 
subject, which have been written at my special request, by the 
Rey. Mr. Samson: 

The idea that immersion, as an ordinance of Christ’s church, is 
incompatible with his design that his religion should spread to 
all nations and climates, is alike disproved by Scripture, and by the 
facts of history in the spread of Christianity. 

When Jesus said “ Go teach,” or make disciples of “ all nations,” 
he added, “ baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” The word baptize in the language in 
which Christ spoke, as every Greek scholar allows, meant nothing 
else than immerse. It is impossible to reconcile it with the 
supreme wisdom of Jesus, that without qualification of language, 
he commanded this ordinance in this form to be performed among 
the nations of every clime, if there really were anything in im- 
mersion inconsistent with health in any latitude, or with propriety 
in any age of refinement. 

Early in the, apostolic history this was tested. The apostle 
was accustomed to baptism at first in the neighborhood of Jerusa- 
lem, among the “common people” that bathed in Jordan, and the 
pools of the Holy City. He writes a letter to Rome, the centre 
of refinement and luxury, where some members of “ Czesar’s house- 
hold” had joined the Christian church, in a region ten degrees 
north of Jerusalem, where the cold of winter compelled the self- 
denying martyr to send as far as Old Troy for a Roman coat he 
had left there; yet there had not been, either on account of the 
peculiar refinement and delicacy of the people of Rome, or on 


e 


APPENDIX. 297 


account of the rigor of their winter, any change in the mode of 
` baptism, if we may draw an inference from the apostle’s words: 
“Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death.”! It 
ought to be remembered that summer is warm in every climate ; 
that bathing is often practised, as it was in Rome, and as it is in 
our country, more by people in northern than in southern lati- 
tudes ; and that the winter of the southern climate, in the latitude of 
Jerusalem, where the snow thaws almost immediately on its fall, is 
more trying than in far northern regions, the air being chillier, and 
the.water more icy-cold. 

Subsequent history is more convincing than even these facts of 
the apostolic age in this regard. The Eastern or Greek Church 
(by the side of which the Western or Roman Church, occupying 
three or four little countries of Southern Europe, is a speck on the 
map), embraces every variety of climate and class of people. Be- 
ginning with Abyssinia, in the hot regions of Central Africa, 
extending through Egypt in Northern Africa, it spreads along all 
Western Asia, takes in half of Europe, and embraces especially all 
Siberia and Northern Russia; thus comprising, the very coldest 
regions, as well as the hottest, in which man can live. In all these 
climates, among all these people, baptism is administered by triple 
immersion. If it be an infant that is brought, despite his struggles 
and cries, he is three times plunged in the broad baptismal font. 
In mid April, while the Jordan’s waters are yet chilly with the 
melting snows that cover the top of Hermon and all the Lebanon 
range (from which that stream flows), every year from 5000 to 6000 
persons of every age, sex, climate, and condition in life, go down 
into the chilling stream, and either bury themselves or are buried 
by others beneath its waters. At St. Petersburgh a stranger 
expression still is given, at midwinter, in reply to the objection that 
climate renders immersion impracticable. The chosen day for 
immersion is at Christmas, near New Year’s; and that through the 
ice of the Neva. A temporary chapel is erected on the ice, a large 
hole is cut, and with a round of ceremonies the water is conse- 
crated by the priest; when mothers bring their infants and plunge 
them, and people of mature age come and dip themselves there. 
Moreover, at any time in the winter, when proselytes in the most 


1 Rom, vi. 4. 


298 APPENDIX. 


northern regions of the Russian possessions are made, they are 
baptized through the ice. Any one wishing to verify these state- 
ments, may consult such a work as William Burder’s Religious 
Ceremonies, published at London, 1841; or he may perhaps be 
personally an eye-witness. 

It is the Western, especially the Roman church, that has de- 
parted from the original mode of baptism; and that not from 
reasons connected with climate. All the Northern portion (not 
the Southern) of Western Europe, which originally was converted 
to pure Christianity and denied the authority of the Roman 
church, which in the age of subsequent corruption departed least 
from the faith as it is in Jesus, and only nominally became allied 
to the Roman church, and which was the first to hail and to em- 
brace the call for the reformation,—all the coldest regions of 
Western Europe received and maintained the longest the rite of 
immersion. It was the warm latitudes that departed from it. 

To verify this, one needs but turn to the Latin chronicles of 
Alcuin and others of those Judson-like missionaries, who, during 
the reign of Alfred of England and Charlemagne of France, 
carried pure Christianity into the heart of Germany, and won all 
the rude tribes of those lands, from which our ancestry sprung, to 
Christianity. It impresses the thoughtful mind with gratitude, 
that the truth as it was in Jesus was preached and embraced by 
the rude men from whom our strong race has come, as we read 
Alcuin’s letters to Charlemagne, rather commanding than entreat- 
ing his sovereign to be true to Christ’s appointment ; charging him 
not to force these people by the sword, which he never could do, 
to receive Christian baptism; and quoting Jerome’s Commentary on 
Matt. xxviii. 19, 20: “ Primum eos doceant, deinde doctas intinquant 
aqua,” to show that the fathers of the church taught that mission- 
aries “must first teach their people, and then immerse them in 
water.” And in the cold northern Vistula, thousands on thousands, 
the records of the times tell us, were, in the heat of summer, and 
in the cold of winter, baptized on sincere personal profession of 
faith in Christ. | 

If farther confirmation of this fact be desired, that the people 
of cold countries have preferred immersion, it may be found in the 
work of “ Wheatly on the Book of Common Prayer of England,” 
Bohn’s edition, pp. 887—350. Of the fonts now found in the 


APPENDIX. 29) 


old English churches, he says, “ So called, I suppose, because bap- 
tism in the beginning of Christianity was performed in springs or 
fountains. * * In the primitive times we meet with them very 
large and capacious, not only that they might comport with the 
general customs of those times, viz.: of persons being immersed or 
put under water, but also because the stated times of baptism 
returning so seldom, great numbers were usually baptized at the 
same time. In the middle of them was always a partition, the one 
part for men, the other for women; that so by being baptized 
asunder they might avoid giving offence and scandal.” The author 
here cites the orders of Edward, when the crowd was so great they 
could not be gathered around the church door; all of which shows 
that baptism was often administered to adults, that it was by im- 
mersion, and that a very large number could be baptized on one 
occasion in the ordinary font. Again the author says, “Except 
upon extraordinary occasions, baptism was seldom, or perhaps 
never, administered for the first four centuries but by immersion or 
dipping. Nor is aspersion or sprinkling ordinarily used, to this 
day, in any country that was never subject to the Pope; and 
among those that submitted to his authority, England was the last 
place where it was received; though it has never obtained so far 
as to be enjoined, dipping having been always prescribed by the 
rubric. The Salisbury Missal, printed in 1530 (the last that was 
in force before the Reformation), expressly requires and orders 
dipping. And in the first Common Prayer Book of King Edward 
VI., the priest’s general order is to dip it in water.” Here we see 
that it was not on account of climate any change grew up; the 
people in the extreme north were the last to surrender the original 
mode; and not even the Pope’s authority could compel them to 
strike out of their Missal the form received in the simplicity of 
their early reception of Christianity. Farther, we read that from 
love for the primitive ordinance, “fonts were in times of popery 
unfitly and surreptitiously placed near the churches.” The author 
states the alleged, and then the real cause why affusion took the 
place of immersion, as follows :—‘‘ Many fond ladies at first, and 
then by degrees the common people, would persuade the minister 
that their children were too tender for dipping. But what princi- 
pally tended to confirm this practice, was that several of our Eng- 
lish divines flying to Germany, Switzerland, &c., during the bloody 


300 APPENDIX. 


reign of Queen Mary, and returning home when Queen Elizabeth 
came to the crown, brought back with them a great love and zeal 
for the customs of those churches beyond sea, where they had 
been sheltered and received. And consequently having observed 
that in Geneva and some other places, baptism was ordered to be 
performed by affusion, they thought they could not do the church 
of England a greater service, than to introduce a practice dictated 
by so great an oracle as Calvin. So that in the times of Queen 
Elizabeth, and during the reigns of King James and King Charles 
I., there were but very few children dipped in the font.” So it 
appears it was not on the score of health (which down to 1500 
years after Christianity had existed in England never had been 
thought of), but it was fashion which led to the change. Of sub- 
sequent times, and the folly of the Reformers of Elizabeth’s and of 
James’ day, the author adds, “ These reformers, it seems, could not 
recollect that fonts to baptize in had been long used before the 
times of popery, and that they had nowhere been discontinued 
from the beginning of Christianity, but in such places where the 
Pope had gained authority. But our divines at the Restoration, 
understanding a little better the sense of scripture and antiquity, 
again restored the order for immersion.” Yet though this is still 
the order of the Book of Common Prayer, the author regrets that 
it is ineffective. Custom, fashion triumphs, even over a statute of 
the realm of England. 

The struggle of his own mind to be satisfied with the appeal to 
climate as an argument for sprinkling, speaks out in these two 
sentences of the author. The present Order of the Prayer Book 
as to baptism is he says “keeping as close to the primitive rule 
for baptism as the coldness of our region, and the tenderness 
wherewith infants are now used, will sometimes admit. Though 
Sir John Floyer, in a discourse on cold baths, hath shown from the 
nature of our bodies, from the rules of medicine, from modern ex- 
perience, and from ancient history, that nothing could tend more 
to the preservation of a child’s health than dipping it in baptism.” 


THE END. 


DATE DUE 


2 


MAY 7 


a 
W 
H 
z 
© 
a 


Q 
La 
o 
-J 


260 
D125 


Dagg, John Leadley 
AUTHOR 


Church order. 
MTE 
12637 
| 260 
D125 Dagg, John Leadley 
Church order. 


| 12637 


Da LTP Ute ena DALDA 
PTY, AH a 


p a 
4. oe 


p 
A 


nents 


