;!'■• 


CHURCH  MANUAL 

DESIGNED  FOR  THE  USE 

OF 

BAPTIST  CHURCHES 

By  J.  M.  PENDLETON,  D.  D. 


Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order. — 1  Cor.  14  :  40 


Philadelphia 

American  Baptist  Publication  Society 

Boston  Chicago  St.  Louis         New  York 

Los  Angeles  Kansas  City  Seattle  Toronto 


rX<»  s4' 


CONTENTS 


Chapter  Pagf 

I.  Nature  of  a  Church   5 

II.  Officers  of  a  Church   22 

III.  Doctrines  of  a  Church   41 

IV.  Ordinances  of  a  Church   63 

V.  The  Government  of  a  Church   100 

VI.  The  Discipline  of  a  Church   117 

VII.  Duties  of  a  Church   147 

APPENDIX 

I.  Business  Meetings  of  a  Church  163 

II.  Forms  of  Minutes,  Letters,  etc 167 

III.  Marriage    Ceremony    172 

IV.  Province  of  Associations  and  Councils.  173 

INDEX 


CHURCH  MANUAL 


CHAPTER  1 

NATURE  OF  A  CHURCH 

THE  term  Church  occurs  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament more  than  a  hundred  times.  The 
word  thus  translated  means  congregation 
or  assembly ;  but  it  does  not  indicate  the  pur- 
pose for  which  the  congregation  or  assembly 
meets.  Hence  it  is  used,  Acts  19  :  32,  39,  41, 
and  rendered  assembly.  In  every  other  place 
in  the  New  Testament  it  is  translated  church. 
In  its  application  to  the  followers  of  Christ, 
it  refers  either  to  a  particular  congregation  of 
saints,  or  to  the  redeemed  in  the  aggregate.  It 
is  employed  in  the  latter  sense  in  Ephesians 
1  :  22;  3  :  21 ;  5  :  25,  27.  Here  we  have  the 
expressions,  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the 
Church  ? ;  "  To  him  be  glory  in  the  Church 
by  Christ  Jesus  throughout  all  ages  world 
without  end  " ;  "  Christ  loved  the  Church  and 


6  CHURCH    MANUAL 

gave  himself  for  it  .  .  .  that  he  might  present 
it  to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having 
spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing;  but  that  it. 
should  be  holy  and  without  blemish."  In  these 
passages,  and  a  few  more  like  them,  it  would 
be  absurd  to  define  the  term  Church  as  mean- 
ing a  particular  congregation  of  Christians, 
meeting  in  one  place  for  the  worship  of  God. 

Our  business,  however,  is  with  the  other 
signification  of  the  word  church.  In  a  large 
majority  of  instances  it  is  used  in  the  Scrip- 
tures to  denote  a  local  assembly,  convened  for 
religious  purposes.  Thus  we  read  of  "  the 
church  at  Jerusalem/'  "  the  church  of  God 
which  is  at  Corinth/'  "  the  church  of  the  Thes- 
salonians,"  "  the  church  of  Ephesus,"  "  the 
church  in  Smyrna,"  "  the  church  in  Perga- 
mus,"  etc.,  etc.  Nor  are  we  to  suppose  that  it 
required  a  large  number  of  persons  to  consti- 
tute a  church.  Paul  refers  to  Aquila  and  Pris- 
cilla  and  "  the  church  that  is  in  their  house." 
to  Nymphas  and  "  the  church  which  is  in  his 
house,"  and  in  his  letter  to  Philemon  he  says, 
"  to  the  church  in  thy  house."  A  congregation 
of  saints,  organized  according  to  the  New- Tes- 
tament, whether  that  congregation  is  large  or 
small,  is  a  church. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  / 

The  inspired  writers,  as  if  to  preclude  the 
idea  of  a  church  commensurate  with  a  province, 
a  kingdom,  or  an  empire,  make  use  of  the  fol- 
lowing forms  of  expression,  "  the  churches  of 
-Galatia,"  "  the  churches  of  Macedonia,"  "  the 
churches  of  Asia/'  "  the  churches  of  Judea  " ; 
but  they  never  say  the  church  of  Galatia,  the 
church  of  Macedonia,  etc.  Wherever  Chris- 
tianity prevailed  in  apostolic  times  there  was 
a  plurality  of  churches. 

In  answer  to  the  question,  What  is  a  church?/ 
it  may  be  said:  A  church  is  a  congregation  of 
Christ's  baptized  disciples,  acknowledging  him 
as  their  Head,  relying  on  his  atoning  sacrifice 
for  justification  before  God,  and  depending  on 
the  Holy  Spirit  for  sanctification,  united  in  the  j 
belief  of  the  gospel,  agreeing  to  maintain  its  I 
ordinances  and  obey  its  precepts,  meeting  to- 
gether for  worship,  and  cooperating  for  the 
extension  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  world. 
If  any  prefer  an  abridgment  of  the  definition  it 
may  be  given  thus  :  A  church  is  a  congregation  ( 
of  Christ's  baptized  disciples,  united  in  the  be- 
lief of  what  he  has  said,  and  covenanting  to  do 
^what  he  has  commanded. 

If  this  be  a  correct  description  of  a  church 
of  Christ,  it  is  manifest  that  membership  must 


8  CHURCH    MANUAL 

be  preceded  by  important  qualifications.  These 
qualifications  may  be  considered  as  moral  and 
ceremonial. 

Moral.  Among  moral  prerequisites  to 
church-membership  may  be  mentioned 

Repentance.  John  the  Baptist,  whose  min- 
istry was  "  the  beginning  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  preached,  saying  to  the  people,  "  Re- 
pent ye;  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand."  His  was  the  baptism  of  repentance. 
When  John  was  cast  into  prison  Jesus  "  came 
into  Galilee,  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  king- 
dom of  God,  and  saying,  "  The  time  is  fulfilled, 
and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand :  repent  ye 
and  believe  the  gospel."  When  the  apostles 
were  sent  forth  they  "  preached  that  men 
should  repent."  The  Lord  Jesus  after  his  res- 
urrection said :  "  Thus  it  is  written  and  thus 
it  behooved  Christ  to  suffer  and  to  rise  from 
the  dead  the  third  day,  and  that  repentance 
and  remission  of  sins  should  be  preached  in  his 
name  among  all  nations."  Peter  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost  said,  "  Repent  and  be  baptized 
every  one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
for  the  remission  of  sins  " ;  and  Paul,  who  testi- 
fied at  Ephesus  for  three  years  "  repentance  to- 


CHURCH    MANUAL  9 

ward  God  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  proclaimed  in  Athens,  "  God  com- 
mandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent/'  The 
New  Testament  is  full  of  the  doctrine  of  re- 
pentance. It  is  a  doctrine  of  the  gospel. 
The  law  knows  nothing  of  it.  The  language 
of  the  law  is,  Do  and  live — not  Repent,  that 
you  may  be  pardoned.  Repentance  involves 
such  a  change  of  mind  in  regard  to  sin  as  is 
indispensable  to  a  proper  appreciation  of  the 
blessings  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Hence  no 
impenitent  sinner  can  constitutionally  enter 
into  the  kingdom.  There  is  no  place  more  in- 
appropriate for  the  impenitent  than  a  church 
of  Christ. 

Faith.  This  is  another  moral  qualification 
for  church-membership.  Great  importance  is 
in  the  Scriptures  attached  to  faith  in  Christ,  as 
will  appear  from  the  following  passages :  "  He 
that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."  "  He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life." 
"  These  things  are  written  that  ye  may  believe 
ttiat  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and 
that  believing  ye  may  have  life  through  his 
name."  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved."  "  By  him  all  that  believe  are 
justified  from  all  things."    "  Whom  God  hath 


JO  CHURCH    MANUAL 

set  forth  as  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his 
blood  .  .  .  that  he  might  be  just  and  the  justi- 
fier  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jesus."  "  There- 
fore being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace 
with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. " 

These  passages,  with  many  others,  clearly 
show  that  in  the  economy  of  the  gospel  faith 
in  Christ  is  recognized  as  an  essential  principle. 
Why  is  this  ?  Not  because  faith  is  a  meritori- 
ous exercise.  There  is,  there  can  be,  no  merit 
in  it.  This  is  evident,  because  faith  is  a  duty, 
and  there  can  be  no  merit  in  the  performance 
of  a  duty.  But,  while  faith  possesses  no  merit, 
it  brings  the  soul  into  vital  contact  with  the 
blood  of  atonement,  which  possesses  infinite 
merit.  It  unites  to  Christ.  Its  province  is  to 
receive  Christ,  and  with  him  all  the  blessings 
of  the  "  new  covenant."  Christ  is  emphatically 
the  object  of  faith.  The  faith  which  avails  to 
salvation  has  respect  to  him  and  embraces  him. 

Faith  in  Christ — the  faith  wThich  instru- 
mentally  achieves  the  sinner's  justification 
before  God — is  an  essential  qualification  for 
church-membership.  No  unbeliever  has  the 
shadow  of  a  claim  to  citizenship  in  the  king- 
dom of  Christ.  The  formal  mention  of  regen- 
eration as  a  prerequisite  to  church-membership 


CHURCH    MANUAL  II 

has  been  omitted,  because  it  necessarily  co- 
exists with  repentance  and  faith.  Every  peni- 
tent believer  is  a  regenerate  person.  Regen- 
eration is  the  spiritual  process  by  which  we 
become  new  creatures  in  Christ — are  born 
again — born  of  the  Spirit — born  of  God — 
quickened  together  with  Christ — renewed  after 
the  image  of  God,  etc.,  etc.  "  Ye  are  all  the 
children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,"  is 
the  language  of  Paul  to  the  Galatians  ;  and  the 
beloved  disciple  says,  "  Whosoever  believeth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  born  of  God."  If 
faith  therefore,  as  we  have  seen,  is  a  qualifica- 
tion for  church-membership,  regeneration  must 
be  also ;  for  it  is  so  inseparable  from  faith,  that 
every  one  who  believes  in  Christ  is  born  of 
God.  And  it  follows,  that  if  faith  is  a  pre- 
requisite to  baptism,  regeneration  is  likewise. 
This  being  the  case,  regeneration  does  not 
occur  in  baptism. 

Let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  the  only  suit- 
able materials  of  which  to  construct  a  church 
of  Christ,  so  far  as  spiritual  qualifications  are 
concerned,  are  regenerate,  penitent,  believing 
persons.  To  make  use  of  other  materials  is  to 
subvert  the  fundamental  principles  of  church 
organization.     It  is  to  destroy  the  kingdom 


12  CHURCH    MANUAL 

0 

of  Christ;  for  how  can  there  be  a  kingdom 
without  subjects — such  subjects  as  the  King 
requires  ? 

It  is  a  regulation  of  the  Head  of  the  Church 
that  his  spiritual  subjects  be  organized  into 
visible,  local  communities.  We  read  therefore, 
in  the  New  Testament  of  churches — another 
name  for  these  communities.  There  are  fre- 
quent references  to  local  congregations.  These 
congregations  had  a  regular,  visible  organiza- 
tion; and  there  must  have  been  some  visible 
act  of  initiation  into  them.  What  was  it? 
This  leads  to  a  consideration  of 

2.  The  ceremonial  qualification  for  church- 
membership.  This  qualification  is  baptism. 
There  can,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  be  no 
visible  church  without  baptism.  An  observ- 
ance of  this  ordinance  is  the  believer's  first 
public  act  of  obedience  to  Christ.  Regenera- 
tion, repentance,  and  faith  are  private  matters 
between  God  and  the  soul.  They  involve  in- 
ternal piety,  but  of  this  piety  there  must  be  an 
external  manifestation.  This  manifestation  is 
made  in  baptism.  The  penitent,  regenerate 
believer  is  baptized  into  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
There  is  a  visible,  symbolic  expression  of  a 


CHURCH    MANUAL  13 

new  relationship  to  the  three  persons  of  the 
Godhead — a  relationship  entered  into  in  repen- 
tance, faith,  and  regeneration.  We  are  said 
to  be  baptized  into  the  death  of  Christ.  We 
profess  our  reliance  on  his  death  for  salvation ; 
and  we  emblematically  declare  that  as  he  died 
for  sin,  so  we  have  died  to  sin,  and  have  risen 
from  our  death  in  trespasses  and  sins  to  new- 
ness of  life.  We  solemnly  commemorate  the 
burial  and  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
are  ourselves  symbolically  buried  to  the  world. 
In  baptism  our  sins  are  declaratively  re- 
mitted— formally  washed  away.  Washing  in 
water  frees  the  body  from  literal  impurity. 
Baptism  is  a  symbolic  release  of  the  soul  from 
the  defilement  of  sin.  There  is  an  actual,  a 
real  remission  of  sins  when  we  believe  in 
Christ — there  is  a  declarative,  formal,  symbolic 
remission  in  baptism. 

That  the  views,  now  presented,  of  the  moral 
and  ceremonial  qualifications  for  church  mem- 
bership are  in  accordance  with  the  New  Testa- 
ment will  be  seen  by  referring  to  the  commis- 
sion of  Christ,  as  understood  and  executed  by 
the  apostles,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The 
commission  said,  "  Go,  teach  [make  disciples 
of]  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of 


14  CHURCH    MANUAL 

the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Spirit:  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things, 
whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you."  A  great 
awakening  took  place  under  Peter's  preaching, 
and  repenting  thousands  accepted  salvation 
through  Christ.  It  is  added,  "  Then  they  that 
gladly  received  his  word  were  baptized :  and  the 
same  day  there  were  added  unto  them  about 
three  thousand  souls."  Subsequently  it  is  said, 
"  The  Lord  added  to  the  church  daily  such  as 
should  be  saved."  The  converts  to  the  faith 
were  first  baptized  and  then  added  to  the 
church.  This  shows  baptism  to  be  prerequi- 
site to  church-membership.  It  was  so  re- 
garded at  Jerusalem  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
when  the  apostles  began  to  act  under  the  com- 
mission of  their  risen  Lord;  and  it  is  morally 
certain  it  was  so  regarded  wherever  they  es- 
tablished churches.  And  as  churches  in  all 
ages  must  be  formed  after  the  apostolic  model, 
it  follows  that  where  penitent,  regenerate,  bap- 
tized believers  in  Christ  are  found,  there  are 
scriptural  materials  for  a  church.  Such  per- 
sons having  first  given  themselves  to  the  Lord, 
and  then  to  one  another,  in  solemn  covenant, 
agreeing  to  make  the  will  of  Christ  as  ex- 
pressed in  his  word  their  rule  of  action,  are,  in 


CHURCH    MANUAL  I J 

the  New  Testament  sense  of  the  term,  a 
church.  Whether  they  are  many  or  few  in 
number,  they  are  a  church.  But  in  the  absence 
of  penitent,  regenerate,  baptized  believers  in 
Christ,  there  cannot  be  a  New  Testament 
church. 

CONSTITUTION    OF    CHURCHES 

When  the  interests  of  Christ's  kingdom  re- 
quire the  formation  of  a  new  church  the  cus- 
tomary mode  of  procedure  is  about  this  : 
Brethren  and  sisters  obtain  letters  of  dismis- 
sion from  the  church  or  churches  to  which 
they  belong,  for  the  purpose  of  entering  into 
the  new  organization.  It  is  well  for  this  pur- 
pose to  be  stated  in  the  letters.  When  they 
meet  together  at  the  appointed  time,  a  Moder- 
ator and  Clerk  pro  tern  are  appointed.  The 
meeting  is  opened  with  devotional  exercises. 
Sometimes  a  sermon  is  preached,  especially 
when  it  is  not  intended  to  have  recognition  ser- 
vices at  some  future  day.  Reading  the  Scrip- 
tures and  prayer  should  be  considered  indis- 
pensable. This  being  done,  the  letters  of  dis- 
mission are  read,  and  the  parties  concerned 
resolve  by  solemn  vote  to  consider  themselves 
an    independent    church.      What    is    called   a 


l6  CHURCH    MANUAL 

church  covenant  is  adopted,  as  also  Articles  of 
Faith.  These  Articles  of  Faith  are  not  in- 
tended as,  in  any  sense,  a  substitute  for  the 
word  of  God;  but  only  as  an  expression  of 
the  views  of  the  constituent  members  as  to  the 
prominent  teachings  of  the  Scriptures.  It  is 
very  important  to  the  peace,  efficiency,  and 
usefulness  of  a  church  that  there  be  among 
its  members  substantial  harmony  of  sentiment 
as  to  what  the  Bible  teaches.  Differences  of 
opinion  on  little  matters,  so  regarded,  have 
sometimes  illustrated  the  truth  of  the  inspired 
exclamation,  "  Behold,  how  great  a  matter  a 
little  fire  kindleth  !  "  It  would  have  saved  hun- 
dreds of  churches  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  if 
they  had  remembered,  at  the  right  time,  that 
neither  two  nor  any  other  number,  can  walk 
together,  except  they  be  agreed.  Ordinarily,  a 
church  at  the  time  of  its  constitution,  selects  a 
name  by  which  it  is  to  be  designated,  and 
appoints  its  officers.  This,  however,  is  not  in- 
dispensable. It  is  sometimes  best,  for  pruden- 
tial reasons,  to  defer  the  election  of  officers. 

RECOGNITION    OF    CHURCHES 

The  same  importance  is  not  to  be  attached 
to  the  recognition  as  to  the  constitution  of  a 


CHURCH    MANUAL  1J 

church.  It  is  not  necessary  to  the  validity  of 
church  organization  Still,  the  advantages  re- 
sulting from  a  suitable  recognition  should  not 
be  lightly  esteemed.  It  adds  much  to  the  in- 
fluence of  a  new  church  to  be  cordially  en- 
dorsed and  welcomed  into  the  sisterhood  of 
churches.  This  is  usually  done  by  a  council 
of  recognition,  composed  of  ministers  and 
others  from  churches  in  the  vicinity.  Some- 
times councils  examine  very  closely  the  facts 
connected  with  the  formation  of  new  churches, 
Articles  of  Faith,  etc. ;  but  generally  are  so 
well  satisfied  as  to  make  no  special  investiga- 
tion. Recognition  services  usually  embrace 
R£3/ling  the  Scriptures,  Prayer,  Sermon,  giv- 
ing the  Hand  of  Fellowship,  and  a  Charge  to 
the  Church. 

HOW    MEMBERS    ARE   RECEIVED 

There  are  two  ways  of  receiving  members 
into  a  church. 

I.  By  Experience  and  Baptism.  2.  By  Let- 
ters of  Dismission  from  sister  churches.  In 
accordance  with  the  first  way,  persons  wishing 
to  unite  with  a  church  give  an-  account  of  the 
dealings  of  God  with  their  souls,  and  state  the 
"  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them  " ;  where- 

B 


l8  CHURCH    MANUAL 

upon,  if,  in  the  judgment  of  the  church  they 
"  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,"  they  are 
by  vote  of  the  church  recognized  as  candidates 
for  baptism,  with  the  understanding  that  when 
baptized  they  will  be  entitled  to  all  the  rights 
and  privileges  of  membership.  Great  care 
should  be  exercised  in  receiving  members. 
Many  churches  err  at  this  point.  They  do 
not  observe  the  requisite  caution ;  for  they  re- 
ceive persons  who  give,  to  say  the  least,  very 
imperfect  evidence  of  piety.  There  is  much 
danger  of  this,  especially  in  times  of  religious 
excitement.  Pastors  should  positively  assure 
themselves  that  those  who  are  received  for  bap- 
tism have  felt  themselves  to  be  guilty,  ruined, 
helpless  sinners,  justly  condemned  by  God's 
holy  law ;  and  under  a  sense  of  their  lost  con- 
dition have  trusted  in  Christ  for  salvation. 
After  baptism — usually  at  the  first  celebration 
of  the  Lord's  Supper — it  is  the  general,  and 
should  be  the  universal  custom  for  the  pastor 
to  give  the  hand  of  fellowship  to  the  newly 
baptized,  in  token  of  their  having  been  re- 
ceived into  full  membership.  This  affords  the 
pastor  a  suitable  opportunity  of  saying  some- 
thing as  to  the  import  and  obligations  of  the 
Christian  profession. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  19 

The  other  way  of  becoming  members  of  a 
church  is  by  presenting  Letters  of  Dismission 
from  sister  churches.  These  letters  affording 
satisfactory  proof  of  their  Christian  character 
and  standing,  the  applicants  for  membership 
are  received  and  the  hand  of  fellowship  given, 
as  in  the  former  case.  It  is  proper  to  say  that 
by  sister  churches  are  meant  churches  of  simi- 
lar faith  and  order.  Hence  no  Baptist  church 
can  receive  and  recognize,  as  a  passport  to 
membership,  a  letter  from  any  Pedobaptist  or- 
ganization. There  is  such  a  lack  of  similar 
faith  and  order  as  to  render  this  utterly  inad- 
missible. It  sometimes  happens  that  persons 
who  have  been  baptized  where  there  is  no 
church,  and  persons  who,  owing  to  the  extinc- 
tion of  the  church  to  which  they  belonged,  or 
to  other  circumstances,  find  themselves  with- 
out regular  Letters  of  Dismission,  wish  to  en- 
joy the  privileges  of  membership.  In  such 
cases  it  is  only  necessary  for  the  church  ap- 
plied to  to  be  satisfied  of  the  worthiness  of 
the  applicants,  and  they  are  received. 

HOW    MEMBERSHIP    CEASES 

Membership  in  a  church  terminates  in  three 
ways. 


20  CHURCH    MANUAL 

1.  By  Death.  The  dead  can  have  no  place 
in  any  earthly  congregation  of  the  saints. 

2.  By  Exclusion.  A  church  has  the  right, 
according  to  the  Scriptures,  and  is  under  ob- 
ligation to  exclude  from  its  fellowship  any 
member  who  holds  heretical  doctrines,  or  lives 
inconsistently  with  the  Christian  profession. 
More  will  be  said  on  this  subject  in  the  Chap- 
ter on  Discipline. 

3.  By  Dismission.  Letters  of  Dismission 
are  granted  to  members  who  apply  for  them, 
provided  they  are  in  good  standing.  The  fact 
that  disciplinary  proceedings  have  not  been  in- 
stituted against  a  member  is  generally  to  be 
taken  as  an  evidence  of  good  standing;  and, 
therefore,  of  a  right  to  a  letter  of  dismission. 
There  are,  however,  some  exceptional  cases. 
A  member  who  asks  for  a  letter  of  dismission 
with  the  purpose  of  evading  church  discipline, 
because  he  has  reason  to  expect  it,  has  no  right 
to  a  letter.  Such  a  case  must  be  investigated. 
The  general  rule  would  be  to  grant  a  letter  to 
the  member  who  asks  for  it,  provided  he  would 
not  be  subject  to  discipline  if  he  did  not  ask 
for  it.  The  time  at  which  a  dismissed  member 
ceases  to  be  a  member  depends  on  the  church 
that  grants  the  letter.     Some  churches  con- 


CHURCH    MANUAL  21 

sider  the  connection  as  terminated  as  soon  as 
a  letter  is  granted.  The  great  majority  of 
churches,  however,  and  very  properly,  regard 
dismissed  members  as  under  their  jurisdiction 
until  they  are  received  into  other  churches. 
Some  churches  have  a  way  a  getting  clear  of 
members  by  a  process  which  is  called  "  drop- 
ping.'" This  is  considered  less  disgraceful 
than  exclusion,  and  is  resorted  to  chiefly  in  the 
case  of  members  who  for  a  long  time,  will- 
ingly, absent  themselves  from  the  meetings  of 
the  church,  or  have  gone,  the  church  knows 
not  where.  The  dropping  process  is  unneces- 
sary. It  differs  but  little  from  exclusion — not 
at  all  in  its  effects.  That  is  to  say,  the  dropped 
as  well  as  the  excluded  are  no  longer  church- 
members.  It  may  be  said  too,  that  members 
who  habitually  stay  away  from  the  house  of 
God  deserve  exclusion,  as  do  those  who,  not 
prizing  church  privileges  as  they  ought,  emi- 
grate to  other  places  without  asking  for  Let- 
ters of  Dismission. 


CHAPTER  II 

OFFICERS   OF   A   CHURCH 

IT  cannot  be  said  that  officers  are  essential 
to  the  existence  of  a  church;  for  a  church 
must  exist  before  it  can  appoint  its  of- 
ficers. After  this  appointment,  if,  in  the 
providence  of  God,  they  should  be  removed 
by  death,  it  might  affect  the  interests,  but  not 
the  being  of  the  church.  It  has  been  well 
said  by  an  able  writer,  that  "although  officers 
are  not  necessary  to  the  being  of  a  church, 
they  are  necessary  to  its  well-being!'  No 
church  can  reasonably  expect  to  prosper 
which  does  not  obey  the  law  of  its  Head 
in  regard  to  the  appointment  of  officers.  It 
is  obvious  too,  from  the  teachings  of  the  New 
Testament,  that  pastors  and  deacons  are  the* 
permanent  officers  of  Christian  churches. 
Paul,  referring  to  Christ's  ascension  gifts, 
says :  if  And  he  gave  some,  apostles ;  and  some, 
prophets ;  and  some,  evangelists ;  and  some, 
pastors  and  teachers ;  for  the  perfecting  of  the 
saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the 


CHURCH    MANUAL  23 

edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ"  (Eph.  4  : 
11,  12).  Apostles,  prophets,  and  evangelists 
filled  extraordinary  and  temporary  offices. 
There  are  no  such  offices  now.  Pastors  and 
teachers,  the  same  men,  are  the  ordinary  and 
permanent  spiritual  officers  of  the  churches, 
while  the  office  of  deacon  has  special  reference 
to  the  secular  interests  of  churches.  Of  these 
officers  in  order: 

I.  Pastor.  This  term  was  first  applied  to 
ministers  having  oversight  of  churches,  be- 
cause there  is  a  striking  analogy  between  such 
a  minister  and  a  literal  shepherd.  A  shepherd 
has  under  his  charge  a  flock,  for  which  he 
must  care,  and  for  whose  wants  he  must  pro- 
vide. The  sheep  and  the  lambs  must  be  looked 
after.  The  Lord  Jesus,  "  the  great  Shepherd 
of  the  sheep/'  the  chief  Shepherd,  virtually 
says  to  all  his  under-shepherds,  as  he  did  to 
Peter,  "  Feed  my  sheep,"  "  Feed  my  lambs." 
It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  this  language  was 
not  addressed  to  Peter  till  the  Saviour  obtained 
from  him  an  affirmative  answer  to  the  question 
three  times  propounded,  "  Lovest  thou  me  ?  " 
As  if  he  had  said,  "  I  love  my  spiritual  flock 
so  well,  I  cannot  entrust  the  sheep  and  lambs 


24  CHURCH    MANUAL 

composing  it  to  any  man  who  does  not  love 
me."  And  love  to  Christ  must  be  regarded  in 
all  ages  and  in  all  places  as  the  pastor's  su- 
preme qualification.  All  other  qualifications 
are  worthless  if  this  is  absent.  Talent  and 
learning  are  not  to  be  undervalued;  but  they 
must  be  kept  under  the  control  of  piety,  and 
receive  its  sanctifying  impress.  With  regard 
to  the  pastoral  office,  there  are  two  things 
worthy  of  special  consideration. 

i.  The  Work  of  Pastors.  Truly  theirs  is  a 
work.  Paul  says,  "  If  any  man  desire  the  of- 
fice of  a  bishop,  he  desireth  a  good  work/'  It 
is  indeed  a  good  work — the  best  work  on 
earth — but  a  work.  We  must  not  suffer  the 
term  bishop  to  suggest  any  such  idea  as  the 
word  in  its  modern  acceptation  implies.  In 
apostolic  times  there  were  no  bishops  having 
charge  of  the  churches  of  a  district  of  country, 
a  province,  or  a  kingdom.  A  bishop  was  a 
pastor  of  a  church,  and  the  New  Testament,  so 
far  from  encouraging  a  plurality  of  churches 
under  one  pastor,  refers,  in  two  instances  at 
least,  to  a  plurality  of  pastors  in  one  church. 
(See  Acts  20  :  28;  Phil.  1  :  1.)  In  the 
former  passage  the  elders  of  the  church  at 
Ephesus  are  called  overseers,  and  the  word 


CHURCH    MANUAL  Z$ 

thus  translated  is  the  same  rendered  bishop  in 
Philippians  I :  i ;  I  Timothy  3:2;  Titus  1:7; 
1  Peter  2  :  25.  Thus  does  it  appear  that  pas- 
tor, bishop,  and  elder  are  three  terms  desig- 
nating the  same  office.  This  view  is  further 
confirmed  by  a  reference  to  Peter  5  :  1,  2, 
where  elders  are  exhorted  to  feed  the  flock — 
that  is,  to  perform  the  office  of  pastor  or  shep- 
herd— taking  the  oversight  thereof,  etc. — that 
is,  acting  the  part  of  bishops  or  overseers. 
For  the  word  translated  taking  the  oversight 
belongs  to  the  same  family  of  words  as  the 
term  rendered  bishop  in  the  passages  cited. 
It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  a  pastor's  work 
is  the  spiritual  oversight  of  the  flock,  the 
church  he  serves.  Like  a  good  literal  shep- 
herd he  must  care  for  the  feeble  and  the  sick, 
as  well  as  for  the  healthy  and  the  vigorous. 
Some  he  can  feed  with  "  strong  food,"  while 
others  can  digest  nothing  stronger  than 
"  milk."  He  must  exercise  a  sanctified  dis- 
cretion, and  "  study  to  show  himself  approved 
to  God,  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be 
ashamed,  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth/'' 
Much  depends  on  dividing  the  word  of  truth 
rightly;  and  hence  the  necessity  of  study — 
prayerful    study,    imbued    with   the    spirit   of 


26  CHURCH    MANUAL 

the  Master.  The  administration  of  ordinances 
as  well  as  the  preaching  of  the  word  is  the 
proper  business  of  the  pastor.  It  does  not  ac- 
cord with  the  plan  of  this  volume  to  elaborate 
any  topic,  and  therefore  the  work  of  the  pastor 
cannot  be  enlarged  on,  nor  is  there  room  to 
present  the  many  motives  to  pastoral  fidelity. 
The  mention  of  two  must  suffice :  the  church, 
over  whose  interest  the  pastor  watches,  has 
been  "  bought  with  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ  " ;  and  the  faithful  pastor  will,  when 
"  the  chief  Shepherd "  comes,  "  receive  a 
crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away."  What 
motives  to  diligence  and  faithfulness  could 
possess  more  exhaustless  power ! 

2.  The  Authority  of  Pastors.  All  things 
earthly  are  liable  to  abuse,  and  that  feature  of 
congregational  church  government  which 
places  all  the  members  on  an  equality  in  the 
transaction  of  church  business,  has  been,  in 
some  instances  at  least,  suffered  to  interfere 
with  the  deference  due  to  pastors.  There  is  a 
class  of  Scriptures  whose  import  is  not  suf- 
ficiently considered — such  as  the  following: 
"  And  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  to  know  them 
which  labor  among  you,  and  are  over  you 
in  the  Lord,  and  admonish  you ;  and  to  esteem 


CHURCH    MANUAL  2J 

them  very  highly  in  love  for  their  work's 
sake/'  "  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be 
counted  worthy  of  double  honor,  especially 
they  who  labor  in  the  word  and  doctrine. " 
"  Remember  them  which  have  the  rule  over 
you,  who  have  spoken  to  you  the  word  of 
God."  "  Obey  them  that  have  the  rule  over 
you,  and  submit  yourselves :  for  they  watch 
for  your  souls,  as  they  that  must  give  ac- 
count." In  these  passages  pastors  are  re- 
ferred to,  and  there  is  claimed  for  them  an 
authority  not  belonging  to  other  church-mem- 
bers. They  are  to  be  esteemed  highly  for  their 
work's  sake.  Whatever  esteem  their  personal 
merits  may  excite,  they  are  to  be  chiefly 
esteemed  for  the  great  and  glorious  work  in 
which  they  are  enagaged.  On  account  of  this 
work  they  are  to  be  regarded  worthy  of 
"  double  honor,"  that  is,  special  honor.  This 
surely  is  reasonable,  for  pastors  are  chosen  by 
the  churches  over  which  they  preside.  The 
churches  act  voluntarily,  and  the  love  which 
prompts  the  choice  of  a  pastor  should  secure 
for  him  reverential  respect  in  the  performance 
of  his  duties.  The  words  rule,  obey,  and  sub- 
mit in  the  foregoing  quotations  mean  some- 
thing.    The  ruling  is  not  unrestricted,  neither 


28  CHURCH    MANUAL 

is  the  obedience  and  submission.  The  pastor 
is  to  rule  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  Christ. 
No  other  kind  of  rule  is  legitimate  or  obliga- 
tory ;  but  when  he  rules  in  accordance  with  the 
will  of  Christ,  obedience  and  submission  on 
the  part  of  the  members  of  the  church  are 
imperative  duties.  Andrew  Fuller  well  says, 
"  It  is  in  this  view,  as  teaching  divine  truth, 
and  enforcing  divine  commands,  that  the  ser- 
vants of  God,  in  all  ages,  have  been  invested 
with  divine  authority." 1  It  may  be  added 
that  this  is  the  only  sense  in  which  men  can 
be   invested  with   divine  authority. 

Distinguished  scholars  are  of  opinion  that 
the  two  passages  quoted,  which  refer  to  ruling, 
should  be  translated  thus :  "Remember  your 
leaders,"  etc.  "  Obey  your  leaders/'  etc.  Ad- 
mitting the  correctness  of  this  rendering— and 
it  cannot  be  denied — still  the  idea  would  not 
be  essentially  different.  Pastors  in  leading 
their  flocks  do,  in  one  sense,  rule  them ;  and  in 
the  only  sense  in  which  they  should  rule  them. 
While  the  proper  exercise  of  pastoral  author- 
ity is  essential  to  the  spiritual  welfare  of  a 
church,  pastors  must  beware  of  assuming  a 
power  which  does  not  belong  to  them.    They 

1  Complete  Works,  Vol.  I,  p.  197. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  29 

must  remember  the  words  of  Peter :  "  Neither 
as  being  lords  over  God's  heritage,  but  being 
examples  to  the  flock/'  There  must  be,  in  the 
exercise  of  pastoral  authority,  nothing  like 
priestly  lordship  or  clerical  despotism ;  but  the 
influence  of  pastors  must  grow  out  of  the 
fact  that  they  faithfully  obey  the  will  of  Christ, 
the  great  Shepherd,  and  thus  set  an  example 
worthy  of  imitation.  There  is  nothing  which 
gives  a  pastor  so  much  influence  as  unreserved 
consecration  to  the  work  of  the  Lord.  As  the 
influence  of  judicious  pastors  increases  the 
more  they  are  known,  the  pastoral  relation 
should  be  rendered  as  permanent  as  possible. 
It  should  not  be  dissolved  for  any  slight  cause. 
As  to  the  custom  of  some  churches  that  choose 
their  pastors  annually,  it  would  be  difficult  to 
say  too  much  in  condemnation  of  it.  It  is 
vastly  injurious  both  to  pastors  and  churches. 
Pastors  should  be  chosen  for  an  indefinite 
period.  If  the  work  of  the  Lord  prospers 
under  their  labors,  well;  if  they  find  after  a 
sufficient  trial,  that  they  are  not  accomplishing 
good,  let  them  resign. 

II.  Deacons.     The  office  of  deacon  origi- 
nated in  a  state  of  things  referred  to  in  the 


3<3  CHURCH    MANUAL 

sixth  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  It 
is  said  that  "  when  the  number  of  the  disciples 
was  multiplied,  there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the 
Grecians  against  the  Hebrews,  because  their 
widows  were  neglected  in  the  daily  ministra- 
tion. "  The  "  Grecians  "  were  Jews  as  well  as 
the  Hebrews,  but  they  spoke  the  Greek  lan- 
guage, and  were  probably  not  natives  of 
Palestine.  The  members  of  the  church  at 
Jerusalem  "  had  all  things  in  common/'  and  a 
distribution  was  made  out  of  the  common  stock 
"  as  every  man  had  need."  This  seems  to  have 
been  done  at  first  under  the  immediate  direc- 
tion of  the  apostles ;  and  the  intimation  is  that 
the  large  increase  of  the  church  interfered 
with  an  impartial  distribution  of  supplies. 
The  apostles  saw  that,  if  they  made  it  their 
personal  business  to  "  serve  tables,"  it  would 
greatly  hinder  their  work  in  its  spiritual  as- 
pects. They  said :  "  It  is  not  reason  that  we 
should  leave  the  word  of  God,  and  serve  tables  ; 
wherefore,  brethren,  look  ye  out  among  you 
seven  men  of  honest  report,  full  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  wisdom,  whom  we  may  appoint  over 
this  business.  But  we  will  give  ourselves  con- 
tinually to  prayer,  and  to  the  ministry  of  the 
word." 


CHURCH    MANUAL  3I 

Thus  the  creation  of  the  office  of  deacon  rec- 
ognizes the  fact  that  the  duties  of  pastors  are 
preeminently  spiritual ;  and  that  they  should 
not  be  burdened  with  the  secular  interests  of 
the  churches.  The  opinion  has  been  enter- 
tained by  some  that  the  deaconship  was  de- 
signed to  be  temporary.  The  argument  is 
that  the  office  was  created  because  the  prop- 
erty of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  had  been 
thrown  together  into  a  common  stock,  and  it 
was  requisite  to  have  officers  to  superintend 
and  distribute  it.  Then  the  inference  is  drawn, 
that  when  the  property  of  church-members 
was  no  longer  put  into  a  common  stock,  the 
office  of  deacon  was  virtually  abolished.  This 
reasoning  is  more  plausible  than  conclusive. 
In  proof  of  this  it  may  be  said,  that  the  mem- 
bers of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  were  not  re- 
quired to  put  their  property  into  a  common 
stock.  It  was  a  voluntary  matter.  Nor  is 
there  an  intimation  in  the  Xew  Testament  that 
any  church,  except  the  one  at  Jerusalem,  ever 
adopted  the  common-stock  regulation.  It  was, 
doubtless,  considered  by  that  church  a  pruden- 
tial arrangement,  which  involved  temporary 
expediency  rather  than  permanent  principle. 
That  the  church  at  Antioch  did  not  follow  the 


32  CHURCH    MANUAL 

example  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem,  in  rela- 
tion  to  this  matter,  is  evident  from  Acts  n  : 
29.     "  Then  the  disciples,  every  man  accord- 
ing  to  his  ability,  determined  to  send  relief  to  I 
the  brethren  who  dwelt  in  Judea."     This  in- 
dividual determination  shows  that  the  property  j 
of  the  church  was  not  in  "  common  stock." 
And  Paul's  direction  to  the  church  at  Corinth 
(1   Cor.  16  :  2)   indicates  that  the  Jerusalem  ( 
policy  had  not  been  adopted.    The  same  apos- 
tle too,  in  his  letter  to  the  Philippians,  and  to  jl 
Timothy,  refers  to  deacons.    There  was,  there-  j 
fore,  a   recognition  of  the  deaconship  when 
there  was,   so  far  as  we  know,  no  common 
property  regulation.    And  more  than  this,  the 
irresistible  inference  from  Paul's  first  Epistle 
to  Timothy,  is  that  the  office  of  deacon  is  as 
permanent  as  that  of  pastor.    No  one  doubts 
that  the  office  of  pastor  is  to  be  perpetuated 
to  the  end  of  time.     The  conclusion  is  that 
the  deaconship  is  permanent  in  the  churches  of 
Christ,  and  that  pastors  and  deacons  are  the  i 
only  permanent  Scriptural  church  officers. 

The  words — "  men  of  honest  report,  full  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  wisdom  " — applied  to  the 
first  deacons,  indicates  that  they  were  men  of 
unblemished  reputation,  ardent  piety,  and  good 


CHURCH    MANUAL  33 

common  sense.  These  qualifications  should  be 
sought  in  all  who  are  appointed  to  the  office  of 
deacon.  The  phrase,  "  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit," 
is  an  admirable  description  of  fervent,  ele- 
vated piety;  and  in  the  selection  of  deacons 
their  spirituality  must  be  regarded,  for  their 
duties  are  not  exclusively  secular.  Their  secu- 
lar duties,  however,  should  be  performed  in  a 
spiritual  frame  of  mind ;  and  in  this  way  "  they 
purchase  to  themselves  a  good  degree,  and  ob- 
tain great  boldness  in  the  faith."  In  visiting 
the  pious  poor,  to  distribute  the  charities  of 
the  church,  deacons  must  not  perform  the  duty 
in  a  formal  manner,  but  must  inquire  into  the 
spiritual  as  well  as  the  worldly  circumstances 
of  the  recipients  of  the  church's  bounty.  They 
will  often  witness  such  an  exhibition  of  faith, 
patience,  gratitude,  and  resignation  as  will 
richly  repay  them  for  their  labor  of  love.  As 
occasion  may  require,  they  should  report  to 
the  pastor  such  cases  as  need  his  special  atten- 
tion, and  thus  they  will  become  a  connecting 
link  between  the  pastor  and  the  needy  ones  of 
the  church. 

As  deacons  were  appointed  at  first  "  to  serve 
tables/'  it  may  be  well  to  say,  there  are  three 
tables  for  them  to  serve:  i.  The  table  of  the 
c 


34  CHURCH    MANUAL 

poor.  2.  The  table  of  the  Lord.  3.  The  table 
of  the  pastor.  The  pecuniary  supplies  to 
enable  them  to  serve  these  tables  must  be 
furnished  by  the  church.  The  custom  of  tak- 
ing a  collection  for  the  poor  when  the  Lord's 
Supper  is  administered  is  a  good  one,  and 
worthy  of  universal  adoption.  It  is  suitable  at 
the  close  of  the  solemn  service  to  think  of  the 
pious  poor,  whom  sickness  or  some  other  mis- 
fortune may  have  kept  from  the  sacred  feast. 

As  some  pecuniary  expenditure  is  necessary 
in  furnishing  the  table  of  the  Lord,  this  should 
be  made  through  the  deacons;  and  it  is  emi- 
nently proper,  though  not  indispensable,  for 
them  to  wait  on  the  communicants  in  the  dis- 
tribution of  the  elements. 

Deacons  must  serve  the  pastor's  table.  It  is 
not  for  them  to  decide  how  liberally  or  scant- 
ily it  shall  be  supplied.  The  church  must 
make  the  decision,  and  enlarged  views  should 
be  taken  when  it  is  made;  for  the  energies 
of  hundreds  of  pastors  are  greatly  impaired 
by  an  incompetent  support.  The  pastor's  com- 
pensation having  been  agreed  on  by  the  church, 
the  deacons  must  see  that  it  is  raised  and  paid 
over.  They  may  appoint  one  of  their  number 
acting  treasurer,  who  shall   receive  and  pay 


CHURCH    MANUAL  35 

out  funds ;  but  it  should  never  be  forgotten 
that  deacons  are  by  virtue  of  their  office  the 
treasurers  of  the  church.  To  appoint  any 
other  member  to  act  as  treasurer  is  not  war- 
ranted by  Scripture. 

As  all  pecuniary  expenditures  are  to  be 
made  through  deacons,  they  should  at  the  end 
of  every  year  make  a  report  to  the  church 
what  moneys  they  have  received  during  the 
year,  how  they  have  been  expended,  etc.  This 
will  keep  everything  straight  and  plain,  while 
it  will  have  no  little  to  do  with  a  church's 
influence  and  efficiency. 

Deacons  should  be  appointed  for  an  indefi- 
nite period,  and  set  apart  to  their  office  by 
prayer  and  the  laying  on  of  hands.  It  is  much 
to  be  regretted  that  many  churches  hold  very 
loose  views  on  these  points.  They  attach  very 
little  importance  to  the  deaconship,  and  seem 
to  regard  it  very  much  as  a  clerkship  or  a 
trusteeship.  Indeed  a  few  churches,  to  their 
shame  be  it  said,  elect  their  deacons  annually ; 
and  of  one  of  them  it  was  once  said :  "  Nearly 
every  male  member  in  it  has  at  some  time 
acted  as  deacon.''  This  amounts  almost  to  a 
degradation  of  the  deaconship.  And  those 
holding  these  views  and  indorsing  this  prac- 


36  CHURCH    MANUAL 

tice  consistently  oppose  the  ordination  of 
deacons.  They  see  not  the  propriety  of  or- 
daining men  to  an  office  to  which  they  attach 
so  little  importance.  Let  deacons  be  chosen 
for  an  indefinite  period  and  then  let  them  be 
solemnly  ordained  according  to  the  example 
given  in  Acts  6  :  6.  "  When  they  had  prayed, 
they  laid  their  hands  on  them!'  Prayer  is  ap- 
propriate on  all  occasions,  and  laying  on  of 
hands  is  a  token  of  designation  to  office.  Some 
object  to  laying  on  of  hands,  supposing  the 
design  of  this  ceremony  in  apostolic  times  was 
the  communication  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  That 
the  Spirit  was  sometimes  given  in  connection 
with  the  imposition  of  hands  is  evident  from 
Acts  8  :  17;  but  the  first  deacons  were  chosen 
because  they  were  already  "  full  of  the  Holy 
Spirit."  Therefore  the  laying  on  of  hands 
was  not  for  the  purpose  of  conferring  the  Holy 
Spirit,  but  of  designating  to  office.  This  is 
the  object  of  the  ceremony  now,  and  no  one 
who  has  scriptural  views  supposes  there  is  a 
bestowal  of  extraordinary  gifts.  It  is  the 
custom  in  some  places  to  lay  on  hands  in  or- 
dination during  prayer.  This  is  not  accord- 
ing to  scriptural  example.  Whenever  prayer 
and  laying  on  of  hands  are  referred  to  in  con- 


CHURCH    MANUAL  37 

nection  with  each  other,  as  in  Acts  6:6; 
13  :  3,  it  is  evident  that  prayer  was  first  of- 
fered— then  followed  imposition  of  hands — 
to  be  seen  and  known  as  a  designation  to  of- 
fice, but  which  could  not  without  a  violation 
of  propriety  be  seen  during  prayer.  It  is  very 
desirable  that  all  the  churches  adopt  the  prac- 
tice of  ordaining  deacons  by  prayer  and  the 
laying  on  of  hands.  It  adds  to  the  influence 
of  the  deaconship  when  induction  into  it  is 
accompanied  by  appropriate  services. 

While  pastors  and  deacons  are  the  only 
permanent  scriptural  church  officers,  it  is  a 
prudential  arrangement  in  all  churches  to 
have  a  clerk ;  and  owing  to  the  requirements  of 
the  civil  law  in  some  places,  it  is  necessary  to 
have  trustees.  The  business  of  the  clerk  of  a 
church  is,  of  course,  to  keep  a  record  of  the 
proceedings  of  the  body.  To  secure  accuracy  ■ 
in  the  record,  at  every  business  meeting  the 
proceedings  of  the  previous  meeting  should  be 
read,  corrected  (if  correction  is  necessary),  and 
approved  by  the  church.  Trustees  are  gener- 
ally the  legal  custodians  of  the  church  prop- 
erty, and  are  chosen  by  the  church.  They  have 
an  official  existence,  because  by  civil  statute  it 
is  required  that  the  legal  right  to  property  be 


o 


8  CHURCH    MANUAL 


vested  in  individuals.  It  follows,  therefore, 
that  the  manner  of  appointing  trustees  depends 
on  the  nature  of  the  civil  statute  regulating 
the  matter,  and  may  be  different  in  different 
States.  If  the  statute  permits  the  church  to 
choose  all  the  trustees,  it  is  so  done.  If  the 
congregation  is  permitted  to  have  an  agency  in 
the  election,  then  most  probably  the  church 
will  select  so  many  and  the  congregation  so 
many.  This  will  depend,  as  has  been  said,  on 
the  civil  statute.  Most  usually  the  church  se- 
lects the  whole  number,  and  chooses  from  its 
own  membership,  which  is  the  better  plan. 

The  province  of  trustees  is  quite  restricted. 
They  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  spiritual  af- 
fairs of  the  church.  They  cannot  control  the 
house  of  worship,  saying  how  it  shall  be  used, 
or  who  shall  preach  in  it,  and  who  shall  not. 
The  church  must  do  all  this.  As  church-mem- 
bers the  trustees  may  with  other  members  de- 
cide what  shall  be  done  with  church  property, 
whether  the  house  of  worship  shall  be  sold  and 
another  built,  etc.,  etc. ;  but  as  trustees  they 
can  do  nothing  in  these  matters.  When  the 
church  so  orders,  they  may  convey  or  re- 
ceive title  to  property,  sue  in  the  courts,  etc., 
but  their  business  as  trustees   is   exclusively 


CHURCH    MAN4JAL  39 

secular.  They  cannot  in  the  capacity  of 
trustees  perform  any  spiritual  function.  A 
practical  remembrance  of  this  fact  would  have 
saved  not  a  few  churches  from  trouble. 

It  is  said  that  in  some  churches  the  trustees 
fix  the  salaries  of  pastors ;  and  from  time  to 
time  increase  or  diminish  them  according  to 
their  pleasure — that  they  employ  choirs,  buy 
organs,  engage  sextons,  etc.,  etc.  All  this  is 
utterly  indefensible.  Trustees  have  not  a  par- 
ticle of  right  to  do  these  things.  The  govern- 
ment of  a  church  is  with  its  members.  The 
churches  must  say  what  pastors'  salaries  shall 
be,  whether  music  shall  be  led  by  choirs,,  with 
the  aid  of  instruments  or  not,  etc.,  etc.  Noth- 
ing must  be  done  which  infringes  the  funda- 
mental doctrine  of  church  independence.  It  is 
well  worthy  of  the  consideration  of  the 
churches  whether  they  should  have  trustees 
distinct  from  deacons.  Would  it  not  be  better 
for  every  church  to  merge  its  trusteeship  into 
its  deaconship?  YVe  do  not  hesitate  to  answer 
this  question  in  the  affirmative.  Trustees  at- 
tend to  some  of  the  secular  interests  of  the 
churches,  and  all  these  interests  should  be 
under  the  management  of  the  deacons.  They 
were  appointed  originally  for  this  very  pur- 


40  CH4JRCH    MANUAL 

pose,  and  a  full  discharge  of  the  duties  of 
their  office  would  supersede  the  necessity  of 
trustees.  Should  the  churches  practically 
adopt  this  view,  it  might  be  necessary,  in  some 
cases,  to  increase  the  number  of  deacons.  This 
could  be  done.  The  probability  too  is  that  the 
plan  here  recommended  would  secure  a  better 
deaconship  in  many  churches;  for  they  make 
it  a  point  to  select  their  best  business  men  for 
trustees.  These  are  the  very  men  for  deacons. 
But  the  supreme  argument  in  favor  of  this  ar- 
rangement is,  that  it  is  scriptural,  while  there 
is  no  scriptural  authority  for  trustees  as  dis- 
tinct officers. 


CHAPTER  III 

DOCTRINES   OF   A    CHURCH 

*T"^HE  phrase,  doctrines  of  a  church,  is 
somewhat  equivocal  in  its  import.  It- 
may  mean  what  a  church  teaches,  or 
what  a  church  believes  the  Bible  to  teach.  It 
is  here  used  in  the  latter  sense.  All  who  be- 
lieve the  Scriptures  to  be  divinely  inspired 
consider  them  the  fountain  of  religious  truth. 
The  Bible  contains  the  revelation  of  God  to 
man.  It  is  the  supreme  standard  of  faith 
and  practice.  Whatever  conforms  to  this 
standard  is  right — whatever  deviates  from  it 
is  wrong.  It  is  a  duty  incumbent  upon  all  to 
"  search  the  Scriptures  "  and  learn  what  they 
teach.  This  duty  cannot  be  faithfully  per- 
formed unless  prejudices  and  preconceived 
opinions  are  laid  aside.  Alas,  how  few  study 
the  Bible  in  this  way.  But  for  human  imper- 
fection there  would  doubtless  be  uniformity 
of  belief  as  to  what  the  Scriptures  teach. 
There  is  not  uniformity,  but  a  deplorable 
variety  of  religious  opinion  throughout  Chris- 

4* 


42  CHURCH    MANUAL 

tendoni.  Different  sects,  professing  to  take 
the  word  of  God  as  their  guide,  contend  as 
earnestly  for  their  distinctive  views  as  if  they 
had  different  Bibles.  Various  constructions 
are  placed  on  the  teachings  of  the  sacred  vol- 
ume, and  multitudes  of  passages  are  diversely 
interpreted.  Owing  to  this  unfortunate  fact, 
though  belief  of  the  Bible  is  significant  as  be- 
tween the  religionist  and  the  infidel,  it  signifies 
nothing  as  between  those  who  receive  the 
Scriptures  as  the  word  of  God.  For  they 
differ  as  to  the  import  of  the  inspired  Oracles ; 
and  the  meaning  of  the  Bible  is  the  Bible.  As 
there  is  such  a  diversity  of  opinion  in  the  re- 
ligious world,  it  is  eminently  proper  for  those 
who  appeal  to  the  Scriptures  as  the  fountain 
of  truth  to  declare  what  they  believe  the  Scrip- 
tures to  teach.  To  say  that  they  believe  the 
Scriptures  is  to  say  nothing  to  the  purpose. 
All  will  say  this,  and  yet  all  differ  as  to  the 
teachings  of  the  Bible.  There  must  be  some 
distinctive  declaration.  What  a  man  believes 
the  Bible  to  teach  is  his  Creed,  either  written 
or  unwritten.  And  though  it  has  sometimes 
been  said  that  creeds  have  produced  differences 
of  religious  opinion,  it  would  be  nearer  to  the 
truth,   logically   and   historically,  to   say  that 


CHURCH    MANUAL  43 

differences  of  religious  opinion  have  produced 
creeds. 

As  to  declarations  of  faith,  it  must  ever  be 
understood  that  they  are  not  substitutes  for 
the  Scriptures.  They  are  only  exponents  of 
what  are  conceived  to  be  the  fundamental  doc- 
trines of  the  word  of  God.  Among  Baptists, 
as  their  churches  are  independent,  it  is  optional 
with  each  church  to  have  a  declaration  or  not, 
as  it  may  think  best.  Each  church  too  may 
adopt  a  declaration  of  its  own.  Its  independ- 
ence gives  it  this  right,  nor  can  it  be  alienated. 
While  Baptists  glory  in  their  form  of  church 
government — which  recognizes  every  church 
as  a  little  republic  in  itself — they  are  perhaps 
as  nearly  united  in  their  views  of  the  truths  of 
the  Bible  as  most  other  denominations.  The 
following  Declaration  of  Faith  expresses,  sub- 
stantially, what  Baptists  believe  concerning  the 
topics  mentioned.1 

DECLARATION  OF  FAITH 

I.   OF  THE   SCRIPTURES 

We  believe  that  the  Holy  Bible  was  written  by 
men  divinely  inspired,  and  is  a  perfect  treasure  of 

1  This  Declaration  of  Faith  was  framed  many  years  ago  by 
J.  Xewton  Brown,  D.  D. 


44  CHURCH    MANUAL 

heavenly  instruction ;  a  that  it  has  God  for  its  author, 
salvation  for  its  end,2  and  truth  without  any  mix- 
ture of  error  for  its  matter ; 3  that  it  reveals  the 
principles  by  which  God  will  judge  us;4  and  there- 
fore is,  and,  shall  remain  to  the  end  of  the  world,  the 
true  center  of  Christian  union,5  and  the  supreme 
standard  by  which  all  human  conduct,  creeds,  and 
opinions  should  be  tried.6 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

12  Tim.  3  :  16,  17.  All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration 
of  God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correc- 
tion, for  instruction  in  righteousness;  that  the  man  of  God 
may  be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works. 
Also  2  Peter  1  :  21;  2  Sam.  23  :  2;  Acts  1  :  16;  3  :  21;  John 
10  :  35;  Luke  16  :  29-31;  Ps.  119  :   11 1;  Rom.  3  :   1,  2. 

2  2  Tim.  3  :  15, — able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation. 
Also  1  Peter  1  :  10-12;  Acts  11  :  14;  Rom.  1  :  16;  Mark 
16  :   16;  John  5  :   38,  39. 

8Prov.  30  :  5,  6.  Every  word  of  God  is  pure,— Add  thou 
not  unto  hi9  words,  lest  he  reprove  thee,  and  thou  be  found 
a  liar.     Also  John  17  :   17;  Rev.  22  :   18,  19;  Ram.  3  :  4. 

4  Rom.  2:12.  As  many  as  have  sinned  in  the  law,  shall  be 
judged  by  the  law.  John  12  :  47,  48.  If  any  man  hear  my 
words— the  word  that  I  have  spoken — the  same  shall  judge 
him  in  the  last  day.  Also  1  Cor.  4  :  3,  4.  Luke  10  :  10-16; 
12  :  47>  48. 

5  Phil.  3  :  16.  Let  us  walk  in  the  same  rule;  let  us  mind 
the  same  thing.  Also  Eph.  4  :  3-6;  Phil.  2  ;  1,  2;  1  Cor. 
1  :   10;  1  Peter  4  :   11. 

6  1  John  4:1.  Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the 
spirits  whether  they  are  of  God.  Isa.  8  :  20.  To  the  law 
and  to  the  testimony;  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word, 
it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them.  1  Thess.  5  :  21. 
Prove  all  things.  2  Cor.  13  :  5.  Prove  your  own  selves. 
Also  Acts  17  :  n";  1  J°hn  4:6;  Jude  3^55  Epk-  6  :  17; 
Ps.  119  :  59,  60;  Phil.  1  :  9-11. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  45 

II.   OF  THE  TRUE  GOD 

We  believe  that  there  is  one,  and  only  one  liv- 
ing and  true  God,  an  infinite,  intelligent  Spirit, 
whose  name  is  Jehovah,  the  Maker  and  Supreme 
Ruler  of  heaven  and  earth;1  inexpressibly  glori- 
ous in  holiness,2  and  worthy  of  all  possible  honor, 
confidence,  and  love ; 3  that  in  the  unity  of  the  God- 
head there  are  three  persons,  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost ; 4  equal  in  every  divine  per- 
fection,5 and  executing  distinct  but  harmonious  of- 
fices in  the  great  work  of  redemption.6 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1John  4  :  24.  God  is  a  Spirit.  Ps.  147  :  5.  His  under- 
standing is  infinite.  Ps.  83  :  18.  Thou  whose  name  alone 
is  JEHOVAH,  art  the  Most  High  over  all  the  earth.  Heb. 
3  :  4;  Rom.  1  :  20;  Jer.  10  :    10. 

2  Exod.  15  :  11.  Who  is  like  unto  Thee — glorious  in  holi- 
ness?    Isa.  6  :   3;   1   Peter  1  :    15,   16;  Rev.  4  :  6-8. 

3  Mark  12  :  30.  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and 
with  all  thy  strength.  Rev.  4  :  11.  Thou  art  worthy,  O  Lord, 
to  receive  glory,  and  honor,  and  power:  for  thou  hast  created 
all  things,  and  for  thy  pleasure  they  are  and  were  created. 
Matt.  10  :   37;  Jer.  2  :   12,  13. 

4  Matt.  28  :  19.  Go  ye  therefore  and  teach  all  nations, 
baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  John  15  :  26.  When  the  Comforter  is 
come,  whom  I  will  send  you  from  the  Father,  even  the  Spirit 
of  Truth,  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  he  shall  testify 
of  me.     1  Cor.  12  :  4-6.      1  John  5  :   7. 

5  John  10  :  30.  I  and  my  Father  are  one.  John  5  :  17; 
14  :  23;  17  :  5,  10;  Acts  5  :  3,  4;  1  Cor.  2  :  10,  11;  Phil. 
2  :  5,  6. 

6  Eph.  2  :  18.  For  through  Him  [the  Son]  we  both  have 
an  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father.  2  Cor.  13  :  14.  The 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the 
communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all.  Rev.  1  :  4,  5. 
Comp.  2  :   7. 


46 


CHURCH    MANUAL 


III.   OF   THE  FALL  OF   MAN 


We  believe  that  man  was  created  in  holiness, 
under  the  law  of  his  Maker ; x  but  by  voluntary 
transgression  fell  from  that  holy  and  happy  state ; 2 
in  consequence  of  which  all  mankind  are  now 
sinners,3  not  by  constraint  but  choice ;  *  being  by 
nature  utterly  void  of  that  holiness  required  by  the 
law  of  God,  positively  inclined  to  evil;  and  there- 
fore under  just  condemnation  to  eternal  ruin,5  with- 
out defence  or  excuse.6 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  Gen.    i  :   27.      God   created  man   in   his   own   image.     Gen. 

1  :   31.     And  God  saw  every  thing  that  he  had  made,  and  be- 
hold,   it    was    very    good.      Eccl.    7  :  29;    Acts    15  :  26;    Gen. 

2  :    16. 

2  Gen.  3  :  6-24.  And  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree 
was  good  for  food,  and  that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  a 
tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise;  she  took  of  the  fruit 
thereof,  and  did  eat;  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband  with 
her,  and  he  did  eat.  Therefore  the  Lord  God  drove  out  the 
man;  and  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  Cheru- 
bim, and  a  flaming  sword  which  turned  every  way  to  keep 
the  way  of  the  tree  of  life.     Rom.  5  :    12. 

3  Rom.  5:19.  By  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made 
sinners.     John  3  :   6;  Ps.  51  :   5;  Rom.  5  :   15-19;  8  :   7. 

4  Isa.  53  :  6.  We  have  turned,  every  one  to  his  own  way. 
Gen.  6  :    12;  Rom.  3  :   9-18. 

5  Eph.  2  :  1-3.  Among  whom  also  we  all  had  our  conver- 
sation in  times  past  in  the  lusts  of  our  flesh,  fulfilling  the  de- 
sires of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind;  and  were  by  nature  the 
children  of  wrath  even  as  others.  Rom.  1  :  18.  For  the 
wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness 
and  unrighteousness  of  men,  who  hold  the  truth  in  unright- 
eousness.    Rom.    1  :   32;   2  :    1-16;   Gal.   3  :    10;   Matt.   20  :    15. 

6  Ezek.  18  :  19,  20.  Yet  say  ye,  Why?  doth  not  the  son  bear 
the  iniquity  of  the  father? — the  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die. 
The  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  neither  shall 
the  father  bear  the  iniquity   of  the  son;   the  righteousness  of 


CHURCH    MANUAL  47 

the  righteous  shall  be  upon  him,  and  the  wickedness  of 
the  wicked  shall  be  upon  him.  Rom.  i  :  20.  So  that  they  are 
without  excuse.  Rom.  3  :  19.  That  every  mouth  may  be 
stopped  and  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God. 
Gal.  3  :  22, 

IV.    OF   THE   WAY   OF    SALVATION 

We  believe  that  the  salvation  of  sinners  is  wholly 
of  grace ;  *  through  the  Mediatorial  offices  of  the 
Son  of  God ; 2  who  by  the  appointment  of  the 
Father,  freely  took  upon  him  our  nature,  yet  with- 
out sin ; 3  honored  the  divine  law  by  his  personal 
obedience,4  and  by  his  death  made  a  full  atonement 
for  our  sins ; 5  that  having  risen  from  the  dead,  he 
is  now  enthroned  in  heaven ; 6  and  uniting  in  his 
wonderful  person  the  tenderest  sympathies  with 
divine  perfections,  he  is  every  way  qualified  to  be 
a  suitable,  a  compassionate,  and  an  all-sufficient 
Saviour.7 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  Eph.  2  :   5.     By  grace  ye  are  saved.     Matt.  18  :    11;  1  John 

4  :    10;    1    Cor.   3  :   5-7;   Acts   15  :    11. 

2  John  3  :  16.  For  God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  hi? 
only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  nor 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.  T**hn  1  :  1-14;  Heb.  4  :  14; 
12  :  24. 

3  Phil.  2  :  6,  7.  Who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  ir 
not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God;  but  made  himself  of  no 
reputation,  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and 
was   made    in   the   likeness    of   men.     Heb.    2:9,    14;    2    Cor. 

5  :  21. 

4  Isa.  42  :  21.  The  Lord  is  well  pleased  for  his  righteous- 
ness' sake;  he  will  magnify  the  law  and  make  it  honorable. 
Phil.  2  :  8;  Gal.  4  :  4,  5;  Rom.  3  :  21. 

5  Isa-  S3  :  4,  5-  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he 
was  bruised  for  our  iniquities;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace 
was  upon  him;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.  Matt. 
20  :  28;  Rom.  4  :  25;  3  :  21-26;  1  John  4  :  10;  2:511  Cor. 
15  :   1-3;  Heb.  9  :   13-15. 


48  CHURCH    MANUAL 

6  Heb.  1  :  8.  Unto  the  Son  he  saith,  thy  throne,  O  God,  is 
for  ever  and  ever.  ,  Heb.  1:3:8:1;  Col.  3  :   1-4. 

7  Heb.  7  :  25.  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them.  Col.  2  :  9.  For  in  him  dwelleth 
all  the  fullness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  Heb.  2  :  18.  In  that 
he  himself  hath  suffered,  being  tempted,  he  is  able  to  succor 
them  that  are  tempted.     Heb.  7  :  26;  Ps.  89  :   19;  Ps.  45. 

V.   OF   JUSTIFICATION 

We  believe  that  the  great  gospel  blessing  which 
Christ1  secures  to  such  as  believe  in  him  is  justi- 
fication;2 that  justification  includes  the  pardon  of 
sin,3  and  the  promise  of  eternal  life  on  principles 
of  righteousness  f  that  it  is  bestowed,  not  in  con- 
sideration of  any  works  of  righteousness  which  we 
have  done,  but  solely  through  faith  in  the  Re- 
deemer's blood ; 5  by  virtue  of  which  faith  his  per- 
fect righteousness  is  freely  imputed  to  us  of  God ; 6 
that  it  brings  us  into  a  state  of  most  blessed  peace 
and  favor  with  God,  and  secures  every  other  bless- 
ing needful  for  time  and  eternity.7 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 
1John   1  :   16.     Of  his  fullness  have  all  we  received.     Eph. 
3  :   8. 

2  Acts  13  :  39.  By  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from 
all  things.     Isa.  3  :    11,  12;  Rom.  8  :   1. 

3  Rom.  5  :  9.  Being  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall  be 
saved  from  wrath  through  him.  Zech.  13  :  1;  Matt.  9:6; 
Acts  10  :  43. 

4  Rom.  5  :  17.  They  which  receive  the  abundance  of  grace 
and  of  the  gift  of  righteousness  shall  reign  in  life  by  one, 
Jesus  Christ.  Titus  3  :  5,  6;  1  Peter  3  :  7;  1  John  2  :  25; 
Rom.  5  :  21. 

5  Rom.  4  :  4,  5.  Now  to  him  that  worketh  is  the  reward  not 
reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt.  But  to  him  that  worketh  not, 
but  believeth  on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is 
counted  for  righteousness.     Rom.  5  :   21;  6  :   23;  Phil.  3  :   7-9. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  49 

6  Rom.  5:19.  By  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made 
righteous.     Rom.   3  :   24-28;    4  :   23-25;    1    John  2  :   12. 

7  Rom.  5  :  1,  2.  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace 
with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  by  whom  also  we 
have  access  by  faith  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand  and  re- 
joice in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  Rom.  5  :  3.  We  glory  in 
tribulations  also.  Rom.  5  :  11.  We  also  joy  in  God.  1  Cor. 
1  :  30,  3i;  Matt.  6  :  33;   1  Tim.  4  :  8. 


VI.   OF   THE   FREENESS   OF    SALVATION 

We  believe  that  the  blessings  of  salvation  are 
made  free  to  all  by  the  gospel ; 1  that  it  is  the  im- 
mediate duty  of  all  to  accept  them  by  a  cordial 
penitent  and  obedient  faith ; 2  and  that  nothing 
prevents  the  salvation  of  the  greatest  sinner  on 
earth,,  but  his  own  inherent  depravity-  and  voluntary 
rejection  of  the  gospel;3  which  rejection  involves 
him  in  an  aggravated  condemnation.4 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  Isa.  55  :   1.     Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the 
waters.      Rev.    22  :   17.      Whosoever    will,    let    him    take    the 
water  of  life  freely.     Luke  14  :    17. 
-  Rom.    16  :  26.      The    gospel — according    to    the    command* 
of  the  everlasting  God.   made  known  to  all  nations  for 
:edience  of  faith.     Mark   1  :    15.     Rom.   1  :   15-17. 
8  John  5  :  40.     Ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  might  have 
life.     Matt.  23  :  37;  Rom.  9  :  32;  Prov.  1  :  24;  Acts  13  :  46. 
4  John  3  :   19.     And  this  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is 
into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light 
-  ?e  their  deeds  were  evil.     Matt.   11  :  20;  Luke  19  :  27; 
2  ihess.  1  :  8. 

VTI.    OF  GRACE  IN  REGENERATION 

We  believe  that  in  order  to  be  saved,  sinners  must 

be   regenerated,   or   born   again ; 1   that   regeneration 
consists  in  giving  a  holy  disposition  to  the  mind : 3 
D 


^O  CHURCH    MANUAL 


that  it  is  effected  in  a  manner  above  our  com- 
prehension by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  con- 
nection with  divine  truth,3  so  as  to  secure  our 
voluntary  obedience  to  the  gospel ; 4  and  that  its 
proper  evidence  appears  in  the  holy  fruits  of  re- 
pentance, and  faith,  and  newness  of  life.5 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  John  3  :  3.  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  except  a  man 
be    bom    again,    he    cannot    see    the    kingdom    of    God.      John 

3  :  6,  7;  1   Cor.  1  :   14;  Rev.  8  :   7-9;  21  :  27. 

2  2  Cor.  5  :  17.  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new 
creature.  Ezek.  36  :  26;  Deut.  30  :  6:  Rom.  2  :  28,  29;  5:5; 
1  John  4  :   7. 

3  John  3  .  8.  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou 
hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh 
and  whither  it  goeth;  so  is  ever}-  one  that  is  born  of  the 
Spirit.  John  1  :  13.  Which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God. 
James  1  :  16-18.  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  with  the  word 
of  truth.     1   Cor.   1  :   30;  Phil.  2  :   13. 

4  1  Peter  1  :  22-25.  Ye  have  purified  your  souls  D37  obeying 
the  truth  through  the  Spirit.  1  John  5:1-  Whosoever  be- 
lieveth    that    Jesus     is    the     Christ    is    born     of     God.     Eph. 

4  :  20-24;  Col.  3  :   9-1 1. 

5  Eph.  5  :  9.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodness,  and 
righteousness  and  truth.  Rom.  8:9;  Gal.  5  :  16-23;  Eph. 
3  :  14-21;  Matt.  3  :  8-10;  7  :  20;  1  John  5  :  4,  18. 

VIII.   OF  REPENTANCE  AND  FAITH 

We  believe  that  repentance  and  faith  are  sacred 
duties,  and  also  inseparable  graces,  wrought  in  our 
souls  by  the  regenerating  Spirit  of  God;1  whereby 
being  deeply  convinced  of  our  guilt,  danger,  and 
helplessness,  and  of  the  way  of  salvation  by  Christ,2 
we  turn  to  God  with  unfeigned  contrition,  confes- 
sion, and  supplication  for  mercy;3  at  the  same  time 


CHURCH    MANUAL  5 1 

heartily  receiving  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our 
Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  and  relying  on  him  alone 
as  the  only  and  all-sufficient  Saviour.* 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  Mark  i  :  15.  Repent  ye,  and  believe  the  gospel.  Acts 
11  :  18.  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  repent- 
ance unto  life.  Eph.  2:8.  By  grace  ye  are  saved,  through 
faith;  and  that  not  of  yourselves;  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  1  John 
5:1.  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born 
of  God. 

2  John  16  :  8.  He  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment.  Acts  2  :  37,  38.  They  were 
pricked  in  their  heart,  and  said — Men  and  brethren,  what  shall 
we  do?  Then  Peter  said  unto  them,  Repent,  and  be  baptized 
every  one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remis- 
sion of  your  sins.     Acts  16  :   30,  31. 

3  Luke  18  :  13.  And  the  publican — smote  upon  his  breast, 
saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.  Luke  15  :  18-21; 
James  4  :   7-10;  2   Cor.   7  :   11;   Rom.   10  :    12,   13;  Ps.   51. 

4  Rom.  10  :  9-11.  If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thy  heart  that  God  hath  raised 
him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.  Acts  3  :  22^  23; 
Heb.   5  :    14;  Ps.  2  :   6;  Heb.   1  :   8;   8  :   25;   2  Tim.   1  :   12. 

IX.  OF  god's  PURPOSE  OF  GRACE 
We  believe  that  election  is  the  eternal  purpose 
of  God,  according  to  which  he  graciously  regener- 
ates, sanctifies,  and  saves  sinners ; x  that  being  per- 
fectly consistent  with  the  free  agency  of  man,  it 
comprehends  all  the  means  in  connection  with  the 
end ; 2  that  it  is  a  most  glorious  display  of  God's 
sovereign  goodness,  being  infinitely  free,  wise,  hory, 
and  unchangeable ; 3  that  it  utterly  excludes  boast- 
ing, and  promotes  humility,  love,  prayer,  praise, 
trust  in  God,  and  active  imitation  of  his  free 
mercy;*  that  it  encourages  the  use  of  means  in  the 
highest  degree ; 5  that  it  may  be  ascertained  by  its 


$2  CHURCH    MANUAL 

effects  in  all  who  truly  believe  the  gospel ; e  that  it  is 
the  foundation  of  Christian  assurance ; T  and  that  to 
ascertain  it  with  regard  to  ourselves  demands  and 
deserves  the  utmost  diligence.8 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1 2  TirtL  i  :  8,  9.  Be  not  thou  therefore  ashamed  of  the 
testimony  of  our  Lord,  nor  of  me  his  prisoner;  but  be  thou 
partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel,  according  to  the 
power  of  God;  who  hath  saved  us  and  called  us  with  an  holy 
calling,  not  according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own 
purpose  and  grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  be- 
fore the  world  began.  Eph.  1  :  3-14;  1  Peter  1  :  1,  2;  Rom. 
n  :  5*  6;  John  15  :   16;   1  John  4  :■  19;  Hosea  12  :  9. 

2  2  Thess.  2  :  13,  14.  But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  al- 
ways to  God  for  you,  brethren  beloved  of  the  Lord,  because 
God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you  to  salvation,  through 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  and  belief  of  the  truth;  whereunto 
he  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining  of  the  glory  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Acts  13  :  48;  John  10  :  16;  Matt. 
20  :   16;  Acts  15  :   14. 

3  Exod.  33  :  18,  19.  And  Moses  said,  I  beseech  thee,  show 
me  thy  glory.  And  he  said,  I  will  cause  all  my  goodness  to 
pass  before  thee,  and  I  will  proclaim  the  name  of  the  Lord  be- 
fore thee,  and  will  be  gracious  to  whom  I  will  be  gracious,  and 
will  show  mercy  on  whom  I  will  show  mercy.  Matt.  20  :  15. 
Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will  with  my  own?  Is 
thine  eye  evil  because  I  am  good?  Eph.  1  :  11;  Rom.  9  :  23, 
24;  Jer.  31  :  3;  Rom.  11  :  28,  29;  James  1  :  17,  18;  2  Tim. 
1:9;  Rom.  11  :  32-36. 

4  1  Cor.  4  :  7.  For  who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another? 
and  what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive?  Now  if  thou 
didst  receive  it,  why  doat  thou  glory  as  if  thou  hadst  not  re- 
ceived it?     1  Cor.  1  :  26-31;  Rom.  3  :  27;  4  :   16;  Col.  3  :   12; 

1  Cor.  3  :  5-7;  15  :   10;   1  Peter  5  :   10;  Acts  1  :  24;   1  Thess. 

2  :   13;  1  Peter  2:9;  Luke  18  :  7;  John  15  :   16;  Eph.  1  :   16; 
1  Thess.  2  :   12. 

5  2  Tim.  2  :  10.  Therefore  I  endure  all  things  for  the 
elects'  sake,  that  they  also  may  obtain  the  salvation  which  is 
in  Christ  Jesus  with  eternal  glory.  1  Cor.  9  :  22.  I  am  made 
all  things  to  all  men,  that  I  might  by  all  means  save  some. 
Rom.  8  :  28-30;  John  6  :  37-40;  2  Peter  1  :   10. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  53 

6  i  Thess.  i  :  4-10.  Knowing,  brethren  beloved,  your  elec- 
tion of  God;  for  our  gospel  came  unto  you,  not  in  word  only, 
but  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance, 
etc. 

7  Rom.  8:  28-31.  Moreover,  whom  he  did  predestinate, 
ihem  he  also  called,  and  whom  he  called  them  he  also  justi- 
fied, and  whom  he  justified  them  he  also  glorified.  What  shall 
we  then  say  to  these  things?  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us?     Isa.  42  :    16;  Rom.   11  :   29. 

8  2  Peter  1  :  10,  11.  Wherefore  the  rather,  brethren,  give 
diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure;  for  if  ye  do 
these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall;  for  so  an  entrance  shall  be 
ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Phil.  3  :  12;  Heb. 
6  :   11. 

X.    OF    SANCTIF1CATION 

We  believe  that  sanctification  is  the  process  by 
which,  according  to  the  will  of  God,  we  are  made 
partakers  of  his  holiness ; a  that  it  is  a  progressive 
work ; 2  that  it  is  begun  in  regeneration ; 3  and  that 
it  is  carried  on  in  the  hearts  of  believers  by  the 
presence  and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Sealer 
and  Comforter,  in  the  continual  use  of  the  appointed 
means — especially,  the  word  of  God,  self-examina- 
tion,  self-denial,  watchfulness,   and  prayer.4 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  Thess.  4  :  3.  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanc- 
tification. 1  Thess.  5  :  23.  And  the  very  God  of  peace  sanc- 
tify you  wholly.     2  Cor.  7  :    1;   13  :   9;  Eph.   1  :   4. 

2  Prov.  4  :  18.  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light 
which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  2  Cor. 
3  :   18;  Heb.  6  :   1;  2  Peter  1  :   5-8;  Phil.  3  :   12-16. 

3  John  2  :  29.  If  ye  know  that  he  [God]  is  righteous,  ye 
know  that  every  one  that  doeth  righteousness  is  born  of  him. 
Blom.  8  :  5.  They  that  are  after  the  flesh,  do  mind  the  things 
of  the  flesh;  but  they  that  are  after  the  Spirit  the  things  of 
the  Spirit.     John  3  :  6;  Phil.  1  :  9-11;  Eph.  1  :   13,  14. 

*  Phil.  2  :  12,  13.  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear 
and  trembling,  for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you  both  to  will 


54  CHURCH    MANUAL 

and  to  do,  of  his  good  pleasure.  Eph.  4  :  11,  12;  1  Peter 
2  :  2\  2  Peter  3  :  18;  2  Cor.  13  :  5;  Luke  11  :  35;  9  :  23; 
Matt.  26  :  41;  Eph.  6  :   18;  4  :  30. 


XI.   OF  THE  PERSEVERANCE  OF   SAINTS 

We  believe  that  such  only  are  real  believers  as 
endure  unto  the  end ; 1  that  their  persevering  at- 
tachment to  Christ  is  the  grand  mark  which  distin- 
guishes them  from  superficial  professors ; 2  that  a 
special  providence  watches  over  their  welfare,3  and 
that  they  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith 
unto  salvation.4 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  John  8  :  31.  Then  said  Jesus — If  ye  continue  in  my 
word,  then  are  ye  my  disciples  indeed.  1  John  2  :  2?,  28; 
3  :   9;  5  '    18. 

2  1  John  2  :  19.  They  went  out  from  us,  but  they  were  not 
of  us;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  no  doubt  have 
continued  with  us;  but  they  went  out  that  it  might  be  made 
manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of  us.  John  13  :  18;  Matt. 
13  :  20,  21;  John  6  :  66-69;  Job  17  :  9. 

3  Rom.  8  :  28.  And  we  know  that  all  things  work  together 
for  good  unto  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who  are  the  called 
according  to  his  purpose.  Matt.  6  :  30-33;  Jer.  32  :  40;  Ps. 
121  :   3;  91  :    11,   12. 

4  Phil.  1  :  6.  He  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you,  will 
perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  Phil.  2  :  12,  13; 
Jude  24,  25;  Heb.  1  :  14;  2  Kings  6  :  16;  Heb.  13  :  5; 
a   John  4  :   4. 

XII.    OF    THE    HARMONY    OF   THE   LAW    AND    THE   GOSPEL 

We  believe  that  the  law  of  God  is  the  eternal 
and  unchangeable  rule  of  his  moral  government ;  * 
that  it  is  holy,  just,  and  good;2  and  that  the  in- 
ability which  the    Scriptures   ascribe  to   fallen  men 


CHURCH    MANUAL  55 

to  fulfill  its  precepts,  arises  entirely  from  their  love 
oi  sin  : 3  to  deliver  them  from  which,  and  to  restore 
them  through  a  Mediator  to  unfeigned  obedience  to 
the  holy  law,  is  one  great  end  of  the  gospel,  and  of 
the  means  of  grace  connected  with  the  establish- 
ment of  the  visible  church.* 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  Rom.    3:31.      Do   we   make   void   the   law   through   faith? 

G3d   forbid.      Yea.   we   establish  the  law.      Matt.   5  :    17;   Luke 

16  :   17;  Rom.  3  :   20;  4  :    15. 

-  Rom.    7  :   12.      The    law   is    holy,    and    the    commandment 

.   and   just,   and   good.     Rom.    7  :   7,    14,   22;   Gal.   3  :  21; 

Ps.    119. 

3  Rom.  &:~,8.  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God, 
for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be. 
So  then  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God.  Josh. 
24  :    19;  Jer.   13  :   23;  John  6  :   44;   5  :   44. 

*  Rom.  8  :  2,  4.     For  the  law  of  the  ^  pirit  of  Life  in  Christ 

Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.     For 

what  the  law  could  not  do,  in   that  it   was  weak  through  the 

God,  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh, 

:or  sin,  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh;  that  the  righteousness 

be   law  might  be   fulfilled  in   us,   who   walk  not  after   the 

flesh   but   after   the   Spirit.      Rom.    10  :   4;    1    Tim.    1:5;   Heb. 

S  :    10;   Jude  20,  21;   Heb.   12  :    14;   Matt.    16  :    17,   18;    1    Cor. 

12  :   28. 

XIII.   OF   A   GOSPEL   CHURCH 

We  believe  that  a  visible  church  of  Christ  is  a 
congregation  of  baptized  believers,1  associated  by 
covenant  in  the  faith  and  fellowship  of  the  gos- 
pel;2 observing  the  ordinances  of  Christ;3  governed 
by  his  laws ; 4  and  exercising  the  gifts,  rights,  and 
privileges  invested  in  them  by  his  word;5  that  its 
only  scriptural  officers  are  bishops  or  pastors  and 
deacons,6  whose  qualifications,  claims,  and  duties 
are  defined  in  the  Epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus. 


56  CHURCH    MANUAL 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  i  Cor.  i  :  1-13.  Paul — unto  the  church  of  God  which  is 
at  Corinth.  Is  Christ  divided?  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you? 
Or  were  ye  baptized  in  the  name  of  Paul?  Matt.  18  :  17; 
Acts  5  :  11;  8  :  1;  11  :  31;  1  Cor.  4  :  i?-r  14  :  23;  3  John 
9;   1  Tim.  3:5. 

2  Acts  2  :  41,  42.  Then  they  that  gladly  received  his  word 
were  baptized;  and  the  same  day  there  were  added  to  them 
about  three  thousand  souls.  2  Cor.  8:5.  They  first  gave 
their  ownselves  to  the  Lord,  and  unto  us  by  the  will  of  God. 
Acts  2  :  47;  1  Cor.  5  :   12,  13. 

3  1  Cor.  11  :  2.  Now  I  praise  you,  brethren,  that  ye  re- 
member me  in  all  things,  and  keep  the  ordinances  as  I  deliv- 
ered them  unto  you.  2  Thess.  z  :  6\  Rom.  16  :  17-20;  1  Cor. 
11  :  23;  Matt.  18  :  15-20;  1  Cor.  5  :  6;  2  Cor.  2  :  7;  1  Cor. 
4  :  11. 

4  Matt.  28  :  20.  Teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  what- 
soever I  have  commanded  you.  John  14  :  15;  15  :  12;  1  John 
4  :  21;  John  14  :  21;  1  Thess.  4:252  John  6;  Gal.  6  :  2. 
All  the  Epistles. 

5  Eph.  4:7.  Unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace  ac- 
cording to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ.  1  Cor.  14  :  12. 
Seek  that  ye  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of  the  church.  Phil. 
1  :  2j.  That  I  may  hear  of  your  affairs,  that  ye  stand  fast  in 
one  spirit,  with  one  mind,  striving  together  for  the  faith  of 
the  gospel.     1   Cor.   12  :   14. 

6  Phil.  1:1.  With  the  bishops  and  deacons.  Acts  14  :  23; 
15  :  22 ;  1  Tim.  3;  Titus  1. 

XIV.  OF  BAPTISM   AND  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER 

We  believe  that  Christian  baptism  is  the  immer- 
sion in  water  of  a  believer,1  into  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost : 2  to  show  forth 
in  a  solemn  and  beautiful  emblem,  our  faith  in  the 
crucified,  buried,  and  risen  Saviour,  with  its  effect, 
in  our  death  to  sin  and  resurrection  to  a  new  life ; 3 
that  it  is  prerequisite  to  the  privileges  of  a  church 
relation;   and  to  the  Lord's   Supper,4  in  which  the 


CHURCH    MANUAL  57 

members  of  the  church  by  the  sacred  use  of  bread 
and  wine,  are  to  commemorate  together  the  dying 
love  of  Christ ; 5  preceded  always  by  solemn  self- 
examination.6 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  Acts  8  :  36-39.  And  the  eunuch  said,  See,  here  is  water; 
what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized?  And  Philip  said,  If  thou 
believest  with  all  thy  heart  thou  mayest.  And  they  went  down 
into  the  water,  both  Philip  and  the  eunuch,  and  he  baptized 
him.  Matt.  3  :  5,  6;  John  3  :  22,  23;  4  :  1,  2;  Matt.  28  :  19; 
Mark  16  :   16;   Acts  2  :   38;   8  :    12;    16  :   32-34;    18  •   8. 

2  Matt.  28  :  19.  Baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Acts  10  :  47,  48; 
Gal.  3  :  27,  28. 

3  Rom.  6  :  4.  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism 
into  death;  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the 
glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness 
of  life.     Col.  2  :   12;   1   Pet.  3  :  20,  21;  Acts  22  :   16. 

4  Acts  2  :  41,  42.  Then  they  that  gladly  received  his  word 
were  baptized,  and  there  were  added  to  them,  the  same  day, 
about  three  thousand  souls.  And  they  continued  steadfastly 
in  the  Apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of 
bread,  and  in  prayers.     Matt.  28  :    19,  20.     Acts  and  Epistles. 

5  1  Cor.  11  :  26.  As  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink 
this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.  Matt. 
26  :  26-29;   Mark   14  :  22-25;   Luke  22  :   14-20. 

g  1  Cor.  11  :  28.  But  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let 
him  eat  of  that  bread  and  drink  of  that  cup.  1  Cor.  5  :  1,  8: 
10  :   3-32;    11  :    17-32;   John  6  :  26-71. 


XV.   OF  THE   CHRISTIAN    SABBATH 

We  believe  that  the  first  day  of  the  week  is  the 
Lord's  Day,  or  Christian  Sabbath ; 1  and  is  to  be 
kept  sacred  to  religious  purposes,2  by  abstaining 
from  all  secular  labor  and  sinful  recreations,3  by 
the  devout  observance  of  all  the  means   of  grace, 


38  CHURCH    MANUAL 

both  private 4  and  public ; 5  and  by  preparation  for 
that  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God,6 

Places  in  the  Bible  inhere  taught. 

1  Acts  20  :  7.  On  the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the  disci- 
ples Came  together  to  break  bread,  Paul  preached  to  them. 
Gen.  2:3;  Col.  2  :  16,  17;  Mark  2  :  27)  John  20  :  19;  1  Cor. 
16  :   1,  2. 

2  Exod.  20  :  8.  Remember  the  Sabbath  Day,  to  keep  it  holy. 
Rev.  1  :  10.  I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  Day.  Ps. 
118  :  24.  This  is  the  day  which  the  Lord  hath  made:  we  will 
rejoice  and  be  glad  in  it. 

3  Isai  58  :  13,  14.  If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from  the 
Sabbath,  from  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day;  and  call 
the  Sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord  honorable;  and 
shalt  honor  him,  not  doing  thine  own  ways,  nor  finding  thine 
own  pleasure,  nor  speaking  thine  own  words;  then  shalt  thou 
delight  thyself  in  the  Lord,  and  I  will  cause  thee  to  ride  upon 
the  high  places  of  the  earth,  and  feed  thee  with  the  heritage 
of  Jacob.     Isa.  56  :  2-8. 

4  Ps.  118  :  15.  The  voice  of  rejoicing  and  salvation  is  in 
the  tabernacles  of  the  righteous. 

5  Heb.  10  :  24,  25.  Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  your- 
selves together,  as  the  manner  of  some  is.  Acts  11  :  26.  A 
whole  year  they  assembled  themselves  with  the  church,  and 
taught  much  people.  Acts  13  :  44.  The  next  sabbath  day 
came  almost  the  whole  city  together  to  hear  the  word  of  God. 
Lev.  19  :  3c;  Exod.  46  :  3;  Luke  4  :  16;  Acts  17  :  2,  3;  Ps. 
26  :  8;  87  :   3. 

6  Heb.  4  :  3-11.  Let  us  labor  therefore  to  enter  into  that 
rest. 

XVI.   OF   CIVTL  GOVERNMENT 

We  believe  that  civil  government  is  of  divine 
appointment,  for  the  interests  and  good  order  of 
human  society ; 1  and  that  magistrates  are  to  be 
prayed  for,  conscientiously  honored,  and  obeyed ; 2 
except  only  in  things  opposed  to  the  will  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,3  who  is  the  only  Lord  of  the 
■conscience,  and  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth.* 


CHURCH    MANUAL  59 

Places  in  the  Bible  zi-here  taught. 

1  Rom.  13  :  1-7.  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God. 
For  rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but  to  the  evil. 
Deut.   16  :   18;   2   Sam.  23  :  3;   Exod.   18  :  23;  Jer.   30  :  21. 

-  Matt.  22  :  21.  Render  therefore  unto  Caesar  the  thing? 
that  are  Caesar's,  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's. 
Titus  3  :    1;   1  Peter  2  :    13;   1  Tim.  2  :    i-S. 

3  Acts  5  :  29.  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  man. 
Matt.  10  :  28.  Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body,  but  are  not 
able  to  kill  the  soul.     Dan.  3  :   15-18;  6  :   7-10;  Acts  4  :   18-20. 

4  Matt.  23  :  10.  Ye  have  one  Master,  even  Christ.  Rom. 
14  :  4.  Who  art  thou  that  judgest  another  man's  servant? 
Rev.  19  :  16.  And  he  hath  on  his  vesture  and  on  his  thigh  a 
name  written,  KING  OF  KINGS.  AND  LORD  OF  LORDS. 
Ps.   ~2  :    11;  Ps.  2;   Rom.   14  :   9-13. 


XVII.   OF   THE   RIGHTEOUS    AND   THE    WICKED 

We  believe  that  there  is  a  radical  and  essential 
difference  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked ;  ' 
that  such  only  as  through  faith  are  justified  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  sanctified  by  the  Spirit 
of  our  God,  are  truly  righteous  in  his  esteem ; 2 
while  all  such  as  continue  in  impenitence  and  un- 
belief are  in  his  sight  wicked,  and  under  the  curse;3 
and  this  distinction  holds  among  men  both  in  and 
after  death.4 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  Mai.  3:18.  Ye  shall  discern  between  the  righteous  and 
t.:e  wicked;  between  him  that  serveth  God  and  him  that  serv- 
eth  him  not.  Prov.  12  :  26;  Isa.  5  :  20;  Gen.  18  :  23;  Ter. 
15  :    19;  Acts   10  :   34,   35;  Rom.  6  :    16. 

2  Rom.  1  :  17.  The  just  shall  live  by  faith.  Rom.  7  :  6. 
We  are  delivered  from  the  law,  that  being  dead  wherein  we 
were  held,  that  we  should  serve  in  newness  of  spirit,  and  not 
in  the  oldness  of  the  letter.  1  John  2  :  29.  If  ye  know  that 
he  is  righteous,  ye  know  that  every  one  that  doeth  righteous- 
ness is  born  of  him.  1  John  3:7:  Rom.  6  :  18.  22:  1  Cor, 
11  :   32:  Prov.   11  :  31;      "  F  •: ■--.-  :  4  :    17,  iS. 


60  CHURCH    MANUAL 

3  i  John  5:19.  And  we  know  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the 
whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness.  Gal.  3  :  10.  As  many  as 
are  of  the  works  of  the  law,  are  under  the  curse.  John 
3  :  36;  Isa.  57  :  21;  Ps.  10  :  4;  Isa.  55  :  6,  7. 

4  Prov.  14  :  32.  The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wicked- 
ness, but  the  righteousness  hath  hope  in  his  death.  See  also 
the  example  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus.  Luke  16  :  25. 
Thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good  things,  and  likewise 
Lazarus  evil  things:  but  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art 
tormented.  John  8  :  21-24;  Prov.  10  :  24;  Luke  12  :  4,  5; 
9  :  22-26;  John  12  :  25,  26;  Eccl.  3  :   17;  Matt.   13,   14. 

XVIII.   OF  THE   WORLD  TO  COME 

We  believe  that  the  end  of  this  world  is  ap- 
proaching ;  *  that  at  the  Last  Day  Christ  will  descend 
from  heaven,2  and  raise  the  dead  from  the  grave  to 
final  retribution ; 3  that  a  solemn  separation  will  then 
take  place;4  that  the  wicked  will  be  adjudged  to 
endless  punishment,  and  the  righteous  to  endless 
joy;5  and  that  this  judgment  will  fix  forever  the 
final  state  of  men  in  heaven  or  hell,  on  principles 
of  righteousness.6 

Places  in  the  Bible  where  taught. 

1  1  Pet.  4  :  7.  But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand;  be  ye 
therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer.  1  Cor.  7  :  29-31; 
Heb.  1  :  10-12;  Matt.  24  :  35;  1  John  2  :  17;  Matt.  28  :  20: 
13  *•  39,  40;  2  Peter  3  :   3-13. 

2  Acts  1  :  11.  This  same  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from  you 
into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him 
go  into  heaven.  Rev.  1:7;  Heb.  9  :  28;  Acts  3  :  21;  1 
Thess.  4  :   13-18;  5  :   1-11. 

3  Acts  24  :  15.  There  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
both  of  the  just  and  unjust.  1  Cor.  15  :  12-59;  Luke  14  :  14; 
Dan.  12  :  2;  John  5  :  28,  29;  6  :  40;  11  :  25,  26;  2  Tim. 
1  :   10;  Acts  10  :  42. 

4  Matt.  13  :  49.  The  angels  shall  come  forth  and  sever  the 
wicked  from  among  the  just.  Matt.  13  :  37-43;  24  ;  30,  31; 
^5  :   31-33. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  6l 


5  Matt.  25  :  35-41.  And  these  shall  go  away  into  everlast- 
ing punishment,  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal.  Rev. 
22  :  11.  He  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still;  and  he 
which  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still;  and  he  that  is  right- 
eous, let  him  be  righteous  still;  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be 
holy  still.  1  Cor.  6  :  9,  10;  Mark  9  :  43-48;  2  Peter  2:9; 
Tude  7;  Phil.  3  :  19:  Rom.  6  :  22 ;  2  Cor.  5  :  10,  11;  John 
4  :   36;   2   Cor.   4  :    18. 

1  Rom.  3  :  5,  6.  Is  God  unrighteous,  who  taketh  vengeance? 
(I  speak  as  a  man.)  God  forbid;  for  how  then  shall  God 
judge  the  world?  2  Thess.  1  :  6-12.  Seeing  it  is  a  righteous 
thing  with  God  to  recompense  tribulation  to  them  that  trouble 
you,  and  to  you  who  are  troubled,  rest  with  us — when  he  shall 
come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints  and  to  be  admired  in  all 
them  that  believe.  Heb.  6  :  1,2;  1  Cor.  4:5;  Acts  17  :  31; 
Rom.  2  :   2-16;   Rev.  20  :   11,   12;   1  John  2  :   28;  4  :    17. 

Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved, 
\vhat  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  con- 
versation and  godliness.  looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the 
coming  OF  the  day  of  God ?      2  Peter   3  :    II,   12. 


CHURCH  COVENANT 

Having  been  led,  as  we  believe,  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  to  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our 
Saviour,  and  on  the  profession  of  our  faith,  hav- 
ing been  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  do  now  in 
the  presence  of  God,  angels,  and  this  assembly, 
most  solemnly  and  joyfully  enter  into  covenant 
with  one  another,  as  one  body  in  Christ. 

We  engage  therefore,  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  to  walk  together  in  Christian  love ;  to  strive 
for  the  advancement  of  this  church,  in  knowledge, 
holiness/  and  comfort;  to  promote  its  prosperity 
and  spirituality*;  to  sustain  its  worship,  ordinances, 
discipline,  and  doctrines ;  to  contribute  cheerfully 
and  regularly  to  the  support  of  the  ministry,  the  ex- 


62  CHURCH    MANUAL 

penses  of  the  church,  the  relief  of  the  poor,  and 
the  spread  of  the  gospel  through  all  nations. 

We  also  engage  to  maintain  family  and  secret 
devotion;  to  religiously  educate  our  children;  to 
seek  the  salvation  of  our  kindred  and  acquaint- 
ances ;  to  walk  circumspectly  in  the  world ;  to  be 
just  in  our  dealings,  faithful  in  our  engagements, 
and  exemplary  in  our  deportment ;  to  avoid  all  tat- 
tling, backbiting,  and  excessive  anger;  to  abstain 
from  the  sale  and  use  of  intoxicating  drinks  as  a 
beverage,  and  to  be  zealous  in  our  efforts  to  advance 
the  kingdom  of  our  Saviour. 

We  further  engage  to  watch  over  one  another  in 
brotherly  love;  to  remember  each  other  in  prayer; 
to  aid  each  other  in  sickness  and  distress ;  to  cul- 
tivate Christian  sympathy  in  feeling  and  courtesy 
in  speech ;  to  be  slow  to  take  offence,  but  always 
ready  for  reconciliation,  and  mindful  of  the  rules  of 
our  Saviour  to  secure  it  without  delay. 

We  moreover  engage  that  when  we  remove  from 
this  place,  we  will  as  soon  as  possible  unite  with 
some  other  church,  where  we  can  carry  out  the  spirit 
of  this  covenant  and  the  principles  of  God's  word. 

PRAYER 

Now  the  God  of  Peace,  who  brought  again  from 
the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus,  that  Great  Shepherd  of  the 
sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  Covenant, 
make  you  perfect  in  every  good  work,  to  do  his 
will ;  working  in  you  that  which  is  well-pleasing  in 
his  sight,  through  Jesus  Christ;  to  whom  be  glory 
forever  and  ever.     Amen. 


CHAPTER  IV 

ORDINANCES    OF    A    CHURCH 

THIS  title  is  not  used  to  convey  the  idea 
that  a  church  has  the  right  to  insti- 
tute ordinances.  Xo  such  right  exists. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  head  of  the  church — 
Lawgiver  of  the  Gospel  dispensation.  He  is 
the  only  Institutor  of  ordinances.  Apostles 
had  no  discretion  in  the  matter.  They  could 
only  teach  the  baptized  disciples  "  to  observe 
all  things  "  commanded  by  Christ.  His  will 
was  to  them,  as  to  his  followers,  now  the 
supreme  law.  It  was  optional  with  him  to 
institute  many  ordinances  or  few7.  It  was  his 
pleasure  to  appoint  only  two,  namely,  Baptism 
and  the  Lord's  Supper.  These  appointments 
of  Christ  are  church  ordinances  in  the  sense 
that  they  pertain  to  his  churches — not  to  the 
world;  and  are  committeed  to  the  care  of  his 
churches,  whom  he  holds  responsible  for  their 
preservation  in  their  original  purity  and  in- 
tegrity. There  are  some  Baptists  who  hesitate 
to  call  baptism  a  church  ordinance.    They  pre- 

'  63 


64  CHURCH    MANUAL 

fer  to  call  it  a  "  gospel  ordinance/'  or  a  "  min- 
isterial ordinance/'  It  is  a  gospel  ordinance, 
and  in  one  sense  it  is  a  ministerial  ordinance. 
That  is  to  say,  it  is  administered  by  ministers 
of  the  gospel.  But  ministers  derive  their  au- 
thority to  preach  and  administer  the  ordi- 
nances from  Christ,  through  his  churches. 
Who  recognizes  the  right  of  any  man  to 
preach  or  baptize,  if  unsustained  by  church 
authority?  In  this  view  of  the  matter  bap- 
tism is  evidently  a  church  ordinance,  and  our 
Fathers  in  their  Confession  of  1689,  refer  to 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  as  Christ's 
ordinances  "  to  be  continued  in  his  church  to 
the  end  of  the  world." 

•     I.    OF   BAPTISM 

In  answer  to  the  oft-repeated  question* 
What  is  Baptism?  it  may  be  said,  Baptism  is 
the  immersion  in  water,  by  a  proper  adminis- 
trator, of  a  believer  in  Christ,  in  the  name  of 
the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Immersion  is  so  exclusively  the  bap- 
tismal act,  that  without  it  there  is  no  baptism ; 
a  believer  in  Christ  is  so  exclusively  the  sub- 
ject of  baptism,  that  without  such  a  subject 
there  is  no  baptism.    In  these  two  statements 


CHURCH    MANUAL  05 

all  Baptists  will  agree.  As  to  a  proper  admin- 
istrator there  may  be  some  difference  of  opin- 
ion. By  a  proper  administrator,  in  the  forego- 
ing definition,  is  meant  a  person  who  has  re- 
ceived from  a  church  authority  to  baptize. 
While  the  validity  of  an  ordinance  is  not  af- 
fected by  every  irregularity  in  its  administra- 
tion, it  does  seem  incredible  that  baptism 
should  be  valid  in  the  absence  of  the  church 
authority  referred  to.  What  other  authority  is 
there?  Will  any  one  say,  the  authority  of 
Christ?  The  supreme  authority  is  undoubt- 
edly his ;  but  does  he  confer  on  men  the  right 
to  baptize,  through  his  churches,  or,  independ- 
ently of  his  churches?  One  of  these  views 
must  be  taken,  and  he  who  takes  the  latter  will 
have  to  set  aside  the  order  of  the  gospel.  But 
it  does  not  comport  with  the  plan  of  this  little 
work  to  elaborate  this  point. 

1.  Act  of  Baptism.  That  immersion  alone 
is  the  baptismal  act  may  be  shown  by  the  fol- 
lowing considerations : 

(1)  Greek  Lexicons  give  immerse,  dip,  or 
plunge,  as  the  primary  and  ordinary  meaning 
of  baptizo. 

Here  it  is  proper  to  state  that  baptizo  and 
baptisma  are,  in  the  Common  Version  of  the 


66  CHURCH    MANUAL 

Scriptures,  Anglicized,  but  not  translated.  By 
this  it  is  only  meant  that  their  termination  is 
made  to  correspond  with  the  termination  of 
English  words.  In  baptizo  the  final  letter  is 
changed  into  e,  and  in  baptisma  the  last  letter 
is  dropped  altogether.  To  make  this  matter  of 
Anglicism  plain,  it  is  only  necessary  to  say, 
that  if  rantizo  had  been  subjected  to  the  same 
treatment  by  King  James'  translators  which 
baptizo  received  at  their  hands,  we  would  have 
rantize  in  the  New  Testament,  wherever  we 
now  have  sprinkle.  King  James  virtually  for- 
bade the  translation  of  baptize  and  baptism. 
This  has  sometimes  been  denied,  but  it  is 
susceptible  of  conclusive  proof.  The  king's 
third  instruction  to  his  translators  reads  thus : 
"  The  old  ecclesiastical  words  to  be  kept,  as 
the  word  church  not  to  be  translated  congre- 
gation." It  is  absurd  to  say  that  this  rule 
had  exclusive  reference  to  the  term  "'  church  "  ; 
for  this  term  is  manifestly  given  as  a  speci- 
men of  "  old  ecclesiastical  words."  And  why 
should  plurality  of  idea  be  conveyed  by  the 
phrase  "  ecclesiastical  words/'  if  the  rule  had 
respect  to  only  one  word?  The  question  then 
is :  Are  baptism  and  baptize  "  old  ecclesiastical 
words  ?    They  were  words  when  the  Bible  was 


CHURCH    MANUAL  67 

translated,  or  they  would  not  be  found  in  it. 
They  had  been  used  by  church  historians,  and 
by  writers  on  ecclesiastical  law,  and  were 
therefore  ecclesiastical.  They  had  been  in  use 
a  long  time,  and  were  consequently  old.  They 
were  "  old  ecclesiastical  words. "  Such  words 
the  king  commanded  "  to  be  kept " — "  not 
translated."  It  is  worthy  of  remark  too,  that 
the  Bishop  of  London,  at  the  king's  instance, 
wrote  to  the  translators,  reminding  them  that 
his  majesty  "  wished  his  third  and  fourth  rule 
to  be  specially  observed.'' x  This  circumstance 
must  have  called  special  attention  to  the  rule 
under  consideration.  In  view  of  these  facts 
it  may  surely  be  said,  that  the  translators  knew 
what  were  "  old  ecclesiastical  words."  Let 
their  testimony  then  be  adduced.  In  their 
"  Preface  to  the  Reader,"  they  say  they  had 
"  on  the  one  side,  avoided  the  scrupulosity  of 
the  Puritans,  who  left  the  old  ecclesiastical 
z^'ords,  and  betook  them  to  other,  as  when 
they  put  zvashing  for  baptism,  and  congrega- 
tion for  church;  and  on  the  other  hand  had 
shunned  the  obscurity  of  the  Papists."  Is  not 
this  enough?  Here  there  is  not  only  an  ad- 
mission that  baptism  was  an  old  ecclesiastical 

1  Lewis'  History  of  Translations,  p.  319. 


68  CHURCH    MANUAL 

word,  but  this  admission  is  made  by  the  trans- 
lators themselves — made  most  cheerfully — for 
it  was  made  in  condemnation  of  the  Puritans, 
and  in  commendation  of  themselves. 

The  king's  fourth  rule  was  this :  "  When 
any  word  hath  divers  significations,  that  to  be 
kept  which  hath  been  most  commonly  used  by 
the  most  eminent  Fathers,  being  agreeable  to 
the  propriety  of  the  place  and  the  analogy  of 
faith."  Baptizo  is  not  a  word  of  divers  signifi- 
cations; but  if  it  was,  the  king's  translators, 
if  they  had  rendered  it  at  all,  would  have  been 
compelled  by  the  fourth  rule  to  render  it  im- 
merse ;  for  every  man  of  ordinary  intelligence 
knows  it  was  "  most  commonly  used  "  in  this 
sense  "  by  the  most  eminent  Fathers."  But  it 
will  be  perceived  that  the  king's  third  rule 
renders  inoperative  the  fourth,  so  far  as  old 
ecclesiastical  words  are  concerned.  Whether 
such  words  have  one  meaning  or  a  thousand 
meanings,  they  are  "  to  be  kept  " — "  not  trans- 
lated." The  translators  were  not  at  liberty  to„ 
refer  to  the  signification  immemorially  at- 
tached by  the  Greeks  to  baptizo — a  significa- 
tion which  received  the  cordial  indorsement  of 
"  the  most  eminent  Fathers."  They  might 
have  examined  the  indorsement  if  the  roval 


CHURCH    MANUAL  69 

decree  had  not  said,  "  hitherto,  but  no  farther," 
u  the  old  ecclesiastical  words  to  be  kept/' 

Some  Baptist  authors  have  expressed  them- 
selves as  if  King  James  had  a  special  antipathy 
to  immersion,  and  forbade  the  translation  of 
baptizo  and  baptism  with  a  view  to  encourage 
sprinkling,  which  had  been  introduced  from 
Geneva  into  Scotland  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth, 
and  was  in  the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth 
century  making  its  way  into  England.  There 
is  no  historical  evidence  that  the  king  was  op- 
posed to  immersion;  but  he  was  bitterly  op- 
posed to  the  "  Genevan  Version  "  of  the  Bible, 
in  which  baptism  was  rendering  washing. 
Most  probably  his  dislike  of  this  version  led 
him  to  give  his  third  rule.  The  Genevan  Ver- 
sion was  made  by  exiles  from  Scotland,  who, 
during  the  reign  of  "  Bloody  Alary,"  fled  to 
Geneva  and  became  acquainted  with  John 
Calvin. 

The  fact  that  baptizo  is  an  Anglicized,  and 
not  a  translated  word,  makes  an  appeal  to 
Greek  lexicons  necessary  in  ascertaining  its 
meaning.  Lexicons  do  not  constitute  the  ulti- 
mate authority,  but  their  testimony  is  valua- 
ble. There  is  a  remarkable  unanimity  among 
them  in  representing  immerse  or  its  equivalent 


yO  CHURCH    MANUAL 

as  the  primary  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the 
word.  On  this  point  Professor  Stuart  (long 
distinguished  as  the  glory  of  the  Andover 
Theological  Seminary,  Mass.)  shall  speak.  In 
his  treatise  on  the  "  Mode  of  Baptism/'  p.  14, 
he  says,  "  Bapto  and  baptizo  mean  to  dip, 
plunge,  or  immerge,  into  anything  liquid.  All 
lexicographers  and  critics  of  any  note  are 
agreed  in  this."  This  quotation  is  made  to 
supersede  the  necessity  of  giving  the  meaning 
of  baptizo  as  furnished  by  the  large  number 
of  Greek  lexicons.  Professor  Stuart's  state- 
ments will  be  received. 

(2)  Distinguished  Pedobaptist  theologians 
concede  that  baptizo  means  to  immerse. 

John  Calvin  in  his  Institutes  1  says :  "  But 
whether  the  person  who  is  baptized  be  wholly 
immersed,  and  whether  thrice  or  once,  or 
whether  water  be  only  poured  or  sprinkled 
upon  him,  is  of  no  importance ;  churches  ought 
to  be  left  at  liberty,  in  this  respect,  to  act  ac- 
cording to  the  difference  of  countries.  The 
very  word  baptize,  however,  signifies  to  im- 
merse; and  it  is  certain  that  immersion  was 
the  practice  of  the  ancient  church." 

Dr.  George  Campbell,  a  distinguished  Pres- 

1  Vol.     Ill,     p.     491,     edition     of     Presbyterian     Board     of 

Publication. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  Jl 

byterian  of  Scotland,  in  his  "  Notes  "  on  Mat- 
thew 3  :  2,  says:  "The  word  baptisein"  (in- 
finitive mode,  present  tense,  of  baptizo)  "  both 
in  sacred  authors  and  in  classical,  signifies  to 
dip,  to  plunge,  to  immerse,  and  was  rendered 
by  Tertullian,  the  oldest  of  the  Latin  Fathers, 
iingere,  the  term  used  for  dyeing  cloth,  which 
was  by  immersion.  It  is  always  construed 
suitably  to  this  meaning." 

Doctor  Chalmers,  in  his  "  Lectures  on 
Romans"  (Lecture  XXX  on  Chap.  VI,  3-7) 
says :  "  The  original  meaning  of  the  word  bap- 
tism is  immersion,  and  though  we  regard  it  as 
a  point  of  indifferency,  whether  the  ordinance 
so  named  be  performed  in  this  way  or  by 
sprinkling — yet  we  doubt  not  that  the  preva- 
lent style  of  the  administration  in  the  apos- 
tles' days  was  by  an  actual  submerging  of 
the  whole  body  under  water.  We  advert  to 
this  for  the  purpose  of  throwing  light  on  the 
analogy  that  is  instituted  in  these  verses.  Jesus 
Christ,  by  death,  .underwent  this  sort  of  bap- 
tism— even  immersion  under  the  surface  of 
the  ground,  whence  he  soon  emerged  again 
by  his  resurrection.  We,  by  being  baptized 
into  his  death,  are  conceived  to  have  made  a 
similar  translation." 


72  CHURCH    MANUAL 

This  is  a  specimen  of  the  concessions  of 
learned  Pedobaptists  in  regard  to  the  meaning 
of  baptizo.  These  concessions  are  of  great 
value;  for  it  may  be  said,  in  the  language  of 
another :  "  This  testimony  of  theirs,  to  me,  is 
worth  a  thousand  others ;  seeing  it  comes  from 
such  as,  in  my  opinion,  are  evidently  interested 
to  speak  quite  otherwise" 

(3)  The  classical  usage  of  baptizo  estab- 
lishes the  position  that  immersion  is  the  bap- 
tismal  act. 

It  has  been  already  stated  that  lexicons  are 
not  the  ultimate  authority  in  settling  the  mean- 
ing of  words.  Lexicographers  are  dependent 
on  the  sense  in  which  words  are  used,  to  ascer- 
tain their  meaning.  But  it  is  not  impossible  for 
them  to  mistake  that  sense.  If  they  do,  there 
is  an  appeal  from  their  definitions  to  the  usus 
loquendi,  which  is  the  ultimate  authority.  It 
is  well  to  go  back  to  the  ultimate  authority. 
Want  of  room  forbids  the  insertion  of  extracts 
from  classical  Greek  authors;  but  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  refer  to  the  treatise  of  Professor 
Stuart  on  the  "  Mode  of  Baptism."  The  reader 
will  see  that  the  learned  professor  in  proving 
that  baptizo  means  immerse,  gives  the  word  as 
used  by  Pindar,  Heraclides  Ponticus,  Plutarch, 


CHURCH    MANUAL  73 

Lucian,  Hippocrates,  Strabo,  Josephus,  etc. 
Doctor  Conant  has  investigated  the  meaning  of 
baptizo  more  exhaustively  than  any  man,  liv- 
ing or  dead.  No  use  is  made  of  his  work,  be- 
cause Pedobaptist  testimony  is  preferred. 
Seven  hundred  years  intervened  between  the 
birth  of  Pindar  and  the  death  of  Lucian.  Dur- 
ing those  seven  centuries  usage  shows  that 
baptizo  meant  to  immerse.  Most  of  the  classic 
Greek  writers  lived  before  baptism  was  insti- 
tuted, and  consequently  knew  nothing  of  im- 
mersion as  a  religious  ordinance.  Those  who 
lived  after  its  institution  cared  nothing  for  it. 
There  was  no  controversy  as  to  the  meaning 
of  baptizo,  during  the  classic  period  of  Grecian 
history.  There  was  no  motive,  therefore,  that 
could  so  operate  on  Greek  writers  as  to  induce 
them  to  use  the  word  in  any  but  its  authorized 
meaning.  That  meaning  was  most  obviously 
to  immerse. 

It  is  said  by  some  that  though  baptizo  in 
classic  Greek  means  immerse,  it  has  a  different 
meaning  in  the  New  Testament.  Let  them 
prove  it  On  them  is  the  burden  of  proof, 
and  they  will  find  it  a  burden  they  cannot  man- 
age. Let  every  man  who  takes  this  view  an- 
swer this  question :  Could  the  New  Testament 


74  CHURCH    MANUAL 

writers,  as  honest  men,  use  baptizo  in  a  new 
sense  without  notifying  their  readers  of  the 
fact  ?  It  is  certain  they  could  not,  and  equally 
certain  that  no  such  notification  was  given. 

(4)  The  design  of  baptism  furnishes  a  con- 
clusive argument  in  favor  of  immersion. 

There  is  in  baptism  a  representation  of  the 
burial  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  Paul 
says :  "  Know  ye  not  that  so  many  of  us  as 
were  baptized  into  Jesus  Christ  were  baptized 
into  his  death?  Therefore  we  were  buried 
with  him  by  baptism  into  death;  that  like  as 
Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the 
glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  should  walk 
in  newness  of  life.  For  if  we  have  been 
planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  deaths 
we  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  his  resur- 
rection "  (Rom.  6  :  3-5).  "  Buried  with  him 
in  baptism,  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with  him, 
through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God  who 
hath  raised  him  from  the  dead  "  (Col.  2  :  12). 
Peter  says :  "  The  like  figure  whereunto  even 
baptism  doth  also  now  save  us  (not  the  putting 
away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer 
of  a  good  conscience  toward  God)  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  "  (1  Peter  3  :  21). 

It  is  clear  from  these  passages  that  baptism 


CHURCH    MANUAL  75 

has  a  commemorative  reference  to  the  burial 
and  resurrection  of  Christ.  The  two  ordi- 
nances of  the  gospel  symbolically  proclaim  the 
three  great  facts  of  the  gospel.  These  facts,  as 
Paul  teaches  (i  Cor.  15  :  3,  4),  are  that  Christ 
died,  was  buried,  and  rose  again.  The  Lord's 
Supper  commemorates  the  first  fact.  At  his 
table  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  solemnly  re- 
minded that  their  Redeemer  submitted  to  the 
agonies  of  death.  They  weep  over  him  as  cru- 
cified— dead.  In  baptism  they  see  him  buried 
and  raised  again,  just  as  they  see  him  dead  in 
the  sacred  Supper.  Baptism  is,  therefore,  a 
symbolic  proclamation  of  two  of  the  three 
prominent  facts  of  the  gospel — the  burial  and 
resurrection  of  Christ. 

Baptism  also  expresses,  in  emblem,  the  be- 
liever's death  to  sin,  and  resurrection  to  new- 
ness of  life.  In  "  repentance  toward  God  and 
faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  there  is  a 
spiritual  death  to  sin,  and  a  spiritual  resurrec- 
tion to  newness  of  life.  These  two  facts  are 
emblematically  set  forth  in  baptism.  Hence 
the  absurdity  of  baptizing  any  who  are  not 
dead  to  sin.  We  are  baptized  into  the  death 
of  Christ.  We  profess  our  reliance  on  his 
death  for  salvation,  and  we  profess,  also,  that 


j6  CHURCH    MANUAL 

as  he  died  for  sin,  we  have  died  to  sin.  As 
burial  is  a  palpable  separation  of  the  dead  from 
the  living,  so  baptism  is  a  symbolic  separation 
of  those  dead  to  sin  from  those  living  in  sin. 
And  as  a  resurrection  from  the  dead  indicates 
an  entrance  into  a  new  sphere  of  existence,  so 
baptism  in  its  similitude  to  a  resurrection  de- 
notes an  entrance  upon  a  new  life.  Hence 
Doctor  Chalmers  in  the  lecture  already  re- 
ferred to  says,  that  we  "  are  conceived  in  the 
act  of  descending  under  the  water  of  baptism, 
to  have  resigned  an  old  life,  and  in  the  act  of 
ascending,  to  emerge  into  a  second  or  new 
life." 

Baptism  is  likewise  a  symbol  of  purification. 
We  read  of  the  "  washing  of  regeneration  " 
and  of  having  "  our  bodies  washed  with  pure 
water."  These  forms  of  expression  were  most 
probably  used  to  indicate  the  defiling  nature 
of  sin,  from  which  we  are  really  cleansed  in 
the  blood  of  Christ.  Then  baptism  is  the  out- 
ward symbol  of  the  inward  washing.  If  any 
one  should  say  the  passages  referred  to  will 
not  bear  this  interpretation,  be  it  so ;  but  there 
is  one  passage  that  will  bear  it.  "Arise  and 
be  baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord/'  said  Ananias  to 


CHURCH    MANUAL  *]7 

Saul  of  Tarsus.  "  Wash  away  thy  sins." 
How  ?  Literally  ?  No,  but  symbolically.  The 
blood  of  Jesus  really  washes  away  sins.  Hence 
the  language — "  and  wrashed  us  from  our  sins 
in  his  own  blood."  But  the  sins  which  the 
blood  of  Jesus  has  really  washed  away  are 
symbolically  and  formally  washed  away  in 
baptism. 

Once  more :  Baptism  anticipates  the  be- 
liever's resurrection  from  the  dead.  This  we 
learn  from  i  Corinthians  15  :  29:  "  Else  what 
shall  they  do,  who  are  baptized  for  the  dead, 
if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all  ?  Why  are  they  then 
baptized  for  the  dead?  "  These  questions  are 
proposed  in  the  midst  of  an  argument  on  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead.  Some  of  the  Corin- 
thians, it  sems,  denied  the  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection,  and  yet  it  does  not  appear  that 
they  questioned  the  propriety  of  an  observ- 
ance of  the  ordinance  of  baptism.  Paul  vir- 
tually tells  them  that  baptism  has  an  anticipa- 
tive  reference  to  the  resurrection  of  the  saints. 
It  has  this  reference,  because  it  has  a  com- 
memorative reference  to  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  It  anticipates  because  it  commemorates. 
The  reason  is  obvious.  The  resurrection  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  procures  the  resurrection  of 


/8  CHURCH    MANUAL 

his  followers  and  is  an  infallible  pledge  of  it. 
The  two  resurrections  are  inseparable.  Bap- 
tism, therefore,  while  it  commemorates  the 
resurrection  of  Christ,  anticipates,  of  neces- 
sity, the  resurrection  of  his  followers. 

Now,  if  these  views  of  the  design  and  sym- 
bolic import  of  baptism  are  correct,  it  follows 
inevitably  that  the  immersion,  in  water,  of  a 
believer  in  Christ,  is  essential  to  baptism — so 
essential  that  there  can  be  no  baptism  without 
it.  If  baptism  represents  the  burial  and  resur- 
rection of  Christ,  it  must  be  immersion.  If  it 
sets  forth  in  emblem  the  believer's  death  to  sin 
and  resurrection  to  a  new  life,  it  must  be  im- 
mersion. If  it  in  symbol  washes  away  the 
sins  which  Christ  has  really  washed  away  in 
his  blood,  still  it  must  be  immersion.  And  if 
it  anticipates  the  resurrection,  nothing  but 
immersion  justifies  the  anticipation.  We  are 
"  buried  by  baptism  " — that  is,  by  means  of 
baptism.  When  the  baptismal  process  takes 
place  there  is  certainly  a  "  burial."  The  two 
are  inseparable ;  and  therefore,  where  there  is 
no  burial  there  is  no  baptism. 

It  had  been  our  purpose  to  present  a  fifth 
consideration  in  favor  of  immersion,  suggested 
by  the  places  selected  for  the  administration  of 


CHURCH    MANUAL  J9 

baptism,  and  the  circumstances  attending  its 
administration 3  as  referred  to  in  the  Nevj  Tes- 
tament; but  the  limits  prescribed  to  this  vol- 
ume positively  forbid. 

2.  Subjects  of  Baptism.  While  the  im- 
port of  the  \vord  baptize  indicates  what  is  the 
baptismal  act,  it  does  not  determine  who  are  to 
be  baptized.  We  must,  therefore,  look  else- 
where than  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  to  as- 
certain who  are  scriptural  subjects  of  baptism. 
And  where  shall  we  look?  To  the  commission 
given  by  Christ  to  his  apostles ;  for  this  com- 
mission is  the  supreme  authority  for  the  ad- 
ministration of  baptism.  Apart  from  it  there 
is  no  authority  to  baptize.  The  circumstances 
connected  with  the  giving  of  this  commisison 
were  replete  with  interest.  The  Saviour  had 
finished  the  work  which  he  came  down  from 
heaven  to  accomplish.  He  had  offered  him- 
self a  sacrifice  for  sin.  He  had  exhausted  the 
cup  of  atoning  sorrow.  He  had  lain  in  the 
dark  mansions  of  the  grave.  He  had  risen  in 
triumph  from  the  dead,  and  was  about  to  as- 
scend  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high. 
Invested  with  perfect  mediatorial  authority,  he 
said  to  his  apostles: 

"  All  power  is  given  to  me  in  heaven  and  in 


8o  CHURCH    MANUAL 

earth.  Go  ye  therefore  and  teach  all  nations, 
baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  teaching 
them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have 
commanded  you  "  (Matt.  28  :  18-20).  "Go 
ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  t  le  gospel  to 
every  creature.  He  that  believeth  and  is  bap- 
tized shall  be  saved;  but  he  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned  "  (Mark  16  :  15,  16).  "  Thus 
it  is  written,  and  thus  it  behooved  Christ  to 
suffer,  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day ; 
and  that  repentance  and  remission  of  sins 
should  be  preached  in  his  name  among  all 
nations,  beginning  at  Jerusalem  "  (Luke  24  : 

46,47). 

Surely  the  language  of  this  commission  is 
plain.  Matthew  informs  us  that  teaching,  or 
making  disciples  (for  the  verb  matheteuo 
which  he  uses  means  make  disciples)  is  to  pre- 
cede baptism;  Mark  establishes  the  priority 
of  faith  to  baptism ;  and  Luke  connects  repent- 
ance and  remission  of  sins  wTith  the  execution 
of  the  commission.  No  man  can,  in  obedience 
to  this  commission,  baptize  an  unbeliever  or  an 
unconscious  infant.  The  unbeliever  is  not  a 
penitent  disciple,  and  it  is  obviously  impossible 
for  the  infant  to  repent  and  believe  the  gospel. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  8l 

It  may  be  laid  down  as  a  principle  of  com- 
mon sense,  which  commends  itself  to  every 
candid  mind,  that  a  commission  to  do  a  thing 
authorizes  only  the  doing  of  the  thing  specified. 
The  doing  of  all  other  things  is  virtually  for- 
bidden. There  is  a  maxim  of  law,  that  the 
expression  of  one  thing  is  the  exclusion  of  an- 
other.1 It  must  necessarily  be  so;  for  other- 
wise there  could  be  no  definiteness  in  contracts, 
and  no  precision  in  legislative  enactments  or 
judicial  decrees.  This  maxim  may  be  illus- 
trated in  a  thousand  ways.  Numerous  scrip- 
tural illustrations  are  at  hand.  For  example : 
God  commanded  Noah  to  make  an  ark  of 
gopher-wood.  He  assigns  no  reason  why 
gopher-wood  should  be  used.  The  command, 
however,  is  positive,  and  it  forbids  the  use  of 
every  other  kind  of  wood.  Abraham  was 
commanded  to  offer  his  son  Isaac  for  a  burnt- 
offering.  He  was  virtually  forbidden  to  offer 
any  other  member  of  his  family.  Aye,  more, 
he  could  not  offer  an  animal  till  the  order  was 
revoked  by  Him  who  gave  it,  and  a  second 
order  was  given,  requiring  the  sacrifice  of  a 
ram  in  the  place  of  Isaac.  The  institution  of 
the  Passover  furnishes  an  illustration,  or  rather 

1  Expressio  unius  est  exclusio  alterius. 
F 


82  CHURCH    MANUAL 

a  combination  of  illustrations:  A  lamb  was 
to  be  killed — not  a  heifer ;  it  was  to  be  of 
the  first  year — not  of  the  second  or  third;  a 
male — not  a  female;  without  a  blemish — not 
with  a  blemish;  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the 
month — not  on  some  other  day ;  the  blood  was 
to  be  applied  to  the  door-posts  and  lintels — 
not  elsewhere. 

The  Constitution  of  the  United  States  sup- 
plies many  illustrations,  only  two  of  which  will 
be  mentioned.  It  provides  that  "  the  President 
shall  have  power,  by  and  with  the  advice  and 
consent  of  the  Senate,  to  make  treaties,  pro- 
vided two-thirds  of  the  senators  present  con- 
cur." Does  any  sane  man  believe  the  Supreme 
Court  and  the  House  of  Representatives  can 
make  treaties  ?  Or  that  the  President  without 
the  Senate,  or  the  Senate  without  the  Presi- 
dent, can  make  treaties?  The  Constitution  in 
giving  the  treaty-making  power  to  the  Presi- 
dent and  Senate  virtually  forbids  all  others  to 
make  treaties. 

Again,  the  Constitution  says :  "  The  Presi- 
dent, Vice-president,  and  all  civil  officers  of  the 
United  States,  shall  be  removed  from  office  on 
impeachment  for  and  conviction  of  treason, 
bribery,  or    other    high     crimes    and    misde- 


CHURCH    MANUAL  83 

meanors."  Here  one  method  of  removal 
from  office  is  prescribed,  and  all  other 
methods  are  prohibited.  Every  man  under- 
stands this. 

In  application  of  the  principle  laid  down  and 
of  the  law  maxim  illustrated,  it  may  be  af- 
firmed, that  the  commission  of  Christ,  in  en- 
joining the  baptism  of  disciples,  believers,  pro- 
hibits, in  effect,  the  baptism  of  all  others.  It 
will  not  do  to  say,  we  are  not  forbidden,  in 
so  many  words,  to  baptize  infants.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  unbelievers ;  aye,  of  horses, 
cattle,  and  bells. 

It  will  be  said  by  those  who  oppose  the 
views  of  Baptists — for  it  has  been  said  a 
thousand  times-- that  if  infants  are  not  to  be 
baptized  because  they  cannot  believe,  they  will 
not  be  saved,  because  they  cannot  believe.  If 
the  salvation  of  infants  depends  on  their  faith, 
they  cannot  be  saved.  They  are  incapable  of 
faith.  They  are  doubtless  saved -through  the 
mediation  of  Christ,  but  it  is  not  by  faith. 
Our  opponents  fail  egregiously  to  accomplish 
their  object  in  urging  this  objection  to  our 
views.  They  must  intend  to  make  us  admit 
the  propriety  of  infant  baptism,  or  force  us  to 
a  denial  of  infant  salvation.     But  we  make 


84  CHURCH    MANUAL 

neither  the  admission  nor  the  denial!  As 
soon  as  we  say  that  infants  are  saved,  not 
by  faith,  but  without  faith,  their  objection  is 
demolished. 

In  considering  the  commission  of  Christ  it  is 
well  to  observe  how  it  was  understood  and  car- 
ried into  effect  in  apostolic  times,  The  first 
practical  interpretation  of  it  was  given  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost.  The  gospel  was  preached, 
the  people  were  pierced  to  the  heart,  and  cried 
out,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?  " 
Peter  replied,  "  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every 
one  of  you."  No  man  will  say  that  the  com- 
mand "  Repent,"  is  applicable  to  infants,  and 
it  is  certain  the  same  persons  were  called  on  to 
repent  and  be  baptized.  The  result  of  Peter's 
sermon  is  seen  in  the  following  words :  "  Then 
they  that  gladly  received  his  word  were  bap- 
tized :  and  the  same  day  there  were  added  to 
them  about  three  thousand  souls/'  The  bap- 
tism was  limited  to  those  who  gladly  received 
Peter's  words ;  and  as  infants  were  not  of  that 
number,  to  infer  that  they  were  baptized  is 
utterly  gratuitous.  The  Pentecostal  adminis- 
tration of  baptism  shows  that  penitent  be- 
lievers were  considered  the  only  subjects  of 
the  ordinance. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  85 

Philip's  labors  in  Samaria  indicate  his  un- 
derstanding of  the  Great  Commission.  He 
preached  Christ  to  the  people.  What  then? 
The  people  "  believed  Philip  preaching  the 
things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.'7  What  next? 
"  They  were  baptized,  both  men  and  women." 
Here  again  baptism  was  restricted  to  be- 
lievers. 

Was  this  rule  deviated  from  among  the  Gen- 
tiles? Certainly  not.  When  Peter  preached 
to  Cornelius  and  his  dependents,  there  was  a 
restriction  of  baptism  to  those  who  received 
the  Holy  Spirit;  and  when  Paul  preached  in 
Corinth  "  many  of  the  Corinthians  hearing, 
believed,  and  were  baptized." 

Thus  it  appears  that  among  Gentiles,  as  well 
as  Samaritans  and  Jews,  baptism  was  pre- 
ceded by  faith  in  Christ.  Thus  does  it  appear 
that  the  commission  was  practically  expounded 
in  the  same  wTay  both  in  Europe  and  Asia. 

Nor  do  the  household  baptisms  mentioned 
in  the  New  Testament  furnish  any  argument 
against  the  baptism  of  believers  alone ;  for 
something  is  said  of  every  household  which 
could  not  be  said  of  unconscious  infants.  For 
example,  it  is  said  of  Cornelius  (Acts  2:2), 


86  CHURCH    MANUAL 

that  he  "  feared  God  with  all  his  house;  of  the 
jailer  (Acts  16  :  32,  34)  that  Paul  and  Silas 
"  spake  to  him  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  to  all 
that  were  in  his  house/'  and  that  he  "  rejoiced, 
believing  in  God  with  all  his  house."  It  is  said 
of  Lydia  (Acts  16  :  40)  that  Paul  and  Silas 
having  been  released  from  prison,  entered  into 
her  house,  "  and  when  they  had  seen  the ' 
brethren,  they  comforted  them."  Doubtless 
'"  the  brethren  "  were  persons  in  Lydia's  em- 
ploy who  constituted  her  "  household/'  and 
were  baptized  as  well  as  herself.  Infants 
would  not  have  been  called  brethren,  nor  re- 
ferred to  as  comforted.  The  intimation  in 
Acts  18  :  8  is  that  the  family  of  Crispus  was 
baptized,  but  it  is  said  he  "  believed  on  the 
Lord  with  all  his  house."  Paul,  as  we  learn 
from  1  Corinthians  1  :  16,  baptized  the  house- 
hold of  Stephanas,  but  he  says  in  the  same 
epistle  (16:  15):  "Ye  know  the  house  of 
Stephanas,  that  it  is  the  first  fruits  of  Achaia, 
and  that  they  have  addicted  themselves  to  the 
ministry  of  the  saints."  These  are  all  the 
household  baptisms  mentioned  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  we  see  in  them  no  deviation 
from  the  commission  of  Christ,  which  requires 
discipleship   as  prerequisite   to   baptism.     On 


CHURCH    MANUAL  87 

the  other  hand,  they  confirm  the  position,  that 
believers  alone  are  scriptural  subjects  of  bap- 
tism. 

The  allusions  to  baptism  in  the  apostolic 
^epistles  forbid  the  supposition  that  infants 
were  baptized.  Paul  refers  to  the  "  baptized  " 
as  "  dead  to  sin  " — rising  from  the  baptismal 
waters  to  "  walk  in  newness  of  life " — as 
"  putting  on  Christ  " — as  "  baptized  for  the 
dead/'  or  in  the  belief  of  the  resurrection. 
Peter  defines  baptism  to  be  "  the  answer  of  a 
good  conscience  toward  God/'  This  is  a  gen- 
eral definition  which  precludes  the  idea  that 
baptism  was,  in  apostolic  times,  administered 
to  any  except  accountable  agents.  What  con- 
science has  a  speechless  infant?  There  is  no 
operation  of  conscience  prior  to  accountability. 
Baptism,  then,  in  its  administration  to  infants, 
cannot  be  what  Peter  says  it  is. 

Without  enlarging  on  these  topics,  what  is 
the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter?  Clearly 
this :  The  commission  of  Christ,  as  understood 
and  exemplified  in  the  apostolic  age,  requires 
the  baptism  of  believers,  disciples;  and  the 
baptism  of  all  others,  whether  adult  unbe- 
lievers or  unconscious  infants,  is  utterly  un- 
warranted.    There  is,  as  Paul  has  said,  one 


88  CHURCH    MANUAL 

baptism.    It  is  one  in  the  action  involved,  and 
one  in  the  subject  of  the  action. 

II.    THE   LORD'S    SUPPER 

What  Paul  says  of  the  institution  and  de- 
sign of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  the  substance  of 
what  the  evangelists  had  recorded.  These  are 
his  words :  "  For  I  have  received  of  the  Lord 
that  which  also  I  delivered  to  you.  That  the 
Lord  Jesus  the  same  night  in  which  he  was 
betrayed  took  bread:  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  Take,  eat :  this  is 
my  body,  which  is  broken  for  you :  this  do  in 
remembrance  of  me.  After  the  same  manner 
also  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped, 
saying,  This  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood : 
this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remem- 
brance of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this 
bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the 
Lord's  death  till  he  come"  (i  Cor.  n  : 
23-26). 

From  this  inspired  account  of  the  origin  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  it  is  plainly  a  commemora- 
tive institution.  It  commemorates  chiefly  and 
supremely  the  death  of  Christ.  "  Ye  do  show 
the  Lord's  death"  We  do  not  show  the  birth, 
or  baptism,  or  burial,  or  resurrection,  or  as- 


CHURCH    MANUAL  89 

cension  of  our  Redeemer,  but  his  death.  If 
ever  the  tragedy  of  Calvary  should  engross  the 
thoughts  of  the  Christian  to  the  exclusion  of 
every  other  topic,  it  is  when  he  sits  at  the 
table  of  the  Lord.  Then  the  death  of  his  Lord 
should  monopolize  all  the  power  of  memory. 

Remember  thee !  thy  death,  thy  shame ! 

The  griefs  which  thou  didst  bear ! 
O  memory,  leave  no  other  name 

But  his  recorded  there. 

Some  will  perhaps  say.  that  in  the  Lord's 
Supper  we  express  our  Christian  fellowship  for 
our  fellow  communicants.  This  is  done  only 
in  an  indirect  and  incidental  manner.  Our 
communion,  according  to  Paul,  is  the  com- 
munion of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ. 
It  is  a  solemn  celebration  of  his  atoning 
death. 

Baptists,  with  comparatively  few  exceptions, 
have  ever  considered  baptism  a  prerequisite  to 
the  Lord's  table.  They  have  so  regarded  it, 
because  they  have  recognized  its  indispensable- 
ness  to  church-membership.  They  have  rea- 
soned in  this  way:  The  Lord's  Supper  is  an 
ordinance  to  be  observed  exclusively  by  the 
members  of  a  visible  church  of  Christ.    As  the 


90  CHURCH    MANUAL 

Lord's  Supper  is  a  church  ordinance  it  is  not 
proper  to  administer  it  to  persons  in  their  in- 
dividual capacity — for  example,  to  the  sick  at 
their  homes.  The  meeting  of  a  church  is  in- 
dispensable to  a  scriptural  observance  of  the 
solemn  feast.  None  can  be  members  of  a  visi- 
ble church  of  Christ  without  baptism.  There- 
fore, baptism  is  a  prerequisite  to  communion 
at  the  Lord's  table.  It  will  be  seen  from  this 
statement  of  the  case,  that  baptism  is  a  pre- 
requisite to  the  Lord's  Supper  because  it  is  a 
prerequisite  to  church-membership.  Church- 
membership  is  the  chief  condition  anterior  to 
communion  at  the  Lord's  table.  Baptism  is  a 
condition  precedent  only  in  the  sense  that  it 
precedes,  and  is  essential  to  church-member- 
ship. It  would  be  well  for  Baptists  to  make 
this  view  more  prominent.  Let  them  not  say 
less  of  baptism,  but  more  of  church-member- 
ship. In  xAxts  ii  :  41  it  is  said:  "Then  they 
that  gladly  received  his  word  were  baptized, 
and  the  same  day  there  were  added  to  them 
about  three  thousand  souls."  The  three  thou- 
sand were  no  doubt  added  to  the  church,  "  the 
hundred  and  twenty  disciples,"  mentioned  in 
the  preceding  chapter ;  for  in  the  last  verse  of 
the  second  chapter  it  is  written :   "  And  the 


CHURCH    MANUAL  91 

Lord  added  to  the  church  daily  such  as  should 
be  saved."  The  adding  in  the  two  verses  was 
the  same  in  kind — that  is.  it  was  an  adding  to 
the  church.  It  will  be  perceived  that  the  bap- 
d  were  added  to  the  church,  and  that  this 
was  done  before  the  "breaking  of  bread" — 
a  phrase  descriptive  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  A 
refusal  on  the  part  of  Baptists  to  commune 
with  Pedobaptists  grows  out  of  the  fact  that 
the  latter  have  ever  been  considered  by  the 
former  as  unbaptized,  and  consequently  with- 
out a  scriptural  church-membership. 

Even  the  celebrated  Robert  Hall,  who  advo- 
cated the  intercommunion  of  Baptist  and  Pedo- 
baptists, with  an  eloquence  and  energy  of  argu- 
mentation rarely  to  be  found  in  the  annals 
of  controversy,  does  not  hesitate  to  express  the 
opinion  that  Pedobaptists  are  unbaptized.  He 
says  : 

'"  We  certainly  make  no  scruple  of  informing 
a  Pedobaptist  candidate  that  we  consider  him 
as  unbaptized.  and  disdain  all  concealment 
upon  the  subject."  Again,  "  If  we  join  with 
those  whom  we  are  obliged  to  consider  as  un- 
baptized, they  unite  with  persons  who.  in  their 
judgment,  repeat  an  ordinance  which  ought 
n : :  to  be  performed  but  once,  nullify  a  Chris- 


92  CHURCH    MANUAL 

tian  institute  and  deprive  their  children  of  the 
benefit  of  a  salutary  rite/'1 

But  while  Mr.  Hall  considered  Pedobaptists 
unbaptized,  he  insisted  on  their  right  as  un- 
baptized persons  to  come  to  the  Lord's  table. 
He  did  not  admit  baptism  to  be  a  prerequisite 
to  communion.  Had  he  conceded  this,  a  point 
almost  universally  conceded  by  Baptists  and 
Pedobaptists,  he  would  not  have  written  his 
"  Terms  of  Communion  "  at  all. 

To  demolish  all  that  Robert  Hall  ever  wrote 
in  favor  of  "  Mixed  Communion/'  it  is  only 
necessary  to  show  the  scriptural  priority  of 
baptism  to  the  Lord's  Supper.  And  surely  this 
is  not  difficult  to  do.  That  baptism  was  first 
instituted,  is  a  significant  fact.  No  one  will 
deny  that  John,  the  harbinger  of  Christ,  bap- 
tized multitudes,  and  that  Jesus  through  his 
disciples  (  John  4  :  1,  2)  baptized  more  than 
John,  before  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per. It  is  morally  certain  that  those  present 
at  its  institution,  the  night  of  the  betrayal,  had 
been  baptized.  Jesus  himself  had  been  bap- 
tized, and  it  is  too  much  for  credulity  itself  to 
believe  that  he  selected  unbaptized  persons  as 
his   apostles.     Does   the   subsequence  of  the 

1  Hall's  Works,  Vol.  I,  pp.  455,  456. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  93 

Lord's  Supper,  in  its  original  appointment,  to 
baptism,  mean  nothing?  But  it  was  said  by 
Mr.  Hall,  that  "  John's  baptism  was  not  Chris- 
tian." It  was  gospel  baptism.  It  was  not  an 
ordinance  of  the  Mosaic  economy.  John  cer- 
tainly introduced  the  gospel  dispensation.  His 
preaching  was  "  the  beginning  of  the  gospel  " 
(Mark  i  :  i)  and  "the  law  and  the  prophets 
were  until  John "  (Luke  16  :  16).  If  any 
one  chooses  to  deny  that  his  baptism  was 
Christian  because  it  is  not  so  termed,  the  de- 
nial may  be  so  enlarged  as  to  embrace  all  the 
baptisms  of  the  New  Testament;  for  the  epi- 
thet Christian  is  not  applied  to  any  of  them. 

But  while  firmly  believing  that  John's  was 
a  gospel  ministry  and  a  gospel  baptism,  all  this 
night  be  waived  by  Baptists,  for  argument's 
sake,  and  then  they  can  show  the  unavoidable 
priority  of  baptism  to  communion.  Let  them 
go  at  once  to  Christ's  last  commission :  "  Go, 
teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them."  Every 
scholar  knows  the  Greek  term  translated 
"  teach "  means  disciple,  or  make  disciples. 
Disciples  to  Christ  were  to  be  made  through 
the  preaching  and  teaching  of  the  apostles. 
This  is  plain.  The  discipling  process  was  first, 
and  then  the  baptismal   act   was   to  be  per- 


94  CHURCH    MANUAL 

formed.  "  Go,  disciple  all  nations,  baptizing 
them."  Now,  according  to  the  commission,  it 
is  evident  that  the  process  of  discipleship 
is  to  be  so  immediately  followed  by  the  admin- 
istration of  baptism,  as  to  leave  no  room  for 
an  observance  of  the  Lord's  Supper  to  inter- 
vene. Baptism  is  the  first  thing  after  a  per- 
son is  discipled  to  Christ.  It  is  the  believer's 
first  public  duty.  It  is  the  first  external  man- 
ifestation of  his  internal  piety.  It  is  an  open 
avowal  of  allegiance  to  Christ.  It  is,  there- 
fore, inevitably  prior  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  an 
observance  of  which  is  no  doubt  included  in 
the  expression :  "  Teaching  them  to  observe 
all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you." 
The  baptized  disciples  are  to  be  taught  to  ob- 
serve all  things  which  he  has  commanded. 
Under  the  commission  of  Christ  his  ministers 
are  not  required  to  say  anything  about  the 
Lord's  Supper  to  the  unbaptized.  The  bap- 
tized disciples  are  to  be  instructed.  How  then 
can  the  Lord's  Supper  precede  baptism,  when 
the  commission  enjoins  the  mention  of  it  only 
to  the  baptized? 

But  how  did  the  apostles  understand  and 
carry  into  effect  this  commission?  This  is  a 
question  of  capital  importance  in  this  discus- 


CHURCH    MANUAL  95 

sion.  On  the  day  of  Pentecost,  Peter  said  to 
the  convicted  Jews,  "  Repent,  and  be  bap- 
tized.'1 The  baptism  was  to  succeed  the  re- 
pentance. There  is  no  intimation  that  the 
Lord's  Supper  was  to  come  between.  And  it 
is  added,  that  the  baptized  "  continued  stead- 
fastly in  the  apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship, 
and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers." 
The  breaking  of  bread — the  Lord's  Supper — 
f  was  preceded  by  baptism.  When  Philip  went 
down  to  Samaria  and  preached,  the  people  be- 
lieved, and  "  were  baptized,  both  men  and 
women."  The  narrative  plainly  indicates  that 
baptism,  and  not  the  Lord's  Supper,  imme- 
diately followed  the  people's  belief  of  what 
Philip  preached.  When  the  Ethiopian  eunuch 
avowed  his  faith  in  Christ,  Philip  at  once  bap- 
tized him.  There  was  no  celebration  of  the 
Lord's  Supper  before  they  left  the  chariot  and 
"  went  down  into  the  water."  When  Cornelius 
and  his  house  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  Peter 
did  not  ask  who  can  forbid  the  Lord's  table  to 
them,  but,  "  Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that 
these  should  not  be  baptized?"  When  Paul 
and  Silas,  at  the  hour  of  midnight,  preached  to 
the  jailer  and  his  family,  and  they  believed, 
what  was  then  done?     Did  thev  commune  at 


96  CHURCH    MANUAL 

the  Lord's  table  ?  No,  but  he  and  all  his  were 
baptized  immediately. 

Thus  does  it  appear  that  the  apostles  and 
primitive  ministers  understood  the  commission 
as  enjoining  baptism  before  the  Lord's  Supper. 
They  have  left  an  instructive  example,  which 
Ave  are  not  at  liberty  to  disregard.  In  view  of 
this  example  we  may  boldly  affirm,  that  the 
whole  tenor  of  the  New  Testament  indicates 
the  priority  of  baptism  to  communion.  Noth- 
ing is  plainer. 

Pedobaptists  concede  the  precedence  of  bap- 
tism to  the  Lord's  Supper.  Doctor  Wall,  in 
his  "  History  of  Infant  Baptism,"  Part  II, 
Chap.  IX,  expresses  himself  in  strong  terms 
as  follows : 

"  No  church  ever  gave  the  communion  to 
any  persons  before  they  were  baptized. 
Among  all  the  absurdities  that  ever  were 
held,  none  ever  maintained  that  any  persons 
should  partake  of  the  communion  before  they 
were  baptized." 

Doctor  Doddridge,  in  his  "  Miscellaneous 
Works,"  p.  510,  remarks  : 

"  It  is  certain  that  Christians  in  general 
have  always  been  spoken  of,  by  the  most  an- 
cient Fathers,  as  baptized  persons.    And  it  is 


CHURCH    MANUAL  97 

also  certain  that,  as  far  as  our  knowledge  of 
primitive  antiquity  extends,  no  unbaptized  per- 
son received  the  Lord's  Supper." 

Doctor  Hibbard,  a  Methodist  author  of  con- 
siderable distinction,  in  his  work  on  "  Christian 
Baptism,"  thus  expresses  himself  : 

"  It  is  but  just  to  remark,  that  in  one  princi- 
ple the  Baptist  and  the  Pedobaptist  churches 
agree.  They  both  agree  in  rejecting  from 
communion  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  and  in 
denying  the  rights  of  church  fellowship  to  all 
who  have  not  been  baptized.  Valid  baptism 
they  consider  as  essential  to  constitute  visible 
church-membership.  This,  also,  we  hold.  The 
only  question  then  that  here  divides  us  is,  what 
is  essential  to  valid  baptism?  The  Baptists, 
in  passing  a  sweeping  sentence  of  disfranchise- 
ment upon  all  other  Christian  churches,  have 
only  acted  upon  a  principle  held  in  common 
with  all  other  churches,  viz. :  that  baptism  is 
essential  to  church-membership.  .  .  Of  course, 
they  must  be  their  own  judges  as  to  what 
baptism  is.  It  is  evident  that,  according  to  our 
views,  we  can  admit  them  to  our  communion ; 
but  with  their  views  of  baptism,  it  is  equally 
evident,  they  can  never  reciprocate  the  cour- 
tesy; and  the  charge  of  close  communion  is  no 
G 


98  CHURCH    MANUAL 

more  applicable  to  the  Baptists  than  to  us ;  in- 
asmuch as  the  question  of  church-membership 
is  determined  by  as  liberal  principles  as  it  is 
with  any  other  Protestant  churches— so  far, 
I  mean,  as  the  present  subject  is  concerned, 
i.  e.,  it  is  determined  by  valid  baptism."  (Hib- 
bard's  "  Christian  Baptism,"  pp.  171,  175.) 

This  extract  from  Doctor  Hibbard  exhibits 
a  spirit  of  controversial  candor  and  fairness, 
not  often  witnessed  in  the  discussion  of  the 
communion  question.  It  explodes  the  charge 
of  "  Baptist  bigotry  and  exclusiveness/'  and 
establishes  the  fact  that  the  point  in  dispute 
between  Baptists  and  others  is  not  about  close 
communion,  but  close  baptism.  The  contro- 
versy is  supremely  and  intensely  baptismal. 

Every  visible  church  of  Christ  may  be  con- 
sidered a  sacred  inclosure,  susceptible  of  en- 
trance in  but  one  way.  In  that  inclosure  is 
set  the  table  of  the  Lord.  And  the  Lord  of 
the  table  has  prescribed  the  terms  of  admit- 
tance into  that  inclosure.  Those  who  have 
complied  with  the  terms  and  have  entered  in, 
are  the  guardians  of  the  table.  They  must  see 
to  it  that  it  is  approached  only  in  the  way 
which  the  Lord  of  the  inclosure  and  of  the 
table  has  specified.    If  they  are  appealed  to,  to 


CHURCH    MANUAL  99 

change  the  entrance  way,  or  to  make  a  new 
entrance,  or  to  allow  those  without  to  make 
ways  of  entrance  to  suit  themselves,  they  must 
say  with  strongest  emphasis :  "  there  is  one 

LAWGIVER  " — "  WE  HAVE  X0  SUCH  CUSTOM, 
NEITHER  THE  CHURCHES  OF  GOD." 

It  will  be  said — for  it  has  been  said,  no  one 
knows  how  often — the  table  is  the  Lord's. 
This  all  will  concede.  But  how  different  are 
the  reasonings  based  on  this  concession ! 
Pedobaptists  say,  as  it  is  the  Lord's  table 
they  have  a  right  to  approach  it — that  as  it  is 
not  the  table  of  the  Baptists,  the  Baptists  ought 
not  to  place  obstructions  in  the  way  of  their 
approach.  Baptists  say,  as  it  is  the  Lord's 
table,  it  must  be  approached  in  the  way  he 
directs — that  his  proprietorship  of  the  table 
furnishes  the  reason  of  their  course — that  if  it 
was  their  table  they  would  have  discretionary 
authority,  whereas  they  now  have  none — that 
they  do  not  place  obstructions  in  the  way  of 
Pedobaptists,  but  that  the  Lord  of  the  table  has 
done  it.  This  is  a  specimen  of  the  logic  em- 
ployed by  the  two  parties  in  the  controversy. 
Which  species  of  logic  indicates  greater  loyalty 
to  Christ,  the  reader  may  determine. 


CHAPTER  V 

THE   GOVERNMENT   OF   A   CHURCH 

THERE  are  three  forms  of  church  gov- 
ernment,  indicated   by   the   terms    Epis- 
copacy, Presbyterianism,  and  Congrega- 
tionalism. 

Episcopacy  recognizes  the  right  of  bishops 
to  preside  over  districts  of  country,  and  one 
of  its  fundamental  doctrines  is,  that  a  bishop 
is  officially  superior  to  other  ministers.  Of 
course,  a  modern  bishop  has  under  his  charge 
the  "  inferior  clergy  " ;  for  it  is  insisted,  that 
the  "  ordaining  power,"  and  "  the  right  to 
rule/'  belong  to  the  Episcopal  office.  Those 
who  adopt  the  Episcopal  form  of  government 
believe  that  there  are  three  orders  in  the  min- 
istry— namely,  deacons,  elders,  and  bishops. 
The  modern  application  of  the  term  bishop 
to  a  man  who  has  under  his  charge  a  district 
of  country,  is  very  objectionable.  It  has  al- 
most banished  from  Christendom  the  idea 
originally  attached  to  the  term.  In  apostolic 
times,  bishop,  pastor,  and  elder  were  terms  of 

IOO 


CHURCH    MANUAL  IOI 

equivalent  import.  The  elders  of  the  church 
of  Ephesus  are  termed  (Acts  20  :  24)  over- 
seers— in  the  original,  episcopos — the  word 
generally  translated  "  bishop,"  if  indeed 
"  bishop  "  may  be  called  a  translation. 

Presbyterianism  recognizes  two  classes  of 
elders — preaching  elders  and  ruling  elders, 
The  pastor  and  ruling  elders  of  a  congregation 
constitute  what  is  called  the  "  session  of  the 
church."  The  "  session  "  transacts  the  busi- 
ness of  the  church,  receives,  dismisses,  ex- 
cludes members,  etc.  From  the  decisions  of  a 
session  there  is  an  appeal  to  the  presbytery; 
from  the  action  of  the  presbytery  an  appeal  to 
the  Synod ;  and  from  the  action  of  the  Synod 
an  appeal  to  the  General  Assembly,  whose  ad- 
judications are  final  and  irresistible. 

Congregationalism  antagonizes  with  Epis- 
copacy and  Presbyterianism,  and  distinctly  rec- 
ognizes these  truths  : 

1.  That  the  governmental  power  is  in  the 
hands  of  the  people. 

It  resides  with  the  people  in  contradistinc- 
tion from  bishops  or  elders — that  is  to  say, 
bishops  or  elders  can  do  nothing,  strictly  and 
properly  ecclesiastic,  without  the  concurrence 
of  the  people. 


102  CHURCH    MANUAL 

2.  The  right  of  a  majority  of  the  members 
of  a  church  to  rule,  in  accordance  with  the  law 
of  Christ. 

The  will  of  the  majority  having  been  ex- 
pressed, it  becomes  the  minority  to  submit. 

3.  That  the  power  of  a  church  cannot  be 
transferred  or  alienated,  and  that  church  ac- 
tion is  final. 

The  power  of  a  church  cannot  be  delegated. 
There  may  be  messengers  of  a  church,  but 
there  cannot  be  delegates  in  the  ordinary 
sense  of  the  term.  It  would  be  well  for  the 
churches  in  their  letters  to  associations  and 
councils,  to  say  messengers,  not  delegates.. 
No  church  can  empower  any  man,  or  body  of 
men,  to  do  anything  which  will  impair  its  in- 
dependency. 

These  are  highly  important  principles,  and 
while  the  existence  of  the  congregational  form 
of  church  government  depends  on  their  recog- 
nition and  application,  it  is  an  inquiry  of  vital 
moment :  Does  the  New  Testament  inculcate 
these  principles?  For  if  it  does  not,  whatever 
may  be  said  in  commendation  of  them,  they 
possess  no  obligatory  force. 

Does  the  New  Testament  then  inculcate  the 
foundation    principle    of    Congregationalism ; 


CHURCH    MANUAL  103 

namely,   that  the   governmental  power   of  a 
church  is  with  the  members?    Let  us  see. 

It  was  the  province  of  the  apostolic  churches 
to  admit  members  into  their  communion. 

In  Romans  14:1  it  is  written :  "  Him 
that  is  weak  in  the  faith  receive  ye."  The 
import  of  this  language  obviously  is,  "  Receive 
into  your  fellowship  and  treat  as  a  Christian 
him  who  is  weak  in  faith."  There  is  unques- 
tionably a  command — receive  ye.  To  whom 
is  this  command  addressed?  To  bishops?  It 
is  not.  To  the  "  Session  of  the  church/'  com- 
posed of  the  pastor  and  the  ruling  elders?  No. 
To  whom  then  ?  To  the  very  persons  to  whom 
the  epistle  was  addressed,  and  it  was  written 
"  to  all  that  be  in  Rome,  beloved  of  God,  called 
to  be  saints."  No  ingenuity  can  torture  this 
language  into  a » command  given  to  the  officers 
of  the  church  in  Rome.  The  members  of  the 
church,  whose  designation  was  "  saints,"  were 
addressed  and  commanded  to  "  receive  the 
weak  in  faith.'7  It  was  their  business  to  decide 
who  should  .  be  admitted  into  their  Christian 
community;  and  Paul  under  the  impulses  of 
inspiration,  says,  "  Him  that  is  weak  in  the 
faith,   receive   ye." 


104  CHURCH    MANUAL 

We  now  proceed  to  show  that  the  New  Tes- 
tament churches  had  the  right  to  exclude  un- 
zvorthy  members,  and  that  they  exercised  the 
right. 

In  i  Corinthians  5  :  1-5  we  read  as  follows : 
"  It  is  reported  commonly  that  there  is  forni- 
cation among  you,  and  such  fornication  as  is 
not  so  much  as  named  among  the  Gentiles,  that 
one  should  have  his  father's  wife.  And  ye  are 
puffed  up,  and  have  not  rather  mourned  that 
he  that  hath  done  this  deed  might  be  taken 
away  from  among  you.  For  I  verily,  as  ab- 
sent in  body,  but  present  in  spirit,  have  judged 
already,  as  though  I  were  present,  concerning 
him  that  hath  so  done  this  deed ;  in  the  name 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  ye  are  gath- 
ered together,  and  my  spirit,  with  the  power 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  deliver  such  .an 
one  to  Satan,  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh, 
that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord  Jesus." 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  while  Paul 
tk  judged  "  that  the  incestuous  man  ought  to  be 
exclude^  from  the  church,  he  did  not  exclude 
him.  He  did  not  claim  the  right  to  do  so ;  and 
when  he  said  to  the  "  churches  of  Galatia,"  "  I 
would  they  were  even  cut  off  who  trouble  you," 


CHURCH    MANUAL  10$ 

he  did  not  cut  them  off,  though  he  desired  that 
it  should  be  done. 

It  deserves  notice  too,  that  the  members  of 
the  Corinthian  church  could  not,  in  their  indi- 
i  idual  capacity,  exclude  the  incestuous  man. 
It  was  necessary  that  they  should  be  "  gath- 
ered together."  They  must  assemble  as  a 
church.  Thus  assembling,  "  the  power  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ "  was  to  be  with  them. 
They  were  to  act  by  his  authority,  and  execute 
his  will;  for  he  makes  it  incumbent  on  his 
churches  to  exercise  discipline.  In  the  last 
verse  of  the  chapter  referred  to,  Paul  says: 
"  Put  away  from  among  yourselves  that 
wicked  person."  Here  is  a  command,  given 
by  an  inspired  man,  requiring  the  exclusion 
of  an  unworthy  member  from  the  church  at 
Corinth.  To  whom  was  the  command  ad- 
dressed? To  the  official  members  of  the 
church?  No;  but  "  to  the  church  of  God, 
which  is  at  Corinth,  to  them  that  are  sanctified 
in  Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints. " 

The  right  of  a  church  to  exclude  from  its 
communion  disorderly  persons  is  recognized  in 
2  Thessalonians  3:6:  "  Now  we  command 
you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,    that    ye    withdraw    yourselves    from 


I06  CHURCH    MANUAL 

every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly.''  This 
command  was  addressed  "  to  the  church  of  the 
Thessalonians."  To  withdraw  from  a  "  disor- 
derly brother  "  is  the  same  thing  as  to  exclude 
him.  There  is  a  cessation  of  church  fellow- 
ship. 

Matthew  18  :  17  has  not  been  referred  to, 
because  it  will  be  noticed  in  another  place. 
The  reader  will  see,  upon  examination,  that  the 
passage  clearly  implies  the  power  of  "  the 
church  "  to  perform  the  act  of  excommunica- 
tion, by  which  the  member  cut  off  becomes 
"  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  publican." 

The  apostolic  churches  had  the  pozver  and 
the  right  to  restore  excluded  members  who 
gave  satisfactory  evidence  of  penitence. 

In  2  Corinthians  2  :  6-8  the  "  incestuous 
man  is  again  mentioned,  as  follows :  "  Suf- 
ficient to  such  a  man  is  this  punishment,  which 
was  inflicted  of  many.  So  that  contrariwise 
ye  ought  rather  to  forgive  him  and  comfort 
him,  lest  perhaps  such  an  one  should  be  swal- 
lowed up  with  overmuch  sorrow.  Wherefore 
I  beseech  you  that  ye  would  confirm  your  love 
toward  him."  The  apostle  manages  this  case 
with  the  greatest  tenderness  and  delicacy.    He 


CHURCH    MANUAL  IO7 

refers   to   the   excluded   member   without  the 
>t  reference  to  the  disgraceful  offence  for 
which  he  was  excluded.    "  Sufficient,"  says  he, 
this  punishment."  etc.     That  is,  the  object 
exclusion  had  been  accomplished.     The 
church  had  shown  its  determination  not  to  con- 
7  at  sin.  and  the  excluded  member  had  be- 
come penitent.    But  the  point  under  considera- 
tion is,  that  the  apostle  advised  the  restoration 
of  the  penitent  offender.     Paul  could  no  more 
restore  him  to  the  church  than  he  could  expel 
him  from  it  in  the  first  instance ;  but  he  says. 
"  I  beseech  you  that  ye  confirm  your  love  to- 
ward him."     The  power  to  restore  was  with 
church,  and  Paul  solicits  an  exercise  of  that 
power.     The  great  apostle  in  saying,  "  /  be- 
:Ii  you,"  bows  to  the  majesty  of  democratic 
church  sovereignty.     He  virtually  admits  that 
-ing  could  be  done  unless  the  church  chose 
to  act. 

Xow.  if  the  Xew  Testament  churches  had 
power  and  the  right  to  receive,  exclude, 
restore  members,  they  must  have  had  the 
right  to  transact  any  other  business  coming 
before  them.  There  surely  can  be  nothing 
more  vital  to  the  interests  of  a  church  than  the 
reception,  exclusion,  and  restoration  of  mem- 


I08  CHURCH    MANUAL 

bers.  Here  we  might  let  the  argument  for 
the  foundation  principle  of  Congregationalism 
rest;  but  there  is  other  proof  of  the  recogni- 
tion of  that  principle. 

In  the  first  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apos- 
tles there  is  an  account  of  the  election  of  Mat- 
thias to  the  apostleship.  He  was  to  succeed 
Judas,  the  traitor.  The  most  natural  infer- 
ence is,  that  Matthias  was  chosen  by  the  "  one 
hundred  and  twenty  disciples  "  mentioned  in 
verse  15.  These  disciples  were,  no  doubt,  the 
church  to  which  the  three  thousand  converts 
were  added  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The 
people  must  have  been  held  in  high  estimation 
by  Peter,  if  called  on  in  conjunction  with  the 
apostles  themselves  to  elect  a  successor  to 
Judas. 

In  Acts  6  there  is  reference  to  the  circum- 
stances which  originated  the  deacon's  office, 
and  also  to  the  manner  in  which  the  first 
deacons  were  appointed.  It  will  be  seen  that 
the  matter  of  grievance  was  referred  by  the 
apostles  to  the  multitude  of  the  disciples — 
that  they  directed  the  brethren  to  look  out 
seven  men — that  the  saying  pleased  the  zvhole 
multitude — and  they  chose,  etc.  The  words  we 
have  italicized  render  the  agency  of  the  people 


CHURCH    MANUAL  IO9 

in  the  whole  transaction  clear  as  the  sun  in 
heaven.  Xot  only  the  disciples,  but  the  multi- 
tude, the  zi'hole  multitude  of  the  disciples 
acted.  Xo  language  could  more  strongly  ex- 
press the  action  of  a  church,  as  distinguished 
from  that  of  its  officers. 

In  support  of  the  fundamental  principle  of 
Congregationalism,  the  following  facts  are 
stated :  The  "  whole  church  " — the  "  breth- 
ren " — are  named  in  connection  with  the 
"  apostles  and  elders  "  Acts  15  :  22 ,  23  :  "  Then 
pleased  it  the  apostles  and  elders,  with  the 
whole  church,  to  send  chosen  men.  .  .  And 
they  wrote  letters  by  them  after  this  manner : 
1  The  apostles,  and  elders,  and  brethren,  send 
greeting/  '  The  brethren  of  the  church  at 
Jerusalem  acted,  as  well  as  the  apostles  and 
elders. 

The  churches  of  apostolic  times  sent  forth 
ministers  on  missionary  tours.  When  Antioch 
received  the  wrord  of  God,  the  church  at  Jeru- 
salem "  sent  forth  Barnabas,  that  he  should  go 
as  far  as  Antioch'7  (Acts  11  :  22).  His 
labors  were  successful — "  much  people  was 
added  to  the  Lord " — and  at  a  subsequent 
period  the  church  in  Antioch  sent  out  Saul  and 
Barnabas,    who    made    a    long   journey,    per- 


IIO  CHURCH    MANUAL 

formed  much  labor,  returned,  and  reported  to 
the  church  all  that  God  had  done  with  them. 
(Acts  13  :  1-3;  14  :  26,  2j.)  With  what  def- 
erential respect  did  these  ministers  of  the 
gospel  treat  the  church  that  sent  them  forth ! 
The  apostles,  so  far  from  exercising  lordship 
over  the  churches,  did  not  control  their  char- 
ities. This  is  seen  in  Acts  n  :  29,  30;  1  Corin- 
thians 16  :  1,  2;  2  Corinthians  9  :  7.  The 
churches  selected  messengers  to  convey  their 
charities.  (See  1  Cor.  16  :  3;  2  Cor.  8  :  18, 
19;  Phil.  2  :  25;  4  :   18.) 

A  second  principle  of  Congregationalism,  al- 
ready announced,  is  the  right  of  a  majority  of 
the  members  of  a  church  to  rule  in  accordance 
zuith  the  lazu  of  Christ. 

In  2  Corinthians  2  :  6  it  is  written,  "  Suf- 
ficient to  such  a  man  is  this  punishment,  which 
was  inflicted  of  many."  A  literal  translation 
of  the  words  rendered  "  of  many,"  would  be 
"  by  the  more  " — that  is,  by  the  majority.  Mc- 
Knight's  translation  is,  "  by  the  greater  num- 
ber." If,  as  has  been  shown,  the  governmental 
power  of  a  church  is  with  the  members,  it  fal- 
lows that  a  majority  must  rule.  This  is  so 
plain  a  principle  of  Congregationalism,  and  of 


CHURCH    MANUAL  III 

common  sense,  that  it  is  needless  to  dwell 
upon  it. 

A  third  truth,  recognized  by  the  Congre- 
gational form  of  church  government  is,  that 
the  power  of  a  church  cannot  be  transferred  or 
alienated,  and  that  church  action  is  final. 

The  church  at  Corinth  could  not  transfer 
her  power  to  the  church  at  Philippi,  nor  could 
the  church  at  Antioch  convey  her  authority  to 
the  church  of  Ephesus.  Neither  could  all  the 
apostolic  churches  combined  delegate  their 
power  to  an  association,  or  synod,  or  conven- 
tion. That  church  power  is  inalienable  results 
from  the  foundation  principle  of  Congregation- 
alism— that  this  power  is  in  the  hands  of  the 
people,  the  membership.  And  if  the  power  of 
a  church  cannot  be  transferred,  church  action 
is  final.  That  there  is  no  tribunal  higher  than 
a  church  is  evident  from  Matthew  18  :  15-17. 
The  Saviour  lays  down  a  rule  for  the  ad- 
justment of  private  differences  among  breth- 
ren. "  If  thy  brother  shall  trespass  against 
thee  go  tell  him  his  fault/7  etc  If  the  of- 
fender, when  told  of  his  fault,  does  not  give 
satisfaction,  the  offended  party  is  to  take  with 
him,  '*  one  or  two  more,  that  in  the  mouth  01 
two  or  three   witnesses   every  word  may  be 


112  CHURCH    MANUAL 

established."  But  if  the  offender  "  shall 
neglect  to  hear  them,"  what  is  to  be  done? 
"  Tell  it  to  the  church."  What  church?  Evi- 
dently the  particular  congregation  to  which  the 
parties  belong.  If  the  offender  does  not  hear 
the  church,  what  then  ?  "  Let  him  be  unto 
thee  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  publican."  But 
can  there  be  no  appeal  to  an  association,  or 
presbytery,  or  conference?  No.  There  is  no 
appeal.  Shall  an  association,  or  presbytery, 
or  conference  put  the  offender  back  in  church 
fellowship,  when  the  church,  by  its  action, 
classed  him  with  heathens  and  publicans? 
This  is  too  preposterous.  What  kind  of  fel- 
lowship would  it  be  ?  Will  it  be  asked,  what  is 
to  be  done  if  the  action  of  a  church  does  not 
give  satisfaction  to  all  concerned?  What  is  to 
be  done  when  the  action  of  a  Presbyterian  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  or  Methodist  General  Confer- 
ence, or  an  Episcopal  General  Convention  does 
not  give  satisfaction?  There  must  be  a  stop- 
ping-place. There  must  be  final  action.  Bap- 
tists says,  with  the  New  Testament  before 
them,  that  the  action  of  each  local  congrega- 
tion of  believers  is  final.  Pedobaptists,  with 
the  exception  of  Independents  and  Congrega- 
tionalists,  deny  the  finality  of  church  action. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  II3 

Who  are  right?  Let  those  who  oppose  the 
Baptist  form  of  church  government  show  in 
the  New  Testament  the  remotest  allusion  to 
an  appeal  from  the  decision  of  a  church  to  any 
other  tribunal.    It  cannot  be  done. 

The  view  here  presented  of  the  independence 
of  the  apostolic  churches  is  so  obviously  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  facts  of  the  case  that  dis- 
tinguished Pedobaptists  have  been  forced  to 
concede  it.  Hence  Mosheim,  a  Lutheran,  and 
a  bitter  enemy  of  Baptists,  speaking  of  the  first 
century,  says :  "  The  churches  in  those  early 
times  were  entirely  independent,  none  of  them 
being  subject  to  any  foreign  jurisdiction,  but 
each  governed  by  its  own  rulers  and  its  own 
laws ;  for,  though  the  churches  founded  by  the 
apostles  had  this  particular  deference  shown  to 
them,  that  they  were  consulted  in  difficult  and 
doubtful  cases,  yet  they  had  no  juridical  au- 
thority, no  sort  of  supremacy  over  the  others, 
nor  the  least  right  to  enact  laws  for  them."  x 

Archbishop  Whately,  a  dignitary  of  the 
Church  of  England,  referring  to  the  apostolic 
churches,  says :  "  They  were  each  a  distinct, 
independent  community   on  earth,  united  by 

1  Maclaine's    "  Mosheim's   Church   History,"   Baltimore    edi- 
tion, Vol.  I,  p.  39. 

H 


114  CIIUKCii    MANUAL 

the  common  principles  on  which  they  were 
founded,  and  by  their  mutual  agreement,  affec- 
tion and  respect;  but  not  having  any  one  rec- 
ognized Head  on  earth,  or  acknowledging 
any  sovereignty  of  one  of  these  societies  over 
others."  Again :  "  A  church  and  a  diocese 
seem  to  have  been  for  a  considerable  time  co- 
extensive and  identical.  And  each  church  or 
diocese,  though  connected  with  the  rest  by  ties 
of  faith,  and  hope,  and  charity,  seems  to  have 
been  perfectly  independent  as  far  as  regards 
any  power  of  control."  x 

This  is  strong  testimony  from  a  Lutheran 
and  an  Episcopalian.  They  would  have  given 
a  different  representation  of  the  matter,  if  they 
could  have  done  so  consistently  with  truth. 
They  virtually  condemned  their  own  denomi- 
national organizations  in  writing  thus. 

Before  closing  this  chapter,  it  may  be  proper 
to  say  that  while  a  church  in  the  exercise  of 
its  independence  may  receive  members  ex- 
cluded from  another  church,  it  cannot  be  done, 
in  ordinary  circumstances,  without  a  violation 
of  church  courtesy,  and  a  departure  from  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel.  It  is  assumed  that,  as 
a  general  thing,  members  are  deservedly  ex- 

1  "  Kingdom  of  Christ,"  Carter's  edition,  pp.  36,  44. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  115 

eluded  from  church  fellowship.  When  this  is 
the  case,  it  is  manifestly  improper  for  them  to 
be  received  by  sister  churches.  It  would  have 
been  a  flagrant  violation  of  propriety  for  any 
other  church  to  have  received  to  its  member- 
ship the  incestuous  man  expelled  by  the  church 
at  Corinth.  Those  justly  excluded,  if  they 
would  enjoy  church  privileges  again,  must 
penitently  confess  the  offenses  for  which  they 
were  excluded,  and  obtain  restoration  to  mem- 
bership in  the  church  from  whose  fellowship 
they  were  cut  off.  This  is  the  general  rule. 
Sometimes,  however,  a  member  is  unjustly  ex- 
cluded. Prejudice  or  party  feeling  may  con- 
trol the  action  of  the  church.  In  the  exercise 
of  discipline  the  law  of  Christ  may  be  departed 
from.  Acknowledgments  which  ought  to  be 
satisfactory  may  be  declared  insufficient.  The 
arraigned  member  is  unjustly  expelled.  The 
impression,  it  may  be,  is  made  on  the  commu- 
nity, as  well  as  on  sister  churches,  that  the  ex- 
pulsion is  unjust.  What  is  to  be  done?  The 
excluded  member  is  suffering  wrongfully,  and 
earnestly  desires  to  enjoy  church  privileges. 
The  church  that  has  passed  the  excluding  act 
ought  to  rescind  it.  Suppose,  howrever,  the 
church,   disregarding  the   advice   of   disinter- 


Il6  CHURCH    MANUAL 

ested,  judicious  brethren,  does  not  rescind  its 
act.  Then  the  expelled  member,  the  injustice 
of  his  exclusion  being  known,  may  be  right- 
fully received  into  the  fellowship  of  another 
church.  Such  cases  rarely  occur;  but  when 
they  do,  it  is  well  to  know  that  they  may  be 
disposed  of  in  the  manner  here  suggested. 
There  is  in  church  independence  ample  author- 
ity for  this  course  of  procedure.  The  acts  of 
a  church  are  valid  and  binding  when 
they  accord  with  the  law  of  christ : 
when   they  do   not   they  are   null  and 

VOID. 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  DISCIPLINE   OF   A    CHURCH 

IF  discipline  is  necessary  in  families,  schools, 
and  armies,  it  must  answer  important  pur- 
poses in  the  churches  of  Christ.  It  may  be 
considered  the  process  by  which  the  spiritual 
improvement,  usefulness,  and  efficiency  of  a 
church  are  promoted.  In  its  comprehensive 
sense  church  discipline  is  both  formative  and 
corrective,  though  the  phrase  is  generally  used 
in  the  latter  acceptation.    We  notice  briefly. 

I.    FORMATIVE   DISCIPLINE 

The  doctrine  of  formative  discipline  is 
taught  in  such  passages  as  these :  "  In  whom 
all  the  building  fitly  framed  together  groweth 
unto  a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord:  in  whom  ye 
also  are  builded  together  for  a  habitation  of 
God  through  the  Spirit."  "  For  the  perfecting 
of  the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for 
the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ ;  till  we  all 
come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a  perfect 

117 


Il8  CHURCH    MANUAL 

man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the 
fullness  of  Christ."  "  Giving  all  diligence,  add 
to  your  faith  virtue ;  and  to  virtue  knowledge ; 
and  to  knowledge  temperance;  and  to  tem- 
perance patience;  and  to  patience  godliness; 
and  to  godliness  brotherly  kindness ;  and  to 
brotherly  kindness  charity."  "  Grow  in  grace, 
and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ"  (Eph.  2  :  21,  22;  4  :  12,  13;  2  Peter 
1  :  5-7;  3  :  18). 

It  is  clear  from  these  Scriptures  that  Chris- 
tians should  ever  be  in  a  state  of  progressive 
spiritual  improvement.  They  must  not  retro- 
grade, nor  remain  stationary,  but  be  constantly 
advancing  in  the  divine  life.  The  "  perfecting 
of  the  saints  "  is  an  object  of  vast  importance. 
The  perfection  referred  to  has  to  do,  not  so 
much  with  absolute  freedom  from  sin,  as  some 
suppose,  as  with  the  symmetrical  development 
and  maturity  of  Christian  character.  The  new 
convert  to  the  faith  of  the  gospel  is  a  "  babe," 
a  spiritual  infant,  that  has  "  need  of  milk,"  and 
not  of  "  strong  meat."  Formative  church  dis- 
cipline contemplates  the  vigorous  growth  of 
the  "  babe  in  Christ "  till  it  is  developed  into 
"  a  perfect  man."  Bringing  the  baptized  disci- 
ples into  local  church  organizations  has  this 


CHURCH    MANUAL  119 

purpose  in  view.  They  are  to  be  taught  "  to 
observe  all  things  whatsoever  Christ  has  com- 
manded." By  such  observance  alone  can  a 
church  edify  itself  in  love,  building  up  its  mem- 
bers on  their  most  holy  faith.  By  such  ob- 
servance is  promoted  the  symmetry  of  Chris- 
tian character,  and  in  it  are  included  all  the 
activities  of  the  Christian  life. 

Formative  discipline,  in  its  sanctifying  in- 
fluences, ought  to  reach  every  church-member. 
The  old,  with  their  gray  hairs,  should  exhibit 
its  beneficial  power  in  the  ripeness  of  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit.  The  middle-aged,  in  the  perfec- 
tion of  physical  strength,  should  also  show  that 
it  makes  them  "  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the 
power  of  his  might."  And  the  young,  in  the 
morning  of  life,  should  yield  to  its  plastic 
touches,  that  they  may  become  useful  laborers 
in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord.  All  have  been 
redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ, 
and  "  should  live,  not  to  themselves,  but  to  him 
who  died  and  rose  again." 

If  every  church  will  experimentally  and 
practically  learn  the  lessons  taught  in  I  Corin- 
thians \2  :  12-27,  ^e  subject  of  formative 
discipline  will  be  well  understood.  Then  no 
member  will  be  dissatisfied  with  his  own  place, 


120  CHURCH    MANUAL 

and  envy  the  place  of  another.  No  one  will 
attach  undue  importance  to  his  own  services, 
and  undervalue  the  services  of  others.  No 
one  will  forget  that  the  "  more  feeble  mem- 
bers "  of  a  church  are  "  necessary/'  because 
they  have  something  to  do.  There  will  be 
cordial  sympathy  and  cooperation  growing  out 
of  identity  of  spiritual  interests.  Such  a 
church  will  prosper  and  "  grow  unto  a  holy 
temple  in  the  Lord."  But  if  a  church  fails  to 
learn  the  lessons  referred  to,  its  members  will 
make  comparatively  no  progress  in  the  divine 
life — they  will  remain  in  a  state  of  spiritual  in- 
fancy— and  their  knowledge  of  the  gospel  will 
be  so  meager  and  superficial  as  to  subject  them 
to  the  charge  brought  against  the  Hebrews: 
"  For  when  for  the  time  ye  ought  to  be  teach- 
ers, ye  have  need  that  one  teach  you  again 
which  be  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of 
God;  and  are  become  such  as  have  need  of 
milk,  and  not  of  strong  meat.  For  every  one 
that  useth  milk  is  unskillful  in  the  word  of 
righteousness:  for  he  is  a  babe"  (Heb.  5  : 
12,  13). 

II.    CORRECTIVE  DISCIPLINE 

This    phrase    implies    the    imperfection    of 
church-members — their  liability  to  sin.     Alas, 


CHURCH    MANUAL  121 

how  many  are  the  proofs  of  this  imperfec- 
tion— how  numerous  the  illustrations  of  this 
liability !  Jesus  said,  "  It  must  needs  be  that 
offences  come."  Depravity  makes  this  certain 
in  society  at  large;  and  the  remains  of  de- 
pravity render  it  certain  in  individual  Chris- 
tians and  in  Christian  churches.  In  every  case 
of  church  discipline  the  honor  of  Christ  and 
the  interests  of  his  cause  are  more  or  less  af- 
fected; and  it  deserves  special  notice  that  the 
Saviour's  injunctions  contemplate  disciplinary 
church  action  as  the  last  resort.  Everything 
else  that  can  be  done  must  first  be  done  to  ad- 
just differences  and  remove  offences  among 
brethren.  There  are  two  commands  of  Christ, 
which,  if,  faithfully  obeyed,  would  in  almost 
every  instance  prevent  personal  offences  from 
assuming  such  form  and  magnitude  as  to  re- 
quire church  action.  These  injunctions  are  to 
be  found  in  Matthew  5  :  23,  24  and  18  :  15, 
and  they  are  as  follows:  "Therefore  if  thou 
bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there  remem- 
berest  that  thy  brother  hath  ought  against 
thee:  leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and 
go  thy  way;  first  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother, 
and  then  come  and  offer  thy  gift."  "More- 
over, if  thy  brother  trespass  against  thee,  go 


122  CHURCH    MANUAL 

and  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him 
alone:' 

According  to  the  former  of  these  passages 
the  brother  who  is  supposed  to  be  the  offender 
is  to  go  to  the  offended  brother.  He  must  go 
promptly.  The  necessity  of  an  immediate  in- 
terview between  the  parties  is  so  imperative  as 
to  justify  the  suspension  of  an  act  of  worship 
till  the  interview  is  held.  "  Leave  there  thy 
gift  before  the  altar."  The  form  of  expression 
was  no  doubt  suggested  by  the  sacrificial  ar- 
rangements of  the  Mosaic  economy.  The  per- 
son addressed  is  supposed,  after  getting  to  the 
altar,  to  remember  that  his  brother  has  some- 
thing against  him.  He  must  not  say :  "  My 
brother  ought  not  to  have  anything  against 
me — I  have  done  him  no  injury — he  is  labor- 
ing under  a  false  impression — his  grievance  is 
not  real,  but  imaginary — and  it  is  needless  to 
go  to  him,"  etc.  But  the  Master  says,  "  Leave 
thy  gift  at  the  altar,  and  go."  Dare  the  ser- 
vant disobey  his  Lord  ?  Let  him  go  and  show 
the  offended  brother  that  he  has  no  just  cause 
of  complaint,  that  he  is  under  a  false  impres- 
sion, if  this  is  the  case.  But  if,  at  the  altar  of 
God,  he  remembers  that  he  has  done  his 
brother  injustice,  let  him  go,  if  possible,  more 


CHURCH    MANUAL  I23 

promptly  and,  confessing  his  fault,  seek  recon- 
ciliation. The  observance  of  this  first  injunc- 
tion of  Christ  would  lead  to  the  adjustment  of 
a  thousand  differences  among  brethren.  But. 
according  to  the  second  command,  there  is 
something  for  the  offended  party  to  do.  "  If 
thy  brother  trespass  against  thee,  go  and  tell 
him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him  alone." 
The  offended  brother  is  not  to  wait  till  the 
offender  goes  to  him  and  seeks  reconciliation. 
The  offender  may  not  know  that  he  has  given 
offence — that  "  his  brother  has  aught  against 
him."  Or  if  he  knows  it,  he  may  neglect  his 
duty.  This,  however,  does  not  affect  the  ob- 
ligations of  the  offended  brother.  There  must 
be  an  interview  between  the  parties.  The 
offender,  as  we  have  seen,  is  required  to  go 
to  the  offended,  and  the  offended  is  required 
to  go  to  the  offender ;  and  should  they  both 
start  at  once  and  meet  midway  it  would  be  so 
much  the  better.  It  would  show  such  a  spirit 
of  obedience  to  Christ  as  would  make  the  set- 
tlement of  the  difficulty  morally  certain.  "  Tell 
him  his  fault  between  him  and  thee  alone." 
The  offended  brother  is,  at  this  stage  of  the 
proceeding,  to  tell  the  offender  his  fault.  He 
must  let  no  one  know  what  he  is  going  to  do, 


124  CHURCH    MANUAL 

He  must  not  ask  the  advice  of  any  one.  He 
needs  no  advice.  Nothing  can  be  plainer  than 
the  command  of  Christ.  "  Tell  him  his  fault." 
This  is  to  be  done  orally.1  A  word  is  used  in 
the  original  which  suggests  the  idea  of  pre- 
senting reasons  or  proofs  to  convince  of  a 
fault.  The  offended  brother  is  to  do  this,  and 
if  he  does,  the  offender  is  to  acknowledge  his 
fault,  ask  forgiveness,  and  there  the  matter  is 
at  an  end.  If,  however,  the  proofs  presented 
are  shown  by  the  accused  brother  to  be  in- 
sufficient to  establish  the  charge  against  him, 
let  the  party  making  the  charge  cheerfully  re- 
tract it,  with  expressions  of  gratification  that 
it  is  not  true,  and  with  expressions  of  regret 
that  it  had  been  made.  Neither  party  should 
ever  mention  the  subject  again. 

TWT0    CLASSES   OF   OFFENCES 

It  has  been  common  to  refer  to  offences  re- 
quiring discipline  as  private  and  public.    These 

1  It  has  sometimes  occurred  that  the  offended  brother  has 
chosen  to  write  to  the  offender  rather  than  state  his  grievance 
by  word  of  mouth.  This  is  very  reprehensible.  Christ  does 
not  say  "  write  a  note  or  a  letter,"  but  "  go  and  tell  him  his 
fault."  In  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred  the  inclination 
to  write  would  indicate  a  wrong  spirit.  It  would  betray  an 
unchristian  desire  to  get  some  advantage,  especially  if  the 
offended  one  believed  he  could  wield  the  pen  more  effectively 
than  the  offender.  The  language  of  the  Master  is,  "  Tell  him 
his  fault." 


CHURCH    MANUAL  125 

epithets  of  designation  are,  perhaps,  not  the 
best  that  could  be  selected.  By  a  private  is 
meant  a  personal  offence,  but  a  personal  of- 
fence may  be  publicly  committed.  Hence  the 
word  private  is  inadequate  to  express  the  full 
idea  intended  to  be  conveyed.  A  public  of- 
fence as  distinguished  from  a  private  one  is 
an  offence  committed  in  public;  but  as  distin- 
guished from  a  personal  offence  it  is  committed 
against  a  church  in  its  collective  capacity.  It 
may  be  committed  too,  in  secret,  or  in  com- 
parative secrecy.  For  example,  theft,  with 
whatever  privacy  perpetrated,  is  against  good 
morals,  and  is  therefore  what  is  usually  called 
a  public  offence.  We  prefer  the  use  of  the 
epithets  person-al  and  general  to  designate  of- 
fences. They  are  sufficiently  descriptive  for  all 
practical  purposes.  There  might  be  a  third 
class  of  offences  termed  mixed — that  is  partly 
personal  and  partly  general — but  we  confine 
this  discussion  to  the  two  classes  indicated. 

1.  Personal.  What  is  a  personal  offence? 
It  is  an  offence  against  an  individual.  "  If  thy 
brother  shall  trespass  against  thee!'  Any  of- 
fence committed  by  one  brother  against  an- 
other, which,  if  acknowledged  and  forgiven  by 
the  parties,  would  leave  the  fellowship  of  the 


126  CHURCH    MANUAL 

church  undisturbed,  is  personal.  Such  an  of- 
fence, whether  committed  in  private  or  public, 
has  to  do  with  the  two  brethren,  and  not  with 
the  church.  It  cannot  be  brought  before  the 
church  legitimately  till  the  directions  of  Christ, 
in  Matthew  18  :  15,  16,  are  complied  with. 
The  offended  brother,  presuming  to  bring  his 
grievance  before  the  church,  in  disregard  of 
these  directions,  would  subject  himself  to 
church  censure ;  and  the  church  by  considering 
the  grievance  would  violate  the  law  of  her 
Head.  The  more  this  law  is  studied  the  more 
will  its  wisdom  be  seen ;  and  the  less  surprise 
will  be  felt  at  the  unhappy  consequences  re- 
sulting from  its  neglect. 

In  all  personal  offences  the  rule  to  be  ob- 
served is  plain :  "  If  thy  brother  shall  trespass 
against  thee,  go  and  tell  him  his  fault  between 
thee  and  him  alone :  if  he  shall  hear  thee  thou 
hast  gained  thy  brother."  The  object  of  the 
offended  brother  must  be  to  gain  the  offender. 
If  this  is  not  his  purpose,  he  violates  the  spirit 
of  Christ's  law  though  he  may  obey  it  in  the 
letter.  He  must  earnestly  hope  and  pray,  that 
he  may  be  so  successful  in  this  first  step  as  not 
to  find  it  necessary  to  take  the  second.  It  is 
sometimes  the  case — it  is  humiliating  to  admit 


CHURCH    MANUAL  12/ 

it — that  the  first  step  is  taken  in  an  unbroth- 
erly  spirit,  with  the  hope  that  the  second  will 
have  to  be  taken,  and  then  the  third,  so  that 
the  offender  will  be,  as  speedily  as  possible, 
put  in  the  place  of  "  a  heathen  man  and  a  pub- 
lican/' When  this  is  so  it  is  not  hazarding 
much  to  say  that  the  offended  brother  is  as 
censurable  as  the  offender. 

"  If  he  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy 
brother/'  It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  Saviour 
refers  to  this  as  the  accomplishment  of  an  im- 
portant object  which  should  gratify  the  ag- 
grieved brother's  heart.  "  Thou  hast  gained 
thy  brother."  What  an  acquisition,  and  how 
sublime  the  satisfaction  arising  therefrom! 
And  it  may  be  said,  the  offending  brother  is 
generally  gained  when  there  is  a  sincere  desire 
to  gain  him  expressed,  in  earnest  prayer,  that 
he  may  be  gained.  If  the  brother  is  gained, 
proceedings  happily  end,  and  the  dearest 
friends  of  the  parties  must  not  know,  if  the 
offence  is  a  private  one,  that  the  adjusted 
difficulty  ever  existed.  Or  if  the  personal 
offence  has  been  publicly  committed  it  is 
enough  for  it  to  be  known  that  the  matter  has 
been  satisfactorily  settled.  It  is  better  not  to 
talk  about  the  details  of  the  adjustment 


128  CHURCH    MANUAL 

But  there  will  be  cases  in  which  the  offend- 
ing brother  is  not  "  gained."  What  then  is  to 
be  done  ?  The  second  step  to  be  taken  is  this : 
"  If  he  will  not  hear  thee,  then  take  with  thee 
one  or  two  more,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or 
three  witnesses  every  word  may  be  estab- 
lished." The  brethren  selected  by  the  ag- 
grieved brother  to  go  with  him  should  be  very 
judicious  and  eminently  spiritual.  Sound 
judgment  and  ardent  piety  will  be  needed.  If 
the  charge  made  by  the  plaintiff  in  the  case  is 
denied  by  the  defendant — that  is,  if  there  be  an 
issue  of  veracity  between  the  parties — and  no 
third  person  knows  anything  of  the  matter,  it 
must  be  dropped.  The  "  one  or  two  more  " 
present  must  so  advise  and  insist.  The  par- 
ties concerned  stand  on  a  perfect  equality  as 
members  of  the  church,  and  the  veracity  of  the 
one  is  to  be  considered  as  unquestionable  as 
that  of  the  other.  It  wall  not  do  for  the  breth- 
ren whom  the  offended  brother  has  taken  with 
him  to  yield  a  credence  to  his  statements 
wrhich  they  withhold  from  the  statements  of 
the  other.  Whatever  may  be  their  private 
opinions  as  to  the  Christian  and  moral  charac- 
ter of  the  parties,  they  must  be  treated  alike. 
Hence  we  repeat,  that  if  there  is  an  issue  of 


CHURCH    MANUAL  1 29 

veracity,  on  which  no  third  person  can  shed 
light,  the  case  must  be  dropped. 

But  the  Saviour's  language  supposes  that 
the  case  may  be  continued.  The  offender  may 
not  deny  the  charge  brought  against  him,  but 
may  attempt  to  justify  himself  as  to  the  thing 
complained  of.  It  may  be  evident  to  the  "  one 
or  two  more  "  who  are  present,  that  he  has  a 
wrong  spirit,  and  that,  from  his  own  account 
of  the  matter  he  has  given  the  aggrieved 
brother  just  cause  of  offence.  Here  then  is 
the  place  for  them  to  exercise  Christian  judg- 
ment and  show  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  They 
must,  if  possible,  convince  the  offender  of  his 
fault,,  and  secure  from  him  a  reparation  of  the 
injury  he  has  done  the  offended  brother.  If 
he  is  convinced  that  he  has  done  wrong,  and 
makes  a  satisfactory  acknowledgment,  it  must 
be  received.  Or,  if  the  acknowledg  i£nt  is 
not  satisfactory  to  the  aggrieved  brother,  while 
those  he  has  taken  with  him  think  it  should 
be,  they  must  say  so,  and  urge  him  to  accept 
it.  It  must  be  the  object  of  their  anxious 
desire  to  have  the  difference  adjusted  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  law  of  Christ.  If  this  is 
done,  let  the  parties  concerned  say  nothing 
more  about  the  matter,  and  let  the  brethren 


130  CHURCH    MANUAL 

who  have  aided  in  the  adjustment  hold  their 
peace. 

But  there  is  another  supposition:  It  is  sup- 
posed that  a  reconciliation  may  not  be  effected 
and  that  the  "  one  or  two  more  "  may  be  called 
to  testify  as  witnesses  before  the  church. 
"  That  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
every  word  may  be  established."  Now  the 
third  and  last  step  is  to  be  taken  by  the  of- 
fended brother :  "  Tell  it  to  the  church."  The 
church,  till  this  point  is  reached,  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  matter.  The  discipline,  strictly- 
speaking,  has  not  been  church  discipline,  but 
the  discipline  of  brethren  in  their  individual 
character.  In  a  meeting  of  the  church  the 
aggrieved  brother  states  that,  in  his  judgment, 
he  has  just  cause  of  offence  against  a  fellow 
member,  and  asks  permission  to  present  the 
facts  in  the  case.  The  pastor,  or  presiding 
officer,  must  inquire  of  him  if  he  has  gone  to 
the  offending  brother  and  told  him  his  fault, 
no  third  person  being  present?  If  he  answers 
in  the  negative,  the  pastor  must  tell  him 
kindly,  but  firmly,  that  he  cannot  be  permitted 
to  state  his  grievance.  If  he  answers  in  the 
affirmative,  the  pastor  must  ask  him  if  he  with 
"  one  or  two  more  "  has  gone  to  the  offending 


CHURCH    MANUAL  I3I 

brother,  taking  the  second  step  enjoined  by 
Christ.  If  he  answers  negatively,  the  pastor 
must  say :  "  The  rule  which  governs  us  will 
not  permit  you  to  tell  your  grievance  to  the 
church  till  the  second  step  is  taken  as  well 
as  the  first."  If  he  answers  affirmatively,  he 
can  name  the  brethren  he  took  with  him, 
who  can  corroborate  his  statement.  The  pas- 
tor can  then  say,  according  to  the  law  of 
Christ,  you  can  now  make  your  statement. 
He  tells  his  grievance  to  the  church.  The 
offender,  it  may  be,  admits  that  the  cause  of 
complaint  is  stated  just  as  it  was  at  the  two 
previous  interviews,  or  if  he  says  it  is  not,  the 
witnesses  can  testify  as  to  the  statement  made 
in  their  presence.  Every  word  said  at  the. 
second  interview  between  the  parties  is  to  be 
established  by  the  witnesses.  The  offender 
may  still  attempt  to  justify  himself.  The  wit- 
nesses may  repeat  the  arguments  they  used  to 
convince  him  that  he  was  in  the  w7rong;  and 
the  church  seeing  him  in  the  wrong,  may  ad- 
monish him  to  make  reparation  of  the  injury 
he  has  done.  If  the  offender  should,  at  this 
point  in  the  proceedings,  "  hear  the  church  " — 
that  is,  carry  her  advice  into  practical  effect — 
the  matter  ends  and  he  retains  his  member- 


132  CHURCH    MANUAL 

ship.  But,  "  If  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church, 
let  him  be  unto  thee  as  a  heathen  man  and  a 
publican/'  The  intimation  here  is,  that  a  re- 
fusal to  hear  the  church  will  be  followed  by 
the  act  of  exclusion,  which  is  a  public  with- 
drawal of  fellowship.  Having  been  excluded 
he  becomes  to  the  offended  member,  and  to  all 
the  members,  "  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  pub- 
lican." There  is  a  cessation  of  Christian  in- 
tercourse. 

2.  General  Offences.  It  has  been  stated 
that  a  general  offence,  as  distinguished  from  a 
personal  one,  is  committed  against  a  church 
in  its  collective  capacity.  That  is  to  say,  it  is 
committed  against  no  member  in  particular, 
but  against  all  the  members  in  general— against 
one  member  as  much  as  another.  To  this  defi- 
nition it  may  be  added  that  while  all  general 
offences  are  against  churches  as  bodies,  some 
are,  and  some  are  not,  violations  of  the  law 
of  public  morals.  For  example,  drunkenness, 
theft,  lying,  etc.,  violate  the  law  of  morality, 
and  may  be  considered  offences  against  society 
at  large  as  well  as  against  the  churches  of 
Christ;  but  the  espousal  of  false  and  heretical 
doctrines  by  a  church-member,  though  an  of- 
fence against  the  church,  is  not  a  crime  against 


CHURCH    MANUAL  1 33 

society.  It  does  not  invade  the  domain  of 
public  morals. 

While  it  does  not  comport  with  the  limits 
or  the  design  of  this  volume  to  give  an  ex- 
haustive catalogue  of  general  offences,  it  is  be- 
lieved that  the  most  of  them  may  be  classified 
as  follows : 

I.  A  rejection  of  any  of  the  fundamental 
doctrines  of  the  gospel.  According  to  the  con- 
stitution of  the  human  mind  the  denial  of 
fundamental  truth  is  the  belief  of  fundamental 
error.  The  apostle  Paul  attached  great  im- 
portance to  what  he  termed  "  the  truth  of  the 
gospel/'  and  knowing  that  he  had  preached 
the  gospel  in  its  purity  to  the  Galatians,  he 
said :  "  Though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven, 
preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than  that 
which  we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be 
accursed.  As  we  said  before,  so  say  I  now 
again.  If  any  man  preach  any  other  gospel 
unto  you  than  that  ye  have  received,  let  him 
be  accursed"  (Gal.  i  :  8,  9).  The  beloved 
disciple,  proverbial  for  kindness  of  heart,  said 
with  great  firmness,  "  If  there  come  any  unto 
you,  and  bring  not  this  doctrine,  receive  him 
not  into  your  house,  neither  bid  him  God 
speed.    For  he  that  biddeth  him  God  speed  is 


134  CHURCH    MANUAL 

partaker  of  his  evil  deeds"  (2  John  10,  11). 
As  the  gospel  is  the  charter  of  the  church's 
incorporation,  it  is  plain  that  a  denial  of  any 
of  the  essential  doctrines  of  the  gospel  is  an 
offence  against  the  church,  and  calls  for  its 
disciplinary  action.  And  then  too,  every 
church  by  virtue  of  its  constitution  is  the 
guardian  of  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus/' 
How  can  its  guardianship  be  effective,  if  it 
does  not  put  fundamental  errorists  without 
the  pale  of  its  fellowship  ?  Paul  said  to  Titus  : 
"  A  man  that  is  a  heretic,  after  the  first  and 
second  admonition,  reject."  The  term  "  here- 
tic "  in  this  passage,  no  doubt,  means  an  in- 
stigator of  divisions ;  but  why  does  the  heretic 
become  such  an  instigator?  Because,  ordi- 
narily, he  has  embraced  false  doctrines  which 
place  him  in  antagonism  with  the  church,  ,and 
make  him  the  head  of  a  faction.  He  is,  there- 
fore, a  proper  subject  of  church  discipline.  It 
will  be  observed  that  reference  has  been  made 
to  fundamental  errors,  and  these  errors  are 
supposed  to  be  inconsistent  with  true  piety. 
There  are  errors,  however,  of  a  lower  grade, 
which,  while  they  do  not  promote  piety,  are 
not  subversive  of  it.  With  regard  to  these  a 
judicious  toleration  must  be  exercised — such  a 


CHURCH    MANUAL  135 

toleration  as  is  suggested  by  the  words  of 
the  apostle :  "  Him  that  is  weak  in  the  faith 
receive  ye."  While  in  the  flesh,  individual 
Christians  and  Christian  churches  will  find  it 
necessary  to  bear  with  errors  in  sentiment 
and  imperfections  in  practice;  but  they  must 
tolerate  nothing  which  is  virtually  subversive 
of  the  gospel.  Loyalty  to  Christ  forbids 
this. 

2.  Anything  that  seriously  disturbs  the 
union  and  peace  of  a  church.  The  New  Tes- 
tament teaches  nothing  more  plainly  than, 
that  while  a  church  meets  together  "  in  one 
place/'  it  should  be  "  of  one  accord,  of  one 
mind."  Its  members  are  required  to  be  united 
in  love;  for  while  truth  is  the  basis,  love 
is  the  cement  of  their  union.  How  reason- 
able that  they  love  one  another,  and  that  out 
of  their  love  should  grow  a  union  sacred  and 
inviolable !  They  are  children  of  the  same 
Father — redeemed  by  the  same  blood — regen- 
erated by  the  same  Spirit — baptized  into  the 
same  body — bound  by  solemn  covenant  to  live 
according  to  the  gospel — and  animated  with 
the  bright  prospect  of  immortal  glory.  Surely 
there  should  be  union  and  peace  among  the 
members  of  such  a  congregation  of  the  Lord. 


I36  CHURCH    MANUAL 

Alas,  the  union  may  be  disturbed — the  peace 
broken.  The  seeds  of  discord  may  be  sown 
and  everything  thrown  out  of  harmony.  This 
was  sometimes  the  case  in  the  days  of  the 
apostles.  Hence  Paul  says :  "  Mark  them 
which  cause  divisions,  and  offences,  contrary 
to  the  doctrine  which  ye  have  learned;  and 
avoid  them.  For  they  that  are  such  serve 
not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  union  and 
peace  of  a  church  may  not  only  be  disturbed 
jy  the  espousal  of  false  doctrines,  but  also  by 
he  adoption  of  false  views  of  church  polity. 
Suppose  a  member,  for  instance,  while  holding 
cO  what  are  termed  "  the  doctrines  of  grace/' 
should  deny  the  necessity  of  regeneration  in 
order  to  church-membership,  or  the  necessity 
of  immersion  in  order  to  baptism,  or  should 
have  his  own  children  christened  in  infancy, 
or  should  insist  on  the  right  of  unbelievers  to 
come  to  the  table  of  the  Lord;  every  one  can 
see  that  the  union  and  peace  of  a  church,  or- 
ganized according  to  the  scriptural  model, 
would  be  seriously  disturbed.  Such  a  dis- 
turber would  deserve  church  discipline,  and 
fidelity  on  the  part  of  his  offended  breth- 
ren would  institute  the  process  without 
delay. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  1 37 

3.  Disorderly  and  immoral  conduct  in  all- 
its  forms.  There  is  reference  to  disorderly 
conduct  in  the  following  passages:  "  Now  we 
command  you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  you  withdraw  your- 
selves from  every  brother  that  walketh  dis- 
orderly. .  .  For  we  hear  that  there  are  some 
which  walk  among  you  disorderly,  working 
not  at  all,  but  are  busybodies  "  (2  Thess.  3  : 
6,  11).  For  a  church  to  withdraw  from  a  dis- 
orderly brother  is  equivalent  to  his  exclusion. 
There  is  a  cessation  of  church  fellowship. 

In  the  subjoined  passage  immoral  conduct 
is  referred  to.  "  But  now  I  have  written  unto 
you  not  to  keep  company,  if  any  man  that  is 
called  a  brother  be  a  fornicator,  or  covetous, 
or  an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or 
an  extortioner;  with  such  an  one  no  not  to 
eat  "  (1  Cor,  5  :  11).  These  terms,  so  expres- 
sive of  immorality,  are  used,  no  doubt,  to  de- 
note specimen  classes  of  wicked  persons.  The 
term  fornicator,  for  example,  is  to  be  under- 
stood as  embracing  all  those  who  commit 
sexual  iniquities.  There  is  no  express  mention 
of  murderers,  liars,  thieves,  etc.,  but  they  are 
unquestionably  included,  with  all  other  wicked 
characters,  as  guilty  of  general  offences  which 


I38  CHURCH    MANUAL 

call  for  church  action.     Alas,  that  these  of- 
fences so  often  occur. 

How  general  offences  are  to  be  treated.  The 
impression  .prevails,  to  a  great  extent,  that, 
because  general  offences  are  committed  against 
a  church  as  a  body,  they  need  not  be  treated 
after  the  manner  of  personal  offences.  True, 
they  cannot  be  treated  alike  in  all  respects, 
but  there  should  not  be  such  a  difference  of 
treatment  as  is  often  seen.  In  some  churches 
there  is  scarcely  a  private,  personal  effort 
made  to  convince  of  their  guilt  those  who 
have  committed  general  offences.  This  is 
wrong.  A  heretic  is  guilty  of  a  general  of- 
fence ;  but,  according  to  Paul,  he  is  not  to  be 
rejected  till  "  after  the  first  and  second  admo- 
nition." The  reference  is  no  doubt  to  the 
program  of  discipline  as  arranged  by  Christ 
in  Matthew  18.  It  cannot  be  too  earnestly 
urged  that  private,  personal  effort  be  made 
with  brethren  who  have  committed  general 
offences.  They  will  be  much  more  likely  to 
show  a  Christian  spirit  when  thus  dealt  with 
than  when  their  offences  are,  without  prelim- 
inary steps,  made  the  subject  of  church  inves- 
tigation. These  private,  personal  exertions 
are  considered  proofs  of  kindness,  and  there  is 


CHURCH    MANUAL  139 

something  in  human  nature  which  revolts  and 
rebels  against  public  exposure.  In  Galatians 
6  :  1,  2  it  is  written:  "  Brethren,  if  a  man  be 
overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual 
restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness, 
considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted. 
Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfill 
the  law  of  Christ."  It  will  be  seen  that  the 
restoration  of  the  offender  is  the  object  to  be 
sought.  It  is  to  be  sought  by  the  "  spiritual  " 
in  the  "  spirit  of  meekness."  While  prosecu- 
ting this  object  they  are  to  consider  their  own 
liability  to  be  overcome  by  temptation,,  and 
make  necessary  allowances  for  the  offending 
brother.  They  are,  as  nearly  as  possible,  to 
place  themselves  in  his  position,  and  take  on 
their  hearts  the  burden  which,  it  may  be, 
is  crushing  his.  This  would  be  fulfilling  the 
law  of  Christ — that  law  is  love;  and  love 
prompts  us  to  bear  the  burdens  of  those  wTe 
love.  When  the  inspired  directions  of  the 
apostle  are  faithfully  followed,  the  brother 
"  overtaken  in  a  fault  "  usually  confesses  it, 
and  gives  satisfaction  to  those  seeking  his 
restoration.  This  is  an  auspicious  result,  and 
it  must  be  announced  at  the  next  meeting  of 
the  church.    The  offence  having  been  general, 


I40  CHURCH    MANUAL 

the  church  must  be  satisfied.  Ordinarily,  what 
satisfies  the  brother  or  brethren  seeking  the 
offender's  restoration  satisfies  the  church. 

Sometimes  the  most  earnest  exertions  to 
reclaim  a  brother  fail  of  success.  Then  the 
case  must  be  brought  before  the  church.  The 
facts  connected  with  it  must  be  stated.  The 
arraigned  member  must  have  ample  oppor- 
tunity to  defend  himself.  If  his  defence  is 
satisfactory  to  the  church  the  matter  goes  no 
farther.  Or  if  the  brother,  while  the  investi- 
gation is  going  on,  becomes  convinced  of  his 
guilt  and  makes  confession,  the  church  must 
forgive  him.  If,  however,  the  offence  is  estab- 
lished by  conclusive  proof,  and  there  is  no 
penitence  leading  to  confession,  the  act  of  ex- 
clusion must  take  place.  The  church  must 
withdraw  its  fellowship. 

Offences  of  an  infamous  or  scandalous  char- 
acter must  have  a  peculiar  treatment.  The 
church  must  express  its  reprobation  of  them 
by  an  immediate  act  of  exclusion.  No  pre- 
liminary steps  are  necessary.  No  penitence 
must  prevent  the  withdrawal  of  fellowship. 
The  honor  of  Christ  and  the  purity  of  his  re- 
ligion are  especially  involved  in  these  cases. 
What  Paul  says  in  regard  to  the  incestuous 


CHURCH    MANUAL  I4I 

man  (i  Cor.  5)  vindicates  the  position  here 
taken,  if  a  church-member  is  guilty  of  adul- 
tery, or  murder,  or  perjury,  or  theft,  or  for- 
eerv,  or  drunkenness,  or  anv  kindred  crime, 
he  deserves  exclusion  without  trial.  Some  per- 
haps would  except  drunkenness  from  this  cata- 
logue, but  taking  into  account  the  manifold 
evils  of  intemperance,  in  connection  with  the 
light  shed  on  the  "  temperance  question  "  for 
thirty  years  past,  one  instance  of  drunken- 
ness makes  it  the  duty  of  a  church  promptly 
to  exercise  its  power  of  excommunication.  Xo 
church  can  adequately  express  a  suitable  ab- 
horrence of  such  offences  without  excluding 
the  offender.  Norl  can  the  world  be  other- 
wise convinced  that  the  church  is  the  friend 
and  the  conservator  of  s:ood  morals. 


HOW     EXCLUDED     MEMBERS    OUGHT    TO    BE 
TREATED 

This  is  a  question  of  no  little  importance ; 
for  the  practical  answer  to  it  has  much  to  do 
with  the  effect  of  church  discipline.  Social 
intercourse  with  the  excluded  is  not  to  be 
entirely  suspended ;  for  then  many  opportu- 
nities of  doing  them  good  will  be  lost :  neither 


142  CHURCH    MANUAL 

is  it  to  be  just  as  before  the  exclusion;  for 
that  would  impair  the  efficacy  of  discipline. 
The  members  of  a  church  must  so  act  toward 
those  they  have  expelled  as  to  give  the  ex- 
pulsion its  legitimate  moral  influence.  The 
apostle  Paul  lays  down  this  rule :  "If  any 
man  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a  fornicator, 
or  covetous,  or  an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or 
a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner;  with  such  an 
one  no,  not  to  eat "  ( i  Cor.  5  :  11).  That 
is,  we  must  not  keep  company  with  such  an 
one.  There  must  be  no  such  social  familiarity 
as  the  excluded  may  construe  into  a  conni- 
vance at  their  offences.  Andrew  Fuller  well 
remarks :  "  If  individual  members  act  contrary 
to  this  rule,  and  carry  it  freely  toward  an 
offender,  as  if  nothing  had  taken  place,  it  will 
render  the  censure  of  the  church  of  none 
effect.  Those  persons  also  who  behave  in  this 
manner  will  be  considered  by  the  party  as  his 
friends,  and  others  who  stand  aloof  as  his 
enemies,  or  at  least  as  being  unreasonably 
severe ;  which  will  work  confusion,  and  render 
void  the  best  and  most  wholesome  discipline. 
We  must  act  in  concert,  or  we  may  as  well  do 
nothing.  Members  who  violate  this  rule  are 
partakers  of  other  men's  sins,  and  deserve  the 


CHURCH    MANUAL  145 

rebukes  of  the  church  for  counteracting  its 
measures.'' x  We  dismiss  the  topic  by  a  refer- 
ence to  2  Thessalonians  3  :  14,  15:  "And 
if  any  one  obey  not  our  word  by  this  epistle, 
note  that  man,  and  have  no  company  with  him, 
that  he  may  be  ashamed.  Yet  count  him  not 
as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  brother." 

OBJECTS    TO    BE    HAD    IN    VIEW    IN    DISCIPLINE 

Prominent  among  these  objects  are: 
1.  The  glory  of  God.  Whatever  makes  cor- 
rective church  discipline  necessary  dishonors 
God.  The  greater  its  necessity  the  more  is 
God  dishonored.  The  need  of  discipline  in 
all  its  stages  arises  from  the  fact  that  there 
is  a  state  of  things  in  conflict  with  the  will 
of  God.  Whatever  is  in  conflict  writh  his  will 
tarnishes  his  glory.  If  then  God  is  to  be 
honored,  and  his  glory  promoted  in  the 
churches,  discipline  must  be  exercised  to  cor- 
rect that  which  is  in  conflict  with  his  will,  and 
which  obscures  his  glory.  Our  God  is  infi- 
nitely holy,  and  the  neglect  of  discipline,  when 
either  personal  or  general  offences  require  it, 
virtually    represents    him    as    the    patron    of 

1  Works,  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  334,  335. 


144  CHURCH    MANUAL 

iniquity.  Let  the  churches  tremble  at  this 
thought,  and  remember  that  the  holy  God 
they  serve  is  also  a  jealous  God. 

2.  Purity  of  the  Churches.  The  followers 
of  Christ,  though  in  the  world,  are  not  of  the 
world.  They  are  called  out  of  darkness  into 
marvelous  light — called  to  be  saints — called 
with  a  holy  calling — and  in  their  embodied 
form  as  churches  they  are  the  depositaries  of 
the  pure  principles  of  the  gospel.  They  are 
Christ's  representatives  in  the  world — lights 
of  the  world,  cities  set  on  hills  which  cannot 
be  hidden.  Paul  said  to  the  Corinthians :  "  Be 
ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  with  unbe- 
lievers :  for  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness 
with  unrighteousness?  and  wrhat  communion 
hath  light  with  darkness  ?  And  what  concord 
hath  Christ  with  Belial?  or  what  part  hath 
he  that  believeth  with  an  infidel?"  (2  Cor. 
6  :  14,  15).  These  significant  questions  show 
that  the  spirit  of  Christianity  and  the  spirit  of 
the  world  are  utterly  irreconcilable.  And  if  so, 
the  churches  of  the  saints,  to  maintain  their 
purity,  must  apply  the  rod  of  corrective  dis- 
cipline to  all  who  live  unworthily  of  the  gos- 
pel. They  must  do  this  to  vindicate  "  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,"  and  to  represent  his 


CHURCH    MANUAL  145 

religion  as  the  antagonist  of  whatever  is  evil. 
With  special  reference  to  the  necessity  of  ex- 
pelling an  unworthy  member  (i  Cor.  5:1) 
an  apostle  says,  "  Know  ye  not  that  a  little 
leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump?  ?'  As  if  he 
had  said,  "Are  you  ignorant  that  the  reten- 
tion of  a  flagrant  transgressor  will  corrupt  the 
entire  church  ?  "  The  purity  of  the  churches 
cannot  be  preserved  without  faithful  discipline. 
And  every  church  virtually  endorses  the 
wrongs  she  does  not,  by  disciplinary  action, 
attempt  to  correct. 

3.  The  spiritual  good  of  the  disciplined. 
This  is  a  third  object  to  be  kept  in  view  in  all 
disciplinary  proceedings.  We  have  seen  al- 
ready that  in  matters  of  personal  offence  the 
"  gaining  "  of  the  offending  brother  is  to  be 
specially  regarded.  Those  who  have  been 
"  overtaken  in  a  fault  "  are,  if  possible,  to  be 
restored.  And  when  a  church  passes  an  act 
of  exclusion — delivering  a  member  over  to 
Satan — that  is,  formally  transferring  him  from 
Christ's  jurisdiction  to  that  of  the  devil — it 
must  be  done,  "  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in 
the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  There  must  be 
no  bitterness  of  feeling,  no  disposition  to  per- 
secute and  oppress,  no  indulgence  of  revenge- 


I46  CHURCH    MANUAL 

ful  impulses.  The  act  of  expulsion  must  be 
considered  a  painful  necessity,  and  should  be 
passed  by  the  church  with  great  solemnity 
and  pronounced  by  the  pastor  with  a  still 
greater  solemnity.  Everything  should  be  so 
done  as  to  make  the  impression  on  all  that  it 
is  an  awful  thing  to  be  cut  off  from  the  fellow- 
ship of  God's  people.  It  would  be  well  for 
an  earnest  prayer  to  be  offered  that  the  dis- 
ciplinary action  may  prove  a  blessing  to  the 
offender,  exert  a  salutary  influence  on  the 
church,  and  impress  the  community  with  the 
holiness  of  the  religion  of  Jesus. 

It  is  suggested  that  it  might  be  well  for 
every  pastor,  the  next  Lord's  Day  after  the 
exclusion  of  a  member,  to  announce  the  fact 
to  the  congregation.  Sometimes  a  church  is 
considered  by  men  of  the  world  as  endorsing 
an  unworthy  character  because  they  do  not 
know  of  the  act  of  exclusion.  It  should,  in 
some  way,  be  made  known. 


CHAPTER  VII 

DUTIES    OF    A    CHURCH 

THOUGH  some  of  the  duties  of  a  church 
have  been  incidentally  referred  to  in  pre- 
ceding chapters,  the  subject  is  too  im- 
portant to  be  dismissed  without  a  more  dis- 
tinct consideration.  It  is  plain  that  Christ,  in 
providing  for  the  formation  of  churches,  rec- 
ognized and  sanctified  the  social  principle.  A 
church  is  a  society — a  social  institution.  Its 
members,  while  they  sustain  a  supremely 
sacred  relation  to  their  Head,  sustain  impor- 
tant relations  to  one  another.  They  are  "  no 
more  strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow 
citizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household 
of  God"  (Eph.  2  :  19).  In  this  passage 
two  metaphors  are  employed,  one  of  which 
represents  a  church  as  a  commonwealth,  and 
the  other  as  a  family.  Fellow  citizens  with 
the  saints,  of  a  spiritual  commonwealth,  is 
one  of  the  apostle's  conceptions.  This  citizen- 
ship denotes  a  state  the  opposite  of  that  indi- 

147 


I48  CHURCH    MANUAL 

cated  by  the  term  "  strangers  and  foreigners," 
or  rather  strangers  and  sojourners.  The  cit- 
izen has  duties  to  perform  and  privileges  to 
enjoy,  which  do  not  concern  the  stranger  at 
all,  and  the  sojourner  to  a  very  limited  extent. 
The  citizen  occupies  not  only  an  honorable,, 
but  a  responsible  position,  and  fellow  citizens 
are  expected  to  act  in  concert.  The  other 
conception  of  the  apostle  represents  a  church 
as  a  household,  a  family  of  God.  A  literal 
translation  would  be  domestics  of  God — that 
is,  belonging  to  his  family.  The  point  we 
make  is  that  the  members  of  a  church,  whether 
considered  as  fellow  citizens  of  God's  com- 
monwealth, or  as  belonging  to  his  family, 
have  something  to  do.  Their  duties  are 
urgent,  imperative,  sacred. 

I.  They  owe  duties  to  one  another.  Paul 
in  one  place  refers  to  the  self-edification  of  a 
church.  His  language  is  "  unto  the  edifying 
of  itself  in  love."  There  is  something  at  fault 
with  every  church  that  does  not  build  itself 
up  on  its  most  holy  faith.  There  should  be 
constant  growth  in  grace.  And  as  the  thrifty 
plant  or  vigorous  tree  grows  in  all  its  parts, 
so  should  there  be  spiritual  growth  in  all  the 
members  of  a  church.     They  must  abound  in 


CHURCH    MANUAL  1 49 

supreme  love  to  Christ  and  in  fervent  love  for 
one  another. 

Christian  love  is  the  great  duty  of  church- 
members,  which,  when  faithfully  performed, 
secures  the  performance  of  all  other  duties 
that  they  owe  one  another.  If  they  remember 
the  words  of  Jesus — "  a  new  commandment 
give  I  unto  you  that  ye  love  one  another  " — 
they  will  not  forget  the  many  ways  in  which 
this  love  may  express  itself.  Toward  the 
pastor  it  will  show  itself  in  respect  for  his 
teachings,  in  obedience  to  his  admonitions, 
and  in  imitation  of  his  example,  so  far  as  he 
follows  Christ.  It  will  provide  an  adequate 
pecuniary  support  for  him  that  he  may  give 
himself  to  his  work,  unperplexed  with  cares 
concerning  the  things  of  this  life. 

Christian  love  will  prompt  the  members  of 
a  church  to  do  good  to  one  another  as  they 
have  opportunity.  "  To  do  good  "  is  a  very 
comprehensive  phrase.  It  is  generic  and  in- 
cludes under  it  all  the  specific  methods  of 
doing  good.  It  embraces  all  forms  of  labor 
for  the  welfare  of  the  body  and  specially  those 
which  concern  the  soul.  It  does  not  overlook 
the  interests  of  time,  but  looks  supremely  to 
the  interests  of  eternity. 


I50  CHURCH    MANUAL 

There  is  another  inspired  expression  de- 
serving special  notice — "  forbearing  one  an- 
other in  love."  This  implies  that  church- 
members  will  have  occasion  to  exercise  their 
forbearance.  Alas,  they  often  have.  Their 
long-suffering  is  tried,  their  patience  put  to 
the  test.  Sometimes  it  seems  wonderful  how 
much  they  can  bear  and  forbear.  It  would 
be  inexplicable,  but  for  the  words,  "  in  love  " 
forbearing  one  another  in  love.  Love  covers 
a  multitude  of  faults.  It  makes  Christians 
look  leniently  on  the  frailties,  weaknesses, 
and  imperfections  of  their  fellow  Christians. 
It  makes  them  bear  patiently  what  they  can- 
not approve,  and  bear  it  till  it  assumes  a  form 
that  calls  for  the  exercise  of  that  discipline 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  has  given  his  churches 
"  for  edification,  and  not  for  destruction." 
"  Forbearing  one  another  in  love  "  would  be  a 
suitable  church  motto. 

In  treating  of  the  duties  which  church- 
members  owe  one  to  another,  it  is  well  to  refer 
briefly  to  the  duty  of 

Seeking  out  and  encouraging  zvhatever  min- 
isterial gifts  there  may  be  in  the  membership. 
This. is  a  very  important  matter.  We  doubt 
not  there  are  many  young  men  in  our  churches 


CHURCH    MANUAL  151 

who  ought  to  preach  the  gospel.  They  have 
impressions  on  the  subject.  They  look  on  the 
work  of  the  ministry  as  so  responsible  that 
they  recoil  from  it  with  trembling.  They 
feel  their  incompetency ;  and,  in  view  of  min- 
isterial duties  and  trials,  repeat  the  stereo- 
typed question,  "  Who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things  ?  "  These  are  the  very  men  who  need 
to  be  sought  out  and  encouraged.  Their  views 
of  the  greatness  of  the  work  of  preaching  the 
gospel  are  correct.  Their  self-distrust  is  alto- 
gether commendable.  The  ablest  of  the  Lord's 
ministers  once  felt  as  they  now  feel.  They 
need  instruction.  Let  them  be  encouraged  to 
speak  and  exhort  in  prayer-meetings,  and  soon 
it  will  be  seen  that  they  possess  ministerial 
gifts.  It  devolves  specially  on  pastors,  and  the 
more  judicious  of  the  brethren,  to  train  these 
future  ministers  for  usefulness;  and,  wherever 
money  is  needed  for  the  education  of  any  of 
them,  the  churches  ought  cheerfully  to  furnish 
it.  There  is  no  pecuniary  investment  so  pro- 
ductive as  that  made  in  ministerial  education. 
But  it  must  ever  be  remembered  that  piety  is 
the  preacher's  first  and  most  important  quali- 
fication, without  which  the  greatest  talents, 
and  the  richest  stores  of  learning,  will  make 


152  .    «  CHURCH    MANUAL 

him  as  "  sounding  brass  or  a  tinkling  cym- 
bal." 

2.  A  church  owes  duties  to  the  world.  The 
term  world  is  here  used  to  denote  impenitent 
sinners.  Every  Christian  by  the  very  process 
which  makes  him  a  Christian  is  brought  under 
obligation  to  do  what  he  can  to  lead  others 
to  Christ  And  when  individual  believers  are 
embodied  in  churches  their  obligations  not 
only  remain  in  full  force,  but  the  facilities  of 
usefulness  are  increased.  Church-members 
must  recognize  these  obligations,  and  avail 
themselves  of  these  facilities.  They  must  labor 
for  the  salvation  of  souls  under  the  distinct 
impression  that  the  grace  which  has  saved 
them  can  save  others.  Thus  only  can  they 
labor  in  faith  and  hope.  The  following  are 
some  of  the  methods  in  which  church-mem- 
bers may  perform  their  duties  to  impenitent 
sinners. 

1.  By  personal  conversation  with  them  about 
their  souls.  Christians  must  not  forget  that 
the  faculty  of  speech  has  been  given  for  im- 
portant purposes,  and  should  be  used  accord- 
ingly. Few  things  are  more  to  be  desired 
among  church-members  than  a  consecration 
of  the  power  of  speech.    Conversational  talent 


CHURCH    MANUAL  153 

needs  to  be  improved  and  sanctified.  How 
can  the  tongue  be  so  worthily  employed  as  in 
speaking  of  the  "great  salvation"?  What 
theme  so  momentous,  so  precious,  so  sublime  ? 
Christians  must  not  only  "  speak  often  one  to 
another,"  but  they  must  converse  with  the 
impenitent  about  their  souls. 

It  is  not  important  that  their  ideas  be  pre- 
sented with  logical  precision  and  rhetorical 
beauty ;  but  it  is  indispensable  that  the  love  of 
Christ  animate  their  hearts  and  prompt  their 
speech.  The  members  of  every  church  should 
see  to  it  that  every  impenitent  sinner  within 
the  bounds  of  the  congregation  is  conversed 
with  on  the  subject  of  religion  and  urged  to 
accept  the  salvation  of  the  gospel.  It  must 
not  be  said  in  truth  by  even  one  of  the  unre- 
generate  "  no  man  cared  for  my  soul/'  Such 
a  declaration  truthfully  made  would  be  a  re- 
proach to  any  church.  Let  it  not  be  made : 
but  let  church-members  show  their  interest  in 
the  welfare  of  the  impenitent  by  personal  con- 
versation with  them  on  the  weighty  concerns 
of  eternity. 

2.  By  tlie  maintenance  of  Sunday  Schools. 
The  Sunday  School  is  not  designed  to  super- 
sede, but  to  aid  family  instruction.     It  must 


154  CHURCH    MANUAL 

be  remembered  always  that  religious  training 
in  the  family  cannot  be  dispensed  with.  Pa- 
rental obligations  can  no  more  be  transferred 
than  parental  relations  can  be  changed.  But 
it  may  be  assumed  as  a  fact,  that  those  parents 
who  are  most  faithful  in  "  bringing  up  their 
children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the 
Lord,"  most  gladly  avail  themselves  of  the  aid 
furnished  by  Sunday  School  instruction.  And 
then  how  many  ungodly  parents  are  to  be 
found  everywhere  who  are  incompetent  to 
give  their  children  religious  training,  and  who 
would  not,  if  they  were  competent !  Are  these 
children  to  be  uncared  for?  No,  nor  those 
whose  parents  are  dead.  The  sympathies  of 
all  generous  hearts  are  enlisted  in  behalf  of 
orphans.  All  children  are  suitable  subjects 
for  the  Sunday  School.  Whether  their  par- 
ents are  pious,  or  ungodly,  or  dead,  let  all  the 
children  be  gathered  together  to  receive  re- 
ligious training  on  the  Lord's  Day.  Superin- 
tendents and  teachers  of  Sunday  Schools  must 
remember  that  scriptural  instruction  is  the  one 
thing  to  be  kept  in  view.  Literary  instruc- 
tion, properly  so-called,  is  given  in  week-day 
schools.-  The  impartation  and  reception  of 
scriptural    knowledge   are   the   distinguishing 


CHURCH    MANUAL  1 55 

features  of  the  Sunday  School.  Great  care 
should  be  exercised  in  the  selection  of  Sunday 
School  libraries.  Books  inculcating  erroneous 
views  must  be  rejected,  and  the  literature  pro- 
vided for  the  children  must  be  religious  and 
evangelical- 

Sunday  School  teachers  should  make  it  a 
point  to  urge,  by  personal  appeal,  the  claims 
of  the  gospel  on  every  scholar,  Every  such 
appeal  ought  to  be  preceded,  accompanied,  and 
followed  by  earnest  prayer  to  God  for  his  bless- 
ing. Without  his  favor  no  effort  to  do  good 
will  be  successful ;  with  his  approving  smile  no 
effort  will  be  unsuccessful. 

It  is  proper  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  the 
relation  of  Sunday  Schools  to  the  churches. 
Ordinarily,  these  schools  are  formed  by  the 
churches  and  are  permitted  to  use  their  houses 
of  worship.  They  should  be  carried  on  under 
the  general  direction  of  the  churches,  and  be 
held  responsible  thereto.  A  church  should  re- 
gard its  Sunday  School  as  one  of  the  agencies 
by  which  to  meet  its  obligations  to  train  the 
rising  generation  in  the  fear  of  God.  And 
when  this  is  the  case  the  church  is  really  at 
work  in  the  Sunday  School.  It  would  be  a 
happy  circumstance  if  facts  would  authorize 


I56  CHURCH    MANUAL 

this  definition  of  a  Sunday  School :  A  church 

ACTIVELY   AT    WORK    ON    THE   Lord's    DAY    FOR 
THE  GOOD  OF  THE  CHILDREN. 

"  The  classes  in  the  school/'  it  has  been 
well  said,  "  should  be  composed,  not  simply  of 
children,  but  also  of  the  grown-up  people  in 
the  neighborhood — grandfathers  and  grand- 
mothers, fathers  and  mothers,  and  men  and 
women.  The  school  should  be  considered  one 
of  the  regular  meetings  of  the  church.  Pas- 
tors should  summon  the  entire  people  to  as- 
semble on  the  Lord's  Day,  either  as  teachers 
or  as  scholars.  It  should  be  considered  as 
strange  for  fathers  and  mothers  to  stay  away 
from  the  Bible  classes  as  for  boys  and  girls  to 
absent  themselves  from  the  Sunday  School. 
That  pastor  who  will  speak  to  his  congrega- 
tion on  this  topic  three  minutes  before  sermon 
each  Lord's  Day  for  one  year,  and  then  work 
to  get  up  classes  as  he  may  be  able  through 
the  week,  will  be  astonished  at  the  results. 
And  ten  years  of  such  efforts  by  all  the 
ministers  of  the  gospel  would  work  a  com- 
plete revolution  in  the  churches.  Instances 
might  be  given  to  show  that  a  church  some- 
times more  than  doubles  its  power  by  employ- 
ing its  private  members  in  this  way." 


CHURCH    MANUAL  1 5/ 

3.  By  the  distribution  of  the  Bible,  religious 
books,  tracts,  etc.  This  is  another  method 
by  which  a  church  may  do  good  to  the  im- 
penitent. God  has  given  to  the  world  one 
book.  It  is  unlike  all  other  books.  It  carries 
with  it,  wherever  it  goes,  the  credentials  of 
its  inspiration  and  claims  the  reverence  due 
to  a  communication  from  heaven.  The  Bible 
is  God's  gift  to  the  world.  It  was  not  given 
to  the  white  man,  nor  the  red  man,  nor  the 
black  man,  as  such,  but  to  universal  man. 
This  volume  alone  unfolds  the  way  of  salvation 
by  telling  the  wonders  of  the  cross.  It  is  re- 
vealed truth  by  means  of  which  the  soul  is  re- 
generated, sanctified,  and  prepared  for  heaven. 
Who  is  to  see  to  it  that  this  precious  book  is 
distributed  at  home  and  abroad?  It  cannot 
be  reasonably  expected  that  God's  enemies  will 
do  it.  His  friends  must  engage  in  the  work. 
They  know  something  of  the  value  of  the 
Bible,  and  their  sense  of  its  worth  must  prompt 
them  to  circulate  it.  Every  church  should 
consider  itself,  by  virtue  of  its  constitution, 
a  Bible  Society,  and  should  aid  in  the  great 
work  of  disseminating  divine  truth  through- 
out the  world.  It  is  a  question  that  may  well 
be  pondered  with  solemn  interest:  Will  God, 


I58  CHURCH    MANUAL 

in  his  providence,  long  permit  any  people  to 
retain  his  word,  if  that  people  do  not  give  it 
to  others?    Let  every  church  think  of  this. 

The  distribution  of  religious  books,  tracts, 
and  periodicals  is  a  work  kindred  to  the  cir- 
culation of  the  Scriptures.  Religious  books 
are  reproductions  and  expositions  of  some  of 
the  truths  of  the  inspired  volume.  A  good 
book  brings  a  portion  of  divine  truth  into 
contact  with  the  conscience  and  heart.  And 
this  is  the  reason  why  the  unobtrusive  tract  is 
so  useful. 

A  special  use  should  be  made  of  the  tracts 
and  pamphlets  that  set  forth  the  distinctive 
principles  of  the  denomination.  The  Pub- 
lication Society  is  publishing  a  very  large 
variety  of  tracts,  pamphlets,  and  books 
Copies  of  these  should  be  circulated  by  hun- 
dreds of  thousands.  As  a  people,  we  claim 
that  certain  great  truths  have  been  committed 
to  our  care.  For  what  did  the  Lord  commit 
them  to  us?— to  pass  them  over  as  unim- 
portant? We  dare  not  do  this.  These  prin- 
ciples are  not  ours  to  do  with  as  may  seem 
most  agreeable.  They  are  Christ's.  He  has 
honored  us  with  their  custody,  not  for  our- 
selves, but  for  others.    Upon  us  he  has  placed 


CHURCH    MANUAL  159 

the  especial  responsibility  of  commending 
them.  In  common  with  all  other  Christians 
it  is  our  duty  to  bear  testimony  to  all  truths, 
but  specially  to  our  distinctive  principles. 
We  owe  it  to  ourselves,  we  owe  it  to  Christ 
our  Lord,  and  we  owe  it  to  our  brethren 
dearly  beloved,  but  in  error,  to  make  known 
these  principles  to  the  very  utmost  of  our 
ability. 

•The  mission  of  Baptists  will  not  be  attained 
by  apologizing  to  the  world  for  an  existence, 
by  asking  pardon  of  other  denominations  for 
differing  from  them,  or  by  begging  that  we 
may  not  be  esteemed  as  bigots.  We  must 
become  aggressive  in  spirit,  positive  in  the 
advocacy  of  our  principles. 

And  these  truths  can  be  made  known  best 
by  the  free  and  wide-spread  circulation  of  our 
denominational  tracts,  pamphlets,  and  books. 
Let  them,  then,  be  freely  used.  Tracts  cost 
but  little — only  one  dollar  for  a  thousand 
pages  sent  free  of  postage.  What  an  irre- 
sistible, all-pervading  power  might  be  called 
into  being  by  the  churches,  if  they  would  but 
address  themselves  with  determination  and 
perseverance  to  the  gradual  but  perpetual  dis- 
tribution of  these  tracts,  pamphlets,  and  books  t 


l60  CHURCH    MANUAL 

How  greatly  might  converts  be  guarded 
from  erroneous  views  and  practices,  be  indoc- 
trinated in  the  principles  of  the  gospel  and 
faith  of  the  church,  and  be  made  substantial 
Christians,  if  with  the  hand  of  fellowship,  the 
pastor  could  give  to  each  one  received  the  best 
small  work  on  Baptism,  another  on  Commu- 
nion, and  another  still  on  the  Duties  of  Church- 
members  !  And  the  pastor  should  not  hesi- 
tate to  ask  the  church  to  supply  him  with 
these  aids  in  his  work. 

4.  By  sustaining  the  cause,  of  missions. 
The  mis  Tnary  enterprise  is  usually  referred 
to  in  te  two  aspects — home  and  foreign. 
There  is  full  scriptural  authority  for  the  pres- 
entation of  both  these  aspects.  The  commis- 
sion of  Christ  to  the  apostles  of  itself  furnishes 
it :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature:  He  that  believeth 
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved;  but  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned  "  (Mark  16  : 
15,  16),  It  is  clear  from  this  commission  that 
the  gospel  is  to  be  preached  at  home  and 
abroad:  for  it  is  to  be  preached  in  all  the 
world.  It  is  to  be  proclaimed  to  all  the  na- 
tions; for  it  is  to  be  proclaimed  to  every 
creature.     "  Ye   shall   be   witnesses   unto   me 


CHURCH    MANUAL  l6l 

both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in 
Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the 
earth"  (Acts  i  :  8 ) .  This  was  the  program 
of  missionary  labor  in  apostolic  times.  How 
suggestive  the  words,  Jerusalem — all  Judea — 
Samaria — uttermost  part  of  the  earth.  This 
was  the  plan  and  zealously  was  it  executed. 

It  may  be  laid  down  as  an  axiom  that  no 
church,  not  animated  with  the  missionary 
spirit,  can  be  in  a  healthful,  prosperous  state. 
The  missionary  spirit  is  the  spirit  of  the 
gospel — the  spirit  of  Christ.  Of  every  church 
it  ought  to  be  said  in  truth  as  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians :  "  From  you  sounded  out  the  word  of 
the  Lord."  The  sound  should  go  forth  till  it 
reaches  the  remotest  limits  of  the  earth.  It 
is  the  sound  of  the  word  of  the  Lord.  The 
word  of  the  Lord  is  the  gospel  by  which  sin- 
ners of  all  nations  may  be  saved.  "  For  who- 
soever shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall 
be  saved.  How  then  shall  they  call  on  him 
in  whom  they  have  not  believed?  and  how 
shall  they  believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have 
not  heard?  and  how  shall  they  hear  without 
a  preacher?  and  how  shall  they  preach  except 
they  be  sent?"  (Rom.  10  :  13-15.) 

Indifference    to    the   cause    of   missions    is 

L 


l62  CHURCH    MANUAL 

cruelty  to  immortal  souls.  How  are  sinners 
in  our  own  land,  or  in  foreign  lands,  to  be 
saved  without  the  gospel?  Ought  not  those 
who  have  the  gospel  to  send  it  to  those  who 
have  it  not?  Earth's  wretched  millions  are 
starving  for  "  the  bread  of  life,"  and  this  bread 
is  in  the  custody  of  the  churches.  Dare  they 
refuse  to  distribute  it  among  the  perishing  at 
home  and  abroad?  No  church  can  perform 
its  duties  to  the  world  without  sustaining  the 
cause  of  missions — without  giving,  according 
to  its  ability,  to  spread  the  gospel  of  the  grace 
of  God.  Praying  without  giving  is  presump- 
tion, and  giving  without  praying  indicates  a 
self-dependence  offensive  to  God.  Let  it  be 
said,  as  of  Cornelius,  so  of  every  church: 
"  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  are  come  up  as 
a  memorial  before  God."  When  prayers  and 
alms  go  together,  there  is  a  happy  conjunc- 
tion. 


Note. — The  subject  of  this  chapter — Duties  of  a  Church — 
might  be  expanded  into  volumes.  Our  narrow  limits  have  re- 
quired its  compression.  It  may  be  said,  in  conclusion,  that  a 
church  with  the  New  Testament  for  its  charter  of  incorpora- 
tion, is  constitutionally  a  society,  organized  for  the  promotion 
of  Christian  objects.  These  objects  should  be  prosecuted 
so  zealously  by  all  church-members  as  to  make  it  apparent 
that  no  secret  or  secular  organization  is  needed  to  carry  for- 
ward any  benevolent  or  Christian  work.  And  besides,  what- 
ever good  church-members  do,  should  be  done  in  their  Chris- 
tian character. 


APPENDIX 


I.  BUSINESS  MEETINGS  OF  A  CHURCH, 
ASSOCIATIONS,  ETC. 

Where  the  spirit  of  Christian  love  and  courtesy 
prevails,  very  few  rules  are  necessary  in  the  trans- 
action of  church  business.  The  pastor  of  a  church, 
by  virtue  of  his  office,  is  its  moderator.  He  there- 
fore presides  at  its  meetings,  which  should  be  opened 
with  singing,  reading  a  suitable  portion  of  Scrip- 
ture, and  prayer.  The  clerk  then  reads  the  min- 
utes of  the  last  meeting,  and  the  pastor  states,  that  if 
there  is  no  motion  to  amend,  the  minutes  will  stand 
approved.  If  corrections  are  necessary,  they  are 
made,  that  the  records  may  show  exactly  what  has 
been  done.  The  items  of  business  should  be  taken 
up  thus :  i.  Unfinished  business ;  2.  Reports  from 
committees ;  3.  New  business,  It  is  not  necessary 
to  make  a  motion  to  take  up  unfinished  business. 
It  is  before  the  church  and  must  be  acted  on,  un- 
less a  motion  to*  postpone  its  consideration  prevails. 
So  of  reports  from  committees.  Under  the  item 
of  new  business  any  brother  can  mention  what,  in 
his  judgment,  claims  the  consideration  of  the  church ; 
but  in  all  matters  of  importance  it  is  desirable  that 
there  should  be  some  previous  consultation  among 
the  most  prudent  brethren  as  to  what  new  busi- 
ness  shall   be   introduced.     Nothing  has   been   said 

163 


I64  CHURCH    MANUAL 

as  to  the  time  of  receiving  members,  because  some 
churches  prefer  that  this  shall  be  done  directly  after 
the  devotional  exercises;  others  that  it  shall  be 
done  after  all  other  business  is  transacted;  while 
others,  still,  receive  members,  not  at  business,  but 
at  covenant  and  prayer  meetings. 

Concerning  Motions 

A  motion  made,  and  not  seconded,  does  not  claim 
the  moderator's  notice ;  but  if  seconded,  he  must  state 
it  to  the  meeting.  This  must  be  done  before  there  is 
any  discussion. 

While  a  motion  is  undergoing  discussion  no  new 
motion  can  be  presented.  But  it  is  in  order  to  move 
to  amend  a  motion  by  adding  or  striking  out  words, 
phrases,  and  sentences.  It  is  even  parliamentary  to 
move  to  amend  by  striking  out  all  after  the  word  Re- 
solved,  and  introducing  new  matter  in  conflict  with 
the  original  proposition.  This,  however,  is  not  an 
amendment,  but  a  substitute.  An  amendment  must 
be  germane  to  the  matter  embraced  in  the  motion: 
a  substitute  is  intended  to  supersede  it. 

Some  suppose  a  motion  can  be  withdrawn  by  the 
mover  any  time  before  the  vote  is  taken.  Others 
think  that  after  a  motion  comes  regularly  before 
the  meeting  it  cannot  be  withdrawn  except  by  con- 
sent of  the  body.  The  practice  of  deliberative  bodies 
is  conforming  more  and  more  to  the  latter  view. 
Unanimous   consent,  however,   is  not  necessary. 

When  an  amendment  to  a  motion  is  accepted  by 
the  mover  no  vote  on  the  amendment  is  to  be  taken ; 
if  the  mover  does  not  accept  it,  a  separate  vote  must 


CHURCH    MANUAL  165 

be  taken  on  the  amendment,  and  then  on  the  orig- 
inal proposition. 

It  is  in  order  to  move  an  amendment  to  an  amend- 
ment, but  this  is  the  utmost  limit  to  which  the  matter 
can  go,  and  seldom  should  go  so  far. 

Privileged  Questions 

These  embrace  motions  to  adjourn,  to  lay  on  the 
table,  to  have  the  previous  question,  to  amend,  to 
commit,  to  postpone.  They  are  called  privileged  be- 
cause, it  is  supposed,  they  can  be  made  at  any  time. 
This,  however,  is  not  strictly  true;  for  even  the 
question  of  adjournment,  which  takes  precedence  of 
all  other  questions,  cannot  be  presented  while  a 
member  is  speaking,  or  a  vote  is  being  taken ;  nor  can 
a  motion  to  adjourn,  which  has  been  negatived,  be 
renewed  until  some  other  proposition  is  made,  or 
other  business  is  transacted.1 

It  will  rarely  be  necessary  in  the  transaction  of 
business  in  churches,  associations,  etc.,  to  call  for 
the  previous  question.  When,  however,  a  motion  for 
the  previous  question  is  made  and  seconded,  the 
moderator  will  say,  "  Shall  the  main  question  now  be 
put?"  If  the  decision  is  affirmative,  the  meeting 
votes,    without   further   discussion,    on   the   original 

1  Writers  on  Parliamentary  Rules  differ  as  to  what  are 
privileged  questions.  Jefferson,  in  his  "  Manual,"  includes 
all  named  above  except  the  "  previous  question."  Matthias, 
in  his  "  Rules  of  Order,"  embraces  all  except  the  motion  to 
lay  on  the  table.  Cushing,  in  his  **  Manual,"  reduces  privi- 
leged questions  to  three,  namely:  adjournment,  questions  of 
privilege,  and  orders  of  the  day;  while  he  ranks  as  "  Sub- 
sidiary Questions "  the  following:  Lie  on  the  table,  pre- 
vious question,  postponement,  commitment,  amendment. 


l66  CHURCH    MANUAL 

motion.  If  the  meeting  decides  that  the  main  ques- 
tion shall  not  be  put — it  indicates  a  desire  that  the 
discussion  shall  go  on. 

Not  Debatable 

Certain  motions  are  not  debatable,  such  as  the  mo- 
tion to  adjourn,  to  have  the  previous  question,  to  lay 
on  the  table,  etc. 

But  when  these  motions  are  modified  by  some 
condition  of  time,  place,  or  purpose,  they  become 
debatable. 

Motions  to  Reconsider 

A  motion  to  reconsider  a  proposition  formerly 
adopted  must  be  made  \>y  one  who  voted  with  the 
majority.  If  such  a  motion  prevails,  the  original 
matter  is  before  the  body,  as  if  it  had  never  been 
acted   on. 

Points  of  Order,  Appeal 

If  a  member  in  debate  violates  any  recognized  rule 
of  order,  it  is  the  business  of  the  moderator  to  call 
him  to  order.  Or,  any  other  member  may  present 
a  point  of  order,  which  the  moderator  must  decide. 
If  the  decision  is  unsatisfactory,  an  appeal  may  be 
taken  to  the  body;  but  this  should  be  done  only  in 
peculiar  cases. 

Miscellaneous  Matters 

In  stating  a  motion  or  taking  a  vote  the  moder- 
ator should  rise  from  his  seat. 

If  there  is  an  equal  division  of  votes,  the  modera- 
tor may  give   the   casting  vote,   or  he  may,   more 


CHURCH    MANUAL  167 

prudently  in  most  cases,   decline  voting.     I:   he  de- 
clines,  the  matter  is    decide  d   in  the  negative.     It   is 
desirable  for  any  question  that  comes  before  a 

neb  to  be  decided  by  a  majority  of  one  vote,  and 
that  vote  tc  be  the  pastor's. 

Xo  member  can  speak  except  on  some  definite 
ect  before  the  holy  unless  he  wishes  to  explain 
why  he  is  about  to  make  a  motion.  It  is  gen- 
erally better  to  make  a  motion  and  then,  after 
it  is  seconded,  speak  in  explanation  and  defence  of  it. 

When  blanks  are  to  be  filled,  if  different  numbers 
are  proposed,  the  vote  must  be  taken  first  on  the 
largest  number,  the  longest  time.  etc. 

If  a  deliberative  body  decides  beforehand  to 
adjourn  at  a  certain  hour,  when  that  hour  comes 
the  moderator,  without  waiting  for  a  motion  to 
adjourn,   must  pronounce  the   meeting  adjourned. 

II.  FORMS  OF  MINUTES,  LETTERS,  ETC. 

There  are  dc   invariable  forms,  but  the  following 

are  recommended  as  generally  suitable: 

1.  Record  of  Church  Meeting 

Philadelphia,   Aug.   8,    1867. 

The  church  met  for  business  at  —  o'clock, 

the  pastor  presiding.  After  devotional  exercises 
the  minutes  oi  the  last  meeting  were  read  and  ap- 
proved. [After  this  whatever  business  is  done  must 
be    recorded.] 

Adjourned. 

,  Clerk. 


1 68  CHURCH    MANUAL 

2.  Letter  of  Dismission 

Philadelphia,  Aug.  15,  1867. 

The Baptist  church  of . 

To  her  sister,  the Baptist  church  of 

Dear  Brethren: 

This  certifies  that is  a  member  with 

us  in  good  standing  and  full  fellowship,     At 

own  request  is  hereby  dismissed  from  us  to 

unite    with    you.      When    received    by   you   

connection  with  us  will  terminate. 
By  order  of  the  church. 

,  Church  Clerk. 


This  letter  wTill  be  valid  for months. 

3.  Letter  of  Notification 

Philadelphia,  Sept.  5,  1867. 

To  the church. 

Dear  Brethren: 

You  are  hereby  notified  that  was 

received  by  letter  from  you  to  membership   in  the 

church, 1867. 

,  Church  Clerk. 

4.  Letters  of  Commendation 
These  are  usually  given  by  pastors  to  members  who 
expect  to  be  absent  from  home  for  a  time.    They  are 
substantially  as   follows: 

Philadelphia,  July  4,  1867. 

This  certifies  that is  a  member  of 

the   Baptist   church    in   this   place,    in    good 


CHURCH    MANUAL  log 

standing-,  and  is  commended  to  the  Christian  fel- 
lowship of  all  sister  churches. , 

Pastor  Baptist  church. 

5.  Call  for  a  Council  of  Recognition 

Philadelphia.  Aug.  10,  1867. 

To  the  Baptist  church  in  . 

Dear  Brethren : 

There  is  a  company  of  brethren  and  sisters  in  the 
Lord  who  wish  to  become  an  independent  church. 
You  are  therefore  requested  to  send  your  pastor  and 

two  brethren  to  meet  in  council  at at 

—  o'clock,  to  take  the  matter  into  consideration. 
If  the  council  approves  the  movement,  said  breth- 
ren and  sisters  will  be  glad  to  have  the  moral  in- 
fluence of  its  recognition.  The  following  churches 
are    invited    to    send    messengers.      ,    . 


Yours,  trulv. 


Committee. 

6.  Call  for  a  Council  of  Ordination 

Philadelphia,  Aug.  20,  1867. 

The Baptist  church  of  . 

To  the Baptist  church  of  , 

Dear  Brethren : 

We   request   you    to    send   your   pastor  and   two 
brethren    to    meet   in   council   at   — 


I/O  CHURCH    MANUAL 

43'clock,   to    consider  the  propriety   of   ordaining  to 

the    work    of    the    ministry   brother    . 

The   following   churches   are  invited  to   send  mes- 
sengers :    ,   ,   . 

By  order  of  the  church, 

,   Clerk. 

7.  Call  for  an  Advisory  Council 

Philadelphia,  Aug.  10,  1867. 

The Baptist  church  of  . 

To  the Baptist  church  of  . 

Dear  Brethren : 

We  are  sorry  to  inform  you  that  there  are  seri- 
ous difficulties  among  us,  disturbing  our  peace  and 
hindering  our  usefulness  as  a  church.  We  there- 
fore request  you  to  send  your  pastor  and  two 
brethren  to  meet  in  council,  to  advise  us  what  to  do. 
The  following  churches  are  invited  to  send  mes- 
sengers :  .  ,  , . 

By  order  of  the  church, 

,   Clerk. 

8.  Record  of  a  Council 

Philadelphia,  Aug.  30,  1867. 
A  council,  called  by  the church,  met 


— .  at  —  o'cjock.     Brother was  chosen 

moderator,  and  brother ,  clerk.    Prayer 

by .     The  church  records,  referring  to 

the  call  of  the   council,   were  read,   from  which   it 

appears  that  the  object  is 

.     The  credentials  of  the  messengers  were  pre- 


CHURCH    MANUAL  171 

sented.  The  following  churches  sent  the  following 
brethren,  namely : 

CHURCHES.  MESSENGERS. 

[Whatever  is  done  must  be  faithfully  recorded.] 
On  motion  the  council  was   dissolved. 

,  Moderator. 

,  Clerk. 

9.  Form  of  Ministerial  License 

Philadelphia,  Sept.  8,  1867. 

This  is  to  certify,  that  brother is  a 

member  of  the Baptist  church,  in  good  stand- 
ing and  full  fellowship.  Trusting  that  God  has  called 
him  to  preach  the  gospel,  we  hereby  license  him  to 
engage  in  the  great  work ;  and  we  offer  to  God 
our  earnest  prayers  that  he  may  become  "  a  work- 
man that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  rightly  dividing 
the  word  of  truth." 

By    order    of    the    church,    this    dav    of 

,  18-. 

,  Pastor. 

,  Clerk. 


10.  Certificate  of  Ordination 
This  is  to  certify  that  brother 


ordained   to    the   work   of    the    gospel    ministry,    by 
prayer    and    the    laying    on    of    the    hands    of    the 

eldership,  on  the day  of ,  18 — .    He  was 

called  to  ordination  by  the  church  of  wrhich 

he  was  a  member,  which  had  ample  opportunity  t© 


172  CHURCH    MANUAL 

become  acquainted  with  his  piety  and  ministerial 
gifts. 

The  ordaining  council   was   composed   of  

brethren  from  churches,  who  after  a  de- 
liberate and  thorough  examination  of  the  candi- 
date cordially  recommended  him  for  ordination. 

Our  beloved  brother,  the  bearer  of  this  paper,  has, 
therefore,  the  entire  approbation  of  the  ordaining 
council  in  being  publicly  set  apart  to  preach  the 
gospel   and  administer  the   ordinances   of   Christ. 

May  he,  like  Barnabas,  be  "  full  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  of  faith,"  and  through  him  may  "much 
people  be  added  to  the  Lord." 

,  Moderator, 

,  Clerk. 


III.  MARRIAGE  CEREMONY 

Marriage  is  an  institution  of  divine  appointment, 
given  in  wisdom  and  kindness,  to  increase  human 
happiness  and  to  support  social  order. 

In  the  Bible,  which  should  be  the  lamp  to  your 
path  in  every  relation,  you  will  find  the  directions 
needed  in  this. 

In  token  of  your  decided  choice  of  each  other  as 

partners  for  life,  you and 

will  please  to  unite  your  right  hands. 

(Joining  of  hands.) 

Do  you  solemnly  promise,  before  Almighty  God 
and  these  witnesses,  to  receive  each  other  as  hus- 
band and  wife,  agreeing  to  perform  the  duties  grow- 


CHURCH    MANUAL  I73 

ing  out  of  the  relation,  pledging-  yourselves  to  love 
each  other,  and  to  make  even*  reasonable  exertion 
to  promote  each  other's  happiness  until  the  union 
into  which  you  are  now  entering  is  dissolved  by 
death  ? 

{When  a  ring  is  employed  the  following  can  be 
used.  In  confirmation  of  these  vows,  you  will  please 
give  and  receive  this  ring,  as  an  emblem  and  pledge 
of  the  pure  and  enduring  love  you  have  promised 
to  cherish  for  each  other.) 

In  view  of  the  promises  thus  made,  I  do  now,  by 
virtue  of  the  authority*  vested  in  me.  as  a  minister 
of  the  gospel,  pronounce  you  husband  and  wife, 
henceforth  in  interest  and  destiny,  as  in  affection, 
One.  And  what  God  hath  joined  together,  let  not 
man  put  asunder. 


IV.  THE  PROVINCE  OF  ASSOCIATIONS  AND 
COUNCILS 

It  is  customary  among  Baptists  for  the  churches, 
according  to  their  convenience,  to  form  District 
Associations.  These  bodies  are  composed  of  mes- 
sengers from  the  churches.  And  as  no  fixed  number 
of  churches  is  necessary  in  organizing  an  association, 
it  may  be  either  large  or  small.  Even-  church  acts 
voluntarily  in  connecting  itself  with  an  association. 
:re  is  not — there  cannot  be — compulsion  in  the 
matter.  This  results  from  the  fact  that  the  Scrip- 
tures recognize  no  higher  tribunal  than  a  church. 

There  are  many  prudential  reasons  for  the  forma- 
tion  of   associations.     Some  persons   seem  to  think 


1/4  CHURCH    MANUAL 

that  the  chief  business  of  associations  is  to  col- 
lect the  statistics  of  the  churches  and  publish  them. 
This  is  the  least  part  of  their  business.  Their 
great  work  is  connected  with  local  Church  Exten- 
sion, the  Missionary  Enterprise,  Bible,  Book,  and 
Tract  Distribution,  Ministerial  Education,  and  the 
Sunday  School  work.  Combined  action  for  these 
objects  is  more  effective  than  isolated  action.  This 
is  the  supreme  reason  for  associations. 

It  follows,  of  necessity,  that  an  association  is  only 
an  advisory  body.  It  may  recommend  to  the  churches 
that  they  do  thus  and  thus ;  but  it  can  go  no 
further.  It  can  enact  no  decrees;  and  if  it  did.  it 
would  have  no  power  to  execute  them.  It  is  no 
Court  of  Appeals,  whose  decisions  are  to  nullify 
those  of  the  churches.  Bpatists  must,  with  holy 
jealousy,  watch  and  arrest  the  first  encroachments 
of  associations  on  the  independence  of  the  churches. 

There  needs  to  be  something  said  about  Councils. 
Like  associations,  they  are  advisory  bodies ;  and 
while  this  fact  is  kept  distinctly  in  view,  their 
utility  cannot  be  questioned ;  but  there  is  danger  lest 
they  assume  authority  over  the  churches;  and  lest 
the  churches  acquiesce  in  the  assumption.  The  fol- 
lowing remarks  on  councils,  from  a  judicious  author,1 
are  recommended  to  the  Christian  brotherhood : 

"  The  true  theory  of  councils  appears  to  be  that 
which  regards  them  as  merely  advisory.  In  ordinary 
cases  of  discipline,  involving  no  doubtful  or  difficult 
question,  they  are  not  needed.     But  cases  of  a  dif- 

1  Rev.  Warnam  Walker,  in  his  "  Church  Discipline/'  pp. 
63,  64. 


CHURCH    MANUAL  I  75 

ferent  character  may  arise.  A  church  may  be  ca 
to  act  upon  questions  of  the  highest  importance,  and 
so  complicated  and  difficult,  as  to  render  nee 
all  the  wisdom  and  experience  that  can  be  brought  to 
bear  upon  them.  Or,  a  church  may  be  so  divided  in 
opinion  on  questions  seriously  affecting  its  vital 
interests,  that  no  approach  to  unanimity  can  rea- 
sonably be  hoped  for,  except  through  the  inrlue:::^ 
of  such  a  council  as  may  command  the  respect  an  I 
confidence  of  the  body.  Or,  the  pastor  of  a  church 
may  be  guilty*  of  some  misconduct,  involving  a  for- 
feiture of  his  ministerial  and  Christian  character. 
In  this  last  case,  although  no  doubt  may  be  enter- 
tained in  relation  to  the  course  to  be  pursued,  still 
it  is  important  that  the  advice  of  other  pastors  and 
able  brethren  should  be  obtained.  The  removal  of 
one  of  Zion's  watchmen  is  a  matter  of  painful  in- 
terest, not  merely  to  the  one  church  over  which  he 
presides,  but  to  many.  As  a  public  teacher  of  re- 
ligion, hte  has  had  a  place  in  their  affectionate  re- 
gard; and  his  fall,  like  the  extinction  of  a  star,  is 
felt  by  them  to  be  a  public  calamity.  It  would  seem, 
therefore,  in  the  case  supposed,  to  be  due  to  the 
neighboring  churches,  that  before  any  decisive  a: 
is  had,  a  council  should  be  called  to  deliberate  upon 
the  whole  matter,  and  say  what  action  in  their 
judgment  is  advisable.  The  opinion  of  such  a 
body,  although  not  binding  upon  the  church,  is  en- 
titled to  its  consideration ;  and  if  adopted  must  add 
greatly  to  the  weight  of  its  final  decision. 

"  In  this,   and  in   all   cases,   where   the  aid   of   a 
council  is  sought,  the  right  of  a  decision  rests  with 


1/6  CHURCH    MANUAL 

the  church.  It  is  the  province  of  the  council,  not  to 
act  authoritatively,  but  to  advise  the  churches  how 
to  act.  The  advice  so  given  ought  by  no  means  to 
be  lightly  rejected;  but  if,  in  the  deliberative  judg- 
ment of  the  church,  it  is  contrary  to  the  will  of  the 
Master,  it  cannot  be  adopted.  When  a  disagree- 
ment of  this  kind  exists,  perhaps  the  most  effective 
means  of  restoring  harmony  may  be  to  have  recourse 
to  a  second  council  Still,  the  ultimate  decision  be- 
longs to  the  church. 

"  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  the  power  of  ordina- 
tion to  the  Christian  ministry  resides,  not  in  the 
church,  but  in  a  council,  assembled  at  the  call  of  a 
church,  and  acting  through  a  presbytery  of  its  own 
selection.  And  this  being  assumed,  it  is  supposed 
to  follow,  that  the  power  to  depose  from  the  min- 
istry, which  is  an  act  of  equal  authority  with  the 
other,  must  be  lodged  in  a  body  similarly  constituted. 
But  whence,  it  may  be  demanded,  does  the  council, 
as  such,  derive  its  origin  and  its  power?  Evidently 
from  the  church.  But  for  the  call  of  the  church  it 
would  never  have  existed.  It  is  the  creature  of  the 
church,  and  cannot,  without  manifest  impropriety, 
exercise  an  authority  superior  to  that  of  its  creator. 
Besides — if  a  church  be  incompetent  to  depose 
from  the  ministry,  it  must  also  be  incompetent  to 
exclude  a  minister,  since  the  former  act  is  virtually 
included  in  the  latter.  The  discipline  of  the  church, 
so  far  as  ministers  are  concerned,  would  thus  be- 
come an  empty  name.  The  truth  seems  to  be  that 
the  ordinary  power  is  in  the  church.  Inasmuch, 
however,  as  the  exrcise  of  that  power  is  an  act  of 


CHURCH    MANUAL  177 

public  importance  and  interest,  it  is  due  to  the 
neighboring  churches,  that  the  advice  of  their  pastors 
and  such  other  members  as  they  may  designate  for 
this  purpose,  should  previously  be  heard.  Especially 
is  it  due  to  the  presbyters  who  may  be  called  upon 
to  act,  that  the}'  should  have  opportunity  to  satisfy 
themselves  in  relation  to  the  character,  call  to  the 
ministry,  and  qualifications  of  the  candidate.  For 
these  reasons,  a  council  ought  always  in  such  cases 
to  be  called,  not  to  ordain,  but  to  advise  the  church 
in  respect  to  ordination;  nor  is  it  easy  to  conceive 
of  a  case  in  which  it  would  be  expedient  for  the 
church  to  insist  upon  proceeding,  contrary  to  such 
advice.  Still,  the  right  of  decision  is  in  the  church ; 
and  the  officiating  presbyter}'  should  be  regarded  as 
acting,  not  in  behalf  of  the  council,  but  in  behalf 
of  the  church." 

This  long  extract  has  been  made,  because  the 
views  it  presents  are  believed  to  be  of  great  im- 
portance. Councils  composed  of  judicious  brethren 
may  be  expected  to  give  good  advice,  and  good 
advice  should  be  taken ;  but  as  councils  are  ad- 
visory, they  are  not  authoritative  bodies.  Hence 
for  a  council  to  require  a  church  to  give  a  pledge 
beforehand  to  abide  by  its  decision  is  a  direct  as- 
sault on  church  independence.  And  for  a  church  to 
give  such  a  pledge  is  disloyalty  to  Christ ;  for  it  is 
a  surrender  of  the  great  principle  that  a  church  is 
the  highest  tribunal,  and  is  the  only  competent 
authority  to  pronounce  a  final  decision. 


M 


INDEX 


Apostolic  Churches,  received  members,  103;  excluded 
members,    104;    restored   members,    106. 

Associations,  Province  of,   173. 

Baptism,  definition  of,  56;  subjects  of,  64;  administration  of. 
65;  design  of,  74;  ceremonial  qualification  for  church- 
membership,  and  no  church  without  it,  12;  believer's  firsr 
public  act  of  obedience  to  Christ,  94;  how  sins  are  remit- 
ted in,  13;  precedes  the  Lord's  Supper,  56,  93;  commemo- 
rates the  burial  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  74;  expresses 
the  believer's  death  to  sin,  75;  symbol  of  purification,  76, 
77;    anticipates   the    resurrection   of    the    saints,    77. 

Baptists,  why  they  do  not  commune  with  Pedobaptists,  91. 

Baptize,  an  Anglicized  word,  65-69;  this  makes  an  appeal  to 
Greek  lexicons  necessary,  69;  lexicons  not  the  ultimate 
authority,  69;  how  Greek  authors  used  baptizo,  73;  what 
Professor  Stuart  and  Calvin  say,  70;  what  George 
Campbell  and  Chalmers  say,  70,  71;  why  Pedobaptist 
concessions  are   of  great  value,   72. 

Believers,  subjects  of  baptism,  84,  85;  allusions  to  baptism 
in  the  New  Testament  forbid  the  idea  of  infant  bap- 
tism,   87. 

Bible,  divinely  inspired,  43;  rule  of  faith  and  practice,  41,  44; 
how  it  should  be  studied,  41;   distribution   of,    157. 

Business,   church,   items   of,   how   taken    up,    163. 

Clerk,   of   church,    proper   to   have    one — his   duties,   37. 

Commission  of  Christ,  circumstances  connected  with  the 
giving  of  it,  79;  how  the  apostles  understood  it,  14,  84; 
only  authority  for  baptizing,  79;  virtually  forbids  what 
it  does  not  enjoin,   81. 

Congregationalism,  defined,  antagonizes  with  Episcopacy  and 
Presbyterianism,    101. 

Covenant,   church,   61. 

179 


l8o  INDEX 

Constitution,  of  churches,  15,   16:  of  United  States  referred 

to   for  illustration,  $2. 

Church,  term  used  in  two  senses  in  New  Testament,  5.  6; 
definition  of  a  local  church,  7,  -55;  prerequisites  to  mem- 
bership, moral,  8,  9 — ceremonial,  12;  constitution  of. 
15,  16;  harmony  of  views  important,  15;  recognition  of, 
16;  what  is  meant  by  sister  churches,  19;  officers  of  a 
church  not  essential  to  its  existence,  but  to  its  well- 
being,   22. 

Council,   forms  of  letters  inviting  to,   169,   170. 

Councils,   advisory  bodies,   province   of,    173-177. 

Deacons,  origin  of  the  deaconship,  29;  the  office  permanent, 
31,  32;  qualifications  of  deacons,  35;  chosen  by  the 
church,  108;  ordination  of,  35,  36;  they  serve  three 
tables,  33;  are  the  treasurers  of  the  church  by  virtue 
of    their    office,    and    should    make    an    annual    report,    35. 

Declaration  of  Faith,  43-62;  not  a  substitute  for  the 
word  of  God,  16:  an  exponent  of  what  the  Bible  is  be- 
lieved to   teach,   42. 

Dismission,  letters  of,  who  entitled  to,  20,  21. 

Discipline,  church,  formative,  1 17-120;  corrective,  120-141; 
objects   to    be    had    in   view,    143. 

Election,   definition   of,    51,   52. 

Episcopacy,  what  it  is,   100. 

Excluded  Members,  how  they  are  to  be  treated,  141;  when 
other   churches    may   receive    them,    116. 

Faith,  definition  of,  50;  prerequisite  to  church-membership. 
9;    Christ  the  object   of,    10;   declaration   of,   43-62. 

Finality,   of  church   action,    111-113. 

Fellowship,   hand   of,    when   usually   given,    18. 

Gifts,  ministerial,  to  be  sought  out  and  encouraged,   150,   151. 

God.   character   of.   45. 

Gospel,   its   harmony  with   the   law   of   God,   54. 

Government,  civil,  of  divine  appointment,  58;  church,  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  Christ,  102;  Congregational  in  form, 
101. 

Hands,  laying  on  of.  a  designation  to  office,  36;  should  be 
done   after  prayer. 

Heretic,  definition   of,   134. 

Household  Baptisms,  no  authority  for  infant  baptism,  85,  86. 


INDEX  IOI 

Infants,  saved,  but  not  by  faith,  S3,  S4;  no  authority  for 
baptizing   them,    84,    85. 

Immersion,  proof  that  it  is  the  baptismal   act,   65,   70,   72,   74. 

Jesus,  Head  of  the  church  and  institutor  of  the  ordi- 
nances,   63. 

Justification,   what   it   is,   48. 

Lexicons,  Greek,  not  the  ultimate  authority  in  deciding  the 
meaning  of  baptizo,  but  the  usus  loquendi  is,  72. 

Letters,  forms  of,  167-170. 

Libraries,  for  Sunday  Schools,  to  be  selected  with  care,  155. 

Lord's   Day,   the   Christian   Sabbath,   57. 

Lord's  Supper,  institution  and  design  of,  88;  a  solemn  cele- 
bration of  Christ's  death,  89;  a  church  ordinance,  and 
therefore  preceded  by  baptism  and  church-membership, 
89,   90. 

Love,  Christian,   the  great  duty  of   church-members,   149,   150. 

Man,   fall  of,  46. 

Marriage   Ceremony,   172. 

Matters    Miscellaneous,    166,    167. 

Majority,  the   right  of,  to   rule,    no. 

Members  of  a  Church,  how  received,  17;  caution  necessary, 
18;  when  received  without  letters  of  dismission,  19; 
how    membership   ceases,    19. 

Ministers  of  the  Gospel,  how  their  authority  to  preach 
and   administer    ordinances    is    derived,   64. 

Ministerial  License,   form  of,   171. 

Missions,  Home  and  Foreign,  to  be  sustained,   160-162. 

Mosheim,  his  testimony  in  favor  of  the  independence  of  the 
first   churches,    113. 

Motions,   rules  concerning,    164;    not   debatable,    166. 

Ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  two,  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper — in    what    sense    church    ordinances,    63,    64. 

Ordination,   council   of,    169;    certificate   of.    171. 

Order,   point  of,   166. 

Offences,  two  classes  of,  125;  personal,  how  to  be  treated. 
126-132;  general,    132-137;   how   to  be  treated,    138. 

Pastor,  why  this  t^rm  was  used,  23;  the  work  of,  24-26;  the 
authority  of,  26-29;  equivalent  to  bishop  and  elder,  25; 
must  not  assume  priestly  lordship,  29;  should'be  chosen 
for   an   indefinite  period,   29;   entitled   to   support,   34. 


I 82  INDEX 

Pedobaptists,    admit   baptism   precedes    communion,   96-98. 

Presbyterianism,   definition   of,    ioi._ 

Privileged  Questions,  what  they  are,   165. 

Power   of  a   Church,   cannot   be   transferred,    in. 

Questions,  privileged,    165;    subsidiary    (note)    not   debatable, 

166. 
Regeneration,  definition  of,  49;  ^coexists  with  repentance  and 

faith,  precedes  baptism,   1 1 . 
Repentance,  definition  of,  50;  precedes  church-membership,  8. 
Robert  Hall,  did  not  consider  Pedobaptists  baptized,  91. 
Saints,   the   perseverance   of,    54. 
Salvation,  way  of,  47;   free,  49. 
Sanctification,   what   it  is,    53. 
Stuart,  Professor,   what  he   says  of   baptizo,   70. 
Sunday    Schools,    to    be    maintained,    153;    the    instructions 

given  in  them  must  be  scriptural,    154;   their   relation  to 

the   churches,   155. 
Tracts  and  Religious  Books,  to  be  circulated,   158,   159. 
Trustees,   duties  of,  no   necessity   for  them  as   distinct   from 

deacons,    39,   40. 
Table  of  the  Lord,  must  be  approached  as  he  directs,  98,  99. 
Whately,    Archbishop,    concedes    the    independence    of    the 

first  churches,  113. 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  April  2006 

PreservatiosiTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 
1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
(724)  779-21 1 1 


0  005  359  945  A 


