^


^,v*\  o«  m


OCT  4  1917


■(^mm


Srctton   •^3)'^


COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS
AND  HEBREWS


{       OCT  ^  IS


Am  Kwterprftotton  of  %  tngltoli  Sibl*  '-^'■''


Colossians,  Ephesians
and  Hebrews


BY

B.  H.  CARROLL,  D.D.,  LL.D.,

President  of  Southwestern  Baptist
Theological  Seminary


EDITED  BY

J.  B.  CRANFILL,  LL.D.


New  York        Chicago        Toronto

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company

London  and  Edinburgh


Copyright,  1917,  by
FLEMING  H.  REVELL  COMPANY


New  York:  158  Fifth  Avenue
Chicago:  125  N.  Wabash  Avenue
Toronto:  25  Richmond  St.,  W.
London:  21  Paternoster  Square
Edinburgh:    100  Princess   Street


CHAPTER

I.

11.

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VIL

VIII.

IX.
X.

XL

XII.
XIII.
XIV.

XV.
XVI.

XVII.

XVIII.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS

PAGE

Editor's  Introduction  v

Historical  Introduction  to  Colossians  . .  i
Analysis,     Paul's     Thankfulness     and

Christ's  Person 1 1

Christ's  Relation  to  the  Church 21

Christ's  Relation  to  the  Father  and  the

Universe    34

Human    Philosophy   vs.   the   Enduring

Gospel  of  Christ 47

Practical  Applications  of  Colossians  ...  58

Historical  Introduction  to  Ephesians.  .  (>"]
Election,      Fore-ordination,      Adoption,

Grace    76

Christ's  Atonement  and  Paul's  Prayer.  .  88

Christ  the  Head  of  the  Church loi

The  Wall  of  Partition 114

Paul's  Second  Great  Prayer 126

The  Great  Unities 141

The  Necessity  of  Regeneration 153

The  Church  in  Glory 164

Author's  Introduction  to  Hebrews,  Part

I    177

Author's  Introduction  to  Hebrews,  Part

II    190

Analysis   of  Hebrews   and   Our  Lord's

Sonships    208


CONTENTS

CHAPTER  PAGE

XIX.     Christ's  Superiority  over  Angels  Good

AND   Bad    221

XX.     Christ  Greater  than  Moses  and  Joshua  233

XXI.     Christ  Greater  than  Aaron 243

XXII.     The  Better  Promises  of  the  New  Cove-
nant     251

XXIII.  The  Promises  of  the  Surety  and  of  the

Sacrifice   261

XXIV.  Promises  of  the  New  Covenant 273

XXV.     The  Heroes  of  Faith 282

XXVI.     The  Heroes  of  Faith  (continued) '. .  290

XXVII.     The  Outcome  of  the  Christian's  Life.  . .  302

XXVIIL     The  Better  Festivals 313

XXIX.     Exhortations  and  Special  Passages 321

XXX.     Exhortations     and     Special     Passages

(continued)    328


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

This  volume  completes  Carroll's  "Interpretation  of  the  ,
English  Bible."  The  publication  of  other  volumes,  in  the
order  of  their  appearance,  has  been  as  follows:  "Revela-
tion," "Genesis,"  "Exodus-Leviticus,"  "Numbers  to  Ruth,"
"Daniel  and  the  Inter-BibHcal  Period,"  "The  Four  Gos-
pels," Volume  I,  "The  Four  Gospels,"  Volume  II,  "The
Pastoral  Epistles,"  "The  Acts,"  "James,  Thessalonians,
Corinthians,"  "The  Hebrew  Monarchy,"  "Galatians,
Romans,  Philippians  and  Philemon."

The  sense  of  joy  and  gratitude  I  feel  in  the  completion
of  this  task  is  beyond  all  words.  It  was  begun  more  than
three  years  ago  during  the  lifetime  of  the  great  author  him-
self. Space  forbids  the  presentation  here  of  the  details
leading  up  to  this  undertaking.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  on
October  30,  1913,  I  entered  into  a  contract  with  Dr.  B.  H.
Carroll  for  the  publication  of  these  books.  At  that  time
his  health  was  failing  and  he  was  aware  that  he  was  near-
ing  the  end  of  his  days.  In  the  interview  in  which  the  con-
tract for  the  publication  of  this  "Interpretation"  was  made,
Dr.  Carroll  expressed  the  wish  that  I  should  secure  the
assistance  in  this  task  of  Rev.  J.  W.  Crowder,  then  assistant
to  Dr.  Carroll  in  the  department  of  the  English  Bible  in
the  Southwestern  Baptist  Theological  Seminary,  and  who
has  since  been  elected  to  the  full  professorship  to  succeed
his  great  predecessor.  Not  only  did  Dr.  Carroll  express
this  wish  while  living,  but  he  did  more — he  inserted  in  his
will  (in  which  his  manuscripts  were  all  devised  to  his  wife
and  to  me),  a  provision  that  Professor  Crowder  should
revise  all  of  these  manuscripts  before  they  were  placed  in
my  hands  for  final  editing  and  for  publication.


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

The  service  of  Professor  Crowder  in  the  preservation,
preparation  and  presentation  of  this  "Interpretation"  has
been  indispensable.  For  half  a  score  of  years  he  sat  at  the
feet  of  the  great  teacher,  and  in  this  way  became  intimately
familiar  with  Dr.  Carroll's  work.  It  is  very  gratifying
that  I  have  been  blessed  with  the  able  assistance  of  this
friend,  student,  and  worthy  successor  to  Dr.  Carroll.  I
have  been  greatly  rejoiced  that  Professor  Crowder  has  so
happily  and  satisfactorily  maintained  the  department  of
English  Bible  in  our  great  Seminary,  and  that  he  now  has
the  largest  class  in  the  English  Bible,  in  which  this  "Inter-
pretation" is  the  text  book,  that  he  has  yet  had.  He  is  as
true  to  God's  Word  and  the  Baptist  faith  as  was  Dr.  Car-
roll himself,  and  his  work  in  the  Seminary  is  in  every  way
invaluable  to  that  great  institution.  While  I  deeply  appre-
ciate every  department  of  the  Seminary,  none  outranks  in
importance  the  department  of  English  Bible,  and  Professor
Crowder  is  demonstrating  day  by  day  the  wisdom  of  the
Board  of  Trustees  in  their  unanimous  call  to  him  to  succeed
Dr.  Carroll.

And  now  the  work  to  which  through  eventful  years  I
have  turned  my  own  time,  talents,  means,  and  energies,  has
reached  its  consummation.  Profoundly  do  I  believe  that
God  has  ruled  and  reigned  in  it  all,  and  as  this  final  volume
of  the  series  is  sent  out  to  the  world,  my  heart  sings  with
inexpressible  joy.  More  than  once  have  I  said,  and  I  repeat
it  here,  that  this  is  the  greatest  single  achievement  of  all  my
life,  and  I  doubt  not  that  this  can  be  said  when  I  have  left
the  walks  of  men  and  have  gone  to  join  the  innumerable
throng  of  God's  redeemed  on  high,  where  the  beloved  author
of  these  volumes  now  abides  with  that  loving  Savior  whom
he  so  deeply  loved,  and  to  whose  service  he  dedicated  his
great,  strong,  eventful  and  triumphant  life.

Dallas,  Texas.  J.  B.  Cranfill.


THE  BOOK  OF  COLOSSIANS


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION

(Note:  For  helps  commended  on  the  Letters  of  the  Roman
Imprisonment  see  Introduction  to  Philippians.)

IT  is  necessary  at  the  beginning  to  get  the  geography  of
this  history  clear  in  mind — to  trace  out  on  the  map  in
the  "Bible  Atlas"  the  places  mentioned.  Indirectly,
where  not  directly,  all  the  churches  established  in  this  region
were  Pauline  churches.  Colosse  is  only  sixteen  miles  from
Hierapolis  and  only  six  miles  from  Laodicea — all  right  there
together,  all  on  the  Lycus,  a  tributary  of  the  Meander.

The  man  who  planted  these  three  churches — who  directly
established  them — was  Epaphras,  an  evangelist,  who  lived
at  Colosse.  He  established  the  churches,  but  Archippus,
the  son  of  Philemon,  was  the  pastor  at  Colosse — a  rather
slow-going  pastor.  He  needed  to  be  stirred  up  right  sharply,
and  Paul  takes  occasion  in  two  of  his  letters  to  stir  him.
These  people  ethnologically  were  Phrygians,  but  politically
they  belonged  to  the  Roman  province  of  Asia.

The  occasion  of  the  Letter  to  the  Colossians  was  the  visit
of  Epaphras  to  Paul  in  Rome,  giving  him  an  account  of  the
state  of  affairs  in  the  Lycus  valley.  The  conditions  were
much  sharper  at  Colosse  than  elsewhere,  but  the  same  errors
prevailed  in  all  three  churches,  and  the  form  of  error  pre-
vailed somewhat  in  the  whole  province.  Hence,  while  he
wrote  a  special  letter  to  Colosse,  he  used  the  main  thoughts
of  the  letter  and  elaborated  them  into  a  circular  letter.  The
Letter  to  the  Ephesians  was  certainly  not  addressed  pri-

1


a         COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

marily  to  Ephesus.  A  great  many  copies  were  made  and
these  copies  were  distributed  among  the  churches  of  Asia.
The  letter  that  went  to  Ephesus  was  one  of  the  copies  pre-
served. A  great  many  copies  were  not  addressed  to  any
particular  place,  but  left  blank.  There  is  a  reference  in
Colossians  to  a  letter  which  they  would  receive  from  Laod-
icea,  which  doubtless  is  the  circular  letter  which  we  call  the
Letter  to  the  Ephesians.  As  the  Letter  to  the  Romans  elabo-
rates the  line  of  thought  presented  in  Galatians,  making  it
an  abstract  discussion,  so  Ephesians  elaborates  the  line  of
thought  in  the  Letter  to  the  Colossians,  making  it  an  abstract
discussion.  Both  Ephesians  and  Colossians,  on  the  face  of
them,  show  that  Paul  did  not  personally  visit  these  places,
but  doubtless  saw  some  of  the  people  at  the  time  he  was  in
Ephesus  holding  that  big  meeting  which  lasted  two  years
or  more.

The  report  that  Epaphras  brought  disclosed  a  prevalent
and  dangerous  form  of  error  sapping  the  Christian  faith.
Before  discussing  what  that  error  was,  I  call  attention  to
some  commentaries.  The  most  scholarly  of  all,  for  both
Greek  and  English  students,  is  Lightfoot.  There  is  also  a  very
fine  expository  commentary  by  Alexander  MacLaren,  but
having  read  both,  I  greatly  prefer,  for  English  students,
Dr.  Dargan's  commentary,  in  "The  American  Commentary,"
published  by  the  American  Baptist  Publication  Society.
Dr.  Dargan,  late  of  the  Southern  Baptist  Theological  Semi-
nary, though  he  wrote  it  when  comparatively  a  young  man,
gives  us  a  perfect  gem,  and  it  is  sound  in  the  faith.  His
introductory  chapter  is  even  clearer  in  its  statement  of  the
case  than  Canon  Farrar  gives  in  his  "Life  and  Epistles  of
Paul,"  and  even  better  than  Conybeare  and  Howson.

It  has  generally  been  held  that  the  error  which  was  sapping
the  faith  of  these  churches  in  the  Lycus  valley  was  Gnosti-
cism. Gnosticism  is  derived  from  the  Greek  word  gnosis,
which  means  knowledge,  like  "agnosticism,"  which  means


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION  S

ignorance — not  knowing.  The  knowledge  to  which  they  pre-
tended was  a  mystical  knowledge  above  that  which  was
written,  and  it  took  the  place  of  the  written  word.  We  get
some  conception  of  Gnosticism  from  mystical  dreamers.
We  occasionally  nieet  them  in  the  present  time.  They  are
very  confident  of  everything,  saying,  "I  know,  I  know,  I
know."  "How  do  you  know?"  "Well,  I  just  feel  that  it
is  so."  "Can  you  prove  it  from  the  Bible?"  "The  Spirit
moves  men  now  as  well  as  He  did  in  Bible  days."  So  he
goes  on  Spirit  knowledge,  as  he  calls  it,  and  places  what  he
says  above  what  is  written.

Another  form  was  this :  They  would  say,  "The  letter  is
nothing;  the  Spirit  is  everything.  You  must  not  interpret
the  Bible  literally.  For  instance,  when  you  read  about  Adam
and  Eve,  it  must  be  interpreted  as  an  allegory,  and  the  book
of  Jonah  is  an  allegory."  Mystics  have  always  been  dream-
ers. They  are  opposed  to  all  forms  of  organization.  If  we
ask  one,  "Do  you  belong  to  the  church?"  he  will  answer,
"I  belong  to  the  universal,  the  invisible  church.  Your  little,
local  concern  is  nothing  to  me.  I  belong  to  the  big  church."
Personally,  I  never  did  have  much  use  for  these  vague,  loose
people.  I  believe  that  all  real  faith  is  susceptible  of  a  clear
statement,  and  that  any  doctrine  which  cannot  be  clearly
derived  from  the  plain  passages  in  the  Word  of  God  is  to  be
rejected.

/  believe  that  the  Word  of  God  is  more  reliable  than  any
mystic  philosophy,  and  if  a  modern  mystic  wants  me  to
accept  his  vagaries,  let  him  give  the  signs  of  an  apostle.
Let  him  by  miracle  accredit  his  inspiration.  Let  him  raise
the  dead  and  perform  other  miracles,  and  then  I  will  be
ready  to  accept  what  he  says,  provided  it  harmonizes  zvith
God's  written  Word.

Gnosticism  did  not  come  in  its  full  development  and  full
fruitage  until  about  a.d.  150,  much  after  this  time.  Then
for  about  100  years  it  swayed  a  large  part  of  the  Orient.


4j         COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

It  was  rampant  before  John  died.  We  have  an  example  in
Cerinthus.  John  had  such  a  horror  of  him,  it  is  said,  that
when  he  went  to  a  pubhc  bath-house  and  found  Cerinthus
there,  he  would  say,  "Let  us  get  away  from  here,  lest  that
building  fall  on  us  for  keeping  such  company."

What  did  that  mystical  philosophy  teach?  What  did  it
pretend  to  account  for?  First,  the  creation  of  the  world,
or  how  things  came  to  be.  Their  position  as  to  God  was
agnosticism,  just  as  the  later  position  of  Huxley,  Herbert
Spencer,  and  John  Stuart  Mill,  namely,  God  is  unknowable.
These  mystics  further  taught  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  finite
being  to  come  in  touch  with  God — that  only  through  several
grades  of  eons,  or  emanations,  could  men  learn  from  God.
These  grades  of  hierarchy  in  angelic  beings  by  shading  down
lower  and  lower  might  finally  get  low  enough  to  touch
man.  Through  these  grades,  or  classes  of  angels  they  held
that  the  world  was  created ;  that  God  did  not  create  it ;  that
Jesus  was  one  of  these  eons,  or  intermediate  angels ;  that
the  eon  took  possession  of  Him  at  His  baptism — of  Jesus
the  mere  man,  born  of  Joseph  and  Mary — and  when  He
was  crucified  the  eon  left  Him ;  that  He  had  no  real  divinity,
and  that  there  were  a  number  of  eons  higher  than  He.

The  second  thing  they  tried  to  account  for  was  the  origin
of  evil.  They  held  to  what  in  theology  is  called  dualism —
that  there  are  two  principles  in  the  world,  a  good  principle
and  an  evil  principle.  Doubtless  they  got  that  from  the
Persians.  They  said  that  evil  rested  in  matter ;  that  matter
was  evil  and  spirit  good,  and  therefore  they  had  what  is  called
ascetic  doctrines,  the  denial  of  appetite,  just  as  far  as  one
could  and  hold  soul  and  body  together;  for  instance,  they
would  take  a  drink  of  water  and  a  crust  of  bread,  have  just
one  simple  garment  of  clothing,  would  not  marry,  lived  in
caves,  and  withdrew  from  the  world  just  as  much  as  pos-
sible. That  was  the  ascetic  part  of  it,  and  by  doing  this,  as
the  body  was  matter,  they  triumphed  over  sin.     Roman


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION  5

Catholics  incorporate  a  great  part  of  this  in  their  belief.
Abstinences,  fastings,  refusal  to  eat  certain  things,  penance,
scourging,  etc.,  are  examples.

Paul  takes  occasion  to  tell  when  here  that  this  is  not  at  all
valuable  in  overcoming  passions;  that  they  have  no  good
effect  in  that  direction.  Many  a  monk  has  found  that  out.
Though  he  retire  from  the  world  and  devote  the  time  to
scourgings  and  fastings,  there  on  the  hard  rocks  temptation
would  bind  him — temptation  to  sin  in  the  vilest  forms,  just
as  they  come  to  men  out  in  the  world.  The  Bible  idea  of
sin  is  that  it  originated  in  the  spirit  and  not  in  the  body;
the  body  is  simply  the  instrument.  "All  sin,"  says  the  apostle
in  another  place,  "is  without  the  body,  but  the  sin  of  forni-
cation is  against  the  body."  These  were  their  dual  ideas —
spirit  and  matter,  both  eternal — matter  evil  and  spirit  good,
and  that  there  must  be  a  conquest  over  matter.  They  directly
controverted  the  Bible  doctrine  of  sin.  When  they  took
the  position  that  the  world  was  created  by  eons  and  when
they  assigned  Christ  a  low  place  among  the  eons,  they  denied
His  divinity.  A  large  part  of  this  teaching  comes  nearer
the  doctrine  of  the  Essenes  than  of  the  Pharisees.  In  the
time  of  Christ  there  were  three  sects  of  Jev/s — Pharisees,
Sadducees,  and  Essenes.  The  Essenes  had  their  headquar-
ters at  Engedi,  near  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea.  They  were
communists,  had  everything  in  common,  were  opposed  to
marriage,  etc.

So  we  find  here  that  this  error  was  more  likely  to  have
come  from  the  Essenes  part  of  Judaism  than  from  the  Phari-
sees. They  had  their  proscriptions  touching  everything  to
eat,  drink  and  wear.  Hence  the  apostle  says,  "Let  no  man
take  you  to  task  about  what  you  eat  and  drink."  The  part
of  their  doctrine  most  Pharisaic  was  the  strict  observance
of  the  Sabbatic  cycle,  that  is,  weekly  Sabbaths,  monthly
Sabbaths,  and  annual  Sabbaths.  So  that  this  Colossian  heresy
was  partly  Jewish  and  partly  heathen,  and  altogether  un-


6         COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

christian.  Epaphras  felt  that  it  created  a  situation  which
he  could  not  master.  So  he  came  to  Rome  to  lay  the  case
before  Paul.  He  had  planted  these  churches,  they  were  very
dear  to  him,  and  he  wanted  to  refer  the  matter  to  an  apostle
upon  whom  inspiration  rested  for  the  correction  of  all
these  evils.    That  is  the  occasion  of  the  letter.

Before  going  into  the  exposition  we  need  to  look  somewhat
at  the  history  of  these  places.  Colosse  was  one  of  the  stop-
ping places  of  Xerxes,  king  of  Persia,  when  on  his  way  to
invade  Greece.  At  Hierapolis  was  born  a  contemporary  of
Paul,  the  philosopher  Epictetus,  one  of  the  most  famous  of
the  stoic  philosophers.  Cicero,  when  proconsul  of  Asia,
stopped  here  at  Colosse,  and  for  a  part  of  the  time  his  head-
quarters were  Hierapolis.  Hierapolis  and  Laodicea  were
both  great  cities.  Colosse  never  did  become  a  great  city,
and  it  was  more  conservative  than  the  others,  clinging  to
the  old  Greek  customs,  while  the  others  went  over  to  the
Romans  when  Rome  conquered  that  territory,  hence  they
prospered  more.

A  long  time  after  Paul  and  John  were  dead,  in  the  4th
century,  a  council  was  held  at  Laodicea  and,  strange  to  say,
when  this  council  was  held  the  matters  disposed  of  were
the  very  errors  that  Paul  is  refuting  here  in  this  Letter  to
the  Colossians.  That  shows  how  tenacious  of  life  heresy
may  be,  since  at  least  250  years  afterward  it  lingered  in  the
Lycus  valley.  In  the  book  of  Revelation  we  find  that  to  be
the  ruling  spirit  at  Laodicea  in  the  last  days  of  John.

The  value  of  the  Letter  to  the  Colossians  is  almost  un-
speakable. We  now  study  one  after  another,  three  marvelous
books — Colossians,  Ephesians  and  Hebrews.  In  Colossians
the  person  and  the  work  of  Christ,  in  Ephesians  the  church,
which  is  the  glory  of  Christ,  in  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  the
superiority  of  the  new  covenant  over  the  old  covenant,  or
the  sacrifice  and  priesthood  of  Christ.  We  have  a  perfect
feast  before  us  in  the  study  of  these  great  doctrinal  letters


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION  7

on  the  person  of  Christ,  His  original  divinity,  His  creative
power.  His  redemptive  power,  His  relation  to  the  church  and
to  the  universe.  We  find  nowhere  in  the  Bible  so  perfect  and
complete  a  statement  as  appears  in  this  Letter  to  the
Colossians.

In  the  study  of  the  harmony  of  the  gospels,  when  we  get
to  that  part  where  John  commences,  "In  the  beginning  was
the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was
God ;  by  Him  all  things  were  created  that  were  created,"  I
put  in  Paul's  gospel  by  the  side  of  that,  and  always  incor-
porate right  there  this  great  passage  from  Colossians,  the
great  passage  from  Philippians,  and  certain  similar  passages
from  Hebrews.  Indeed,  Hebrews  supplements  and  interprets
Colossians.  Every  preacher  should  have  clear  ideas  of  the
person  of  Christ  in  His  relation  both  to  the  universe  and  to
the  church  as  we  have  them  in  these  letters.

There  is  a  textual  difficulty  in  this  letter.  See  2 :  20  and
note  the  difference  in  the  parenthetical  clause  between  the
King  James  and  the  revised  versions.

1.  Does  taking  the  "touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not"  from
the  parenthesis  materially  alter  the  sense?

2.  Are  the  precepts,  "touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not,"
Paul's  precepts,  or  is  he  here  condemning  them?

3.  Have  they  any  bearing  on  the  modern  prohibition  of
the  liquor  habit  and  traffic,  as  sometimes  applied  by  Prohi-
bitionists ?

An  old  deacon  once  in  my  hearing  quoted  this  passage,
"Touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not,"  as  a  decisive  scripture
against  both  the  liquor  traffic  and  habit.  I  told  him  he  had
better  let  that  passage  alone,  since  if  it  were  pertinent  to  the
subject  of  prohibition,  it  furnished  a  most  plausible  and
forcible  argument  to  the  saloon  man.  He  would  use  it  this
way :  "Let  no  man  take  you  to  task  about  what  you  eat  and
drink,  which  things  perish  in  the  using.  If  you  are  a  Chris-
tian free  from  rudimental  things,  why  are  you  subject  to


8        COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

such  decrees  as  Touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not  ?' "  How
could  you  answer  him  except  by  denying  the  application  of
the  passage  to  the  liquor  habit  and  traffic?  Your  defense
would  consist  in  showing  the  real  application."  Paul  was
teaching  a  salvation  of  grace  through  faith  in  Christ,  and
opposing  a  salvation  through  ritualistic  observances  of  the
Mosaic  Sabbath- feasts,  the  rudiments  of  Old  Testament
typical  teaching,  or  by  trying  to  kill  sin  through  ascetic  appli-
cations of  the  body.  The  whole  Sabbatic  cycle  was  nailed
to  the  cross  of  Christ.  They  were  but  shadows  of  which
He  was  the  body  or  substance.  That  old  typical  food-dis-
tinction between  clean  and  unclean  animals  was  abrogated.
Therefore  he  says,  "Let  no  man  take  you  to  task  about  what
you  eat  and  drink."  "Let  no  man  therefore  judge  you  in
meat,  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of  a  feast  day  [annual  Sab-
bath] or  a  new  moon  [monthly  Sabbath]  or  a  Sabbath  day
[seventh  day] ."  In  other  words,  "Why  do  you  subject  your-
selves to  such  ordinances  as,  Touch  not,  taste  not,  handle
not  ?* "  That  means  that  the  Christian  is  not  to  be  under
subjection  to  a  ritualistic  system  which  was  a  shadow  of  the
things  to  come,  but  to  the  body  of  Christ.  That  ritualistic
system  said,  "You  may  eat  a  goat  but  not  a  rabbit ;  you  may
eat  a  sheep  but  not  a  hog."  Paul  says  that  every  one  of  these
things  was  nailed  to  the  cross ;  he  is  not  discussing  the  tem-
perance question  of  drinking  whiskey,  but  he  is  discussing
the  Levitical  law  and  the  superadded  traditions.

When  a  Jew  says  that  we  should  keep  the  seventh  day  our
reply  is:  "That  was  nailed  to  the  cross.  There  remaineth
a  Sabbath-keeping  to  the  people  of  God  which  is  the  first  day
of  the  week."  And  if  when  we  want  to  eat  a  squirrel  or  a
catfish  he  says,  "Touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not,"  our  reply
is,  "These  distinctions  were  rudimentary  and  typical.  They
perished  with  the  using.  Being  shadows,  they  are  fulfilled.
So  we  understand,  then,  that  it  is  not  Paul  who  is  saying,
Touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not.* "


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION  S|

Let  us  close  this  discussion  in  a  few  words  of  review.
Who  wrote  the  letter  ?  Paul.  When  ?  About  a.d.  62  or  63.
To  whom  ?  Brethren  at  Colosse.  That  includes  the  regular
church,  also  the  churches  in  the  private  houses.  Who  is
associated  with  him  in  the  letter?  Timothy.  What  is  the
occasion  of  the  letter?  The  coming  of  Epaphras  stating
the  false  doctrines  prevalent  in  the  churches  in  the  Lycus
valley,  particularly  the  churches  at  Colosse,  Hierapolis,  and
Laodicea.  What  the  trouble  ?  It  was  a  blended  error  partly
heathen  and  partly  Jewish,  and  altogether  unchristian.  In
its  asceticism  it^embodies  the  doctrines  of  the  Essenes ;  in  its
ritualism,  the  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees;  in  its  dualism
the  Persian  doctrine  of  spirit  and  matter.  As  a  phi-
losophy it  proposed  to  answer  two  questions:  i.  How
the  world  or  universe  first  came  to  be.  2.  The  origin  and
seat  of  sin,  and  the  means  of  its  conquest.  As  a  doctrine  it
denied  the  divinity  of  Christ,  relied  upon  mystic,  esoteric
knowledge  as  above  God's  Word,  and  taught  the  worship
of  angels.

QUESTIONS

1.  Locate  on  the  map  the  cities  of  the  Lycus  valley.

2.  Who  planted  the  three  churches  in  this  valley?

3.  What  the  occasion  of  this  letter  ?

4.  What  its  relation  to  Ephesians  ?

5.  What  the  purpose  of  both  of  them?

6.  What  commentaries  commended?

7.  What  was  the  error  widespread  in  the  Lycus  valley?

8.  What  the  derivation  and  meaning  of  the  term?

9.  What  another  form  of  it?

10.  Give  examples  of  their  Biblical  interpretation.

11.  What  is  a  notable  characteristic  of  these  people?

12.  When  did  this  doctrine  reach  its  full  development?

13.  Give  an  example.

14.  What  did  this  mystical  philosophy  teach  (i)  As  to  the  origin
of  the  world?     (2)  As  to  the  origin  of  evil  and  its  logical  results?

15.  What  three  sects  of  Jews  in  the  time  of  our  Lord?

16.  Which  of  these  more  nearly  approached  this  doctrine?

17.  What  their  headquarters  and  some  of  their  characteristics?

18.  What  part  of  their  doctrine  most  Pharisaic?

19.  What  noted  characters  of  history  connected  with  Colosse  and
Hierapolis,  and  how  ?


10       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

20.  What  the  council  of  Laodicea,  and  what  doctrine  was  up  for
settlement  ?

21.  What  the  theme  of  Colossians,  Ephesians  and  Hebrews,  re-
spectively?

22.  What  passage  in  John's  gospel  parallels  Paul's  in  this  letter?

23.  What  passages  from  Philippians  parallels  John's  ?

24.  What  textual  difficulty  in  2:20?  Explain  its  meaning  and
application.

25.  In  Review  answer:  (i)  Who  wrote  this  letter?  (2)  When?
(3)  To  whom?  (4)  Who  is  associated  with  Paul  in  this  letter?
(5)  What  the  occasion  of  the  letter?  (6)  What  the  trouble?  (7)
What  its  three-fold  origin?  (8)  As  a  philosophy  it  proposed  to
answer  what  questions?     (9)  What  of  it  as  a  doctrine?


II


ANALYSIS,  PAUUS  THANKFULNESS  AND
CHRIST'S  PERSON

Scripture:  Col.  1:1-17

WE  now  begin  to  expound  Colossians.  There  are
new  words  in  its  vocabulary,  and  especially  com-
pound words,  suggested  by  the  occasion,  which
make  exposition  in  English  alone  very  difficult.  The  temp-
tation is  strong  to  refer  to  the  Greek  text  for  nice  shades
of  meaning.  Remembering,  however,  that  but  few  of  the
mass  of  readers  have  studied  Greek,  our  endeavor  shall  be
to  give  the  sense  of  obscure  passages  as  best  we  can  without
confusing  the  mind  by  references  to  a  language  of  which  so
many  are  ignorant.  Moreover,  in  all  matters  of  importance
we  may  thoroughly  rely  on  getting  the  best  sense  by  compari-
son of  the  several  English  translations.

First  of  all  we  need  an  analysis  of  the  whole  letter,  that
we  may  understand,  as  we  progress  in  exposition,  the  devel-
opment of  the  argument  and  the  relation  between  its  parts.
While  we  find  in  the  several  commentaries  analyses  more
or  less  simple,  we  will  follow  throughout  the  author's  analy-
sis which  is  as  follows :

I.  Textual  Introduction,  1:1-14.  (a)  Greeting,  1:1,  2.
(b)  Thanksgiving,  i :  3-8.    (c)  Prayer,  i :  9-14.

II.  Doctrine  of  Christ's  Person,  i :  15-23.  (a)  In  relation
to  the  Father,  i :  15a.  (b)  In  relation  to  the  material  uni-
verse and  all  its  intelligences,  both  human  and  angelic,
1 :  15b- 1 7.    (c)  In  relation  to  the  church,  i :  18-23.

III.  Parenthetical  Explanation  of  the  Apostle's  Mission

11


la       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

to  the  Gentiles  and  Consequent  Concern  for  Them,  i :  24 —
2:7.

IV.  Polemics  against  False  Teachers  and  Teaching  at
Colosse,  2 : 8 — 3 :  17.  (a)  As  limiting  by  a  false  philosophy
the  sufficiency  of  Christ  and  their  completeness  in  Him,
2:8-15.  (b)  Against  the  folly  of  this  philosophy  in  account-
ing for  creation,  and  in  defining  sin,  and  in  the  insufficiency
of  its  means  for  the  conquest  of  sin,  such  as,  ( i )  A  Pharisaic
observance  of  an  obsolete  Sabbatic  ritual ;  (2)  A  self-imposed
humility ;  (3)  The  worship  of  angels,  supposed  to  be  emana-
tions from  God,  himself  unknowable;  (4)  A  bondage  to
impracticable  ascetic  precepts,  based  on  the  idea  that  sin
resided  in  matter,  which  precepts  were  but  expressions  of
will  worship  and  powerless  to  hedge  against  temptation  or  to
subdue  the  passions,  or  to  supply  objects  high  enough  to
incite  to  love-motives,  2: 16-23.  (c)  Against  the  substitu-
tion of  a  mystic  knowledge  (Gnosis)  as  a  standard  instead
of  the  gospel,  2: 16-23.  (^)  But  the  gospel,  on  the  other
hand,  raises  us  with  Christ  and  makes  us  sharers  of  His
life  and  exaltation,  supplies  us  with  heavenly  objects  of
thought  and  desire,  and  pledges  our  manifestation  in  glory
with  Christ,  3: 1-4.  (e)  It  shows  sin  to  be  an  evil  nature
called  "the  old  man,"  resident  in  mind,  not  matter,  and  ex-
presses itself  in  fornication,  uncleanness,  passion,  evil  desire,
coveteousness,  anger,  wrath,  malice,  railing,  shameful  speak-
ing, 3:5-9.  (f)  It  provides  for  the  real  conquest  of  sin
( I )  by  regeneration,  putting  off  the  old  man  and  putting  on
the  new  man — a  re-creation  after  the  image  of  God — express-
ing itself  in  a  heart  of  compassion,  kindness,  lowliness,  meek-
ness, forbearance,  forgiveness,  love;  (2)  by  the  process  of
sanctification  through  the  instrumentality  of  God's  Word
and  through  spiritual  worship  in  teaching,  prayer,  and  song,
and  (3)  by  supplying  the  dominant  motive  in  all  word,  deed,
or  thought,  the  glory  of  our  Lord,  3:10-17.  (g)  It  unifies
in  Christ  all  races,  nations,  and  social  castes,  3:11.


ANALYSIS,  PAUL'S  THANKFULNESS        IS

V.  Exhortations,  by  Way  of  Application,  3:18 — 4:6.
(a)  To  family  relations  and  duties,  3 :  18 — 4 :  i.  (b)  To  their
spiritual  devotions,  4:2-4.  (c)  Their  outward  walk  and
speech,  4 :  5,  6.

VL  Personal  Matters,  Salutations,  and  Directions,  4 : 7-17.

VIL  Attestation  of  the  Letter  and  Benediction,  4: 18.

This  outline  emphasizes  the  distinctions  between  doctrftie,
polemics,  and  practice.  The  Historical  Introduction  having
been  given  in  a  previous  chapter,  we  now  take  up  in  order  the
divisions  of  the  text-outline.

L  Textual  Introduction,  i :  1-14. — ^This  introduction  con-
sists of  the  greeting,  thanksgiving,  and  prayer.  It  is  a  New
Testament  method,  particularly  a  Pauline  method  of  com-
mencing a  letter.  Paul,  declaring  his  apostleship  and  cour-
teously associating  Timothy  with  himself,  addresses  the  let-
ter, not  formally  to  the  pastor,  nor  indeed  to  the  church,  but
"to  all  the  saints  and  faithful  brethren  in  Christ  at  Colosse."
We  may  infer  a  reason  for  this  address  from  the  fact  that
there  were  at  least  two  churches  at  Colosse  (see  Philemon
1:2).  We  reserve  to  the  close  of  the  exposition  an  impor-
tant observation  on  the  plurality  of  churches  in  one  city,
characteristic  of  Hierapolis  also  (4:  15),  as  we  find  it  to  be
of  Rome  (Rom.  16:  5).

Paul  always  finds  some  reason  for  thanksgiving.  Note
carefully  for  what  he  expresses  thanks  in  this  case :  "Having
heard  of  your  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  of  the  love  which  ye
have  toward  all  the  saints,  because  of  the  hope  which  is  laid
up  for  you  in  the  heavens."  The  proof  is  decisive  that  Paul
himself  had  not  planted  the  churches  in  the  Lycus  valley.  He
"hears"  and  "learns"  of  their  faith  and  love  through  his
disciple,  Epaphras,  the  evangelist,  who  probably  planted
these  churches  (Col.  4: 13).  Note  that  "hope"  in  verse  5  is
used  objectively,  meaning  the  inheritance  for  which  they
hoped.    It  is  common  with  Paul  to  use  words  objectively.


14       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

See  an  example  in  Gal.  3 :  23,  "But  before  faith  came,"  i.e.,
before  Christ,  the  object  of  faith,  came.

With  Paul  thankfulness  for  great  blessings  glides  into
prayer  for  other  blessings.  Dissatisfied  ever  with  his  own
attainments,  he  constantly  reaches  out  to  higher  things  (Phil.
3 :  10-14)  and  so  would  incite  them  to  progress.  Note  there-
fore the  precise  things  for  which  he  prays  in  their  behalf :
(a)  "That  ye  may  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  will
in  all  spiritual  wisdom  and  understanding;"  (b)  "Strength-
ened will  all  power,  according  to  the  might  of  His  glory ;"
(c)  "Giving  thanks."  So  he  prays  then  for  increase  of
their  knowledge  and  power  and  thankfulness.  They  must
not  be  content  to  stand  still.  His  prayer  calls  for  progress.
But  mark  that  each  blessing  sought  is  toward  a  practical
end  in  service  and  character.

He  asks  for  nothing  to  be  hoarded,  nothing  for  mere  en-
joyment. The  "increased  knowledge  of  His  will"  must,  when
received,  lead  them  "to  walk  worthily  of  the  Lord  unto  all
pleasing,  bearing  fruit  in  every  good  work."  And  so  the
increased  power  must  be  used  "unto  all  patience  and  long-
suffering  with  joy."

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  all  New  Testament  teaching  is
on  the  same  line.  The  constant  cry  is  "forward,"  "higher,"
and  "excelsior."  Not  only  so,  but  there  is  a  close  and  neces-
sary connection  between  increase  of  knowledge  and  increase
of  growth.  On  this  point  Spurgeon's  great  sermon  on  H
Peter  3:18,  "Grow  in  the  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our
Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,"  deserves  careful  study,  since
he  stresses  the  thought  that  we  grow  in  the  grace  by  growing
in  the  knowledge.  We  must  know  more  to  be  more  and  do
more.  The  emphatic  thought  here  is  that  a  new  convert  is
but  a  babe  in  Christ,  able  to  be  nourished  only  by  the  "sincere
milk  of  the  word,"  i.e.,  its  simplest  truths,  and  by  continued
indoctrination  in  higher  truths  he  attains  through  fulness  of
knowledge  to  maturity  of  manhood  in  Christ.     Compare


ANALYSIS,  PAUL'S  THANKFULNESS        15

Peter's  similar  teaching  by  letter  to  the  same  people  (I  Pet.
2:2).  In  Ephesians,  the  companion  letter  to  Colossians,  we
find  the  thought  greatly  amplified  and  elaborated  (Eph.
3:11-16).

Later,  Paul  in  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  rebukes  them  for
remaining  babies :  "For  when  by  reason  of  the  time  ye  ought
to  be  teachers,  ye  have  need  again  that  someone  teach  you
the  rudiments  of  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God  ;
and  are  become  such  as  have  need  of  milk,  and  not  of  solid
food.  For  everyone  that  partaketh  of  milk  is  without  expe-
rience of  the  word  of  righteousness ;  for  he  is  a  babe.  But
solid  food  is  for  fullgrown  men,  even  those  who  by  reason
of  use  have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  good  and  evil.
Wherefore  leaving  the  doctrine  of  the  first  principles  of
Christ,  let  us  press  on  unto  full  growth."

This  prayer  of  Paul  that  the  Colossians  might  have  in-
crease of  knowledge  and  spiritual  power  was  most  pertinent
to  their  condition  as  reported  by  Epaphras.  If  they  had
known  more  of  the  gospel,  they  would  have  been  less  at  the
mercy  of  the  false  teachers  leading  them  astray  with  vain
philosophy,  and  if  they  had  attained  greater  spiritual  power
they  would  not  have  been  in  danger  of  falling  through  weak-
ness. It  is  the  ignorant  and  undeveloped  Christians  who
support  impostors,  freaks,  and  cranks.  On  this  point  it  might
be  profitable  to  read  my  sermon  on  "Lambs,  Little  Sheep
and  Sheep."

We  need  now  to  consider  carefully  what  things  Paul  re-
garded as  worthy  of  thanks  in  the  Colossians.  When  we
study  them  we  understand  why  Paul  prayed  that  they  might
be  thankful  to  the  Father.  Here  are  the  items:  (a)  "Who
made  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints
in  light."  (b)  "Who  delivered  us  out  of  the  power  of  dark-
ness." (c)  "Who  translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son
of  His  love."  (d)  "In  whom  we  have  our  redemption,  the
forgiveness  of  our  sins."


16       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

To  make  "meet"  is  to  make  fit  or  suitable.  Adam  had  a
helpmeet  suitable  to  him.  Heaven  is  not  only  a  prepared
place,  but  for  a  prepared  people.  An  unprepared  man  would
not  enjoy  heaven.  It  would  be  hell  to  him.  A  wolf  hates  the
light.  A  sinner  of  the  world,  with  a  mind  that  is  enmity
against  God  and  holiness,  would  hate  heaven's  light.  Even
now  we  Christians  are  not  fully  prepared  for  heaven.  While
regeneration  has  given  a  holy  disposition  to  our  minds  so  that
we  love  God  and  approve  right  things,  yet  we  need  the
process  of  sanctification  to  complete  our  holiness  of  spirit,
and  we  further  need  the  resurrection  and  glorification  of  our
bodies  that  the  whole  man  may  be  prepared  for  the  heavenly
estate.

The  delivery  from  the  power  of  darkness  deserves  special
thankfulness.  As  bearing  on  this,  compare  Paul's  commis-
sion (Acts  26:  18),  being  sent  to  the  Gentiles  "to  open  their
eyes,  that  they  may  turn  from  darkness  to  light  and  from
the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that  they  may  receive  remis-
sion of  sins  and  an  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sancti-
fied by  faith  in  me."  Darkness  is  the  realm  of  Satan  and  he
is  its  power,  as  light  is  the  realm  of  Christ  and  He  is  its
power.  We  ought  to  cultivate  thankfulness  that  we  have
been  rescued  from  Satan.

In  illustration  I  have  sometimes  cited  this  fact  of  border
warfare.  A  settler's  camp  had  been  surprised  by  savages.
This  was  the  scene  when  help  came:  the  father  was  lying
across  the  wagon-tongue  killed  and  scalped,  a  little  boy
mangled  and  scalped  was  hanging  in  a  thorny  bush.  A
painted  Indian  brute  was  standing  over  a  helpless  girl,  his
left  hand  twisted  in  her  golden  hair,  his  right  hand  brandish-
ing the  bloody  scalp-knife,  with  the  mother  kneeling  before
him  pleading  for  her  child.  What  must  have  been  her  thank-
fulness for  the  opportune  rescue  of  her  girl  ?  But  how  shall
this  scene  compare  in  horror  with  that  of  a  sinner  under
the  power  of  Satan,  led  captive  at  his  will  toward  the  pit  of


ANALYSIS,  PAUL'S  THANKFULNESS       17

darkness  where  his  fetters  may  be  riveted  on  the  victim  for-
ever. In  the  "Three  Hours  of  Darkness,"  in  that  devil-
darkness,  Christ  on  the  cross  triumphed  over  Satan  and
rescued  us  from  his  power.

The  thankfulness  increases  on  our  transfer  to  the  king-
dom of  the  Son  of  His  Love.  The  phrase,  "Son  of
His  love,"  needs  explanation.  It  does  not  mean  the  "well
beloved  Son,"  for  that  expresses  the  Father's  love  for  the
Son.  It  means  that  the  Son  is  the  representative  and
depository  of  the  Father's  love  toward  us.  "God  so  loved
the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son  that  who-
soever believeth  on  Him  should  not  perish  but  have  ever-
lasting life."

The  final  ground  of  the  thankful  spirit  which  he  invokes
on  the  Colossians  is  "our  redemption,  the  forgiveness  of  our
sins."  There  can  be  no  more  disturbing  thought  than  the
exact  record  of  our  sins.  Books  are  kept  in  heaven.  Therein
is  written  every  evil  desire,  imagination,  thought,  word  or
deed.  This  book  of  the  transgressions  of  the  finally  impeni-
tent will  be  opened  at  the  judgment.  But  just  now  in  the
day  of  mercy  our  Lord  stands  with  uplifted  hands — the  nail-
pierced  hands — over  that  record,  and  promises  to  any  peni-
tent believing  sinner  to  bring  down  that  hand  and  blot  out
the  record  forever.

/  would  have  the  reader  lay  to  heart  the  solemn  fact  thai
we  all  sin  in  not  cultivating  the  spirit  of  thankfulness.  We
continually  pray,  "Give!  Give!  More!  More!"  and  show  not
due  appreciation  of  what  we  receive.

This  hinders  the  efficiency  of  our  prayers.  God  more
freely  gives  to  the  thankful.  I  recall  an  incident  in  my  own
life.  Once  I  spent  a  half -hour  impressing  on  my  mind,  item
by  item,  the  grounds  of  gratitude  in  this  passage,  and  was
surprised  to  realize  its  instant  effect  on  my  own  state.  I  was
blue  when  I  commenced  and  happy  when  I  finished.  The
fruit  ripened  at  once  in  my  own  heart,  and  I  was  conscious


18      COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

of  great  unction  and  power  in  prayer.    We  come  now  to
the  second  division  of  our  outline :

II.  The  Doctrine  of  Christ's  Person,  i :  15-23 — This  doc-
trine is  presented  here  in  three  relations — to  the  Father,  to
the  material  universe  with  all  its  intelligences,  and  to  the
church.  This  passage  has  been  a  battleground  of  contro-
versy for  ages.  "What  think  ye  of  Christ?"  has  ever  been  a
touch-stone  question.  Let  us  consider  Christ's  person  in
each  relation.

(a)  In  relation  to  the  Father.  The  words  expressing  this
relation  are  few :  "Who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God."
"Image"  and  "invisible"  stand  over  against  each  other,
"image"  meaning  that  which  may  be  seen,  "invisible"  that
which  may  not  be  seen.  So  that,  as  it  were,  we  might  read,
"Who  is  the  visible  of  the  invisible  God."  Compare  Heb.
1:3:  "Who  being  the  effulgence  [shining  forth]  of  His
glory  and  the  very  image  of  His  substance."  Compare  John's
expression,  "God  manifest."  Compare  His  mission  to  "reveal
the  Father."  Compare  His  reply  to  Philip :  "Lord  show  us
the  Father  and  it  sufficeth  us.  Jesus  saith  unto  him.  Have  I
been  so  long  time  with  you,  and  dost  thou  not  know  me,
Philip  ?  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father.  How
sayest  thou.  Show  us  the  Father?"  And  particularly  Phil.
2:6:  "Existing  in  the  form  of  God."  This  makes  "image"
equal  to  John's  declaration,  "The  Logos  was  God,"  i.e.,
essential  deity  in  nature.

(b)  In  relation  to  the  universe  with  all  its  created  intelli-
gences. Here  we  have  six  strong  expressions :  ( i )  First-
born of  all  creation;  (2)  Creation  was  in  Him;  (3)  Cre-
ation was  through  Him;  (4)  Creation  was  unto  Him;  (5)
He  was  before  all  things ;  (6)  By  Him  all  things  consist.

The  Arians  in  later  days  contended  that  "firstborn  of
all  creation"  meant  that  He  was  the  first  to  be  created,  as
"firstborn  from  the  dead"  in  verse  18  means  the  first  to  be
raised  from  the  dead.    This,  of  course,  denies  His  essential


(AJSTALYSIS,  PAUL'S  THANKFULNESS       19

deity  and  eternity  of  being,  since  it  makes  Him  a  mere  crea-
ture. To  the  Arian  interpretation  we  must  oppose  ( i )  the
fact  that  it  is  not  consistent  with  the  five  other  strong  terms
of  the  context.  (2)  In  the  original  there  is  a  difference  of
construction  between  "firstborn  of  creation"  and  "firstborn
from  the  dead."  (3)  It  is  out  of  harmony  with  the  corre-
sponding passages  in  John  and  in  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews.
When  creation  is  said  to  be  "in  Him,"  "through  Him,"  and
"unto  Him"  and  "consists  by  Him,"  and  "He  was  before  all
created  things  and  beings,"  we  cannot  count  Him  a  creature.
The  reader  must  note  the  great  force  of  the  prepositions,
"in,"  "through"  and  "unto."  "In  Him"  denotes  source,
potentiality,  as  in  John,  "In  Him  was  light,  in  Him  the  life,"
denoting  origin,  source,  fountain.  "Through  Him"  denotes
the  creative  act,  "Unto  Him"  the  creative  end  or  purpose.
"Consisting  by  Him"  denotes  the  standing,  on  continued
preservation  concerning  all  the  powers  of  Providence.  As
Lightfoot  puts  it,  "He  is  the  source  of  the  life,  the  center
of  its  development,  the  mainspring  of  all  its  motio.is."  The
reader  will  note  the  Arian  false  interpretation  of  Phil.  2 : 6,
7,  in  the  exposition  of  that  letter.

In  view  of  the  Colossian  heresy  we  should  particularly  note
the  sweeping  statement,  "In  the  heavens  and  upon  the  earth,
things  visible  and  things  invisible,  whether  thrones  or  domin-
ions or  principalities  or  pov/ers,"  and  should  compare  the
teaching  in  Hebrews  on  the  infinite  distinction  between  Christ
and  the  angels.  "Firstborn"  in  Col.  1:15  must  refer  back
to  its  ancient  meaning,  expressing  sovereignty,  heirship,  as
primal  head  and  Lord.  It  has  been  well  said,  "The  idea  of
the  Son  of  God  being  a  part  of  creation  was  foreign  to  Paul's
mind  and  to  the  thought  of  his  day."

Words  cannot  be  formed  to  express  the  idea  of  essential
deity  if  the  words  of  John  and  Paul  do  not  express  the  deity
of  the  Son  of  God  who  was  manifested  and  became  flesh  in
order  to  our  redemption.


20      COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS


QUESTIONS

'♦

1.  What  the  difficulty  of  exposition  in  this  letter?

2.  Give  the  author's  analysis.

3.  What  distinction  emphasized  in  the  outline?

4.  Of  what  does  the  textual  introduction  consist?

5.  To  whom  addressed,  and  why?

6.  What  the  ground  of  Paul's  thanksgiving  here?

7.  What  the  meaning  of  "hope"  in  verse  5  ?

8.  Itemize  Paul's  prayer  for  them.

9.  What  is  the  relation  of  knowledge  and  growth  ?

10.  What  Paul's  rebuke  to  the  Hebrews  ?

11.  What  the  application  to  the  Colossians?

12.  What  things  did  Paul  consider  worthy  of  thanksgiving?

13.  What  is  the  meaning  of  "meet"  in  1 :  12?    Illustrate.

14.  What  is  the  meaning  of  "delivered  us  out  of  the  power  of
darkness"  in  1:13?    Illustrate.

15.  What  the  meaning  of  "Son  of  His  love?"

16.  What  the  greatest  blessing  for  which  we  should  be  thankful
to  God?

17.  What  three  relations  of  the  person  of  Christ?

18.  What  expresses  his  relation  to  the  Father  ?

19.  With  what  scriptures  should  this  be  compared?

20.  Sum  up  all  these  in  one  sentence.

21.  On  His  relation  to  the  universe,  answer :  (i)  What  the  Arian
contention  relative  to  "firstborn  of  all  creation,"  and  upon  what  scrip-
ture is  this  interpretation  based?  (2)  What  the  three-fold  reply  to
this  contention?  (3)  What  the  meaning  of  "creation  was  in  Him?"
(4)  What  the  meaning  of  "creation  was  through  Him?"  (5)  What
the  meaning  of  "creation  unto  Him?"  (6)  What  the  meaning  of
"He  was  before  all  things?"  (7)  What  the  meaning  of  "By  Him
all  things  consist?"

22.  On  1 :  16,  "Thrones,  dominions,  principalities,  powers,"  an-
swer: (i)  Are  angels  referred  to?  (2)  Do  the  terms  express  a
hierarchy,  i.e.,  a  graded  order  of  angels?  (3)  Does  the  apostle
express  his  belief  in  a  hierarchy  of  angels  ?

23.  Then  what  is  the  meaning  of  "firstborn  of  all  creation?"


Ill

CHRIST'S  RELATION  TO  THE  CHURCH
Scripture:  Col.  i :  18-22

BEFORE  taking  up  this  chapter  proper  let  us  review-
briefly  the  doctrinal  part  of  the  previous  chapter.  We
stopped  at  1:17,  and  the  special  points  made  were
that  Christ  in  His  relation  to  the  Father  was  the  image  or
visible  of  God  invisible.  The  term  "image"  was  further  care-
fully explained  in  this  context,  being  interpreted  by  the  sub-
sequent qualifications  that  creation  was  "in  Him,"  "through
Him,"  "unto  Him"  and  "consisting  by  Him,"  and  He  was
"before  all  things."  All  these  expressions  were  in  turn  care-
fully explained  in  their  own  context  and  compared  with  the
parallel  passages  in  John's  gospel  and  Revelation,  in  Hebrews
and  Philippians,  and  their  bearing  on  the  essential  deity  of
Christ  was  pointed  out,  together  with  their  pertinence  to
the  prevalence  of  the  heresy  at  Colosse.  We  should  espe-
cially fix  clearly  and  definitely  in  our  minds  the  meaning  of
the  words  "image,"  "firstborn,"  "consist,"  and  the  force  of
the  prepositions  "in,"  "through,"  "unto"  and  "before."

This  chapter,  commencing  at  i :  18,  considers  Christ's
relation  to  the  church  expressed  in  the  figure  of  a  head  and
body.  Whenever  this  figure  (a  common  one  with  Paul)  is
employed,  the  church  is  conceived  of  as  an  organism,  a  much
stronger  term  than  organization,  but  by  that  very  fact  empha-
sizing the  inherent,  essential  idea  of  organization  in  the
word  "church."  The  word  "head"  implies  not  only  sover-
eignty but  rule,  the  source  of  the  body's  life  and  growth
through  vital  connection  with  it.    In  every  sense  of  the  word

21


n      COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

"church,"  Christ  is  the  head.  He  is  the  head  of  every  par-
ticular church  in  which  alone  the  institution  expresses  itself,
and  He  is  the  head  of  the  prospective  church  in  glory,  whose
constituent  elements,  or  component  parts,  will  be  the  whole
number  of  the  elect  saved  by  Him.

The  only  sense  in  which  the  church  in  the  third  meaning
above  now  exists,  is  in  the  gathering  and  preparing  of  mate-
rial, which,  when  all  is  gathered  and  fully  prepared,  will
be  constructively  fitted  together  as  an  everlasting  habitation
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  time  and  circumstances  of  the  con-
stitution of  the  universal,  or  glory-church,  with  every  orderly
step  leading  thereto,  are  as  clearly  set  forth  as  in  the  case  of
any  particular  church  here  on  earth :  ( i )  Jesus  will  come  in
glory.  Matt.  25 :  31 ;  (2)  He  will  bring  with  Him  the  spirits
of  the  just  made  perfect,  I  Thess.  4:  14;  (3)  will  raise  and
glorify  their  bodies,  I  Thess.  4 :  16 ;  (4)  will  change,  or  trans-
figure, living  Christians,  I  Thess.  4:  17  and  I  Cor.  15  :  51-54;

(5)  will  separate  Christians  from  sinners,  Matt.  25:  32,  33;

(6)  will  present  the  church  to  himself  as  a  glorified  bride,
Eph.  5  :  27 ;  Rev.  21 :  2,  9 ;  19 :  7-9 ;  (7)  Infilling  of  the  fin-
ished Temple  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  Rev.  21 :  3.  This  church,
when  constituted,  will  be  a  local,  visible,  organized  assembly.
It  is  as  yet  only  a  concept  to  become  an  actuality,  a  plan  of
the  architect  according  to  which  he  continually  works  in
order  ultimately  to  a  finished  house,  a  purpose  of  the  divine
mind  conceived  of  as  fulfilled,  because  with  Him  the  end  is
present  as  well  as  the  beginning.

It  is  every  way  important  that  the  reader  should  have  clear
ideas  of  the  several  meanings  of  the  word  "church,"  set  forth
above,  and  be  able  to  determine  from  the  context  which  one
of  the  meanings  is  employed  in  any  particular  passage.  While
this  is  essential  to  a  right  interpretation  of  the  word  where-
ever  it  is  used  in  the  New  Testament,  it  is  emphatically  so
in  Colossians  and  Ephesians  which,  while  employing  the
word  in  all  its  meanings,  especially  stress  the  third  meaning.


CHRIST  AND  THE  CHURCH  ^

Full  discussion  of  this  matter  will  be  reserved  to  the  exposi-
tion of  Ephesians  whose  usage  is  much  more  extended  and
elaborate.  And  I  say  in  advance  that  whoever  can  expound
the  word  "church"  in  Colossians  and  Ephesians  is  a  past
master  in  exegesis  so  far  as  that  term  is  concerned.

We  find  next  the  expression :  "Who  is  the  beginning,  the
firstborn  from  the  dead."  There  is  here  a  relation  between
"the  beginning"  and  the  "firstborn  from  the  dead."  The  two
expressions  seem  to  be  in  apposition,  the  second  modifying
or  defining  the  first.  That  is,  Christ  is  called  the  beginning
from  the  dead  in  that  He  was  the  firstborn  from  the  dead.
He  had  the  pre-eminence  in  relation  to  the  creation,  as  has
been  set  forth,  and  the  pre-eminence  in  relation  to  the  church,
just  expressed,  so  must  He  now  have  pre-eminence  in  rela-
tion to  the  dead,  being  the  beginning  or  firstborn  from  the
dead.  Thus  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  all  the  fulness
should  dwell — fulness  as  to  being  God's  image,  fulness  as  to
creation,  fulness  as  to  the  church,  fulness  as  to  the  resur-
rection.

On  the  meaning  of  "firstborn  from  the  dead"  the  question
of  fact  has  been  raised :  Was  the  resurrection  of  Christ  abso-
lutely the  first  one  in  history?  We  must  say,  "Yes,  abso-
lutely." Elsewhere  He  is  called  "the  first  fruits  of  them
that  are  asleep."  It  has  been  objected  that  Lazarus  and
others  were  raised  from  the  dead.  But  all  these  were  but
restorations  to  life  under  the  old  conditions.  The  bodies
were  not  glorified.  They  were  yet  subject  to  mortality,
weakness,  dishonor,  and  corruption.  They  all  died  again.
In  Christ's  case  He  rose  to  die  no  more.  There  was  com-
plete and  final  triumph  over  the  grave.  "I  was  dead  and
behold  I  am  alive  forevermore."  Again,  it  has  been  objected
that  Moses,  who  certainly  died  and  was  buried,  was  seen
alive  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  Yes,  but  was  not
alive  in  the  body.  The  Jewish  myth  of  the  assumption  of
the  body  of  Moses  is  as  false  as  the  later  papal  myth  of  the


U       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

assumption  of  the  body  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  The  bodies  of
Moses  and  of  Mary  are  yet  "mouldering  in  the  ground."
EHjah,  indeed,  was  bodily  visible  on  the  Mount  to  Peter,
James  and  John,  but  Elijah,  like  Enoch,  was  translated  that
he  should  not  see  death.  The  disciples  were  illumined  to
see  Moses  in  the  spirit  as  well  as  Elijah  in  the  body.  The
purpose  of  the  Transfiguration  is  defeated  if  we  interpret
that  Moses  was  there  bodily.  The  Transfiguration  scene
was  designed,  at  least  in  part,  to  give  a  miniature  repre-
sentation of  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  as  follows:  (i)
When  He  comes  He  will  come  in  glory  (Christ  was  there
seen  glorified).  (2)  When  He  comes  living  Christians  will
be  glorified  without  death.  Elijah  represented  that  class.
(3)  When  He  comes  He  will  raise  the  dead.  Moses  repre-
sented the  class  to  be  raised.  So  that  the  Transfiguration
scene  imaged  in  miniature  the  power  and  majesty  of  the
second  advent.  John  so  understood  it,  for  he  testifies :  "We
beheld  His  glory,  as  the  glory  of  the  only  begotten  from  the
Father,"  John  i :  14.  Peter  so  understood  it,  for  he  testifies :
"For  we  did  not  follow  cunningly  devised  fables  when  we
made  known  unto  you  the  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  but  we  were  eye-witnesses  of  His  majesty.  For
He  received  from  God  the  Father  honor  and  glory,  when
there  was  borne  such  a  voice  to  Him  by  the  Majestic  Glory,
This  is  my  beloved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased :  and  this
voice  we  ourselves  heard  borne  out  of  heaven,  when  we  were
with  Him  in  the  Holy  Mount,"  H  Peter  i :  16-18.  He  had
said,  "There  are  some  of  them  that  stand  here  who  shall  in  no
wise  taste  of  death  till  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in
His  kingdom,"  Matt.  16 :  28.  Or,  as  Mark  puts  it :  "Till  they
see  the  kingdom  of  God  come  with  power,"  9:1.  Or,  as
Luke  puts  it :  "Till  they  see  the  kingdom  of  God."

Matthew  prefaced  his  statement  with  the  words:  "For
the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  His  Father  with
His  angels,"  thus  showing  that  the  kingdom  they  would  be


CHRIST  AND  THE  CHURCH  25

enabled  to  see  before  death  was  not  the  kingdom  in  any  of
its  earthly  aspects,  but  the  glory-kingdom  at  His  second
advent.  The  promise  finds  no  fulfillment  except  on  the
Mount  of  Transfiguration,  and  both  Peter  and  John  declare
it  to  be  a  vision  of  Christ  in  glory  as  at  His  second  advent.
Hence  to  represent  Moses  as  having  already  risen  from
the  dead  destroys  the  completeness  of  the  Transfiguration-
imagery  to  represent  all  the  power  and  majesty  of  the  second
advent.

Again  it  has  been  objected  that  some  of  the  saints  rose
from  the  dead  at  the  moment  Christ  died  on  the  cross.  This
objection  misreads  the  scripture,  which  says,  **And  the  tombs
were  opened ;  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints  that  had  fallen
asleep  were  raised ;  and  coming  forth  out  of  the  tombs  after
His  resurrection  they  entered  into  the  Holy  City  and  ap-
peared unto  many,"  Matt.  27 :  52,  53.  Let  us  not  balk  at  the
doctrine.  It  is  fundamental.  Christ  is  the  firstborn  from  the
dead.  In  that  old  English  classic,  "The  Spectator,"  is  an
article  by  Addison  entitled,  "The  Vision  of  Mirza."  In  this
vision  Mirza  sees  a  flowing  river  whose  source  and  exit  are
hidden  in  clouds,  but  across  the  section  visible  is  a  bridge  over
which  pours  the  tide  of  successive  generations.  The  bridge
is  sadly  out  of  repair,  and  so,  sooner  or  later,  each  passing
pilgrim  drops  through  some  crevice  into  the  river  below  and
is  swept  away  into  the  impenetrable  darkness  which  veils
its  exit.  The  vision  was  designed  to  teach  that  unaided
human  philosophy  can  neither  discover  the  origin  of  life  nor
the  destiny  to  which  death  bears  us.  Shakespeare  also  rep-
resents death  as  "that  bourne  from  which  no  traveler  has  ever
returned."  Like  the  tracks  of  the  animals  which  visited  the
sick  lion  in  the  cave,  they  could  all  be  seen  going  in,  but  none
could  be  seen  coming  out.  So  was  death  a  dark  realm  until
Jesus  was  raised  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.
He  is  the  one  traveler  who  has  returned  from  death  and  for
us  flashes  light  on  its  secrets.    He  tells  of  the  state  of  disem-


26       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

bodied  spirits,  good  and  bad,  of  His  coming  advent  in  glory,
bringing  with  Him  the  souls  of  the  saints  in  heaven  and  drag-
ging to  Him  the  souls  of  the  wicked  in  hell,  and  the  general
resurrection  of  both  the  just  and  the  unjust,  the  reunion  of
long  severed  souls  and  bodies,  the  general  judgment  of  all,
and  the  final  state  of  the  just  and  the  unjust.

All  this  is  pledged  in  His  own  resurrection.  He  is  declared
to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power  by  His  resurrection.  Or,  as
the  Psalmist  puts  it :  "This  day  have  I  begotten  thee,"  refer-
ring to  the  demonstrations  of  His  sonship  by  the  resurrection.
Just  here  it  is  important  to  note  that  what  we  call  the  second
advent  will  be  really  the  third.  When  He  suffered  on  the
cross  His  spirit  left  this  world  and  went  to  the  Father.  There,
as  high  priest.  He  made  the  atonement  behind  the  veil  by
sprinkling  His  own  blood  on  the  mercy-seat  in  the  true  Holy
of  Holies.  On  the  third  day  He  returned  to  earth  for  His
risen  body,  and  this  was  His  second  advent.  So  "when  He
bringeth  His  only  begotten  again  into  the  world.  He  said.  Let
all  the  angels  of  God  worship  Him,"  Heb.  i :  6.  His  first
advent  was  to  assume  by  incarnation  the  body  of  His  humili-
ation. This  was  when  He  was  born  of  Mary.  His  second
advent  was  when  He  returned  from  heaven  to  assume  His
body  of  glory.  This  was  when  He  was  born  by  the  resurrec-
tion. His  third  advent  will  be  when  He  comes  to  assume  His
mystical  body — the  church — and  to  judge  the  world.

This  is  a  great  doctrine — a  multiform  doctrine — the  resur-
rection of  Christ.  It  is  the  one  sign  of  His  divinity  and  the
one  pledge  of  our  glory.  As  an  historical  fact  it  is  attested
by  witnesses.  John  says,  "That  which  we  have  seen  with  our
eyes,  heard  with  our  ears,  and  handled  with  our  hands —
that  we  declare  unto  you."  He  himself  said,  "A  spirit  hath
not  flesh  and  bones,  such  as  ye  see  me  have — handle  me  and
see."  Luke  said,  "He  showed  himself  alive  after  His  pas-
sion, by  many  infallible  proofs."

The  church,  with  all  its  officers  and  ordinances,  under  the


CHRIST  AND  THE  CHURCH  27

guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  witness  through  the  ages
to  His  last  advent  that  Jesus  is  alive — He  was  dead,  but  is
alive  forever  more.  Apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  pastors
and  teachers  are  all  witnesses  to  this  one  great  pivotal  fact —
that  Jesus  is  risen  indeed.  Baptism  is  a  witness  to  the  same
fact  whenever  administered  in  font,  pool,  flowing  stream,
lake,  gulf,  sea  or  ocean.  It  memorializes  all  spectators  on
earth,  in  hell,  in  heaven,  that  Christ  is  risen,  is  alive,  is  exalted
to  be  the  head  of  the  church,  and  head  over  all  things  to  the
church.  The  Lord's  Supper  testifies  that  He  died  for  our
sins,  but  is  alive  now,  and  points  its  finger  of  triumphant
hope  to  His  last  advent,  for  "as  oft  as  ye  do  this  ye  show
forth  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come."

Both  all  pre-eminence  and  all  fulness  are  vested  in  Christ.
So  is  the  Father's  good  pleasure.  That  there  are  heights
and  depths  in  this  thought  seldom  realized  by  the  profoundest
Bible  students  will  appear  as  we  examine  the  next  thought —
the  thought  of  reconciliation  and  its  scope.  Mark  the  text :
"And  through  Him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  himself  .  .  .
whether  things  upon  the  earth  or  things  in  the  heavens."  Or,
as  the  thought  is  more  broadly  expressed  in  Phil.  2:10,  "That
in  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  beings  in
heaven,  beings  on  earth,  and  beings  under  the  earth"

In  some  real  sense  the  atonement  made  by  Christ  in  the\
Holy  of  Holies  in  heaven,  based  upon  His  expiation  on  the
cross,  will  touch  either  to  save,  confirm,  or  subdue  every
angel  m  heaven  or  hell,  every  man,  saint  or  sinner.  The^
saints  it  saves,  the  good  angels  it  confirms,  bad  men  an(i
demons  it  subdues,  so  that  they  ground  arms  of  active  rebel-
lion, and  in  receipt  of  final  punishment  and  chains  show  that
the  war  against  God  is  over  forever,  and  the  whole  uni-
verse IS  PACIFIED.

Throughout  the  universe  the  authority  of  God  is  forever
established.  The  kingdoms  of  this  evil  world  have  become
the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  Satan's  kingdom  is  overturned ;  the


28       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

earth  itself  is  redeemed  unto  the  Hberty  of  the  children  of
God ;  death  and  Hades  are  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,  and  even
Gehenna  itself  shall  float  no  flag  of  rebellion.  There  is  no
more  conspiring  or  fighting  against  God.  Gehenna's  in-
mates, men  and  demons,  in  everlasting  punishment,  endure,
but  resist  no  more.  All  things  through  Christ  are  in  this  way
reconciled.  As  when  a  victorious  army  marches  through  a
revolting  province,  disperses  all  armed  companies,  captures
all  strongholds,  receives  the  surrender  of  all  antagonists,
rescues  and  rewards  all  the  loyal,  expels,  confines  and  pun-
ishes all  the  disloyal.

Angels  and  men  finally  lost  are  not  merely  conquered  in
the  sense  that  they  surrender  and  are  by  banishment  and  con-
finement debarred  from  future  revolt,  but  they  are  forced
to  see  and  publicly  acknowledge  on  bended  knee  that
CHRIST  is  King  and  their  punishment  is  just.

More  than  this :  Because  angels  were  appointed  to  be  min-
istering spirits  to  man,  who  was  made  originally  "lower  than
the  angels,"  Satan,  through  pride,  revolted.  He  was  unwill-
ing to  be  subordinate  to  the  lower  creature — man.  This  was
the  origin  of  sin  in  heaven,  and  led  to  Satan's  being  cast  out
from  heaven  with  his  fellow  apostates.  Hence  his  hatred  of
man  and  his  purpose  through  temptation  to  alienate  him  from
God  and  thereby  destroy  him,  and  thus  defeat  the  purpose  of
God  in  subordinating  him  to  man.  This  led  to  sin  on  earth,
and  thus  man  passed  under  bondage  to  Satan  with  the  earth,
his  home.

But  Jesus,  the  Second  man,  was  appointed  to  destroy  the
devil  and  his  works.  On  the  cross  of  expiation  He  triumphed
over  Satan,  making  a  show  of  him  openly,  despoiling  princi-
palities and  powers  as  we  see  further  on  in  this  letter.
Through  His  consequent  exaltation  to  the  throne  of  the  uni-
verse, He  makes  all  things  work  together  for  good  toward
the  consummation  described  above.  Now  the  unfallen  angels
were  yet  on  probation.    They  did  not  follow  Satan,  but  it


CHRIST  AND  THE  CHURCH  29

remained  to  be  seen  if  they  would  actually  become  minister-
ing spirits  to  the  human  Jieirs  of  salvation  achieved  by
Christ's  expiation.  If  they  did  so  become,  then  they  would
be  confirmed  and  so  lose  all  liability  to  fall,  and  thus  things
in  heaven  would  be  reconciled.  When  the  saints  at  Christ's
advent  sit  with  Him  on  His  glory-throne  they  will  "judge
angels."  Their  testimony  of  help  received  vindicates  and
confirms  the  unfallen  angels.  The  fallen  angels  who  fell
through  unwillingness  to  be  under  man  are  now  brought
before  men  to  be  judged.  Think  of  it !  Peter  and  Job  judg-
ing Satan !  When  Satan  and  his  angels  thus  bow  the  knee  to
redeemed  and  glorified  humanity,  confess  their  sovereignty,
and  receive  sentence  of  punishment  from  them  and  go  away
into  everlasting  confinement,  the  war  is  over  and  all  things
are  reconciled.  What  a  pity  that  Milton  in  his  great  epic,
"Paradise  Lost,"  so  misconceived  the  reason  of  Satan's
rebellion !  And  what  a  greater  pity  that  in  his  feebler  epic,
"Paradise  Regained,"  he  stops  at  Christ's  resistance  to
Satan's  temptation,  so  very  short  of  the  cross.  But  Milton,
in  more  points  than  one,  was  a  very  unsound  theologian.

This  Letter  to  the  Colossians  transcends  all  other  scrip-
tures in  its  comprehensive  grasp  of  the  atonement.  Very
clearly  it  shows  that  the  cross  is  the  keystone  of  the  arch —
the  hinge  on  which  swings  open  every  door  of  revelation.  No
wonder  its  author  could  say  elsewhere:  "I  determined  to
know  nothing  among  you  but  the  cross.  God  forbid  that  I
should  glory  save  in  the  cross,  and  if  an  angel  from  heaven
should  preach  any  other  gospel,  let  him  be  anathema."

We  thus  see  that  Christ's  first  advent  was  to  assume  the
body  of  His  humiliation  and  in  it  to  make  expiation  on  the
cross,  followed  by  His  making  the  atonement,  or  reconcili-
ation in  heaven,  where,  for  this  purpose,  His  spirit  went
immediately  after  His  death,  and  this,  in  turn,  followed  by
His  second  advent  to  earth  for  His  risen  or  glorified  body,
and  this  followed  by  His  ascension,  soul  and  body,  to  the


30       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

throne  of  the  universe,  and  this  followed  by  His  sending  of
His  vicar,  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  accredit,  endue,  and  abide  with
His  church,  and  this  followed  by  His  reign  in  heaven  and
the  Spirit's  reign  on  earth  in  the  church,  and  this  followed
by  His  third  advent  to  assume  His  mystical  body,  the  glori-
fied church,  and  this  followed  by  the  final  judgment,  and
this  followed  by  the  Spirit-filled  glorified  church,  descending
to  occupy  the  now  purified  and  redeemed  earth,  not  only  com-
pletes the  story  of  reconciliation,  or  purification  of  the  uni-
verse, but  shows  how  the  reconciliation  severally  touches  all
beings  and  things,  saving  saints,  confirming  good  angels,  sub-
duing and  forever  expelling  evil  angels  and  men,  so  that
in  all  His  holy  mountain  there  is  nothing  left  to  offend,  to
make  afraid,  to  awaken  tears,  or  to  incite  to  pain,  sickness,  or
death.

But  while  all  this  presents  reconciliation  in  its  general
aspects,  we  need  to  consider  it,  as  does  Paul,  in  its  special
relation  to  the  Colossians.  Reconciliation  implies  previous
alienation.  Sin  alienated  God  from  men  and  men  from  God.
Christ  is  the  mediator  who  brings  the  two  together.  The
ground  of  His  mediation  is  His  sacrificial  and  vicarious
death.  This  satisfies  the  punitive  demands  of  the  law,  and  so
propitiates  or  placates  toward  God.  The  offering  of  the
blood  of  the  sacrifice  by  Christ  as  High  Priest,  in  the  Holy
of  Holies  in  heaven,  reconciles  God.  The  reconciliation  of
men  to  God  is  effected  by  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  savingly
applied  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Accordingly  Paul  says  in  our
text :  "And  you,  being  in  times  past  alienated  and  enemies
in  your  mind  and  in  your  evil  works,  yet  now  hath  He
reconciled  in  the  body  of  His  flesh,  through  death,  to  present
you  holy  and  without  blemish  and  unreprovable  before  Him."

The  last  clause  shows  not  only  the  end  of  reconciliation,
but  indicates  that  their  salvation  involves  more  than  justi-
fication Not  only  must  the  penal  sanctions  of  the  law  be
satisfied,  but  they  must  be  internally  fitted  for  presentation


CHRIST  AND  THE  CHURCH  31

to  God.  That  is,  not  only  saved  from  guilt  and  condemnation
of  sin,  but  also  from  its  dominion  in  their  hearts  and  lives.
This  makes  the  doctrine  of  reconciliation  intensely  practical.
It  involves  regeneration,  sanctification  and  glorification.  The
presentation  of  the  redeemed  in  the  completeness  of  salvation
is  a  definite  and  official  transaction.  Indeed,  it  is  compared
to  a  marriage.  We  are  engaged  or  betrothed  to  Christ  by
faith  here  in  time.  Paul  says:  "I  have  espoused  you  to
Christ  as  a  chaste  virgin."  The  marriage  comes  later.  The
bride  must  be  made  ready  for  the  husband.  This  marriage
takes  place  when  our  Lord  comes  again.  In  the  accompany-
ing Letter  to  the  Ephesians  the  thought  is  amplified,  closing
thus:  "That  He  might  present  the  church  unto  himself  a
glorious  church,  not  having  a  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such
thing;  but  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish."

The  grandest  scene  of  time  or  eternity  will  be  this  presen-
tation of  the  redeemed  considered  as  a  unit,  a  bride,  glorious
in  her  apparel.  So  in  the  apocalypse  John  saw  and  heard :
"And  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  multitude,  and
as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  mighty
thunders,  saying.  Hallelujah:  for  the  Lord  our  God,  the
Almighty,  reigneth.  Let  us  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,
and  let  us  give  the  glory  unto  Him ;  for  the  marriage  of  the
Lamb  is  come,  and  His  wife  hath  made  herself  ready.  And
it  was  given  unto  her  that  she  should  array  herself  in  fine
linen,  bright  and  pure ;  for  the  fine  linen  is  the  righteous  acts
of  the  saints.  And  He  saith  unto  me.  Write,  Blessed  are
they  that  are  bidden  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb,"
Rev.  19:6-9.

Reconciliation  is  therefore  a  call  to  holiness.  Let  not  Bap-
tist preachers  skip  this  "if"  of  Paul's :  "//  so  be  that  ye  con-
tinue in  the  faith,  grounded  and  steadfast,  and  not  moved
away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel."  A  transient  faith  is  not
the  faith  of  the  gospel.  Any  professed  regeneration  that
does  not  move  on  toward  sanctification  is  not  true  regenera-


33       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

tion.  It  was  not  the  purpose  of  God  to  imitate  human  rulers
who,  when  exercising  power,  turn  loose  a  criminal  on  society.
"Whom  God  justifies,  them  He  sanctifies  and  glorifies."

QUESTIONS

1.  How  is  Christ's  relation  to  the  church  expressed  ?

2.  What  the  conception  of  the  church  in  the  use  of  this  figure?

3.  What  does  the  word,  "head,"  imply?

4.  In  what  senses  of  the  word,  "church,"  is  Christ  the  head?

5.  In  what  sense  only  does  the  glory  church  now  exist?

6.  What  the  time  and  circumstances  of  the  constitution  of  the
glory  church?    (State  this  in  seven  orderly  steps.)

7.  When  so  constituted,  what  will  be  the  nature  of  this  glory
church  ?

8.  Which  meanings  of  the  word,  "church,"  are  employed  in
Colossians  and  Ephesians?

9.  What  the  relation  between  "the  beginning"  and  the  "firstborn
from  the  dead?"

10.  What  do  they  mean  ?

11.  What  question  of  fact  raised  here?

12.  What  its  answer  ?

13.  Explain,  then,  the  cases  of  Lazarus,  Moses  and  Elijah,  and
their  bearing  on  the  Transfiguration.

14.  Give  proof  that  the  Transfiguration  gave  a  miniature  repre-
sentation of  Christ's  second  advent.

15.  What  a  second  objection  and  its  answer?

16.  What  the  vision  of  Mirza?

17.  What  is  it  designed  to  teach  ?

18.  Explain  His  several  advents,  and  the  purpose  of  each.

19.  What  the  one  sign  of  Christ's  divinity  and  the  one  pledge  of
His  glory?

20.  What  the  witnesses  to  the  fact  that  Jesus  is  alive  ?

21.  What  the  scope  of  Christ's  reconciliation?    Explain  fully.

22.  Give  an  account  of  the  origin  of  sin:  (i)  By  whom  origi-
nated?    (2)  Where?     (3)  The  cause?     (4)  The  result?

23.  Who  was  appointed  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and
when  was  it  accomplished?

24.  What  the  position  of  the  unf alien  angels  now?

25.  What  the  position  of  the  saints  at  the  judgment?

26.  What  vital  mistake  in  Milton's  "Paradise  Lost?"  In  "Para-
dise Regained?"

27.  In  what  does  this  letter  transcend  all  other  scriptures,  and
what  the  keystone  of  the  arch  of  revelation?

28.  On  reconciliation  in  its  special  relation  to  the  Colossians
answer:  (i)  What  does  it  imply?  (2)  Who  the  mediator?  (3)
What  the  ground  of  reconciliation?  (4)  How  effected?  (5)  How
applied  ?

29.  Show  that  salvation  involves  more  than  justification,  and  that
reconciliation  is  intensely  practical.


CHRIST  AND  THE  CHURCH  33

30.  Compare  the  redeemed  to  a  bride.

31.  Describe  the  scene  when  the  bride  shall  be  presented  to  her
husband.

32.  What  is,  therefore,  the  call  of  reconciliation?

33.  Give  the  clause  following  Paul's  "if."

34.  What  the  evidences  of  real  faith?


IV


CHRIST'S  RELATION  TO  THE  FATHER  AND  THE
UNIVERSE

Scripture:  Col.  i :  23 — 2 : 7

THIS  chapter  commences  with  a  question  based  on  the
King  James  version  of  Col.  i :  23 :  "Which  was
preached  to  every  creature  which  is  under  heaven."
In  my  younger  days  the  Hardshell  Baptists  used  this  passage
to  prove  that  the  commission  in  Mark  16: 15-18,  command-
ing to  "preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature"  was  literally
and  finally  fulfilled  by  the  apostles  to  whom  alone  it  was
given.  They  supported  their  contention  by  citing  the  fact
that  the  "signs"  in  Mark  16: 17,  18,  which  were  to  accom-
pany and  confirm  missionary  work  had  long  since  failed,
and  therefore  missions  were  ended;  that  the  "signs"  were
a  part  of  the  commission,  and  whoever  now  claimed  authority
to  do  mission  work  under  that  commission  must  show  the
signs  or  stand  convicted  of  imposture.  I  used  to  press  this
point  on  Missionary  Baptist  preachers  to  see  how  they
would  answer  it.  Finally  one  of  them  passed  the  question
back  to  me,  "You  are  a  Missionary  Baptist  yourself — how
do  you  answer  it  ?"    My  reply  was  this :

I.  Mark  16:15-18  must  be  construed  with  Matt.  28 :  18-20.
The  perpetuity  of  the  Matthew-commission  appears  from
"Lo  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,"
and  from  the  fact  that  the  "make  disciples  of  all  nations"
is  co-extensive  with  "teaching  them  to  observe  all  things,
etc.,"  which  Hardshells  themselves  admit  to  be  binding
now.

64


CHRIST  AND  THE  FATHER  35

2.  Even  after  Paul  had  written,  "which  was  preached  to
every  creature  which  is  under  heaven,"  he  himself  went  right
on  in  the  mission  work  and  commanded  others  to  do  the
same,  which  examples  prove  the  continuity  and  perpetuity
of  the  commission.  So  also  does  Peter,  as  appears  from
his  letters  written  after  Paul  wrote  Colossians.  And  so,
also,  does  John.  See  particularly  the  letter  to  Gains  long
after  Colossians,  in  which  John  commends  Gains  for  help-
ing the  missionaries  and  condemns  the  Hardshell — Diot-
rephes,  verses  6-10.

3.  We  must  look  to  the  apostle  in  subsequent  teaching  to
learn  if  the  "signs"  are  always  to  accompany  the  mission
work,  or  are  to  cease  when  their  accrediting  purpose  is
accomplished,  I  Cor.  13:8,  13.

4.  The  accuracy  of  the  King  James  version  of  Col.  i :  23
is  questionable.  The  revision  thus  renders  Mark  16:15,
"Preach  the  gospel  to  the  whole  creation,"  and  renders  Col.
1 :  23,  "which  was  preached  in  all  creation  under  heaven."
Compare  Rom.  10:18.

5.  Whatever  the  rendering,  the  Hardshell  interpretation
is  manifestly  erroneous.  The  gospel  must  be  preached  to
all  the  world,  generation  by  generation,  and  not  merely  to
one  generation.  The  church,  as  the  pillar  and  ground  of
the  truth,  must  continue  to  instruct  the  angels  in  the  manifold
wisdom  of  God  until  Jesus  comes  (Eph.  3 :  10)  and  must,  by
its  mission  work,  exhibit  the  glory  of  God  throughout  all
generations  (Eph.  3:21).  Ephesians  was  v/ritten  after
Colossians.

6.  Paul  was  operating  under  a  direct  commission  given
subsequently  to  the  one  in  Matt.  28  and  Mark  16,  (see  Acts
9: 15;  22  \  14-21 ;  26:  16-18),  and  transmitted  to  others  the
carrying  on  of  the  same  mission  work,  H  Tim.  2 :  2.

The  next  item  in  the  analysis  is  the  parenthetical  explana-
tion of  the  apostle's  mission  to  the  Gentiles,  and  his  conse-
quent concern  for  these  Colossians.    That  item  of  the  analysis


S6       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

extends  from  i :  24  to  2 : 7.  He  is  expounding  here  the
object  of  his  mission  to  the  Gentiles.

We  recall  that  when  Paul  was  so  long  a  time  at  Ephesus,
the  capital  of  the  Roman  province  of  Asia,  in  which  were
these  Lycus-valley  cities,  that  representatives  from  this
Lycus  valley  attended  these  meetings,  among  whom  were
Philemon  and  Epaphras,  of  Colosse,  who  were  both  con-
verted. And  while  he  himself  at  the  time  of  this  great  meet-
ing did  not  personally  visit  these  Lycus-valley  cities,  those
who  were  converted  by  him  did  visit  them  and  plant  the
gospel  there ;  so  the  establishment  of  the  churches  there  was
indirectly  attributable  to  him,  and  so  he  would  have  an
interest  in  them.

But  apart  from  that  fact,  he  was  the  Christ-appointed
missionary  to  the  Gentiles,  and  they  were  mostly  Gentiles.
In  this  valley  there  were  some  Jews.  The  population  was
blended.  While  ethnologically  most  of  them  were  Phrygians,
they  were  a  mixed  people ;  some  were  Jews,  some  Greeks,
and  some  Romans.  But  he  was  concerned  because  the  whole
Gentile  mission  had  been  turned  over  to  him,  as  to  Peter
and  the  other  apostles  was  given  the  mission  to  the  Jews.
So  we  note  when  Peter  writes  a  letter  to  these  very  people
later,  he  confines  himself  to  the  Jewish  inhabitants,  thus:
"Peter,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  elect  who  are
sojourners  of  the  dispersion  in  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,
Asia,  and  Bithynia."  While  Peter  writes  to  the  elect  of  the
sojourners  of  the  dispersion — to  the  dispersed  Jews — Paul
writes  as  an  apostle  to  the  Gentiles.  What  is  the  difference
between  the  "to  whom"  that  Paul  wrote  and  the  "to  whom"
that  Peter  wrote  ?  Paul  wrote  as  an  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,
and  the  whole  cast  of  his  letter  is  Gentilic.  Peter  wrote  to
the  Jews  of  the  dispersion,  and  the  whole  cast  of  his  letter
is  Jewish.  So  then,  because  Paul  was  the  apostle  to  the
Gentiles,  it  is  a  matter  of  concern  to  him  that  they  should
take  on  false  doctrine.


CHRIST  AND  THE  FATHER  S7

I  call  attention  to  some  expressions  in  verse  24.  He  says,
"I  rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for  your  sake,  and  fill  up  on  my
part  that  which  is  lacking  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my
flesh  for  His  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church."  Did  Dr.
Gordon  in  his  book  on  the  Spirit  rightly  interpret  that
passage,  "I  fill  up  on  my  part  that  which  is  lacking  of  the
afflictions  of  Christ?"  Or  does  Paul's  suffering  have  any-
thing to  do  with  Christ's  sacrificial  suffering,  in  order  to  the
salvation  of  man?  Or  does  he  mean  that  his  sufferings  sup-
plement the  non-sacrificial  sufferings  of  Christ?  Some  of
Christ's  sufferings  were  for  our  example  and  others  were
not.  As  proof  I  cite  I  Pet.  2 :  20 :  "For  what  glory  is  it,  if,
when  ye  sin,  and  are  buffeted  for  it,  ye  shall  take  it  patiently  ?
but  if,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  shall  take  it
patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God.  For  hereunto  were  ye
called :  because  Christ  also  suffered  for  you,  leaving  you  an
example,  that  ye  should  follow  in  His  steps."  So  we  may
now  follow  the  example  of  Christ's  sufferings,  except  that
expiatory  part,  and  pur  sufferings  may  supplement  His
sufferings  except  that  expiatory  part.  There  we  cannot
come  in.  Those  who  deny  the  substitutionary  and  vicarious
expiation  of  Christ  are  accustomed  to  quote  this  passage  from
Peter  and  this  passage  from  Paul  to  show  that  the  suffer-
ings of  Christ  were  merely  martyr-sufferings,  not  unlike
Paul's  martyr-sufferings  and  Peter's,  and  serve  merely  as
an  example  of  patience,  and  that  they  had  no  expiatory
nature.  It  is  necessary  to  emphasize  this  point  as  to  the
distinction  between  what  He  did  as  a  vicarious  substitute  for
sinners  and  the  ordinary  sufferings  of  Christ,  such  as  we  and
all  of  His  people  participate  in.  He  himself  refers  to  this
when  He  says,  "If  the  world  hateth  you,  ye  know  that  it
hath  hated  me  before  it  hated  you.  If  ye  were  of  this  world,
the  world  would  love  its  own ;  but  because  ye  are  not  of  this
world,  but  I  chose  you  out  of  the  worTd,  therefore  the  world
hateth  you.    Remember  the  word  that  I  said  unto  you,  A


38       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord.  If  they  persecuted  me,
they  will  also  persecute  you;  if  they  kept  my  word,  they
will  keep  yours  also."

In  verse  26  we  have  a  word  that  needs  explanation.  What
does  Paul  mean  by  "mystery?"  He  says,  "I  was  made  a
minister  according  to  the  dispensation  of  God,  which  was
given  me  to  you- ward,  to  fulfill  the  word  of  God,  even  the
mystery  which  hath  been  hid  for  ages  and  generations,  but
now  hath  been  manifested  to  His  saints."  What  is  this
mystery  ?  He  explains  it  in  the  next  verse :  "To  whom  God
was  pleased  to  make  known  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of
this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles."  In  the  Letter  to  the
Ephesians  he  elaborates  on  that  mystery  this  way :  "Where-
fore remember  that  once  ye,  the  Gentiles  in  the  flesh,  who
are  called  Uncircumcision  by  that  which  is  called  Circumci-
sion, in  the  flesh,  made  by  hands ;  that  ye  were  at  that  time
separate  from  Christ,  alienated  from  the  commonwealth  of
Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  the  promise,
having  no  hope  and  without  God  in  the  world.  But  now  in
Christ  Jesus  ye  that  once  were  afar  off  are  made  nigh  in  the
blood  of  Christ.  For  He  is  our  peace,  who  made  both  one,
and  brake  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition,  having  abolished
in  His  flesh  the  enmity,  even  the  law  of  commandments  con-
tained in  ordinances;  that  He  might  create  in  himself  of
the  two  one  new  man,  so  making  peace ;  and  might  reconcile
them  both  in  one  body  unto  God  through  the  cross,  having
slain  the  enmity  thereby :  and  He  came  and  preached  peace
to  you  that  were  far  off,  and  peace  to  them  that  were  nigh :
for  through  Him  we  both  have  access  in  one  Spirit  unto  the
Father.  So  then  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  sojourners,
but  ye  are  fellow  citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  house-
hold of  God."

The  mystery  then  was  this — that  in  the  beginning  of  the
human  race  God  had  purposed  not  to  make  any  discrimina-
tion between  people,  and  salvation  was  to  be  as  free  to  one


CHRIST  AND  THE  FATHER  09

nation  as  to  another,  and  that  in  electing  the  Jews  and  isolat-
ing them  from  all  other  people,  it  was  not  done  because  they
were  better  than  other  people,  nor  was  it  done  to  confer
special  grace  upon  them,  but  simply  to  make  them  the  deposi-
tory of  His  truth  for  the  time  being,  which  in  the  fulness
of  time  would  include  all  the  human  race.  This  is  the  mys-
tery. But  the  Jews  supposed  that  God  was  partial  to  them —
that  they  were  not  merely  the  custodians  of  revelation  for
all  mankind,  but  that  between  them  and  the  Gentiles  there
was  a  wall  that  could  not  be  broken  down.  They  would
stand  up  on  that  wall,  glorying  in  their  sanctity,  and  saying
to  outsiders,  "You  dogs !  Don't  touch  me !  I  am  holier  than
you!"  They  carried  that  so  far  that  they  would  go  home
from  the  crowded  streets,  immerse  themselves  and  wash  their
clothes  to  remove  possible  defilement  by  contact  with  a
Gentile.  Paul  does  not  use  the  word,  "mystery,"  in  the  sense
that  what  he  now  reveals  is  mysterious,  but  that  his  revela-
tion makes  clear  what  was  once  a  mystery — that  the  pur-
pose of  grace  for  the  whole  human  race  was  veiled  in
the  Old  Testament  times  but  unveiled  in  New  Testament
times.

So  John,  in  Revelation,  talking  about  the  scarlet  woman,
says  that  she  is  "mystery,"  meaning  that  for  the  time  being
the  truth  was  veiled  under  a  symbol.  The  symbol  was  a
woman  dressed  in  scarlet,  sitting  upon  a  beast.  All  Bible
critics  confront  the  question.  What  is  the  meaning  of  "mys-
tery" in  the  New  Testament  ?  It  has  several  meanings.  The
context  determines  in  each  case.  Paul  in  a  letter  to  Timothy
says,  "Confessedly,  great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,"  and
then  gives  all  the  elements  of  that  mystery  of  godliness,
commencing,  "God  made  manifest  in  the  flesh."

In  Col.  2 :  2  he  says,  "That  their  hearts  may  be  comforted,
they  being  knit  together  in  love  and  unto  all  riches  of  the
full  assurance  of  understanding,  that  they  may  know  the
mystery  of  God,  even  Christ."    The  idea  is  that  God,  out  of


40       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Christ,  is  a  mystery,  unknowable,.but  in  Christ  He  is  declared
and  the  mystery  solved.

Consider  also  that  word,  "assurance."  We  have  three
examples  of  its  use:  We  have  faith  and  the  assurance  of
faith.  We  have  hope  and  the  assurance  of  hope.  We  have
understanding  and  the  assurance  of  understanding.  There
is  a  distinction  between  a  man's  simple  faith  in  Christ  and
the  assurance  of  that  faith.  Faith,  hope  and  understanding
are  all  objective,  in  that  they  go  out  of  us  and  take  hold  of  an
external  object.  But  assurance  is  subjective.  It  does  not
raise  a  question  concerning  the  merits  of  the  object  of  faith,
but  rather  the  question,  Do  I  really  believe?  So  with  hope
and  understanding.  Hope  looks  to  certain  things  reserved
in  heaven;  assurance  of  hope  is  a  kind  of  certificate  to  a
person  that  thoroughly  satisfies  him  that  his  hopes  are  well
grounded.

These  Gentiles  did  not  understand  that  the  gate  of  salva-
tion was  to  be  just  as  wide  open  to  them  as  to  the  Jews.
When  they  took  hold  of  it  they  took  hold  of  it  timidly.  So
Paul  says,  "I  want  you  to  get  full  assurance  of  understand-
ing that  you  are  entitled  to  this — that  God  meant  you  just  as
much  as  he  meant  a  Jew."  We  see  that  if  the  Gentiles  could
reach  full  assurance  of  understanding  that  they  were  entitled
to  salvation  under  the  same  law  and  the  same  terms  as  the
Jew,  then  Judaizing  teachers  could  not  subvert  them,  could
not  shake  them  by  saying,  "You  must  be  circumcised  in  order
to  be  saved."  The  reply  would  be,  "I  have  an  understanding
of  that  matter,  and  I  have  full  assurance  of  the  understand-
ing, and  I  know  that  I  do  not  have  to  become  a  Jew  in  order
to  be  saved."

So  Paul  continues  in  2:4:  "This  I  say  that  no  one  may
delude  you  with  persuasive  speech."  That  is  exactly  what
was  taking  place  there.  There  was  a  false  teacher  in  Colosse
who  was  endeavoring  to  make  proselytes  to  his  philosophy,
and  one  part  of  that  philosophy  was  that  they  must  observe


CHRIST  AND  THE  FATHER  41

all  Sabbatic  rituals,  whether  the  seventh-day  Sabbath,
monthly  Sabbath  or  annual  Sabbath.  That  is  precisely  the
point  that  this  false  teacher  was  trying  to  make.  Paul  says
to  these  Gentiles,  "I  have  a  deep  concern  for  you,  and  I  want
to  lead  you  into  a  clear  practical  understanding  of  this  gospel,
lest  somebody  come  and  delude  you  with  persuasive  speech."

In  verse  6  we  have  another  variation  of  the  same  thought :
"As  therefore  ye  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  so  walk  in
Him."  In  other  words,  "You  received  Him  by  simple  faith,
without  conformity  to  Jewish  ritual ;  continue  as  you  com-
menced." Compare  Gal.  3:  1-3,  "O  foolish  Galatians,  who
did  bewitch  you,  before  whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  was  openly
set  forth  crucified?  This  only  would  I  learn  from  you:
Received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the
hearing  of  faith?  Are  ye  so  foolish?  Having  begun  in  the
Spirit,  are  ye  now  perfected  in  the  flesh?"

He  continues  the  assurance-thought :  "Rooted  and  builded
up  in  Him  and  established  in  your  faith,  even  as  ye  were
taught."  Those  three  words,  "rooted,"  "builded  up"  and
"established"  contain  the  thought  he  was  trying  to  impress :
"I  want  you  to  be  so  well  indoctrinated  that  you  cannot  be
turned  aside  by  specious  error."

The  same  thought  prevails  in  his  Letter  to  the  Ephesians
in  his  prayer,  3:4-19:  "For  this  cause  I  bow  my  knees  unto
the  Father,  from  whom  every  family  in  heaven  and  on  earth
is  named,  that  He  would  grant  you,  according  to  the  riches
of  His  glory,  that  ye  may  be  strengthened  with  power  through
His  Spirit  in  the  inward  man ;  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your
hearts  through  faith;  to  the  end  that  ye,  being  rooted  and
grounded  in  love,  may  be  strong  to  apprehend  with  all  the
saints  what  is  the  breadth  and  length  and  height  and  depth,
and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge,
that  ye  may  be  filled  unto  all  the  fulness  of  God."  That  is
one  of  the  greatest  troubles  with  modern  churches.  They  no
longer  emphasize  doctrine.    We  would  be  amazed  if  we  were


43       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

to  call  up  our  entire  church  membership,  and  as  each  one
comes  up  begin  to  catechise  to  see  if  every  member  was
thoroughly  indoctrinated  in  the  faith  once  for  all  delivered
to  the  saints.  Many  of  them  cannot  discriminate  between
one  denomination  and  another — ^between  justification  and
sanctification.  Herein  the  Presbyterians  excel  the  Baptists —
in  the  use  of  the  catechism.

Where  a  church  has  been  faithfully  ministered  unto  by  a
pastor  who  selects,  not  high  sounding  texts  whose  mere  sound
led  him  to  the  selection,  but  who  has  from  his  deliberate  con-
viction preached  from  the  themes  that  they  needed  for  their
rooting  and  grounding  and  establishment  in  faith,  that  man
will  have  an  indoctrinated  church.  But  there  is  a  class  of
wishy-washy,  "milk  and  cider"  preachers  who  would  rather
say  it  does  not  make  any  difference  v/hat  one  believes  if  the
heart  is  all  right ;  it  does  not  make  any  difference  how  he  is
baptized ;  they  do  not  care  whether  he  is  a  member  of  the
church  or  not.  That  class  of  preachers  raise  up  congrega-
tions to  become  the  prey  of  any  evangelical  tramp  or  crank.
Such  an  ill-trained  congregation  does  not  make  even  good
militia,  much  less  veteran  soldiers.

To  illustrate:  Recently  a  Boston  Baptist  preacher,  mod-
erator of  an  association,  published  in  "The  Baptist  Watch-
man" a  full  four-page  article  that  would  degenerate  a
vertebrate  into  a  jelly-fish.  He  denies  that  baptism  is  a
prerequisite  to  church  membership,  denies  that  a  church  has
anything  whatever  to  do  with  receiving  members  or  judging
of  their  qualifications,  affirms  that  when  a  man  believes  it
automatically  makes  him  a  member  of  the  church,  prefers
to  make  baptism  essential  to  salvation  rather  than  essential
to  church  membership.  In  a  word,  the  whole  article  is  made
up  of  "airy  nothings"  without  a  stalwart  thought  in  it.  The
wonder  is  how  that  man  ever  got  into  a  Baptist  church.  It
must  have  been  automatically,  for  no  true  Baptist  church,  if
it  had  been  consulted,  would  have  received  him.


CHRIST  AND  THE  FATHER  43

To  illustrate  again :  One  day  a  man  called  at  my  house  who
denied  that  a  church  was  either  an  assembly  or  an  organiza-
tion at  all,  saying  that  it  was  merely  a  living  community.
God  help  us  when  such  jelly-fish  views  about  the  church  are
taught  by  those  in  authority !

Two  parts  of  this  letter  are  of  transcendently  great  impor-
tance. One  is  the  doctrine  and  the  other  is  this  part — the
fourth  item  of  the  analysis.  Let  us  look  at  what  the  analysis
says:

Polemics  Against  the  False  Teacher  and  Teachings  at
Colosse,  2:8-3: 17.

(a)  As  limiting  by  a  false  philosophy  the  sufficiency  of
Christ  and  their  completeness  in  Him.

(b)  Polemics  against  the  folly  of  this  philosophy  in
accounting  for  creation,  and  in  defining  sin,  and  in  the  insuffi-
ciency of  its  means  for  conquest  of  sin,  such  as  ( i )  a  Phar-
isaic observance  of  an  obsolete  Sabbatic  ritual,  (2)  a  self-
imposed  humility,  (3)  the  worship  of  angels,  supposed  to  be
emanations  from  God,  himself  unknowable,  (4)  a  bondage
to  impracticable  ascetic  precepts  based  on  the  idea  that  sin
resides  in  matter,  which  precepts  were  but  expressions  of
will-worship  and  powerless  to  hedge  against  temptation  or
to  subdue  the  passions,  or  to  supply  objects  high  enough  to
incite  to  love-motives.

(c)  Against  its  substitution  of  a  mystic  knowledge
("gnosis")  as  a  standard  instead  of  the  gospel,  2 :  16-23.

(d)  But  the  gospel  on  the  other  hand  raises  us  with  Christ
and  makes  us  sharers  of  His  life  and  exaltation,  supplies  us
with  heavenly  objects  of  thought  and  desire,  and  pledges  our
manifestation  in  glory  with  Christ,  3:1-4.

(e)  It  shows  sin  to  be  an  awful  nature  called  the  "old
man,"  resident  in  mind,  not  matter,  and  expresses  itself  in
fornication,  uncleanness,  passion,  evil  desire,  covetousness,
anger,  wrath,  malice,  railing,  shameful  speaking,  3 :  5-9.

(f )  It  provides  for  the  real  conquest  of  sin  by  regenera-


44       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

tion,  puts  off  the  old  man  and  puts  on  the  new  man,  a  re-cre-
ation after  the  huage  of  God,  expressing  itself  in  a  heart
of  compassion,  kindness,  lowliness,  meekness,  forbearance,
forgiveness,  love,  and  by  the  sanctifying  instrumentality  of
God's  Word,  and  by  spiritual  worship,  in  teaching,  prayer,
and  song,  and  by  supplying  the  dominant  motives  in  all
word,  deed  or  thought,  the  glory  of  God,  3:  10-17.

(g)  It  glorifies  in  Christ  all  races,  nations,  social  castes,

3:11.

There  was  a  false  teacher,  not  teachers — it  was  one  person.
We  do  not  know  who,  but  there  was  one  prominent  man
there  in  the  Lycus  valley  who  possessed  and  held  this  false
philosophy.  This  philosophy  was  partly  Pharisaic  in  its
adherence  to  the  Sabbatic  ritual,  and  partly  of  the  Essenes
in  its  ascetic  teaching.  This  philosophy  held  that  the  world
was  not  created  by  God,  because  God  is  unknowable  and  can-
not touch  man  and  things,  but  that  it  was  created  by  emana-
tions from  God — eons — and  therefore,  instead  of  worship-
ing God,  they  worshiped  eons,  or  angels.  They  said  that
they  should  not  worship  God  because  they  could  not  know
Him.  They  worshiped  intermediate  beings  that  came  in
touch  with  them.

Then  this  philosophy  taught  that  as  sin  resided  in  matter,
the  way  to  conquer  it  was  by  conformity  to  ascetic  precepts —
that  one  should  retire  from  the  world,  live  like  the  Essenes
in  a  cave  on  the  border  of  the  Dead  Sea,  not  marry,  have  just
as  few  clothes  as  possible,  all  the  time  working  on  the  destruc-
tion of  the  body,  because  there  is  where  sin  resides,  since  the
soul  is  all  right.  That  was  one  phase  of  the  philosophy.
Paul  was  combating  that,  as  shown  in  his  doctrines :  Christ
in  His  relation  to  the  Father,  the  universe  and  its  intelli-
gences, and  that  by  Him,  in  Him,  and  unto  Him  was  creation,
and  that  He  was  before  all  things,  and  in  His  relation  to  the
church.

With  reference  to  sin,  notice  what  things  he  enumerates


CHRIST  AND  THE  FATHER  45

as  expressions  of  sin,  and  see  whether  it  be  of  the  body:
"Evil  desire,  covetousness,  anger,  wrath,  maHce,  raiHng,
lying,  shameful  speaking  out  of  your  mouth."  Some  of
these  are  overt  acts,  but  sin,  according  to  that  teaching,
resides  in  the  soul  and  not  in  the  body.  The  body  is  merely
used  as  an  instrument  in  a  great  many  sins,  but  sin  does  not
reside  in  the  body.  To  show  further  how  Paul  was  con-
troverting this  philosophy  as  to  the  nature  of  sin,  he  calls
it  the  old  man,  the  old  Adam.  How  then  is  sin  to  be  con-
quered ?  It  is  to  be  conquered  by  something  that  will  change
the  nature — that  will  put  off  the  old  man  and  put  on  the  new
man.  That  is  regeneration,  and  then  follows  a  sanctifying
power  that  will  carry  on  the  regenerating  work,  so  that
instead  of  the  deeds  of  the  old  man  like  anger,  wrath,
malice,  etc.,  we  put  on  the  deeds  of  the  new  man,  like  love,
kindness,  a  heart  of  compassion,  forbearance  and  forgive-
ness. Then  he  goes  on  to  show  what  instrumentalities  are
necessary  to  bring  this  about :  "Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell
in  you  richly."  So  we  see  the  difference  between  the  two
philosophies  in  question.

QUESTIONS

1.  State  the  Hardshell  contention  based  on  the  King  James  ver-
sion of  Col.  1 :  23,  and  reply  to  it.

2.  What  the  difference  between  the  "to  whom"  Paul  is  writing
and  the  "to  whom"  Peter  later  writes  ?

3.  Expound  1 :  24,  "I  fill  up  on  my  part  that  which  is  lacking  of
the  afflictions  of  Christ,"  and  show  Dr.  Gordon's  interpretation.

4.  What  the  meaning  of  "mystery"  in  i :  25  and  elsewhere  by
Paul,  does  it  mean  the  same  thing  when  used  by  the  Synoptic
Gospels  and  by  John  in  Revelation,  and  does  it  mean  the  same
thing  when  used  in  the  classics  and  by  modern  secret  societies?

5.  Expound  the  word,  "assurance,"  in  Col.  2 : 2,  distinguish  be-
tween "knowledge"  and  the  "assurance  of  knowledge,"  between
"faith"  and  the  "assurance  of  faith,"  between  "hope"  and  the
"assurance  of  hope,"  and  apply  the  context  showing  the  value  of
the  "assurance  of  knowledge."

6.  Show  the  variation  of  the  same  thought  in  verses  6  and  7.

7.  What  similar  expressions  in  Eph.  3,  and  what  the  applica-
tion there?


46       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

8.  What  defect  in  many  Baptist  churches,  what  the  kind  of
preachers  that  promote  it,  and  wherein  do  Presbyterians  excel  us
at  this  point?

9.  Illustrate  by  the  article  in  "The  Baptist  Watchman"  and  by
a  modern  definition  of  the  word,  "church."

10.  What  the  two  very  important  parts  of  this  letter,  and  what  a
brief  summary  of  the  second  as  indicated  in  the  analysis  and  the
brief  discussion  which  follows?


HUMAN  PHILOSOPHY  VERSUS  THE  ENDURING
GOSPEL  OF  CHRIST

Scripture:  Col.  2:8 — 3: 17

THIS  chapter  continues  the  exposition  of  Colossians.
While  on  broad  general  lines,  the  main  teaching-part
of  the  letter  has  already  been  considered,  we  need  to
examine  somewhat  in  detail  certain  words  and  phrases  in
the  long  paragraph  commencing  2 :  8  and  ending  3:17.  In
2 : 8  "spoil"  has  the  sense  of  captives — "make  you  a  spoil,"
and  in  the  same  verse,  on  the  word  "philosophy,"  note —

1.  The  derivation  of  the  word — literally  "a  love  of  wis-
dom," i.  e.,  human  wisdom,  or  reasonings,  in  accounting  for
things,  as  opposed  to  divine  revelation  in  accounting  for
things.

2.  The  province  of  philosophy.  Certain  matters  come
legitimately  within  the  realm  of  human  philosophy  upon
which  its  reasonings  and  even  its  working  suppositions  may
be  heard  tentatively,  its  conclusions,  or  hypotheses,  con-
tinually subject  to  modification  as  investigation  affords  new
light.

But  certain  other  matters  are  entirely  outside  its  realm,
e.  g.,  whatever  is  supernatural  cannot  be  settled  by  natural
reasonings.

Whatever  touches  ultimate  origin  and  destiny  lies  entirely
outside  the  realm  of  human  science,  and  hence  when  human
philosophy  attempts  to  settle  matters  beyond  the  reach  of
human  science  it  becomes  mere  speculation.  Its  dogmatic
claims  are,  as  the  apostle  here  puts  it,  "vain  deceit"    All  its

4a


48       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

voluminous,  varied  and  contradictory  literature  upon  these
subjects  from  the  beginning  of  time  till  this  hour  is  as  value-
less  as  the  "airy  nothings''  of  a  dream.  If  every  book  of  it
were  burned  today  in  one  huge  bonfire,  as  were  the  magical
hooks  of  the  Ephesians,  the  world  would  be  better  off.

The  only  light  in  it  all  is  the  light  of  its  burning.  See
I  Cor.  I :  i8;  2:  i6.

Do  not  understand  me  to  deny  all  legitimate  scope  to
human  philosophy.  Within  bounds  it  has  a  great  place,  but
even  in  that  place  its  value  may  be  greatly  overestimated.

/  am  quite  sure  that  more  than  half  of  the  matter  in  the
text-books  on  philosophy  in  all  our  schools,  colleges  and  uni-
versities is  the  most  worthless  rubbish,  and  some  of  it  rank
poison.

I  am  not  talking  of  science.  A  man  who  denies  the  value
of  science — real  science — rails  at  God's  appointed  method
by  which  man  is  commanded  to  subdue  the  earth  and  lay
under  tribute  all  nature's  potentialities.  The  predicate  for
all  schools  of  human  learning  is  God's  dower  of  authority  to
man  over  land  and  sea  and  sky,  and  his  commission  to  subdue
the  earth.  Here  in  the  natural  world  human  philosophy  is
the  avant-courier  and  handmaid  of  science.  It  supposes,  it
experiments,  it  makes  myriads  of  tentative  explorations
and  flights,  shedding  off  the  failures,  utilizing  and  improv-
ing the  successes,  and  thus  ever  contributing  to  the  enlarge-
ment of  science.

Philosophy  becomes  a  fool  only  when  it  invades  the  realm
of  ultimate  origins,  destinies  and  the  supernatural.  Here
it  is  vainer  than  a  peacock,  and  blinder  than  a  mole,  which,
burrowing  under  the  earth,  is  a  fine  judge  of  earthworms,\
but' utterly  incompetent  to  become  a  critic  of  landscapes,  sky-
views  and  ocean-wonders.

"Ne  siitor  ultra  crepidam.'*  On  these  matters  all  God's
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  stored  up  in  Christ,
who  is  the  only  revelator  of  God's  hidden  things.    A  human


THE  GOSPEL  VS.  PHILOSOPHY  49

philosophy  which,  leaving  out  God  (deifying  instead,  Chance
or  Fate),  leaving  out  man's  highest  nature  and  highest  rela-
tions, leaving  out  distinction  between  matter  and  spirit,
attempts  a  scheme  of  the  universe  and  the  related  human
life — ^perpetrates  a  folly  unworthy  of  preservation  in  human
literature.    Observe  next  in  2:8,

3.  "After  the  tradition  of  men."  "Tradition,"  that  which
is  handed  down — transmitted  from  father  to  son,  or  from  one
generation  to  another — may  be  either  good  or  bad  according
to  its  origin  or  subject  matter.  In  the  New  Testament  the
word  is  accordingly  used  sometimes  in  a  good  sense,  some-
times in  a  bad  sense.  Paul  commands  Timothy  to  pass  on
to  other  good  men  the  deposit  of  good  doctrine  which  he
had  received  from  Paul.  If  the  original  matter  be  a  revela-
tion from  God,  it  does  not  cease  to  be  good  because  "handed
down,"  provided  only  it  be  held  sacredly  intact  and  trans-
mitted unimpaired.  The  supreme  test  of  an  oral  "tradition"
is  its  conformity  with  the  word  written.  The  Pharisees  made
void  the  written  Word  of  God  with  Rabbinical  traditions.
And  so  tradition  in  the  early  Christian  centuries  began  that
undermining  of  the  simplicity  of  the  written  gospel  which
culminates  in  our  day  into  that  which  is  another  gospel  or
no  gospel.

The  context,  verses  11  to  18,  indicates  that  "the  traditions
of  men"  here  rebuked  by  the  apostle  is  a  Jewish  element
of  Gnosticism  rather  than  heathen,  because  these  traditions
are  in  the  same  verse  said  to  be  "after  the  rudiments  of  the
world"  and  not  "after  Christ."  But  what  is  meant  here  by
"rudiments?"  In  a  general  way  "rudiments"  means  what
is  elemental — ^thc  first  principles.  Of  course,  "rudiments  of
the  world"  may  mean  worldly  first  principles,  referring  to
mere  human  origin,  but  this  hardly  accords  with  the  New
Testament  usage  of  the  word,  "rudiments,"  or  with  the  imme-
diate context  The  rudiments  of  revelation  were  the  types,
shadows  and  ritual  of  the  Old  Testament.    It  was  character-


50       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

istic  of  the  Jew  in  the  time  of  our  Lord,  and  is  so  even  now,
that  he  went  not  beyond  these  rudiments.  He  would  not
see  in  Christ  the  substance  of  these  shadows,  so  he  never
went  on  to  maturity.

Moreover,  by  their  traditions  they  corrupted  and  dis-
torted even  the  shadows.  This  corruption  might  appear  in
stressing  the  letter  which  killeth  against  the  Spirit  which
maketh  alive.  Or  by  their  endless  elaborations,  interpreta-
tions, emendations,  infinite  trifling  details  they  might  con-
vert the  law  into  a  burdensome  yoke  impossible  to  be  borne.
Or  by  merely  human  speculation  on  the  fact  that  the  law  was
given  by  "the  disposition  of  angels"  they  might  merge  Jewish
speculation  into  the  heathen  element  of  Gnosticism,  a  creation
by  eons — graded  emanations  from  God.  To  meet  which
Paul  presents  Jesus  as  having  in  himself  "all  the  fulness  of
the  Godhead  bodily."  Let  the  reader  particularly  note  the
force  of  this  expression,  perhaps  the  strongest  in  the  New
Testament.

Observe  (i)  "Godhead."  The  Greek,  fheotes,  means
"deity" — not  the  weaker  word,  "divinity,"  the  natural  force
of  which  may  be  evaded,  or  shaded  down.  The  expression
is  even  stronger  than  John's  "The  Word  was  God  (Theos)/*

Observe  (2)  "fulness,"  not  in  part  nor  in  certain  direc-
tions, but  "all  the  fulness  of  Deity."

Observe  (3)  "bodily  (somatikos),  i.  e.,  "bodily-wise."  The
word  is  carefully  chosen.  Here  Lightfoot  speaks  to  the
point :  "It  is  not  'in  a  body*  for  Deity  cannot  be  so  confined.
It  is  not  'in  the  form  of  a  body'  for  this  might  suggest  the
unreality  of  Christ's  human  body,  but  'bodily*  i.  e.,  bodily-
wise,  or  with  a  bodily  manifestation."

Observe  (4)  "dwells  (katoikei):  "In  Him  dwells  all  the
fulness  (pleroma)  of  Deity  bodily,"  as  just  before,  in  con-
trast with  their  vain  deceit,  their  philosophy,  he  has  affirmed
that  in  Christ  "all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  [sophia]  and  of
knowledge  [gnosis]  are  stored,"  2:3.


THE  GOSPEL  VS.  PHILOSOPHY  51

Observe  (5)  "And  ye,  in  Him,  are  complete/'  i.  e.,  filled
full  (pepleromenoi).  Being  in  union  with  Christ,  there  is  no
need  to  seek  from  human  sources  a  wisdom,  a  knowledge,  a
philosophy,  on  the  matters  stated.

Observe  (6)  Instead  of  Christ  being  a  low  grade  eon,  or
emanation  from  God — a  subordinate  angel — "He  is  the  head
of  all  principality  and  authority" — Greek,  he  Kephale  pases
arches  kai  exousias.  He  then  goes  on  to  show  that  in  being
united  to  Christ  they  received  the  real,  or  spiritual  circum-
cision, and  their  baptism  was  in  a  figure  both  a  burial  and  a
resurrection  with  Christ.  In  other  words,  the  antitype  of
circumcision  is  regeneration,  and  baptism  symbolizes  Christ's
burial  and  resurrection  and  pledges  our  own.  He  then
reaches  his  true  climax  in  a  double  direction :

1.  That  in  His  death  on  the  cross  He  fulfilled,  cancelled
and  abrogated  all  the  Old  Testament  economy — took  it
entirely  out  of  the  way — took  it  forever  away.

2.  That  on  the  cross  He  not  only  conquered,  but  made  an
open  show  of  Satan  and  all  his  demons.

Here  he  follows  the  imagery  of  a  Roman  triumphal  pro-
cession, accorded  to  their  conquering  generals,  dragging  cap-
tive princes  in  their  train.  (See  the  author's  sermon  on  the
"Three  Hours  of  Darkness.")  He  came  in  triumph,  by
resurrection  and  ascension,  after  the  battle  on  the  cross,  not
to  imperial  Rome,  but  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  city  of
God,  shouting,

"Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates,
And  be  ye  lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,
And  let  the  King  of  Glory  come  in."

"When  He  ascended  up  on  high  He  led  captivity  captive,"
i.  e.f  He  broke  all  the  chains  of  bondage  which  Satan  had
bound  on  men,  redeeming  the  captives  of  the  terrible  one,
and  He  gave  as  largess  the  outpoured  Holy  Spirit  with  all
His  varied  gifts  to  men.  Truly  that  was  "the  crisis  of  this
world"


5^       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Let  not  the  reader  fail  to  note  the  apostle's  conclusions
from  this  victory  on  the  cross :

1.  Let  no  man  judge  you  in  meat  and  drink  according  to
the  Mosaic  distinctions  betwen  the  clean  and  unclean.  That
distinction  is  abrogated.  >

2.  Let  no  man  judge  you  on  any  part  of  the  Sabbatic  cycle,
either  the  Seventh-day  Sabbath,  the  lunar  Sabbath,  the
three  great  annual  Sabbaths,  the  land  Sabbath  or  the  Jubilee
Sabbath.  They  were  all  shadows;  the  body  is  of  Christ.
The  whole  old  covenant  with  its  sacrifices,  types,  ritual  and
priesthood,  has  passed  away.  This  passage  is  the  death-blow
to  all  sects  which  observe  the  Seventh-day  Sabbath.  They
are  either  Jews  on  this  point  or  merely  keepers  of  a  Sabbath
which  commemorates  creation.  Yet  when  we  come  to  con-
sider the  more  elaborate  arguments  in  the  Letter  to  the
Hebrews,  written  a  little  later,  we  will  find  that  "there
remaineth  to  the  people  of  God  a  Sabbath-keeping'*  (Sab-
hatismos)  which  commemorates  not  rest  from  creation  nor
deliverance  from  Egypt,  but  our  Lord's  rest  after  His  greater
work  of  redemption.

3.  Let  no  man  seek  to  impose  on  you  circumcision  of  the
flesh.    Ye  are  regenerated,  having  the  spiritual  circumcision.

4.  Let  him  not  judge  as  one  of  the  Essenes,  trying  to  kill
sin  by  afflicting  the  body,  saying,  "handle  not,  taste  not,
touch  not"  this  or  that.  All  their  minute  rules,  all  their
asceticism,  all  their  abjurement  of  marriage,  all  their  retire-
ment from  the  world  into  caves,  nunneries  or  monasteries,
all  their  regimen  of  diet  and  scourging  of  the  body  is  mere
will-worship  and  availeth  nothing  toward  shutting  out  temp-
tations. Allurement,  lust,  passion,  envy,  jealousy,  malice
and  covetousness,  that  run  riot  in  the  world,  will  find  a  man
in  his  seclusion.  Walls  of  brick  and  stone  cannot  shut  out
human  passion.  God  meant  for  us  to  live  in  the  world,  but
not  to  be  of  the  world.  "I  pray  not  that  they  may  be  taken
out  of  the  world,  but  that  they  may  be  kept  from  the  evil


THE  GOSPEL  VS.  PHILOSOPHY  6S

one,"  says  our  Lord.  The  true  remedy  is  to  set  our  affec-
tions on  things  above,  where  our  citizenship  is.  Let  the
expulsive  power  of  new  affections  drive  the  old  loves  out
of  the  heart.  Put  off  the  old  man  and  put  on  the  new  man,
which,  after  God,  is  recreated  unto  knowledge,  righteous-
ness and  true  holiness.  Let  the  reader  note  that  chapter  3:11
of  this  letter  and  Eph.  4 :  24,  both  allude  to  man's  original
creation  in  the  image  of  God,  and  this  image  involved
"knowledge"  (epignosis),  "righteousness"  (dikaiosune)  and
"holiness  of  truth"  (hosioteti  tes  aletheias).

5.  Where  there  cannot  be  Greek  and  Jew,  circumcision
and  uncircumcision,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bondmen,  freemen,
but  Christ  is  all  and  in  all.

These  five  conclusions  from  Christ's  work  on  the  cross
constitute  a  priceless  heritage,  ever  to  be  most  jealously
guarded.    They  are  summed  up  as  follows :

1.  The  distinctions  between  clean  and  unclean  meats  and
drinks  is  forever  obliterated.

2.  The  creation-Sabbath  and  all  the  cycle  of  Jewish  Sab-
baths are  superseded.

3.  Circumcision  of  the  flesh,  distinguishing  Jew  from
Gentile,  is  abrogated.

4.  Asceticism  and  seclusion  from  the  world  as  a  preventive
of  temptation  and  passion  is  valueless.

5.  Distinctions  of  race,  caste,  society,  slavery  and  freedom,
civilization  and  barbarism,  culture  and  ignorance,  are  all
impossible  in  Christ.  He  died  for  man,  as  man.  Regenera-
tion, or  the  new  creation,  ignores  all  artificial  distinctions.
There  will  never  be  a  kingdom  of  Jesus  over  Jews,  as  Jews.
There  will  never  be  a  restoration  of  the  Jewish  polity.  It
would  be  a  horrible  anticlimax.

Christ  was  crucified  because  He  would  not  restore  the
national  Jewish  polity,  but  established  a  spiritual  kingdom.

Seventh  Day  Adventism  and  all  pre-millennial  adventism
representing  Christ  as  coming  to  reign  for  a  thousand  years


54^      COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

in  a  restored  earthly  Jerusalem  over  a  restored  Jewish  nation,
with  the  Gentile  world  in  subjugation,  nullify  the  cross  and
seek  to  rebuild  what  He  there  forever  cast  down.

Since  the  cross,  and  forever  since  the  cross,  it  will  be
true — "Where  there  cannot  be  Greek  and  Jew,  circumcision
and  uncircumcision,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bondmen,  freemen ;
but  Christ  is  all  and  in  all."

There  will  be  a  Jerusalem,  the  capital  of  this  world.  But
it  will  be  the  heavenly  Jerusalem — coming  down  from  God
out  of  heaven — after  the  general  judgment.  The  Holy
Spirit  will  infill  it,  according  to  John's  vision,  Rev.  21 :  10-14,
"The  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls ;  each  one  of  the  several
gates  was  of  one  pearl :  and  the  street  of  the  city  was  pure
gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass.  And  1  saw  no  temple
therein:  for  the  Lord  God  the  Almighty,  and  the  Lamb,  are
the  temple  thereof.  And  the  city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,
neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  upon  it :  for  the  glory  of  the
Lord  did  lighten  it,  and  the  lamp  thereof  is  the  Lamb.  And
the  nations  shall  walk  amidst  the  light  thereof :  and  the  kings
of  the  earth  bring  their  glory  into  it.  And  the  gates  thereof
shall  in  no  wise  be  shut  by  day  ( for  there  shall  be  no  night
there)  :  and  they  shall  bring  the  glory  and  the  honor  of  the
nations  into  it :  and  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any-
thing unclean,  or  he  that  maketh  an  abomination  and  a  lie :
but  only  they  that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life,"
Rev.  21 :  10-14,  22-27.

There  never  will  be  a  reversion  to  Moses.  The  great
central  truth  of  the  cross  and  what  it  abrogates,  set  forth
in  Colossians,  enlarged  in  Ephesians  and  elaborated  in  every
detail  in  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews,  makes  an  eternal  break
with  Judaism,  as  is  fitly  followed  by  the  destruction  0/  Jeru-
salem and  its  temple  and  the  eternal  cessation  of  its  sacrifices
and  priesthood.  Therefore  the  author  cannot  bear  the
thought  that  anyone  should  fail  to  learn  the  lesson  of  Col.
2: 14, 15.    As  the  Crusaders  failed,  so  will  the  Jewish  Zion-


THE  GOSPEL  VS.  PHILOSOPHY  55

ists.  The  tomb  is  empty.  The  sanctity  is  forever  gone  from
the  earthly  Jerusalem  and  the  land.  Let  Greek  Catholic  and
Roman  Catholic  have  their  quarrels  over  the  empty  tomb  and
vacant  temple  site,  regulated  by  Moslem  police.  Our  Lord
is  not  there;  He  is  risen.  The  Jerusalem  that  now  is
answereth  to  Mount  Sinai  and  is  in  bondage  with  her  chil-
dren. The  Jerusalem  that  is  above  is  our  mother,  and
regeneration  is  our  certificate  of  citizenship.  Heaven  is  our
Holy  Land.  Let  us  by  illumination,  faith,  hope  and  love
make  tours  to  that  holy  land.  I  am  far  from  denying  that
God  overruled  the  Crusades  to  much  reflexive  good.  But
the  Crusades  themselves,  so  far  as  their  immediate  purpose
and  hope  are  concerned,  have  no  rivals  in  the  history  o|
folly.

I  have  no  desire —

"To  climb  where  Moses  stood
And  view  that  landscape  o'er — "

but  would  prefer  to  be  caught  up  with  Paul  into  the  third
heaven,  into  the  Paradise  of  God

"And  view  that  landscape  o'er."

/  continually  rejoice  that  I  ant  not  coming  unto  the  dark^
thunder-rocked,  fire-crested,  smoke-shrouded,  trumpet-riven
Mountain  of  the  Law,  there  to  quake  and  tremble,  hut  unto
Mount  Zion,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  unto  God  the  judge,
unto  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  firstborn,  unto
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  unto  Jesus  the  mediator
of  the  New  Covenant,  unto  the  blood  of  sprinkling  in  the^
true  Holy  of  Holies  whose  atoning  efficacy  speaks  better
things  for  us  than  the  blood  of  AbeVs  typical  animal  sacrifice.

"Oh !  when,  thou  city  of  my  God,
Shall  I  thy  courts  ascend?"

I  have  not  the  temperament  of  the  archaeologist.  I  could
never  potter  with  Old  Mortality  among  the  tombs  of  men


56       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

once  heroes,  but  seek  the  company  of  living  heroes.  I  could
not  be  a  Chinaman  with  his  back  to  the  future,  worshiping
his  ancestors,  and  am  entirely  without  desire  to  go  East
except  "by  way  of  the  West."  Campbell's  "Pleasures  of
Hope"  is  a  greater  book  than  Rogers'  "Pleasures  of  Mem-
ory." I  lift  my  hat  when  I  hear  Paul  shouting:  "Forgetting
the  things  that  are  behind  and  reaching  out  to  the  things  that
are  before  I  press  on  toward  the  goal  of  the  prize  of  the  high
calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."

I  have  been  scornfully  asked,  Why  the  waste  of  the  letters
to  the  Colossians,  Ephesians  and  Hebrews,  since  Titus  in
less  than  a  decade  would  obviate  their  necessity  by  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Jewish  polity?

My  answer  was.  Because  he  foresaw  the  great  apostasy
which,  under  the  guise  of  Christianity,  would  revert  to  the
Old  Testament  type  and  revive  its  hierarchy,  its  priesthood,
its  human  mediators,  its  ritual,  its  anointings,  its  genu-
flexions, commanding  to  abstain  from  meats  and  forbidding
to  marry,  and  which  would  foist  on  half  the  world  a  blended
Jewish  and  heathen  system  of  superstition,  tyrannising  over
the  cradle,  the  grave  and  the  spirit-world,  and  over  govern-
ments, while  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  saints.


QUESTIONS

1.  What  the  meaning  of  "spoil"  in  2 :  8?

2.  What  the  derivation  of  the  word,  "philosophy?"

3.  What  the  province  of  human  philosophy  and  its  value  there?

4.  Into  what  realm  may  it  not  intrude,  and  what  the  value  of  its
literature  when  intruding  there  ?

5.  Into  this  realm  beyond  the  scope  of  human  philosophy,  what,
according  to  2:3  of  this  letter,  is  the  position  of  our  Lord,  and  how
does  He  make  known  its  secrets?

6.  What  the  meaning  of  "tradition"  in  2 : 8,  and  how  is  the  word
used  in  the  New  Testament?

7.  What  the  meaning  of  "rudiments"  in  2:8,  and  to  what  does
the  New  Testament  usage  of  the  word  usually  refer?

8.  Show  from  the  context  that  a  Jewish  element  of  Gnosticism  is
under  consideration  here.


THE  GOSPEL  VS.  PHILOSOPHY  57

9.    At  what  point  in  the  argument  does  the  Jewish  element  blend
with  the  heathen  ?

10.  In  what  great  declaration  concerning  Christ  does  Paul  meet
the  false  philosophy?     (2:9.)

11.  Meaning  of  "Godhead"  in  verse  9,  and  how  often  elsewhere
in  the  New  Testament  does  the  word  occur,  and  compare  its  force
with  John's  "the  Word  was  God."

12.  Meaning  of  "bodily,"  and  quote  Lightfoot  on  the  choice  of
the  word  ?

13.  Meaning  of  "complete  in  Him?"

14.  What  the  antitype  of  circumcision,  and  the  relation  of  bap-
tism thereto  ?

15.  State  the  great  climax  of  Paul  in  two  directions.

16.  State  the  five  conclusions  from  his  argument.

17.  What  the  value  of  the  conclusions  as  a  heritage?

18.  What  the  effect  as  to  Judaism  of  the  central  truth  of  the  cross
as  argued  in  Colossians,  Ephesians  and  Hebrews  ?

19.  Wherein  the  great  error  of  Seventh-Day  Adventism,  and
most  pre-millennial  teaching?

20.  What  the  folly  of  the  Crusades  ?

21.  Will  there  ever  be  a  restored  earthly  Jerusalem,  with  Christ
as  King  over  the  Jews,  and  Gentiles  in  subjection?

22.  What  the  Jerusalem  before  the  saints  ?

23.  Why,  in  view  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  in  less  than  a
decade,  did  Paul  write  these  prison  letters  to  make  a  final  break  with
Judaism  ?


VI

PRACTICAL  APPLICATIONS  ON  COLOSSIANS
Scripture:  Col.  3: 18 — ^4: 18

IN  this  chapter  we  take  up  the  practical  application  of
this  letter.  From  3:  18  to  4:  i  the  exhortations  relate
to  the  family  or  home,  and  are  based  on  reciprocal  rela-
tions. From  relation  arises  obligation.  These  relations  are
husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child,  master  and  servant.
The  first  two  relations  are  natural,  the  third  artificial.

God  himself  created  the  relation  between  husband  and
wife.  He  made  them  one  in  the  beginning,  himself  per-
forming the  marriage  ceremony.  Adam  was  first  made.
Eve  was  derived  from  his  body  and  soul.  Hence  the  name,
"woman,"  meaning  derived  from  man.  This  marriage  rela-
tion is  the  basis  of  the  home,  the  family.  It  was  intended
to  be  indissoluble.  The  New  Testament  permits  only  one
ground  of  divorce.  The  sanctity  of  the  bond  cannot  be
maintained  without  regard  to  the  reciprocal  duties.  There
can  be  but  one  head  to  a  family.  The  husband  is  that  head.
This  involves  subjection  on  the  part  of  the  wife.  She  must
honor  and  obey,  but  it  is  not  a  slavish  obedience.  Her  realm
is  the  home.  She  lives  in  her  husband  and  children.  The
husband  must  love  his  wife  and  be  not  bitter  towards  her.
This  thought  is  elaborated  and  illustrated  in  the  accompany-
ing Letter  to  the  Ephesians.  As  Christ  loved  the  church
and  gave  himself  for  it,  so  must  husbands  love  their  wives.
Where  this  great  love  is  extended  by  the  husband  it  is  easy
for  the  wife  to  honor  and  obey,  and  the  children  born  of
the  marriage  will  be  an  heritage  of  the  Lord.

68


PRACTICAL  APPLICATIONS  59

Children,  too,  are  in  subjection.  They  must  honor  and
obey ;  that  is  the  first  commandment  with  a  promise.  This
honor  and  obedience  must  be  in  letter,  spirit  and  form.  A
look  or  a  gesture  may  disobey.  Dr.  Adam  Clarke,  the  great
Methodist  commentator,  says  that  his  mother  was  a  Scotch
Presbyterian,  famous  for  teaching  and  enforcing  family  dis-
cipline— that  on  one  occasion  when  commanded  by  her  to
do  an  unpleasant  service,  he  obeyed,  but  looked  disobedient.
His  mother  caught  the  meaning  of  disrespect  in  his  eye,  and,
shaking  her  finger  in  his  face,  quoted  the  proverb :  "The
eye  that  mocketh  at  his  father  and  despiseth  to  obey  his
mother,  the  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it  out  and  the
young  eagles  shall  eat  it."  Her  solemn  denunciation
impressed  him  much.  Her  words  rang  in  his  ears.
Walking  out  alone  in  the  woods,  he  was  startled  by  the
cry  of  a  raven  overhead,  "Caw !  Caw !  Caw !"  His
mother's  words  burned  in  his  mind  like  fire,  and,  placing
his  hands  over  his  face,  he  ran  back  home,  crying  out:
"Oh,  my  eyes,  my  eyes,  let  not  the  ravens  pick  out  my
eyes  I"  But  the  law  binds  not  the  child  alone.  The  parent
must  not  provoke  the  child.  Many  a  child  has  become
discouraged  in  honoring  and  obeying  parents  by  their
provocations.

These  exhortations  on  the  sanctity  of  family  ties  were
very  pertinent  to  the  matter  in  hand.  The  false  philosophy
prevalent  at  Colosse  discountenanced  marriage  and  the  rais-
ing of  children,  as  tending  to  sin.  Their  selfish  delusion  was
that  the  escape  from  sin  was  to  be  found  in  abstinence  from
marriage  and  retreat  from  social  claims  to  the  solitude  of  a
cave.  While  a  few  free-lovers  have  denounced  what  they
call  the  bondage  of  marriage,  and  while  the  trend  of  modern
society  is  to  multiply  causes  for  divorce,  yet,  on  the  whole,
the  common  sense  of  mankind  honors  both  the  sacred  insti-
tution of  marriage  and  the  mutual  laws  governing  marriage
and  children.    They  respect  the  New  Testament  declaration


60       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

that  "He  that  provideth  not  for  his  own  hath  denied  the
faith  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel."

But  some  over-pious  people  have  taken  great  offense  at
the  gospel  because  it  does  not  peremptorily  inculcate  the
abolition  of  slavery,  and  incite  to  servile  insurrection.  They
greatly  mistake  the  purpose  of  the  gospel.  It  did  not  under-
take to  be  a  political  and  revolutionary  force.  It  came  to
serve  religious  ends.  It  would  have  perished  in  the  begin-
ning if  it  had  pronounced  on  forms  of  political  government
or  the  legality  of  social  conditions.  Whenever  its  legisla-
tion touched  a  social  or  political  evil,  it  was  to  ameliorate
its  harshness,  but  it  relied  mainly  on  the  leavening  power
of  its  great  principles.  Slavery  abounded  everywhere.  It
taught  the  slave  God's  care  for  him  and  led  him  into  spiritual
freedom.  It  taught  him  to  be  honest,  industrious,  conscien-
tious, as  living  unto  his  Lord.  It  revealed  to  him  that  God,
unlike  man,  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  and  held  out  for  his
patient  hope  the  heritage  of  the  world  to  come.  It  laid  a
restraining  hand  upon  the  Christian  master,  curbing  his  pas-
sions, enjoining  justice  and  mercy  in  the  treatment  of  the
slave,  and  called  upon  him  to  remember,  first,  that  he  was
Christ's  bondman,  and,  second,  that  in  Christ  there  were  no
distinctions  between  the  bond  and  the  free.  Thus  indirectly,
by  the  leavening  power  of  its  principles,  it  is  reforming  all
evils  of  government  and  society,  and  will  ultimately  purge
the  earth  of  all  wickedness  of  whatever  kind.

The  exhortations  pass  from  these  social  relations  to  incul-
cate the  habit  of  thankful  prayer,  suggesting  as  a  special
object  of  petition  his  own  case.  But  he  solicits  on  his  behalf
no  selfish  gain,  only  "that  God  may  open  to  him  a  door  for
the  Word"  and  that  when  it  is  open  he  may  unveil  the  mys-
tery of  the  gospel  "as  he  ought  to  speak."  These  two  objects
of  prayer,  repeated  in  the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians,  are  very
suggestive.  He  conceives  of  prayer  as  able  to  influence  the
workings  of  Providence,  and  to  influence  the  Spirit's  power


PRACTICAL  APPLICATIONS  61

on  his  own  heart.  In  view  of  them,  let  us  take  heed  that
we  fall  into  no  infidel  attitude  concerning  prayer,  nor  raise
in  our  minds  the  doubt,  "What  profits  shall  we  have  if  we
pray  unto  Him?"  They  also  suggest  that  if  an  inspired
apostle  deeply  felt  the  need  and  longed  for  the  power  of
the  prayers  of  his  brethren,  how  foolish  in  us  to  discount  so
valuable  a  service.

From  devotions  we  pass  to  outward  walk  and  speech.
"Walk  in  wisdom  before  them  that  are  without."  How
little  are  Christians  sensible  of  the  fact  that  they  all,  as
well  as  the  apostles,  are  "a  spectacle  to  the  angels,"  to
demons,  and  to  men.  What  a  text  for  preachers !  "Them
that  are  without."  Note  the  frequency  of  the  phrase  and
its  several  contexts,  for  example,  Mark  4:11;!  Cor.  5 :  13 ;
I  Tim.  3  :  7.  Indeed  it  is  a  qualification  of  the  preacher  that
"he  have  a  good  report  of  them  that  are  without."  Apart
from  the  exact  form  of  the  phrase  are  many  passages  em-
bodying the  thought  in  other  words.  Moreover,  as  words
count  as  much  as  conduct  with  "them  that  are  without,"
"let  your  speech  be  always  with  grace  seasoned  with  salt,
that  ye  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  each  one."  The
outside  world  bristles  with  interrogation  points  toward  Chris-
tians and  Christianity.  How  often  we  injure  the  cause  by
injudicious  answers.  How  closely  Peter  follows  Paul's  lead
in  this  exhortation :  "Ready  always  to  give  answer  to  every
man  that  asketh  you  a  reason  concerning  the  hope  that  is  in
you,  yet  with  meekness  and  fear,"  I  Peter  3:15-

Concerning  these  exhortations  on  family  duties,  devotions,
outward  walk  and  speech,  observe,  first,  how  close  the  con-
nection between  Colossians  and  Ephesians,  and,  second,  how
uniform  the  teaching  by  all  the  New  Testament  writers  and
speakers  on  all  these  grave  matters.  Compare,  for  example,
on  husbands  and  wives,  Paul's  teaching  in  these  prison  letters
(Col.  3:18,  19 ;  Eph.  5 :  22,  23)  with  Peter's  (I  Peter  2>''7)
writing  later  to  the  same  people  in  part.    The  letter  refers


62^       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

them  to  its  bearers,  Tychicus  and  Onesimus,  for  detailed
information  of  his  state  and  work.

In  the  salutation  he  distinguished  between  his  Jewish  and
Gentile  companions  in  labor.  Aristarchus,  Mark  and  Justus
are  Jewish  Christians,  while  Luke,  Demas  and  Epaphras
are  Gentiles.  It  is  gratifying  to  note  that  he  takes  pleasure
in  the  association  and  co-operation  of  Mark.  Evidently  in
some  way  his  mind  toward  Mark  is  changed  since  his  refusal
to  let  him  be  a  companion  on  his  second  missionary  tour
(Acts  15 :  37-40).  We  have  no  evidence  of  the  ground  of
the  reconciliation,  and  so  cannot  say  whether  Paul  revised
his  original  judgment,  or  Mark  evinced  repentance  for  his
former  abandonment.

In  the  first  letter  from  Peter,  written  a  few  years  later
from  Babylon  to  these  same  Colossians,  he  reports  that  both
Silas  and  Mark,  with  others,  are  with  him.  In  the  separa-
tion Barnabas  took  Mark  and  Paul  took  Silas.  Peter  has
fallen  heir  to  both  of  the  companions  on  that  divided  second
missionary  tour.  We  learn  in  these  salutations  that  Luke
was  a  physician,  which  many  terms  of  his  writings  indicate,
and  that  Epaphras  was  an  evangelist  who  probably  planted
the  three  churches  of  the  Lycus  valley — Colosse,  Hierapolis
and  Laodicea.

In  his  second  imprisonment  at  Rome  we  find  Paul  com-
plaining that  the  Demas  he  here  commends  had  forsaken
him,  having  loved  this  present  world  (II  Tim.  4:  10).  And
what  a  difference  in  his  own  salutation  when  II  Timothy
is  written!  Only  Luke  is  with  him.  He  urges  Timothy
to  come  and  bring  Mark.  Tychicus  had  been  sent  to
Ephesus.

In  his  directions  we  find  a  household  church  in  Hierapolis
as  well  as  in  Colosse.  We  find  more  than  one  of  these
churches  in  Rome.  Doubtless  these  churches  in  private
homes  came  about  from  the  fact  that  they  had  no  public
meeting  house  for  all  the  churches  in  a  city,  and  services


PRACTICAL  APPLICATIONS  63

were  held  in  the  home  of  some  leading  brother  or  sister  who
could  afford  the  most  room.

The  number  of  these  churches  in  one  city  is  a  disproof  of
the  now  current  theory  that  in  apostolic  times  all  Christians
of  a  metropolis  were  in  one  church  organization,  presided,
over  by  a  leading  bishop,  with  subordinate  bishops  supplying
the  various  sub  congregations,  assembling  in  different  parts
of  the  city.

As  bearing  upon  this  point  Rev.  W.  T.  Whitley,  in  deliver-
ing the  "Gay  Lectures"  before  the  Southern  Baptist  Theo-
logical Seminary  on  the  topic,  "The  Story  of  Missions  in
Five  Continents,"  special  topic,  "Expansion  in  America  and
Australia,"  has  this  to  say,  as  reported  in  "The  Review  and
Expositor,"  January,  1908:

"Look  next  at  church  organization.  To  these  shores  were
transplanted  from  Britain  three  patterns,  monarchical,  aris-
tocratic, democratic.  Already  a  Methodist  Episcopal  has
been  produced — an  ingenious  crossing  of  two  of  these.  Al-
ways in  Tasmania  the  Baptist  leaders  examined  their  Bibles
to  see  if  Baptist  traditions  were  absolutely  in  harmony  with
New  Testament  principle ;  whether  a  few  baptized  believers
who  build  a  house  for  prayer  and  praise,  paying  a  few  men
and  women  to  conduct  it,  with  one  pastor  at  the  head,  form
a  ^church'  on  divine  right,  on  a  necessary  pattern.  They
decide  not,  and  all  the  Baptists  in  the  island  form  really  one
community,  with  the  ministers  the  ministers  of  the  whole
body.  Church  extension  and  matters  of  general  interest  are
decided  by  the  whole,  and  selfish  isolation  is  discouraged.
The  same  question  occurs  to  a  minister  in  this  town,  and
he  asked  whether  New  Testament  precedent  did  not  point
to  a  single  church  of  Louisville,  like  the  church  of  Ephesus
or  Corinth.  American  conservatism  frowned  down  the
heretic,  and  he  sought  refuge  at  Rome.  But  the  same  ques-
tion has  again  been  raised  in  Britain,  the  president  of  the
Baptist  Union  stating  as  his  New  Year's  message  that  our


64*       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

usual  plan  is  at  best  of  human  origin,  and  not  ordered  in
scripture,  while  many  of  its  developments  are  absolutely  anti-
scriptural.  For  the  next  few  years  English  Baptists  are
likely  to  inquire  diligently  whether  the  congregational  system
blindly  adopted  by  Robert  Browne  is  the  last  word  in  organi-
zation, or  whether  the  New  Testament  does  not  show  us  all
the  baptized  believers  in  a  town  forming  one  church,  with
a  plurality  of  elders  both  to  teach  and  to  administer  business,
and  probably  many  houses  for  worship.  Indeed,  in  one
great  town  this  system  is  just  being  tried,  and  the  question
has  been  ventilated  by  papers  at  our  last  session  of  the  Bap-
tist Union."

As  further  illustration  of  the  dangerous  trend,  I  cite  a
letter  from  "The  Argus."  The  title  of  the  letter  is :  "The
Baptist  Outlook  in  Great  Britain,"  by  J.  H.  Shakespeare.
Under  the  head  of  "Ministerial  Recognition"  the  writer  gives
as  news :

"The  regular  door  into  the  Baptist  ministry  is  through
one  of  our  recognized  theological  colleges.  Hitherto  as  soon
as  a  student  left  college  and  became  the  pastor  of  a  church,
his  name  was  placed  on  the  list  of  'accredited  ministers'  in
*The  Baptist  Handbook.'  This  recognition,  as  it  was  called,
carried  with  it  the  right  to  share  in  the  Annuity  Fund,  and
other  privileges  of  membership  with  the  Baptist  Union.  The
pastors  who  entered  the  ministry  without  first  passing
through  one  of  the  recognized  colleges  were  required  to  pass
two  examinations  before  being  placed  upon  the  accredited
list  of  the  Baptist  Union.  At  our  last  spring  assembly,  how-
ever, a  new  scheme  of  ministerial  recognition  was  all  but
unanimously  adopted,  and  our  pastors  are  henceforth  to
be  divided  into  two  sections — probationers  and  recognized
ministers.  Collegiates  who  receive  satisfactory  certificates
from  their  college  principals  will  be  at  once  placed  upon  the
probationers'  list,  and  non-collegiates  will  have  the  same
privilege  on  passing  one  examination.    All  ministers  on  the


PRACTICAL  APPLICATIONS  65

probationers'  list,  whether  collegiate  or  non-collegiate,  will
be  required  to  pass  a  Baptist  Union  examination  and  to
submit  satisfactory  proof  as  to  their  pastoral  efficiency  be-
fore their  names  can  be  transferred  to  the  accredited  list,
and  they  then  become  recognized  ministers.  It  is  hoped
that  these  new  regulations  will,  to  some  extent,  guard  the
portals  to  the  ministry,  and  make  it  more  possible  to  infer
that  if  a  man  is  a  Baptist  minister  he  shall  not  only  be
spiritually  qualified,  but  also  be  an  educated  person."

These  two  extracts  indicate  a  most  dangerous  trend.  The
first  surrenders  the  old-time  definition  of  a  church,  not  only
advocating  the  metropolitan  idea  but  the  provincial  idea  of
a  church.  The  second  goes  to  a  greater  extreme.  An  asso-
ciation of  purely  human  origin  assumes  to  "guard  the  portals
of  the  ministry" — to  divide  them  into  classes  of  probationers
and  accredited — into  collegiates  and  non-collegiates,  usurps
the  church  prerogative  of  subjecting  to  its  examination,  and
seeks  to  limit  the  ministry  to  "educated  persons."

The  stupendous  folly  of  the  whole  business,  its  suicidal
unscripturalness,  becomes  apparent  by  applying  the  rule  to
New  Testament  apostles,  evangelists,  and  pastors,  and  to
past  Baptist  history.  God  forbid  that  we  should  follow  the
English  Baptists !

The  direction  about  exchange  of  letters  between  Colosse
and  Laodicea  (4:  16)  throws  light  on  two  points :  (i)  That
in  all  probability  the  letter  from  Laodicea  was  the  letter
which  we  call  Ephesians.  (2)  We  learn  how  New  Testa-
ment manuscripts  were  passed  around  before  there  was  a
collection  of  them  into  one  book  or  library.  And  how  some
lists,  after  collections  were  formed,  and  even  some  earlier
versions,  did  not  have  all  the  New  Testament  books.  We
note  also  in  the  directions  that  Archippus,  son  of  Philemon,
was  a  minister,  and  one,  too,  that  needed  to  be  stirred  up
somewhat  in  the  line  of  duty.  The  reader  will  note  the  usual
attestation  of  Paul's  letters  by  his  autograph  signature,  a


66       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

habit  adopted  since  he  wrote  his  first  letter,  caused  by  report
of  forged  letters  in  his  name.


QUESTIONS

1.  Where  does  the  practical  part  of  this  letter  commence,  and
what  reciprocal  relations  expressed  in  3  :  18 — 4 :  i  ?

2.  What  the  character  of  these  relations,  and  what  arises  from
them?

3.  Who  the  author  of  the  relation  between  husband  and  wife,
what  the  history  and  nature  of  this  relation  ?

4.  How  may  the  sanctity  of  the  marriage  relation  be  maintained,
and  what  does  this  involve?

5.  Where  do  we  find  the  subject  of  the  marriage  relation
elaborated  and  illustrated,  and  what  the  essential  points  in  the
discussion  there?

6.  What  injunction  here  for  children,  and  what,  in  detail,  the
striking  illustration  given  ?

7.  What  the  special  application  of  the  exhortations  on  the  sanc-
tity of  family  ties  to  the  Colossians  ?

8.  What  the  gospel's  attitude  toward  the  institution  of  slavery,
and  what  special  precepts  here  touching  this  subject?

9.  What  the  lessons  here  on  prayer  ?

ID.    What  the  lessons  on  outward  walk  and  speech?

11.  How  does  this  teaching  harmonize  with  other  N.  T.  teaching
on  the  same  subject,  and  what  the-proof  ?

12.  Who  were  the  bearers  of  this  letter,  and  what  trust  did  Paul
commit  to  them  besides  this  letter  ?

13.  What  distinction  does  Paul  here  make  in  his  salutation,  what
gratifying  bit  of  information  here  relative  to  Mark,  and  what  the
probable  ground  of  this  reconciliation?

14.  What  information  touching  these  brethren  from  Peter,  and
what  information  about  Luke  and  Epaphras  found  in  this  closing
salutation?

15.  What  is  here  said  of  Demas,  what  is  said  of  him  in  a  later
letter,  and  what  the  lesson?

16.  What  some  modern  ideas  of  the  church,  and  what  the  bearing
of  the  household  churches  referred  to  here  and  in  Romans  on  such
ideas?

17.  What  Rev.  W.  T.  Whitley's  position  on  this  and  kindred
questions  ?

18.  What  J.  H.  Shakespeare's  idea  of  the  ministry?

19.  What  the  fault  with  each  of  these  positions,  respectively?

20.  What  light  here  on  important  matters  from  4: 16-18?


THE  BOOK  OF  EPHESIANS

VII

HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION

WE  now  come  to  consider  the  great  Letter  to  the
Ephesians.  The  history  of  Paul's  connection  with
the  Ephesians  may  be  found  in  Acts  18:19-21;
19:  1-41 ;  20:  17-38.  His  latest  connection  is  in  the  two  let-
ters to  Timothy.  Peter's  connection  with  all  of  the  dispersed
Jews  in  the  province  of  Proconsular  Asia,  including  Ephesus,
appears  in  his  two  letters,  I  and  II  Peter.  There  is  very
little  in  that ;  the  only  connection  is  his  writing  to  the  Jewish
part  of  them.  John's  connection  with  these  churches  in
Asia  is  presented  in  the  book  of  Revelation.  Unquestion-
ably the  tradition  is  correct  that  John  in  his  old  age  moved
to  Ephesus,  and  from  that  place  as  headquarters  he  con-
ducted his  last  apostolic  labors.  It  was  from  that  point  that
he  was  arrested  and  banished  to  the  Isle  of  Patmos,  and
there  wrote  the  book  of  Revelation,  and  that  book  of  Reve-
lation was  addressed  to  the  seven  churches  in  Proconsular
Asia.

Much  of  what  is  called  Historical  Introduction  is  omitted
in  this  chapter.  The  reasons  are  that  all  of  these  matters
have  been  treated  in  the  discussions  on  Acts  18,  19  and  20,
and  mainly  because  this  letter  is  more  of  a  circular  letter
than  a  special  communication  to  a  single  church.  There  is
an  utter  absence  of  any  local  tone  in  the  letter.  That  it  is
a  general  letter  appears  from  the  following  considerations :
I.  The  absence  of  all  personal  messages — an  unaccount-
able thing  in  a  special  letter  to  the  church  at  Ephesus,  in  view

67


68       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

of  his  long  stay  there,  and  the  necessary  intimate  personal
relations  established.  When  we  read  the  Letter  to  the  Ro-
mans we  see  that  one  whole  chapter  is  devoted  to  personal
salutations,  and  we  notice  in  almost  all  of  his  special  letters
that  there  are  personal  messages  showing  intimate  acquaint-
ance.   This  letter  has  none  of  that.

2.  It  would  be  impossible  for  Paul,  in  writing  a  special
letter  to  the  Ephesians,  to  use  these  two  expressions :  "Hav-
ing heard  of  the  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  which  is  among
you,"  1:15.  In  reading  those  three  chapters  in  Acts  we
note  that  it  was  not  a  matter  of  hearing  with  Paul  to  be
acquainted  with  the  affairs  at  Ephesus,  especially  about  their
faith  in  Christ.  The  second  expression  is:  *Tf  so  be  that
ye  have  heard  of  the  dispensation  of  that  grace  of  God
which  was  given  me  to  you-ward."  That  shows  that  he
had  to  know  about  them  by  hearsay,  and  that  they  had  to
know  about  him  by  hearsay,  which  does  not  fit  at  all  with  the
facts  in  the  case  concerning  Paul's  relation  with  the  Ephesus
people.  Then  he  goes  on  to  say :  "As  I  wrote  before  in  few
words,  whereby,  when  ye  read,  ye  can  perceive  my  under-
standing in  the  mystery  of  Christ,"  that  is,  "When  you  read
my  former  letter  you  will  perceive  my  understanding  in  the
mystery  of  Christ."  It  is  impossible  that  these  two  expres-
sions could  have  been  used  by  Paul  in  writing  the  church  at
Ephesus  a  special  letter.  Then  that  reference  to  the  former
letter  to  them  is  a  reference  to  the  Letter  to  the  Colossians.
He  wrote  to  the  Colossians  first,  but  before  he  got  a  chance
so  send  it  he  wrote  the  more  extended  letter  which  we  call
the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians.  The  same  persons  who  were  in
his  mind  when  he  wrote  to  the  Colossians  were  evidently
in  his  mind  when  he  wrote  to  the  Ephesians.

3.  Again,  the  reference  in  Colossians  4 :  16  to  a  letter  from
Laodicea  which  they  were  to  get  and  read,  just  as  the  Laodi-
ceans  were  to  get  and  read  the  Letter  to  the  Colossians,
shows  that  what  is  called  the  letter  from  Laodicea  is  the


INTRODUCTION  TO  EPHESIANS  69

letter  which  we  call  the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians.  Both
Colossians  and  Ephesians  were  intended  primarily  for  the
churches  in  the  Lycus  valley,  which  he  himself  had  not
planted,  but  of  which  he  had  heard.

4.  The  phrase,  "at  Ephesus,"  in  the  first  verse :  "To  the
saints  that  are  at  Ephesus,"  is  not  in  the  two  oldest  manu-
scripts— the  Sinaitic  and  the  Vatican.  Yet  again,  the  earliest
fathers,  when  commenting  upon  this  Letter  to  the  Ephesians,
say  that  the  expression,  "at  Ephesus,"  was  not  in  the  copies
they  had.  It  remains,  then,  to  be  explained  how  the  name,
"Ephesians,"  got  into  the  title,  and  especially  how  "at
Ephesus"  got  into  the  text.  These  titles  were  not  a  part
of  the  original  letters,  but  were  added  much  later  to  all  of
them.  How  did  it  happen  that  all  manuscripts  have  the
title,  "To  the  Ephesians,"  and  how  did  it  happen  that  "at
Ephesus"  got  into  the  first  verse  ?  The  reasonable  explana-
tion is  this :  The  letter  is  a  circular  letter,  a  general  discus-
sion of  a  great  theme  introduced  in  the  Colossian  letter,  but
here  elaborated  for  all  the  churches  in  Proconsular  Asia.
A  copy  would  probably  be  addressed  to  the  Laodiceans,
other  copies  might  be  given  to  other  churches.  The  original
letter  may  have  been  this  way :   "To  all  the  saints  that  are

at ,"  leaving  a  blank  for  the  insertion  of

the  name  of  the  church  to  which  a  copy  would  be  sent.  It
was  the  object  of  Paul  that  this  letter  which  we  call  "Ephe-
sians" should  have  general  circulation.  There  is  no  local
tone  about  it ;  it  is  just  as  applicable  to  one  church  in  Asia
as  to  any  other.  It  is  certain  that  one  copy,  probably  the
original  one,  reached  the  church  at  Ephesus,  the  metropolis
of  Proconsular  Asia,  so  that  this  copy  would  naturally
and  more  readily  be  preserved  and  passed  into  history.
The  testimony  is  both  substantial  and  sufficient  that
Ephesus  had  this  letter  in  her  archives.  So  the  world  at
large  would  bear  and  know  of  this  Ephesian  copy  of  the
letter.


70       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

The  Alexandrian  manuscript  which  is  one  of  the  three
oldest  (in  the  order  of  their  antiquity  (i)  Sinaitic,  (2)
Vatican,  (3)  Alexandrian)  has  "At  Ephesus."  What  is  still
more  important  is  that  the  Peshito-Syriac  version,  which  is
older  than  any  manuscript  that  we  have,  has  "At  Ephesus,"
so  the  evidence  is  clear  that  some  of  the  copies  of  the  New
Testament  did  have  "At  Ephesus."  The  Alexandrian  manu-
script and  the  Peshito-Syriac  version  prove  this.  Other
copies  did  not  have  it ;  the  Vatican  and  Sinaitic  manuscripts
and  the  early  fathers  prove  this.  The  absolutely  non-local
tone  of  the  letter  shows  its  general  character.  We  know  that
Paul  wrote  the  circular  letter.  He  might  have  filled  in  one
of  the  blanks,  "At  Ephesus."  Tychicus,  who  carried  the
letter,  was  very  probably  an  Ephesian.  There  is  no  clear
proof  as  to  whether  his  home  was  at  Colosse,  Laodicea,
Hierapolis,  or  Ephesus,  but  the  probabilities  are  in  favor  of
his  living  at  Ephesus.

Now,  this  is  why,  in  giving  this  discussion,  the  usual  matter
of  General  Introduction  is  omitted,  viz. :  because  this  letter
does  not  concern  Ephesus  any  more  than  Laodicea,  Hierap-
olis, or  Colosse.  While  a  copy  went  to  Ephesus,  unquestion-
ably a  copy  also  went  to  Laodicea  and  one  to  Colosse.  There-
fore it  would  be  out  of  order  for  me  in  a  discussion  on  the
General  Introduction  to  go  into  details  on  the  history  of
Ephesus.

The  relation  of  Ephesians  to  Colossians  is  even  more
evident  and  striking  than  the  relation  of  Galatians  to  Ro-
mans. The  reader  should  carefully  study  the  parallels  be-
tween these  letters  so  ably  set  forth  in  the  Introduction  to
the  "Commentary  on  Ephesians"  by  Moule  in  the  Cam-
bridge Bible  for  Schools  and  Colleges,  which  I  here  quote
entire :

I.  Christ  the  head  of  the  church:  Eph.  1:22;  4:15;
5:23;  Col.  1 :  18;  2:  19.  This  view  of  the  Lord's  position
and  function  is  practically  confined  to  these  epistles.


INTRODUCTION  TO  EPHESIANS  71

2.  Christ  supreme  over  angelic  powers :  Eph.  1:21;  Col.
2: 10.

3.  The  church  Christ's  body :  Eph.  i :  23  ;  4 :  12 ;  5  :23-30,
etc. ;  Col.  1:18,  24.

4.  Articulation  and  nourishment  of  the  body:  Eph.
4: 16;  Col.  2:  19.    The  imagery  is  peculiar  to  these  epistles.

5.  Growth  of  the  body :  Eph.  4:16;  Col.  2 :  19.

6.  The  body  one :  Eph.  2  :  16 ;  4 :  4 ;  Col.  3:15.

7.  Christians  once  dead  in  sin:   Eph.  2:1,  5 ;  Col.  2:  13.

8.  Once  alienated  from  God  and  grace:  Eph.  2:12;
4:18;  Col.  1:21.  The  Greek  verb  is  confined  to  these
epistles.

9.  Once  in  darkness :  Eph.  4 :  18 ;  5  :  8 ;  Col.  1:13.

10.  Now  risen  with  Christ :  Eph.  2:6;  Col.  2:12;  3:1.
The  Greek  verb  is  confined  to  these  epistles.

11.  Made  alive  with  Christ:  Eph.  2:5;  Col.  2:  13.  The
Greek  verb  is  confined  to  these  epistles.

12.  Reconciled  through  the  death  of  Christ:  Eph.  2:13-
16;  Col.  1:20,  21.  The  Greek  verb  is  confined  to  these
epistles.

13.  Redeemed,  in  the  sense  of  pardon  of  sin,  in  Christ:
Eph.  1:7;  Col.  1:14.  The  exact  phrase  is  peculiar  to  these
epistles.

14.  In  the  light :  Eph.  5  : 8,  9 ;  Col.  1:12.

15.  Rooted  in  Christ:  Eph.  3:  17;  Col.  2:  7.  The  Greek
verb  is  confined  to  these  epistles.

16.  Built  up  as  a  structure :  Eph.  2 :  20 ;  Col.  2 :  7.

17.  On  a  foundation :  Eph.  3:17;  Col.  i :  2^.

18.  Spiritually  filled :  Eph.  i :  23 ;  3 :  19 ;  5  :  18 ;  Col.  1:9;
2: 10.

19.  The  fulness :  Eph.  i :  23 ;  3  :  19 ;  Col.  i :  19 ;  2 :  9.

20.  The  old  man  and  the  new  man :  Eph.  4 :  22-24 ;  Col.
3:9>io.

21.  Similar  classes  of  sins  reproved:  Eph.  4:2,  3;  Col.
3: 12-14;  Eph.  4 :  25 ;  5 :  5 ;  Col.  3 :  5-8.


72       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

22.  The  wrath  of  God  coming :  Eph.  5:6;  Col.  3  :  6.

23.  The  duties  of  home  enforced,  in  the  same  order  and
similar  words :   Eph.  5 :  22 — 6 : 9 ;  Col.  3 :  18 — ^4 :  i.

24.  The  walk  of  sin :  Eph.  2 :  2 ;  4 :  17 ;  Col.  3 :  7.

25.  The  walk  of  holiness  :  Eph.  2 :  10 ;  4 :  i ;  5  :  2 ;  5  :  15 ;
Col.  1 :  10;  2:6;  4:  5.

26.  Redemption  of  opportunity:  Eph.  5:16;  Col.  4:5.
The  phrase  is  peculiar  to  these  epistles.

2^.  Prayer  and  intercession :  Eph.  6:18;  Col.  4 :  2.

28.  The  mystery  revealed :  Eph.  1:9;  3:3,  4,  9 ;  6:19;
Col.  1 :  26,  27 ;  2 :  2 ;  4 :  5.

29.  Riches :  Eph.  i :  7,  18 ;  2 :  7 ;  3 :  8,  16 ;  Col.  i :  27 ;  2 :  2.

30.  Ages  and  generations  :  Eph.  3  :  21 ;  Col.  i :  26.
"Generation"  occurs  in  Paul  only  in  these  epistles  and  the
Philippians.

31.  The  word  of  truth:  Eph.  1 :  13;  Col.  i :  5.

32.  Character  and  commission  of  Tychicus:  Eph.  6:21;
Col.  4:  7.

The  reader  will  note  the  great  characteristics  of  this
Letter  to  the  Ephesians :

1.  It  is  a  letter  of  great  prayers.  There  are  two  prayers
in  this  letter  that  beat  the  world  on  prayer.  One  of  them
staggers  qredulity  itself.  When  we  come  to  expound  the
letter  both  of  these  great  prayers  will  be  analyzed.  I  ven-
ture to  say  that  most  people  never  in  their  lives  prayed  for
some  of  the  things  which  Paul  prayed  for  here.

2.  Then  it  is  a  letter  of  salvation  by  grace.  It  certainly
presents  the  doctrine  that  salvation  is  by  grace,  from  its
incipiency  in  the  Divine  purpose  to  its  consummation  in
glory.

3.  It  is  a  letter  of  great  unities.  Nowhere  else  do  we  find
such  complete  unities.  For  instance,  Jew  and  Gentile  are
made  one — one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  one  Holy
Spirit,  all  members  of  the  church  one,  consisting  of  one
body.


INTRODUCTION  TO  EPHESIANS  73

4.  In  the  next  place  it  is  a  letter  concerning  the  multiform
views  of  the  word  "church,"  such  as  we  find  nowhere  else.

5.  Finally,  it  is  a  letter  of  great  love.  We  find  when  we
come  to  Revelation  that  Jesus  has  just  one  thing  against  the
church  at  Ephesus,  and  that  is,  that  it  had  left  its  first  love.
We  find  in  I  Cor.  13  a  marvelous  apostrophe  on  the  power  of
love,  but  that  only  presents  love  in  one  of  its  aspects.  This
Letter  to  the  Ephesians  presents  it  in  many  forms.

We  now  come  to  the  analysis.  We  need  a  plan,  or  scheme
of  study,  so  here  I  give  the  following  analysis :

1.  The  greeting,  i :  1,2.

2.  The  sublime  ascription  of  praise,  i :  3-14.

3.  The  thanksgiving,  1:15.

4.  The  first  great  prayer,  i :  16-21.

5.  Christ's  exaltation  and  its  purpose  toward  the  church,
1 : 2.:i,  23.

6.  Salvation  by  grace,  2 :  i-io.

7.  The  breaking  down  of  the  wall  of  partition  between
Jew  and  Gentile,  and  their  union  in  one  church  as  an  insti-
tution, which  finds  expression  in  each  particular  church,
2:  11-22.

8.  The  relation  of  Paul  to  this  great  mystery,  3 :  1-13.

9.  His  second  great  prayer,  3  :  14-21.

10.  The  great  unities,  and  the  instruments  for  securing
them,  4:  1-16.

11.  Consequent  Exhortation:  (i)  To  a  life  of  holiness  in
a  wicked  world,  4 :  17-21.  (2)  To  a  life  of  hohness  in  family
relations,  5  :  22 — 6 :  9.

12.  Christ  as  the  bride,  illustration,  5  :  25-32.

13.  The  Christian  armor,  6:  10-20.

14.  Tychicus,  the  messenger,  6:  21,  22.

15.  The  benediction,  6 :  23.

Attention  needs  to  be  recalled  to  the  development  of
thought  in  these  letters  written  during  the  final  imprison-
ment at  Rome — that  they  concern  the  person  and  office  of


74       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Christ.  In  Philipplans  on  the  person  and  office  of  Christ  we
have  presented  His  great  humihation  in  laying  aside  the
form  of  God  and  taking  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  slave
and  becoming  obedient  unto  the  sacrificial  death  on  the
cross,  then  His  transcendent  exaltation  to  be  King  of  kings
and  Lord  of  lords.  This  is  the  thought  in  Philippians.
When  we  come  to  Colossians  we  have  the  person  of  Christ
in  His  relation  to  the  Father,  in  His  relation  to  the  universe,
and  in  His  relation  to  the  church.  When  we  come  to  Ephe-
sians  we  have  the  relation  of  Christ  to  the  universe  not
much  stressed,  and  His  relation  to  the  church,  with  emphasis
on  the  church.  In  other  words,  Ephesians  is  a  letter  more
concerning  the  church  than  concerning  the  person  of  Christ.
Colossians  is  more  concerning  the  person  of  Christ  than
concerning  the  church.  And  Philippians  is  altogether  con-
cerning the  person  of  Christ.  Thus  Philippians,  the  person
of  Christ  alone;  Colossians  the  person  of  Christ  mainly,
church  partly ;  Ephesians,  person  of  Christ  somewhat,  church
mainly.    That  is  the  development  in  these  letters.

Whoever  can  expound  the  references  to  the  church  in
the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians  is  a  past  master  on  the  New
Testament  usages  of  the  word,  and  nobody  is  a  master  or
expert  on  the  New  Testament  usage  of  the  word,  "church,"
who  cannot  find  in  Ephesians  all  three  great  senses  of  the
word,  "church,"  that  is,  the  church  in  glory  conceived  in
the  mind  of  God  as  a  unit,  all  the  elect;  the  church  as  an
institution,  and  the  church  as  a  particular  congregation.
Every  one  of  these  will  be  seen  when  we  come  to  expound
the  letter.


INTRODUCTION  TO  EPHESIANS  75


QUESTIONS

1.  Where  do  you  find  the  history  of  Paul's  connection  with  the
church  at  Ephesus  prior  to  this  letter,  and  where  his  subsequent
connection  ?

2.  What  the  slight  connection  between  Peter  and  Jude  with  the
Christians  of  proconsular  Asia?

3.  What  John's  connection  ?

4.  What  matter  is  usually  given  in  an  introductory  chapter  to  a
letter  written  to  a  particular  place,  and  why  omitted  here?

5.  What  expressions  in  the  letter  itself  make  it  impossible  that
this  letter  is  especially  for  the  Ephesians  ?

6.  What  authorities  omit  "At  Ephesus"  in  verse  i,  and  what
retain  it,  and  how  do  you  account  for  this  discrepancy?

7.  What  the  letter  to  which  Paul  refers  in  Col.  4 :  16,  and  what
references  in  Ephesians  confirm  it?

8.  Give  the  parallels  between  Colossians  and  Ephesians,  and
state  what  they  prove.

9.  What  the  great  characteristics  of  this  letter?

10.  Give  the  author's  analysis.

11.  Trace  the  development  of  thought  in  Philippians,  Colossians,
Ephesians  and  Hebrews  on  the  person  of  Christ  and  His  relations,
and  show  the  change  in  emphasis  as  the  development  proceeds.

12.  What  the  position  of  one  who  can  give  the  several  senses  of
the  word,  "church,"  in  this  letter  ?

13.  Collocate  the  references  to  each  and  expound  them.


VIII

ELECTION,  FOREORDINATION,  ADOPTION,
GRACE

Scripture:    1:1-14

IN  the  historical  introduction  attention  was  called  to  the
characteristics  of  this  letter.  Let  us  recall  these  charac-
teristics. It  is  a  letter  of  exuberant  joy.  There  is  not  a
pessimistic  note  or  tone  in  it.  The  circumstances  of  Paul's
own  imprisonment  cast  no  shadow  over  its  glowing  pages.
It  treats  of  salvation  by  grace.

Salvation,  from  its  incipiency  in  the  divine  purpose  before
the  world  was  created,  to  its  consummation  in  glory,  is  all  of
grace.

The  divine  sovereignty  is  exalted  throughout,  and  the
divine  love  is  the  fountain-medium  and  application  of  sal-
vation. This  brings  out  in  a  marked  degree  the  Holy
Trinity — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit — distinguishing  with
great  clearness  the  peculiar  office  of  each  in  the  salvation
of  men.  The  Father  is  the  source,  the  Son  is  the  medium,
and  the  Holy  Spirit  applies.  All  the  divine  attributes  are
magnified — infinite  holiness,  love,  wisdom,  omniscience,
omnipotence,  and  omnipresence.

The  salvation  is  according  to  a  well-ordered  plan,  and
worked  out  without  accident  or  confusion  to  a  glorious  end.
What  love  desired,  that  wisdom  planned,  intelligence  chose,
will  decreed,  and  Providence  worked  out,  making  contribu-
tory thereto  the  whole  universe  with  all  its  material  laws
and  spiritual  intelligences.  No  detail  is  left  to  chance;  all
means  are  included,  whether  friendly  or  hostile.    Each  link

76


SALVATION  CORNERSTONES  77

of  the  chain  is  forged  by  infinite  wisdom  and  power,  and  the
whole  chain,  infallibly  strong  in  all  its  parts,  extends  from
eternity  to  eternity.

What  of  this  plan  was  mystery  to  the  finite  mind  in  Old
Testament  days  is  made  manifest  in  the  revelation  of  Christ.
God's  apparent  partiality  toward  a  particular  nation  is  now
disclosed  to  be  an  equal  love  for  all  nations.  Jew  and  Gen-
tile are  made  one,  and  aliens  and  strangers  become  fellow-
citizens  in  the  commonwealth  of  Him  who  is  no  respecter  of
persons.  Christian  character  and  service,  as  fruits  of  ante-
cedent grace,  magnify  Him  whose  holiness  is  repugnant  to
sin  and  idleness.  The  whole  letter  is  designed,  not  only  to
glorify  the  sovereignty  of  God,  but  to  promote  purity  of
heart  and  life.

We  take  up  the  exposition,  following  the  order  of  the
analysis  given  in  the  last  chapter.  The  first  item  of  the
analysis  is  the  greeting,  verses  1,2.  In  most  of  his  greetings
Paul  first  announces  his  authority,  "an  apostle,"  and,  second,
that  he  is  such  by  the  will  of  God.  Those  addressed  are  called
"saints"  with  reference  to  their  profession  rather  than  char-
acter, and  "believers"  or  "faithful"  with  reference  to  their
subjective  state.  He  invokes  on  them,  as  upon  all  to  whom
he  writes,  grace  and  peace.

We  come  now  to  the  ascription  of  blessedness  to  God
because  He  blessed  us.  This  item  extends  from  verse  3  to
verse  14.  Let  the  reader  note  the  use  of  the  past  tense  (the
Greek  aorist)  and  not  the  perfect  tense.  It  is  hardly  proper
in  this  connection  to  say  "who  hath  blessed  us."  It  means
"who  blessed  us,"  referring  to  a  time  long  past.  That  tense
goes  all  the  way  through.  We  will  be  able  to  see  the  force  of
this  presently.

Let  us  notice,  in  the  second  place,  the  distinction  in  mean-
ing when  we  bless  God  and  when  He  blesses  us.  When  we
bless  God  we  ascribe  blessedness  to  Him  ;  when  He  blesses  us
He  confers  blessings.     In  the   Old  Testament  the  term


78       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

"blessed"  is  applied  quite  often  to  men.  In  the  New  Testa-
ment the  term  is  used,  I  think,  about  eight  times,  and  always
refers  to  God.

Now  let  us  analyze  a  sentence  twelve  verses  long,  extend-
*|\  ing  from  verse  3  to  verse  14,  inclusive.  I  have  yet  to  find  a
man  who  has  thoroughly  followed  that  sentence  clear  through
and  kept  up  the  connection.  The  grammatical  construction
is  exceedingly  difficult,  making  a  clear  analysis  very  hard,
because  the  apostle,  like  a  Titan,  piles  mountains  upon  top  of
mountains  in  his  thoughts.  He  is  very  economic  in  his  use
of  periods.  No  matter  how  difficult,  let  us  try  to  analyze  it,
particularly  that  "blessed  us,"  which  in  verse  3  is  in  the  past
tense.  We  want  to  analyze  it  as  follows :  Place  where  He
blessed  us?  He  blessed  us  in  heavenly  places.  Time  when
He  blessed  us  ?  Before  the  world  was.  In  whonj  He  blessed
us  ?  In  Christ — we  were  not  there  personally.  In  what  He
blessed  us?  In  all  spiritual  blessings  ;  temporal  blessings  are
not  taken  into  account  at  all.  How  did  God  bless  us  then  and.
there,  that  is,  in  Heaven  before  the  world  was  ?  In  election,
foreordination  and  grace.  That  is  how  He  blessed  us  before
we  existed ;  in  His  purpose  of  election,  in  His  foreordination,
and  in  His  grace.  We  notice  how  frequently  he  brings  in
both  foreordination  and  election,  and  therefore  as  He  blessed
us  in  election  and  foreordination  we  want  to  see  what  those
words  mean.

I  take  up  the  first  one— ^election.  What  is  it?  Abstractly
it  means. choice.  Concretely  there  may  be  an  election  of  a
nation,  like  Israel,  for  a  national  or  typical  purpose,  but  that
is  not  what  he  is  discussing  here.  He  is  discussing  the  elec-
tion of  individuals,  or  persons.  When  did  this  election  take
place?  Before  the  world  was.  As  it  took  place  then,  and  as
we  were  not  existing  then,  in  whom  did  it  take  place  ?  We
were  elected  in  Christ.  To  what  end  were  we  elected  ?  That
we  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish  in  love,  That  is  what
the  text  says  about  the  election.


SALVATION  CORNERSTONES  79

The  other  term  used  is  *'foreordination."  First,  what  is
it?  It  is  a  decree  beforehand.  To  ordain  is  to  decree,  and
/preordination  is  a  decree  beforehand.  Who  were  ordained?
The  individuals  that  were  chosen.  Unto  what  were  they  or-
dainer?  Unto  adoption  as  sons.  Through  whom  were  they
adopted  as  sons  ?  Through  Christ.  According  to  what  was
this  foreordination  of  the  adoption  as  sons  through  Christ?
According  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will.  It  could  not  be
according  to  anything  in  us ;  it  was  anterior  to  our  being.  JTo
^Mt  end  was  that  foreordination  ?  To  the  praise  of  the  glory
of  His  grace.

Let  us  now  see  how  far  we  have  advanced.  He  blessed
us — where?  In  heaven.  When?  Before  the  world  was.
In  whom?  In  Christ.  In  what?  All  spiritual  blessings.
How  could  He  do  that  then  and  there?  In  election,  fore-
ordination and  grace.  What  is  election?  Choice  toward
individuals.  When  was  this  choice  made?  Before  the  world
was.  As  we  were  not  there  then,  in  whom  was  it  made  ?  In
Christ.  To  what  end  ?  That  we  should  be  holy  and  without
blemish  in  love.  He  blessed  us  at  that  time  in  foreordina-
tion. What  does  that  mean?  To  decree  beforehand.  Con-
cerning whom  ?  The  particular  individuals  that  were  elected.
Unto  what?  Unto  adoption  as  sons.  Through  whom?
Through  Jesus  Christ.  According  to  what?  According  to
the  good  pleasure  of  His  will.  To  what  end?  To  the  praise
of  the  glory  of  His  grace.

That  brings  in  another  term — -^race — in  which  He  then
blessed  us.  What  is  grace  ?  Unmerited  favor.  How  is  that
bestowed?  Freely,  gratuitously.  I  once  heard  a  man  say,
"free  gratis,  for  nothing,  without  charge."  That  is  the  way
it  is  bestowed.  As  we  were  not  there,  in  whom  was  it
bestowed  ?  In  Christ,  the  Beloved.  The  blessings  that  I  am
to  receive  as  a  Christian  were  not  bestowed  upon  me,  the
hateful,  but  in  Christ,  the  Beloved.  I  will  get  to  them  by  get-
ting into  Him,  and  be  complete  in  Him.


80       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

So  far  we  have  analyzed  that  sentence  up  to  the  specifica-
tions of  the  blessings.  The  first  specification  is  adoption.
What  is  adoption?  Adoption  is  a  form  of  law  by  which  one
not  naturally  a  child  is  legally  made  a  child  and  heir.  Just
as  if  a  father  should  go  to  the  Orphans'  Home  and  select  a
little  orphan,  with  nothing  in  it  to  recommend  it,  take  that
child  according  to  the  forms  of  law  and  receive  it  into  his
family,  so  that  under  the  law  it  will  inherit  just  as  much  as
if  it  were  born  in  that  family.    That  is  adoption.

When  does  adoption  take  place  ?  It  is  not  like  election  and
foreordination.  We  were  foreordained  to  adoption;  when
the  time  comes  we  get  it.  We  are  all  children  of  God  by
faith,  but  as  John  expresses  it,  "As  many  as  received  Him,
to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  sons  of  God,  even  as  many
as  believed  on  Him."  So  our  adoption  takes  place  at  the  time
when  we  believe,  and  when  we  receive  Christ  as  our  Savior.
Foreordination  took  place  way  back  yonder  in  eternity,  but
the  fruitage,  the  adoption,  takes  place  in  time.  How  is  this
adoption  signified  to  us?  How  am  I  to  tell  when  I  am
adopted  ?  Whenever  in  the  heart  of  a  believer  there  comes  a
filial  feeling  toward  God,  "He  hath  sent  forth  the  spirit  of
adoption  whereby  we  cry  Abba,  Father."

I  remember  distinctly  when  that  filial  feeling  came  into
my  own  heart.  Before  I  was  converted  I  thought  of  God
as  distant,  dreadful,  unapproachable,  and  did  not  like  to
think  about  Him.  But  when  I  believed  on  Jesus  Christ  and
the  spirit  of  adoption  came  into  my  heart,  I  could  not  say
often  enough,  "Father!  Father!  Father!"  I  would  wake
in  the  night  and  say  it.

In  heaven,  before  the  creation  of  the  world,  He  blessed  us
in  all  spiritual  blessings,  but  He  blessed  us  then  in  election,
foreordination  and  grace.  Later  the  election,  foreordination
and  grace  fruited  in  adoption.  He  elected  us,  foreordained
us  unto  adoption  as  sons  through  Christ  unto  himself,  accord-
ing to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will.


SALVATION  CORNERSTONES  81

Let  us  take  the  next  blessing  that  is  specified.  "In  whom
we  have  our  redemption."  What  is  redemption  ?  To  redeem
means  to  buy  back  that  which  had  been  sold.  We  were  sold
under  sin,  we  were  in  bondage,  under  the  power  of  Satan,  a
lawful  captive  to  Satan.  Christ  proposes,  as  one  of  the  bless-
ings of  salvation,  to  buy  us  back,  to  redeem  us.  So  redemp-
tion is  buying  back.  What  is  the  price?  His  blood  on  the
cross.  We  notice  over  in  Peter,  he  says :  "You  were  pur-
chased, not  with  corruptible  things  like  silver  and  gold,  but
with  the  blood  of  Christ."  Redemption  and  adoption  are
both  legal  terms.  They  relate  to  the  external  aspects  of  sal-
vation, while  regeneration  and  sanctification  relate  to  the
internal  aspects.

The  next  blessing  is  forgiveness  of  our  sins.  This  stands
in  apposition  with  redemption — redemption,  which  is  the  for-
giveness of  sins :  "Our  redemption,  even  the  forgiveness  of
our  sins."  That  idea  of  redemption  is  peculiar  to  these  prison
letters.  In  Colossians  the  word,  "redemption,"  is  so  inter-
preted, but  let  us  get  the  distinction  between  redemption  and
forgiveness.  Redemption,  or  buying  back,  implies  that  we
were  sold  under  sin  and  had  to  be  bought  back.  Redemp-
tion consists  in  loosing  the  bond  of  sin,  it  consists  in  remission
or  forgiveness  of  sin.  Forgiveness  of  sin,  throughout  the
Bible,  particularly  throughout  the  New  Testament,  is  a  great
covenant  blessing.  See  how  it  is  referred  to  in  Hebrews  as
one  of  the  three  great  blessings  of  the  new  covenant
(8:9-13)  towit:

1.  "I  will  write  my  law  in  their  minds" — not  on  tablets
of  stone.

2.  "All  shall  know  me  experimentally."

3.  "I  will  be  merciful  to  their  unrighteousness,  and  their
sins  and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  In  the
sacrifices  of  the  Old  Testament  the  sins  were  simply  passed
over  until  the  true  expiation  came.    So  that  we  may  count


82       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

the  actual  expiation  of  sins  as  a  great  blessing  of  the  new
covenant.

Just  here  arises  a  question  which  has  confused  many.  If
sins  under  the  old  covenant  were  merely  passed  over  until
the  Antitype  of  the  sacrifices  came,  were  men  really  pardoned
before  Christ  died?  The  difficulty  lies  in  confounding  two
quite  distinct  things — expiation  Godward  and  forgiveness
manward.  No  sin  was  expiated  Godward  till  Christ  died,
but  sins  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  were  forgiven
manward  whenever  the  sinner's  faith  looked  beyond  the
typical  sacrifice  to  the  antitypical.  The  Son's  pledge  to  ex-
piate in  the  fulness  of  time  was  accepted  by  the  Father  as  if
performed,  and  the  transgression  of  the  offender  who  be-
lieved was  reckoned  to  Christ  and  not  imputed  to  the  trans-
gressor. The  moment  a  creditor's  debt  is  charged  to  the
surety,  the  debtor  is  released.

At  this  point  also  we  need  to  clear  up  another  matter.  If  I
am  justified,  declared  innocent,  when  I  believe  on  Jesus
Christ,  how  can  there  be  any  forgiveness  of  sin  ?  I  have  been
tried  and  acquitted,  and  after  I  have  been  acquitted  why  say,
*T  will  forgive  thee?"  I  will  explain.  A  owes  $10,000  and
B  is  surety.  A  becomes  bankrupt,  is  unable  to  pay,  and  the
security  pays  it.  B  having  paid  it,  if  the  creditor  were  to
bring  suit  against  A  for  it,  he  would  stand  acquitted  before
the  law,  because  he  holds  the  receipt  that  B  has  paid  it.
While  he  is  declared  free,  so  far  as  the  original  creditor  is
concerned,  he  still  owes  B,  his  surety,  and  B  may  remit  the
debt.  So  when  Christ  paid  our  debts  we  were  acquitted
before  the  law,  but  were  left  under  obligation  to  the  surety.
Now  the  surety,  having  saved  us  from  the  law,  can  say  to
us,  *T  will  freely  forgive  you  what  I  have  paid  for  you  on
certain  conditions."

We  are  now  ready  to  go  back  and  take  up  those  blessings
— adoption,  redemption,  forgiveness  of  sin.  These  are  the
specifications  of  the  blessings  in  Christ.    They  have  all  been


SALVATION  CORNERSTONES  83

explained.  According  to  what  are  all  these?  Our  text  tells
us  that  they  are  "according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace."  How
are  these  riches  of  His  grace  made  to  abound  in  us?  By-
revelation  of  the  mystery  of  His  will.  Suppose  we  are  in  sin ;
we  do  not  know  a  thing  about  what  took  place  way  back
yonder  before  the  world  was.  We  do  not  know  that  way
back  yonder  we  were  elected  and  foreordained  and  have  a
portion  in  Christ.  Our  text  says,  "According  to  the  riches
of  His  grace  which  He  made  to  abound  toward  us  in  all  wis-
dom and  prudence,  making  known  to  us  the  mystery  of  His
will."  When  was  this  mystery  fully  made  known?  In  the
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  time.

This  brings  us  to  another  point.  What  object  had  God  in
view  in  all  these  things  explained  so  far,  in  blessing  us  in
all  spiritual  blessings,  in  election,  foreordination  and  grace,
which  blessings  are  adoption,  redemption,  and  forgiveness  of
sin  ?  To  what  end  ?  Here  we  get  on  Colossian  ground :  "To
sum  up,  gather  together,  or  re-collect  all  things  in  Christ."
To  re-collect  means  that  there  has  been  a  dispersion.  That
dispersion  took  place  when  sin  came  into  the  world.  Not
only  was  man  lost,  but  the  world  in  which  he  lived  was
accursed.  Now  the  object  was  to  sum  up,  re-collect,  all
things  in  Christ.  In  Colossians  we  considered  the  person  of
Christ:  (i)  in  His  relation  to  the  Father;  (2)  in  His  rela-
tion to  the  universe;  (3)  in  His  relation  to  the  church.  All
things  in  heaven — that  includes  the  angels;  all  things  in
earth — that  includes  man.  He  gives  two  samples  or  speci-
fications of  this  gathering  together,  or  re-collection,  which
takes  place  here  on  the  earth  (verse  12)  :  i.  "IVe  who  had
before  hoped  in  Christ."  2.  (verse  13)  "In  whom  ye  also
having  heard  the  word  of  truth,  the  gospel  of  your  salva-
tion." "We"  and  "you"  that  have  been  dispersed  are  to  be
brought  together  in  Christ.  Who  is  the  "we  ?"  Those  who
hoped  in  Christ  before  the  gospel  times — the  Jews,  with  types
and  prophecies  to  guide  them.    Who  are  "ye  ?"    Those  who


84       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

heard  the  gospel.  It  is  the  purpose  of  all  the  election  and
predestination  and  foreordination  to  re-collect  all  things  and
to  sum  them  up  in  Christ.

Let  us  see  the  process  with  reference  to  "we."  (i)  It  is
said  "we  are  made  God's  heritage."  That  is  the  first  item.
(2)  "Having  been  foreordained."  (3)  "According  to  His
purpose."  (4)  To  what  end?  "That  we  should  be  unto  the
praise  of  His  glory."

Let  us  look  at  the  "you"  also.  "In  whom  ye  also  having
heard  the  word  of  truth,  the  gospel  of  your  salvation,  first
believed,  then  were  sealed  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise."
He  is  called  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise  because  He  was
promised.  "Behold  I  send  upon  you  the  promise  of  the
Father."  The  prophets  promised,  John  the  Baptist  promised,
Christ  promised.  What  is  the  seal  ?  Pedobaptists  tell  us  that
it  is  baptism.    This  is  error.

Baptism  is  never  called  a  seal.  We  were  sealed  with  the
Holy  Spirit.  We  were  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption.
The  object  of  the  seal  is  to  indicate  ownership  and  to  safe-
guard what  is  sealed  unto  its  destination.

We  take  a  package  down  to  the  express  office  addressed
to  A.  B.  C,  Los  Angeles,  California.  The  package  is  sealed ;
on  the  seal  is  the  signet  of  the  express  company.  If  the
company  is  strong  enough  to  guarantee  the  sanctity  of  the
seal,  it  will  remain  sealed  until  it  gets  to  its  destination.  When
we  believe,  something  takes  place  that  is  called  sealing,  and
whatever  it  is,  it  is  done  by  the  Holy  Spirit  and  not  by  bap-
tizing. In  the  Letter  to  Timothy  we  find  an  account  of  the
signet  pressed  on  the  seal.  That  signet  had  two  inscriptions,
one  on  each  side.  On  one  side  this:  "The  Lord  knoweth
them  that  are  His."  We  may  not  know ;  we  may  make  a
mistake  about  it.  The  devil  may  make  a  mistake  about  it,
but  the  Lord  knows.  On  the  other  side:  "Let  Him  that
taketh  the  name  of  the  Lord  depart  from  iniquity."    The


SALVATION  CORNERSTONES  85

seal  of  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  distinct  impressions  that  God
will  always  recognize.

The  lumber  camps  furnish  an  illustration.  Many  parties
cut  down  the  pine  trees  and  roll  the  logs  into  the  river.  In
the  succeeding  freshet  they  all  come  down  to  the  boom  to-
gether. How  do  they  determine  separate  ownership  ?  Each
log  has  its  distinguishing  mark.  So  the  mark  or  seal  of  the
Spirit  given  unto  us  declares  God's  ownership  and  guar-
antees that  we  will  reach  our  destination — the  day  of  redemp-
tion.

This  seal  is  God's  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are
His.  Each  one  has  the  witness  in  himself.  "They  shall  all
know  me  from  the  least  unto  the  greatest."  It  is  a  matter
of  personal  experience  and  consciousness.  It  is  even  more,
for  the  next  thought  is,  "it  is  an  earnest  of  our  inheritance."
But^what  is  an  earnest?  The  grapes  of  Eshcol  brought  by
the  spies  illustrate.  The  Israelites  had  in  these  grapes  a
foretaste  of  the  promised  land.  It  was  a  sample  only,  but  it
prophesied  more  to  follow.  So  the  joy  that  comes  to  the  new
convert,  when  he  is  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  same  in
kind,  though  not  in  degree,  of  the  inheritance  laid  up  in
heaven  for  the  saints.  While  the  blessing  of  this  earnest  of
the  Spirit  is  fresh  in  our  hearts,  we  say,  "This  is  heaven  on
earth."

In  commercial  matters  an  earnest  is  a  part  of  the  purchase
money,  binding  the  contract,  and  guaranteeing  the  rest  of
the  paym.ent.  Whoever  accepts  the  earnest  is  bound  to  abide
by  the  full  terms  of  the  contract.  So  our  text  says  this
earnest  is  "unto  the  redemption  of  God's  own  possession."
The  seal  declares  His  title  to  us,  and  is  an  earnest  that  "He
who  commenced  a  good  work  in  you  will  perfect  it  unto  the
day  of  Jesus  Christ."  Not  only  does  it  assure  us  of  God's
personal  interest  in  His  property,  and  of  His  purpose  to  com-
plete what  He  has  begun,  thereby  making  it  God's  own  con-
cern and  interest  that  our, salvation  receive  its  consummation.


86       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

but  it  commits  God  to  the  redemption  of  the  cursed  earth,
man's  habitation.  See  the  thought  elaborated  in  Rom.
8 :  19-23  :  *'For  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  creation  waiteth
for  the  reveaHng  of  the  sons  of  God.  For  the  creation  was
subjected  to  vanity,  not  of  its  own  will,  but  by  reason  of  Him
who  subjected  it,  in  hope  that  the  creation  itself  also  shall
be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  liberty
of  the  glory  of  the  children  of  God.  For  we  know  that  the
whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until
now.  And  not  only  so,  but  ourselves  also,  who  have  the
first  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves  groan  within
ourselves,  waiting  for  our  adoption,  towit,  the  redemption
of  our  body."

QUESTIONS

1.  In  the  plan  of  salvation  set  forth  in  this  letter,  how  is  the
distinguishing  office  work  of  the  persons  in  the  Trinity  brought  out?

2.  In  the  working  out  of  the  salvation,  in  what  order  are  the
divine  attributes  exercised,  and  the  part  of  each?

3.  When  was  the  plan  a  mystery,  and  when  was  the  mystery
unveiled  by  revelation  ?

4.  In  addressing  the  letter  to  "saints,"  does  the  apostle  use  the
term  as  a  designation  of  actual  character  or  of  profession  and
consecration?

5.  Mark  the  terminals  of  Paul's  ascription  of  blessedness  to  God
because  He  blessed  us.

6.  What  the  tense  and  signification  of  the  verb  in  His  blessing  us?

7.  What  the  distinction  in  meaning  between  our  blessing  God  and
His  blessing  us?

8.  In  analyzing  this  long  compound  sentence,  1:3-14,  answer:
(i)  Where,  when,  in  whom,  and  in  what  did  He  bless  us?  (2)  De-
fine the  terms  election,  and  foreordination,  and  the  order  and  time
of  each.     (3)  When,  in  whom,  and  according  to  what  the  adoption?

(4)  What  is  grace,  how  bestowed,  in  whom,  and  how  do  we  get  it?

(5)  What  the  three  specifications  of  the  blessings  we  receive?     (6)
Define  and  explain  the  three.

9.  When  and  how  were  sins  expiated?

10.  Explain  how  sins  in  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  were  not
expiated  and  yet  were  forgiven.

11.  Explain  how  one  justified  is  afterward  forgiven.

12.  What  the  end,  or  purpose,  of  God  in  the  blessings,  as  in
election,  foreordination  and  grace?

13.  Distinguish  between  the  "we"  and  the  "ye"  m  1 :  13,  and
give  the  process  in  each.


SALVATION  CORNERSTONES  87

14.  Why  is  the  Holy  Spirit  called  the  "Spirit  of  promise"  and
cite  both  Old  Testament  and  New  Testament  instances  of  the
promise,  and  when  was  the  promise  fulfilled?

15.  Explain  the  "seal"  in  i :  13,  what  it  is,  when  and  by  whom
done,  and  the  purpose.

16.  Explain  "earnest"  in  i :  14.

17.  How  may  we  subjectively  know  or  be  assured  that  we  are
adopted  ?


IX

CHRIST'S  ATONEMENT  AND  PAUL'S  PRAYER
Scripture:  Eph.  i :  15-21

BEFORE  taking  up  this  part  of  the  exposition  I  will
answer  a  question  arising  from  the  discussion  in  the
previous  chapter,  viz. :  "Did  Christ  expiate  the  sins
of  all  men,  or  the  sins  of  the  elect  only,  and  does  not  uni-
versal expiation  demand  universal  salvation  ?"  This  question
belongs  to  the  department  of  systematic  theology.  Without
desire  to  intrude  into  that  department,  yet  as  Biblical  theology
cannot  be  altogether  separated  from  the  teaching  of  the
English  Bible,  I  submit  a  reply  for  the  benefit  of  those  who
may  never  study  systematic  theology.  It  is  every  way  a
difficult  question,  and  calls  out  in  its  answer  all  the  theories
of  the  atonement  advocated  in  the  Christian  ages.  In  gen-
eral terms  it  is  the  old  question — is  the  atonement  general
or  limited?  Perhaps  no  man  has  ever  given  a  precise
answer  satisfactory  to  his  own  mind  even,  and  it  is  certain
no  one  has  ever  satisfied  all  others.

It  must  be  sufficient  for  present  purposes  to  deal  with
the  question  briefly,  relegating  to  systematic  theology  the
critical  and  extended  reply  derived  from  a  comparison  of
all  the  prominent  theories  of  the  atonement  in  the  light  of
the  scriptures.  The  following  passages  of  scripture  doubt-
less suggest  the  question :  Heb.  2 :  9,  "Jesus  hath  been  made
a  little  lower  than  the  angels  *  *  *  that  by  the  grace  of
God  He  should  taste  death  for  every  man."  There  must  be
some  real  sense,  some  gracious  sense,  in  which  He  tasted
death  for  every  man.     I  Tim.  4:9,  10:    "Faithful  is  the

88


CHRIST'S  ATONEMENT  89

saying  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation.  For  to  this  end  we
labor  and  strive,  because  we  have  our  hope  set  on  the  living
God,  who  is  the  Savior  of  all  men,  specially  of  them  that
believe."  Here  again  it  is  evident  that  God  in  some  real
sense  is  the  Savior  of  all  men,  but  not  in  the  special  sense
in  which  He  is  the  Savior  of  believers.  A  more  pertinent
passage  is  I  John  2 : 2,  "And  he  [Jesus  Christ]  is  the  pro-
pitiation for  our  sins ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  hut  also  for
the  whole  world."

The  first  question  is  answered  here  if  anywhere.  The
question  is,  **Did  Christ  expiate  the  sins  of  all  men?"  And
this  passage  says,  "He  is  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of
the  whole  world."  Further  on  in  the  letter  (4 :  14)  John
says,  "And  we  have  beheld  and  bear  witness  that  the  Father
hath  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Savior  of  the  world,"  this  lan-
guage doubtless  referring  back  to  John  i :  29,  "On  the  mor-
row he  [John  the  Baptist]  seeth  Jesus  coming  unto  him,
and  sayeth,  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the
sin  of  the  world!"  Here  "Lamb  of  God,"  the  vicarious
sacrifice,  and  "taketh  away  the  sin,"  must  refer  to  the  expia-
tion in  some  real  sense.  Moreover,  it  accords  with  "God  so
loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that
whosoever  believeth  on  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have
eternal  life,"  and  quadrates  particularly  with  the  sincerity
of  the  great  commission  in  Matt.  28:  19  and  Mark  16:  16,
and  the  intense  earnestness  with  which  the  apostles  pressed
home  upon  every  heart  the  duty  and  privilege  of  all  men
to  accept  the  salvation  offered.

The  case  of  Paul  is  much  in  point,  because  of  the  use  of
the  very  word  in  question,  H  Cor.  5 :  18-20,  "But  all  things
are  of  God,  who  reconciled  us  to  himself  through  Christ,
and  gave  unto  us  the  ministry  of  reconciliation;  towit,  that
God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  nnto  himself,  not
reckoning  unto  them  their  trespasses,  and  having  committed
unto  us  the  word  of  reconciliation.     We  are  ambassadors


90       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

therefore  on  behalf  of  Christ,  as  though  God  were  entreating
by  us :  we  beseech  you  on  behalf  of  Christ,  be  ye  reconciled
to  God."  This  particular  passage  is  the  more  pertinent
and  important  since  it  discriminates  so  clearly  between  the
two  reconciliations,  towit:  (i)  God  was  reconciled  to  us
through  the  expiation  of  Christ,  satisfying  the  claims  of
justice  and  placating  the  wrath  of  the  law  on  account  of  sin.
(2)  Our  reconciliation  to  God  through  acceptance  of  Christ
tendered  in  the  ministry  of  the  Word.

Here  it  is  evident  that  expiation  becomes  effective  to  us
through  faith  in  Christ.  And  it  is  perfectly  clear  from  many
scriptures  that  no  matter  in  what  sense  expiation  was  effec-
tive toward  God  for  all  men,  it  cannot  result  in  universal
salvation,  since  "he  that  believeth  not,  shall  be  damned."
The  second  question  is  answered,  towit:  No  matter  in
what  sense  expiation  was  for  all  men  Godward,  it  can  avail
to  us  ward  by  faith  alone.  The  question  of  universal  sal-
vation is  not  therefore  bound  up  with  reconciliation  God-
ward,  whatever  its  extent,  but  with  the  ministry  of  recon-
ciliation and  our  acceptance  or  rejection  of  the  tendered
mercy.  Speculate,  theorize,  philosophize  as  we  may  on  the
extent  of  the  atonement  Godward,  we  are  shut  up  peremp-
torily by  the  scriptures  to  the  conclusion  that  "he  that  believ-
eth not,  shall  be  damned."

It  is  the  opinion  of  the  author  that  universal  or  limitedi
salvation  is  not  connected  with  the  atonement  Godward,
but  with  the  ministry  of  reconciliation.  In  other  words,
the  question  is  not,  ''Unto  how  many  was  God  reconciled
through  Christ?"  hut,  "How  many  of  us  are  reconciled  to
God  through  faith  in  Christ f"

It  seems  to  the  author  that  the  crux  of  the  whole  matter
lies  in  three  thoughts:  (i)  That  in  the  final  judgment  the
supreme  test  for  men  and  angels  is  the  question,  "What
was  your  attitude  toward  Christ,  either  in  himself,  His
people,  or  His  cause?"     See  particularly  Matt.  25:31-46,


CHRIST'S  ATONEMENT  91

where  this  principle  is  appHed  to  all  men.  And  see  I  Cor.
6 : 3,  where  the  test  is  implied  toward  angels,  else  saints
could  not  judge  them.  Again,  this  decisive  principle  of  the
final  judgment  is  expressly  taught  in  Matt.  12:41,  42  in
the  reference  to  the  men  of  Nineveh  and  the  Queen  of
Sheba,  and  yet  again  in  our  Lord's  denunciation  of  the  Gali-
lean cities,  Matt.  11:21-24.  (2)  The  second  thought  lies
in  our  Lord's  teaching  that  only  one  sin  is  an  eternal  sin,
having  never  forgiveness  in  either  world,  Mark  3 :  28-30 ;
Matt.  12:31,  32,  showing  that  condemnation  comes  from
action  in  the  Spirit's  realm  of  application.  See  the  culmi-
nation of  unpardonable  sin  in  "doing  despite  to  the  Spirit
of  grace"  in  Heb.  10 :  26-29.  (3)  The  effect  of  the  death  on
the  cross  conferred  on  the  Messiah,  i.  e.,  not  the  Son  of
God  in  eternity,  but  the  Son  of  God  by  procreation,  born
of  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  sovereignty  of  the  universe.  See
Phil.  2:5-11.

I  hold  James  P.  Boyce  to  be  the  greatest  all-around  Bap-
tist ever  produced  by  the  South.  While  in  his  "Systematic
Theology"  he  teaches  that  expiation  of  the  sins  of  all  men
must  mean  universal  salvation,  yet  before  he  closes  his  dis-
cussion he  uses  these  remarkable  words,  which  I  cite :

(i)  "While  for  the  elect  He  made  an  actual  atonement,
by  which  they  are  actually  reconciled  to  God,  and  because
of  which  are  made  the  subjects  of  the  special  divine  grace
by  which  they  became  believers  in  Christ,  and  are  justified
through  Him,"  (2)  "Christ  at  the  same  time  and  in  the
same  work,  wrought  out  a  means  of  reconciliation  for  all
men,  which  removed  every  legal  obstacle  to  their  salvation,
upon  their  acceptance  of  the  same  conditions  upon  which
the  salvation  is  given  to  the  elect."  "Abstract  of  Theology,"
revised  by  F.  H.  Kerfoot,  page  296.  (3)  On  page  297  he
says,  "The  atoning  work  of  Christ  was  not  sufficient  for  the
salvation  of  man.  That  work  was  only  Godward,  and  only
removed  all  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  God's  pardon  of


92       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

the  sinner.  But  the  sinner  is  also  at  enmity  with  God,  and
must  be  brought  to  accept  salvation,  and  must  learn  to  love
and  serve  God.  It  is  the  special  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit
to  bring  this  about.  The  first  step  here  is  to  make  known
to  man  the  gospel,  which  contains  the  glad  tidings  of  salva-
tion under  such  influences  as  ought  to  lead  to  its  acceptance."
For  the  purpose  of  comment  I  mark  these  paragraphs
(i),  (2)  and  (3).  It  seems  difficult  to  reconcile  (i)  with
(3)  but  (2)  and  (3)  are  in  perfect  harmony.  In  (i)  he
says  that  "for  the  elect  He  made  actual  atonement"  *  *  *
"they  were  actually  reconciled  to  God."  But  in  (3)  he
says  that  the  atoning  work  was  not  sufficient  for  the  salva-
tion of  man,  that  work  was  only  Godward,  and  only  removed
all  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  God's  pardon  for  the  sinner."
This  language  applies  of  course  to  the  elect.  But  in  (2)  he
says,  ''Christ  wrought  out  a  means  of  reconciliation  for  all
men  which  removed  every  legal  obstacle  to  their  salvation**
Then  for  the  elect  the  atonement  "was  not  sufficient  for  the
salvation  of  man"  and  "only  removed  all  the  obstacles  in  the
way  of  God's  pardon  for  the  sinner,"  and  if  for  the  non-
elect  the  atonement  "wrought  out  a  means  of  reconciliation,"
"removing  every  legal  obstacle  to  their  salvation,"  what  is
the  difference  Godward?  What  is  the  difference  so  far  as
Christ's  work  is  concerned?  Does  not  the  difference  come
in  the  Spirit's  work  in  connection  with  the  application  of
the  atonement  and  the  ministry  of  reconciliation?  Do  elec-
tion and  foreordination  become  operative  toward  atonement
or  toward  acceptance  of  the  atonement?  These  questions
are  submitted  for  consideration  in  the  realm  of  the  study
of  systematic  theology.  The  author  does  not  dogmatize  on
them.  While  he  has  only  a  very  moderate  respect  for  phi-
losophy in  any  of  its  departments  as  taught  in  the  schools,
and  prefers  rather  to  accept  every  word  of  God  without
speculation,  and  believes  it  true  and  harmonious  in  all  its
parts,  whether  or  not  he  is  able  to  philosophically  explain


CHRIST'S  ATONEMENT  93

it,  yet  he  submits  merely  for  consideration  along  with  other
human  philosophizing  on  the  atonement  the  philosophy  of
Dr.  Wm.  C.  Buck  on  this  matter.  It  is  found  in  his  book,
"The  Philosophy  of  Religion."  On  the  question  of  general
or  limited  atonement  he  takes  this  position,  as  I  recall  it:
Jesus  Christ  through  His  death  re-purchased  or  bought
back  the  whole  lost  human  race,  including  the  earth,  man's
habitat.  The  whole  of  it  and  all  its  peoples  passed  thereby
under  His  sovereignty.  What  debt  they  once  owed  to  the
law  they  now  owe  to  Him,  the  surety  who  paid  the  debt.
From  His  mediatorial  throne  He  offers  to  forgive  this  debt
now  due  Him  to  all  who  will  accept  Him.  But  all  alike
reject  Him.  The  Father,  through  the  Spirit,  graciously
inclines  some  to  accept  Him.  Thus  those  really  saved  are
saved  according  to  the  election  and  foreordination  of  God,
not  operative  in  the  atonement  which  was  general,  but  in
the  Spirit's  application  which  was  special.  Those  thus  saved
were  originally  promised  by  the  Father  to  the  Son.  He
dies  for  the  whole  world  as  the  expression  of  the  Father's
universal  love.  He  died  for  the  elect.  His  church,  as  His
promised  reward.

Dr.  Buck  illustrates,  so  far  as  such  an  illustration  can
serve,  by  supposing  a  raid  by  Algerian  pirates  on  a  Spanish
village,  leading  a  multitude  into  captivity  in  Moorish  North
Africa.  A  philanthropist,  touched  by  their  piteous  condi-
tion, ransoms  all  of  them  by  one  price,  and  now,  owning
them  all,  offers  remission  of  the  debt  and  free  passage  back
to  native  Spain  to  all  who  will  accept.  Some  prefer  bond-
age and  remain,  others  accept  joyfully  and  go  back  home.
Of  course  this  illustration  takes  no  account  of  the  Father's
work  or  the  Spirit's  work,  touching  only  the  question  of
ransom  for  all,  the  passing  of  the  debt  over  to  the  surety,
his  sovereignty,  in  its  remission  and  their  acceptance  or
rejection.

Let  us  do  with  this  or  any  other  philosophy  what  we  will,


94       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

but  let  us  not  hesitate  to  accept  all  that  the  scriptures  teach
on  this  matter.  When  we  read  John  lo:  14-16;  11 :  26-29;
Acts  13 :  48 ;  Rom.  8 :  28-39  J  Eph.  5 :  25-32,  let  us  not  abate
one  jot  of  their  clear  teaching  of  Christ's  death  for  the  elect
and  their  certain  salvation.  And  when  we  read  John  i :  29 ;
3:16;!  Tim.  4:10;  Heb.  2:9;!  John  2:2;  Ezek.  33 : 1 1 ;
Matt.  28 :  19 ;  I  Tim.  2 : 4,  let  us  beware  lest  our  theory,  or
philosophy,  of  the  atonement  constrain  us  to  question  God's
sincerity,  and  disobey  His  commands.  There  are  many  true
things  in  and  out  of  the  Bible  beyond  our  satisfactory
explanation.  Let  faith  apprehend  even  where  the  finite
mind  cannot  comprehend.

The  exposition  proper  commences  with  the  third  item  of
the  analysis,  which  is  the  thanksgiving.  On  that  item  we
have  only  verse  15  of  chapter  i:  "For  this  cause  I  also,
having  heard  of  the  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  which  is  among
you,  and  the  love  which  ye  show  toward  all  the  saints,  cease
not  to  give  thanks  for  you."  We  can  see  that  there  are  two
things  for  which  he  is  thankful:  First,  their  faith  in  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  second,  their  love  for  all  the  saints.

We  come  now  to  the  first  great  prayer,  the  fourth  item
in  the  analysis,  which  extends  from  i :  16  to  i :  21 :  "Making
mention  of  you  in  my  prayers;  that  the  God  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory,"  etc.  That  is  the  person
to  whom  he  prays.  We  may  say,  "Of  course  he  prays  to
God."  But  successful  prayer  has  its  relation  to  Jesus  Christ.
Paul  says,  "I  pray  to  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  the  Father  of  glory."  That  settles  the  first  point —
to  whom  does  he  pray?  The  next  thing  is,  for  what  does
he  pray  ?  "May  give  unto  you  a  spirit  of  wisdom  and  reve-
lation in  the  knowledge  of  Him;  having  the  eyes  of  your
heart  enlightened."  That  is  what  he  prays  for,  "a  spirit  of
wisdom  and  revelation,  having  the  eyes  of  your  heart  en-
lightened." We  can  put  in  one  word  the  whole  thing.  That
word  is  "illumination."    "I  pray  that  you  may  be  illumined."


CHRIST'S  ATONEMENT  95

There  are  three  terms — revelation,  Inspiration,  and  illumi-
nation. Revelation  discloses  that  which  we  could  not  other-
wise know.  Inspiration  infallibly  records  it.  Illumination
causes  us  to  understand  it.  Some  people  read  the  Bible
and  find  in  it  nothing  to  them.  But  consider  these  passages :
"Open  thou  mine  eyes  that  I  may  understand  the  wonderful
things  in  thy  law."  "The  Lord  opened  the  heart  of  Lydia
so  that  she  attended  unto  the  things  spoken  by  Paul."

Illumination,  then,  is  that  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which
causes  one  to  get  the  real  spiritual  meanings  of  the  Bible.
Time  and  again  have  I  come  to  some  passage  and  said,
"That  looks  like  it  was  intended  to  mean  much,  but  some-
how I  cannot  get  hold  of  it."  It  was  like  a  fog  to  me,  and
I  could  not  see  the  real  spiritual  meaning.  I  have  long
since  found  out  that  mere  intellectual  study  does  not  find
the  meaning.  The  Spirit  indited  that  passage  and  the  Spirit
knows  what  it  means ;  for  us  to  understand  it,  an  opening
of  the  eyes  of  the  heart  must  take  place.  Paul  prays  for
these  people  to  whom  he  writes,  that  they  may  have  illumi-
nation, that  is,  "the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the
knowledge  of  Him,"  or  as  he  otherwise  expressed  it,  "the
opening  of  the  eyes  of  the  heart."  Illumination  covers  the
whole  thing.    That  is  what  he  prays  for.

The  next  question  is,  What  the  end  or  object  of  that
illumination?  Why  should  he  pray  that  they  might  re-
ceive illumination?  "That  ye  may  know."  Let  us  see  what
are  the  things  that  they  were  to  know.  They  are  as  follows :
(i)  "The  hope  of  His  calling."  (2)  "The  riches  of  the
glory  of  His  inheritance  in  the  saints."  (3)  "The  exceeding
greatness  of  His  power  toward  us."  These  are  the  things
that  he  prays  for — that  they  might  receive  Illumination  and
know  these  three  things.  That  through  illumination  they
were  to  know:  (i)  The  hope  of  their  caUing.  Hope  here
is  used  objectively ;  it  means  the  things  hoped  for,  to  which
we  are  called;  (2)  that  we  may  know  what  the  things  are


96       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

that  God  called  us  to ;  (3)  and  what  we  hope  for.  That  is  a
great  prayer.

In  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  the  thought  is  presented  this
way :  "Ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of
the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem."  That  is  the  place
we  are  coming  to.  We  are  coming  unto  this  companion-
ship: (i)  Angels — an  innumerable  company.  (2)  The
general  assembly  of  the  church  of  the  firstborn.  (3)
The  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect.  (4)  To  God,  the
judge  of  all.  (5)  To  Jesus,  the  mediator  of  the  new  cov-
enant. (6)  To  the  blood  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh  better
than  that  of  Abel.  Now  his  prayer  is  that  they  may  be
illumined  in  order  that  they  may  know  the  riches  of  the
inheritance  that  is  laid  up  in  heaven  for  the  saints.  The
reason  so  many  Christians  are  weak  and  fruitless  is  that
they  have  no  grip  on  the  things  extended  to  the  hope  of  the
Christian.  The  powers  of  the  world  to  come  do  not  take
hold  of  them.

I  heard  a  most  estimable  lady-member  of  the  church  say
once,  "Heaven  ?  Oh,  -I  do  not  know  anything  about  it !  It
is  'way  off  yonder,  very  vague!"  I  said,  "My  sister,  if
heaven  was  vague  to  me  I  could  not  preach.  I  know  what  I
am  hoping  for.  I  have  clear  conceptions  of  the  world  to
come:  the  place,  state,  company,  joy,  all  is  clear  in  my
mind,  and  in  that  way  it  attracts."

To  illustrate:  "Jesus  Christ,  for  the  joy  that  was  set
before  Him,  endured  the  cross  and  despised  the  shame."
Take  the  case  of  Moses.  How  was  it  that  he  was  enabled
to  refuse  to  become  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter?  "He
had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  reward."  He  saw
something  better  than  the  pleasures  of  sin.  He  saw  some-
thing more  durable  than  the  riches  and  glory  of  this  world.
What  was  it  that  enabled  Abraham  to  bear  up,  wandering
about,  living  in  a  tent?  "He  sought  a  city  which  hath
foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."     So  Paul,


CHRIST'S  ATONEMENT  97

seeing  that  they  had  faith  and  love  toward  the  brethren,
prayed  that  they  might  be  illumined  to  know  the  things  which
a  Christian  hopes  for,  and  to  which  he  is  called.

I  delight  to  preach  on  heaven.  There  is  a  tremendous
power  over  the  mind  and  heart  in  it.  If  a  man  does  not
know  the  hope  of  his  calling,  there  is  not  the  incentive  to
action  which  comes  from  the  hope  of  reward.  The  mind
of  man  is  influenced  by  motives — the  hope  of  reward  and
the  fear  of  punishment.

Once  when  I  was  preaching  at  Belton,  not  getting  results,

I  went  out  and  prayed  three  times  that  God  might  make
me,  the  preacher,  realize  the  nearness  and  certainty  and
eternity  of  both  heaven  and  hell.  When  I  got  that  in  my
mind  and  heart  the  revival  broke  out,  heaven  came  down,
and  we  were  in  the  glory  of  the  mercy  seat.  A  Methodist
preacher  who  was  there  said  he  had  to  take  hold  of  a  table
to  keep  from  shouting.

"I  pray  that  ye  may  be  enabled  to  know  what  are  the
riches  of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance  in  the  saints."  Mark
well  the  distinction  between  the  first  and  second  thing  that
he  prayed  for.  The  first  related  to  their  inheritance  in
Christ,  the  object  of  their  hope.  The  second  related  to
Christ's  inheritance  in  them.  We  should  know  both.  Does
that  distinction  suggest  anything  at  all  ?  Is  it  not  clear  that
Christ  had  an  object  when  He  died?  There  was  a  joy  set
before  Him  so  precious  that  He  was  willing  to  bear  all  things
for  it.    Here  are  two  scriptures  that  will  give  an  idea  of  it :

II  Thess.  I :  lo,  "When  He  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in
His  saints,  and  to  be  marvelled  at  in  all  them  that  believed,
in  that  day."  Christ's  glory  is  to  be  in  His  saints — not  as
we  are  on  earth,  but  as  the  finished  product  will  be  up
yonder  in  heaven.  Then  take  this  passage  in  Eph.  5 :  2^,
"That  He  might  present  the  church  to  himself  a  glorious
church,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing;  but
that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish."    The  inherit-


98       COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

ance  of  Christ  in  His  saints  stood  as  an  incentive  to  bear
their  sins.    He  had  an  interest  in  them.

One  of  the  most  wonderful  buildings  in  the  world  is
Westminster  Abbey.  As  we  step  into  that  building  we  see
this  inscription:  "Whosoever  would  see  a  monument  to
Sir  Christopher  Wren,  look  around."  Sir  Christopher  Wren
was  the  architect,  and  a  real  monument  to  him  was  that
building.  A  sculptor,  when  he  undertakes  to  make  a  fine
piece  of  work,  first  goes  to  the  quarry  or  marble  yard  and
selects  a  piece  of  marble  of  fine  texture — a  great,  big,  un-
couth block.  He  stands  there  and  looks  at  it  and  thinks  out
his  plan,  and  at  last  he  sees  an  angel  in  it.  He  goes  to  work
with  his  mallet  and  chisel,  lopping  off  here  and  there,  and
after  a  while  it  begins  to  assume  shape;  we  see  the  head,
then  the  wings,  then  the  feet,  and  when  the  finishing  touches
are  put  on  we  stand  in  the  presence  of  an  angel  that  looks
like  it  could  breathe,  fly  and  talk.

So  when  Christ's  work  is  completed,  the  body  raised,
then  we  see  the  inheritance  that  Christ  has  in  the  saints.
The  best  person  in  the  world,  taken  as  he  is,  after  grace
has  done  so  much,  is,  after  all,  an  imperfect  recommenda-
tion of  Christ.  But  when  Jesus  is  done  with  him,  his  body
has  been  raised  and  glorified,  the  spirit  sanctified  and  made
perfect,  with  all  mortality,  corruption  and  dishonor  gone,  in
all  beauty  and  holiness  like  Him — not  one,  not  hundreds,
not  thousands,  but  a  great  multitude  that  no  man  can  num-
ber— each  one  with  a  crown  upon  his  head,  each  one  with
a  harp  in  his  left  hand,  and  a  palm  leaf  of  victory  in  his
right  hand,  and  each  one  praising  God — that  is  Christ's
inheritance  in  the  saints.  Paul  says,  "I  want  you  to  know
that."  We  ought  to  know  it  for  our  own  sakes,  because  our
conception  of  heaven  will  determine  the  kind  of  respect  we
have  for  heaven.  If  our  aspiration  is  to  be  only  an  ordinary
man,  we  will  not  have  much  self-respect,  but  we  should
have  a  burning  in  our  heart,  "This  is  not  the  best  of  me.


CHRIST'S  ATONEMENT  99

Ah,  no!  I  have  climbed  the  mountain  somewhat,  but,  like
Paul,  I  must  say,  'Higher!  Higher!  Excelsior!'  After  a
while  I  will  sit  on  God's  throne  and  judge  the  world,  judge
the  angels;"  that  is  the  thing  we  must  know.

Let  us  take  the  next  thing  we  must  know:  "And  what
the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power  toward  us  who  be-
lieve." We  must  know,  if  we  are  illumined,  "the  greatness
of  His  power  toward  us  who  believe."  He  illustrates  thus :
"According  to  that  working  of  the  strength  of  His  might
which  He  wrought  in  Christ  when  He  raised  Him  from
the  dead,  and  made  Him  to  sit  at  His  right  hand  in  heavenly
places,  made  Him  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  That
power  will  be  exercised  toward  believers.  We  may  die  away
off  by  ourselves;  the  world  may  not  even  know  that  we
have  lived;  no  monument  may  mark  our  resting  place;  in
our  last  illness  no  loving  hand  may  be  there  to  wipe  the
death  damp  from  our  brow,  but  if  we  are  children  of  God,
we  ought  to  know  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His
power  toward  us.

That  unknown  grave  will  open;  the  angels  will  come  down;
that  body  will  he  raised  and  glorified  and  reunited  with  the
spirit,  taken  to  the  throne  in  heaven  and  made  joint  heir
with  Christ  upon  the  throne  of  the  universe.

But  his  primary  meaning  is  not  directed  to  our  bodily
resurrection.  He  means  that  in  our  inward  development
as  Christians  the  power  exerted  shall  be  as  the  power  that
raised  our  Lord's  dead  body.

Let  us  sum  up  this  first  great  prayer :  ( i )  Unto  whom  ?
God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  For  what?
Illumination,  expressed  here  as  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and
revelation,  an  enlightenment  of  the  eyes  of  the  heart.  (3)
To  what  end?  That  they  might  know  the  hope  of  their
calling;  that  they  might  know  the  riches  of  the  glory  of
Christ's  inheritance  in  the  saints ;  that  they  might  know  the
greatness  of  His  power  toward  believers.


100     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS


QUESTIONS

1.  What  double  question  of  systematic  theology  arises  here?

2.  What  old  theological  question  does  this  question  revive,  and
what  theories  ?

3.  What  scriptures  were  cited  as  bearing  on  the  first  part  of  the
question  ?

4.  What  the  special  value,  as  bearing  on  this  question,  of  II
Cor,  5:  18-20?

5.  What  passage  makes  it  clear  that  no  matter  whether  expiation
be  for  all  men  or  for  the  elect,  universal  salvation  does  not  follow?

6.  In  what  three  thoughts  lies  the  crux  of  the  whole  matter,
according  to  the  author's  judgment,  and  what  the  scriptures  under-
lying each  thought?

7.  ^  Cite  the  three  passages  from  Boyce's  "Systematic  Theology,"
and  give  your  own  view  of  their  harmony  with  each  other.

8.  On  the  whole,  then,  do  election  and  foreordination  become
operative  or  effective  toward  atonement,  whether  general  or  limited,
or  toward  the  Spirit's  application  of  the  atonement?

9.  _  State  the  view  of  Dr.  William  C.  Buck,  in  his  "Philosophy  of
Religion,"  and  give  his  illustration.

10.  Whatever  man's  philosophy,  or  theory  of  the  atonement,  what
is  our  plain  duty  toward  the  scriptures  cited  pro  and  con  ?

11.  What  the  distinction  between  "apprehend"  and  "comprehend,"
and  are  there  many  things  in  the  scriptures  we  must  apprehend,  even
though  we  may  not  comprehend?

12.  For  what  two  things  does  the  apostle  express  thanks?

13.  On  the  first  great  prayer,  1:16-21,  answer:  (i)  To  whom?
(2)  For  what?

14.  What  one  word  covers  all  he  prayed  for?

15.  Distinguish  between  revelation,  inspiration  and  illumination.

16.  Define  illumination  and  give  its  purpose,  or  end.

17.  What  three  great  things  will  the  illumination  enable  us  to
know?

18.  Distinguish  between  the  first  and  the  second.

19.  What  the  meaning  of  the  first?

20.  What  the  meaning  of  the  second?     Illustrate.

21.  What  the  meaning  of  the  third?


CHRIST  THE  HEAD  OF  THE  CHURCH
Scripture:   Eph.  1:22 — 2:10

WE  now  come  to  that  part  of  the  analysis,  item  5,
Christ's  exaltation  and  its  purpose  toward  the
church,  1 :  22,  23.  These  two  verses  express  the
following  thoughts :  Christ  exalted,  first,  to  be  the  head  of
the  church ;  second,  to  be  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,
which  is  a  very  different  idea ;  third,  that  the  church  is  the
body ;  fourth,  as  His  body  the  church  expresses  His  fulness.

Christ  exalted  to  be  the  head  of  the  church. — "Head"
expresses,  first,  sovereignty,  or  rulership.  When  we  say
the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  family,  we  mean  he  is  the
ruler  of  the  family.  Head  expresses  in  the  next  sense  the
source  of  vital  connection.  In  this  Letter  to  the  Ephesians,
as  we  will  find  a  little  later,  that  vital  connection  between
the  head  and  every  member  of  the  body  is  greatly  empha-
sized and  elaborated.

If  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church  in  the  sense  of  sover-
eign or  ruler,  then  it  is  impious  to  call  anybody  else  the
head  of  the  church.  Some  claim  to  be  the  head  of  the
church  in  the  sense  of  vicegerent,  or  vicar.  For  example,  the
Pope  claims  to  be  the  head  of  the  church  in  that  he  is  Christ's
vicar.

The  only  vicar  that  Christ  has  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  When
Jesus  went  up  to  heaven  He  did  send  a  vicegerent  to  take
His  place;  another  Paraclete  to  abide  with  and  to  guide  the
church.  It  is  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Spirit  for  a  mere
man  to  claim  to  be  the  head  of  the  church.

101


lOa     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Spurgeon  in  his  many  volumes  of  sermons  has  one  polem-
ical volume.  One  of  the  sermons  in  that  polemical  volume
is  the  most  excoriating  denunciation  of  the  claim  that  the
sovereign  of  England  is  head  of  the  church  that  I  have  ever
seen.  He  read  a  proclamation:  "I,  Victoria  Regina,  by
the  grace  of  God  head  of  the  church."  Then  immediately
following  that  he  quoted  Paul's  words:  "I  suffer  not  a
woman  to  teach  nor  to  usurp  authority."  Everybody  should
read,  particularly,  that  eighth  volume  of  Spurgeon's  ser-
mons. The  greater  part  of  Christendom  today  is  under
bondage  to  the  thought  that  the  Pope  of  Rome  is  the  head
of  the  church.  They  mean  by  that  that  he  stands  in  the
place  of  God,  and  that  whatever  he  speaks,  ex  cathedra,  is
infallibly  true,  and  that  his  authority  is  ultimate.

In  1870  the  cap-stone  was  put  on  the  Papacy  by  the
Vatican  Council,  in  servile  obedience  to  the  Pope,  proclaim-
ing his  infallibility  as  head  of  the  church.  The  head  of
the  church  also  carries  with  it  the  idea  of  authority,  which
is  called  the  key  of  power.  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church.
There  is  no  other.  We  see  on  earth  a  body,  but  the  head
is  above  the  clouds;  we  cannot  see  it.  The  head  of  the
church  is  in  heaven,  the  body  here  on  the  earth.  It  is  a
vital  and  fundamental  article  of  the  Christian  faith  that
we  should  accept  no  head  of  the  church  of  Jesus  Christ
except  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself.  The  disciples  of
Pythagoras  were  accustomed  to  end  a  controversy  by  saying,
"Ipse  dixit  et  ipse  Pythagoras."  But  there  should  be  no
question  of  absolute  deference  to  mere  human  authority.

We  will  now  take  up  the  second  thought:  Christ  the
head  over  all  things  to  the  church.  Not  the  head  of  the
church;  we  have  just  discussed  that,  but  the  head  over  all
things  to  the  church,  which  is  a  very  different  thought.  It
means  that  by  virtue  of  His  sacrificial  expiation  here  upon
the  earth,  and  the  atonement  made  in  heaven  based  upon
that  expiation  on  the  cross.  He  received  the  name  which  is


CHMST  HEAD  OF  THE  CHURCH        105

above  every  name,  was  made  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of
lords,  that  He  now  holds  in  His  hand  the  scepter  of  universal
dominion,  and  that  He  is  over  all  things  to,  or  in  behalf  of,
the  church.

We  see  Him  express  this  thought  when  by  anticipation
He  commands  His  church,  assembled  upon  a  mountain  in
Galilee,  about  500  being  present,  to  go  out  and  preach  the
gospel  to  every  creature.  The  statement,  "And  all  author-
ity in  heaven  and  upon  earth  is  given  unto  me,"  means  that
He  is  the  head  of  all  things  to  the  church ;  that  He  exercises
the  entire  sovereignty  of  the  universe  in  behalf  of  the
church.  Oftentimes  when  we  get  a  little  frightened  or  blue,
become  intimidated  either  by  the  formidable  adversaries
with  whom  we  have  to  cope  or  by  the  insuperable  obstacles
that  block  our  pathway,  we  are  prone  to  forget  that  the
Savior  is  head  over  all  things  in  our  behalf ;  that  there  is
nothing  hard  for  Him ;  that  when  it  comes  to  exercising  His
power  in  behalf  of  the  church  there  are  no  limitations ;  that
we  can  draw  on  Him  to  the  last  possibility.

That  is  why  I  have  said  that  the  Texas  Baptist  Conven-
tion once  foolishly  got  scared  over  a  little  financial  flurry,
forgot  that  Jesus  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  They
ought  to  have  gone  on  serenely  laying  out  their  work,
having  faith  in  God,  who  is  able  to  raise  the  dead.

Surely  if  God  could  in  the  wilderness  for  forty  years  feed
so  many  families,  and  see  to  it  that  their  clothes  did  not
wear  out,  that  there  was  a  shade  over  them  every  day  so
that  the  sun  did  not  smite  them,  and  that  their  camp  was
illumined  by  night — a  light  brighter  than  the  most  luminous
display  of  electric  lights  in  the  cities  of  our  time — if  He
could  call  rocks  to  open  and  send  forth  waters,  and  the  quail
to  come  at  His  bidding,  and  angel's  food  to  fall  at  His  will,
what  are  we,  Christ's  people  in  New  Testament  days,  that  we
should  hesitate  on  account  of  difficulties  in  the  way  of  dis-
charging duties  incumbent  upon  usf


104     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

For  illustration,  I  recall  the  first  mission  rally  held  in
Johnson  County.  I  prepared  the  program.  That  county
was  in  danger  of  Antinomianism.  Some  of  the  noblest
pastors  in  that  association  purposed  to  get  together  and
sound  a  higher  note.  The  program  compared  missions  to
a  suspension  bridge  across  a  mighty  river,  not  a  prop  under
that  bridge  where  the  waters  rolled,  but  on  each  shore  there
was  the  basis  for  the  support  of  the  bridge.  The  first
pedestal  was  "All  authority  in  heaven  and  earth  is  given
unto  me;"  on  the  other  shore  the  pedestal,  "Lo,  I  am  with
you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  That  is,  if
He  had  authority  and  power,  we  His  people  had  no  right
to  hesitate  at  any  time  in  the  discharge  of  His  plain  com-
mandments. That  is  what  is  meant  by  Christ's  being  the
head  over  all  things  to  the  church.  Consider  carefully  what
that  means.  Every  attribute  of  God  is  made  contribu-
tory to  the  church — infinite  love,  infinite  justice,  infinite
compassion,  omnipotence,  omniscience,  omnipresence,  all
engaged  to  help  the  church  in  the  accomplishment  of  its
mission.  Note  carefully  that  this  headship  is  headship  of
an  organization.

But  we  come  next  to  a  new  thought — that  the  church  is
His  body.  Wherever  that  expression  occurs  it  implies  not
so  much  an  organization  as  an  organism.  An  organism  is
a  living  thing.  John  the  Baptist,  after  he  was  beheaded,
had  no  life.  There  was  a  vital  relation  between  the  body
of  John  the  Baptist  and  his  head.  When  his  head  was
severed  his  body  died.  In  the  Letter  to  the  Romans,  again
in  the  first  Letter  to  the  Corinthians,  again  in  the  Letter  to
the  Colossians,  and  pre-eminently  in  this  Letter  to  the  Ephe-
sians,  the  church  is  called  the  body  of  Christ,  which  means
that  whatever  sense  of  the  word  be  employed,  then  Christ  is
the  head.

Some  people  unnecessarily  trouble  themselves  in  trying  to
apply  the  double  sense  of  headship  to  the  triple  sense  of


CHRIST  HEAD  OF  THE  CHURCH         105

the  church.    That  is,  the  word  church  is  used  in  the  New
Testament  in  three  distinct  senses :

1.  Abstractly  as  an  institution,  Matt.  i6:  i8.

2.  A  particular  congregation  at  one  place,  I  Cor.  i :  2.

3.  All  the  redeemed  conceived  of  as  a  unit  and  glorified
as  a  bride  or  city,  Eph.  5 :  25-27  and  Rev.  21 : 9,  10.  In
applying  this  headship  we  say  that  Christ  is  the  head  of  the
church,  and  head  over  all  things  to  the  church  as  an  institu-
tion, or  as  a  particular  congregation,  or  as  the  general  assem-
bly of  the  redeemed  in  glory.

We  now  come  to  the  last  thought  in  that  paragraph,  "The
fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all."  The  church  is  the
fulness.  If  I  want  a  true  conception  of  God  the  Father,  I
look  at  Jesus:  "In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the
Godhead  bodily,  the  express  image  of  the  person  of  God."
If  I  want  a  true  conception  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  look  at  the
church,  which  is  the  fulness  of  Christ,  the  fulness  of  author-
ity, the  fulness  of  power,  the  fulness  of  divine  love,  and  the
fulness  of  glory,  as  it  ultimately  will  be.  The  fulness  of
Christ  in  the  church  is  very  much  like  the  thought  expressed
in  "The  glory  of  His  inheritance  in  the  saints."  We  have
already  noted  the  distinction  between  our  inheritance  in
Christ  and  His  inheritance  in  us.

To  see  the  fulness  of  Christ  in  the  church,  turn  to  the
last  chapter  of  Revelation,  "And  I  saw  the  Holy  City,  new
Jerusalem,  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,  made
ready  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband.  And  I  heard  a
great  voice  out  of  the  throne  saying.  Behold,  the  tabernacle
of  God  is  with  men,  and  He  shall  dwell  with  them,  and  they
shall  be  His  peoples,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,
and  be  their  God ;  and  He  shall  wipe  away  every  tear  from
their  eyes ;  and  death  shall  be  no  more ;  neither  shall  there
be  mourning,  nor  crying,  nor  pain,  any  more:  the  first
things  are  passed  away."
i     Again  the  angel  asked  John  if  he  would  like  to  see  the


106    COLOSSIANS,  I:PHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  and  there  is  given  a  picture  of  the  re-
deemed in  the  fulness  of  their  redemption.  If  when  that  time
comes  one  should  ask,  "Where  shall  I  look  to  see  the  fulness
of  the  Father?"  Look  at  Christ.  "Where  shall  I  look  to  see
the  fulness  of  Christ?"  Look  at  that  church  in  glory.  Be-
hold how  many  nations  are  represented  in  it !  See  the  ends  of
the  earth  come  together  in  it.  Behold  how  many  varieties
of  men,  some  very  great  men  intellectually,  and  some  very
simple  folk;  some  very  wicked,  others  just  as  wicked  by
nature,  who  were  not  so  wicked  by  practice,  but  now  all  are
redeemed.  We  have  the  fulness  of  Christ  presented  in
this,  that  all  peoples,  regardless  of  distinguishing  national-
ities and  distinguishing  castes,  are  there.  As  the  Genesis-
creation  was  an  expression  of  God,  so  that  "the  heavens  de-
clare the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  showeth  His
handiwork,"  so  the  re-creation,  or  redemption,  will  more
manifest  His  glory.  Not  one  of  them  but  has  arrived
through  regeneration  and  glorification.  Not  one  of  them
but  connects  back  with  the  eternal  foreknowledge,  elec-
tion, and  predestination  of  God.  That  is  the  fulness  of
Christ.

The  next  item  of  our  analysis  is  salvation  by  grace,
2:  i-io.  That  is  the  text  upon  which  Jerry  Clark,  in  some
respects  the  greatest  preacher  in  Texas,  preached  his  famous
sermon  before  the  General  Association  of  Texas  in  Waco
when  I  was  a  young  pastor  there.  I  had  heard  a  great  deal
about  Clark;  that  he  was  the  greatest  preacher  living,  if
one  could  only  get  him  to  preach.  His  extreme  modesty
made  him  an  expert  dodger.  One  of  his  friends  said,  "If
you  want  Clark  to  preach  you  must  challenge  him  on  the
doctrines  of  grace.  That  will  stir  him."  So  I  had  him
assigned  to  my  house  and  set  a  trap  for  him.  In  a  private
conversation  I  said  to  him  that  I  had  heard  of  preachers  who
were  willing  enough  to  preach  salvation  by  grace  in  the
backwoods,  but  would  shirk  if  called  upon  to  preach  it


CHRIST  HEAD  OF  THE  CHURCH        107

before  a  cultured  city  audience.  His  eye  flashed  fire  and
he  said,  "I  am  not  afraid  to  preach  it  anywhere."  "Very
well,  then,  you  are  appointed  to  preach  Sunday  night  from
Ephesians  2:8-10."  He  preached  from  it  and  made  the
stars  fairly  sparkle.  It  was  the  greatest  pulpit  classic  I
ever  heard.    It  stirred  all  the  dry  bones  in  the  valley !

Salvation  by  grace!  The  first  thought  is,  "And  you  did
He  make  alive  when  you  were  dead."  There  is  the  sinner,
spiritually  as  dead  as  a  door  nail.  Has  a  dead  man  power
in  himself,  pr  is  he  able  to  call  from  any  source  whatever
the  power  to  start  to  be  alive?  That  is  the  question.  The
declaration  is :  "When  you  were  dead  God  made  you  alive."
That  is  what  old  theologians  called  regeneration.  I  do  not
think  that  is  what  the  New  Testament  calls  regeneration,
because  it  stops  short  of  a  full  idea  of  regeneration  as
expressed  in  many  scriptures,  yet  it  is  that  power  of  the
Holy  Spirit  which  makes  the  soul  sensitive.  It  is  a  new
creation  and  is  antecedent  to  any  manifestation  of  life.  That
is  perfectly  clear  in  the  teaching  of  the  scriptures.

Of  course,  with  that  kind  of  a  start,  spiritually  dead,  if
a  man  is  saved  at  all  he  is  saved  by  grace.  It  is  impossible
for  a  dead  man  to  make  himself  alive.  Notice  how  that
deadness  is  expressed  in  this  paragraph:  "And  were  by
nature  children  of  wrath."  That  knocks  the  bottom  out  of
the  thought  that  sin  consists  in  the  wilful  transgression  of
a  known  commandment,  as  the  Arminians  say.  Sin  is  law-
lessness, first  of  all— lawlessness  in  nature  before  there  have
been  any  external  manifestations  in  overt  actions.

We  may  take  a  baby  rattlesnake,  carry  him  home,  feed
him  on  milk,  never  let  him  see  his  father  or  mother,  pet  him
and  try  to  educate  him  out  of  his  nature.  As  that  snake
grows  the  poison  secretes,  the  fangs  form,  and  the  rattles
come,  and  if  we  were  to  put  him  in  heaven  he  would  throw
himself  into  a  coil,  sound  his  alarm  and  strike  at  the  angels
passing  by.    Why  ?  Because  the  snake  is  a  snake.


108     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

This  sin  of  nature — of  depravity — digs  up  by  the  root
any  idea  of  salvation  by  external  ordinances.  I  recall  an
illustration  before  a  Sunday  School  by  Harvey  Chamberlain,
who  desired  to  impress  the  lesson  in  John  3 :  7,  "Ye  must
be  born  again."  He  had  provided  a  basin  of  water  with
soap  and  a  sealed  bottle  of  ink,  and  called  on  the  little
fellows  to  come  up  and  wash  the  black  off  of  that  bottle.
The  outside  washing  only  revealed  the  blackness  yet  more.
The  hollowest  sham  ever  imposed  upon  the  credulity  and
gullibility  of  exceedingly  simple  folks  is  the  doctrine  of
literally  washing  away  sins  in  baptism.  Grace  finds  us  by
nature  the  children  of  wrath — that  is  the  original  sin.  Then
it  found  us  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins — that  is  practice.
From  that  basis  it  starts  by  making  alive,  or  making  sensitive,
which  is  the  initial  touch  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  superinducing
in  us  contrition,  or  Godly  sorrow  for  sin,  repentance,  or  a
change  of  mind  toward  God  on  account  of  sin,  conversion,
or  turning  from  sin,  and  faith  in  Christ.  So  we  are  bom
anew.

The  second  thought  is,  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."
These  are  expressions  of  the  inward  nature,  and  sustain
the  relation  of  fruit  to  the  tree.  They  are  symptomatic  of
the  inward  state.  Our  Lord  declares  that  out  of  the  heart
proceed  evil  thoughts,  evil  speech  and  evil  deeds.

Notice  the  third  thought.  Dead  by  nature,  dead  by  actual
trespasses  and  sins,  and  now  "walking  according  to  the
course  of  this  world."  By  the  "course  of  this  world"  is
meant  its  spiritual  trend  expressed  in  its  maxims  of  business,
pleasure  and  every  form  of  selfishness.  It  erects  its  own
shifting  standard  of  right  and  wrong.  It  leaves  God  out.
Yea,  it  is  in  its  spirit  and  mind  the  enemy  of  God.  But  the
course  of  the  world  is  not  the  result  of  chance.

This  leads  to  the  fourth  thought  that  Satan  is  by  usurpa-
tion the  de  facto  prince  and  ruler  of  this  world.  There  is  a
guiding  intelligence,  the  directing  will  of  a  master.    So  our


CHRIST  HEAD  OF  THE  CHURCH         109

text  adds :  "According  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,
the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience."
What  a  succession  of  thought,  and  what  a  cHmax!  Dead
by  nature,  dead  by  practice,  swept  along  on  the  tide  of  the
world-spirit,  under  the  domination  of  Satan !  What  a  hope-
less outlook  for  salvation  by  human  merit!  What  a  predi-
cate for  salvation  by  grace !  What  a  reinforcement  of  the
thought  in  Paul's  commission,  Acts  26:  17,  18:  "Delivering
thee  from  the  [Jewish]  people,  and  from  the  Gentiles,  unto
whom  I  send  thee,  to  open  their  eyes,  that  they  may  turn
from  darkness  to  light  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto
God,  that  they  may  receive  remission  of  sins  and  an  inherit-
ance among  them  that  are  sanctified  by  faith  in  me."  He
is  to  "turn  them  from  darkness  to  light;"  so  they  are  in
darkness.  He  is  to  "turn  them  from  the  power  of  Satan
unto  God ;"  so  they  are  under  the  power  of  Satan.  "That
they  may  receive  remission  of  sins;"  so  they  are  unpar-
doned. "That  they  may  receive  an  inheritance;"  so  they
are  bankrupt.  "An  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanc-
tified;" so  they  are  now  unholy.  "An  inheritance  among
them  that  are  sanctified  through  faith  in  Christ;"  so  they
are  without  faith.  Think  of  a  preacher  going  out  relying
on  himself  to  undertake  a  job  like  that !

We  are  not  through  yet.  "Among  whom  we  also  once
lived  in  the  lusts  of  our  flesh,  doing  the  desires  of  the  flesh
and  of  the  mind."  Those  whom  we  found  dead  by  nature,
dead  by  practice,  bound  up  in  the  chains  of  the  world,  under
the  power  of  the  devil,  are  also  found  to  be  under  the
dominion  of  the  desires  of  the  flesh.  As  John  puts  it:
"Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world.
If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not
in  him.  For  all  that  is  in  the  world — the  lust  of  the  flesh,
and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  vainglory  of  life,  is  not  of
the  Father,  but  is  of  the  world.  And  the  world  passeth
away  and  the  lust  thereof,"  I  John  2: 15-17.    Or,  as  James


110     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

puts  it :  "Know  ye  not  that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is
enmity  with  God  ?"   Jas.  4 : 4.

The  reader  will  note  particularly  the  relation  of  good
works  to  salvation,  expressed  both  negatively  and  positively :
"Not  of  works"  but  created  and  saved  "unto  good  works."
They  do  not  cause  or  even  contribute  to  salvation,  but  flow
from  it  as  a  result.  As  our  Lord  puts  it:  "First  make  a
tree  good  and  then  the  fruit  will  be  good."  Or,  as  Paul
later  expresses  it:  "For  we  also  once  were  foolish,  dis-
obedient, deceived,  serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures,  living
in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  hating  one  another.  But  when
the  kindness  of  God,  our  Savior,  and  His  love  toward  man
appeared,  not  by  the  works  done  in  righteousness,  which  we
did  ourselves,  but  according  to  His  mercy  He  saved  us,
through  the  washing  of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  He  poured  upon  us  richly,  through
Jesus  Christ  our  Savior;  that  being  justified  by  His  grace,
we  might  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life.
Faithful  is  the  saying  and  concerning  these  things  I  desire
that  thou  affirm  confidently,  to  the  end  that  they  who  have
believed  God  may  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works,"  Titus
3 : 3-8.  The  relation  of  good  works  to  salvation  is  here
expressed  very  clearly.

While  good  works  before  salvation  are  impossible,  yet  it
is  the  instruction  of  saving  grace  that  they  follow  salvation.
So  Paul  again  says :  "For  the  grace  of  God  hath  appeared,
bringing  salvation  to  all  men,  instructing  us  to  the  intent
that  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live
soberly  and  righteously  and  Godly  in  this  present  world,
looking  for  the  blessed  hope  and  appearing  of  the  glory  of
the  great  God  and  our  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  him-
self for  us,  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and
purify  unto  himself  a  people  for  His  own  possession,  zealous
of  good  works,"  Titus  2 :  1 1-14.

Lest  we  might,  by  attributing  some  merit  to  faith,  place


CHRIST  HEAD  OF  THE  CHURCH         111

it  among  good  works  antecedent  to  salvation,  our  text  is
careful  to  say,  "and  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God.'*
True,  it  is  fairly  questioned  that  the  "gift"  here  is  gram-
matically limited  to  faith.  This  matters  nothing,  since  it
includes  faith;  elsewhere  most  unequivocally  faith  itself  is
reckoned  as  a  grace,  a  gift.  Like  repentance  (Acts  ii :  i8)
faith  is  a  gift  of  grace  before  it  is  a  human  exercise,  being  a
fruit  of  the  regenerating  Spirit,  Phil,  i :  29 ;  II  Pet.  2:1;
Acts  13:48.

Moreover,  as  the  essence  of  faith  is  merely  to  receive  an
offered  gift,  its  exercise  cannot  be  classed  as  a  work.  The
old  hymn  holds  good :

"Grace  first  contrived  the  way

To  save  rebellious  man ;
And  all  the  steps  that  grace  display
Which  drew  the  wondrous  plan.

Grace  led  my  roving  feet

To  tread  the  heavenly  road ;
And  new  supplies  each  hour  I  meet

While  pressing  on  to  God.

Grace  all  the  work  shall  crown.

Through  everlasting  days ;
It  lays  in  heaven  the  topmost  stone.

And  well  deserves  the  praise."

Let  us  note  particularly  that  the  whole  paragraph  on
salvation  by  grace  is  clothed  with  the  imagery  of  creation,
with  an  evident  comparative  reference  to  the  Genesis-
creation.  Creation  is  the  bringing  into  being  without  the
use  of  pre-existing  material,  so  that  "what  is  seen  hath  not
been  made  out  of  the  things  which  appear,"  and  so  "if  any
man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creation."  This  imagery
absolutely  excludes  and  forbids  the  idea  of  any  antecedent
good  or  merit  in  the  subjects  of  grace.  Indeed,  redemption
is  a  much  higher  order  of  creation  than  the  Genesis-creation
and  deserves  and  obtains  another  memorial,  as  we  will  later
learn  from  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews,  which  shows  that
when  God  had  finished  the  original  creation  He  sanctified  the


lis     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

seventh  day  to  commemorate  it;  but  when  Jesus  finished
the  creation  of  redemption,  He  also  rested  from  His  work,
as  God  had  done  from  His,  and  so  "there  remaineth  a
Sabbath-keeping  for  the  children  of  God" — a  first  day  of
the  week  to  commemorate  the  new  creation,  after  Christ  had
nailed  to  His  cross  and  blotted  out  the  whole  cycle  of  Jewish
Sabbaths.    (Heb.  4:9,  10;  Col.  2:  14-17.)

The  creative  idea  in  salvation  is  according  to  the  power
put  forth  when  Jesus  was  raised  from  the  dead  and  exalted
to  the  throne  of  the  universe.  This  power  is  infinitely  super-
human. Regeneration  is  a  spiritual  resurrection  from  the
dead  (Ezek.  2)7'-  1-14;  John  5:25,  26).  The  bones  in  the
valley  were  very  dry.  There  was  no  life-power  in  them.
Only  after  the  Divine  breath  was  breathed  on  these  bones
did  they  live.

Pointing  to  the  sinners  dead  by  nature,  dead  by  practice,
borne  as  dead,  non-resisting  leaves  on  the  tidal  course  of  this
world,  a  course  impelled  by  Satan,  until  like  a  frail  boat  in
the  suction  of  Niagara  whose  fall  just  ahead  is  like  the
doom  of  eternity — ^pointing,  I  say,  to  such  sinners,  we  may
re-echo  the  words  of  Jehovah  to  Ezekiel,  "Son  of  man,  can
these  dry  bones  live?"  The  only  possible  answer  is,  "Not
of  themselves — only  by  God's  creative  power  of  grace."

The  reader  will  notice  the  distinction  in  idea  between  the
salvation  in  Eph.  2:1-10,  and  the  salvation  arising  from
redemption,  justification  and  adoption  in  Galatians  and
Romans.  Here  the  salvation  is  in  us;  there  it  is  for  us.
There  the  salvation  is  in  relation  to  its  legal  aspects ;  here,
to  its  spiritual  effects.  Redemption  is  Christ's  work — justi-
fication and  adoption,  the  Father's  work  on  account  of
Christ's  work.  Regeneration,  sanctification  and  glorifica-
tion are  the  Spirit's  work  applying  the  benefits  of  Christ's
work.  It  is  not  meant  that  Romans  and  Galatians  leave  out
the  Spirit's  work,  but  that  the  prison  letters  change  the
emphasis  and  stress  the  internal  salvation.


CHRIST  HEAD  OF  THE  CHURCH         US


QUESTIONS

1.  What  the  four  thoughts  in  Ephesians  i :  2.2,  23?

2.  What  two  ideas  involved  in  "The  head  of  the  church?"

3.  Where  now  is  "the  Head  of  the  church?"

4.  How,  then,  does  "the  head"  in  heaven  rule  the  church  on  earth?

5.  What  impious  claims  have  been  made  as  to  a  human  vicar,  or
vice-regent  ?

6.  When  and  by  what  act  was  the  capstone  put  on  the  Roman
Papacy  ?

7.  What  is  meant  by  "Christ  head  over  all  things  to  the  church  ?"
Illustrate  by  the  great  commission.

8.  Comparing  the  great  commission  to  a  suspension  bridge,  what
the  anchorage  on  either  shore  ?

9.  What  idea  is  involved  when  the  church  is  called  the  body  of
Christ,  the  head,  and  what  the  distinction  between  this  idea  and  the
idea  of  headship  in  regard  to  the  execution  of  the  great  commission
just  considered.

10.  In  what  three  senses  does  the  New  Testament  use  the  word,
"church,"  and  how  do  you  apply  the  double  idea  of  headship  to  the
triple  idea  of  the  church?

11.  On  whom  must  I  look  to  find  the  fulness  of  God,  the  Father?

12.  Where  must  I  look  to  find  the  fulness  of  Christ?    Illustrate.

13.  In  the  paragraph  2 :  i-io,  what  the  first  thought?  ^

14.  What  the  first  way  in  which  the  sinner's  deadness  is  expressed  ?
Illustrate  by  the  snake  and  ink-bottle.  What  the  bearing  of  this  dead-
ness on  the  dogmas  of  salvation  by  external  ordinances  ?

15.  What  the  second  thought  of  the  deadness  and  its  relations  to
the  first?    Illustrate.

16.  What  the  third  thought  of  the  deadness,  and  what  the  appro-
priate scriptures  ?

17.  What  the  fourth  thought,  and  what  the  appropriate  scriptures
from  other  books  of  the  New  Testament?  Illustrate  by  Paul's
commission.

18.  What  the  relation  of  "good  works"  to  this  salvation,  and  what
the  proof-texts  ?

19.  What  the  imagery  of  this  whole  passage,  and  how  does  this
support  the  teaching  so  far  ?

20.  What  Sabbath  commemorated  the  material  creation  ?

21.  What  additional  idea  underlies  the  Jewish  Sabbath  ?

22.  What  scriptures  prove  the  abrogation  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath?
2^.    What   Sabbath  supersedes   and   commemorates   the  greater

work  of  redemption  ?

24.  Cite  passages  to  prove  the  creative  idea  in  the  Spirit's  appli-
cation of  our  Lord's  redemption.

25.  What  distinction  in  the  idea  of  salvation  in  Eph.  2:  i-io  from
the  idea  in  Galatians  and  Romans  arising  from  redemption,  justifica-
tion and  adoption  ?


XI

THE  WALL  OF  PARTITION
Scripture:  Eph.  2: 11-22

THIS  chapter  commences  with  the  seventh  item  of  the
analysis — the  breaking  down  of  the  wall  of  partition
between  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  the  uniting  of  the  two
into  one  church,  as  an  institution,  which  finds  expression  in
every  particular  church.  The  particulars  of  the  statement
of  the  condition  of  the  Gentiles  prior  to  the  proclamation  of
the  gospel  after  Christ's  ascension  are  thus  given  in  our  text :

1.  Separate  from  Christ — ^having  no  knowledge  of  Him,
or  any  interest  in  Him — "salvation  is  of  the  Jews."

2.  "Having  been  alienated  from  the  commonwealth  of
Israel" — i.e.,  as  uncircumcised,  not  entitled  to  citizenship
in  it.  The  force  of  "alienated"  here  is  about  this :  The  orig-
inal promise  of  the  gospel  was  to  the  race.  Through  both
the  antediluvian  and  Noachic  periods  the  promise  was  uni-
versal in  its  application.  But  after  these  two  race-falls,
particularism  in  a  single  nation  succeeded.  The  race  proba-
tions culminated  at  the  Tower  of  Babel  in  the  dispersion
of  the  nations,  followed  by  the  call  of  a  particular  nation.
This  was  the  time  of  their  alienation.  In  the  Hebrew
"politeia"  or  citizenship-condition,  including  country,  con-
stitution, economy,  they  had  no  part.  The  call  of  one  nation
made  the  others  aliens.

3.  "Strangers  from  the  covenants  of  the  promise."  Mark
the  plural,  including  all  covenants  made  with  Abraham  or
any  of  his  descendants.  Mark  the  word,  "promise,"  not
promises  in  general,  but  the  promise,  that  is,  of  the  Messiah.

114.


THE  WALL  OF  PARTITION  115

4.  "Having  no  hope."  This  does  not  deny  desire  or
aspiration,  but  expectation  based  on  definite  and  reliable
grounds  Hope  is  composite — a  blending  of  two  elements,
desire  and  expectation.  We  may  desire  what  we  may  not
expect  and  expect  what  we  do  not  desire.  Many  heathen
desired  better  things,  but  had  no  assured  ground  of  hope.
They  had  no  accredited  revelation.  Mommsen  in  his  "His-
tory of  Rome"  says,  "In  Hellas  [Greece],  at  the  epoch  of
Alexander  the  Great,  it  was  a  current  saying,  and  one  pro-
foundly felt  by  all  the  best  men,  that  the  best  thing  of  all
was  not  to  be  born,  and  the  next  best  to  die."  Testimonies
from  the  classics  might  be  multiplied  on  this  point.

5.  "Without  God  in  the  world."  Mark  the  Greek,
"Atheoi"  i.e.,  atheists,  not  in  the  active  but  passive  sense.
They  had  indeed  gods  many — their  own  creation.  The  one
true  God  was  unknown  to  them.  See  Paul's  speech  at
Athens  referring  to  the  altar  inscribed  to  the  "unknown
God."

6.  "Far  off."  Compare  Rom.  i :  18-32,  to  see  not  only
how  far  off,  but  just  how  they  sinfully  arrive  at  that  dark
and  guilty  distance.

7.  "A  wall  of  partition"  rigidly  separated  them  from  the
people  who  were  custodians  of  the  Oracles  of  God,  and  the
heirs  of  all  the  covenants  from  Abraham  to  David.

The  reader  will  miss  the  mark  at  this  point  if  he  does  not
look  back  carefully  to  the  first  eleven  chapters  of  Genesis.
There  are  in  these  chapters  three  distinct  race-probations.
First,  in  Adam,  as  head  of  all  human  beings.  Adam  fell,
and  all  his  posterity,  without  distinction,  fell  with  him  and
in  him.  Second,  after  his  fall  and  expulsion  from  the
Garden,  the  throne  of  grace  was  set  up  at  the  East  of
the  Garden,  and  all  his  descendants,  without  distinction,
were  privileged  to  approach  the  God  of  grace  and  mercy
through  typical  sacrifices  based  on  the  promise  to  the  race,
"The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head."


116     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

This  race  probation  culminated  in  the  flood,  and  a  third
race  probation  commenced  with  Noah,  as  the  new  head  of
the  race  and  under  a  special  covenant.

When  this  third  race  probation  failed  at  the  Tower  of
Babel,  and  the  dispersion  of  the  nations  then  followed
(Genesis  12),  the  call  of  Abraham,  and  the  fourth  race-
probation,  commenced  through  one  family  to  become  a
chosen  nation  under  national  covenants.  The  very  consti-
tution of  one  nation  to  become  God's  organized  people,  by
isolating  laws  and  ordinances,  left  out  all  other  nations  as
aliens  and  strangers.  These  segregating  laws  and  ordinances
constituted  the  wall  of  partition  between  the  Hebrews  and
other  nations.

Circumcision,  the  entire  Sabbatic  cycle,  priesthood  and
sacrifices,  with  their  ritual,  all  social  and  political  ordinances
of  separation,  prescribed  limitations  of  citizenship,  a  spe-
cial home-land,  indeed  the  entire  Sinaitic  legislation  with
its  later  developments  in  Numbers  and  Deuteronomy,  en-
tered into  the  wall  of  separation.  There  is  no  parallel  in
history  to  the  isolating,  exclusive  legislation  of  Moses.

We  find  in  the  New  Testament  that  Christian  Jews  wanted
to  keep  up  that  wall  of  partition — to  deny  that  Christ  had
broken  it  down.  They  said  in  order  to  be  saved  one  had
to  become  a  Jew — had  to  be  circumcised.  All  of  these  laws
with  reference  to  their  altar,  the  way  of  approach  to  God,
etc.,  as  embodied  in  the  tabernacle,  or  its  successor,  the
temple,  and  its  offerings  setting  forth  ways  and  means  by
which  one  could  come  to  God,  were  in  the  partition  wall.
In  Galatians  Paul  says  that  even  believers  in  Christ,  up  to
the  time  the  object  of  faith  came — that  is,  until  Christ  came —
were  under  these  laws  and  had  to  observe  these  old  cere-
monial laws.  The  heirs  by  faith  were  under  tutors  until
Christ  died.

So  we  see  Christian  Jews  in  New  Testament  times  still
wishing  to  keep  up  this  wall  of  partition.    When  Peter  went


THE  WALL  OF  PARTITION  117

into  the  house  of  Cornelius  and  ate  with  the  Gentiles  he  was
sharply  rebuked  by  some  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem,  but  by
patient  explanation  of  all  the  circumstances  he  quieted  the
opposition,  but  did  not  conquer  it.

It  reappeared  at  Antioch  in  the  demand  that  the  Gentiles
must  be  circumcised  in  order  to  be  saved.  This  was  a  vital
and  fundamental  matter.  So  Paul  and  Barnabas  sternly
resisted  it,  and  as  these  Judaizing  teachers  came  from  Jeru-
salem and  claimed  authority  from  the  apostles  and  the  mother
church,  the  whole  case  was  referred  to  them  and  resulted
in  the  council  described  in  Acts  15.  Paul's  contention  was
fully  sustained.    Peter,  and  even  James,  sided  with  him.

But  even  this  solemn  decision  did  not  end  the  matter,  so
far  as  the  Jews  were  concerned.  The  question  of  eating
with  the  Gentiles  was  reopened  at  Antioch.  While  a  Gen-
tile might  be  saved  without  becoming  a  Jew,  a  Jewish  Chris-
tian must  remain  a  Jew.  In  this  form  of  the  question  Peter
and  Barnabas  were  led  to  dissimulation,  the  more  reprehen-
sible on  Peter's  part,  since  this  was  the  very  form  of  the
question  on  which  he  had  stood  so  nobly  in  the  case  of
Cornelius.    Paul  won  again,  but  the  war  went  on.

How  did  Christ  break  down  the  wall?  In  the  Letter  to
the  Colossians  is  the  clearest  passage  in  the  whole  Bible  on
how  the  whole  Jewish  law  was  abrogated,  2:14:  "Having
blotted  out  the  bond  written  in  ordinances  that  was  against
us,  which  was  contrary  to  us ;  and  He  hath  taken  it  out  of
the  way,  nailing  it  to  the  cross,  having  despoiled  the  prin-
cipalities and  powers.  He  made  a  show  of  them  openly,
triumphing  over  them  in  it.  Let  no  man  therefore  judge
you  in  meat  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of  a  feast  day,  or  a
new  moon,  or  a  Sabbath  day."

Christ  nailed  the  whole  thing  to  the  Cross — ^blotted  it  out.
These  things  were  typical.  When  Christ,  the  Antitype,  came
they  were  done  away  forever.  The  whole  Sabbatic  cycle
is  set  forth  in  this  passage ;  feast  days,  or  annual  Sabbaths ;


lis     COLOSSIANS,  EPHIiSIANS,  HEBHEWS

new  moons,  or  monthly  Sabbaths ;  a  Sabbath  day,  or  weekly
Sabbath,  are  all  blotted  out,  just  as  Hosea  predicted:  "I
will  also  cause  all  her  mirth  to  cease,  her  feasts,  her  new
moons,  and  her  Sabbaths  and  all  her  solemn  assemblies."
Seventh  Day  Adventists  try  to  get  people  to  go  back  to
keeping  the  Seventh  Day  instead  of  the  first  day  of  the
week.

That  means  Christ  has  not  come — that  we  are  still  under
the  bondage  of  types  and  ceremonies.  Whoever  believes  that,
announces  himself  as  a  Jew  of  the  old  kind.

It  took  a  Paul  to  make  people  see  that  the  wall  was  broken
down,  ground  to  powder,  and  swept  out  of  the  realm  of
obligation  by  the  breath  of  God's  abrogation.  It  is  utterly
gone.  Paul  would  sometimes  as  a  matter  of  expediency,
out  of  consideration  for  weak  brethren  who  believed  it  was
something  awful  to  eat  meat  offered  to  idols,  refrain  from
eating  meat.  He  said,  "The  idol  is  nothing.  That  is  all
done  away  with  in  Christ.  And  all  of  these  laws  about
clean  and  unclean  animals  have  no  force  now,  but  so  far
as  I  am  concerned,  if  my  eating  meat  will  cause  some  weak
brother  to  stumble  and  fall  down  and  keep  on  falling,  I  will
let  it  alone.  I  do  not  let  it  alone  because  there  is  any  harm
in  it  to  me,  but  because  of  these  weak  brethren  for  whom
Christ  died."

While  that  wall  of  partition  stood,  on  one  side  were  men
without  God,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,
strangers  to  the  covenant,  who  had  no  hope  in  the  Messiah,
therefore  without  God.  It  said  to  the  Gentile,  "You  stand
off  yonder."  In  Mark  7,  to  show  how  extreme  their  position
became,  in  addition  to  the  law,  they  observed  their  added
traditions;  if  a  Jew  went  to  market,  when  he  came  back
he  must  immerse  himself  to  be  free  from  possible  defilement
by  contact ;  he  must  immerse  the  table  on  which  he  ate,  the
couch  on  which  he  slept,  the  pots  and  vessels  which  he  used.
That  entire  typical  ceremonial  legislation  which  shut  out  the


THE  WALL  OF  PARTITION  119

Gentile  was  abrogated.  It  was  blotted  out,  abolished,  and
nailed  to  the  cross  of  Christ.

We  will  now  see  how  the  thought  develops.  The  old  dis-
tinction between  Jew  and  Gentile  being  blotted  out,  he  now
uses  a  series  of  figures.  The  first  figure  is  marriage,  by
which  two  entirely  different  individuals  become  one :  "They
twain  shall  be  one  flesh."  The  scripture  on  that  is  verse  14 :
"He  hath  made  both  one."  And  in  verse  15:  "That  He
might  create  in  himself  of  the  two,  one  new  man."  The
wall  being  broken  down,  it  is  the  purpose  of  Christ  to  take
the  Jew  and  Gentile  and  make  one  new  man,  so  that  in
Christ  there  will  be  neither  Jew  nor  Greek.  That  is  the
first  figure.

The  next  figure  is  the  new  commonwealth.  He  says,  "Ye
are  no  more  strangers  and  sojourners,  but  ye  are  fellow
citizens  with  the  saints."  Here  is  a  citizenship,  and  it  is
just  as  good  and  proper  for  the  Gentiles  to  be  citzens  in
Christ  Jesus  as  for  the  Jews.  The  next  figure  is  the  house-
hold, or  family.  This  is  the  language :  "And  of  the  house-
hold of  God."  So  we  have  a  new  man,  a  new  commonwealth,
a  new  family.

He  changes  the  figure  again  to  the  temple,  or  house  of
God.  Here  is  the  language :  "Being  built  upon  the  founda-
tion of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Christ  Jesus  himself  being
the  chief  corner  stone."  That  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  one
of  the  strongest  factors  in  the  wall  of  partition.  Why?
There  was  a  certain  place  that  the  Gentiles  were  permitted
to  go — the  court  of  the  Gentiles — but  they  could  not  go
any  further.    No  Gentile  could  go  up  into  the  Jewish  court.

Now  Paul  says,  "That  old  temple  is  out  of  the  way;  he
builds  a  new  Temple  that  the  old  one  foreshadowed,"  and
in  this  new  Temple  Gentile  material  will  be  used  as  well  as
Jewish  material.  The  chief  corner-stone  in  the  foundation
of  this  new  Temple  is  the  rock,  Christ  Jesus.  A  corner-
stone is  one  that  holds  two  walls  together.    We  notice  in  a


120     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

building  where  two  walls  come  together  a  large  stone  that
goes  into  each  wall  and  holds  them  together.  Of  course
there  are  corner-stones  all  the  way  up,  but  the  chief  corner-
stone is  down  next  to  the  foundation.  Every  Christian
who  exercises  the  holding-together  power  is  a  corner-stone.
Some  just  stick  in  the  wall.  Others  we  may  call  inter-
mediate corner-stones.    That  is  the  imagery  of  the  Temple.

In  verse  i8  he  shows  a  much  more  precious  thought:
"Through  Him  we  both  [Jew  and  Gentile]  have  access  to
the  Father."  Before,  it  was  only  the  Jews  who  had  access,
but  under  this  new  economy,  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  the
Jews  have  access  in  Christ  to  the  Father.  I  stated  that  when
Christ  died  He  nailed  to  His  cross  all  discriminating  legis-
lation. There  was  a  signal  token.  Just  at  the  time  Christ
died  the  veil  in  the  Temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  top  to
bottom.  That  veil  was  said  to  be  70  feet  long,  30  feet  wide,
and  4  inches  thick.  Ten  yoke  of  oxen  could  not  have  torn  it.
It  was  closely  woven  and  beautifully  colored.  At  the  mo-
ment Christ  said,  "It  is  finished,"  it  was  rent  in  twain,  com-
mencing at  the  top  and  going  all  the  way  down.  This  signi-
fied that  the  way  to  the  Holy  of  Holies  was  then  made
open  to  all.

Paul  refers  to  that  in  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  when  he
says,  "Wherein  God,  being  minded  to  show  more  abun-
dantly unto  the  heirs  of  the  promise  the  immutability  of
His  counsel,  interposed  with  an  oath ;  that  by  two  immutable
things,  in  which  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  may  have
a  strong  encouragement,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay
hold  of  the  hope  set  before  us :  which  we  have  as  an  anchor
of  the  soul,  a  hope  both  sure  and  steadfast  and  entering  into
that  which  is  within  the  veil ;  whither  as  a  forerunner  Jesus
entered  for  us,  having  become  a  high  priest  forever  after
the  order  of  Melchizedek."  Christ  destroyed  two  enmities ;
first  the  enmity  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  made  peace
between  these  two  and  converted  them  into  one;  then  He


THE  WALL  OF  PARTITION  121

made  peace  between  each  one  of  them  and  the  Father.  Being
reconciled  to  the  Father  through  Christ  we  are  reconciled
to  our  fellow-men.

We  now  come  to  a  very  important  thought.  When  Paul
talks  about  the  new  man,  and  the  church  is  said  to  be  the
bride  made  one  with  Christ,  as  Adam  and  Eve  were  made
one,  and  when  he  talks  about  one  commonwealth  and  one
citizenship,  and  when  he  talks  about  them  being  one  house-
hold, and  being  made  into  one  temple,  he  is  speaking  of  the
church  as  an  institution.  God  established  a  time  institution.
That  institution  is  exemplified,  becomes  operative,  in  par-
ticular churches.

This  thought  is  expressed  in  verse  21 :  "In  whom  each
several  building,  fitly  framed  together,  groweth  into  a  holy
temple  in  the  Lord."  That  is  to  say,  each  particular  congre-
gation, particular  church,  is  an  expression  of  the  church  as
an  institution,  and  its  only  expression.  For  instance,  a  new
state  may  provide  for  "trial  by  jury."  There,  "jury"  is  an
institution,  of  which  each  particular  jury  is  an  expression.
So  the  expression,  "I  will  build  my  church,"  when  that  insti-
tution becomes  operative,  it  is  exemplified  in  a  particular
church.  We  must  make  the  distinction  in  usage  according
to  the  laws  of  language  between  an  institution  in  the  abstract
sense  and  its  expression  in  every  particular,  concrete  case.
Speaking  abstractly,  we  may  say  that  the  church  is  a  temple.
Speaking  concretely,  each  particular  church  is  a  temple.
Such  usage  of  language  is  common.  We  never  misunder-
stand its  import  in  other  matters.  We  never  make  the  ab-
stract sense  a  conglomeration.  If  we  say  abstractly  "the
husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife"  we  do  not  mean  all  hus-
bands are  blended  into  one  big  universal  husband.  But  we
mean  that  in  every  particular  case  the  husband  is  the  head
of  the  wife.  Just  so  in  Eph.  i :  22 ;  2 :  12-20 ;  3 :  10,  21  the
church  as  an  institution  is  discussed  under  several  figures.
But  always  Eph.  2:21,  22  (revised  text)  shows  what  the


122     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

institution  is  in  its  expression.  It  becomes  operative  in
particular  churches  only.  Later  Eph.  5 :  23-33  will  discuss
the  glory  church.

The  Judaizing  Christians  fought  PauFs  gospel  on  every
field  of  evangelism,  and  notwithstanding  his  letters  to  the
Corinthians,  Galatians,  Romans,  Philippians,  Colossians,
Ephesians,  and  Hebrews,  he  foresaw  the  coming  of  a  great
apostasy  that  after  his  day  would  revert  to  a  national
church  with  an  earthly  head  and  re-incorporate  into  the
Christian  system  the  ideas,  priesthood  and  ritual  of  an  abro-
gated economy.  He  foresaw  the  coming  of  Christian  inter-
preters who  would  revert  to  the  Jewish  Sabbath  and  insist
on  the  restoration  of  a  Jewish  kingdom  with  a  returned
Christ  as  King  at  Jerusalem  and  with  the  Gentile  world  in
subjugation.

Tens  of  thousands  of  pulpits  in  Christendom  today  are
seeking  in  some  fashion  to  rebuild  that  wall  which  Christ
demolished  on  the  cross,  and  whose  crumbling  stone  and
wasting  wood  were  pulverized  and  scattered  as  fine  dust.

From  the  old  covenant,  and  from  effete  heathen  religions
and  customs,  they  gathered  fragments  and  blended  them
into  a  new  yoke  of  bondage,  setting  aside  the  liberty  and
simplicity  of  the  gospel.  And  particularly  on  the  ideas  of
the  church  there  is  yet  before  Baptists  a  hard  battle,  whose
preliminary  skirmishes  have  already  commenced.

So  far  only  the  general  line  of  thought  has  been  followed.
But  we  need  to  look  more  critically  at  some  particular  expres-
sions, even  though  there  be  repetition.

Verse  14,  "For  He  is  our  peace."  What  the  strict  mean-
ing? Is  it  limited  to  peace  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  or  is
it  the  peace  of  both  Jew  and  Gentile  with  God,  or  both?
The  peace  under  discussion  is  a  reconcilation  by  the  cross.
The  cross  must  have  here  an  expiatory  sense ;  it  must  pro-
pitiate toward  God,  making  peace  between  Him  and  the
sinner,  and  as  both  Jew  and  Gentile  draw  near  to  God  they


THE  WALL  OF  PARTITION  133

draw  near  to  each  other.  As  all  the  diverging  spokes  of  a
wheel  come  together  and  unite  in  the  hub,  so  Jew  and  Gen-
tile find  in  Christ,  the  center,  primarily,  peace  with  God,  and,
secondarily,  peace  with  each  other.  Isaiah  (9:  5,  6),  Micah
(5:6),  and  Zechariah  (10:10)  predict  peace  through  the
coming  Messiah.

Verse  15,  "The  enmity."  Here  again  the  enmity  is  not
merely  or  primarily  the  hatred  between  Jew  and  Gentile,
but  the  enmity  of  both  toward  God.  This  is  what  stood  in
the  way  of  peace.  Enmity  which  antagonizes  and  holds
nations  apart  can  never  be  converted  to  peace  until  first  the
enmity  toward  God  on  the  part  of  opposing  nations  is  gotten
out  of  the  way.  In  the  death  of  enmity  toward  God  is  also
the  death  of  enmity  toward  each  other.  The  thought  is
beautifully  imaged  in  the  two  staves  of  the  prophet,  the
staff,  "Beauty,"  and  the  staff,  "Bands,"  the  first  representing
the  tie  uniting  Ephraim  and  Judah  to  God,  the  second
binding  the  two  together.  "Bands"  cannot  be  broken  until
"Beauty"  is  first  broken.

"Create  in  himself  of  the  two  one  new  man."  This  is  not
demanding  that  a  Gentile  shall  become  a  Jew,  nor  that  a
Jew  shall  become  a  Gentile;  this  would  not  be  a  creation.
But  he  creates  a  new  corporate  body,  i.e.,  the  church  as  an
institution.  But  as  the  two  elements,  Jew  and  Gentile,  are
blended  into  the  new  corporation,  this  would  not  be  a  crea-
tion on  account  of  the  use  of  pre-existing  material.  A  mere
blending,  therefore,  does  not  express  the  thought.  The
blending  would-be  purely  artificial  if  unchanged,  incoherent
elements  are  bound  together.  By  the  creating  power  of  re-
generation the  Jew  is  made  a  Christian,  and  so  the  Gentile.
This  Christian  material  of  the  new  corporation  did  not
exist  before.  In  this  way  He  created  in  himself  of  the
two  one  new  man,  i.e.,  a  new  church.  As  the  corporation
was  new,  so  the  elements  which  composed  it  were  made  new.

Verse  16.   "Reconcile  them  both  in  one  body,  unto  God,


IM     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

through  the  cross."  Here  it  is  evident,  what  has  been  ex-
pressed before,  that  the  reconcihation  of  peace  is  toward
God,  and  sacrificially  through  the  cross,  and  hence  their
peace  with  each  other  is  only  a  secondary  thought  resulting
from  the  first.

Verse  17.  "And  He  came  and  preached  peace  to  them
that  were  far  off  and  peace  to  them  that  were  nigh."  "And
He  came."  When  and  what  this  coming  ?  It  was  the  coming
in  the  Holy  Spirit  on  Pentecost — the  beginning  of  the  exe-
cution of  the  commission  given  before  His  ascension.
Instrumentally  the  church,  endued  with  power  by  the  Spirit,
did  the  preaching.

Verse  18.  "For  through  Him  [Christ]  we  both  [Jew  and
Gentile]  have  access,  in  one  Spirit,  unto  the  Father."  Here
in  one  short  sentence  we  have  all  the  persons  of  the  Trinity
in  their  distinguishing  office-work.

Verse  20.  "Foundation — Corner-stone."  Christ  is  really
the  foundation  and  the  corner-stone  (I  Cor.  3:  10-15  5  I  P^t.
2:6,  7).  The  New  Testament  apostles  and  prophets  are
the  foundation  only  in  the  sense  that  they  laid  it  in  their
preaching,  and  in  that  way  their  vital  doctrines,  or  what  they
preached,  is  called  the  foundation  (Heb.  6:1).

Real  foundation  =  Christ.

Teaching  foundation  =  the  apostles  and  prophets.

Doctrinal  foundation  ==  what  they  preached.

Verses  21,  22.  Let  the  reader  particularly  note  that  the
church  as  an  institution,  whether  called  "one  new  man,"
"one  body,"  "one  commonwealth,"  "one  household,"  or  "one
temple,"  finds  expression  in  "each  several  building"  or  par-
ticular congregation,  and  that  the  leading  idea  of  its  mission
is  to  become  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit.


THE  WALL  OF  PARTITION  125


QUESTIONS

1.  Cite  and  explain  each  particular  of  the  condition  of  the  Gen-
tiles prior  to  the  gospel  proclamation.

2.  What  race  probations  in  the  first  eleven  chapters  of  Genesis,
and  what  change  commences  in  chapter  12?

3.  What  the  wall  of  partition  ?

4.  When  and  how  abrogated  ?

5.  Prove  that  this  includes  abrogation  of  the  Jewish  Sabbaths  of
all  kinds.

6.  In  what  letters  of  Paul  is  all  this  made  plain  ?

7.  Yet  what  did  he  foresee  ?

8.  In  this  chapter  what  various  images  are  employed  to  express
the  idea  of  the  church  as  an  institution?

9.  Prove   that   this   institution   finds   expression   in   particular
churches.

ID.    What  the  meaning  of  "Christ  our  peace?"

11.  What  the  meaning  of  unity?

12.  What  the  meaning  of  "He  came  and  preached  peace,"  i.e.,
when  and  how  was  this  coming  ?

13.  What  verse  of  this  chapter  presents  all  the  persons  of  the
Trinity,  distinguishing  between  their  office  work?


XII

PAUL'S  SECOND  GREAT  PRAYER

Scripture:  Eph.  3:1-21

THIS  discussion  covers  chapter  3,  connecting  two  items
of  the  analysis,  towit :  Paul's  relation  to  the  mystery
of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  and  his  second  great
prayer.  And  what  a  prayer  it  is !  Let  us  notice  that  in  the
first  verse  he  starts  to  pray,  side-tracks  it  for  twelve  verses,
and  then  resumes.  This  is  peculiar  to  Paul,  starting  on  a
main  thought  and  then  leaving  it  to  branch  out  on  a  collat-
eral thought.  But  he  always  comes  back,  as  we  see  here  in
verse  14.  A  man  who  does  that  shows  an  earnest,  fruitful,
tenacious  mind.  We  have  noticed  the  trait  in  lower  animals.
A  dog  starts  out  and  follows  a  deer  until  he  crosses  a  fresher
bear  track.  His  hunting  instinct  turns  him  immediately  into
the  cross-trail,  but  he  returns  to  take  up  the  original  trail.
Unlike  the  dog,  some  preachers  start  with  a  text  and  follow
it  until  they  flush  a  new  thought,  then  take  after  that  and
never  get  back  to  the  text,  leaving  their  sermon  as  Tacitus,
the  historian,  leaves  that  great  German  hero,  Arminius,
standing  on  a  bridge,  his  readers  not  knowing  whether  he
ever  crossed  over,  went  back,  or  is  standing  there  yet.
Other  preachers,  alas !  follow  this  order :  i .  They  take  a
text.  2.  They  instantly  leave  it.  3.  They  never  get  back  to  it.
Paul  starts  off:  "For  this  cause  I,  Paul,  the  prisoner  of
Christ  Jesus  in  behalf  of  you  Gentiles."  This  introduces  his
prayer,  but  a  parenthesis  follows  showing  why  he  prays.
This  parenthesis  is  the  eighth  item  of  the  analysis.  It
occurred  to  him  that  he  ought  to  explain  why  he  was  so

1^6


PAUL'S  SECOND  GREAT  PRAYER         12T

earnest  in  praying  for  them.  His  interest  grew  out  of  a
special  relation,  such  as  no  other  man  sustained,  expressed  in
these  words :  "The  dispensation  of  that  grace  of  God  which
was  given  me  to  you-ward."  There  was  a  special  dispen-
sation of  the  grace  of  God  given  to  Paul.  In  the  Letter  to
the  Galatians  he  uses  this  language  bearing  upon  the  thought :
"When  they  saw  that  I  had  been  entrusted  with  the  gospel
of  the  uncircumcision,  even  as  Peter  with  the  gospel  of  the
circumcision  (for  he  that  wrought  for  Peter  unto  the
apostleship  of  the  circumcision  wrought  for  me  also  unto
the  Gentiles)  ;  and  when  they  perceived  the  grace  that  was
given  unto  me,  James  and  Cephas  and  John,  they  who  were
reputed  to  be  pillars,  gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right
hands  of  fellowship,  that  we  should  go  unto  the  Gentiles,
and  they  unto  the  circumcision."

To  explain  his  prayer  for  the  Gentiles,  he  says  that  the
dispensation  of  the  gospel  for  the  Gentiles  was  specially
committed  to  him.  God  himself  divided  the  work.  He
created  a  foreign  mission- department  and  put  it  in  the  hands
of  Paul.  The  home  mission  department  he  left  to  the  orig-
inal twelve ;  they  were  to  go  to  the  Jews  and  Paul  was  to  go
to  the  Gentiles.  There  is  the  scriptural  thought  and  justi-
fication for  our  division  of  the  mission  work  into  home  and
foreign  departments.  To  illustrate:  If  our  foreign  mis-
sion secretary  starts  to  write  a  letter  touching  a  mission
station  in  Mexico,  Brazil,  China  or  Africa,  he  pauses  to
explain  his  interest — that  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention
has  given  him  the  dispensation  of  the  foreign  mission  work,
and  that  is  why  he  is  writing.

The  next  point  is  that  this  dispensation  was  given  to  him
by  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  did  not  get  it  second
hand  from  Peter.  He  is  clear  to  say  that  this  gospel  did
not  come  from  man.  It  was  a  direct  revelation  from  Jesus
Christ  to  him.  That  is  demonstration  against  even  the  idea
of  a  human  pope,  for  here  is  a  man  whose  gospel  is  entirely


128     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

independent  of  the  gospel  committed  to  the  twelve.  And  he
insists  that  he  is  not  a  whit  behind  any  of  them ;  he  is  not
indebted  to  any  of  them  for  the  authority  with  which  he
preaches,  and  they  were  forced  to  concede  that  the  same
God  who  wrought  mightily  through  Peter  to  the  circum-
cision, wrought  just  as  mightily  through  Paul  to  the  Gentiles.
He  makes  these  points  clear.

In  Acts  9  we  have  the  first  account  of  God's  designating
Paul  to  this  work,  setting  him  apart  to  be  a  great  foreign
missionary.  And  as  time  developed,  He  called  him  more
specifically  to  that  work.  To  show  the  strenuousness  and
insistence  of  this  separation  of  Paul  to  this  work,  note  that
he  himself  had  an  intense  desire  to  be  a  home  missionary,
and  on  one  occasion,  contrary  to  the  direct  teaching  of  the
Spirit  of  God,  he  went  to  Jerusalem,  and  when  he  got  there,
God  met  him  in  the  temple  and  said,  "They  will  not  hear
you.  Go  work  where  I  sent  you."  In  other  words,  it  is
as  much  the  province  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  select  the
field  of  labor  as  it  is  to  call  a  man  to  preach,  and  the  preacher
who  disregards  the  divine  jurisdiction  over  the  place  where
he  is  to  preach,  is  sure  to  get  into  trouble  and  bring  shame
and  failure  to  himself.  After  God  had  purposed  that  this
should  be  his  work,  and  after  God  had  called  him  to  that
work,  he  still  kept  hanging  around  the  home  mission  depart-
ment. So  the  Lord  came  to  the  church  at  Antioch  and  said,
"Set  apart  Paul  and  Barnabas  for  the  work  to  which  I  have
called  them."    Church  action  followed  the  divine  action.

Just  here  we  come  to  an  expression  that  causes  some
people  a  little  trouble.  Verse  3 :  "How  that  by  revelation
was  made  known  unto  me  the  mystery,  as  I  wrote  before  in
a  few  words/'  The  question  is,  if  this  letter  was  intended
primarily  and  exclusively  to  be  for  the  Ephesians,  when  did
Paul  ever  write  them  about  the  dispensation  having  been
committed  to  him  ?  Some  commentaries  say  that  it  is  in  the
first  part  of  this  letter,  but  there  is  not  a  syllable  about  it


PAUL'S  SECOND  GREAT  PRAYER         129

in  the  first  part  of  this  letter.  We  find  it  in  Col.  i :  25 :
"Whereof  I  was  made  a  minister,  according  to  the  dispen-
sation of  God  which  was  given  me  to  you-ward,  to  fulfill
the  Word  of  God,  even  the  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  for
ages  and  generations :  but  now  hath  it  been  manifested  to
His  saints."  That  is  where  he  ''wrote  before  in  a  few
words'*  That  shows  that  there  is  a  very  close  relation
between  Colossians  and  Ephesians.  The  Letter  to  the
Ephesians  elaborates  the  Letter  to  the  Colossians,  and  jus-
tifies the  position  taken  in  the  introductory  chapter  about  the
phrase,  "At  Ephesus."

We  now  come  to  the  word,  "mystery."  The  word  is  fre-
quently used  in  the  Bible,  but  not  always  with  reference  to
the  same  thing.  John,  in  Revelation,  presents  a  picture  of
a  woman  dressed  in  scarlet  sitting  on  a  wild  beast  with  seven
heads  and  ten  horns,  and  on  her  forehead  is  written:
"Mystery,  Babylon  the  great,  mother  of  the  harlots

AND  OF  THE  ABOMINATIONS  OF  THE  EARTH.'*     In  that  figure,

under  the  name,  Babylon,  he  represents  the  mystery  of  the
Roman  Catholic  Church.  In  another  place  Paul  himself
says  in  his  Letter  to  Timothy:  "Great  is  the  mystery  of
godliness."  That  is  a  different  mystery,  towit:  (i)  That
God  was  veiled  in  the  flesh.  (2)  That,  though  veiled,  the
angels  recognized  Him.  (3)  That  thus  veiled  He  was
preached  unto  the  Gentiles.  (4)  That  He  was  believed  on
by  the  Gentiles.  (5)  He  was  received  up  in  glory.  "Con-
fessedly, great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness."

But  Paul  uses  the  word  "mystery"  in  this  passage  in  a  dif-
ferent meaning.  It  is  not  a  mystery  to  him,  nor  will  it  be  a
mystery  to  them  after  he  explains.  The  mystery  will  be  taken
away.  Here  is  the  secret  of  the  mystery,  in  verse  6 :  "That
the  Gentiles  are  fellow-heirs,  and  fellow-members  of  the
body,  and  fellow-partakers  in  the  promise  of  Christ  Jesus
through  the  gospel."  It  was  a  mystery  in  Old  Testament
times ;  it  was  then  veiled.    The  Jews  seemed  to  be  everything


ISO     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

there.  But  the  mystery  unveiled  shows  that  even  in  the
beginning  God  looked  kindly  toward  all  nations  of  men.
God  intended  that  all  nations  of  men  should  seek  Him  and
find  Him,  that  when  the  typical  age  passed,  His  gospel
through  His  Son  should  go  to  all  nations  that  inhabit  the
face  of  the  earth.  That  was  all  hidden  in  Old  Testament
times,  but  it  is  not  mysterious  now.

In  that  remarkable  Letter  to  the  Romans,  chapter  ii,
where  the  same  matters  are  under  discussion,  he  points  out
that  Israel,  the  chosen  nation,  loses  the  kingdom  of  God;
that  through  their  fall  the  Gentiles  receive  the  kingdom  of
God ;  that  through  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  the  Jews  come
back  to  the  kingdom  of  God;  that  the  failure  of  the  Jews
helps  the  Gentiles ;  that  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  helps  the
Jews.  He  says  that  the  whole  thing  was  according  to  divine
purpose,  and  then  ends  with  this  exclamation :  "O  the  depth
of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  the  knowledge  of  God !
how  unsearchable  are  His  judgments,  and  His  ways  past
tracing  out!  For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord?
or  who  hath  been  His  counsellor?  or  who  hath  first  given  to
Him,  and  it  shall  be  recompensed  unto  him  again?  For  of
Him,  and  through  Him,  and  unto  Him,  are  all  things.  To
Him  be  the  glory  forever.    Amen."

Our  thoughts  so  far  are :  ( i )  That  the  dispensation  of  the
gospel  to  the  Gentiles  was  given  to  Paul.  (2)  That  this  dis-
pensation was  given  to  him  by  special  revelation ;  it  did  not
come  secondhand  ;  he  was  to  be  the  great  foreign  missionary-
man.  (3)  That  this  was  formerly  a  mystery,  but  is  now  ex-
plained. (4)  The  purpose  of  God  is  that  the  Gentiles  shall
be  fellow-heirs,  fellow-members  of  the  body  and  fellow-
partakers  of  the  promise  of  Christ  Jesus  through  the  gospel.

He  adds  a  thought  showing  a  more  distant  and  extensive
end  of  his  ministry :  "Unto  me,  who  am  less  than  the  least
of  all  saints,  was  this  grace  given,  to  preach  unto  the  Gen-
tiles the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ ;  and  to  make  all  men


PAUL'S  SECOND  GREAT  PRAYER        131

see  what  is  the  dispensation  of  the  mystery  which  for  ages
hath  been  hid  in  God  who  created  all  things ;  to  the  intent
that  now  unto  the  principalities  and  the  powers  in  the  heav-
enly places  might  be  made  known  through  the  church  the
manifold  wisdom  of  God."  This  is  my  great — my  favorite —
text.  It  sets  me  on  fire.  I  could  wake  suddenly  in  the  night
and  preach  from  it  offhand.  Through  Paul,  by  special  divine
appointment,  all  men  are  to  be  made  to  see  this  mystery
unveiled.  Not  only  so,  but  unto  angels  by  the  church  must
this  manifold  wisdom  of  God  be  made  known.  The  church
is  a  pedagogue  to  angels.    By  the  church  they  are  instructed.

The  first  time  I  ever  met  my  cousin,  J.  L.  Carroll,  he
preached  a  sermon  at  the  Southern  Baptist  Convention  in
Jefferson  on  the  text:  "What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,
but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  In  this  discussion  he  quoted
verbatim  the  entire  poem  on  the  two  weavers,  one  that  I  have
never  seen  anywhere  except  in  Goodrich's  old  "Fourth
Reader."  One  weaver  was  complaining  that  everything  went
wrong;  the  other  believed  that  everything  went  right,  and
he  said  to  his  brother  weaver :  "You  see  in  part  only.  Let
your  carpet  instruct  you.  While  in  the  loom  you  see  only  its
outside.  There  appears  to  be  a  chaotic  jumble — warp  and
woof  and  flying  shuttle.  But  when  complete  and  the  rolls
are  fitted  on  the  floor,  the  pattern  is  plain.  Fragments  of
design  in  one  roll  find  their  counterpart  in  another.  So  to
us  just  now  the  world  is  a  carpet  inside  out — it  is  yet  in  the
weaving — at  the  end  the  design  and  the  pattern  will  appear."
I  thought  I  had  never  heard  anything  more  appropriate  than
this  illustration.

"Now,"  says  Paul,  "those  angels  up  yonder  are  flaming
spirits,  but  there  are  many  things  they  do  not  know.  They
have  had  their  curiosity  aroused  ever  since  Christ  inter-
posed to  save  man,  *which  things  the  angels  desired  to  look
into.'  "  On  the  mercy-seat  the  curiosity  of  the  angels  is  rep-
resented by  two  golden  cherubim  on  either  side  leaning  over,


132     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

looking  down  where  the  blood  is  dropping.  These  heavenly-
students  are  trying  to  study  out  God's  wisdom,  and  God's
wisdom  is  manifold,  it  is  rolled  up  in  a  great  roll  and  the
angels  cannot  see.  The  church  comes  along  and  takes  hold
of  the  roll  and  unrolls,  unrolls,  unrolls,  the  many  folds,  and
as  the  church  unrolls,  the  angels  behold  the  manifold  wisdom
of  God.

That  is  a  beautiful  thought.  It  elevates  one  in  his  own
mind  to  know  that  he  is  helping  explain  difficult  things  to
the  angels.  Not  only  were  the  apostles  a  "spectacle  to  the
angels,"  but  the  church  in  its  work  is  a  spectacle  to  the  angels,
in  unfolding  to  their  view  the  marvelous  election,  foreordina-
tion,  predestination,  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  developed
in  redemption  and  made  apparent  through  the  ministry  of  the
church  in  preaching  the  gospel.  The  church  comes  opening
one  door  and  sets  Jerusalem  on  fire,  and  the  angels  clap
their  hands  and  praise  God — 3,000  Jews  saved.  The  church
turns  a  key,  throws  open  another  door,  and  the  Gentiles
come  in.  The  angels  clap  their  hands  and  sing,  "Glory  to
God  in  the  highest."  The  church  goes  to  Ephesus,  100,000
perhaps  are  converted  there ;  it  crosses  the  Bosphorus  and
enters  Europe,  goes  to  Athens,  Corinth,  and  to  Rome  itself.
From  there  it  goes  to  Britain,  and  then  on  gospel  wings
it  flies  across  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  the  gospel  is  carried  across
the  American  continent,  rises  in  another  flight  to  the  islands
of  the  sea,  the  Orient,  flies  over  the  walls  of  China,  and
goes  into  Thibet,  that  darkest,  most  isolated  place  in  the
world.    All  of  that  the  angels  learn  as  the  kingdom  develops.

We  come  now  to  a  point  that  always  thrilled  me.

/  never  could  understand  why  some  Baptists  rejoice  to
say  there  is  no  church-succession.

I  would  like  for  them  to  take  hold  of  these  two  passages
in  this  chapter,  "To  the  intent  that  now  unto  the  principalities
and  the  powers  in  the  heavenly  places  might  be  made  known
through  the  church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  according


PAUL'S  SECOND  GREAT  PRAYER         133

to  the  eternal  purpose  which  He  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus
our  Lord,"  coupled  with  the  last  verse,  "Unto  Him  be  the
glory  in  the  church  and  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  all  generations
forever  and  ever.    Amen."

Whenever  church-work  stops,  then  the  glory  stops.  Did
God  intend  for  it  to  stop?  If  He  did,  why  did  He  say,  ''Lo,
I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world?'*  And
why  should  we  tell  the  church  when  celebrating  the  Lord's
Supper,  "As  often  as  you  do  this  you  show  forth  the  Lord's
death  till  He  come?"    Why  does  He  provide  for  perpetuity?

I  am  not  discussing  church  history  now.  I  am  discussing
God's  purpose  in  establishing  the  church.  Jesus  said,  "The
gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  I  do  not  believe
they  have.  They  have  never  been  able  to  convince  me  that
the  gates  of  hell  have  prevailed  against  the  church.

/  believe  that  God  not  only  has  had  people  in  all  ages,  but
that  He  has  had  an  organised  people.

He  provided  for  transmission :  "The  things  which  I  have
committed  to  you,  the  same  commit  thou  to  faithful  men."
How  do  men  have  faith  ?  By  hearing.  How  can  they  hear
without  a  preacher,  and  how  can  they  have  a  preacher  unless
he  be  sent?  Did  He  not  send  the  church  all  gifts — apostolic
gifts,  prophetic  gifts,  evangelistic  gifts  and  pastoral  gifts?
He  set  every  one  of  them  in  the  church.  The  apostles  and
prophets  served  the  church;  when  they  were  taken  away,
there  remained  pastors,  evangelists,  teachers.  On  whose
authority?  Christ's.  Where  placed?  In  the  church.  I  am
satisfied  that  if  the  angels,  after  watching  the  unfolding  of
the  wisdom  of  God  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  from  the
time  Christ  died  until  the  time  the  apostles  died,  they  have
not  had  a  recess  since  of  a  thousand  years.  They  are  not  left
in  suspense,  vainly  bending  over  to  learn  more  through  silent
centuries.  The  school  goes  right  on.  The  purposes  ripen.
The  ordinances  continue  to  tell  their  story.  Churches  come
from  churches  somewhat  as  horses  come  from  horses.    His-


134     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

tory  cannot  trace  every  detail  of  the  pedigree  showing  how  a
certain  drove  of  wild  mustangs  in  western  Texas  are  de-
scendants of  the  Spanish  barbs,  brought  here  by  the  dis-
coverers 400  years  ago.  The  fact  that  the  mustangs  are  here
proves  the  succession,  since  only  like  begets  like.

/  do  not  undervalue  church  history,  hut  far  more  impor-
tant to  me  than  fallible  human  records  of  passing  events  is
the  New  Testament  forecast  of  church  history.  The  former
may  err — the  latter  never.

Before  the  "Louisiana  Baptist  Historical  Society"  it  was
my  pleasure  to  discuss  this  very  theme.

We  now  consider  the  marvelous  second  prayer  of  Paul  for
the  Ephesians,  which  is  the  ninth  item  of  the  analysis.  The
petitioner  is  Paul.  He  is  a  prisoner.  The  chain  on  his  hand
clanks  with  every  line  he  writes.  But  the  Word  of  God  is  not
chained,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  not  chained,  and  the  spirit  of  this
man  who  prays  is  not  chained.  It  is  amazing  that  a  man  in
his  circumstances  could  so  far  forget  himself  in  the  riches
of  his  benevolence  and  go  out  in  his  supplications  and  entreat
for  such  blessings  as  are  embodied  in  this  petition.

The  next  thought  is  the  relation  of  this  prayer  to  preceding
things.  This  relation  is  expressed  in  these  words :  "For  this
cause  I  pray."  What  cause?  It  has  just  been  stated:  first,
that  it  was  the  purpose  of  God  that  the  Gentiles  should  be
fellow-heirs,  and  that  Paul  was  the  minister  selected  who
should  preach  to  these  Gentiles  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven
was  open  to  them.  So  it  was  for  this  cause — ^because  God
intended  that  they  should  have  these  benefits,  and  because
He  designated  Paul  as  the  instrument  by  which  they  should
come  to  them,  therefore  he  prayed.

Let  us  look  at  the  attitude  which  was  very  reverent  and
very  deliberate:  "I  bow  my  knees."  To  whom?  To  the
Father.  There  is  a  modifying  phrase  that  we  need  now  to
consider,  bearing  on  why  he  prayed  to  Him,  and  especially
why  Paul  prayed  to  Him  in  this  connection.    This  modifying


PAUL'S  SECOND  GREAT  PRAYER        135

phrase  is  "from  whom  every  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is
named."  There  is  something  in  the  modifying  clause  sug-
gesting why  Paul  offers  this  petition  to  the  Father,  but  we
have  a  difficulty  in  determining  what  it  means.  The  common
version  reads :  "For  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and
earth  is  named."  It  is  very  easy  to  understand  what  that
idea  is.    It  is  exactly  the  idea  expressed  in  this  hymn :


"Let  saints  on  earth  unite  to  sing
With  those  to  glory  gone ;
For  all  the  servants  of  the  King
In  heaven  and  earth  are  one.


"One  family  we  dwell  in  Him,

One  church  above,  beneath.
Though  now  divided  by  the  stream,
The  narrow  stream  of  death."


If  the  King  James  version  is  the  correct  rendering,  that
is  what  it  means,  and  we  can  see  the  idea  at  once  when  he
prays  to  the  Father  from  whom  the  whole  family,  Jews  and
Gentiles,  those  in  heaven  and  those  on  earth,  and  those  yet
to  be  born,  is  named.  It  is  a  very  beautiful  thought.  The
objection  to  that  being  the  proper  rendering  is  that  there  is
no  article  in  the  Greek,  and  therefore  grammatically  the  re-
vised version  is  more  accurate,  not  referring  to  the  whole
family  collectively  but  distributively :  "From  whom  every
family  is  named,"  that  is,  those  who  go  to  heaven  may  con-
stitute a  family;  down  here  on  earth  they  are  not  all  as-
sembled in  one.  There  was  a  family  at  Rome,  one  at  Corinth
and  one  at  Ephesus.  In  this  sense  the  word  "family"  is  a
synonym  for  "church."  Which  is  correct  ?  The  revised  ver-
sion is  very  accurate :  "I  pray  unto  the  Father,  from  whom
every  family  in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  named."  Every
church  is  named,  whether  you  conceive  of  it  as  the  church
of  the  spirits  of  the  just,  made  perfect  in  glory,  or  distribu-
tively, each  particular  congregation  of  Christ's  disciples  here


136     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

upon  earth.  There  is,  quite  possibly,  another  meaning  which
we  find  in  the  margin  of  our  Bible:  "From  whom  every
Fatherhood  is  named."  That  does  not  make  the  sense  mate-
rially different  from  the  sense  of  the  revised  text.  Father-
hood upon  earth  is  a  reflection  of  the  true  fatherhood  in
Heaven.  All  fatherhood  gets  its  idea  and  ideal  from  God,
the  Father.

These  are  the  three  possible  meanings  of  this  passage.  I
do  not  like  to  be  on  the  fence  myself,  and  after  studying
about  it  a  great  deal.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  King
James  version  has  the  true  idea,  and  I  am  quite  sure  it  can
be  defended  exegetically  and  grammatically,  because  we  find
in  the  Greek  New  Testament  four  or  five  places  where  the
article  is  absent  and  yet  the  unity  is  there,  and  it  is  so  ren-
dered by  the  revisers  themselves.  I  think  this  makes  the  best
sense  and  connects  better  with  Paul's  thought.  He  has  just
been  telling  them  that  under  the  old  economy  the  Gentiles
were  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  without  God,
and  without  hope  in  the  world,  but  that  under  the  new  revela-
tion of  the  mystery  of  God's  purpose  it  is  evident  He  in-
tended Jew  and  Gentile  to  be  one  in  Christ.  And  he  is  speak-
ing of  the  unity  continually,  the  gathering  together,  and  I
prefer  that  translation:  "From  whom  the  whole  family  in
heaven  and  earth  is  named."  The  Gentile  belongs  to  that
family  just  as  much  as  the  Jew.

So  we  advance  in  our  thought.  We  have  Paul  the  peti-
tioner, the  Father  petitioned,  and  the  power  according  to
which  he  asks  that  things  be  granted — "according  to  the
riches  of  His  glory."  What  does  he  ask  for?  We  see  the
whole  Trinity  in  this:  The  Father  is  the  source,  therefore
the  petition  is  addressed  to  Him.  He  asks  one  blessing  that
touches  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  third  person  in  the  Trinity,  and
several  touching  Christ,  the  second  person  in  the  Trinity.
The  first  thing  for  which  he  asks  is  strength :  "That  ye  may
be  strengthened  with  power  through  His  Spirit  in  the  inward


PAUL'S  SECOND  GREAT  PRAYER         137

man."  We  often  see  physical  giants,  like  John  L.  Sullivan,
Jim  Jeffries,  strong  on  the  outside  but  not  strong  on  the
inside.  Then  we  see  some  frail,  weak  men,  like  William  of
Orange,  who  was  so  sick  that  he  could  not  stand  up,  but
strong  inside  and  commanding  his  army.  And  we  see  the
general  on  the  other  side,  the  Duke  of  Luxemburg,  who  was
so  frail  and  sick  that  his  soldiers  had  to  carry  him  about  on
a  litter.  A  man  who  did  not  have  strength  inside  would
have  been  whining  in  the  hospital  and  asking  for  a  furlough,
but  these  two  generals  were  strong  inside,  and  they  directed
their  armies  while  they  fought  one  of  the  most  famous  battles
of  history.  Even  so,  and  more  so,  is  it  with  the  Christian.
The  outward  man  perishes,  but  the  inward  man  is  renewed
day  by  day.  The  fact  is  that  no  man  is  whipped  until  he  is
whipped  inside,  and  when  whipped  inside  he  is  whipped  alto-
gether. Just  as  long  as  his  soul  is  firm  and  steadfast  he  is
invincible  by  any  force  that  can  be  sent  against  him.

We  will  now  look  at  the  Christ-side  of  it,  and  there  are
several  parts  in  that.  First,  "that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your
hearts  through  faith."  There  is  a  great  difference  between
taking  permanent  residence  and  paying  an  occasional  visit.
It  seems  that  some  Christians,  at  occasional  intervals,  receive
visits  from  Christ,  not  very  welcome  visits  on  their  part,
and  He  has  to  stand  outside  and  knock :  "Behold,  I  stand  at
the  door  and  knock."  Paul  does  not  pray  for  that,  but  that
Christ  may  dwell  in  their  hearts  through  faith.  That  means
to  abide,  not  just  a  visitor  staying  over  night,  but  owning
the  house  and  living  in  it,  and  He  can  dwell  in  your  hearts
only  through  faith.

The  second  thing  is  stability :  "That  being  rooted  [that  is
the  image  of  a  tree]  and  grounded  [there  he  changes  the
figure  to  a  house  with  strong  foundations]  in  love."  That  is
stability.  Look  at  a  China  tree;  a  little  wind  will  blow  it
over.  Why  ?  Because  it  has  no  tap  root.  One  cannot  turn
over  a  post,  but  he  can  turn  over  a  block  of  wood  that  is  rest-


138     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

ing  on  the  ground.  The  use  of  the  lateral  roots  of  the  tree
is  to  feed  the  tree.  All  of  those  little  fibrous  roots  close  to
the  top  of  the  ground  furnish  the  tree  food  and  water.  But
that  big  root  that  goes  straight  down  is  not  to  feed  it,  but  to
hold  it  firmly.  So  Paul  prays  for  stability :  "being  rooted  and
grounded."  Some  of  those  buildings  in  San  Francisco  with
their  rock  foundations  and  steel  frames,  the  rock  holding
them  together  under  the  ground  and  the  steel  frames  holding
them  together  above  the  ground,  were  not  shaken  by  even
the  earthquake.

The  third  thing  is,  "That  ye  may  be  strong  to  apprehend
with  all  the  saints."  Apprehend  what  ?  Certain  dimensions
— breadth,  length,  heighth,  and  depth  of  the  love  of  Christ.
In  other  words,  "I  pray  that  you  may  be  able  to  apprehend
the  dimensions  of  the  love  of  Christ ;  that  you  may  see  how
high  it  is,  how  deep  it  is,  how  broad  it  is  and  how  long  it  is."
All  the  saints  are  invited  to  join  in  it.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  said
that  he  was  just  a  little  child  on  the  coast  picking  up  shells.
He  claimed  not  to  know  much.  So  Paul  said,  "I  have  not
apprehended  all  things  for  which  He  laid  hold  of  me,  but  I
pray  that  you  Ephesians  may  be  strong  to  apprehend  the
dimensions  of  the  love  of  Christ."

The  fourth  thing  is  knowledge — "to  know  the  love  of
Christ."  That  refers  to  personal  experience,  not  a  mental
conception,  but  a  realization  of  it  in  the  heart,  i.  e.,  to  know
experimentally  the  love  of  Christ.  We  learn  some  things
about  Christ  intellectually  and  put  them  in  our  hearts  and
assimilate  them,  but  let  us  learn  them  personally.  As  each
lesson  comes,  let  us  put  it  in  our  hearts  and  learn  it  per-
sonally. That  is  why  we  are  called  upon  to  know  the  love
of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge.  We  know  now  in  part,
but  not  altogether.

The  fifth  thing  connected  with  Christ  that  he  prays  for,
"That  ye  may  be  filled  unto  all  the  fulness  of  God."  Paul
is  not  here  offering  a  prayer  for  one  person,  but  he  is  pray-


PAUL'S  SECOND  GREAT  PRAYER        139

ing  for  the  church,  which  is  the  temple  of  God,  and  the
temple  of  God  is  to  have  the  fulness  of  God.

Several  years  ago  in  a  controversy  I  quoted  this  passage
and  a  man  asked,  "What  do  you  get  out  of  that  ?  I  have  read
it  many  times  but  I  do  not  get  anything  out  of  it."  I  said,
"The  church  is  the  habitation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Holy
Spirit  is  in  the  church,  not  in  part  of  His  power,  but  in  the
fulness  of  His  power.  The  church  has  the  fulness,  but  may
not  have  the  realization  of  the  fulness.  You  let  a  church  get
into  a  great  meeting  and  those  who  have  been  doing  wrong
repent  and  confess;  and  those  who  have  become  alienated
become  reconciled,  the  proud  become  humbled,  and  the  selfish
become  unselfish,  those  who  could  not  pray  learn  to  pray,
and  in  that  realization  they  begin  to  pray  for  big  things.
Before  that,  if  they  could  get  fifteen  or  twenty  around  one
sinner,  they  might  have  faith  enough  to  pray  for  him,  but
now  they  pray  for  men  who  are  far  off."

I  have  seen  the  old  Waco  church  in  the  fulness  of  God.  I
went  down  one  day  in  the  great  meeting  and  my  nerves
tingled;  I  could  feel  prickling  sensations  running  all  over
me,  the  presence  of  God  was  so  sensibly  felt.  I  asked  the
church  to  pray  for  a  certain  one  who  was  very  dear  to  me.
They  got  down  and  prayed  a  very  short,  sweet  prayer,  and
that  very  moment  while  the  words  were  still  coming  from
the  lips  of  the  one  offering  the  petition,  God  converted  that
man  from  infidelity,  and  on  the  next  train  he  was  at  the
church  to  tell  them  how  he  was  saved  at  the  very  hour  of
the  prayer.

These  are  the  five  things  in  connection  with  Christ :  The
indwelling  of  Christ  by  faith,  being  rooted  and  grounded
in  love,  to  be  able  to  apprehend  the  dimensions  of  Christ's
love,  to  know  the  love  of  Christ  and  to  be  filled  with  the
fulness  of  God.

That  brings  us  to  the  benediction.  That  benediction  is  an
offering  of  glory.     To  whom?    To  the  Father.     In  what


140     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

sphere?  In  the  church.  Through  what  medium?  Christ.
How  long?  World  without  end.  That  means  church  per-
petuity.

,     QUESTIONS

1.  What  two  items  of  analysis  are  discussed  in  this  chapter?

2.  What  characteristic  of  Paul's  letters  appears  in  the  beginning
of  the  chapter,  and  wherein  does  he  differ  from  some  other
preachers  ?

3.  What  special  relation  of  Paul  to  those  addressed  was  the
reason  of  the  prayer  now  to  be  offered?

4.  What  passage  in  Galatians  bears  on  the  matter,  and  does  this
justify  our  present  division  of  the  missionary  work  into  two  distinct
departments — home  and  foreign?

5.  How  did  he  receive  this  dispensation  of  the  grace  of  God,
and  what  the  bearing  of  it  on  the  question  of  a  human  pope?

6.  What  three  passages  in  Acts  give  the  history  of  this  commit-
ment of  the  Gentile  work  to  Paul?

7.  Where  do  we  also  find  in  Acts  a  revelation  from  God  to  the
church  to  ordain  Paul  to  this  work  unto  which  our  Lord  had  called
him,  and  what  two  things  does  this  prove?

8.  How  do  you  explain  the  phrase,  "As  I  wrote  you  before  in  a
few  words  ?"

9.  What  the  meaning  of  "mystery"  here  as  distinguished  from
its  meaning  in  I  Tim.  3:  16  and  Rev.  17:  5?

10.  What  additional  thought  in  Paul's  conception  of  his  mission,
and  to  what  marvelously  glorious  end?

11.  What  then  the  relation  of  the  church  to  angels?

12.  What  the  lesson  and  application  in  the  story  of  the  two
weavers  ?

13.  Cite  two  passages  in  this  chapter  having  a  bearing  on  church
perpetuity,  and  explain  the  bearing.

14.  Which  the  more  important,  the  New  Testament  forecast
of  church  perpetuity  or  the  testimony  of  church  history  on  that
point,  and  why?

15.  What  verses  of  this  chapter  contain  Paul's  second  great
prayer  for  those  addressed?

16.  On  this  prayer  answer:  (i)  What  the  circumstances  of  the
petitioner?  (2)  What  not  chained?  (3)  What  the  cause  of  the
prayer?  (4)  What  the  attitude  or  posture  of  the  petitioner?  (5)
To  whom  addressed?  (6)  What  the  three  varied  renderings  of  the
clause  modifying  the  Father,  what  the  difference  in  meaning,  and
which  do  you  prefer?

17.  Name  the  things  asked  for  in  this  prayer.

18.  Illustrate  how  a  church  may  now  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness
of  God.


XIII

THE  GREAT  UNITIES
Scripture:  Eph.  4:1-16

WE  have  come  to  the  tenth  division  of  our  analysis  of
Ephesians — The  Great  Unities,  and  the  Means  of
Securing  Their  Recognition.  The  importance  of
this  section,  Eph.  4: 1-16,  cannot  be  overstated.  It  would
be  well  to  memorize  this  section  verbatim.  It  would  be  well
for  the  reader  to  drill  himself  on  it  until  every  thought  in  it  is
rooted  unto  such  stability  that  no  whirlwind  could  uproot  the
sturdy  oak  tree  of  his  faith  or,  changing  the  figure,  until
the  composite  structure  of  his  faith  is  so  grounded  in  the
rock,  so  tied  at  the  corners,  so  compacted  in  each  layer  of
stones,  so  jointed  and  roofed  that  no  storm  of  wind  and  wave
could  undermine,  tear  apart,  or  shake  it  down.  These  nine
unities  are  thus  named :

One  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  over  all,  and  through  all,
and  in  all.

One  Lord,  who  is  Jesus  Christ.

One  bond  of  peace,  which  is  Christ's  atonement.

One  Spirit,  which  is  the  Holy  Spirit.

One  calling,  meaning  the  inheritance  to  which  we  are
called.

One  body,  which  is  the  church.

One  act  of  Faith,  by  which  we  have  access  into  grace.

One  baptism,  a  prerequisite  of  church  membership.

One  system  of  Faith,  i.e.,  "The  Faith,"  which  is  the
church-creed,

141


14^     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

In  a  true  sense  this  chapter  begins  the  practical  side  of  the
letter :  "I  therefore,  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord,  beseech  you  to
walk  worthily  of  the  calling  wherewith  ye  were  called,  with
all  lowliness  and  meekness,  with  longsuffering,  forbearing
one  another  in  love ;  giving  diligence  to  keep  the  unity  of  the
Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace."

From  doctrines  come  morals.  The  relation  is  philosophical
and  the  bond  is  indissoluble.  All  the  modern  hue  and  cry
against  dogma  is  really  against  morals.  The  more  we  reduce
the  number  of  the  creed-articles,  the  more  we  undermine
practical  religion.

Neither  Christ  nor  the  apostles  predicate  morals  on  any
other  than  a  doctrinal  foundation.  If  we  are  to  walk  worthily
of  our  calling,  we  must  first  know  the  doctrine  of  the  calling,
that  is,  unto  what  we  were  called.  And  all  our  "lowliness
and  meekness  and  longsuffering  and  forbearance  toward  each
other,  and  diligent  keeping  of  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the
bond  of  peace"  are  dependent  on  the  antecedent  doctrines
set  forth,  otherwise  there  is  no  force  in  Paul's  "therefore."
And  what  one  of  the  doctrines  in  the  three  preceding  chap-
ters or  in  this  can  we  omit  from  our  creed  without  omitting
something  profitable  in  our  life?  A  Christian's  creed  should
enlarge,  and  not  diminish,  up  to  the  last  utterance  of  revela-
tion in  order  that  each  article  might  be  transmuted  into
experience.

A  church  with  a  little  creed  is  a  church  with  a  little  life.
The  more  divine  doctrines  a  church  can  agree  on,  the  greater
its  power,  and  the  wider  its  usefulness.  The  fewer  its
articles  of  faith,  the  fewer  its  bonds  of  union  and  compact-
ness.

The  modern  cry:  "Less  creed  and  more  liberty,"  is  a
degeneration  from  the  vertebrate  to  the  jelly-fish,  and  means
less  unity  and  less  morality,  and  it  means  more  heresy.
Definitive  truth  does  not  create  heresy — it  only  exposes  and
corrects.    Shut  off  the  creed  and  the  Christian  world  would


THE  GREAT  UNITIES  143

fill  up  with  heresy  unsuspected  and  uncorrected,  but  none  the
less  deadly.

Just  so  it  is  not  good  discipline  that  creates  backsliding
and  other  sins  of  Christians.  But  discipline  is  oftentimes
the  only  means  of  saving  a  church.  To  hold  to  discipline  for
immoralities  and  relax  it  on  doctrine  puts  the  cart  before  the
horse  and  attempts  to  heal  a  stream  while  leaving  the  foun-
tain impure.  To  Christ  and  the  apostles  false  creeds  were
the  most  deadly  things,  and  called  most  for  the  use  of  the
knife.  Let  us  apply  these  reflections  to  the  great  unities  in
this  chapter :

1.  One  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  over  all,  through  all
and  in  all.  That  declaration  not  only  dethrones  the  idols
of  the  world,  but  digs  under  the  multitudinous  and  gross
immoralities  arising  from  the  idolatries.  Not  only  so,  but
it  uproots  all  the  false  philosophies  and  cosmogonies;  for
example.  Materialism,  Pantheism,  Stoicism,  Epicurianism
(more  recently  labeled  Darwinian  evolution),  and  the  like.

2.  "One  Lord."  This  limits  revelation,  mediation,  priest-
hood and  kingly  rule  to  Jesus  the  Messiah,  the  image  of  God.
How  vast  the  sweep  of  this  exclusive  truth,  and  how  multi-
tudinous the  immoralities  it  outlaws !

3.  "One  bond  of  peace."  That  is  one  sacrifice  through
which  our  peace  with  God  is  secured  and  our  peace  with
each  other  is  assured.  Apart  from  this  there  is  no  real  peace
between  God  and  man,  and  between  man  and  man.

4.  "One  Spirit."  This  limits  the  vicarship  and  the  vice-
gerency  to  one,  and  so  not  only  cuts  off  the  head  of  Pope  and
king  who  claim  to  be  vicars  of  Christ,  but  outlaws  all  ap-
proaches to  Christ  or  interpretations  of  Him  not  directed  by
the  Spirit,  and  closes  up  the  way  to  all  immoral  attempts  to
penetrate  the  future  through  demon,  wizard,  witch,  diviner
or  soothsayer.  Moreover,  it  limits  all  application  of  the
atonement  to  the  Holy  Spirit.

5.  "One  calling."   This  refers  not  only  to  the  act  of  calKng,


lU     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

but  to  the  inheritance  to  which  we  are  called.  It  means  the
complete  salvation  of  man  and  his  heavenly  home,  with  all  the
riches  of  its  glory.  We  are  all  going  to  one  place — ^the
heavenly  land  of  promise.

6.  "One  body,"  or  one  church.  Applying  this  to  the  re-
deemed in  the  aggregate,  it  limits  salvation  to  those  in  Christ
and  vitally  connected  with  Him.  Applying  it  as  we  may  and
must  to  the  time  institution  He  established,  it  overturns  the
claims  of  all  human  institutions  affecting  equality  with  God's
institution,  or  assuming  the  right  to  be  recognized  as  a  branch
thereof.  Applying  it  as  we  may,  and  as  Paul  does,  to  a  par-
ticular church,  the  only  expression  of  the  institution,  it
excludes  all  so  called  churches  not  modeled  after  the  New
Testament  pattern  in  its  terms  of  membership,  polity,  doc-
trines, ordinances,  and  officers.

7.  "One  faith."  This,  construed  with  verses  13  and  14
below,  as  it  may  be  construed,  would  evidently  not  refer  to
an  individual's  trust  in  Jesus,  but  to  the  system,  or  body  of
truth  taught  by  Christ  and  the  apostles.  But  construed  with
baptism  and  the  body,  which  is  a  nearer  and  better  connec-
tion, then  it  means  two  things :

(a)  The  one  means  of  contact  with  Christ,  i.e.,  "by  faith
we  enter  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand,"  and  so  becomes
an  essential  prerequisite  to  church  membership  and  to  sal-
vation.

(b)  It  would  also  mean  one  definite  transaction  through
which  justification  comes  once  for  all.  The  thought  excludes
the  heresy  that  we  may  lose  justification  and  so  be  under  the
necessity  of  repeating  the  saving  act  of  faith.  Faith,  in  the
act  of  receiving  and  relying  on  Christ  for  justification,  is  not
repeated.  It  is  one  faith.  We  may  go  on,  we  may  not  go
back  to  relay  the  foundation.  This  one  definite  act  of  faith
is  instantaneous.  It  receives  Christ,  as  a  woman  in  marriage
takes  a  man  to  be  her  husband.  It  commits  the  keeping  of
the  soul  to  Christ  and  relies  on  His  ability  to  keep  that  which


THE  GREAT  UNITIES  145

IS  so  committed  until  the  judgment  day.  Neither  the  taking
,  in  marriage  nor  the  making  of  a  deposit  is  progressive  or
contingent.  And  so  justification,  following  faith,  is  not  con-
tingent nor  progressive.  It  is  a  declaration  of  the  court  of
the  last  resort  that  one  is  acquitted  definitely,  at  once,  and  is
forever  free.

8.  "One  baptism."  The  reference  here  is  unquestionably
to  the  ordinance  of  water  baptism  that  follows  faith  and  pre-
cedes church  membership.  By  a  figure  of  speech  other  things
are  called  baptism.  The  overwhelming  of  Christ  in  suffer-
ing is  so  called  (Luke  12:50).  The  overwhelming  of  the
saints  in  the  outpoured  Spirit  is  so  called  (Acts  1:5).  The
final  overwhelming  of  sinners  in  the  penal  fires  of  judgment
is  so  called  (Matt.  3 :  10-12).  But  these  figures  of  speech —
baptism  in  suffering,  baptism  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  baptism  in
fire — gather  their  significance  from  a  likeness  in  the  over-
whelming act  to  the  immersion  of  a  believer  in  water.  The
one  baptism  of  our  text  means  the  one  immersion  in  water
according  to  Christ's  example  and  precept.  It  therefore
implies  two  things :

(a)  Baptism  is  one  definite  thing — immersion — and  not
permissibly  one  of  three  things — sprinkling,  pouring,  or
immersion.

The  baptism  of  our  Lord  in  the  river  Jordan  settles  the
whole  matter  and  fixes  the  particular  meaning,  even  if  the
word  had  many  meanings,  for  John,  in  baptizing  Jesus,  did
only  one  thing.  He  either  sprinkled  or  poured  water  on
Christ  or  immersed  Christ  in  water.    He  did  not  do  all  three.

What  he  did  is  the  one  baptism,  for  when,  through  His
disciples,  Christ  also  baptized,  and  baptized  more  than  John
did,  the  act  was  the  same  as  that  to  which  He  had  submitted
himself  (John  3:22,  23  and  4:  i,  2).  And  what  He  sub-
mitted to  himself  that  He  also  commanded  to  be  done  by  His
disciples  (Matt.  28:  19).

(b)  It  is  not  only  one  thing  as  distinguished  from  others.


140     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

but  one  in  that,  unlike  the  Lord's  Supper,  it  may  not  be  re^
peated,  when  the  elements  of  its  validity  are  all  present.
These  elements  are:  (i)  proper  authority;  (2)  proper  sub-
ject; (3)  proper  act;  (4)  proper  design,  upon  all  of  which
the  receiving  church  must  pass  judgment.  By  the  consensus
of  Christendom,  baptism  is  prerequisite  to  church  member-
ship, and  consequently  to  participation  in  the  Lord's  Supper,
which  is  peculiarly  a  church  ordinance.

9.  "The  unity  of  the  faith"  (verse  13).  Here  certainly,
if  not  in  verse  5,  the  reference  is  to  the  system  or  body  of
truth  constituting  the  creed  of  the  church,  as  sufficiently
appears  from  its  direct  connection  with  verse  14.  It  cer-
tainly teaches  the  importance  of  all  gospel  truth,  and  the
necessity  of  bringing  all  babes  in  Christ,  or  new  converts,
into  unity  of  belief  to  safeguard  them  from  divisions  and
from  becoming  the  prey  of  cunning  craftiness,  to  hedge
against  shifting  from  doctrine  to  doctrine,  all  in  order  to
their  reciprocal  growth  so  as  to  affect  the  maturity  of  the
church  in  Christian  knowledge  and  the  consequent  maturity
of  development  as  the  body  of  Christ.

"The  faith"  here  coincides  with  its  use  in  Jude  3:  "Be-
loved, while  I  was  giving  all  diligence  to  write  unto  you  of
our  common  salvation,  I  was  constrained  to  write  unto  you
exhorting  you  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  which  was
once  for  all  delivered  unto  the  saints/*  Here  is  a  sacred
deposit  of  truth  called  "the  faith" — a  deposit  delivered  to
the  saints — a  fixed  deposit  delivered  once  for  all.  This  truth
certain  heresiarchs,  who  had  crept  privately  into  the  church,
were  seeking  to  undermine,  "denying  our  only  Master  and
Lord,  Jesus  Christ."  And  as  Jude  shows  powerfully  this
departure  from  the  faith  was  followed  by  immorality  in  life.

Paul  refers  to  this  deposit  and  its  sanctity  in  several  places.
Notably  I  Cor.  15  :  3-8 :  "For  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all
that  which  I  also  received,"  itemizing  ( I )  Christ's  death  for
pur  sins  according  to  the  scriptures,  (2)  His  burial,  (3)  His


THE  GREAT  UNITIES  147

resurrection,  (4)  His  appearance.  Again,  concerning  the
Lord's  Supper,  he  says :  "For  I  received  of  the  Lord  that
which  I  also  deHvered  unto  you,"  I  Cor.  1 1 :  23-34.  And
yet  again :  "Now  I  praise  you  that  ye  hold  fast  to  the  things
handed  down,  even  as  I  delivered  them  unto  you,"  I  Cor.
1 1 :  I .  To  Timothy  he  writes,  "O  Timothy,  guard  that  which
is  committed  unto  thee,  turning  away  from  the  profane
babblings  and  opposition  of  the  knowledge  which  is  falsely
so  called ;  which  some  professing  have  erred  concerning  the
faith"  I  Tim.  6 :  20,  21.  And  again :  "And  the  things  which
thou  hast  heard  from  me  among  many  witnesses,  the  same
commit  thou  to  faithful  men  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others
also,"  II  Tim.  2 :  2.  Thus  does  he  provide  both  for  keeping
and  for  transmission.  Concerning  himself  about  to  die,  he
says,  "I  have  kept  the  faith,"  II  Timothy  4:  7.

This  body  of  truth,  constituting  the  creed  of  the  church,
be  held  as  of  inestimable  value,  and  was  ready  to  pronounce
anathema  against  an  angel  from  heaven  v/ho  would  preach
any  other  gospel.  It  is  a  radical  mistake  to  say  that  these
New  Testament  articles  of  faith  were  few  and  simple.  They
touched,  among  other  things,  the  nature,  being,  attributes
and  offices  of  the  triune  God ;  the  Holy  inspired  scriptures,
the  church  with  its  polity,  terms  of  membership,  officers,
ordinances  and  mission,  the  whole  plan  of  salvation  from
election,  foreordination  and  predestination  to  glorification;
the  family ;  the  citizen ;  the  whole  of  this  life,  and  the  whole
of  the  life  to  come ;  the  ministry  of  angels  good  and  the  oppo-
sition of  angels  bad,  and  the  final  judgment.

Particularly  they  touched  the  personality  of  the  Messiah,
His  pre-existence  and  deity.  His  emptying  himself  of  His
heavenly  glory  and  prerogatives  to  assume  in  His  first
advent  the  body  of  His  humiliation,  in  order  to  His  vicarious
expiation  of  sin  on  the  cross,  His  going  in  His  spirit  after
death  to  make  the  atonement  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  ;  His  sec-
ond advent  to  earth  in  order  to  assume  His  body  of  glorifi-


148     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

cation,  and  His  ascension  and  exaltation  to  the  throne  of  the
universe  as  a  royal  priest ;  His  sending  of  His  vicar,  or  vice-
gerent, the  Holy  Spirit,  to  accredit,  infill,  endue  with  power,
and  to  abide  with  His  church  on  earth ;  His  third  advent  to
assume  His  mystical  body,  the  glorified  church,  to  raise  the
dead  and  judge  the  world.

Broad  as  is  the  foregoing  statement,  it  does  not  include  all
the  clearly  defined  articles  of  the  New  Testament  faith.  So
the  reader  may  find  it  interesting  and  profitable  to  study  in
connection  with  the  nine  unities  of  Ephesians  4:1-16,  Romans
12 : 4,  5, 1  Cor.  12 :  12-31,  and  these  other  scriptural  declara-
tions or  summaries  of  the  faith :  Matt.  16 :  16,  28 :  18-20,  Rom.
8:  28-30;  I  Cor.  5:1-8  and  especially  I  Tim.  3 :  15-18.  The
last  is  quite  important,  for  after  setting  forth  that  the  church
is  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  faith,  i.e.,  the  keeper,  con-
servator, publisher,  illustrator  and  vindicator  of  the  truth,
the  apostle  then  summarizes  the  elements  of  the  truth — at
least  the  elements  that  enter  into  the  mystery  of  godliness — ^
thus:

1.  God  was  manifested  in  the  flesh.

2.  So  manifested  He  was  justified,  or  vindicated,  by  the
Holy  Spirit,  (a)  at  His  baptism  (Matt.  3),  (b)  in  offering
up  himself  as  a  sacrifice  (Heb.  9:  14),  (c)  in  His  resurrec-
tion (I  Pet.  3:  18,  and  Rom.  1 14),  (d)  by  His  descent  at
Pentecost  (Acts  2).

3.  Though  veiled  in  the  flesh.  He  was  recognized  by  the
angels  (Luke  2:9-14;  Matt.  3:  11;  Luke  22-43).

4.  Preached  among  the  nations.

5.  Believed  on  in  the  world.

6.  Received  up  into  glory.

Very  solemnly  I  would  warn  the  reader  against  any  teach-
ing that  decries  doctrines,  or  which  would  reduce  the  creed
of  the  church  into  two  or  three  articles.

We  are  entitled  to  no  liberty  in  these  matters.  It  is  a  posi-
tive and  very  hurtful  sin  to  magnify  liberty  at  the  expense


THE  GREAT  UNITIES  149

of  doctrine.  A  creed  is  what  we  believe.  A  confession  of
faith  is  a  declaration  of  what  we  believe.  The  church  must
both  believe  and  declare.  The  longest  creed  of  history  is
more  valuable  and  less  hurtful  than  the  shortest.

While  "the  faith"  has  many  articles,  there  is  unity  in
them.  They  articulate.  And  it  is  intensely  important  to
bring  all  members  of  the  church  into  unity  touching  all  the
faith.    This  brings  us  to  a  consideration  of —

The  Means  for  Securing  Unity. — These  are  all  of  divine
appointment.  If  we  ask,  what?  They  are  all  summed  up  in
the  one  word,  "Gifts."  These  gifts  are  men — teaching  men.
As  here  enumerated  they  are :

Apostles,  who  are  inspired.

Prophets,  who  are  inspired.

Evangelists,  who  labor  in  the  kingdom  at  large.

Pastors  and  teachers,  or  pastor-teachers,  whose  work  is  in
the  particular  churches.

The  first  two  were  inspired  to  fix  the  limits  of  the  faith.
The  second  two  were  illumined  to  understand  and  expound
these  limits.  If  we  ask  where  are  these  gifts  set,  or  placed?
They  are  not  in  the  church  ( i  Cor.  12 :  28) .  If  we  ask,  why,
i.e.,  to  what  end  ?  This  is  the  answer :  "For  the  perfecting  of
the  saints,  unto  the  work  of  ministering,  unto  the  building  up
of  the  body  of  Christ ;  till  we  all  attain  unto  the  unity  of  the
faith,  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a  full-
grown  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of
Christ."  That  is  the  answer  to  the  positive  side.  Negatively
it  is  expressed  thus :  "That  we  may  be  no  longer  children,
tossed  to  and  fro  and  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doc-
trine, by  the  sleight  of  men,  in  craftiness,  after  the  wiles  of
error."    The  standard  is  the  holy  scriptures.

The  apostle  now  gives,  under  the  figure  of  head  and  body,
as  a  livii^  organism,  the  most  vivid  description  in  the  Bible
of  a  well  organized  and  thoroughly  instructed  church :  From
Christ  the  head,  "all  the  body  fitly  framed  and  knit  together


150     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

through  that  which  every  joint  supplieth,  according  to  the
working  in  due  measure  of  each  several  part,  maketh  the
increase  of  the  body  unto  the  building  up  of  itself  in  love."

This  is  an  ideal  church.  It  constitutes  the  standard  of
perfection  toward  which  every  pastor  should  work.  It
teaches  not  only  that  each  individual  member  should  have
vital  connection  with  Christ  through  faith,  but  should  have
living  articulation  connecting  with  the  whole  body  of  church
members,  and  should  contribute  in  due  measure  toward  the
development  of  the  whole  church.  In  other  words,  it  ex-
cludes absolutely  the  idea  of  unsaved  men  in  the  church,  and
even  of  saved  men  who  refuse  to  be  articulated  with  others,
and  even  those  articulated  who  will  not  co-operate  according
to  ability.  So  that  it  provides  not  only  for  individual  salva-
tion, but  for  the  organization  of  individuals  into  a  corpora-
tion and  the  full  developments  of  corporate  life.

To  change  the  figure,  it  provides  not  only  for  good  indi-
vidual horses,  but  for  a  well  harnessed  team  of  horses  to
pull  together ;  not  only  for  good  individual  soldiers,  but  for
a  well-drilled  phalanx,  moving  and  fighting  as  a  unit.  One
balking  horse  spoils  the  team.  One  deserter  from  the  line
leaves  an  opening  through  which  the  enemy  may  penetrate
and  break  up  the  phalanx.

Dr.  Burleson  used  to  say  of  a  certain  town :  *Tt  has  more
individual  excellence,  and  more  general  worthlessness  than
any  other  town  in  Texas."  He  meant  that  they  had  no  organ-
ized community  life.  Their  magnified  individuality  went  off
in  every  direction  on  tangential  lines.  We  Baptists,  in  stress-
ing individual  liberty,  are  continually  sacrificing  the  power  of
united  forces.

Just  so  the  present  trend  toward  cutting  off  every  article
of  faith  to  which  some  individual  crank  may  object,  will,  if
tamely  unresisted,  leave  the  church  without  a  creed  and  with-
out a  moral  life.  Turning  away  from  doctrines  toward  God,
we  necessarily  turn  away  from  the  injunction,  "Love  the


THE  GREAT  UNITIES  151

brotherhood."  We  need  to  restudy  Zech.  ii :  10-14.  When-
ever the  staff,  "beauty,"  which  binds  us  to  God,  is  broken,
then  will  be  broken  the  staff,  "bands,"  which  binds  us  to  each
other.

This  discussion  is  incomplete  until  we  consider  the  source
of  the  gifts  which  make  for  corporate  unity  and  development.
Our  text  declares  that  Christ  is  the  author  of  the  preacher-
gifts.  The  continued  supply  of  these  gifts  results  from  His
exaltation  to  the  mediatorial  throne  and  this  exaltation
results  from  the  previous  humiliation.  The  one  who  ascended
to  bestow  the  gifts  is  the  very  one  who  first  descended  to
make  the  expiation  which  is  the  basis  of  the  gifts.  He  was
dead,  but  is  alive  forevermore.

We  may  close  with  these  observations:  (i)  While  even
babes  in  Christ  may  be  received  into  the  church  for  further
instruction  and  development,  those  appointed  to  instruct
and  develop  must  have  far  higher  qualifications  of  charac-
ter, capacity,  and  knowledge.  The  minimum  of  entrance
qualification  into  the  church  can  never  be  made  the  limit
of  the  church  creed,  and  especially  cannot  be  made  the  limit
of  examination  for  ordination  to  the  ministry.  This  would
assume  that  a  babe  must  teach  a  babe.  (2)  The  limit  of
ordination  examination  on  doctrine  is  the  maximum  of
church  creed  on  doctrine.  The  teacher  must  develop  each
new  born  soul  unto  the  ultimate  height  of  church-belief  in
doctrine.  Therefore  the  injunction:  "Lay  hands  suddenly
on  no  man — not  on  a  novice."  The  minister  must  be  "apt
to  teach."  A  teacher  is  one  long  past  the  milk  diet,  and  who
himself  nourishes  on  stronger  meat,  by  reason  of  use  has  his
senses  exercised  to  discern  between  good  and  evil.  He  must
himself  be  "sound  in  the  faith."  Even  a  deacon  must  be  a
proved-man,  "sound  in  the  faith."  (3)  Unless  "the  faith"
is  a  needed  creed  of  definite  vital  truth,  there  is  no  basis  for
examination  looking  to  ordination  and  no  standard  up  to
which  the  convert  must  be  developed.    The  church,  being


15^     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth,  must  have  a  standard  of
truth  to  uphold  and  conserve.  Upon  the  one  point  of  the
mystery  of  godliness,  Paul  cites  six  distinct  creed-items.  On
the  plan  of  salvation  he  cites  many  others.  See  Rom.
8:  28-30,  33,  34;  I  Cor.  15:  1-8;  and  on  the  ordinances  yet
others.  (4)  As  the  church  must  publish  the  truth,  it  must
know  what  to  publish.  As  the  church  must  illustrate  the
truth  in  ordinances  it  must  know  the  ordinances  and  their
import.  As  the  church  must  vindicate  the  truth  in  discipline,
it  must  know  what  is  a  vindication  of  truth  in  either  doctrine
or  life.

Again,  I  solemnly  warn  the  reader  against  all  who  depre-
ciate creeds,  or  who  would  reduce  them  to  a  minimum  of
entrance  qualifications  into  the  church.


QUESTIONS

1.  Name  the  nine  unities  in  Eph.  4:  1-16.

2.  What  side  of  the  letter  does  this  chapter  commence?

3.  What  the  philosophical  relation  between  doctrines  and  morals  ?

4.  What  bearing  has  this  relation  on  creeds  ?

5.  What  the  particular  effect  of  this  modern  cry :  "Less  creeds —
more  liberty?"

6.  Apply  the  foregoing  to  each  one  of  the  nine  unities  in  order,
making  clear  the  meaning  and  result  of  each,  citing  appropriate
scriptures.

7.  What  scriptures  may  be  profitably  studied  in  connection  with
Eph.  4:  1-16?

8.  Why  is  a  long  creed  better  than  a  short  one  ?

9.  What  the  means  of  securing  unity  in  doctrine,  where  placed,
and  why,  both  positively  and  negatively,  and  what  the  standard?

ID.     What  the  teaching  of  Eph.  4:  16?

11.  Who  the  source  of  the  gifts,  and  how  the  continual  supply?

12.  What  the  difference  in  standard  between  receiving  converts
into  a  church  and  a  man  into  the  ministry,  and  why?


XIV

THE  NECESSITY  OF  REGENERATION

Scriptures:  Eph.  4: 17—5:21  and  6:1-9

THIS  section  extends  from  4:17  to  6:9,  except  we
leave  out  the  illustration  in  5 :  21-33,  Christ  and  the
Bride.    That  will  follow  in  the  next  chapter.

Attention  has  already  been  called  to  the  remarkable  paral-
lels between  Colossians  and  Ephesians.  They  are  nowhere
more  striking  than  in  the  exhortations  to  newness  of  life
in  the  world  and  in  the  family.  In  both  we  find  the  sharp
distinction  between  the  philosophy  of  a  corrupt  life  and  the
philosophy  of  a  pure  life.

Effects  are  traced  in  each  case  to  an  adequate  cause.  The
unrenewed  nature  causes  the  first.  The  renewed  nature,
which  is  a  new  creation,  causes  the  second.  Nowhere  else
in  the  scripture,  except  perhaps  in  Romans  i  and  7,  is  there
more  clearly  shown  the  power  and  depravity  of  original  sin,
the  inheritance  of  sin-nature,  and  the  necessity  of  regenera-
tion in  order  to  a  life  of  holiness.  That  is  the  capital  thought
in  this  section.

The  two  sources  of  such  divergent  life  are  here  called
the  "old  man,"  and  the  "new  man."  In  the  first  the  fruit  is
bad  because  the  tree  is  bad.  In  the  second  the  fruit  is  good
because  the  tree  has  first  been  made  good.  The  whole  exhor-
tation powerfully  expounds  the  words  of  our  Lord  to  Nico-
demus :  "Except  a  man  be  born  from  above  he  cannot  see
the  kingdom  of  God,"  therefore,  "Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto
you,  Ye  must  be  born  again."  If  any  man  has  any  doubt
about  the  necessity  of  regeneration,  let  him  read  this  section.

15S


154     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

It  is  the  most  powerful  argument  on  the  necessity  of  regen-
eration anywhere  in  the  Bible.

Henry  Ward  Beecher,  the  great  Congregationalist
preacher,  who  had  several  heretical  tendencies,  was  once
subjected  to  an  examination  on  orthodoxy  before  a  council
of  his  people.  I  have  the  paper  which  he  submitted  at  that
time.  One  of  the  points  on  which  he  was  examined  was  the
subject  of  regeneration.  He  said,  "I  unswervingly  hold  to
the  necessity  of  regeneration  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  order  to
be  a  Christian."  That  looks  all  right.  But  when  one  of  the
examiners  asked,  "Do  you  hold  that  regeneration  is  neces-
sary for  any  other  reason  than  the  actual  transgressions  of
men  ?"  What  a  searching  question  that !  His  reply  was  a
dodge :  "I  believe  that  a  man  needs  to  be  regenerated  because
he  is  an  animal."  He  would  not  admit  original  sin.  He
would  not  admit  inherited  depravity.  He  said  that  the
Adam-man  was  an  animal  and  must  be  regenerated  before
he  can  become  a  spiritual  man  in  Christ.  That  was  new  to
me.  Beecher  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  thinkers  the
world  has  ever  known.  Nobody  else  would  have  thought  of
replying  just  that  way.  If  I  had  been  there  I  would  have
asked  Mr.  Beecher  some  questions  on  the  Letter  to  the
Ephesians.

The  reader  will  notice  that  every  gradation  in  process  of
corruption  is  set  forth  with  philosophical  power  in  this  sec-
tion. In  analyzing  it  we  see  that  he  starts  with  spiritual
ignorance.  That  produces  vanity  of  mind,  darkness  of
understanding,  and  alienation  from  the  life  of  God.  Then
evil  practice  hardens  the  heart  until  we  lose  sensitiveness  to
right  and  wrong,  become  past  feeling,  so  that  the  whole  life
is  surrendered  to  lasciviousness,  to  work  all  uncleanness  with
greediness.

How  much  we  are  reminded  here  of  the  terrible  process
set  forth  in  Romans  i :  21-32 !  There  also  the  whole  process
is  given:  "Because  that,  knowing  God,  they  glorified  Him


NECESSITY  OF  REGENERATION  155

not  as  God,  neither  gave  thanks ;  but  became  vain  in  their
imaginations,  and  their  senseless  heart  was  darkened.  Pro-
fessing themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools."  Because
they  did  not  like  to  retain  the  knowledge  of  God,  God  g^ve
them  up  to  reprobate  minds,  to  the  working  out  of  all  evil
passion.  Read  the  whole  of  that  awful  indictment  against
the  Gentile  world.

A  great  missionary  in  the  early  days  here  in  Texas
preached  for  me  in  Waco  on  this  theme :  "Are  the  heathen
lost  without  the  gospel  ?"  His  answer  was,  "Yes,  lost."  He
took  that  first  chapter  of  Romans  and  showed  how  what  is
there  said  fits  just  as  well  to  conditions  in  heathen  lands  today
as  then;  that  human  nature  is  always  the  same,  and  that
through  the  fall  of  Adam  an  evil  nature  was  inherited.  That
evil  nature  develops  into  acts.  The  wicked  man  waxes  worse
and  worse  and  finally  becomes  crystallized,  past  feeling,  with-
out God,  and  without  hope  in  the  world.  That  was  once  the
condition  of  these  Ephesians.  Many  of  them  were  Greeks,
who  prided  themselves  upon  the  greatest  intellectual  develop-
ment in  the  world.  Highest  in  art,  science,  sculpture,  paint-
ing, eloquence,  philosophy,  they  thought  themselves  the
cream  of  the  earth,  but  notwithstanding  this  culture  their
moral  corruption  was  extreme.  But  new  in  Christ,  renewed
in  mind,  they  are  exhorted  to  put  off  the  old  man  with  his
lusts,  his  anger,  falsehood,  idleness,  theft,  evil  speaking,  bit-
terness, clamor,  railing,  malice,  fornication,  covetousness,
filthiness,  foolish  talking  and  jesting,  and  drunkenness.
These  are  overt  acts.  As  soon  as  we  are  renewed  in  Christ
we  are  obliged  and  empowered  to  put  on  the  new  man  with
his  truth,  industry,  generosity,  thankfulness,  spirituality,
mercy,  love,  praise  and  prayer.

We  see  in  the  Letter  to  the  Galatians  the  fruits  of  the  two
trees  contrasted.  Gal.  5 :  22 :  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,
joy,  peace,  longsuffering,  kindness,  goodness,  faithfulness,
meekness,  self-control ;  against  such  there  is  no  law."    Gal.


150     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

5: 19;  "The  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are
these :  fornication,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness,  idolatry,  sor-
cery, enmities,  strife,  jealousies,  wraths,  factions,  divisions,
parties,  envyings,  drunkenness,  revellings,  and  such  like."

When  I  was  a  young  preacher  I  preached  a  sermon  on
the  two  trees — the  tree  of  the  flesh  and  the  tree  of  the  Spirit
— and  stated  that  some  people  spend  half  of  a  life-time
trying  to  find  out  whether  or  not  they  are  converted.  I
held  up  these  two  trees,  saying,  "Under  which  tree  do  you
stand?  There  is  a  practical  way  of  knowing  that  you
are  a  child  of  God.  Here  are  the  things  that  are  the  fruits
of  the  flesh,  and  here  are  the  things  that  are  the  fruits  of
the  Spirit.  You  know  the  fruit  of  your  life;  judge  from
that.  If  a  man  sows  to  the  flesh,  he  reaps  corruption;  if
he  sows  to  the  Spirit,  he  reaps  life  everlasting."  Our  Lord
said,  "By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  The  carnal
nature  and  spiritual  nature  are  opposites  and  antagonists.
He  had  already  shown  the  source  of  the  different  fruits:
"That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  that  which  is  born
of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  They  are  just  as  wide  apart  as
possible.  There  is,  however,  one  difficulty  in  reaching  a
correct  judgment  from  the  fruit,  towit :  Even  the  renewed
man,  until  sanctification  is  complete,  finds  a  war  in  himself,
as  we  learn  from  Rom.  7.  Sometimes  the  soul  is  on  top
and  sometimes  the  fleshly  lusts.  In  such  cases  there  are
yet  two  ways  of  ascertainment :

1.  What  is  the  trend  of  the  life,  good  or  evil,  and  is  there
progress  toward  the  good  ?

2.  Which  trend  does  the  person  deliberately  encourage
and  make  provision  for?

"You  may  not  be  able  to  keep  a  bird  from  lighting  on
your  head,  but  you  can  keep  him  from  building  a  nest  in
your  hair."  "You  may  not  be  able  to  keep  the  devil  from
knocking  at  your  door,  but  you  are  able  to  refrain  from
asking  him  to  spend  the  night."


NECESSITY  OF  REGENERATION         157

In  this  careful  elaboration  of  both  good  and  evil  fruits
there  are  several  expressions  calling  for  special  notice :  "Be
ye  angry  and  sin  not:  let  not  the  sun  go  down  on  your
wrath:  neither  give  place  to  the  devil."  The  first  part  of
this  statement  shows  that  there  is  no  sin  per  se  in  indigna-
tion against  a  wrong.  Christ  became  terribly  indignant  at
many  evils  which  He  saw  in  His  day.  We  cannot  stand
by  and  see  a  great,  burly  boy  browbeat  and  evil  treat  a
weak  little  fellow  without  being  indignant,  that  is,  if  we
are  any  good  ourselves.  If  a  man  sees  a  snake  creeping
up  just  about  to  strike  a  child,  love  in  that  case  reaches  out
after  a  stick  and  hits  quickly,  and  hits  to  hurt.  In  this  way
a  man  may  be  angry  and  sin  not.

We  come  now  to  a  nice  point  of  discrimination :  In  our
indignation  at  what  is  wrong  there  is  a  great  hazard  of
committing  a  sin,  so  our  text  puts  in  three  cautions.  One
is,  "do  not  let  the  sun  go  down  on  your  wrath,"  that  is,  "do
not  cherish  it  until  it  breaks  out  in  the  wrong  direction — •
get  rid  of  it  before  night."  When  a  man  carries  anger  in
his  heart  and  broods  over  it  for  a  week,  or  a  year,  or  waits,
as  Absalom  did,  two  years  before  striking,  it  grows  into
malice.  There  are  two  things  the  sun  ought  never  to  go
down  on,  viz. :  Never  let  the  sun  go  down  on  your  anger —
cool  off  before  night — and  never  let  it  go  down  on  unpaid
wages  due  a  day  laborer.  Many  are  entirely  dependent  on
each  day's  pay.  So  let  us  pay  our  wash-women  and  not
forget  that  there  are  some  obligations  that  a  gentleman
cannot  defer.

The  next  danger  in  anger  is  this :  We  are  apt,  if  we  are
very  hot  about  a  matter,  to  take  vengeance  into  our  own
hands.  I  will  cite  a  passage  which  explains :  "Avenge  not
yourselves,  beloved,  but  give  place  unto  the  wrath  of  God;
for  it  is  written,  vengeance  belongeth  to  me ;  I  will  recom-
pense, saith  the  Lord.  But  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed
him ;  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink ;  for  in  so  doing  thou  shalt


158     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

heap  coals  of  fire  upon  his  head.  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,
but  overcome  evil  with  good."

I  knew  a  man  once  to  make  a  wrong  application  of  that.
While  he  was  conducting  family  prayer  his  boy  kept  doing
something  that  angered  him,  and  he  overcame  evil  with
good  by  throwing  the  family  Bible  at  him  and  knocking
him  down,  which  was  not  promotive  of  reverence  for  that
service.

No  matter  how  angry  we  get,  we  should  never  forget
that  vengeance  is  a  divine  prerogative.  Nobody  is  qualified
to  take  vengeance  except  God.  He  never  forgets,  and  He
takes  everything  into  account.  Our  text  says,  "Neither  give
place  to  the  devil."  When  a  Christian  gets  angry  there
stands  the  devil,  whispering,  "Hit  him!"  "Kill  him!"
"Take  vengeance  in  your  own  hands !"

I  saw  a  man  once  walk  the  floor  for  hours,  and  finally  I
said  to  him,  "What  is  the  matter?"  "I  am  trying,"  said  he,
"to  get  rid  of  a  desire  to  get  on  the  train,  go  to  a  certain
place  and  cow-hide  a  man  until  his  skin  hangs  in  strings.
It  is  not  right  for  me  to  do  that,  but  I  am  continually
reaching  out  my  hand  and  trying  to  take  hold  of  the  thunder-
bolt of  the  Almighty  and  hurl  it."

The  question  has  been  asked,  "What  bearing  has  Eph.
4: 19,  'being  past  feeling'  on  the  unpardonable  sin?"  It  is
the  tendency  of  turning  away  from  light  to  have  less  light ;
turning  away  from  feeling  to  have  less  feeling.  A  young
man  in  a  protracted  meeting  may  be  wonderfully  impressed.
He  is  convinced  that  the  Bible  is  true,  that  Christ  is  a
Savior  and  that  he  is  a  sinner.  He  is  stirred  up  over  the
matter,  and  feels  impelled  to  go  and  fall  upon  his  knees
and  say,  "God  have  mercy  on  my  soul,"  but  says,  "Not
right  now — at  a  more  convenient  season — some  other  time."
The  next  time  he  will  not  feel  that  impression  as  strong
as  the  first  time.  The  third  time  he  feels  it  still  less,  and
after  a  while  he   is  past   feeling— cannot  be  awakened.


NECESSITY  OF  REGENERATION         159

The  sun  shines  on  wax  and  melts  it.  The  sun  shines  on
soft  clay  and  hardens  it.  So  light  followed  gets  brighter;
light  neglected  dims  into  darkness.  Being  past  feeling
may  well,  in  some  cases,  indicate  the  unpardonable  sin,
but  not  in  all  cases.  Some  feel,  by  anticipation,  the  pangs
of  hell.  Remorse  can  be  active  when  there  is  no
repentance.

The  next  particular  passage  is  verse  28:  "Let  him  that
stole  steal  no  more :  but  rather  let  him  labor,  working  with
his  hands  the  thing  that  is  good,  that  he  may  have  whereof
to  give  him  that  hath  need."  The  point  that  I  want  to
impress  is  this :  Many  people  in  the  church  think,  because
they  have  no  real  estate,  no  bank  account,  and  are  not  rich,
that  they  ought  not  to  help.  They  say,  "I  have  nothing."
Here  is  the  answer :  "Go  to  work,  get  something  and  help.
You  have  strength."  One  of  the  sweetest  offerings  ever
laid  upon  the  altar  of  God  is  the  offering  of  the  poor  which
is  the  result  of  the  labor  of  their  hands.

One  day  when  I  was  taking  up  a  great  collection,  people
calling  out  in  hundreds  all  over  the  house,  an  old  woman,
who  had  to  be  helped  up,  came  on  her  crutches  to  the  table
and  put  on  the  table  a  pair  of  socks  which  she  had  knit.
I  felt  the  tears  running  down  my  face,  and  I  almost  listened
to  hear  a  voice  from  heaven  say,  "Behold,  she  hath  done
more  than  they  all  1"  She  felt  that  she  had  a  right  to  help,
even  if  she  was  poor,  and  that  God  did  not  require  her  to
give  beyond  her  ability.  She  could  labor  with  her  hands
and  make  a  contribution.

Next  consider  specially  5:4:  "Nor  filthiness,  nor  foolish
talking,  nor  jesting,  which  are  not  befitting."  This  is  the
"fly  in  the  apothecary's  ointment"  in  the  case  of  many
preachers.  Many  a  good  meeting  has  been  ruined  by  the
talk  in  the  preacher's  tent.  Let  a  young  man  who  has  been
deeply  concerned  about  his  salvation  hear  that  foolish  talk-
ing and  jesting  in  the  hour  of  the  preacher's  relaxation,  and


160     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

it  hurts  him;  he  is  led  to  question  the  sincerity  of  the
previous  exhortation.

That  is  why,  in  my  young  manhood,  I  made  a  covenant
with  Dr.  Riddle,  moderator  of  our  association,  that  we
would  never  tell  an  obscene  anecdote  and  never  let  any-
body tell  us  one.  He  and  I  made  that  covenant  when  camp-
ing out  on  the  prairie  between  Waco  and  Groesbeck.  After-
wards many  people  joined  us  in  that  covenant.  It  had  a
marked  effect.  I  would  like  to  see  every  preacher  solemnly
enter  into  an  agreement  with  God  to  set  a  watch  before  his
lips,  to  avoid  foolish  jesting  and  foohsh,  obscene  stories.

I  was  in  a  stage  travelling  from  Canyon  to  Plainview,  one
other  Christian  besides  myself  on  the  stage,  and  two  worldly
sinners.  One  of  them  started  to  tell  a  very  vulgar  anecdote.
I  said,  "Stop !  I  imagine  that  is  going  to  be  tough.  Let  me
get  out  and  walk ;  I  do  not  want  to  hear  it.  I  am  willing  to
help  you  while  away  the  time  by  telling  anecdotes,  if  they
be  good  ones  without  any  twang  in  them."  He  said,  "If
you  will  let  me  tell  this  one,  I  will  not  tell  any  more."  "But
I  do  not  want  to  hear  that  one;  I  know  it  is  bad,  and  I  do
not  want  to  hear  it."  "Why?"  he  asked.  "Sir,"  I  said,  "I
made  a  covenant  with  a  man  who  is  now  in  heaven  that
I  would  never  allow  any  one  to  tell  me  a  smutty  anecdote."
"Well,"  he  said,  "Dr.  Carroll,  I  respect  your  wishes  in  the
matter."  I  said  to  him,  "Now  you  feel  better ;  you  have  a
better  taste  in  your  mouth."

The  next  passage  is  5:5:  "Nor  a  covetous  man,  who  is
an  idolator."  Just  look  at  that  language!  We  claim  that
idolatry  has  passed  away.  But  there  stands  that  text :  "A
covetous  man  is  an  idolator."  He  worships  an  idol,  and
that  idol  is  money.

No  devotee  ever  bowed  before  Moloch,  or  any  other
hideous  idol  in  China  or  India,  who  was  more  of  an  idolator
than  a  covetous  man  is.

When  I  was  a  boy  a  book  of  poetry  was  largely  read


NECESSITY  OF  REGENERATION         161

called  "Pollock's  Course  of  Time."  I  am  sorry  people
stopped  reading  it.  It  describes  a  miser  in  hell  with  the
devil  pouring  melted  gold  down  his  throat.

The  miser  is  the  meanest,  ghastliest,  grizzliest  of  all  gross
men!

Milton  does  the  same  thing  in  "Paradise  Lost"  when  he
comes  to  describe  Mammon.  He  makes  other  demons  some-
what respectable,  but  when  he  comes  to  Mammon,  there  is
nothing  in  him  to  admire.

We  now  notice  5 : 7.  Here  arises  the  question,  "What
are  you  going  to  do  with  this  evil  tide  all  around  you?"
(i)  "Be  ye  not  partakers  with  them."  We  cannot  help
what  they  do,  but  we  should  not  be  partakers.  (2)  We
should  have  no  fellowship  with  their  unfruitful  works.  (3)
We  should  reprove  them.  I  do  not  say  that  we  ought  to  go
out  on  the  streets  and  denounce  them.  Our  lives  will  reprove
them  if  we  show  by  the  way  we  live  that  we  do  not  touch
those  things.  We  cannot  walk  down  the  street  without
condemning  them.

Again,  the  14th  verse:  "Wherefore  he  sayeth,  Awake,
thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall
shine  upon  thee."  That  is  a  great  text.  Who  can  locate
that  text  in  the  Bible  ?  On  that  passage  one  of  the  greatest
sermons  I  ever  read  is  by  Dr.  Addison  Alexander,  a  Pres*
byterian.    I  give  the  divisions  of  his  sermon :

1.  Sin  is  a  state  of  darkness — "Christ  shall  give  thee  Hght."

2.  A  state  of  sleep — "Awake,  thou  that  sleepest."

3.  A  state  of  death — "Arise  from  the  dead."

Let  us  look  at  5:  18:  "Be  not  drunken  with  the  wine,
wherein  is  riot,  but  be  filled  with  the  Spirit."  There  are
two  kinds  of  intoxication,  one  of  wine  and  one  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  I  have  seen  people  under  the  intoxication  of  the
Spirit.  I  remember  one  lady — one  of  the  sweetest  ladies
I  ever  knew.  I  was  not  a  Christian,  but  it  did  me  good  to
watch  her  in  a  meeting.     When  the  power  of  the  Spirit


162     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

would  begin  to  fill  her  heart,  she  would  begin  to  show  her
intoxication.  Her  face  would  become  luminous,  her  lips
would  quiver  and  she  would  commence  to  sing :  "Oh  Love
Divine,  how  sweet  thou  art!"  It  was  like  the  rustling  of
the  wings  of  an  angel.

A  preacher  oftentimes  needs  a  stimulant.  The  trouble  is
that  some  of  them  take  the  wrong  kind.  One  thing  I  know :
Nobody  respects  a  preacher  who,  before  he  enters  the  pulpit,
takes  a  little  toddy  or  opium  to  enable  him  to  take  hold  of
things  lively  while  in  the  pulpit.  One  of  the  most  brilliant
preachers  in  the  South  made  a  shipwreck  of  himself  that
way.  I  was  called  on  to  preach  for  him  in  his  church,  and
when  he  got  up  to  make  his  introductory  remarks  he  was
braced  up  right  sharply  with  whiskey,  and  said  some  very
foolish  things.  He  could  get  a  church  anywhere  at  first,
but  at  last  he  could  get  a  church  nowhere.  Whenever  we
want  to  be  stimulated,  we  should  go  off  and  pray.  As  we  are
infilled  with  the  Spirit,  we  become  enthusiastic;  a  divine
afflatus  rests  upon  us,  enabling  us  to  think  thoughts  that
breathe,  to  speak  words  that  burn  and  to  sing  songs  that
have  more  convincing  power  than  the  sermon.  That  is
spiritual  intoxication.

It  is  often  a  practical  question :  "What  shall  we  do  with
exuberant  feelings?"  How  may  we  find  a  safe  vent  for
our  enthusiasms,  ecstasies,  exultations  ?  Edward  Eggleston
tells  of  a  crowd  of  intoxicated  boys  raising  this  very  ques-
tion. One  of  them  said,  "Let's  do  something  lu-dick-er-ous/'
When  asked  what  he  would  call  a  "ludickerous"  thing  he
replied,  "Let's  go  and  rock  the  Dutchman's  house."  There
was  one  inoffensive  German  in  the  neighborhood,  and  their
rocking  his  house  led  to  some  costly  and  disastrous  results.
But  verse  19  suggests  a  better  and  safer  vent:  "Speaking
one  to  another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,
singing  and  making  melody  with  your  heart  to  the  Lord."
I  have  known  churches  intoxicated  with  the  Spirit  to  do


NECESSITY  OF  REGENERATION         163

that  very  thing,  the  members  going  from  house  to  house
holding  glorious  song-services  that  did  much  to  deepen  and
widen  the  religious  awakening.

From  this  general  discussion  of  "the  old"  and  "the  new
man"  expressed  in  life's  work,  he  turns  to  the  application
in  life's  relation,  viz. :  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child,
master  and  servant,  pointing  out  clearly  as  he  does  in  other
letters  the  reciprocal  obligations,  but  as  these  relations  have
been  discussed  in  the  Letter  to  the  Colossians,  we  pass  them
here.

QUESTIONS

1.  What  philosophy  of  a  good  or  evil  life  does  this  section  give?

2.  What  the  bearing  of  the  philosophy  on  the  necessity  of
regeneration  in  order  to  a  good  life?

3.  Cite  the  case  of  Henry  Ward  Beecher's  examination  by  a
council  of  his  people.

4.  Are  the  heathen  lost  without  the  gospel  ?

5.  What  our  Lord's  standard  for  our  judgment  of  men's  pro-
fessions ?

6.  What  the  difficulty  in  applying  this  test,  and  how  obviated  ?

7.  Expound  :   "Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not."

8.  What  the  first  hazard  in  being  angry,  and  how  guarded?

9.  What  the  second,  and  how  obviated  ?

10.  What  the  third,  and  how  obviated?

11.  What  the  bearing  of  "past  feeling"  on  the  unpardonable  sin?

12.  Show  how  the  poor  should  help  in  Qirist's  work.

13.  What  danger  attends  the  preacher's  hours  of  relaxation,  and
what  examples  cited?

14.  Prove  that  we  have  idolators  among  us.

15.  What  two  poets  describe  the  miser  ?

16.  Where  do  you  find  the  quotation :  "Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,
etc.,"  who  preached  a  great  sermon  on  the  text,  and  what  his  outline?

17.  What  two  intoxications  are  contrasted?

18.  What  prescription  in  this  section  for  finding  a  safe  vent  to
religious  exuberance,  and  what  Edward  Eggleston's  account  of  a
different  vent  for  worldly  exuberance  ?


XV

THE   CHURCH   IN   GLORY
Scriptures:  Eph.  5 :  22-33  and  6: 10-24

THIS  chapter  closes  the  exposition  of  the  Letter  to
the  Ephesians,  elaborating  the  12th  and  13th  items
of  our  analysis,  towit :

Christ  and  the  bride,  or  the  church  in  glory.

The  Christian's  enemies,  warfare  and  armor.

First,  we  will  expound  the  relation  between  Christ  and
His  church,  so  far  as  set  forth  under  the  figure  of  husband
and  wife.  We  need  to  recall  so  much  of  the  first  part  of
our  definition  of  the  word,  "church,"  in  New  Testament
usage  as  applied  to  our  subject:  "In  the  divine  purpose
from  eternity  and  in  its  consummation  in  glory,  the  whole
number  of  the  redeemed  are  conceived  of  as  a  unit,  set
forth  in  the  scripture  under  the  figure  of  the  bride,  or  wife,
of  the  Lamb."  This  divine  conception  was  foreshadowed
in  Eve,  the  first  woman,  derived  from  Adam,  the  first  man,
so  as  by  derivation  to  be  bone  of  his  bone  and  flesh  of  his
flesh.  As  Adam  was  the  head,  or  lord,  over  Eve,  so  is
Christ  head,  or  Lord,  of  the  church.  As  Eve  was  derived
from  Adam,  being  made  a  part  of  himself,  extracted  from  his
side  in  a  deep  sleep,  so  the  church  is  derived  from  the  body
of  Christ  in  the  sleep  of  vicarious  death  on  the  cross.  As
Eve,  when  fashioned  gloriously,  was  presented  to  Adam  and
united  to  him  in  marriage,  to  be  his  companion,  so  the
church,  when  complete  as  to  its  number,  and  complete  as  to
the  glorification  of  each  member,  will  be  presented  to  Christ
and  married  to  Him,  to  be  His  companion  forever.    Under

164


THE  CHURCH  IN  GLORY  166

this  imagery  the  church  is  the  mystical  bride  of  the  Lamb.

The  reader  will  readily  see  that  the  church  in  this  mys-
tical sense  has  no  real  existence  now  except  in  the  con-
tinuous preparation  of  its  members.  It  is  not  yet  a  church
except  in  purpose,  plan  and  prospect.  It  is  called  a  church
by  anticipation.  Some  of  its  members  are  already  prepared
in  both  soul  and  body,  for  example,  Enoch  and  Elijah,  and
perhaps  those  who  rose  after  Christ's  resurrection  (Matt.
27:53).  Some  are  prepared  in  spirit,  and  constitute  the
"spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect,"  whose  bodies  yet  sleep.
Some  on  earth  yet  are  prepared  so  far  as  regeneration,
justification  and  adoption  go,  but  are  not  yet  sanctified  in
spirit  or  glorified  in  body.  By  far  the  greater  number  are
not  yet  even  born.  To  be  a  church  they  must  be  assembled
and  organized.  What  is  called  the  "presentation  and  mar-
riage" is  a  definite  transaction  yet  for  the  future.

We  hear  much  of  the  "universal  church."  The  word,
*'katholikos"  (universal),  is  not  found  in  the  Greek  Bible
in  either  the  Old  or  the  New  Testament.  When  those  so
fond  of  this  phrase  as  expressive  of  a  now  existing  church
are  called  on  to  define  it,  they  go  to  pieces.  Some  of  them
say  it  means  all  existing  denominations,  which  are  branches
of  the  church.  Others  say  that  it  means  all  the  particular
churches  collectively.  Yet  others,  that  it  means  all  living
Christians,  whether  or  not  they  are  members  of  the  church.
And  so  they  go.  In  all  probability,  i.e.,  judging  from  the
prophecies  of  the  uncountable  number  that  will  ultimately
be  saved,  not  one  thousandth  part  of  the  elect  are  yet  in
existence.  How  can  a  thousandth  part  of  the  whole  be
universal  ?

It  has  no  actual  existence  beyond  the  preparation  of  mate-
rial for  it,  constantly  going  on.  One  may  say,  "I  believe
in  the  Catholic  (universal)  church,"  just  as  he  may  say,  "I
believe  in  the  judgment  to  come,"  "I  believe  in  the  second
advent,"  "I  believe  in  the  regeneration  of  the  earth."


166     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

The  whole  of  the  modern  Baptist  idea  of  a  now  existent
"universal,  invisible  church''  was  borrowed  from  Pedo-
baptist  confessions  of  faith  in  the  Reformation  times,  and
the  Pedo-baptists  devised  it  to  offset  the  equally  erroneous
idea  of  the  Romanist  ''universal  visible  church"  We  need
to  be  well  indoctrinated  on  this  point,  because  the  error  is
not  harmless.  It  is  used  to  depreciate  Christ's  earth-church,
"the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth."

Let  us  carefully  analyze  the  paragraph  before  us :

1.  "Christ  loved  the  church,"  that  is,  He  loved  the  people
v^ho  were  to  be  given  to  Him — all  of  them.  In  eternity  a
joy  was  set  before  Him — a  future  reward.

2.  "He  gave  himself  for  it,"  that  is,  He  died  for  His
promised  people.  They  in  prospect  constituted  the  travail
of  His  soul.  It  was  promised  that  He  should  see  the
travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied.

3.  He  will  cleanse  it  in  order  to  its  holiness.  Our  text
reads,  "that  He  might  sanctify  it,  having  cleansed  it."

4.  This  cleansing  is  to  be  by  "the  washing  of  water  with
the  Word,"  that  is,  a  method  of  cleansing  was  established.
In  the  Old  Testament-time  this  cleansing  was  by  the  water
of  purification,  which  was  the  sprinkling  on  the  unclean  the
ashes  of  the  red  heifer  mingled  with  water.    The  sprinkling
was  done  with  a  bunch  of  hyssop.    (See  Num.  10,  Ps.  51 :  7,
Ezek.  36:25.)     This  typical  water  of  purification  finds  its
antitype  in  the  blood  of  Christ  (Heb.  9: 13,  14).     So  that
the  washing  of  water  in  our  text  means  simply  the  appli-
cation of  the  blood  of  Christ  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  regenera-
tion.    Hence  it  is  called  "the  washing  of  regeneration,"
Tit.  3:5.    In  regeneration  there  are  always  two  elements :
(i)  Cleansing  by  the  application  of  Christ's  blood;  (2)  Re-
newing or  changing  the  heart,  or  nature  (Ezek.  36:  25,  26;
Tit.  3:5).     Christ  gave  himself  for  His  people  that  He
might  cleanse  them  by  washing  them  in  His  blood   (see
revised  text  of  Rev.  7: 14;  22: 14).    This  cleansing  is  also.


THE  CHURCH  IN  GLORY  167

of  course,  "by  the  Word."  It  is  the  gospel  preached  that
leads  to  regeneration  (see  John  1:9,  13,  15;  James  i :  18;
I  Peter  i :  23 ;  I  Cor.  4:15).  The  Word  of  God  is  not  only
an  instrumentality  of  the  cleansing-part  of  regeneration,
but  also  of  the  continued  sanctification.  It  includes  all  ex-
pressed in  the  prayer  for  the  Thessalonians  (I  Thess.  5  :  23),
"body,  soul,  and  spirit"  and  "wholly."  It  includes  the  glori-
fication of  the  body.  So  that  when  complete  it  is  a  glorious
church,  not  having  spot  nor  wrinkle  nor  any  such  thing,
but  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish.  The  church
will  then  be  complete  in  the  presence  of  all  its  members,  and
complete  in  the  full  salvation  of  every  member.

5.  He  makes  it  holy.  Our  text  says,  "That  He  might
sanctify  it,  having  cleansed  it."  Cleansing  or  regeneration
first,  then  holiness.  "Sanctify"  here  may  not  mean  to  set
apart,  to  consecrate.  The  glorified  church  is  set  apart  to  its
eternal  mission,  but  more  naturally  "to  make  holy,"  as  is
implied  by  the  next  thought.

6.  "That  He  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  church,
not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  but  that  it
should  be  holy  and  without  blemish."  This  means  complete
holiness  as  God  is  holy.  This  presentation  is  the  offering
of  the  Bride  to  the  Groom  at  the  marriage  altar.  She  is
adorned  as  a  bride  for  her  husband.  Psalm  45,  which  is
intensely  Messianic,  anticipates  this  presentation  thus :

"Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  consider,  and  incline  thine  ear ;
Forgot  also  thine  own  people,  and  thy  father's  house :
So  will  the  king  desire  thy  beauty ;
For  he  is  thy  Lord ;  and  reverence  thou  him.

♦  ♦****

The  king's  daughter  within  the  palace  is  all  glorious :
Her  clothing  is  inwrought  with  gold.
She  shall  be  led  unto  the  king  in  broidered  work."

7.  Then  follows  the  marriage.  Let  inspiration  describe  it :
"And  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  multitude,  and
as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  mighty


168     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

thunders,  saying,  Hallelujah:  for  the  Lord  our  God,  the
Almighty,  reigneth.  Let  us  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,
and  let  us  give  the  glory  unto  Him :  for  the  marriage  of  the
Lamb  is  come,  and  His  wife  hath  made  herself  ready.  And
it  was  given  unto  her  that  she  should  array  herself  in  fine
linen,  bright  and  pure:  for  the  fine  linen  is  the  righteous
acts  of  the  saints.  And  He  saith  unto  me,  Write,  Blessed
are  they  that  are  bidden  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the
Lamb,"  Rev.  19 :  6-9.

The  event  here  described  is  the  crowning  glory  of  the
future.  It  follows  the  advent  of  our  Lord.  He  will  come
in  glory.  He  will  bring  with  Him  the  spirits  of  the  just
made  perfect.  He  will  raise  and  glorify  their  bodies.  He
will  transfigure  the  living  saints.  He  will  catch  up  all  the
redeemed  to  himself  in  the  air  and  thus  separate  between
the  sheep  and  the  goats.  He  thus  assumes  His  mystical
body,  the  church,  as  at  His  first  advent  He  assumed  the
body  of  His  humiliation,  and  as  in  His  second  advent  He
assumed  the  resurrection  body  of  His  glory.

How  vivid  the  picture  in  Matt.  25:5-12:  "Now  while
the  bridegroom  tarried,  the  virgins  all  slumbered  and  slept.
But  at  midnight  there  was  a  cry.  Behold  the  Bridegroom!
Come  ye  forth  to  meet  Him.  *  *  *  And  they  that  were
ready  went  in  with  Him  to  the  marriage  feast,  and  the  door
was  shut.  Afterwards  came  also  the  other  virgins,  saying,
Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us !  But  He  answered  them  and  said,
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not."

On  this  great  day  is  fulfilled  the  scripture :  "He  shall  see
of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied."  Now  to
the  universe  appears  "the  riches  of  His  inheritance  in  the
saints."  "When  He  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  His  saints,
and  to  be  marveled  at  in  all  them  that  believed."

We  thus  see  in  these  prison  letters  of  Paul  the  several
meanings  of  the  word,  "church,"  all  illustrated :

As  an  institution,  it  is  one  new  man  made  out  of  the  Jew


THE  CHURCH  IN  GLORY  169

and  Gentile;  it  is  one  commonwealth  in  which  both  alike
are  citizens.  It  is  one  temple.  It  is  one  body.  It  is  one
bride.  As  an  institution  it  is  appointed  to  instruct  angels,
and  to  be  the  depository  of  the  divine  glory  unto  all
generations.

As  a  particular  church,  in  which  alone  this  institution
finds  expression,  "each  several  building  fitly  framed  together
groweth  into  a  holy  temple  of  the  Lord  for  a  habitation  of
God  in  the  Spirit."  Each  particular  church  is  a  body  "fitly
framed  and  knit  together  through  that  which  every  joint
supplieth,  according  to  the  working  in  due  measure  of  each
several  part."

'  As  a  glory  church  it  includes  all  the  redeemed,  and  each
one  of  the  redeemed  saved  fully,  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.

The  use  of  the  word,  "church,"  in  a  sense  too  broad
for  application  to  a  particular  church  must  be  found
in  this  letter,  if  anywhere.  In  view  of  this  fact,  it  is
fortunate  that  we  have  such  historical  passages  touching
the  Ephesian  church  as  appear  in  Acts  20:17-38  and  I
Tim.  3 :  14.  In  both  these  passages  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  address  concerns  the  particular  church  at
Ephesus,  and  yet  these  broad  terms  are  used :  "Take  heed
to  all  the  flock  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  hath  made  you
bishops  to  feed  the  church  of  the  Lord  which  He  purchased
with  His  own  blood."  "These  things  write  I  unto  thee
*  *  *  that  thou  mayest  know  how  men  ought  to  behave
themselves  in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  church  of  the
living  God,  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth."  There  is
no  term  so  broad,  whether  house,  temple,  body,  flock,  bride,
but  may  be  applied  to  a  particular  church,  because  each
particular  church  in  itself  alone  foreshadows  the  church  in
glory.

The  several  steps  which  lead  up  to  the  assembling,  organi-
zation, visibility,  and  locality  of  the  universal  church — the
steps  which  lead  to  its  constitution — are  as  clearly  set  forth


IW     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

in  the  scriptures  as  the  steps  looking  to  the  constitution  of
any  particular  earth-church.    These  steps  are  as  follows :

1.  Jesus  will  come,  bringing  with  Him  the  souls  in
heaven,  I  Thess.  4: 13,  14.

2.  He  raises  and  glorifies  their  bodies,  I  Thess.  4: 16.

3.  He  glorifies  without  death  the  Christians  then  living,
I  Cor.  15:51-55.

4.  Both  classes  are  caught  up  in  the  clouds  with  the  Lord,
I  Thess.  4:  17.  This  is  the  separation  of  the  righteous  from
the  wicked.  Matt.  13 :  24-30 ;  24 :  27-31 ;  25  :  10,  31,  32.  They
are  now  for  the  first  time  an  assembly — an  organization —
and  they  can  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,
Mai.  3 :  17,  19.

5.  At  this  time  the  world  is  purified  by  fire,  Mai.  4:1-3;
n  Pet.  3:4-12;  Rom.  8 :  19-23.

6.  Presentation  and  marriage  of  the  bride,  Eph.  5 :  27 ;
Psa.  45 :  10-15 ;  Rev.  19 : 6-9.

7.  The  church  then  sits  on  the  throne  and  with  Christ
judges  the  evil  men  and  angels.  Rev.  3 :  21 ;  I  Cor.  6:2,  3 ;
Matt.  19:28.  This  judgment  is  final.  Matt.  25:41-46;
Rev.  20: 11-15.

8.  There  is  now  a  redeemed  earth,  purified  by  fire,  H
Pet.  3:13;  Rev.  21 : 1,  and  the  glorified  church  rules  therein.
Rev.  21 : 2-27 ;  so  that  lost  Paradise  with  its  tree  of  life  is
regained.  Rev.  22: 1-15,  and  at  last  "the  meek  inherit  the
earth,"  Matt.  5 :  5.

9.  The  wicked,  both  men  and  angels,  having  bowed  the
knee  and  confessed  Christ's  sovereignty  (Phil.  2:  10),  are
isolated  forever  in  their  final  prison,  Rev.  20:  14,  15;  Matt.
25:41,  46,  and  so  the  pacification  is  complete  and  then
cometh  the  end,  I  Cor.  1 5  :  24-28.

The  entrance  qualifications  for  the  church  in  glory  may
be  summed  up  in  one  sentence:  The  complete  and  eternal
salvation  of  the  entire  man — ^body,  soul,  and  spirit.  That
derivation  of  the  woman  from  the  man,  and  God's  uniting


THE  CHURCH  IN  GLORY  171

them  in  marriage,  while  an  historical  fact,  foreshadowed  a
greater  mystery — the  derivation  of  the  church  from  the
Lord,  and  their  final  marriage  in  heaven.

The  latter  part  of  this  book  commences  with  chapter  6 : 6
and  goes  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  This  paragraph  presents
to  us  the  Christian's  warfare,  the  Christian's  enemies,  and
the  Christian's  armor.  We  make  a  very  great  mistake  if  we
think  that  in  the  happy  hour  of  our  conversion  all  trouble,
battle  and  strife  is  over.  It  has  just  commenced.  That  is
the  day  we  enlisted.  The  whole  war  is  ahead  of  us — not
a  war  for  our  salvation,  but  a  war  in  Christian  service.  The
writer  brings  out  very  clearly  the  nature  of  the  enemies
with  which  the  Christian  has  to  contend.  He  expressly
says  that  they  are  not  human  enemies — not  flesh  and  blood.
He  must  not  be  understood  as  denying  that  "the  flesh"  is
an  enemy,  for  that  enmity  has  been  clearly  expressed  in
Rom.  7,  but  "flesh  and  blood"  as  here  used  mean  simply
human  enemies  who  are  unimportant  when  compared  with
the  superhuman  enemies  of  whom  he  speaks.  He  refers  to
these  greater  enemies  and  specifies  thus:  "Our  wrestling
is  not  against  flesh  and  blood  (human  enemies),  but  against
principalities,  against  powers,  against  the  world  rulers  of
this  darkness,  against  the  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness  in
heavenly  places."  These  are  the  enemies  in  his  mind.
He  tells  us  who  is  the  leader  of  these  enemies :  "That  we
may  be  able  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil."

It  is  the  teaching  of  the  scriptures  that  Satan,  a  distinct
angelic  person,  sinned  in  heaven  and  led  away  with  him  a
great  number  of  angels.  My  own  judgment  of  the  occasion
of  that  sin  is  that  he  revolted  against  being  put  lower  than
man.  God  having  announced  that  the  new  creature,  which
at  first  was  made  for  a  little  season  lower  than  the  angels,
would  ultimately  be  put  above  the  angels  and  that  the  angels
should  be  ministering  spirits  unto  them.  That  caused  the
revolt  of  Satan  in  heaven.    That  was  the  cause  of  his  down-


172     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

fall,  and  it  also  accounts  for  his  enmity  to  the  human  race.

Having  been  expelled  from  heaven  because  he  refused  to
submit  to  this  divine  enactment,  he  determined  to  wage  a
perpetual  warfare  against  man  to  thwart  the  purpose  of  God
that  man  should  be  put  above  the  angels.  That  accounts
for  the  introduction  of  sin  on  earth,  in  the  Garden  of  Eden.
He  determined  to  bring  about  the  downfall  of  the  human
race.  H  he  could  make  them  enemies  to  God,  and  God  an
enemy  to  them,  they  would  become  his  subjects,  and  he
would  still  be  over  them.

He  certainly  did  win  his  fight  in  the  Garden  of  Eden.
He  captured  the  whole  world  in  capturing  the  head  of  the
human  race,  and  from  that  time  on  the  whole  human  race
has  been  in  bondage  to  Satan.  He  and  his  evil  spirits  are
the  world-rulers.  He  dictates  its  maxims  of  pleasure  and
business.  Of  course,  when  grace  comes  in  to  destroy  the
work  of  the  devil  and  to  rescue  the  human  race  from  his
dominion,  and  people  were  converted  into  the  power  of  this
grace,  the  devil  did  not  give  up  the  fight.  H  he  cannot
destroy  Christians  who  have  escaped  from  him,  he  at  least
can  worry  them,  and  he  will  wage  a  warfare  against  Chris-
tian people  who,  as  he  calls  them,  are  rebels  against  him.
They  were  in  his  kingdom,  and  are  now  trying  to  pull  down
his  strongholds,  lessen  his  empire,  and  spread  revolt  in  his
kingdom.

It  is  to  the  reality  and  intensity  of  this  struggle  that  the
apostle  calls  attention  here.  He  is  very  careful  to  teach
that  Christians  unaided  are  unable  to  cope  with  such  adver-
saries— that  if  they  go  into  this  fight,  they  need  to  go  into
it  protected  in  every  possible  way  defensively,  and  equipped
with  effective  offensive  weapons.

In  a  most  beautiful  allegory  Bunyan  brings  out  the  whole
thought.  As  soon  as  Christian  gets  rid  of  the  burden  of
sin  at  the  cross,  he  is  led  to  the  Interpreter's  house  (the  house
of  the  Holy  Spirit),  where  many  things  are  explained  to


THE  CHURCH  IN  GLORY  173

him,  and  before  he  starts  off  on  his  pilgrimage  to  heaven
he  is  led  into  the  armory,  where  he  puts  on  the  armor  which
God  has  provided  for  His  people.  Long  before  a  child  can
appreciate  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  book,  he  is  de-
lighted and  carried  away  with  its  imagery  of  warfare.
Christian  soon,  in  going  down  the  hill  Difficulty,  commits
a  sin  and  meets  Apollyon,  who  straddles  his  pathway.  There
ensues  a  terrible  conflict.  The  book  in  its  allegorical  form
describes  the  victory  which  Christian  won  over  Apollyon.

Our  text  says  that  in  view  of  these  enemies,  in  view  of
the  wiles  of  the  devil  and  his  demons,  on  account  of  their
cunning,  on  account  of  their  malice,  on  account  of  the  hold
that  they  have  on  the  Christian  through  the  remains  of  his
carnal  nature  yet  with  him,  for  he  is  not  yet  sanctified,  and
in  going  out  to  this  battle  he  needs  an  armor,  or  panoply.
The  idea  is  doubtless  suggested  to  Paul  by  the  fact  that
even  as  he  wrote  he  was  chained  to  the  soldier  of  the  Praeto-
rian guard,  the  most  formidable  of  Roman  soldiers.  The
soldier  has  on  a  helmet,  breast-plate,  a  military  girdle,  war-
sandals,  and  has  a  sharp  two-edged  sword,  certainly  the
most  formidable  weapon  ever  devised  for  warfare,  and  a
long  shield  with  which,  when  he  goes  out  into  battle,  he
protects  himself.  So  Paul  takes  this  imagery  to  show  how
the  Christian  must  guard  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil —
that  the  Christian  must  be  panoplied.

As  has  been  said,  Paul  illustrates  by  the  armor  of  a  Roman
soldier,  so  familiar  to  him  from  being  chained  to  one  of  the
Praetorian  guard  every  day.  The  pieces  of  armor  specified
are  all  defensive,  except  the  sword  and  prayer,  which  are
offensive  weapons.  The  office  of  the  girdle  was  to  gather
up  and  hold  together  both  the  loose  dress  and  parts  of  the
armor.  In  the  place  of  this  girdle  he  offers  truth,  that  is,
the  truth  of  the  gospel.  In  the  place  of  the  breast-plate,
whose  office  is  to  protect  the  heart,  he  offers  righteousness.
Of  course  this  raises  the  question,  Whose  righteousness —


174     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Christ's  as  imputed,  or  the  Christian's  own  right  doing?
Something  may  be  said  for  the  second,  but  more  for  the
first.  It  is  true  that  right  doing  is  a  conscious  defense
against  false  charges.  But  the  devil  is  not  apt  to  confine
himself  to  false  charges.  He  will  hurl  the  fiery  dart  of
true  charge  against  some  weakness,  infirmity  and  sin  of  the
Christian.  The  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ  is  imper-
vious to  any  missile  whatever.

The  office  of  the  spiked  sandal  was  to  insure  safe  footing
on  slippery  or  treacherous  ground.  For  this  he  offers  the
preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace.  Being  justified  by
faith,  we  have  peace  with  God,  and  if  God  be  for  us  who
can  be  against  us?  Peace  in  the  heart,  the  peace  of  God
which  passeth  all  understanding,  will  aid  to  step  surely  and
stand  firmly.

The  office  of  the  helmet  is  to  protect  the  head,  another
vital  part,  and  for  this  Paul  offers  salvation.  He  means  sal-
vation so  far  as  justification  goes,  and  all  it  pledges.  The
thought  is :  "He  that  believeth  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall
not  come  into  condemnation."  H  God  justifies,  who  can
condemn?  Who  can  lay  any  charge  to  God's  elect?  This
thought  nourished  in  the  heart  protects  from  any  fiery  dart
of  doubt  Satan  may  hurl  at  the  mind.

The  office  of  the  shield  is  more  general.  It  is  carried
on  the  left  arm  and  covers  the  whole  vital  part  of  the  body.
In  the  place  of  this,  Paul  offers  faith.  But  the  question
arises :  Is  faith  itself  a  shield,  or  is  it  the  hand  that  inter-
poses the  true  shield?  In  Genesis  15,  where,  in  giving  an
account  of  Abraham's  conversion,  so  many  new  words
appear  for  the  first  time  in  the  Bible,  among  them,  "shield,"
"believe,"  "imputed  righteousness,"  God  says,  "I  am  thy
shield."  God,  then,  is  the  shield  of  faith — the  shield  that
faith  lays  hold  of  and  interproses  between  the  soul  and
danger.  We  are  not  equal  to  Satan.  God  is  greater  than
Satan.    When  we  see  Satan  coming  faith  puts  God,  the


THE  CHURCH  IN  GLORY  176

shield,  between  our  weakness  and  Satan;  we  hide  behind
God.  One  of  ^sop's  fables  says,  "A  kid  standing  on  the
roof  of  a  house  railed  at  a  wolf  passing  by,  to  whom  the
wolf  replied :  Not  you,  but  the  roof  raileth  at  me."  This
fable  teaches  that  time  and  place  often  make  the  timid  brave.
A  timid  little  fellow  gets  behind  a  big  brother  and  valorously
shakes  his  fist  at  an  opponent  from  whom  he  had  just  fled.

One  of  the  great  magazines  illustrated  that  point.  An-
drew Johnson  wanted  to  get  rid  of  Secretary  Stanton.
Stanton  refused  to  resign  or  to  be  removed,  and  defied
Johnson,  whereupon  Johnson  appointed  U.  S.  Grant  war
secretary.  Him  Stanton  dared  not  defy.  The  magazine,
in  a  telling  illustration,  pictures  the  irate  and  terrible  Stan-
ton charging  on  the  little  president,  but  just  before  he  gets
to  him,  Johnson  reaches  back  and  pulls  Grant  in  front  of
him.  Under  the  picture  it  reads :  "Let  me  see  you  hit  him !"
So  faith  puts  God,  its  shield,  between  us  and  the  devil.

The  office  of  the  sword  is  offensive.  With  it  an  enemy  is
thrust  or  smitten.  Paul  commends  as  the  Christian's  sword
the  Word  of  God.  This  is  called  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,
not  merely  because  the  Spirit  inspired  it,  but  also  because
the  Spirit  gives  it  point  and  edge  when  rightly  used.  Just
here  we  need  to  connect  Heb.  4: 12:  "For  the  Word  of
God  is  living,  and  active,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged
sword,  and  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  of  the  soul  and
spirit,  of  both  joints  and  marrow,  and  quick  to  discern  the
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart."  With  this  compare
Isa.  49 : 2  and  Hosea  6 :  5.  The  most  striking  example  for
us  in  the  right  use  of  this  sword  against  Satan  is  our  Lord's
use  of  "It  is  written"  in  replying  to  Satan's  temptation.
Another  one  is  the  case  of  Michael  mentioned  in  Jude  6.

The  second  offensive  weapon  of  the  Christian  is  prayer:
"With  all  prayer  and  supplication,  praying  at  all  seasons  in
the  Spirit,  and  watching  thereunto  in  all  perseverance  and
supplication  for  all  the  saints."


176     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

This  praying  covers  a  wide  field:  (i)  All  prayer  and
supplication.  (2)  At  all  seasons.  (3)  In  the  Spirit.  (4)
Watching  thereunto.  (5)  In  all  perseverance.  (6)  For  all
the  saints.

Helmet,  breastplate,  girdle,  sandals  and  shield  are  de-
fensive— they  protect  us.  The  word  of  God,  and  prayer,
are  offensive  weapons ;  with  them  we  smite  Satan.

"Satan  trembles  when  he  sees
The  weakest  saint  upon  his  knees."

Cromwell's  Ironsides,  about  to  join  battle,  first  prayed,
then,  singing  a  battle  song,  they  smote  with  the  sword.

QUESTIONS

1.  Give  so  much  of  the  definition  of  the  word,  "church,"  as
relates  to  Christ  as  bridegroom  and  the  church  as  bride.

2.  In  what  sense  only  does  this  glory  church  now  exist?

3.  Why  must  we  call  it  a  church  in  prospect,  and  not  an
actuality  ?

4.  What  is  the  Greek  word  for  "universal,"  and  how  often  is  it
used  in  Greek  Old  Testament  and  New  Testament?

5.  Where  do  all  break  down  who  claim  that  there  is  now  a
universal  church?    Cite  examples.

6.  Who  invented  the  phrase,  "A  universal,  spiritual,  invisible
church,"  and  why,  and  how  did  Baptists  obtain  it?

7.  In  analyzing  the  phrase,  point  out  what  Christ  did  or  will  do?

8.  Expound  the  cleansing,  showing  Old  Testament  type  and  New
Testament  type,  giving  scriptures.

9.  What  the  instrumentality  employed,  and  what  the  scriptures?

10.  When  this  marriage  between  Christ  and  the  church,  and  what
scriptures  ?

11.  As  this  letter,  more  than  any  other,  gives  the  usage  of  the
word,  "church,"  in  broad  senses,  show  from  Acts  and  Timothy  the
application  of  these  broad  terms  to  the  particular  church  at  Ephesus.

12.  _  Cite  every  use  of  the  word,  "church,"  or  any  corresponding
in  this  letter,  and  locate  each  use  under  one  of  three  heads — the
church  as  an  institution,  a  particular  church,  the  glory  church.

13.  Give  carefully  all  the  steps  of  the  constitution  of  the  glory
church.

14.  What  its  entrance  qualifications?

15.  Who  the  Christian's  most  formidable  adversaries?

16.  How  are  Christians  qualified  to  cope  with  them?

17.  What  great  Baptist  author  illustrates  all  this  in  an  allegory?

18.  Name  and  explain  each  piece  of  defensive  armor.

19.  Give  the  offensive  pieces,  and  an  illustration  of  each.

20.  What  circumstances  of  Paul's  prison  condition  perhaps  sug-
gested the  imagery  ?


THE  BOOK  OF  HEBREWS
XVI

AUTHOR'S  INTRODUCTION
Part  I

THIS  letter  has  evoked  more  controversy  than  any
other  New  Testament  book  except  Revelation.  The
controversy  has  been  mainly  on  two  points,  somewhat
related — its  canonicity  and  authorship.  A  book  may  be  de-
termined canonical  whose  author  may  not  be  named  in  the
text  not  otherwise  determinable.  But  while  positive  knowl-
edge of  the  author  is  not  essential  to  canonicity,  it  strengthens
the  claim,  if  the  author  is  shown  to  be  a  prophet  or  an
apostle.

CANONICITY  OF  THE  LETTER

The  elaborate  discussion  of  this  question  belongs  to  the
department  of  Historical  Introduction,  but  a  condensed  yet
reliable  statement  of  the  case  is  here  given :

1.  In  the  East  its  place  among  the  New  Testament  books
has  never  been  seriously  questioned.

2.  In  the  West:  (a)  It  was  recognized  as  authoritative
in  the  first  century,  as  appears  from  the  letter  of  Clement,
pastor  at  Rome,  about  a.d.  96, 'addressed  to  the  church  at
Corinth.  Irenseus  speaks  of  Clement  as  embodying  in  his
letter  the  teaching  which  he  had  recently  received  from  the
apostles,  (b)  From  the  end  of  the  second  century  to  the
close  of  the  fourth  its  place  in  the  New  Testament  books
yras  retained,  but  its  apostolic  origin  questioned  by  some.

17T


178     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Jerome  states  the  case  in  his  time  thus :  "The  epistle  to  the
Hebrews  is  not  included  in  the  Latin  canon,  nor  Revelation
in  the  Greek  canon,  and  yet  we  receive  both ;  following  by
no  means  the  usage  of  the  present  time,  but  the  authority
of  ancient  writers,  who  for  the  most  part  freely  refer  to
passages  of  both  as  canonical."  (c)  From  the  end  of  the
fourth  century  it  was  firmly  established  in  the  Western
canon,  and  remain  undisturbed  for  more  than  a  thousand
years,  (d)  In  the  Reformation  period,  like  many  other
books,  it  was  subjected  to  doubt,  both  on  authorship  and
somewhat  on  its  matter.  Some  examples  will  indicate  the
nature  of  the  doubt :

Erasmus  denied  both  the  received  title  and  subscription
and  the  Pauline  authorship,  but  says,  "I  do  not  think  that
the  faith  is  exposed  to  peril  if  the  whole  church  be  mistaken
in  regard  to  the  title  of  this  epistle  (the  title  attributed  to
Paul)  so  long  as  it  is  settled  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  its  author,
and  on  this  point  we  are  agreed"

Luther  questioned  Paul's  authorship  because,  as  he  inter-
preted them,  some  passages,  particularly  6 : 4-6,  were  unlike
Paul.  He  is  the  first  to  suggest,  by  way  of  a  mere  guess,
that  Apollos  was  the  author,  and  others  since  have  adopted
his  guess,  notably  Henry  Ward  Beecher.

Calvin  wrote,  "I,  indeed,  embrace  it  without  controversy
among  the  apostolic  epistles.  *  *  *  As  to  the  question,  *Who
composed  it,'  we  need  not  trouble  ourselves  much."

Much  later.  Dean  Alford :  "Nowhere  are  the  main  doc-
trines of  the  faith  more  purely  or  more  majestically  set
forth;  nowhere  holy  scripture  urged  with  greater  authority
and  cogency ;  nowhere  those  marks,  in  short,  which  distin-
guish the  first  rank  of  primitive  Christian  writings  from
the  second  are  more  unequivocably  and  continuously
present."

Without  multiplying  citations  we  may  count  it  settled  that
the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  is  an  integral  and  very  important


THE  BOOK  OF  HEBREWS  179

part  of  the  inspired  word  of  God.  The  questions  evoking
discussion,  and  wide  divergence  of  views,  are :  When,  where,
to  whom,  and  by  whom  written  ?

Canonicity  established  and  conceded,  it  may  be  asked.
Why  consider  the  relatively  unimportant  questions  of  author,
date,  place,  and  persons  addressed?  The  sufficient  reply  is,
that  answers  to  these  questions  will  aid  much  not  only  in
the  interpretation  of  the  book  itself  and  of  other  books  as
well,  but  what  is  more  important,  the  relation  of  the  New
Testament  books  to  each  other,  and  their  adjustment  as
component  parts  of  a  complete  and  final  revelation  of  God
to  man,  will  appear.  When  these  books  are  considered  in
their  adjustment,  New  Testament  revelation  is  no  longer  so
many  disjoined  fragments,  but  a  complete  and  symmetrical
system  of  orderly  developed  truth.

The  reader  will  understand  that  on  these  matters  not  vital,
and  concerning  which  the  best  scholars  of  Christendom  have
honestly  differed,  there  must  be  no  assumption  of  dogma-
tism. With  the  utmost  respect  for  the  opinions  of  others,
with  our  own  fallibility  of  judgment  premised,  we  will  for
ourselves  approach  the  subject  in  our  own  way,  announcing
in  advance  that  our  conclusions  are  no  mightier  than  the
arguments  back  of  them.    First  of  all,  then,  come —

THE  TITLE  AND  SUBSCRIPTION

In  our  common  version  the  title  reads  "The  Epistle  of
Paul,  the  Apostle,  to  the  Hebrews."  And  the  subscription
reads:  "Written  to  the  Hebrews  from  Italy  by  Timothy."
In  the  Canterbury  revision,  the  title  is  simply  "To  the  He-
brews," and  there  is  no  subscription.  It  is  at  once  conceded
that  the  oldest  New  Testament  manuscripts  support  the
Canterbury  revision,  both  as  to  the  superscription  and  the
subscription,  and  yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that  both  are  evi-
dence of  an  early  and  general  conviction  that  Paul  wrote  this
letter  from  Italy  by  Timothy.


180     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Our  next  question  is:  Who  are  intended  by  "The  He-
brews?" It  accords  with  well  established  usage  to  employ
the  term  "Hebrews"  to  distinguish  Palestinian  Jews  from
Hellenists,  or  Jews  of  the  dispersion,  as  in  Acts  6,  but  the
word  may  also  be  employed  to  distinguish  Jews  from  Gen-
tiles. In  every  case  the  context  determines  whether  the
term  must  be  understood  in  its  restricted  or  general  sense.
In  other  words,  if  the  subject  matter  applies  equally  to  the
Hebrew  people,  regardless  of  locality,  we  cannot  fairly  limit
it  to  the  Palestinian  Jews.  You  may  not  say  this  letter  was
written  to  the  Jerusalem  Jews  merely  because  the  superscrip-
tion says,  "To  the  Hebrews."  Paul  himself  claimed  to  be
a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,  and  yet  he  was  not  a  Palestinian
Jew,  but  a  Cilician — one  of  the  dispersion.  It  cannot  be
questioned  that  both  the  argument  and  the  exhortation  apply
to  Jews  abroad  as  well  as  to  the  Jews  at  home.  We  must
gather,  then,  from  the  letter  itself  the  locality  of  the  persons
addressed.  Indeed,  the  superscription,  no  matter  who  put
it  there,  tells,  us  nothing  more  than,  yea,  not  as  much  as
the  letter  itself.  From  the  initial  sentence  to  the  benediction
the  letter  is  to  the  Jews  only,  as  if  there  was  not  a  Gentile
in  the  w^orld.  Nor  may  we  in  advance  say  that  it  was  written
to  the  Jews  of  otie  city  only,  that  is,  to  Jerusalem  Jews,  or
Alexandrian  Jews,  or  Ephesian  Jews,  or  Roman  Jews.
Everything  in  the  letter  is  too  general  to  admit  of  such  an
extreme  local  restriction.  One  thing,  however,  everybody  will
admit — it  was  written  exclusively  to  Jews  professing  to  be
Christians.  Neither  saint  nor  sinner,  ancient  or  modern,
denies  that.  It  being  evident  beyond  a  shadow  of  a  doubt
that  it  was  written  to  Christian  Jews,  the  question  recurs — ■
to  Christian  Jews,  zvheref

Forgetting  everything  we  may  have  heard,  believed,  or
read,  let  us  go  to  the  letter  itself  for  light.  Let  us  open  our
book  and  read  the  following  passages:  5:12-14;  6:1-3;
6:10;  10:32-34;  12:4;  13:3,  18,  19,23.


THE  BOOK  OF  HEBREWS  181

From  these  passages  the  following  facts  appear :

1.  The  religious  history  of  the  persons  addressed  was  well
and  personally  known  to  the  writer  and  he  to  them.

2.  Considerable  time  had  elapsed  since  their  conversion.

3.  They  were  in  a  state  of  arrested  development.

4.  The  writer  and  Timothy  had  labored  together  with  and
for  them.

5.  They  had  suffered  persecution  when  converted,  were
despoiled  of  goods,  had  been  made  a  "spectacle"  by  either
their  own  afflictions  or  through  their  compassion  for  im-
prisoned leaders,  but  had  never  themselves  been  persecuted
to  martyrdom.

6.  They  had  been  particularly  noted  for  their  ministering
to  the  saints.

7.  They  were  tempted  to  abjure  Christianity  and  relapse
into  Judaism.

8.  They  were  called  upon  to  pray  for  the  writer's  restora-
tion to  them,  and  are  supposed  to  be  glad  of  that  prospect
and  of  Timothy's  being  set  at  liberty,  and  of  the  prospect  of
seeing  the  two  together  again.

There  is  absolutely  nothing  in  any  of  these  facts  to  sug-
gest Alexandrian  Jews  as  the  persons  addressed.  Nor  did
the  Alexandrian  Jews  ever  suppose  themselves  to  be  those
to  whom  the  letter  was  written.  The  facts  also  exclude  the
Jerusalem  or  Palestinian  Jews,  no  matter  who  the  writer.
For  example :  Assuming  Barnabas  for  the  author,  Timothy
does  not  fit;  he  never  worked  with  Barnabas  anywhere,
much  less  in  Jerusalem  or  Alexandria.  Assuming  ApoUos
for  the  author,  and  Jerusalem  Jews  addressed,  the  facts  will
not  adjust  themselves.  He  could  not  have  written  to  Jeru-
salem Jews  the  passage  at  13:  19,  23;  and  the  passages  at
6:  10  and  12 :  4  could  not  fit  the  Jerusalem  Jews.  From  the
beginning  the  Jerusalem  Christians  had  resisted  unto  blood.
It  was  the  martyr  church  of  the  New  Testament,  and  but
recently  James,  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  had  been  murdered.


182     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

From  the  beginning  they  had  been  ministered  unto  by  the
churches  abroad,  and  had  never  themselves  so  ministered,
and  there  is  no  New  Testament  evidence  that  they  were  in
danger  of  apostasy.  Assuming  Apollos  to  be  the  author
and  Alexandrian  Jews  addressed,  it  is  simply  incredible  that
his  own  people  received  a  letter  from  him  and  never  attrib-
uted it  to  him  at  any  time  in  their  history.

All  of  the  passages  exactly  fit  the  known  history  of  the
Christian  Jews  of  Asia  Minor,  Macedonia,  and  Achaia,  and
the  Christian  Jews  of  no  other  place.  They  did  know
Timothy,  They  had  been  persecuted  and  despoiled  of  goods
when  they  were  converted.  They  had  been  made  a  spectacle
in  their  own  afflictions  and  in  their  compassion  for  impris-
oned leaders.  They  had  not  themselves  been  persecuted  to
martyrdom.  They  were  in  a  state  of  arrested  development,
and  from  the  beginning  had  been  under  the  fire  of  tempta-
tion to  apostatize,  as  is  evident  from  letters  written  by  Paul,
Peter,  Jude,  and  John.  They  had  been  and  were  yet  noted
the  world  over  for  ministering  unto  the  poor  saints  of  Jeru-
salem and  Judea.

There  is  absolutely  nothing  in  the  letter  to  limit  its  ad-
dress to  one  town  or  city.  The  context  does  not  favor  one
church  a  great  majority  of  which  were  Jews.  On  the  con-
trary, some  of  the  exhortations  can  be  better  understood  by
supposing  the  Jewish  Christians  addressed  to  be  in  the
minority,  and  staying  away  from  the  church  meetings  be-
cause the  pastors  were  Gentiles  or  the  Gentile  element  pre-
dominated. The  author,  therefore,  voices  the  conviction
rather  than  a  dogmatic  assertion —

It  is  impossible  that  this  letter  was  written  to  Jews  either
at  Jerusalem,  Alexandria,  Rome,  Ccesarea,  or  Syrian  An-
tioch.

All  of  them  are  out  of  the  question.  No  one  of  them
ever  claimed  for  a  moment  to  be  the  recipient  of  the  letter.
Moreover,  at  the  most  probable  date  of  this  letter  all  Judea


THE  BOOK  OF  HEBREWS  183

was  seething  in  revolt  against  Rome,  like  a  boiling  pot,  and
in  no  condition  to  receive  a  letter  from  any  one.  Therefore,
in  answer  to  the  question,  "To  whom  addressed  ?"  my  reply
is.  To  the  Jewish  Christians  of  Asia  Minor  and  Greece.  Of
course  this  answer  includes  pro-consular  Asia  as  a  part  of
Asia  Minor.  There  are  much  stronger  arguments  on  the
persons  addressed  that  can  be  better  cited  under  other  heads.

The  Occasion  of  the  Letter. — On  this  point  there  is  abso-
lute unanimity.  Indeed,  the  whole  trend  of  the  letter  leaves
no  room  for  doubt.  These  Jewish  Christians,  wherever  they
were,  were  in  eminent  danger  of  abjuring  Christianity  alto-
gether and  relapsing  into  Judaism.  That  this  may  be  evident
let  us  open  our  book  and  read  the  following  passages:
2:  1-3;  3:6,  12-14;  4: 1,  2,  14-16;  10:19-36;  12:1-3,  12-17.

Here  again  the  context  forbids  the  idea  that  the  persons
addressed  were  Palestinian  Jews.  The  New  Testament  his-
tory nowhere  indicates  that  the  Jerusalem  church  was  in
danger  of  abjuring  Christ  altogether  and  totally  relapsing
into  Judaism.  The  evidence  is  indeed  abundant  that  many
of  them  desired  to  make  Gentiles  become  Jews  in  order  to
become  Christians,  and  that  others,  while  waiving  this  point,
yet  insisted  that  Jewish  Christians  must  hold  themselves
aloof  from  social  contact  with  Gentile  Christians,  but
nowhere  is  there  a  hint  that  they  were  about  to  abjure
Christianity  altogether.

In  the  Sadducean  persecution.  Acts  3  and  4,  and  in  the
Pharisee  persecution,  led  by  Saul  of  Tarsus,  and  in  the
persecution  by  Herod,  they  had  remained  as  firm  as  a  rock
in  their  faith.  When  James  and  Jude,  brothers  of  our
Lord,  and  Peter  write  letters  exhorting  to  steadfastness  in
faith,  they  write  to  the  Christian  Jews  of  the  dispersion,
and  not  to  the  Palestinian  Jews.  When  in  the  persecution
which  had  but  recently  led  to  the  marytrdom  of  James,
there  is  no  historical  evidence  that  Jerusalem  Christians  were
in  danger  of  abjuring  Christianity.


184.     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Just  here  comes  another  very  forcible  argument  against
the  idea  that  Palestinian  Jews  are  being  addressed.  There  is
not  a  word  in  the  letter  that  supposes  the  danger  of  apostasy
to  arise  from  witnessing  the  imposing  ceremonies  of  the
Herodian  temple.  While  indeed  the  letter  incidentally  proves
that  the  temple  is  yet  standing,  and  while  it  clearly  threatens
the  near  and  utter  destruction  of  the  whole  Jewish  polity  as
a  covenant,  its  entire  argument  is  based  upon  the  ancient  his-
toric Judaism  as  established  by  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Joshua.
It  is  not  even  germane  to  the  argument  to  mention  the  first
temple  built  by  Solomon.  It  is  a  question  of  origins,  of  the
dignity  of  founders,  and  not  of  present  imposing  rites  and
ceremonies.  In  other  words,  the  argument  goes  to  the  root
of  things,  and  not  to  the  superficial  present.  From  Pentecost
to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  Jerusalem  Jews  were
safeguarded  against  total  relapse  into  Judaism.  But  not  so
with  the  Jews  of  the  dispersion.  If  addressed  to  the  Pales-
tinian Jews,  the  absence  of  special  reference  to  the  services
of  the  Herodian  temple  is  inexplicable.

Our  next  question  inquires  for  the  cause  of  the  danger  of
apostasy.  What  juncture  of  affairs  constituted  the  tempta-
tion to  abjure  Christianity  ?  The  letter  itself  explains.  First
of  all,  the  bitterness  of  persecution  was  wearing  out  their
patience,  and  the  pressure  of  non-Christian  Jews  tempting
them  to  apostatize  was  very  great.  The  Lord  did  not  come
to  avenge  them,  as  had  been  promised,  and  they  were  weary
and  despondent.  They  were  losing  respect  for  their  leaders,
many  of  whom  were  Gentiles.  They  were  absenting  them-
selves from  the  popular  assemblies.  This  can  be  best  ac-
counted for  if  they  were  in  the  minority  and  the  Gentile
element  predominant;  in  such  case  they  would  not  feel  at
home  in  this  mixed  crowd.

In  the  meantime  a  very  subtle  philosophy  was  constantly
appealing  to  them,  which  has  been  described  in  letters  pre-
ceding this  one.     The  discussion  against  gnosticism,   so


THE  BOOK  OF  HEBREWS  185

prominent  in  the  letters  to  the  Colossians  and  the  Ephesians,
is  carried  on  in  this  letter.  Its  methods  of  approach  were
esoteric  and  not  exoteric.  It  worked  privately  from  house
to  house.  It  slipped  and  crept  and  slided  around  and  whis-
pered :

"No  use  to  go  to  church;  you  can  learn  better  at  home.
Public  gatherings  may  suit  the  vulgar,  'the  great  unwashed/
the  hoi  polloi,  but  this  philosophy  appeals  to  the  cultured  few.
The  Christian  Messiah  at  best  was  only  a  lower  eon,  or  much
shaded  down  emanation  of  God.  You  may  accept  this  phi-
losophy and  remain  a  Jew  of  the  type  of  the  Essenes  if  you
are  inclined  to  asceticism ;  or  you  may  accept  it  and  remain
a  Jew  of  the  Pharisee-type  if  you  want  to  cling  to  ritualism
and  the  cycle  of  weekly,  new  moon,  or  annual  Sabbaths.  Or
you  may  accept  it  and  turn  to  license  and  pleasure,  seeing  that
sin  resides  only  in  matter.  This  Christianity  is  too  harsh,
rigid,  and  exacting.  It  calls  on  you  to  sacrifice  everything.
Why  needlessly  put  your  head  in  the  fire?  Why  give  up
everything?  You  have  waited  in  vain  for  that  promised
coming  of  the  Lord.  Your  own  Moses,  Aaron  and  Joshua,
and  long  line  of  prophets  were  greater  than  this  Nazarene,
who,  after  all,  was  executed  as  a  felon,  and  it  is  a  shame
to  become  the  followers  of  a  publicly  convicted  and  executed
felon.  Christianity  is  impractical.  Humanity  cannot  endure
its  requirements."

It  will  be  shown  later  in  the  exposition  that  this  letter  was
especially  intended  to  controvert  this  many-sided  philosophy
of  blended  Jewish  and  heathen  elements ;  that  its  arguments
closely  follow  and  connect  with  the  letters  to  the  Colossians
and  Ephesians,  and  is  itself  closely  followed  by  and  con-
nected with  the  letters  of  Jude  and  Peter  addressed  to  the
same  people  and  called  forth  by  the  same  emergency.  This
writer,  and  Jude,  and  Peter,  recognized  the  same  danger  of
apostasy,  the  same  lack  of  patient  endurance,  the  same  temp-
tation to  deny  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  despair  about


186     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

His  second  advent.  And  so  did  John,  last  of  all,  long  after
the  temple  had  fallen,  write  his  letters  and  the  book  of  Reve-
lation to  the  same  people.  Indeed,  this  emergency  called
forth  all  of  John's  writings.  In  other  words,  the  provoca-
tion to  apostatize  was  the  old-time  Jewish  reluctance  to  pay
the  cost  of  a  spiritual  religion,  whose  rewards  were  in  another
world;  to  endure  its  privations  in  this  life;  to  patiently  wait
for  the  Lord.  All  the  exhortations  in  the  letter  are  on  this
line.  And  here  again  we  find  another  strong  argument  against
the  thought  that  it  was  written  to  the  Jerusalem  Jews.  The
gnostic  philosophy  originated  in  the  Lycus  valley  of  pro-
consular Asia,  and  spread  over  the  section  to  whose  people
this  letter  was  addressed.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
Jerusalem  Jews  were  ever  tempted  to  apostatize  through  this
philosophy.

We  now  come  to  the  questions :  Who  wrote  the  letter  to
the  Hebrews,  when  did  he  write  it,  and  where  ?  Just  where,
in  order  of  time,  is  its  place  among  the  New  Testament
books  ?  And  in  what  language  did  he  write  it  ?  Again  dis-
claiming dogmatism,  the  author  here  expresses  in  one  sen-
tence an  answer  to  all  of  these  questions  thus :

//  was  written  in  Greek,  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  near  the  close
of  the  first  Roman  imprisonment,  just  after  the  Letter  to  the
Ephesians,  and  was  addressed  exclusively  to  professing  Jew-
ish Christians  in  Asia  Minor  and  Greece.  It  completes  the
group  of  letters  of  the  first  Roman  imprisonment.

In  order  to  account  for  Timothy's  imprisonment  and  re-
lease, the  reader  will  please  look  at  the  beginning  of  Philip-
pians,  Philemon  and  Colossians.  In  all  three  of  these  Tim-
othy is  associated  with  Paul  at  Rome,  as  the  author  of  the
letters.  But  when  we  look  at  the  beginning  of  the  Letter
to  the  Ephesians  we  do  not  find  Timothy's  name  associated
with  Paul's.  There  is  no  evidence  that  he  had  left  Rome,  and
unless  he  was  imprisoned  at  this  juncture,  there  is  no  fair
way  to  account  for  his  not  being  associated  with  Paul  in


THE  BOOK  OF  HEBREWS  187

the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians.  He  was  speedily  released  after
that  imprisonment,  however,  and  in  the  Letter  to  the  He-
brews, following  the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians,  it  is  announced
that  Timothy  has  been  set  at  liberty,  and  when  we  take  up
the  first  Letter  to  Timothy  we  can  see  how  the  subscription
may  have  been  added :  "Written  from  Italy  to  the  Hebrews,
by  Timothy."

While  not  contending  for  the  superscription  and  subscrip-
tion as  a  part  of  the  original  text,  I  am  thoroughly  convinced
that  both  express  facts,  and  generally  recognized  at  the  time
they  were  appended  to  the  letter.

Without  arguing  another  matter  at  all,  the  abiding  con-
viction is  expressed  that  the  letter  is  not  a  translation  from
a  Hebrew  original,  nor  is  it  a  treatise,  speech  or  sermon  by
Paul  which  has  been  used  substantially  by  another  writer,
but  clothed  in  his  own  style  and  language.  There  is  only  one
mind  in  the  letter.  It  is  not  a  composite  work.  It  is  not  Luke
or  Clement  or  Timothy  working  out  the  thoughts  of  Paul.
The  author  of  the  thoughts  is  the  author  of  the  style  and  of
the  words.  Any  attempt  to  make  Luke  the  author  because
some  parts  of  the  letter  resembles  Luke's  style  fails  from  the
fact  that  the  parts  which  make  it  resemble  Luke's  books  are
matters  originally  coming  from  Paul  and  merely  quoted  by
Luke.    Undoubtedly  Paul  fixed  Luke's  style  on  these  points.

The  letter  is  a  careful  and  elaborate  composition  through-
out. The  arguments,  each  followed  by  exhortation,  extend
down  to  verse  i8  of  the  last  chapter.  It  is  a  calm,  quiet,
painstaking,  deliberately  prepared  document,  and  yet  a  gen-
uine epistle.  It  grows  out  of  preceding  letters.  Not  as  II
Corinthians  grew  out  of  I  Corinthians,  but  as  Romans  grew
out  of  Galatians,  and  as  Ephesians  grew  out  of  Colossians.
Having  written  a  special  letter  to  the  Colossians  against  the
gnostic  heresy,  he  wrote  a  circular  letter  elaborating  the  same
line  of  thought,  which  letter  we  call  Ephesians.  And  having
written  the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians  addressed  to  the  whole


188     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

body  of  the  churches  to  which  it  was  sent,  it  fits  exactly  that
he  should  continue  the  same  thought  or  subject  in  a  letter
addressed  to  the  Jews  only.

Careful  preparation  is  evinced,  moreover,  in  the  studied
self -repression  of  the  author  and  in  the  rigid  restriction  of
the  argument  to  the  one  view-point  and  purpose.

While  the  author  of  Hebrews  does  not  sign  his  name,  for
reasons  to  be  given  later,  the  restraint  is  not  with  a  view  to
conceal  his  identity.  He  knows  well  to  whom  he  writes,  and
well  knows  that  they  will  know  him  as  well  as  if  he  had  signed
his  name  in  the  usual  fashion.  It  is  not  therefore  a  case  of  an
anonymous  communication,  nor  of  a  nom  de  plume,  to  put
people  to  guessing  at  the  author.  A  writer  who  wished  to
conceal  his  identity  by  absence  of  a  signature  would  never
say,  "Pray  that  I  may  be  restored  to  you.'*  "Our  brother
Timothy  is  set  at  liberty ;  with  whom,  if  he  come  shortly,  I
will  see  you."  And  it  may  be  said  here  that  Asia  Minor
never  doubted  from  whom  the  letter  came,  nor  did  any  other
place  down  to  the  middle  of  the  second  century.


QUESTIONS

X.    On  what  points  has  this  letter  mainly  evoked  controversy?

2.  May  a  book  be  canonical  whose  author  is  not  named  ?

3.  Give  brief  statement  of  canonicity  of  this  book.

4.  Apart   from   canonicity,   what   questions   have  been   widely
discussed,  with  divergent  views?

5.  Why  are  these  questions  important?

6.  Tell  of  the  title  and  subscription,  and  their  value.

7.  To  whom  was  the  letter  addressed?

8.  In  what  two  senses  may  this  word,  "Hebrews,"  be  employed,
and  how  determine  in  a  given  case  which  is  meant?

9.  Why  may  we  not  conclude  that  the  letter  is  addressed  to  Jews
of  a  particular  church  or  city?

10.  To  what  class  of  Hebrews  is  it  addressed?

11.  What  passages  in  the  letter  bear  on  the  "where"  of  these
Hebrews,  and  the  facts  developed?

12.  Show  why  these  facts  do  not  fit  Jerusalem  Jews  or  Alexan-
drian Jews.

13.  The  facts  of  these  passages  fit  the  Christian  Jews  where?

14.  What  the  occasion  of  the  letter,  and  the  passages  bearing  on


THE  BOOK  OF  HEBREWS  189

it,  and  why  do  these  passages  exclude  Jerusalem  Jewish  Christians?

15.  What  other  fact  bears  in  the  same  direction?

16.  Why  does  this  letter  make  no  reference  to  the  Temple  at
Jerusalem  ?

17.  What  causes  were  operating  at  this  time  to  provoke  relapse
into  Judaism  on  the  part  of  Christian  Jews  in  Asia  Minor  and
Greece,  and  which  of  these  causes  also  make  against  the  theory  of
the  letter  being  addressed  to  Jerusalem  Jews  ?

18.  In  one  sentence  give  the  author's  view  of  who  wrote  this
letter,  where,  when,  and  in  what  language,  to  whom,  and  in  what
group  of  letters?

19.  Account  for  the  reference  in  the  letter  to  Timothy's  being
set  at  liberty  ?

20.  Why  not  take  the  position  that  the  thoughts  are  Paul's,  either
written  originally  in  Hebrew  and  translated  by  another,  or  that  Paul's
thoughts  are  wrought  out  by  another  in  his  own  style  ?

21.  Where  do  the  arguments  stop  ?

2.2.     Show  how  the  letter  is  evolved  from  and  fits  into  other  letters.
2Z.    Why  is  not  the  letter  anonymous  in  the  ordinary  sense  of
that  word?


XVII

AUTHOR'S  INTRODUCTION^
Part  II

THE  question  yet  before  us  is,  Who  is  the  author  of
this  letter?  External  evidence  is  what  has  been
handed  down  by  tradition  or. history;  internal  evi-
dence is  gathered  from  the  letter  itself,  that  is,  what  may  be
inferred  from  its  doctrines,  historical  statements,  and  style
— style  to  be  used  in  a  very  comprehensive  sense,  including
the  purity  of  the  Greek  text,  rhetorical  form,  vocabulary,
phrases,  terms  of  expression,  etc.

The  argument  against  Paul's  authorship  is  based  entirely
on  internal  evidence.  A  fair  examination  will  disclose  that
there  is  not  a  shred  of  external  evidence  either  against  Paul
or  for  any  other  man.  When,  in  history  it  has  been  conjec-
turally  attributed  to  others,  this  has  been  based  upon  some
inference  from  internal  evidence.  The  external  evidence,  be
it  much  or  little,  is  all  one  way.  It  is  axiomatic  that  external
evidence  cannot  be  set  aside  by  internal  evidence,  unless  the
latter  be  overwhelming,  conclusive  and  demonstrative.  In-
ternal evidence  is  available  by  comparison  only,  i.e.,  this  ques-
tioned letter  must  be  compared  with  history,  doctrines  and
style,  as  set  forth  in  unquestioned  sources  of  information.
Various  names  have  been  suggested  as  the  possible  author.
Of  these  the  only  ones  worth  a  moment's  consideration  arc
Paul,  Luke,  Barnabas,  Apollos.  In  the  case  of  Apollos  there
is  not  a  scrap  of  his  writing  left  to  us  with  which  to  com-
pare this  letter.  If  he  ever  wrote  anything  we  do  not  know
it.    He  had  opportunity  to  know  Paul  and  Timothy.    He  was

190


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  191

an  Alexandrian  Jew,  an  eloquent  man  and  mighty  in  the
Hebrew  scriptures.  That  is  the  only  foundation  for  Luther's
guess  1500  years  after  the  letter  was  written.

Barnabas  left  no  certain  literary  remains  with  which  to
make  comparison.  The  matter  of  the  one  document  attrib-
uted to  him  would  never  suggest  that  he  wrote  this  great,
immortal  letter.  The  Barnabas  of  Acts  14 :  37-39  and  Gala-
tians  2: 13  could  never  have  made  the  complete  break  with
Judaism  that  is  disclosed  in  this  letter.

Luke  alone,  in  his  gospel  and  Acts,  leaves  us  a  basis
for  comparison.  But  these  books  present  him  only  as  a
historian,  carefully  tracing  out  what  others  did  and  said.
He  himself  makes  no  speeches,  does  no  arguing  or  inter-
preting. In  him  appears  only  a  hand  and  pen  to  record  the
deeds  and  words  of  others.  Moreover,  Luke  was  not  a  pure
Hebrew,  and  perhaps  a  Gentile.  In  Colossians  4,  he  is  not
reckoned  among  the  circumcision.  He,  if  wholly  a  Gentile,
is  the  only  one  writing  a  Bible-book.  The  author  of  this
letter  was  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews.  The  parts  of  Luke's
books  which  most  nearly  resemble  this  letter  are  reported
speeches  of  Paul,  or  matter  that  he  derived  from  Paul.  In
Paul's  case  there  is  no  lack  of  documentary  matter  with
which  to  make  comparison.  But  in  making  comparison,  ob-
jectors to  Pauline  authorship  have  not  only  ignored  the  va-
riety of  Paul's  style,  but  have  based  their  conclusions  upon
the  distinction  between  Hebrews  and  only  a  part  of  Paul's
writings — mainly  his  letters  to  the  Galatians  and  Romans.
They  fail  to  discriminate  between  Paul's  method  and  style
in  writing  to  Gentiles  and  in  writing  to  Jews  exclusively.

We  go  very  far  toward  the  settlement  of  this  question
when  we  understand  the  full  extent  of  the  Pauline  literature
with  which  Hebrews  must  be  compared.  We  must  take  all
of  the  thirteen  conceded  letters  of  Paul,  and  of  the  reported
speeches  in  the  Acts  and  even  Stephen's  speech,  supposedly
reported  to  Luke  by  Paul.


m     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Apart  from  Hebrews,  these  books  give  us  our  knowledge
of  Paul's  life,  doctrines,  and  styles.  It  is  admitted  at  once
that  if  from  any  or  all  of  the  books  involved  in  the  compar-
ison, it  could  be  proved  that  Paul  died  before  the  Letter  to
the  Hebrews  was  written,  that,  of  course,  would  settle  the
case  against  the  Pauline  authorship.  But  there  is  no  such
proof.  It  is  impossible  to  fix  either  the  exact  date  of  Paul's
death  or  the  writing  of  this  letter.  It  would  be  something
in  a  negative  way  if  it  could  be  shown  that  this  letter  could
not  be  made  to  fit  well  into  the  period  of  Paul's  life.  But
it  is  quite  easy  to  find  one  period  of  Paul's  life  into  which  it
fits  exactly,  and  another  period  where  it  could  possibly  fit.
It  fits  all  round  just  after  the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians,  as
the  closing  letter  written  in  Paul's  first  Roman  imprisonment.
A  case  could  also  be  made  out,  but  not  so  strong,  that  it
follows  II  Timothy.  This  would  make  it  the  very  last  of
Paul's  letters.

A  critic  like  Luther  gets  his  idea  of  Paul's  doctrines  and
style  from  Galatians  and  Romans,  ignoring  the  fact  that
not  all  of  Paul's  doctrines  nor  all  of  his  styles  are  confined
to  these  two  books.  A  statement  on  the  case  of  authorship
is  about  this :  The  field  against  Paul.  It  is  the  only  way  to
make  any  kind  of  a  plausible  showing  against  him.

The  opposition  breaks  down  when  it  attempts  to  support
the  claim  of  any  other  one  name.

It  maintains  a  precarious  standing  by  alternatives  only,
saying,  "The  author  was  Barnabas,  or  Luke,  or  Clement,  or
Apollos,  or  some  other  man."  Limit  the  issue  to  Paul
against  Barnabas  alone,  or  any  of  the  others,  and  there
would  be  no  case  worth  trying.

Moreover,  the  opposition  breaks  down  when  attempt  is
made  to  secure  a  consensus  of  judgment  on  the  internal  evi-
dence. The  ground  continually  shifts  as  taken  by  individual
objectors  like  the  location  and  formation  of  loose  desert
sand  driven  by  contrary  winds.    What  one  objector  to  Paul


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  193

regards  as  quite  conclusive,  another  concedes  to  be  very
questionable.  It  is  like  the  testimony  of  expert  doctors  in
a  case  at  court.  The  expert  in  a  specialty  is  the  most  incom-
petent of  all  witnesses  out  of  his  particular  line ;  he  cannot
generalize.  "Ne  sutor  ultra  crepidemf  Of  all  men  he  has
the  least  judicial  mind.  His  dependence  upon  presupposi-
tions, his  contempt  for  external  evidence,  his  conceit  of  his
own  power  to  dissect  the  most  ancient  documents,  or  to  put
aside  as  worthless  the  most  ancient  traditions,  may  qualify
him  for  special  pleading,  but  never  to  be  a  safe  juryman  or
a  sane  judge.

Inasmuch  as  all  of  the  argument  against  Paul's  author-
ship is  based  upon  internal  evidence,  it  may  be  well  to  submit
a  fair  statement  of  these  objections  as  developed  from  time
to  time  in  the  history  subsequent  to  the  apostles,  i.e.,  all  of  it
worth  considering  as  a  reply  thereto.  They  may  be  summed
up  under  the  following  heads :

1.  The  absence  of  his  name  in  either  the  address  or  fare-
well. The  force  of  this  objection  is  strengthened  by  the  fact
that  his  name  does  appear  in  the  address  of  his  genuine
letters,  and  after  I  Thessalonians,  for  reasons  stated,  his
autograph  is  appended  to  them  at  the  close.

2.  The  author  of  Hebrews  at  2 : 3  concedes  that  he  was
not  an  apostle,  but  derived  his  gospel  second  hand  from  the
apostles,  whereas  Paul's  gospel  was  independent,  original,
and  first  hand.  To  put  the  objection  in  other  words,  who-
ever wrote  Galatians  i :  11,  12  could  not  have  written  He-
brews 2 :  3.  Dr.  Farrar  ventures  to  call  this  decisive  against
Paul's  authorship.

3.  The  severity  of  two  passages,  Hebrews  6:4-8  and
10:26-31  is  not  apostolic,  and  their  doctrine  of  apostasy
not  Pauline.  These  two  passages  underlie  the  opposition  of
more  critics  to  Pauline  authorship  than  all  others.  Some,
in  the  early  centuries,  rejected  the  letter  because  they  sup-
posed that  the  first  of  these  passages  favored  the  Novation-


194     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

ists.  The  supposed  teaching  of  apostasy  in  these  passages
was  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  Luther  being  unwilHng  to
receive  the  letter  as  Paul's.  Tertullian,  in  trying  to  make
Barnabas  the  author,  does  so  in  the  very  chapter  in  which
he  quotes  Heb.  6 :  4-8.

4.  It  is  objected  that  the  style — the  word  style  here  used
in  its  comprehensive  sense — is  un-Pauline;  that  it  is  an
Alexandrian  style,  evincing  such  an  acquaintance  with  Philo
as  was  not  possessed  by  Paul.  On  this  ground  of  style,
Origen,  while  conceding  Paul's  virtual  authorship,  attributes
the  form  of  the  composition  to  an  unknown  amanuensis.
Erasmus,  the  great  scholar  in  the  beginning  of  the  Reforma-
tion time,  declared  the  style  of  Hebrews  wholly  unlike  Paul's,
and  Luther,  on  the  same  ground,  after  being  disturbed  by
the  passages,  6 : 4-8  and  10 :  26-31,  and  recalling  Acts  18 :  24-
28,  made  the  first  guess  known  to  history  that  ApoUos  was
the  author.  It  has  become  quite  fashionable  now  to  count
Luther's  guess,  made  1500  years  after  the  letter  was  written,
a  demonstration.

5.  The  absence  of  certain  favorite  terms  of  Paul,  e.g.,
"justify"  (Greek  dikaiod)  used  so  often  in  Galatians  and
Romans,  and  the  use  of  "purify"  (Greek  katharizo)  instead,
and  the  infrequent  use  of  Sateria — Salvation.

6.  The  relative  purity  of  the  Greek.

On  one  or  the  other  or  all  of  these  internal  grounds,  some
learned  men,  while  attributing  the  doctrine  and  thought  to
Paul,  have  assigned  the  composition  and  rhetorical  form  to
an  amanuensis,  while  others  have  denied  to  Paul  any  con-
nection with  the  authorship.  Let  us  consider  these  objections
seriatim :

I.  It  is  admitted  that  the  absence  of  Paul's  name  in  either
the  address  or  farewell  is  contrary  to  his  custom,  and  cer-
tainly calls  for  rational  and  adequate  explanation.  When
once,  however,  the  explanation  is  sufficient,  the  absence  of
the  name  constitutes  a  strong  presumption  of  Paul's  author-


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  195

ship.  For  example,  while  no  good  reason  can  be  assigned
why  Apollos  should  omit  his  name,  if  he  was  the  author,  the
reasons  of  Paul's  omission  of  his  name,  under  the  circum-
stances, are  very  strong.  Let  us  consider  these  circumstances.
Paul  was  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles.  This  letter  is  exclu-
sively to  the  Jews.  Its  whole  line  of  argument  designedly
stops  short  of  his  own  call  and  testimony.  To  make  it  thor-
oughly effective,  to  strike  from  it  an  embarrassing  complica-
tion, he  must  utterly  repress  any  allusion  to  his  own  mission,
never  acceptable  to  Jewish  minds.  In  other  words,  he  ^ust,
in  this  case,  rigidly  carry  out  one  of  the  great  self-reprtoo.ng
principles  of  his  life  so  forcibly  expressed  by  himself  else-
where :  "To  the  Jews  I  became  as  a  Jew,  that  I  might  gain
Jews.  I  am  become  all  things  to  all  men  that  I  may  by  all
means  save  some"  (I  Cor.  9:19-23).  The  object  of  the
letter  is  to  prevent  Christian  Jews  from  abjuring  Christian-
ity and  relapsing  into  Judiaism.  The  argument  is  limited  to
this  view.  Gentiles  are  not  considered.  Hence  as  Paul
writes  he  does  not  write  as  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles.  The
argument  is  necessarily  shut  up  to  proof  anterior  to  his  own
call,  and  apart  from  his  own  special  mission.  His  usual  offi-
cial signature  or  any  appeal  to  his  own  testimony  would
unnecessarily  complicate  his  problem  and  prejudice  its
solution.  His  problem,  hence,  is  not  "Shall  Gentiles  become
Christians  ?"  or  "Shall  they  become  Jews  in  order  to  become
Christians  ?"  or  "Shall  Jews  admit  Gentile  Christians  to  social
fellowship?"  but  it  is  "Shall  professing  Jews  abjure  Chris-
tianity altogether  and  return  to  strict  Judiaism  ?"  Therefore,
not  being  an  apostle  to  the  circumcision,  he  omits  his  name
and  apostleship,  but  being  a  Jew  he  has  the  feeling  of  a  Jew —
that  intense  desire  to  speak  and  write  to  his  brethren  accord-
ing to  the  flesh,  expressed  so  forcibly  in  his  other  letters.
The  man  who  wrote  Rom.  9:  1-5,  10:  1-3,  I  Cor.  3:5  and
9 :  19-23  would  not  hesitate  to  suppress  himself  and  his  signa-
ture in  this  case  in  order  that  his  arguments  might  stand  upon


im     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

their  Jewish  merits,  unhandicapped  by  official  signature
which  would  necessarily  introduce  a  view  of  the  case  not  at
all  within  his  purpose  or  the  scope  of  his  argument,  and  this
self-repression  is  a  marked  characteristic  of  Paul.  Its  deli-
cacy in  this  case  surpasses  that  displayed  in  Philemon  8.
This  man  always  preferred  to  be  a  home  missionary,  and  had
to  be  choked  off  that  line  of  work.  He  kept  turning  his  face
toward  Jerusalem  against  both  divine  and  prophetic  inter-
diction (see  Acts  22:13-21  and  21:10-13).  In  all  the
history  of  missions,  if  perhaps  we  except  Jonah's  case,  there
is  not  another  so  remarkable — a  man  burning  as  with
unquenchable  fire  to  be  a  home  missionary,  but  divinely
thrust  out  and  whipped  into  being  a  foreign  missionary.

2.  The  second  objection  to  Pauline  authorship  is  based
on  Heb.  2 : 3  which  reads,  "Which  salvation  having  at  first
been  spoken  through  the  Lord,  was  confirmed  to  us  by  them
that  heard."  This  language  does  not  concede  that  the  author
was  not  an  apostle,  nor  does  it  intimate  that  he  derived  his
own  gospel  of  salvation  from  others.  It  simply  affirms  that
Christ  first  spoke  His  own  gospel  of  salvation,  and  that  it
was  confirmed  to  the  Jews  by  the  original  apostles,  after  the
gifts  at  Pentecost,  all  of  which  was  literally  true  before
Paul's  conversion  and  call.  His  own  call  and  independent
gospel  did  not  concern  Jews,  to  whom  exclusively  he  is  now
writing,  and  whom  he  is  addressing  strictly  on  a  line  that
would  appeal  to  them.  Under  such  circumstances  to  say
that  it  is  unlike  Paul  to  omit  reference  to  his  call  and  gospel,
contradicts  a  striking  incident  of  his  life,  for  he  makes  sub-
stantially the  same  statement  under  like  circumstances  at
Pisidian  Antioch,  as  reported  in  Acts  13:31.  What  is  there
in  one  case  more  than  the  other  ?  Compare  them  fairly.  It
is  true  in  Hebrews  he  says  that  the  gospel  spoken  by  our  Lord
was  confirmed  to  us  by  them  that  heard  it.  Addressing
Jews  only  at  Antioch  he  says :  "He  was  seen  for  many  days
of  them  that  came  up  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem,  who  are  now


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  197

His  witnesses."  This  does  not  intimate  that  Paul  himself  had
not  seen  the  risen  Lord,  nor  that  he  was  not  now  a  witness.
In  both  cases  and  for  the  same  reason  he  omits  reference  to
himself.  Then,  if  he  at  Antioch  of  Pisidia,  addressing  Jews
only,  might  refer  exclusively  to  the  confirmation  of  Christ's
resurrection  by  the  testimony  of  the  twelve,  without  impugn-
ing his  own  independent  testimony,  which  he  does  not  there
even  mention,  why  may  he  not,  in  a  letter  to  Jews  only — a
letter  whose  argument  designedly  stops  short  of  his  own  call
to  the  Gentiles — refer  to  the  same  kind  of  confirmation  of
the  gospel,  without  disparagement  of  his  independent  gospel
and  testimony?  In  other  words,  with  equal  propriety,  he
might  be  the  author  of  Acts  13 :  30,  31  and  of  Heb.  2 :  3,  4.
We  may  always  distrust  an  inference  that  is  decisive  to  Dr.
Farrar  when  it  comes  to  historical  criticism.

3.  The  objection  to  Pauline  authorship  based  on  the  pas-
sages 6:4-8  and  10:26-31  arises  solely  from  the  objectors'
questionable  interpretation  of  these  passages.  It  is  an
assumption  merely  that  the  severity  complained  of  in  them
is  not  apostolic.  It  is  many  times  paralleled  in  the  words  of
our  Lord  and  in  the  teachings  of  Paul  elsewhere.  More-
over, it  is  no  easier  to  find  apostasy  here  than  in  many
unquestioned  utterances  of  Paul.  When  we  come  in  the
exposition  to  interpret  these  passages,  it  will  not  be  difficult
to  show  that  there  is  nothing  here  to  contradict  the  final
preservation  and  perseverance  of  the  saints.  This  objection
is  on  a  line  with  Luther's  going  off  at  a  tangent  against  the
Letter  of  James  because  he  misunderstood  its  import.
Neither  James  nor  Hebrews  is  "an  epistle  of  straw."

4.  The  objection  based  on  style  in  its  broadest  sense  is
equally  inconclusive.  The  most  indeterminate  method  of
proving  authorship  known  to  literature  is  the  style  method.
All  historical  critics,  like  other  experts,  lose  the  power  of
generalization  in  the  narrowness  and  depths  of  the  rut  into
which  specialism  leads  them.    A  blind  mole  burrowing  is  an


198     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

authority  on  earth-worms,  but  is  no  judge  of  landscapes  or
mountain  scenery.  Let  it  be  repeated  as  proverbial  that  a
specialist  is  unsafe  on  a  jury  or  the  bench.

A  man,  by  a  life  devoted  to  microscopic  details  concerning
a  very  small  matter,  may  become  an  authority  on  the  variety
of  humming  birds,  and  might  be  able  to  prove  ultimately
that  the  sprigs  of  down  on  a  mouse's  tail  are  more  numerous
than  the  stickers  on  a  grasshopper's  hind  leg,  but  that  would
not  qualify  him  to  judge  of  the  spiritual  beings  of  the  cosmos.

We  have  seen  the  result  when  style  adepts  have  turned
themselves  loose  on  Junius,  Shakespeare,  Homer,  or  Milton.
Each  one  is  able  to  prove  to  his  own  satisfaction  anything  he
chooses,  but  let  him  not  hope  to  convince  his  brother  adepts.
Each  of  them  has  his  own  demonstration,  equally  worthless.
How  easy  to  prove  in  this  way  that  the  author  of  **I1
Penseroso"  could  not  have  written  "L'  Allegro."  They
forget,  if  they  ever  knew,  that  a  genius  possesses  many
styles,  and  adapts  his  vocabulary  to  each  new  theme,  yea,
even  his  turns  of  expression.

Paul  was  the  loftiest  genius  among  men.  Compare  the
rugged  fiery  style  of  the  Letter  to  the  Galatians  with  the
apostrophe  to  Love  in  I  Cor.  ij,  and  the  mighty  logic  of
Romans  with  the  sweet  humility  and  tact  of  Philemon.

In  the  first  case  it  is  like  comparing  Niagara  Falls  with
Lake  Tahoe,  and  in  the  other  the  Himalaya  range  with  a
violet  in  a  hedge-row.  The  man  who  delivered  the  address
before  Agrippa,  the  address  on  Mars  Hill,  and  who  wrote
Romans,  Philemon,  I  Cor.  13,  was  a  master  of  all  styles  and
vocabularies.  And  why  should  not  a  cultured  Jew,  reared
in  the  university  city  of  Tarsus,  graduated  from  the  Rab-
binical School  at  Jerusalem,  familiar  with  the  Greek  poets.
Rabbi  of  a  Hellenist  Synagogue  in  Jerusalem — why  should
he  be  ignorant  of  Philo  and  Alexandrian  literature?  The
Mediterranean  is  not  very  broad,  and  Alexandria  was  in
constant  touch  with  Tarsus,  in  literature  as  well  as  trade.


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  199

We  may  safely  take  for  granted  that  Paul  knew  more  about
Philo  and  Alexandrian  literature  than  all  of  his  critics  put
together.

5.  We  now  reply  to  the  fifth  serious  objection  to  Pauline
authorship,  towit :  The  use,  or  nonuse,  of  certain  words.

(i)  It  is  conceded  that  Hebrews  does  not  use  the  word
"justify" — dikaioo,  so  often  used  in  Galatians  and  Romans —
and  does  use  "purify — katharizo — but  the  reason  is  obvious :
Justification  was  the  theme  of  Galatians  and  Romans,  or  the
salvation  for  us.  Sanctification  is  the  theme  of  Hebrews,  or
the  salvation  in  us.  Paul's  words  correspond  to  his  theme,
e.g.,  he  uses  the  word  "law" — nomos — seventy-five  times  in
Romans  because,  as  the  correspondent  to  justification,  he
needs  it,  but  does  not  use  it  in  I  and  H  Thessalonians,  H
Corinthians,  Colossians,  Titus,  and  H  Timothy,  because  he
does  not  need  it.  If  the  absence  of  the  word  "justify"  from
a  letter  disproves  Pauline  authorship,  then  he  was  not  the
author  of  I  and  II  Thessalonians,  II  Corinthians,  Philip-
pians,  Philemon,  Colossians,  and  Ephesians.  And  while  he
does  not  use  katharizo — purify — in  Romans  and  Galatians,
because  not  needed,  yet  he  does  use  it  where  the  same  sense
requires  it  quite  as  many  times  in  II  Corinthians,  Ephesians,
and  Titus,  as  in  Hebrews.  "Justify"  is  a  legal  term  relat-
ing to  Christ's  work  for  us.  "Purify"  is  a  Holy-Spirit-term
applying  the  work  of  Christ  in  us.  Unfortunately  some
critics  get  their  one  idea  of  Paul's  style  and  words  from  his
discussion  of  the  legal  aspects  of  salvation  in  Galatians  and
Romans,  making  that  alone  the  standard  of  his  style  and
vocabulary.

The  letters  of  the  first  Roman  imprisonment  make  a  great
advance  in  the  development  of  the  plan  of  salvation.  In  the
same  way  they  argue  against  Pauline  authorship  because  of
the  infrequent  use  of  soteria — salvation — in  Hebrews,  though
Romans  uses  the  word  five  times,  to  seven  in  Hebrews,  and
all  his  other  letters  use  it  nineteen  times.


200     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

6.  And  where  will  the  narrow  argument  based  on  the
relative  purity  of  the  Greek  in  different  compositions,  com-
posed at  different  times  and  under  different  circumstances,
lead  us  ?  It  would  certainly  lead  us  to  deny  that  the  author
of  John^s  gospel  was  also  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse,  and
the  same  argument  would  distribute  the  New  Testament
books  among  many  unnamed  authors,  reverse  all  established
dates  and  annihilate  all  historical  evidence.  A  dim-eyed  Jew,
rapidly  writing  in  great  sprawling  letters  to  the  Galatians —
writing  in  the  hand  of  fiery  speech  off-hand,  in  a  foreign
tongue — would  hardly  turn  out  the  same  kind  of  Greek  in
the  calm,  carefully  prepared  treatise  to  the  Hebrews.  Let
a  professor  of  Greek  in  an  American  college  today,  while
on  a  trip  away  from  his  books,  stirred  by  profound  emotion,
write  rapidly  off-hand  an  impassioned  letter  in  Greek — write
it  as  if  he  were  talking — and  afterwards  in  the  quiet  of  his
study,  with  grammar  and  lexicon  at  hand,  prepare  care-
fully, without  haste,  a  labored  and  dispassionate  treatise  in
Greek  for  a  literary  magazine,  and  then  let  him  submit  these
two  documents  to  one  of  these  infallible  experts  and  hear
this  verdict:  "It  is  impossible  that  one  man  wrote  both.
The  author  of  No.  i  struggles  in  embarrassment  to  express
himself  in  an  unfamiliar  tongue.  His  sentences  are  ragged,
elliptical  and  faulty.  The  author  of  No.  2  thinks  in  Greek.
His  Greek  is  like  a  polished  shaft  of  Parian  marble  chiseled
by  the  sculptor.  His  vocabulary  is  abundant  and  choice.
His  argument  is  articulated,  his  periods  well  rounded,  and
his  style  superbly  rhetorical.  No  amount  of  external  proof
could  convince  a  cosmopolitan  scholar  that  the  same  man
wrote  both,  however  much  it  might  mislead  an  uncultured
provincial/*    Lo !  Sir  Oracle,  the  Owl !

All  the  objections  based  on  vocabularies,  on  methods  of
quotation,  on  phrases  and  terms  of  expression,  are  not  only
utterly  inconclusive  against  Paul,  but  there  can  be  made  out
a  much  stronger  case  for  him  than  against  him  on  these  very


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  201

grounds,  as  we  see  in  the  "Speaker's  Commentary"  in  the
introduction  to  Hebrews.
The  case  of  Paul  may  be  briefly  stated  thus :

EXTERNAL  EVIDENCE

The  external  evidence  is  cumulative  and  threefold :  Scrip-
tural, Documentary,  and  Traditional.

Scriptural. — The  first  scriptural  evidence  is  derived  from
II  Pet.  3: 15:  "And  account  that  the  long  suffering  of  our
Lord  is  salvation;  even  as  our  beloved  brother  Paul  also,
according  unto  the  wisdom  given  to  him,  wrote  unto  you."
If  this  testimony  be  relevant  it  is  decisive.  The  argument
for  its  application  to  the  case  is  substantially  this :

1.  Peter  wrote  his  first  letter  to  elect  Jews  of  the  disper-
sion in  five  provinces  of  Asia  Minor  (I  Pet.  1:1).

2.  His  second  letter  was  to  the  same  people  (H  Pet.  3:1).

3.  In  this  second  letter  he  says,  "Our  beloved  brother
Paul  hath  written  to  you"

4.  The  particular  topic  discussed  by  Peter,  concerning
which  he  alleges  agreement  with  Paul,  is  the  emphatic  topic
in  our  Letter  to  the  Hebrews,  namely,  the  long  suffering  of
our  Lord  in  delaying  His  advent,  which  delay  was  tempting
them  to  apostatize.

5.  Peter  distinguishes  this  letter  of  Paul  to  the  Hebrews
from  all  his  other  letters.

6.  The  most  probable  date  of  Peter's  second  letter  allows
ample  time  for  his  knowledge  of  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews.
Indeed,  Peter's  letter  shows  evident  acquaintance  with  the
group  of  Paul's  letters  written  during  his  first  Roman  im-
prisonment, and  designedly  supplements  Paul's  great  argu-
ment against  the  Gnostics.

7.  If  our  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  be  not  the  one  which
Peter  attributed  to  Paul,  then  Paul's  letter  is  lost.  The  only
escape  from  this  argument  would  be  proof  that  Peter  him-
self never  wrote  the  second  letter  attributed  to  him,  but  this


^02     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

would  be  only  a  nominal  escape,  since  somebody  wrote  that
letter  and  the  direct  testimony  as  to  Paul  writing  to  the
Hebrews  remains.  Whatever  may  be  the  merits  of  this  argu-
ment as  to  Peter's  testimony,  it  is  certain  that  Peter  never
said,  *'Our  beloved  brother  Barnabas,  or  Apollos,  or  Clement,
or  Luke,  hath  written  unto  you."

The  second  scriptural  evidence  is  the  constructive  testi-
mony of  Paul  himself  derived  from  a  comparison  of  the  last
paragraph  of  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  with  certain  passages
in  the  letters  to  Timothy.  Hebrews  closes  with  the  announce-
ment that  Timothy  is  at  liberty  and  about  to  visit  the  people
addressed  in  that  letter,  and  that  Paul  expected  to  be
acquitted  and  restored  to  them,  perhaps  accompanying
Timothy.  Now,  later  after  Paul's  release  in  I  Tim.  i :  3  and
n  Tim.  1 :  15  we  find  that  Paul  and  Timothy  were  together
in  Ephesus,  the  metropolis  of  Asia.  The  fit  is  like  that  of  a
glove  on  the  fingers  or  the  feathers  in  a  dove's  tail.

The  third  scriptural  evidence  is  based  on  H  Tim.  i :  15-18.
The  strange  fact  is  disclosed  that  Paul  was  not  welcomed  in
Ephesus,  that  all  Asia  had  turned  against  him,  and  but  for
the  ministering  care  of  one  family,  the  household  of  Onesiph-
orus,  Paul  would  have  suffered  there,  and  there  seems  to
be  a  hint  that  his  very  life  might  have  been  in  danger.
Timothy  knew  of  these  ministrations  of  Onesiphorus  and
when  Paul  went  away  he  was  constrained  by  exhortation  to
remain  in  Ephesus  to  see  if  he  could  not  right  matters  there.
Now,  in  some  way  we  must  account  for  this  sudden  revulsion
of  sentiment  against  Paul — a  revulsion  that  amounted  to  a
revolution.  We  can  easily  understand  how  a  Gentile  convert,
under  the  influence  of  the  Gnostic  heresy,  would  naturally
hate  a  man  who  exposed  that  heresy  in  the  letters  to  the
Colossians  and  Ephesians,  but  something  more  is  necessary
to  account  for  the  sudden  sweeping  opposition  of  Jewish
Christians  to  Paul.  This  Letter  to  the  Hebrews,  and  it  alone,
accounts  for  so  great  a  revolution  of  sentiment.    The  case


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  203

was  about  this :  Not  only  all  Palestine,  but  the  dispersion  as
well,  was  seething  at  this  time  with  a  revolt  against  Rome.
That  awful  struggle  had  already  commenced  which  in  two
or  three  years  would  terminate  in  the  total  destruction  of
Jerusalem  and  of  the  temple,  and  the  utter  overthrow  of
the  entire  Jewish  polity.  The  prophetic  denunciations  of
Moses  (Deut.  28: 47-68,  of  Daniel  (Dan.  9:  26,  27),  and  of
our  Lord  (Matt.  23:29-39;  Luke  19:42-44),  were  now
massed  in  an  awful  menace  and  hanging  over  Jerusalem  as
a  storm-cloud  of  wrath  about  to  burst  upon  the  holy  city
and  people.  Everywhere,  at  home  and  abroad,  a  frenzy
possessed  this  doomed  people.  Their  patriotism  impelled
them  to  stand  up  for  their  old  order,  the  holy  city  and  the
sacred  temple,  and  to  become  implacable  foes  to  those  who,
in  their  judgment,  slighted  these  holy  things.

At  this  juncture  of  intolerant  frenzy  came  Paul's  Letter
to  the  Hebrews,  plainly  announcing  an  eternal  severance  of
Christianity  from  Judaism.  Far  beyond  anything  in  other
letters,  it  calls  for  a  final  break  between  the  old  and  the  new
covenant,  and  foreshows  the  speedy  overthrow  of  the  entire
Jewish  polity.  Its  covenant  is  annulled,  its  heavens  are
shaken,  and  the  whole  system  has  become  as  worthless  as
the  perishing  shell  of  a  nut  whose  kernel  has  sprouted  into
a  new  tree.  Its  great  leaders — Abraham,  Moses,  Aaron,
Joshua,  and  David — are  overshadowed  by  a  greater  Lord,
of  whom  they  are  but  feeble  types.  To  unconverted  Jews
such  a  letter  at  this  juncture  was  as  a  spark  of  fire  to  a
powder  magazine,  and  the  undeveloped  Christian  Jew,
always  leaning  back  toward  Jerusalem,  could  not  stand
before  the  pressure,  and  so  all  Asia  was  turned  against  Paul.
He  was  outlawed  and  banned.  It  became  treason  to  give
him  shelter,  food,  or  drink.  His  very  appearance  would
stir  a  mob  into  a  most  lawless  and  fanatical  outbreak  of
violence.

In  such  a  view  of  the  case  we  can  understand  the  unselfish


S04     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

devotion  of  Onesiphorus,  who,  having  previously  at  Rome
shared  Paul's  sufferings,  now  with  his  household  shelters,
surreptitiously  hides  away  and  ministers  unto  this  hunted
man  when  he  attempted  to  join  Timothy  at  Ephesus.  It  is
fairly  inferable  from  II  Tim.  4:  13  that  Paul's  escape  from
Asia  Minor  was  a  flight,  leaving  behind  in  his  hurry  at  Troas
his  cloak  and  books  or  parchments.

If  it  be  objected  that  this  argument  in  supporting  Paul's
appearance  again  in  Ephesus  flatly  contradicts  his  own
prophecy  in  Acts  20 :  25,  the  reply  is  a  flat  denial  of  contra-
diction. Both  the  prophecy  and  the  history  are  true  and
only  apparently  contradictory.  We  find  in  the  case  of  Abra-
ham (Rom.  4: 18-21  and  Heb.  11 :  17-19)  an  illustration  of
apparent  conflict  betwen  history  and  prophecy.  We  may
find  another  case  of  the  unbelieving  captain  described  in
II  Kings  7:1,  2,  and  17.  So  here  he  did  indeed  return  to
Ephesus,  but  the  elders  of  that  church  from  whom  he  parted
in  tears  at  Miletus,  saw  his  face  no  more.

Documentary. — ^As  one  example  only  of  documentary  evi-
dence, we  cite  the  fact  that  in  all  the  early  manuscripts  of
the  New  Testament — the  Alexandrian,  the  Vatican,  and  the
Sinaitic — the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  not  only  grouped  with
Paul's  letters,  but  is  placed  between  the  Ephesians  and  the
pastoral  epistles.  This  indicates  a  widespread  consensus
among  the  learned  in  favor  of  the  Pauline  authorship.

Traditional. — It  would  go  far  beyond  the  limits  of  this
chapter  to  cite  all  the  traditional  evidence,  but  we  do  give
the  earliest  traditions.  Clement  of  Alexandria,  a.d.  165-220,
preserved  the  tesitmony  of  Pantenus  that  the  Letter  to  the
Hebrews  was  written  by  Paul.  Pantenus  almost  touched  the
times  of  the  apostles.  The  testimony  of  Origen,  186-253  a.d.,
is  also  very  striking.  He  says,  "Not  without  good  reason
have  the  men  of  old  times  handed  down  this  letter  as  Paul's."
Here  Origen  speaks  simply  as  a  witness  as  to  what  is  tradi-
tion.    His  declaration  is  clear  that  the  men  of  old  times


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  205

handed  down  this  letter  as  Paul's.  As  a  critic  on  internal
evidence  he  may  attribute  the  style  to  an  amanuensis.

When  we  come  to  consider  the  internal  evidence,  it  will
then  be  appropriate  to  give  the  views  of  Origen,  the  critic,
to  the  effect  that  while  the  doctrine  and  thoughts  of  the
letter  are  Pauline,  its  composition  was  by  an  unknown  scribe*
This  view  of  what  was  tradition  prevailed  throughout  the
East,  and  particularly  in  the  section  where  lived  the  people
addressed.  Asia  Minor  never  attributed  the  letter  to  any-
body but  Paul.

While  some  critical  views,  as  to  internal  evidence  con-
jectured, have  attributed  this  letter  to  others  than  Paul,  there
is  not  a  shred  of  traditional  evidence,  fairly  considered,
against  Paul  and  in  favor  of  any  other  man.  It  is  admitted
that  while  at  first  this  letter  was  received  as  apostolic  at
Rome,  i.e.,  in  the  Western  churches,  yet  later  for  about  two
centuries,  on  internal  grounds  alone,  the  Pauline  authorship
was  questioned,  but  by  the  meeting  of  the  Council  of  Laodi-
cea  and  of  Carthage,  the  consensus  swung  back  to  Paul.  It
is  a  little  remarkable  that,  whether  in  earlier  or  later  times,
historical  critics,  influenced  by  what  they  conceive  to  be
internal  evidence,  have  questioned  Paul's  authorship,  as  time
passes  the  pendulum  swings  back,  and  like  the  temporary
quiverings  of  the  magnetic  needle  which  finally  settles  in  a
definite  position  pointing  to  the  north,  so  always  the  judg-
ment returns  to  Paul  as  the  writer  of  this  letter.

INTERNAL  EVIDENCE

The  internal  evidence  in  favor  of  the  Pauline  authorship
may  be  briefly  stated  thus :

1.  On  all  hands  everywhere  the  doctrines  and  thought  are
attributed  to  Paul ;  even  many,  who  suppose  an  amanuensis,
Luke,  or  ApoUos,  or  some  other,  say  that  whoever  wrote  it
expressed  Paul's  thought  in  his  own  style.

2.  Vocabulary. — There  are  in  this  letter  more  than  fifty


206     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Greek  words,  all  of  them  found  elsewhere  in  Paul's  letters  or
speeches,  but  found  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.

3.  There  is  also  a  large  number  of  words  in  this  letter  fre-
quently used  elsewhere  by  Paul,  but  seldom  used  by  any  other
New  Testament  writer.  In  the  same  way  it  would  be  easy
to  cite  a  long  list  of  phrases  and  modes  of  expression  in  this
letter  to  be  found  elsewhere  only  in  the  speeches  and  letters
of  Paul.

4.  Metaphors. — The  metaphors  employed  in  this  letter  are
various.  Some  domestic,  some  architectural,  some  pugilistic,
some  theatrical,  some  nautical,  some  medical,  some  based  on
the  races  in  the  Isthmian  games,  and  all  these  metaphors  we
find  used  by  Paul  in  similar  constructions  in  his  letters  and
speeches  elsewhere.

5.  Quotations. — Any  student  of  Paul  readily  sees  that
certain  Old  Testament  passages  had  fixed  themselves  on  his
mind.  This  is  evidenced  in  his  speeches  and  other  letters.
In  this  letter  these  are  the  very  Old  Testament  passages
which  he  quotes.  The  coincidence  is  not  only  remarkable  as
to  the  passages  quoted,  but  in  the  method  of  citing  the  Old
Testament  and  in  his  ways  of  viewing  and  handling  religious
truth.  There  is  not  here  and  now  time  and  place  for  a  critical
reply  to  the  objections  on  internal  evidence,  but  it  is  cer-
tainly safe  to  say  that  taking  internal  evidence  alone,  an
argument  can  be  made  for  Paul's  authorship  far  stronger  to
a  judicial  mind  than  anything  that  can  be  made  out  against
him.

6.  The  strongest  argument  for  Paul  on  the  internal  evi-
dence is  found  in  the  closing  paragraph  of  Heb.  13:  18-25.
In  every  word  and  phrase  and  idea  this  paragraph  is  Pauline.
It  is  impossible  to  make  it  apply  with  any  degree  of  plausibil-
ity to  any  other  author.  We  have  only  to  compare  it  with
the  methods  of  closing  in  his  other  letters  to  note  its  refer-
ence to  Timothy,  to  his  request  for  prayer  that  he  may  be
restored  to  them,  its  harmony  with  the  conceded  history  of


INTRODUCTION  TO  HEBREWS  207

Paul's  previous  life  and  labors,  and  particularly  with  dove-
tail exactness  it  fits  into  the  group  of  Paul's  letters  which
preceded  this  closing  letter  of  the  first  Roman  imprison-
ment, in  order  to  be  assured  of  Pauline  authorship.

Having  examined  many  authorities  and  studied  thousands
of  pages  of  controversy  on  this  subject,  the  author  is  thor-
oughly settled  in  his  mind  that  Paul,  and  no  other,  is  the
author  of  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews;  that  it  concludes  the
group  of  letters  written  during  the  first  Roman  imprison-
ment, following  Ephesians,  elaborating  the  doctrines  set
forth  in  the  preceding  letters  against  Gnosticism,  properly
introducing  the  pastoral  letters,  and  that  it  was  addressed
to  the  Jews  of  Asia  Minor  and  Greece.


QUESTIONS

r.    What  the  two  kinds  of  evidence  in  determining  authorship,
and  what  their  relative  value?

2.  How  only  is  internal  evidence  available?

3.  How  does  this   fact  alone  affect  the   suggested  names  of
Apollos,  Barnabas  and  Luke?

4.  What  other  and  decisive  argument  against  Luke?

5.  What  capital   error   usually  committed  by  critics   opposing
Pauline  authorship?

6.  What  the  full  sources  of  matter  confessedly  derived  from
Paul  must  be  considered  in  the  comparison?

7.  What  one  proof  would  be  decisive  against  Paul,  and  why
cannot  it"  be  given  ?

8.  What  a   fair  statement  of  the  case  of  authorship,  and  on
what  points  does  this  case  against  Paul  break  down?

9.  Name    under    six   heads    the    strongest   arguments    against
Pauline  authorship.

10.  What  the  reply  to  them  seriatim?

11.  What  the  nature  of  the  external  evidence  for  Pauline  author-
ship, and  what  its  three  classifications?

12.  State  the  argument  on  the  first  scriptural  evidence  in  support
of  Paul's  authorship ;  the  second ;  the  third.

13.  What  documentary  proof  tends  to  the  same  conclusion  ?

14.  Give  substance  of  traditional  evidence  coming  from  the  East.

15.  State  the  case   in   the  West,   citing  authorities   up   to  the
Reformation,

16.  How  was  the  question  reopened  in  the  Reformation-period,
and  what  the  position  of  Erasmus,  Luther,  and  Calvin  respectively?

17.  State  in  substance  the  internal  evidence  favoring  Pauline
authorship.


XVIII

ANALYSIS  OF  HEBREWS  AND  OUR  LORD'S
SONSHIPS

BEFORE  commencing  the  exposition  of  this  remark-
able letter,  I  wish  to  refer  briefly  to  commentaries
suitable  to  English  students.  I  commend,  heartily,
"Jamieson,  Faussett  and  Brown,"  brief  but  critical  and
trustworthy,  though  dissenting  from  it,  however,  in  the
persons  to  whom  the  letter  is  addressed.  I  commend  very
heartily  "The  Speaker's  Commentary."  Its  introduction  is
superb,  indeed,  the  best  I  have  seen,  though  I  differ  from
this  "Commentary"  as  to  the  persons  addressed  in  the  letter.
I  commend,  with  some  reservation,  "The  Pulpit  Commen-
tary," particularly  its  homiletical  part.  Farrar,  in  "The
Cambridge  Bible,"  is  as  usual  sharp  and  erratic.  Of  course,
as  a  radical  critic,  he  dissents  from  authorship  by  Paul.
Edwards,  in  "The  Expositor's  Bible,"  is  weak.  In  "The
American  Commentary,"  Kendrick  follows  the  radical  critics
in  his  introduction,  and  gives  an  easy  flowing  translation  of
Hebrews.  I  have  never  regarded  Kendrick  as  occupying  the
first  rank  on  the  matter  of  soundness  of  judgment  in  inter-
pretation.

ANALYSIS  OF  HEBREWS

I.    Introduction,  answering  the  questions :

1.  Who  wrote  it?

2.  In  what  language?

3.  Where  written  ?

4.  What  the  circumstances  of  the  writer?

5.  When  written  ?

6.  To  whom?

7.  The  occasion,  or  circumstances  of  those  addressed.

208


ANALYSIS  OF  HEBREWS  209

8.  Of  what  group  of  letters  is  it  a  part,  and  what  its  place  in
the  group  ?

9.  What  its  character  and  style  ?
10.    What  its  theme?

II.  The  Mediator  of  the  New  Covenant  Is  the  Son  of  God,

1:1-9

1.  By  eternal  subsistence.  In  His  pre-existence :  (i)  "The  efful-
gence of  God's  glory  and  very  image  of  His  substance."  (2)
'Through  whom  also  He  made  the  worlds."  (3)  "Upholding  all
things  by  the  word  of  His  power."

2.  In  His  incarnation

(i)     "The  First-born."    "Made  purification  of  sins."

3.  In  His  resurrection

(i)  "Thou  art  my  son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee."  "When
He  again  bringeth  His  first-born  into  the  world."  (2)  "Sat  down
at  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high."  "Thy  throne,  O  God,  is
forever  and  ever."  (3)  "Anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above
His  fellows."

III.  Superior  to  the  Material  Universe,  i  :  10-12

1.  He  created  and  upholds  it.

2.  He  is  changeless ;  it  changes.

3.  He  dissolves  it  by  fire  at  His  final  coming  (i:  li,  12,  and  II
Pet.  3:4-12),  and  recreates  it  (Rev.  21:1).

IV.  Superior  to  All  Old  Testament  Prophets  as  a  Revealer

1.  Their  revelation  fragmentary,  diverse,  incomplete.

2.  His  revelation  complete,  and  closes  the  canon  of  scripture.

3.  It  is  a  gospel  of  salvation — theirs  a  promise.

y.    Superior  to  Angels — Good  and  Bad

1.  To  good  angels:  (i)  In  His  threefold  Sonship  He  is  the
object  of  their  worship.  (2)  In  His  expiation  of  sin.  (3)  In  His
inheritance.  (4)  In  His  enthronement.  (5)  In  His  anointing  with
the  oil  of  gladness.  (6)  In  their  subordination  of  service.  (7)  In
His  confirmation  of  them  for  their  fidelity  in  ministering  to  the
heirs  of  salvation.  (8)  In  His  gospel  as  compared  with  the  law
disposed  by  them.  (9)  In  the  higher  penal  sanctions  of  His  gospel
over  the  penal  sanctions  of  the  law.  (10)  In  the  gospel's  better
accrediting  than  the  law.  (11)  In  His  sympathetic  priesthood.
(12)  In  His  becoming  a  brother  to  them  whom  they  only  serve.

2.  To  bad  angels:  (i)  In  His  successful  resistance  to  Satan's
temptation,  both  in  the  desert  and  in  Gethsemane.  (2)  In  His  com-
plete victory  over  Satan  and  all  his  demons  on  the  cross.  (3)  In
delivering  Satan's  victims.    (4)  In  His  final  judgment  of  them.

yi.    Greater  than  Moses,  the  Mediator  of  the  Old  Covenanc

1.  The  builder  of  the  house  greater  than  the  house.

2.  The  Son  in  the  house  greater  than  the  servant.


«10     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

3.  The  house  built  by  the  Son  greater  than  the  house  built  by
the  servant.

4.  Neither  Moses  nor  the  people  led  out  of  bondage  by  him  ever
reached  the  earthly  promised  land,  but  Jesus  enters  the  heavenly
promised  land,  saying,  "Here  am  I  and  the  children  thou  hast
given  me."

VII.  Greater  than  Joshua,  the  Captain  General  of  Israel

The  rest  into  which  Joshua  led  his  generation  was  imperfect  and
temporary,  but  Jesus  entered  the  true  rest  of  redemption.

VIII.  The  Seventh  Day  Sabbath

Commemorating  the  rest  after  creation  (Gen.  2:2,  3),  and  com-
memorating the  temporal  deliverance  from  Egypt  (Deut  5:4-15),
and  of  the  imperfect  rest  of  Joshua  (Heb.  4:8),  was  nailed  to  fiie
cross  of  Christ  and  blotted  out  (Col.  2:14,  16,  17),  and  forever
superseded  by  another  day — the  Christian's  Sabbath — "Sabbath-
keeping"  (Sabbatismos)  that  remaineth  to  the  people  of  God,"
commemorating  the  resurrestion-rest  of  Christ's  finished  work  of
redemption  (Heb.  4:8-10).

IX.  Greater  than  Aaron  the  High  Priest

1.  In  descent  from  Judah,  not  Levi.

2.  After  the  order  of  Melchizedek.

3.  Sinless,  whereas  Aaron  was  a  sinner.

4.  Aaron  died,  but  He  ever  liveth  to  intercede,  and  therefore  is
able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  to  God  through  Him.

5.  In  sympathetic  touch  with  His  people.

X.  The  General  Superiority  of  the  New  Covenant  Over  thi

Old  Covenant  (Heb.  8: 5  to  10: 18)

1.  In  its  better  promises.

2.  In  its  better  surety.

3.  It  is  the  substance  of  which  the  other  was  the  shadow.

4.  Written  on  the  heart  instead  of  tablets  of  stone.

5.  In  the  dignity  and  intrinsic  merit  of  its  one  great  expiatory
sacrifice,  offered  once  for  all.

6.  This  one  expiation  blots  out  sin  and  its  remembrance;  the
multitude  of  the  others,  oft  repeated,  only  passed  sin  over  till  this
one  came.

7.  In  the  personal  and  experimental  knowledge  of  God  possessed
by  all  members  of  the  new.

&  All  the  members  of  the  new  arc  priests  unto  God,  having  a
supwior  festival  and  better  non-expiating  sacrifices  (13:1013,
15,  16).

9.  The  old  broken  repeatedly  by  one  of  the  parties  to  it,  and
disregarded  by  the  other.

10-  The  old  in  its  city,  its  tabernacle,  and  all  its  appointments
and  sacrifices  and  priesthood  and  ritual  and  ordinances  forever


ANALYSIS  OF  HEBREWS  211

taken  away.  The  new  abideth  forever,  thoroughly  kept  by  its  surety,
and  so  provides  for  all  its  members  that  they,  when  fully  saved,
will  forever  keep  it.

XI.  All  the  Worthies  of  the  Old  Testament  Times

Won  their  victories  by  faith— the  great  first  principle  of  the  new
covenant  (Heb.  ii).

XII.  The  Encouragements  to  a  Successfxjl  Race
Under  the  new  far  exceed  those  of  the  old  (Heb.  12: 1-17).

XIII.  The  Outcome  of  the  New

Far  better  and  more  glorious  (Heb.  12:18-24).  The  covenant-
argument  has  its  climax  in  chapter  12  and  closes  at  13 :  16.  The
Mediator-argument  finds  its  climax  in  13 : 8.

XIV.  Closing  Words  (13: 17-25)'

The  one  theme  of  this  book  is :  Christian  Jews  should  hold
fast  to  the  profession  of  their  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  steadily
going  forward  to  maturity,  and  not  relapse  into  Judaism,
because  the  new  covenant,  mediated  by  our  Lord,  forever
supersedes,  and  on  all  points  is  infinitely  superior  to  the  old
covenant  given  through  the  disposition  of  angels  and  medi-
ated by  Moses.

The  argument  and  exhortation  rest  on  the  nature,  person,
and  office  of  our  Lord  in  relation  to  salvation,  and  on  the
excellencies  of  the  new  covenant  mediated  by  Him.  So
resting,  the  argument  naturally  commences  with  the  dignity
and  worth  of  the  Mediator  as  contrasted  with  all  other  intel-
ligences, and  then  develops  the  excellencies  of  His  covenant.

Jesus  the  Messiah  is  the  one  hero  of  the  book  from  start
to  finish.  The  arguments,  each  followed  by  appropriate
exhortation,  commence  with  verse  i,  reach  the  climax  as  to
the  covenant  in  chapter  12,  and  close  with  the  priesthood  of
all  Christians  and  the  superiority  of  their  festivals  and  of
their  non-expiatory  sacrifices,  at  Heb.  13: 10,  15,  16.  The
climax  on  the  Mediator  is  reached  at  13:8.

The  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant  is  first  presented  to
view  in  His  threefold  Sonship  to  the  Father :


2ia     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

1.  The  Sonship  of  His  pre-existence,  i.e.,  prior  to  time  and
creation  of  the  universe.  He  was  the  Son  of  God  by  eternal
subsistence,  or,  as  this  book  expresses  it,  "being  the  efful-
gence of  His  glory  and  the  very  image  of  His  substance."
The  activities  of  this  substance  are  thus  expressed:
"Through  whom  He  also  made  the  worlds,"  and  His  prov-
idence after  their  creation,  "upholding  all  things  by  the  word
of  His  power."  Eternity  of  being,  creation,  providence,  set
forth  His  essential  deity  and  overthrow  the  false  concep-
tions of  the  Gnostic  philosophy  concerning  eons,  which  at
this  very  time  is  one  of  the  active  causes  tending  to  apostasy.
On  this  point,  as  on  others,  the  book  fits  into  the  preceding
letters  of  the  first  Roman  imprisonment,  rounding  up  their
argument,  and  prepares  for  the  interfitting  of  subsequent
New  Testament  books.  We  cannot,  except  by  violence  to
the  system  of  correlated  revelation,  disrupt  it  from  this  con-
nection. But  it  is  the  evident  purpose  of  the  book  to  connect
His  first  Sonship  with  the  second  and  third  Sonships,  reach-
ing the  climax  of  the  argument  as  to  Mediator  in  verse  8  of
the  last  chapter:  "Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday  and
today,  yea,  and  forever."

2.  Son  of  God  by  procreation  of  the  Virgin  Mary — His
"first-born."  Compare  Luke  i :  35  and  H  Sam.  7 :  14.  This
chapter  expresses  the  work  of  this  Sonship  in  four  distinct
offices :

(a)  Prophet :  "Hath  at  the  end  of  these  days  spoken  unto
us  in  His  Son"  (1:2).

(b)  Both  priest  and  (c)  expiating  sacrifice:  "When  He
had  made  purification  of  sins"  (1:3).  Other  parts  of  the
letter  give  elaborate  details  of  His  priesthood  and  vicarious
sacrifice,  which  will  be  considered  later.

(d)  King:  "I  will  be  to  Him  a  Father  and  He  will  be  to
me  a  Son"  (latter  clause  of  1:5).  This  is  a  quotation  from
n  Sam.  7.  The  verses  immediately  before  it  are:  "When
thy  days  are  fulfilled,  and  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  fathers,  I


ANALYSIS  OF  HEBREWS  «15

will  set  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  that  shall  proceed  out  of  thy
bowels,  and  I  will  establish  His  kingdom.  He  shall  build  a
house  for  my  name,  and  I  will  establish  the  throne  of  His
kingdom  forever"  (H  Sam.  7: 12,  13).

It  is  this  promise  to  David  which  influenced  him  more  than
all  other  words  of  God  to  him,  and  evoked  the  matchless
72nd  Psalm ;  occasioned  the  kingdom  prophecies  of  Daniel,
Zechariah,  and  Micah,  and  the  testimonies  so  elaborately  set
forth  in  the  gospel  of  Matthew,  on  the  King  and  kingdom.
But  so  far,  the  allusions  are  to  the  King  and  His  birth,  and
in  the  setting  up  of  His  kingdom,  and  the  constitution  of  His
church  before  His  death.  It  is  the  King  building  and  estab-
lishing and  not  His  reigning  after  His  exaltation.  The  w^ord,
"first-born,"  belongs  to  the  second  Sonship,  i.e.,  so  far  as  it
relates  to  His  first  coming  into  this  world,  and  not  "the
bringing  in  again."

3.  The  Son  of  God  by  His  resurrection:  "Thou  art  my
Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee."  "And  when  He
again  bringeth  in  His  first-born  into  the  world."  The  first
passage,  i :  5,  first  clause,  is  a  quotation  from  Psalm  2,  and
by  Paul  himself,  is  expounded  as  applying  to  His  resurrec-
tion at  Acts  13:33.  The  other  passage:  "When  He  again
bringeth  in  His  first-born  into  the  world,"  needs  careful  con-
sideration. It  means  that  as  He  brought  Him  first  into  the
world  by  His  incarnation — His  birth  of  the  Virgin  Mary — so
He  brought  Him  into  the  world  the  second  time  at  His  resur-
rection. It  means  that  when  He  died  on  the  cross  He  left
the  world  and  His  spirit  ascended  to  the  Father,  as  in  Luke
23 :  46 — "And  Jesus,  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  said,  'Father,
into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit,*  and  having  said  this  He
gave  up  the  spirit."

Here  arises  a  series  of  crucial  questions :  Where  did  the
spirit  of  Jesus  go  when  separated  from  His  body,  why  did
it  go  there,  and  how  long  did  it  stay  there,  and  leaving  there,
where  did  it  next  go,  and  for  what  purpose,  and  how  long


n^     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

did  He  remain  at  this  second  place,  and  for  what  purpose,
and  then  where  did  He  next  go  and  why,  and  where  is  He
now,  and  what  doing,  and  how  long  will  He  remain,  and
then  where  will  He  go,  and  for  what  ?

The  answers  are:  His  spirit  went  to  heaven;  He  went
there  as  High  Priest  to  sprinkle  on  the  mercy  seat  the  blood
shed  on  the  cross  and  make  atonement  for  sins ;  He  remained
there  in  the  interval  between  His  death  and  resurrection ;  He
then  returned  to  the  earth  for  His  glorified  resurrection-
body,  and  remained  on  earth  comforting  and  instructing  His
disciples  for  forty  days,  and  then  He  again  ascended  to
heaven,  soul  and  body,  and  sat  down  at  the  right  hand
of  God,  crowned  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  and
there  He  reigns  as  King  and  makes  intercession  as  High
Priest  until  His  third  and  final  advent  to  raise  the  dead  and
judge  the  world  and  then  turn  over  the  kingdom  to  the
Father.

Let  us  note  very  carefully  the  following  points :

1.  At  His  first  advent  He  assumed  the  body  of  His  humil-
iation to  become  the  sacrifice  for  sin.  At  His  second  advent
He  assumed  the  body  of  His  glory  for  reigning  and  inter-
ceding in  heaven.  At  His  final  advent  He  will  assume  His
mystical  body,  the  church,  for  its  glorification  forever.

2.  When  His  body  died,  His  soul,  negatively,  (a)  did  not
descend  into  (Gehenna)  hell.  His  descent  into  hell  was  on
the  cross,  soul  and  body,  during  the  three  hours  of  darkness ;
(b)  His  soul  did  not  go  into  hades  considered  as  a  place,  in
order  to  preach  a  gospel  unto  the  wicked  dead,  nor  to  deliver
Old  Testament  saints  from  a  half-way  prison,  but,  positively,
according  to  Leviticus  i6,  entered  heaven  to  make  atone-
ment in  the  Holy  of  Holies  for  offering  and  pleading  the
merit  of  His  expiating  blood.  On  that  great  day  of  atone-
ment (Lev.  i6)  there  was  continuous  action.  Immediately
after  the  death  of  the  vicarious  sacrifice,  the  high  priest,
with  the  warm  blood,  parted  the  veil  which  hid  the  holy  of


ANALYSIS  OF  HEBREWS  ^15

holies.  This  blood  of  the  typical  vicarious  sacrifice  cleanses
the  typical  sanctuary  and  makes  atonement.  There  is  no
halt  in  the  proceedings;  the  action  is  continuous.  So  this
letter  will  tell  us  how  Jesus  passes  through  the  veil — that  is,
by  the  death  of  His  body — and  enters  into  the  Most  Holy
Place  beyond  the  veil  and  cleanses  with  His  own  nobler  blood
the  true  sanctuary  and  makes  atonement.

To  make  this  clear,  let  us  repeat :  One  of  the  greatest  ques-
tions of  New  Testament  theology  is :  How  was  the  soul  of
our  Lord  employed  in  the  interval  between  His  death  and
resurrection?  Some  make  hades  an  intermediate  place  be-
tween heaven  and  hell  (Gehenna),  divided  into  two  compart-
ments— Paradise  for  the  good,  and  Tartarus  for  the  wicked.
This  they  call  "the  middle  life"  They  contend  that  all  Old
Testament  saints  are  side-tracked  in  Paradise,  and  that  all
the  lost  of  Old  Testament  times  are  side-tracked  in  Tartarus
until  the  final  judgment  and  that  the  same  disposition  is  now
made  of  the  souls  of  good  and  bad.  See  J.  R.  Graves'
"Middle  Life,"  Bishop  McTyiere's  sermon  in  "Methodist
Pulpit,  South,"  afterwards  regretted,  as  I  am  informed,
and  Bishop  Hobart's  (Episcopal)  funeral  sermon  on  a
brother  bishop,  and  the  interpretation  of  the  creed:  "He
descended  into  hell  (hades).

On  this  theory  some  contend,  by  a  misinterpretation  of
I  Pet.  3:19,  20 ;  4:6,  that  the  disembodied  soul  of  Christ,
between  His  death  and  resurrection,  was  employed  in  preach-
ing a  saving  gospel  in  Tartarus  to  those  who  perished  in  the
flood.  Others,  citing  apocryphal  books,  contend  He  entered
into  Paradise  and  announced  to  the  souls  of  the  saints  rest-
ing there  the  finishing  of  His  work  for  their  salvation,  and
that  He  took  out  with  Him,  when  He  left,  the  souls  of  Abra-
ham and  other  Old  Testament  saints.  On  similar  lines  is
based  the  Romanist  theory  of  Purgatory.  When  we  come
to  interpret  I  Pet.  3:19,  20 ;  4 : 6,  all  these  theories  will  be
examined  in  a  special  chapter.    Just  now  our  concern  is  to


^16     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

establish  positively  where  He  was  and  how  employed  in  the
interval  between  His  death  and  resurrection.

The  answer  is  suggested  by  His  own  words  on  the  cross :
"It  is  finished.  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."
And  He  gave  up  the  spirit,  intensified  by  the  recorded
prodigy :  "The  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  top
to  bottom"  (Luke  23:45)  with  this  comment  in  our  letter:
"Which  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  a  hope  both  sure
and  steadfast  and  entering  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil ;
whither  as  a  forerunner  Jesus  entered  for  us,  having  become
a  High  Priest  forever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek"
(Heb.  6:  19,  20)  ;  "But  into  the  second  the  high  priest  alone,
once  in  the  year,  not  without  blood,  which  he  offereth  for
himself  and  for  the  errors  of  the  people:  The  Holy  Spirit
thus  signifying  that  the  way  into  the  holy  place  hath  not  yet
been  made  manifest  while  the  first  tabernacle  is  yet  standing.
But  Christ  having  become  a  High  Priest  of  the  good  things
to  come,  through  the  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle,
not  made  with  hands,  that  is  to  say,  not  of  this  creation,  nor
yet  through  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but  through  His
own  blood,  entered  in  once  for  all  into  the  Holy  Place,  hav-
ing obtained  eternal  redemption.  For  Christ  entered  not
into  a  holy  place  made  with  hands,  like  in  pattern  to  the
true,  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  before  the  face
of  God  for  us."  (Heb.  9:7,  8,  11,  12,  24)  ;  "Now  where
remission  of  these  is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin.  Hav-
ing, therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the  Holy  Place
by  the  blood  of  Jesus"  (Heb.  10:  18,  19).  Here  it  is  evident
that  the  veil  which  hid  the  holy  of  holies  typified  Christ's
body.  When  His  body  died  that  veil  was  forever  rent.
Through  this  rent  body  He  entered  the  heavenly  Holy  of
Holies  and  there  offered  His  own  expiating  blood  an  offer-
ing through  the  eternal  Spirit,  hence  in  12:22-24,  the  last
glorious  thing  the  Christian  comes  to  is  "the  blood  of  sprink-
ling," not  on  his  heart  as  applied  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in


ANALYSIS  OF  HEBREWS  217

regeneration,  but  that  blood  sprinkled  on  the  mercy  seat  in
the  heavenly  sanctuary.

It  has  been  objected  to  this  view  that  Jesus  said  to  Mary
after  His  resurrection:  "I  have  not  yet  ascended  to  my
Father,"  but  that  refers  to  His  ascension  in  His  glorified
body,  and  not  in  His  disembodied  spirit.  His  body  could  not
be  raised  until  His  spirit  had  made  atonement  in  heaven,
hence  it  said:  "Now  the  God  of  peace  who  brought  again
from  the  dead  the  great  shepherd  of  the  sheep  with  the  blood
of  an  eternal  covenant,  even  our  Lord  Jesus."

I  once  heard  a  preacher  say  that  Jesus  never  sprinkled
that  blood  on  the  mercy  seat  in  heaven  until  His  ascension  in
His  risen  body  forty  days  after  His  resurrection  as  described
in  Acts  1 :  10.    I  asked  him  two  questions :

1.  "If  the  high  priest  in  Leviticus  i6  waited  forty  days
after  the  sacrificial  goat  was  slain  to  take  the  blood  into  the
sanctuary  ?"

2.  "How  the  body  of  Jesus  could  be  raised  until  the  blood
of  the  covenant  was  on  the  mercy  seat  ?"

It  was  through  his  rent  body,  not  His  risen  body  that  our
Forerunner  reached  that  sanctuary.  When  He  expiated  sin
on  the  cross  it  was  necessary  that  He  offer  the  blood  in  the
sanctuary  for  atonement.  So  long  as  the  blood  remained  at
the  cross  it  could  not  be  made  efficacious.  It  must  be  accepted
to  become  a  propitiation.  The  mercy  seat  was  the  place  of
propitiation.  Therefore  when  His  body  died,  His  soul  imme-
diately passing  through  the  veil — a  rent  body — entered  into
the  heavenly  sanctuary  to  make  His  expiation  effective  in  the
salvation  of  men.  It  was  the  culmination  of  the  whole
process  of  the  work  of  His  second  Sonship.

His  third  Sonship  starts  at  the  resurrection.  He  was
brought  to  life  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant
accepted  in  heaven.  This  makes  clear  the  passage  which
Milton  misunderstood:  "And  when  He  again  bringeth  in
the  first-born  into  the  world  He  saith :  *And  let  all  the  angels


218     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

of  God  worship  Him.' "  His  soul  was  out  of  the  world  and
in  heaven.  He  must  be  brought  into  the  world  again  to
obtain  and  inhabit  His  risen  and  glorified  body,  which  is  His
second  advent,  as  our  souls  must  come  from  heaven  with
Him  at  His  third  and  final  advent,  to  obtain  and  inhabit  our
glorified  bodies  (I  Thess.  4: 14).  And  as  the  angels  had
worshiped  Him  in  His  second  Sonship  (Luke  2:9-14;
Matt.  4: 11-20)  so  now  in  His  third  Sonship — His  risen  and
glorified  humanity — God  says,  "Let  all  the  angels  of  God
worship  Him."  You  may  rest  assured  that  all  of  Psalms  2
and  no  apply  to  His  third  Sonship  as  expressed  in  this  first
chapter  and  affirmed  in  Acts  4 :  23-28,  and  in  many  other
New  Testament  passages.

I  once  had  a  friendly  private  controversy  with  a  Campbell-
ite  who  affirmed  that  there  could  be  no  law  of  pardon  till
Jesus  became  the  Son  of  God,  which  took  place  at  His  resur-
rection, and  therefore  Acts  2 :  38  was  the  first  law  of  pardon
under  the  new  covenant,  and  so  all  gospel  cases  of  pardon
must  not  be  considered.  I  told  him  that  his  fallacy  consisted
in  ignoring  the  second  Sonship,  and  that  in  all  His  Sonships
sinners  were  pardoned,  and  that  the  plan  of  salvation  was
one  plan  from  Abel  to  the  final  judgment,  as  the  eleventh
chapter  of  this  book  abundantly  shows.  It  is  to  this  third
Sonship  that  His  heirship  and  His  anointing  with  gladness,
and  His  session  at  God's  right  hand,  all  belong.  He  was
appointed  heir  because  of  the  reconciliation  He  accomplished
in  His  second  Sonship,  so  our  lesson  declares  (1:4),  and
the  great  passage  in  Philippians  2:6-11.  So  testify  also
Psalms  2  and  no.  Equally  clear  also  His  anointing  with
gladness  1:9;  12:2,  which  will  be  considered  more  par-
ticularly in  another  connection.

3.  Superior  to  the  Universe  (i :  10-12). — We  must  note
that  in  all  the  first  two  chapters  the  arguments  connect  with
Philippians,  Colossians  and  Ephesians  in  a  demonstration
against  the  Gnostic  heresy  concerning  creation  and  eons.


ANALYSIS  OF  HEBREWS  219

Here  our  Lord's  pre-eminence  over  the  universe  appears
from:

(i)  He  created  it.  (2)  His  providence  upholds  it.  (3)
His  eternity  and  immutability.  (4)  He  dissolves  it  at  His
will.

On  this  last  point  the  reader  will  recall  the  process  by
which  the  chaotic  matter  of  the  earth  was  reduced  to  order
(Gen.  1:6-10)  by  the  creation  of  the  atmosphere  separat-
ing the  waters  above  from  the  waters  below,  and  then  sep-
arating the  waters  below  from  the  land,  and  how  this  process
was  reversed  in  bringing  about  the  flood  (Gen.  7:11;
7: 17-24),  and  then  renewed  in  restoring  the  old  condition
after  the  flood  (Gen.  8 : 2,  3) .  That  was  a  memorable  muta-
tion, and  showed  God*s  control  over  the  ordinary  course  of
nature.  He  will  recall  His  covenant  with  Noah,  pledging
continuity  of  the  order  of  nature,  and  safeguarding  against
another  water  dissolution  while  the  earth  remaineth  (Gen.
8:22;  9:8-17).

But  here  in  our  lesson  is  predicted  a  more  remarkable
mutation — a  dissolution  by  fire  (Heb.  i :  11,  12).  And  no
reliance  on  what  is  called  "the  settled  course  of  nature"  will
avail  against  this  dissolution.  Soon  after  this  letter  Peter
wrote  to  the  same  people  his  great  argument  on  the  same
line  (H  Pet.  3: 1-13),  and  reminded  the  Christian  Jews  of
Asia  Minor  of  this  very  letter  of  Paul  (H  Pet.  3:  14-16).
Jesus  is  sovereign  over  nature's  course,  which  He  established,
and  in  it  brings  mutation  at  His  will.

4.  Greater  as  a  Revelator  than  all  the  Old  Testament
Prophets  (1:1,  2)  :

( 1 )  In  all  His  Sonships  He  is  a  revelator  of  the  Father —
the  visible  of  the  invisible  God.  The  effulgence  and  image
in  His  first  Sonship,  so  in  His  second  Sonship  (John  14:
8,  9),  and  so  in  His  third  Sonship.

(2)  In  the  teaching  of  His  prophetic  office.  Their  reve-
lation  was    fragmentary,    infrequent,    diverse,    incomplete


2^0     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

(i :  I,  2),  and  often  beyond  their  own  understanding  (I  Pet.
i:  10-12).

(3)  His  revelation  illumines  theirs,  dispels  its  mysteries,
and  completes  the  canon  of  the  scripture.

(4)  It  unfolds  in  panorama  the  events  of  all  time  touching
the  kingdom  of  God,  until  the  great  culmination  (see  Rev.
1:1,  and  throughout  the  book).

QUESTIONS

1.  What  commentaries  named  on  this  book,  and  how  com-
mended ?

2.  Give  the  main  points  of  the  author's  analysis.

3.  What  the  theme  of  this  book?

4.  On  what  does  the  argument  and  exhortation  rest?

5.  How  does  the  argument  naturally  commence,  what  does  it
develop,  who  the  hero  of  the  book,  and  what  the  terminals  of  the
several  arguments?

6.  What  the  threefold  Sonship  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mediator  of
the  new  covenant?

7.  What  His  work  in  the  first  Sonship,  and  how  expressed?

8.  Against  what  heresy  are  the  first  two  chapters  especially
directed,  with  what  preceding  letters  does  this  argument  connect,
and  into  what  subsequent  N.  T.  books  by  other  writers  does  it  fit?

9.  What  the  activities  of  our  Lord  in  His  second  Sonship?

10.  What  the  activities  of  our  Lord  in  His  third  Sonship?

11.  How  many  advents  of  our  Lord  into  the  world,  and  what  the
purpose  of  each?

12.  What  was  Jesus  doing  between  His  death  and  resurrection?

13.  What  heresies  concerning  the  place  where  our  Lord's  soul
went,  and  His  work  between  His  death  and  resurrection,  and  what
the  scriptural  and  other  grounds  relied  on  to  support  them?

14.  What  distinguished  advocates  of  these  theories?

15.  State  at  length  the  author's  argument  as  to  what  Jesus  was
doing  between  His  death  and  resurrection?

16.  In  what  particulars  is  our  Lord  superior  to  the  material
universe?

17.  On  what  ground  do  men  of  science  reject  miracles?

18.  Show  from  Genesis  the  process  of  the  established  order  of
things,  and  in  one  remarkable  instance  this  reverse  of  this  process,
and  its  restoration.

19.  What  second  mutation,  according  to  this  letter,  awaits  the
heavens  and  the  earth,  and  what  the  means  of  its  accomplishment?

20.  Prove  from  Peter  in  a  letter  subsequent  to  this  how  men's
reliance  on  the  continuity  of  the  order  of  nature  will  be  swept  away
by  this  second  mutation.

21.  Show  how  in  this  letter  of  Peter  to  the  same  people  addressed
in  Hebrews,  he  identifies  this  letter  as  Paul's.

22.  In  what  particulars  is  our  Lord  superior  to  O.  T.  prophets?


XIX

CHRIST'S  SUPERIORITY  OVER  ANGELS
GOOD  AND  BAD

Scripture:  Heb.  i :  i — 2: 18

IN  the  first  chapter  on  the  exposition  of  the  Letter  to
the  Hebrews,  we  considered  Christ  in  His  three  Son-
ships,  showing  that  the  Son  of  God  by  eternal  subsist-
ence, being  the  effulgence  of  God's  glory  and  the  express
image  of  His  substance,  and  in  that  pre-existent  state
created  the  universe  and  all  of  these  intelligences,  and  having
created  them  He  upholds  them  by  His  providence.  Then
we  considered  His  second  Sonship,  when  He  became  the
Son  of  God  by  birth  of  the  Virgin  Mary  in  order  to  make
purification  for  sins,  and  in  that  incarnate  state  He  did  make
purification  for  sins.  That  in  His  third  Sonship  He  was  the
Son  of  God  by  His  resurrection.  We  then  followed  His
ascent  into  the  heavens,  in  His  disembodied  spirit,  presenting
His  blood  as  the  basis  for  the  atonement  which  He  there
made,  followed  by  His  exaltation  a  royal  priest  to  the  throne
of  the  universe  and  His  session  there  ruling  and  interceding.
We  then  considered  Christ's  superiority  over  the  universe,
that  in  the  beginning  He  created  it,  and  in  His  unchangeable-
ness  and  the  changeableness  of  the  universe.

We  then  considered  Christ's  superiority  over  the  prophets
of  the  Old  Testament.  They  did  give  us  a  revelation  as  far
as  the  Old  Testament  goes,  but  it  was  a  fragmentary  and
diverse  revelation.  But  the  revelation  He  gave  us  completes
theirs,  and  completes  the  canon  of  the  scriptures,  and  so
He  is  superior  to  all  the  prophets.


COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

So  we  come  now  to  a  new  line  of  superiority :  His  supe-
riority over  the  angels,  good  and  bad.  The  question  arises,
Why  introduce  the  angels  in  this  discussion?  Because  the
old  covenant  was  given  by  the  disposition  of  the  angels,
and  inasmuch  as  the  object  of  this  letter  is  to  show  the
superiority  of  the  new  covenant  over  the  old  covenant,  it
is  necessary  to  show  that  Christ  is  superior  to  the  angels.
That  accounts  for  the  introduction  of  the  angels  into  the
discussion.

Then  arises  our  second  question :  On  what  points  is  Christ
superior  to  the  good  angels?  Evidently  He  is  superior  to
them  in  His  pre-existence  as  the  image  of  God  and  the
effulgence  of  His  glory,  because  that  was  before  there  were
any  angels.  Then  He  is  superior  in  that  He  created  the
angels  as  well  as  other  intelligences  of  the  universe ;  creator
is  greater  than  creature.

But  these  are  not  the  points  of  superiority  upon  which
this  letter  principally  dwells.  It  is  His  superiority  in  His
second  and  third  Sonship,  not  His  first,  that  is  emphasized.
This  superiority  is  that  of  the  incarnate  man,  or  God-man,
and  what  He  did  in  His  incarnation.  No  angel  ever  made
expiation  of  sin.  It  was  impossible  that  an  angel  could
make  an  expiation  for  the  sins  of  man.  But  Jesus,  whose
deity  in  the  flesh  was  recognized  by  the  angels,  and  who
was  worshiped  by  the  angels  in  His  humanity,  did  in  that
humanity  by  sacrifice  of  himself  make  purification  for  the
sins  of  the  world — for  the  sins  of  His  people.  And  our  text
tells  us  that  because  He  made  purification  for  the  sins  of  the
world  and  is  seated  on  the  right-hand  of  the  majesty  on
high,  He  has  obtained  a  more  glorious  name  than  the  angels.
For  a  little  season  in  His  second  sonship  He  was  lower  than
the  angels,  but  in  that  second  Sonship,  having  expiated  the
sins  of  the  world,  and  having  been  exalted  into  heaven.  He
obtains  a  greater  name  than  any  angel  ever  had.  In  other
words,  as  expressed  in  a  previous  letter   "The  name  that


CHRIST  SUPERIOR  TO  ANGELS

is  above  every  name,"  "King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."
High  above  all  principalities  and  powers,  He  received  that
excellent  name.

In  arguing  upon  that  name,  Paul  takes  up  the  beginning
of  the  exaltation  of  Christ,  and  says,  "Unto  what  angel
did  He  ever  say,  'Thou  art  my  son — this  day  have  I  begotten
thee  ?'  "  referring  to  His  resurrection.  No  angel  is  the  Son
of  God  in  that  sense.  And  then  He  says  again,  "When  He
bringeth  again  His  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,"  as
He  does  at  the  resurrection  in  order  to  obtain  His  risen
body,  "let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  Him,"  that  is.  He
is  the  object  of  angelic  worship  as  the  risen  Savior  of  men.
He  carries  on  the  thought  further — that  He  is  not  only  risen,
but  He  attains  to  the  state  above  the  angels  because  God
said  to  Him,  "Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  forever  and  ever."
He  never  said  that  to  an  angel.  And  on  that  throne  upon
which  He  now  sits — not  the  throne  upon  which  He  sat
before  He  was  manifested  and  became  a  man,  but  the  throne
upon  which  the  risen  Jesus  sits  today — on  that  throne  He  is
superior  to  all  angels.  And  Paul  quotes  Psalm  104:7:
"And  of  the  angels  he  sayeth,  Who  maketh  His  angels  winds
and  His  ministers  a  flame  of  fire :  but  of  the  Son  He  saith,
Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  forever  and  ever;  and  the  sceptre
of  uprightness  is  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom.  Thou  hast
loved  righteousness  and  hated  iniquity."  That  is  the  next
point  of  the  superiority.

The  third  point  of  the  superiority  is  that,  being  so  exalted
to  that  throne,  He  is  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above
His  fellows.  Knox  said  that  when  he  died,  if  his  heart  were
examined,  this  writing  would  be  found  on  it:  "Scotland."
And  I  feel  that  stamped  on  my  innermost  being,  ineffaceably
on  the  tablets  of  my  memory  forever,  are  two  pictures :  One
is  Christ,  the  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,
the  saddest  man  that  ever  lived.  And  the  other  is  Christ
anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows,  the


224     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

gladdest  man  that  ever  lived,  as  it  is  presented  again  later
in  this  book:  "Who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him
endured  the  cross,  despising  shame,  and  hath  sat  down  at
the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God,"  Heb.  12:2.  This
was  a  recompense  of  gladness  beyond  that  any  other  being
in  this  world  will  enjoy.  In  Luke  15  we  have  some  beautiful
illustrations  of  this  gladness  of  Christ :

A  sheep  is  lost.  Whose  sheep?  The  Shepherd's.  Who
goes  after  the  sheep  ?  The  Shepherd.  Who  finds  the  sheep  ?
The  Shepherd  finds  it.  What  does  the  Shepherd  do  when
He  finds  it?  He  rejoices  over  it.  Whose  is  the  greatest
joy  over  the  finding  of  the  lost  sheep  ?  His  is  the  greatest  joy.
When  it  says  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  over
one  sinner  that  repenteth,  it  does  not  mean  that  the  angels
were  glad,  but  that  there  was  joy  in  their  presence.  It  is
the  Savior  that  is  glad — the  one  that  saved  the  sheep.

Then  there  is  the  woman  who  lost  the  coin.  Whose  was
it?  Hers.  Who  found  it?  She.  Which  was  the  greater
joy,  hers  or  the  neighbors'  whom  she  called  to  share  it?
It  was  hers.  She  called  in  her  friends  and  they  rejoiced
with  her,  but  their  joy  was  not  equal  to  hers.

In  the  last  parable,  the  lost  son,  whose  son  was  the
prodigal?  That  old  father's.  Whose  was  the  joy  when
that  prodigal  son  came  home?  It  was  the  father's  joy.
When  it  is  said  that  Jesus  was  anointed  with  the  oil  of  glad-
ness above  His  fellows  it  means  the  same  thing  as  what  is  said
in  Isaiah  53 :  "He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and
shall  be  satisfied."  If  His  joy  be  so  great  over  one  sinner,
who  can  measure  the  height,  and  depth,  and  breadth  of  the
gladness  of  Jesus  Christ  when  that  great  multitude — that
uncountable  number  out  of  every  nation  and  tribe  and  tongue
— gets  safely  home  to  heaven  and  God?  We  are  glad  if  a
sinner  is  converted  under  our  ministry,  but  we  are  not  as
glad  as  Jesus  is.  I  have  no  doubt  the  angels  are  glad,  but
they  cannot  have  the  joy  that  Jesus  has,  because  angels


CHRIST  SUPERIOR  TO  ANGELS  225

did  not  make  us,  angels  did  not  die  for  us,  and  angels  did
not  make  atonement  for  us.  Let  us  never  forget  this  point
of  superiority  of  Christ  over  angels.  As  Paul  elsewhere
expresses  it :  "The  gospel  of  the  glory  of  the  happy  God,"
I  Tim.  i:  ii.

The  superiority  is  evidenced  again  in  1:14:  "Are  they
not  all  ministering  spirits  sent  forth  to  do  service  for  the
sake  of  them  that  shall  inherit  salvation?"  Theirs  is  a
subordination  in  service.  They  did  not  save  men,  but
they  have  a  subordinate  service  of  ministering  to  the
saved.

The  next  point  is  a  very  fine  one.  The  law  was  given
by  the  disposition  of  the  angels,  and  it  had  very  high  penal
sanctions.  But  the  gospel  was  given  by  Jesus  Christ,  and
it  has  a  higher  penal  sanction;  the  superiority  is  in  the
higher  penal  sanction.  Commencing  at  chapter  2 :  "There-
fore we  ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  the  things
that  were  heard,  lest  haply  we  drift  away  from  them.  For
if  the  word  spoken  through  angels  proved  steadfast,  and
every  transgression  and  disobedience  received  a  just  recom-
pense of  reward,  how  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great
a  salvation?  which  having  at  first  been  spoken  through  the
Lord,  was  confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that  heard."  The
point  is  that  the  punishment  for  rejecting  the  gospel  is  far
beyond  the  punishment  for  rejecting  the  law.  When  we
get  to  chapter  10  the  thought  is  brought  out  this  way :  "For
if  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge
of  the  truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  a  sacrifice  for  sins,
but  a  certain  fearful  expectation  of  judgment,  and  a  fierce-
ness of  fire  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries.  A  man
that  hath  set  at  nought  Moses'  law  dieth  without  compas-
sion on  the  word  of  two  or  three  witnesses :  of  how  much
sorer  punishment,  think  ye,  shall  he  be  judged  worthy  who
hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath  counted
the  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  was  sanctified  an


ne     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of
grace?"  First,  he  has  trampled  under  foot  the  Son  of  God.
This  is  sin  against  the  Father,  and  is  pardonable.  Second,
he  has  counted  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant  an
unholy  thing.  That  is  sin  against  the  Son,  and  is  pardon-
able. Third,  he  has  shown  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace.
That  is  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit  and  hath  never  forgive-
ness. By  so  much  as  the  light  under  the  gospel  is  superior
to  the  light  under  the  law,  by  that  much  is  the  responsibility
greater  and  the  penalty  severer.  Why  did  Jesus  say:  "It
shall  be  more  tolerable  in  the  day  of  judgment  for  Sodom
and  Gomorrah  than  for  the  cities  around  the  Sea  of  Galilee?"
Because  the  cities  around  the  Sea  of  Galilee  heard  the  gospel
from  the  lips  of  Jesus,  and  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  did  not
hear  that.  In  the  final  judgment  men  are  judged  according
to  the  light  they  have  had.  It  is  on  that  account  that  the
man  who  rejects  Christ  will  be  condemned  in  the  final  judg-
ment by  the  men  that  repented  at  the  teachings  of  a  prophet
— an  unwilling  prophet — a  prophet  who  preferred  to  see
them  swept  away,  but  Jesus  is  greater  than  Jonah.  Thus
at  the  last  great  day  the  Ninevites  shall  condemn  those  who
refused  the  gospel.  So  also  the  queen  of  Sheba,  who  came
from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  to  hear  the  derived
wisdom  of  Solomon,  shall  condemn  those  people  who  re-
jected the  gospel — rejected  the  original  and  underived  wis-
dom of  the  greater  than  Solomon,  Matt.  12 :  41,  42.

The  next  point  of  superiority  is  that  the  gospel  is  better
accredited  than  the  law  was  accredited.  That  is  set  forth
in  this  passage:  "Was  confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that
heard;  God  also  bearing  witness  with  them,  both  by  signs
and  wonders,  and  by  manifold  powers,  and  by  gifts  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  according  to  His  own  will."  All  we  have  to
do  in  order  to  get  at  this  point  is  to  contrast  the  miraculous
prodigies  at  the  giving  of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai  with  the
miraculous  confirmation  of  the  gospel  when  the  church  was


CHRIST  SUPERIOR  TO  ANGELS  2^7

baptized  in  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  There
were  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit ;  there  was  the  power  to  speak
with  tongues,  to  heal  the  sick,  to  raise  the  dead.  By  that
much  is  Christ  superior  to  angels.

The  next  point  of  His  superiority  is  presented  in  2 :  5  in
these  words :  "For  not  unto  angels  did  He  subject  the  world
to  come,  whereof  we  speak.  But  one  hath  somewhere
testified,  saying,  What  is  man  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him,
or  the  Son  of  man,  that  thou  visitest  Him?  Thou  madest
Him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels;  thou  crownedst  Him
with  glory  and  honor,  and  didst  set  Him  over  the  works  of
thine  hands:  thou  didst  put  all  things  in  subjection  under
His  feet."  That  says  that  Jesus,  in  His  humanity,  for  a
little  season  lower  than  the  angels  because  of  the  work
that  He  did,  will  have  subjected  to  Him  the  world  to  come.
That  never  was  subjected  to  the  angels.  And  what  is  the
world  to  come?  It  is  the  world  after  the  general  judgment.
Then  will  be  fulfilled  what  is  said  in  Psalm  8.  Christ,  as
the  Second  Adam,  enters  into  the  possession  of  all  the
authority  and  dominion  conferred  upon  the  first  Adam.  The
first  Adam  in  his  temptation  lost  all  in  a  garden,  turning  it
into  a  desert.  Christ,  resisting  temptation  in  a  desert,  con-
verted it  into  a  garden.

Paul  goes  on  to  show  that  we  do  not  yet  see  all  things
subjected  to  Him.  But  we  do  see  this  much — that  Jesus
Christ,  who  in  His  flesh  tasted  death  for  every  man,  has
been  set  upon  the  throne  of  authority  in  heaven  and  is  wait-
ing until  that  full  promise  shall  be  carried  out,  that  all  things
shall  be  subjected  unto  Him,  as  it  is  expressed  in  I  Cor.  15 :
"He  must  reign  until  all  His  enemies  are  put  under  His
feet."  That  will  put  us  into  the  world  to  come,  and  the  last
enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death.  Death  is  not  de-
stroyed yet.  Christ  is  up  there  reigning  and  bringing  about
the  subjection  of  the  world  to  come.  In  Psa.  1 10  we  have
this :   "The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my  right


228     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

hand  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool."  When  every
enemy  is  put  under  the  foot  of  Christ,  all  of  our  enemies  are
put  under  our  feet,  for  Christ  does  not  do  that  simply  for
himself ;  He  does  it  for  humanity ;  He  does  it  that  all  who
are  under  Him  may  sit  down  with  Him  on  His  throne,  and
every  enemy  is  to  be  put  under  their  feet.

And  that  leads  us  to  the  next  point  of  superiority.  Com-
mence at  verse  lo:  "For  it  became  Him  for  whom  all
things,  and  through  whom  all  things,  in  bringing  many  sons
unto  glory,  to  make  the  author  of  their  salvation  perfect
through  suffering.  For  both  He  that  sanctifieth  and  they
who  are  sanctified,  are  all  of  one,  for  which  cause  He  is
not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."  The  angels  were  not
His  brethren,  but  more  scripture  is  quoted  in  confirmation
of  it:  "I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren,  in  the
midst  of  the  church  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee."  "I  will
not  sit  off  and  sing  my  song  by  myself,  but  I  will  sing  it  in
the  congregation,"  is  the  thought.

Now  comes  a  very  important  question — to  know  when
He  did  declare  His  name  among  the  brethren,  or  sing  among
the  brethren.  The  only  place  I  know  of  in  the  New  Testa-
ment so  far  is  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  where  with  His  church
memorializing  His  death  for  the  sins  of  His  people ;  at  the
conclusion  of  that  service  "they  sang  a  hymn  and  went  out."
The  hymn  that  they  sang  is  what  is  called  in  the  Psalms  the
great  Hallel,  or  Hallelujah  song.  We  find  in  the  book  of
Psalms  certain  ones  called  Hallelujah  songs.  They  were
appointed  to  be  sung  at  the  festival  of  the  Passover,  this
being  the  type  of  Christ  causing  the  angel  of  death  to  pass
over  us.  The  Jews  had  sung  that  Hallel  for  ages  at  the
annual  Paschal .  festival.  So  we  know  the  hymn  He  sang
when  they  went  out  from  the  Lord's  Supper.

And  that  proves  that  there  was  a  church  in  existence  then.
In  the  church  He  sang.

The  great  fulfillment,  however,  will  be  when  all  of  the


CHRIST  SUPERIOR  TO  ANGELS  229

redeemed  are  gathered  together,  as  described  in  Revela-
tion 19.  Then  is  when  they  sing  in  the  great  congregation,
the  glory  church:  "Hallelujah!  Hallelujah!  The  Lord  God
Omnipotent  reigneth.  Let  the  earth  rejoice.  Hallelujah!
Hallelujah !"  That  is  the  final  fulfillment.  The  one  in  the
church-nucleus  at  the  Lord's  Supper  was  a  foretaste  of  it — •
a  prefiguring  of  the  one  in  the  glory-church.  In  that  world
to  come,  presented  to  us  in  Revelation  21  and  22^  after  the
last  enemy  is  destroyed — our  enemy,  Christ's  enemy — ^that
world  is  not  subjected  to  the  angels,  but  we  have  a  glorious
picture  of  the  New  Jerusalem  coming  down  out  of  the  heav-
ens from  God.  Oh !  the  light  of  it,  the  joy  of  it !  That  is
the  world  to  come.  But  the  thought  is  even  finer  than  that.
He  has  superiority  over  the  angels  not  merely  because  the
world  to  come  is  subjected  to  Him  and  to  His  people,  but
because  He  gets  nearer  to  us  experimentally  than  an  angel.
Angels  are  fellow-servants,  but  we  are  brethren  of  Christ.
The  angels  minister  to  us,  but  they  have  not  the  sympa-
thetic touch,  that  is,  Gabriel  is  not  my  brother — he  is  my
fellow-servant,  but  not  my  brother.  Christ  is  my  brother,
and  that  leads  us  to  the  last  point  of  superiority  as  expressed
in  the  end  of  that  chapter,  where  he  says,  "wherefore  it
behooved  Him  in  all  things  to  be  made  like  unto  His  breth-
ren, that  He  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest
in  things  pertaining  to  God,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the
sins  of  the  people.  For  in  that  He  himself  hath  suffered,
being  tempted,  He  is  able  to  succor  them  that  are  tempted."
The  angels  cannot  get  close  to  you  like  that;  they  are  not
priests;  they  do  not  pass  through  that  suffering  and  that
temptation  as  He  did ;  He  took  our  place.  We  are  born  of
woman ;  so  was  He.  We  have  the  helplessness  of  childhood ;
so  had  He.  We  confront  hunger,  cold,  contradiction  of
sinners ;  so  did  He.  And  because  He  had  these  expenences
that  no  angel  ever  did  have.  He  can  help  us  where  no  angel
can.    I  have  presented  twelve  special  points  of  superiority


230     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

over  angels,  and  I  am  not  through  yet,  because  they  are  the
points  of  superiority  over  the  good  angels.

We  come  now  to  consider  His  superiority  over  the  bad
angels,  and  let  us  see  what  they  are:  First,  He  success-
fully resisted  all  of  Satan's  temptations,  principally  in  the
wilderness  and  in  Gethsemane — two  capital  points  at  the
beginning  and  ending  of  His  earthly  life.  He  successfully
resisted  Satan  at  the  threshold  of  His  public  life.  The  first
Adam  did  not.  He  fell.  He  was  tempted  in  the  Garden
and  turned  it  into  a  desert ;  Christ  was  tempted  in  a  desert
and  turned  it  into  a  garden.

The  second  point  is  His  victory  over  Satan  on  the  cross.
Chapter  2 :  14  reads :  "Since  then  as  the  children  are  par-
takers of  flesh  and  blood,  He  also  himself,  in  like  manner,
partook  of  the  same ;  that  in  death  He  might  bring  to  naught
him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil."  It  was
His  mission  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  In  these  two
conflicts  He  defeated  Satan.  In  the  three  hours  of  darkness
on  the  cross  when  God  forsook  Him,  and  Satan  and  all  of
his  demons  shut  out  every  light  in  the  heavens,  hovered
around  Him  and  fought  Him  to  the  death — there  He  ob-
tained His  final  superiority  over  Satan.  We  learned  in  the
Letter  to  the  Colossians  that  He  triumphed  over  the  princi-
palities of  power  on  the  cross  and  made  a  show  of  them
openly.

The  imagery  is  that  of  a  Roman  general  returning  from  a
successful  war  over  a  national  enemy  of  the  Roman  Empire
and  accorded  a  triumph  therefor.  His  head  crowned  with
laurels,  in  a  snow-white  chariot,  drawn  by  snow-white  horses,
he  comes  to  receive  his  crown.  There  is  paraded  before
him  the  trophies  that  he  won  in  the  war — the  jewels,  the
gold,  the  fine  raiment.  There  come  after,  tied  to  his  chariot
wheels,  the  princes  and  nobles  of  that  conquered  land.  And
so  he  makes  a  show  of  them  openly.

Moreover,  He  delivers  all  Satan's  captives — strips  him


CHRIST  SUPERIOR  TO  ANGELS  231

of  all  his  spoils.  The  idea  of  His  superiority  advances  in
the  1 6th  verse:  "For  verily  not  unto  angels  doth  He  give
help,  but  He  giveth  help  to  the  seed  of  Abraham."  Our
common  version  disguises  that  and  says :  "He  took  not  on
Him  the  nature  of  angels."  That  is  not  the  thought.  His
superiority  over  the  bad  angels  is  asserted  in  His  excluding
them  from  participation  in  salvation.  He  did  not  come  down
to  this  earth  to  save  the  devil  and  his  demons — He  came  to
save  the  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham — and  the  devils  are  ex-
cluded from  any  participation  in  that  salvation.  Here  comes
up  the  question,  "Does  God  love  a  sinner  in  hell  ?"  the  point
of  which  is  that  wherever  God  loves.  He  loves  remedially —
His  love  is  active.  He  does  not  love  a  fallen  angel.  "For
verily  not  to  angels  doth  He  give  help."  No  part  of  salva-
tion for  any  fallen  angel.  So  when  sinners  finally  reject
Him  they  go  to  a  place  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels
and  share  their  doom.  If  we  strip  His  love  of  remedial
activity,  we  take  away  the  love  itself.

The  last  thought  of  His  superiority  over  the  angels  is  this
(This  book  does  not  present  it,  but  I  bring  it  in  to  make  the
arguments  complete)  :  Not  only  does  He  judge  these  fallen
angels  at  the  last  great  day,  but  He  causes  His  people  to
judge  them:  "Know  ye  not  that  the  saints  shall  judge
angels?"  They  are  those  who  kept  not  their  first  estate,
but  are  cast  down  in  chains  of  darkness  and  are  awaiting
the  last  great  day  of  judgment.

So  over  bad  angels  we  have  found  these  points:  First,
His  successful  resisting  of  Satan's  temptation.  Second,  His
victory  over  Satan  and  his  demons  on  the  cross.  Third,  the
deliverance  of  the  prey  that  is  in  the  hands  of  Satan,  who
has  to  turn  loose  all  those  that  he  had  reigned  over,  for
Christ  plucks  them  out  of  his  hand.  Fourth,  His  exclusion
of  them  from  participation  in  salvation.  Fifth,  his  final
judgment  of  them  and  causing  His  people  to  judge  them.


g32     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS


QUESTIONS

1.  Why  introduce  the  angels  in  this  discussion?

2.  What  two  points  of  superiority  of  our  Lord  over  the  angels
not  especially  discussed  in  Hebrews  ?

3.  What  the  particulars  of  our  Lord's  superiority  over  the  good
angels  as  discussed  in  this  book?     (See  analysis.)

4.  What  the  particulars  of  our  Lord's  superiority  over  the  bad
angels?    (See  analysis.)

5.  Prove  that  Jesus  in  His  threefold  Sonship  was  worshiped  by
the  angels.

6.  Show  His  superiority  in  His  expiation  of  sin.

7.  Show  His  superiority  in  His  inheritance.

8.  Show  His  superiority  in  His  enthronement.

9.  Expound  our  Lord's  anointing  with  the  oil  of  gladness,  and
illustrate  by  three  parables  in  Luke  15.

10.  Show  His  superiority  in  their  subordination  of  service.

11.  Show  it  in  His  confirmation  of  the  angels.

12.  Show  it  in  His  gospel  compared  with  the  law.

13.  What  two  passages  in  this  letter  exhibit  the  higher  order  of
the  penal  sanctions  of  the  new  covenant,  and  what  the  application
of  the  second  to  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit?

14.  Show  this  superiority  in  the  fact  that  the  gospel  is  better
accredited  than  the  law.

15.  Show  it  in  His  sympathetic  priesthood.

16.  Show  it  in  His  becoming  a  brother  to  them  whom  the  angels
only  serve.

17.  Show  His  superiority  over  bad  angels  in  His  temptations.

18.  Show  it  in  His  victory  on  the  cross.

19.  Show  it  in  His  delivering  Satan's  victims.

20.  Show  it  in  His  final  judgment  of  them.

21.  What  the  Greek  word  for  "congregation"  in  2 :  12,  when  was
this  prophecy  first  fulfilled,  when  the  last  and  larger  fulfillment,
what  hymn  was  sung  at  the  first  fulfillment,  and  what  the  bearing
of  the  first  fulfillment  on  the  institution  of  the  church  in  Christ's
life-time  on  earth?

22.  What  the  difference  in  meaning  between  the  common  ver-
sion rendering  of  2 :  16  and  the  revision,  and  what  the  bearing  on
the  question,  "Does  God  love  a  sinner  in  hell  ?"

23.  What  the  meaning  of  "world  to  come"  in  2 : 5  ?


XX


CHRIST  GREATER  THAN  MOSES  AND  JOSHUA,

AND  THE  CHRISTIAN  SABBATH  GREATER

THAN  THE  JEWISH  SABBATH

Scriptures:  Heb.  3  and  4

THIS  discussion  commences  at  chapter  3.  The  "where-
fore" refers  to  statements  made  in  the  preceding
chapter,  and  particularly  to  the  latter  part  of  chap-
ter 2,  which  opens  the  discussion  of  Christ's  priesthood,  a
matter  that  will  again  be  taken  up  at  length.  It  was  intro-
duced there  simply  in  connection  with  the  argument  showing
the  superiority  over  angels.

"Wherefore,  holy  brethren,  partakers  of  a  heavenly  call-
ing," that  is,  who  have  been  called  from  heaven  to  the  world
to  come.  It  may  be  called  heavenly  because  the  call  issues
from  heaven,  and  because  the  call  is  to  heaven.  In  view  of
what  has  been  said,  "consider  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest."
An  apostle  is  one  sent  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth  and  to
teach  the  truth,  as  expressed  in  chapter  i — "hath  in  these
last  days  spoken  unto  us  through  His  Son."  Jesus  was  the
one  sent  to  be  the  prophet.  "Consider  the  Apostle  and  High
Priest  of  our  confession,  even  Jesus."  That  is  to  say,  when
one  makes  a  profession  of  religion,  he  makes  an  open  con-
fession before  witnesses  that  Christ  is  his  prophet,  his  sacri-
fice, his  priest,  his  judge  and  his  king.  Paul  is  making  an
appeal  to  that  first  ceremonial  qualification  of  church  en-
trance— confession  first,  then  baptism.  Before  you  were
received  into  the  church  you  made  a  public  profession  or

£3S


234     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

confession  of  Christ  as  your  Savior.  So  see  what  you  are
to  consider — even  Jesus.

What  are  we  to  consider  about  Him?  "He  was  faithful
to  Him  that  appointed  Him,  as  also  was  Moses  in  all  his
house."  He  is  preparing  to  institute  another  comparison.
These  Jews  were  about  to  abandon  Christianity  and  go
back  to  Judaism,  and  this  whole  letter  is  to  show  the  folly
of  such  a  course.  One  reason  for  their  going  back  was  their
undue  magnifying  of  Moses.  In  one  particular  Christ  and
Moses  are  alike — they  were  both  faithful  to  the  One  who
appointed  them.

But  we  come  to  a  point  of  difference :  "For  He  hath  been
counted  worthy  of  more  glory  than  Moses,  by  so  much  as
He  that  built  the  house  hath  more  honor  than  the  house."
That  is  the  first  point  of  distinction  between  Christ  and
Moses.  Moses  is  a  part  of  the  house,  but  Christ  built  the
whole  house.  The  house  he  is  talking  about  is  the  antitype
of  the  tabernacle — the  true  church,  the  church  of  which
every  converted  man  in  the  world  from  the  beginning  of
time  to  the  end  of  time  will  be  a  member.  That  is  the
house  that  Jesus  is  building.  "He  is  counted  worthy  of  more
glory  than  Moses  by  so  much  as  He  that  built  the  house
hath  more  honor  than  the  house,  for  every  house  is  builded
by  some  one,  but  He  that  built  all  things  is  God."  Again,
"Moses  indeed  was  faithful  in  all  his  house  as  a  servant,
for  a  testimony  of  those  things  which  were  afterward  to  be
spoken,  but  Christ  is  a  Son  over  His  house."  That  is  the
second  point  of  distinction — Moses  was  only  a  servant  in
the  house,  while  Christ  was  a  Son  over  the  house.

Already  in  Colossians  and  Ephesians  we  have  pointed  out
how  Christ  was  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,  whether
as  an  institution,  a  particular  church,  or  the  church  in  glory.
Christ  is  over  even  the  typical  shadows  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment. But  to  show  you  what  house  He  has  in  mind  He
says !  "Whose  house  are  we."    This  accords  with  a  previous


CHRIST  GREATER  THAN  MOSES         265

statement  to  the  Corinthians :  "Ye  are  God's  building ;"  "ye
are  the  Temple  of  God" — the  spiritual  house  which  Christ
built.  So  here :  "Whose  house  are  we,  if  we  hold  fast  our
boldness  and  the  glorifying  of  our  hope  firm  unto  the  end."

That  is  to  say,  whosoever  does  not  presevere  unto  the  end
is  not  God's.

"He  that  overcometh  is  heir  to  all  things."  All  through
this  epistle  he  discusses  religion  in  two  distinct  views :  First,
of  profession;  second,  of  reality.  Only  those  who  possess
the  internal  reality  really  belong  to  Christ,  and  are  a  part  of
this  house.  "Whose  house  are  we,  if  we  hold  fast  our  bold-
ness and  the  glorying  of  our  hope  firm  unto  the  end."

This  letter  uniformly  presents  the  doctrine  of  the  final
perseverance  of  the  saints,  not  from  the  starting  point  in
profession,  hut  in  the  outcome.  He  only  is  a  true  Christian
who  is  faithful  unto  death.

The  earthly  church  consists  of  professors.  Whether  pro-
fession was  true  or  false  is  determined  by  the  issue.  He
illustrates  by  quoting  that  remarkable  Psalm  of  David — the
95th:  "Today,  if  ye  shall  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your
hearts,  as  in  the  provocation,  like  as  in  the  day  of  the  trial  in
the  wilderness,  where  your  fathers  tried  me  by  proving  me,
and  saw  my  works  forty  years ;  wherefore,  I  was  displeased
with  this  generation,  and  said,  They  do  always  err  in  their
hearts :  But  they  did  not  know  my  ways ;  as  I  sware  in  my
wrath,  they  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest."

It  is  very  important  to  notice  the  significance  of  this  pas-
sage. These  two  thoughts  in  it  are:  First,  God  had  an
ostensible  people  whom  He  led  out  of  Egypt  toward  a  country
ahead  of  them — a  place  promised  to  the  believing  and  faith-
ful as  a  land  of  rest.  The  majority  of  them  never  got  there — •
they  were  always  erring  in  their  hearts,  and  did  not  know
God's  way.  They  did  not  have  the  true  faith,  and  because
they  did  not  they  were  destroyed  on  the  way.

The  second  thought  is :  That  as  were  the  fathers  so  were


g36     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

the  descendants  in  David's  day,  therefore  the  Psalmist  said
to  them:  "Today,  if  ye  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your
hearts  with  unbelief,  as  your  fathers  did  when  they  pro-
voked God  in  the  wilderness."  This  whole  book  shows  that
whoever  failed  in  getting  the  good  rest,  failed  from  lack  of
faith.  They  did  not  have  a  faith  that  would  stick.  It  was
a  temporary  faith,  which  did  not  take  hold  of  the  power  of
the  world  to  come.

We  may  readily  foresee  Paul's  application:  "You  pro-
fessing Hebrews,  I  call  your  attention  to  the  reason  your
fathers  failed  in  the  wilderness  and  also  their  descendants
in  David's  time;  they  professed  outwardly,  but  apostatized
because  they  were  without  true,  persistent  faith  in  God.
Like  them,  you  have  professed,  but  it  seems  that  some  of
you  will  fall  short  through  unbelief."  The  church  on  earth
cannot  see  and  judge  the  heart.  They  receive  members  on
credible  profession.

Hence  the  exhortation :  "Take  heed,  brethren,  lest  haply
there  shall  be  in  any  one  of  you  an  evil  heart  of  unbeHef
in  falling  away  from  the  living  God :  but  exhort  one  another
day  by  day  so  long  as  it  is  called  today."  That  is  to  say,
there  comes  a  time  in  every  man's  life  when  his  opportu-
nities cease.  With  most  people  that  time  is  at  death,  but
with  those  who  happen  to  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  it
ceases  before  death.  Jesus  had  that  thought  in  His  mind
when,  weeping  over  Jerusalem,  He  said:  "Oh,  if  thou  hadst
known  the  day  of  thy  visitation !"

When  a  man  is  in  doubt  as  to  his  status — and  sometimes
good  people  do  doubt  their  status  in  the  sight  of  God — ^you
may  rest  assured  that  the  status  is  not  determined  by  their
doubt  or  confidence.  You  may  be  so  confident  that  never
a  shadow  of  doubt  rolls  across  your  mind,  or  you  may  be
so  far  gone  that,  like  the  Laodiceans,  there  is  never  a  sense
of  need.  That  is  false  confidence.  Or  you  may  be  appre-
hensive when  there  is  no  need  to  be  so.    He  calls  attention


CHRIST  GREATER  THAN  MOSES         237

to  this :  "Lest  any  one  of  you  be  hardened  by  the  deceitful-
ness  of  sin."  Sin  is  exceedingly  deceitful,  and  whenever  a
man  imagines  that  he  is  exempt  from  being  imposed  upon
by  sin  he  is  apt  to  get  into  trouble.  For  instance,  sin  will
tell  a  man :  "You  are  a  little  out  of  the  way,  but  not  much —
you  can  get  back  easily.  I  only  ask  you  to  step  over  here
and  walk  in  the  shade  instead  of  upon  the  hard,  hot  high-
way." He  is  beguiled  and  deceived — ^beguiled  until  finally
his  heart  is  hardened,  and  he  is  insensible  to  warning
impression.    Let  us  get  that  thought  clearly  before  us.

A  lady  once  determined  to  get  up  early  in  the  morning,
and  so  bought  an  alarm  clock.  She  set  the  alarm  for  exactly
6  o'clock,  and  when  it  rang  she  got  up.  The  next  time  when
she  heard  it  ring  she  waited  a  little  while  before  getting  up.
The  next  time  she  waited  a  little  longer,  and  while  waiting
she  fell  asleep.    After  that  it  never  disturbed  her.

Whoever  disregards  an  alarm  soon  quits  hearing  it.

If  we  go  toward  a  light  it  gets  brighter ;  if  we  go  from  it,
it  gets  feebler.  If  we  go  tQward  a  fire,  we  get  more  and
more  of  its  heat,  while  if  we  go  away  from  it,  we  lose  the
power  of  its  heat.  Sin  blunts  the  conscience.  Take  Nero,
for  instance.  When  a  young  man  he  would  weep  if  he
stepped  on  a  worm  and  crushed  it  unthoughtedly,  but  after
continual  indulgence  in  sin  and  crime  he  could  dance  and
make  music  over  his  mother  whom  he  had  murdered,  and
could  actually  enjoy  driving  between  parallel  lines  of  burn-
ing Christians.  That  is  what  is  meant  by  hardening  the
heart.  "Take  heed,  lest  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,
you  shall  be  hardened  in  unbelief."  Their  unbelief  was
arising  largely  from  the  fact  that  Christ  did  not  come  when
they  thought  He  ought  to  come.  It  had  been  preached  to
them  that  He  was  coming,  and  they  had  fixed  dates  for  His
coming,  but  as  date  after  date  failed,  they  began  to  disbelieve
the  whole  thing.

"We  become  partakers  of  Christ  if  we  hold  fast  our


238     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

boldness  and  the  glory  of  our  hope  firm  unto  the  end."
There  is  your  solution.  You  want  to  know  whether  you
are  a  partaker  of  Christ.  You  are  if  you  hold  fast  to  the
end.  If  before  you  get  to  the  end  you  turn  loose  and  quit,
you  are  not  a  partaker  of  Christ.  I  repeat  the  old  proverb :
"When  you  see  a  star  fall  you  may  know  it  is  not  a  star."
That  expresses  the  thought  exactly.  Stars  do  not  fall.
Meteors  fall,  and  they  look  like  stars,  but  if  one  falls  it  is
not  a  star.  We  are  partakers  of  Christ  if  we  hold  fast  to
the  end.

He  repeats  David's  exhortation,  and  he  uses  it  a  great  deal
more  before  he  gets  through.  "While  it  is  said.  Today  if
ye  shall  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,  as  in  the
provocation.  That  fits  this  case  just  as  well  as  the  people
of  David's  time,  or  the  people  in  the  wilderness.  Some,
through  lack  of  true  faith — through  unbelief — did  not  get
there,  and  it  will  be  so  in  your  case."  "For  who,  when  they
heard,  did  provoke?  Did  not  all  they  that  came  out  of
Egypt  by  Moses  ?  And  with  whom  was  he  displeased  forty
years  ?  Was  it  not  with  them  that  sinned,  whose  bodies  fell
in  the  wilderness  ?  And  to  whom  sware  he  that  they  should
not  enter  the  rest,  but  to  them  that  were  disobedient?  And
we  see  that  they  were  not  able  to  enter  in  because  of  their
unbelief."  Moses  had  charge  of  that  crowd.  "Let  us  fear,
therefore,  lest  haply  a  promise  being  left  of  entering  into  the
rest,  any  one  of  you  should  seem  to  have  come  short  of  it.
For  indeed  we  have  had  good  tidings  preached  unto  us,
even  as  also  they:  but  the  word  of  hearing  did  not  profit
them,  because  it  was  not  united  by  faith  with  them  that
heard.  For  we  who  have  believed  do  enter  into  that  rest :
even  as  He  hath  said.  As  I  sware  in  my  wrath  they  shall
not  enter  into  my  rest,  although  the  works  were  finished  from
the  foundation  of  the  world."  There  we  see  the  point  of
his  exhortation.  Never  from  the  beginning  of  this  letter
until  the  emd  does  he  vary  from  this  thought — that  final


CHRIST  GREATER  THAN  MOSES         239

apostasy  is  decisive  proof  that  they  were  never  Christians.
This  brings  us  to  a  new  item  in  the  analysis :

CHRIST   SUPERIOR  TO   JOSHUA

As  Christ  is  superior  to  angels  and  Moses,  so  He  is  supe-
rior to  Joshua.  Joshua  indeed  led  the  people  into  the  earthly
promised  land,  but  the  conquest  was  not  complete.  Through
unbelief  they  left  much  territory  in  the  hands  of  their  ene-
mies, which  plagued  them  for  generations,  and  ultimately
brought  about  their  loss  of  the  whole  land,  as  Moses  had
foreshown.  Joshua  indeed  secured  for  the  people  a  rest  at
the  end  of  his  wars  (Josh,  ii :  2^),  but  the  rest  was  not  the
true  rest.  It  was  only  temporary,  as  the  dark  period  of  the
Judges  shows.  So  that  in  summing  up  the  work  of  Joshua,
great  as  it  was,  we  find  these  defects :

1.  It  led  to  an  earthly  Canaan.

2.  This  Canaan  was  not  all  conquered.

3.  The  rest  attained  was  only  temporary.

But  our  Lord,  the  Captain  of  our  Salvation,  leads  to  a
heavenly  Canaan.  His  conquest  is  complete.  His  rest  is
glorious  and  eternal.  In  this  connection,  the  author  passes
to  a  new  thought — a  comparison  of  memorials,  which  brings
us  to  consider  another  item  of  the  analysis :

THE   SABBATH-KEEPING   OF  THE   NEW    COVENANT

The  whole  matter  is  found  in  4 : 4- 11.  The  interpretation
is  confessedly  difficult,  and  the  best  of  scholars  differ  widely
as  to  the  import.  The  reader  will  understand  that  the  views
now  presented  are  not  urged  dogmatically,  but  are  offered
for  fair  consideration  along  with  variant  views.  Take  them
at  their  intrinsic  value  and  form  your  own  judgment.  First
of  all,  read  the  whole  passage  carefully  and  particularly,
and  note  the  following  words  in  the  original :

I.  The  word  "rest" — Greek,  katapausis,  at  3 :  11,  18;  4:1,
3>8, 10,  II.


^40     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

2.  "The  seventh  day" — Greek,  hehdome,  4 : 4.

3.  "Another  day" — Greek,  alia  hemera,  4 :  8.

4.  "Sabbath-keeping" — Greek,  Sabbatismos,  4 : 9.

The  difficulty  of  interpretation  has  resulted  from  three
causes :

1.  A  failure  to  note  the  contrast  between  the  "seventh  day"
in  verse  4,  and  "another  day"  in  verse  8.

2.  In  translating  Sabbatismos  in  verse  9  as  if  it  were
katapausis.  Uniformly  in  all  the  context  when  the  apostle
means  "the  rest"  in  any  sense  he  uses  the  katapausis.  The
change  to  Sabbatismos  is  inexplicable  if  he  means  the  same
thing.  But  Sabbatismos  is  a  verbal  noun,  and  means  "the
keeping  of  a  Sabbath,"  and  so  explains  the  contrast  between
"the  seventh  day,"  as  appointed  of  old,  and  "another  day"
foretold  in  the  prophetic  Psalm.

3.  In  arbitrarily  referring  the  pronouns,  "0/*  autou  and
autos  in  verse  10  to  the  Christian,  instead  of  to  Christ  as  the
true  antecedent.

In  the  deliberate  judgment  of  the  author  there  is  no  justi-
fication for  any  one  of  those  three  things.  The  idea  of  the
context  is :

1.  God  rested  after  creating  the  world,  and  appointed  the
seventh  day  to  be  kept  in  commemoration.

2.  The  prophets  foretold  "another  day"  instead  of  the
seventh,  to  commemorate  a  greater  rest,  following  a  greater
work  than  creation.

3.  Into  this  greater  rest  Joshua  never  led  the  Jewish
people.

4.  But  our  Lord,  having  finished  the  work  of  redemption
on  the  cross.  He  himself  rested  from  the  work  on  the  first
day  of  the  week,  as  God  had  done  from  His  own  on  the
seventh.

5.  To  this  cross  He  nailed  the  whole  typical  Sabbatic  cycle,
taking  it  away,  Hos.  2:11;  Col.  2: 14-17.

6.  Therefore,  in  commemoration  of  the  glorious  rest  fol-


CHRIST  GREATER  THAN  MOSES        241

lowing  the  greater  work  of  redemption  there  remaineth  a
Sabbath-keeping  to  the  people  of  God.  The  reader  is  urged
to  re-read  the  last  sermon  in  my  first  book  of  sermons  for
full  discussion  of  this  point.

7.  It  was  necessary  for  the  argument,  to  show  the  Jew
who  was  glorying  in  his  Sabbath  day,  that  the  Christian
had  a  greater  Sabbath  day.

He  closes  the  chapter  with  this  statement :  "Having  then
a  great  High  Priest,  who  hath  passed  through  the  heavens,
Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  let  us  hold  fast  our  confession."
We  confessed  faith  in  Christ ;  they  confessed  faith  in  Joshua,
were  led  into  the  promised  land,  and  in  the  book  of  Joshua
we  are  told  that  they  had  rest.  But  it  was  a  very  temporary
rest,  and  was  not  the  real  Promised  Land  that  the  man  of
faith  saw  all  of  the  time.  Abraham  saw  far  beyond  Canaan.
He  never  got  as  much  of  that  land  as  he  could  cover  with
his  foot.  He  sought  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  and
whose  builder  and  maker  is  God.  Another  reason  is  that
our  High  Priest  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities
because  He  has  been  in  all  points  tempted  as  we  are,  yet
without  sin.

Now  comes  the  exhortation :  "Let  us  therefore  draw  near
with  boldness  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  receive
mercy  and  may  find  grace  to  help  us  in  time  of  need."  The
whole  letter  has  this  end  in  view — ^to  stir  up,  to  put  to  full
test  what  is  worked  in  you.  If  you  are  God's  child  you  will
hear  the  exhortation  and  hold  on.  If  you  are  not  God's
child,  your  heart  will  become  hardened  in  unbelief,  and  you
will  turn  loose  and  go  back.


24^     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS


QUESTIONS

Ik

1.  In  what  particulars  is  Christ  superior  to  Moses  ?

2.  What  the  two  distinct  views  of  religion  in  this  book?

3.  What  Paul's  application  of  these  views  to  the  ones  addressed
in  this  letter  ?

4.  What  his  exhortation  based  thereon  ?

5.  What  of  the  Christian's  doubts  relative  to  his  status?

6.  What   the   warning    relative   to   the   deceitfulness    of    sin?
Illustrate.

7.  What  the  evidence  that  any  one  is  a  partaker  of  Christ  as
taught  in  this  book?

8.  Of  what  exhortation  of  David  does  Paul  make  frequent  use
in  this  letter,  and  what  the  point  of  his  exhortation  ?

9.  In  what  particulars  is  Christ  superior  to  Joshua?

10.  What  the  crucial  Greek  words  in  chapter  4  bearing  on  the
change  of  the  Sabbath  day?

11.  What  the  three  causes  constituting  the  difficulty  of  inter-
pretation ?

12.  Can  there  be  a  Sabbath  day,  not  the  seventh?

13.  Who  the  antecedent  of  the  pronouns,  "he,"  the  first  "his"  and
"himself"  of  4 :  10,  and  what  the  argument  therefor  ?

14.  What  the  several  historical  backgrounds  of  the  seventh-day
Sabbath?

15.  What  the  historical  background  of  the  Christian  Sabbath?

16.  Paraphrase  Heb.  4:9,  10  so  as  to  bring  out  the  meaning.

17.  What  scriptural  proof  that  the  seventh-day  Sabbath  and  all
its  cycle  of  Sabbaths  was  abrogated  ?

18.  What  name  was  given  the  Christian  Sabbath,  and  what  the
proof  of  its  observance?

19.  What  Paul's  exhortations  in  the  closing  part  of  this  chapter,
and  what  the  application  of  each?

20.  What  the  purpose  of  the  letter  as  seen  from  the  closing  part
of  this  chapter?


XXI


JESUS    CHRIST,    HIGH    PRIEST    OF    THE    NEW
COVENANT,   GREATER  THAN   AARON,
HIGH  PRIEST  OF  THE  OLD
COVENANT

Scripture:  Heb.  4: 14— 8:  5

THE  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  is  an  inspired  exposition
of  the  Sinaitic  covenant,  and  particularly  of  the  book
of  Leviticus.  Our  analysis  and  exposition  of  the
Sinaitic  covenant  (Ex.  19:  i — 24:9)  shows  that  this  cove-
nant consisted  of  three  distinct  elements :

1.  God  and  the  normal  man,  or  the  moral  law  (Ex.  20:
I-17)  as  a  way  of  life ;  not  simply  an  obligation  but  a  condi-
tion of  life — they  that  do  these  things  shall  live,  they  that  do
them  not  shall  perish.

2.  God  and  the  Nation,  or  the  ordinances  that  set  forth
the  principles  of  civic  righteousness  (21:1 — 24:9);  in
obedience  to  which  the  nation  lives,  and  in  disobedience  dies.

3.  God  and  the  sinner,  or  the  Law  of  the  Altar  (Ex.  20:
22-26),  or  the  way  of  the  sinner's  approach  to  God  in  order
to  find  mercy.

We  learn  that  all  subsequent  statutory  legislation  in  the
Pentateuch  was  developed  from  these  constitutional  elements
or  principles.  Deuteronomy  was  developed  from  the  first
and  second,  and  from  the  third  was  developed  the  last  six-
teen chapters  of  Exodus,  all  of  Leviticus,  and  most  of  the
legislation  in  Numbers.  The  Altar  part,  or  God  and  the
sinner,  was  typical  of  the  new  covenant,  and  contained  in
figures  the  way  of  grace  and  mercy,  and  revealed  the  only

US


244.     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

way  by  which  Parts  i  and  2  could  be  kept.    Hence  it  was  the
most  important  element  of  the  Sinaitic  law.

In  the  Pentateuch  we  find  also  these  elements  of  the  law
of  the  sinner's  approach  to  God :

1.  The  sanctuary,  holy  of  holies,  or  a  place  where  the
sinner  might  find  God.

2.  A  means  of  approach  to  God  in  the  sanctuary,  or
vicarious,  expiating  sacrifices  placating  the  divine  wrath
against  sin.

3.  A  mediator  to  go  between  the  sinner  seeking  mercy,  and
God  bestowing  mercy.  This  mediator,  or  priest,  took  the
blood  of  the  vicarious  expiation  and  carried  it  behind  the
veil  and  offered  it  upon  the  mercy  seat,  where  God  dwelt
between  the  cherubim.  That  mediator,  on  the  basis  of  that
offered  blood,  made  intercession  for  the  people.

4.  Times  in  which  to  approach  God  are  set  forth  elabo-
rately in  that  book — daily,  weekly,  monthly,  annually,  septen-
nially,  and  every  fiftieth  year.  Those  were  the  times  that
they  could  go  before  God,  but  the  heart  of  Leviticus,  as  well
as  the  heart  of  Hebrews,  was  a  particular  time,  towit :  On
the  great  day  of  atonement,  when  the  people  appeared  be-
fore God  to  receive  through  an  offering  presented  by  the
priest,  the  remission  of  their  sins,  we  find  a  prescribed  ritual
that  gave  the  steps  involved.

5.  Then  we  find  what  place  there  was  for  penitence,  faith,
and  prayer.  We  find  penitence  to  indicate  that  the  man
approaching  God  came  as  a  confessed  sinner.  We  find  faith
set  forth  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  upon  the  head  of  the
victim — the  victim  to  take  his  place.  We  find  the  prayer-
part  to  be  the  petitions  that  went  with  the  high  priest  and
were  presented  by  him  when  he  made  the  offering.  All  that
is  presented  in  the  book  of  Leviticus.

So  we  find  that  the  sanctuary  of  God  was  that  part  which
was  called  the  holy  of  holies,  and  that  there  God  was  visibly
manifested,  according  to  all  Jewish  interpretation,  in  the


CHRIST  GREATER  THAN  AARON    M5

Shekinah  of  fire  between  the  cherubim  on  the  mercy  seat.
We  find  the  victims  to  be  bullocks,  goats,  and  lambs.  We
find  the  mediator  to  be,  and  particularly  upon  the  great  day
of  atonement,  Aaron.  We  find  the  sacrifices  constantly  re-
peated every  year ;  on  the  great  day  of  atonement  the  priest
had  to  go  for  the  people,  carrying  the  names  of  the  tribes
on  his  breast-plate,  going  for  them  into  the  holy  of  holies.
In  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews,  which  expounds  the  Altar-
part  of  the  Sinaitic  covenant,  Paul  does  not  discuss  the
temple  of  Solomon,  nor  of  Zerubbabel,  nor  of  Herod,  but  the
tabernacle  of  Moses,  because  his  plan  is  to  go  back  to  origins,
and  to  the  dignity  of  founders.  It  would  have  been  incon-
gruous if  after  discussing  angels,  Moses,  Aaron,  and  the
prophets,  he  had  skipped  to  the  ritual  of  the  Herodian  temple.

He  makes  this  argument:  As  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of
God,  is  greater  than  the  prophets,  greater  than  the  angels,
greater  than  Moses,  greater  than  Joshua,  so  He  is  greater
than  Aaron.  We  do  not  discuss  in  this  chapter  superiority
of  the  new  covenant  over  the  old,  but  the  superiority  of
Jesus  Christ  over  Aaron  as  high  priest.

In  some  respects  Aaron  and  Jesus  Christ  are  alike —
neither  one  took  the  honor  to  himself,  Aaron  did  not  appoint
himself  high  priest  to  go  before  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  did
not  appoint  himself  to  be  mediator.  The  Father  appointed
them.  Aaron  was  one  of  the  people.  Christ  was  like
Aaron  in  that  respect — He  was  one  of  the  people.  He  took
upon  himself  the  nature  of  man  and  became  as  one  of  those
who  became  His  brethren.

So  we  have  not  yet  arrived  to  the  point  of  discrimination
between  Christ  and  Aaron,  but  we  do  now  come  to  the
dividing  line :  Aaron  being  a  priest  under  the  covenant  made
upon  Mount  Sinai,  was  himself  of  the  tribe  of  Levi.  Jesus
Christ  did  not  belong  to  that  tribe.  He  was  of  the  tribe  of
Judah,  therefore  the  priesthood  of  Christ  does  not  come
within  the  law  of  the  covenant  established  by  Moses  on


246     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Mount  Sinai.  It  was  not  His  office  to  go  to  the  temple  at
Jerusalem  and  there  officiate  as  priest.  He  had  no  such
place  there.  That  is  a  distinction.  It  shows  that  the  Priest-
hood of  Christ  must  be  according  to  an  entirely  different
covenant,  otherwise  He  would  have  to  be  a  son  of  Levi  to
be  a  priest.

In  getting  to  this  point  of  distinction,  Paul  takes  up  a  frag-
ment of  the  history  of  Genesis,  about  an  ancient  king  of
Jerusalem — Melchizedek.  Before  Abraham  had  any  posses-
sion there,  this  man  was  both  a  king  and  a  priest  of  God —
before  the  call  of  Abraham,  before  the  segregation  of  the
Jewish  nation,  when  there  was  no  distinction  between  Jew
and  Gentile.  He  had  no  pedigree  of  which  there  is  any  rec-
ord, but  when  we  come  to  Aaron's  time,  no  man  could  offici-
ate as  an  Aaronic  priest  unless  he  could  trace  his  Levitical
descent.  Melchizedek  had  no  such  genealogy,  and  therefore
in  a  genealogical  sense  he  is  said  to  be  without  father  or
mother,  and  held  his  office  as  king  and  priest  directly  from
God.  He  was  recognized  as  greater  than  Abraham,  the
father  of  the  Jewish  people,  for  when  Abraham  was  return-
ing from  the  victory  over  Chedorlaomer  he  paid  tithes  to  the
king  of  Salem  and  received  a  blessing  from  him.

In  the  days  of  the  Psalmist  a  reference  is  made  to  that  his-
tory :  "The  Lord  hath  sworn.  Thou  art  a  priest  forever  after
the  order  of  Melchizedek."  This  makes  another  distinction
— Christ,  not  Aaron,  was  made  priest  by  oath  of  God.  So  a
distinction  between  Christ  and  Aaron  is  that  Aaron  is  after
the  order  of  Levi  and  his  priesthood  is  under  the  Mosaic
covenant  made  upon  Mount  Sinai,  and  Jesus  Christ  is  a  priest
after  the  order  of  Melchizedek  anterior  even  to  Abraham,
much  less  Moses,  and  greater  than  Abraham,  receiving  tithes
from  the  whole  Jewish  people  in  the  person  of  Abraham,  and
inducted  by  the  oath  of  God.  It  shows,  too,  that  no  scripture
is  of  private  interpretation.  The  prophets  spoke  and  wrote
as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  when  you  go  to


CHRIST  GREATER  THAN  AARON   Wl

interpret  a  passage  of  scripture  which  the  Holy  Spirit  in-
dited, you  get  the  meaning  through  the  illumination  of  the
Holy  Spirit.

The  next  point  is  that  when  Aaron,  under  the  Levitical  law
was  preparing  to  offer  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  people,
he  must  first  offer  for  himself  because  he  was  a  sinner,  and
before  he  offered  for  others  he  must  himself  be  cleansed;
but  this  Man  was  holy,  "tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are
tempted,  yet  without  sin."  That  distinction  in  character  is
very  strong  between  the  two  persons — between  the  two  or-
ders of  priesthood.  Aaron  was  a  sinner ;  our  priest  was  not
a  sinner.    No  man  ever  convicted  Him  of  sin.

Then  Aaron  died  and  could  not  continue  to  live  to  inter-
cede for  the  people,  but  this  priest  ever  liveth  to  make  inter-
cession for  His  people.

We  now  take  up  the  general  superiority  of  the  New  Cove-
nant, and  it  embraces  lo,  1 1,  and  12  of  the  items  of  the  analy-
sis, only  in  expounding  this  I  will  follow  a  more  orderly  and
logical  method  than  we  have  in  the  analysis.  This  section
extends  from  8:  5  to  13 :  16,  and  it  even  includes  one  verse
of  chapter  7.

So  far,  our  exposition  has  had  to  do  with  the  person  and
most  of  the  offices  of  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,
but  here  we  contrast  the  covenants  themselves.  Notwith-
standing the  previous  statements  of  the  elements  of  the
Sinaitic  covenant,  we  must  restate  them  here  briefly  in
order  to  clearness  in  this  exposition.  The  old  covenant  is
set  forth  in  Ex.  19  to  24:11,  and  consists  of  three  distinct
elements :

1.  The  decalogue,  or  God  and  the  normal  man.

2.  The  fundamental  principles  of  civic  righteousness,  or
God  and  the  theocratic  nation.

3.  The  altar,  or  God  and  the  sinner,  or  the  law  of  the  sin-
ner's approach  to  God.

From  the  first  and  second  elements  are  derived  a  part  of


248     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Numbers,  and  all  of  Deuteronomy ;  from  the  third  element,
God  and  the  sinner,  or  the  law  of  the  altar,  are  derived  the
last  1 6  chapters  of  Exodus,  the  whole  of  Leviticus,  and  a
part  of  Numbers.

Our  first  question  now  arises :  What  are  the  faults  of  the
old  covenant,  for  our  text  says  that  God  found  that  old  cove-
nant faulty.  If  we  know  what  the  faults  are,  we  can  then
consider  the  superiorities  of  the  new  covenant.  Evidently
the  one  supreme  fault  of  the  first  and  second  elements,  that
is,  the  moral  code  and  the  national  code,  was  the  inability  of
a  fallen,  sinful  people  to  keep  the  law,  as  a  way  of  life  for
the  individual,  or  a  way  of  life  for  the  nation.  The  reason
is  that  the  moral  element  was  written  outside  of  the  people
and  on  tablets  of  stone ;  they  had  no  internal  personal  knowl-
edge— spiritual  knowledge — of  the  law.  So  written,  it  dis-
covered sin  and  condemned  sin,  but  there  was  nothing  in  it
to  overcome  this  inability  and  render  the  obedience  effica-
cious. The  normal  man — Adam  before  his  fall,  and  his
descendants — could  have  kept  the  decalogue  if  he  had  not
fallen  and  corrupted  their  nature  derived  from  him,  could
have  constituted  a  successful  theocratic  nation.  But  after
the  fall  no  lineal  descendant  from  Abraham,  nor  circumcision
of  the  flesh,  could  impart  a  new  nature.

And  now  what  the  faults  of  the  third  part  of  that  covenant
— that  is,  the  Levitical  code — the  last  three  chapters  of  Exo-
dus, the  whole  of  Leviticus,  and  a  part  of  Numbers?  The
faults  of  that  element  were :

1.  It  was  in  whole  and  in  all  its  parts  but  a  shadow  merely
of  heavenly  things  to  come ;  in  its  nature  and  in  its  intent  it
was  only  transitory  and  educational.

2.  The  lack  of  intrinsic  merit  in  the  expiating  sacrifices
to  atone  for  sin.

3.  The  emptiness  of  its  non-expiatory  sacrifices  arising
from  the  want  of  the  heart  back  of  them.

4.  Conforming  to  it  could  never  relieve  the  conscience


CHRIST  GREATER  THAN  AARON    U9

from  the  sense  of  sin,  guilt,  and  condemnation,  and  give
peace  and  rest.

5.  The  dependence  of  the  sinner  on  human  go-betweens,
or  third  parties  in  making  offerings,  and  in  the  administra-
tion of  cleansing  ordinances,  the  limitation  of  one  fixed  place
to  meet  God,  and  the  further  limitation  of  set  times  in  which
to  meet  God — that  is,  the  sinner  could  not  for  himself  directly
approach  God  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and  in  all
emergencies.

From  these  faults  what  our  text  declares  necessarily  and
inevitably  followed,  towit :  "They  continued  not  in  my  cove-
nant, and  I  regarded  them  not,  saith  the  Lord."  Their  whole
national  history  is  but  the  record  of  a  series  of  breaches  of
the  covenant  on  their  part,  and  of  God's  disregard  of  them  on
His  part.  They  broke  the  covenant  first  in  the  very  shadow
of  Sinai,  before  its  tablets  were  completed,  in  the  matter  of
the  golden  calf.  They  broke  the  covenant  again  at  Kadesh-
barnea,  and  the  whole  generation  of  adults  were  disregarded
and  perished.  They  broke  the  covenant  again  throughout
the  period  of  the  judges,  and  at  the  close  of  that  period  their
rebellion  culminated  in  the  rejection  of  God  as  King,  and
in  the  demand  for  a  human  monarchy.  After  that  monarchy
was  established,  the  ten  tribes  broke  the  covenant  at  the  very
start  in  erecting  the  calves  to  worship  at  Dan  and  Bethel,
and  kept  on  breaking  it  without  cessation  until  they  perished.
The  Judah-part  of  the  monarchy,  while  more  faithful  than
the  ten  tribes,  repeatedly  broke  the  covenant,  and  finally,  at
the  downfall  of  the  monarchy  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  they  were
swept  away.  The  hierarchy  which,  through  the  clemency  of
Persia,  succeeded  the  monarchy  and  continued  throughout
the  Grecian  and  Roman  supremacies,  repeatedly  violated  the
covenant,  and  the  culmination  of  their  rebellion  was  in  the
days  of  our  Lord  when  they  rejected  Him  and  killed  the
Prince  of  Glory,  bringing  upon  themselves  the  terrible  denun-
ciation in  Matthew  21-23 — the  gravest  judgment  that  was


250     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

ever  assessed  against  a  people.  This  on  account  of  the  faults
in  that  covenant.  In  every  period  of  their  probation  they
broke  it  and  disregarded  it.

This  review  of  the  faults  enables  us  to  sum  up  in  one
sweeping,  inclusive  generality  the  superiority  of  the  new
covenant,  towit:  Our  text  says,  ^'It  was  enacted  on  better
promises"  so  that  our  next  question  arises :  What  are  these
better  promises  ?  Here  it  is  all  important  to  make  no  mistake.
H  we  do  not  discern  these  better  promises  clearly  and  retain
them  permanently  in  our  hearts,  we  will  utterly  fail  to  master
the  priceless  lessons  of  this  book.  Notwithstanding  the  im-
portance of  discerning  and  retaining  these  promises,  what  a
sad  thing  it  is,  that  if  the  preachers  of  Christendom  were
called  up  and  asked  to  state  what  these  better  promises  are,
probably  not  more  than  one  in  a  hundred  could  give  them  cor-
rectly, and  three-fourths  of  so-called  Christendom  have  never
seen  them.    I  will  give  them  to  you  in  the  next  chapter.

QUESTIONS

1.  Hebrews  is  an  exposition  of  what  covenant,  and  what  O.  T.
book  in  particular?

2.  Where  is  the  record  of  the  old  covenant,  and  what  its  con-
stituent elements  ?

3.  What  subsequent  parts  of  the  Pentateuch  developed  from
each  of  these  elements?

4.  What  the  elements  of  the  law  of  the  sinner's  approach  to  God,
and  what  the  particulars  of  each?

5.  What  do  we  find  as  to  the  sanctuary,  the  victims  of  sacrifice,
the  mediator,  the  times  and  the  work  of  the  high  priest  under  the  old
covenant  ?

6.  Why  does  the  author  of  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  discuss  the
tabernacle  of  Moses  and  not  the  temple  of  Herod?

7.  In  what  respects  are  Aaron  and  Christ  alike?

8.  In  whatparticulars  is  Christ  greater  than  Aaron?   (See  analysis.)

9.  Who  was  Melchizedek,  and  how  does  he  illustrate  the  order  of
Christ's  priesthood?

10.  What  the  faults  of  the  first  and  second  elements  of  the  old
covenant?

11.  What  the  faults  of  the  third  element  of  the  same  covenant?

12.  From  these  faults  what  necessarily  and  inevitably  followed,
and  what  particular  illustrations  of  this  in  the  history  of  God's
people,  Israel?

13.  Sum  up  in  a  sweeping  generality  the  superiority  of  the  new
covenant  and  show  its  importance.


XXII

THE  BETTER  PROMISES  OF  THE  NEW
COVENANT

Scripture:  Heb.  8 :  6 — lo :  39

THE  promises  of  the  new  covenant  are  as  follows:
I.  The  Promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  renew  and
sanctify  their  souls  and  glorify  their  bodies,  in  order
to  enable  them  ultimately  to  keep  God's  law  individually,  and
to  become  collectively  a  holy  nation  for  God's  own  posses-
sion. The  first  promise,  then,  relates  to  the  work  of  the  Holy
Spirit.

2.  The  Promise  of  a  Surety,  who  would  stand  for  them
until  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  completed.  For  instance,  say
you  were  converted,  you  were  regenerated,  and  yet,  even
though  regenerated,  your  soul  is  not  yet  sanctified,  your  body
is  not  yet  prepared  so  that  the  entire  man,  body,  soul  and
spirit,  will  perfectly  keep  the  law  of  God.  You  need  a  surety
to  stand  for  you  until  the  Spirit's  work  is  completed,  and
so  that  is  the  second  promise  as  expressed  in  7 :  22 :  "J^sus
hath  become  the  surety  of  a  better  covenant."

3.  The  Promise  of  one  Expiatory  Sacrifice,  whose  dig-
nity and  intrinsic  merit  and  all-sufficiency  would,  when  once
offered,  really  and  forever  atone  for  sin.

4.  The  final  and  glorious  advent  of  our  Lord,  not  as  a  sin-
offering  but  as  judge  of  the  world.

5.  The  Priesthood  of  Every  Subject  of  the  Covenant,  thus
forever  dispensing  with  the  human  go-betweens,  or  third
parties,  and  enabling  him  (the  sinner)  to  approach  God
directly  for  himself  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and  in  all  emer-

^51


252     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

gencies,  and  the  substitution  of  spiritual  sacrifices  for  all  the
cumbersome  non-expiating  sacrifices  of  the  old  covenant,  so
that  each  Christian,  himself  a  priest,  offers  these  spiritual
sacrifices.  You  see,  the  promise  has  relation  to  two  kinds
of  sacrifices,  one  expiatory  sacrifice,  and  then  spiritual  sacri-
fices that  take  the  place  of  the  old  covenant  non-expiating
sacrifices — for  instance,  all  meat-offerings,  and  all  the  un-
bloody offerings  of  the  old  covenant.

6.  A  glorious  Outcome  into  a  Heavenly  Country  and  a
heavenly  city,  and  eternal  rest,  peace,  and  joy,  into  ever-
lasting companionship  with  God  and  with  all  the  holy  angels.

7.  A  Better  Festival.  We  will  have  a  good  time  when  we
get  to  that  better  festival.  How  proud  was  the  Jew  of  his
festivals,  the  great  annual  feasts.  We  find  that  immediately
after  the  consummation  of  the  covenant  in  Exodus,  that  a
covenant-feast  was  held,  and  that  Aaron,  Moses,  and  Joshua,
and  the  elders  went  up  on  the  side  of  the  mountain  and
feasted  and  held  communion  with  God.  But  the  new  cove-
nant has  a  better  festival.

I  will  briefly  restate  these :

1.  The  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

2.  The  promise  of  a  surety  who  will  stand  for  them  until
the  work  of  the  Spirit  shall  be  completed.

3.  The  promise  of  one  expiatory  sacrifice.

4.  The  promise  of  our  Lord's  final  advent,  not  as  a  sin-
offering.

5.  The  priesthood  of  every  subject  of  the  new  covenant,
and  the  substitution  of  spiritual  sacrifices  that  this  priesthood
would  offer.

6.  The  glorious  outcome  in  heaven.

7.  The  better  festival.

These  are  the  better  promises  of  the  new  covenant,  and  it
is  our  business  now  to  show  from  the  text  in  detail  the  very
scriptures  which  embody  these  seven  better  promises,  and
therefore  we  commence  at  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  quoted


THE  BETTER  PROMISES  ^53

in  chapter  8 :  "Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I
will  make  a  new  covenant  with  the  house  of  Israel  and  with
the  house  of  Judah;  not  according  to  the  covenant  that  I
made  with  their  fathers  in  the  day  that  I  took  them  by  the
hand  to  lead  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt ;  for  they
continued  not  in  my  covenant,  and  I  regarded  them  not,  saith
the  Lord.  For  this  is  the  covenant  I  will  make  with  the
house  of  Israel  after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  (now  we
come  to  the  first  promise),  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their
mind,  and  on  their  heart  also  will  I  write  them."  This  is  the
internal  writing  contrasted  with  the  law  externally  written
on  stone,  and  is  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  is  equivalent  to
regeneration,  as  Paul  expresses  it  in  II  Cor.  3:3:  "Ye  are  an
epistle  of  Christ  ministered  by  us,  written  not  with  ink,  but
with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God ;  not  on  tables  of  stone,  but
on  tables  that  are  hearts  of  flesh."  The  connection  on  that
passage  is  as  follows :

"Who  also  made  us  sufficient  as  ministers  of  the  new  covenant;
not  of  the  letter  [that  is,  of  the  letter  traced  on  the  tables  of  stone],
but  of  the  Spirit ;  for  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth  life.  But
if  the  ministration  of  death,  written  and  engraved  on  stones,  came
with  glory,  so  that  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  look  steadfastly
upon  the  face  of  Moses  for  the  glory  of  his  face ;  which  glory  was
passing  away :  how  shall  not  rather  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be
with  glory?  For  if  the  ministration  of  condemnation  hath  glory,  much
rather  doth  the  ministration  of  righteousness  exceed  in  glory.  For
verily  that  which  hath  been  made  glorious  hath  not  been  made  glori-
ous in  this  respect,  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  surpasseth.  For  if  that
which  passeth  away  was  with  glory,  much  more  than  which  remain-
eth  is  in  glory.  Having  therefore  such  a  hope,  we  use  great  boldness
of  speech  [that  is,  simplicity  of  speech],  and  are  not  as  Moses,  who
put  a  veil  upon  his  face,  that  the  children  of  Israel  should  not  look
steadfastly  on  the  end  of  that  which  was  passing  away:  but  their
minds  were  hardened;  for  until  this  very  day  at  the  reading  of  the
old  covenant  the  same  veil  remaineth,  it  not  being  revealed  to  them
that  it  is  done  away  in  Christ.  But  unto  this  day,  whensoever  Moses
is  read,  a  veil  lieth  upon  their  heart.  But  whensoever  it  shall  turn
to  the  Lord,  the  veil  is  taken  away  [As  he  will  be  in  the  final  deliver-
ance of  all  Israel].  Now  the  Lord  is  the  Spirit:  and  where  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty.  But  we  all,  with  unveiled  face
beholding  as  in  a  mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  transformed
into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  from  the  Lord  the
Spirit."


^54     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

This  passage  should  very  solemnly  impress  upon  our
hearts  that  the  first  great  promise  in  the  new  covenant
relates  to  the  writing  inside  of  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.

The  regeneration  in  its  quickening,  or  renewal,  part  (and
it  always  consists  of  two  parts ;  the  second  one  we  will  bring
out  presently)  makes  alive  and  gives  a  holy  disposition  to
the  mind,  inclining  to  love  God  and  desiring  to  obey.  They
did  not  keep  that  old  covenant;  they  continued  not  in  it.
Why  ?  They  did  not  have  the  heart  to  do  it.  Thus  regenera-
tion is  the  antitype  of  circumcision.

Some  people  talk  about  baptism  coming  in  place  of  cir-
cumcision. Let  us  consider  what  Paul  says  of  circumcision :
"For  he  is  not  a  Jew  who  is  one  outwardly ;  neither  is  that
circumcision  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh ;  but  he  is  a  Jew
who  is  one  inwardly ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,
in  the  spirit,  not  in  the  letter,  whose  praise  is  not  of  men
but  of  God."  So  that  spiritual  circumcision  qualifies  one
to  be  a  true  subject  of  God.

As  an  example  of  this  writing  on  the  heart  under  the  new
covenant,  take  Acts  2,  where  Peter  preached  that  great
sermon  on  the  Messiah  that  day  when  the  Holy  Spirit  came
down.  That  is  the  Spirit  of  promise  (we  are  on  the  first
promise  of  the  new  covenant)  :  "Tarry  ye  at  Jerusalem,
until  I  send  ye  the  promise  of  the  Father."  On  that  day
while  Peter  was  preaching,  the  record  shows  they  were
"pricked  in  their  heart"  and  cried  out,  "Men  and  brethren,
what  shall  we  do?"  There  is  the  handwriting  on  the  heart.
A  much  more  marvelous  example  is  yet  in  the  future — earth
never  saw  anything  like  it.  It  is  in  the  salvation  of  the
whole  Jewish  nation  in  one  day  by  the  Spirit's  regenerating
power.  The  Jewish  nation  stood  at  Sinai,  and  the  law  was
written  on  tables  of  stone,  outside  of  them,  and  affected
them  not.

There  will  come  a  time  when  the  same  Jewish  nation,  in
their  'descendants,  will  he  gathered  together  from  all  the


THE  BETTER  PROMISES  26fi

countries  of  the  earth  where  they  have  been  dispersed,  and
in  the  flash  of  an  eye  God  will  write  the  new  covenant  on
their  hearts.

Ezekiel  discusses  it  in  the  famous  36th  and  37th  chapters
of  his  prophecy,  where  he  says,  "Not  for  your  sakes  do  I
do  this,  but  for  my  own  name  sake  I  will  gather  you  together
out  of  all  the  nations  where  you  have  profaned  my  name,
and  I  will  take  away  your  stony  heart  and  give  you  a  heart
of  flesh,  and  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within  you,  and  then  you
will  keep  my  commandments."  In  order  to  show  the  stu-
pendous nature  of  that  writing  on  the  heart  a  picture  of  it
is  given  in  the  imagery  of  "the  valley  of  dry  bones" — very
many  and  very  dry.  God  asked  the  prophet  the  question :
"Can  these  dry  bones  live?"  "Not  by  any  human  power,
Lord,  thou  knowest."  Then  said  God,  "Stand  over  them
and  prophesy."  "What  shall  I  prophesy  ?"  "Say,  Come,  O
Spirit,  and  breathe  on  these  slain."  And  the  Spirit  came
and  breathed  on  the  slain,  and  the  bones  lived,  and  stood
up  a  great  army.  I  have  selected  these  two  examples  because
one,  i.e.,  the  3,000  Jews  saved  at  Pentecost,  is  the  first  fruits,
and  the  final  salvation  of  all  Israel  is  the  harvest.

There  is  a  striking  reference  to  this  harvest  in  the  closing
part  of  Zech.  12  and  verse  i  of  Zech.  13.  After  referring
to  their  barrenness  in  their  dispersion,  he  says,  "In  the  last
days  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  I  will  pour  out  on  my  people,
Israel,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication,  and  as  soon  as
that  comes  upon  them  they  shall  mourn  as  one  mourning
for  his  first-born;  they  shall  look  upon  Him  whom  they
pierced,  with  an  eye  of  faith,  and  in  that  day  shall  be  a
fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness."  I  cannot
help  wishing  that  I  could  live  to  see  it.  Isaiah,  in  talking
about  it,  says,  "Hath  the  earth  ever  heard  of  such  a  thing?
Has  anybody  ever  seen  such  a  thing,  that  a  nation  is  born
in  a  day  ?"

Let's  see  how  Paul  continues  his  discussion  of  this  promise


256     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

of  the  Spirit.  What  is  the  result?  "And  I  will  be  to  them
a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a  people,"  i.e.,  "When  they
are  regenerated,  I  will  be  to  them  a  God  in  reality,  and  they
shall  be  to  me  a  people  in  reality."  Let*s  see  how  this  is
expressed  elsewhere.  In  I  Pet.  2 : 8  we  have  this  statement :
"A  stone  of  stumbling,  a  rock  of  offence  was  Christ,  for
they  stumbled  at  the  word,  being  disobedient,  whereunto
they  were  also  appointed.  But  ye  [that  is,  ye  new-covenant
people]  are  an  elect  race,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,
a  people  for  God's  own  possession,"  as  here  in  Hebrews  he
says,  "I  will  be  their  God  and  they  will  be  my  people."
How  does  Paul  elsewhere  express  the  same  thought?  In
Tit.  2 :  14  he  says,  "He  gave  himself  for  us,  that  He  might
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity  and  purify  unto  himself  a  people
for  His  own  possession,  zealous  of  good  works."

The  result,  then,  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  that
God  in  reality  becomes  their  God,  and  they  become  in  reality
His  people.  That  leads  us  to  consider  the  culmination  of
that  very  thing.  The  Spirit's  work  is  not  completed  at  once.
We  are  God's  people  now,  because  we  are  regenerated ;  but
suppose  we  turn  to  the  culmination  of  this  covenant  as  pre-
sented in  Rev.  21 : 3:  "And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of
the  throne  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,
and  He  shall  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  His  people,
and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God ;  and
He  shall  wipe  away  every  tear  from  their  eyes,  and  death
shall  be  no  more,  neither  shall  there  be  mourning  nor  crying,
nor  pain,  any  more ;  the  first  things  are  passed  away."  So
that  when  He  says,  as  the  first  result  of  that  regenerating
work,  "I  shall  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people,"
it  means  His  being  our  God  as  we  now  are,  and  His  being
our  God  when  we  are  perfect  in  heaven.  That  is  the  first
result  of  the  Spirit's  work.

The  Second  Result. — Let  us  consider  the  passage  quoted
from  Jeremiah,  verse  1 1 :   "And  they  shall  not  teach  every


THE  BETTER  PROMISES  ^57

man  his  fellow-citizen,  and  every  man  his  brother,  saying,
Know  the  Lord:  for  all  shall  know  me,  from  the  least  to
the  greatest  of  them."  That  is  the  second  result.  This  per-
sonal spiritual  knowledge  of  God  is  a  characteristic  of  the
subjects  of  the  new  covenant.  Paul  thus  expresses  the
same  thought  in  the  Letter  to  the  Romans,  8: 14 — it  is  very
important — "For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,
these  are  the  sons  of  God.  For  ye  received  not  the  spirit
of  bondage  again  unto  fear;  but  you  received  the  spirit  of
adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.  The  Spirit  him-
self beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  children
of  God :  and  if  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-
heirs  with  Christ."

To  every  subject  of  the  new  covenant  there  comes  an
experimental  knowledge  of  God.  In  the  light  of  this  per-
sonal experience  witnessed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  an  ignorant
Negro  is  more  than  a  match  for  the  most  highly  cultured
and  educated  infidel.  I  heard  of  such  a  case.  The  infidel
said,  "That  is  all  foolishness ;  there  is  no  such  thing  inside
of  you."  The  old  Negro  said,  "You  ought  to  say.  There
is  no  such  thing  as  yoii  knows  of.'  "

The  humblest  son  of  earth,  with  that  internal,  personal
knowledge  of  God  that  comes  through  his  regeneration,  is
stronger  than  the  greatest  infidel  or  the  strongest  demon  in
hell.

A  reason  then  is  assigned  attesting  the  character  of  this
knowledge.  Let's  see  what  it  is.  He  says,  "For  I  will  be
merciful  to  their  iniquities,  and  their  sins  will  I  remember
no  more,"  Heb.  8: 12.  There  he  is  referring  to  their  sub-
jective knowledge — the  effect  on  their  conscience — ^that  He
had  been  merciful  to  their  iniquities,  and  that  He  will  not
remember  these  iniquities  any  more  forever.  This  means
that  the  sense  of  guilt  and  condemnation  awakened  by  the
Spirit's  conviction  of  sin  is  followed  by  a  sense  of  peace
and  rest  through  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  so  that


£58     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

being  justified  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God,  and  the
sins  being  thus  removed  never  more  trouble  the  conscience.
God  has  forever  blotted  them  out;  as  far  as  the  East  is
from  the  West  He  has  removed  them.

Knowing  this,  I  have  employed  it  as  a  test  in  the  inquiry
room.  Three  preachers  once  came  to  me,  bothered  over  a
certain  case ;  they  could  not  tell  whether  he  was  converted
or  not,  and  wanted  me  to  talk  to  him.  I  sat  down  by  him
and  put  these  questions :  "Have  you  a  sensitive  conscience  ?"
"Yes,  sir."  "Does  that  conscience  trouble  you  on  account
of  sins?"  "Yes,  sir."  "Do  you  remember  when  the  sense
of  guilt  and  condemnation  as  a  sinner  first  came  on  you."
"Well,  yes,  I  do."  "Do  you  remember  what  became  of  it?"
"Well,"  he  says,  "when  I  believed  on  Jesus  Christ  it  just
fled  away  like  a  cloud."  Here  comes  my  crucial  question:
"In  your  present  trouble  of  conscience  on  account  of  sins,
does  your  conscience  go  back  to  take  up  the  burden  of  those
old  sins  before  you  were  converted,  or  does  it  take  up  the
burden  of  the  sins  committed  since  that  time?"  He  said,
"The  sins  committed  since  I  became  a  Christian."  "Sir,  if
you  were  not  converted,  it  would  go  back  and  take  up  that
old  burden  and  emphasize  that  as  the  chief  burden."

That  is  one  of  the  best  tests  I  ever  saw.  "I  will  be  merci-
ful to  their  iniquities,  and  their  sins  I  will  remember  no
more" — "I  never  will  bring  those  sins  up  against  you."  A
man's  justification  is  instantaneous  and  forever,  and  that
peace  that  comes  in  justification  will  outlast  all  the  stars  in
the  heavens.    That  burden  never  can  be  assumed  again.

So  far,  I  have  referred  to  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  as
the  first  promise  of  the  new  covenant,  and  we  have  con-
sidered the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  one  element  of  regenera-
tion only — the  renewing,  or  quickening,  or  making  alive —
but  there  is  another  element  of  the  Spirit's  work  that  is
brought  out  clearly  in  the  next  chapter,  as  follows :  "For  if
the  blood  of  goats  and  bulls,  and  the  ashes  of  a  heifer  sprink-


THE  BETTER  PROMISES  259

ling  them  that  have  been  defiled,  sanctify  unto  the  clean-
ness of  the  flesh :  how  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,
who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without
blemish  unto  God,  cleanse  your  conscience  from  dead  works
to  serve  the  living  God  ?"

That  element  of  regeneration  is  the  application  of  the
blood  of  Christ  to  the  soul.  Some  believe  I  am  cranky  on
the  two  elements  in  regeneration.  Take  Ezek.  36 :  25-27,
"And  I  will  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be
clean:  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols,
will  I  cleanse  you.  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  you,  and
a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you;  and  I  will  take  away
the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  a  heart
of  flesh.  And  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within  you,  and  cause
you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  mine  ordi-
nances, and  do  them."  David  brings  out  the  two  elements :
"Purify  with  hyssop" — ^you  see,  that  water  of  purification
was  sprinkled  with  hyssop — "wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter
than  snow,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me" — that  is  the
other  part  of  it.

To  the  same  eflfect  is  Tit.  3:5,  6 :  "Not  by  works  done
in  righteousness  which  we  did  ourselves,  but  according  to
His  mercy  He  saved  us,  through  the  washing  of  regenera-
tion, and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  So  the  first  thing —
the  washing,  or  cleansing  and  renewing — comes  from  the
application  of  the  blood  of  Christ;  the  Spirit  does  that  in
regeneration — that's  just  where  faith  takes  hold.  The  Spirit
regenerates  in  the  sense  of  renewing,  or  first  cleanses  and
then  renews — that  is  the  order.  There  can  be  no  renewal
brought  about  until  the  Spirit  applies  the  blood  of  Christ,
and  then  He  renews  the  nature.  That  is  exactly  what  is
meant  in  John,  "Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  Spirit,"
which  means  except  that  a  man  be  cleansed  by  the  blood
of  Christ  and  renewed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter
the  kingdom  of  God.    The  two  together  make  the  new  birth.


260     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

or,  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  Letter  to  the  Ephesians :  "Christ
also  loved  the  church  and  gave  himself  for  it,  that,  having
cleansed  it  by  the  washing  of  the  water  through  the  Word,"
and  then  goes  on  to  tell  that  He  makes  it  holy,  without
blemish,  in  love.

Let  the  reader  study  that  passage  in  Numbers  concerning
the  red  heifer,  and  how  her  ashes  are  mingled  with  water,
making  lye,  thus  making  the  water  of  cleansing  which  repre-
sents the  application  of  Christ's  blood.


QUESTIONS

1.  What  the  promises  of  the  new  covenant?

2.  What  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  under  the  new  covenant?

3.  What  scriptures  show  this  first  promise,  and  what  other  scrip-
tures show  its  fulfillment?

4.  What  the  relation  of  the  conversion  of  3,000  at  Pentecost  and
the  conversion  of  the  Jews  as  a  nation?

5.  What  the  first  result  of  this  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  how  is  this
thought  elsewhere  expressed  in  the  N.  T.  ?

6.  What  the  second  result,  and  how  is  this  thought  elsewhere
expressed  by  Paul?

7.  Explain  the  difference  in  experimental  knowledge  between  the
subjects  of  the  two  covenants,  8:  11.

8.  What  the  illustration  by  the  author?

9.  What  reason  is  assigned  attesting  the  character  of  this  knowl-
edge, and  what  its  meaning?

ID.    How  would  you  apply  10 :  17  as  a  test  in  an  inquiry  room  to
determine  a  case  of  doubtful  conversion?

11.  What  the  two  distinct  elements  in  regeneration?

12.  Show  these  two  elements  in  Ezek.  36 :  25-27.

13.  Show  the  same  in  Titus  3:5.

14.  Also  in  Jno.  3 :  5.

15.  Eph.  5 :  2^.

16.  What  O.  T.  type  of  applying  the  blood  of  this  one  sacrifice,
and  where  found?    Explain  fully.


XXIII

THE  PROMISE  OF  THE  SURETY  AND  OF  THE
SACRIFICE

Scripture:  8:6 — 10:39

WE  have  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter  that  the  coming
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  first  great  promise  of  the
new  covenant,  that  is,  in  the  order  of  Paul's  argu-
ment, and  that  the  objects  of  the  Spirit's  work  is  to  secure
a  perfect  obedience  to  the  law.  That  this  is  accomplished
by  (i)  regeneration  in  its  two  elements,  cleansing  by  the
application  of  Christ's  blood  to  the  sinner  and  by  renewing
the  mind;  (2)  by  certifying  in  the  experience  of  its  sub-
ject the  remission  of  sins  and  Sonship;  and  (3)  by  complete
sanctification  of  the  soul  and  the  glorification  of  the  body.
The  second  great  promise  of  the  new  covenant  is
The  Surety  of  the  New  Covenant.  This  doctrine  is  thus
expressed :  "By  so  much  also  hath  Jesus  become  the  surety
of  the  better  covenant."  That  is  in  7 :  22,  but  because  this
is  the  second  idea,  or  High  Priest  idea,  or  the  suretyship
of  Jesus,  discussion  was  deferred  when  we  were  on  chap-
ter 7  until  we  came  to  the  first,  or  legal,  idea  of  the  surety-
ship, so  as  to  present  the  two  together.  Webster  thus  defines
the  legal  idea :  "In  law,  one  that  is  bound  with  and  for
another,"  and  he  cites  the  words  of  Judah  to  Joseph :  "Thy
servant  became  surety  for  the  lad  to  my  father"  (Gen.
44:22),  and  further  says  that  the  surety  is  compellable  to
pay  the  debt  of  the  original  debtor.  The  legal  idea  is  even
stronger  when  the  surety  becomes  an  instant  substitute  for
the  original  debtor  by  having  the  debt  charged  to  the  surety

^61


26S     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

and  the  debtor  released.  In  this  case  there  is  remission
to  the  debtor  before  the  surety  actually  pays  the  debt  to
the  creditor.  For  instance,  Paul  writes  Philemon  concern-
ing Onesimus:  "But  if  he  oweth  thee  aught,  put  that  to
mine  account;  I  Paul  writeth  with  mine  own  hand  I  will
pay  it."  This  is  a  legal  bond  assuming  the  debt,  and  Onesi-
mus is  legally  released  when  the  debt  is  transferred  to
PauFs  account,  though  it  may  be  quite  a  while  before  Paul
pays  it.  As  the  author  of  Hebrews  expresses  the  thought
elsewhere :  "God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto
himself,  not  reckoning  unto  them  their  trespasses'' — He  is
putting  them  to  the  account  of  the  surety,  not  reckoning
their  trespasses  to  them.  Or,  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham
himself:  "And  he  believed  in  Jehovah,  and  He  reckoned
it  unto  him  for  righteousness."  In  this  way  only  could  the
sins  of  the  Old  Testament  saints  (see  chapter  ii)  be  re-
mitted and  consciousness  of  remission  given  by  the  Holy
Spirit  before  the  expiation  of  sins  was  made  to  God  on
the  cross.  As  our  old  "Philadelphia  Confession  of  Faith"
expresses  it  (Art.  8,  Sec.  6)  :  "Although  the  price  of  re-
demption was  not  actually  paid  by  Christ  till  after  His
incarnation,  yet  the  virtue,  efficacy,  and  benefit  thereof  was
communicated  to  the  elect  in  all  ages  successively  from  the
beginning  of  the  world,  in  and  by  those  promises,  types,
and  sacrifices  wherein  He  was  revealed  and  signified  to
be  the  Seed  of  the  woman  which  should  bruise  the  serpent's
head ;  and  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,
being  the  same  yesterday,  and  today,  and  forever."  That  is
what  our  Baptist  Articles  of  Confession  say.  One  cannot
be  a  sound  theologian  if  he  fail  to  master  this  legal  idea  of
the  suretyship  of  our  Lord.  It  is  precisely  at  this  point
that  many  great  heresies  have  arisen,  two  of  which  I  now
state :

I.  That  Old  Testament  saints,  after  death,  were  side-
tracked into  a  half-way  place  until  after  Christ's  death,  and


PROMISES  OF  THE  SURETY  263

then  He  announced  to  them  their  dehverance,  and  took  them
with  Him  into  heaven — a  conceit  derived  from  uninspired
apocryphal  books,  written  in  part,  perhaps,  before  Christ
came,  and  the  rest  after  His  death,  yet  this  error  prevails
with  many  till  this  day.

2.  The  second  heresy  is  very  modern,  and  is  most  thor-
oughly set  forth  by  Mr.  Ezell,  a  Campbellite  preacher,  in
a  book  which  treats  the  new  covenant  as  Christ's  last  will
and  testament  which  could  not  become  effective  until  after
Christ's  death,  his  object  being  to  shut  off  consideration  of
all  cases  of  pardon  as  recorded  in  the  gospels  as  not  now
applicable,  and  make  Acts  2 :  38  the  one  and  only  "law  of
pardon."  His  argument  is  based  on  Heb.  9:  16,  17.  Before
a  will  or  testament  is  effective  there  must  of  necessity  be
the  death  of  him  that  made  it.  On  which  we  remark  (i)
that  the  Greek  word,  diatheke,  means  "covenant,"  and  the
only  place  in  the  Bible  where  it  may  be  translated  "testa-
ment" is  in  Heb.  9:  16,  17,  which  would  show,  not  that  the
new  covenant  is  a  will,  or  testament,  but  that  in  one  point
only  a  will  is  analogous  to  the  covenant,  namely,  there  must
be  a  death  to  ratify  it.  He  takes  a  will  to  illustrate  this  one
point  of  the  covenant.  The  fallacy  of  his  whole  argument
lies  in  his  failure  to  see  that  through  the  surety  of  the  new
covenant  being  accounted  in  God's  mind  "a  Lamb  slain  from
the  foundation  of  the  world,"  the  benefits  of  the  covenant
may  accrue  to  any  believer  before  the  debt  is  actually  paid
God-ward,  as  our  argument  has  just  shown,  and  as  the
whole  of  chapter  1 1  will  demonstrate.

The  second  idea  of  the  suretyship  is  based  on  the  passage
showing  the  high  priesthood  of  Christ,  who,  by  ever  living
to  intercede  for  His  people,  secures  the  remission  of  sins
committed  after  justification,  as  the  legal  idea  of  surety-
ship secured  the  remission  of  sins  committed  before  justi-
fication. Hence  the  conclusion  of  the  author  of  Hebrews:
"He  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  all  that  come  unto


g64     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

God  through  Him,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  intercede  for
them."  The  first  idea  of  surety  covers  all  past  sins  up  to
justification,  as  we  see  clearly  set  forth  in  Rom.  3 :  25,  and
the  second  idea  covers  all  sins  to  the  uttermost — that  is,
after  justification  until  we  pass  out  of  the  world.  This  entire
argument  is  in  Rom.  8 :  33-39,  where  he  says,  "Who  can
lay  any  charge  to  God's  elect?"  First,  Christ  has  died  for
us;  second.  He  is  risen;  third,  He  is  exalted  to  the  right
hand  of  the  majesty  on  high ;  fourth,  He  ever  liveth  to  inter-
cede for  us.  And  that  passage  in  the  first  letter  of  John:
"And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,
Jesus  Christ  the  righteous"  *  *  *  "If  we  say  that  we  have
no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."
We  see  the  double  idea  of  a  surety — the  legal  idea,  covering
sin  up  to  justification,  and  the  High  Priest  idea,  covering  sin
after  justification.

Let  us  compare  some  Old  Testament  verses  that  bring
out  the  idea  of  the  surety.  First,  the  prayer  of  Job :  "Give
now  a  pledge,  be  surety  for  me  with  thyself  ;"  second,  Psalms
119:  122:  "Be  surety  for  thy  servant  for  good;  let  not  the
proud  oppress  me ;"  third,  the  prayer  of  Hezekiah  when  he
was  so  sick:  "Like  a  swallow  or  a  crane  did  I  chatter;
I  did  moan  as  a  dove ;  mine  eyes  fail  with  looking  upward :
O,  Lord,  I  am  oppressed,  be  thou  my  surety/'  We  see  that
every  one  of  these,  in  a  dark  hour,  desired  a  surety  that  is
above  human  power ;  they  wanted  a  divine  surety.

We  now  come  to  the  third  great  promise  of  the  new
covenant,  as  set  forth  in  Heb.  10:  1-18,  that  is —

The  One  Expiating  Sacrifice. — This  scripture  contrasts
them  by  first  showing  that  the  law  was  merely  a  shadow
of  the  substance  that  was  to  come.  As  the  poet,  Campbell,
expresses  it  in  the  words  of  the  wizard  warning  Lochiel
before  the  battle  of  Culloden :

"  'Tis  the  sunset  of  life  gives  me  mystical  lore,
And  coming  events  cast  their  shadows  before."


PROMISES  OF  THE  SURETY  S65

If  early  in  the  morning  on  a  bright  day  one  starts  toward
the  West,  he  casts  his  shadow  before  him,  the  sun  is  behind
him  and  the  shadow  before  him.  And  just  so  the  real
things  in  heaven  cast  before  a  model  or  rough  outline  like
a  shadow.  And  that  constituted  the  typical  part  of  the  old
covenant — it  was  the  shadow  of  the  reality  in  heaven.  That
is  the  first  point.

The  second  point  is  that  the  constant  repetition  of  these
shadows  year  by  year,  say  on  the  great  day  of  atonement
every  year,  could  not  make  those  who  drew  nigh  to  God
perfect.

His  third  idea  is  that  sacrifices  without  intrinsic  merit
cannot  take  away  sin — "it  is  impossible  for  the  blood  of
bullocks  and  goats  to  take  away  sin."  The  blood  of  a  brute
cannot,  take  away  a  human  sin,  and  the  principle  involved
in  that  declaration  is  very  far-reaching.  We  may  apply  that
principle  this  way :  It  is  impossible  on  account  of  the  lack
of  intrinsic  merit  that  the  water  of  baptism,  or  the  bread
and  wine  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  shall  take  away  sin.

The  next  point  is  the  testimony  of  the  prophets,  and  the
prophet  he  cites  here  is  David  in  Psalm  40,  but  he  quotes
this  from  the  Septuagint,  which  in  the  second  line  gives  a
different  idea  from  the  Hebrew — and  gives  the  true  idea,
too.  Let  us  consider  Psalm  40,  commencing  with  verse  6 :
"Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  hast  no  delight  in."  The  trans-
lation of  the  Hebrew  reads :  "Mine  ears  hast  thou  bored."
But  Paul  says,  "Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldst  not,  but
a  body  didst  thou  prepare  for  me,"  and  Paul  follows  the
Septuagint  in  quoting ;  there  is  not  so  very  much  difference
in  the  two  meanings.  When  a  man  voluntarily  preferred
slavery  under  the  old  law,  his  ear  was  nailed  to  a  post  as  a
badge  of  slavery;  or  the  literal  Hebrew,  "Mine  ears  hast
thou  digged,"  which  might  mean  "ears  to  hear."  That  is
the  old  scripture  idea ;  but  the  Septuagint  idea  is :  "And  a
body  hast  thou  prepared  for  me."    And  that  agrees  with


266     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Luke  1 :  35 :  "The  Holy  Spirit  shall  come  upon  thee,  and
the  power  of  the  Most  High  shall  overshadow  thee ;  where-
fore also  the  holy  one  which  is  begotten  shall  be  called  the
Son  of  God."  And  it  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  John  i :
"And  the  Word  that  was  God  was  manifest  and  became
flesh" — incarnate,  took  on  body.  And  it  is  in  perfect  accord
with  what  we  have  already  found  in  Hebrews  2:  "Since
then  the  children  are  sharers  in  flesh  and  blood.  He  also
himself  in  like  manner  partook  of  the  same,  that  through
His  death  He  might  bring  to  nought  him  that  had  the  power
of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;"  and  it  is  still  more  clearly  brought
out  in  I  Peter,  where  he  says:  "Who  His  own  self  bare
our  sins  in  His  body  upon  the  tree."  So  that  the  quotation
from  the  Septuagint  gives  the  Spirit-idea:  "Sacrifices  and
offerings  thou  wouldst  not,  but  a  body  didst  thou  prepare
for  me."  According  to  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah:  "What
unto  me  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  ?  saith  Jehovah :
I  have  had  enough  of  the  burnt-offerings  of  rams,  and  the
fat  of  fed  beasts ;  and  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  bullocks,
or  of  lambs,  or  of  he-goats.  When  ye  come  to  appear  before
me,  who  hath  required  this  at  your  hand,  to  trample  my
courts  ?  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations ;  incense  is  an  abomi-
nation unto  me;  new  moon  and  Sabbath,  the  calling  of
assemblies, — I  cannot  away  with  the  iniquity  and  the  solemn
meeting.  Your  new  moon  and  appointed  feasts  my  soul
hateth ;  they  are  a  trouble  unto  me ;  I  am  weary  of  bearing
them.  And  when  ye  spread  forth  your  hands,  I  will  hide
mine  eyes  from  you;  yea,  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  I
will  not  hear;  your  hands  are  full  of  blood"  (Isa.  i :  11-15).
That  is  the  testimony  of  one  of  the  prophets.  David  in
Psalm  40 :  "Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  hast  no  delight  in ;
mine  ears  hast  thou  opened :  burnt-offering  and  sin-offering
hast  thou  not  required.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  am  come ;  in  the
roll  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me ;  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,
O  my  God."


PROMISES  OF  THE  SURETY  267

But  I  want  to  give  you  the  testimony  of  other  prophets,
including  David  in  another  place,  as  to  the  relative  merit
of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament  sacrifices.
First,  Psalm  51 :  "For  thou  delightest  not  in  sacrifice,  else
would  I  give  it;  thou  hast  no  pleasure  in  burnt-offerings.
The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit;  a  broken  and  a
contrite  heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise."  Note  here
that  the  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit  and  a  contrite
heart.  Second,  a  passage  from  Samuel,  the  prophet  (I  Sam.
15 :  22,  23)  :  "And  Samuel  said,  Hath  Jehovah  as  great
delight  in  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices,  as  in  obeying  the
voice  of  Jehovah?  Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  to  sacri-
fice, and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams."  Samuel  is
talking  to  Saul.  Third,  that  remarkable  prophecy  in  Jer.
7 :  22 :  "For  I  spake  not  unto  your  fathers,  nor  commanded
them  in  the  day  that  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt,  concerning  burnt-offerings  or  sacrifices:  but  this
thing  I  commanded  them,  saying,  Hearken  unto  my  voice,
and  I  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  my  people;  and
walk  ye  in  all  the  way  that  I  command  you,  that  it  may
be  well  with  you."  Fourth,  the  prophecy  from  Hos.  6:  6:
"For  I  desire  goodness  and  not  sacrifice,  and  the  knowledge
of  God  more  than  burnt-offerings.  But  they,  like  Adam,
have  transgressed  the  covenant ;  there  have  they  dealt  treach-
erously against  me."  Fifth,  the  passage  from  Micah  6 : 6-8 :
"Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  Jehovah,  and  bow  myself
before  the  high  God?  Shall  I  come  before  Him  with  burnt-
offerings,  with  calves  a  year  old  ?  Will  Jehovah  be  pleased
with  thousands  of  rams,  or  with  ten-thousands  of  rivers  of
oil?  Shall  I  give  my  first-born  for  my  transgression,  the
fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  soul  ?"

My  object  is  to  foHov\r  out  the  thoughts  of  the  author  of
Hebrews  here  in  order  to  shov>'  that  the  prophets  of  the
Old  Testament,  who  were  the  true  spirtual  interpreters,
understood  that  these   Old  Testament  offerings  were  to


268     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

cease;  they  never  had  any  doubt  in  their  minds  about  it,
and  indeed  some  higher  critics  contend  that  God  never  meant
for  Moses  to  institute  sacrifices  at  all — in  which  the  higher
critics  are  far  astray.  But  it  does  make  plain  this  point:
That  there  was  preparation  of  mind  for  a  new  covenant,
in  which  the  better  sacrifice  should  take  the  place  of  the
shadowy  sacrifice  of  the  old  covenant.

Let  us  look  at  Isa.  53  in  order  to  get  the  true  idea  of  the
sacrifice ;  here  is  a  description  of  it :

"For  He  grew  up  before  Him  as  a  tender  plant,  and  as  a  root  out
of  the  dry  ground :  He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness  and  when  we
see  Him  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  Him.  He  was
despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with
grief,  and  as  one  from  whom  men  hide  their  face  He  was  despised,
and  we  esteemed  Him  not.  Surely  He  hath  borne  our  grief  and  car-
ried our  sorrows,  yet  we  did  not  esteem  Him  stricken,  smitten  of
God,  and  afflicted.  But  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions ;
He  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities ;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was
upon  Him,  and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed.  All  we,  like  sheep,
have  gone  astray,  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way,  and
Jehovah  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  He  was  oppressed,
yet  when  He  was  afflicted  He  opened  not  His  mouth ;  as  a  lamb  that
is  led  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  that  before  His  shearers  is
dumb,  so  He  opened  not  His  mouth.  By  oppression  and  judgment
He  was  taken  away,  and  as  for  His  generation,  who  among  them
consider  that  He  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living  for  the
transgressions  of  my  people  to  whom  the  stroke  was  due?  And
they  made  His  grave  with  the  wicked,  and  with  a  rich  man  in  His
death;  although  He  had  done  no  violence,  neither  was  any  deceit
in  His  mouth.  Yet  it  pleased  Jehovah  to  bruise  Him:  He  hath  put
Him  to  grief :  when  thou  shalt  make  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin,
He  shall  see  His  seed,  He  shall  prolong  His  days,  and  the  pleasure
of  Jehovah  shall  prosper  in  His  hand.  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of
His  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied :  by  the  knowledge  of  himself  shall
my  righteous  servant  justify  many;  and  He  shall  bear  their  iniqui-
ties," Isa.  53:2-12.

That  is  a  picture  of  Christ,  and  it  is  as  good  a  picture  of
Him  as  one  who  lived  in  His  time  could  have  painted.  I
present  one  other  idea  of  this  sacrifice — the  leading  sacrificial
idea  of  the  old  covenant — the  festival  lamb,  or  Passover
lamb,  whose  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  door-posts  to  secure
the  passing  over  of  the  angel  of  death.  In  I  Cor.  5 :  7  Paul
says:    "Christ,  our  Passover  Lamb,  is  sacrificed  for  us/*


PROMISES  OF  THE  SURETY     269

and  in  John  i :  29,  John  the  Baptist  sees  Jesus  coming  and
points  at  Him  and  says,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh
away  the  sins  of  the  world."

A  last  thought  on  the  sacrifice  is  this — that  Christ's  offer-
ing is  repeatedly  stated  in  this  book  to  be  once  for  all,  in
contrast  with  the  year  by  year  sacrifices  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment; He  would  never  die  but  the  one  time.  He  would
make  but  one  expiation  of  sin  by  His  death,  and  then  take
a  seat  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,  and  ever
live  to  intercede  for  us.

Just  here  I  must  call  attention  to  a  heresy  of  the  gravest
character — the  Romanist  heresy  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Mass.
They  say  that  whenever  their  priest  consecrates  the  wafer
and  the  wine,  that  he  actually  creates  God,  and  that  in  the
offering  of  that  wine  and  bread  there  is  a  real  sacrifice  of
the  Son  of  God.  That  is  fixing  upon  Him  what  He  expressly
declared  should  not  be — that  there  would  be  no  repetition
of  this  sacrifice — that  it  was  to  be  once  for  all.  They  tell
their  people  that  when  they  take  the  wafer  on  their  lips
(the  priests  do  not  give  them  any  of  the  wine ;  they  just
give  them  the  wafer)  that  they  masticate  God,  and  they
base  it  upon  that  word  of  our  Lord  when  He  held  out  the
bread :  "This  is  my  body,  broken  for  you,"  whereas,  there
is  no  clearer  meaning  of  the  verb  "to  be"  than  the  sense  of
represent.  For  instance,  in  Genesis,  Joseph  says,  "The  seven
lean  kine  and  the  seven  poor  ears  of  corn  which  you  dreamed
about,  are  seven  years  of  famine."  There  is  the  verb  "to  be"
— "are"  that  is,  they  represent  seven  years  of  famine.  When
I  go  into  a  picture  gallery  and  say,  "This  is  Washington,  that
is  Webster,  that  is  Henry  Clay,"  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that
my  word  creates  these  men,  but  that  the  pictures  represent
thert\.

/  do  not  know  of  any  other  heresy  equal  to  this  one.

And  they  expressly  declare  that  whoever  denies  that  that
action  of  the  priest  does  create  God,  and  that  whoever  denies


270     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

that  there  is  a  real  sacrifice  of  Christ  every  time  the  priest
consecrates  these  elements,  will  not  be  saved.  And  they
expressly  declare  in  the  Council  of  Trent  that  no  man  can
be  saved  who  does  not  believe  what  they  teach  on  this  subject.

That  is  what  is  called  trans-substantiation — a  change  of
substance.  Trans-substantiation — that  is  the  name  of  their
doctrine — that  there  is  in  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine
a  real  person  and  blood,  hence  they  carry  these  elements
in  procession,  and  they  teach  that  as  they  carry  them,  who-
ever does  not  kneel  down  and  worship  them  sins  against  the
Holy  Ghost.  That  is  what  is  called  the  "Procession  of  the
Host,"  which  one  must  adore  as  God,  and  if  he  does  not
believe  that,  he  will  go  to  hell.  That  is  the  teaching  of
every  Romanist  in  the  world.

The  Lutheran  doctrine  also  contradicts  the  statement  here
of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  once  for  all.  Luther  denies  that
there  is  a  change  of  substance.  He  calls  his  doctrine  "Con-
substantiation" — not  trans-substantiation.  He  says  that  every
time  the  Lord's  Supper  is  observed  there  is  in  the  elements
the  real  presence  of  God,  and  His  favorite  illustration  is
this:  "I  take  a  piece  of  iron — cold,  dark  iron — and  put  it
into  the  fire,  I  do  not  change  the  substance,  but  when  I  take
it  out  there  is  something  in  it  that  was  not  in  it  before — and
that  is  heat — and  it  looks  different  from  what  it  did  before ;
so  it  is  practically  the  same  thing."  And  Luther  bases  his
arguments  upon  exactly  the  same  scripture,  thus :  "  This  is
my  body.'  When  we  consecrate  the  bread,  there  enters
a  real  presence  of  a  person  that  was  not  in  it  before,  just
like  putting  the  iron  into  the  fire  puts  heat  into  it  that  was
not  in  it  before."  And  this  doctrine  of  Luther  split  the
Reformation  into  the  German  camp  and  the  Genevan  or
French  camp.  The  Huguenots  denied  the  doctrine  of  con-
substantiation  on  the  principle  of  Christ's  sacrifice  once  for
all.  The  Prince  of  Hesse  Cassel  was  very  much  disturbed
over  the  divisions  of  the  Protestants,  so  he  invited  Luther


PROMISES  OF  THE  SURETY  S71

and  Melancthon  on  one  side,  and  Zwingli  and  Ecolampadius
on  the  other  side,  to  meet  in  his  palace  and  discuss  this  until
they  could  come  together — and  they  were  about  like  some
juries — the  longer  they  discussed  it  the  wider  apart  they
were.  So  in  order  to  keep  down  a  row,  Philip  of  Hesse,
knowing  that  Zwingli  was  fiery  and  that  Luther  was  fiery,
put  Ecolampadius  to  debate  with  Luther,  and  put  Melanc-
thon to  debate  with  Zwingli.  But,  after  they  had  debated
for  a  while,  the  two  fiery  men  left  their  mild  opponents
and  rushed  up  to  each  other.  Luther  said,  "I  affirm,  in  the
words  of  the  Bible :  'This  is  my  body,'  "  to  which  Zwingli
replied:  "You  quote  a  Latin  translation,  and  I  oppose  it
with  the  doctrine:  Ascendit  in  Coclum;  His  body  cannot
be  in  two  places  at  the  same  time."  They  had  a  time  of  it.
That  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  incidents  of  the  Reforma-
tion— that  fight  between  Zwingli  and  Luther.


QUESTIONS

1.  Explain  the  surety  of  the  new  covenant.

2.  What  Webster's  definition  of  "surety,"  and  what  his  illustra-
tion of  its  use?

3.  Under  what  conditions   is  the  legal  phase  of  this   subject
strongest,  and  how  does  Paul  illustrate  this  thought?

4.  What  bearing  has  this  on  the  remission  of  the  sins  of  O.  T.
saints  ?

5.  What  the  article  of  faith  in  the  old  Philadelphia  confession
of  faith  on  this  point?

6.  State  and  elaborate  two  heresies  arising  at  this  point.

7.  What  the  second  idea  of  suretyship,  and  what  the  N.  T.
scriptures  proving  it?

8.  What  O.  T.  scriptures  bear  on  the  idea  of  the  surety?

9.  Explain  "the  shadow,"  or  "the  pattern,"  or  "copy,"  character-
istic of  the  old  covenant,  and  cite  a  poetic  illustration  (10:  i).

10.  Expound  Heb.  10:  1-14,  bringing  out  clearly  the  dignity  and
intrinsic  merit  of  the  one  great  vicarious  sacrifice  of  the  new  cove-
nant, citing  parallel  passages  in  both  Testaments.

11.  Apply  the  logic  of  10 :  4  to  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  remission
or  other  sacramental  means  of  salvation,  and  cite  the  Campbellite
and  Romanist  views.

12.  What  distinct  ofRce  of  our  Lord  involved  in  Heb.  10:  5-7?

13.  What  the  striking  testimony  of  the  prophets  on  the  inefificacy
and  transitory  character  of  the  sin-offerings  of  the  old  covenant?


g7a     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

14.  Where  do  we  get  the  true  idea  of  sacrifice  in  the  O.  T.,  and
how  is  it  expressed  there?

15.  What  the  great  type  of  the  one  sacrifice  in  the  Pentateuch,
and  what  the  N.  T.  identification  of  it?

16.  What  New  Testament  festival  of  the  altar  (Heb.  13:10)
commemorating  this  one  sacrifice,  and  where,  in  another  letter,  does
Paul  enforce  this  close  communion?

17.  What  the  difference  in  effect  on  sins  between  the  one  sacri-
fice, once  for  all,  of  the  new  covenant,  and  the  many  sacrifices,  oft
repeated,  of  the  old  covenant?

18.  Apply  the  logic  of  10 :  12-14  to  the  Romanist  Transubstanti-
ation  and  the  Lutheran  Consubstantiation,  and  cite  on  the  latter  the
debate  between  Luther  and  Zwingli.


XXIV

PROMISES   OF  THE  NEW  COVENANT

Scripture:  Heb.  8 : 6 — lo :  39

THE  fourth  promise  of  the  new  covenant  is  that  all
Christians  shall  be  priests  unto  God,  and  shall  directly
offer  to  Him  spiritual,  non-expiatory  sacrifices,  any-
where, at  any  time,  and  in  all  places.  The  negative  value
of  this  promise  is  itself  incalculable.  It  forever  sets  aside
and  dispenses  with :

1.  The  old  covenant's  on^ /j/ac^  of  meeting  God.  Whether
tabernacle,  temple,  earthly  Jerusalem,  or  land  of  Canaan,
their  mission  and  sanctity  are  ended  forever.  Holiness  no
longer  attaches  to  any  of  them.  All  are  as  empty  as  the
sepulchre  of  our  Lord.  The  efforts  of  the  Crusades  to
recover  a  city  and  land  no  longer  holy  was  a  foolish  quest.
As  says  our  Lord  himself  to  the  woman  of  Samaria:
"Woman,  believe  me,  the  hour  cometh,  when  neither  in  this
mountain  (i.e.,  Gerizim,  the  site  of  the  Samaritan  temple)
nor  in  Jerusalem  shall  ye  worship  the  Father  *  *  *  The
hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  true  worshipers  shall
worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  truth:  for  such  doth  the
Father  seek  to  be  His  worshipers.  God  is  a  Spirit:  and
they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  in  spirit  and  truth,"
John  4:21-24.

2.  It  dispenses  with  all  the  third  party — human  go-
betweens — that  officiated  between  the  soul  and  its  God.  The
Greek  and  Romanist  priestly  hierarchies  of  human  go-
betweens,  and  all  their  imitations  in  other  denominations,

^73


274     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

are  sinful  degenerations  into  the  obsolete  and  superseded
old  covenant.

3.  It  sets  aside  all  the  doctrines  of  consubstantiation  and
transubstantiation,  which  in  any  form  affirms  and  repeats
and  adores  a  real  expiatory  sacrifice  in  the  memorial  supper
of  our  Lord,  or  attaches  saving  efficacy  to  the  memorial  rite
of  baptisrn.  In  other  words,  connecting  two  and  three,  it
sweeps  away  the  whole  system  of  sacerdotalism  which  makes
the  office  of  a  human  third  party  necessary  to  the  salvation
of  the  sinner.

4.  All  the  Old  Testament  Sabbatic  cycle,  whether  7th
day,  lunar,  annual,  7th  year,  or  50th  year — the  limited  fixed
times  in  which  to  come  before  the  Lord.

5.  All  the  Old  Testament  non-expiating  sacrifices.

6.  Israel  according  to  the  flesh  as  the  people  of  God.

POSITIVELY

I.  It  affirms  a  spiritual  Israel,  every  one  of  whom  is  a
priest  unto  God.  In  the  book  of  Hebrews  this  doctrine  is
embodied  in  the  phrase :  "church  of  the  first-born"  (12 :  23),
which  means  that  the  Old  Testament  type,  which  gave  to
the  first-born  of  a  family  the  right  of  primogeniture,  includ-
ing the  authority  of  priesthood,  and  which  was  exchanged
for  the  tribe  of  Levi,  is  fulfilled  in  each  one  born  of  the
Holy  Spirit  under  the  new  covenant.  In  other  words,  every
one  born  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  priest  who  may  at  all  times
in  all  places  and  under  all  emergencies  go  for  himself  directly
to  God.

The  doctrine  of  this  new  and  spiritual  Israel — a  people
for  God's  own  possession — is  elsewhere  presented  by  Paul,
II  Cor.  6: 17 — 7:  i  and  Titus  2:  14.  Here  the  language  of
Peter  is  the  most  explicit:  "Ye,  as  living  stones,  are  built
up  a  spiritual  house  to  be  a  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up
spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ
*  *  *  Ye  are  an  elect  race,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  na-


THE  NEW  COVENANT  PROMISES        275

tion,  a  people  for  God's  own  possession,  that  ye  may  show
forth  the  excellencies  of  Him  who  called  you  out  of  dark-
ness into  His  marvelous  light."  To  these  we  may  add:
"And  He  made  us  to-be  a  kingdom,  to  be  priests  unto  His
God  and  Father;  to  Him  be  the  glory  and  dominion  for-
ever and  ever.  Amen,"  Rev.  i ;  6.  "And  makest  them  to
be  unto  our  God  a  kingdom  and  priests,  and  they  reign
upon  the  earth,"  Rev.  5:10.  "Blessed  is  he  that  hath  part
in  the  first  resurrection;  over  these  the  second  death  hath
no  power,  but  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,
and  shall  reign  with  Him  a  thousand  years,"  Rev.  20 : 6.
2.  The  Spiritual  Sacrifices  of  the  New  Covenant :

(a)  Our  own  selves :  "I  beseech  you,  therefore,  brethren,
by  the  mercies  of  God,  to  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacri-
fice, holy,  acceptable  to  God,  which  is  your  spiritual  service."
And  concerning  the  Macedonians  Paul  says,  "And  this,  not
as  we  had  hoped,  but  first  they  gave  their  own  selves  unto
the  Lord,  and  to  us  through  the  will  of  God,"  H  Cor.  8 :  5.

(b)  Contribution  to  Christ  in  His  cause  and  people.  We
recall  the  case  of  the  Philippians :  "And  ye  yourselves  also
know,  ye  Philippians,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,
when  I  departed  from  Macedonia,  no  church  had  fellow-
ship with  me  in  the  matter  of  giving  and  receiving  but  ye
only ;  for  even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and  again  unto
my  need.  Not  that  I  seek  for  the  gift,  but  I  seek  for  the
fruit  that  increaseth  to  your  account.  But  I  have  all  things
and  abound :  I  am  filled,  having  received  from  Epaphroditus
the  things  that  come  from  you,  an  odor  of  a  sweet  smell,  a
sacrifice  acceptable,  well  pleasing  to  God,"  Phil.  4: 15-18.

(c)  The  testimony  of  this  letter:  "Through  Him  then
let  us  offer  up  a  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,  that  is
the  fruit  of  lips  which  make  confession  to  His  name.  But
to  do  good,  and  to  communicate  forget  not,  for  with  such
sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased,"  Heb.  13:  15,  16.

(d)  All  the  testimonies  from  the  prophets  introduced  in


276     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

the  last  chapter  (See  Job  17: 3;  Psa.  119: 122;  Isa.  38: 14;
I  Sam.  15:22;  Psa.  51: 16,  17;  Isa.  i:  11-17;  Jer.  7:21-23;
Hos.  6:6;  Micah6:6-8).

But  this  idea  of  the  priesthood  of  all  Christians  is  so
closely  associated  with  another  thought  that  we  cannot  sepa-
rate them.  One  of  the  passages  cited  says,  "A  royal  priest-
hood;" another  says,  "He  has  made  us  a  kingdom  and
priests,"  while  this  letter  says,  in  commenting  on  the  service
of  the  Christian  priesthood,  "Wherefore,  receiving  a  king-
dom that  cannot  be  shaken,  let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we
may  offer  service  well  pleasing  to  God  with  reverence  and
awe."  Everything  relating  to  the  old  covenant  was  shaken,
and  soon,  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  would  pass  away
forever.  But  this  royal  priesthood  would  continue — ^this
kingdom  would  never  be  moved.  As  Daniel  prophesied,  the
kingdom  set  up  by  the  God  of  heaven  would  be  an  ever-
lasting kingdom  and  would  never  pass  to  another  people.
Or,  as  our  Lord  expresses  it :  "The  gates  of  hell  shall  never
prevail  against  the  church  He  established.  These  priests
are  all  kings,  and  their  kingdom  is  eternal.

The  fifth  great  promise  of  the  new  covenant  is  the  final
advent  of  our  Lord  to  raise  the  dead  and  judge  the  world.
The  passages  in  this  letter  are  very  striking:  "So  Christ
also,  having  been  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many,
shall  appear  a  second  time,  apart  from  sin,  to  them  that  wait
for  Him  unto  salvation."

1.  On  this  passage  particularly  note  the  negative:  "apart
from  sin,"  i.e.,  not  this  last  time  as  a  sin-offering.  That
was  the  object  of  His  first  advent.  There  is  no  gospel  to
be  preached  after  this  final  advent — no  intercession — for
He  vacates  the  mediatorial  throne  and  the  high  priest-
advocacy.

2.  "Not  forsaking  our  own  assembling  together,  as  the
custom  of  some  is,  but  exhorting  one  another,  and  so  much
the  more  as  ye  see  the  day  drawing  nigh.  *  *  *     For  ye


THE  NEW  COVENANT  PROMISES        277

have  need  of  patience,  that,  having  done  the  will  of  God,
ye  may  receive  the  promise,"  Heb.  lo :  25-37.

Here  the  speediness  of  His  coming  is  emphasized,  as  in
very  many  other  New  Testament  passages.  But  it  is  not
"quickly"  as  man  counts,  but  "quickly"  as  He  counts,  "with
whom  a  thousand  years  is  as  a  day."    As  Peter  declares :

"Knowing  this  first,  that  in  the  last  days  mockers  shall  come  with
mockery,  walking  after  their  own  lusts,  and  saying,  Where  is  the
promise  of  His  coming?  for  from  the  day  that  the  fathers  fell  asleep,
all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation.
For  this  they  wilfully  forget,  that  there  were  heavens  from  of  old,
and  an  earth  compacted  out  of  water  and  amidst  water,  by  the  Word
of  God  by  which  means  the  world  that  then  was,  being  overflowed
with  water,  perished :  but  the  heavens  that  now  are,  and  the  earth,
by  the  same  Word,  have  been  stored  up  for  fire,  being  reserved
against  the  day  of  judgment  and  destruction  of  ungodly  men.  But
forget  not  this  one  thing,  beloved,  that  one  day  is  with  the  Lord  as
a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day.  The  Lord  is  not
slack  concerning  His  promise,  as  some  count  slackness ;  but  is  long-
suffering  to  you-ward,  not  wishing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that
all  should  come  to  repentance.  But  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as
a  thief ;  in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,
and  the  elements  shall  be  dissolved  with  a  fervent  heat,  and  the
earth  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up.  Seeing  that
these  things  are  thus  all  to  be  dissolved,  what  manner  of  persons
ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  living  and  godliness,  looking  for  and  ear-
nestly desiring  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God,  by  reason  of  which  the
heavens  being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  shall  melt
with  fervent  heat?  But  according  to  His  promise,  we  look  for  new
heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness,"  II  Pet.
3:3-13.

It  was  the  apparent  tardiness  of  His  coming,  as  men
judged,  that  was  tempting  these  Asia-Minor  Jews  to  apos-
tatize. And  it  is  in  this  very  connection  and  on  this  precise
point  that  Peter  bears  the  direct  testimony  of  Paul's  author-
ship to  this  letter :  "And  account  that  the  long  suffering  of
our  Lord  is  salvation ;  even  as  our  beloved  brother  Paul  also,
according  to  the  wisdom  given  to  him,  wrote  unto  you,"  H
Pet.  3:15.

3.  He  comes  in  His  last  office,  not  as  a  prophet,  sacrifice,
priest,  and  not  even  as  king  to  continue  His  mediatorial
session  at  God's  right  hand,  for  He  will  turn  over  the  king-


278     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

dom  to  the  Father  (I  Cor.  15 :  24,  25),  but  He  comes  as  judge
to  wind  up  earth's  affairs.

(a)  In  the  dissolution  of  the  material  universe:  "And
thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning,  didst  lay  the  foundation  of  the
earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  thy  hands:  they
shall  perish,  but  thou  continuest;  and  they  shall  wax  old
as  doth  a  garment;  and  as  a  mantle  shalt  thou  roll  them
up,  as  a  garment,  and  they  shall  be  changed ;  but  thou  art
the  same,  and  thy  years  shall  not  fail,"  Heb.  i :  10-12.  "But
immediately  after  the  tribulation  of  those  days  the  sun  shall
be  darkened,  and  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the
stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the  powers  of  the  heavens
shall  be  shaken,"  Matt.  24 :  29.  "And  I  saw  a  great  white
throne,  and  Him  that  sat  upon  it,  from  whose  face  the  earth
and  heaven  fled  away,  and  there  was  found  no  place  for
them"  (Rev.  20:  11)  ;  and  particularly:  "But  the  heavens
that  now  are  and  the  earth,  by  the  same  word,  have  been
stored  up  for  fire,  being  reserved  against  the  day  of  judg-
ment and  destruction  of  ungodly  men.  *  *  *  But  the  day
of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief,  in  which  the  heavens  will
pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  be  dis-
solved with  fervent  heat,  and  the  earth  and  the  works  that
are  therein  shall  be  burned  up,"  H  Pet.  3:7,  10.

(b)  In  the  everlasting  punishment  of  the  wicked:  "For
if  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge
of  the  truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  a  sacrifice  for  sins,
but  a  certain  fearful  expectation  of  judgment  and  a  fierceness
of  fire  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries.  A  man  that  hath
set  at  naught  Moses'  law  dieth  without  compassion  on  the
word  of  two  or  three  witnesses ;  of  how  much  sorer  punish-
ment, think  ye,  shall  he  be  judged  worthy,  who  hath  trodden
under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of
the  covenant  wherewith  he  was  sanctified  an  unholy  thing,
and  hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace?  For  we
know  Him  that  said :  Vengeance  belongeth  unto  me,  I  will


THE  NEW  COVENANT  PROMISES        279

recompense.  And  again,  The  Lord  shall  judge  His  people.
It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God,"
Heb.  10:26-31.

"For  the  land  which  hath  drunk  the  rain  that  cometh
oft  upon  it,  and  bringeth  forth  herbs  meet  for  them  for
whose  sake  it  is  also  tilled,  receiveth  blessings  from  God;
but  if  it  beareth  thorns  and  thistles,  it  is  rejected  and  nigh
unto  a  curse ;  whose  end  is  to  be  burned,"  Heb.  6\y,  8.
"How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  a  salvation?
which  having  at  first  been  spoken  through  the  Lord,  was
confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that  heard,"  Heb.  2 : 3.  "See
that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh.  For  if  they  escaped
not  when  they  refused  him  that  warned  them  on  earth,
much  more  shall  not  we  escape  who  turn  away  from  Him
that  warneth  from  heaven:  whose  voice  then  shook  the
earth,  but  now  He  hath  promised,  saying.  Yet  once  more
will  I  make  to  tremble  not  the  earth  only,  but  also  the
heaven.  *  *  *  For  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire,"  Heb.
12 :  25,  26,  29.

4.  In  the  better  resurrection  of  the  righteous :  "Women
received  their  dead  by  a  resurrection :  and  others  were  tor-
tured, not  accepting  their  deliverance ;  that  they  might  obtain
a  better  resurrection"  (Heb.  11 :  35),  and  the  consummation
of  their  salvation :  "For  not  unto  angels  did  He  subject  the
world  to  come,  whereof  we  speak.  *  *  *  And  again  I  will
put  my  trust  in  Him.  And  again.  Behold,  I  and  the  chil-
dren God  hath  given  me.  *  *  *  For  ye  have  need  of  pa-
tience, that,  having  done  the  will  of  God,  ye  may  receive
the  promise,"  Heb.  2:5,  13;  10:  36.  On  two  and  three  as
simultaneous :  "The  men  of  Nineveh  shall  stand  up  in  the
judgment  with  this  generation  and  shall  condemn  it;  for
they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah;  and  behold,  a
greater  than  Jonah  is  here.  The  queen  of  the  South  shall
rise  up  in  the  judgment  with  this  generation  and  shall  con-
demn it,  for  she  came  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  to  hear


^80     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

the  wisdom  of  Solomon :  and  behold,  a  greater  than  Solomon
is  here,"  Matt.  12 :  41,  42.  "But  when  the  Son  of  man  shall
come  in  His  glory,  and  all  the  angels  with  Him,  then  shall
He  sit  on  the  throne  of  His  glory ;  and  before  Him  shall  be
gathered  all  the  nations;  and  He  shall  separate  them  one
from  another,  as  the  shepherd  separateth  the  sheep  from
the  goats;  and  He  shall  set  the  sheep  on  His  right  hand,
but  the  goats  on  the  left.  Then  shall  the  King  say  unto
them  on  His  right  hand:  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,
inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation
of  the  world.  *  *  *  Then  shall  He  say  also  unto  them  on
His  left  hand,  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  the  eternal
fire  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  *  *  *
And  these  shall  go  away  into  eternal  punishment;  and  the
righteous  into  eternal  life,"  Matt.  25 :  31-46.  "And  to  you
that  are  afflicted  rest  with  us,  at  the  revelation  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  from  heaven  with  the  angels  of  His  power  in
flaming  fire,  rendering  vengeance  to  them  that  know  not
God,  and  to  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord
Jesus:  who  shall  suffer  punishment,  even  eternal  destruc-
tion from  the  face  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  glory  of  His
might,  when  He  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  His  saints,  and
to  be  marvelled  at  in  all  them  that  believed  (because  our
testimony  unto  you  was  believed)  in  that  day,"  H  Thess.
1 : 7-10.  "And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  Him  that
sat  upon  it,  from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heavens  fled
away ;  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them.  And  I  saw
the  dead,  the  great  and  the  small,  standing  before  the  throne ;
and  books  were  opened ;  and  another  book  was  opened,  which
was  the  book  of  life,  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  the
things  which  were  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their
works.  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  that  were  in  it,  and
death  and  hades  gave  up  the  dead  that  were  in  them,  and  they
were  judged  every  man  according  to  their  works.  And
death  and  hades  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.    And  if  any


THE  NEW  COVENANT  PROMISES         281

was  not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life,  he  was  cast  into
the  lake  of  fire,"  Rev.  20: 11-15.

QUESTIONS

1.  What  the  fourth  promise  of  the  new  covenant?

2.  What  the  negative  value  of  this  promise?

3.  What  its  positive  value  ?

4.  What  passage  in  the  book  affirms  the  first  element  of  positive
value  ?

5.  Cite  passages  from  other  New  Testament  books  supporting
this  view?

6.  What  new  and  additional  idea  attaches  to  this  priesthood,
what  the  proof  of  it,  and  what  the  conclusion  therefrom?

7.  What  the  spiritual  sacrifices  offered  by  this  new  priesthood?

8.  What  the  fifth  great  promise  of  the  new  covenant?

9.  What  passage  shows  the  negative  object  of  His  coming,  and
what  the  explanation  of  it?

10.  Cite  the  passages  which  emphasize  the  speediness  of  His
coming  ?

11.  Is  this  a  speediness  in  man's  sight  or  God's  sight,  and  what
the  proof  from  Peter?

12.  Prove  from  Peter  on  this  point  that  Paul  wrote  the  Letter  to
the  Hebrews.

13.  In  what  offices  does  He  not  come,  and  the  resultant  doctrines?

14.  In  what  office  does  He  come?

15.  What,  without  citing  passages,  the  three  objects  of  His  final
advent  ?

16.  What  passage  in  this  book  shows  the  effect  of  His  coming  on
the  material  universe,  and  what  correlative  passages  from  other
books  ?

17.  What  passages  from  this  book  show  that  He  comes  to  judge
and  punish  the  wicked  ?

18.  What  the  passages  in  this  book  which  show  that  He  comes
for  the  consummation  of  the  salvation  of  the  righteous?

19.  Cite  passages  from  other  New  Testament  books  that  the  sal-
vation in  glory  of  the  righteous  is  simultaneous  with  the  everlasting
punishment  of  the  wicked.

20.  In  view  of  the  fourth  promise,  will  there  ever  be  a  restora-
tion of  the  Jews,  as  Jews,  and  a  restoration  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem
and  its  temple  worship?

21.  What  then,  is  the  meaning  of  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  as  a
nation?


XXV

THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH
Scripture:  Heb.  ii :  i — 12: 17

ALL  the  great  heroes  of  the  past  achieved  their  glory
and  immortality  by  faith,  the  distinctive  and  conquer-
ing principle  of  the  new  covenant,  which  especially
laid  hold  upon  new  covenant  promises.  Indeed,  this  section
is  introduced  by  a  reference  to  the  fifth  great  promise  of  the
new  covenant  just  discussed.  Chapter  10  closes  thus:  "For
ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  having  done  the  will  of  God,
ye  may  receive  the  promise.  For  yet  a  little  while,  He  that
Cometh  shall  come,  and  shall  not  tarry.  But  my  righteous
one  shall  live  by  faith ;  and  if  he  shrink  back,  my  soul  hath
no  pleasure  in  him.  But  we  are  not  one  of  them  that  shrink
back  unto  perdition;  but  of  them  that  have  faith  unto  the
saving  of  the  soul,"  Heb.  10 :  36-39.

Here  is  the  promise — the  speedy  coming  of  the  Lord.
Here  especially  they  have  need  of  patience.  These  Asia-
Minor  Jews  were  suffering  great  afflictions,  trials  and  perse-
cutions. Their  oft  promised  Lord  delayed  His  coming  to
deliver  them.  They  were  tempted  to  give  up  all  hope  of  the
promise.  The  exhortation  is  that  a  justified  man  must  live
by  faith.  If  he  shrink  back  God  has  no  pleasure  in  him —
that  a  true  Christian  does  not  shrink  back  unto  perdition,  but
has  faith  unto  the  saving  of  his  soul.

To  illustrate  his  thought,  Paul  calls  the  roll  of  their  illus-
trious dead  and  shows  their  patience  of  faith  and  their  stead-
fastness, not  only  under  greater  trials  than  any  of  these
people  were  subjected  to,  but  held  on  unswervingly,  though


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  283

they  knew  that  the  promise  would  never  be  fullilled  in  their
day.  He  appeals  to  heroic  history.  History  not  only  teaches
lessons  and  imposes  obligations,  but  summons  all  the  mighty
dead  as  witnesses  of  the  present,  and  encouragers  to  present
fidelity.  The  author  of  Hebrews  has  that  creative  faculty —
the  imagination — and  makes  the  history  live  before  us.  The
heroes  are  quickened,  come  out  of  their  graves,  and  as  sym-
pathetic spectators,  crowd  the  amphitheatre  of  our  race-
course. They  beckon,  they  clap  their  hands,  they  wave  their
crowns  and  shout:  "Don't  faint!  Don't  fall!  Come  on!
Come  on,  and  win  the  race !"

He  opens  the  discussion,  not  so  much  with  a  technical
definition  of  faith  as  a  description  of  its  nature :  "Faith  gives
substance  to  things  hoped  for."  That  is  his  first  idea.  Let
us  illustrate :  A  debtor  offers  in  payment  of  his  debt  a  cer-
tified check  for  the  amount  due.  That  check  is  not  money,
but  serves  as  money.  The  creditor's  acceptance  of  the  check
gives  substance  to  it.  He  knows  the  bank  on  which  it  is
drawn  and  the  trustworthiness  of  the  cashier's  certificate.
The  debtor  does  not  need  to  show  him  the  bullion  in  the  bank
that  makes  it  good.  A  promise  that  is  adequately  assured
and  guaranteed  may  be  used  as  cash  in  the  money  market.
So  the  future  things  promised  in  the  new  covenant,  like  the
coming  of  our  Lord,  excite  our  hopes,  and  faith,  resting  on
the  guaranty  of  the  promise,  gives  present  substance  to  the
things  hoped  for.  By  faith  thus  exercised,  the  powers  of
the  world  to  come  are  here.

His  second  idea  is  that  faith  is  a  conviction  of  things
unseen.  The  invisible  thing  may  be  past,  present,  or  future.
But  God's  word  certifies  its  reality.  Faith  takes  God  at  His
word  and  is  a  conviction  that  the  word  is  true,  though  not
demonstrable  to  the  carnal  senses.  We  may  not  see  it — for
faith  walks  not  by  sight — it  may  not  be  audible  nor  pal-
pable, but  God  said  it,  and  it's  true.  In  all  the  examples  to  be
cited  one  or  the  other  of  these  ideas  of  faith  is  evident.


284?     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

His  third  idea  is  that  God  himself  bears  witness  whenever
such  faith  is  exercised,  and  this  divine  witness-bearing,
realized  in  our  experience,  is  a  confirmation,  or  assurance,
to  the  believer  which  justifies  his  faith  and  gives  experi-
mental rest  and  peace  to  him,  for  as  says  the  text  "Therein
the  elders  had  witness  borne  to  them."

His  fourth  idea  is  that —

Such  faith  confers  an  earthly  immortality:  "By  it,  he  being
dead,  yet  speaketh"  That  voice  never  becomes  silent.  Faith
makes  the  believer  an  orator,  a  poet,  a  prophet  forever.  The
voices  of  unbelief  die  utterly  away.

In  this  glorious  chapter  we  shall  see  other  virtues  of  faith :

1.  In  two  cases  it  has  secured  translation  over  the  river  of
death,  and  will  again,  on  a  mightier  scale  at  our  Lord's
coming.

2.  It  always  pleases  God,  and  without  it  God  cannot  be
pleased.

3.  It  brings  salvation — sometimes  temporal,  always
eternal.

4.  It  both  conquers  and  condemns  the  world.

5.  It  sustains  under  a  privation  or  torture.

6.  It  is  a  spiritual  telescope,  bringing  the  invisible  and
heavenly  world  into  clear  view,  and  the  spiritual  microscope
discerning  God's  providence  in  the  fall  of  a  sparrow.

7.  It  confers  potency  on  impotency.

8.  It  staggers  not  in  unbelief,  though  the  dead  must  be
raised  to  fulfill  the  promise.

9.  It  has  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  foretelling  future  events.
ID.  It  is  the  principle  by  which  great  decisions  are  made.

11.  It  divests  of  all  fear  except  the  fear  of  God.

12.  It  is  the  principle  of  obedience,  progress,  and  sancti-
fication.

13.  It  overcomes  the  insuperable  and  achieves  the  impos-
sible. It  passes  seas  and  rivers  dry-shod,  crumbles  the  walls
of  hostile  cities,  subdues  kingdoms,  obtains  promises,  stops


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  285

the  mouths  of  lions,  quenches  the  power  of  fire,  escapes  the
sword,  waxes  vaUant  in  fight,  accepts  spoHation  of  goods,
wanders  unawed  in  mountains,  and  sleeps  undisturbed  in
dens  and  caves  of  the  earth.

14.  It  understands  origins,  and  destinies,  and  the  super-
natural— all  beyond  the  ken,  and  outside  the  realm  of  human
science  and  philosophy.

15.  It  controls  the  life,  being  the  eye  and  ear  and  hand  and
heart  of  the  soul.

We  now  take  up,  in  order,  the  cited  examples  of  its  power :
I .  "By  it  we  understood  that  the  worlds  have  been  framed
by  the  word  of  God,  so  that  what  is  seen  hath  not  been  made
out  of  things  which  appear."  That  is,  it  learns  more  in  the
first  sentence  of  the  Bible  than  all  human  science  and  phi-
losophy ever  discovered,  towit :  "In  the  beginning  God  cre-
ated the  heavens  and  the  earth."  To  create  is  to  bring  into
being  without  the  use  of  pre-existing  material.  That  one
sentence  answers  all  atheism,  pantheism,  stoicism,  Epicurian-
ism,  agnosticism,  materialism.  In  this  first  example  "faith
is  the  conviction  of  things  unseen."  No  man  was  there  to
witness.  We  take  it  on  God's  word.  He  alone  being  pres-
ent, reveals  the  past.  We  do  not  ask  science  or  philosophy
to  account  for  the  universe.  The  scientist  and  philosopher
were  not  there.

We  prefer  to  accept  the  testimony  of  the  infinite  eye-wit-
ness and  agent  rather  than  the  peurile  fancies  and  contra-
dictory conjectures  of  finite  absentees.

ABEL  AND  CAIN  (  1 1  :  4)

This  is  the  first  recorded  case  of  saving  faith  on  the  one
hand,  and  of  unbelief  rejecting  the  gospel  on  the  other  hand.
The  case  is  every  way  notable :

I.  These  were  probably  twin  brothers — the  first  born  of
woman.


£86     COLOSSIANS,  EPHEStANS,  HEBREWS

2.  The  mother's  hopes  turned  to  Cain,  believing  him  to  be
the  promised  seed  that  would  bruise  the  serpent's  head.

3.  The  Lord  dwelt  between  the  Cherubim  as  a  Shekinah,
or  sword-flame,  on  the  newly  established  throne  of  grace,
at  the  east  of  the  lost  Paradise  to  keep  open  or  shut,  the  way
to  the  tree  of  life.

4.  A  way  of  approach  to  God  had  been  appointed  through
sacrifices,  both  expiatory  and  non-expiatory,  the  latter  non-
acceptable  when  not  based  on  the  former.

5.  From  the  throne  of  grace  two  ways  divided :  The  way
of  faith,  and  the  way  of  Cain.  In  one  or  the  other  the  whole
human  race  has  walked.

6.  The  expiatory  sacrifice  proclaimed  its  oflferer  a  sinner,
seeking  mercy  through  a  propitiation.  The  non-expiatory
without  the  other  announced  its  offerer  as  denying  himself
to  be  a  sinner  in  need  of  atonement,  and  acknowledged  only
the  necessity  of  a  thank-offering.

The  record  shows  both  men  coming  before  the  Lord  with
sacrifices,  and  Jehovah's  accepting  the  one  and  rejecting  the
other.  Here  we  need  to  read  the  Genesis  history  of  the
transaction,  and  then  the  New  Testament  interpretation :

1.  The  text  says  (verse  4)  Abel  had  faith,  i.e.,  he  looked
to  the  unseen  Antitype  of  his  propitiatory  sacrifice  and
gave  substance  to  what  he  hoped  for.

2.  This  sacrifice  was  more  excellent  than  Cain's.

3.  God's  witness  assured  his  faith.  This  was  an  internal
witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  his  spirit.

4.  God  bore  witness  by  fire  to  the  excellence  of  his  offer-
ing, as  in  the  case  of  Gideon  (Judg.  6:21)  and  David
(I  Chron.  21 :  26),  and  Elijah  (I  Kings  18:  38).  This  was
an  external  witness.

5.  By  his  faith,  though  dead,  he  yet  speaketh.  The  excel-
lence of  this  sacrifice  consisted  in  its  confession  that  he  was
a  sinner,  approaching  God  in  the  appointed  way  for  propitia-
tion of  sin,  by  the  blood  of  a  vicarious  sacrifice.     Again


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  287

this  letter  teaches  that  the  blood  of  our  Lord  sprinkled  on
the  heavenly  mercy  seat  speaketh  better  things  for  us  than
the  blood  of  Abel's  typical  lamb  (12:  24).

The  Apostle  John,  in  commenting  on  the  Genesis  history,
goes  deeper  into  the  origin  of  the  case :  "Not  as  Cain  was  of
the  evil  one,  and  slew  his  brother.  And  wherefore  slew  he
him?  Because  his  works  were  evil  and  his  brother's  right-
eous." His  context  plainly  attributes  the  difference  in  the
actions  of  the  two  brothers  to  the  difference  in  the  filial  rela-
tions, not  to  Adam  and  Eve,  but  to  God  and  the  devil.  Abel
was  born  of  God,  and  Cain  was  a  child  of  the  devil.  The  one
following  his  spiritual  origin,  believed,  loved,  obeyed.  The
other,  following  his  spiritually  devilish  origin,  did  not  be-
lieve, did  not  obey,  but  hated  and  murdered  his  brother.
Jude,  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  warned  these  very  hesitating
Jews  of  the  dispersion  that  denying  the  Lord  is  "going  in
the  way  of  Cain."  As  has  been  said  before,  from  that  first
altar  scene,  two  ways  diverge :

1.  The  way  of  Abel,  followed  by  Seth,  Methuselah,  Noah,

2.  The  way  of  Cain,  followed  by  the  other  antediluvians,
who  perished  in  the  flood.

3.  After  the  flood,  all  the  world-population,  descendants
of  Noah  according  to  the  flesh,  diverge  according  to  their
spiritual  descent.  It  was  so  in  Christ's  time,  who  said :  "Ye
are  of  your  father,  the  devil."  It  is  so  now.  Spiritual  descent
alone  determines  the  way  we  follow.

THE  CASE  OF  ENOCH

This  case  is  remarkable  in  its  bearing  on  the  fifth  promise
of  the  new  covenant.  From  the  Genesis  history  we  learn  the
turning  point  in  the  life  of  Enoch.  He  was  sixty-five  years
old,  and  a  child  had  just  been  born  to  him.  A  revelation
from  God  caused  him  to  name  the  child  "Methuselah,"  which
means  that  the  world  would  be  destroyed  when  this  child
died.    And  indeed  the  flood  came  the  very  year,  and  perhaps


S88     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

the  very  day,  that  Methuselah  died.  The  revelation  made  a
profound  impression  on  Enoch's  mind.  He  was  converted,
and  from  that  time  on  walked  with  God.  Two  cannot  walk
together  except  they  be  agreed.  Enoch  was  reconciled  to
God  and  companioned  with  Him  all  the  rest  of  his  life  on
earth.    His  faith  was  remarkable  in  two  directions  :

1.  It  went  beyond  the  flood,  beyond  the  first  advent  of  our
Lord,  even  to  His  final  advent  and  the  very  purposes  of  that
advent.  The  spirit  of  prophecy  came  on  him,  and  he  spoke
concerning  the  last  scene  in  the  drama  of  time :  "And  to  these
also  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  prophesied,  saying.
Behold  the  Lord  came  with  ten  thousand  of  His  holy  ones,
to  execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to  convict  all  the  ungodly
of  all  their  works  of  ungodliness  which  they  have  ungodly
wrought,  and  for  all  the  hard  things  which  ungodly  sinners
have  spoken  against  Him,"  Jude  14,  15.

2.  It  was  yet  more  remarkable  in  its  effect  on  himself.
Genesis  says,  "Enoch  walked  with  God  three  hundred  years.
And  he  was  not,  for  God  took  him."  The  text  in  Hebrews
explains  "By  faith  Enoch  was  translated  that  he  should  not
see  death,  and  he  was  not  found  because  God  translated  him ;
for  he  hath  had  witnesses  borne  to  him  that  before  his  trans-
lation he  had  been  well-pleasing  unto  God,"  Heb.  11:5.  His
faith  here  evidently  laid  hold  on  the  fifth  promise  of  the
new  covenant — the  final  advent  of  our  Lord — for  it  is  only
at  that  advent  that  all  living  Christians  are  glorified  without
death,  as  explained  by  Paul  elsewhere :  "Behold,  I  tell  you  a
mystery :  We  all  shall  not  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed,
in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump :
for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised
incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed.  For  this  corruptible
must  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immor-
tality. But  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on  incorrup-
tion, and  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  immortality,  then  shall
come  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  written,  Death  is  swallowed


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  289

up  in  victory.  O,  death,  where  is  thy  victory?  O  death,
where  is  thy  sting?"

Here  the  apostle  describes  a  harvest.  But  Enoch  and
EHjah,  by  mighty  anticipatory  faith,  were  first-fruits.  Look
at  that  word,  "translated,"  derived  from  the  compound  Latin
word,  trans — "across"  or  "over,"  and  ferro,  the  irregular
verb  "to  bear,"  or  "to  carry" — he  was  borne  across,  or  over,
the  river  of  death.  The  principal  parts  of  this  verb  are
transferro,  transferre,  transtuli,  translatum.

As  in  all  the  other  cases,  Enoch  had  witness  borne  to  him
that  he  was  well-pleasing  to  God — a  double  witness :  First,
internal  assurance  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  second,  external  wit-
ness in  his  translation.  Enoch,  therefore,  was  the  first  man
who  ever  entered  heaven  in  both  soul  and  body.  An  apoc-
ryphal book  has  been  attributed  to  him,  which  is  discussed
in  the  interpretation  of  the  book  of  Jude.


QUESTIONS

1.  What  promise  of  the  new  covenant  introduces  chapter  ii  ?

2.  How  does  chapter  ii  illustrate  the  introduction?

3.  What  creative  faculty  is  employed  in  the  method  of  using  this
history  ?

4.  What  metaphor  concludes  the  argument?

5.  State  the  several  ideas  and  virtues  of  faith  in  this  discussion.

6.  Cite  and  expound  the  first  example.

7.  In  the  case  of  Abel  and  Cain,  what  the  facts  that  make  it
notable  ?

8.  What  the  five  points  in  Abel's  case?

9.  In  what  did  the  excellence  of  his  sacrifice  consist?

10.  Expound  the  reference  in  12 :  24.

11.  Cite  John's  reference  to  the  case,  and  show  how  he  goes  to  the
root  of  the  matter.

12.  How  does  Jude  use  the  case?

13.  In  the  case  of  Enoch,  what  and  when  the  turning  point  in
his  life?

14.  What  the  result  on  his  life?

15.  Show  the  two  remarkable  characteristics  of  his  faith?

16.  In  what  two  ways  was  witness  borne  to  Abel ?    To  Enoch?


XXVI

THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH
(Continued)

Scripture:  Heb.  1 1 : 6-40

WE  commence  this  chapter  by  glancing  back  to  the
witness  borne  to  Enoch,  with  the  broad  affirma-
tion: "Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  be  well-
pleasing  unto  God,  for  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe
that  He  is,  and  that  He  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  seek
after  Him."

This  affirmation  not  only  condemns  atheists  who  say  there
is  no  God,  and  deists,  who,  while  admitting  His  existence,
deny  His  revelation  in  the  Bible,  and  all  who  deny,  from  any
cause.  His  providence  and  supernatural  intervention  by
miracle  and  answer  to  prayer,  but  it  also  condemns  all  hy-
pocrisy, ritualism,  formalism,  or  other  perfunctory  obedience
and  worship  on  the  part  of  those  who,  however  orthodox  in
profession,  yet  in  heart  and  life  deny  Him.  Its  teaching  is
on  a  line  with  a  previous  exhortation  that  as  our  High  Priest
is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  having  been  in
all  points  tempted  as  we  are:  "Let  us  therefore  draw  near
with  boldness  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  receive
mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  every  time  of  need."  That
is  no  religion  at  all,  whatever  its  guise,  which  does  not  avow
and  practice  the  doctrine  that  there  is  a  throne  of  grace  and
mercy,  approachable  directly,  at  any  time  or  anywhere,  by
any  member  of  the  human  race  in  this  life  and  free  from  the
unpardonable  sin,  and  that  God  hears  and  answers  prayer
according  to  a  supernatural,  spiritual  law,  which  is  above

890


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  ^91

what  is  called  the  course  of  nature  as  defined  by  human
science.

At  the  beginning  of  a  great  meeting  in  Waco  I  preached  a
series  of  sermons  on  "He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe
that  He  is,  and  a  rewarder  of  them  that  seek  Him,"  and
applied  it  particularly  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  pressing  the  ques-
tions :  Do  you  believe  there  is  a  personal  Holy  Spirit  ?  Do
you  believe  He  is  present?  Do  you  believe  He  is  a  prayer
hearing  God?

Noah. — "By  faith,  Noah,  being  warned  of  God  concerning
things  not  seen  as  yet,  moved  with  godly  fear,  prepared  an
ark  to  the  saving  of  his  house ;  through  which  he  condemned
the  world,  and  became  the  heir  of  the  righteousness,  which
is  according  to  faith,"  Heb.  11:7.  The  order  of  events  here
are:

1.  God,  by  special  revelation,  warns  Noah  of  the  destruc-
tion of  the  world  by  a  flood.

2.  He  commands  him  to  prepare  an  ark  according  to  a
given  plan  for  the  preservation  of  his  house  and  such  animals
as  were  necessary  to  repopulate  the  earth  after  the  subsi-
dence of  the  flood.

3.  Noah  believed  God's  revelation  and  obeyed  Him  in
every  particular.

4.  The  flood  came  according  to  the  warning,  and  Noah
and  all  with  him  in  the  ark,  human  and  other  animal  life,
were  saved  and  did  repopulate  the  earth.  See  Gen.  6:  13;
9:19;  and  compare  I  Pet.  3:19-21  and  4:6,  and  H  Pet.
3:1-15,  and  Matt.  24:37-39.

This  stupendous  achievement  of  faith  is  remarkable  from
at  least  these  considerations :

1.  The  event  predicted  was  unseen  and  unforeseeable  by
human  wisdom.

2.  It  was  contrary  to  all  antecedent  human  experience,  and
contrary  to  the  established  order  of  nature.

3.  It  was  on  a  scale  of  magnitude  to  stagger  credulity.


^92     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

4.  Its  alleged  reasons  were  on  moral  and  not  natural
grounds.

5.  It  called  for  great  and  long-continued  labor  and  great
expense.  The  ark  approximated  the  Great  Eastern  in  size
and  tonnage.  The  various  supplies  to  sustain  its  occupants
for  a  year  added  enormously  to  cost  and  labor.

6.  The  one  matter  of  isolating  from  their  fellows  and
assembling  in  the  ark  at  a  particular  date  the  required  pairs
and  sevens  of  animals  was  wholly  beyond  unaided  human
power.

7.  The  jeers  and  scorn  of  an  unbelieving  world  added
greatly  to  the  difficulty  of  obedience.

This  book  declares :

1.  That  in  all  this  course,  Noah  was  led  by  faith.

2.  That  by  this  faith  he  became  an  heir  of  righteousness.

3.  That  by  it  he  condemned  the  unbelieving  world.

4.  That  believing  God,  he  was  moved  by  fear.

Men  are  influenced  by  motives.  The  hope  of  reward  and
the  fear  of  punishment  influence  all  men.  In  my  youth  I
read  the  great  sermon  on  Noah  by  Andrew  Fuller,  of  Eng-
land. It  brought  out  the  greatness  of  the  faith  of  Noah  as
did  no  other  sermon  I  ever  read.  It  made  a  profound  and
lasting  impression  on  my  mind.  This  is  the  Andrew  Fuller
whose  exposition  of  Genesis  I  commend.  The  case  of  Noah
was  a  worthy  background  for  the  exhortation  of  this  letter.

Abraham  and  Sarah. — This  case  is  every  way  worthy  of
note,  because  Abraham  is  called  "The  father  of  the  faithful,"
and  his  faith  declared  to  be  the  model  faith  for  all  the  future,
fixing  the  standard  to  which  even  the  faith  of  our  day  must
conform.  All  of  us  are  required  to  "walk  in  the  steps  of  his
faith."  A  faith  that  will  not  take  steps,  moving  out  and  for-
ward— "from  faith  to  faith,"  "from  grace  to  grace,"  "from
strength  to  strength,"  "from  glory  to  glory,"  is  no  faith  at  all
in  a  gospel,  saving  sense.


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  ^93

It  is  not  denied,  but  claimed,  that  the  faith  by  which  we
are  justified  is  one  definite  act,  at  a  given  moment  of  time.
But  it  is  also  claimed  that  the  justified  one  shall  live  by  his
faith.  Justification  is  instantaneous,  but  sanctification  is
progressive,  and  we  are  sanctified  by  faith  as  well  as  justi-
fied. So  that  while  it  will  always  be  true  that  one  act  of  faith
justifies  us  all  at  once  and  once  for  all,  yet  that  faith  does
not  then  and  there  go  out  of  business,  but  lives,  moves,  steps
out  unto  every  development  of  sanctification.  There  are  no
degrees  of  faith  laying  hold  of  justification,  but  it  is  in  the
realm  of  sanctification  that  faith  is  little  or  great,  swift  or
slow,  hesitating  or  unstaggering,  commendable  or  censurable.
It  is  in  this  light  we  examine  the  model  faith  of  Abraham,
citing  four  distinct  events  in  his  history:

1.  His  Call  While  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees. — ^Two  scriptures
need  to  be  connected  with  this  text :  the  words  of  Stephen
(Acts  7:2),  and  Gen.  12:1.  The  common  version  correctly
renders  Gen.  12:  i :  "Now  Jehovah  had  said."  As  there  is
no  pluperfect  tense  in  the  Hebrew,  we  translate  the  Hebrew
past  tense  into  the  English  pluperfect  when  the  context
demands  it.  The  revision  makes  his  call  originate  in  Haran,
and  nullifies  a  half-dozen  scriptures,  including  the  preceding
context.

This  was  a  call  to  a  promised  place,  not  only  yet  unseen,
but  one  he  would  never  see  in  this  life.  By  faith  he  obeyed
God,  not  knowing  whither  he  went.  This  first  vision  of  God
turned  him  from  idolatry  and  put  him  on  a  pilgrimage.  It
answers  to  that  part  of  our  experience  expressed  by  contri-
tion and  repentance,  but  has  not  yet  found  peace  in  accept-
ance of  a  Savior.  So  Bunyan  makes  his  contrite  pilgrim
leave  the  City  of  Destruction  and  set  out  to  find  a  heavenly
country,  but  yet  burdened  with  unpardoned  sin  for  a  part
of  the  way,  until  he  comes  to  the  cross.  So  far  there  is
indeed  faith,  but  faith  in  a  what  and  not  in  a  whom.

2.  This  faith  did  not  rest  on  the  land  of  Palestine;  that


S94     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

would  be  only  swapping  Ur  for  Syria.  He  dwelt  in  tents  in
that  land,  moving  continually  as  a  sojourner,  not  possessing
a  foot  of  ground  there  as  a  home,  because  he  looked  for  the
celestial  city.  So,  in  our  experience  we  are  dissatisfied  with
this  world  and  long  for  a  heaven  of  rest,  even  before  we  are
converted.

3.  But  now  we  come  to  the  great  definite  transaction  of  his
life — one  famous  star-light  night.  The  circumstances  were
these :  He  had  just  returned  to  Hebron  from  his  victory  over
the  five  kings  and  from  his  tithe-paying  to  Melchizedek,
priest  of  the  most  high  God.  His  mind  was  greatly  troubled
on  three  points :

( 1 )  His  maintenance,  seeing  he  had  refused  to  accept  even
a  shoe  latchet  of  the  spoils  or  compensation  from  the  rescued
king  of  Sodom.

(2)  He  was  full  of  the  reaction  of  fear  after  his  triumph.
He  was  only  a  stranger  in  the  land  with  only  300  men —
shifting  pasturage  from  time  to  time  by  sufferance  of  the
Canaanite  nations,  who  might  at  any  time  turn  against  him
and  spoil  him  of  his  wealth — and  by  his  intermeddling  had
incurred  the  hostility  of  powerful  kingdoms.

(3)  He  was  old,  his  wife  was  barren,  and  his  slave  was  his
heir.  Suddenly  an  unearthly  visitor  enters  his  tent.  And
here  the  record  (Gen.  15  : 1-6)  introduces  a  number  of  new
words  and  phrases  occurring  for  the  first  time  in  the  Bible :

(a)  "The  Word  of  the  Lord,"  or  "The  Logosr  Why
need  John  go  to  Philo  for  his  Logos,  when  he  could  so  easily
find  it  in  Gen.  15?  (b)  "Shield,"  (c)  "believe,"  (d)  "im-
puted for  righteousness."  We  know  this  "Word  of  Jehovah"
was  a  person,  and  "the  Logos"  for  He  was  visible.  "He
came  in  a  vision,"  not  in  a  sound,  as  a  common  word  would
do.  He  was  visible,  audible,  palpable.  "He  brought  Him
forth."  This  was  a  person.  Abraham  saw  Him,  and  hence
after  the  Logos  was  incarnate.  He  said,  "Before  Abraham


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  ^95

was  I  am  *  *  *  Abraham  saw  my  day — ^he  saw  it  and  was
glad."

Let  us  note  this  remarkable  interview  between  Abraham
and  his  Savior :  "Fear  not,  Abraham,  I  am  thy  shield."  In
other  words,  "be  not  afraid  of  the  enmity  of  the  five  kings  of
Mesopotamia,  nor  of  the  uprising  of  Canaanite  nations,  nor
of  Egypt,  nor  of  Philistia.  I,  as  a  shield,  am  between  you
and  all  foes."  In  Ephesians  we  are  commanded  to  take  with
us  the  shield  of  faith,  not  faith  as  a  shield,  but  God,  the
shield,  which  faith  grasps  and  interposes  to  catch  all  the  fiery
darts  of  Apollyon.  "I  am  thy  reward,"  "Blessing,  I  will
bless  thee."  God  insured  to  him  basket,  store  and  cattle,  and
safeguarded  them  from  the  spoiler.  "Thy  servant  shall  not
be  thine  heir,"  but  potency  shall  come  on  thy  impotency  and
on  the  barrenness  of  thy  wife.  By  supernatural  power  a  son
of  promise  shall  be  born  of  thee.  From  him  shall  come  the
Messiah.  Then  the  Logos  took  him  by  the  hand  and  led  him
out  of  the  tent  to  look  upon  the  star-spangled  sky  of  an  Ori-
ental night,  saying  to  him,  "More  than  the  stars  of  heaven,
more  than  the  sand-grains  on  a  world-circumference  of  ocean
beach — ^more  than  all  these  shall  be  thy  seed."  Then  Abra-
ham, looking  not  on  children  of  the  flesh,  but  on  the  countless
multitude  of  spiritual  children  "saw  Christ's  day — he  saw  it
and  was  glad."  The  record  says,  "He  believed  on  Jehovah,
and  it  was  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness."  Then  and
there  was  Abraham  justified.  He  now  believed  on  a  person
and  not  a  proposition.  "I  know  whom  I  have  believed,"
says  Paul.  But  this  justifying  faith  that  entered  his  heart
that  night  once  for  all,  also  becomes  the  living  principle  of
his  life  "My  justified  one  shall  live  by  faith."

(4)  So  we  come  to  the  great  trial  of  that  faith  in  his  later
life — the  one  unique  experience,  unshared  in  some  features
by  any  other  man.  He  is  commanded  to  take  Isaac,  the  child
of  promise,  his  only  and  well-beloved  son  by  his  wife,  and
offer  him  up  as  a  sin-offering.    This  commandment  seemed


296     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

to  be  squarely  against  the  promise :  "In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed
be" — "sacrifice  Isaac."  The  great  events  of  the  trial  are
these:

1.  His  faith  did  not  stagger  at  the  apparent  clash  between
command  and  promise,  but  argued :  Both  are  true  and  right
and  in  harmony.  God  will  fulfill  the  promise  by  raising
Isaac  from  the  dead.

2.  Abraham  alone,  of  all  men,  was  made  to  experience,  in
some  degree,  the  feelings  of  the  Father  in  giving  up  Jesus
to  die  for  men.

3.  Isaac  alone,  of  all  men,  was  to  share  somewhat  the
experience  of  our  Lord  in  submitting  voluntarily  to  a  vica-
rious death  as  a  sin-ofifering  at  the  hands  of  the  Father.

Isaac  blessing  Jacob  and  Esau. — It  is  evident  that  Isaac
personally  preferred  to  bestow  the  blessing  of  primogeniture
on  Esau,  but  against  nature  and  by  faith  he  bestowed  it  on
Jacob.

Jacob  blessing  Ephriam  and  Manasseh. — Joseph  brought
his  boys  to  Jacob  for  a  blessing,  so  placing  them  that  Jacobus
right  hand  would  rest  on  Manasseh,  the  elder,  and  so  bestow
the  greater  blessing.  ,  But  Jacob,  too  dim-eyed  for  earthly
sight,  yet  seeing  by  faith,  crossed  his  hands  and  put  the
greater  blessing  on  the  head  of  Ephriam,  the  younger.

Joseph. — "By  faith  he  gave  commandment  concerning
his  bones."    The  elements  of  his  faith  were :

1.  He  believed  the  word  spoken  to  Abraham,  that  his
people  would  be  enslaved  for  a  long  time  in  Egypt,  though  it
was  then  against  human  probability.

2.  He  believed  that  after  a  long  servitude  God  would
deliver  His  people  and  take  them  to  Canaan,  the  promised
land,  and  so  commanded  that  his  bones  be  taken  with  them.

3.  He  believed  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  else  why
be  concerned  about  his  body?  Mere  animals  care  nothing
for  the  dead  body  of  their  kind.  Birds  care  nothing  for  the
shells  out  of  which  they  were  hatched,  nor  snakes  for  the


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  29T

skins  they  shed.    The  reader  should  read  Melville's  great
sermon  on  "The  Bones  of  Joseph."

The  Case  of  Moses. — This  case  Is  very  remarkable  on
many  accounts

1.  The  faith  of  his  parents,  (a)  Pharaoh's  law  required
all  male  children  to  be  cast  into  the  Nile  when  born.  Their
faith  saw  in  the  child  a  great  future,  so  they  hid  him  three
months.

(b)  When  hiding  was  no  longer  possible  they  were  not
afraid  of  the  king's  command,  but  by  a  faith  which  used
means  they  put  him  in  a  water-proof  vessel,  and  placed  him
in  the  rushes  in  the  brink  of  the  Nile.

(c)  They  stationed  his  sister  to  watch  the  outcome,  and
so  engineered  it  that  his  own  mother  should  nurse  him  for
Pharaoh's  daughter.

(d)  In  the  time  they  kept  him,  they  instructed  him  in  the
revelations  and  promises  of  their  religion  and  so  safeguarded
him  when  he  entered  the  palace.  So  Lois  and  Eunice  safe-
guarded Timothy,  in  that  from  a  child  he  was  instructed  in
the  holy  scriptures.  Thus  all  Christian  parents  should  bring
up  their  children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  God.

2.  The  Faith  of  Moses  Himself. — At  a  great  turning  point
in  his  life,  his  faith  enabled  him  to  make  a  wise,  decisive
choice  "And  Moses  was  instructed  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the
Egyptians ;  and  he  was  mighty  in  his  words  and  works.  But
when  he  was  well  nigh  forty  years  old,  it  came  into  his  heart
to  visit  his  brethren,  the  children  of  Israel.  And  seeing  one
of  them  suffer  wrong,  he  defended  him,  and  avenged  him
that  was  oppressed,  smiting  the  Egyptian  and  he  supposed
that  his  brethren  understood  that  God  by  his  hand  was  giv-
ing them  deliverance,  but  they  understood  not,"  Acts  7 :  22-25.
"By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was  grown  up,  refused  to  be  called
the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter;  choosing  rather  to  share
ill-treatment  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the  pleas-
ures of  sin  for  a  season ;  accounting  the  reproach  of  Christ


298     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt,  for  he  looked
unto  the  recompense  of  reward,"  Heb.  1 1 :  24-26.  On  these
passages  note:

1.  That  a  revelation  from  God  came  to  Moses.  This  we
infer  from  "it  coming  into  his  heart  to  visit  his  people,"  and
from  his  supposition  that  they  would  understand  that  he
was  their  deliverer.  There  is  no  record  in  his  history  prior
to  this  time  that  he  was  appointed  deliverer.  Nothing  but  a
revelation  from  God  can  account  for  the  tremendous  and
instantaneous  change  in  him,

2.  It  has  been  said  that  religion  is  only  for  children  and
weak-minded  women.

But  here  is  a  mature  man,  the  best  educated  of  his  age,
"learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians"  a  man  of
affairs,  mighty  in  words  and  works,  occupying  the  highest
social  position,  even  a  prince  of  the  greatest  nation  then  on
earth.  All  pleasures  bidding  for  his  enjoyment  of  them,
uncounted  riches  at  his  disposal,  who,  not  on  an  impulse,  but
on  mature  reflection,  carefully  weighing  the  moral  qualities
of  human  action  and  pushing  his  investigations  to  the  eternal
outcome,  deliberately  refuses  all  earthly  honor,  pleasures,
and  treasures,  and  casts  in  his  lot  with  a  generation  of
despised  slaves.

Such  unnatural  conduct,  reversing  every  worldly  maxim
and  motive — indeed  such  a  revolution — calls  for  an  adequate
explanation.  We  desire  to  know  the  principle  guiding  his
choice,  and  the  ulterior  motive  prompting  his  action.  The
text  says,  "by  faith  he  refused"  one  set  of  things ;  "by  faith
choosing  rather"  the  opposite  set  of  things;  "by  faith  ac-
counting the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treas-
ures of  Egypt."  Faith,  then,  was  the  principle  by  which  he
chose.  The  text  then  lays  bare  his  motive,  the  considera-
tion influencing  his  life,  towit :  "for  he  looked  unto  the  recom-
pense of  the  reward."  He  had  come  to  the  forks  of  the  road
of  life.    On  one  way  were  earthly  learning,  pleasures,  treas-


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  299

ures,  palaces  and  power,  with  a  royal  sepulchre  in  the
Pyramid  of  Cheops.  On  the  other  was  social  and  literary
downfall,  ill-treatment,  reproach,  the  desert,  poverty,  weari-
ness, toil  and  an  unknown  grave  on  which  mortal  eye  would
never  rest.  But  over  that  flower-bordered  way  was  written :
"The  way  of  sin,"  and  over  all  its  allurements  was  written
again :  "Only  for  a  season,"  and  at  the  end  of  the  way  loomed
up  the  dark  and  eternal  recompense  of  the  reward.  That
way  was  like  Niagara — ^very  insidious  in  its  ever-increasing
suction,  and  the  boom  of  fall  just  ahead.

Over  every  foot  of  the  unpleasant  way  was  written :  "The
way  of  righteousness  and  the  company  of  the  people  of  God,"
and  over  all  its  horrors  was  also  written :  "Only  for  a  sea-
son," and  at  the  end  of  the  way  was  the  glorious,  eternal
recompense  of  the  reward.  Faith,  then,  in  making  this
choice,  was  the  exercise  of  the  highest  reason.  Other  great
men,  like  Washington,  Gladstone,  Robert  E.  Lee  and  Stone-
wall Jackson,  have  exercised  this  highest  expression  of  rea-
son. Here  was  no  weakness  of  puerility,  no  mere  sentimen-
tality, no  gullibility,  no  fanatical  superstition.  Moses,  hav-
ing chosen  the  reproach  of  Christ,  and  cast  in  his  lot  with  the
people  of  God,  is  now  a  Christian — a  justified  man.  So
far,  his  faith  appears  as  the  principle  of  choice.     But —

2.  "By  faith  he  forsook  Egypt,  not  fearing  the  wrath  of
the  king:  for  he  endured  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible."
This  refers  to  his  flight  into  Midian  and  desert  life  of  prepa-
ration for  forty  years  more.

3.  "By  faith  kept  the  passover,"  looking  beyond  the  symbol
and  memorial  to  "Christ  our  Passover  Lamb  to  be  sacrificed
for  us."

4.  "By  faith  he  passed  through  the  Red  Sea  as  by  dry
land."  So  the  end  of  his  life,  the  faith  which  justified  him
once  for  all,  lived  and  conquered  over  every  opposing
obstacle.

We  may  here  pause  to  inquire,  after  the  lapse  of  thou-


SOO     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

sands  of  years,  if  the  results,  now  apparent,  justify  the  wis-
dom of  the  choice  of  Moses.

Where  now  are  the  pleasures,  and  treasures,  and  glory,
and  learning  of  ancient  Egypt?  All  forever  gone.  Her
Pyramids  are  empty,  her  Sphynx  is  dumb,  her  oracles  are
dead,  the  wood  of  her  palaces  is  wasted,  and  the  stones  have
crumbled,  and  a  nation  of  degenerate  slaves  crouches  amid
her  ruins,  or  zvanders  over  her  deserts.  But  look  at  the  monu-
ments of  Moses.  His  Pentateuch  talks  in  all  languages,  and
underlies  all  the  legal  codes  of  the  highest  civilisations.  His
poth  Psalm  echoes  at  all  funerals,  and  his  song  of  deliverance
at  the  Red  Sea  is  one  of  the  hymns  of  heaven,  Rev.  15:3.

We  content  ourselves  in  this  discussion  with  the  elabora-
tion of  the  great  cases  of  Abel,  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  and
Moses,  covering  the  rest  of  the  examples  cited  with  questions
that  follow.

QUESTIONS

1.  What  does  the  affirmation  in  11 : 6  condemn?

2.  What  an  essential  characteristic  of  any  religion,  without  which
it  is  no  religion  at  all  ?

3.  What  the  order  of  historical  events  in  the  case  of  Noah?

4.  What  facts  constitute  Noah's  faith  a  stupendous  achievement?

5.  What  the  resultant  declarations  of  the  text  concerning  Noah?

6.  Who  preached  one  of  the  world's  greatest  sermons  on  the
faith  of  Noah,  and  what  other  great  work  did  he  write?

7.  Why  is  the  case  of  Abraham  specially  noteworthy?

8.  Distinguish  be.tween  (i)  Some  belief  before  saving  faith,
(2)  Saving  faith,  (3)  Sanctifying  faith.

9.  What  four  events  of  Abraham's  life  are  selected  for  illustra-
tion?

ID.    Illustrate  Nos.  i  and  2  of  these  events  by  Bunyan's  pilgrim.

11.  In  what  chapter  of  Genesis  do  we  find  the  account  of  Abra-
ham's justification,  how  do  you  prove  it,  and  what  the  new  words  in
that  chapter  ?

12.  Where  does  John  get  his  Logos  in  the  first  chapter  of  his
gospel  ?

13.  State  the  circumstances  of  the  visit  of  the  Logos  to  Abra-
ham, and  what  three  senses  attested  Kis  presence,

14.  Is  faith  itself  a  shield?  If  not,  what,  and  what  then  faith's
relation  to  the  shield?

15.  What  the  great  trial  of  Abraham's  faith,  and  show  how  com-
mand and  promises  were  in  apparent  conflict.

16.  What  the  three  great  events  of  this  trial?


THE  HEROES  OF  FAITH  SQl

17.  How  is  it  evident  that  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  with  the  right  of
primogeniture  by  faith  ?

18.  How  is  Jacob's  faith  evident  in  blessing  Ephraim  and
Manasseh.

19.  What  the  elements  of  Joseph's  faith?

20.  Who  preached  a  great  sermon  on  Joseph  giving  command-
ment concerning  his  bones?

21.  Why  the  difference  between  men  and  brutes  in  caring  for
the  dead  body?

22.  State  the  elements  of  the  faith  of  the  parents  of  Moses.

2Z.  What  the  first  great  element  in  the  faith  of  Moses,  and  what
the  scriptures  giving  an  account  of  it?

24.  What  noteworthy  things  in  these  passages?

25.  What  the  principles  by  which  Moses  made  his  choice,  and
what  the  consideration  or  motive?

26.  Show  from  this  case  of  Moses  that  faith  was  highest  reason
in  rejecting  one  way  and  choosing  the  other.

27.  Cite  other  great  men  of  history  who  have  found  faith  and
the  highest  exercise  of  reason.

28.  How  do  you  prove  that  Moses,  at  this  time,  was  justified?

29.  What  exploits  of  his  faith  after  justification  are  cited?

30.  Judging  from  the  viewpoint  of  today,  what  the  evidences  of
the  wisdom  of  the  choice  of  Moses?

31.  What  exploits  of  faith  are  cited  from  the  period  of  Joshua?

32.  Who  preached  a  great  sermon  on  Rahab's  faith,  and  what  his
text?

Ans. :    Spurgeon.    Text,  "The  Scarlet  Thread."

2,Z-    Who  of  the  judges  are  cited  as  heroes  of  faith?

34.  Consider  the  list  of  achievements  in  11 :  33-38,  and  prove  that
Samuel  "wrought  righteousness."

35.  Prove  that  David  "subdued  kingdoms  and  obtained  promises,"
"escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,"  "waxed  valiant  in  fight,"  "wander-
ing in  deserts  and  mountains  and  caves  and  holes  of  the  earth."

36.  In  whose  case  was  "stopped  the  mouths  of  lions  ?"
Z7.    In  whose  "was  quenched  the  violence  of  fire?"

38.  What  woman  "received  her  dead  raised  to  life?"

39.  Recite  the  case  from  the  Maccabees  of  the  martyred  mother
and  her  children?

40.  What  noted  prophet  was  "imprisoned?"

41.  Who  was  "stoned?"

42.  Who  "sawn  asunder?"

43.  Who  "went  about  in  sheepskins?"

44.  On  1 1 :  39,  40  answer :  ( i )  What  is  meant  by  "not  receiving
the  promises?"  (2)  What  is  meant  by  "some  better  things  concern-
ing us?"    (3)  When  will  they  and  we  be  made  perfect  together?


XXVII

THE  OUTCOME  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  LIFE

Scripture:  Heb.  12: 18-24

THE  sixth  great  promise  of  the  new  covenant  is  the  out-
come of  the  Christian's  Hfe,  12:  18-24.  This  para-
graph is  the  cHmax,  but  not  the  end  of  the  argument
of  this  letter.  The  thought  has  been  touched  more  than  once
already,  but  here  is  gathered  in  a  correlated  group  the  sum
of  all  detached  antecedent  teachings.  Here  is  not  one  star,
but  a  constellation  more  luminous  and  alluring  than  the
Pleiades.  Indeed,  it  is  a  vivid  contrast  between  two  oppos-
ing constellations — "The  sweet  influences  of  Pleiades"  vs.
"The  bands  of  Orion,"  for  it  presents  both  negative  and
positive  aspects,  to  wit :  What  the  Christian  is  not  coming  to,
and  what  he  is  coming  to.

Verses  18  to  20  tell  us  that  the  Christian  is  not  coming
to  Mount  Sinai,  i.e.,  to  the  old  covenant,  ministered  by  angels
and  mediated  by  Moses,  with  its  terrors  of  voice,  earthquake,
tempest,  fire,  darkness  and  trumpet,  so  awful  that  even  Moses
feared  exceedingly  and  trembled — a  mountain  whose  touch
was  death  and  whose  yoke  gendered  to  bondage  and  death.
Elsewhere  Paul  has  declared  that  this  mountain,  as  an  alle-
gory, "answereth  to  Jerusalem  that  now  is;  for  she  is  in
bondage  with  her  children,"  Gal.  4:21-25.  Indeed,  Gal.
4:21-31  parallels  our  paragraph  and  demonstrates  Pauline
authorship  of  this  letter.  At  the  giving  of  the  law,  the
trumpet  of  heaven  which  marshalled  the  angels,  waxed
louder  and  louder  until  its  awful  peals  smote  the  people  with
terror — an  unearthly  trumpet  sound  that  earth  never  heard

30S


OUTCOME  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  LIFE      303

before  and  will  not  hear  again  until  the  final  advent,  when
again  it  marshals  the  angels  to  attend  our  Lord  for  gather*
ing  the  elect  and  for  burning  the  tares,  and  not,  according
to  Negro  theology,  to  wake  the  dead.  (See  Matt.  13:30,
38-43, 49 ;  Matt.  24 :  31 ;  I  Thess.  4 :  16  for  the  meaning  of  the
trumpet.)  The  outcome  of  the  old  covenant  is  death,  to
which  the  Christian  never  comes,  for  "Our  Savior,  Jesus
Christ,  hath  abolished  death  and  brought  life  and  immortality
to  light  through  the  gospel,"  and  himself  said,  "I  am  the
resurrection  and  the  life  *  *  *  Whosoever  liveth  and  be-
lieveth  in  me  shall  never  die."

If  we  construe  the  word  "come"  in  "ye  are  not  come"  and
"ye  are  come,"  in  the  present  or  perfect  tense,  the  meaning
is :  "Ye  are  not  come  unto  the  old  covenant  as  a  regime,  but
to  the  new  covenant  as  a  regime."  But  it  is  the  prophetic
present,  or  perfect,  and  represents  the  outcome  or  destiny.

THE  PARTICULARS  OF  THE  OUTCOME

I.  To  a  definite  place.  "But  ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,
and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem."
This  accords  with  the  statements  in  chapter  11 :  10:  "For
Abraham  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose
builder  and  maker  is  God,"  and  11 :  14-16:  "For  they  that
say  such  things  make  it  manifest  that  they  are  seeking  after
a  country  of  their  own.  And  if  indeed  they  had  been  mind-
ful of  that  country  from  which  they  went  out,  they  would
have  had  opportunity  to  return.  But  now  they  desire  a  better
country,  that  is,  a  heavenly ;  wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed
of  them,  to  be  called  their  God,  for  He  hath  prepared  for
them  a  city."  On  the  same  line  speaks  our  Lord :  "In  my
Father's  house  are  many  mansions ;  if  it  were  not  so  I  would
have  told  you ;  for  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I
go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  come  again,  and  will  receive
you  unto  myself;  that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also.
And  whither  I  go  ye  know  the  way,"  John  14:  2-4.    And  in


804     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

the  Apocalypse  of  John  we  have  these  precious  words  as  to
the  conditions  there :  "And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new
earth;  for  the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  are  passed
away ;  and  the  sea  is  no  more.  And  I  saw  the  holy  city,  new
Jerusalem,  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,  made
ready  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband.  And  I  heard  a
great  voice  out  of  the  throne  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle
of  God  is  with  men,  and  He  shall  dwell  with  them,  and  they
shall  be  His  people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and
be  their  God.  And  He  shall  wipe  away  every  tear  from  their
eyes ;  and  death  shall  be  no  more ;  neither  shall  there  be
mourning  nor  crying,  nor  pain  any  more ;  the  first  things  are
passed  away,"  Rev.  21 :  1-4.  "And  I  saw  no  temple  therein,
for  the  Lord  God  the  Almighty,  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple
thereof.  And  the  city  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the
moon,  to  shine  upon  it ;  for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,
and  the  lamp  thereof  is  the  Lamb.  And  the  nations  [of  the
saved]  shall  walk  amidst  the  light  thereof,  and  the  kings  of
the  earth  bring  their  glory  into  it.  And  the  gates  thereof
shall  in  no  wise  be  shut  by  day  (for  there  shall  be  no  night
there)  and  they  shall  bring  the  glory  and  the  honor  of  the
nations  into  it :  and  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any-
thing unclean,  or  he  that  maketh  an  abomination  and  a  lie ;
but  only  they  that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life,"
Rev.  21 :  22-27.  "And  he  showed  me  a  river  of  water  of  life,
bright  as  crystal,  preceding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and
of  the  Lamb,  in  the  midst  of  the  street  thereof.  And  on  this
side  of  the  river  and  on  that  was  the  tree  of  life,  bearing
twelve  manner  of  fruits,  yielding  its  fruit  every  month :  and
the  leaves  of  the  tree  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.
And  there  shall  be  no  curse  any  more,  and  the  throne  of  God
and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  therein:  and  His  servants  shall
serve  Him,  and  they  shall  see  His  face,  and  His  name  shall
be  on  their  foreheads.  And  there  shall  be  night  no  more;
and  they  need  no  light  of  lamp,  neither  light  of  sun ;  for  the


OUTCOME  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  LIFE     305

Lord  God  shall  give  them  light ;  and  they  shall  reign  forever
and  ever,"  Rev.  22: 1-5.

It  was  this  Paradise  regained  that  Paul  was  himself  per-
mitted to  see :  "I  must  needs  glory,  though  it  is  not  expedient ;
but  I  will  come  to  visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord.  I
know  a  man  in  Christ,  fourteen  years  ago  (whether  in  the
body  I  know  not :  God  knoweth),  such  a  one  caught  up  even
to  the  third  heaven.  And  I  know  such  a  man  (whether  in  the
body,  or  apart  from  the  body,  I  know  not — God  knoweth),
how  that  he  was  caught  up  into  Paradise,  and  heard  unspeak-
able words,  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  man  to  utter,"  II  Cor.
12: 1-4.  And  it  was  concerning  this  place  and  condition  he
also  said :  "While  we  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen :
for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal,  but  the  things
which  are  not  seen  are  eternal.  For  we  know  that  if  the
earthly  house  of  our  tabernacle  be  dissolved,  we  have  a  build-
ing from  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal,  in  the
heavens,"  II  Cor.  4: 18 — 5 :  i.

We  need  to  impress  our  minds  with  the  fact  that  all  finite
beings  must  have  a  place,  whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  the
body — only  the  infinite  is  omnipresent — and  that  the  clear-
ness of  our  conception  of  heaven  much  affects  our  life.  Many
Christians  live  far  from  God  and  are  unhappy,  and  prone  to
backsliding,  because  their  conception  of  heaven  is  so  vague
and  misty.  They  do  not  lay  hold  of  the  powers  of  the  world
to  come.  Dr.  Chalmers,  in  his  greatest  sermon,  on  "The
Expulsive  Power  of  New  Affections,"  says  substantially:
"Oh,  if  some  island  of  the  blessed  could  be  loosed  from  its
heavenly  moorings  and  float  down  the  tide  of  time  so  that
we  could  just  once  behold  the  serenity  of  its  skies,  the  tran-
quility of  its  pcace^^if  just  once  we  could  inhale  the  aroma
of  its  flowers,  catch  the  sheen  of  the  apparel  of  its  inhab-
itants—just once  have  our  hearts  ravished  with  the  melody
of  its  musio— tbca  ttcver  again  would  we  oount  this  world
our  hom€."


SOB     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

I  once  heard  at  a  great  camp-meeting  a  thousand  happy
voices  singing  that  old  time  Methodist  hymn:

"Have  ye  heard,  have  ye  heard,  of  that  sunbright  clime,
Undimmed  by  sorrow  and  unhurt  by  time;
Where  age  hath  no  power  o'er  the  fadeless  frame;
Where  the  eye  is  afire  and  the  heart  is  aflame :
Have  ye  heard  of  that  sunbright  clime?"

The  effect  was  electrical  and  the  impression  uneflfaceable.

I  stood  by  the  bed-side  of  a  once  gifted,  but  nov^r  broken-
hearted viroman,  from  whose  life  all  earthly  joy  had  been
cruelly  snatched  away — and  crushed  and  dying,  but  with  face
illumined,  she  said,  "Old  time  friend  and  schoolmate  of  my
happy  girlhood,  have  your  people  sing  to  me."  "And  what
would  you  have  us  sing?"  "Sing  to  me  of  heaven."  And
so  we  sang,

"Oh !  sing  to  me  of  heaven
When  I  am  called  to  die;
Sing  songs  of  holy  ecstasy
To  waft  my  soul  on  high."

Her  face  shone  as  the  face  of  an  angel,  and  in  a  low,  sweet
voice  she  repeated  the  last  stanza,  and  whispered,

"Let  music  cheer  me  last  on  earth,
And  greet  me  first  in  heaven."

And  so  her  soul  passed  upward  in  a  gentle  sigh.

We  recall  the  ecstasy  of  martyred  Stephen ;  "But  he,  being
full  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  looked  up  steadfastly  into  heaven,
and  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  standing  on  the  right
hand  of  God,  and  said.  Behold,  I  see  the  heavens  opened,
and  the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"
Acts  7:55,  56.

THE  COMPANIONSHIP  OF  HEAVEN

2.  Our  companions  there  forever  are  of  three  classes:

Angelic,  human  and  divine.    Let  us  consider  them  in  order :

(i)  "To  an  innumerable  company  of  angels."    All  those


OUTCOME  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  LIFE     307

ministering  spirits  who,  since  the  throne  of  grace  was  estab-
lished, have  served  the  heirs  of  salvation.  Jacob  saw  them
in  his  dream  at  Bethel,  descending  and  ascending  the  ladder
which  reached  from  heaven  to  earth,  which  ladder  was  our
Lord  himself,  John  1:51.  Cherubim  and  seraphim,  which
constitute  the  chariot  of  God,  and  overlook  the  mercy  seat,
and  sing,  "Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God  Almighty."  They
hover  over  our  assemblies  on  earth,  and  are  instructed  in
the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  as  the  church  unrolls  and
reveals  that  wisdom.  They  gather  the  elect  for  glory,  and
the  wicked  for  destruction.

(2)  Human  companionship  in  heaven.  The  "heaven"  of
the  text  must  be  considered  as  the  place  where  the  disem-
bodied souls  of  the  saints  now  go,  and  in  the  references  to
the  human  companionship  there  are  five  distinct  ideas :

(a)  The  first  idea  relates  to  them  individually.

(b)  The  second  idea  relates  to  their  sanctified  state.  Both
these  ideas  are  in  the  expression :  "The  spirits  of  just  men
made  perfect."

(c)  The  third  idea  relates  to  their  official  character  while
on  earth,  "first-born" — this  has  been  explained  as  meaning
that  every  regenerate  man  possesses  the  right  and  office  of
primogeniture  constituting  him  a  priest  unto  God.

(d)  The  fourth  idea  relates  to  them  as  having  been  an
organized  assembly,  or  the  enrollment  of  the  "first-born"
ones  into  a  church — Greek,  ekklesia.  The  third  and  fourth
ideas  are  in  the  phrase :  "Church  of  the  first-born  who  are
enrolled  in  heaven."  This  is  a  back  reference  to  their  church
life  as  a  business  body  on  earth.

(e)  The  fifth  idea  relates  to  them  collectively  in  heaven,
and  is  an  entirely  new  one.  These  churches  of  the  first-
born ones  on  earth,  enrolled  in  heaven,  are  in  their  disem-
bodied state,  no  longer  business  bodies,  but  have  become  a
"general  assembly" — Greek,  panegyris.  Here  the  apostle,
following  the  idea  of  Greek  civic  or  state  bodies,  each  an


508     COLOSSIANS,  :ePHESIANS,  HEBREWS

independent  business  body,  beholds  them  gathered  in  one
great  assembly,  not  for  business  or  war,  but  for  joyous  fes-
tivity. Let  not  the  Spartan  ekklesia  "come  with  arms  to  the
panegyris"  "The  panegyris  and  ekklesia  of  the  first-born
who  are  enrolled  in  heaven."

The  author  utterly  repudiates  any  interpretation  of  pane-
gyris which  makes  it  a  festive  assembly  of  angels.  There  is
not  an  allusion  in  the  Bible  to  angels  keeping  a  festival,  but
the  references  are  abundant  to  the  festival  of  the  saints  in
heaven,  as  will  be  shown  when  we  come  to  the  seventh  great
promise  of  the  new  covenant.

These  several  ideas  restated  are  as  follows

1.  When  we  die  we  go  at  once  to  heaven  and  become  a
companion  of  every  saint  whose  death  preceded  ours.  We
will  know  then,  not  in  part,  but  as  we  are  known.  We  will
recognize  and  enjoy  Abel,  Seth,  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,
Isaac,  Jacob,  Joseph,  Moses,  Joshua,  Samuel,  and  all  the
prophets,  and  all  the  apostles,  evangelists,  and  martyrs.  We
will  enjoy  the  companionship  of  Spurgeon,  Bunyan,  and
every  other  faithful  preacher  or  layman.  We  will,  like
David,  go  to  our  own  dead  children,  our  sainted  father,
mother,  brother,  or  sister.

2.  We  ourselves,  completely  sanctified  in  spirit,  will  join
the  spirits  of  all  the  justified  now  made  perfect.

3.  On  earth  we  were  not  only  a  priest  unto  God,  offering
spiritual  sacrifices,  but —

4.  Were  enrolled  in  heaven  as  belonging  to  an  organized
business  body — an  ekklesia.

5.  There  we  will  be  a  member,  not  of  a  business  body,  but
gf  a  general  assembly — panegyris — an  assembly,  not  for
war  as  on  earth,  but  for  a  festival  of  eternal  joy.

We  now  enjoy  the  companionship  of  every  imperfect  saint
of  our  acquaintance.  We  now  enjoy  our  church  relations,
offering  jointly  with  our  brethren  assembled  in  worship,
spiritual  praises  as  priests  unto  God.    We  now  enjoy  our


OUTCOME  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  LIFE     30^

gatherings  for  co-operation  in  Christian  work  and  warfare,
whether  in  district  associations,  state  conventions,  national
conventions,  or  international  assemblies,  for  the  promotion
of  the  cause  of  our  Redeemer,  but  then  and  there,  when
earth's  business  is  ended  and  its  warfare  has  ceased,  we
join  the  general  assembly  of  all  the  saints  who  have  crossed
the  flood  and  there  are  ready  to  welcome  those  who  follow,
"till  all  the  ransomed  church  of  God  are  saved  to  sin  no
more."

Dr.  Talmage  tore  his  rhetoric  to  tatters  in  a  vain  attempt
to  describe  the  home-coming  of  the  Federal  army — a  million
men — at  the  close  of  the  Civil  War,  as  they  passed  in  one
grand  review,  company  by  company,  regiment  by  regiment,
brigade  by  brigade,  division  by  division,  army  corps  by  army
corps — infantry,  cavalry,  artillery — drums  beating,  bands
playing,  cannon  thundering,  flags  floating,  and  cheer  after
cheer  saluting.  But  how  shall  all  that  compare  with  the
grand  review  of  the  redeemed,  which  John  saw  in  vision
from  Patmos?  "After  these  things  I  saw,  and  behold,  a
great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number,  out  of  every
nation  and  of  all  tribes  and  peoples  and  tongues,  standing
before  the  throne  and  before  the  Lamb,  arrayed  in  white
robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands ;  and  they  cry  with  a  great
voice,  saying,  "Salvation  unto  our  God  who  sitteth  on  the
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb.  *  *  *  These  are  they  that  come
out  of  the  great  tribulation,  and  they  washed  their  robes,
and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Therefore
are  they  before  the  throne  of  God ;  and  they  serve  Him  day
and  night  in  His  temple :  and  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne
shall  spread  His  tabernacle  over  them.  They  shall  hunger
no  more,  neither  thrist  any  more  ;  neither  shall  the  sun  strike
upon  them,  nor  any  heat :  for  the  Lamb  that  is  in  the  midst
of  the  throne  shall  be  their  shepherd,  and  shall  guide  them
unto  fountains  of  waters  of  life :  and  God  shall  wipe  away
every  tear  from  their  eyes,"  Rev.  7 : 9,  10,  14-17.


310     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

3.  Divine  Companionship. — "Ye  are  come  to  God,  the
Judge  of  all  *  *  *  to  Jesus,  the  mediator  of  the  new  cove-
nant." The  desire  of  the  ages  to  see  God  has  been  baffled
by  the  statement:  "No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  or
can  see  Him."  Job  cried  out :  "O  that  I  knew  where  I  might
find  Him  and  talk  to  Him  face  to  face  as  with  a  friend!"
Philip  prayed :  "Lord,  show  us  the  Father  and  it  sufficeth."
But  it  is  the  promise  of  the  new  covenant  that  we  shall  see
God.  "Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."
The  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect  do  see  Him.  They  come
to  Him:  "Oh  that  my  words  were  now  written!  Oh  that
they  were  inscribed  in  a  book !  That  with  an  iron  pen  and
lead  they  were  graven  in  the  rock  forever !  But  as  for  me,
I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  at  last  He  will  stand
up  upon  the  earth;  and  after  my  skin,  even  this  body,  is
destroyed.  Then  without  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God,  whom  I,
even  I,  shall  see  on  my  side,  and  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and
not  as  a  stranger,"  Job  19:  23-27.  Not  only  so,  but  in  our
glorified  bodies  we  shall  see  Him :  "And  they  shall  see  His
face,  and  His  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads,"  Rev.  22 : 4.

The  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect  shall  see  Jesus,  the
mediator  of  the  new  covenant.  We  never  saw  Him  in  the
flesh — that  "man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief" —
but  when  we  die  we  shall  see  Him  anointed  with  the  oil  of
gladness  above  His  fellows.  Then  with  Paul  elsewhere  we
may  say :  "Whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the  body,  we  are  absent
from  the  Lord;"  for  us  "to  die  is  gain,  for  when  we  are
absent  from  the  body  we  are  present  with  the  Lord."

Not  only  so,  but  when  absent  from  the  body  we  come  "to
the  blood  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh  better  things  for  us
than  the  blood  of  Abel."  This  does  not  mean  the  application
of  the  blood  of  Christ  to  our  hearts — that  is  done  in  regenera-
tion— ^but  it  means  that  we  come,  when  we  die,  to  the  Holy
of  Holies  in  heaven  and  see  where  Christ's  blood,  shed  on
earth  for  expiation,  was  sprinkled  on  the  mercy  seat  in


OUTCOME  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  LIFE      311

heaven  for  atonement,  in  the  interval  between  His  death  and
resurrection.

We  now  need  to  understand  the  meaning  of  "which
speaketh  better  things  for  us  than  the  blood  of  Abel,"  i.e.,
the  blood  of  Abel's  typical  lamb,  which  could  not  possibly
take  away  sin.  Yet  Spurgeon  in  a  great  sermon  on  this  text,
construes  it  to  mean  Abel's  own  blood  which  Cain  shed,
according  to  Gen.  4:  lo,  11 :  "And  He  said.  What  hast  thou
done?  the  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto  me  from
the  ground.  And  now  cursed  art  thou  from  the  ground,
which  hath  opened  its  mouth  to  receive  thy  brother's  blood
from  thy  hand."  The  great  preacher  draws  a  vivid  picture
of  the  evicted  soul  of  Abel  rushing  into  heaven  and  crying :
"Vengeance!  Vengeance,  O  God,  on  my  murderer!"  But
our  Lord's  blood  cries:  "Father,  forgive  them;  they  know
not  what  they  do."

I  wish  I  could  close  my  discussion  here,  but  inexorable
duty  requires,  at  least,  an  outline  of  the  outcome  of  the
impenitent  sinner:

1.  He,  too,  when  he  dies,  comes  to  a  place — "a  place  pre-
pared for  the  devil  and  his  angels."

2.  The  conditions  of  that  place  are  foreshown  by  our  Lord
in  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  Luke  16:  23-31.
A  place  of  intolerable  thirst  and  torment,  so  far  from  the
water  of  Hfe.  Between  this  place  and  the  place  of  the
righteous  is  a  deep  impassable  gulf,  a  place  of  unanswered
prayers,  a  place  not  only  unreachable  by  agents  of  mercy  in
heaven  or  in  earth,  but  a  place  from  which  no  mission  can
be  sent  to  earth  to  warn  loved  ones  not  to  join  him  there.

3.  It,  too,  has  its  human  companions — all  liars,  thieves,
gamblers,  extortioners,  covetous  men,  adulterers,  and
idolators.

4.  It  has  its  angelic  companions — the  devil  and  his
dem.ons,  whom  the  impenitent  in  life  preferred  to  God  and
holy  angels.    Ah !  "Wide  is  the  place,  and  deep  as  wide,  and


312     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

ruinous  as  deep,  while  over  head  and  all  around,  wind  wars
with  wind,  and  storms  unceasing  hurl  the  lightning  bolts
of  wrath,  and  remorse,  the  undying  worm  forever  gnaws/*
The  outcome — the  outcome  of  the  path  whose  steps  take
hold  of  death  and  hell!


QUESTIONS

1.  What  the  climax  of  the  argument  in  this  letter?

2.  State  the  negative  outcome  of  the  Christian's  life.

3.  Cite  the  particulars,  without  the  scriptures,  of  what  the  Chris-
tian comes  to.

4.  Give  scriptures  on  the  place.

5.  Give  the  scriptures  on  the  conditions  of  the  place.

6.  Why  do  many  Christians  live  so  unhappily,  so  unprofitably,
so  prone  to  backsliding?

7.  Quote  Dr.  Chalmers.

8.  Quote  the  great  Methodist  hymn.

9.  Give  the  scriptures  on  the  angelic  companionship.

10.  What  the  several  ideas  on  the  human  companionship?

11.  What  the  scriptures  on  coming  to  the  Father  and  seeing  Him?

12.  On  coming  to  the  Son?  In  the  passage  from  Job  19  on  seeing
the  Redeemer,  which  version  is  correct,  common  or  revised?  In
other  words,  does  Job  expect  to  be  "without  his  body"  or  "in  his
risen  body"  when  he  beholds  his  Redeemer  ?

13.  Explain  "coming  to  the  blood  of  sprinkling,"  and  do  you  agree
with  Spurgeon?

14.  State  the  particulars  of  the  sinner's  outcome,  by  way  of
contrast.


XXVIII

THE  BETTER  FESTIVALS

Scripture:  All  References

SO  far  as  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews  is  concerned,  I  quote
two  passages  of  scripture — 12 :  10 :  "We  have  an  altar
whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  that  serve  the  taber-
nacle." The  other  passage  is  just  one  word  of  chapter  12:
"You  have  come  to  the  general  assembly" — the  Greek  word,
panegyris,  which  means  a  festive  assembly,  that  is,  an
assembly  not  for  business,  and  not  for  war,  but  for  joyous
festivities.

The  theme  of  this  chapter  is  the  seventh  great  promise  of
the  new  covenant,  towit :  The  Christian's  festivals  superior
to  the  old  covenant  festivals.    I  divide  this  into  four  heads :

First,  the  feasts  of  supports.  The  sacrifices  of  the  altar  that
went  to  the  support  of  the  Old  Testament  priesthood,  and  it  is
to  that  that  our  first  passage  quoted  refers :  "We  have  an
altar  whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  that  serve  the  taber-
nacle." To  show  the  meaning  of  that  first  thought,  we  will
turn  to  in  our  study  I  Cor.  9:  13,  14,  which  presents  the
same  thought  exactly :  "Know  ye  not  that  they  that  minister
about  sacred  things  eat  of  the  things  of  the  temple,  and  they
that  wait  upon  the  altar  have  their  portion  with  the  altar?
Even  so  did  the  Lord  ordain  that  they  that  proclaim  the
gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel."  One  of  the  accusations
made  by  Jews  against  Christians  was  that  their  covenant
made  ample  provision  for  their  priesthood — those  who  were
set  apart  exclusively  to  the  service  of  God.  Now,  it  is
promised  them  by  this  passage  (I  Cor.  9:  13,  14  and  Heb.

313


314     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

13:10)  that  Christianity  has  a  better  provision  for  its
ministers  than  the  Jews  had  for  their  priesthood — that  it
comes  by  a  special  ordinance  of  the  Lord  that  they  who
preach  the  gospel  shall  live  of  the  gospel.  In  the  old  covenant
the  things  that  were  for  the  Levites  to  eat  were  never
sin-offerings ;  these  sin-offerings  had  to  be  entirely  consumed.
They  would  not  eat  of  part  of  that,  but  some  burnt-offerings
were  not  sin-offerings.  Of  these  they  had  a  part  and  also  of
meal-offerings,  the  parts  of  the  crop  and  the  parts  of  the
flock,  and  the  parts  of  the  increase,  the  tithing;  that  por-
tion was  made  for  the  support  of  the  Levites  and  the  priests.
It  is  the  object  of  the  apostle  to  claim  that  Christianity
makes  a  better  provision,  not  based  upon  an  ad  valorem  tax,
nor  a  certain  amount  of  specified  increase,  nor  a  certain
portion  of  each  burnt-offering,  nor  a  sin-offering;  nor  a
certain  portion  of  the  thank-offering,  nor  of  a  meal-offering ;
but  a  general  ordinance  of  Jehovah  that  one  whose  life  was
consecrated  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  must  live  of  the
gospel.    That  is  the  first  thought.

The  second  thought  is  the  family,  or  memorial  feast  of
the  passover.  In  the  book  of  Exodus  we  have  an  account  of
the  establishment  of  the  passover,  and  of  the  feasts  of
unleavened  bread,  and  of  the  lamb,  and  of  bitter  herbs.  In
the  Letter  to  the  Corinthians,  Paul  discusses  these  feasts
and  what  the  Christian  has  to  take  the  place  of  them,  using
this  language :  "Purge  out  the  old  leaven  that  ye  may  be  a
new  lump,  even  as  ye  are  unleavened.  For  our  passover
also  hath  been  sacrificed,  even  Christ :  wherefore  let  us  keep
the  feast,  not  with  the  old  leaven,  neither  with  the  leaven  of
malice  and  wickedness,  but  with  the  unleavened  bread  of
sincerity  and  truth.  I  wrote  unto  you  in  my  epistle  to  have
no  company  with  fornicators,  not  at  all  meaning  with  the
fornicators  of  this  world,  or  with  the  covetous  or  extor-
tioners, or  with  idolators,  for  then  must  ye  needs  go  out
of  the  world.    But  as  it  is,  I  wrote  unto  you  not  to  keep


THE  BETTER  FESTIVALS  315

company,  if  any  man  that  is  named  a  brother  be  a  forni-
cator, or  covetous,  or  an  idolator,  or  a  reviler,  or  a  drunk-
ard, or  an  extortioner;  with  such  a  one  no,  not  to  eat."
I  Cor.  5:7-12.  That  is  the  first  exclusion  in  the  institution
of  the  Lord's  Supper — an  exclusion  of  church  members
whose  lives  are  at  war  with  their  profession.  We  are  to  come
to  that  feast  in  sincerity  and  in  truth,  each  one  examining
himself  as  to  his  faith  in  Christ;  and  we  are  to  partake  of
that  feast  shut  off,  not  from  outside  evil-doers,  for  they  are
not  in  it  at  all,  but  from  such  as  are  members  of  the  church
who  are  extortioners,  liars,  thieves,  idolators;  from  men
whose  lives  are  outrageous  in  sin — with  such  do  not  eat.

Whereas  the  Jew  kept  that  feast  as  a  family,  our  family
is  the  church.  They  kept  the  feast,  each  family  apart — the
Christians  keep  this  feast  as  a  church  family,  every  church
having  jurisdiction  that  can  exclude  from  participation  in
that  feast  all  unworthy.  Thus  they  celebrate  that  memorial
feast  of  our  Lord.  That  is  the  first  exclusion,  that  is,  exclu-
sion from  the  inside.  I  now  show  that  outsiders  cannot  par-
take of  this  feast,  and  I  give  a  passage  from  I  Cor.  10: 15 :
"I  speak  as  to  wise  men ;  judge  ye  what  I  say.  The  cup  of
blessing  w^hich  we  bless,  is  it  not  a  communion  (or  participa-
tion) of  the  blood  of  Christ?  And  the  bread  which  we
break,  is  it  not  a  communion  (or  participation)  of  the  body
of  Christ  ?  Seeing  that  we  who  are  many,  and  are  one  bread,
one  body,  for  we  all  partake  of  the  one  bread.  Behold,
Israel  after  the  flesh:  have  not  they  that  eat  the  sacrifices
communion  with  the  altar?  What  say  I  then  that  things
sacrificed  to  idols  is  anything,  or  that  an  idol  is  anything;
but  I  say  that  the  things  that  the  Gentiles  sacrifice,  they
sacrifice  to  demons,  and  not  to  God;  and  I  would  not  that
ye  have  communion  with  demons.  Ye  cannot  drink  the  cup
of  the  Lord,  and  the  cup  of  demons ;  ye  cannot  partake  of
the  table  of  the  Lord  and  of  the  table  of  demons."

You  see  in  that  part  in  the  Christian  festival  there  is  no


316     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

open  communion  with  false  worship.  It  is  a  close  com-
munion document.  Here  is  the  table:  it  is  the  Lord's,  not
mine.  If  it  were  mine  I  could  put  it  out  under  a  tree  in  the
yard,  or  in  the  cellar,  or  in  the  field,  or  in  the  house.  If  it
were  mine  I  could  invite  anybody  to  eat  with  me  that  I
pleased,  but  it  is  the  Lord's  table,  and  the  cup  is  the  cup  of
the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  must  say  who  shall  partake  of  this
feast.

In  such  a  place  as  Corinth,  where  there  were  inter-mar-
riages, it  was  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  for  a  woman,
who  was  a  Christian,  to  be  approached  by  her  husband,  who
was  an  idolator,  who  might  say,  "Let  us  partake  together;
you  come  and  eat  my  feast  with  me  and  I  will  eat  your  feast
with  you."  Here  comes  the  injunction — it  is  not  a  participa-
tion of  husband  and  wife — it  is  a  participation  in  the  blood
and  body  of  Christ,  and  we  cannot  take  the  cup  of  the  Lord
and  the  cup  of  the  demons,  for  idolators  do  worship  demons
— their  oracles  are  demon  oracles.  So  that  is  the  second
thought  of  the  Christian  festival.    We  now  come  to  the —

Third  thought :  the  love  feasts.  From  the  Old  Testament,
just  after  the  covenant  on  Sinai  was  ratified,  we  have  this
record:  "Then  went  up  Moses  and  Aaron,  Nadab,  Abihu,
and  seventy  of  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  they  saw  the  God
of  Israel ;  and  there  was  under  His  feet  as  it  were  a  paved
work  of  sapphire  stone,  and  as  it  were  the  very  heavens  for
clearness,  and  upon  the  nobles  of  the  children  of  Israel  He
laid  not  His  hand,  and  they  beheld  God  and  did  eat  and
drink"  (Ex.  24:9-11).

That  feast  of  joy  was  celebrated  after  the  ratification  of
their  covenant.  In  Jude  12  he  refers  to  Christian  "love
feasts"  this  way  (he  is  talking  about  those  that  deny  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  that  go  in  the  way  of  Balaam  for
hire,  or  in  the  way  of  Korah  by  gainsaying)  :  "These  are
they  who  are  hidden  rocks  in  your  love  feasts  when  they  feast
with  you,   shepherds  that  without   fear   feed  themselves;


THE  BETTER  FESTIVALS  317

clouds  without  water  carried  along  by  winds ;  autumn  trees
without  fruit,  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots;  wild
waves  of  the  sea,  foaming  out  their  own  shame ;  wandering
stars  for  whom  the  blackness  of  darkness  hath  been  reserved
forever."

There  is  a  feast  after  the  ratification  of  the  new  covenant.
It  is  called  a  love  feast.  In  Acts  2  this  love  feast  is  used  in
contra-distinction  from  the  Lord's  Supper.  I  will  first  take
the  passage  about  the  Lord's  Supper :  "And  they  were  con-
stant in  their  attendance  on  the  public  teachings  of  the
apostles,  and  in  contribution,  in  the  breaking  of  bread,  and
in  prayers."  Breaking  of  the  bread  there  refers  to  the  ordi-
nance of  the  Lord's  Supper.  "And  all  that  believed  were
come  together  and  had  all  things  common ;  and  they  sold  their
possessions  and  goods,  and  parted  them  to  all,  according  as
any  man  had  need.  And  day  by  day,  continuing  steadfastly
with  one  accord  in  the  temple,  and  breaking  bread  at  home,
they  took  their  food  with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart,
praising  God,  and  having  favor  with  all  the  people."

Out  of  that  passage  in  Acts,  and  the  one  in  Jude,  grew  up
after  apostolic  days  "love  feasts"  of  a  somewhat  different
order.  They  would  have  that  feast  at  the  time  they  had  the
Lord's  Supper,  making  a  common  meal  of  it,  and  would
sometimes  extend  the  feasting  unto  excess,  as  I  have  known
Negroes  to  do.  I  saw  a  Negro  love  feast  once.  Their  com-
munion-wine was  a  jug  of  whisky,  and  their  unleavened
bread  was  stacks  of  pies  arranged  along  the  side  of  the  wall,
and  they  would  drink  the  whisky  and  eat  those  pies,  and  join
hands  and  have  a  regular  hallelujah  dance.  Church  history
tells  much  about  these  love  feasts.  The  Methodists  have
founded  spiritual  love  feasts.  They  do  not  give  bread  to
eat,  or  wine  to  drink,  but  have  a  soul-feast.

The  point  that  I  am  making  is  that  in  the  joy  that  came
to  the  old-covenant  people  after  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice
had  been  sprinkled,  and  the  covenant  had  been  ratified,  the


318     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

representatives  went  up  into  the  mountain  in  the  presence
of  God  and  had  their  feast  in  His  presence.  So  the  Chris-
tians, after  the  ratification  of  their  covenant,  came  to  the
outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and
had  their  feasts  and  their  spiritual  communion.

I  come  now  to  the  fourth  thought.  In  the  Old  Testament
there  were  general  or  national  feasts — not  family  feasts,  like
the  Passover,  but  the  feast  of  the  tabernacles  and  the  feast
of  Pentecost.  Once  every  year  they  would  come  up  and  live
in  tents,  and  Jerusalem  would  have  millions  of  people  in  it
from  every  part  of  the  world.  The  Jews  would  come  up  in
general  assembly.  It  was  an  exceedingly  joyous  time  with
them  with  all  the  dispersion  coming  from  the  ends  of  the
earth.  What  is  there  in  the  Christian  covenant  superior  to
that?  It  is  expressed  in  Hebrews  12  in  that  word,  panegyris
— a  general  festive  assembly.  Paul  strictly  follows  the  Greek
custom  in  the  use  of  words.  Each  particular  Greek  State
was  an  independent  civic  government,  an  ekklesia,  but  every
four  years  say,  the  entire  Greek  nation  would  come  together
in  a  general  assembly — a  panegyris — that  was  the  name  of
it.  They  did  not  come  together  to  make  war  on  each  other :
"Let  not  the  Lacedamonians  come  up  to  the  panegyris  with
arms  in  their  hands."  They  had  feasts  and  games  and  great
joy.  The  apostle  seizes  upon  that  refinement  of  Greek
thought  to  show  that  as  each  church  here  on  earth  has  its
Lord's  Supper,  so  there  will  be  a  general  assembly  of  all
the  people  of  God — not  for  the  transaction  of  business,  for
business  is  done ;  not  for  war,  for  war  is  over — but  they
come  together  in  heaven  in  a  great  festive  assembly.

I  give  some  of  the  passages  that  bear  out  this  idea.  There
must  be  something  more  than  a  reference  to  the  Lord's
Supper  in  Luke  22 :  28-30 :  "But  ye  are  they  that  have  con-
tinued with  me  in  my  temptations ;  and  I  appoint  unto  you
a  kingdom,  even  as  my  Father  appointed  unto  me,  that  ye
may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my  kingdom ;  and  ye  shall


THE  BETTER  FESTIVALS  319

sit  on  thrones  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."  In
Matthew  8 :  1 1  Jesus  says,  "Many  shall  come  from  the  East
and  the  West,  the  North  and  the  South,  and  shall  recline  at
the  table  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of
God."  That  panegyris  seems  to  be  in  his  mind.  In  Luke  i6
we  have  a  picture  of  a  single  person  coming  up  from  death
and  joining  that  panegyris:  "And  it  came  to  pass  that  this
beggar  [Lazarus,  starved  to  death  on  earth,  hungering  for
even  the  crumbs  that  fell  from  the  rich  man's  table]  died,
and  he  was  carried  away  by  angels  into  Abraham's  bosom."
The  thought  is  based  on  the  posture  of  reclining  at  a  feast
that  as  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  John  leans  his  head  against
the  bosom  of  the  Lord,  so  that  poor  starved-out  man  on  eart*h,
as  soon  as  he  dies,  goes  to  the  great  heavenly  festival  and
rests  his  head  upon  the  bosom  of  Abraham,  while  that  rich
man,  who  fared  sumptuously  every  day  here  on  earth,  as
soon  as  he  died,  woke  up  in  hell,  burning  with  consuming
thirst  and  hunger.  But  Lazarus  goes  to  the  panegyris — the
general  assembly.  Let  us  consider  one  more  passage  on  it.
In  Matt.  26,  where  our  Lord  has  just  instituted  the  Lord's
Supper  and  is  holding  the  cup  in  His  hands  after  they  had
participated  in  it.  He  says,  "I  shall  drink  no  more  of  this
fruit  of  the  vine  until  I  drink  it  new  [not  as  it  is  now]  in
the  kingdom  of  God."  That  is  a  clear  reference  to  the  same
thought.  In  other  words,  the  idea  of  heaven  is  :  Warfare  is
ended,  privation  is  ended,  and  the  widely  scattered  people
of  God  are  brought  into  a  general  assembly.  Of  course  this
imagery  here  is  spiritual ;  it  refers  to  the  joys  of  redemption
of  God's  people — not  isolated  and  imperfect — but  assembled
and  glorified.

Let  us  now  restate  briefly  these  four  thoughts  of  the
festival.  The  first  thought  is  that  while  the  Jew  had  an
appointed  provision  for  his  priests  and  Levites  of  which  a
Christian  could  not  partake,  so  our  Lord  made  provision  for
His   ministers   that  no  Jewish  priest  could   share,   towit:


320     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

"They  that  preach  the  gospel  shall  live  by  the  gospel."
Second,  that  as  the  Jew  had  his  love  feasts,  so  the  Christian
has  his  agapae,  for  social  and  religious  enjoyment.  Third,
that  as  the  Jew  had  his  passover  family- feast,  the  Christian
has  his  Lord's  Supper,  or  church- feast.  Fourth,  that  as  the
Jew  had  his  national  festivals  every  year  when  all  Jews
came  together,  the  Christian  will  have  his  panegyris,  when
all  Christians  of  the  universe  shall  come  together  in  one
great  festive  assembly.

QUESTIONS

1.  What  the  seventh  great  promise  of  the  new  covenant?

2.  Under  what  four  heads  is  this  treated?

3.  What  two  passages  are  cited  from  Hebrews  bearing  on  this
matter  ?

4.  Contrast,  under  the  first  head,  the  provision  of  the  old  cove-
nant for  the  support  of  its  priests,  with  the  provision  of  the  new
covenant  for  the  support  of  its  preachers.

5.  Under  the  second  head  what  feast  has  the  new  covenant
analogous  to  the  Jewish  Passover  ?

6.  The  Jewish  Passover  was  a  family  feast.  What  is  the  Lord's
Supper  ?

7.  In  respect  to  how  many  classes  is  the  Lord's  Supper  exclusive?

8.  Show  what  members  of  the  church,  even,  are  to  be  refused
participation  ?

9.  What  scripture  bears  on  its  exclusiveness  of  outside  religions?

10.  What  would  you  argue  from  its  being  "The  Lord's  table —
the  cup  of  the  Lord" — as  bearing  on  invitations  to  participation  in  its
observance?

11.  Under  the  third  head  what  love,  or  joy-feast,  was  held  after
the  ratification  of  the  old  covenant?

12.  What  single  passage  names  the  new  covenant  "love-feasts?"

13.  What  the  character  of  Methodist  "love-feasts?"

14.  Under  the  fourth  head  what  N.  T.  passages  are  cited  bearing
on  the  heavenly  feast?

15.  What  one  Greek  word  in  Hebrews  names  it?

16.  Distinguish  between  the  particular  Greek  assemblies  called
ekklesias  and  their  general  festive  assembly  called  panegyris.


XXIX

EXHORTATIONS  AND  SPECIAL  PASSAGES

Scripture:  All  References

ALL  New  Testament  exhortation  is  based  on  antecedent
statement  of  doctrine.  In  Hebrews  the  whole  letter
is  a  succession  of  doctrines  and  exhortations — first
a  doctrine,  then  its  application.  In  some  respects,  then,  is
it  a  model  in  homiletics.

1.  It  shows  the  relation  between  dogma  and  morals.  There
can  be  no  morals  apart  from  dogma.  To  leave  out  dogma
undermines  morality.

2.  Dogma,  as  a  mere  theory,  is  valueless.  Its  power  lies
in  its  application  to  practical  life,  governing  thought,  emo-
tion, imagination,  words,  and  deeds,  in  all  of  life's  relations
to  God,  home,  country,  and  the  universe.

The  present-day  ministry  has  deteriorated  in  the  power  of
exhortation  based  on  vivid  conceptions  of  great  and  definitive
doctrines  concerning  God,  law,  sin,  salvation,  heaven  and
hell.  The  first  exhortation  in  this  letter  is  an  exhortation  to
earnest  attention:  "Therefore,  we  ought  to  give  the  more
earnest  heed  to  the  things  that  were  heard,  lest  haply  we  drift
away  from  them.  For  if  the  word  spoken  through  angels
proved  steadfast,  and  every  transgression  and  disobedience
received  a  just  recompense  of  reward,  how  shall  we  escape
if  we  neglect  so  great  a  salvation,  which  having  at  the  first
been  spoken  through  the  Lord,  was  confirmed  unto  us  by
them  that  heard?"  Heb.  2:  1-3.  The  doctrinal  basis  of  this
exhortation  is  all  the  first  chapter,  setting  forth  our  Lord's
threefold  Sonship,  by  eternal  subsistence,  by  His  incarnation,


322     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

by  His  resurrection,  and  His  threefold  superiority  over  the
universe,  over  the  angels,  and  over  the  prophets.  The  pre-
cise tendency  against  which  this  exhortation  warns  is  to
"drift  away"  from  great  truths.  Any  steady  lateral  pres-
sure which  insidiously  swerves  a  floating  object  from  a
given  direction,  and  causes  drifting,  as  a  prevalent  wind,  an
ocean-current  or  undertow,  rapids  in  a  river  leading  to  a
fall  or  the  suction  of  a  whirlpool.  Inherited  depravity,  the
course  of  this  world,  the  temptations  of  Satan,  the  increas-
ing power  of  evil  habits  until  they  become  second  nature —
in  a  word,  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil  constitute  the
drifting  power,  or  trend  away  from  salvation.  The  danger
of  neglecting  this  exhortation  is  that  we  are  carried  away
unwittingly  until  there  is  no  escape  forever.  The  great
majority  of  life's  irreparable  disasters  are  brought  about
by  "drifting  away"  through  "heedlessness"  and  "neglect."

The  element  of  the  greatness  in  this  salvation  is  deliver-
ance of  the  entire  man,  soul  and  body,  forever,  from  the
guilt,  defilement,  love  and  dominion  of  sin,  into  an  eternal
and  most  blessed  state  of  reconciliation  and  companionship
with  God.  The  historical  argument  against  any  hope  of
escape  if  this  salvation  be  neglected  is  that  from  Sinai  to
Christ's  advent  every  word  of  the  law  disposed  by  angels
proved  steadfast,  and  every  transgression  was  justly  pun-
ished. The  historical  instances  of  this  penalty  of  the  law
and  of  the  prophets  are  numerous.  The  applied  logic  of  this
history  is  as  follows :

By  so  much  as  Christ  is  greater  than  angels  or  prophets ;
by  so  much  as  His  revelation  is  more  complete  and  the
light  of  His  gospel  brighter ;  by  so  much  as  it  is  better
accredited ;  by  so  much  as  it  is  final  where  theirs  was  transi-
tional and  educational — by  that  much  is  its  penalty  surer  and
severer.

The  second  exhortation,  found  in  3 :  8,  is  against  "harden-
ing the  heart."    There  is  a  relation  between  "drifting"  and


EXHORTATION,  SPECIAL  PASSAGES      3^3

"hardening."  "Drifting"  precedes  and  tends  toward  "hard-
ening," which  is  a  more  dangerous  state.  By  "hardening"
is  meant  a  blunting  of  the  moral  perceptions,  a  growing
callousness  to  spiritual  sensations,  tending  to  the  condition
of  "past  feeling."  According  to  the  context  "an  evil  heart
of  unbelief"  operating  through  the  "deceitfulness  of  sin"
causes  hardening.  This  deceitfulness  consists  in  miscon-
struing the  grace  of  delay  in  punishment  as  immunity  alto-
gether, as  saith  the  prophet:  "Because  sentence  against  an
evil  deed  is  not  speedily  executed,  the  heart  of  the  sinner  is
fully  set  in  him  to  do  evil."

The  third  exhortation  is  found  in  4 :  1 1  thus  :  "Let  us  labor
therefore  to  enter  into  that  rest."  The  doctrinal  basis  of
this  exhortation  is  that  as  God  rested  from  creation,  com-
memorating it  by  a  Sabbath  day,  so  Jesus  rested  after  the
greater  work  of  redemption,  commemorating  it  by  appoint-
ing a  new  day  for  Sabbath-keeping.

The  fourth  exhortation,  found  in  4:  14,  is  this:  "To  hold
fast  to  our  confession."  The  doctrinal  basis  is  the  fact  that
Jesus,  our  High  Priest,  has  entered  into  the  heavenly  Holy
of  Holies  to  make  atonement  and  intercession  for  us.

The  fifth  exhortation,  4 :  16,  is  to  come  boldly  to  the  throne
of  grace  for  mercy  and  help  in  every  time  of  need.  The
doctrinal  basis  of  this  exhortation  is  the  fact  that  our  High
Priest  is  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  having
been  in  all  points  tempted  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.

The  occasion  for  the  sixth  exhortation  is  that  they  were
in  a  state  of  arrested  development,  remaining  "babes  in
Christ"  when  they  ought  to  have  been  teachers,  and  so  not
only  unprepared  to  receive  the  higher  grades  of  Christian
knowledge,  but  they  were  unable  to  discern  between  good
and  evil  because  their  spiritual  senses  had  not  been  exercised ;
hence  they  were  continually  tempted  to  try  to  rub  out  and
make  a  new  start  from  the  very  beginning  (See  5 :  11-14).
This  reminds  us  of  the  three  classes  into  which  our  Lord


324f     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

divided  His  flock :  ( i )  Lambs,  Greek :  arnia,  i.e.,  new  con-
verts; (2)  Sheep,  Greek:  probata,  i.e.,  mature  Christians;
(3)  Little  sheep,  Greek  (best  manuscript)  :  "prohatia"  i.e.,
Christians  stunted  in  growth  (See  John  21 :  15-19).  These
Hebrews  were  "little  sheep."

The  phrase,  "by  reason  of  use,"  is  illustrated  by  the  senses,
or  faculties,  or  muscles  which  increase  in  power  by  use,  or
go  into  bankruptcy  by  disuse.  Certain  Chinese  families,
training  the  sense  of  touch  for  generations,  can  tell  colors
of  cloth  fabrics  in  the  dark  by  feeling.  It  is  said  also  that
certain  Japanese  dentists,  by  long  training  of  the  muscles
of  thumb  and  forefinger,  extract  teeth,  using  the  hand  alone
as  forceps.  Again,  the  prophet,  referring  to  the  second
nature  of  long  continued  evil  habits,  says,  "As  the  Ethiopian
cannot  change  his  skin  nor  a  leopard  his  spots,  so  one  accus-
tomed to  do  evil  cannot  learn  to  do  well."

This  sixth  exhortation  is  to  leave  the  first  principles,  not
attempting  the  relaying  of  foundations,  but  go  on  to  maturity,
6: 1.  The  first  principles  of  Christian  oracles  are  the  foun-
dation of  repentance  and  faith,  the  teaching  of  baptisms,  the
laying  on  of  hands,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  eternal
judgment,  6 : 2.

Repentance  and  faith  are  called  a  foundation  because
without  them  one  can  neither  be  a  Christian  nor  be  saved.
Therefore  the  folly  of  attempting  to  relay  this  founda-
tion, since  it  is  never  laid  but  once,  which  Paul  hypothet-
ically  states  thus:  "For  as  touching  those  who  were  once
enlightened  and  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were  made
partakers  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  tasted  the  good  word  of
God,  and  the  powers  of  the  age  to  come,  and  then  fell  away,
it  is  impossible  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance,"
Heb.  6:4-6.

This   passage   has    several    interpretations,    as    follows:

I.  John  Bunyan  held  that  the  "enlightening,"  "tasting,"
and  "partaking"  of  this  passage  refer  to  illumination  and


EXHORTATION,  SPECIAL  PASSAGES      325

conviction  by  the  Holy  Spirit  which  did  not  eventuate  in
regeneration.  This  view  the  author  rejects  because  the
passage  also  supposes  genuine  repentance  as  well  as  "illu-
mination" and  "conviction,"  else  why  say  it  is  impossible  to
renew  them  again  unto  repentance  f  Moreover,  he  discon-
nects the  force  of  "being  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Spirit**
and  "tasting  of  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come."

2.  Dr.  Wilkes,  a  Methodist  preacher,  as  the  author  heard
him  say,  held  that  the  passage  certainly  taught  two  things :
(a)  A  genuine  Christian  may  lose  regeneration;  and  (b)
if  he  does  he  can  never  be  converted  again.

3.  The  author  holds  that  "the  enlightening,"  "tasting"
and  "partaking"  are  equivalent  to  regeneration,  and  that
the  passage  does  teach  that  if  regeneration  were  once  lost
it  could  never  be  regained,  because,  having  exhausted  the
benefits  of  Christ's  crucifixion  in  the  direction  of  regenera-
tion, another  regeneration  would  call  for  another  crucifixion,
but  Christ,  as  a  sin-offering,  dies  but  once — He  is  offered
once  for  all.  So  the  passage  teaches  "Seeing  they  crucify
to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh  and  put  Him  to  an
open  shame."  It  would  be  an  open  shame  to  Christ  if  a
beneficiary  of  His  salvation  should  lose  it  and  thus  vitiate
the  certainty  of  the  Father's  promise  to  Him  and  covenant
with  Him.  But  that  the  statement  is  hypothetic  appears
from  the  apostle's  added  words:  "But,  beloved,  we  are
persuaded  better  things  of  you,  and  things  that  accompany
salvation,  though  we  thus  speak ;"  "But  we  are  not  of  them
that  shrink  back  unto  perdition ;  but  of  them  that  have  faith
unto  the  saving  of  the  soul."  The  object  of  the  exhortation
is  to  influence  the  Christian  to  move  on  and  not  spend  a  life-
time at  the  foundation,  for  in  any  event  this  is  folly.

To  illustrate :  Being  present,  as  a  visitor,  at  a  Methodist
meeting,  I  was  invited  to  talk  to  some  of  the  mourners.  I
approached  a  man  who  seemed  to  be  weeping  in  great  dis-
tress, and  asked  what  was  his  trouble.    His  reply  was,  sub-


326     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

stantially :  "I  have  been  converted  several  times,  but  I  always
lose  it."  I  assured  him  he  was  mistaken  on  one  or  the  other
of  two  points — either  he  was  never  genuinely  converted,  or
he  had  never  lost  it — both  could  not  be  true.  He  replied:
"I  knozv  I  was  converted,  and  I  know  I  lost  it."  Then  said
I :  "Why  are  you  wasting  time  here ;  why  shedding  fruit-
less tears?  H  you  are  right  on  both  points,  then  you  are
forever  lost.  You  have  exhausted  the  plan  of  salvation.
Your  only  chance  is  for  Christ  to  come  and  die  again  and
send  the  Holy  Spirit  again,  of  w^hich  there  is  no  promise,
and  even  in  that  case  there  is  no  certainty  for  you  unless  He
and  the  Holy  Spirit  should  do  more  efficient  work  next  time.
I  don't  desire  to  shake  your  positive,  infallible  knowledge
that  you  have  been  regenerated  and  that  you  have  lost  it,
but  merely  point  out  that  in  such  case  you  are  forever  lost,
just  as  certainly  as  if  you  were  in  hell  now.  Here,  look  at
Heb.  6 : 4-6,  and  see  that  I  can  do  you  no  good,  and  so  will
pass  on  to  cases  not  hopeless."  "Don't  leave  me,"  he  said,
"maybe  I  am  mistaken  on  one  of  those  points."

"Baptism"  here  is  in  the  plural  and  there  is  a  reference
here,  (i)  To  baptism  in  water  (Matt.  28:19);  (2)  To
baptism  in  fire,  or  eternal  punishment  (Matt.  3:10-12);
(3)  To  baptism  in  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts  1:5);  (4)  To
baptism  in  suffering  (Mark  10:  39).

"The  teaching  of  laying  on  of  hands"  refers :  (i)  To  con-
ferring of  miraculous  power  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  of
the  apostles  (Acts  8:  17;  19:6)  which,  accrediting  of  the
apostles,  passed  away  with  the  apostles ;  (2)  To  the  abiding
requirement  of  laying  on  of  hands  in  the  ordination  (a)  for
deacons  (Acts  6:6),  (b)  For  evangelists  (Acts  13 :3 ;  I  Tim.
4: 14),  and  (c)  For  other  preachers  (I  Tim.  5  :  22).

From  a  peculiar  interpretation  of  Heb.  6:  i,  2  there  arose
a  sect  known  as  the  "Six-Principle  Baptists"  who  practiced
laying  hands  on  those  who  were  baptized  as  an  essential  part
of  the  form  of  the  ordinance.


EXHORTATION,  SPECIAL  PASSAGES      327


QUESTIONS

1.  What  the  New  Testament  method  of  exhortation?

2.  What  the  method  in  Hebrews?

3.  In  what  respects,  then,  is  it  a  model  in  homiletics?

4.  Wherein  has  the  present-day  ministry  deteriorated?

5.  What  the  first  exhortation  in  this  letter,  and  what  its  doc-
trinal basis?

6.  What  the  precise  tendency  against  which  this  exhortation
warns  ?

7.  What  the  causes  of  drifting?

8.  What,  in  plain  terms,  constitute  the  drifting  power,  or  trend
away  from  salvation?

9.  What  the  danger  of  neglecting  this  exhortation?

10.  What  is  your  estimate  of  the  relative  proportion  of  life's
irreparable  disasters  brought  about  by  "drifting  away"  through
"heedlessness"  and  "neglect?"

u.     What  the  elements  of  greatness  in  this  salvation?

12.  What  the  historical  argument  against  any  hope  of  escape  if
we  neglect  this  salvation  ?

13.  Cite  historical  instances  of  this  penalty  (i)  of  the  law  and  (2)
of  the  prophets.

14.  What  the  applied  logic  of  this  history?

15.  Against  what  is  the  exhortation  in  3:8?

16.  What  the  relation  between  "drifting"  and  "hardening?"

17.  What  do  you  understand  by  "hardening?"

18.  What  do  we  find  in  the  context  as  a  cause  of  "hardening?"

19.  In  what  does  deceitfulness  consist?

20.  What  the  exhortation  relative  to  rest,  and  what  its  doctrinal
basis  ?

21.  What  the  exhortation  relative  to  confession,  and  what  its
doctrinal  basis?

22.  What  the  exhortation  relative  to  our  need,  and  what  the  doc-
trinal basis?

22).    What  the  occasion  of  the  exhortation  relative  to  perfection?

24.  Into  what  three  classes  did  our  Lord  divide  His  flock,  and  of
which  class  were  these  Hebrews?

25.  Expound  the  phrase,  "by  reason  of  use."

26.  What,  then,  the  exhortation  relative  to  perfection?

27.  What  the  first  principles  of  Christian  oracles?

28.  Why  are  repentance  and  faith  called  a  foundation?

29.  What  the  folly  of  trying  to  relay  this  foundation,  and  what
the  doctrine  involved?

30.  How  does  Paul  hypothetically  state  this?

31.  What  the  several  interpretations  of  this  passage?

32.  Give  an  incident  of  the  use  of  this  passage  by  the  author.
ZZ'    What  is  the  meaning  of  "baptisms"  used  in  this  passage?

34.  What  the  meaning  of  "laying  on  of  hands?"

35.  What  sect  of  Baptists  arose  from  a  peculiar  interpretation  of
Heb.  6:1,  2,  and  what  their  construction  of  "laying  on  of  hands?"


XXX

EXHORTATIONS  AND  SPECIAL  PASSAGES
(Concluded)

Scripture:  All  References

THE  seventh  exhortation  in  this  book  is  as  follows:
"Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart  in  fulness  of
faith — let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope
that  it  waver  not — let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke
unto  love  and  good  works,  not  forsaking  our  own  assembling
together,  exhorting  one  another,"  lo:  22-25.  The  doctrines
that  underlie  this  manifold  exhortation  are,  (i)  Christ  has
rent  the  veil  hiding  the  holy  of  holies  by  His  death,  and
dedicated  for  us  a  new  and  living  way.  (2)  We  have  a
great  High  Priest  over  the  house  of  God.  (3)  The  day  of
His  final  coming  is  rapidly  approaching,  Heb.  10:  19-21.

Here  a  question  arises.  Does  "having  our  bodies  washed
with  pure  water"  (10:22)  refer  to  water  baptism,  and  if
so,  what  the  bearing  of  the  teaching?  It  is  not  clear  that  it
has  such  reference.  But  if  it  does,  it  strongly  supports  the
Baptist  teaching,  towit :  Our  souls  are  cleansed  by  the  appli-
cation of  Christ's  blood  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  regeneration.
Baptism  in  water  only  washes  the  body,  and  hence  can  only
externally  symbolize  the  internal  cleansing.  In  this  way
Paul,  internally  cleansed,  could  arise  and  wash  away  his
sins  symbolically  in  baptism  (Acts  22: 16),  or  as  Peter  puts
it:  "Water,  even  baptism,  after  a  true  likeness  doth  now
save  us,  not  putting  away  the  filth  of  the  flesh  (i.e.,  the  carnal
nature),  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God,
through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,"  I  Pet.  3:21.    In

S28


EXHORTATION,  SPECIAL  PASSAGES      329

other  words,  it  is  a  figurative  salvation,  and  the  figure  or
likeness  is  that  of  a  resurrection  (See  Romans  6:4,  5).

Paul's  reason  for  the  seventh  exhortation  is  expressed  in
the  famous  passage,  10:26-29,  the  whole  of  which  is  an
explanation  of  the  eternal,  unpardonable  sin  against  the
Holy  Spirit,  very  different  from  the  gradual,  unconscious
sins  of  "drifting"  and  "hardening."  Its  conditions  and
characteristics  are :

1.  There  has  been  great  spiritual  light  and  knowledge,
thoroughly  convincing  the  judgment  of  the  truth  of  the
gospel,  and  strongly  impressing  the  mind  to  accept  it.

2.  It  is  a  distinct  and  wilful  rejection  of  the  well  known
light  and  monition  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

3.  It  is  a  culmination  of  sin  against  every  person  of  the
Trinity,  (a)  It  is  a  sin  against  the  Father  in  deliberately
trampling  under  foot  the  Son  of  His  love,  (b)  It  is  a  sin
against  the  Son  in  counting  the  blood  of  His  expiation  an
unho)y  thing,  (c)  It  is  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit  in
doing  despite  to  His  grace  who  has  furnished  complete  proof
to  the  rejector's  conscience  that  it  is  God's  Son  who  is
trampled  under  foot,  and  that  the  blood  of  His  vicarious
sacrifice  alone  can  save.

4.  Once  committed,  the  soul  is  there  and  then  forever  lost,
having  never  forgiveness  in  time  or  eternity,  and  knows  that
for  him  there  is  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  expects
nothing  but  judgment  and  fiery  wrath  which  shall  devour
the  adversaries.

5.  Let  the  reader  particularly  note  that  this  sin  cannot  be
committed  except  in  an  atmosphere,  not  merely  of  light  and
knowledge,  but  of  spiritual  light,  knowledge  and  power,  and
that  it  is  one  wilful,  malicious  act,  arising  from  hate — hating
the  more  because  of  the  abundance  and  power  of  the  light.

The  eighth  exhortation  is,  "Cast  not  away  your  boldness,"
10 :  35.  The  exhortation  is  based  on  appeal  to  their  remem-
brance of  the  triumphs  of  their  past  experience.    They  had


330     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

patiently  endured  a  great  conflict  of  sufferings  just  after
their  conversion;  they  had  been  made  a  gazing-stock  both
by  reproaches  and  afflictions  cast  on  them,  and  by  their  shar-
ing in  the  afflictions  of  their  leaders.  This  is  evident  from
the  history  of  Paul's  labors  among  them.  There  was
nothing  in  their  present  afflictions  severer  than  those  they
triumphantly  endured  in  their  earlier  experience.

The  ninth  exhortation  is,  "Therefore,  let  us  also,  seeing
that  we  are  compassed  about  by  so  great  a  cloud  of  wit-
nesses, lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which  doth  so
easily  beset  us,  and  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that
is  set  before  us,  looking  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and  per-
fecter  of  our  faith,  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him
endured  the  cross,  despising  shame,  and  hath  sat  down  at
the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God.  For  consider  him  that
hath  endured  such  gainsaying  of  sinners  against  himself,
that  ye  wax  not  weary,  fainting  in  your  souls,"  Heb.  12 :  1-3.
The  imagery  here  is  that  of  a  foot-race,  such  as  these  people
had  often  witnessed  in  the  Isthmian  Games  at  Cornith,  or
in  the  great  amphitheatre  at  Ephesus.  "The  race  set  before
us" — the  great  example  upon  whom  the  runner  must  fix  his
eye — is  Jesus,  the  author  (or  captain)  and  perfecter  of  our
faith.
The  force  of  the  example  of  Jesus  in  12:  2  is  this:
He  is  set  before  us  as  the  one  perfect  model  or  standard.
A  joy  was  set  before  Him  as  a  recompense  of  reward  that
when  attained  would  make  Him  the  gladdest  man  in  the
universe.  For  this  He  voluntarily  became  the  saddest  man
in  the  universe.  Thus  "the  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted
with  grief"  was  "anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above
His  fellows;"  "He  saw  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  was
satisfied."  Here  we  are  confronted  with  this  double  ques-
tion :  Does  the  phrase,  "author  and  perfecter  of  our  faith,"
mean  that  Jesus  first  inspires  and  then  completes  our  individ-
ual faith — i.e.,  what  He  begins  He  consummates — or  that


EXHORTATION,  SPECIAL  PASSAGES      331

He  is  the  Captain  and  completer  of  the  faith  in  the  sense
that  His  completed  victory  is  both  cause  and  earnest  of  our
own  victory,  as  in  2:  lo?  The  latter  best  accords  with  the
import  of  the  Greek  word,  archegos,  used  both  here  and  in
2:10,  and  with  the  whole  context.

The  word,  '"witnesses,"  in  12:  i  means  "martyrs'*  whose
examples  should  excite  our  emulation,  and  accords  with  the
meaning  and  usage  of  the  Greek  word  marturos,  which
makes  them  witnesses  to  the  truth  and  not  spectators  of
what  other  people  may  do.  Moreover,  the  Biblical  evidence
is  scant,  if  there  be  any  at  all,  that  departed  souls  are  allowed
to  sympathetically  intervene  in  the  struggles  of  those  left
behind.  Yet,  by  rhetorical  license,  in  the  exercise  of  the
imagination,  a  poet,  orator,  or  writer,  may  summon  the  dead
to  appear  before  the  living  for  dramatic  effect.  But  we  go
far  when  we  seek  to  construct  doctrine  on  rhetorical  license.
What  is  the  "besetting  sin"  in  12:  i?  It  may  not  be  the
same  in  all  cases.  It  is  the  sin  to  which  one  most  easily
yields,  whether  pride,  lust,  covetousness,  anger,  vanity,  or
any  other.

The  tenth  exhortation,  12:4-13,  is,  "Regard  not  lightly  the
chastening  of  the  Lord,"  because  (i)  chastening  is  an  evi-
dence of  sonship.  (2)  If  we  have  borne  arbitrary  chastening
from  earthly  parents,  much  more  we  will  bear  disciplinary
chastening  from  our  heavenly  Father.  (3)  While  grievous
at  first,  it  yieldeth  afterward  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness,
if  rightly  received.

Here  come  up  the  Creationist  theory  of  the  origin  of
human  spirits  and  the  Traducian  theory.  The  Creationist
theory  is  that  the  spirit  of  every  human  being  born  into
the  world  is  a  direct  creation  of  God,  and  only  the  body
is  derived  from  the  earthly  parent.  The  Traducian  theory
is  that  every  child,  in  his  entirety,  spirit  and  body,  is  de-
rived from  his  earthly  parents,  begotten  in  the  likeness  not
only  of  bodily  features,  but  in  spiritual  state,  otherwise  man


332     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

could  not  propagate  his  species,  and  every  child  would,  in
his  inner  nature,  be  born  holy,  not  subject  to  inherited  de-
pravity and  not  needing  regeneration  until  he  became  an
actual  transgressor,  hence  needing  only  proper  environment
and  training  to  grow  up  in  holiness.

The  passage  in  question  is  not  decisive  for  either  theory.
God  is  the  Father  of  spirits  in  that  originally  the  spirit  of
man  was  not  a  formation  from  inert  matter,  but  a  special
creation  (See  Gen.  2:7).  Thus  the  whole  race,  body  and
spirit,  was  potentially  in  the  first  man,  died  body  and  spirit
in  him  when  he  fell,  and  after  his  fall  he  "begat  children
in  his  likeness"  body  and  spirit.

In  12:12,  13,  "hands  hanging  down,"  "palsied  knees,"
and  "crooked  paths"  refer  to  the  physical  effects  of  spiritual
depression  or  terror,  the  inner  man  acting  on  the  outer.  See
case  of  Belshazzar  (Dan.  5:6),  and  recall  cases  coming
under  your  own  observation  in  which  discouragements  or
despondency  of  the  spirit  enfeeble  the  body.  Some  men,
morally  brave,  are  physically  timid.  A  famous  French  mar-
shall  always  trembled  at  the  beginning  of  battle.  On  one
occasion  his  officers  rallied  him  on  his  shaking  legs.  He
answered,  "If  my  legs  only  knew  into  what  dangers  I  will
take  them  today,  they  would  shake  more  than  they  do."

The  eleventh  exhortation,  12 :  i4ff,  is,  "Follow  after  peace
with  all  men,  and  the  sanctification  without  which  no  man
shall  see  the  Lord."  There  are  two  hazards  attending  obe-
dience to  this  exhortation,  against  which  there  are  specia/
cautions,  as  follows:  (i)  The  springing  up  of  a  root  of
bitterness  to  defile  many.  (2)  The  spirit  of  profanity,  or
the  despising  of  sacred  things.

In  our  own  experience  or  observation,  cases  arise  of  a
single  root  of  bitterness  disturbing  the  peace  of  communi-
ties and  retarding  the  sanctification  of  hundreds.

Profanity  here  means,  not  so  much  swearing  as  it  does  a
Spirit  of  irreverence  in  speaking  of  sacred  things,  and  some-


EXHORTATION,  SPECIAL  PASSAGES     333

times  interested  lost  souls  are  completely  side-tracked  by
the  levity  and  foolish  jestings,  and  the  questionable  anec-
dotes of  preachers  in  their  hours  of  relaxation.

The  author  having  often,  in  his  early  ministry,  witnessed
the  wounding  and  shocking  of  sober-minded  Christians  and
the  loss  of  interest  in  awakened  sinners  caused  by  the  foolish
jestings  in  the  preacher's  tent  concerning  sacred  things,  and
sometimes  by  obscene  anecdotes,  entered  into  a  solemn  cove-
nant with  Dr.  Riddle,  the  moderator  of  the  Waco  Associa-
tion, never  to  tell  nor  willingly  hear  a  doubtful  anecdote.
This  covenant  was  made  while  camping  out  one  night  on
the  prairie  in  the  light  of  the  stars.

The  twelfth  exhortation  and  its  doctrinal  basis  are  found
in  12 :  28,  29 :  "Wherefore,  receiving  a  kingdom  that  cannot
be  shaken,  let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  offer  service
well-pleasing  to  God  with  reverence  and  awe :  for  our  God
is  a  consuming  fire.

I  will  group  in  classes  the  exhortations  of  chapter  13  as
follows :

1 .  Love  to  brethren,  strangers,  and  those  in  bonds.

2.  Honor  the  sanctity  of  marriage.

3.  Eschew  the  covetous  spirit.

4.  Hold  in  kind  remembrance  your  leaders  that  have
passed  away.

5.  Bear  the  reproach  of  Christ,  even  if  it  ostracises  from
worldly  cities.

6.  Offer  spiritual  sacrifices  of  praise,  confession,  contri-
bution and  prayer.

In  closing  this  exposition  there  are  two  things  worthy  of
note:  First,  The  bearing  of  13:8  on  the  preceding  verse,
which  means  that  preachers  may  come  and  go,  but  Jesus
is  ever  the  same.  Second,  The  controversy  arose  over  13 :  10
— a  controversy  as  to  what  is  the  Christian  altar.  Was  it
the  cross  on  which  Jesus  was  crucified  ?  Then  how  can  the
altar  be  greater  than  the  gift  on  the  altar,  as  Christ  taught  ?


334     COLOSSIANS,  EPHESIANS,  HEBREWS

Was  it  Christ's  divinity  on  which  His  humanity  was  sacri-
ficed? This  controversy  was  a  refinement  of  foolishness,
because  the  altar  under  consideration  is  not  supporting  the
expiating  sin-offering  of  which  the  priests  were  never  allowed
to  have  a  part,  but  the  altar  to  which  non-expiatory  offer-
ings were  brought,  such  as  meat  offerings,  thank-offerings,
tithes,  etc.  Of  these  the  priests  and  Levites  might  partake.
The  meaning  is  simply  this — that  Christianity  provides  in
its  way  for  the  support  of  its  laborers  through  the  voluntary
offerings  to  Christ's  cause  (See  I  Cor.  9:  13,  14).

QUESTIONS

1.  What  the  exhortation  in  this  book  relative  to  faith,  hope  and
love?

2.  What  doctrines  underlie  this  manifold  exhortation?

3.  Does  "having  our  bodies  washed  with  pure  water"   (10:22)
refer  to  water-baptism,  and  if  so,  what  the  bearing  of  the  teaching?

4.  How  do  you  interpret  Paul's  reason  for  this  exhortation  as
expressed  in  10 :  26-29,  which  refers  to  the  eternal  sin  ?

5.  What  the  exhortation  relative  to  boldness,  and  on  what  is  it
predicated  ?

6.  What  the  exhortation  relative  to  weights,  sins,  etc.,  what  its
imagery,  and  what  its  elements?

7.  What  the  force  of  the  example  of  Jesus  in  12:2?^

8.  What  does  the  phrase,  "author  and  per  f  ecter  of  our  faith,"  mean  ?

9.  What  the  meaning  and  import  of  "witnesses"  in  12:  i?

10.  What  the  "besetting  sin"  in  12:1?

11.  What  the  exhortation  relative  to  chastening,  and  what  its
reasons?

12.  What  the  theories  relative  to  the  origin  of  human  spirits,  and
what  the  bearing  of  this  passage  on  the  subject?

^  13.    What  the  meaning  and  force  of  "hands  hanging  down,"  "pal-
sied knees"  and  "crooked  paths?"

14.  What  the  exhortation  relative  to  peace  and  sanctification  ?

15.  What  two  hazards  attending  obedience  to  this  exhortation?

16.  Do  you  know  of  a  case  of  a  single  "root  of  bitterness"  disturb-
ing communities  and  hindering  sanctification?

17.  What  the  meaning  of  profanity  here,  and  what  illustration  of
the  effect  of  such  profanity  given?

18.  In  what  did  Esau's  profanity  consist?

19.  What  the  meaning  of  12:  17?

20.  What  the  exhortation  relative  to  grace,  and  what  its  doctrinal
basis?

21.  Group  in  classes  the  exhortations  of  chapter  13.

22.  What  the  bearing  of  13 :  8  on  the  preceding  verse?

23.  What  controversy  arose  over  13:  10?

24.  Why  was  this  controversy  a  refinement  of  foolishness?


Date  Due

^  .  ^  '3!

^'6  m

^rP'-t-t-^

r--..

^
