
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmiimmmf^m' 
mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmimmmmmmmmmmmmmf 



' 




CoMMENmi 



G 



c 



AND 



OMMENTAfflES 



Vi< ;■^-•^i^w»'-^ V4ii.v/L':> 



.ji.Spux^c^on. 





iita)i»»MiiafM'Mji-MWiim&Mjf.i»i»i»taiac;i.-jAj.y.v:ijaj 



Gfotttell Itttuersttg ffithtatg 

attjata, ■New ^ark 



LIBRARY OF 

LEWIS BINGLEY WYNNE 

A.B..A.M.. COLUMBIAN COLLEGE. 'Tl, '73. 
WASHINGTON. D. C. 



THE GIFT OF 

MRS. MARY A. WYNNE 

AND 

JOHN H. WYNNE 

CORNELL '98 
1922 



Cornell University Ubrery 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tliis book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924031176252 



COMMENTING AND COMMENTARIES. 

LEOTUHES 

ADDRESSED TO THE STUDENTS OF THE 

FASTOK'S COLLEGE, METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, 

WITH A LIST OP THB BEST 

BIBLICAL COMMENTARIES AND EXPOSITIONS, 

Also 

A LECTUEB ON ECCENTRIC PREAOHEES, 

WITH A COMPLETE LIST OF ALL OF SPITRGEON'S SERMONS, 
WITH THE SCEIFTUEE TEXTS USED. 

BY 

0. H. SPURGEON, 

FBESISBNT. 



NEW YORK: 

Sheldon & Company. 

NO. 8 MUEKAY STREET. 
1870. 



The present volume is the second of a series of works useful 
to Students and Ministers prepared by Mr. Spttrgeon ; and pub- 
lished at $1.25. The first volume is "Lectures to my Students : 
» Selection from Addresses delivered to the Students of the 
Pastor's College, Metropolitan Tabernacle." 

Mr. Sptirgeon has other works of a similar character in con- 
templation, which will be issued, if the Lord will. It is hoped 
that The College Series may render efficient service to 
preachers of the gospel. Friends who appreciate the books will 
greatly oblige by making them known to others. The same 
motive which prompted the author to write, leads him to desire 
a large circle of readers. 



PREFAOE, 



Whes I issued the first volume of " Lectures to my 
Students " it was my intention to prepare another series 
as soon as time permitted, and I meant to include two 
addresses upon commenting in the proposed selection. 
It struck me, however, that a better thing was possible. 
The two lectures might introduce the topic of exposition, 
and then a list of Commentaries might help the student 
to carry the advice into practice. The making of that 
list would, of course, be no small labor ; but, once ac- 
complished, it might be of service to many, and effect 
more in the direction aimed at than the most earnest 
exhortations. I therefore resolved to attempt the work, 
and here is the result. 

It would be easy to point out the deficiencies of the 
modern pulpit, and hold up one's own ideal of what 
preaching ought to be, but this has been so often at- 
tempted by others with such slender results that we 
decline the task. A judicious critic would probably 
complain that many sermons are deficient in solid in- 
struction. Biblical exposition, and Scriptural argument : 
they are flashy, rather than fleshy ; clever, rather than 
solid ; entertaining, rather than impressive. He would 
point to rhetorical discourses in which doctrine is barely 
discernible, and brilliant harangues from which no food 



4 PREFACE. 

for the soul could ever be extracted. Having done this, 
he would probably propose that homilies should flow out 
of texts, and should consist of a clear explanation, and 
an earnest enforcement of the truths which the texts 
distinctly teach. Expository preaching he would advo- 
cate as the great need of the day, its best protection 
against rising errors, and its surest means of spiritual 
edification. To such observations most of us would 
offer no opposition; we should confess them to be 
full of wisdom, and worthy of being pondered. We 
should not unite in any indiscriminate censuring of 
hortatory addresses, or topical sermons, nor should we 
agi'ee with the demand that every discourse should be 
limited to the range of its text, nor even that it should 
have a text at all ; but we should heartily subscribe to 
the declaration, that more expository preaching is greatly 
needed, and that all preachers would be the better if 
they were more able expounders of the inspired Word. 

To render such a result more probable, every induce- 
ment to search the Holy Scriptures should be placed in 
the way of our ministers, and to the younger brethren 
some guidance should be proffered as to the works most 
likely to aid them in their studies. Many are pei'suaded 
that they^ should expound the Word, but being unversed 
in the original tongues they can only fall back upon the 
help of their English Concordances, and are left floun- 
dering about, when a sound comment would direct their 
thoughts. True, the Holy Spirit will instruct the seeker, 
but he works by means. The Ethiopian eunuch niight 
have received divine illumination, and doubtless did 
receive it,, but still, when asked whether he understood 
the Scripture which he read, he replied, "How can I 
unless some man shall guide me ?" The guiding man 



PEEFAOE. 5 

is needed still. Divines who hare studied the Scriptures 
have left us great stores of holy thought which we do 
well to use. Their expositions can never be a substitute 
for our own meditations, but as water poured down a 
dry pump often sets it to work to bring up water of .its 
own, so suggestive reading sets the mind in motion on 
its own account. Here, however, is the difficulty. 
Students do not find it easy to choose which works to 
buy, and . their slender stores are often wasted on books 
of a comparatively worthless kind. If I can save a poor 
man from spending his money for that which is not 
bread, or, by ^directing a brother to a good book, may 
enable him to dig deeper into the mines of truth, I shall 
be well repaid. For this purpose I have toiled, and 
read much,^ and passed under review some three or four 
thousand volumes. From these I have compiled my 
catalogue, rejecting many, yet making a very varied 
selection. Though I have carefully used such judgment 
as I possess, I have doubtless made many errors ; I shall 
certainly find very few who will agree with all my 
criticisms, and some persons may be angry at my 
remarks. I have, however, done my best, and, with as 
much impartiality as I can command, I have nothing 
extenuated nor set down aught in malice. He who finds 
fault will do well to execute the work in better style : 
only let him remember that he will have my heifer to 
plough with, and therefore ought in all reason to excel me. 
I have used a degree of pleasantry in my remarks on 
the Commentaries, for a catalogue is a dry affair, and, 
as much for my own sake as for that of my readers, I 
have indulged the mirthful vein here and there. For 
this I hope I shall escape censure, even if I do not win 
commendation. 



6 PREFACE. 

The preface to the List will be found on pages 60 and 
61 which the reader is requested to peruse before at- 
tempting to use the list. 

To God I commend this labor, which has been under- 
taken and carried out with no motive but that of hon- 
oring his name, and edifying his Church by stimulating 
the study of his Word. May- he, for his Son's sake, 
grant my heart's desire. 

The preparation of the present work was suggested 
by the author's connection with the Pastors' College, and 
the Library of that Institution has in a high degree 
assisted in its execution, therefore the reader must per- 
mit the College to be noticed in these pages in the same 
manner as in the former volume of this series. To make 
it known, and to win for it willing friends is confessedly 
one object of these publications, which may indeed be 
viewed as merely the giving forth to a wider area the 
instruction carried on within the College walls. 

The Institution is intended to aid useful preachers 
in obtaining a better education. It takes no man to 
make him a minister, but requires that its pupils should, 
as a rule, have exercised their gifts for at least two years, 
and have won souls to Jesus. These we receive, how- 
ever poor or backward they may be, and our endeavors 
are all turned toward the one aim, that they should be 
instructed in the things of God, furnished for their 
work, and practised in the gift of utterance. Much 
prayer is made by the Church that this end may be 
accomplished, nor has the prayer been in vain, for some 
330 men are now declaring the gospel of Jesus who were 
trained in this manner. Besides the students for the 
regular ministry, several hundreds of street preachers, 
city missionaries, teachers, and workers of all kinds 



PBEFACE. 7 

have passed through our evening classes, and a band of 
250 such men are now with us, pursuing their callings 
by day and studying in the evening. We ask for much 
prayer from all our brethren, that the supply of the 
Spirit may sanctify the teaching, and anoint every worker 
for the service of the Lord. 

As it would be quite unwarrantable for us to interfere 
with the arrangements of other bodies of Christians, who 
have their own methods of training their ministers, and 
as it is obvious that we could not find spheres for men 
in denominations with which we have no ecclesiastical 
connection, we confine our college to Baptists ; and in 
order not to be harassed with endless controversies, we 
invite those only who hold those views of divine truth 
which are popularly known as Calvinistic, — not that we 
care for names and phrases, but as we wish to be under- 
stood, we use a term which conveys our meaning as 
nearly as any descriptive word can do. Believing the 
grand doctrines of grace to be the natural accompani- 
ments of the fundamental evangelical truth of redemp- 
tion by the blood of Jesus, we hold and teach them not 
only in our ministry to the masses, but in the more select 
instruction of the class-room. Latitudrnarianism with 
its infidelity, and unsectarianism with its intolerance, 
are neither of them friends of ours : we delight in the^ 
man who believes, and therefore speaks. Our Lord has 
given us no permission to be liberal with what is none of 
ours. We are to give an account of every truth with 
which we are put in trust. 

Our means for conducting this work are with the 
most High God, possessor of heaven and earth. We 
have no list of subscribers or roll of endowments. Our 
trust is in Him whom we desire to serve. He has sup- 



8 PEEFACE. 

ported the work for many years, by moving his stewards 
to send us help, and we are sure that he will continue to 
do so as long as he desires us to pursue this labor of love. 
We need, at least, £100 every week of the year. Since 
our service is gratuitous in every sense, we the more 
freely, appeal to those who agree with us in believing 
that to aid an earnest young minister to equip himself 
for his life-work is a worthy efEoi"t. No money yields so 
large a return, no work is so important, just now none 
is so absolutely needful, 

C. H. SPTJEGEOir. 
Nightingale Lane, 

Claphau, Subbbt. 



OOE'TES'TS. 



LECTURE I. 

FAQB 

A Chat about Commentariea 11 



LECTURE IL 

On Commenting 43 

Remarks upon the List of Commentaries 60 

List of Commentaries on the Whole Bible 63 

„ „ on the Old Testament 74 

„ „ on the separate Books of the Old Testa- 
ment 75 

„ ,, on the New Testament 201 

J, „ on the separate Books of the New 

Testament 209 

Eccentric Preachers 283 

A Complete Index to all of Mr, Spurgeon's Works, including 
the Text of Scripture from which he preached, etc 805 



LECTURE I. 

A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTAKIES. 

In order to be able to expound the Scriptures, and 
as an aid to your pulpit studies, you will need to be 
familiar with the commentators : a glorious army, let me 
tell you, whose acquaintance will be your delight and 
profit. Of course, you are not such wiseacres as te think 
or say that you can expound Scripture without assistance 
from the works of divines and learned men who have 
labored before you in the field of exposition. If you are 
of that opinion, pray remain so, for you are not worth 
the trouble of conversion, and like a little coterie who 
think with you, would resent the attempt as an insult 
to your infallibility. It seems odd, that certain men 
who talk so much of what the Holy Spirit reveals to 
themselves, should think so little of what he has revealed 
to others. My chat this afternoon is not for these great 
originals, but for you who are content to learn of holy 
men, taught of God, and mighty in the Scriptures. It 
has been the fashion of late years to speak against the 
use of commentaries. If there were any fear that the 
expositions of Matthew Henry, Gill, Scott, and others, 
would be exalted into Christian Targums, we would join 
the chorus of objectors, but the existence or approach 
of such a danger we 'do not suspect. The temptations 
of our times lie rather in empty pretensions to novelty 
of sentiment, than in a slavish following of accepted 



12 A CHAT ABOUT COHMEIJXABIES. 

guides. A respectable acquaintance with the opinions 
of the giants of the past, might have saved many an 
erratic thinker from wild interpretations and outrageous 
inferences. Usually, we have found the despisers of 
commentaries to be men who have no sort of acquaint- 
ance with them ; in their case, it is the opposite of 
familiarity which has bred contempt. It is true there 
are a number of expositions of the whole Bible which are 
hardly worth shelf-room ; they aim at too much and fail 
altogether ; the authors have spread a little learning over 
a vast surface, and have badly attempted for the entire 
Scriptures what they might have accomplished for one , 
book with tolerable success ; but who wiU deny the pre- 
eminent value of such expositions as those of Calvin, Ness, 
Henry, Trapp, Poole, and Bengel, which are as deep as 
they are broad ? and yet further, who can pretend to 
biblical learning who has not made himself familiar with 
the great writers who spent a life in explaining some one 
sacred book ? Caryl on Job will not exhaust the patience 
of a student who loves every letter of the Word ; even 
CoUinges, with his nine hundred and nine pages upon 
one chapter of the Song, will not be too full for the 
preacher's use ; nor will Manton's long-metre edition of 
the hundred and nineteenth Psalm be too profuse. No 
stranger could imagine the vast amount of real learning 
to be found in old commentaries like the following : — 
Durham on Solomon's Song, Wilcocks on Psalms and 
Proverbs, Jermin on Ecclesiastes and Proverbs, Green- 
hill on Ezekiel, Burroughs on Hosea, Ainsworth on the 
Pentateuch, King on Jonah, Hutcheson on John, Peter 
Martyr on Eomans, etc., and in Willett, Sibbes, Bayne, 
Elton, Byfield, Daill6, Adams, Taylor, Barlow, Goodwin, 
and others on the various epistles. Without attempting 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 13 

to give in detail the names of all, I intend in a familiar 
talk to mention the more notable, who wrote upon the 
whole Bible, or on either Testament, and I especially 
direct your attention to the titles, which in Puritan 
writers generally give in brief the run of the work. 

First among the mighty for general usefulness we 
are bound to mention the man whose name is a house- 
hold word, Matthew Hbkbt.* He is most pioua and 
pithy, sound and sensible, suggestive and sober, terse 
and trustworthy. You will find him to be glittering 
with m.etaphor3, rich in analogies, overflowing with illus- 
trations, superabundant in reflections. He delights in 
apposition and alliteration ; he is usually plain, quaint, 
and full of pith ; he sees right through a text directly ; 
apparently he is not critical, but he quietly gives the 
result of an accurate critical knowledge of the original 
fully up to the best critics of his time. He is not versed 
in the manners and customs of the East, for the Holy 
Land was not so accessible as in our day ; but he is 
deeply spiritual, heavenly,, and profitable ; finding good 
matter in every text, and from all deducing most prac- 
tical and judicious lessons. His is a kind of commentary 
to be placed where I saw it, in the old meeting-house at 
Chester — chained in the vestry for anybody and every- 
body to read. It is the poor man's commentary, the old 
Christian's companion, suitable to everybody, instructive 
to all. His own account of how he was led to write his 
exposition, affords us an example of delighting in the 
law of 'the Lord. "If any desire to know how so mean 

* An Exposition of all the Books of the Old and New Testa- 
ments. By Mattubw Henry, late minister of the gospel in 
Chester. (Many editions ; to be met with at very low prices.) 



14 A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 

and obscure a person as I am, who in learning, judgment, 
felicity of expression, and all advantages for such a ser- 
vice, am less than the least of all my Master's servants, 
came to venture upon so great a work, I can give no 
other account of it but this. It has long been my 
practice, what little time I had to spare in my study from 
my constant preparation for the pulpit, to spend it in 
drawing up expositions upon some parts of the "Sew 
Testament, not so much for my own Tise, as purely for 
my own entertainment, because I know not how to 
employ my thoughts and time more to my satisfaction. 
Trahit sua quemque voluntas ; every man that studies 
hath some beloved study, which is his. delight above any 
other ; and this is mine. It is that learning which it 
was my happiness from a child to be trained up in by 
my ever honored father, whose memory must always be 
very dear and precious to me. He often minded me, 
that a good textuary is a good divine ; and that I should 
read other books with this in my eye, that I might be 
the better able to understand and apply the Scripture." 
You are aware, perhaps, that the latter part of the New 
Testament was completed by other hands, the good man 
having gone the way of all flesh. The writers were 
Messrs. Evans, Brown, Mayo, Bays, Eosewell, Harriss, 
Atkinson, Smith, Tong, Wright, Merrell, Hill, Reynolds, 
and Billingsley — all Dissenting ministers. They have 
executed their work exceedingly well, have worked in 
much of the matter which Heni'y had collected, and 
have done their best to follow his methods, but their 
combined production is far inferior to Matthew Henry 
himself, and any reader will soon detect the difference. 
Every minister ought to read Matthew Henry entirely 
and carefully through once at least. I should recom- 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 15 

mend you to get through it in the next twelve months 
after you leave college. Begin at the beginning, and 
resolve that you will traverse the goodly land from Dan 
to Beersheba. You will acquire a vast store of sermons 
if you read with your note-book close at hand ; and as 
for thoughts, they will swarm around you like twittering 
swallows around an old gable toward the close of autumn. 
If you publicly expound the chapter you have just been 
reading, your people will wonder at the novelty of your 
remarks and the depth of your thoughts, and then you 
may tell them what a treasure Henry is. Mr. Jay's 
sermons bear indubitable evidence of his having studied 
Matthew Henry almost daily. Many of the quaint 
things in Jay's sermons are either directly traceable to 
Matthew Henry or to his familiarity with that writer. 
I have thought that the style of Jay was founded upon 
Matthew Henry : Matthew Henry is Jay writing. Jay is 
Matthew Henry preaching. What more could I say in 
commendation either of the preacher or the author ? 

It would not be possible for me too earnestly to press 
upon you the importance of reading the expositions of 
that prince among men, Johu Calvik ! * I am afraid 
that scant purses may debar you from their purchase, 
but if it be possible procure them, and meanwhile, since 
they are in the College library, use them diligently. I 
have often felt inclined to cry out with Father Simon, a 
Eoman Catholic, " Calvin possessed a sublime genius," 

* The works of John Calvin, in 51 volumes. Messrs. Clark, 
of Edinburgh, announce that they possess the copyright of the 
works of Calvin originally published by the Calvin Translation 
Society, and issue them on the following terms : — Complete sets 
in 51 volumes, £9 9s. The "Letters," edited by Dr. Bonnet, 2 
vols., 10s. 6d., additional. Complete seta of Commentaries, 45 vols., 
£7 17s. 6d. The " Institutes," 3 vols., 34s. 



16 A CHAT ABOUT COMJIEIITAEIES. 

and with Scaliger, " Oh ! how well has Calrin reached 
the meaning of the prophets — no one better." You will 
find forty-two or more goodly volumes worth their weight 
in gold. Of commentators I believe John Calvin to be 
the most candid. In his expositions he is not always what 
moderns would call Calvinistic : that is to say, where 
Scripture maintains the doctrine of predestination and 
grace he flinches in no degree, but inasmuch as some 
Scriptures bear the impress of human free action and 
responsibility, he does not shun to expound their mean- 
ing in all fairness and integrity. He was no trimmer 
and prnner of texts. He gave their meaning as far as he 
knew it. His honest intention was to translate the 
Hebrew and the Greek originals as accurately as he 
possibly could, and then to give the meaning which 
would naturally be conveyed by such Greek and Hebrew 
words : he labored, in fact, to declare, not his own mind 
upon the Spirit's words, but the mind of the Spirit as 
couched in those words. Dr. King very truly says of 
him, " No writer ever dealt more fairly and honestly by 
the "Word of God. He is scrupulously careful to let it 
speak for itself, and to guard against every tendency of 
his own mind to put upon it a questionable meaning for 
the sake of establishing some doctrine which he feels to 
be important, or some theory which he is anxious to 
uphold. This is one of his prime excellences. He will 
not maintain any doctrine, however orthodox and essen- 
tial, by a text of Scripture which to him appears of 
doubtful application, or of inadequate force. For 
instance, firmly as he believed the doctrine of the Trini- 
ty, he refuses to derive an argument in its favor from 
the plural form of the name of God in the first chapter 
of Genesis. It were easy to multiply examples of this 



A CHAT ABOUT C0MMENTABIE3. 17 

kind, which, whether we agree in his conclusion or not, 
cannot fail to produce the conyiction that he is at least 
an honest commentator, and will not make any passage 
of Scripture speak more or less than, according to his 
view, its divine Author intended it to speak." 

The edition of John Calvin's works which was issued 
hy the Calvin Translation Society, is greatly enriched by 
the remarks of the editors, consisting not merely of notes 
on the Latin of Calvin, and the French translation, or 
on the text of the original Scriptures, but .also weighty 
opinions of eminent critics, illustrative manners and 
customs, and observations of travellers. By the way, 
gentlemen, what a pity it is that people do not, as a 
rule, read the notes in the old Puritan books I If you 
purchase old copies of such writers as Brooks, you will 
find that the notes in the margin are almost as rich as 
the books themselves. They are dust of gold, of the 
same metal as the ingots in the centre of the page. But 
to return to Calvin. If you needed any confirmatory 
evidence as to the value of his writings, I might summon 
a cloud of witnesses, but it will suffice to quote one or 
two. Here is the opinion of one who is looked upon as 
his great enemy, namely, Arminius : "Next to the 
perusal of the Scriptures, which I earnestly inculcate, I 
exhort my pupils to peruse Calvik's commentaries, 
which I extol in loftier terms than Helmich * himself ; 
for I affirm that he excels beyond comparison in the inter- 
pretation of Scripture, and that Ms commentaries ought 
to be more highly valued than all that is handed down to 
us by the Library of the Fathers ; so that I acknowl- 
edge him to have possessed above most others, or rather 

* Werner Helmich, a Dutch Protestant divine, a.d. 1551 — 1608. 



18 A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTAEIES. 

above all other men, what may be called an eminent 
gift of prophecy." 

Quaint Robert Robinson said of him, " There is no 
abridging this sententious commentator, and the more I 
read him, the more does he become a favorite expositor 
with me." Holy Baxter wrote, "I know no man since 
the apostles' days, whom I value and honor more than 
Calvin, and whose judgment in all things, one with 
another, I more esteem and come nearer to." 

If you are well enough versed in Latin, you will find 
in Poole's Synopsis,* a marvellous collection of all the 
wisdom and folly of the critics. It is a large cyclopaedia 
worthy of the days when theologians could be cyclopean, 
and had not shrunk from folios to octavos. Query — a 
query for which I will not demand an answer — ^has one of 
you ever beaten the dust from the venerable copy of Poole 
which loads our library shelves ? Yet as Poole spent no 
less than ten years in compiling it, it should be worthy of 
our frequent notice — ^ten years, let me add, spent in Am- 
sterdam in exile for the truth's sake from his native land. 

His work was based upon an earlier compilation 
entitled Critici Sacri, containing the concentrated light 
of a constellation of learned men who have never been 
excelled in any age or country, 

Matthew Poole also wrote Akitotations f upon 

* Synopsis Critieorum alioramque S. Scripturse Interpretum. 
Opera Matthsei Poli. Londinensia, mdclxix. 

f Annotations upon the Holy Bible. Wherein the sacred text 
is inserted, and various readings annexed, together with the 
parallel Scriptures. The more difficult terms in each verse 
explained; seeming contradictions reconciled; questions and 
doubts resolved ; and the whole text opened. By the late Rev. 
and learned divine, Mr. Matthew Pools. 1700. 



A CHAT ABOUT 00MMENTAEIB8. 19 

the Word of God, in English, which are mentioned hy 
Matthew Henry as haying passed through many impres- 
sions in his day, and he not only highly praises them, hut 
declares that he has in his own work all along been brief 
upon that which Mr. Poole has more largely discussed, 
and has industriously declined what is to be found there. 
The tliree volumes, tolerably cheap, and easily to be got 
at, are necessaries for your libraries. On the whole, if I 
must haye only one commentary, and had read Matthew 
Henry as I haye, I do not know but what I should choose 
Poole. He is a very prudent and judicious commen- 
tator ; and one of the few who could honestly say, " We 
have not willingly balked any obvious diflSculty, and 
have designed a just satisfaction to all our readers ; and 
if any knot remains yet untied, we have told our readers 
what hath been most probably said for their satisfaction in 
the untying of it. " Poole is not so pithy and witty by far 
as Matthew Henry, but he is perhaps more accurate, less 
a commentator, and more an expositor. You meet with 
no ostentation of learning in Matthew Poole, and that 
for the simple reason that he was so profoundly learned 
as to be able to give results without a display of his 
intellectual crockery. A pedant who is forever quoting 
Ambrose and Jerome, Piscator and CEcolampadius, in 
order to show what a copious reader he has been, is 
usually a dealer in small wares, and quotes only what 
others have quoted before him, but he who can give you 
the result and outcome of very extensive reading without 
sounding a trumpet before him is the really learned man. 
Mind you do not confound the Annotations with the 
Synopsis ; the English work is not a translation of the 
Latin one, but an entirely distinct performance. 
Strange to say, like the other great Matthew he did not 



20 A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTAEIES. 

live to complete his work beyond Isaiah Iriii.; other 
hands united to finish the design. 

Would it be possible to eulogize too much the incom- 
parably sententious and suggestive folios of Johw 
Tkapp ? * Since Mr. Dickinson has rendered them 
accessible,! I trust most of you have bought them. 
Trapp wiU be most valuable to men of discernment, to 
thoughtful men, to men who only want a start in a line 
of thought, and are then able to run alone. Trapp 
excels in witty stories on the one hand, and learned 
allusions on t^e other. You will not thoroughly enjoy 
him unless you can turn to the original, and yet a mere 
dunce at classics will prize him. His writings remind 
me of himself : he was a pastor, hence his holy practical 
remarks ; he was the head of a public school, and every- 
where we see his profound scholarship ; he was for some 
time amid the guns and drums of a parliamentary garri- 
son, and he gossips and tells queer anecdotes like a man 

* Annotations upon the Old and New Testament, in fire 
distinct volumes. Whereof the first is upon the five Books of 
Moses, and upon the following Books, of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 
Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles. The second is upon Ezra, Nehe- 
miah, Esther, Job and Psalms. The third is upon Proverbs, 
Ecclesiastes, Solomon's Song, and the four major prophets, with 
a treatise called, "The righteous Man's Recompense." The 
fourth is upon the twelve minor prophets, the fifth and last is 
upon the whole New Testament, with a. Decade of Divine Dis- 
courses, or Common-places, thereunto annexed. By John 
Teapp, M.A., pastor and preacher of the word of God at Weslon- 
upon-Avon, in Gloucestershire. 1663. 

f The reprint by Mr. R. D. Dickinson is edited by Rev. W. 
Webster, and Rev. Hugh Maetin , with a Memoir of the Author, 
by Rev. A. B. Grosakt, 5 vols., super-royal 8vo., cloth ; £3 8s. 6d. 
to subscribers. 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMBKTARIES. 21 

used to soldier- life ; yet withal, he comments as if he 
had been nothing else but a commentator all his days. 
Some of his remarks are far-fetched, and like the far- 
fetched rarities of Solomon's Tarshish, there is much 
gold and silyer, but there are also apes and peacocks. 
His criticisms would some of them be the cause of 
amusement in these days of greater scholarship ; but for 
all that, he who shall excel Trapp had need rise very 
early in the morning. Trapp is my especial companion 
and treasure ; I can read him when I am too weary for 
anything else. Trapp is salt, pepper, mustard, vinegar, 
and all the other condiments. Put him on the table 
when you study, and when you have your dish ready, 
use him by way of spicing the whole thing. Yes, gen- 
tlemen, read Trapp certainly, and if you catch the 
infection of his consecrated humor, so much the better 
for your hearers. 

A very distinguished place is due to Db. Gill.* 

* An Exposition of the Old Testament, in which are recorded 
the origin of mankind, of the several nations of the world, and 
of the Jewish nation in particular ; the lives of the patriarchs of 
Israel ; the journey of that people from Egypt to the land of 
Canaan, and their settlement in that land : their laws, moral, 
ceremonial, and judicial ; their government and state under 
judges and kings ; their several captivities, and their sacred 
books of devotion : in the exposition of which, it is attempted to 
give an account of their several books and the writers of them ; 
a summary of each chapter, and the genuine sense of each verse, 
and, throughout the whole, the original text and the versions of 
it, are inspected and compared ; interpretation of the best note, 
both Jewish and Christian, consulted ; difficult places at large 
explained, seeming contradictions reconciled, and various passages 
illustrated and confirmed by testimonies of writers as well Gentile 
as Jewish. By John Gill, D.D. 



22 A CHAT ABOtJT COMMBNTAEIES. 

Beyond all controversy, Gill was one of the most able 
Hebraists of his day, and in other matters no mean 
proficient. When an opponent in controversy had ven- 
tured to call him "a botcher in divinity," the good 
doctor, being compelled to become a fool in glorying, 
gave such a list of his attainments as must have covered 
his accuser with confusion. His great work on the 
Holy Scriptures is greatly prized at the present day by 
the best authorities, which is conclusive evidence of its 
value, since the set of the current of theological thought 
is quite contrary to that of Dr. Gill. No one in these 
days is likely to be censured for his Arminianism, but 
most modem divines affect to sneer at anything a little 
too highly Calvinistic : however, amid the decadence of 
his own rigid system, and the disrepute of even more 
moderate Calvinism, Gill's laurels as an expositor are 
still green. His ultraism is discarded, but his learning 
is respected : the world and the church take leave to 
question his dogmatism, but they both bow before his 
erudition. Probably no man since Gill's days has at all 
equalled him in the matter of Rabbinical learning. Say 
what you will about that lore, it has its value : of course, 
a man has to rake among perfect dunghills and dust- 
heaps, but there are a few jewels-which the world could 
not afford to miss. Gill was a master cinder-sifter among 
the Targums, the Talmuds, the Mishna, and the Gemara. 

An Exposition of the New Testament, in which the sense of 
the sacred text is taken ; doctrinal and practical truths are set in 
a plain and easy light, difficult passages explained ; seeming con- 
tradictions reconciled ; and whatever is material in the various 
readings and several Oriental versions is observed. The whole 
illustrated with notes taken from the most ancient Jewish writ- 
ings. By John Gill, D.D. 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 23 

Eiclily did he deserve the degree of which he said, " I 
never bought it, nor thought it, nor sought it." 

He was always at work ; it is diflBlcult to say when 
he slept, for he wrote 10,000 folio pages of theology. 
The portrait of him which belongs to this church, and 
hangs in my private vestry, and from which all the pub- 
lished portraits have been engraved, represents him after 
an interview with an Arminian gentleman, turning up 
his nose in a most expressive manner, as if he could not 
endure even the smell of free-will. In some such a vein 
he wrote his commentary. He hunts Arminianism 
throughout the whole of it. He is far from being so 
interesting and readable as Matthew Henry. He deliv- 
ered his comments to his people from Sabbath to Sab- 
bath, hence their peculiar mannerism. His frequent 
method of animadversion is, " This text does not mean 
this," nobody ever thought it did; "It does not mean 
that," only two or three heretics ever imagined it did ; 
and again it does not mean a third thing, or a fourth, 
or a fifth, or a sixth absurdity ; but at last he thinks it 
does 'mean so-and-so, and tolls you so in a methodical, 
sermon-like manner. This is an easy method, gentle- 
men, of filling up the time, if you are ever short of heads 
for a sermon. Show your people firstly, secondly, and 
thirdly, what the text does not mean, and then after- 
wards you can go back and show them what it does mean. 
It may be thought, however, that one such a teacher is 
enough, and that what was tolerated from a learned 
doctor would be scouted in a student fresh from college. 
For good, sound, massive, sober sense in commenting, 
who can excel Gill ? Very seldom does he allow himself 
to be run away with by imagination, except now and 
then when he tries to open up a parable, and finds a 



24 A CHAT ABOUT COMMEUTAKIES. 

meaning in every circumstance and minute detail ; or 
when he falls upon a text which is not congenial with 
his creed, and hacks and hews terribly to bring the word 
of God into a more systematic shape. Gill is the Oory- 
phoeus of hyper-Calvinism, but if his followers never 
went beyond their master, they would not go very far 
astray. 

I have placed next to Gill in my library Adak 
Clakkb,* but as I have no desire to have my rest broken 
by wars among the authors, I have placed Doddridge 
between them. If the spirits of the two worthies could 
descend to the earth in the same mood in which they 
departed, no one house would be able to hold them. 
Adam Clarke is the great annotator of our Wesleyan 
friends ; and they have no reason to be ashamed of him, 
for he takes rank among the chief of expositors. His mind 
was evidently fascinated by the singularities of learning, . 
and hence his commentary is rather too much of an old 
curiosity shop, but it is filled with valuable rarities, such 
as none but a great man could have collected. 'Like 
Gill, he is one-sided, only in the opposite direction to our 
friend the Baptist. The use of the two authors may help 
to preserve the balance of your judgments. If you consid- 
er Clarke wanting in unction, do not read Mm for savor 
but for criticism, and then you will not be disappointed. 

* The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments. 
The text carefully printed from the most correct copies of the 
present Authorised Translation, including the Marginal Readings 
and Parallel Texts. With a Commentary and Critical Notes ; 
designed as a help to a better understanding of the Sacred Writ- 
ings. By Adam Clabke, LL. D., P. S. A„ &c . A new edition 
with the Author's final correction. London : Printed for Thomas 
Tegg, etc. (7 volumes.) 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTABlBS. 25 

The author thought that lengthy reflections were 
rather for the preacher than the commentator, and hence 
it was not a part of his plan to write such observations 
as those which endear Matthew Henry to the million. 
If you have a copy of Adam Clarke, and exercise discre- 
tion in reading it, you will derive immense advantage 
from it, for frequently by a sort of side-light he brings 
out the meaning of the text in an astonishingly novel 
manner. I do not wonder that Adam Clarke still stands, 
notwithstanding his peculiarities, a prince among com- 
mentators. I do not find him so helpful as Gill, but 
still, from his side of the question, with which I have 
personally no sympathy, he is an important writer, and 
deserves to be. studied by every reader of the Scriptures. 
He very judiciously says 6f Dr. Gill, " He was a very 
learned and good man, but has often lost sight of his 
better judgment in spiritualizing the text ; " this is the 
very verdict which we pass upon himself, only altering 
the last sentence a word or two ; " He has often lost 
sight of his better judgment in following learned singu- 
larities ; " the monkey, instead of the serpent, tempting 
Eve, is a notable instance. 

As I am paying no sort of attention to chronological 
order, I shall now wander back to old Master Mater,* 

* A commentary npon the whole " Old Testament," added to 
that of the same anthor upon the whole " New Testament," pub- 
lished many years before, to make a complete work upon the 
whole Bible. Wherein the divers Translations and Expositions, 
LiteraU and Mysticall, of all the most famous Commentatprs, both 
Ancient and Modern, are propounded, examined, and judged of, 
for the more full satisfaction of the studious reader in all things, 
and many most genuine notions inserted for edification in tlie 
grace of oar Lord Jesus Christ. A work, the like unto which 
hath never yet been published by any man, yet very necessary. 



26 A CHAT ABOUT COMMEXTABIESi 

a rare and valuable author, I have been in London a long 
time now, but I have only of late been able to complete 
my set. The first volume especially, is rare in the ex- 
treme. The six volumes, folio, are a more judicious and 
able digest of former commentators, enriched with the 
author's own notes, forming altogether one of the full- 
est and best of learned English commentaries ; not 
meant for popular use, but invaluable to the student. 
He is a link between the modem school, at the head of 
which I put Poole and Henry, and the older school who 
mostly wrote in Latin, and were tinctured with the con- 
ceits of those schoolmen who gathered like flies around 
the corpse of Aristotle, He appears to have written 
before Diodati and Trapp, but lacked opportunity to 
publish. I fear he will be forgotten, as there is but little 
prospect of the republication of so diffuse, and perhaps 
heavy, an author. He is a very Alp of learning, but cold 
and lacking in spirituality, hence.his lack of popularity. 

In 1653, Arthur Jackson,* Preacher of God's "Word 
in Wood Street, London, issued four volumes upon the 
Old Testament, which appear to have been the result of 

not only for stnUents in divinity, but also for every Christian that 
lovetlx the knowledge of divine things, or humane, whereof this 
comment is also full, &c. By John Mayer, Doctor of Divinity. 
London, mdcmii. 

* A help for the understanding of the Holy Scripture. Intended 
chiefly for the assistance and information of those that use con- 
stantly every day to read some part of the Bible, and,would gladly 
always understand what they read if they had some man to help 
them." The first part. Containing certain short notes of exposi- 
tion upon the five books of Moses, etc. By Arthur Jackson, 
preacher of God's Word in Wood Street, London. Anno Dom. 
injcciiiii. 



A CHAT ABOUT COMJIEIfTAEIES. 37 

his pulpit expositious to his people. Valuable his works 
would be if there were no better, but they are not com- 
parable to others already and afterward mentioned. 
You can do without him, but he is a reputable author. 
I'ar more useful is if bss's Histoby and Mystery of the 
Old and New Testament,* a grand repository of quaint 
remarks upon the historical books of Scripture. You 
will find it contained in four thin folio volumes, and you 
will have a treasure if you procure it. 

Need I commend Bishop Hall's Contemplations f 
to your affectionate attention ? What wit ! What sound 
sense ! What concealed learning I His style is as pithy 
and witty as that of Thomas Fuller, and it has a sacred 
unction about it to which Fuller has no pretension. 

Haak's Annotations J come to us as the offspring 

* A Complete History and Mystery of tlie Old and New Testa- 
ment, logically discussed, and tUeologically improved. In three 
distinct volumes. The first beginning at the Creation of the 
World, and ending at Moses. The second continuing the History 
from Joshua till the Birth of Christ. The third from the Birth of 
Christ, to the Death of the last and longest living Apostle, John 
the Divine. The like undertaking (in such a manner and method) 
being never attempted before. By Mr. Christophek Ness, min- 
ister of the gospel in London. 1690. 3 vols., thin folio. 

f Contemplations on the historical passages of the Old and New 
Testament. By the right Rev. JosErn Hall, D. D., Bishop of 
Norwich. Numerous editions ; the one before us has " a memoir 
of the author, by Jambs Hamilton, M.B.S.," and was published 
by Mr. Nelson of Edinburgh. 

\ The Dutch Annotations upon the whole Bible ; or, all the 
Holy Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, t6gether 
with, and according to, their own translation of all the text : as 
both the one and the other were ordered and appointed by the 
Synod of Dort, 1618, and published by authority, 1637. Now 



28 A CHAT ABOUT COMMEHTABIES. 

of the famous Synod of Dort, and the Westminstek 
Annotations * as the production of a still more yener- 
able assembly ; but if, with my hat ofE, bowing pro- 
foundly to those august conclaves of master minds, I may 
venture to say so, I would observe that they furnish an- 
other instance that committees seldom equal the labors of 
individuals. The notes are too short and fragmentary to 
be of any great value. The volumes are a heavy investment. 

Among entire commentators of modern date, a high 
place is usually awarded to Thomas Scott, f and I shall 
not dispute his right to it. He is the expositor of evan- 
gelical Episcopalians, even as Adam Clarke is the proph- 
et of the Wesleyans, but to me he has seldom given a 
thought, and I have almost discontinued consulting him. 
The very first money I ever received for pulpit services 
in London was invested in Thomas Scott, and I neither 
regretted the investment nor became exhilarated thereby. 
His work has always been popular, is very judicious, 

faithfully commanicated to the use of Great Britain, in English, 
etc. By Theodore Haas, Esq. London, 1657. 2 volumes folio. 

* Annotations upon all the Books of the Old and New Testa- 
ments. This third, above the first and second, edition so enlarged, 
as they make an entire commentary on the sacred Scriptures, the 
like never before published in English. Wherein the text is ex- 
plained, doubts resolved. Scriptures paralleled, and various read- 
ings observed. By the labor of certain learned divines, thereunto 
appointed, and therein employed, as is expressed in the preface. 
London, 1057. 

f The Holy Bible, containing the Old and New Testaments, 
according to the authorized version, with explanatory notes, prac- 
tical ob.servations, and copious marginal references. By Thomas 
Scott, rector of Ashton Sandford, Bucks. A new edition, with 
the author's last corrections and improvements, with ten maps. 
London : L. B. Seeley and Sou. 1837. 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTAEIES. 29 

thoroughly sound and gracious ; but for suggest! veness 
and pith is not comparable to Matthew Henry. I know 
I am talking heresy, but I cannot help saying that for a 
minister's use, Scott is mere milk and water — good and 
trustworthy, but not solid enough in matter for full- 
grown men. In the family, Scott will hold his place, 
but in the study you want condensed thought, and this 
you must look for elsewhere. 

To all young men of light purses let me recommend 
TheTeact Society's Commentaey,* in six volumes, 
which contains the marrow of Henry and Scott, with 
notes from a hundred other authors. It is well executed, 
and for poor men a great godsend. I believe the Soci- 
ety has some special arrangement for poor students, that 
they may have these volumes at the cheapest rate. 

Gentlemen, if you want something full of marrow and 
fatness, cheering to your own hearts by way of comment, 
and likely to help you in giving to your hearers rich ex- 
positions, buy De. Hawkee's Poor Man's Commest- 
TABT. f Dr. Hawker was the very least of commenta^ 
tors in the matter of criticism ; he had no critical capa- 
city, and no ability whatever as an interpreter of the 
letter ; but he sees Jesus, and that is a sacred gift which 
is most precious whether the owner be a critic or no. 

• The Holy Bible ; the text according to the authorized ver- 
Bion ; and a ComTnentary from Henry and Scott, with numerous 
Observations and Notes from otlier Authors : also, the Marginal 
References, Maps of the Countries mentioned in Scripture, and 
various useful Tables. London : The Religious Tract Society. (0 
volumes.) 

■f The Poor Man's Commentary on the Bible. By Robert 
Hawker, D. D., Vicar of Charles Plymouth, 1832. (3 vols, folio, 
or 10 vols. 8vo.) 



30 A CHAT ABOUT COMMEUTABIES. 

It is to be confessed that Le occasionally sees Jesns 
where Jesus is not legitimately to be seen. He allows 
his reason to be mastered by his affections, which, vice 
as it is, is not the worst fault in the world. There is 
always such a savor of the Lord Jesns Christ in Dr. 
Hawker that you cannot read him without profit. He 
has the peculiar idea that Christ is in every Psalm, and 
this often leads him totally astray, because he attributes 
expressions to the Saviour which really shock the holy 
mind to imagine our Lord's using. However, not as a 
substantial dish, but as a'condiment, place the Plymouth 
vicar's work on the table. His writing is all sugar, and 
you will know how to use it, not devouring it in lumps, 
but using it to flavor other things. 

" Albeet Baenes," say you, "what do you think 
of Albert Barnes ?" Albert Barnes is a learned and 
able divine, but his productions are unequal in value, 
the gospels are of comparatively little worth, but his 
other comments are extremely useful for Sunday-school 
teachers and persons with a narrow' range of reading, 
endowed with enough good sense to discriminate be- 
tween good and evil. If a controversial eye had been 
turned upon Barnes's Notes years ago, and his inaccura- 
cies shown up by some unsparing hand, he would never 
have had the popularity which at one time set rival 
publishers advertising him in every direction. His Old 
Testament volumes are to be greatly commended as 
learned and laborious, and the epistles are useful as a 
valuable collection of the various opinions of learned 
men. Placed by the side of the great masters, Barnes is 
a lesser light, but taking his work for what it is and 
professes to be, no minister can afford to be without it. 



A CHAT ABOUT COHMEITTAEIES. 31 

and this is no small praise for works whioli were only 
intended for Sunday-school teachers.* 

Upon the New Testament Doddkige's Expositor f 
is worthy of a far more extensive reading than is nowa- 
days accorded to it. It is in all the form of a paraphrase, 
with the text in italics ; a mode of treatment far from 
satisfactory as a rule, hut exceedingly well carried out in 
this instance. The notes are very good, and reveal the 
thorough scholar. Our authorized version is placed in 
the margin, and a new translation in the paraphrase. 
The four evangelists are thrown into a harmony, a plan 
which has its advantages but is not without its evils. 
The practical improvements at the end of each chapter 
generally consist of pressing exhortation^ and devout 
meditations, suggested by the matter under discussion. 
It is sadly indicative of the Socinianism of the age in 
which the good man lived, that he feels called upon to 
apologize for the evangelical strain in which he has 
written. He appears to have barely finished this work 

* There are several Englisli editions of Barnes's Notes ; the one 
before us is thus advertised : " The Bev. Albekt Baknks's Notes 
(Explanatory and Practical), designed for the Heads of Families, 
Students, Bible Classes, and Sunday Schools. Edited, and care- 
fully revised, by the Rev. John Gumming, D. D., Minister of the 
Scotch Church, Crown Court." The Notes on the Entire New 
Testament, in 11 vols., on the Book of Isaiah, in 3 vols., on the 
Book of Job, in 2 vols., on the Book of Daniel in 2 vols., or in 11 
double vols. The " Notes on the book of Psalms " are now being 
issued in 3 vols, by Messrs. Gall and Inglis. 

f The Family Expositor ; or a Paraphrase and Version of the 
New Testament ; with Critical Notes, and a Practical Improve- 
ment of each Section. By P. Doddridge, D. D. To which is 
prefixed a Life of the Author, By Andrew Kippis, D. D., F. B. S., 
and S. A. London: Longman, Orme, and Co., 1840. (4 vols. 
8vo.) 



33 A CHAT ABOUT COMMEHTABIES. 

in shorthand at the time of his death, and the later 
books were transcribed under the care of Job Orton. 
Ko Life Insurance Society should accept the proposals 
of a commentator on the whole of either Testament, for 
it seems to be the rule that such students of the Word 
should be taken up to their reward before their task is 
quite completed. 

Then, of oonrse, gentlemen, you will economise 
rigidly until you have accumulated funds to purchase 
KiTTo's Pictorial Bible. You mean to take that 
goodly freight on board before you launch upon the sea 
of married life. As you cannot visit the Holy Land, it 
is well for you that there is a work like the Pictorial 
Bible, in which the notes of the most observant travellers 
are arranged under the texts which they illustrate. 
For the geography, zoology, botany, and manners and 
customs of Palestine, this will be your counsellor and 
guide. Add to this noble comment, which is sold at a 
surprisingly low piice, the eight volumes of Kitto's 
Daily Readixqs.* They are not exactly a commen- 
tary, but what marvellous expositions you have there ! 
You have reading more interesting than any novel that 
was ever written, and as instructive as the heaviest theol- 
ogy. The matter iB quite attractive and fascinating, 
and yet so weighty, that the man who shall study those 
eight volumes thoroughly, will not fail to read his Bible 
intelligently and with growing interest. 

* Daily Bible lUuBtrations, being Original Readings for a 
Year, on subjects tiom Sacied History, Biography, Antiquities, 
and Theology. Especially designed for the family circle. By 
John Krrro, D.D., F.'S.A. 8 volumes, small 8vo. (A New An- 
notated edition has just been brought out by Messrs. Uliphant of 
Edinburgh.) 



a chat about commentaries. 33 

The Gnomon of the New Testament, by John Al- 
bert Bengel,* is the scholar's delight. He selected the 
title as modest and appropriate, intending it in the sense 
of a pointer or indicator, like the sun-dial ; his aim being 
to point out or indicate the full force and meaning of 
the words and sentences of the New Testament. He 
endeavors to let the text itself cast its shadow on his 
page, believing with Luther that " the science of theol- 
ogy is nothing else but grammar exercised on the words 
of the Holy Spirit." The editor of the translation pub- 
lished by Messrs. Clarke, says in his preface, " It is 
quite superfluous to write in praise of the Gnomon of 
Bengel. Ever since the year in which it was first pub- 
lished, A. D. 1743, up to the present time, it has been 
growing in estimation, and has been more and more 
widely circulated among the scholars of all countries. 
Though modem criticism has furnished many valuable 
additions to our materials for New Testament exegesis, 
yet in some respects, Bengel stands out still 'fadle prin- 
ceps ' among all who have labored, or who as yet labor 
in that important field. He is unrivalled in felicitous 
brevity, combined with what seldom accompanies that 
excellence, namely, perspicuity. Terse, weighty, and 
suggestive, he often, as a modern writer observes, ' con- 
denses more matter into a line, than can be extracted 
from pages of other writers.'" "In the pas- 
sages which form the subject of controversy between 
Calvinists and Arminians, Bengel takes the view adopted 

• Gnomon of the New Testament, by JOHN Albbut Bengel. 
Now first translated into English, with original notes explanatory 
and illustrative. Revised and edited by Rev. Andrew R. Faus- 
set, M. A., of Trinity College, Dublin. Edinburgh ; T. & T. 
Clarke, 38 George-street, 1863. (5 vols, demy 8vo. ; Subscription 
31s. 6d.) 



34 A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 

by the latter, and in this respect I do not concur with 
him. But whilst he thus gives an undue prominence, 
as it would seem to me, to the responsibility and free- 
dom of man in these passages, yet, in the general tenor 
of his work, there breathe such a holy reverence for 
Go4^s sovereignty, and such spiritual unction, that the 
most extreme Calvinist would, for the most part, be un- 
able to discover to what section of opinions he attached 
himself, and as to the controverted passages would feel 
inclined to say, ' Qumn talis sis, utinam noster esses.' " 
Men with a dislike for thinking had better not pur- 
chase the five precious volumes, for they will be of little 
use to them ; but men who love brain-work will find 
fine exercise in spelling out the deep meaning of Bengel's 
excessively terse sentences. His principles of interpre- 
tation stated in his "Essay on the Right Way of Han- 
dling Divine Subjects," are such as will make the lover 
of God's word feel safe in his hands : "Put nothing into 
the Scriptures, but draw every thing from them, and 
suffer nothing to remain hidden, that is really w them." 
"Though each inspired writer has his own manner and 
style, one and the same Spirit breathes through all, 
one grand idea pervades all. " " Every divine communi- 
cation carries (like the diamond) its own light with it, 
thus showing whence it comes ; no touchstone is re- 
quired to discriminate it." " The true commentator 
will fasten his primary attention on the letter (literal 
meaning), but never forget that the Spirit must equally 
accompany him ; at the same time we must never devise 
a more spiritual meaning for Scripture passages than 
the Holy Spirit intended." "The historical matters of 
•Scripture, both narrative and prophecy, constitute as it 
were the bones of its system, whereas the spiritual mat- 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 35 

ters are as its muscles, blood-vessels, and nerves. As 
the ioncs are necessary to the human system, so Scrip- 
ture must have its historical matters. The expositor 
who nullifies the historical ground-work of Scripture 
for the sake of finding only spiritual truths everywhere, 
brings death on all correct interpretations. Those ex- 
positions are the safest which keep closest to the text." 
His idea of the true mode of dying touched me much 
when I first saw it. He declared that he would make no 
spiritual parade of his last hours, but if possible continue 
at his usual works, and depart this life as a person in 
the midst of business leaves the room to attend to a knock 
at the door. Accordingly he was occupied with the cor- 
rection of his proof-sheets as at other times, and the last 
messenger summoned him to his rest while his hands 
were full. This reveals a calm, well-balanced mind, and 
unveils many of those singular characteristics which 
enabled him to become the laborious recensor of the 
various MSS., and the pioneer of true Biblical criticism. 

The Cbitical English Testament.*— A Criti- 
cal New Testament, so compiled as to enable a reader, 
unacquainted with Greek, to ascertain the exact English 
force and meaning of the language of the New Testa- 
ment, and to appreciate the latest results of modern 
criticism." Such is the professed aim of this commen- 
tary, and the compilers have very fairly carried out their 
intentions. The whole of Bengel's Gnomon is bodily 
transferred into the work, and as one hundred and 

* The Cbitical English Tbstamemt. — Being an adaption 
of Bengel's Gnomon, with numeroua Notes, showing Precise 
Results of Modern Criticism and Exegesis. Edited by He v. W. L. 
Blackley, M. A., and Kev. James Hawes, M. A. Published by 
Messrs. Isbister and Co., Ludgate Hill, London. (Three vols, 18s.) 



36 A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 

twenty years have elapsed since the first issue of that 
book, it may be supposed that much has since been 
added to the wealth of Scripture exposition ; the sub- 
stance of this has been incorporated in brackets, so as to 
bring it down to the present advanced state of knowledge. 
We strongly advise the purchase of this book, as it is 
multum inparvo, and will well repay an attentive peru- 
sal. Tischendorf and Alford have contributed largely, 
with other German and English critics, to make this 
one of the most lucid and concise commentaries on the 
text and teachings of the New Testament. 

Alfokd's Gbekk Testament, * " for the use of 
Theological Students and Ministers," is an invaluable 
aid to the critical study of the text of the New Testa- 
ment. You will find in it the ripened results of a 
matured scholarship, the harvesting of a judgment, gen- 
erally highly impartial, always worthy of respect, which 
has gleaned from the most important fields of Biblical 
research, both modern and ancient, at home and abroad. 
You will not look here for any spirituality of thought 
or tenderness of feeling ; you will find the learned Dean 
does not forget to do full justice to his own views, and 
is quite able to express himself vigorously against his 
opponents ; but for what it professes to be, it is an ex- 
ceedingly iible and successful work. The later issues are 

* The Greek Testament ; with a Critically Revised Text ; n 
Digest of various Readings ; Marginal References to Verbal and 
Idiomatic Usage; Prolegomena: and a Critical and Exegetical 
Commentarjr. For the use of Theological Students and Ministers. 
By HEiniT Alfoisd, D. D., Dean of Canterbury. In four vol- 
umes. London: Rivingtons, Waterloo Place; and Deighton, 
Bell, and Co., Cambridge. 18G1. 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 37 

by far the most desirable, as the author has considerably 
reyised the work in the fourth edition. 

What I liave said of his Greek Testament applies 
equally to Alfobd's New Testament eok English 
Eeaders,* which is also a standard work, 

I must confess also a very tender side towards Bloom- 
field's Greek Testament, f and I am singular enough 
to prefer it in some respects to Alford ; at least, I have 
got more out of it on some passages, and I think it does 
not deserve to be regai-ded as superseded. 

The Commentary by Patrick, Lowth, Arnald, 
Whitby, and Lowman,! is said, by Darling, to be of 
standard authority, but you may do without it with less 
loss than in the case of several others I have mentioned. 
The authors were men of gi-eat learning, their associa- 
tion in one commentary is remarkable, and their Joint 
production has a place in all complete libraries. 

Dr. Wordsworth's Holy Bible, with Notes and 
Introductions, II is a valuable addition to our stores, 

* The Greek Testament, with English Notes, Critical, Philo- 
logical, and ExplanatoT7 ; partly selected and arranged from the 
best Commentators, ancient and modern, bat chiefly original. 
Fourth edition, revised. 2 vols. 8vo. London. 1841. 

f A Critical Commentary and Paraphrase of the Old and New 
Testament, and the Apocrypha. By Patrick, Lowth, Abnald, 
Whitbt, and LowMAN. A new edition, &c., in 4 vols. William 
Tegg and Co. 

I The New Testament for English Headers ; containing the 
Authorized Version, with a revised English Text ; Marginal Refer- 
ences ; and a Critical and Explanatory Commentary ; By Henby 
Alfobd, D. D., late Dean of Canterbury. New edition. 4 vols. 
8 vo. 54b. 6d. London, Oxford, and Cambridge, Rivingtons, and 
«. Bell and Sons, 1872. 

J The Holy Bible ; with Notes and Introductions [Old Testa- 



38 A CHAT ABOUT C0MMBNTABIE3. 

but it is rendered much more bulky and expensive than 
it needed to be by the printing of the text at large. It 
gives many precious hints, and much of the choicest 
thought of mediaeval writers, besides suggesting catch- 
words and showing connections between various passa- 
ges, although it is occasionally marred by the character- 
istic weaknesses of the Bishop, and has here and there 
foolishnesses at which one cannot but smile, it is a great 
work, such as only an eminent scholar could have pro- 
duced. ^ 

I am not so enamored of the German writers as cer- 
tain of my brethren appear to be, for they are generally 
cold and hai-d, and unspiritual. As Dr. Graham says, 
" there are about twenty or thirty names in the literary 
world who have gained a conspicuous place in theologi- 
cal circles ;-and in German commentaries these are per- 
petually introduced. In some of them the bulk of the 
work is made up of these authoritative names, and quo- 
tations from their works. This gives their writings the 
appearance of prodigious learning and research. Every 
page is bristling with hard words and strange languages, . 
and the eye of the common reader is terrified at the very 
appearance, as the powerful citizen is at the pointed 
cannon of a fortress." I do, however, greatly prize the 
series lately produced under the presidency of Du. 
Lawoe.* These volumes are not all of equal value, 

ment only]. 6 vols. imp. 8vo. £6. — The New Testament in the 
original Greek ; with Notes, Introductions, and Indexes. By 
Chk. WORDSWOIITH, D. D., Bishop of Lincoln. . 2 vols, imp. 8vo. 
£3. London, Oxford, and Cambridge. Kivingtons. 1873, etc. 

* A Commentary on the Holy Scriptures, Critical, Doctrinal, 
and Homiletical, with special reference to Ministers aild Students, 
byPETEBJouNLANGK, D. D., in Connection with a number of emi- 



A CHAT ABODT COM^ENTAKIES. 39 

but as a whole, they are a grand addition to our stores. 
The American translators have added considerably to 
the German work, and in some cases these additions are 
more valuable than the original matter. For homileti- 
cal purposes these volumes are so many hills of gold, but, 
alas, there is dross also, for Baptismal Eegeneration and 
other grave errors occur. 

The Speakek's Commentart* is. issued (August, 
1875) as far as the Lamentations. It is costly, too 
costly for your pockets, and I am therefore somewhat 
the less sorry to add that it is not what I hoped it would 
be. Of course it is a great work, and contains much 
which tends to illustrate the text; but if you had it 
you would not turn to it for spiritual food, or for fruit- 
ful suggestion, or if you did so, you would be disap- 
pointed. The object of the work is to help the general 
reader to know what the Scriptures really say and mean, 
and to remove some of the difficulties. It keeps to its 
design and in a measure accomplishes it. 

I must also add to the list A Commentary, critical, 

nent European divines. Transluted from the German, and edited, 
with additions, by Philip Schafp, D. D., in connection witli 
American scholars of various Evangelical denominations. Imperial 
8vo. Edinburgh, T. &. T. Clarke. 1868, etc. [18 volumes, price 
21s. each, or to subscribers ISs.] 

* The Holy Bible, according to the Authorized Version (A. D. 
1611), with an Explanatory and Critical Commentary, and a Revis- 
ion of the Translation by Bishops and other Clergy of the Angeli- 
can Church. Edited by F. C. CooK, M. A., Canon of Exeter, 
Preacher at Lincoln's inn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen. 
Medium Svo. London, John Murray. 1871, etc. [5 volumes pub- 
lished. Genesis to Lamentations, Vol. 1 in 2 parts, 30s. Vols. IF. 
and III, 303. Vol. IV, 343. Vol. V, 203.] 



4.0 A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 

EXPEKIMENTAL, AND PEACTICAL, ON THE OlD AND 

New Testaments.* Of this I have a very high opin- 
ion. It is the joint work of Mr. Jamieson, A. K. Faus- 
set, and Dr. David Brown. It is to some extent a com- 
pilation and condensation of other men's thoughts, but 
ib is sufficiently original to claim a place in every minis- 
ter's library ; indeed it contains so great a variety of 
information that if a man had no other exposition he 
would find himself at no great loss if he possessed this 
and used it diligently. 

Several other works I omit, not because they are worth- 
less, or unknown to me, but because for scant purses 
the best will be best. I must not omit upon the New 
Testament the goodly volume of Buekitt. f If you can 
get him cheap, buy him. He is the celebrated " Eec- 
tor " whom Keach " rectified " in J;he matter of infant 
baptism, Burkitt is somewhat pithy, and for a modern 
father rich and racy, but he is far from deep, and is 
frequently common-place. I liked him well enough till 
I had read abler works and grown older. Some books 
gi'ow upon us as we read and re-read them, but Burkitt 
does not. Yet so far from depreciating the good man, I 

* A Commentary, Critical, Experimental, and Practical, on the 
Old and New Testaments. By the Rev. Bobert Jamieson, D. D., 
St. Paul's, Glasgow ; Kev. A. R. Fausset, A. M., St. Cuthbert's, 
York ; and the Kev. David Brown, D. D., Professor of Theology, 
Aberdeen. 6 vols, medium 8vo. £3 13s. ; or separately at 14s. 
each vol. London, Glasgow, and Edinburgh. W. Collins, Sons, 
& Co. 1871. 

f Expository Notes, with Practical Observations, on the New 
Testament of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, wherein, etc. 
Endeavored by William Burkitt, M.A Late Vicar and Lec- 
turer of Dedham, in Essex. (Numerous editions, folio and quarto.) 



A CHAT ABOUT COMMENTARIES. 41 

should be sorry to have missed his acquaintance, and 
would bespeak for him your attentive perusal. 

The best commentators, after all, are those who have 
written upon only one book. Few men can comment 
eminently well upon the whole Bible ; there are sure to 
be some weak points in colossal works ; prolixity in so 
vast an undertaking is natural, and dulness follows at 
its heels — but a life devoted to one of the inspired vol- 
umes of our priceless Bible must surely yield a noble ' 
result. If I find myself able to do so, at some future 
time I will introduce you to a selection of the great 
one-book writers. For the present thi^ much must 
sufSce. 



LECTURE n. 



ON COMMENTING. 



Havik Q introduced you to the commentators, I must 
now press upon you one of the most practical uses of 
them, namely, your own public commenting upon the 
Scriptures read during divine service. Preaching in the 
olden time consisted very much more of exposition than 
it does now. I suppose that the sermons of the primi- 
tive Christians were for the .most part expositions of 
lengthy passages of the Old Testament ; and when copies 
of gospels, and the epistles of Paul, had become accessi- 
ble to the churches, the chief work of the preacher would 
be to press home the apostolical teachings by deliv- 
ering an address, the back-bone of which would be a 
complete passage of Scripture : there would probably be 
but faint traces of divisions, heads and points, such as 
we employ in modern discoursing, but the teacher would 
follow the run of the passage which was open before 
him, commenting as he read. I suppose this to have 
been the case, because some of the early Christian modes 
of worship were founded very much ujjou that of the 
synagogue. I say some of the modes, since I suppose 
that as the Lord Jesus left his disciples free from rubrics 
and liturgies, each church worshipped according to the 
working of the free Spirit among them; one with. the 
open meeting of the Corinthians, and another with a 
presiding minister, and a third with a mixture of the 



ON' COMMENTING. 43 

two methods. In the synagogue, it was the rule of the 
Eabbis that never less than twenty-two verses of the law 
should be read at one time, and the preaching consisted 
of notes upon a passage of that length. Such a rule 
would be a mere superstition if we were slavishly bound 
by it, for the present plan of preaching from short texts, 
together with the great neglect of commenting publicly 
upon the word is very unsatisfactory. We cannot expect 
to deliver much of the teaching of Holy Scripture by 
picking out verse by verse, and holding these up at ran- 
dom. The process resembles that of showing a house 
by exhibiting separate bricks. It would be an astound- 
ing absurdity if our friends used our private letters in 
this fashion, and interpreted them by short sentences 
disconne^d and taken away from the context. Such 
expositoiTwould make us out to say in every letter all 
we ever thought of, and a great many things besides far 
enough from our minds ; while the real intent of our 
epistles would probably escape attention. Nowadays 
since expository preaching is not so common as it ought 
to be, there is the more necessity for our commenting 
during the time of our reading the Scriptures. Since 
topical preaching, hortatory preaching, experimental 
preaching, and so on — all exceedingly useful in their 
way — have almost pushed proper expository preachings 
out of place, there is the more need that we should, 
when we read passages of Holy Writ, habitually give 
running comments upon them. 

I support my opinion with this reason, that the pub- 
lic reading of the abstruser parts of Scripture is of ex- 
ceedingly little use to the majority of the people listening. 
I can recollect hearing in my younger days long passa- 
ges out of Daniel which might have been exceedingly 



44 OK COMMENTING. 

instructive to me if I had obtained the remotest concep- 
tion of what they meant. Take, again, parts of the 
prophecy of Ezekiel, amd ask yourselves what profit can 
arise from their perusal by the illiterate " unless some 
man shall guide them " ? What more edification can 
come from a chapter in English which is not understood 
than from the same passage in Hebrew or Greek ? The 
same argument which enforces translation demands 
exposition. If but a few explanatory words are thrown 
in by a judicious reader, it is wonderful how luminous 
obscure portions may be made. Two or three sentences 
will often reveal the drift of a whole chapter ; the key 
of a great diflScuIty may be presented to the hearer in 
half-a-score words, and thus the public reading may be 
made abundantly profitable. I once saw a-^chool of 
blind children among the charming ruins of York Abbey, 
and could not help pitying their incapacity to enjoy so 
much beauty : how willingly would I have opened their 
eyes ! Are ignorant people wandering among the glories 
of Scripture much less to be pitied ? Who will refuse 
them the light ? 

Abundant evidence has come before me that Irief 
comments upon Scripture in our ordinary services are 
most acceptable and instructive to our people. I have of- 
ten heard from working men, and their wives, and from 
merchants and their families, that my own expositions 
have been most helpful to them. They testify that when 
they read the Bible at home in the family, the exposition 
makes it doubly precious to them ; and the chapter 
which they had unprofitably read in course at family 
prayers, when they peruse it the next time, recollecting 
what their minister has said upon it, becomes a real de- 
light to them. The mass of our hearers, in London at 



ON COMMEUTIXG. 45 

least, do not, to any appreciable extent, read comnientaries 
or any other books which throw a light upon thenScript- 
ures. They haye neither the money nor the time to do 
so, and if they are to be instructed in the Word of God 
in things which they cannot find out by mere experience, 
and are not likely to have explained to them by their 
associates, they ipust get that instruction from us, or 
nowhere else ; nor do I see how we are to give them such 
spiritual assistance except through the regular practice 
of exposition. 

Besides, if you are in the habit of commenting, it 
will give you an opportunity of saying tnany things which 
are not of sufficient importance to become the theme of a 
whole sermon, and therefore would probably remain un- 
noticed, to the great loss of the Lord's people and others. 
It is astounding what a range of truth, doctrinal, practi- 
cal, and experimental. Holy Scripture brings before us ; 
and equally worthy of admiration is the forcible manner 
in which that truth is advanced. Hints given in the 
way in which the word of God offers them are always 
wise and opportune ; as, for instance, the rebukes which 
the word administers might have seemed too severe had 
they been made by the pastor, unsustained by the word 
and unsuggested by it, but arising out of the chapter 
they cannot be resented. You can both censure sins 
and encourage virtues by dilating upon the histories 
which you read in the inspired records, whereas you 
might never have touched upon them had not the chap- 
ter read brought the matter before you. If you want to 
make full proof of your ministry, and to leave no single 
point of revelation untouched, your easiest mode will be 
to comment upon Scripture habitually. Without this 
much of the word will be utterly unknown to many of 



46 ON COMMEKTING. 

your people. It is a very sad fact that they do not read 
so much as they should at home ; the ungodly, in 
England^carcely read the Bible at all ; and if only that 
part which we preach upon be expounded to them, how 
little of the Bible can they ever know ! If you will mark 
your Bibles with lines under the texts from which you 
have spoken, as I have always done ,with an old copy 
which I keep in my study, you will discover that in 
twelve or fourteen years very little of the book has been 
gone through : a very large proportion of it remains 
unmarked, like a field unploughed. Try, then, by ex- 
position to give your people a fair view of the entire 
compass of revelation ; take them as it were to the top 
of Nebo, and show them the whole land from Dan to 
Beersheba, and prove to them that everywhere it floweth 
with milk and honey. 

Earnestly do I advocate commenting. It is un- 
fashionable in England, though somewhat more usual 
beyond the Tweed. The practice was hardly followed 
up anywhere in England, a few years ago, and it is very 
uncommon still. It may be pressed upon you for one 
other reason, namely, that in order to execute it well, the 
commenting minister will at first have to study twice as 
much as the mere preacher, because he trill be called upon . 
to prepare both his sermons and his expositions. As a 
rule I spend much more time over the exposition than 
over the discourse. Once start a sermon with a great 
idea, and from that moment the discourse forms itself 
without much labor to the preacher, for truth naturally 
consolidates and crystallizes itself around the main sub- 
ject like sweet crystals around a string hung up in syrup ; 
but as for the exposition, you must keep to the text, you 
must fa«e the difficult points, and must search into the 



OS" COMMBKTIlfa. 47 

mind of the Spirit rather than your own. You will 
soon reveal your ignorance as an expoator if you do not 
study ; therefore diligent reading will he forced upon 
you. Anything which compels the preacher to search 
the gi'and old Book is of immense service to him. If any 
are jealous lest the labor should injure their constitutions, 
let them remember that mental work up to a certain 
point is most refreshing, and where the Bible is the 
theme toil is delight. It is only when mental labor 
passes beyond the bounds of common sense that the mind 
becomes enfeebled by it, and this is not usually reached 
except by injudicious persons, or men engaged on topics 
which are unrefreshing and disagreeable ; but our sub- 
ject is a recreative one, and to young men like ourselves 
the vigorous use of our faculties is a most healthy exer- 
cise. Classics and mathematics may exhaust us, but not 
the volume of our Father's grace, the charter of our 
joys, the treasure of our wealth. 

A man to comment well should be able to read the 
Bible in the original. Every minister should aim at a 
tolerable proficiency both in the Hebrew and the Greek. 
These two languages will give him a library at a small 
expense, an inexhaustible thesaurus, a mine of spiritual 
wealth. Keally, the effort of acquiring a language is 
not so prodigious that brethren of moderate abilities 
should so frequently shrink from the attempt. A minis- 
ter ought to attain enough of these tongues to be at least 
able to make out a passage by the aid of a lexicon, so as 
to be sure that he is not misrepresenting the Spirit of 
God in his discoursings, but is, as nearly as he can judge, 
giving forth what the Lord intended to reveal by the 
language employed. Such knowledge would prevent 
his founding doctrines upon expressions in our version 



48 ON COMMENTING. 

when nothing at all analogous is to be found in the 
inspired original. This has been done by preachers time 
out of mind, and they have shouted over an inference 
drawn from a shall, or an if gathered out of the transla- 
tion, with as much assurance of infallibility and sense 
of importance as if the same language had occurred in 
the words which the Holy Ghost used. At such times, 
we have been reminded of the story told by the late 
beloved Henry Craik, in his book on the Hebrew language. 
At one time, the Latin Vulgate was so constantly spoken 
of as the very word of God, that a Roman Catholic theo- 
logian thus commented upon Genesis L 10 :— " The 
gathering together of the waters called he seas." The 
Latin term for seas is Maria. On this ground, the 
writer asks, " What is the gathering together of waters 
but the accumulation of all the graces into one place, 
that is, into the Virgin Mary {Maria) ? But there is 
this distinction, that Maria {the seas) has the (i) short, 
because that which the seas contain is only of a transi- 
tory nature, whUe the gifts and graces of the blessed 
Virgin (Maria) shall endure forever." Such superlative 
nonsense may be indulged in if we forget that transla- 
tions cannot be A^erbally inspired, and that io the origi- 
nal is the last appeal. 

Fail not to be expert in the use of your Concordance. 
Every day I live I thank God more and more for that 
poor half-crazy Alexander Cruden. Of course you have 
read his life, which is prefixed to the concordance ; it 
exhibits him as a man of diseased mind, once or twice 
the inmate of a lunatic asylum, but yet for all that suc- 
cessfully devoting his energies to producing a work of 
absolutely priceless value, which never has been im- 
proved upon, and probably never will be ; a volume 



ON COMMENTING. 49 

which must ever yield the greatest possible assistance to 
a Christian minister, being as necessary to him as, a plane 
to the carpenter, or a plough to the husbandman. Be 
sure you buy a genuine unabridged Cruden, and none of 
the modern substitutes ; good as they may be at the 
price, they are a delusion and a snare to ministers, and 
should never be tolerated in the manse library. To 
consider cheapness in purchasing a concordance is- folly. 
You need only one : have none but the best. At the 
head of each notable word, Cruden gives you its mean- 
ing, and very often all its particular shades of meaning, 
so that he even helps you in sermonizing. When you 
have read his headings, by following out the concordance, 
you will observe connections in which the word occurs, 
which most advantageously and correctly fix its mean- 
ing. Thus will the word of God be its own key. A 
good textuary is a good theologian ; be then well skilled 
in using Cruden. 

I make but small account-of most reference Bibles ; 
they would be very useful if they were good for any- 
thing ; but it is extremely easy to bring out a reference 
Bible which has verbal and apparent references, and 
nothing more. You will often turn to a reference, and 
will have to say, " Well, it is a reference, certainly, in a 
way, for it contains the same word, but there is no refer- 
, ence in the sense that the one text will explain the other." 
The useful reference cuts the diamond with a diamond, 
comparing spiritual things with spiritual; it is a 
thought-reference, and not a word-reference. If you 
meet with a really valuable reference Bible, it will be to 
you what I once heard a countryman call " a reverence 
Bible," for it will lead you to prize more and more the 
sacred volume. The best reference Bible is a thorough- 
3 



50 ON COMMENTING. 

ly good concoydance. Get the best, keep it always on 
the table, use it hourly, and you will find your best com- 
panion. 

Need I after my previous lectures commend to you 
the judicious reading of commeniaries ! These are called 
"dead men's brains" by certain knowing people, who 
claim to give us nothing in their sermons but what they 
pretend the Lord reveals direct to themselves. Yet 
these men are by no means original, and often their sup- 
posed inspiration is but borrowed wit. They get a peep 
at Gill on the sly. The remarks which they give forth 
as the Spirit's mind are very inferior in all respects to 
what they affect to despise, namely, the mind of good 
and learned men. A batch of poems was sent me some 
time ago for The Sword and the Trowel, which were 
written by a person claiming to be under the immediate 
influence of the Holy Spirit. He informed me that he 
was passive, and that what was enclosed was written 
under the direct physical and mental influence of the 
Spirit upon his mind and hand. My bookshelves can 
show many poems as much superior to these pretended 
inspirations as angels are to blue-bottles ; the miserable 
doggrel bore on its face the evidence of imposture. So 
when I listen to the senseless twaddle of certain wise 
gentlemen who are always boasting that they alone are 
ministers of the Spirit, I am ashamed of their preten- 
sions and of them. No, my dear friends, you may take 
it as a rule that the Spirit of God does not usually do for 
us what we can do for ourselves, and that if religious 
knowledge is printed in a book, and We can read it, 
there is no necessity for the Holy Ghost to make a fresh 
revelation of it to us in order to screen our laziness. 
Read, then the admirable commentaries which I have 



ON COMMENTIjSFG. 51 

already introduced to you. Yet be sure you use your 
own minds, too, or the expounding will lack interest. 
Here I call to mind two wells in the courtyard of the 
Doge's palace at Venice, upon which I looked with much 
interest. One is filled artificially by water brought in 
barges from a distance, and few care for its iosipid con- 
tents ; the other is a refreshing natural well, cool and 
delicious, and the people contend for every drop of it. 
Freshness, naturalness, life, will always attract, whereas 
mere borrowed learning is flat and insipid. Mr. Cecil 
says bis plan was, when he laid a-hold of a Scripture,~-to 
pray over it, and get his own thoughts on it, and then, 
after he had so done, to take up the ablest divines who 
wrote upon the subject, and see what their thoughts 
were. If you do not think and think much, you will 
become slaves and mere copyists. The exercise of your 
own mind is most healthful to you, and by perseverance, 
with divine help, you may expect to get at the meaning 
of every understandable passage. So to rely upon your 
own abilities as to be unwilling to learn from others, is 
imbecility. 

What should he the manner of your public comment- 
ing? One rule should be always to point out very care- 
fully wherever a word bears a special sense j for rest 
assured in Holy Scripture the same word does not 
always mean the same thing. The Bible :js a book 
meant for human beings, and therefore it is written in 
human language ; and in human language the same 
word may signify two or three things. For instance, 
" a pear fell from the tree ; " "a man fell into drunken 
habits." There the meaning of the second word, 
" fell," is evidently different from the first, since it is 
not literal, but metaphorical. Again,^ " the cabman 



62 OK COMMEKTIKG. 

mounted the box ; " " the child was pleased with his 
Christmas box ;" " his lordship is staying at his shoot- 
ing box." In each case there is the same word, but 
who does not see that there ia a great difference of 
meaning ? So it is in the word of God. Tou must 
explain the difference between a word used in a peculiar 
sense, and the ordinary meaning of the word, and thus 
you will prevent your people falling into mistakes. If 
people will say that the same word in Scripture always 
means the same thing, as I have heard some assert pub- 
licly, they wiU make nonsense of the word of God, and 
fall into error through their own irrational maxims. 
To set up canons of interpretation for the Book of God 
which would be absurd if applied toother writings, is 
egregious folly ; it has a show of accuracy, but inevi- 
tably leads to confusion. 

The obvious literal meaning of a Scripture is not 
always the true one, and ignorant persons are apt 
enough to fall into the most singular misconceptions — a 
judicious remark from the pulpit will be of signal ser- 
vice. Many persons have accustomed themselves to 
misunderstand certain texts ; they have heard wrong 
interpretations in their youth, and will never know 
better unless the correct meaning be indicated to them. 

We must make sure in our public expositions that 
obscure and involved sentences are explained. To over- 
leap difficulties, and only expound what is already clear, 
is to make commenting ridiculous. When we speak of 
obscure sentences, we mean such as are mostly to be 
found in the prophets, and are rendered dark through 
the translation, or the Orientalism of their structure, or 
through" their intrinsic weight of meaning. Involved 
sentences most abound in the writings of Paul, whose 



OK COMMENTING. 53 

luxuriant mind was not to be restrained to any one line 
of argument. He begins a sentence, and does not finish 
it perhaps until eight verses further on, and all the in- 
terstices between the commencement and the end of the 
sentence are packed full of compressed truth, which it 
is not always easy to sepsxrate from the general argu- 
ment. Hints consisting of but two or three words will 
let your hearers know where the reasoning breaks off, 
and where it is taken up again. In many poetical parts 
of the Old Testament the speakers change ; as in Solo- 
mon's Song, which is mostly a dialogue. Here perfect 
nonsense is often made ' by reading the passage as if it 
were all spoken by the same person. In Isaiah the 
strain often varies most suddenly, and while one verse is 
addressed to the Jews, the next may be spoken to the 
Messiah or to the Gentiles. Is it not always well to 
notify this to the congregation ? If the chapters and 
verses had been divided with a littl4 common sense, this 
might be of less importance, but as our version is so 
clumsily chopped into fragments, the preacher must 
insert the proper paragraphs and divisions as he reads 
aloud. In fine, your business is to make the word plain. 
In Lombardy I observed great heaps of huge stones in 
the fields, which had been gathered out from the soil by 
diligent hands to make room for the crops : your duty 
is to "gather out the stones," and leave the fruitful field 
of Scripture for your people to till. There are Orien- 
talisms, metaphors, peculiar expressions, idioms, and 
other verbal memorabilia which arise from the Bible 
having been written in the East ; all these you will do 
well to explain. To this end be diligent students of 
Oriental life. Let the geography of Palestine, its 
natural history, its fauna and its ilora, be as familiar to 



54 OIT COMMEXTIUG. 

you as those of your own native village. Then as you 
read you will interpret the word, and your flock will be 
fed thereby.* 

The chief part of your commenting, however, should 
consist in applying the truth to the hearts of your hearers, 
for he who merely comprehends the meaning of the let- 
ter without understanding how it bears upon the hearts 
and consciences of men, is like a man who causes the 
bellows of an organ to be blown, and then fails to place 
his fingers on the keys ; it is of little service to supply 
men with information unless we urge upon them the 
practical inferences therefrom." Look, my brethren, 
straight down into the secret chambers of the human 
soul, and let fall the divine teaching through the win- 
dow, and thus light will be carried to the hieart and con- 
science. Make remarks suitable to the occasion, and 
applicable to the cases of those present. Show how a 
truth which was first heard in the days of David is still 
forcible and pertinent in these modern times, and you 
will thus endear the Scriptures to the minds of your 
people, who prize your remarks much more than you 
imagine. Clean the grand old pictures of the divine 
masters ; hang them up in new frames ; fix them on the 
walls of your people's memories, and their well-instructed 
hearts shall bless you. 

Is a caution needed among intelligent men ? Yes, it 
must be given. Be sure to avoid prosiness. Avoid it 
everywhere, but especially in this. Do not be long in 

* For suggestions as to interpretation the student is referred to 
the Bible Handbook by Dr. Joseph Angus. From page 150 of 
that work and onwards the most valuable hints will be met with. 
Much that we would otherwise have inserted in this volume is 
admirably stated by our learned friend. 



ON commekting; 55 

your notes. If you are supremely gifted, do not be long ; 
people do not appreciate too much of a good thing ; and 
if your comments are only second-rate, why, then be 
shorter still, for men soon weary of inferior talking. 
Very little time in the service can be afforded for read- 
ing the lessons ; do not rob the prayer and the sermon 
for the sake of commenting. This robbing Peter to pay 
Paul is senseless. Do not repeat common-plac§ things 
which mast have occurred even to a Sunday-school child. 
Do not remind your hearers of what they could not pos- 
sibly have forgotten. Give them something weighty if 
not new, so that an intelligent listener may feel when 
the service is over that he has learned at least a little. 

Again, avoid all pedantry. As a general rule, it may 
be observed that those gentlemen who know the least 
Greek are the most sure to air their rags of learning in 
the pulpit ; they miss no chance of saying, "The Greek 
is so-and-so." It makes a man an inch and a half. taller 
by a fool meter, if he everlastingly lets fall bits of. Greek 
and Hebrew, and even tells the people the tense of the 
verb and the case of the noun, as I have known some do. 
Those who have no learning usually make a point of 
displaying the pegs on which learning ought to hang. 
Brethren, the whole process of interpretation is to be 
carried on in your study ; you are not to show your 
congregation the process, but give them the result ; like 
a good cook who would- never think of bringing up 
dishes, and pans, and rolling pin, and spice box into the 
dining hall, but without ostentation sends up the feast. 

Never strain passages when you are expounding. Be 
thoroughly honest with the word : even if the Scriptures 
were the writing of mere men, conscience would demand 
fairness of you ; but when it is the Lord's own word, 



56 ON COMMENTIITG. 

be careful not to pervert it even in the smallest degree. 
Let it be said of you, as I bave beard a venerable bearer 
of Mr. Simeon say of bim, " Sir, be was very Calvinis- 
tic when the text was so, and people thought bim an 
Arminian when the text was that way, for he always 
stuck to its plain sense." A very sound neighbor of ours 
once said, by way of depreciating the grand old reformer, 
" John Calvin was not half a Calvinist," and the remark, 
was correct as to his expositions, for in them, as we have 
seen, he always gave his Lord's mind and not his own. 
In the church of St. Zeno, in Verona, I saw ancient 
frescoes which had been plastered over, and then covered 
with other designs ; I fear many do this with Scripture, 
daubing the text with their own glosses, and laying on 
their own conceits. There are enough of these plaster- 
ers abroad, let us leave the evil trade to them and follow 
an honest calling. Remember Gowper's lines— t 

" A critic on the Bacred text should be 
Candid and learn'd, dispassionate and free ; 
Free from the wayward bias bigots feel. 
From fancy's influence and intemperate zeal ; 
For of all arts sagacious dupes invent. 
To cheat themselves and gain the world's assent, , 
The worst is — Scripture warped from its intent." 

Use your judgment more than your fancy. Flowers 
are well enough, but hungry souls prefer bread. To 
allegorize with Origen may make men stare at you, but 
your work, is to flU men's mouths with truth, not to 
open them with wonder. 

Do not he carried away with new meanings. Ply- 
mouth Brethren delight to fish up some hitherto undis- 
covered tadpole of interpretation, and cry it around the ' 
town as a i-are dainty ; let us be content with more ordi- 



ON COMMEKTIS-G. 57 

nary and more wholesome fishery. No one text is to be 
exalted above the plain analogy of faith ; and no solitary 
expression is to shape our theology for us. Other men 
and wiser men have expounded before us, and anything 
undiscovered by them it were well to put to test and 
trial before we boast too loudly of the treasure-trove. 

Do not needlessly amend our authorized version. It 
is faulty in many places, but still it is a grand work, 
taking it for all in all, and it is unwise tp be making 
every old lady distrust the only Bible she can get at, or 
what is more likely, mistrust you for falling out with 
her cherished treasure. Correct where correction must 
be for truth's sake, but never for the vain-glorious dis- 
play of your critical ability. When reading short psalms, 
or connected passages of the other books, do not split up 
the autJior's utterances by interjecting your notes. Eead 
the paragraph through, and then go over it again with 
your explanations ; breaking it up as you may think fit 
at the second reading. No one would dream of dividing 
a stanza of a poet with an explanatory remark ; it would 
be treason to common sense to do so : sound judgment 
will forbid you thus marring the word of God. Better 
far never to comment than to cut and carve the utter- 
ances of inspiration, and obscure their meaning by im- 
pertinently thi'usting in untimely remarks of your own. 
Upon many passages comments would be gross folly : 
never think of painting the lily or gilding refined 
gold ; leave the sublime sentences alone in their glory. 
I speak as unto wise men ; prove your wisdom in this 
thing also. 

If I were bound to deliver a sermon upon the subject 
in hand, I could not desire a better text than Nehemiah 
viii. 8 : "So they read in the book in the law of God 



58 ON commenting; 

distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to nn 
derstand the reading." Here itf a hint for the reader as 
to his reading. Let it always be distinct. Aim to be 
good readers, and be the more anxious about it because 
few men are so, and all preachers ought to be so. It 
is as good as, a sermon to hear our best men read the 
Scriptures ; they bring out the meaning by their correct 
emphasis and tone. Never fall into the idea that the 
mere utterauce of the words before you is all that is re- 
quired of you in reading ; good reading is a high, but 
rare attainmenrt. Even if you do not comment, yet read 
the chapter previously, and become familiar with it ; it 
is inexcusable for a man to betray the fact that he is out 
of his latitude in the reading, traversing untrodden 
ground, floundering and picking his way across country, 
like a huntsman who has lost his bearings. Never open 
the Bible in the pulpit to read the chapter for the first 
time, but go to the familiar page after many rehearsals. 
You will be doubly useful if in addition to this you 
"give the sense." You will then, by God's blessing, be 
the pastor of an intelligent, Bible-loving people. You 
will hear in your meeting-house the delightful rustle of 
Bible leaves which is so dear to the lover of .the Word ; 
your people will open their Bibles, looking for a feast. 
The Word will become increasingly precious to yourself, 
your knowledge will enlarge, and your aptness to teach 
will become every day more apparent. Try it, my breth- 
ren, for even if you should see cause to discontinue it, 
at least no harm will come of the attempt. 

In all that I have said I have given you another rea- 
son for seeking the aid of the Holy Spirit. If you do 
not understand a book by a departed writer you are un- 
able to ask him his meaning, but the Spirit, who in- 



OK COMMBilTIirG. 59 

spired Holy Scripture, lives forever, and he deliglits to 
open up the Word to those who seek his instruction. 
He is always accessible : " he dwelleth with you and shall 
be in you." Go to him for yourselves and cry, " Open 
thou mine eyeS that I may bi^hold the wondrous things 
out of thy law;" and, this, being granted you, entreat 
him to send forth his light and power with the Word 
when you expound it, that your hearers also may be led 
into all truth. Conimentaries> expositions, interpreta- 
tions, are all mere scaffolding ; the Holy Ghost himself 
must edify you and help you to build up the church of 
the living God. 



EEMAEKS UPON" THE LIST OF COM- 
MENTAKIES. 

This List is compiled for the use of ministers of aver- 
age attainments, and the brief reviews are written from 
that stand-point. Other useful lists have been published, 
specially those by Darling, Orme, and Hartwell Horae, 
but these are not easily procurable, and are not quite 
what is needed ; and therefore as the furnishing of the 
Pastor's College Library necessitated a Catalogue, and 
afEorded an opportunity for purchasing books, the pre- 
sent work has been produced. Eew can conceive the 
amount of toil which this compilation has involved, both 
to myself and my industrious amanuensis, Mr. J. L. 
Keys. In almost every case the books have been actu- 
ally examined by myself, and my opinion, whatever it 
may be worth, is an original one. A complete list of all 
comments has not been attempted. Numbers of volumes 
have been left out because they were not easily procura- 
ble, or were judged to be worthless, although some of 
both these classes have been admitted as specimens, or 
as warnings. 

The titles have been abbreviated to gain space, but it 
is believed that in every case they are full enough for 
recognition. The prices, which relate to second-hand 
books, have been placed as proximate valuations, and 
have either been taken from actual invoices, and cata- 
logues, or have been kindly filled in by the aid of vari- 
ous booksellers, to whom we tender our thanks for the 



EEMAEKS UPON THE. WST OF COMMENTAKIES. 61 

kindly interest they have taken in this work. Prices 
vary according to the condition of the book, the binding, 
the ever-changing demand, and the booksellers' mode of 
trade. The abbreviation S stands for second-hand. 
That mark is not inserted where the date is remote, and 
where the price can only refer to second-hand copies, 
since there are no others. 

The reader will please observe that the books most 
heartily recommended are printed in black faced type, 
with the remarks in larger tjrpe. Good, but more ordi- 
nary works are in medium type, and the least desirable 
are in the smallest letters. Thus we hope the eye will 
be caught at once by volumes best worthy of attention. 

Latin authors are not inserted, because few can pro- 
cure them, and fewer still can read them with ease. 
We are not, however, ignorant of their value. Hosts of 
family Bibles, discourses, and paraphrases are omitted 
because they would have wasted our limited space, and 
we could only have admitted them by raising the price 
of our book, which we resolved not to do, .lest it should 
be out of the reach of men of slender incomes. The 
first volume of this series * has had so excellent a circu- 
lation that we are able to issue this second one, although 
we know from the nature of the work that its sale will, in 
all probability, never cover the cost of production. Wo 
give the labor to our brethren freely, only wishing that 
we could with it confer upon our poorer friends the 
means of purchasing the choicest of the comments 
here mentioned. 

* Lectures to my Students ; a selection from Addresses deliv- 
ered to the Students of the Pastor's College, Metropolitan Taberna- 
cle. By C.'H. Spurgeon, President; New York, Sheldon and Co. 
Price 11.25. 



62 EEMAEKS UPON THE LIST OF COMMENTAKIES. 

It is to be specially noted, that in no case do we en- 
dorse all that any author has written in his commentary. 
We could not read the works through, it would have 
needed a Methuselah to do that ; nor have we thought it 
needful to omit a book because it contains a measure of 
error, provided it is useful in its own way; for this 
catalogue is for thoughtful, discerning men, and not for 
children. We have not, however, knowingly mentioned 
works whose main drift is sceptical, or Socinian, except 
with a purpose ; and where we have admitted comments 
by writers of doubtful doctrine, because of their superior 
scholarship, and the correctness of their criticism, we 
have given hints which will be enough for the wise. It 
is sometimes very useful to know what our opponents 
have to say. 

The writers on the Prophetical Books have completely 
mastered us, and after almost completing a f uU list, we 
could not in our conscience believe that a tithe of them 
would yield anything to the student but bewildeiment, 
and therefore we reduce the number to small dimensions. 
We reverence the teaching of the prophets, and the 
Apocalypse, but for many of the professed expounders 
of those inspired books we entertain another feeling. 

May God bless this laborious endeavor to aid his 
ministers in searching the Scriptures. If Biblical stud- 
ies shall be iu any measure promoted, we shall be more 
than repaid. 

N. B. Many of the works in this list are published 
m the United States ; and the English looks, which are 
obtainable can be imported by any bookseller at about 
AOcts. to the shilling of the price given. 



lilST 

OP 



Jiblial Comtnentarhs snir ^^positions. 



COMMEITOAEIES ON THE WHOLE BIBLE. 

1 ANNOTATED PARAGRAPH BIBLE, THE. According 
to the Authorized Version, arranged in Paragraphs and 
ParalleUsms, with Explanatory Notes and Prefaces to the 
several Books. An issue of the London Beligious Tract 
Society, republished, and containing numerous maps. 
Library sheep, in one vol. 8vo. . . . 8 00 
Library sheep, in three vols 10 00 

"Never before has so much important information 
respecting the ' Word of God ' been condensed in a sin- 
gle Tolume." 

3 ALLEN (John). A Spiritual Exposition of the Old and New- 
Testaments ; or, The Christian's Gospel Treasure. Three 
vols. 8vo. 1816. 4s. 6d. 

Spiritnal reflections after the High CaMnistio School. Some preach- 
ers cannot see Christ where he is, hut Allen finds him where he is not. 
There is in these reflections much godly savor, bat very little exposition. 

3 ASSEMBLY OF DIVINES, Westminster. Annotations. Two 

vols. Folio. Lond., 1657. lOs. to 16s. 
Contain valuable remarks, but are somewhat out of date. The work 
is probably leas esteemed than it should be. (See page 28). 

4 BARTH (Dr. C. G., of Calw,. Wurtemberg).— Practical Com- 

mentary on the Books of Holy Scripture, arranged in Chrono- 
logical Order ; being a Bible Manual for tlie use of Students 
of the Word of God. Translated from the German. Imp. 
8vo„ 12s. Lond., Nisbet & Co. S. 7s. 



64 WHOLE BIBLE. 

Helpful in showing the historical position of the 
books, and in assisting to illustrate them by the circum- 
stances under which they were written. We have re- 
ferred to it with benefit. 

5 BENSON (Joseph, 1748—1821. An eminent Methodist 

Preacher). Notes, Critical, Explanatory, and Practical. 
Six, vols. Imp. 8vo. lOs.^ 6d. each, LoncL, Wesleyan Con- 
ference Office. S. 37s. 6d. '• ^ <) [ I 
Adopted by the Wesleyan Conference as a standard work, and charac- 
terized by that body as marked by " solid learning, soundness of theolo- 
gical opinion, and an edifying attention to experimental and practical 
religion. Necessary to Methodist Students. 

6 BIBLICAL MUSEUM. (Jamks Compeb Gray). Old Testa- 

ment portion to be issued in eight vols., at ^. 6d. eaph. 
New Testament already oat, five vols., 4s. 6d. each. Lond., 
Elliot Stock. 

We can only speak of the New Testament ; it is sur- 
passingly useful, sententious, and sensible. Buy the 
work at once. 

7 BONAR (Hoi\ATlTJS, D. D.) Light and Truth; or, Bible 

Thoaghts 'and Themes. Vol. I., Old Testament. Vol. II., 
Gospels. Vol. III., Acts and Larger Epistles. Vol. IV., 
Lesser Epistles. Vol. V., Revelation of St. John. Ci?own 
8vo. 5s. each. Lond., Nisbet. 

One volume is rather short space in which to bring 

out the " light and truth " of the Old Testament. If Dr. 

Bonar required four volumes for the New, we wish he 

had felt the same need for the Old. The passages 

selected are popularly expounded, but the thought is not 

deep. The volumes will be more prized by the ordinary 

reader than by the minister. 

8 BOOTHROTD (Benjamin, D.D., 1768-183Q. A learned Inde- 

pendent Minister and eminent Hebrew scholar). Family 
Bible. Improved Version. Notes, and reflections on each 
chapter ; introduction on the authenticity and inspiration 
of the sacred books, and a complete view of the Mosaic laws, 
&c. Three vols. Royal 4to., 1834, 16s., or one volume, thick 
8vo., 1853, 7s. 
Good, but may be dispensed with, now that the East has been more 
fully explored. 



WHOLE BIBLE. G5 

9 BROWN (John, 1723-1787). Splf-Interpreting Bible. 6s. to 15b. 
Ueeful in its day, and still popular. Notes on New Testament 

an undisguised plagiarism from Quyse. Not a Student's book. 

10 BUKDER (Samuel, A. M.) The Scripture Expositor ; a New 

CJommentary, Critical and Practical. 4vols.,4to. 1811 203. 
Well selected notes. Those upon Eastern manners, geography, &c., 
are collected very judioiously, 

11 CALVIN (John, 1509-1564). In the works of Calvin, pub- 

lished by the Calvin Translation Society, are the Comment- 
aries, in 45 volumes. Messrs. T. & T, Clark, of Edinburgh, 
now issue sets of 45 vols, at £7 17s. 6d., or six vols, for One 
Guinea, excepting Psalms, vol. V., and Habakkuk. Sepa- 
rate volumes, 6s. each. Old copies of Calvin's comments 
are to bo met with at second-hand book stores. We liave 
entered most of them in their proper places, but cannot 
afford space for separate mention of the volumes of the 
C; T. Society. 

Of priceless value. (See pages 15 and 16 of this work). 

12 CHALMERS (Thomas, D.D., LL.D., 1780-1847). Daily 

Scripture Readings (3 vols.) and Sabbath Scripture Read- 
ings (2 vols.), being vols. I. to V. of the "Posthumona 
Works " of 0r. Chalmers, edited by Rev. W. Hanna, D. D. 
Lond., Hamilton, Adams & Co. ; Edinb.,Edmonston & Doug- 
lass, in whose catalogue they are priced as follows : D. S. 
Readings, three vols., crown 8vo., £1 lis. 6d. ; cheap edi- 
tion, two vols., 10s. S. S. Readings, two vols., £1 Is.; 
cheap edition, two vols., 10s. 

Those acquainted with the writings of Chalmers will 
know what to expect from .his pen when guided by fer- 
vent devotion. 

13 CLARKE (Adam, LL. D., 1760-1832). A New Edition, with 

the Author's final corrections. Six vols.. Imp. 8vo. Lond., 
. 1844. W. Tegg's edition, new, £3 3s. S, 38s. Also 
printed on large paper, six vols., 4to. 

Despite some few oddities, this is one of the most 

learned of English expositions. (See page 34.) 

14 CLARKE (Samwel. Died 1701). The Old and New Testa- 

ment, with Annotations and Parallel Scriptures. Folio. 

Lond., 1690. 7s. 
Notes very brief, bnt judicious. Author one of the ejected minis- 
ters, an exceedingly learned man. This work was highly commended 
by Owen, Baxter, Howe, and others, but is now superseded. 



66 WHOLE BIBLE. 

15 CIiASS AND THE DESK, THE. By J. Compek Grat, of 

Halifax, and C. Stokes Cakbt, of London. Four vols. 
Crown 8vb., 13a. Lond., J. Sangster & Co. 

Condensed thought. Suited for Teachers and Local 

Preachers. 

16 COBBIN (iNttKAM). Evangelical Synopsis. The Holy Bible, 

with Notes Explanatory and Practical, selected from the 

writings of the most esteemed divines and Biblical critics. 

Three vols. Imp. 4to. Lond., George Berger. S. 34s. or 

less. 
An admirable coUeetion of notes. Men with small means will find it 
a miniature library. We have heard brethren who have had no commen- 
tary but Cobbin's speak of the work with ma6h euthnKiasm, 

17 COBBIN (Ingkam). A condensed Commentary on the Bible. 

Second edition. Imp. Svo. Loud., 1839. 12s. 
An excellent makeshift for a poor man. 

18 COKE (Thomas, LL. D. Wesleyan Methodist Minister. 

Died 1814). A Commentary on the Old and New Testa- 
ment. Six vols. 4to. Loud., 1803. 17s. 6d. 

A Wesleyan comment. Too big: ought to have been pat in half the 
space. Moreover, it is next door to a fraud, fi)r it is " in the main a reprint 
of the work of Dr. Dodd," without that atithor's name. Ah, Dr. Coke, 
tins is a burning shame 1 

19 COMMENTARY, WHOLLY BIBLICAL, THE. An Exposi- 

tion in the very words of Scripture. Three vols., 4td. 
£2 16a. Lond., S. Bagster and Sons. S. 36s. 

It is very handy to have explanatory passages thus presented to the 
eye. In general the work is excellently done ; but ministers with scanty 
purses can make a Biblical exposition for themselves. 

20 COMPREHENSIVE BIBLE, THE. (Edited by W. Green- 

field, M.B.A.S.) The Old and New Testaments, with the 
various readings and marginal notes, parallel passages 
systematically arranged, numerous philological and ex- 
planatory notes, etc., etc. Medium 4to., pica type, £1 15s. 
in cloth ; crown 4to., small pica type, £1 la., cloth. Loud., 
S. Bagster and Sous. 

Generally used as a Pulpit Bible. Said to contain 4,000 notes and 
600,000 parallel passages, being all those of Blaney, Scott, Clarke, and 
others. The tables, notes, introductions, etc., are of standard value. 



WHOLE BIBLE. 67 

21 DIOD ATI (John, 1576— 1649). Annotations plainly expound- 

ing the most difficult places. Third edition. Folio. Lond. 
1651. [Quarto editions exist, but the folio is best, 4s. 6d.j 

Kckersteth gays : "The spiritual and evangelical remoiks are of much 
value." Siodati'B notes are short and worth consulting. 

22 DODD (William, D. P.) A Commentary on the Boolis of 

the Old and New Testament ; in which are inserted the 
notes and collections of John Locke, Esq. ; Daniel Water- 
land, D. D. ; the Earl of Clarendon, and other learned 
persons ; with practical improvements, etc. Three vols. 
Folio. Lond., 1770. IBs. 

An almost forgotten production of the unhappy Dodd. It is founded 
on the manuscript collections of Cudworth, Waterland, Clarendon, and 
others, Not very likely to quicken piety, or inspire spiritual thought; 
yet, as Adam Clarke thought very highly of it, and Dr. Coke appropriated 
it, it must have some value. 

23 D'OTLY AND MANT. Notes, taken principally from the 

Church of England writers. Published by the S.P.C.K. 
Prepared by the Eev. Geo. D'Oyly, D. D., and the Rev. R. 
Mant, D. D. Three vols. Koyal 8vo., with the text, S. 
15s. ; or in one vol., without the text, 6s. 1845, etc. 

Of moderate value. More fitted for the family than the study. A 
compilation most appreciated among Episcopalians. 

24 DUTCH ANNOTATIONS upon the whole Bible, as ordered 

by the Synod of Dort, 1618, and published in English, by 
Theodore Haak, Esq. Two vols. Folio. Lond., 1657. 123. 

Similar to the Westminster Assembly's Annotations. (See page 2T). 

25 PAUSSET (A. R., A. M.— See Jamibson, and page 40.) 

26 FOURFOI.D UNION COMMENTART, THE. Contain- 

ing, I. Parallel Texts, in full. II. Commentary of Matthew 
Heury, etc. 111. Scott's Commentary condensed. IV. 
Commentary by Jamieson, Fausset, and Brown. To which 
is added the Biblical Cyclopaedia, by Dr. John Eadie, a 
Biblical Atlas, etc. Two handsome volumes. Koyal 4to. 
£'d 38. net. Lond., Wesley. 1872. 

A Christian man wishing for the cream of expository 
writers could not make a better purchase. Ministers, 
as a rule, should not buy condensations, but get the 
works themselves. 



68 WHOLE BIBLE. 

27 FRASER (Donald, D. D.) Synoptical Lectures on the 

Books of Holy Scripture. First Series — Genesis to Canti- 
cles. Second Series — Isaiah to Acts. Post 8vo. 6s. each-. 
Lond., Nisbet & Go. 

Dr. Praser has observed, like many others of us, the 
mischief wHieh results fi-om cutting the Bible into frag- 
ments, and using it piecemeal. la these volumes he 
discourses of the Bible at large, indicates the scope of 
each book, and furnishes a brief digest of its contents. 
He has compressed rigorously. The design was in itself 
most laudable, and it has been well carried out. 

28 GILL (John, D. D. 1697—1771). An Exposition of the Old 

and New Testament. Nine vols. Folio. Lond., 1763. S. 
, £5. Nine vols., 4to., 1810. S. £i 15b. Six vols., Eoyal 
8vo., 1853. £3 3s. 

Invaluable in its own line of things. (For full title 
and extended remarks see pages 21 and 22.) 

39 HAAK (Theodore).. See under " Dutch Annotations." 

.30 HALL (Joseph, D. D., Bishop of Norvcich. 1574—1656). 
Contemplations. Several editions ; the one published by 
T. Nelson, Edinb., 1844, has a memoir of the good Bishop 
by the late Dr. James Hamilton. S. 4s. 

The work can be readily procured ; but if its price 
were raised in proportion to its real value, it would become 
one of the most costly books extanti (See page 27.) 

31 HALL (Joseph). A plain and familiar Explication, by way 
of Paraphrase, of all the Hard Texts of the whole Divine 
Scriptures. Small Folio, 1638. S. 5s. Also forming Vols. 
Ill, and IV. of the 8vo. edition of Hall's works in twelve 
vols. Oxford, 1837. 

Not so pithy as the Contemplations ; nor, indeed, could it be expected 
to be BO. It is not necessary to the Student, but might be useful. 

33 HAWEIS (Thomas. 1734—1820). The Evangelical Expos- 
itor. Two vols. Folio. 1765-6. 13s. 
Partakes of the author's character ; for of him it has been said, that 
" he ■was rather useful than eminent." The work is mainly an abridg 
ment of Heniy. 



WHOLE BIBLE. 69 

33 HAWKER (Robebt, D. D. 1753—1837). The Poor Man's 

Commentary. Nine vols. 8vo., and three vols. 4to. 1843. 
8. 30s. 

Full of devotion and sweetness. (See pnge 29). 

34 HE^rRY (Matthew. 1663—1714). Exposition. The fol- 

lowing are recent editions. Tlie prices refer to new copies. 
Blackie's, three vols.. Royal 4to., £3 10s. ; Cassell's, three 
vols., demy 4to., £2 13s. 6d. ; Griffin's, three vols.. Super- 
royal 8vo., £3 10s.; Nisbet's, nine vols., Imp. 8vo., £3 3s. 
S. from 20s. to 30s. according to condition. 

For tible and remarks see pages 13, 14, 15.) 

35 HOLDEN (George, M. A.) Christian Expositor. Two vols., 
8vo. 1837. 4s. 

Notes bigMy spoken of; we consider them the most ordinary of 
platitudes. 

36 JAIOIEiSON (Rev. Dr., Glasgow). FAUSSET (Rev. A. R., 

York), and BROWN (REV. Dk. D., Aberdeen). THE 
LIBRARY COMMENTARY, Critical, Experimental, 
and Practical. Six vols. Medium 8vo., iE3 12s. ; or 14s. 
each vol. Collins & Co., Edinb. 

A really standard work. "We consult it continually, 

and with growing interest. Mr. Fausset's portion strikes 

us as being of the highest order. (See page 40.) 

The following are different forms or abridgments 
of the same work, each of which we can highly recom- 
mend : — 

37 JAMIESON. The Complete Commentary. Two vols.. 

Royal 4to., with maps, £3 10s. Much the same as the 
Fourfold Commentary, Edinb., W. Collins. (See No. 25.) 

38 The Student's Commentary. Four vols., foolscap 8vo. 

3s. 6d. per vol. W. Collins. 

39 ! The Portable Commentary. Two vols., post 8vo. 7s. 

6d. each. W.' Collins, Sons, & Co. 

40 KITTO (JOHU, D. v., F. S. A., 1804—1850). The Pictorial 

Bible. Four vols.. Imp. 8vo., £1 10s. 1855. Lond. and 
Edinb., Chambers. S. 20s. 

A work of art as well as learning. • (See page 33.) 



70 WHOLE BIBLE. 

41 KITTO. The Illustrated Commentary of the Old and New 
Testaments. A reproduction of the Notes, etc., of the 
Pictorial Bible. Five vols. 8vo. 1840. S. 10s. 6d. 

The omission of the text renders the work cheaper. 

43 KITTO'B Daily Bible Illustrations : being Original Readings 
for a Tear, on subjects relating to Sacred History, Biog- 
raphy, Geography, Antiquities, and Theology. New 
edition, edited and revised by J. L. Porter, D. D. Eight 
vols., £3 8s. Edinb., Oliphant & Co. S. 20s. 

May always be obtained, both new and second-hand. 

(See page 32.) 

43 ZiAJNOE (J. p. , D. D.) Translations of the Commentaries of 

Dr. Lange, and his Collaborateurs. Edited by Dr. Schaff. 
T. & T. Clark. 

There are now ready eight volumes on the Old Testa- 
ment, viz., Genesis, 1 vol. ; Joshua, Judges, and Euth, 
1 vol. ; Kings, 1 vol. ; Job, 1 vol. ; Psalms, 1 vol. ; 
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon, 1 vol. ; 
Jeremiah and Lamentations, 1 vol. ; Minor Prophets, 
1 vol. The other Books of the Old Testament are in 
active preparation. 

New Testament, complete in 10 vols. 

The volumes greatly differ in excellence, yet none 
could be spared. We have nothing equal to them as a 
series. (See page 38.) 

44 LEES (Fkbd. R., Ph. D.) and BURNS (Dawson, M. A.) The 

Temperance Bible Commentary, Demy 8vo., 6s. Lond., 

S. W. Partridge & Co. 1872. 
Beaders will probably estimate the value of this work according to 
their views upon Total Abstinence. This question appears to be one which 
Tenders both advocates «nd opponents too warm cither to give or accept a 
cool, impartial verdict ; we shall not therefore offer one. 

45 LEIGH (Sm Edward. 1602-3—1671). Annotations from 

Job to Canticles. Folio. Lond., 1657.' 8s. 6d. 

Annotations upon all the New Testament. Philological 
and Theological. Folio. Lond., 1650. 3s. 6d. Frequently 
a!>«ociated with Richardson on the Old Testament. (See 
No. 71.) 
Good, brief notes. Antique, but still prized. 



■WHOLE BIBLE. 71 

Critica Sacra. In two parts : I. Observations on all the 
primitive Hebrew words of the Old Testament. II. Philo- 
logical and Theological Observations on all the Greek 
words of the New Testament. Folio. Lond., 1662. 3s. 6d. 
Home gays this is " a very valuable help to the understanding of the 
original languages." Farkhurst valued it. 

46 MA.NT. (SeeD'Oyly.) 

47 MAYER (John, D. D.) Commentary. Six vols, folio, and 

one vol. 4to. Lond., 1653. [The seventh volume, contain- 
ing the Catholic Epistles and Revelation, was published in 
4to. only.] £66s. (For full title and remarks see page 35.) 
Laborious writing and heavy reading. 

48 MILLINGTOX (Thomas S.) The Testimony of the Heathen 

to the Truths of Holy Writ. Compiled almost exclusively 
from Greek and Latin Authors of the Classical Ages of 
Antiquity. 4to, Lond., Seely, Jackson & Halliday. 1863. 
S. 8s. 
It was a capital idea to lay the heathen under contribution. The author 
is at home in the Classics, and has performed his work well. 

49 NESS (Christopher. 1631—1705). History and Mystery. 

Four vols.. Folio. Lond., 1690-6. S. £4 to £5. 

Quaint, pithy, suggestive. Pull of remarks such as 
are to be found in Thomas Fuller and Bishop Hall. 
(See page 27.) 

50 NEW BIBLE COMMENTARY, THE. [Sometimes spoken 

of as " The Speaker's Commentary."] In progress. Lond., 
Murray. 1871 , etc. (For full title see page 39.) 

The proverb concerning too many cooks applies also to Commentators. 
The work is good, but it might have been better. 

51 PATRICK & LOWTH. A Critical Commentary. Corrected 

by the Rev. J. R. Pitman. Six vols., Royal 4to. 1823. 
[There are other editions, but some of them do not contain 
the whole of the Commentary ; the above is one of the 
best. Good edition in smaller type, four vols.. Imp. 8vo., 
£3 3s. Lond., W. Tegg.] S. 24s. (See page 37.) 

53 POOLE (Matthew. 1684 — 1679). Annotations. Our copy 
is dated 1853. Lond., Nisbet & Co. S. 21s. Old folios, 14s 

See title and remarks on page 18. 



'72 WHOLE BIBLE. 

63 PURVER (Anthony. 1703—1777). A New and Literal 
Translation, with Notes. Two vols.. Folio. Lond., 1764. 10s. 
A Quaker Translation. Often ungrammatioal and uiiintelMgible. Not 
without ita good poiutis, but much more curious than useful. 

54 RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY'S COMMENTARY. From 

Henry and Scott, with numerous observations from other 
writers. Witlx the text and maps, six vols.^ Super royal 
8vo., £2 6s. Without the text, six vols., 13mo., £1 4s. S. 9s. 

The Society kindly allowB Students to purchase this work at a reduced 
rate. The abridgments are carefully executed. 

55 SCOTT (Thomas. 1747—1821). The Holy Bible. A New 

Edition. Six vols., 4to. £3 10s. Lond., Nisbet & Co. S. 
30s. (For title and remarks see page 38.) 

J. M. Neale says of Scott's practical observations, 

" They are such as some men would not take the trouble 

of even thinking, many would not be at the pains of 

speaking, and — one should have imagined, were not the 

fact as it is — such as no man would have condescended 

to write down." This judgment is far too severe, and 

reveals the High Churchman : it raises Scott in our 

esteem. 

56 SIMEON (Chahles, M. A. 1759—1836). Horae Homileticae ; 

or Discourses digested into one continued series, forming 
a Comment upon every book of the Old and New Testa- 
ment ; twenty-one vols. 8vo. Seventh edition. Lond., H. G. 
Bohn. 1845. S. £3 10s. [Being tbe entire works of 
Charles Simeon, with Copious Indexes, prepared by T. 
Hartwell Home.] 

Not Commentaries, but we could not exclude them. They have been 
called " a valley of dry bones " : be a prophet and they will live. 

57 SPEAKER'S COMMENTARY, THE. (See New Bible Com- 

mentary.) 

58 SUTCLIFFE (Joseph, M. A. Wesleyan Minister). A Com- 

mentary^; c-ontaining Copious Notes. Imp. 8vo., 12s. 6d. 
Lond., 66 Paternoster Row, E. C. S. 7s. 

To comprise tbe whole Bible in one volume necessitated notes few and 
brief. SutcUffe, though an Arminiau, is in general so good that we wish 
we had more of him ; his style is vivacious and forcible. 

59 TEMPERANCE BIBLE COMMENTARY, THE. (See 

Lees R.) 



WHOLE BIBLE. 73 

60 TRAPP (John. 1611—1669). Commentary. Five vols., 

Folio. 1654, «tc. There are also 4to. editions of parts of 
the Commentary. Reprinted by Mr. R. D. Dickinson, Far- 
ringdon Street, E. C, in five vols., Super- royal 8vo., price 
£2 18s. 6d. (published at £3 15s.); or, 12s. 6d. each vol. nett. 

Oh, rare John Trapp ! (See page 20.) 

61 "WALL (William, D. D. 1646—1720). Critical Notes on the 

Old and New Testament. Three vols., 8vo. Lond., 1730-4. 
S.3s. 6d. 

Dr. Wall was the great champion of infant baptism against the learned 
Gale. His notes are good, but oat of date. ' 

62 WELLS (Edward, D. D. Died 1724). Help for the more 

easy and clear understanding of the Holy Scriptures. Six 
vols.,4to. Oxford, 1724, etc. 18s. 
Seldom to be met •with complete, but this need not be regretted, for 
though somewhat useful, it is not of primary importance. 

63 WESLEY (John, A. M. 1703—1791). Notes on Old and 

New Testament. Four vols., 4to. Lond., .1764. S. 20s. 
[Editions of the New Test., with Wesley's Notes, are pub- 
lished at the Wesleyan Conference Office. 18mo., 2s.; 
8vo., 4s.] 
The Notes on the New Testament are esteemed, but Dr. Clark says 
that those on the Old are meagre and unsatisfactory. He is quite right. 

64 WILSON (Thomas, D. D. 1663—1755. Bishop of Sodorand 

Man). The Holy Bible, with Notes and various renderings. 
By the Rev. C. Crut'well. Three vols., 4to. Lond., 1785. 

The good Bishop's notes are brief hints, only intended for the explana- 
tion or practical improvement of certain passages ; their value to Biblical 
Students is inconsiderable. Orutwell's various readings are numerous. 
We gave no less than £3 8 s. for the copy by which we have been able to 
form this estimate ; but for our own use we should be sorry to give half-a- 
guinea for it. 

65 WORDSWORTH (Chbistophbb.D.D. Bishop of Lincoln.) 

See page 37. 

66 YOUNG (Robert, LL. D.) Commentary on the Bible, as 

Literally and Idiomatically Translated. Crown 8vo. Lond., 
FuUarton & Co. . S. 3b. 6d. 

Too small to be of any use. You cannot put the sea into a tea cap. 



74 WHOLE BIBLE. 

OLD TESTAMENT, OR CONSIDEEABLE POE- 
TIONS THEEBOP. 

67 AINSWORTH (Hbnry, Died 1632). Annotations upon the 

Five Bookes of Moses, the Booke of Psalmes, and the Song 
of Songs : wherein the Hebrew words and sentences are 
compared with the Greeke and Chaldee versions. Folio. 
Lond., 1627 and 1639. 7s. 

" Ains worth was a celebrated scholar and an excellent 
divine. His uncommon skill in Hebrew learning, and 
his excellent Commentaries on the Scriptures are held 
in high reputation to this day." — Brook's Lives of the 
Puritans. 

68 HENQSTENBERG (E. W., D. D.), Christology of the Old 

Testament : a Commentary on the Messianic Predictions. 
Four vols., £3 2s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1858. S. 20s. 

This great Work deals with a most vital theme in a masterly manner. 

■ It has always been held in high esteem. We confess, however, that we 

can only read it as a task, for the dry scholastic style repels us, and it 

seems to us that in answering a number of sceptical doctors,' whose opin* 

ions are ridicnloos, the author has made much ado about nothing. 

69 HORSLET (Samuel, LL. D., F. R. S., and F. A. S. Bishop 

of St. Asiph. 1733—1806). Biblical Criticism on the first 
fourteen Historical Books of the. Old Testament ; also on 
the first nine Prophetical Books. Second edition. Two 
vols., 8vo. Lond., 1844. S. 7s. 6d. 

These criticisms will be of more interest to the scholar than of value to 
the mitdster. Sbrsley was fer too ready to invent new readings ; yet he 
was a master in his own line. He writes very dogmatically and with a 
violent bias toward a theory of interpretation which with all its excel- 
lencies, cannot be everywhere maintained. Numbers of other writers 
have followed in his track, but none with equal footsteps. 

70 JACKSON (AKTHim, M. A. 1593—1666). A Help for the 

Understanding of the Holy Scriptures (Geneisis to Isaiah). 
Four vdls. 4to. 1643, etc. 10s. to '20s. 

Eather tame, but will well repay quiet reading. His works are now 
somewhat rare. (See page 26.) 



PENTATEUCH. 75 

71 OETON (Job, D. D. 1717—1783). Exposition of the Old 
Testament, with Devotional and Practical Reflections, Pub- 
lished from the Author's Manuscripts, by Robert Gentle- 
man. Six vols. 8vo. Shrewsbury, 178S. Reprinted, 1823. 
S. 6s. 
A sort of paraphrase, after the manner of Doddridge's Family Mpositor, 

which it was intended to accompany. Not a very ahle production. 

73 RICHARDSON (John, Kshop of ATdagh. Died 1654). 
Choice Observations and Explanations upon the Old Testa- 
ment, containing in them many remarkable matters, addi- 
tional to the large Annotations made by some of the 
Assembly of Divines. Polio, 1655. S. 2s. 6d. 
Of secondary importance, and very short ; yet good. Frequently 

bound up with ieigh (No. 45). 



PENTATEUCH AND OTHEK HISTOEIOAL 
BOOKS OP THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

73 AINSWORTH (Hehbt), Annotations on the Pentateuch 

(See also No. 67). 4to. 1616. 2s. 6d. 

Thoroughly learned. Though old not out of date. 

74 ALEXANDER (William). The Pentateuch, with Notes. 

S. Is. 6d. 
A book of no importance. 

75 BABINGTON (Gkkvase, Bishop of Worcester. Died 1610)- 

In Babington's works, folio, 1633, there are "Certaine 
plain, brief, and comfortable notes " upon the Five Books 
of Moses. Whole works 30s. 
Our copy is in the old Black Letter. It contains little to repay the 
student for toiling through tfae old-fashioned expressions. 

76 BARRETT (R. A. P., M. A.) A Synopsis of Criticisms upon 

those passages of the Old Testament in which modern com- 
mentators have differed from the Authorized Version. 
Two vols, in two parts each, and vol. III. part 1, large 
8vo., 1847. [Only extends from Genesis to Esther.] 
S. 10s. 6d. 
The object of this work is to lay before the reader the principal 
alterations which modern critics have proposed in the Authorized Ver- 
sion, together with the reasons for or against such emendations. Manv 
of the notes are in Latin. Of small use to the average minister. 



76 PENTATEUCH. 

77 BATE (JtJMTJS, M. A. 1711—1771). New Literal Translation 

of the Pentateuch and Historical Bookg to end of 3 Kings. 
With Notes. 4to. Lond., 1773. 43. 
Paper spoiled. We greatly grudge the four shillings which Tre gave 
for it. 

78 BIBLE TEACHINGS; or Remarks on «enesia, Exodus, and 

Leviticus. With Recommendatory Preface by Rev. W, B. 

Mackenzie. 8yo. Lond., 1853. S. 2b. 6d. 
This hook was written by the Three iStaea Bird, of Tbploio. The 
Eemarks are very plain and practical, and a spirit. of earnest piety and 
fervent prayer pervades them thronghout, 

79 BLUNT (Hknry, A. M. Died 1843). Family Exposition of 

Pentateuch. 1844. Three vols., 12mo. 6s. each. Hatch- 
ards. S. three vols. 5s. 
See remarks under each separate volume. 

80 BRIGHTWELL (T.) Notes selected from the exegetical . 

parts of Rosenmiilier's Scholia, and of Dathe's Notes to his 

Latin version; also from Schrank, Michaelis, Le Clerc, 

Ainsworlh, Poole, and other authors. 8vo. Lond., 1840. 

S. Is. 6d. 

This writer worked very industriously at the almost impossible task 

of condensing the twenty-^ight volumes of SosenmuUer' a JTolea. Besides 

the remarks from authors mentioned in the text, there are observations 

from the manuscripts of Joseph Kinghmrn, of Norwich. It is not a didacfio 

or spiritual work, but almost entirely explanatory and illustrative. 

81 CHRIST IN THE LAW ; or the Gospel fereahadowed in the 

Pentateuch. Compiled by a Priest of the Church of 

England. Christ in the Prophets. — Joshua to Kings. 

Two vols.. Foolscap 8vo. 3s. 6d. each. Lond., Masters 

1872 and 1873. 
Of the High Church order, and praised by the Saturday Seview. 
What worse need be said 1 Yet will we add that the savor of Christ in 
these books saves them from unqualified condemnation. 

83 DELG ADO (Isaac. Jewish Teacher). New Translation. 4to. 
Loud., 1789. 2s. 
The author modestly says, that his work is ImgKI/y •aaefuL. This Is an- 
other instance of paternal partiality, and of " great cry and little wool." 

83 ETHERIDGE (J. W., M. A.) The Targums of Onkeloa and 

Jonathan Ben Uzziel on the Pentateuch, with the Frag- 

men-ts of the Jerusalem Targum, Leviticus, Numbers, and 

Deuteronomy. 8vo. Lond., Longmans, 1865. S. 7s. 6d. 

Comparativelv few of our readers will set much store by the Targums 

of Onkeloa and Jonathan Ben Viziel; but those who desire to read "' 

will find hero a good literal version. 



PEKTATEUCH. 77 

84 GEDDES (Alexander, LL. D. — A Roman Catholic Divine. — 

1737 — 1802.) Translation from corrected texts with various 
Reading and Notes. [Genesis to Ruth only published.] 
Threevols.,4to., 1793— 1800. 12s. 
Tlie author was a Hebraist of considerable repute, but treated the 

inspired word far too flippantly. His style of criticism is essentially 

sceptical. 

85 GERLACH (Otto Von. 1801—1849). Pentateuch. Trans- 

lated by the Rev. Henry Downing. Demy 8vo., 10s. 6d. 
Edinb.,.T. & T. Clark. 
Very diSereut &om other German authors. Plain, clear, and inatmo- 
tive. Not choked up with metaphysical bewilderments and long lists of 
sceptical authors whose names defile the pages which bear them. 

86 HAVERNICK (Dr. H. A. Ch.) Historico-Critical Introduction 

to the Pentateuch. Translated by A. Thomson, A. M. 

Edinb., Clark. 1850. S. lOs. 6d. 
Almost entirely occupied with a discussion upon the genuineness of 
the Pentateuch. A check to the rationalistic and infidel spirit. Those 
who have never taken the poison do not need the antidote. 

87 HENGSTENBERG (E. W., D. D.) Genuineness of the Pen- 

tateuch. Translated by J. E. Eyland. Two vols., 8vo. 
Edinb., 1847. S. 8s. 
This great author contends ably for the Pentateuch, but the perusal of 
his book reminds us of the king who 

" Fought all his battles o'er again, 
And thrice he routed all his foes, and thrice he slew the slain." 

88 Egypt and the Books of Moses ; or the Books of 

Moaes Illustrated by the Monuments of Egypt. 8vo. 73. 

■ 6d. Edinb., 1845. T. & T. Clark. 
Dr. Hengstenberg, as Professor at Berlin, had access to the rich collec- 
tion of Egyptian antiquities in the Museum, and he has made noble use 
of his advantages. 

89 HOWARD (The Hon. E. J., D. D., Dean of Lichfield.) 1. Gen- 

esis according to the LZX. Translated into English, with 
Notes on the Passages in which it diiSers from our Author- 
ized Version. Cr. 8vo. 8s. 6d. 2. Exodus and Leviticus, 
10s. 6d. 3. Numbers and Deuteronomy, 10s. 6d. Camb., 
Macmillan, 1857, etc. S. 38. 6d. each. 
Of no particular use to preachers ; but the Ovardian says, " It is an 
excellent introduction to the comparative study of God's word, in those 
three languages with which on ordinary English student is mainly con- 
cerned." 



78 PENTATEXICH. 

90 JAMIESON (J., LL. D.) The Pentateuch, with Kotes, etc 

[Anon.]' Folio; Lend., 1748. S. 6s. 
Published anonymously. Sliunly a compilation, in -wKibh more in- 
dustry was shown in the collection thau discretion in the selection. 

91 KALISCH (M. M., Ph. D.) Historical and Critical Commen- 

tary on the Old Testament ; with a New Translation. 8vo. 
Vol. I. Genesis, 18s.; or adapted- for the general- reader, 
13s. Vol: II. Exodus, l'5s., 13a. Vol. III. Leviticus, part 
1, 15s., 83. Vol'. IV. Leviticus, part 3, 15a., 8s. Lond., 
Longmans. 1858. 

Contains a large amount of historical illustration, shedding new light 
upon the letter of the Word. The author has used' the fresh information 
which has come to us from the Euphrates and the NQe. At the same time 
he sows scepticisms broadcast, and we cannot recommend him. 

93 KEIL (Cakl Friedrigh, P. Di, Ph. D.) Pentateuch. Three 
vols., 8voi 3l8. 6d. Ediab., T. &. T. Clark. 1864. 

A work for the learned. It has received the highest commendations 
from competent scholars. But it is- somewhat dViU and formal. 

93 KELLT (William). Introductory Lectures. Ct. Svo., 4s. 

6d. Lond., W. H. Broom. 

By a leading writer of. the. exclusive Plymouth, schooli Not to our 
mind. 

94 KIDDER (EtCHATlB, D. D., Bishop of Bath and Wells.— Died 

1'703). Five Books of Moses. Two vote;, Svo. Lond., 
1694. 4a. 

Of no impoitanoe ; a chip in thia poiTi(^ : mild as a modem Bishop. 

95 KINGSLET (Chakeks, M. A., Canon of Westminster. Died 

1875). The Gospel of the Pentateuch. [18 sermonsi] 
Foolscap Svo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Macmillan. 

A small volume of Zingslei/'t usual sort. Not over-freighted with what 
is usually known as the Gospel; butplun and practical, with common 
sense remarks for common people. 

96 LAW (Henkt, M. a.. Dean of Gloucester). " Christ is All." 

The Gospel of the Old Testament, SeveraiL editions ; a 
recent one is published by the Religious Tract Society, in 
four vols., Cir. Svo. 2s. each. 

Deservedly popular. Simple,, inetruetive. Ml of 
Christ. Law abounds in gospel. 



PENTATEUCH. 79 

97 MACDONALD (Donald, >L A.) Introduction, and an inquiry 

into the genuineness, authority and design of the Mosaic 
■writings. Two vols., demy 8vo. Sis. Edinb., Clark. 1861. 
" A full review of the evidence, external and internal, for the genuine- 
ness, autheaticity, and Bivine character of the Pentateuch, Its special 
attention is devoted to the connection between the Pentateuch and the 
great scheme of revelation, of which it forms the basis." — Ghmrdicm. 

98 MORISON (Jambs, 1763—1809). Introductory Key to the 

first four Books of Moses ; being an attempt to show that 
the great design o( the things recorded therein was the 
Bufferings of Christ and the following glory. Svo. Perth, 
1810. S.3a. 
Plain, forcible, and instructive remarks, realizing the title— an Xntaro- 
ductory Key. 

99 PARKER (Samtiei,, son of Bp. Samuel Parker). Bibliotheca 

Biblica ; a Commentary gathered out of the writings of 
fathers and ecclesiastical historians, etc. [Anonymous.] 
Five vols., 4to. Oxford, 1720, etc. [Genesis to Deuteronomy 
only completed.] 35s. 
DarUngi says, that this is " a commentary of profound learning and 

research ; " bat it seems to us to be mainly filled with that archaio learning 

which is now out of date, 

100 PIERCE (Samuel Eyles). Discourses on the several Rev- 

elations of the Lord Jesus, from the Fall, to Moses, etc. 
Svo. Lond., 1815. S. 3s. 

Dr. Hawher says, that " these Discourses carry with them testimonies 
of being written under Divine teaching." Sweet, but not veiy expository. 

101 PYLE (Thomas, M. A. 1674^1756). Paraphrase, with 

Notes. Four vols., Svo. 1717—28. S. 3b. [Genesis to 
Esther only.] 
A pile of paper, valuable to housemaids for lighting fires. 

102 ROBERTSON (James, A. M.) Clavis Pentateuch!. A.naly- 

sis of the Hebrew words in the Pentateuch, with Notes. 
Reprinted, edited by Kinghorn, at Norwich, 1824. Svo. 
S. 9s. 
Almost entirely in Latin, and therefore nseful only to those who can 
readily read that language. The work was in good repute in its day. 

103 SAURIN (James. 1677—1730). Dissertations on the most 

memorable events of the Bible. [Vol. I. The Books of 
Moses, was all ever published in English. Folio. Lond., 
1733.] S. 5s. 
More eloquent than accurate. Florid rather than solid. 



80 PENTATEUCH. 

104 SHEPHEARD (H., M. A.) Traditions of Eden : or Proofs 

of the Historical Truth of the Pentateuch, from existing 
facts, and from the Customs and Monuments of all Nations. 
Demy 8yo. 10s. Loud., Nisbet & Ck>. 

A very interestinj^and carious work. Gtood lectures might be gathered 
from it for week-night instruction. Not a Commentary. 

105 STANLEY (Ahthdb Penrikn, D. D., Dean of Westmin- 

ster). Lectures on the History of the Jewish Church. 
Part I. Abraham to Samuel. Part II. Samuel to the 
Captivity. Two vols., 8vo. 33s. Lond., 1870. S. 18s. ' 

A &scinating book, which no one can read without being the better- 
able to realize the scenes of Scripture history. The author's broad views 
are known and deplored : that he has equal breadth of learning we cheer- 
fully admit. 

106 THISTLBWAITE(W.,M.A.) Expository Sermons. Four 

vols., 12mo. Lond., 1837-8. S. 2s. 6d. 

Sermons as good as these are plentiful as blackberries. Why were 
they printed I 

107 TOWNSEND (George, D. D., Canon of Durham). The 

Pentateuch and the Book of Job, arranged in Chronologi- 
cal Order, with Prayers and Notes. Two vols., 8vo. 
Lond., 1849. 10s. 

A singular combination of family prayers, essays and notes, by an able 
hut singular writer. 

108 WEIGHT (Abraham). A Practical commentary, wherein 

the Text of every Chapter is Practically expounded, in a 
way not usually trod by Commentators. Folio. 1663. 
10s. 6d. to 20s. 

An extremely rare book. The style and matter are after the manner of 
Christopher Ness. Wright does not comment upon every verse, but after 
indicating the run of the chapter gives little sermons upon the more salient 
points. Ho is very quaint and pithy. 



a£X£Sis. 81 



GENESIS. 

109 ALFORD (Henry, Dean of Canterbury. 1810—1871). 

The Book of Genesis and part of the Book of Exodus 
[Ch, I. — XXV.] : a revised version, witli Commentary. 
Demy 8vo. 12s. Lond., W. Isbister & Co. 1873. 

The works of this eminent scholar are too well known 

and appreciated to need even a word from ns. 

110 BLUNT (Hbnry, M. A.) Genesis [Vol. I. of a Family Ex- 

position of tlie Pentateuch. 13mo. Loud., Hatchards. 
1841.] S. Is. 6d. 
Simple Erpositions for family reading. Good, bnt not brilliant. 

111 BURROUGHS (W. K., M. A.) Lectures on Genesis. Svo. 

Dublin, 1848. 
TTsefol to groceia and bnttermen. Worth nothing to stadents. 

112 BUSH (Geokge. Prof, of Heb. and Orient. Lit., New York). 

Notes on Genesis. Two vols., small 8vo. New York, 
1853. Reprinted in London in one vol., 8vQ. S. 5s. 
Butih has in the most barefaced manner taken copious verbatim extracts 
from Andrew Fuller, without acknowledgment, and he has also plagiarized 
LoMtan, on Jbeeph by wholesale, without even mentioning his name. For 
Buch a scholar to be guilty of wholesale plunder is inexcusable. It is one 
of the worst cases of robbery we have ever met with, and deserves a far 
stronger denunciation than our gentle pen and slender space will permit. 

113 CALVIN (John). Genesis, translated by Tho. Tymme. 

Black letter. 4to. Lond., 1578. 9s. 

Participates in the general excellencies of Calvin's 
works. 

114 CANDIiISH (Robert S., D. D.) Lectures. New Edition. 

Two vols., Svo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., Adam Black. 1843. 

We venture to characterize this as the work upon 
Genesis, so far as Lectures can make up an exposition ; 
we have greatly profited by its perusal. It should be 
in every Biblical library. 

115 CLOSE (Francis, D. D., A. M., Dean of Carlisle). Histori- 

cal Discourses. 13mo. Lond., 1838. S. 3a. 6d. 
A course of smoothly-flowing, respectable, quiet, evangelical sermons. 
Kobody could be so wicked as to call them sensational, 
4* 



82 GENESIS. 

116 COGHLAN (0. L.) Genesis and St. Matthew. Two vols., 

8vo. 1832. 3s. 6d. 
Consists entirely of parallel and iUnstrative passages of Seriptnre printed 
in full ; it is supeiseded by the CammaUary WhoUy SiUieal. 

117 CUMMING (John, D. D., F. R. S. E.) Scripture Readings 

on Genesis. Small 8vo. Lond., J. F. Shaw. 1853. S. 2s. 
Dr. Cnmming's vorte are not very ori^nal, bat bis style is flowing, his 
teachings are always evangelical, and he puts other men's thoughts into 
pleasing langnage, 

118 DAWSON (Abraham). New Translation of Genesis 

I.— XVII.], with Notes. 4to. Lond., 1763. 2s. 6d. 
Tainted with infidelity. A writer of the Oeddes school, 

119 DIMOCK (Henbt). Notes. 4to. Gloucester, 1804. 2s. 

to 4s. 
Chiefly taken up with the Tarions readings of Hebrew MSS. The 
young student will not value it. The same author has written on Exodus 
aud the Prophets. 

120 FRANKS (James, A. M.) Sacred Literature ; or Remarks 

on Genesis. Svo. HaUfax, 1802. S. 2s. to 4s. 
This writer collected notes from various authors. As the sources from 
which he drew his extracts are within reach, we can select for ourselves. 

121 FULLER (Andrew, 1754—1815). Expository Discourses 

on Genesis. One small vol.. Is. 6d. (Also in Fuller's 
Works.) 

Weighty, judicious, and full of Gospel trath. One of 

the very best series of discourses extant upon Genesis, as 

Bush also thought. 

122 GIBBENS (ITicholas). Questions and Disputations con- 

cerning Holy Scripture. Genesis. 4to. 1602. 3s. 
In his own fashion this antique writer tries to answer curious questions 
which are suggested by Genesis. His day is over. 

123 GREENFIELD (William, M. R. A. S. Editor of the Com- 

prehensive Bible). Genesis in English and Hebrew, with 
an Interlinear Translation, Notes, and Grammatical intro- 
duction. 8vo. Lond., 1862. S. 3s. 
This work will not only enable the Student to get at the literal mean- 
ing of the text, but may be used as an introduction to the Hebrew lan- 
guage. The plan is most admirable and we earnestly commend it to the 
attention of those uninstrncted in the sacred tongue. 



OEKESIS. 83 

124 GBOVES (Henuy Chaklks, M. A.) Commentary on 
Genesis, for readers of the English version. Small 8vo 
Lond., and Camb., Macmillan & Co. 1861. S. 3b. to 6b. 
Physical sdence, the discoveries of travellers, and the results of criti- 
cism, so far as they hoax upon Genesis, are here hroaght within the reach 
of the general reader. 

135 HARWOOD (T.) Annotations. Svo. Lond., 1789. Is. 6d. 

The author professed to ofter his work with great difSdenoe, and he 
had just cause to do so : he had better have burned his manuscript. 

126 HAWKER (John, M. A.) Bible Thoughts in Quiet Hours. 
Genesis. Small Cr. Svo. 3b. Lond., Yapp. 1873. 
Deeply spiritual reflections, not without learning and critical power. 
The preacher will And here many hints for sermons. 

187 HEAD (F. A.) The World and its Creator. Cr. 8vo. Lond., 
1847. 2a. 
One of the many good books which from lack of vigor are only " bom 
to die." 

128 HUGHES (George, B.D., Puritan, 1603—1667). AnalyHcal 
Exposition of Genesis, and of XXIII chapters of Exodua. 
Folio. 1673. 10s. 6d. to 15a. 

The deductions which Hughes draws from the text 
are of the nature of homiletical hints, and for this rea- 
son he will be a treasure to the minister. He belongs 
to the noble army of Puritans. 

139 JACOBUS (Melancthon W., ProfesSbr of Biblical Litera^ 
ture, Alleghany, XJ. S.) Notes. Two vols. sm. Svo. New 
York, 1866. S. 8s. 

A very valuable work, in which Colenso is boldly met 

and answered. It contains much Gospel teaching, and 

aids the preacher greatly. Not easily to be obtained. 

It ought to be reprinted. 

130 JERVia WHITE-JERVIS (John.) Genesis : a New Trans- 
lation collated with the Samaritan, Septuagint, and 
Syriac, with Notes, 8vo. 12s. Lond., Bagsters. 1853. 
S. 5a. 
Brings out very vividly the oriental character of Genesis, and although 
we cannot reconcile ourselves to Ahh-rauhaum, Whavik^ and Y^aahohhy 
and find it hard to believe In Sauraah and Bwughamr, we have been glftf" 
of the light which the East and its languages have here afforded. 



84 QEUESIS. 

131 JUKES (Andrew). Types of Geneeis. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., 
Longmans. 1858. S. 3s. 6d. 
In many places far too forced, and therefore to 1)6 read 'with caution; 
hnt in ita own spiritnalizing way very masterly. Jnkes dives deep. 

133 LANGB'S COMMENTARY edited by Dr. Schaff. Vol.1. 
Comiueutary on Genesis. Imp. 8to., 21s. ; or to sub- 
Bcribers, 15s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1868. 

The best of the series, and in all respects beyond price. 

133 M[AOKINTOSH] (C. H.) Notes on Genesis. By C. H. M. 

13mo. Second Edition. 2s. 6d. Lond., G. Morrish. 1858. 

Precious and edifying reflections marred by peculiar- 
ities. 

134 MACGREGGE (Sm C, Bart., M. A.) Notes for Students 

in Divinity. Part 1. [Chap, i-ii.] 8vo. Lond., Parker. 
1853. S. 3s. 
Contains a great deal of learning, of small use to the preacher. Many 
cniions and knotty points which arise in the first eleven chapters of Gen- 
esis are discussed with considerable ability. 

135 MXTRPHY (James G., LL. D., Professor of Hebrew, 

Belfast). Commentary on Genesis, with a New Transla- 
tion. . 8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1863. 
S. 5s. 6d. 

" A work of massive scholarship, abounding in rich 
and noble thought, and remarkably fresh and sugges- 
tive." — Evangelical Mag. 

136 OSBTJEN (Wibliam). Israel in Egypt ; or the Books of 

Genesis and Exodus illustrated by existing Monuments. 
Small 8vo. 5s. Lond., Seeleys. 1856. S. 2s. 
Not a Commentary ; but a volume full of interest, which should be 
studied by all who would understand this portion of history. 

137 PAUL (William, A. M.) Analysis and Critical Interpreta- 

tion of the Hebrew Text, preceded by a Hebrew Grammar. 
8vo. Edinb. and Lond., W. Blackwood & Sons. 1853. 
S. 8s. 
Designed to promote the study of Hebrew. Not a comment, but rather 
a grammatical exercise. Usefal to students of the saored tongue. 

138 PRESTON (THEODonE, M. A.) Phraseological Notes on the 

Hebrew Text. 8vo. Loud., 1853. S. 4s. 
Intended to explain and illustrate the most remarkable peculiarities 
and anomalies of matter, style, and phrase in the Book of Genesis. It 
may interest Hebraists, but can little aid the preacher. 



GENESIS. 85 

139 SIBTHORPE (Eichakd Waldo, B. D.) Genesis, with 

Brief Observations. Imp. 8vo. Lond., 1835. S. 3s. 6d. 

Mere platitudes. Paper spoiled. 

140 TURNER (Samuel H., D. D., Professor Columbia College, 

New York). A companion to Genesis. 8vo. New York, 
1851. S. 48. 6d. 

In Rome'8 Introduction we read : — " Though not designed to be a 
Commentary, this valuable work furnishes the Biblical student with abun- 
dant aid for the exact and literal interpretation of the Book of Genesis." 

141 WAENEB (Richard). Exposition. 13mo. Lend., Long- 

mans. 1840. S. 29. 

Common-place remarks ; intended to be used at family worship. Likely 
to send the servants to sleep. 

143 WHATELEY (William). Prototypes; or the Primarie 
Precedent Presidents out of the Booke of Genesis. Shew- 
ing the Good and Bad Things they Did and Had. Prac- 
tically adapted to our Information and Reformation. 
Folio. Lond., 1640. Ss. 6d. 

A queer old book. The oddity of the title is borne out by the singu- 
larity of the matter. It does not expound each verse ; but certain incidents 
are dwelt upon. 

143 WILLET (Andrew. 1563—1631). Hexapla. A sixfold 

Exposition of Genesis. Folio. 1605. 5s. to 8s. 

This work is called by its author a Sexapla, because he treats his sub- 
ject under six heads, giving " a sixfold use of every chapter, showing, 1. 
The method, or argument. 2. The divers readings. 3. The explanation 
of difficult questions and doubtful places. 4. The places of doctrine. 5. 
Places of confutation. 6. Moral observations." WiUet is tedious read- 
ing ; his method hampers him. In all his Commentaries he lumbers 
along in his six-wheeled wagon. 

144 WRIGHT (C. H. H.) Book of Genesis in Hebrew, with 

various Readings, Notes, etc. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Williams 
& Norgate. 8. 8s. 6d. 

Intended to assist the student who has mastered the elements of 
Hebrew Grammar to acquire a better knowledge of that language. Eather 
a class-book than a Conunentary, 



86 GENESIS — EAELT CHAPTEES, AND PATEIAECHS. 

GENESIS — EAELY CHAPTEES, AND PATEI- 
AECHS. 

145 BONAR (HORATITJS, D. D.) Earth's Morning ; or Thoughts 

on Genesis. 12mo. Ss. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1875. 

An exposition of the first six chapters only. The 
author endeavors " to investigate the meaning of each 
verse and word ; that, having done so, the exact relation 
of Q.od in these may be brought out, and the spiritual 
truth envoi ved." He has in a great measure attained 
his object. What more could be said in his praise ? 

146 BTJNYAN (John). Ten first chapters of Genesis, and part 

of the eleventh. [In Bunyan's Works.] Complete works, 
8. 30s. 
Allegorical and spiritnal. Simon's characteriBUcs are very promi- 
nently manifest. 

147 EDEKSHEIM (Alfred, D. D.) World before the Flood, 

and History of the Patriarchs. Small sq. 8to. 2s. 6d. 

Lond., Keligious Tract Society. 1875. 
The author has mainly aimed at giving instruction to the Sunday School 
Teacher, and the Bible Class Student. He may he read with profit by 
students of a higher grade. The work is not a Commentary, but ia full 
of instruction. 

148 HENRY (Philip, M. A. 1631—1696). Exposition of the 

first eleven chapters of Genesis. 18mo. Lond., 1889. 
S. Is. 
IntereBting as the exposition of Mattheui Senry't fiither, taken down 
from his lips at family prayer by Matthew, his son. This probably suggested 
the famous Commentary. 

149 HURDIS (James). Select Critical Remarks upon the English 

version of the first ten chapters of Genesis. Svo. Lond., 
1793. 2s. 
"Judicious observations " ; but it is so easy to ia Judiciims. Cnimpor- 
tant. 

150 LUTHER (MAnTni). On the first five chapters of Genesis, 

translated by Dr. Henry Cole. Svo. Edinb., 1858. 
S. 5s. 6d. 
GoU made a choice selection. Luther left four volumes upou Genesis, 
in Latin. How these Eeformers worked I 



GESTESIS — EAKLT CHAPTERS, AND PATKIAKCHS. 87 

151 MAODONALD (D.) Creation and tUe Fall. The first three 

chapters of Genesis. 8vo. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 13s. 
" We do not hesitate to designate this volume as the most complete 
examination of the literatore and the exegesis of the Creation and the fall 
which has appeared in England." — Jtmmal of Sacred lAterature, 

152 NEEDLER (Benjamin). Expository Notes, with Observa- 

tions, towards the opening of the first five chapters of 
Genesis. Small 8vo. Lond., 1655. 'ia. 
Seedier was one of the eminent divines who took part in the famous 
Morning Exercises. The little work is a curiosity, hut nothing more, 

153 BOSSE (Axexandbr). Exposition of the first fourteen 

chapters of Genesis. 8vo. Loud., 1626. 4s. 6d. 
A very scarce catechism by that Scotch divine who is mentioned in 
JBudibroi in the lines — 

" There was an ancient sound philosopher 
That had read Alexander Boss over." 

154 WHITE (John, M. A. A Puritan Divine, called "The 

Patriarch of Dorchester. Died 1648.) The first three 
chapters of Genesis. Folio. 1656. 7s. to 10s. 6d. 
A folio upon three chapters I There were giants in those days. JUart- 
ton says, " To speak of the worth of the author is needless, bis praise being 
already in all the churches," and he adds that he had been greatly re- 
freshed by the perusal of this book. 

155 WILLIAMS (Isaac, B. D.) Beginning of Genesis, with 

Notes. Sm. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lend., Kivingtons. 1861. 

A very remarkable work by a high churchman, open- 
ing up in a masterly manner the mystical teachings of 
the early chapters of Genesis. To be read cum grano 
salts. 

[The following works are placed in chronological order.] 

156 BONNET (L.) The Exile from Eden : Meditations on the 

Third Chapter of Genesis, translated from the French, by 
Eev. W. Hare. Small 8vo. Lond., 1839. S. 5s. 
After the French manner. In nine meditations the salient points in 
the all-important story of the Fall are touched upon. One of the best 
separate treatises upon the subject. 

157 OIiMSTE.\D (J., American). Noah and his Times. 2s. 

Edinb., Collins. 
One of the dreariest works ever written. We have often wondered 
why it was reprinted, or even printed at all. It is as dry as Noah in the 
ark. 



88 GEKESIS — EAELT CHAPTBES, AND PATSIAECRS. 

158 BLUNT (Hbnby, A. M.) Twelve Lectures on the History 

of Abraham. 13iuo. 5s. 6d. Bight Lectures on the 
History of Jacob. 4s. 6d. Lond., Hatchards. 1842. S. 
Is. 6d. each. 

like, the rest of this author's lectures. Good, plain addresses. 

159 SHUTE (JosiAS, B. D. "Above three-and-thirty years 

Rector of St. Mary, Woolnoth.") Sarah and Hagar ; or 
Genesis xvi. opened in Twenty Sermons. Folio. 1649. 5s. 
In shape, the editor tells us, " this hook is somewhat slender, like the 
encouragements of learning." He informs us that the author was " one of 
the five famous brother-preachers, somewhat Uke the five flngeis on the 
right hand of fellowship ; " and that Chrysoitom did so much lie in his 
bosom that he became like him in his flowing style and golden eloquence. 
He writes like a learned man, and treats the Scripture as if " each book 
were a course, each chapter a Benjamin's mess, and every verse a morsel 
of the food of angels." 

160 BOUCHIER (Barton, M. A.) History of. Isaac. 12mo. 

Lond., Houlston. S. 2s. 
A charming hook, in Bouehier's gracious style. 

161 EOLLINSON (Francis, B. D.) Twelve Prophetical Leg- 

acies; or Twelve Sermons upon Jacob's Last Will, 
recorded in the 45th chapter of Genesis. 4to., Lond., 1612. 
Scarce. Hardly to be priced. Say 5s. 

Old-fashioned learning, and singular remarks ; its rarity is no great 
calamity. 

163 GUMMING (John, D. D„ F. E. S. E.) The Last of the 
Patriarchs ; or Lessons from Life of Joseph. Sm. 8vo. 
1856. S.2s. 
Fitted for popular reading : ministers need more thought. 

163 GIBSON (T.) Lectures on Joseph. 8vo. Lond., 1848. Is. 
Very respectable sermons, brining oat the gospel of Joseph's history 

164 IiAWSON (George, D. D., 1749—1830). Lectures on 

Joseph. Two vols., 12mo. Edinb., 1807 and 1813. 4s. 

Dr. Lawson had a fertile mind, and a heart alive both 
to the human and divine side of truth. He writes with 
pleasing simplicity of style. One of the highest com 
pliments to this book is found in the fact that a distin- 
guished American scholar issued much of it as his own. 



EXODUS. 89 

165 SlVirm (Teorkley). History of Joseph viewed in connec- 

tion with the Antiquities of Egypt, and the times in which 
he lived. Cr. 8vo. 4s. Edinb., W. OUphant. 1875. 

"Written under the full light of the most recent 
archaeological discoveries, modern scholarship, and theo- 
logical science, it is the book on the subject. Now we 
have it, we cannot dispense with it." — Homilist. 

166 WARDLA.W (Ualph, D. D.) Life of Joseph and the Last 

Years of Jacob. 12mo. 1845. S. 2s. 3d. 
"Wardlaw, though rather wordy, is always instructive. 



EXODUS. 

167 BIBKS (T. E , M. A.) The Exodus of Israel ; its Difficulties 

explained and its Truth confirmed. 8vo. 1863. S. 3s. 6d. 
A reply to Dr. ColensD'a famous assault upon the Pentateuch. The 
great abilities of the author are known to all. 

168 BLUNT (Henky, M. A.) Exodus and Leviticus. Vol. 3 of 

A Family Exposition of the Pentateuch. 12mo. 6s. 
Lond., Hatchards. 1842. S. Is. 
Profitable for household and private reading : not very striking. 

169 BUSH (George). Notes on Exodus. Two vols., sm. 8vo. 

New York, 1856, etc. S. 5s. 6d. 
Of considerable value. We do not know that it is a plagiarism. 

170 COTTAGE BEADINQS on the Book of Exodus. [Anon.] 

Sm. cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Nisbet & Co. S. 2s. 
Not at all a student's book ; yet many preachers might learn from it 
how to put things plainly. There is a similar volume on Genesis. 

171 GUMMING (John, D. D.) Sabbath Morning Readings on 

Exodus. Sm. 8vo. Lond., J. F. Shaw. 1853. S. 3b. 
Dr. Cumming's style is a model, but his matter seldom verges upon 
originality. He always gives you the gospel when he is not prophesying. 

173 EXELL (Joseph S.) Homiletic Commentary on Exodus. 
[Being Part 1 of The Pkbachbr'b Commentary, publish- 
ing by Dickinson in monthly parts. 1875. Is. each.] 
It excels, so far as we have seen. 

173 HUGHES (Georcje). See No. 128. 



90 EXODITS-r-LWES OF MOSES. 

174 JACKSON (Thomas, I>. D;, Dean of PeterborougU.— 1579t- 

1640). Paraphrase on the eleven first chapter&of Exodus, 
with Annototions, etc. Works, 8vo., IX.,384v Folio, III., 
191. Three vols, folio 35s. ; twelve vols. 8vo. SOa. 
Oeorge Serbert set great store by Or. JackxotCt -writings, for he said, — 
" I bless God for the coafirmatioa Dr. Jackson has given me in the Chris- 
tian religion, against the Atheist, Jew, and Socinian, and in the Protes- 
tant against Borne." It would hardly repay a student to purchase three 
folio volumes to obtain the small portion allotted to bis Paraphrase. So 
£>r as commenting is concerned it is not impo'rtant. 

175 M[AOKIN!rOSH] ( C. H.) Notes. By C. H. M. 13mo. 

3s. 6d. Lond., G. Morrish. 1858. 

Not free from Plymoutli errors, yet remarkably sug- 
gestive. 

176 BULIiINGTON (Thojcas S.) Signs and Wonders in the 

Land of Ham. A Description of the Ten Plagues of 
Egypt. Post 8vo. 7b. 6d. Lond., Murray. 1873i 

It has been an intelleetual treat to read.; this, interest- 
ing work. On the same subject there is an old work by 
James Bryant, 1794: ; but Millington is enough. 

177 MURFHT (James Q.., LL. D.) Commentary on Exodus. 

New Translation. 8vo. ' Edinb., Clark. 1866. 9s. 

The result of laborioua study by a scholar of ripe 
learning. 

178 WILLET (Andkbw>. Hexapla; or Sixfold Commentaria 

upon ExodxiB. Folio. Lond-., 1608. 6a. to 10a. 
See No. 14S. Full, exhaustive, and exhausting. 



LIVES OF MOSES. 



179 HAMILTON (James, D. D., F. L. S. 1814—1867). Moses, 

the Man of God. Sm. cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Nisbet. 

Beautiful as a poem, like everything which fell from 
Dr. Hamilton's pen. It wouH be impossible to study 
it without prophet. 

180 OOSTEEZEE (J. J. Van, D. D.) The Life of Moses. Edinb., 

T. & T. Clark. [In preparation.] 



THE CHILDKBU GF ISKAEL. 91 

181 SMITH (Thoknlet). History- of Moses ; viewed in con- 
nection' with Egyptian Antiquities, and the times in which 
he lived. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Hamilton. 1863. 

Of the same class as Kitto's Daily Readings : well 

executed. 

183 SPONG (James). Moses.— The Hero of the Desert. Cr. 8vo. 
3s. 6d. Loud:, Partridge & Co. 
A book for the public. Not for Students. 



JOUENEYINGS OF THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL. 

183 BTTDDICOM (K. P., M. A., F. A. S.) The Christian Exodus, 

in a Series of Discourses. Two vols., 8vo. Lond., 1836. 
S; 3s-. 
Able disoonrsei, using flie Exodus spiritually and wisely; 

184 CARDALL (WiLLTAM, M. A.) Israel's Journeys, illustrative 

of the Divine Pilgrimage. 8vo. Loud., Hatchards. 184S. 
S. as. 6d. 
Twenty evangelieal leotnres manifesting respectable ability. 

185 FORSTER (Chaeles, B. D.) " Israel in the Wilderness " ; 

or, Gleanings from the Scenes of the Wanderings. 8vo. 

Loud., Richard Bentley. 1865. S. 2s. 
If the author's renderings of the desert inscriptions are indeed correct, 
this is a wonderful book. That„ however, is a question for the learned, 
and they have pronounced against him. 

186 JOURNETINQS OF THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL, and 

their Settlement in the Promised Land. (Anon.) 18mo. 

Is. 6d. Lond., Religious Tract Society. 1833. 
Useful to the young, but the engca^dngs are of almost Pre- Adamite 
antiquity, and nearly as ugly as the profoundest master of the ridiculous 
could have made them. 

187 KRUMMACHER (Gottfried Daniel. 1774—1887). Is- 

rael's Wanderings. Two vols., sm. 8vo. Londi., Nasbet 
1887. S. 7s. 6d. 
■Written by the uncle of the author of Elijah the Tkhbite. A good, 
thought-breeding work. 

188 OSBURN (W.) See ander Genesis, No. 136. 



93 THE DECALOGUE. 

189 SSATOK (W.) Church in the Wilderness. Two vols. 

12mo. S. 2s. Second edition, Lond., 1831. Enlarged. Two 
vols., 8vo. S. 4s. 

Of the thoroughly evangelical school, fraught' with 
much experimental truth and sound doctrine soberly 
discussed. 

190 WAGNER (Gboege). The Wanderings of the Children 

of Israel. Cr. 8vo. 6s. Lond., Nisbet and Co. 



A book which we have rea'd with great pleasure and 
profit, and very heartily recommended. 



THE DECALOGUE. 



[This list does not include comments contained in Bodies of Divinity, 
&e., but those forming separate volumes. In many theological works 
there are lengthy portions set apart for the Commandments.] 

191 ANSREWES (Lancelot, Bp. of Worcester. 1555—1626.) 

The patterne of Catechisticall Doctrine at large ; or a 
Learned and Pious Exposition of the X Commandments. 
Folio. 1675. 7s. 6d. to 10s. 

This is a book indeed ; it is a joy to read it, for 
it flashes with thought and illustration, and sparkles 
with ingenious remarks. Profound learning did not 
lead the Bishop into the depths of dulness, as it has 
done many another diyine ; he manifests the happy 
quaintness of Latimer side by side with great scholar- 
ship. He was highly esteemed by his contemporaries ; 
but we can hardly believe that his death 

" Left the dim face of our dull hemisphere 
All one great eye all drown'd in one great tear." 

Yet so we are informed at the foot of his effigies. 

192 BARKER (Peter.) A Learned and Familiar Exposition. 

4to. 1624. 5s. 
Old-fashioned, remarkably quaint, and even coarse in places. Barker's 
work abounds in Scriptural illustrations, but it is almost forgotten. 



THE DECALOGUE. 93 

193 DALE (K. W., M. A., of Birmingham.) The Ten Com- 

mandmenta. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Hodder and Stough- 

ton. 1873. 
Written in a dear, bold, and trenchant style. We could not subscribe 
to all the author's views, but we admire his practical remarks, and their 
outspoken manner. 

194 DOD (John) & CLEAVER (Rokbrt). Familiar Exposition. 

Eighteenth edition. 4to. Lond., 1632. S. 2s. 6d. 
This work was published by John Dad and Bobert Cleaver, with an 
intimation that the name of the author was purposely suppressed. Our 
edition, dated 1682, is the eighteenth, so that the work enjoyed a rare 
popularity in its own time. It haa been frec[uently reprinted since. The 
book has been long held in high esteem. 

195 DOWNAME OR DOWNHAM (George, D.D., Bishop of 

Derry. Died 1634.) Abstract of the Duties Commanded 

and Sinnes Forbidden in the Law of God. Svo. Lond., 

1635. is. 6d. 

A sort of catalogue of sins, arranged in a tabular form under the Ten 

Commandments. These are the heads and divisions of a large treatise, 

which does not appear to have been published. These mighty men could 

afford to leave in the oblivion of monuscript works which would cost 

modern weaklings half a life-time to write. 

196 DURHAM (James. 1622—1658.) Exposition, with a res- 

olution of several momentous questions, and cases of con- 
science. 4to. Lond., 1675. 8vo., 1735, 2s. 6d. to 4s. 

Whatever Durham has written is very precious. He 

has the pen of a ready writer, and indites good matter. 

197 ELTON (Edward, B. D.) God's Holy Minde, Touching 

Matters Morall ; which himself uttered in Ten Command- 
ments. 4to. Lond., 1648. 8s. 6d. 
This work discusses the Decalogue in question and answer, in a some- 
what dull manner ; but touches many cases of conscience ana deals wisely 
with them. Belief in witchcraft comes out very strongly in some pas- 
sages. 

198 FISHER (Edward, A. M. Bom about 1600.) A plain, pithy, 

and spiritual Exposition of the Ten Commandments. 
[Marrow of Modern Divinity. Numerous editions.] 12mo. 

2s. 

This exposition is part of the work which occasioned the famous Mar- 
roa Contrmeriy. One fails to see anything calculated to stir up such a 
strife. Fisker might have siud that the lines had fallen to him in troubled 
waters. 



94 THE DECALOGUE. 

199 HOOPER (John. Bishop and Martyr. 1495—1554). A 

Declaration of the Ten Holy Conimanrtments of Almighty 
God. 1548, 1550, etc. [Reprinted in Hooper's Works.] 
After the manner of the English Beformeis. The style is harsh to the 
modern ear, and the matter too much occupied trith the controversies 
raging in the author's times to be very interesting now. 

200 HOPKINS (EZEKIEL, D. D. Bp. of London-Derry. 1633— 

1690). An Exposition of the Ten Commandments. 4to. 

1692. [Reprinted in Hopkins' Works.] 
Sbpkmt in this exposition searches the heart thoroughly, and makes 
very practical application of the Commandments to the sitnatiohs and cir- 
cumstances of daily life. His homely eloquence will always make his 
•works valuable. 

201 KNEWSTUB (John). Lectures on Exodus XX. 4to. 1584. 

7s. 6d. 
More valuable for its antiquity than for anything else. 

202 McCAUL (Joseph B., Chaplain to the Bp. of Rochester.) 

The Ten Commandments ; the Christian's Rule of Daily 
Life. 8vo. Lond., Saunders, Otley & Co. 1861. S. 3s. 
The author says, " There is nothing deep in the following pages except 
their subject " : a modest estimate. 

203 NEWTON (Richakd, D. D.) The King's Highway. Post 

8vo. 2s. 6d. Lond., Nelson. Also 16mo. Is. 6d. Nisbet. 

Though intended for children, ministers will find it 
useful, for it teems with illustration, and brings up lit- 
tle points of conduct worth touching upon. Dr. New- 
ton is the prince of preachers to childi^n. 

204 TUDOR (Richabd, B. A.) Decalogue viewed as the Chris- 

tian's Law. Cr. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Lend., Macmillan. 1860. 
S. 6s. 
The author attempts to ^ve the Christian sense of the Decalogue in its 
application to present needs and questions. With much moderation 
he discusses many of the disputed p<Hiits of the day, such as the legisla- 
tive enforcement of the Sabbath, marriage with a deceased wife's sister, 
etc. He usually takes the view which is natural to a clergyman ; but he 
says some capital things. 

205 WEEMSE (John. Died about 1636). The Morall Laws. 

[In Vol. I. of Weemse's Works ; two vols., 4tb. Lond., 

1633, &c.] 3b. 
Solid, sober, weighty. Orme says of Weemse ; " He was well acquiunted 
with the original Scriptures, with Jewish manners and antiquities, and 
with the best mode of interpreting the Bible. The style is quaint, but 
always intelligible." (See No. 226.) 



THE TABEKNACLB, 95 

206 WHATELEY (Wiiliam. Puritan. 1583—1839). A PltUie, 
Short, and Methodloall Opening of the Ten Command- 
mentB. 12i»o. Lend., 1632. (Not often in the market.) 
Exceedingly scarce, but as rich as it is rare. 



THE TABEKNACLE. 



[Of works on this subject it ia not possible to give more than a selec- 
tion.] 

307 BROWN (W.) The Tabernacle and its Services in relation 

to Christ and the Church. 8vo. 3b. 6d. Edinb., Oli- 
phant & Co. 1874. 
An instructive interpretation of the types of the Tabernacle. 

308 GARRATT(S.) Scripture Symbolism. Sm.Svo. 1848. S. 

Is. 6d. 
Most unexceptionable in doctrine and style. It deals mainly with the 
sacred vessels. 

209 KITTO (John, D. D.) Tabernacle and ita Furniture. 4to. 

1849. 
Artistic illustrations with a little letter-press. SoUau well supplies the 
place of this rare work. 

210 MUDGE (WiLLrAM). The Tabernacle in the Wilderness. 

12mo. Lond., Simpkin & Marshall. 1861. S. 2s. 6d. 
The writer, a thoroughly evangelical secoud-advent clergyman, makes 
some Veiy admirable remarks in these Lectures, which were delivered in his 
parish church, Uiir copy is in the third edition. We are not surprised 
to find the work thus popular. 

311 SOLTAU (H. W.) The Holy Vessels and Furniture of the 
Tabernacle of Israel. [With Ten Ohromo-Lithographic 
Illustrations.] Imp. oblong 8vo. 16s. Lend., Yapp & 
Hawkins, and S. W. Partridge & Co. 
A series of sumptuous pictures, executed in the best style of art, im- 
pressing the mind far more vividly than any letter-press could do. 

212 SOLTATJ (H. W.) The Tabernacle, the Priestly Garments, 
and the Priesthood. &vo. 4s. 6d. Loud., Morgan & 
Scott. 

Eichly suggestive. Exceedingly well -worked out iu 

details ; but not so wire-drawn as to prevent thought on 

the reader's part. 



96 LEVITICUS. 

213 WHITE (Fbank H.) Christ in the Tabernacle, with gome 
Remarks on the Ofierings. Illustrated by Twelve Chromo- 
Lithographs. Cr. 8vo., 5s. Lend., S. W. Partridge. 1873. 
Written for the private Christian. Full of instraotion and devotion. 



LEVITICUS. 



214 BONAR (Akdke-w A.) Leviticus. With Hotes. Svo. 

8s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1861. 

Very precious. Mr. Andrew Bonar has a keen eye 
for a typical analogy, but he always keeps the rein 
upon his imagination, and is therefore safe to foUow. 
He is a master in Israel. 

215 BUSH (Geobge). Notes on Leviticus. Sm. Svo. New 

lork, 1857. Ss. 

The author read extensively to produce this volume. 
In his later years he became a Swedenborgian, but there 
is no trace qt that leaning in this 6r his other comments. 
He inserts the notes of the Pictorial Bible, but hand- 
somely acknowledges them. 

216 GUMMING (Johk, D. D.) Sabbath Morning Readings on 

Leviticus. Sm. 8vo. Lond., J. F. Shaw. 1854. 2s. 
For popular reading. The author wrote too much to be profound. 

217 GUMMING (John, D. D) The Great Sacrifice ; or, the Gos- 

pel according to Leviticus. 2s. 
A companion to the volome last mentioned. 

218 JAMES (HonATio, M. A.) Sermons on the Levitical Types. 

Sm. Svo. Lond., 1847. Is. 6d. 
Veiy attenuated. These sermons, like the lean idne, have eaten up 
the fat kine of the types and are never the fatter. 

219 JUKES (Andrew). The Law of the Offerings [Leviticus, 

_ chap. I-VIIj. Cr. Svo. 3s. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 18S4. 

A very condensed, instructive, refreshing book. It 
will open up new trains of thought to those unversed in 
the teaching of the types. 



LEVITICUS. 97 

^330 M[ACKINTOSH] (C. H.) Notes on Leviticus. By C. H. M. 
13mo. 2s. 6d. Lond., Q. Morrish. 1860. 
We do not endorse the Plymoiitliism wliich pervades these notes, hat 
they are frequently suggestive. Should he read cautiously. 

231 MATHER (Samuel. 1636—1671.) The Figures or Types 
of the Old Testament. Second edition. 4to. 7s. 6d. 
Lond., 1705. 

Though this is a work upon all the types, it contains so much instruc- 
tive matter upon the Levitical sacrifices that we cannot forbear mention- 
ing it here. It is one of the old standard hooks of our fathers. 

333 KEACH (Bbnjamin, Baptist Pastor. 1640—1704). Tropo- 
logia. Folio and Boy. 8vo. Ss. to 18s. 

This is a vast cyclopaedia of types and metaphors of all sorts, and was 
once very popular. It is a capital book, though too often the figures not 
only run on all-fours hut on as many legs as a centipede. It is not strictly 
upon Leviticus, but we felt bound to insert it in this place. 

223 MICHAELIS (Sir John David. 1717—1791). The Laws 
of Moses. Translated by Alexander Smith, D. D, Four 
vols., 8vo. 20s. Lond., 1814." 
However much of learning there may be here, we are not prepared to 
recommend a work which treats so sacred a subject with levity and coarse- 
ness. 

234 NEWTON (Benjamin Wills). Thoughts on Parts of Le- 
viticus. 13mo. Lond., Houlston. 1857. S. 3s. 
This touches only the first six chapters; hut it treats of the offerings in 
a manner deeply spiritual and helpful. . This writer has some peculiarities 
of style and thought ; but in matter and spirit he is-far removed from the 
Darby school. 

225 SEISS (Joseph A., D. D.) The Gospel in Leviticus. 8vo. 
63. Edinb., Thomas C. Jack. 1860. 

Twenty-one very admirable lectures, founded upon Bush and Sonar, 
but containing much original matter. The work deserves attention. 

336 WEEMSE (John). Exposition of the Laws of Moses, Mor- 
al, Ceremonial, Judicial, etc. Two vols., 4to. Lond., 
1633. 2s. 6d. or 3s. 

This contains many useful and curious things, together with fancies and 
rabbinical trifies. Weemse may generally be bought very cheap, and we 
should think his work is very little read or cared for. (See Orme'e opinion, 
No. 205.) 



98 3!rUMBEKS. 

227 WILLET (Andrew). Hexapla; Leviticua. Folio. 1631. 
53. 6d. 
Plodding along with his six-fold load, "Willet pves ns a comparison of 
ten versions, "handles well nigh two thousand theological qaestions," and 
quotes " above forty authors, old and new." He sums up all preceding 
oommentaries, hoth Protestant and Bomish, 



NUMBBES. 

[Seaton, Wagner, and other writers whom we have placed under Exo- 
dus are equally upon Numbers, and should be referred to.] 

228 AT'rERSOLL (WiLLiAii). A Commentarie upon Numbers. 

Folio. Lond., 1618. 10s. to 14s. 

A stupendous work, well fitted to make a headstone for the author's 
grave. It is so huge that it might have been the work of a lifetime, and 
yet the same writer has also given us Philemon. Think of 1271 folio pages 
ou Numbers ! 

229 BLIINT (Hbitrt, M. A.) Numbers and Deuteronomy. [Vol. 

3 of Pentateuch.] 12mo., 6s. Lond., Hatchards. 1843. 
S. Is. 6d. 

Intended for families, but not without value to the preacher. 

230 SUSH (George). Notes on Numbers. Thick small 8vo. 

New York, 1838. 4s. 

Although Biish is indcbteii to many authors, he is by 
no means a mere collector ; his remarks repay you for 
consultation, and we hope that in this case they are 
his own. 

231 GUMMING (John, D. D.) Readings on Nnmbere. 8vo. 

Lond., J. F. Shaw. S. Is. 9d. 

Good, as usuaL 

232 MfACKINTOSH] (C. H.) . Notes on Numbers. By C. H. M. 

Lond., G. Mbrrish. 1862. 2s. 

L^e the other notes of C. H. M., they need filtering. Good as they are, 
their Darbyism gives them an unpleasant and unhealthy aivor. 



DEUTEEOlfOMT — JOSHUA. 99 



BEUTEEONGMY. 

[As'BO few expssitions have been written npon DeuteWnomy alone, the 
reader will do well to use the Commentaries upon the Pentateuch and the 
whole Old Testament,] 

333 CALVIN (John). Sermons upon Deuteronomie. Trans- 
lated out of French by A. Golding. Folio. 1583. 15s. 

This is not the same as that which is contained in 

the " Calvin Translation Society's Commentaries." 

Everything that Calvin wrote by way of exposition is 

priceless ; even those who differ from him in theology 

admit this. 

234 CUMMIMG (John, D. D.) Readings in Deuteronomy. Sm. 
8vo. Lond., J. F. Shaw. 1856. S. 3s.3d. 
Pretty, popular, profitable. 



JOSHUA. 



235 BLACKWOOD (Stevenson A.) Heavenly Places. Ad 

dresses. Sm. cr. 8vo. 2s. and 2s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet & 

Co. 1873. 
J&. Slachwood has illustrated passages tteta the first five chapters only. 
He has a beautifully quiet way of saying very sweet things. This little 
book will be useful if it shows the young preacher how to expound Scrip- 
ture with nnetion and power. 

236 BUSH (George). Kotea. Sm. Svo. New York. 1852. 

3s. 

Bush is a careful illustrator of the Word, and apt at 
giving the practical lesson. His works are well compiled. 

237 CAIfVIN (John). Commentarie upon Joshue. Translated 

by W. F. 4to. Lond., 1578. 9s. 

"We have said enough upon Calvin in general. His 
expositions are more equal in excellence than those of 
other men ; other men rise and fall, but he is almost 
uniformly good. 



100 JOSHUA. 

238 CHRIST IN THE PROPHETS.— Jostua, Judges, Samuel, 

Kings. [Anon.] Foolscap 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lend., Masters. 
1873. 
See Christ in the Law, No. 81. Needs well sifUng. There is much 
rubbish. 

239 GUMMING (John, D .D.) Readings on Joshua and Judges. 

Sm. 8vo. Lond., J. F. Shaw. 1857. 2s. 
Dr. Oummmg keeps np to his average of value. 

240 GROSER (W. H.) Joshua and his Successors : an Introduc- 

tion to Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and Samuel I., with Notes. 
Parts I. and II. 8vo. 2s. each. Lond , S. S. Union. 1874. 
A very useful condensed book for teachers. 

341 KEIL (Kakl Friedrich, D. D., Ph. D.) Joshua, Judges, 
and Ruth. Onevol.8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 
1865. S. 5s. 
" Let our biblical students not only master the facts and logic, but 
catch the spirit of these commentaries, and we can have no fear for the 
issue of that conflict with Eationalism and Popery united, by which Pro- 
testantism in this country seems to be threatened." — Weeleyatt Methodut 



242 KELLY (Wilmam). Lectures Introductory to the Study 

of the earlier Historical Books [Joshua to H Samuel]. 

8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Broom. 1874. 
After the manner of Plymouth commenting in general ; quite suf- 
ficiently token up with spiritualizing and nice points ; but yet, read with 
half a ton of salt, a book, likely to arouse thought, and suggest topics. 

243 LANGE'S COMMENTARY Joshua (by F. R. Fay) ; 

Judges, Ruth (by P. Gassel, D. D.) Edited by Dr. Schaff. 
One vol. Imp. 8vo. 31s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1873. 

This is a standard work. No minister's library is 

furnished without the whole set. Joshua however is 

inferior to Judges. 

344 MARCHANT (P. Q.) Commentary on Joshua. [Part IIL 

of Preacher's Commentary. Is.] Lond., Dickinson. 1875. 

While writing this we have only one number before us, but it promises 

well, and we feel sure its quality will be sustained, for we know the 

author's industrious habits. 

245 THE GOSPEL IN THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [Anon.] Cr. 
8vo. Is. 6d. Lond., Partridge & Co. 1867. 
Pious remarks, such as any one would make. 



JUDGES. 101 

246 SEATON (W.) The Church in Canaan; or, heirs in pos- 

session receiving the promises. Vol. I. 13mo. Lend., 
1823. 2s. 
A sequel to No. 189. 

247 SMITH (Thornlbt). The History of Joshua, viewed in 

connection with the Topography of Canaan, and the 
Customs of the Times in which he lived. Cr. 8vo. 43. 
6d. Edinb., W. Oliphant & Co. 1870. 
Although not a commentary, it will answer the same 

purpose ; for almost every event is fully illustrated. A 

capital work. 



JUDGES. 
[See also under Jbaiua.] 

248 BUSH (Geobqe). Notes on Judges. Sm. Svo. New 

York, 1852. S. 3s. 6d. 

Like other works of this author — of considerable 
value. 

249 DODS (Mabcdb, M. A., D. D.) Israel's Iron Age : Sketches 

from the Period of the Judges. Crown 8vo. Ss. Lond., 

Hodder and Stoughton. 1874. 
Dr. Bods considers that to find in Samson and other judges types of 
our Lord Jesus is mere fancy, and he interprets upon " a rational prin- 
ciple " which renders his hook dry and unspiritual ; at the same time his 
sketches are not without value. 

250 HENGSTENBEKG (E. W.) Time of the Judges. (See No 

87.) 

251 HITTO (John, D. D.) " The Judges," in Daily Bible Illus- 

trations. (See No. 42.) 

Exceedingly meritorious. Kefer to it frequently. 

252 MAETTR (Pbtek. 1500—1563). Most Fruitful and Learned 

Commentarie upon the Book of Judges. Black Letter. 

Folio. 1560. Bare. 18s. 
This would seem to be a profound work. Sogers says of I^ter Martyr ; 
— " Few private men can understand his works, and few ministers who 
understand tjiem can obtain them ; nor if they can wUl they find in them 
much that will benellt their simple hearers." This has not been our 
experience with Feter Martyr's works ; on the contrary, we have read them 
with interest. 



103 JUDGES. 

253 NOBIjE (Samtiei,). Sermons on the singular histories 

leco'rdedi in the first eleven chapters. 8vo. 8s. 6d. 
Lend., J. S. Hodson. 1856. S. Is. 6d. 
Bwedenborgian mysticism. Exposition in a trance. 

254 ROGJSR& (Kichabd. Puritan). The whole Book of 

Judges. [103 Sermons.] Folio. Lend., 1615. 12s. to 153. 

This for the Ptaitan period is the work upon Judges. 
It is thoroughly plain and eminently practical. 

255 WISEMAN (Luke H., M. &.. Died 1875). Men of Faith ; 

or. Sketches from the Book of Judges. Cr. 8vo, 3s. 6d. 
Lond., Hodder & Stoughton. 1874. 

Mr. Wiseman in this work tells "of Gideon and 

Barak, of Samson and of Jephthah," and he does it in a 

powerful style. He was one of the best preachers in 

the Wesleyan body; A man of fuljness, and judicious- 

nfiss ;. in fact, a wis© man. 



256 BEUCE (John, D. D.) Life of Gideon. Fcap. 8vo. 5s. 

Edinb., Edmonston & Douglas. 1870. 
The author deserves attention,, both formatter and stylo» Note Sitjfh 
JUtUer't l%h opinion of his " Biography of Samson ; " (No. iSO). Gid- 
eon is a better work, hut both are over-eBtimated. 

257 EL WIN (Fountain). Sermons on the character of Gideon. 

12mo. Load.. Hatchards, 1844. S. Ss, 
Seven sermons, coutEuuing nothing remarkable. 

258 HOWARD (Lady). Gideon the Mighty Man of Valour. 

[Anon.] Lond..Hatc*»ard&, 1841. S, Is. 6(1. 
Of small use to the preacher. 

259 ROGERS. (aBORQB Albert, M. A.) The Valour of Faith ; 

or the Gospel in the Life of Gideon. 12mo. 3s. fid. Lond., 
Wertheim. Mackintosh & Hunt. 1859. 

A thoroughly lively little book. Each of the eight 

chapters is full of thought. 

260 BRUCE (John, D. D.) The Biography of Samson. 18mo. 

2s. Edinb., Edmonston & Douglas. 1870. 
ff^lgh MUler said " There is a poetic richness in the stj'le, which at one 
time reminds us of Ghalmers, and at another otJir&n^ Ikylor, but which 
in reality is Mr. Brute's own, that does not seem poor or bald beside 
even the blank verse of the great master of English song." We think 
this eulogy is greatly overdone. . 



KUTH. 103 

361 QTJABLES. (Fiiancib. 1592—1644). The Historie of Sam- 
son. 4to. Lond., 1631. 6s. 
This queer, quaint, odd volume of rhymes is far from despicable. Mtto 
frequentiy quotes Qmrlea upon Samson, and says of hini that he was a 
poet of no mean order. We are glad to have hia testimony to confirm 
our 9wn opinion. Eefined tastes -will be offlfendedj but those who wish for 
quaint thought will be gratifted. The book is very rare. 



EIJTH. 

[See also under JMua,] 

263 BERNARD (Richabd. Puritan. Die4 1641). Ruth's 
Recompense. 4to. 1638. 3s. 6d. 
Mr, Broaart is enthusiastic in his praise of this work, and says " that 
It ahQUQds with apppJ^tbegms and compressed thoi)ghts," We defer to 
so high an authority, but W^ s''? V^^ qiao^ &scinated by the book. 

263 FULLER (Thomas, D. D. 1608—1661). A Comment on 

Ruth, with two Serjnons. 1650. 

Not one of FiMer's best ; but still quaint and pithy, and lit up with 
flashes of his irrepressible wit. The above yif>r}ia otBerjiard and Soulier 
have been repi;inted in HtchoVi Series of Oan^mentariea, in one volume. 
Cr. 4to. 78. 6d. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1865. 

^r. Tegg, Fancras Lane, London, has also published a reprint ot Ful- 
ler's Comment on Euth, and Notes upon Jonah. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. 

264 BRADEN (William). The Beautiful Gleane?.' Cr. Svo. 

2s. 6d. Lond., James Clark & Co(. 1874. 
Mr. Braden is an able preacher. His sermons upon Buth are popular 
and practical, though not veiy remarkable, 

265 LAVATER (Lewis. A Swiss Protestant Divine. 1537— 

1586.) Ruth expounded in 28 Sermons. Translated from 

the Latin by E. Pagetl. Svo. Lond., 1586. 

Lavator was a Eeformer of high repute, son-in-law of BvUimger. He 

wrote a curious work on spectres, and made a catalogue of comets, thus 

showing himself to be both philosopher and divine. His book is seldom 

met with. 

366 LAWSON (Geokgb, D. D.) Lectures on the Book of Ruth. 
13nip. Edinb., 1805. 3s. 

By a man of great genius. Simple, fresh, and gracious, 

Nothing critical or profp.und may be looked for, but 

■ffise and sound teaching may be gleaned in these pages. 



104 RUTH. 

267 MACARTNEY (H. B.) Observations on Ruth. 13mo. 

Loud., 1843. 9d. 
A nice little book, little in all ways. 

268 MAGGOWAN (John. 1736—1780). Discourses on Ruth, 

and other important subjects. 8vo. Lond., 1781. 2s. 6d. 
Maegowan, the author of the Dialogue of Devils, is well known for 
originality and force. In this case his sermons are full of Gospel truth, 
but the texts- are too much acoonunodated and spiritualized. The dis- 
courses are good reading. 

269 OXENDEN(A. Bishop of Montreal). Story of Ruth. 18mo. 

Is. Hatchards, 
A very tiny affair, of no great moment to the expositor. 

270 PHILPOT (B., A. M.) Six Lectures. Square Fcap. 3s. 

6d. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 
A very small book, containing good, simple lectures — ^not an exposition. 

271 PRICE (AuBKEY C, B. A.) Six Lectures on the Book of 

Ruth. 12mo. 2s. 6d. Lond., Hatchards. 1869. 
Sermons of remarkable power, both of doctrine and diction. Not so 
expository as practical. Mr. Price is an earnest and large-hearted clergy- 
man of thoroughly evangelical school. 

272 TOPSEIiL (Edwakd). The Reward of Religion. Lectures 

upon Ruth. 8vo. Lond., 1613. 7s. 6d. to 10s. 

A very choice old ■work. Attersol in his rhyming 
preface says of it — 

" Go little Booke, display thy golden title. 
(And yet not Httle though thou little bee) ; 
Little for price and yet in price not Uttle, 
Thine was the Faine, the gaine is ours I see : 
(Although our gaine thou deem'st no paine to thee). 
If then, O reader, little paine thou take. 
Thou greatest gaine with smallest paino shall make." 

273 TTNG (Stephen, D. D., of New Topk). The Rich Kins- 

man ; or the History of Ruth. Small 8vo. Lond., 1856. 
S. Is. 6d. 
Written for young people, and suitable for their reading, though none 
too Uvely. 

274 WRIGHT (C. H. H., M. A.) Ruth, in Hebrew; with gram- 

matical and critical Commentary. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., 
Williams & Norgate. 1864. 
For Hebraists only. The author has selected the book of Enth as a 
study for beginners in the Hebrew tongue, because of the simplicity of the 
language. 



•I. AKD II. SAMUEL. 105 



I. A:^D II. SAMUEL. 

[Expositions upon these books being few, the student should consult 
■works on Scripture characters, and also comments on the Old Testament 
as a whole.] ♦ 

275 KEIL (C. F., D. D.) and DELITZSCH (F., D. D.) The 

Books of Samuel. Translated from the German by the 
Rev. James Martin, B. A. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. 
Clark. 1872. 
Like most of Glare's series, KeiFa works, are valuable helps towards 

obtaining the meaning of the text ; but for spiritual reflections and fruitful 

hints we must look elsewhere. 

276 LINDSAY (Henkt, M. A.) Lectures on the Historical 

Books [1 and 2 Samuel only]. Two vols. 12mo. Lond., 
1828. 2a. 6d. 
Practical sermons on a few of the more prominent events. 

277 WILLET (.Indrew). An Harmonie upon the First Booke 

of Samuel, and an Harmonie upon the Seconde Booke of 
Samuel. Folio. 1611 10s. 6d. to 12s. [There is also a 
4to. edition upon 1 Samuel. 1607.] 

The work continues the Hexapla to which we have 

referred in Nos. 143 and 178. It is unusually brief for 

the age of its composition, and full of variety. Under 

every verse, and often clause of a verse, the learned 

author proposes a question, and proceeds to answer it. 

These are such as the following : — " What a daughter 

of Belial is ?" " Whether any may be said to sin with 

the will of God?" "What doors of the house of 

Jehovah Samuel opened ?" " What is to be thought, of 

Eli's state before God ? " 

278. QUILD(WiLLiAM, D. D. 1586—1657). The Throne of David. 
An Exposition of the 2nd Samuel, wherein is set down 
the Pattern of a Pious and Prudent Prince. Oxford, 
1659. lis. 
The MSS. of tliis rare book was sent to Dr. John Owen by the widow 
of the author, with a letter of her own, informing him that her dying hus- 
band desired it to be so forwarded. Dr. Owen says, that he tbund the 
treatise " wr.lten with perspicuity and clearness, handling a subject of great 



106 SAMUEL, SAUL, DAVID. 

and delightful variety, with a choice mixture of spiritual, moral, and polit- 
ical observations, tempered hy a good and sound judgment unto com- 
mon capacities." We do not preaome to criticise where Oieen commends, 
bnt we should not have originated such a commendation. 



SAMUEL, SAUL, DAVID. 

279 EITTO. Daily Bible lUostrations, "Sftmuel, SsaH, and 
David." (See No. 42.) 

Should always be consulted. 

SSO FIiUMFTRE (Helbn). The History of Samuel. 18mo. 
Is. 6d. Lend., Nisbet & Co. 1843. 

A children's book, and childlike men will be thank- 
ful for the many very useful hints which it throws out. 
We have got more out of it than we have found in huge 
and learned tomes. 

281 STEEL (Robert). Samuel the Prophet. 8vo. 4b. 6d. 

Lond., Nelson & Song. 1861. S. 2s. 

The author has done his work well, and has shown an 
evident desire to excite others to a greater knowledge of 
the subject than he could impart. Hence he gives a list 
of the writers upon Samuel, and such accounts of them 
as were within his reach. Young readers will find this 
book a great help to them. 

282 MILLER (J. A.) Saul, The First King of Israel. Fcap. 

8vo. iB. 6d. Lond., Snow & Co. 1866. 

Eminently thoughtful, useful, practical sermons. 
We do not see how Saul's life-failure could be more prof- 
itably set forth. 

£83 BLAIKIE (Willtam G., A. M.) David, King of Israel: 
the Divine Plan and Lessons of his Life. 8vo. 5s 
Lohd., Nisbet & Co. 1861. 

Dr. Blaikie is a good writer. This Life of David 

has supplied a great lack. 



SAMUElj 3AUI.J OAVID. 107 

3S4 GH4.NDLER (S4¥UbI'. fl- E!-, F. E. S., find F. A. 8. 1693— 
1766). A Critical History of tUe Life of bavid. Two 
vols., 8vo. Lond., 1^66. S. 5s. Que vsj.., 8vo. J. H. & 
J. Parker. 1853. S- 5s. 

This is a masterpiece as a critical history, and the best of Chandler's 
productions. Many of the Fsalms are explained with commendable learn- 
ing, bnt the spiritual element is absent. 

285 DELANY (Patrick, D. D., Dean of Down. 1686—1768). 

An Historical Account of the Life and Beign of Di^vld. 
[Anon.] Two vols., 'Svo. Lpnd., 1745. 4?. 

Delany was a Mend of Swift, no great recommendation for a com- 
mentator. He defends David in a way which Darid would have sternly 
repudiated. Chandler is far preferable to Delany, but both are devoid of 
the evangelical spirit. 

286 KINGSLEY (Chaklks, M. A.) David. Four Sennona. 

F'cap. Svo. 2s. 6d. Load., Macmillan & Co. 

In bis usual free and easy manner KingaUg speaks of David's strength 
and his wealaiess, his anger and his deserts. The character of this writer 
is supposed to be well understood, but we question if many have formed 
a true estimate of him. For commenting purposes these sermons are of 
small value ; they are plain, practical discourses. 

287 KRUMMACHER (F. W., D. D.) David, the King of Isael. 

Cr. Svo. 78. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 

Anything by Krummaeher is worthy of patient reading, 

288 LAWSON (George, D. D. 1749—1820.) Discourses on 

the History of David. 12mo. Berwick, 1833. S. 3s. 6d. 

Here the life of David is pipugly turned to practical 
use. Delany and Chandler are but bones, and Lawson 
the marrow. 

289 MARBECK (Jomi). The wjiole History of King David. 

4to. 1579. 

This is in English metre, and was written by the famous organist of 
the Koyal Chapel in Windsor, in the reign of Henry VIII. ' He narrowly 
escaped martyrdom. His work entitled "Booke of Common Praier noted," 
is the groundwork of the plain song used in our Cathedrals from the Ke- 
formation to the present day. Marieofg History of David is very rare. 
We cannot therefore set a prioe. 



108 I. AND II. KINGS. 

290 [ROGERS (Mrs.) ] The Shepherd King. By the Authoress 

of " The Folded Lamb." 12mo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet. 
1856. S. Is. 6d. 
This authoress writes well for the young, and her book will be uaefal 
to those who teach them. 

291 SMITH (George, LL. D. and F. A. S.) The Life and Reign 

of David. Cr. 8vo., 7s. 6d. Lond., Longmans. 1867. S. 
3b. 6d. 
David's life is here concisely written, with such of the Fsolms inter- 
woven as can be referred to special periods It cannot be read without 
ministering instruction. 

293 TAYLOR (William M., D. D. Of the Broadway Taber- 
nacle, New York). David : his Life, and its Lessons. Cr. ' 
8vo. 8s. 6d. Lond., Sampson Low, Marston & Co. 1875. 

A grand work which should be in every library. 

293 THOMPSON (Henkt, M. A.) Davidica. Twelve Sermons 

on the Life and Character of David. Lond., 1827. Is. 6d. 

Discourses of the kind which are usually published by subscription; 

rather pretentions, but with nothing in them. The process of subscribing 

to print sermons is one snggested by kindness, but seldom directed by 

reason. 

294 VINOB (Charles, Baptist Minister, of Birmingham. 

Died 1875). Lights and Shadows in the Life of King 
David. Cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond. Elliot Stock. 1871. 

Sermons of the highest order upon a few incidents 

in David's life. They are models of chaste, subdued, 

but powerful preaching. 



I, and II, KINGS. 



295 GENESTE (Maximilian, M. A.) The Parallel Histories 
of Judah and Israel. Two vols., Roy. 8vo. £i lis. 6d. 
Lond., S. Bagster.& Sons. 1843. S. 6s. to 8s. 

The explanatory notes are mostly from other authors. The work has a 
very noble appearance, and may be useful as showing the run of Biblical 
history ; but Barih't Bible Mdnval (No. 4) would answer every purpose. 



solomok's tehple. 10'9 

296 JUKES (Andrew). The Mystery of tlie Kingdom, traced 

through the Books of Kings. Part I. Is. 6d. Lond., 
Longmans. 1858. 
This author is more myatioalthan we could wish, but never writes with- 
out being instructive. 

297 KEIL (K. P.) and BERTHEAU (E.) Commentary on the 

Books of Kings. By K. F. Keil. Translated by James 
Murphy, LL. D. Supplemented by a Commentary on the 
Books of Chronicles. By Ernst Bertheau, Professor iu 
Goettingen. Translated by James Martin, B. A. Two 
vols, 10s. 6d. each. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1857. S. 
10s. 
Distinguished by careful investigation of the meaning of the text. This 

is a most important help to the expositor. The student will not, however, 

find much in the way of reflections and doctrines. 

298 KEIL and DELITZSCH. The Books of the Kings. By C. 

P. Keil. Translated by James Martin, B. A. One vol. 
10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1865. 
This appears to be another form of the work mentioned above. At 
least there can be no necessity for purchasing both. This is the better. 

299 KITTO. Daily Bible Illustrations. "Solomon and the 

Kings." (See No. 43.) 

Full of deeply interesting matter. 

300 LANGE'S COMMENTARIES. Edited by Dr. Schaff. 

Kings. By Dr. Bahr. One vol.. Imp. 8vo. 21s, or to 
subscribers 15s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1872. 
It must have cost great effort to make the homileti- 
cal part of this volume as good as it is. It is a treasury 
to the preacher, and is all the more precious because we 
have next to nothing upon the books of the Kings. 
(See No. 43.) 



SOLOMON'S TEMPLE. 



301 BUNYAN (JOH>f). Solomon's Temple Spiritualized. Lond., 
1088. [In Banyan's Works, Offor's edition, III., 460.] 

A marvellous display of allegorizing genius; full of Gospel truth. 
Banyan bammors away ftt each type, but no one may call it tinlcering. 



110 ELIJAH, BLISHA, *C. 

803 EDERSHEIM (A., D. D.) The Temple : its Ministiy and 
Services. Imp. l6mo. Sa. Relig. Tract. Soc. 1874. 

This will supply the student with all that he needs 

upon the subject in hand. 

303 LEE (Samoel, M. A. 1625—1691.) Orbis miraculum ; or, 
the Temple of Solomon pourtrayed by Scripture light. 
[Anon.] Folio. 1659. 12s. to 14a. 
Of coarse, as will be inferred from its date, this work is of the antique 
order, bat it is profonndly learned, and goes into architectaral aad ritualis- 
tic details, expluning then^ spiritually with much sweetness and sogges- 
tiveness. 



ELIJAH, ELISHA, &c. 

304 ANDERSOI^^ (James, S. M., M. A.) Discouraeg on EUjah, 

etc. 8vo. Lond., 1835. 2s. 
Ordinary sermon? by a " Chaplun in Ordinary to the Queen.'* Ehe- 
torical and gnmdiose, but not ezpositoiy. 

305 BAYNE (Pbter). The Days of Jezebel. An Historical 

Drama. 13mo. 6s. Lond., Strachan & Co. 1872. 
A fine poetic drama, worthy of (Quotation by preachers ; but hardly in 
the line of worlds contemplated by this Catalogue. 

306 EDERSHEIM (Alfred, D. D.) Elisha the Prophet, a Type 

of Christ. Cr. 8yo. 3s. 6d. Lond., W. Hunt & Co. 1873. 
This author is always interesting, showing close acquuutance with 
Jewish customs, and knowing how to utilize his information. 

307 HOW AT (H. T.) Elijah, the Desert Prophet. Cr. 8vo. 5s. 

Edinb., Johnstone & Hunter. 1868. 
Veiy picturesque and ppetica). A work to be read for enjoyment, 

308 ERUMMAOHER (F. W., D. D.) Elijah the Tishbitt). 

Translated from the German. [Numerous editions ; one 
has lately been issued by the Religious Tract Society. 
Cr. 8vo. 3at] S. Is. 6d. 

Too well known and approved to need any commen- 
dation from us. 

309 MACDUFF (J. R., D. D.) The Prophet of Fire. Post 8vo. 

6s. 6d. Lond., James Nisbet & Co. 1S63. 

Dr. Macduff writes popularly, yet he is by no means 



ELIJAH, KLISHA, 40. HI 

■weak or shallow. He is to the young ministei? all the 
more useful, because he has worked out the problem of 
making sound thought intelligible to the multitude. 

810 M[ACKINTOSH] (C.H.) Reflections on the Life and Times 
of Elijah. By 0. H. M. Is. Loud., G. Morrish. 
Strongly Plyipontlustic, A small affair. 

311 BLUNT (Henry, M. A.) Lectures upon the History of 
Elisha. 12mo. 5s. 6d. Lond., Hatchards. 1839. S. 2a. 
We like JBhint better open Eliaba than upon any other portion of 
Scripture. Ho says that, had he known of Krummaeher't having written 
upon the subject, he should uot have attempted it himself. A wise obser- 
vation. What shall he do that ooraeth after a King, or after a iTrwn- 
maeherf 

313 DOTHIE (W. P. , M. A.) The History of the Prophet Elisha. 
Cr. 8vo. 23. 6d. Lond., Hodder & Stoughton. 1872. 
Sketchy. Not very deep, but interesting. 

313 QLTU (Gbokgb L., Barf.) Life of Elisha, in eleven plain 

discourses. 8vo. Lend., Wertheim & Matiintosb. 1857. 
S. Is. 
Erangelioal and simple. Ministers do not need it. 

314 KRUMMAOHER (F. W., D. D.) Elisha. Translated 

from the German. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1837. S. Is. 6d. 

Of 'this we may say as we did of the same author's 
Elijah, — it needs no commending fi'om us. 

315 BULLOCK (Chaklbs). The Syrian Leper. P'cap, 8vo. 

2s. 6d. Lond., Wertheim & Macintosh. 1863. S. Is. 3d. 
Telling in style, and earnestly evangelical. These chapters are good 
Bpeoimens of popular expounding. 

316 MACDUFF (J. R., D. D.) The Healing Water* ; or. The 

Story of Naaman. An Old Testament Chapter on Provi- 
dence and Grace. Cr. 8vo. 3s, 6d. Lond., Nisbet. 1873. 

In Dr. Macduff's best manner : the story of Naaman 

is admirably handled, and made to teach the gospel with 

much freshness. 

317 ROGERS (Daniel, B. D. Puritan. 1573—1653). Naa- 

man the Syrian, his disease and cure j discovering lively 
to the reader the spiritual leproaie of siijne and selfe-love ; 
together with the remedies, viz., selfe-denial and faith. 
Folio. JLiond., f643. 7s. to 10s. 



112 CHRONICLES, EZEAj NEHEMIAH, AND ESTHER. 

A huge volume of 898 folio pages, almost large 
enough to have loaded one of Naamaa's mules. It is a 
work which exhausts the subject and turns it to earnest 
evangelical uses. 

318 WOODWARD (Henry, A. M.) The Sliunamite. 8vo. 10s. 
■6d. Lond. and Ca,mb:, Macmillan & Co. 1863. 8. 33. 
We scarcely remember a more flagrant case of high-soanding verbiage. 
Here is the author's way of describing a ben which has hatched ducklings. 
— " That much tried bird, whose hard allotment it has been to hatch and 
rear a brood of aliens, and who seems as if melancholy had marked her 
for her own, when ber charge, with unanimous consent, hurry to some 
tempting pool of water, and violate her feelings and shook ber instincts, 
by casting, themselves upon that hostile element." ^ 



I. and II. CHRONICLES. 



319 BERTHEAU (E.) See Keil and Bertheau, No. 297. 

320 KEIL(K.F.) The Book of the Chronicles. Translated from 

the German. By Andrew Harper, B. D. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 

Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1872. 
"Without indicating; either the spiritual lesson or the moral of the his- 
tory, Seii simply expl^ns the facts, and in so doing aids the reader to 
realize them. We confess we should like something more. 



EZRA, NEHEMIAH, and ESTHER. 

331 KEIL (K. F.) Commentary on Ezra, Nehe,miah, and Esther. 

Translated by Sophia Tavlor. 8vo. IDs. 6d. Edinb., T. 

& T. Clark. F. T. L. 1873. 
Just the kind of book in which KeiTs method of commenting appears 
to the best advantage. He gives much needful information, and thus 
supplements more didactic works. We cannot read Xeil with pleasure, 
lor we want spiritual meat, but yet it is most desirable for us to know 
what the text really means. 

322 PILKINUTON (James, B. D. Bishop of Durham. 1530— 

1!575). A Godlie Exposition upon certeine chapters of 

Nehemiah. 1585. Reprinted in the Parker Society's 

edition of Pilkington's Works. 8^0. Camb., 1842. 

Very old fashioned and singular, somewhat in the style of Latimer and 



ESTHER. 113 

perhaps a little coarser. ilBJMnj'iom'* downright onelaughta upon the vices 
and foUiea of hia time ai-e fine instances of personal, faithful preaching ; 
they are, however, so minutely descriptive of the manners which then 
prevailed that they arc the less useful now. The style is cramped, and 
even grotesque in places, yet FilUagton is a, grand old author. He has 
only written upon five chapters. 

323 RANDALL (J. Montague, A. K. C.) Nehemiah, the Tir- 

shatha : hia Life and Lessons. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., 

Nisbet. 1874. 
The substance of thirteen Sunday evening addresses to a village con- 
gregation, " dictated by the author, who is nearly blind, on the following 
Monday." These familiar and almost chatty discourses are full of gospel 
teaching, and while they give a fair idea of Nehemiah and his times, they 
are also enlivened by anecdote, and made exceedingly interesting. Stu- 
dents will not learn much from these sermons, but they may see how 
rustic preaching should be done. 
334 SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF NEHEMIAH ; or. Chapters 

for Christian Workers. [Anon.j P'cap. 8vo. Is. Lond., 

66, Paternoster Row, E. C. 
The heads of these chapters would serve exceedingly well for the key- 
notes of a series of sermons. 
835 STOWELL (Hugh, M. A.) A Model for Men of Business, 

or, Lectures on the Character of Nehemiah. 8vo. Lond., 

Hatchards. 1855. S. 3s. 
The author does not attempt a full exposition, but aims at ful'nishing a 
plain, practical handbook for men of business and others whose time is 
limited. He gives fourteen good, sensible lectures on the Book. 

336 WOODWARD (Hbnky, M. A.) Thoughts on the Character 
and History of Nehemiah. 12mo. Lond., 1849. 
Words, and only words. 



ESTHER 

837 COOPER (Thomas). The Churches Deliverance ; containing 

Meditations and short'Notes upon the Booke of Hester. 
4to. Lond., 1609. 53. to 7s. 
We have not been able to meet with this work. 

838 DAVIDSON (Alexandbu D., D. D.) Lectures on Esther. 

Cr. 8vo. 5b. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1859. 
Helpful lectures. The Book of Esther is here used for instruction in 
doctrine and practice. The work is not so much for the study as for tho 
family. 



114 THE POBXICAi BOOKS. 

33» HUGHES (John). Esther an* her People. Ten Sermons. 
ISmo. 1843^ g»l^. 3d. 
Grood eyangelical diecouraea, bat notluiig very spedaL 

830 LAWSON (George, D. D.) Discourses on Esther. 12iuo. 
Ediab., 1804. S. Sa. 6d. 

Intended for the general reader. The discourses 

are as spiritual aud unaffected as theii; excellent author. 

Dr. John Brown, in commending all the Lawson books, 

says that " he has rendered subjects, apparently barren, 

full of instruction." 

331 McCRIE (Thomas). Lectures on Esther. 13mo. 1838. 
S. Is. 6d. 

Dr. Davidson says of Dr. McCrie : " There is an 

ancient fable of a king who was gifted with the power 

of turning everytlung he touGh,ed iuto gold ; and this 

eminent divine and historian possessed remarkably the 

gift of rendering every subject he handled so precious, ?i|S 

£i,t least tq discoHrag^ any one from attempting to, follow 

in his track. In his Lectures upon the book of Esther, 

he has certainly left little for any to say who may come 

aftey him." 

333 MORGAN (R. C.) The Book of Esther typical of the King- 
dom. Sm. Svo. 1855. S. Is. 6d. 
An allegorical interpretation, which commenoes with these words: 
" The true scene of this heantifal hook opens in heaven," Is heaven 
under the dominion of Ahasnems ! Who thenia Vashti} 



THE POETICAL BOOKS. 

333 DURELL (D., p. D.) Critical Remarks on the Books of 

Job, Proverbs, Psalms, Ecclesiastes, and Canticles. 4to. 

Oxford, 1773. 48. to 6a. 

A critic who is forever mending the text, who contends fbr the modem 

origin of Job, thinks the Cantioles to be a love song, and considers the 

imprecatory Fsalms to ha ebullitions of passion, is not one whom oar 

readers need consult. 



JOB. ' 115 

834 HOLDEN (Lawkencb). Paraphrase on the Books of Job, 
Psalms, Proverbs, and Eoclesiastes, with Notes. Four 
Tols., 8vo. 1763. 5s. 
An atrQ(aoi)8 instance of bQmbastio veibpaity. Job ii. 2 is thus ex- 
panded : — " Heakveu and earth'a great Lord and gaardian, the instant 
Satan appeared observed, and. thus demanded of him : ' from vrhat, qaarter 
proeeedest thou ! or in, what district, sjad. to what purpose hast thou 
lately employed thy perverted, and subtle, wicked abilities and arts 3 ' To 
whom the destroyer answers : ' my last station, or rather, unsettled, wan- 
dering motion, has been upon earth ; various districts whereof I have made 
short visits to, being sometimes with the inhabitants of one region of 
climate, sometimes with those of another.' " Paraphrases generally mean 
the text padded out with superfluous words, and this is an emphatic in- 
stance. 

333 EPTTO. Daily Bible IlluBtrations, "Job and the Poetical 
Books." (See No. 42.) 

Worthy of attentive reading. 

336 L?IQH (Edwabp), §ee unde? Whole Bibje, No. 4S. 

337 WILCOCKS (Thomas, A. M. Puritan. 1549—1608). The 

Works of that Keyereftd and Learned Divine, Mr. Thomas 
Wilcocks, Minister of God's Word : containing an Exposi- 
tion upon the whole Booke of David's Psalmes, pplomou's 
Proverbs, the Canticles, and part of the eighth chapter 
of St. Paul's Epistle to tte Romans. Folio. Iiond. ^589, 
1630 and 1634. 9s. to 13s. 

Very old. The notes are brief, but furnish many hints for sermons. 

JOB. 

338 ABBOT (George. Died 1648). The whole Book of Job 

Paraphrased, or made Easie for s^ny to Understand. 4to- 

hoxid., 1,64a 3s. 64. 
This is not by Archbishop Abbot, neither is the work of any value. 
This Abbot was a Member of Parliament, and his paraphrase is better than 
we could have expected from an M. P. ; but still it is a heavy, perform- 
ance. 

339 AMERICAN BIBLE UNION. The Book of Job. 4 Trans- 

lation from the Original Hebrew ; on the Basis of the 
Common and Earlier English Versions. By Thomas J. 
Conant, D. D., Professor of Sacred Literature in Bochester 
Theological Seminary. 4to. New York, 1867. Lond., 
Triibner. S. 3s. 6d. 



116 JOB. 

An excellent translation. The design did not allow of more tlian 
Blender notes, but those notes are good. 

340 BARNES (Albert. 1798—1870). Notes on Job. Rout 

ledge's edition, edited by Dr. Camming. Two vols., Svo 
5a. Blackie's edition. Two vols., post Svo. 7s. 

Exceedingly good. One of the best of this author's 

generally valuable productions. The student should 

purchase this work at once, as it is absolutely necessary 

to his library. 

341 BELLAMY fD.) Paraphrase, with observations. 4to. 

Lend., 1748. 4s. 
A collection of notes fW>m other anthors. Original works are &i better. 

343 BEZA (Thkodoke. 151&— 1605.) Job expounded. 8vo. 
1590. 7s. 
Beza was the great friend and assistant of Calvin. As a commentator 
he lacked the profound insight and comprehensive grasp of Calvin, but as 
a critical scholar be is s^d to have been his equal if not his superior. This 
work on Job is rare. 

343 BLACKMORB (Sir R.) Baraphrase on the Book of Job, 

the Songs of Moses, Deborah, and David, four select 

Psalms, some Chapters of Isaiah, and the 3d Chapter of 

Habakkuk. Folio. 1700. 3s. 

Grandiose poetry. ibp« speaks of the power of Blaehmare's uumberB 

" to soothe the soul in slumbers." The worthy knight is not the worst 

of the poetical expositors, bat he is bad enough. Miserable paraphrasers 

are ye all, ye brethren of jingling rhyme and. doubtful measure. 

344 CALVIN (John). Sermons on the Booke of Job. Trans- 

lated out of French. By A. Golding. Folio. Lond., 1584. 

Kot the same as the Commentary, but equally rich. 

345 CAREY (Cateret Priattlx, M. A.) Book of Job translated, 

explained by Notes, and illustrated by extracts from 
works on Antiquities, Science, &c. Royal Svo. 1858. 
5s. to 7s. 6d. 
Purely critical and exegetical. The author has grappled manfully with 

all difficulties, and has stored up a mass of precious materials with which 

to illuminate a book dark from its antiquity. 

346 CARTIi (Joseph. 1603—1673). Exposition, with Practi- 

cal Observations. Twelve vols., 4to. 1648—1666. 553. 
Also in Two vols., folio. 1676. 50s. 

Caiyl muist have inherited the patience of Job to 



JOB. 117 

have completed his stnpendons task. It would be a 
mistake to suppose that he is at all prolix or redundant ; 
he is only full. In the course of his expounding he has 
illustrated a very large portion of the whole Bible with 
great clearness and power. He is deeply devotional and 
spiritual. He gives us much, but none too much. His 
work can scarcely be superseded or surpassed. 

347 An Abridgment of Caryl's Exposition. 8vo. Edinb., 

1836. Is. 6d. 

We do not believe in abridgments of a book which is 
good throughout. Think of twelve large volumes con- 
densed into one small one ! An ox in a gallipot is 
nothing to it. 

348 CHAPPELOW (Lbonakd, B. D.) A Commentary, in which 

is Inserted the Hebrew Text and English Translation. 

Two vols., 4to. 6s. Cambridge, 1753. 
OhappeXoxB is great upon Arabic etymologies, but he is dreadfully ver- 
bose, and really says nothing of any consequence. Chappeflow and several 
other authors follow Sohultens in the belief that the Hebrew can only be 
read by the light of the Arabic ; they even imagine that the Book of Job 
was originally composed in Arabic by Job himself and then translated by 
some one else into the Hebrew tongue. This opened a fine field for parad- 
ing their learning. 

349 COLEMAN (J. Noble). The Book of Job; from the 

Hebrew. With Notes. 4to. 7s. 6d, Lond,, Nisbet & 
Co. 1869. S. 4s. 
We do not value this so much as the same author's " Psalms," but it is 
serviceable in its own way. 

350 CONANT (T. J.) See American Bible Union. (No. 339.) 

351 DAVIDSON (A. B., M. A. Hebrew Tutor, New College, 

Edinb.) A Commentary Grammatical and Exegetical ; 
with a Translation. Vol. I. 8vo. 7b. 6d. Lond., Williams 
& Norgate. 1863. 
Strict grammatical treatment of Scripture is always commendable, and 
in this case the results are valued by advanced scholars. 

353 DELITZSCH (Franz). Biblical Commentary on Job. Two 
vols., 8vo. 21s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1866. S. 13. 
" Unquestionably the most valuable work on this inexhaustibly inter- 
esting Scripture that has reached us from Germany." — Mncon/ormist. 



118 • JOB. 

353 DURHAM (Jambb. 1623—1658). Exposition of Job. 

12mo. 1659. Also Glasgow, 1759. Say 4s. 

This is a small book, and we have been unable to 
procure it. Orme only mentions it upon the authority 
of Watts' Bibliotheca. It is certain to be good, for 
Durham is always admirable. 

354 EVANS (Aliued BfrWEN). Lectiires on the Book of Job. 

8vo. Lond. Bosworth & Harrison. 11^6. S. 3s. 
Discourses from tburteen single verses from different parte of the pa- 
tient patriarch's history. They are quite out of the ran of Church of Eng- 
land preaching, and are full of thought and originaUty. They would have 
been all the better for a little gospel, for even if his text does not look that 
\ray, ire do e^ect a Christian minister to have something to say about his 
Master. 

355 FENTON (Thomas, Sf. A.) Annotationa on Job and the 

Psalms, collected from several Commentators, and meth- 
odized and improved. 8vo. Lond., 1733. 3s. 
i All that will^be found here is taken from others, but well selected. 

356 'FRY (JoHK). New Translation iand Exposition, with 

Notes. Svo. Lond., 1827. 4s. 6d. 

"VTritten in a derout, inquiring spirit, with due 
respect to learned writers, but not with a slavish follow- 
ing of their fanciiss. Pry's work is somewhat of the 
same charabter as Good's (No. 359). We greatly esteem 
this exposition for its own sake, and also for the evan- 
gelical tone which pervades it. 

357 GARDEN (CHAMiKS, D.D.) An Improved Metrical Version, 

with preliminary dissertation and notes. 8vo. Uxford, 

1796. 3s. 
This author has not attempted a Commentary, but he has cobsulted a 
vast array of authors, and from them gathered a large number of netes. 
His work is of very moderate value. 

358 GARNETT (John. Bishop of Clogher). A Dissertation on 

the Book of Job, etc. 4to. Lond., 1749. 3s. 6d. 

Rubbish. This Bishop ascribes the nuUiomlup of Job to £zekiel 1 



JOB. 119 

359 OOOD (John Mason, M. D., F. E. S. 1764—1837). The 
Book of Job literally translated. With Notes, etc. 8vo. 
Lond., 1813. 5s. 
A Tery valuable contribution to sacred literature. Dr. Good's learning 

•ffos, however, more extensive than accurate, and it would be dangerous U> 

BCcepFhis translations without examination. 

860 GREGORY THE GREAT. On the Book of Job. [The 
Maona Moralia.] Translated with Notes and Indices. 
Library of the Fathers. Four vols. £3 15b., or to sub- 
scribers £3 3s. Lond., James Parker & Co. 
The Fathers are of course beyond criticism, and contain priceless gems 
here and there ; but they spiritualize at such a rate, and also utter so many 
crudities and platittides, that if they were tnbdern writers they '♦foixld not 
be so greatly Valued as they are. Antiquity lends eiiohantuieut. 

361 HEATH (Thomas). Essay toward a New English Version 
of the Book of Job. With a Commentary. 4to. Lond., 
1756. 3s. 6d. 
All that is good in this book is marred by its utterly untenable con- 
jectures. It treats ilob with slender reverence. Do not lumljer your 
shelves with it. 

^63 HODGES (Walter, D. D.) Elihu : an Enquiry into the 
Scope and Design of the Book of Job. 4to. Lond., 1750. 
13mo., third edition, 1756. 3s. 
Based upon the absurd supposition that Elihu was the Bon of Ood him- 
self, atid Job a type of the Saviour. Poor Job's book has been the sub- 
ject of trials as numerous as those of its hero, and Hodges has given the 
finishing stroke. The course of dreaming can no further go. Hodge the 
•village Methodist could never have raved at the rate of Dr. Hodge, Pro- 
vost of Oriel College, Oxford. 

363 HENGSTENBERG (E. W.) See under Eccleslastes. 

364 HULBERT (Charles Augustus, M. A., Perpetual Curate 

of Harthwaite, Yorks.) The Gospel Revealed to Job. 
Thirty Lectures, with Notes. 8vo. Lond., Longmans. 
1853. S. 3s. 6d. 

An unusually good book ; exceedingly comprehen- 

sive and helpful in many ways. The author aimed at 

usefulness and has succeeded wonderfully. We wonder 

that his work has not been better known. 

365 HUTOHBSON (George). An Exposition upon Job, being 

the sum of 316 Lectures. Folio. 13s. to 14s. Lohd., 1669. 

Whenever the student sees a Commentary by Hutche- 



120 JOB. 

son let him buy it, for we know of no author who is 
more thoroughly helpful to the minister of the Word. 
He distils the text, and gives his readers the quintes- 
sence, ready for use. 

366 HUTCHINSON (R. E., M. D., M. R. C. S. E., Surgeon-Major 
Bengal Army). Thoughts on the Book of Job. Lond., S. 
Bagster & Sons. [In the press. 1875.] 

867 KITTO (John, D. D.) " Job and the Poetical Books." In 
Daily Bible Illustrations. (See No. 43.) 

Exceedingly instructive. Most charming reading. 

368 LANGE'S COMMENTARY. The Book of Job. A 

Commentary, by Otto ZSckler, D. D., Professor of Theo- 
logy at Greifswald. Translated from the German, with 
Additions by Prof. L. J. Evans, D. D., Lane Theological 
Seminary, Cincinnati, Ohio. Imp. 8vo. 21s, or to sub- 
scribers 15s. Edinb., T. & T. Cbrk. 1874. 

Contains a large collection of available material, and, 

if within a minister's means, should be a foundation 

.book in his library. We are very far from endorsing all 

Zockler's remarks, but the volume is an important one. 

369 LEE (Samuel, D. D. 1713—1853). .The Book of Job trans- 

lated ; with Introduction and Commentary. 8vo. Lond., 

1837. 7s. 6d. 
Barnes says, " This work is not what might have been expected from 
the learning and reputation of Prof. Lee. It abounds with Arabic learning 
which is scattered witli ostentatious profusenesa through the volume, but 
which often contributes little to the elucidation of the text. It is designed 
for the critical scholar rather than the general reader." 

370 NOYES (G. E., D. D.) A New Translation, with Notes. 

12mo. Boston, IT. S. [N. D.] S. 3s. 
We have been informed that Dr. Noyes belongs to the Unitarian body, 
but we fail to see any trace of Arian or Sooinian views in this volume. We 
do not agree with all that he says, but he strikes us as being an honest, 
able, and accurate translator and commentator, worthy to stand in the 
foremost rank. 

371 PETERS (Chakles, A. M. Died 1777). A Critical Disser- 

tation on the Book of Job. Wherein the Account given . 
in that book by the author of The Divine Legation of 
Moses Demonstrated, etc., is particularly considered ; and 
a Future State shewn to have been the Popular Belief of 
the Ancient Hebrews. 4to. Lond., 175J. '2s. 6d. 



JOB. 131 

Of a oontroversial charaoter ; mainly written against ■Warbnrton and 
Le Clero, and aa thoee authors are now almost forgotten, answers to them 
have lost their interest. Pctere was an eminently learned man, and well 
versed in argument ; but his work is of very small use for homiletical pur- 
poses. 

372 QUARLES (Feancis). Job Militant, with Meditations, 

Divine and Moral. 4to. 1624. Sa. 
A Poem in Quarles' usual inflated, but withal instructive manner. 

373 ROBINSON (T., D. D.) A Homiletic Commentary on Job. 

[In progress. 1875. Being Part IV of the Preacher's Com- 
mentary. Is.] Lond., Dickinson. 
This we hope will be of use to preachers, but we have hardly enough 
before us to judge of it. 

374 SCOTT (Thomas). The Book of Job in English Verse, with 

Remarks. 4to. Lond., 1771. Reprinted, 8vo., 1733. S. 
3s. 8d. 
Here we have Job in rhyme — 

■' There lived an Arab of distingnish'd &me, 
In Idumeau Uz ; and Job his name. 
Of spotless manners, with a soul sincere. 
Evil his hate, and God alone his fear." 
This will hardly do. To translate Job in metre needed a Pope or a 
Dryden, and Thomas Scott was neither : be has, however, done his best, 
the best could have done no more. This is not Thomas Scott the great 
Expositor, but a Dissenting Minister at Ipswich. 

375 SENAULT (J. F.) A Paraphrase. 4to. Lond., 1648. 3s. 6d. 
Seuanlt was a famous preacher of the Oratory in Paris, who, from the 

character of his works, would seem to have been almost a Protestant. His 
writings were highly esteemed in their day, and translated into English. 

376 SMITH (Elizabeth). The Book of Job translated from the 

Hebrew, with Annotations. 8vo. Lond., 1810. Is. 6d. 
" A good English version of Job, produced chiefly by the aid of Park- 
hurst's Lexicon." — Orme. 

377 STATHER (Lieut-Col., W. C.) The Book of Job, in Eng- 

lish Verse ; with Notes. 12mo. Lond., E. Marlborough 

& Co. 1859. S. Is. 
■We do not like Job in rhyme. We know of no rhyming version of any 
part of Scripture, except the Psalms, which can be called a success. Cer- 
tainly this is not one. The author's notes deserve consideration. 

378 STOCK (Joseph, D. D. Bishop of Killalla). The Book of 

Job, Metrically arranged, and newly translated with Notes. 
4to. 1805. 4s. 



123 PSALMS. 

The work of six weeks ! "Well may Magee say that it is Ml of " pra- 
cipitauces, mistakes, and mutilations." This was a bishop and a Doi^or 
of Divinity ! It takes a great man to perpetrate a very great folly. A 
metrical translation of Job with Notes in six weeks 1 In that time stocks 
bloom to perfection. Perhaps that feet operated on our author. Let this 
blundering haste serve as a warning to young divines. 

379 UMBREIT (Fribdrich, W. K. Prof, of Theol. in Heidel- 

berg. 1795—1860). A New Version of the Book of Job; 
with Notes. Translated by the Rev. John Hamilton Gray, 
M. A. Two vols., 12mo. 8s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 
Useful philologically ; but Barnes would supply fer more in that direc- 
tion, and spiritual exposition besides. 

380 VAN HAGEN (Mrs. Henry). Evenings in the Land of Uz ; 

a Comment on Job. Second Edition. 12mo. 1843. Is. 

6d; 
Isaac Taylor commends this volume as one which " disclaiming all pur- 
pose of critical exposition, aims only under the guidance of Christian feel- 
ing and experience to follow and to unfold the spiritual intention of this 
rich portion of Holy Scripture." Such an introduction must have helped 
to sell the work and carry it speedily to the second edition. 

381 WAGNER (George). Sermons on the Book of Job. Cr. 

8vo. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1863. S. 3s. 
Wagner's sermons are simple and plain, devout and instructive. We 
have here nothing very iresh, but everything is sound and goo4. 

382 WEMYSS (Thomas). Job and his Times. New Version, 

with Notes. 8vo. Lond., 1839. 2s. 6s. 
Barnes says : — " This is designed to be a popular work. It is not so 
much of the nature of a Commentary as a collection of ft'agmcnts and brief 
essays on various topics referred to in the Book of Job. It is chiefly 
valuable for its illustration of the religion of the time of Job, the arts and 
sciences, the manners and customs, etc." It lacks lucid arrangement, and 
furnishes comparatively little illustration of the difficulties of the text. 



PSALMS. 

383 ABBOT (George). Brief Notes. Being a pithie and clear 

opening of the Scope and Meaning of the Text, to the ca- 

pacitie of the Weakest. 4to. Lond., 1651. 5s. 

An experimental exposition by a Member of Parliament under the 

Commonwealth. Though not of the first order, many of his remarks are 

good. Abbot was nephew to the Archbishop of the same name. 



PSALMS. 123 

384 ALEXANDER (Joseph Addison, D. D., Professor of 

Theology, Princeton, U. S.) The Psalms Translated and 
Explained. 8vo. 8s. 6d. Edinb., Andrew Elliot. 18G4. 
S. 5s. 6d. 
Occupies a first place among expositions. It is a 

clear and judicious explanation of the text, and cannot 

be dispensed with. 

385 ALEXANDER (William Henkt). The Book of Praises. 

The Psalms, with Notes. Small 8vo. Lond., Jackson, 

Walford & Hodder. 1867. S. 2s. 6d. 
The Notes are mostly from other authors, and are selected with discre- 
tion. They do not appear to have been designed by their collector for use 
beyond his own family circle, and they were published after his death by 
his friends. We question the wisdom of the pubhcation. 

386 AUGUSTINE. Expositions. Translated, with Notes. Six 

vols., 8vo. Oxf., 1847. [In The Library of the Fathers, 
published by Messrs. J. Parker & Co., Oxf. and Lond.j 
£3 1,5s., or to subscribers £3 16s. 6d. 
As a Father he is beyond ordinary criticism, or we would venture to 
say that he is too frequently mystical, and confounds plain texts. No the- 
ological library is complete without this work, for there are grand thoughts 
in it like huge nuggets of Australian gold. 

387 BAKER (Richard, D. D.) The Psalms Evangelized. 8vo. 

1811. 2s. 6d. 
Very pious ; but if the work should ever disappear from literature its 
absence will not leave a very great gap. Bishop Home and Dr. Hawker 
between them more than cover the space. 

388 BARNES (Albert). Notes. Three vols., post 8vo. 13s. 

6d. Lond., Edlnb., and Glasgow, Blackie & Sons. 1868. 

Thoroughly good. Using these notes constantly, we 
are more and more struck with their value. For the 
general run of preachers this is probably the best com- 
mentary extant. 

389 BELLARMINE (Robert. Cardinal. 1542—1621.) A Com- 

mentary. Translated from the Latin by the Ven. John 

O'Sullivan, D. D. Small 4to. Lond., James Duffy. 1866. 

S.4s. 

Popish, but marvellously good for a Cardinal. He is frequently as 

evangelical as a Keformer. He follows the Vulgate text in this comment. 



124 PSALMS. 

390 BELLET (J. Q.) Short Meditations on the Psalms, chiefly 

in their Prophetic character. 3s. Lond., W. H. Broom. 

1871. 

Mere fragments, in a style which we do not admire, which aeema to he 

peculiar to certain brethren. Only the initiated can understand what such 

writers mean. 

'391 BINNIB (William, D. D.) The Psalms: Their History, 
Teachings, and Use. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., T. Nelson. 
1870. 

A highly valuable work. It is not an exposition, 
but can readily be used as such, for it possesses a good 
index to the passages treated of. Dr. Binnie reviews 
with great skiU and intense devotion the various sacred 
poems contained in the Book of Psalms, and gives the 
general run and character of each one. His work is un- 
like any other, and supplies a gi'eat desideratum. 

392 BONAR (Andrew A.) Christ and his Church in the 

Book of Psalms. Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d. Load., Nisbet. 
1859. 

Of the highest order of merit. The author does not 
strain the text, but gives ^its real meaning. His re- 
marks are always weighty, spiritual, and suggestive ; we 
only wish there were more of them. He has cultivated 
brevity. 

393 BOUCHIER (Barton, A. M.) Manna in the Heart ; or. Daily 

Comments on the Psalms, for the Use of Families. Two 
vols., Sm. 8vo. Lond., J. P. Shaw. 1856. S. 5s. 
Among the best books ever written for &mily reading. Evangelical, 
devotional, and ezpositoiy. Preachers will find good thought here. 

394 BURTON (John). The Book of Psalms in English Verse. 

Cr. 8vo. 6s. Lond., John Shaw & Co. 1871. 
The Psalms rhymed in a New Testament spirit : they are better in 
prose. 

395 BUSH (G.) A Commentary on the Book of Psalms. With 

a new literal version. 8vo. New York, 1838. 
Does not appear to have been reprinted in England. 



PSALMS. 125 

396 BYTHNER (VictOK. Died IBTO.) The Lyre of David; 
or, an Analysis of the Psalms, Critical and Practical ; to 
which is added a Hebrew and Chaldee Grammar. To 
which are added by the Translator a 'Praxis of the first 
eight Psalms. Translated by the Rev. Thomas Dee, A. 
B. 8vo. 1836. S. 7s. 6d. 

We agree with the statement found in the Preface of 

this work: "Nearly two centuries have passed away, 

since Bythner, uncertain of its reception, first committed 

his Ljrra to public light ; during which time, instead of 

sinking, it has advanced in estimation ; being admitted 

by all the learned to be the very best work on the 

Psalms in Hebrew. The number of Hebrew, radical 

words is 1867 ; of these, 1184 occur in the Psalms ; it 

follows then, that a thorough knowledge of the Psalms 

very nearly amounts to a thorough knowledge of the 

language, and that Bythner's Lyra, in being the best 

work on the Psalms, must be the best work on Hebrew 

in general." Our readers will scarcely need us to add 

that Bythner's work is only useful to those who study 

the Hebrew. 

39r CALVIN (JoHS). The Psalms of David and others, with 
Commentaries. Translated by Arthur Golding. Two 
vols., 4to. Lond., 1.571. 

398 



- A Commentary on the Psalms. Translated. Three 
vols., 8vo. Oxford, 1840. S. 7s. 

Calvin is. a tree whose " leaf also shall not wither ; " 
whatever he has written lives on, and is never out of 
- date, because he expounded the word without bias or 
partiality. 

399 CARTER (Chaklbs. Missionary to Ceylon). The Psalms 
newly translated from the Hebrew. 13 mo. 2s 6d' 
Lond., J. Snow. 1869. 

The emendations are carefully made by the translator, who has been 
for many years engaged upon the Singalese version. A helpful book. 



126 PSALMS, 

400 CATLEY(C.B., B.A.) The Psalms in Metre. [With Notes.] 

12ino. 6s. Loud., LoDgmans. 1860. 
We do not think mach of the metrical rendering, which often jar» on 
the ear. There are a tew good notes at the end. 

401 CHAMPNEY (H. N., Esq.) A Textual Commentary on the 

Psalms. Sq. 16mo. 3s. Lond., S. Bagster & Sons. 
1853. S. Is. 
Merely a collection of parallel texts. Uake one for yonrself. 

402 CHANDLER (Samotl, D. D.) See No. 384. 

403 CLAY (WiLLrAM Keatinge, B. D.) Expository Notes on 

the Prayer Book Version of the Psalms. Sm. Svo. Lond., 
John W. Parker. 1839. S. 3s. 6d. 
Commendable in its way, but not important. Most Of its matter is to 
be found elsewhere. 

404 COLEMAN (John Noble, M. A.) Psalterium Messianicum 

Dayidis Regis et Prophetse. A Revision of the Authorized 

Version, with Notes, original and selected ; vindicating the 

prophetic manifestations of Messiah in the Psalms, etc. 

Imp. 8vo. 12s. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1865, S. 5s. 

TJsefal for its quotations from the Fathers and ancient writers. The 

large type swells out a small quantity of material to a needless size, and 

so puts purchasers to an unnecessary expense. 

* 

405 CONANT (Thomas J.) The Psalms. The Common Version, 

revised for the American Bible Union. 4to. 1871. 
Lond., Trubner & Co. S; 4s. 
A trustworthy translation with a few notes. 

406 CONGLETON (Lord). The Psalms. A New Version, with 

Notes. Thick 13mo. Lond., James E. Hawkins. 1875. 

The translation is mainly that of Rogers (No. 465), and the Notes refer 
the Psalms to historic and prophetic subjects. We see no use whatever 
in this production. 

407 COWLES (Henkt, D. D.) The Psalms ; with Notes. Svo. 

New York, 1873. Worth about 5s. 

Always repays for consulting, though it does not 
contain much that is new, original, or profound. It 
might be reprinted in England, with the probability of 
a large sale. 



PSALMS. 137 

408 CRESSWELL (Daniel, D. D., P. R. S.) Psalma of David, 

according to the Book of Common Prayer ; with Notes. 
Sm. 8vo. Lond., Rivingtons. 1843. S. 2s. 

The explanatory notes are neither prolix nor commonplace, hnt show 
maSh clear insight. They are deservedly held in esteem. 

409 CRITICAL TRANSLATION (A) of the Psalms, in Metre. 

Cr. 8vo. 53. 6d. Lond., S. Bagster & Sons. 
The author has labored hard to arrive at the correct meaning of the 
Hebrew, and to versify it. The work is very carefully done, but few 
preachers can atford to spend their money on a book of this kind. 

410 DALLAS (A. E. C, M. A.) The Book of Psalms arranged 

in Daily Portions for Devotional Seading. Cr. 8vo. 3s. fid. 
Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1860. S. Is. 6d. 
A new arrangement : the old one is good enough for us. 

411 DARBY (J. N.i Practical reflections. Cr. 8vo. Lond., 

R. A. Allen. 1870. 
Too mystical for ordinary minds. If the author would writ« in plain 
English his readers would "probably discover that there is nothing very 
valuable in his remarks. 

413 DE BURGH (William, A.M.) Commentary ; Critical, Devo- 
tional, and Prophetical. Two vols., 8vo. 28s. Dublin, 
Hodges, Smith & Co. 1860. S. 12s. 6d. 
A second-advent interpreter ; and one of the best of his class. Highly 

esteemed by those who are enthusiastic upon prophetical subjects. 

413 DELITZSCH (Franz). Commentary on the Psalms. Three 

vols., 10s. 6d. each. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1871. S. 5a. 
each. 

Thoroughly learned, but wants unction. Not adapted for common 
readers, but scholars will prize it greatly. 

The Princeton Eeview says of it : " We commend this commentary as 
a valuable aid to preachers and exegetes in elucidating the Psalms." 

414 DICKSON (David'. Professor of Divinity in the University 

of Edinb. 1583—1663). A brief explanation of the 
Psalms. Three vols., 8vo. Lond., 1655. Reprinted in 
two vols., 13mo. Glasgow, 1834. 3s. to 6s. 

A rich volume, dropping fatness. Invaluable to the 

preacher. Having read and re-read it, we can speak of 

its holy savor and suggestiveness. We commend it with 

much fervor. 



128 PSALMS. 

415 DIMOCK (H.) Notes, Critical and Explanatory, on the 

Book of Psalms, etc. 4to. 1791. 38. 
The notes mainly concern the various readings, and exhibit consider- 
able learning ; but we do not think much of a homiletical kind can be got 
out of them. 

416 ■DUNWELL(F. H.,B. A.) Parochial Lectures on the Psalms, 

from the Fathers of the Primitive Churcli. 8vo. Lond., 
J. H. Parker. 1855. 3s. 6q. 
This author spiritualizes far too much. His metaphors are overdone. 

417 EDWARDS (Joseph, M. A.) Devotional Exposition. 8vo. 

Lond., 1850. Is. 6d. 
A paraphrase of no great value. Even Masters of Arts may taH. 

418 EDWARDS (T.) New Translation, vyith Notes, etc. 8vo. 

Lond., 1755. 
The -imter was an able man, but his book is of smaU worth. 

419 E WART (J., A M.) Lectures on the Psalms. Three vols., 

8vo. Lond., 1836. 5s. 
The author was a Presbyterian Minister of the time of the Pretender, 
and we suspect that he was a high and dry Moderate. His comments were 
g^ven at the public reading of the Scriptures, and although destitute of 
spirituality and Gospel clearness, they are not without a measure of origi- 
nality. 

420 EXTON (Richard BbudbnbilIi). Sixty Lectures on the 

Psalms, as appointed to be read in the Services of the 
Church of England. 8vo. Lond., 1847. 38. 
Very poor and prosy. We pity the hearer who sat out these sixty 
lectures. 

431 FENTON (Thomas, M. A.) Annotations on Job and Psalms, 
from several Commentators. 8vo. Lond., 1733. 3s. 
The Annotations are choice, but will be found in easily a'coessible works. 

433 FENWICK (George, B. D.) Thoughts on the Hebrew- 
Titles of the Psalms, etc. 8vo. Lond., 1749. 6s. 

433 The Psalter in its original form. . . with Arguments 

and Notes. [Anon.] 8vo. Lond., 1789. 3s. 
These two works are praiseworthy in design, but they are too fanci- 
ful. 

424 FORBES (Gbantille). The Voice of God in the Psalms. 
Cr. 8vo. 6s. 6d. Lond., Macmillan. S. 3s. 6d. 
Sermons by a Northamptonshire Eeotor of the Broad School. They do 
not strike us as being anything very wonderful j certainly " The Voice of 
God" is not remarkably audible in them. 



PSALMS. 139 

425 " FOUR FRIENDS." The Psalms of David Chronologically 
arranged, with Notes. By Four Friends. Cr. 8vo. 8s. 6d. 
Lend., Macmillan. 1867. 
Here the Paalms are thrust out of then' usual order, and treated after 
the manner of the Broad School of thought. We do not attach any great 
yalne to this production. With some persons perversity passes for pro- 
fundity, and if a man differs from everybody else they are persuaded that 
he must be an original genius : the " four friends " will stand high in the 
esteem of such critics. We neither believe in their chronology, their the- 
ology, nor their philology. 

436 FRENCH (Wiluam, D. D.) and SKINNER (George, M. A.) 

Translation, with Notes. 8vo. Lond., Parker. 1842. 2s. 6d. 
A version held in high esteem. Notes very short. 

437 FRY (John, B. A.) A Translation and Exposition of the 

Psalms ; on the principles adopted la the posthumous 
work of Bishop Horsley ; viz., that those sacred oracles 
have for the most part an immediate reference to Christ 
and to Ills first and second advents. 8vo. Lond., Hamil- 
ton, Adams & Co. 1842. 5s. 
Fry follows Bishop Horsley and looks much to the second advent. Tlie 
work is not fair either as a translation, or as an exposition. It is useful in 
its own direction, as showing how a peculiar tlieory has been supported 
by an able man ; but it must not be implicitly relied upon. 

438 FYSH (Frederic, M. A.) A Lyrical, Literal Version [with 

Notes.] Two vols., 12mo. Lond., Seeleys. 185i; 3s. 6d. 
A valuable literal version. Notes scant, but scholarly. 

429 GEDDES (Alexander, LL. D. A Roman Catholic Divine. 

1737 — 1802). New Translation, with Various Readings 
and Notes. 8vo. Lond., 1807. 3s. 
This is said to be " a careful rendering, aiming at the primary meaning 
of the psalmists." Dr. Henderson speaks of Geddes as flagrantly disfigur- 
ing his Biblical labors with profanity. He was a singular mixture of 
Somanist and free-thinker. 

430 GOOD (John Mason, M. D., F. R. S.) Historical Outline 

of the Book of Psalms. Edited by the Rev. John Mason 
Neale, B. A. Lond., W. H. Dalton. 1843. 3s. 

This is not a commentary, but may be regarded as 

an introduction to the work next mentioned, by the 

same author. Historical light is frequently the very 

best which can be cast upon a passage, and Dr. Good 

6* 



130 PSALMS. 

has known how to apply it. He may sometimes be 
thought fanciful, but he is never really speculative, and 
he almost always says something worth noting. 

431 GOOD (J. M.) The Book of Psalms ; a New Translation, 

with Notes. Edited by the Eev. E. Henderson, P. D. 
8vo. Lond.-, Seeleys. 1854. 4s. 

Dr. Good was a medical gentleman with a large prac- 
tice, and yet he managed to produce this learned volume. 
" I save every quarter of an hour for it," said he, " for 
my heart is in it." He was a man of great attainments 
and genuine piety. The progress made in Hebrew 
philology and exegesis since his day has been great ; but 
his work has not been altogether superseded. It is of a 
high class, from a literary point of view, but must not 
be blindly followed. 

432 GKEEN (William^ M. A.) A Translation, with Notes. 

8vo. 1763. 33. 
A translation with meagre notes. 

433 HAMMOND (Henrt, D. D. 1605—1660). Paraphrase and 

Annotations. Folio. 1659. 7b. 6d. Two vols. 8vo. 

Oxford, 1850. S. 6s. 
Much esteemed, and deservedly so. Hammond's weighty tome is some- 
what dry, and many of bis remarks are rather those of a linguist than of a 
divine, but he touches on many matters which others omit, and is, upon 
the whole, an expositor of singular merit. 

434 HAPSTONE (Dalman, M. A.) The Psalms in appropri- 

ate Metres ; a strictly literal Translation, with Notes. 8to. 
7s. 6d. Edinb., Oliphant. 1867. 
We prefer our own version, and do not tliink many of Mr. Hapstone's 
stanzas successful as attempts at poetry. 

435 HEXGSTENBERG (E. W., D. D.) Commentary. Three 

vols., 8vo. £1 13s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1845^. S. 15s. 
A masterly work ; but about as dry as Gideon's unwetted fleece. 

436 HILLEB (0. Prescott. Minister of the New Jerusalem 

Church, Cross Street, London.) Notes on the Psalms [I. — 
LXXVII.] Explanatory of their Spiritual Sense. 8vo. 
Lond., James Spiers. 1869. S. 4s. 
Swedenborglan, and frequently absurd. The author confounds rather 
than expounds. 



PSALMS. 131 

437 HORNE (Gbokge, D. D. Bishop of Norwicli. 1730—1792.) 

Commentary. [Numerous editions : among others a Glas- 
gow edition, three vols., 12mo., with Introductory Essay 
by. Ed ward Irving, M. A., whicli is one of Irving's best 
efforts. Tegg's edition. One vol., 9vo. 6s.] S. 33. 

It has been said that this author had no qualification 
ior a commentator except piety. This is not true, for 
he had natural poetry in his soul ; and even if it were 
true, his work would go far to show how abundantly 
piety compensates for other deficiencies. He is among 
the best of our English writers on tliis part of Scripture, 
and certainly one of the most popular. 

438 HORSLEY (Samuel. Bishop of Norwich). The Book of 

Psalms. With Notes Explanatory and Critical. 8vo. 
Lend., 1833. 4s. 

Vigoroas writing, with a propensity to indulge in new readings, and a 
persistent twist in one direction. The notes show the hand of a mas- 
ter, and have exerted much influence in directing thoughtful minds to the 
subject of the Second Advent, as foreshadowed in the Old Testament, but 
they must be used with extreme caution. 

439 JEBB (John). Literal Translation ; with Dissertations on 

the word Selah, and on the Authorship, Order, Titles, and 
Poetry of the Psalms. Two vols., 8vo. Lond , Long- 
mans. 1846. 4s. 

Jebb takes for his motto in translating, that saying of Hooker : " I hold 
it for an infallible rule in expositions of sacred Scripture, that where a 
literal construction will stand, the farthest from the letter is commonly the 
worst." His notes are scant, but his dissertations in the second volume 
are most admirable. 

440 JENNINGS (A. C, B. A.) and LOWE (W. H., M. A.) The 

Psalms, with Introductions and Critical Notes. Books III. 
and IV. [Psalms LXXIIl. to CVI.] Cr. 8vo. 63. Lond.. 
Macmillan & Co. 1874. 

Learned, but more occupied with mere verbal criticisms than with any 
useful suggestions which could be turned to account by a preacher. 

441 JONES (Joseph, M. A.) The Psalms ; with Reflections. 

12mo. Lond., 1846. Is. to 3b. 
Pious, but poor. 



132 PSALMS. 

443 KAT (William, D. D.) The Psalms translated from the 
Hebrew. With Notes, chiefly Exegetical. 8vo. 13s. 6d. 
Loud., Rivingtons. 1871. 

A refreshing book ; the notes being out of the ordi- 
nary ran, and casting much light on many passages. 
To thoroughly appreciate this author one should be a 
Hebrew scholar. 

443 KEBLE (Johk, M. A. Author of " The CSiristian Tear." 

1793—1869). The Psalter, in English Verse. Fcap. Svo. 
63. Lond., Parker & Co. 1869. 
A poeVs version of a grand series of poems. 

444 LANQE'S COMMENTARY. Edited by Dr. P. SchafiT. Imp. 

8vo. 31s. Subscribers 15s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1873. 
Comparatively feeble. Not up to the usual standard of this admirable 
series. Still, it is among the best of modern oommentaries. 

445 LINTON (Henry, M. A.) The Psalms of David and Solo- 

mon explained. F'cap., Svo. 3s. Lond.,Bagsters. 1871. 
A small afEiur in all ways. 

446 LITTHER (Martin). A Manual of the Book of Psalms ; or 

the subject-contents of all the Psalms. Translated by 
Rev. Henry Cole. Svo. Lond., 1833. [Also a volume of 
" The Christian's Family Library." 13mo. Lond., See- 
leys.] 2s. 
Fragmentary, a mere table of contents, but truly Lutheran. 

447 MANT (Richard, D. D. Bishop of Down. 1776—1849). 

The Book of Psalms in an English Metrical Version, 
with Notes. Svo. Oxf., 1824. 3s. 

A bold version, with important notes. In this in- 
stance we confess that there may be real poetry in a 
metrical version, and though the flame does not in each 
composition burn with equal brilliance, yet in some 
verses it is the true poetic fire. Mant is no mean writer. 

448 MARSH (Edward Garrard, M. A.) The Book of Psalms 

translated into English verse, with Notes. Svo. Lond., 
1833. 3s. 6d. 
Contains nothing of any cousequence to an expositor, though the verse 
is considerably above the average of such productions. 



PSALMS. 133 

449 MERRICK (Jambs, M. A. 1720— 1709). The Psalms Para- 

phrased in English verse. 12mo. Reading, 1766. Is. 6d. 
Annotations on the Psalms. 4to. Reading, 1778. Ss. 

These two trorks are scarce. They are rather more suited for the 
admirers of poetry than for ministers of the Word. It is said that some 
of the notes are hy Arohhishop Seeker, and that Lowth also aided in the 
exposition ; bat the oomHned result is of no great value to the preacher. 

450 MORISON (John, D. D.) Exposition of the Book of 

Psalms, explanatory, critical, and devotional. Two vols., 
8vo. 1839. Three vols., 8vo. 1832. Ss. to 10s. 

The first volume is the best. There is nothing very 
original, but it is an instructive exposition, and ought to 
be better known. 

451 MUDGE (Zachaky. Prebendary of Exeter. Died 1760). 

An Essay towards a New English Version. 4to. Lond., 
1744. 3a. 

Elegant in taste rather than sound in scholarship. Mudge was highly 
esteemed hy Dr. Johnson, and he was no doubt a very worthy man ; but 
his exposition can be dispensed with. 

452 MURPHY (James G., LL. D.) A Critical and Exegetical 

Comment. Svo, 153. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1875. 

This may be called a volume of compressed thought. 
The author has aimed at neither being too long nor too 
short. He has succeeded in producing a very useful 
and usable work, with many points of unusual value. 
Dr. Murphy is well known as an accomplished Hebraist 
and a lucid expositor. We have already noticed his 
works on Genesis (135) and Exodus (177.) 

453 NEALE (John Mason, D, D.) and (LITTLEDALE, R. F., 

LL. D.) A Commentary, from Primitive and Mediaeval 
Writers. Four vols., post Svo. 10s. 6d. each. Lond., 
Masters & Co. 1860-74, 

Unique, and to very high churchmen most precious. We admire the 
learning and research; but the conceits, the twistings, and allegorical 
interpretations surpass conception. As a collection of medisval mysticisms 
it is unrivalled. 



134 PSALMS. 

454 NICHOLSON (Wilmam. Bishop of Gloucester. Died 

1671). David's Harp Strung and Tuned ; or An Easie Analy- 
sis of the Whole Book of Psalms. Folio. Lond., 1663. 31s. 
" Wholly practical and explanatory. In his explications the author 
Bteera between the two extremes of literal and spiritual interpretation. Dr. 
Adam Clark has inserted Bishop Nicholson's Analysis in his commentary 
on the Fsalms, omitting his prayers." — Home. This book fetches a high 
price when complete, and we cannot advise a poor man to lay out so much 
money upon it, good as it is. 

455 NaYES (G. R., D. D.) A New Translation, with Notes. 

12iuo. Boston, U. S., 1831 and 1846. 2s. 6d. to 4s. 
Dr. Noyes was the Hebrew Professor in Harvard University, ffis In- 
troduction is full of information ; the new translation is useful, and the 
notes are brief and pertinent. 

456 OXEN DEN (ASHTON, D. D. Bishop of Montreal). A Sim- 

ple Exposition. Two vols., Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. each. Lond., 
Hatcliards. 
For reading at family prayers. Alas, poor families ! Ye have need of 
patience. 

457 PEROWNE (J. J. Stewakt, B. D., Canon Res. of IJan- 

daff). The Book of Psalms ; a New Translation, with 
Introductions and Notes. 8vo. Vol. I. ISs. Vol. II. 16a. 
[Abridged edition for Schools and Private Students. Cr. 
8vo. 10s. 6d.] Lond., George Bell & Sons. 1864-68. 

A masterpiece of extraordinai-y learning and critical 
skill, although not altogether what we would desire. 
The " Saturday Review " said : — " Mr. Perowne is proba- 
bly as capable as any one in England of doing all that 
Hebrew scholarship can do. towards a better knowledge 
of the Psalms. The learning which he has brought 
together gives a value of its own to his book, and makes 
it an important contribution to a department of Biblical 
scholarship in which we are at present rather poorly 
furnished." 

458 PIERCE (Sam OEi, Eylks). The Book of Psalms. Two vols., 

8vo. 1817. Very scarce. 343. 
This author is held in high esteem for the " sound and savory " char- 
acter 0^ his works. On the Psalms ho writes to comfort and edification. 
The works is regarded as superexcellent by our extra-calvinistic friends, 
but we do not think it quite worth the fancy price which ia now asked. 



PSALMS. 135 

459 PHILLIPS (Gboroe, B. D.) The Psalms in Hebrew ; with 

Commentary. Two vols., 8vo. 31s. Lond., J. W. Par- 
ker, and Williams & Norgatei. 1846. S. 7s. 
This commentary will bo vnlued by Hebrew scholars ; but it is beyond 
the general attainments of those for whom this Index is compiled. 

460 PLAIN COMMENTARY (A) on the Book of Psalms (P. 

B. Version), chiefly grounded on the Fathers. Two vols., 
F'cap 8vo. 10s. 6d. Oxf. & Lond. Parker. 1859. S. 4s. 
6d. 

Of the high Church school, and rather strained in 

places, but abounding in sweet spiritual thoughts. We 

have read it with pleasure and profit, though with some 

caution. 

461 PLUMER (Wn.LiAM S., D. D., LL. D.) Studies in the Book 

of Psalms. Imp.Svo. 28s. Edinb., A. & C. Black. 1867. 
S. 18s. 
A hnge volume, compiled from such works as were accessible to the 
author in the TJuited States. Full of instructive comment, but not very 
original, or remarkably learned. 

463 PBACTICAL ILLUSTRATION (A) of the Book of Psalms; 
by the Author of the Family Commentary on the New 
Testament. [? Mrs. Thomson.] Two vols. Svo. York, 
1826. 23. to 3s. 
For families. Consisting of remiirks which would occur to any moth- 
erly person. 

463 PRIDHAM (Arthur). Notes and Reflections on the Book 

of Psalms. Cr. Svo. Ss. 6d. Lond., James Nisbet & (b. 
1869. S. 43. 
Spiritual reflections of an excellent kind, but not very striking. 

464 REMARKS upon the Psalms as Prophetic of the Messiah. 

Svo. Lond., 1843. 2s. 
Mere outlines : of no consequence. 

465 ROGERS (J., M. A.) The Book of Psalms in Hebrew, met- 

rically arranged ; with Selections from the various Headings 
of Kennicott and De Rossi, and from the Ancient Versions. 
Two vols., 12mo. Oxf., 1833. 2s. 6d. to 4s. 
For the Hebrew scholar only. 

466 ROSENMULLER (Ernest, F. C. 1768—1835). Annota- 

tions on the Messianic Psalms. Translated. 12mo. 7s. 
6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1841. 
It may be altogether our own fault, but we cannot make any use of this 



136 PSALMS. 

volume. No donbt these scholastic notes have a valae ; hnt commentaries 
upon inspired Scripture written in the same style as one might write apon 
Ovid or Horace are not to our taste. Gesenius praises this work for its 
criticisms. We wish there had been a little religion in it, but perhaps if 
there had been it would have been the religion of neology. 

467 RTLAND (R. H.., M. A.) The Psalms restored, to Messiah. 

Sm. 8vo. 6s. Lond., Nisbet. 1853. S. 2s. 6d. 
Written with an admirable design. Good, but not very able. The 
subject still demands the pen of a master. ~~ 

468 SHERIFPE (Mrs.) Practical Reflections. Two vols., 12mo. 

Lond., 1820. 2s. 
We hope they benefited the printer ; they will not help the reader 
much. 

469 SPtJRGEON (Charles Haddon). The Treasury of David : 

containing an Original Exposition of the Book of Psalms; 

a collection of Illustrative Extracts from the whole range 

of literature ; a Series of Homiletical Hints upon almost 

every verse ; and Lists of Writers upon each Psalm. [In 

progress.] Vol. I. containing Psalms I. — XXVI. ; Vol. II. 

PsB. XXVII.— LII. ; Vol. III. Pss. LIII.— LXXVIIL ; Vol. 

IV. Pss. LXXIX.— cm. 8s. each. Lond., Passmore & 

Alabaster. 1870, etc. 

To be completed in six volumes, if God permit. Keviewers have 

handled this book with remarkable kindness, and the public have endorsed 

their judgment by largely purchasing the volumes already issued. It 

would not become us to say more. 

470 STREET (Stephen. M. A.) A New Literal Version ; with 

a Preface and Notes. Two vols., 8vo. Lond., 1790. 3i. 
One hardly desires a rigidly literal translation of a poetic book, for the 
beauty and spirit are lost. The notes are purely critical and are super- 
seded by later works. 

471 THOLTJCK (AtrousTUS P., D. D., Ph. D.) A Translation and 

Commentary. Translated from the German by J. Isidor 
Mombert. 8vo. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1856. S. 5s. 6d. 
Tholuck is one of the most spiritual of German interpreters. Though 
we cannot say that this is equal to some others of liis works, yet he is a 
great writer, and always deserves attention. 

472 THRUPP (Joseph Francis, M. A.) An Introduction to the 

Study and Use of the Psalms. Two vols., 8vo. 21s. 
Lond. and Camb., Macmillan & Co. 1860. S. 13s. 
Though not the best, it is still a learned and helpful work of its class. 



PSALMS. 137 

473 TUCKER (William Hill, M. A.) The Psalms [P. B. Ver- 

sion], with Notes, showing their Prophetic and Christian 
Character. Post 8vo. 6s. Lond., 1840. S. 2s. 6d. 
The writer refers all the Psalms to Christ, and writes many weighty 
things, but we cannot place him in the front rank among expositors. 

474 WAKE (W. B.) A Literal Version of the Psalms into Mod- 

em Language, according to the Liturgy translation. Two 
vols., Cr. 8vo. Bath. 1793. 3a. 
Think of a translation. The author was Wake, but not awake, or ha 
would never have wasted so much good paper. 

475 WALFORD (William. Late Classical and Hebrew Tutor 

at Homerton). A New Translation, with Notes, Explana- 
tory and Critical. 8vo. Lond., 1837. 2s. 3d. to 3s. 
Contains some useful notes, good, but not specially remarkable. 

476 WEISS (Bbnj. Missionary to the Jews, A.Igiers). A New 

Translation, Exposition, and Chronological Arrangement 
of the Book of Psalms, with Critical Notes. 8vo. Edinb., 
W. Oliphant & Co. 1852. S. 2s. 6d. 
The Psalms are arranged in a new order, and are very hard to find. 

The author is dogmatic to the last degree. Our estimate of his work is 

not so high as his own. 

477 WILCOCKS (Thomas, A. M. Puritan. 1549—1608). A 

very godly and learned exposition upon the whole Book of 
Psalms. [Works. Folio.] See No. 337. 
Short spiritual remarks, followed by many doctrinal inferences, calcu- 
lated to suggest topics to preachers. 

478 WILSON (W., D. D.) The Psalms ; with an Exposition, 

Typical and Prophetical, of the Christian Dispensation. 
Two vols. 8vo. 16a. Lond., Nisbet. 1860. S. 5s. 

We have consulted Wilson with advantage and often 

quoted from him in the " Treasury of David." He is a 

clear, gospel Expositor, and has written much that is 

weighty and precious. 

479 WOODFORD (Samdel). A Paraphrase. 4to. Lond., 1667. 3b.. 
Poor rhymes ; though the prefkce says of the author — 

" At length the skilful way you found. 
With a true ear judg'd the melodious sound, 
And with a nimble hand run descant on the Hebrew ground." 
It wonld seem from this that the poem scrambles on all-fours, and we 
think it does. 



138 PSALMS. 

480 WRIGHT (Abraham). A Practical Commentary, wherein 

the Text of every Psalme is Practically espoanded, ac- 
cording to tlie Doctrine of the Catholick Churcli, in a way 
not usually trod by Commentators ; and wholly applyed to 
the Life and Salvation of Christians. Very thin folio. 1(501. 
Wrigiit selects the more remarkable verses, and comments upon them 
in a deeply spiritual, quaint, nnd suggestive manner. His work is ex- 
tremely rare. 

481 ZILLWOOD (J. 0.) The Psalms, arranged in Parallelisms, 

with Notes, chiefly from Bishops Home and Horsley. 
Two vols., 8vo. Lond., 1855. 3s. 
The student had hetter get Home and Horsley for himself, and he vriU 
have no need of this. 



CONSIDERABLE POKTIONS OP THE PSALMS. 

483 BAKER (Sm Richasd. 1568—1645). Meditations and 
Disquisitions on the First, ^nd Seven Penitential Psalms, 
viz. the 6, 32,38,51, 103, 130, & 143. 4to. Lond., 1640. 5s. 
Meditations and Disquisitions on the Seven Consolitarie 
Psalms, viz., the 23, 27, 30, 34, 84, 103, and 116. 4to. 
Lond., 1640. 5s. 

rare Sir Richard Baker ! Knight of the flowing 
pen. His "Meditations and Disquisitions" are alto- 
gether marrow and fatness. We have often tried to 
qnote from him and have found ourselves so embarrassed 
with riches that we have been inclined to copy the whole 
book. Why it has not been reprinted, and made to 
pass through fifty editions, we cannot tell. Poor man, - 
he became a surety and smarted, dying in poverty in the 
Fleet. Were there any Christians alive in those days ? 

483 BARKER (Frederick, M. A.) Thirty-six Psalms ; with 

Commentary and Prayer, for use in families. Cr. 8vo. 

Jackson, 1854. Is. 6d. 

What platitudes people will write for the use of families. Families will 

best use these commentaries and prayers by lining their cake tins with 

them. 



PSALMS. 130 

484 BERTRAM (R. A.) The Imprecatory Psalms. Six Lectures. 
]2mo. Lond., Elliot Stock. 1867. S. Is. 6d. 
Contains some very sensible remarks upon a subject which no doubt 
bewilders certain of the weaker sort, 

483 BOWMAN (Hkttt). Studies in the Psalms. 13mo. Lond., 
The Book Society, and John Snow & Co. 1869. 
Outlines of teaching upon a few Psalms. The authoress begs that these 
" Studies " may not in any sense be considered as a commentary : we do 
not so consider tbera. 

486 BOYS (John, D. D. Dean of Canterbury. 1571—1635). 

Workes. Folio, 1629. An Exposition of the Proper 
Psalms used in our English Liturgy. (See under New 
Testament.) 12s. 

One of the richest of writers. From his golden pen 

flows condensed wisdom. Many of his sentences are 

worthy to be quoted as gems of the Christian classics. 

487 COPE (Srn Anthony. Chamberlain to Queen Catherine 

Parr). Meditations oirTwenty Select Psalms. Reprinted 
from the edition of 1547. Small square 8vo. Lond., 
John Ollivier. 1848. 2s 6d. 
More carious than valuable. The style is scholastic and pointless. 

488 DIDHAM (R. Cbnningham, M. A.) I.— XXXVI.— New- 

Translation : made by means of Arabic Lexicons, Syriac 
New Testament Words, the Ancient Versions, Bishop 
Lowtli's Parallelisms, and Parallel Places, whereby the 
Scriptural Messianic Canon that our Lord Christ is the 
Key to the Psalm is upheld, etc. 8vo. 15s. Lond., 
Williams & Norgate. 1870. S. Is. 9d. 
Principally consists of denunciations of other writera. As the price has 

descended from ISs. to Is. 9d. for new copies, the verdict of the public is 

pretty definite. 

489 LUTHER (M.^-RTIn). A Commentary on Psalma I.— XI. ; 

and on Psalm LI., in Vol. 3 ; on Psalms XII. — XXII, and 
on Psalm II. in Vol. 4, of Select Works of Luther. Trans- 
lated by Rev. H. Cole. [Four vols. 8vo. Lond., 1824. 

183.] 

A Commentary on the Psalms, commonly called the 
Psalms of Degrees [CXX.—CXXXIV]. 8vo. Lewes, 1823. 
Also a black letter 4to., 1577, and other editions of this 
work. 
Luther needs no trumpeter. 



140 THE PENITENTIAL PSALMS. 

490 PITMAN (J. R., M. A.) A Course of Sermons on some of 

the Chief Subjects in the Book of Psalms ; abridged from 
eminent divines of tlie Established Church. 8vo. Lond., 
Longmans. 1846. 3s. 
We have seldom obtained much from these sermons. A far better 

selection might have been made ; at the same time, some of the discouraes 

are admirable. 

491 BOLLOCK (Robert. 1555—1598). An Exposition upon 

some select Psalms. 13mo. 1600. 
bollock's vorks are rare. He wrote in Latin, and his language is made 
more dull than need be by the translator. All his writings are masterly. 

493 STRIGELLIUS (Victorinus. 1534—1569). Part of the 
Harmony of King David's Harp. Translated by B. Bobin- 
Gon. [In four parts.] 4to. 1583 to 1596. 
Tills volume the expositor is not at all likely to see, and there is there- 
fore, the less need tor us to speak of it. Strigellius was the friend of 
Luther and Melancthon, and a man of sound sense and vast learning. 

493 WILUAiaS (Isaac, B. D.) The Psalms interpreted of 
Christ. [Vol. I., Psalms L^XXVL] Thick 13mo. Lond., 
Rivingtons. 1864. S. 3s. 

The writer is of the High Church school, hut he is 
Tery spiritual and deep, and we seldom turn to him with- 
out profit. 



THE PENITENTIAL PSALMS. 

[The Penitential Psalms are seven in number. Psalms 6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 
180, and 143. For 102 some substitute 25.] 

494 BAKER (Sir B.) See No. 483. 

495 DONNE (John. 1573—1631). Sermons on the Penitential 

Psalms. In Vols. II. and III. of his Works. [Six vols., 
8vo., £3. 1839.] 

A right royal writer, whose every line is a pearl. 

496 FISHER (John. 1459—1535). Fruytf ul saynges of Danid. 

Black Letter. 4to., 1509 ; 8vo., 1555. Reprinted in 13mo., 
1714. 5s. 
Piy and tedious : in the stiff antique stylo. 



SEPAKATE PSALMS. 141 

497 HATWARD (Sir John, LL. D. Died 1627). David's 

Tears. [On VI., XXXII., CXXX. only.] 4to., 1623 ; 12mo., 
1649. 3s. to 5s. 
After the Puritanic metliod : full of point and pith. 

498 OXEN DEN (Charles). Sermons on tlie Seven Penitential 

Psalms, preached during Lent. 13mo. 1838. Is. 6d. 
To listen to these sermons must have afforded a suitable Lenten pen- 
ance to those who went to church to hear them. There their use began and 
ended. 

499 SYMSON (Archibald). A Sacred Septenarie ; or a Godly 

and Fruitf ull Exposition on the Seven Psalmes of Bepent- 
ance. 4to. 1638. 5s. to 7s. 

A marrowy author, full of instruction. 



SEPAEATE PSALMS. 

[The following worts are arranged according to the order of the Psalms, to 
assist reference. We have not attempted to include all writers in this 
list.] 

500 Psalm I.— SMITH-(Samuel. 1584—1665). David's Blessed 

Man. Ninth edition, 18mo. 1685. Is. 6d. to 3s. Re- 
printed in Nichol's Commentaries, vfith Pierson (No. 528) ; 
and Gouge (No. 561). 
Very popular in its day, and worthily so. 

501 I.— STONH AM (Matthew). A Treatise on the First Psalme. 

4to. laiO. 
Somewhat dry, scholastic and out of date ; bnt still an interesting and 
instructive piece of old divinity. 

503 II., XLV., ex.— HARPUR (George, B. A.) Christ in the 
Psalms. A Series of Discourses. Cr. 8vo. 6s. Lond., 
Wertheim & Co.. 1863. S. 3s. 
Discourses of a high order as to ability, but the historico-prophetdc 

interpretations here given do not commend themselves to us. 

503 II.— PITCAIRN (David). Zion's King. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 
Lond., J. H. Jackson. 1851. S. 3s. 6d. 
This author does not err on the side of conciseness. His book is a 
meritorious effort, but we have found it somewhat heavy reading. 



143 SEPARATE PSALMS. 

504 IV., XLII., LI., LXIII.— HORTON (Thomas, D. D. Died 

1673). CUioce and Practical Expositions. Folio. 1675. 

5s. to 7s. 
A marvellous homiletical exposition. Horton's dis- 
courses are very full of divisions, but then he always 
has plenty of solid matter to divide. Ministers will 
find teeming suggestions here. 

505 XV.— CARTWRIGHT (Christopheu). Commentary. 4to. 

1658. 7s. 6d. 
A learned and weighty work ; not readily met with. 

506 XV.— DOWNAME (Gbosqe, D. D.) Lectures. 4to. 1604. 

6s. 6d. 
Lectures by one of the race of giant divines. 

507 XV.— TUENBULL (Richakd). Four Sermons on Psalm 

XV. 4to. 1606. Forming last part of volume on James 
and Jude. 9s. to 14s. 
By a popular and ediljring preacher of theolden times. 

508 XVI.— DALE (Thomas, M. A. Canon of St. Paul's). The 

Golden Psalm. 12mo. 1847. S. 2s. to 3s. 
Oood, simple discourses ; the headings might suggest a couree of ser- 



509 XVI.— FRAME (James). Christ in Gethsemane. Cr. 8vo. 

1858. S. 2s. 
A sterling, well-intentioned and well-ezecnted comment. The text 
has to be a little twisted to suit the theoiy of the interpreter, hut we do not 
suppose that Mr. Frame ia conscious of it. He is one of the best of mod- 
em discoursers upon the Psalms. 

510 XVIII.— BROWN (John, D.D.) The Sufferings and Glories 

of the Messiah. 8vo. Edinb., 1853. 

Like all Dr. Brown's productions, this is a work of 
the highest order. Clear, full, and, in the best manner, 
exegetical. 

511 XIX.— REEVE (J. W.) Lectures on the Nineteenth 

Psalm. Cr. 8vo. 5s. 1863. S. 2b. 3d. 

By one of the ablest preachers among the Evangeli- 
cal Episcopalians. Scriptural, thouglitful, and original 



SEPAEATE PSALMS. 143 

513 XIX.— RICHARDSON (J. Wilberpobcb). Illustrations of 
the Nineteenth Psalm. . Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., John 
Snow & Co. 1870. S. 38. 
Sound in doctrine, but verbose and oommon-place. 

513 XX., verses 1— 6.— BOWND (Nicholas, D. D.) Medicines 

for the Plague [Twenty-one Sermons]. 4to. 1604. 5s. 6d. 
Sacy, quaint, extremely rare. 

514 XXII.— FRAME (James). The Song of the Cross. Cr. Svo. 

5s. Lond., S. W. Partridge & Co. 1872. S. 3s. 6d. 
This is valuable, as Mr. Frame's books generally are. 

515 XXII.— STEVENSON (John, D. D., Hon. Canon of Canter- 

bury.) Christ on the Cross : An Exposition of the Twenty- 
second Psalm. Post 8vo. 5s. Lond., Bagsters. S. Is. 6d. 
The best of Dr. Stevenson's books. Exceedingly precious in its un- 
veiling of the Eedeemer's sorrows. Wo have derived personal spiritual 
benefit from the perusal of this gracious cxpositiou, and are unable to 
judge it critically. 

516 XXIII.— STEVENSON (John, D. D., Hon. Canon of Canter- 

bury). The Lord our Shepherd : An Exposition of the 
Twenty-third Psalm. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Bagsters. 
Too wire-drawn, but it is golden wire. 

517 XXIII.— BAKER (Sir R.) See No. 482. 

518 XXIII.— DALE (Thomas, M. A.) The Good Shepherd and 

the Chosen Flock. ]2mo. 1847. S. 2s. 6d. 
Somewhat ordinary evangelical discourses. 

519 XXIII.. LXIL, LXXIII.—LXXVII.— HOOPER (John, Bishop 

and Martyr). Certain Comfortable Expositions. [In Parker 
Society's edition of Hooper's Works.] 
The cramped style and antiquated malter repel the reader. 

530 XXIII.— MILLER (Andbew). Meditations on Twenty-third 

and Eighty-fourth Psalms. 12mo. Lond., G. Morrish. 
Discursive, but devout ; more useful to the heart than the head^ 

531 XXIII.— PATON (James, B. A.) The Children's Psalm: 

Twelve Meditations and Twelve Spiritual Songs. 13mo. 
Lond., Passmore & Alabaster. 1870. S. Is. 6d. 
Worthy of much commendation. It is unfortunate that the title leads 
the reader to expect a book for children, whereas the author intended to 
edify the childi'en of God of an older growth. 

523 XXIII.— SEDGWICK (Obadiah, B. D.) The Shepherd of 
Israel. 4to. 1658. 7s. 6d. to 10s. 6d. 
Sedgwick was one of the most eminent preachers of the time of the 
Commonwealth. His commenting is solid and lively. 



144 "SEPABATE PSALMS. 

523 XXIII.— SMITH (SAMnELl. The Chiefe Sliepheard ; or An 

Exposition on ye XXIII Psalme. 18mo. 1625. 
All the writings of Samuel Smith are good, bat not so full of memor- 
able sentences and pithy sayings as certain others of their date. 

524 XXIII.— STOUGHTON (John, D. D.) The Song of Christ's 

Flock. 13mo. 5s. Lond., 1860. S. 3s. 
Devout practical meditations, but -we don't see bow a flock can sing, 

525 XXIII.— THORNTON (J., of Billericay). The Shepherd of 

Israel. 13mo. 1836. 
We need no longer wonder how spiders make such long threads with 
such little material, for here is an equally amazing instance of spinning. 
Flentifnl quotations of Scripture, aqd venerable anecodotes are here used 
as BubstituteB for thought, not as aids to it. 

536 XXV.— HALKET (Lady Anne. 1632—1699). Meditations. 

8vo. Edinb., 1778. Is. 6d. 
This lady was eminent for medicine as well as theology ; she left 
twenty-one volumes : this and another book of meditations appear to be 
all that have been reprinted. 

537 XXV.— MOSSOM (Robert, Bishop of Londonderry. Died 

1679). The Preacher's Tripartite, contains Divine Medi- 
tations upon Psalm XXV. Folio. 1657. 3s. 6d. to 5s. 

Thoroughly devotional, eminently consolatory, and 

deeply experimental. Mossom is a fruitful writer. 

528 XXVII., LXXXIV., LXXX:V., LXXXVII. — PIERSON 

(Thomas, M. A. 1570 — 1688). Excellent Enconrage- 
ments against Afflictions. 4to. 1647. 5b. [Reprinted 
in Nichol's Commentaries, with Smith, No. 500; and 
Gouge, No. 561J. 
Pierson was not the richest or most overflowing of the old divines, but 
yet one who stood in the fi'ont rank. 

529 XXXII.— BINGHAM (Chaklbs H., B. A.) Lectures. Post 

8vo. 1836. 2s. 
Tame sermons. Faultlessly feeble. Good, but no good. 

530 XXXIL— IiEIGHTON (Robeut, Archbishop of Glasgow. 

1611—1684). 
In some editions of Leighton's collected works will 
be found choice meditations on this Psalm, and also on 
Psalms IV. and CXXX. Everything that fell from his 
pen is worth its weight in diamonds. 



SEPAEATE PSALMS. 145 

531 XXXII.— TAYLOR (Thomas, D. D.) David's Learning, or 

Way to True Happiness. 4to. 1617. 7b. Also in his 

Wor^. Folio. 1660. 
On account of Taylor's great inowledge of the Scriptures, he was com- 
monly called " the illuminated Doctor." Puller oalls-him " a grave divine 
a paiuftil preacher, and a profitable writer." He is one of the richest in 
matter of all the Puritans. 

532 XXXII.— REEVE (J. W., M. A.) Lectures. Cr.Svo. 3s. 6d. 

Lond., Nisbet. 1859. S. 3s. 
Orthodox, spiritual, and suggestive lectures, by an evangelical deigy- 
man. 

533 XXXII.— WILLARD (Samuel). The Truly Blessed Man. 

8vo. Boston, N. E. Bis. 6d. Rare. 
One of the first books printed in the United States. An old-fashioned 
exposition. The price la caused by its rarity rather than its value. 

534 XL.— FRAME (James). Christ and his Work. Cr. 8vo. 6s. 

Lond., Snow & Co. 1869. S. 2s. 6d. 
Well done. Though differing from the author at times, wo are grate- 
ful for such real help. 

535 XLII.— MACDUFF (J. K., D. D.) The Hart and the Water- 

brooks. Sm. cr. Svo. Lond., Nisbet. 1860. S. 3s. 
See remarks on other books by this copious writer. (Nos. 309, 816, etc.) 

636 XLir., XLIII.— MARCH (H.) Sabbaths at Home. Svo. 
1833. Is. 6d. 
Profitable reading, rendered all the more pleasing by the introduction 
of very choice poetry. Not important to the expositor. 

537 XLII.— SIBBES (Richard, D. D.) The SouVs Conflict and 

Victory over itself by Faith. 12mo. 1635, etc. Is. 6d., 
to 3s. Works, Vol. I., Nichol's edition. 

Mainly upon verses 5 and 11. Sibbes never wastes 

the student's time ; he scatters pearls and diamonds 

with both hands. 

538 XLV.— BENNET (Thomas). Sermons on the Forty-fifth 

Psalm. Sm. Svo. Edinb., 1781. 
Twenty-four sermons after the manner of Ralph Erskine, in which 
Jesus is all in all. What more need be said in their praise ! 

539 XLV.— PENNEFATHER (William, M. A.) The Bride- 

groom King. A Meditation on the Forty-fifth Psalm 
ISmo. Is. 6d. Lond., J. F. Shaw & Co. 

Bather a meditation than an exposition. A fitting book for a sick bed. 
The little chapters might lie, like wafers made with honey, upon the 



14:6 BEPAEATE PSALMS. 

praiscfal tongue of the suffering believer. The beloved writer has now 
gone to see the King in his beauty, of whom he hod those glimpses here 
which enabled him to pen this tiny volume. 

340 XLV.— TEOUGHTON (W.) The Mystery of the Marriage 
Song. 12mo. 1656. 
An old work with nothing new or striking in it. Bemarkably tame 
and meagre for a work of that exuberant period. Let it alone. 

641 XLV.— PITCAIRN (David). The Anointed Saviour. 12mo. 
1846. 
Contains an exposition of part of Psalm XLV., as applied to Messiah's 
£rst and second advents. Good, yet it reads rather wearily to us. 

543 LI.— ALEXANDER (Thomas, M. A.) The Penitent's Pray- 
er. Cr. 8vo. 3a. 6d. Lend., Nisbet. 1861. S. la. 9d. 
Our friend the late Dr. Alexander of Chelsea handled this Psalm well. 

543 LI.— DE COETLOGON (Chaklks Edvtard, A. M. Died 

1820). The Portraiture of the Christian Penitent. Two 
vols., i3mo. 1775. S. 2s. 6d. to 4s. 
Very proper. We see nothing in the book but platitudes decorously 
expressed. 

544 LI.— BIDDULPH (Thomas T., A. M., 1763—1838). Lectures 

on Psalm LI. 8vo., 1830 ; 12mo., 1835. S. Is. 6d. to 2s. 
6d. 
Lectures far above the average of such luonbtatious, making up a very 
fair exposition. 

545 LI.— BULL (John, M. A.) Sermons on the Fifty -first Psalm. 

8vo. 1824. Is. 6d. 
Another specimen of sermons published by subscription. The poor 
curate was no doubt the better for the profits, and nobody was any the 
worse. Clipston church was not set on fire by the flaming eloquence of 
the preacher, nor was the country disturbed by any fanatical exratement 
produced by his excessive zeal. 

646 LI.— HIERON (Samuel. 1572—1617). David's Penitentiall 
Psalme opened. 4to. 1617. 5s. 6d. 
Hieron was a conforming Puritan. His works were once exceedingly 
popular and they are still esteemed. 

547 LI.— HILDBRSHAM (Arthub. Puritan. 1563—1631). 
One Hundred and Fifty-two Lectures upon Psalm LI. 
Folio. 1635 and 1642. 6a. to 10a. 

Hildersham was one of the most tried of the Non- 
conforming ministers, and at the same time one of the 
moat able. He is copious and discursive, we had almost 



SBPAEATB PSALMS. 147 

said long-winded. Both Willet and Preston speak of 

him in the highest terms. 

648 LI.— MORGAN (James, D. D.) The Penitent. 12mo. 
Belfast, M'Comb ; Lond., Hamilton. 1855. 

The excellent doctor first wrote this exposition for 
his own spiritual benefit, then preached it for the edifi- 
cation of his flock, and lastly published it for the good 
of us all. This is a worthy pedigree for a book, and the 
book itself is worthy of the pedigree. 

• 549 LI.— PAGE (Samtjel, D. D. Died 1630). David's Broken 
Heart. 4to. 1637 and 1646. 5a. 

Every page is like a bank note for yalue. Here are 

homiletical materials in abundance. 

550 LI.— SMITH (Samuel). David's Repentance. ISrao. 16th 

Edition. 1655. (See Nos. 500 and 533). 
It will lie Been from the nnmerons editions that this work was well 
received in its author's life time. He tells us that he spent the spare houra 
of a lon^ sickness in publishing this short exposition, and thus the world 
is all the healthier for his iUness. 

551 LXVUI., ex.— DIXON (Eichakd, A, M., F. K. S.) A New 

Interpretation of the Sixty-eighth Psalm : with an Exposi- 
tion of the Hundred and Tenth Psalm. 4to. Oxf., 1811. 
2b. 
This author, in a most interesting manner, traces out the analogy be- 
tween this Fsalm and the Song of Deborah. Those who like choice pieces 
of writing upon the literature of Scripture will be gratified by the perusal 
of this exposition. 

552 LXXIIL— PARRY (Edward. Bishop of Killaloe). David 

Restored ; or an Antidote against the Prosperity of the 
Wicked and the Afflictions of the Just. 8vo. 1660. 4s. 
6d. to 8s. 
Not snper-cxcellent, nor free from blemishes, but contmning much of 
sterling value. 

553 LXXXII.— HALL (Thomas, B.D. 1610—1665). The Beauty 

of Magistracy. An Exposition of Psalm LXXXII. 4to. 
1660. [Vol. IV. of Swinnock's Works, Nichol's edition.] 
This exposition has always nestled in the bosom of Swinnock's works. 
We agree with Dr. Jenkyu's criticism — " The style is teree and clear, 
though grave and theological, and the matter is solid and judicious," 



148 SBPABATE PSALMS. 

654 LXXXIV.— HEMINGE (Nicholas. 1513 — 1600). The 
Faith of the Church Militant. 8vo. 1581. 
A Danish divine of high repute in his own day. Some of hia works 
were turned into English ; but the translations, like the originals, ore now 
left in undeserved ohlivion. 

555 XC— SMITH (Samuel). Moses, hia Prayer. ISmo. 1656. 
See our notes on No. 500, 523, and 550. 

556 XCIX., CI.. CII.— EDERSHEIM (Alfred, D. D.) The 

Golden Diary of Heart Converse with Jesus. 1873. Con- 
tains Expositions of Psalms XCIX., CI., CII. 
Sweet and spiritual ; worth purchasing. 

557 CIII.— STEVENSON (John, D. D. Hon. Canon of Canter- 

bury). Gratitude. An Exposition of the Hundred and 
Third Psalm. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., S.-Bagster & Sons. 
Somewhat diffase, but at the same time too good to be criticised, 

558 CVII.— -HTPERIUS (Andrew Gerard. 1511—1564). A 

Special Treatise of God's Providence and Comfort against 
all kinds of Crosses and Calamities, to be drawn from the 
same ; with an Exposition of the One Hundred and Seventh 
Psalme. From the Latin. Black Letter. 8vo. 1602. 
15s. Scarce. 
This author has written in Latin upon many subjeotB, but his works 
are now little known. He was a learned Lutheran. 

559 CVII.— ROMAINE (William, M. A. 1714—1795). APrac- 

tical Comment on Psalm CVII. 8vo. Fifth edition. 1767. 

Is. 6d. to 4s. Also in Works, IV. 
Bomaine's doctrine and style of writing are well known. He could not 
be accused of overlaying the truth with much learning. The thought is 
gracious, sound, and practical, but the style is just a little dull. 

500 ex.— REYNOLDS (Edward, D. D. Bishop of Norwich, 
1599—1676). Explication of the One Hundred and Tenth 
Psalm. 4to., 1632 and 1635 ; 12mo., 1837. 2s. to 3s. 6d. 
Also in Works. 

Surpassingly clear and elaborate.^ Eeynolds was a 

man of vast learning and thoroughly evangelical spirit. 

561 CXVI.— GOUGE (William, D. D. Puritan. 1575—1653). 
The Saints' Sacrifice. 4to. 1632. Scarce. 3s. 6d. Re- 
printed in Nichol's Commentaries, with Smith, No. 500 ; 
and Pierson, No. 528. 
Gouge's method of cutting up his exposition into sections and discuss- 
ing every thing in propositions, is very tedious to the reader, but we 



SEPARATE PSALMS. 149 

judge it to be advantageous to the preaoher. At any rate Gouge has often 
given us a hint. He was a man of great learning. 

563 CXIX.— BRIDGES (Charles, M. A.) Exposition. Twen- 
ty-second edition. Cr. 8vo. Lond., 1857. 

Worth its weight in gold. Albeit that the work is 
neither learned nor very original we prize it for its sur- 
passing grace and unction. 

563 CXIX.— COWPER (William. Bp. of Galloway. 1566— 

1619). A Holy Alphabet for Sion's Scholars. A Commen- 
tary upon CXIX Psalm. Folio. Lond., 1613 ; and in 
Works. Folio. 1639. 

Dr. M' Crie gives a high character to all Cowper's works, and says that 
a vein of practical piety runs through them, while the style is remarkable 
for ease and fluency. This remark applies emphatically to the " Holy 
Alphabet," We have found it very delightful reading. 

564 CXIX.— GREENHAM (Richabd. Puritan. 1531—1591). 

An Exposition of the 119 Psalme. Works. Folio. iLoud., 

1613. 

We regret that this comment is not published separately, and is only to 

be procured by purchasing the rest of Greenham's works. The style, 

however, is antique and cramped, and Manton and Bridges are quite 

enough. 

565 CXIX.— MANTON (Thomas, D. D. 1630—1677). One 

hundred and ninety Sermons on the One Hundred and 
Nineteenth Psalm. Folio, Lond., 1735 ; three vols., 8vo., 
Lond., 1843 ; three vols (with Life), 1845. 7s. 

Fully up to Manton's highest mark, and he is well 

known to have been one of the chief of the Puritan 

brotherhood. The work is long, but that results only 

from the abundance of matter. 

566 CXIX.— SANDERSON (R. B., Esq., B. A.) Lord's Day Lit- 

erature : or Illustrations of the Book of Psalms from the 

•Hundred and Nineteenth Psalm consecutively. 13mo. 

Lond., 1843. 

We cannot call this an exposition, its title far more accurately describes 

it. The author takes occasion from the text to plead for those points of 

doctrine and practice into which he had been led by the Spirit of God, He 

was an eminently oinscientious man, a bold' believer, and a Baptist. 



150 SEPARATE PSALMS. 

567 CXX.— CXXXIV.— AKMFIELD (H. T., M. A. Vice-Princi- 

pal, Theol. Coll., Vicar of the Close, and Minor Canon of 
Samm). Tlie Gradual Psalms : a Treatise on the Fifteen 
Songs of Degrees, with Commentary, based on Ancient He- 
brew, Chaldee, and Christian Authorities. 8vo. Lond., 
J. T. Hayes. 1874. 
A wonderfully interesting book from a literary point of view ; perhaps 
more singular than profitable ; but in many respects a publication which ' 
we should have been sorry to have missed. The homiletioal student will 
not be able to make much use of It. 

568 CXX.— CXXXIV.— OOX (Samtjel). The Pilgrim Psalms; 

an Exposition of the Songs of Degrees. 8ro. Lond., 
Daldy, Isbister and Co. 1874. 

This will be greatly valued by intelligent readers. A 
noble series of sermons would be pretty sure to grow 
out of its attentive perusal. Mr. S. Cox is a great ex- 
positor. 

569 CXX.— CXXXIV.— LUTHEB (Martin). See No. 489. 

570 CXX.— CXXXrV.— M'MICHAEL (N., D. D.) The Pilgrim 

Psalms. Cr. 8vo. Edinb., Oliphant. 1860. S. 3s. 

A capital work, full of sound doctrine perfumed 
with devotion. 

571 CXX.— CXXXIV.— NISBET (EoBEET, D. D.) The Songs of 

the Temple Pilgrims. Lond., Nisbet. 1863. 
Dr. Nisbet regards the " Songs of Degrees as affording so complete an 
exhibition of the phases of religions sentiment, as to make these short 
poems a transcript of the feelings of the whole Church ; a miniature Bible 
for the use of all." He has expounded in this spirit, with- well chosen 
language, and produced a very valuable and instructive book. 

572 CXXII.— WILLET (Andrew). In Willet's Harmonie and 

Exposition of the Books of Samuel there is " a brief 

exposition of the 123 Psalm." 
WDlet ought to have known better than to twist a psalm to the honor 
and gloiy of James I, As a learned man he says good things, and as a 
courtier foolish things. 

573 CXXX.— HUTCHESON (George). Forty-five Sermons. 

Psalm CXXX. 8vo. Edinb., 1691. Scarce. 5s. 

We have already advised the purchase of anything 
and everything by Hutcheson. Be sure not to confound 
this with Hutchinson. 



SEPABATE PSALMS— SOLOMON". 151 

574 CXXX.—I.EiaHTON (Robert). See No. 530. 

575 CXXX.— OWEN (John, D. D.) A Practical Exposition on 

the One Hundred and Thirtieth Psalm. Lond., 4to. 1669 
and 1680. R. Tract Society's edition. ISmo. 3s. 

One of the best known and most esteemed of John 
Owen's works. It is unnecessary to say that he is the 
prince of divines. To master his works is to be a pro- 
found theologian. Owen is said to be prolix, but it 
would be truer to say that he is condensed. His style is 
heavy because he gives notes of what he might have said, 
and passes on without fully developing the great thoughts 
of his capacious mind. He requires hard study, and 
none of us ought to grudge it. 

576 CXXX.— SIBBES (Richard, D. D.) The Saints' Comforts. 

18mo. 1638. Works, Vol. VX. Nichol's Edition. Ss. 6d. 
per vol. 1874. 
Notes on five verses only. Published without the author's sanction, 
it is incomplete, but very full as far as it goes, and considering its brevity. 

577 CXXX.— WINSLOW (Octavids, D. D.) Soul-Depths and 

Soul-Heights ; an Exposition of Psalm CXXX. Cr. 8vo. 
Lond., J. F. Shaw. 1874. 
Not very deep nor very high, but pleasant spiritual reading. 



BOOKS OP SOLOMON. 



578 KEXL and DELITZSCH'S Commentaries. Solomonic Writ. 

ings. Three vols. [In preparation], 10s. 6d, each. Edinb., 
T. & T. Clark. 

579 IiANGE'S Commentaries. Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and 

Song of Solomon. By Dr. Otto Zflckler. Imp. 8vo. 21s, 
or to subscribers los. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1870. 

We cannot say that we admire Zockler's interpreta- 
tion of the Song of Solomon. The volume contains 
much that we do not like, but its value is considerable. 
It is a pity that the value of the volumes in this series 
varies so much. 



152 PBOVEEBS. 

580 NOTES (G. E., D. D.) A Translation of Proverbs, Ecclesi- 

aates, and Canticlea, with Notes, etc. 13mo. Boston. U. 

S. 1846. 

Of Noyes upon Eodeaiastes, Dr. Hamilton says : — " This interpretation 

is clear and straightforward, hut the American Professor ^ves to the book 

an air of theological tenuity and mere worldly wisdom which carries 

neither our conviction nor onr sympathy." Noyes is a good literary 

expositor, hut his theolo^oal views render him a very poverty-strioken 

commentator from a spiritual point of view. 



PEOVERBS. 

581 ALLEN (Robert. Puritan). Concordances of the Proverbs 

and Ecclesiastes. 4to. 1613. 3s. 6d. 
An ordinary concordance will answer the purpose far better ; bnt the 
wonderfhlly wise, half-crazy Cruden had not compiled his invaluable 
work in Allen's days. 

582 AHNOT (William, D. D. Died 1875). Laws from Heaven 

for Life on Earth. Two vols., cr. 8vo. S. 7s. 6d. 1858. 
Also 1 vol., cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Edinb., Nelson. 1869. S. 5s. 

"We wish Dr. Amot had gone steadily through the 
whole book, for his mind was of an order peculiarly 
adapted for such a task. Those passages which he 
dilates upon are set in a clear and beautiful light. For 
a happy blending of illustrative faculty, practical sound 
sense, and spirituality. Dr. Amot was almost unrivalled, 

583 BRIDGES (Chakles, M. A.) An Exposition. Two vols., 

13mo. Lond., Seeleys. 1850. S. 6s. 
The best work on the Proverbs. The Scriptural 
method of exposition so well carried out by Bridges 
renders aU his writings very suggestive to ministers. 
While explaining the passage in hand, he sets other 
portions of the word in new lights. 

584 BROOKS (J. W., M. A.) A New Arrangement of the Prov- 

erbs of Solomon. 13mo. Lond., Seeleys. 1860. Is. 
We do not see the use of the arrangement ; but those who want the 
Proverbs classified have the work done for them here. 



PEOVEBBS. 153 

585 CASE (R. J.) A Commentary. 12mo. Lond., 1832. S. 6d. 
The Proverbs themselves are plainer than this author's exposition of 

them. 

586 DAY (William. Formerly Missionary to the South Seas). 

A Poetical Commentary. 8vo. lis. Lond., Simpkin, 
Marshall & Co. 1862. S. 3a. 
The author says, ho has " a taste for building rhymes," and has here 
gratified it. That is all we can say for his book. 

587 DELITZSCH(Fkanz, D. D.) Biblical Commentary. Trans- 

lated from the German, by M. Q. Easton, D. D. Vol. I. 
[In progress.] Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1875. 

588 DOD (John. Puritan. Died 1645). A Plaine and Familiar 

Exposition of Proverbs, Chapters IX. to XVII. 4to. 
Lond., 1608-9. [The comment on Chapters XIII. and XIV. 
appears to have been the work of Robert Cleaver. In oar 
copy, containing Chapters XXVIII. — XXX., the names of 
both Dod and Cleaver are given, and the last chapter was 
" penned by a Godly and learned man, now with God."] 
Both Dod and Cleaver were popular as preachers, and their joint works 
were widely circulated. This book can rarely be met with entire. 

589 FRENCH (W., D. D.) and (SKINNER, G., M. A.) A New 

Translation, with Explanatory Notes. 8vo. Loud., 1831. 

S. Is. 3d. 
These translators endeavor to produce faithful renderings of the text, 
giving to each word the same sense in oil places. They are calm, dispas- 
sionate, judicious, and able. 

590 HODGSON (Bernard, LL. D.) The Proverbs of Solomon, 

with Notes. 4tb. Oxford, 1788. 23. 6d. 
Darling says : — " A good translation ; the notes are chiefly philological.' ' 
We set no store by this mass of letter-press, and we question whether any 
one else does. 

591 HOLDEN (George, M. A.) An attempt towards an improved 

Translation, with Notes, etc. 8vo. Liverpool, 1819. 4s. 6d. 
Home says of this. work: — " It is one of the most valuable helps to the 
critical understanding of this book." It is certainly one, of the best of 
Holden's productions. We may be wrong, but we could not conscien- 
tiously subscribe to Home's opinion. 

592 JACOX (Francis). Scripture Proverbs, illustrated, anno- 

tated, and applied. Thick cr. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Lond., 

Hodder & Stoughton. 1874 S. 6s. 
This work illustrates many of the proverbs scattered throughout the 
Scriptures, and some of those collected by Solomon. Mr. Jaeox seems to 
have read everything good and bad, and hence he pours forth a medley of 



154 PEOVERBS. 

fact and flction more entertwniug than edifying. He reminda ns of the 
elder Disraeli and his " Cnriositiea of Literature." 

593 JERMIN (Michael, D. X>. Died 1659). Paraptrastical 

Meditations upon the Book of Proverbs. Folio. 1638. 

9s. 6d. 
Very antique, and full of Latin qaotations. Jermin does not err in 
excesslTe spirituality, hut the reverse. Those who can pat np witli his 
style will be repaid by his quaint learning. 

594 I.ANGE. (See No. 579). 

595 LAWSON (George, D. D. 1749—1820). Exposition of the 

Book of Proverbs. Two vols., 13mo. Edinb., 1821. 68. 
to 7s. 
A thoroughly sound and useful commentary. Lawson wrote popularly 
and vigorously. 

596 MILLER (John. Princeton, N. J.) A Commentary, with 

a New Translation, and with some of the Original Exposi- 
tions Re-examined. DemySvo. 7a. Dickinson & Higham. 
1875." 
This author's interpretations are new, and in our judgment very &r 
removed from accurac^. Certainly the old interpretations are better in 
many ways. His theory that the Proverbs are spiritual and not secular 
will not hold water. He needs reading with very great discrimination : if 
read at all. " Too great innovation " is the author's own suspicion of his 
work, and we quite agree with him, only we go beyond mere saspi-* 
cion. 

597 MUFFET (Petbk). A Commentary on the whole Book of 

Proverbs. 8vo. 1596. [Reprinted, with Cotton's Com- 
mentaries on Ecclesiastes and Song of Solomon, in one of 
the volumes of Nichol's series. Cr. 4to. 7s. 6d. Lond., 
Nisbet. 1808.] 
Homely, but not very striking, Mr. Mohol'a choice of commentators 
for reprinting was not a wise one. 

598 NEWMAN (William, D. D. Formerly President of Stepney 

Theol. Institution). An improved version. 18mo. liond., 
1839. Is. 
Merely the corrected text, A very small affair. 

599 NICHOLLS (Benjamin Elliott, M. A.) The Book of 

Proverbs, explained and illustrated from Holy Scripture. 

12mo. Lond., Kivingtous. 1858. Is. 3d. 
Contains very sensible suggestions for the interpretation of proverbs, 
and gives instances of explanations by geography, natural history, etc. It 
is a somewhat helpful work. 



PEOVEBBS. 155 

600 NOTES. (See No. 580). 

601 STUART (Moses). A Commentary on the Book of Proverbs. 

8vo. New York, 1853. 4s. to 5s. 
We have not met with any English reprint of this UBeful volume. Dr. 
Stuart purposely adapted hia work to beginners in Hebrew study. He 
has set himself to prepare a commentary of explanation only, helieviug 
that a hortatory and practical comment every minister ought to he able to 
make for liimself. Stuart's introductory matter is highly instructive, 
though no reader should blindly accept it all. 

602 TAYLOR (Francis, B. D.) Observations upon the three 

first chapters of Proverbs. 4Lto. Lond., 1645. 

An Exposition [as above] upon The 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 Chap- 
ters, etc. 4to. 1657. -18s. to 35s. 

Two volumes (in one) of rich, old-fashioned Puritan 

divinity. 

60.3 THOMAS (David, D.D.) The Practical Philosopher. Thick 
8vo. 13s. 6d. nett (published at 17s. 6d). Lond., Dickinson. 
1873. 
Dr. Thomas of the " Homilist " is a well-known writer, and a man 
capable of great things. This work does not equal hia " Genius of the Gos- 
pel." It contains a large amount of practical comment, written in a rather 
grandiose style. We can hardly fancy men of business reading this book 
from day to day as the author proposes. 

604 WARDLAW (Ralph, D. D.) Lectures. Three vols., cr. 

8vo. 3s. 6d. each. Ediub., PuUarton. 1861. S. 6s. 6d. 

Wardlaw is diffuse, and his views upon "wisdom" 
are peculiar ; but he always repays the reader and neither 
Bridges nor Arnot have rendered him obsolete, for he 
works a different vein, and expounds in a manner pecu- 
liar to himself. 

605 WILCOCKS (Thomas, Puritan. 1549—1608). A Short yet 

Sound Commentarie. [Works. See No. 387.] 
Wilcocks briefly sums up the teaching of the verses, and bo aids in 
suggesting topics ; in other respects he is rather wearying. 



156 ECCL£SIA3I£S. 



ECCLESIASTES. 

606 ANNOTATIONS on the Book of Ecclesiast^.[13mo.] Load. 

Printed by J. Streater. 1669. 
By no means remarkable, except for extreme rarity. 

607 BEKA (Theodore), Ecclesiastes. Solomon's Sermon to 

the People, with an Exposition.' Small 8to. Cambridge, 
[1594]. 78. 6d. 
Sure to be weighty and inBtmctive. It is exceedingly rare. 

608 BRIDGES (Chaklbs, M. A.) Exposition of Ecclesiastes. 

Sq. 8vo. 6s. Lond., Seeley & Co. 1860. S. 3s. 

After the manner of ot"her works by this devout 
author, who is always worth consulting, though he gives 
us nothing very new. 

609 BKOUGHTON (Htjgh. 1549—1613). A Comment upon 

Ecclesiastes, framed for the Instruction of Prince Henry. 

4to. 1605. 
Bronghton was a far-famed and rather pretentions Hebrust whom Dr. 
Gill quoted as on authority. His work is nearly obsolete, but its loss is 
not a severe one. 

610 BUCHANAN (Kobekt, D. D.) Ecclesiastes ; its Meaning 

and its Lessons, explained and illustrated. Sq. 8vo. 7s. 
6d. Lond., Olasg., and Ediub., Blackie & Sons. 1859. 
S. 3b. 6d. 

Dr. Buchanan has endeavored in every instance to 

give the true meaning of the text. His explanations 

were composed for the pulpit and delivered there. The 

work is most important, but strikes us as' 'lacking in 

liveliness of style. 

611 CHOHELETH, or "The Royal Preacher, a Poem." First 

published in the year 1768. 4to. 33. Keprinted, 8vo., 
183a Is. 6d. 

This is the work of which Mr. Wesley wrote : — " Monday, Feb. 8, 1768. 
I met with a surprising poem, intituled Ctioheleth, or the Preacher: it is 
a paraptu-ase in tolerable verse on tlie Book of Ecclesiastes. I really think 
the author of it (a Turkey merchant) understands both the difBcult expres- 
sious and the connection of the whole, better than any other, either ancieat 
or modern, writer whom I have seen." We defer to Mr. Wesley's opin- 
ion but it would not have occurred to us to commend so warmly. 



ECCLESIASTES. ' 157 

CIS COLEMAN (John Noble, M. A.) Eeclesiastes. A New- 
Translation, with Notes. Imp. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Nisbet. 
1867. S. 2s. 6d. 
A scholarly translatloa with important observations. 

613 COTTON (John. 1585—1653). A briefe exposition, with 

practical observations. Small 8vo. Lond., 1654 [Re- 
printed in Nichol's series of Commentaries. See Muffet, 
No. 597.] 

By a great lingaist and sound divine. Eeclesiastes is not a book to bo 
expounded verse by verse ; but Cotton does it as well as any one. 

614 COX (Samubl). The Quest of the Chief Good : Expository 

Lectures. Sq. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., Isbister. 1868. S. 
33. 6d. 

We should find it hard to subscribe to Mr. Cox's views of Eeclesiastes, 
for, to begin with, we cannot admit that its author was not Salomon, but 
some unnamed Kabbi : nevertheless, "TheQuestof the Chief Good" is full 
of valuable matter, and abundantly repays perusal, 

615 DALE (Thomas Pelham, M. A.) Eeclesiastes. With a 

running Commentary and Paraphrase. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 

Loud., Rivingtons. 1873. 
This author makes all that he can out of the errors of the Septnagint, 
which he seems to value almost as much as the correct text itself. The 
new translation is a sort of stilted paraphrase, which in a remarkable man- 
ner darkens the meaning of the wise man's words. Mr. Dale says he is a 
man of one book, and we are glad to hear it : for we should be sorry for 
another book to suffer at his hands. 

616 DESVOEUX (A. V.) A Philosophical and Critical essay on 

Eeclesiastes. 4to. Lond., 1760. 3s. 6d. 
A curious and elaborate production. Neither in criticism, nor in the- 
ology,, is the author always sound, and his notes are a very ill-arranged 
mass of singular learning. 

617 GINSBURG (Christian D.) Coheleth, or Eeclesiastes; 

translated, with a Commentary. 8vo. Lend., Longmans. 

1857. S. 13s. 
The author does not believe that Solomon wrote the book, and his view 
of its design is not the usual, nor, as we think, the right one. His out- 
line of the literature of the book is very complete. 

618 GRANGER (Thomas). A Familiar Exposition, wherein the 

World's Vanity and the true Felicitie are plainly deci- 
phered. 4to. Lond., 1631. 5s. to 7s. Od. 
Very antique, containing many obsolete and coarse phrases ; but pithy 
and qnaaut. 



158 • BOOI.ESL4.SXB3. 

619 GREENAWAT (Stephen). New Translation. 8vo. Lei- 
cester, 1781. 3a. 6d. 
Confused, eccentric, and happily very rare. 

630 HAMILTON (James, D. D. 1814—1867). Eoyal Preaclier : 

Lectures on Ecclesiastes. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Also 13mo., 
1851 ; 16mo., 1854. Lond., Nisbet. S. Is. 6d. to 2s. 6d. 

We have had a great treat in reading this prose poem. 

It is a charming production. 

631 HENGSTENBERa (E. W., D. D.) Commentary on 

Ecclesiastes. To which are appended : Treatises on the 
Song of Solomon ; on the Book of Job ; on the Prophet 
Isaiah, etc. 8vo. 9s. Edinb., T. & T. Clarfc. 1860. S. 
48. 6d. 

Scholarly of course, and also more vivacious than is 

usual with Hengstenberg. 

623 HODGSON (Bbbnard, LL. D.) New Translation. 4to. 

Oxford, 1791. 4s. 
Notes neither long, numerous, nor Talnable. 

633 HOLDEN (Geokgb, M. A.) An Attempt to illustrate the 
Book of Ecclesiastes. 8vo. Lond., 1822. 3b. 6d. 
Bridges says that Holden " stands foremost for accuracy of critical 
exegesis," and Ginsburg considers his Commentary to be the l>est in our 
language. We may therefore be wrong in setting so little store by it aa 
we do, but we are not convinced. 

624 JERMIN (Michael, D. D.) Ecclesiastes. Folio. 1639. 

6s. 6d. 
The seliool to which Jermin belonged delighted to display their learn- 
ing, of which they had no small share ; they excelled in wise sayings, but 
not in unction. The iVuit is ripe, but lacks flavor. 

635 KEIIi & DELITZSCH. (See Books of Solomon. 578.) 

636 I.ANGE. (See Books of Solomon. No. 579.) 

627 LLOYD (J., M. A.) An Analysis of Ecclesiastes: with 
reference to the Hebrew Grammar of Gesenius, and with 
Notes ; to which is added tlie Book of Ecclesiastes, in 
Hebrew and English, in parallel columns. 4to. 7s. 6d. 
Lond., Bagsters. 1874. 

This will be esteemed by men who have some knowledge of the He- 
brew. The repeated references to Gesenius would render the book tedious 
to the ordinary reader, but they make it all the more valuable to one who 
aspires to be a Hebraist. 



ECCLESIASTES. 169 

638 [LUTHER]. An Exposition of Solomon's Boobe, called 
Ecclesiastea, or the Preacher. 8vo. Printed by J. Day. 
Lond., 1573. 
Even the British Maseam authorities have heen unable to find this 

octavo for U3, though it ia mentioned in their catalogue. 

629 MACDONALD (Jambs M., D. D. Princeton, N. J.) 

Ecclesiastea. Tliick 12mo. New York. 1856. S. 4s. 6d. 

Thoroughly exegetical, with excellent "scopes of 
argument " following each division : to be purchased if 
it can be met with. 

630 MORGAN (A. A.) Eccleaiastes metrically Paraphrased, with 

Illustrations. 4to. 31s. Lond., Bosworth. 1856. 
TliiB is an artiele de luxe, and is rather for the drawing-room than for 
the study. A graphic pencil, first-class typography, and a carefully 
written metrical translation make np an elegant work of art. 

631 MTLNE (Q. W.) Ecclesiastes : or Lessons for the Christian's 

Daily Walk. 16mo. Lond., 1859. Is. 6d. 
The author in this little publication does not comment upon the whole 
Book ; but the passages he touches are ably explained. 

633 NISBET (Alexander. Died about 1658). An Exposition, 
with Practical Observations. 4to. Edinb., 1694. 4s. 6d. 
to 10s. 6d. 
One of those solid works which learned Scotch divines of the seven- 
teenth century have left us in considerable numbers. In our judgment it 
is as heavy as it ia weighty. 

633 NOYES. (See No. 580.) 

634 PEMBLE (William, M. A. 1591—1623.) Solomon's Recan- 

tation and Repentance : or the Book of Ecclesiastea briefly 
and fully explained. Thin 4to. Lond., 1638. 3s. 6d. 
Anthony i Wood calls Pemble " a famous preacher, a skilfUl linguist, 
a good orator, and an ornament to society." Moreover, he was a learned 
Calvinistic divine. This " Kecantation " is a minor production. The style 
is scholastic, with arrangements of the subjects such as render it hard to 
read. We confess we are disappointed with it. 

635 PRESTON (Theodoke, M. A.) A translation of the Com- 

mentary of Mendelssohn from the Rabbinic Hebrew ; also 
a newly arranged English Version. 8vo. Lond., 1845. 5s. 
A book more prized by linguists than by preachers. We might with 
propriety have named tliia Mendelssohn's Commentary, for so it is. 



160 ECCLESIASTES. 

636 PROBY (W. H. B., M. &..) Ecclesiastes for English Readers. 

Thin 8vo. 4s. 6d. Lond., Bivingtons. 1874. S. 3s. 3d. 
About 45 pages, and these are quite enough. What has come to a man's 
hmn when he prophecies that Antichrist will take away the daily sacri- 
fice, that is, " forbid the eucharistio bread and wine," and then adds : " To 
tliis awful time there is probably a mystical reference in the words of our 
present book (XII. 6), ' While the silver cord is not loosed, or the golden 
bowl broken, or the pitcher broken at the fountaiu, or the wheel broken 
at the cistern.' For silver and gold mgnify respectively, in the symbolic 
language of Scripture, love and truth : thus the loosening of the silver cord 
will mean the love of many waxing cold, and the breaking of the golden 
bowl will mean the failure of truth from the earth ; and we understand, 
then, that in the last awful time there will be no longer any speaking of 
the truth in love. And as the ' wells of salvation ' in Isaiah XII. 3, are 
the sacrameqts and other means of grace, so the breaking of the pitcher and 
the wheel may signify the cessation of those ministries by which the sac- 
rament and other means of grace are dispensed." 

637 EEYNOLDS (Edwakd, D. D. Bishop of Norwich. 1599— 

1676). Annotations. Works. Vol. IV. 8vo. Lond., 
1836. Keprinted, by Dr. Washburn. 8vo. Lond., 1811. 
2b. 6d. 
See Westminster Assembly's Annotations CNo. 3), for which Reynolds 
wrote this : he is always good. 

638 SERBANUS, or DE SERRES (John. 1540—1598). A 

Godlie and Learned Commentary upon Ecclesiastes, newly 
turned into English, by John Stockwood, Schoolmaster of 
Tunbridge. 8vo. Lond., 1585. 7s. 6d. 
Serranus was a Protestant pastor at Niameg, of such moderate opinions, 
and such objectionable modes of stating them, that he was about equally 
abhorred by Romanists and Protestants. He is said to have been very in- 
accurate in his learning. 

639 STUART (Moses). A Commentary on Ecclesiastes. 12mo. 

63. New York. 1851. S. 3s. 

Full and miniite, with most instructive introductions. 
It is unnecessary to say that Moses Stuart is a great 
authority, though not all we could wish as to spirituality. 

640 TYLER (Thomas, M. A.) Ecclesiastes ; a Contribution to 

its Interpretation. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., Williams & Nor- 

gate. 1875. 
This writer is no doubt a profound tliinker, but we do not set much 
store by the result of his thinkings. He maintains that the writer of 
Kcclesinstes was a Jew who had travelled abroad, aud heard the Stoic 



BOCLESIASTES. 161 

philosophers and their opponents at Athens. He seems to think that his 
point is proved, but it is the merest surmise possible. The work is not at 
all to our taste. 

641 WARSLAW (Ralph, D. D.) Lectures on Ecclesiastes. 
Two vols., 8vo. 1831. Tyro vols., 13nio. 1838. Oliphant 
& Go's, edition, in one vol., 8s. 6d. 1871. S. 4s. 6d. 

Wardlaw is always good, though not very brilliant. 
He may be relied upon, when not critical, and he gen- 
erally excites thought. 

643 WEISS (Benjamin). New Translation and Exposition. 

with Critical Notes. 12mo. 4s. Lond., Nisbet & Co., 

1856. S. Is. 6d. 
It is pleasing to find a oonverted Jew engaged upon this Book. Mr. 
Weiss says many good things, but ft-equently his interpretations and 
remarks are more singular than wise. 

643 TCARD (Fb. Dean ol Aohonrv). Paraphrase. 8vo. Lond., 

1701. Is. 6d. 
The dean supposes the Eoyal Preacher to have been interrupted by an 
impudent sensualist, and so he gets rid of the difficulty of certain passages 
by putting them into the scoffer's mouth. The theory is not to be toler- 
ated for a moment. 

644 YOUNG (Loyal, D. D.) Commentary, with introductory 

Notices by McGill and Jacobus. 8vo. Philadelphia, 1865. 

This American comment is highly spoken of by 
eminent judges, and appears to have been carefully ex- 
ecuted. It is able and solid, and at the same time 
enlivened with originality of thought, vivacity of expres- 
sion, and practical pungency. 

645 SMITH (John, M. D., M. R. C. P. L.) King Solomon's Por- 

traiture of Old Age, wherein is contained A Sacred Anatomy 
both of Soul and Body, v?ith an account of all these Mysti- 
cal and ^Enigmatical Symptomes, expressed in the six 
former verses of the 12th Chapter of Ecclesiastes, made 
plain and easie to a mean Capacitie. 8vo. Loud,, 1660. 
3s. 6d. to 5b. 
A curious book by a Physician, who brings his anatomical knowledge 
to bear upon the twelfth chapter of Ecclesiastes, and tries to show that 
Solomon understood the circulation of the blood, etc. Matthew Poole 
introduced the substance of this treatise into his Synopsis, and in that 
huge compilation he speaks eulogistioally of the author, with whom he 
resided. We mention it because of its singularity. 



163 SOKG OF SOLOMON. 

SONG OF SOLOMON. 

646 AINSWORTH. (See under Pentateuch, No. 73). 

647 AVRILLON (John Baptist Elias. 1653—1729). The Year 

of AfEectiona ; or Sentiments on the love of God, drawn 

from the Canticles, for every day of the year. F'cap. 

8vo. 6s. 6d. Loudon and Oxford, Parker & Co. 1847. 

S. 4b. 
One of the series of Eomish authors, issued by Dr. Pusey. It is n deeply 
spiritual work, after the manner of the mystics. It might have been writ- 
ten by Madame Guyon. Despite its occasional Popery and sacrameut- 
aiiauism, it contains much choice devotional matter. 

648 BEZA (Thkodoke). Sermons upon the three first chapters 

of Canticles, translated out of the French, by John Harmar. 
4to. Oxford, 1587. 

These thirty-one sermons are a well of instruction, 

very precious and refreshing. The unabbreviated title 

indicates a controversial use of the Song, and we were 

therefore prepared to lament the invasion of the dove's 

nest of the Canticles by the eagle of debate ; but we 

were agreeably disappointed, for we found much less of 

argument, and much more of the Well-Beloved, than 

we looked for. 

649 BEVEELET (T.) An Exposition of the Divinely prophetlck 

Song of Songs, which is Solomon's ; beginning with the 

reign of David, and ending in the glorious Kingdom of 

our Lord Jesus Christ. 4to. 1687. 5s. 

This maondering author finds in Canticles the history of the church 

ftaia David to our Lord, and rhymes no end of rubbish tliereon. Truly 

there is no end to the fooUsbness of expositors. We suppose there must 

be a public &r which they cater, and a very foolish public it must be. 

650 BRIGIHTMAN (Thomas). A Commentary on the Canticles, 

wherein the Text is Analised, the Native Signification of 

4he Words Declared, the Allegories Explained, and the 

Order of Times whereunto they relate Observed. 4to. 

Loud., 1644. [See under Daniel and Revelation.] 

Brightman wns a writer of high renown among the prophetjo students 

of the seventeenth century. With singular strength of the visionary 

faculties he sees in the Canticles " the whole condition of the church ii-om 

the time of David till time shall be no more." Expounding on this theory 

needs an acrobatic imagination. 



SONG OF SOLOMOK. 163 

651 BXTRROWES (Georgk. Prof. Lafayette Coll. XT. S.) Com- 
mentary. Cr 8vo. Philadelphia, 1853. 3s. 6d. 

Mr. Moody Stuart says : — " The excellent work of 
Dr. Buri;owes is specially fitted to remove the prejudices 
of men of taste against the Song of Solomon, as the 
medium of spiritual communion between the soul and 
Christ. We welcome it as a valuable contribution to 
us from our transatlantic brethren." 

653 BUSH (Joseph, M. A.) The Canticles of the Song of Solo- 
mon. A metrical Paraphrase, with Explanatory Notes 
and Practical Comments. Post 8vo. Lond., Hatchards. 
1867. S. Is. 6d. 

A good compilation, -with a helpful translation. I'or popular use. 

653 CLAPHAM (Enoch). Solomon ; his Songs expounded. 4to. 

Lond., 1603. 

Clapham was a voluminous author of very remarkable attainments. 
He wrote also on the first fourteen ohapters of Genesis. This work is rare 
as angels' visits. 

654 OOLLINGES(JOHN,D.D. 1623—1690). The.Intercouraes 

of Divine Love betwixt Christ and his Church, metaphor- 
ically expressed by Solomon in Canticles I. and II. Two 
vols., 4to. Lond., 1676. 10s. to 148. 

Mne hundred and nine quarto pages upon one chap- 
ter is more than enough. The materials are gathered 
from many sources and make up a mass of wealth. On 
the second chapter there are five hundred and thirty 
pages. It would try the constitutions of many modern 
divines to read what these Puritans found it a pleasure to 
write. When shall we see their like ? 

655 COTTON (John, B. D. 1585—1653). A Brief Exposition, 

describing the estate of the Church in all ages thereof, 
both Jewish and Christian, and modestly pointing at the 
gloriousness of the restored estate thereof. 8vo. Lond., 
1642. [Reprinted in Nichol's series. See Muffet, No. 597.] 

Cotton explains the sacred love-song historically, and misses much of 
its sweetness by so doing. We should never care to read bis exposition 
while Durham, and Gill, and Moody Stuart are to be had. 



1G4 SONG OF SOLOIIOK. 

656 DAVIDSON (William, Esq.) A Brief outline of an Exam- 

ination of the Song of Solomon. 8vo. Lond., 1817. 2s. to 
3s. 6d. 
A predous work by one whose heart is warm with the good matter. 
He sees in the Song the history of the Chnroh of Christ. 

657 DOVE (John, D. D.) The Conversion of Solomon, a Direc- 

tion to holiness of Life ; handled by way of Commentarie 
upon the whole Booke of Canticles. Profitable for young 
men which are not yet mortified, for old men which are 
decrepit and have one foote ia the grave, and for a)l sorts 
of men which have an intent to renounce the vanities 
of this world, and to follow Jesus Christ. 4to. Lond., 
1613. 6s. to 8s. 

A quaint old work. The student will do better with the moderns. 
Moreover, this Dove is rare, and seldom lights on poor men's shelves. 

658 DURHAM (James. 1623—1658). Clavis Cantici ; or an 

Exposition of the Song of Solomon. 4to. Lond., 1668 and 
1728. Also 12mo., Aberdeen. 1840. 2s. 6d. to 6s. 

Durham is always good, and he is at his best upon 

the Canticles. He gives us the essence of the good 

matter. For practical use this work is perhaps more 

valuable than any other Key to the Song. 

659 FENNER (Dudley). The Song of Solomon, in Verse, with 

an Exposition. Middleburgh. 8vo. 1587. 4to. 

Moody Stuart says : — " This is a fiuthfal and excellent translation, ac- 
companied by an admirable esposidon. There is no poetry in it, but the 
renderings are often good, and the comment valuable." We have not met 
with it, 

660 FLEMING (Robert. Died 1716). The Mirrour of Divine 

Love unvail'd, in a Poetical Paraphrase of the Song of 
Solomon. Sm. 8vo. 1691. 3s. 6d. 

The poetry is after the same manner as that of Quarles, and though not 
without merit, it is too antiquated to be admired in the present day. This 
is the Fleming who interpreted the Apooalyptio vials, and was fortunate 
enough to hit upon the date of the French revolution and other events 
connected with the decline of the Papal power. His pmphetio work has 
been reprinted, bat not this limping poetry. 

661 FRANCIS (Ann. Died 1800). A Poetical Translation ; with 

Notes, Historical, Critical, and Explanatory. 4to. Lond., 
1781. Is. 6d. to 2s. 6d. 

Framed on a fanciful theory. Verses flowing and feeble. Insignificant. 



SOSG OF SOLOMOIT. 165 

662 FEY (John, A. B.) New Translatioiij with Notes, and an 

attempt to interpret the sacred allegories. 8vo. Lond., 

1811. 2a. to 3s. 
Fry's work may be called the supplement and complement of Dr. Good's. 
He divides the Songs into idyls, and gives notes in the same manner as 
Good ; but he also plunges into the spiritual meaning of the blessed Song, 
and so far is to be preferred. 

663 GIFFORD (Mr.) A Dissertation on the Song of Solomon. 

8vo. Lond., 1751. 
Worthless rhymes. This man dares to say that the Song is a pastoral 
composed by Solomon for the amusement of his lighter hours, before God 
had given him the divine wisdom for which he was afterwards so eminent. 

664 GILL (John, D. D.) An Exposition of the Book of Solo- 

men's Song. Folio. Lond., 1738. 5s. Not contained in 
the author's Exposition of the Old and New Testament. 
An 8vo. edition was published by CoUingridge, Lond., 
1854. S. 33. 6d. 

The best thing Gill ever did. He could not exhaust 
his theme, but he went as far as he could toward so 
doing. He is occasionally fanciful, but his work is pre- 
cious. Those who despise it have never read it, or are 
incapable of elevated spiritual feelings. 

665 GINSBURG (Christtan D.) A Translation, with a Com- 

mentary, Historical and Critical. 8vo. 10s. Lond., 

Longmans. 1857. 5s. to 6s. 
Written upon an untenable theory, viz., that the Song is intended " to 
record an example of virtue in a young woman, who encountered and con- 
quered the greatest temptations, and was eventually rewarded." This 
grovelling interpretation needed the aid of great liberties with the text, 
and a few interpolations, and the author has not hesitated to use them. 
However learned the book may Ije, this vicious theory neutralizes all. 

666 GOOD (John Mason, M. D., F. R. S.) Song of Songs ; or 

Sacred Idyls translated ; with Notes, Critical and Explana- 
tory. 8vo. Lond., 1803. 4s. 
By a man of great learning. It is not at all spiritual, or even expository, 
in the theological sense, but treats the Canticles as an Oriental drama, 
expluning its scenery and metaphors from a literary point of view. 

667 GREEN (William, M. A.) Song of Solomon. In "The 

Poetical Parts of the Old Testament translated, with 
Notes." 4to. 1781. 
Critical only. Orme says, " the translations are in general very accu- 
rate and elegimt specimens of biblical interpretation." 



166 SOKG OF SOLOMOK. 

668 GUILD (William, D. D. 1586—1657). Love's Intercourse 

between the Lamb and his Bride. 8vo. Lend., 1658. 5a. 
to 7s. 
A rare old work : but we prefer Durham, The author was one of the 
better sort of the Scotch Episcopalians. 

669 GTFFARD (Georoe). Fifteen Sermons upon the" Song of 

Solomon. 8vo.' 1398 to 1612. 
> We have several times met with this writer's name coupled with that 
of Brightman as in his day regarded as a very learned writer, hut we can- 
not procure his work. Possibly some reader of this Catalogue may yet 
present us with it. We beg to assure him of the gratitude wliioh we 
already feel, in the form of " a lively sense of favors to come." 

670 HARMER (Thomas. 1715—1788). Outlines of a New Com- 

mentary on Solomon's Song, drawn by the help of instruc- 
tions from the East. 8vo. Lond., 1768. la. 6d. to 2s. 6d. 
" This book is not well arranged, but is otherwise one of the most in- 
genious, modest, and interesting of all the treatises on the outward sense 
of the Song."— Moody Stuart. 

671 HBNGSTBNBERG. (See under Ecclesiastes, No. 631.) 

673 HODGSON (Bbrnabd, LL. D.) Solomon's Song translated 
from the Hebrew. 4to. Oxf., 1786. 2a. 6d. 
Moody Stuart says that this is " a good translation," and therefore we 
suppose it is so, but we do not admire it. It does not even refer to the 
mystical sense, and it mars the poetry of the Song. Dr. Hodgson renders 
ch. vi. ver. 9 : — " My pigeon, my undefiled is but one." This is an altera- 
tion, bat certainly not an emendation. The name of the bride's mother 
he discovers to have been Talmadni. Wonderful 1 

673 HOMES (Nathaniel. Died 1678). A Commentary on the 

Canticles. Works. Folio. 1652. 63. to 10s. 
This goes to the very marrow of spiritual teaching, and uses every word 
and syllable in a deeply experimental manner with great unction and 
power. Homes, however, spiritualizes too much, and is both too lusdous 
in expression and too prolix for these degenerate days. 

674 HOUGHTON (Wm.) Translation. 8vo. 2s. 6d. Lond., 

Trubner. 1865. 
Useless. The Song is viewed as a secular poem on chaste We. 

675 IBN EZRA (Abraham). Commentary on the Canticles, after 

the first recension. Edited from two MSS., with a Trans- 
lation, by H. J. Matthews, B. A. 12mo. Lond., Trilbner 
&Co. 1874. 
The original Hebrew of the Song, with a Jewish comment, which con- 
veys but little instruction. In this small book the stadent will have a speoi- 
meu of Jewish exposition. 



SOXQ OF SOLOMOK. 167 

676 IRONS (JosBPH, of Camberwell. 1786—1853). NyMphas. 

A Paraphrastic Exposition. 16mo. Lond., 1844. 9. la. 6d. 

Outside of his own circle we fear that this work by 
the late Joseph Irons is little known. It is a paraphrase 
in blank verse, rendered in a very spiritual manner. 
We confess that we looked upon the little book with 
admiring eyes, though we know that the critics will 
sneer both at us and it. 

677 KEIL & DEIilTZSCH. (See Books of Solomon, No. 578.) 

678 KBUMMACHER (F. W., D. D.) Solomon and the Shula- 

mite. Sermons on the Book of Canticles. lOmo. Lond., 
1838. S. Is. 
Touches only upon a few pOTtiouB. Short and .sweet. 

679 liANGE. (See Books of Solomon, No. 578.) 

680 LITTLEDALE (R. F.) A Commentary. From Ancient and 

Mediaeval Sources. 12mo. 7s. Lond., J. Masters. 1869. 

S. 4s. 6d. 
littledale is a close follower of John Mason Neale, and here reproduces 
the beauties and the deformities of medieBval spiritualizing. Great judg- 
ment will he needed to extract the good and true from the mass of semi- 
popish comment here heaped together. If discretion be used, jewels of 
silver and jewels of gold may he extracted. 

681 MACPHERSON (Pkthr, A. M.) The Song of Songs shown 

to be constructed on Architectural Principles. Post 8vo. 

Edinb., 1856. 4s. 
" His supposition that this song consists of verses written round an 
archway is so entirely gratuitous, that it is only misguiding and decep- 
tive."^A. Moody Stuart. 

682 METRIC AI. MEDITATIONS on the Canticles. [Anon,] 

16mo. Lond., Wertheim. 1856. S. Is. 

Exceedingly well rendered : noteworthy both from a 
literary and religious point of view. The author seizes 
the meaning of the Song, and repeats it in well- chosen 
words. 

683 MILLER (Andrew). Meditations. ISmo. Is. 6d. Lond., 

Morrish. 
First published in the Flymouthite magazine, " Things New and Old." 
Devotional, and glowing with the light of fellowship with Jesus. 



168 SONG OF SOLOMON. 

684 MOORE (Daniei., M. A.) ChriBt and his Church. A 

Course of Lent Lectures on the Song of Solomon. Sm. 
cr. 8vo. 33. 6<i. Lond., H. S. King & Co. 1875. 

These lectures treat upon the first chapter only, but 
they do so in an admirable manner. Moore has evan- 
gelized Littledale. 

685 [NEALE (John Mason, D. D.) ] Sermona on the Canticles, 

preached in a Religious House. By a Priest of the Church 
of England. 12mo. Lond., Masters. 1857. S. 2s. 6d. 
By that highest of high churchmen, Dr. Neale, These sermons smell 
of Popery, yet the saTor of our Lord's good ointment cannot be hid. Our 
Protestantism is not of so qnestionahle a character that yre are afraid to du 
justice to Papists and AngUcans, and therefore we do not hesitate to say 
that many a devout thought has come to us while reading these " sermons 
hy a Priest of the Church of England." 

686 NEWTON (Adklaidb L.) The Song of Solomon compared 

with other parts of Scripture. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., 
Nisbet. 1871. [The earlier editions were published 
anonymously.] 
Miss Newton's book is very dear to spiritual minds ; it is fall of that 

quiet power which comes from the Spirit of God through deep experience 

and precious fellowship with the Well-Beloved. 

687 NOTES. (See No. 580.) 

This author sees in the Canticles nothing but a collection of amatory 
songs, written without express moral or religious design. Blind 1 

688 PERCY (Thomas, D. D. Bishop of Dromore. 1729—1811). 

New Translation : with a Commentary and Annotations. 
[Anon.] 8vo. Lond., 1764. 6s. 
His theory of the sacred Song is dead, and not worthy of a monument 
in our ps^es. We trust that not a reUc will remain. Percy did very well 
with his hallads, but he had better have let the Song of Songs alone. 

689 POWER (Philip Bbnnet, M. A.) ' Failure and Discipline : 

Thoughts on Canticles V. 16mo. Is. 6d. Lond., Wer- 
theim. 
Upon the fifth chapter only. Mr. Power always writes attractively. Hia 
book is " linked sweetness," but not " long drawn out" 

690 REFLECTIONS ON CANTICLES ; or, the Song of Solomon, 

with Illustrations from Modern Travellers and Naturalists. 
[Anon.] ISmo. Lond., S. W. Partridge & Co. 1870. S. 
Is. 3d. 
Has much sweetness, and a fiur measure of freshness. 



SOUG OF SOLOMON. 169 

691 BOBOTHAM (John). Exposition 4to. Loud., 1653. 6a. to 

8s. 
Very solid ; bat not to be compared with Durham, No. 658. It ia just 
a little dull and commonplace. 

692 ROMAINE (WrLLiAia:, M. A.) Discourses upon Solomon's 

Song. 8vo. Loud., 1789. 2s. 6d. 

Twelve excellent sermons from verses taken out of the Songs. They do 
not summarize the book, nor form a commentary, but are simply a selec- 
tion of spiritual discourses by one of the most eminent Calvinistlc divines 
of the last century. 

693 SIBBES (Richabd, D. D. 1577—1635).. Bowels Opened; 

or, a, Discovery of the Neere and Deere" Love, Union and 
Communion betwixt Christ and the Church. Sermons 
on Canticles IV., V., and VI. 4to. 1639, etc. 6s. to 9s. 
[Works II. Nichol's edition.] 

Sibbes never writes ill. His repute is such that we 
need only mention him. His title is most unfortunate, 
but in all else his " discoTery " is worthy of our com- 
mendation. 

694 SKINNER (John. Bishop of Aberdeen. 1721—1806). Es- 

say towards a literal or true radical Exposition. Works 
II. Two vols., 8vo. Aberdeen, 1809. 4s. 
Not very important. The Bishop closes his exposition with the follow- 
ing prayer for those who do not believe in the mystical sense : — " God 
forgive the fools and open their eyes." Pretty strong for a Bishop I 

695 STUAHT (A. Moodt, M. A.) Exposition, with Critical 

Notes. 8vo. 13s. Lond., Nisbet. 1860. S. 6s. 

Although this admirable author expounds the Song 
upon a theory which we do not quite endorse, we do 
not know where to find a hook of equal value in all 
respects. He has poetry in his soul, and, beyond that, 
a heart like that of Eutherford, fired with love to the 
Altogether Lovely One. We thank him for this noble 
volume. 

696 THE BRIDE OP CHRIST ; or. Explanatory Notes on the 

Song of Solomon. [Anon.] 18mo. Lond Seeleys. 1861. 
S. 6d. 
A little book for general use ; not for students. 



170 SONG OF SOLOMOK. 

697 THE THREEFOLD MYSTERY : Hints on the Song of Songs, 

■viewed as a Prophecy of the Double United Church of Jew 
and Gentile. By the author of " The Gathered Lily." 
lamo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Partridge & Co. 1869. 
It seems to us to he a wild fancy that all ecclesiastical history is con- 
densed into the Canticles ; hence we do not valiie this book. 

698 THRUPP (John Fhancis). New Translation, with Com- 

mentary. Cr. 8vo. 78. 6d. Lond., Macmillan. 1863. 

We are highly pleased with this work. It defends 
the usual Christian interpretation by the conclusions of 
sober criticism, and shows that the spiritual sense is 
confirmed by the investigations of modern scholarship. 
In the introduction the author deals heavy blows at the 
sceptical school, and at those who, like Ginsburg, con- 
tent themselves with imputing a merely moral meaning 
to the blessed Canticle of love. 

699 WEISS (Benjamin). The Song of Songs unveiled : a New 

Translation and Exposition. Cr. 8vo. W. Oliphant & Co. 

1859. S. Is. 6d. to 2s. 6d. 
This anthor believes that the Song sets forth the history of Israel and 
her relation to the Covenant Angel from Horeb to Calvary. Beyond a few 
Eastern illustrations, nothing of value is contributed to existing materials. 
The work is thoroughly evangelical. 

700 WILCOCKS (Thomas). Exposition. Works. Folio. 1624. 

12s. 
Short, and somewhat in the maimer of a paraphrase. This venerable 
author gives a doctrinal summary of each verse, andfirom this we have fre- 
quently been directed to a subject of discourse. 

701 WILLIAMS (Thomas). A New Translation, with a Com- 

mentary and Notes. 8vo. Lond,, 1801. Second edition, 

1828. S. 2s. 
This volume is little known, but its value is above the average of Can- 
ticles literature. We have read many of the remarks with pleasure, but 
most of tliem are to be found in the standard commentaries. 

702 WOODFORD (Samtjei,, D. D.) Paraphrase in Verse. Svo. 

1679. Is. 6d. to 3s. 
-Setter than many poetical paraphrases, but still below the mark of true 
poetry. 



WORKS OST PBOPHECY. 171 

703 WRIGHT (M.) The Beauty of the Word in the Song of 
Solomon. Cr. 8vo. 6s. Lond., Nisbet & Co. 1873. 

A purely spiritual commentary, casting no light upon the text, hut 
drawing much from it. More devotional than expository. The figures 
of the allegory are pressed as far as they should be, perhaps further. 



WOKKS OK PEOPHECY. 

[Volumes upon this subject are so extremely numerous and so varied in 
their opinions that we confine ourselves to the few which follow. The 
reader is also referred to works upon the Apocalypse.] 

704 DAVISON (John, B. D. 1777—1834). Discoursea on 

Prophecy , its Structure, Use, and Inspiration. [Warbur- 
tonian Lectures.] 8vo. Oxf., 1845. S. 5s. 6d. 

Elliott calls this " Davison's noble Work on Proph- 
ecy." This is one of the Warburtonian lectures, and we 
would here note that those lectures are all upon proph- 
ecy, and are many of them by first-class men, and there- 
fore worthy of study. Of course they greatly vary in 
value according to the ability of the lecturers. 

705 FABBR (George Stanley, B. D. 1773—1854). Calendar 

of Prophecy, or a Dissertation on the Prophecies which 
treat of the Seven Times, and especially of the latter 
Three Times and a Half. Three vols., 8vo. Lond., 1828. 
78. 6d. 13mo. editions, 3s. 6d. 
Faber is one of the great rabbis of prophecy. He was a man of almost 
boundless learning and industry. His characteristics are said to have been 
*' strong mascaline sense, extensive classical erudition, and a hearty love 
of hypothesis." This last quality, no doubt, led him to expound proph- 
ecy, and also disqualified him for doing it well. 

706 FAIRBAIRN (Patuick, D. D.) Prophecy : its Distinctive 

Nature, Special Functions, and Proper Interpretation. 
Svo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1856. S. 5s. 6d. 

A standard work by one who is at home with the 

subject. 



172 WORKS OK PEOPHECT. 

707 FLEMING (Robert. 1630—1694). The Fulfilling of the 

Scripture. Fifth edition. Folio. Lond., 1736, Ss. 6d.; 
two vols., 8vo., 1801, 3s. 6d.; two vols., 13mo., 1845, 3b. 

This we mention because it is generally placed under this head, but 
it is not an exposition of prophecy at all. It is an elaborate treatise upon 
the fact that the Scriptures are folfllled, and the word of the Lord is true. 
As such it deserves the high encomiums bo freely showered upon it by 
the eminent divines of Fleming's own time, and it abundantly justifies the 
issue of so many editions. 

708 HENGSTENBERQ (B. W.) The Messianic Prophecies 

of Isaiah and the other Prophets. 

These remarks are contained in Hengstenberg's 
Christology, which is a standard work on the subject. 
(See No. 68.) 

709 K£!ITH (AiEXANDEn, D. D.) Evidence of the Truth of the 

Christian Religion, derived from the literal Fulfilment 
of Prophecy ; as illustrated by the History of the Jews, 
and by the Discoveries of recent Travellers. Thirty-sixth 
edition. Thick 8vo. 1848. S. 4s. to 6a. 

Home says, " The multiplied editions which have 
been required within a very few years sufiBciently attest 
the high estimation in which Mr. Keith's work is deserv- 
edly held ; " and we may add that the improrements and 
additions have increased its value, and that fresh editions 
have shown that it is still appreciated. 

710 NEWTON (Thomas, D. D., Bp. of Bristol. 1704—1782). 

Dissertations on the Prophecies which have been fulfilled 

■ and are fulfilling. Numerous editions. Two and three 

vols., 8vo. Also, one vol., 8vo., 7s. 6d. Lond., W. Tegg. 

A standard work of a laborious and learned author ; 
rather laborious reading. The Bishop must not be 
trusted upon the New Testament prophecy. Theologi- 
cally his standing is very dubious. 



THE PROPHETS — ^ISAIAH, 173 



THE PROPHETS. 

711 KITTO (John, D. D.) "Isaiah and the Prophets." In 
Dally Bible Illustrations. (See No. 43.) 

Should be consulted wherever the readings touch 

upon a passage. 

713 LOWTH (Bishop) and others. A Literal Translation of the 

Prophets from Isaiah to Malachi, with Notes by Lowth, 

Blayney,~ Newcome, etc. Five vols. 8vo. Lond., 1836. 

lOs. to 15s. 

Concerning each of the five volumes we refer the reader to our notices 

under the separate books. 

713 LOWTH (William, B. D., 1661^1733, Father of Bp. Lowth) 

Commentary on the Prophets. Four vols. 4to. Lond., 
1714. 
This is Lowth's part of Patrick (No. 51). He was more spiritual than 
those with whom he became associated, which is not saying much. 

714 NOTES (George E., D. D.) A New Translation of the He- 

brew Prophets. Three vols., 13mo. New York, 1849. 
We are bound to commend this author's learning, taste, and candor, 
even though we differ widely from him. The reader must not look for 
savor or spiritual quickening, but use the work as a literary help ouly. 

715 WILLIAMS (Rowland, D. D.) The Hebrew Prophets dur- 

ing the Assyrian and Babylonian Empires. Translated 

afresh from the Original, with Illustrations. Two vols., 

8vo. 23s. 6d. Lond., Williams & Norgate. 1866-71. 

The author does not admit that there are references to the Messiah iu 

the Prophets. Whatever he may have written, this fatal error deprives it 

of value. A man writing in that fashion should have been a rabbi in the 

synagogue, and not a minister among professed Christians, 



ISAIAH. 

716 AIiEXANDER (Joseph Adbison). Prophecies of Isaiah, 
earlier and later. T. Clark. Two vols. 17s. 1874. S. 
13s. 
Dr. Hodge says of the author : " I regard Dr. Joseph 

Addison Alexander as incomparably the greatest man I 



174 ISAIAH. 

ever knew — as incomparably the greatest man our Church 
has eyer produced." He wastes no space, but gives the 
essence of exposition. 

717 AIiEZANDER (Joseph Addison). Isaiah Translated 

and Explained. An Abridgment of the Preceding. Two 
vols. 12mo. New York, 1858. S. 6s. 

This abridgment of the larger work is by no means 
"a small affair. For all ordinary purposes it is volum- 
inous enough. We cannot too strongly recommend it. 

718 BARNES (Albert). Notes on Isaiah. Edited by Dr. 

Camming. Three vols. Sm. 8vo. 7s. 6d. , Boatledge, 
1850. Cobbin's Edition, two vols., 1853. S. 4s. 6d. 

A good popular exposition, though not the most 

learned. 

719 BIRKS (T. E., M. A.) Commentary on Isaiah, and a revised 

Translation. 8vo. 12s. Lond., Bivingtons. 1871. S. 6b. 
Written for the Speaker's Commentary, and, thpngh not inserted 
therein, it Btrikes ns as being &r superior to that work. It is a great trea- 
smre to the student of this much neglected prophet. 

730 CALVIN (John). Commentarie on Isaiah Translated by 
C. Cotton. Folio. Lond., 1609. 9s. 
The translation of the Calvin Translation Society will be better. 

721 CHEYNE (T. K., M. A.) The Book of Isaiah chronologic- 
ally arranged. An Amended Version. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 
Lond., Macmillan & Co. 1870. 
We do not as a rule believe in these re-arrangementB ; the book of 
Isuah is best as we have it. The tone of the interpretation in this in- 
stance is not such as we can delight in ; what the evangelical teacher has 
a right to expect is totally absent. The work is of the Broad School ; the 
notes are, however, learned and somewhat suggestive. 

723 Notes and Criticisms on the Hebrew Text of Isaiah. 

Cr. 8vo. 2s. 6d. Lond., Macmillan & Co. 
The Westminster Beview speaks of it as " a piece of scholarly work, 
very carefully and considerately done." It may be so. 

733 COWLES ( Henry, D. D.) Isaiah, with Notes. 13mo. 
New York, D. Appleton & Co. 1869. S. 6s. 6d. 

Cowles writes more popularly than Alexander, and, 

though he is not so profound an authority, we have read 

him with pleasure. 



Isaiah. 175 

724 DAT (William). An Exposition ol the Book of Isaiali. 

Folio. 1854. 12s. 6d. to 14s. 
Day does not throw mnch light npon the text : he says be wrote for his 
children, and certainly he is childish enough, 

725 DELITZSCH (Pkanz.) Biblical Commentary on Isaiah. 

Two vols., 8vo. 21s. Edinb., T. & T Clark. 1862. 
" The author has long been honorably distinguished among the scholars 
of Germany. He occupies, indeed, a position always peculiar to himself ; 
for, whilst his attainments in Hebrew philology and Talmudical lore are 
of the highest order, he unites with these a genuine appreciation of evan- 
gelical truth and godliness," So says the Literary Churchman. For our 
own part, we are not enraptured with Beiitzsch, 

726 EWAIiD(H.) The Prophet Isaiah, Chapters I.— XXXIII. 

From the German. By Octavius Glover, Cr. 8vo. 6s. 

Lond., Bell & Sons. 1869. 
Decidedly sceptical ; but yet it may be useful as leading the reader to 
appreciate the poetic beauty of the book. Question if the good to be giuned 
equals the risk incurred. Our verdict is to the contrary. 

727 FBASEB (Alexander). Paraphrase with Notes. 8vo. 

Edinb., 1800, 2s, 
Of very small value, 

728 GALLOWAY (William Brown, M. A.) Isaiah's Testimony 

for Jesus. A Series of Discourses. 8vo. 14s. Lond., G. 

Bell & Sons. 1864. S. 23. to 4s. 
A congregation which would listen to such lectures as these must be 
a very select one indeed. The writer goes most thoroughly and learnedly 
into his subject, 

729 HENDERSON (Ebenezer, D. D.) Isaiah, translated from 

the Hebrew ; with a Commentary. Bvo, 1840. Second 
and best edition. 1857. S. 8s. 6d. Scarce (pub. at 16s.). 
The author has given no doctrinal or practical observations, as he con- 
ceived that others had famished these in abundance ; he has confined 
himself to eliciting the real meaning of the words, and has thereby rendered 
great service to all expositors who have wit enough to make use of his 
critical assistance. To the less instructed reader, Dr. Henderson's work 
will appear to be dull and savorless ; but to those who only need to have 
the language translated, and are able to supply reflections for themselves, 
it will be of much service. 

730 GOVETT (R. Junior, M. A.) Isaiah Unfulfilled. Exposi- 

tion, with new Version and Critical Notes. 8vo. Lond,, 
1841. S. 2s. 6d. 
We have not met with this publication. 



l'?6 ISAIAH. 

731 JENOUR (Alfred, M. A.) The Book of Isaiah, translated, 
■with Notes and Practical Remarks. Two vols., 8vo. 
Lond., 1830. 3s. 

This appears to as to he a faithful translation ; the commentary and 
practical reflections are instructive and gracions. 

733 KEITH (Alkxander, A. M.) Isaiah as it is : or Judah and 
Jerusalem the suhjects of Isaiah's prophesying. Cr. 8vo. 
Edinh., 1850. 33. 
The student will consnlt ^th heneflt this valnaUe oontribntion to the 

explanation of a most important, hut neglected hook, 

733 EELLY (William). Lectures on Isiuah. 2s. 6d. Lond., 

Q. Morrish. 1871. 
This eminent divine of The Brethren school Bometimes expounds ahly, 
hut -with a twist towards the peculiar dogmas of Iiis party, 

734 LOWTH (Robert, D. D., F. R S., Bishop of London. 1710— 

1787). Isaiah, Translation with Notes. 8vo. Numerous 

editions, S. 2s. ; a modern one, 8vo., 48. 6d. Loud., W. 

Tegg, See No. 712. 

Smith's Dictionary remarks that Bp. Lowth's inoeaaant oorreotion of 

the Hehrew text is constantly to hemistrasted. This seriously diminishes 

Lowth's value, hut this is a grand work notwithstanding, 

735 LTTH (John, D. D.) Homiletical Treasury. 12mo. Is. 

Lond., Elliot Stock. 1868. 
Tliia should have been to the preacher a hook of the utmost value, for 
it oonsists whoUy of outlines and hints fbr sermons, hut these are fre- 
quently poor and commonplace. The design is superlatively practical, and 
had the execution been hatter we should have rejoiced in it, 

736 MACCULLOCH (Robert, D. D.) Lectures on Isaiah. Four 

vols. 8vo. Lond., 1791—1805. 13s, to 18s. 
In these days we need condensation. This author would have been Ha 
more valued if he had compressed his matter into one volume. He is goodt 
but verbose. . Some authors toil not, but they spin ; Maccullooh both toils 
and spins. 

737 MACLACHLAN (Mrs., of Maclachlan), Notes on the unful- 

filled Prophecies of IsaiaH. [Anon.] 8vo. 8s. 6d. Lond., 

Nisbet. 1868. 
This authoress treats Isaiah as a Jewish hook only, and refers all the 
prophecies to that nation. We do not agree with her fundamental prin- 
ciple. 



ISAIAH. 177 

738 MANCHESTER (Gkokgb Montague, Duke of). Short 

Notes on laaiah, chap. V.— XII. 8vo. 1852. 3s. 

We confess that we cannot enjoy the very singalar style of the Duke's 
prelections, but there are some who set great store by them. We wonder 
why. 

739 NOYES(G. E.) See No. 714. 

740 STOCK (Joseph, M. A., Bishop of Killalla). Isaiah in 

Hebrew and English. With Notes. 4to. 1808. 43. 

The notes are few, but are said by the British Critic to be " uncom- 
monly valuable for their depth and acuteness." We should not have 
thought so. Stock alters the renderings of Lowth, but seldom improves 
them. We judge him to be over estimated. 

741 SMITH (B. Payne, D. D., Dean of Canterbury). The 

Authenticity and Messianic Interpretation of the Prophe- 
cies of Isaiah Vindicated, in Sermons before the University 
of Oxford. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Oxf. and Lond., J. H. & J. 
Parker. 1863. S. 5s. 6d. 

A work which would be invaluable in a discussion with Jews. It meets 
their objections, and also those advanced by neologians, and by the writers 
of Assays and Beviews. 

743 VEENET (Lady). Practical Thoughts on the First Forty 
Chapters of Isaiah. 8vo. Lond., Nisbet. 1858. S.2s. 6d. 

Some sensible spiritual hints will be found in these remarks. As an 
exposition it is one of the least, 

743 WHISH (J. C, M. A.) A Paraphrase of the Book of Isaiah, 

with Nates. 12mo, 3s. 6d. Lond., Seeley & Co. 1863. 
S. Is, 3d, 

Somewhat helpful. The paraphrasing is not prolix, and it does, as a 
rule, aid the reader in getting at the literal sense. With the spiritual 
teaching Mr, Whish has not intermeddled, 

744 WHITE (Samuel, M. A. Commentary on Isaiah, wherein 

the literal sense is briefly explained, 4to. Lond., 1709. 
3s. 6d. 
This author keeps to the literal sense and is very severe upon spiritual- 
izers of whose vagaries he gives specimens. In aiming at one excellenoo 
he misses others, and fiiils to see Chiist where he certainly is, thus render- 
ing his remarks less valuable to the Cbriatian mind. 
8* 



178 PAETS OF ISAIAH. 



PAETS OF ISAIAH. 

[There are many worts upon separate chapters of this book, but it does 
not fall in with our plan to go so much into detdl as to enumerate them 
aQ. We thought it would be useful to our readers if we mentioned a 
few.] 

745 MACDUFF (J. R., D. D.) " Ctomfort ye, Comfort ye : " 

God's words of comfort addressed to his Church in the 
last twenty-seven chapters of Isaiah. Cr. 8vo. 58. 
Lond., Nisbet. 1872. 
Br. Macduff translates Into popular language the teachings of great ez- 
positoiB, and does it to perfection. For an hour's pleasant and holy read- 
ing commend us to Dr. Macduff. 

746 CALVERT (Thomas). Mel Coeli, Medulla Evangelii: or 

The Prophet Isaiah's Crucifix. An Exposition of the Fifty- 
third chapter of Isaiah. 4to. 1867. 5s. to 7s. 6d. 

Precious and practical. Just what the title would 
lead us to expect — marrow and fatness ; honey from the 
Eock, Christ Jesus. 

747 DURHAM (James). Christ Crucified : or the Marrow of 

the Gospel, holden forth in Seventy-two Sermons on 
Isaiah liii. Editions, folio, 4to. and 8vo. 3s. to Ss. 

This is marrow indeed. We need say no more : Dur- 
ham is a prince among spiritual expositors. 

748 MACDONOGH (T. M.) Messiah as revealed in Isaiah liii. 

Founded upon Manton (749). 13mo. Lond., 1858. ls.6d. 

This is a serving up of the next work in the form of lectures. "We do 

not admire abridgments, and especially those which make alterations and 

additions ; still it is likely that many have read Macdonogh's Mantoa who 

might never have fiiUen in with Manton's Manton. 

749 MANTON (Thomas, D. D.) A Practical Exposition on the 

whole Fifty-third Chapter of Isaiah. 8vo. Lond., 1703. 
Also in Works, Vol. III. Nichol's Puritan Series. 

Manton needs no praise from us. Whatever he does 

is done in a style worthy of a chief among theologians. 

He is, however, seldom too brief, and his own bulk hinders 

his being read. Preachers of long sermons should take 

a hint from this. 



JEREMIAH AKD LAMENTATIONS. 179 

750 MAEQOLIOUTH (Moses, B. A.) Six liecturea on laaiah liii., 

etc 8vo. Lond., Hatchards. 1846. 3s. 
Well worth a carefiil reading. 

751 STEWART (James Haldanb, M. A.) Lectures upon 

Isaiah LV. 12mo. Lond., Hatcliards. 1846. Is. 6d. 
Nine sweet evangelloal discourses, in a lively, impressive style. 



JEREMIAH AND LAMENTATIONS. 

[We would call special attention to tlie volume of tlie Speaker's Commen- 
tary upon this Book, It is by Dr. Payne Smith, Dean of Canterbury, 
and deserves much praise.] 

752 BLATNET (Benjamin, D. D. Died 1801). Jeremiah and 

Lamentations. New Translation, with Notes. 8vo. Lond., 
1836. 2s. 6d. (See No. 712.) 
Blayney belonged to a past school of clever men, too apt to suggest new 
readings, and more able to appreciate literary beauties than spiritual teach- 
ings. He was a zealous follower of Lowth, but he lacked the fine taste 
and poetic genius of his master. 

753 BROUQHTON- (Hugh). The Lamentations of Jeremy 
" translated. With Explications. 4vo. 1608. 

Incomprehensible. One of Broughton's wilder pieces. It may as well 
die. 

754 HUIjIj (John, D. D.) Exposition upon part of Lamenta- 

tions. 4to. Lond., 1618. 7s. 6d. 
Pull of quaintnesses. Marrowy throughout. 

735 KEIL (K. F. 1754 — 1818). Commentary on Jeremiah and 
Lamentations. Two vols., 8vo. 21s. Edinb., T. & T. 
Clark. 1874. 
We have already indicated the direction in which Keil is serviceable. 

For exact interpretation he is esteemed, but he is too cold and formal ever 

to be a favorite. 

756 liANGE'S COMMENTARY. Jeremiah and Lamenta- 
tions. By Dr. C. W. Nagelsbach. One vol., Imp. 8vo. 
21s. Edinb., T. Clark. 1871. 
" Whoever becomes possessed of this great work will 

have, in a comprehensive form, the results of all ancient 



180 EZEKIEL. 

and modern exegesis, -with an apparatus criticus of sur- 
prising copiousness." — British Quarterly Eeview. 

757 LOWTH (Wilmam, M. A.) A Commentary on Jeremiah 

and Lamtjstatious. 4to. Lond., 1718. Is. 6d. (See Nos. 

51 and 713.) 
This forms a part of what is known as Bp. Patrick's Commentary. 
Orme says that Lowth is " one of the most judicious commentators on the 
prophets, and he never prophesies himself." We wish we could say this 
of all writers on prophetic subjects. 

758 SMITH (Thoknlbt). The Prophet of Sorrow : or Life and 

Times of Jeremiali. 'Cr. Svo. 4s. 6d. Edinb., Oliphaat. 
1875. 
Not a commentary ; hut as it casts Kght on the character and times of 
the prophet it deserves a place here. 

759 SWIFT (Daniel). Zion's sufferings: an Exposition of 

Lamentations V. 13mo. Lond., 1654. 4s. 
Strong, rough, coarse. Excessively rare. 

760 UDALL (Johk). A Commentarie upon the Lamentations of 

Jeremy. [Anon.] 4to. Lond., 1599. 4s. or 5b. 
In this extremely rare work the author has labored after brevity, and 
has given the abridgment of many discourses ; hence, to those who can 
procnre, it, it is all the more useful. 



EZEKIEL. 

761 ALLEINE (William). The nine last Chapters of Ezekiel 
unfolded. Svo. 1679. 5s. 6d. 
Very rare ; will interest interpreters of prophecy. 

763 OOWLES (Hbnky, D. D.) Ezekiel and Daniel : with Notes, 
Critical, Explanatory, and Practical. Thick cr. Svo. 
New York, D. Appleton & Co. 1867. S. 6s. 6d. 

In his own way this author is one of the most in- 
structive of American writers ; he is clear and definite, 
and leaves his meaning impressed upon the mind. His 
scholarship is respectable, 

763 PAIRBAIRN (Patrick, D. D. Ezekiel, Exposition ; with 
New Translation. Svo. 10. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 
1S51. 
This exposition has passed through three editions. 



EZEKIEL. 181 

and has gained for its author a high place among eluci- 
dators of diflScnlt parts of Scriptm-e. Dr. Fairbairn has 
a cool judgment and a warm heart ; he has cast much 
light upon Ezekiel's wheels, and has evidently felt the 
touch of the live coal, which is better still. 

764 GREENHILL (William,- M. Av 1591—1677). Exposition 

of Ezekiel. Five vols. 4to. 1645—1667. Reprinted in a 
thick imp. 8vo. volume, 1827, and now issued in Nichol's 
Commentaries. 10a. 6d. Lend., Nisbet. 1863. 

We always get something out of Greenhill whenever 
we refer to him. He had not, of course, the critical 
skill of the present day, but his spiritual insight was 
keen. He rather commented on a passage than ex- 
pounded it. 

765 GUTHRIE (Thomas, D. D.) The Gospel in Ezekiel. Cr. 

8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Daldy & labister. 1864. 
Veiy little of Ezekiel, and a great many of those flowers of eloquence 
which rendered Dr. Guthrie so famous. We can hardly regard it as an 
exposition. It only dwells upon the latter part of the 36th chapter. 

766 HENDERSON (Ebenezeb, D. D.) Ezekiel. With Com- 

mentary. 8vo. Lond., Hamilton. 1855. 5s. 

Valuable condensed notes. 

767 HENGSTENBERG (E. W., D. D.) The Prophecies of 

Ezekiel elucidated. Demy 8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb.,T. &T. 
Clark. 1869. 

We have frequently characterized this author's writings. They are 
clear, cold, and dry, like a fine moonlight night in the middle of winter. 
A man needs a peculiar mind to enjoy Hengstenherg ; hut all educated 
students can profit by him. 

768 KEIL (K. F.) Ezekiel [Two vols., in preparation]. Edinb., 

T. Clark. 

769 IiANGE. Commentaries on Ezekiel and other Books of 

Old Testament. [In preparation.] Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 

770 NEWCOME (William, D. D., Abp. of Armagh. 1729— 

1800). Improved version, metrical arrangement, and ex- 
planation. 4to. Dublin, 1728. 8vo. Lond., 1836, etc. 
(See Lowth and others. No. 712). 
Dr. Fairbairn says : — " The notes areof a very brief description, chiefly 



182 DANIEL. 

explanatory of the meamngs given in the translation ; and both the trans- 
lation and the notes proceed to a large extent on the vidoas principle, very 
prevalent at the time, of getting rid of difficulties in the sense by proposed 
emendations of the text." Yet Newcome showed both learning and dili- 
gence in this improved version. 



DANIEL. 

771 AMNER (B.) Essay towards interpretation. 8to. Lond., 

1776. 
Written on the absnrd hypothesis that the prophecies were all fulfilled 
before the death of Antiochus Epiphanes. 

772 AUBERLEN (Carl August, Ph. D.) The Prophecies of 

Daniel and the Revelation, by C. A. A. Translated by 
Adolphe Saphir. 8vo. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1857. 5s. 
Not a textu:il commentary, but a treatise upon the mysterious prophe- 
cies. Auberlen's spirit is reverential and his views are evangelical, or we 
should not have found Mr. Saphir translating it. He acknowledges his 
indebtedness to Eoos, No. 800. We must leave the interpretations to be 
judged by those who are learned in such subjeota. 

773 BABKES (Albert). Notes. Blackie's edition. Two 

vols., post 8vo. 7s. S. 3s. 6d. 

Dr. Wardlaw said of this work : — " I have examined 
the ' Notes ' of the Eev. Albert Barnes on a considerable 
Tariety of testing passages ; and, so far as my examina- 
tion has gone, I feel confident in pronouncing them to 
be characterized, in no ordinary degree, by discriminar 
tive judgment, sound theology, unostentatious learning, 
practical wisdom, and evangelical piety." 

774 BIRKS (T. R., M. A.) Exposition of the first two Visions of 

Daniel. Fcap. Svo. 6s. Lond., Seeleys. 1845. S.2s. 6d. 

775 BIRKS (T. R., M. A.) The Two Later Visions of Daniel 

historically explained. F'cap 8vo. 6s. Lond., Seeley. 
1846. 
We must leave judgment upon this work and the preceding one to 
those skilled in prophetic interpretation. 



DAlflEL. 183^ 

776 BRIGHTMAN (Thomas. Puritan. 1557—1607). A most 

comfortable Exposition of the last and most difficult part 
of the Prophecie of Daniel, from the 26th verse of the 
11th Chapter to the end of the 13th Chapter, wherein the 
restoring of the Jewes and their calling to the faith of 
Christ after the utter overthrow of their three last enemies 
is set forth in lively colors. 4to. Lond., 1644. 
Tliis exposition and the autbor^s commentary on Canticles are appended 
to his work on Eevelation, and do not appear to have been pabliahed 
separately. In his title-page Brightman ia called a bright and worthy man, 
and in the preface we are told that " he shined every way and was a Bright- 
man indeed." His work is rather a curiosity than a treasure. 

777 BEOtTGHTON (Hugh. 1549—1612). Daniel's Chaldee Vis- 

ions. Works. Folio. Lond., 1662. 
This author was pedantic and eccentric, but yet a man of real learning. 
His works have almost disappeared. In his own day some considered 
him a sage and others a quack. He was a little of both. 

778 CALVIN (John). Commentaries upon Daniel. 4to. 

Lond., John Day. 1570. 10s. 

Also in Calvin's complete works. 

779 COLEMAN (Thomas). Decision, exemplified in Daniel. 

8vo. Lond., 1858. 
This is by the author of " Memorials of Independent Churches," It is 
inteaded fur children and is suitable for them, 

780 OOWLBS (Hbnky, D, D.) See under Ezekiel, No. 763. 

781 DANIEL : Statesman and Prophet. [Anon.] 8vo. Ss. 6d. 

Lond., Religions Tract Society. [N. D.] 
A valuable popular addition to the literature of the book of Daniel. 
Objections to its authenticity and inspiration are met, and the assaults of 
infidels are made to bring out the evidences of Divine authority with all 
the greater clearness. We are delighted with the volume, which is beauti- 
fully got up. Every student and minister should have a copy. 

783 DARBY (John Nelson). Studies. Is. Lond., W. H. 
Broom. 
The name of the writer sufficiently indicates the character of the book. 

783 DBSPREZ (Philip S., B. D.) Daniel ; or, the Apocalypse of 
the Old Testament. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Williams & Nor- 
gate. 1865. 
This work is of the Essays and Eeviews school. The author cannot see 

the Messiah in Daniel. It is worse than useless. . 



184 DAlflBIi. 

784 ELLIOTT (E. B.) See under Revelation. 

785 PKERE (James Hatlbt, Es<i.) A Combined View of the 

Prophecies of Daniel, Ezra, and St. John. 8vo. Lend., 
1836. S. 3s. 6d. 

Thia has been esteemed by many in its day, bat we do not recommend 
its purchase. 

786 GAUSSEN (S. R. Louis). Daniel, explained for Young 

Persona. Two Tola. 8to. 9a. Lond., J, & C. Mozler. 

1874. 

This is a work for children only. We hope it will not 
set our Sujiday School teachers explaining to their little 
ones the image and its toes, the he-goat, and all the 
other marvels. If they do attempt it we wish them as 
well through their task as Professor Gaussen. 

787 HARRISON (Benjamin, M. A., Archdeacon of Maidstone). 

Prophetic Outlines of the Christian Church and the Anti- 
christian Power, as traced in the Visions of Daniel and St. 
John. [Warburtonian Lectures.) 8vo. 1849. Ss. 

We like the manner of this book. The author has 
been content throughout to trace the true outline of in- 
terpretation without entering on a detailed examination 
of counter theories ; and he has done this in the spirit 
of Bishop Eidley, who said upon a kindred subject, 
" Sir, in these matters I am so fearful that I dare not 
speak further than the very text doth, as it were, lead 
me by the hand," 

788 HENGSTENBERG (B. VV.) Dissertations on the Genuine- 

ness of Daniel and the Integrity of Zechariah. 8vo. 12s. 
Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1848. S. 5s. 6d, 

Mnch valuable matter is brought out by the discussion ; but few of na 
have time to go into it, or any need to do eo ; for we are fuUy persuaded 
of the integrity of all the prophets, and of their books too. 

780 HUIT (Ephraim. Puritan). The whole Prophecie of Dan- 
iel Explained. 4to. Lond., 1643. Ss. (id. 

Huit's short doctrinal summaries of the verses will bring useful snb- 
jocla before the preacher's mind ; otherwise Hait is not very remarkable. 



DA KIEL. 185 

790 IRVING (Edward, M. A. 1792—1834). Babylon and Infi- 

delity foredoomed of God ; A Discourse on Daniel and the 
Apocalypse. Two vols., 12mo. Glasg., 1826 ; also one 
vol:, 8vo. 3s. 6d. 
More of rolling sound than anything else. 

791 KEIIi (K. F.) Commentary on the Book of Daniel. 8vo. 

10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1872. 

" We have just had occasion to mal^e ourselves ac- 
quainted with Keil's book on Daniel, and we can speak 
of it in very high terms. It is marked by gi-eut erudi- 
tion, rare accuracy, -and much spiritual thoughtfulness." 
— Evangelical Magazine. 

792 KELLT (William). Notes. 12mo. la. 6d., Lond., Morrish. 

1870. 
It needs minds of a peculiar organization to enjoy Plymouth writingn. 
They abound in peculiar phraseology, which only the initiated can under- 
stand. We are sorry to see such a mind as Mr. Kelly's so narrowed to 
party bounds. 

793 KNOX (J.) Eeflections on Daniel. Small 8vo. 1849. 
This book is unknown to us. 

794 MANCHESTER (Geobge Montaguk, Dokb op). The 

Times of Daniel, Chronological and Prophetical. 8vo. 

Lond., 1845. 3s. 

This work has received the most enthusiastic praise ft'ora German 

writers, who dwell with pleasure upon his being " erudite and illastrious." 

The duke's writing is oerbunly sui generis. He is by no means a favorite 

author with us. 

795 MILES (Charles Popham, B. A.) Lectures, vcith Notes. 

[Chap. I— VII]. Two vols. 12mo. Lond., Nisbet. 1840- 
41. 3s. 6d. 
Commendable sermons and good notes, 

796 MORE (Hbnry, D. D., F. R. S. 1614—1687). A Plain and 

Continued Exposition of the several Prophecies of Daniel. 
4to. Lond., 1681. 2s. 6d. 
If a man had no more than More on Daniel he would certainly long fur 
more, and need a work more spiritual and more suggestive. 

797 NEWTON (Sir Isaac, F. E. S. 1642—1727). Observations 

on Daniel and the Apocalypse, 4to. Lond., 1733; 8vo., 
1881. 2s. to 3s. 
The author's name will always keep this book in repute. The spiritail 
student wUl not glean mnoh from it. Sir Isaac's fame does not rest on his 



186 DAXIEL. 

expositions. The following extract we cannot forbear inserting in this 
place : — ^The folly of interpreters has been, to foretell times and things by 
this prophecy [the Apocalypse], as if God designed to make them prophets. 
By this rashness they have not only exposed themselves, bat brought the 
prophecy also into contempt. The design of God was much otherwise. 
He gave tliis and the prophecies of the Old Testament, not to gratify men's 
cariosities, by enabling them to foreknow things, bat that after they wet'e 
falfllled they might be interpreted by the event ; and his own providence, 
not the interpreter's wisdom, be then manifested thereby to the world." 

798 PARKER (Thomas. Puritan. Died 1677). Daniel ex- 

pounded. 4to. Lond,. 1646. 
This learned book is enough to perplex and distract any ordinary mor- 
tal, but probably Dr. Camming and brethren of his school would revel in 
it. We had sooner read a table of logarithms, 

799 PUSET (Edwakd BotrvERiB, D. D. Regius Profeflsor of 

Hebrevir). Daniel the Prophet. Nine Lectures. 8vo. lOs. 
6d. Lend., J. Parker & Co. 1869. 

To Dr. Pasey's work on Daniel all subsequent writers 
must be deeply indebted, however much they may differ 
from him in other departments of theological study. 

800 ROOS (Magnus Fbedkrick. 1727—1803). Exposition of 

such of the Prophecies of Daniel as receive their accom- 
plishment under the New Testament. Translated by £. 
Henderson. 8vo. Edinb., 1811. Is. 6d. and 3s. < 

Dr, Henderson gently chides those who are not suf- 
ficiently intent upon prophetical interpretation. There 
would be fewer of such delinquents if expositors were 
more reasonable. Koos, however, is dull to a dreadful 
^gree : we should say that nobody ever read him through, 
except his translator. He is very devout, and this is 
the saving point about his book. We cannot tell whether 
the views of Eoos are correct or not, for we cannot keep 
awake while reading him. As far as we have gone we 
have seen some reason to question. 

801 RniiE (William Harris, D. D.) Historical Exposition of 

Daniel. Cr. 8vo. Lend., Seeley & Co. 1869. 3s. 

A notably interesting exposition, bringing historical 



DANIEL. 187 

facts and memorials to bear upon the prophecy. It is 

not merely readable, but attractive. 

803 STRONG (Leonabd). Lectures. 12mo. 2s. Loud., Yapp. 
1871. 
Notes of instructive lectures. 

803 STTJART (Moses). A Commentary on the Book of Daniel. 

8vo. Boston, U. S. 1850. S. 9s. 6d. 
Stnart gives quite an independent interpretation, and fails to see the 
Pope and his Cardinals in Daniel, for wMoh we like him all the better. 
We do not accept his conclusions, hut he is always worthy of respect. 

804 TREGELLES (S. Phidbaux, LL. D.) Remarks on the Pro- 

phetic Visions of Daniel. Cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond,, Bagsters. 
1852. 
Tregelles is deservedly regarded as a great authority upon prophetical 
Buhjects. 

805 WELLS (Edward, D. D.) Daniel explained. 4to. Lond., 

1716. Is. 6d. 
Tills is a different work to that mentioned in number 62. It is of no 
great value. 

806 WILLET (Andrew). Hexapla in Danielem. Folio. 1610. 

8s. 6d. 
Dr. Williams says that this is a work of much information, as it con- 
tains the " opinions of many aathors on each point of diificulty.' ' He adds 
that in none of his expositions does Willet " discover mora skill and judg- 
ment than in the present work." 

807 WILSON (Joseph, A. M.) Horse Proplieticse ; or Disserta- 

tion On the Book of Daniel. 8vo. Oundle, 1834. 2a. 
We consider this to be of more than average worth. 

808 WINTLB (Thomas, B. D. 1737—1814). Daniel, an Im- 

proved Version, with Notes. 4to. Oxf., 1792 ; 8vo., 
Lond., 1836. 2s. (See No. 712.) 
Learned notes, mainly philological, with a translation on the plan of 
Lowth. 

809 WODROW (Robert). Destiny of Israel, as unfolded in the 

Eighth and succeeding Chapters of Daniel. 12mo. Black- 
ie & Son. 1844. Is. 6d. 
This devout author follows the system of Sir Isaac Newton and Bishop 
Newton. His calculations as to the year 1843 were disproved by history. 

810 WOOD (William, A. M.) Lectures on the first Seven Chap- 

ters of Daniel. 12mo. Lond., Cleaver. 1847. Is. 6d. 
Flun sqrmons of no great expository value. 



188 MINOK PKOPHETS. 



MINOR PROPHETS, 

811 BARLEE (Edwabd). Explanatory Version of the Minor 

Prophets. 12mo. Lond., Pickering. 1839. Is. 6d. 
One of the hest paraphrases we have ever met with. 

812 COWLES (Henbt, D. D.) The Minor Prophets, with Notes. 

Cr. 8vo. New York, D. Appleton & Co; 1867. S. 7s. 
" This work is designed for hoth pastor and people. It embodies the 
results of much research, and elucidates the text of sacred Scripture with 
admirable force and simplicity." — New York Christian Intelligencer. 

813 DANiEUS, or DANEAU (Lambert. Eminent French Prot- 

estant Divine. 1530—1596). A fraitfull Commentarie 
upon the Twelve Small Prophets. Translated by John 
Stockwood, Minister at Tunbridge. 4to. Lond., 1594. 
A translation of a work famous in its day, but of small service now. 

814 HENDERSON (Ebknezeb, d; D.) The Twelve Minor 

Prophets. Large 8vo. Lond., Hamilton & Co. 1845. 

Scarce. S. 10s. 
A learned critical work, not spiritually or dootrinally suggestive, but 
simply explanatory of the text. This author denounces the theory of a 
double sense in prophecy ; we, none the less, believe it to be a fact. 

815 HUTOHBSON(QEOBaE). Briefe Exposition of the Twelve 

Small Prophets. Three vols., Sm. 8vo. Lond., 1655 ; 
One vol., folio, 1657. 7s. 6d. to 10b. 

Get it. ■ Hutcheson ip always rich. He resembles 

Dickson. 

816 KEIIi (K. P.)- Commentary on the Minor Prophets. Two 

vols., 8vo. 21s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1871. 

" Dr. Keil is at his best in this Commentary ; and 
to all who have ventured on this obscure region we can 
promise an intelligent guide and a serviceable light in 
this work. We ourselves, under his guidance, have, 
resumed the study of these beautiful and instructive 
Scriptures with renewed vigor and growing delight." — 
Nonconformist. 

817 KELLY (Weluam). Lectures. Cr. 8vo. 4b. 6d. Lond., ■ 

Broom. 1871. 
Mr. Kelly finds in the Minor Prophets a great many things which wa 



MINOB PEOPHETS. 189 

cannot see a trace of— for mBtance,lie here discovers that we shall lose 
India. It is a pity that a man of such excellence should allow a very supe- 
rior mind to he so warped. 

818 liANGE. CommentaTy on the Minor Prophets. Edited 

byDr.Schaff. Imp. 8vo. 21s. JEdinb., T. & T. Clark. 1874. 

The commentaries on the different prophets are by 
various authors ; hence their value differs. As a whole 
the volume is excellent, but not so good as Keil. 

819 NEWCOME (William, D. D. Abp. of Armagh.. 1739— 

1800). Improved Version, Metrical Arrangement, and Ex- 
planation. With all the Principal Notes of Horsley on 
Hoaea, and Blayney on Zechariah. 8vo. Lond., 1836. 
2s. 6d. (See No. 712.) 
A celebrated critical work of a past age, but not expository. Newcome 
was too fond of new readings to be safely followed. 

830 PUSET (E. B., D. D.) The Minor Prophets. With a Com- 

mentary. 4to., sewed, 5a. each part. Part I., Hosea to 
Joel ; II., Joel to Amos, vi. 6 ; III., Amos, vi. 6 to Micah, 
i. 13 ; IV., Micah, i. 13 to Nahum ; V. [in the press]. Hab- 
akkuk to Haggai. Lond., J. Parker. 1860—1871. 

All authorities speak of this work with great respect 
and so would we ; but it is evident that Dr. Pusey is far 
too much swayed by patristic and mediaeval commen- 
tators. 

831 BAND ALL (James, M. A.) Sermons on the Books of Joel, 

Jonah, Nahum, Micah, and Habakkuk. 8vo. Lend., 1843. 
as. 6d. 

Superior sermons ; bat what are they among so many prophets ? 

833 STOKES (David, D. D.) Paraphrase. 8vo. Lond., 1659. 4b. 
Of no importance. 



190 HOSEA. 



HOSEA. 

833 BURROUGHBS (Jeremiah. Puritan. 1599—1646). Ex- 
position of the Prophesie of Hosea. Four vols. 4to. 
Lond., 1643 — 1651. [The original work does not include 
Chapter XIV., upon which there is an Exposition by 
Sibbes, and another by Bp. Reynolds. The reprint, by 
James Sherman, contains the Exposition completed by 
Hall and Reynolds. Nichol's Series of Commentaries. 
One vol., Imp. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Nisbet, 1863. 

Masterly. A vast treasure-house of experimental 

exposition. With the exception of Adams, we prefer it 

to any other of the expositions reprinted under the 

editorship of Mr. Sherman. 

824 HORSLET (Samuel, Bishop of St. Asaph). Hosea. Trans- 

lated from the Hebrew ; with Notes. 4to. Lond., 1804. 

S. 3s. And in Vol. 2 of Biblical Criticism. 

Horsley occasionally succeeds in elucidating obscurities, but frequently 

his treatment of the text reminds one of the old army surgeons who out 

and hacked their patients without mercy. This translation is still valued, 

but is to be followed with discretion, 

825 DOWNAME (John, B. D. Died 1664.) Lectures upon the 

Four First Chapters of Hosea. 4to. Lond., 1608. 3s. 6d. 

An exposition of the richest kind. Get it by all 
means, if you can. 

836 DRAKE (William, M. A.) Notes, critical and explanatory, 
on the Prophecies of Jonah and Hosea. 8vo. Camb., 
Macmillan & Co. 1853. 
For Hebraists only. 

827 NEALE (James, M. A.) Hosea. Translation, Commentary, 

' and Notes. Royal 8vo. Lond., 1850. S. Is. 6d. to 2s. Od. 

"We do not think many ministers will value it for homiletioal purposes. 

838 POCOCK (Edward, D. D. 1604—1691). Commentary on 
Hosea. In Vol. 2 of his Vi^orks ; two vols., folio. Lond., 
1740. 12b. 6d. 

Orme says Pooook was " one of the finest Oriental scholars, and cer- 
tainly the first Arabic scholar of his age." His book is a treasury flllecJ 
vvltli the products of laborious research. 



HOSEA. 191 

829 WOLFENDALE (J.) Homiletical Commentary on Hosea. 

[In progreas ; being Part 5 of the Preacher's Commentary.] 

Is. Lond., B. D. Dickinson. [1875.] 
On an excellent plan, and moderately well executed. With Burroughes 
and others to quarry from, and so good a method to work hy, Mr. Wolfen- 
dale ought to have produced a better book ; but even aa it is he deserves a 
measure of commendation, 

830 SMITH (Samuel). An Exposition upon the Sixth Chapter 

of the Prophesie of Hosea. 4to. Lond., 1616. 5b. 

In Smith's usual quiet, rich, expository manner. 

831 MARGOLIOUTH (Moses, B. A.) Genuine Repentance, and 

its Effects. Exposition of Hosea XIV. 8vo. Lond., 
1854. 3s. 
Bespectable discourses. 

832 REYNOLDS (Edwabd, D. I)., Bishop of Norwich. 1599— 

1676). An Explication of the Fourteenth Chapter of 
Hosea, in Seven Sermons. 4to. 1649. 2b. Reprinted 
by the Religious Tract Society. 18mo. Is. 6d. See also 
under Burroughes, No. 823. 

Keynolds was one of the greatest theological writers 

in an age of great divines. He worthily takes place 

with Burroughes. 

833 SIBBES (Richakd, D. D.) Tlie Returning Backslider, or 

a Commentary upon Hosea XIV. 4to. 1639, etc. 23. 
Also in Vol. 11. of his Works, Nichol's edition. 

Manton says of Sibbes, that he had a peculiar gift 

in unfolding the great mysteries of the Gospel in a sweet 

and mellifluous manner, and therefore he was by his 

hearers usually termed the Sweet Dropper, "sweet and 

heavenly distillations usually dropping from him with 

such a native elegance as is not easily to be imitated." 

This commentary on Hosea is a fair specimen of his style. 



193 JOEI* 



JOEL. 

834 CHANDLER (Samtjbl, D. D.) A Paraplirase and Critical 

Commentary on Joel. 4to. Lond., 1735. 2s. 6d. 
Chandler makes very few remarks of a Bplritnal kind, bnt explains the 
letter of the word with considerable skill. In wrilang upon Joel he does 
not appear to the same advantage as in his " Life of David." He does not 
effect much in clearing up the " things hard to be understood " in the 
prophet, and he is of the old broad school. 

835 HUGHES (Joseph, B. A.) The Prophecy of Joel. The 

Hebrew Text metrically arrangied, with a New Transla- 
tion and Criiical Notes. F'cap. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lend,, 
Bagaters. 
A purely literary troatise, useful to Hebrmsts only. 

836 POCOCK (Edwakd, D. D.) A Commentary on Joel. 

Works, Vol. L Folio. Oxf., 1691. [The same volume 
contains his commentaries on Micah and Malachi.] 
Full of antique learning. Holds a high place among the older com- 
ments, but will never again be popular. 

837 ROWLEY (Adam Clakke, M. A.) Joel. Metrical Transla- 

tion. Sq. 8vo. Lond., Hamilton. 1867. S. Is. 6d. 
The translation has been carefully executed. The notes are illustrative 
and literary only ; they do not profess to open up the moral and spiritual 
teaching of the prophet. Could Adam Clarke rise from the dead, he would 
rejoice to find his grandson fallowing in his footsteps. 

838 TOPSELIi (Edwakd). Times Lamentations : or An Expo- 

sition on the Prophet Joel. 4to. Lond., 1599. 9s. 

Among the old English Commentaries Topsail is the 
writer on Joel. He has the usual fore?, homeliness, 
piety, and fulness of the Puritan period. 

839 UDALL (John). The true remedie against Famine and 

Warres. Fine Sermons vpon the first Chapter of the 
prophesie of Joel. Lond. 12mo. 1586. 15s. 
We gave so high a price for this small black letter volume that we 
should like to make it profitable to our brethren, and therefore we com- 
mend to the more starchy of them the following extract, which will also 
serve to show how the old preachers lashed with vigor the fashions of 
the times. TTdaU says : " For the feeding of our monstrous humor of 
vanity, how many thonsauds of quarters of the finest wheat, which God 
ordained for the food cf man, are yearly converted into that most devilish 



AMOS — OBADIAH. 193 

device of starch. A sin ao abominable that it doth cry so loudly in the 
Lord's ears for vengeance, as his justice most needs proceed against us for 
it, without speedy repentance." 



AMOS. 

840 BENEFIELD (Sebastian, D. D. 1559—1630). A Commen- 

tary upon the first Chapter of the Prophecle of Amos. 

Delivered in twenty-one Sermons. 4to. Lond., 1629. 

Upon the second chapter, in twenty-one Sermons, 1620. 

Upon the third chapter, in seventeen Sermons, 1629. 

[Sometimes to be met with in one volume.] 9s., or with 

Hall (No. 841), two vols., 18s. to 203. 
Dr. Benefield was Lady Margaret Professor in Oxford, a Puritan and 
thorough Calvinist. His volume was, in its time, the standard Commen- 
tary on Amos. It is somewhat prolix and pleutifolly sprinkled with Latin ; 
it only discusses three chapters in 953 pages. 

841 HALL (Thomas, B. D., Puritan, Born 1610). An Exposition ; 

by way of Supplement, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, 
eighth, and ninth Chapters of Amos. 4to. Lond., 1661. 
Hall took up Amos where Benefield left off. He says he studied brev- 
ity, and perhaps he succeeded, for he does not quite fill 600 pages with six 
chapters. The two quartos make up a complete work, of an antique type, 
not suitable to modern tastes, nor up to the mark of present criticism, but 
still instructive. What Puritan is not ? 

842 ETAN (Vincent Wilmam, M. A.) Lectures on Amoa. 

12mo. Lond., Seeleys. 1850. 28. 
A commendable series of Lectures ; the more valuable because so few 
modems have ventured to touch the subject. 



OBADIAH. 

843 MARBtTRY (Edwakd, A. M. Died about 1655). Obadiah. 
4to. Lond., 1649. 4s. 6d. Reprinted, with his Commen- 
tary upon Habakkuk, in Nichol's Series. Cr. 4to. 7s. 6d. 
Lond., Nisbet.., 1865. 

Far more lively than Eainolds. His spirituality of 

mind prevents his learning becoming dull. He says in 

9 



194 ' JONAH. 

the preface, " »11 my desire is to do all the good I can," 
and he writes in that spirit. 

844 PILKINGTON (James, B. D., Bishop of Durham. 1530— 

1575). In the " Works of Bishop Pilkington," reprinted 

by the Parker Society, there are Commentaries on Haggai, 

Obadiah, and Nehemiab. S. 3s. 

!Fall of the minor as well as the major controversies of the Beformation 

period, and ttierefore the less interesting to ns. In its own day it was the 

master-work on the two prophets, Haggu and Obadiah. 

845 RAINOLDS (John, D. D. 1549—1607). The Prophecie of 

Obadiah opened and applyed. 4to. 1613. 3s. to 4s. 6d. 

Beprinted, with his work on Haggai, and King on Jonah, 

in one volume of Nichol'a Series. Cr. 4to. Ts. 6d. Lond., 

Nisbet. 1864. 
Fnll of classical stories and learned allusions ; but more useful when 
first written than now. The author was one of the most learned men the 
world ever produced, but he is not likely to be a favorite with modem 
readers. 



JONAH. 

[This unlovable Prophet has found more Commentators than any other ; 
partly we suppose because the angles of his chacrater excite greater inter- 
est, but mainly because we have some knowledge of his life, and there- 
fore are able to realize his personality. He has received quite as much 
attention as he deserves in proportion to other Prophets.] 

846 ABBOTT (George, Abp. of Canterbury. 1563—1643). 

An Exposition upon the Prophet Jonah. 4to. 1613. Ss. 
New edition, published at 12s, offered for 3s., hy Ogle & 
Murray, Edinb. 

Abbott was a renowned Calvinistic divine, and one 

of the translators of the present version of the Bible. 

No set of works on Jonah would be complete without 

this learned, laborions, and comprehensive exposition. 

It is, of course, very antique in style ; but, like " old 

wine," it is none the worse for its age. 

847 BENJOIN (Geobgb). Jonah. Translation, with Notes. 

4to. Camb., 1796. 
Plenty of paper. Horoe says this work " is literally good for nothing." 



JOUAH. 195 

848 OALVIN (John). Lectures upon the Prophet Jonas 

Translated by N. Baxter. 4to. Lond., 1578. 9fl. 

This of course is fuller than the Commentary, and, 
as the work of a revered master, is beyond our criticism. 

849 CUISfNINGHAM (J. W., A. M.) Six Lectures on the Book 

of Jonah. F'cap. boards. 3s. Lond., Hatchards. 1833. 
Qood simple Lectares. 

850 DESPBEZ (P. S., D. D.) The Book of Jonah. Illustrated 

by Discoveries at Nineveh. 13mo. 1857. Is. 6d. 
To make Lajard illustrate Jonah was a good idea, and it has been well 
carried out by this author. 

851 DRAKE (WilIiIAH, M. A.) Notes on Jonah and Hosea. 

8vo. 9s. Camb., Macmillan & Co. 1853. S. Is. 6d. 
Entirely critical. Only useful to Hebrew scholars. 

852 EDWAEDS (Henbt). Exposition of the Book of Jonah. 

13mo. Long Sutton, Strain. 1887. 3a. 
Foorteen plain, earnest, practical sennons. 

853 EPHRABM SYRUS. (Died about 379). A Metrical Homily 

on the Mission of Jonah. Translated from the original 
Syriac, by Henry Burgess, LL. D. Cr. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 
Lond., Sampson Low & Co. 1853. S. Is. 6d. 
A literary curiosity — ^nothing more. 

854 EZEIiIi (Joseph S.) Practical Readings on the Book of 

Jonah. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Elliot Stock. 1874. 

Mr. Exell, in a very unpretending but able way, 
brings to light the practical lessons of Jonah. Paxton 
Hood calls these readings " admirable," and we concur 
in the verdict. 

855 FAIRBAIRN (Patrick, D. D.) Jonah: Life, Character, 

and Mission. 13mo. Edinb., Johnstone. 1849. S. 2s. 

The life and times of the prophet are set in a clear 
light ; and the nature and design of his mission fully 
explained. The work is well done, and is by far the 
ablest English treatise on this prophet. 



196 JOKAH. 

856 PULLER (Thomas, D. D.) Notes upon Jonah. [In " A 

Collection of Sermons." Sm. 8vo. Lond., 1656.] Mr. 
Tegg has reprinted Fuller's Comment on Ruth, and Notes 
npon Jonah, in one small 8vo. vol. 4s. 6d. 1868. S. 3s. 6d. 

Full of wisdom, and fuller of wit ; in fact, too full 

of the soul of the latter, for they are far too short. 

857 GAirsSEN (S. R. Louis, Theol. Prof., (Jeneva). Jonah, the 

Prophet. Lessons on his Life. 18mo. la. 6d. and 2b. 
Lond., Religious Tract Society. [N. D.] 
Addresses to a Sunday School at Gteneva. 

858 HARDING (Thomas). Expository Lectures. 12mo. Lond., 

1856. S. Is. 
What intelligent man in this kingdom oonld learn anything from these 
lectm-es ? The worthy man writes only such self-evident trniams as mnst 
have occnrred to anyhody and everyhody who has read his Bible. 

859 HOOPER (John. Bishop and Martyr). An oversyghte and 

dellberacion uppon the holy prophet Jonas : made and 
uttered before the Kinges Majesty and his most honorable 
Councell, by Jhon Hooper, in Lent last past. Compre- 
hended in seven Sermons. 16mo. Lond., 1550. Re- 
printed by the Parker Society. 8vo. Camb., 1843. S. 3s. 
It would not repay the student to buy Hooper's works for this short 
piece. The language is antique, and the thought not of the newest. 

860 JONES (Thomas, of Creaton). Jonah's Portrait. 13mo. 

1837. 2s. 
" Jonah's Portrait " was very popular fifty years ago, and deservedly 
so, for Mr. Jones sketches it with considerable power. We should fancy 
that Jonah's portrait, as he sat nnder his withered gourd, was not a thing 
of beauty, or a joy forever. 

861 KING (John, Bishop of London. 1559—1621). Lectures 

upon Jonas. 4to. Oxf., 1600, etc. S. 3s. to 5s. Reprinted 
in Nichol's Series of Commentaries. (See Rainolds, 
No. 845). 
Quaint and rich, with a little occasional quiet mirth. It was the book 

of its time. Some will think it out of date, others will, like Grosart, prize 

the work of " the Bishop with the royal name." 

862 MACPHERSON (A.) Lectures. ]8mo. Edinb., 1849. Is. 
Far superior to the general run of lectures. 

863 MARTIN (Hugh). The Prophet Jonah. Cr. 8vo. 6a. 

Lond., W. labister & Co. 1866. 

A first-class exposition of Jonah. No one who has 



JONAH. 197 

it ■will need any other. It is not a small treatise, as 
most of the Jonah books are ; but it contains 460 
pages, all rich with good matter. It is out of print, and 
ought to be republished. What are publishers at to let 
such a book slip out of the market ? 

864 MUIK (A. S.) Lessons from Jonah. Cr 8vo. Lond., 1857. 

Is. 6d. 
A lively, popular, and earnest book, in a Bpecially florid style. Th» 
author talks a great deal about " the Son of Amitlai ; why not say Jonah J 
We are tempted to pull the finery to pieces ; but we stay our hand, for 
there is really something good in these " lessons." 

865 PEDDIE (James, D. D. 1759—1845). A Practical Exposi- 

tion of the Book of Jonah. 13mo. Edinb., 1843. 3s. 

"The pungent remarks peculiar to the Ealph Erskine 
school make the Jonah of Dr. Peddie a favorite wherever 
it is known." 

866 PRESTON (Matthew Morbis, M. A.) Lectures. 8vo. 

Lond., 1840. Is. 
Ordinary sermons. Better ones can be bought for a penny. 

867 QUAKLES (Francis). A Feast for Wormes. A Poem on 

the History of Jonah. 4to. Lond., 1630. 
Quiuut and rather bombastic verse, hut full of meaning. 

868 RALEIGH (Alexander, D. D.) The Story of Jonah. Cr. 

8vo. 6s. Edinb., A. & C. Black. 1875. 
Dr. Ealeigh calls your attention to every touch of 

the strange picture which hangs before us in the life of 
Jonah. Although we do not always endorse the Doctor's 
remarks, we can but marvel at the beauty and power of 
his descriptions and reflections. 

869 TWEEDIE (W. K.) Man by Nature and Grace : or Lessons 

from Jonah. 13mo. Edinb., Johnstone & Hunter. 1850. 
a Is. 6d. 
A good practical work, expounding the book of Jonah for Christian edi- 
fication. 

870 SIMPSON (James). Discourses from Jonah I. 8vo. Edinb. 

1816. 3s. 6d. 
Very little in the sermons, but their titles are singularly happy, and in 
themselves enough to afford subjects of discourse to preachers. 



198 MICAH — HABAKKtJK — ^HAGGAI. 



MICAH. 

[Since there is so very little npon tiiis book the student shonld refer to 
■trorks on the Minor Prophets, as a whole. There are some excessively 
rare authors and also works in Latin ; bat these do not &11 within our 
range.] 

871 POGOCK (Edward, D. D.) See No. 836. 



HABAKKTJK. 



872 MABBTTRY (Edwasd, A. H.) Commentarie. 4to. Lond. 
1650. 33. 6d. to 53. For Reprint, See No. 843. 

Here Marbury holds the field alone among old Eng- 
lish authors, and he does so ■worthily. There is about 
him a vigorous, earnest freshness which makes his 
pages glow. 



HAGGAL 

873 QEYN^US (John James, D. D. 1540—1617). Haggeus, 

the Prophet ; a most plentiful Commentary, gathered out 
of the Publique Lectures of Dr. J, J. Grynseua. 12mo. 
Lond., 1586. 
Grynteus was a voluminous author, and commented on most of the 

books of Scripture, but only this work has been turned into English, and 

it is now seldom met with. 

874 MOORE! (T. V., D. D., of Eichmond, Va., XJ. S.) Haggai, 

Zechariah, and Malachi. A New Translation, with Notes. 
8vo. New York, 1856 ; Lond., 1858. 53. to 68. 6d. 

A capital book. Most useful to ministers. 

875 PILKINGTON (Bishop). See under Obadiah, No. 844. 

876 EAINOLDS (John, D. D.) Ha^ai; Interpreted and 

Applyed. 4to. 1613 and 1649. For Beprint, See No. 845. 
Eainolds was the tutor of Hooker, and had a main hand in our author- 
ized version of the Bible. Bishop Hall says, " the memory, the reading of 
that man were near a miracle." We ought to be enraptured with a Com- 
mentary from such a divine, but wo confess that we are not. 



ZECHAKIAH. 199 



ZECHARIAH. 

877 BLATNEY (Benjamin, D. D.) Zechariah. A New Trans- 

lation, with Notes. 4to. Oxf., 1797. 3s. 6d. 
Tiiis learned anther writes after the manner of Lowth, bnt has neither 
Lowth's taste nor poetic vein. His notes will not suggest sermons, bat 
will be philologioally useful if cautiously read. 

878 HENGSTENBERG (E. W.) 

In his " Christology " (for which See No 68) Hengstenberg has given a 
thorough and elaborate exposition of the greater part of Zechariah and 
Malachi. He is top grammatical and dry to be generally interesting. 

879 KIMCHI (David. A celebrated Spanish Rabbi. Died about 

1240). Commentary on Zechariah. Translated from the 
Hebrew by Rev. A. M'CauI, A. M. 8vo. Lend., 1837. 
Is. 6d. 
This enables the English reader to see how the Jews themselves under- 
stood the Prophets, and this is worth knowing. 

880 MOORE (T. V.) See under Haggai, No. 874. 

881 PARK (I. R., M. D.) An Amicable Controversy with a 

Jewish Rabbi on the Messiah's coming ; with an entirely 

new Exposition of Zechariah. 8vo. Lond., 1832. 2s. 

The words " entirely new exposition " put us on our guard, and did 

not entice ub to read. The caution was needful. This author explains the 

prophecy spiritually, and asserts that " the spiritual is the most literal 

interpretation." We more than doubt it. 

882 PEMBLE (William, M. A. Puritan. 1591—1633). A 

Short and Sweet Exposition upon the First Nine Chap- 
ters of Zechariah. In his Works. Folio. Oxf., 1659, and 
Lond., 1635. 3s. 6d. to 58. 
Bichard Capel says : " Amongst the hardest books of Scripture the 
Prophets may have place, and amongst the Prophets, Zechary is a deepe, 
wherein an elephant may swimme, and therefore I cannot but commend 
the wisdom of that man of God (the author of this books), who bestowed 
his learning and his paines to open the mysteries of this Propheoie. Death 
ended his dayes ere he could quite finish his works, and great weakness 
hindered an intended supplement." Pemble was a learned Calvinistio 
divine, and his writings are highly esteemed, but not very captivating. 



200 UALAOHI. 

883 STONAED (Johk, D. D. 1769—1849). CommenteTy on 

Zechaiiali, with, a Corrected Translation, and Critical 
Notes. 8vo. Lond., 1834. 4s. 
An earnest attempt to exponnd this prophecy ; we do not think the 
author has succeeded, hut he has written some good things. 

884 WARDLAW (Ralph, D. D.) Lectures on Zechariah. 

[Posthumous Works, Vol. III.] Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Edinb., 
A. FuUerton & Co. 1863. S. 2s. 6d. 

Written in the Doctor's old age ; but we prefer it, in 

some respects, to other volumes of his lectures. We 

always consult it. 



MALACHI. 

885 MOOEE (T. v., D. D.) See under Haggai, No. 874. 

886 POCOCK (Edwabd, D. D.) See under Joel, No. 836. 

887 SCLATER (Wihiam, D. D.) Brief and Plain Commentary 

upon Malachy. 4to. Lond., 1650. 5s. or 6s. 
Not equal to the general standard of Puritan comments. The editor of 
the work rightly says, " the method is, for the chapters themselTes, an- 
alytical ; for the practical ohservalioDB, synthetical." We are quaintly told 
that he would start the hare with any man ; that is to say, he would sug- 
gest thought and leave others to pursue its track. 

888 STOCK (RiCHAKD, M. A. 1568—1636). A Commentary 

upon Malachy. Whereunto is added an Exercitation 
upon the same Prophecy by Samuel Torshell. Folio. 
Lond., 1641. [Reprinted, together with Bernard and 
Fuller on Ruth. Cr. 4to. 7s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet. 1865.] 
See No. 368. 
Contains a stock of knowledge, and more than a sufficient stock of 
quotations from the fathers. Torshell printed the book fifteen years after 
Stock's death, and finding it to be written for a popular audience only, he 
added an examination of the original and a ibw notes in a more learned 
style, to make a complete commentary. The two authors have thus com- 
posed the work upon Malaohi. 

889 WATSON (Thomas. Puritan). Notes on Malachy III. 

8vo. 1683. 

This would be a great find if we could only come at it, for Watson is 



COMMBNlAEIES OK THE HEW TESTAMENT. 301 

one of the clearest and liveliest of Fnritan authors. We fear we shall 
never see this commentary, for we have tried to obtain it. and tried in vain. 

May God iless this effort Co assist his ministers in tie staiy of the Old 



COMMENTARIES ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

[See also under Whole Bible Nos. 1 — 66. In many cases the New Testa^ 
ment may be had separately.] 

890 ALFORD (Henkt, D. D., Dean of Canterbury). The Greek 

Testament ; with a Critically Revised Text, etc. Four 
vols., 8vo. £5 3s. Loud., 1856—61. (See page 36 of this 
Work). Rivingtons, and G. Bell & Sons. 

891 The New Testament for English Readers. Four 

parts. 8vo. £3 I4s. 6d. Rivingtons, and G. Bell and 
Sons. 1873. (See page 37). 

892 The New Testament Authorized Version Revised. 

Long Primer, Cr. 8vo., 63. ; Brevier, F'cap. Svo., 8s. 6d. ; 
Nonp. Sm. 8vo., Is. 6d. Rivingtons, and Isbister & Co. 

■ How to Study the New Testament. Part 1, Gospels 



and Acts ; Part 8, Epistles (first section) ; Part 3, Epistles 
(second section) and Revelation. Sm. 8vo. 3s. 6d. each. 
Lond., W. Isbister & Co. 1868. 

All critics speak of Alford with respect, though they 
consider that something better than his Oreek Testa- 
ment is still needed. He is, for the present at any rate, 
indispensable to the student of the original. With some 
faults he has surpassing excellencies. We specially 
commend 893 to the careful reading of young ministers. 

894 ASH (Edwaed, M. D.) Notes and Comments on the New 

Testament. Three vols. Sm. 8vo. Lond., 1849-50. 
Bemarks such as any plain, thoughtful reader would make off hand. 

895 BARNES (Albert). Notes on the New Testament. 

Blackie's edition. Eleven vols., Post 8vo. £1 14s. 6d. 
Routledge's edition, Ten vols., £1. 

Everybody has his work, and therefore can judge for 

himself, or we would both commend and criticise. 

(See page 30.) 

B* 



203 COMMEKTAKIES ON XHE KBW TESTAMENT. 

896 BAXTEE (Richard. 1615—1691). Paraphrase on the New 

Testament, with Notes. 4to., 1685. 8vo., 1810. 4s. or 5s. 
The notes are in Baxter's intensely practical and personal style, and 
show the hortatory use' of Scripture ; but they are not very explanatory. 

897 BENGEIi (John Albert. 1687—1752). Gnomon of the 

New Testament, translated into English. With Original 
Notes. Five vols. Demy 8vo. Subscription price, 31s. 
6d. Cheap issue, the five vols, bound in three, 34s., to 
snbscribers. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. (See also No. 910.) 

See our remarks upon pages 33 and 34. 

898 BEZA (Theodore). Newe Testament, Translated out of 

Greeke.byTheod. Beza. Sm. fol. Lond., 1596. 25s. 

The compact marginal notes are still most useful. 
The possessor of this old black letter Testament may 
think himself happy. 

899 BIBUCAL MUSEUM (The). A complete Commentary 

on au Original Plan. By James Comper Gray. Five 
vols., Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. efich. Lond., Elliot Stock. 1871-3. 

Most helpful in suggesting divisions, and furnishing 
anecdotes. Multum in parvo. Our opinion of it is very 
high. It is not critical, but popular. The author has 
used observations in order to crowd in as much matter 
as possible. (See No. 6.) 

900 BLOOMFrBUD (S. T., D. D.) The Greek Testament, with 

English Notes ; chiefly original. Two vols., 8vo. Lond., 
1841. 8s. 6d.' to 14s. 

901 Additional Annotations on the New Testament. 8vo. 

Lond., 1850. 2s. 6d. 

We frequently get more from Bloomfield than from 
Alfred, though he is not so fashionable. His notes are 
full of teaching. 

902 Recensio Synoptica Annotationis Sacrse ; being a Crit- 
ical Digest on the most important Annotations on the New 
Testament. Eight vols., 8vo. Lond., 1826. 15a. to Sis. 
[A considerable part of this work was included in recent 
editions of the editor's Greek New Testament.] 

" It would be impossible to convey to our readers an 



COMMENTAKIES ON THE TESTAMENT. 203 

adequate idea of the mass of information which the 
learned author has brought to bear upon the numerous 
passages which he has undertaken to illustrate, and we 
can safely say, that the enquirer will find very few of 
wMch Mr. Bloomfield has not given a complete and sat- 
isfactory exposition." — Quarterly Theological Eeview. 

903 BOWrEK (Wn-LIAM, P. S. A. 1699—1777). Critical Con- 

jectures and Observations on the New Testament, From 
various authors. 4to. Lond., 1813. 2s. 6d. 
According to Orme, the best that can be sud for th%se conjectures, is 
that they are ingenioos; bat who wants conjectures at all! 

904 BOYS (John, D. D., Dean of Canterbury. 1571— 1635)' 

Exposition of the Domiuicall Epistles and Gospels used 
in our English Liturgie throughout the whole yeere. 
Folio. Lond., 1638. 143. 

Racy, rich, and running over. We marvel that it 

has not been reprinted. English churchmen ought not 

to leave such a book in its present scarcity, for it is 

specially adapted for their use. Boys is all essence. 

What a difference between the John Boys of 1638 and 

the Thomas Boys of 1837 ! Note well the name. 

905 BOTS (Thomas, M. A.) The New Testament, with a plain 

exposition for the use of families. 4to. Lond., 1837. 5s. 
Ordinary readers might be benefited by the practical observations and 
evangelical applications and exhortations ; but students do not require this 
Boys' exposition. 

906 BURKITT (William. 1650—1703). Expository Notes. 

Numerous editions, folio, 4to., and 8vo. Mr. Tegg pub- 
lishes it in two vols., 8vo. 15s. S. 5s. to 8s. (See page 40). 
We liked Barkitt better when we were younger. He is, however, a 
homely and spiritual writer, and his work is good reading for the many. 

907 CHALMERS (Thomas, D. D., LL. D.) Sabbath Scripture 

Readings. Posthumous Works, vol. IV. (See No. 12). 

The readings are not upon every portion of Scripture, 
neither can they be viewed as a full exposition of any 
part thereof. They are precious fragments of immortal 
thought. 



204 COMMENXAEIES ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

908 CHBYSOSTOM. Homilies on Matthew, three vols., 36s. ; 

John, two vols.. 34s. 6d. ; Acts, two vols., 21s. ; Romans, 
one vol. ; 1 and 2 Corinthians, three vols., 2s. 6d. ; Com- 
mentaries on Galatians and Homilies on Ephesians, one 
vol. ; Philippians, Colossians, and Thessalonians, one vol. ; 
Timothy, Titus, and Philemon, one vol., 13s. 8vo. Li- 
brary of the Fathers. Land., J. Parker & Co. The price 
of the volumes to subscribeis is considerably less. Sec- 
ondhand volumes about 5s. each. 
Enongh of solid truth and brilliant ntterance will be found here to 
justify this father's title of "Golden Mouth"; but still all is not gold 
-which fell from his lips, and to modern readers Chiyaostom is not ao in- 
structive as he was to his own age. 

909 CHURTON (Edwaiuj, M. A.), and JONES (William Basil, 

M. A.) The New Testament. With a Plain Explanatory 
Comment. Two vols., Cr. 8vo. 21s. Lond., Murray. 
1869. S. 13s. 6d. 
Meant for private or &m3y reading; with brief notes and well executed 
engravings. An elegant work. 

910 CKrnCAI' ENGLISH TESTAMENT, (The). An Adap- 

tation of Bengel's Gnomon, witb Notes, showing the Re- 
sults of Modern Criticism and Exegesis. Three vols:, Cr. 
8vo. 6s. each. Lond., Isbister. 1869. S. 9s. to lis. 

" The editors of this valuable work have put before 
the English reader the results of the labors of more than 
twenty eminent commentators. He who uses the book 
will find that he is reading Bengel's suggestive ' Gnomon,' 
modifying it by the critical investigations of Tischendorf 
and Alford, and comparing it with the exegetical works of 
De Wette, Meyer, Olshausen, and others, and adding to 
it also profound remarks and glowing sayings from 
Trench and Stier." — ^Evangelical Magazine. 

We have heard this opinion questioned ; but with all 
discounts the book is a good one. 

911 CUMMING (John, D. D.) Sabbath Evening Readings. Is- 

sued as follows: — The Four Gospels, iu four vols., 20a. ; 
Acts, 7s. ; liomaus, 4s. 6d. ; Corinthians, 5s. ; Galatians, 
EphBsians, and Philippians, 6s. ; James, Peter, and Jude, 
■6s. ; Revelation, 7s. 6d. Loud., Arthur Hall, Virtue & Co. 
185a, etc. S. 2s. each. 
Dr. Gumming is always evangelical, and his style is very attractive. 



COltMElTTAHIES ON THE NEW TESTAMENT, 205 

These works are rather for popular reading than for students ; but they are 
good as a whole, and their spirit is excellent. The doctor has written too 
fast, and borrowed too much ; but he interests aud edifies. 

912 DALLAS (Alexander, A. M.) The Cottager's Guide to the 

New Testament. Sis vols. 12mo. Lend., Nisbet. 1839— 

45. 7s. 6d. 
Six volumes for cottagers I How could they ever buy them ? If bought, 
how could they refrain from sleeping while trying to read them S The 
** Guide " could be of no possible use to a sensible man, except as an opiate. 

913 DALTON (W., A. M.) Commentary. Edited by the Eev. 

W. Dalton, A. M. Twovola. 8vo. Lond., Seeleys. 1848. 
5s. 6d. 
Not of use to preachers. Prepared for famDy reading, and mainly 
taken from" Henry and Scott, There are quite enough of these compila- 
tions, 

914 DAVIDSON (David). Critical Notes. ' Two vols., 18mo. 

Edinb., 1834. 3a. 
Two small thick volumes : really a pocket commentary. Although the 
notes are good, the student had better spend his money on better books, 

915 DODDRIDGE (Philip, D. D. 1702—1751). Family Expos- 

itor ; With Critical Notes. Many editions. Six vols., 
4to. ; five vols., 8vo. ; four vols., 8vo. ; and one vol., imp. 
8vo.. 10s. 6d. Lond., Tegg. 
" The late Dr. Barrington, Bishop of Durham, in addressing his clergy 
on the choice of books, characterizes this masterly work in the following 
terms : — ' I know no expositor who unites so many advantages as Dodd- 
ridge ; whether you regard the fidelity of his version, the fullness and per- 
spicuity of his composition, the utility of his general and historical in- 
formation, the Impartiality of his doctrinal comments, or, lastly, the piety 
and pastoral earnestness of his moral and religious applications.' " Later 
interpreters have somewhat diminished the value of this work. 

916 ERASMUS (Dbsiderius. 1467—1536). Paraphrase. Black 

Letter. Two vols. Polio. Loud., 1548 and 1551. 
This paraphrase was appointed by public authority to be placed in all 
churches in England, and the clergy were also ordered to read it. The 
volumes are very rare, and expensive because of their rarity. 

917 GELL (Robert,. D. D. ' Died 1665). Gell'a Remains ; or. 

Select Scriptures explained. One or two vols. Folio. 

Lond., 1676. 7s. Od. to 10s. 
A queer collection of remarks, criticisms, and fancies, in a huge volume. 
Baxter called Gell " one of the sect-makers." He was, no doubt, a singu- 
lar man, an Arminian, and one who had great respect for " the Learned 
Bocietic of Astrologers." 



206 COMMEOTAEIBS OK THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

918 GILPIN (WrLUAM, A. M. 1724:— 1804). Exposition of the 

New Testament. 4to. 1790. Fourth edition. Two vols. 
8vo. 1811. 3s. 6d. 
Half paraphrase, half very free translation. Notes meagre. Useful to 
butter-men. 

919 GIRDLESTONE (Charles, M. A.) New Testament. Lec- 

tures for Families. Two vols. 8vo. Lond., 1835. 5a. 
Profitable household reading. 

920 GUTSE (John, D. D. 1680—1671.) The Practical Exposi- 

tor. Three vols., 4to., 1739—53 ; six vols., 8vo., 1775, etc. 

8s. 6d. to 15a. 
The day of paraphrases is past. Dr. Qnyse was ponderous m style, 
and we question if at this date he is ever read. Doddridge's Expositor is 
far better. 

921 HAMMOND (Henby, D. D.) Paraphrase and Annotations. 

Folio. Lond., 1675. Works, vol. III. Also in four vols., 

8vo. Oxf ., 1845. 9s. to 12s. 
Though Hammoud gives a great deal of dry CTitidsm,and is Anninian, 
churchy, and peculiar, we greatly value his addition to our stores of bibli- 
cal information. Use the sieve and reject the chaff. 

922 HETLYN (John, D. D.) Theological Lectures at Westmin- 

ster Abbey ; with an Interpretation of the New Testament, 
Two vols., 4to. Loni, 1749—61. 4s. 
Five volumes with absolutely nothing in them beyond a spinning out 
of the text. 

923 KNATCHBXTLL (Sra Norton, Bart. Died 1684). Annota- 

tions upon some Difficult Texts. 8vo. Camb., 1693. 2s. 
Much valued in its day ; hut far outdone by more recent critics. 

924 IiANGE (J. P., D. D.) Translations of the Commentaries 

of Dr. Lange and his Collaborate urs. Ten vols., imp. 8vo. 
21s., or to subscribers, 153. each. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 

See under separate books. 

925 LEIGH (Sir Edward). See No. 45. 

926 LINDSAT (John). Now Testament ; with Notes. [Selected 

from Grotius, Hammond, etc.] • Two vols., folio. Lond., 
1736. 4s. 6d. 
A condensation of other writers — very well done. 



COMMENTARIES ON THE NEW TESTAMENT. 207 

927 McCLELLAN (John Brown, M. A.) New Testament. A 

New Translation, Analyses, Copious References, and Illua- 
trationa from Original Authorities. Harmony of the Gos- 
pels, Notes, and Dissertations. In two vols." 8vo. Vol. I. 
The Gospels, with the Harmony. 30a. Loud., Macmillan 
& Co. 1875. S. 123. 
This work is what it professes to he, and we need say no more. It Isj 
however, a very expensive luxury at the publishing price. 

928 MATER (John, D. D.) New Testament. Two vols.. 

Folio. 1631. 163. (See pages 25 and 26.) 

929 METER (Dr. H. A. W. Oberconsistorialrath, Hannover). 

Commentary on the New Testament. Messrs. T. & T. 

Clark are issuing a Translation of Meyer's Commentary. 

They have issued Romans, two vols. ; Galatians, one vol. ; 

John's Gospel, one vol. Average price to non-subscribers, 

10s. 6d. per vol. ; subscription price, 2l3. for four vols. S. 

53. each. 
A very learned Commentary, of which Bp. Ellicott speaks in the high- 
est terms. Meyer must he placed in the first class of scholars, though 
Bomewliat lower down in the class than his admirers have held. Apart 
from scholarship we do not commend him. Alford was certainly no very 
rigid adherent of orthodoxy, yet he says of Meyer that he is not trusted 
where there is any room for the introduction of rationalistic opinions. 
Whatever credit may he due to him for accurate interpretation, this is a 
terribly serious drawback. It is well to be warned. 

930 NEWCOME (William, D. D., Apb. of Armagh. 1729— 

1800). Attempt towards revising our English Translation 
and Illustrating the Sense by Notes. Two vols., royal 
8vo. Dubl., 1796. 10s. to 13s. 
Newcome was a critical scholar whose works enjoyed a high repute. 
Cnhappily, the Unitarians brought out an " Improved Version," profes- 
sedly based upon Newoome's and this led the public to question New- 
come's orthodoxy, bnt there was little reason for doing so. Few of our 
readers will care tor this cold literal interpretation. 

931 BIBLIOAI. COMMENTARY ON THE NEW TESTA- 

MENT. (By Dr. Heemann Olshausbn). Continued 
after his Death by Ebrard and Wiesinger. Carefully re- 
vised, after the last German edition, by A. C. Kendrick, 
D. D., Greek Professor in the University of Rochester. 
Six volumes, large octavo. Price in cloth, $18. 

"The Commentaries of Olshausen are remarkable 

for their union of the results of critical learning witli 

devout feeling, and an insight which takes up very effect- 



208 COMMEITTAEIES ON THE NEW TESTAMESTT. 

ively the train of thought in the apostle or evangelist. 
In this last respect he approaches Calvin. 

932 PENN -(GBAinncLl-E, P. S. A.) The Book of the New Cove- 

nant ; being a Critical Revision of the English Version. 
8vo. Lond., 1836. 3s. 6d. 

933 Annotations on the Book of the New Covenaat. Svo. 

1837. 

934 Supplemented Annotations. Lend., 1838. 

These bookB are too learned for much to be learned from them ; per- 
haps if they had been more learned still they would have been nsefol. 

935 PLATTS (John). Self-Interpreting Testament. Foarvols., 

Svo. Lond., 1827. 7s. 6d. 

A sort of Biblical Commentary. A concordance will answer the par- 
pose. 

936 QUESNELL (Pasquibk. 1634—1719). New Testament. 

Four vols., Svo. Lond., 1719—1725. [The Gospels have 
been reprinted. Three vols., 12ma. Glasg., 1830. S. 7s. 
6d.] 
A Bweet and simple French writer who says many good things of a very 
harmless character. 

987 SUMNEE (John Bird,, Archbishop of Canterbury). Prac- 
tical Exposition of the Gospels, Acts, Epistles of Paul, 
James, Peter, John, and Jude. Nine vols., Svo. 1833 to 
1851. Is. 6d. to 2s. 6d. per vol. 

Sumner's Expositions are very mild and can generally be boaght very 
cheap. The public are pretty good judges, and the price indicates the 
value. The qualities which procure an archbishopric are not such as 
qualify a man to be an eminent expositor. 

938 TOWNSEND (George, M. A.) New Testament. Arranged 

in Chronological Order. Notes. Two vols., Svo. Lond., 
1838. S. 5s. 6d. 
This harmony has always been in repute ; but we confess we like the 
New Testament best aa we find it. 

939 TROLLOPE (William, M. A.) Analecta Theologica. Two 

vols., Svo. Lond., 1830—35. 5a. 
A condensation of the opinions of eminent ezpositois, very well exe- 
cuted, and useful except so fiir as superseded by more modern works. 

940 WALL (William, D.D. 1645— 1727-S). Brief Notes. Svo. 

Lond., 1730. ls.6d. 
Explains some difficulties, but is far surpassed by other annotators. 



THE FOUR GOSPELS. 209 

941 WESLEY (JoHK). See No. 63. 

943 WHEDON (D. D., D. D. Meth. Epia. Ch., America). Pop- 
ular Commentary. To be completed in five vols., or. 8vo. 
5s. each. Hodder and Stoaghton. 
Dr. "Whedon lacks common sense, and is no expositor. He is foriously 

anti-calviniatic, and as weak as he ia forions. 

943 WHITBY (Daniel, D. D. 1638—1736). See No. 51. 
This ia a part of Patrick, Lowth, etc. 

944 WILSON (William, B. D. 1763—1800). Explanation of 

the New Testament by the early opinions of Jews and 
Christians concerning Christ. 8vo. Camb., 1838. 3s. 
Follows a deeply interesting line of investigation. It is not a oom- 
mentaiy, but is too good to be omitted. 

945 WORSLEY (John). Translation, with Notes. 8vo. Lond., 

1770. 3s. 
Translatiou second rate, criticism none, notes very short. 



THE FOUE GOSPELS. 



946 ADAM (Thomas. 1701—1784. Of Wintringham). Expo- 

sition of the Gospels. Two vols., 8vo. Lond., 1837. 
4s. 6d. 
Short and sweet ; bat Adam is not the first man as an expositor. 

947 AQUINAS (Thomas. 1334—1374). Catena Aurea. Com- 

mentary, collected out of the Fathers. Six vols., 8vo. 

£3 3s. Lond. and Oxf., Parker. 1870. 
The Fathers are over-estimated, by a sort of traditionary repute, for we 
question if they are mnch read. This collection of extracts we always 
look into with curiosity, and sometimes we find a pearl, 

948 BONAR (HoBATirs, D. D.) Light and Truth. (See No. 7.) 

949 BOUCHIER (Bahton, A. M.) Manna in the House. Vol. L, 

Matthew and Mark ; Vol. II., Luke ; Vol. III., John. 

Thick 13mo. Lond., J. P. Shaw. 1853^. 5s. 
Mr. Boachier writes sweetly, and his books aid the devotions of many 
&milie3. Ministers may read them with profit ; but they are not exactly 
intended for them. 

950 BROWN (John, D. D., of Edinburgh). Discourses and 

Sayings of our Lord. Three large 8vo. vols. 31s. 6d. 
Edinb., Oliphant & Co. 1853. S. 18.S. 

Of the noblest order of exposition. Procure it. 

8* 



JIO THE FOXJB GOSPELS. 

951 BURGON (J. W., D. D.) Plain Commentary lor devotional 
reading. Five vols., f'tap. 8vo. 21s. Lond., Parker. 
1870. S. 12s. 
Eyle says : " This is an excellent, suggestive, and devout work; but I 

cannot agree with the author when he touches upon such subjects as the 

Church, the sacraments, and the ministry." 

953 CAMPBELL (Qeorse, D. D., P. B. S., Edinb. 1719—1796). 

The Gospels translated, with Notes. Four vols., 8vo. 

Aberd., 1814. 4s. 
Clear and cold. Orme says it is " one of the best specimens of a trans- 
lation of the Sonptures in any language." The preliminary dissertations 
are valuable ; the notes are purely critical. 

953 CHOICE NOTES on Matthew, drawn from Old and New 

Sources. [Also on Mark, Luke, and John.] Cr, 8vo. 49, 
6d. each. Lond., Macmillan & Co. 1868-69. 
These are taken from the grander treasuries of Prebendary Ford (No. 

957). "We have mentioned them because those who could not afford to buy 

Ford's books might be able to get these. 

954 CLARKE (Samuel. D. D. 1673—1729). Paraphrase, with 

Notes. Two vols., 8vo. Lond., 1741 ; Oxf., 1816. 2b. 
We do not care for paraphrases. Clarke was a learned man, but an 
unsafe guide. 

955 DENTON (W., M. A.) The Gospels for the Sundays and 

other Holy Days of the Christian year. Three vols., 8vo. 
15s., 14b, and 13s. each respectively. Lond., G. Bell k Co. 
l>'60-63. 
Curates will find this just the thing they need for sermonizing. 

956 [ELSLEY.] Annotations on the Gi>spela and Acts. Three 

vols., 8vo. Lond., 1827. S. 2. 6d. to 4s. 
Wholly critical and philological. 

957 rORD (James, M. A.) The Gospels, illustrated from 

Ancient and Modern Authors. Four vols., 8vo. Matthew 
lis. ; Mark, 10s. ; Luke, 12s. ; John, 133. Lond., Masters. 
. 1856—72. S. 7s. each. 

Those who wish to see what the Fathers said upon 
the Gospels, and to read the choicest sapngs of the early 
Anglican bishops, cannot do better than consult Ford, 
who has made a very rich collection. Some of the ex- 
tracts do not materially illustrate the text, but they are 
all worth reading. 



THE FOCR GOSPELS. 211 

958 FORSTER (John, M. A.) The G^ospel Narrative, with «, 

Continuous ExpoBition. Imp. 8vo. Load., J. W. Parker. 
1845. S. 3a. 
A paraphrase upon a good system, carefully executed, and instructive. 
Thoroughly Anglican. 

959 GILBY (William S., M. A.) Spirit of the Gospel. 8vo. 

Lond., 1818. 2s. 

Interesting remarks on certain texts. All can he found in other writers. 

960 HALL (Chables H.) Notes, for the Use of Bible Classes. 

Two vols., 8vo. New York and Lond., 1857. S. 8s. 

This hook is as full of reverence to Bishops and other Episcopal arrange- 
ments as if it had heen " appointed to he read in Churches." American 
Episcopalians can evidently he very thorough. Notes poor. 

961 JACOBUS (Melancthon W., Pennsylvania). Notes. 

Three vols., cr. 8vo. Ss. 6d. each. Edinb., W. Oliphant. 
1868-9. 

Jacobus is sound and plain, and is therefore a safe 

guide to Sunday-School teachers and others who need to 

see the results of learning without the display of it. 

963 JTTKES (Andrew). Characteristic Difierencea of the 
Gospels considered, as revealing various relations of the 
Lord Jesus. Cr. 8vo. 28. 6d. each. Loud., Nisbet. 1853. 
8. Is. 6d. 

Bemarks prompting thought ; containing in a small 

compass a mass of instruction. 

963 LANGE (J. P.) See No. 924. 

The Gospels are among the best of the series. 

964 LYTTLETON (Lord George). Gospels and Acts, with 

Notes. Sm. 8vo. Lond., Rivingtpns. 1856. S. 3s. 
Such remarks as most teachers could make for themselves. 

965 NORRIS (John, Canon of Bristol). Key to the Gospel Nar- 

rative. Sm. 8vo. 2s. 6d. Lond., Rivingtona. 1871. S. 

Is. 6d. 
" Canon Norris writes primarily to help ' younger students ' in study- 
ing the Gospels. But the unpretending volume is one which all students 
may peruse with advantage. It is an admirable manual for those who take 
Bible Cluasea through the Gospels." — So says the London Quarterly. 



312 THE FO0B GOSPELS. 

966 OLSHAtrSEN (HsBMAira, D. D.) CommenteTy on the 

Gospels and Acts. Four vols., demy. 8vo. £2 2s. Cheap 

edition, four vols., cr. 8vo. 24s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 

1848—1860. 

Olshansen is mentioned by Alford as so rich in original material, that 

he has often cited him in his " New Testament for English Eeaders." He 

is one of the most devout of the Germans, and a great scholar; but we are 

not enamored of him, 

967 OXENDEN (Ashton, Bishop). Short Lectures on the 

Sunday Gospels. Two vols., 12mo. 2s. 6d. each. Lond., 
Hatchards. 1869, etc. S. 3s. 

Why Oxenden's hooks sell we do not know. We would not care to 
have them for a gift " Milk for babes " watered beyond measure. 

968 PEARCE (Zachakt, D. D., Bishop of Rochester. 1690— 

1774). Commentary. Gospels, Acts, and 1 Corinthians. 
Two vols., royal 4to. Lond., 1777. 5s. 6d. 
A huge mass of learning, said by great divines to he invaluable. To 
most men these volumes will simply be a heap of lumber. 

969 RIDDLE (J. E., M. A.) Commentary. Royal 8vo. 1843. 

S. 3s. 
Choice extracts selected by the author of the well-known Latin Die- 
tionaiy. Ministers should make such collections for themselves rather than 
purchase them. 

970 RIPLET (Henky J. Prof. Newton Theol. Instit., TJ. S.) 

The Gospels, with Notes. Two vols., post 8vo. Boston, 
tr. S., 1837. S. 2s. 
Adapted for Sunday-school use. Simple, brief, and practical. 

971 I RYIiE (J. C, B. A.) Expository Thoughts. For Family 

and Private Use. Matthew, 6s. ; Mark, 5s. ; Luke (two 
vols.), 12s. 6d. ; John (three vols.), 30s. 8vo. Lond., W. 
Hunt & Co. [N. D.] 

"We prize these volumes. They are diffuse, but not 
more so than family reading requires. Mr. Eyle has 
evidently studied all previous writers upon the Gospels, 
and has given forth an Individual utterance of consid- 
erable value. 

972 STABBACK (Thomas, A. B.) Gospels and Acts, with Anno- 

tations. Two vols., 8vo. Falmouth, 1809. 3s. 6d. 
Very useful in its day, but quite out of date. 



THE FOUE GOSPELS. 313 

973 STIER (Rudolph, D. D.) The M''ords of the Lord Jesus. 

Eight vols, in four. 8vo. 42s. T. & T. Clark. 18(J9. 

974 The Words of the Bisen Saviour, and Commentary 

on the Epistle of St. James. ' 8to. lOs. 6d. Edinb., 
Clark. 1859. 

'No one can be expected to receive all that Stier has 

to say, but he must be dull indeed who cannot learn 

much from him. Bead with care, he is a great instructor. 

975 STOCK (Eugene). Lessons on the Life of our Lord. For 

the Use of Sunday School Teachers. 8vo. 4s. 6d. Lond., 
Ch. of England S. S. Institute. 1875. 

For real use a thoroughly commendable book. Teach- 
ers and preachers have here more matter given them on 
the lesson than they are likely to use. Admirable ! 

976 TOWNSON (Thomas, Archdeacon of Richmond. 1715— 

1792). Discourses on the Gospels. Two vols., 8vo. 1810. 
Is. 6d. to 53, 
Bishop Lowth welcomed this as " a capital performance." It is only so 
from Lowth's point of view. 

977 TRAPP (Joseph, D. D. 1679—1747). Notes. 8vo. 1748. 

Is. 6d. 
This Trapp, grandson of the famous commentator, is the author of a 
wretched pamphlet upon " the nature, folly, sin, and danger of being 
righteous overmuch." He opposed Whitfield and Wesley with more vio- 
lence than sense. His work is utterly worthless, and we only mention it 
to warn the reader against confounding it with the productions of the real 
old Trapp. 

978 TRENCH (R. Chenevee, D. D., Abp. of Dublin). Studies 

on the Gospels. 8vo. 8s. 6d. Lond., Macmillan & Co. 

1874. 

Masterly studies on important topics. Students will 
do well to read also Trench's " Sermon on the Mount." 
We do not always agree with this author, but we always 
learn from him. 

979 WARREN (Israel, D. D.) Sunday School Commentary. 

8vo. 7s. 6d. 1873. 
An American work, imported by Hodder and Stoughton. Notes 
slender. 



314 THE FOTTE GOSPELS. 

980 WATSON (Richabd). Exposition of Mattliew and Mark. 

Demy 8vo., 63. ; 13mo., 3s. 6d. Lond., 66 Paternoster Row. 

Arminian views crop np at every opportunity. The notes are meant to 
elucidate difficulties in the text, and frequently do so. 

981 WESTOOTT (Brooke Foss, M. A.) Introduction to the 

Study of the Gospels. Cr. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Lond., Mac- 
millan & Co. 1860. S. 6s. 

Worthy of high commendation- The author Imowa 
the German writers, but is not defiled by their scepti- 
cism. He is a man of deep thought, but displays no 
pride of intellect. A man had need be a thorough stu- 
dent to Talue this Introduction : it is not an introduc- 
tion to the Gospels, or to the reading of them, but to 
their study. - 

983 WIESELEK(Kakl). C!hronologlcal Synopsis of the Gospels. 
8vo. 13s. Lond., Bell & Daldy. 1864. S. 4s. 

This important work formed the basis both of the Synopsis Evangelica 
of Tischendorf, and of the Historical Lectures on the Life of our Lord 
by Bishop Ellicott. It is much to be regretted that so many novel interpre- 
tations and baseless hypotheses should have marred the hook ; but, notwith- 
standing all drawbacks, it must be a masterly work to have received the 
heartiest commendations of the greatest scholars of the day. Only the 
more advanced students will care for this Synopsis. 

983 WILLIAMS (Isaac, B.D.) Devotional Commentary. Eight 
vols., cr. 8vo. 5s. each, viz : Thoughts on the Study of 
the Gospels. Harmony of the Evangelists. The Nativity. 
Second Tear of the Ministry. Third Tear of the Ministry. 
The Holy Week. The Passion. The Resurrection. 
Lond., Rivingtons. 1873. 

Anglican popery for quartz, and sparkling grains of precious gospel 
largely interspersed as gold. We cannot imagine any spiritual man read- 
ing these works without benefit, if he knows how to discriminate. 



HAKMOSIES OF THE GOSPELS. 215 



HARMONIES OF THE GOSPELS. 

[As these are somewhat aside fi'om our plan, we mention bnt few. That 
they are very nnmerons may be gathered from the following list given 
in Smith's Dictionary. — Osiander, 1587 ; Jansen, 1.549 ; Stephanas, 1553 ; 
Calvin, 1558 ; Cluver, 1628 ; Calov, 1680 ; Chemnitz, 1593 (oontinned by 
Leyser and Gerhard, 1704) ; Calixt, 1624 ; Cartwright; 1627 ; Lightfoot, 
1654; Cradook, 1668; lancy, 1689; Le Clerc, 1699; Tomard, 1707; 
Barmann, 1712 ; Whiston, 1702 ; Ens, 1727-8—30 ; Bengel, 1786 ; Hauber, 
1737; Busching, 1766; Doddridge, 1739—40; Pilkington, 1747 ; Mao- 
knight, 1756 ; Berthing, 1767 ; Griesbach, 1776, 97, 1809, 22 ; Neweome, 
1778 ; Priestly, 1777, in Greek, and 1780, in English ; Michaelis, 1788, 
in his Introduction ; White, 1799 ; Planck, 1809 ; Keller, 1802 ; Mut- 
Bchelle, 1806 ; De Wette and Lucke, 1818 ; Hess, 1822 ; Sebastiani, 1806, 
Matthaei, 1826 ; Kaiser, 1828 ; Eoediger, 1829 ; Clausen, 1829 ; Grcswell, 
1830 ; Chapman, 1836 ; Carpenter, 1838 ; Reiohel,-lS40 ; Gehringer, 1842 ; 
Eobinson, 1842, in Greek, 1846, in English ; Stroud, 1853 ; Anger, 1851 ; 
Tisehendorf, 1851.J 

984 OALVIN (John). A Harmony of Matthew, Mark, and 

Luke. Translated by Eev. W. Pringle. Three vols., 8vo. 
[Calvin Trans. Soc] Edinb., T. & T. Olark. 1845. S. 
10s. 6d. 

There are older translations of this noble work, but 
they are less suitable to modern taste than Mr. Pringle's, 
Calvin only harmonized three of the evangelists, but he 
did his work in his usual superb manner. 

985 CLARKE (Geoegb W.) Harmony, with Notes, etc. Cr. 

8vo. New York, 1870. Worth 3s. 

This American author is greatly ' indebted to other 
works. He has produced a veiy handy book for teach- 
ers of youth. 

986 DODDRIDGE (Philip, D. D.) See No. 915. 

987 DUNN (Samuel). Gospels Harmonized, with Notes : form- 

ing a complete Commentary on the Evangelists. Chiefly 
by Adam Clarke. Thick 8vo. Lond., 1838. 3s. 6d. 

Samuel Dunn has taken Adam Clarke as his basis, and then built thereon 
with stones flrom Lightfoot, Maoknight, Doddiige, Greswell, and others. 



216 HABStONIES OF THE GOSPELS. 

It is, of oonrse, a Wealeyan harmony, and the reader is not long before he 
discovers that fact ; hut the names of those concerned are a suffident 
guarantee that it is by no means a deapioable prodttotion. 

988 GREENLBAF (SmoN, LL. D., Dane Professor of Law in 

Harvard tTnlveislty). Bsamination of the Testimony of 

the Evangelists by the Kales of Evidence administered in 

Courts of Justice. With an account of the Trial of Jesus. 

Thick 8vo. Lond., 1847. 5b. 

The author is an American lawyer, very learned in his profession. He 

has issued a treatise npon the laws of evidence, which is a standard work 

among his brethren. It was a happy thought on Ms part to apply the laws 

of evidence to the narratives of the evangelists. To thonghtfal men of all 

sorts, but to lawyers especially, this book is commended. 

989 GRESWELL (Edward, B. D.) Dissertations upon the 

Principles and Arrangement of an Harmony of the Gospels. 
Four vols., 8vo. Oxf., 1837. 6a. to ISs. 

" The learned writer has greatly distinguished him- 
self as the most laborious of modern harmonists. Hi^ 
work is the most copious that has appeared, at least 
since -the days of Chemnitz's folios." So says Dr. S. 
Davidson. To us it seems to be prolix and tedious. 

990 LIQHTFOOT(JoHN,D.D. 1602—1675). Harmony. Chroni- 

cle, and Order of the New Testament. FoUo. 1654. 

2s. 6d. 
Lightfoot was a member of the Assembly of Divines, profoundly skilled 
in Boriptuial and Talmadical lore. He never completed this harmony, for 
his plan was too comprehensive to be finished in a life time. 

991 MACKNIQHT (Jamks, D. D. 1731—1800). Harmony of 

the Gospels, with Paraphrase and Notes. Fifth edition. 
Two vols., 8vo. Lend., 1819. _3s. 6d. 
This author has enjoyed considerable repate and is still prized by 
many, but we can never bring our soul to like him, he always seems to us 
to be so graceless. 

992 MIMPRISS (Robekt). The Treasury Harmony of the Four 

Evangelists. Thick demy 4to., 16s. Also cr. 8vo., two 
vols, in one, 6s. S. 3s. 6d. Lond., Partridge & Co. 
Condensed and compressed. Wonderfully useful. 

993 NEWCOME (William, Archbishop of Armagh). English 

Harmony, with Notes. 8vo. Lond., S. Bagster. 1837. 4s. 
Merely the text arranged and a few rather ordinary notes. We do not 
Bee what a man can get oat of it. But, hush 1 It is by an archbishop 1 



LIVES OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST. 217 

994 ROBINSON (Edwabd, D. D., Prof. Bib. Lit., New York). 

Harmony on the Authorized Version. Following the 
Harmony in Greek, by Dr. E. Robinson. With Notes. 
8vo. Lond., Religious Tract Society. S. Is. 6d. 

Eobinson's Harmony is a work which has met with 
great acceptance, and the Tract Society did well to 
bring out this work for those unacquainted with Greek. 
The notes are mainly those of Eobinson ; but Wieseler, 
Greswell, and others have also been laid under contri- 
bution by the Editor, who has executed his work well. 

995 STROUD (William, M. D.) Greek Harmony, with Synop- 

sis and Diatessaron. 4to. 15s. Lond., Bagsters. 1853. 
S. 5s. 6d. 

One of the best of the Harmonies. 

996 WILLIAMS (Isaac). See No. 981. 
Merely the text arranged, without note or comment. 



LIVES OP OUE LOKD JESUS CHEIST. 

[Here also we can only mention a few leadiiDg works.] 
See under Gospels, especially Nos. 973, 974, 975, and 983. 

997 ANDREWS (Samotsl). The Life of our Lord upon the 

Earth, in its Historical, Chronological, and Geographical 
Relations. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Strahan & Co. 1863. 

A good book for a student to read through before 

taking up larger works. It is a standard work. 

998 BEECHER (Henry Ward). Life of Jesus, the Christ. 

Earlier scenes. Thick 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond,, Nelson. 1873. 
Here the great genius of Beeoher glows and hums ; but we are disap- 
pointed with his book as a biography of our Lord. 

999 BENNETT (James, D. D.) Lectures on the History of Jesus 

Christ. Second edition. Two vols., 8vo. Lond., 1828. 
6s. 6d. 
lively popular lectures, fuU of matter, well expressed, and possessing 
sterling excellence. 



318 LIVES OB OUK LOED JESTTS CHRIST. 

1000 ELLICOTT (C. J., D. D., Biatop of Gloucester and Bristol), 

Historical Lectttrea. 8vo. 12b. Lend., Longmans. 1869. 
This great author stands in the highest place of honor ; bat having no 
sympathy with what he oalis "the popular theology," he should be read 
with considerable caution. 

1001 PARRAR (P. W., D. D., F. R. S.) Life of Christ. Two 

vols., demy 8v6. 24s. Lend., Caasell, Fetter & Galpin. 
1874. 
THE work upon the subject. Fresh and full. The 
price is very high and yet the sale has been enormous. 

1003 FLEETWOOD (John, D. D.) Life of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Also the Lives of the Apostles and Evangelists.' 
Imp. 8vo. Lond., Mackenzie. S. 6s. 
This has had a great run, and is to be found in farm houses and cot- 
tages. Why we cannot tellj' except that the sellers of parts and numbers 
are fine hands at pushing the trade, and plates and pictures have caught 
the simple purchasers. 

1003 KITTO (John, D. D.) "Life and Death of our Lord." 

Daily Bible Illustrations. (See No. 42.) 

Abounds in instructive matter. 

1004 M17GE: (J. P., D. D.) Life of our Lord Jeaua Christ. 

With Additional Notes, by Rev. Marcus Dods, D. D. 
Four vols., demy 8vo. 283. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1864. 

We constantly read Lange, and though frequently 

differing from him, we are more and more grateful for 

so much thoughtful teaching. 

1005 NEANDER (J. A. W.) The Life of Jesus Christ in its His- 

torical Development. Translated by Professors McClin- 
tock and Blumenthal. . Sm. 8vo. 3a. 6d. Lond., Bohn. 
1858. 
Good as an answer to Strauss, but unsatisfactory &om the standpoint 
of evangelical theology. 

1006 PRESSENSE (Edmond DE, D. D.) Jeaus Christ: Ma 

Times, Life, and Work. Cr. Svo. 9s. Lond., Hodder & 

Stoughton. 1875. The above work "abridged by the 

author, and adapted for general readers." Cr. 8vo. 5s. 

There have been many discussions upon the orthodoxy of this worli, 

but it is a noble production, and is written in an adoring spirit. The 

accomplished author has made a valuable contribution to the cause of truth. 



MIBACLES OF OXJU LOBD.. 219 

Tet we are inclined to agree with the writer who said, " to write a life of 
Christ is to paint the sun with charcoal." The life of a Christian is the 
test picture of the life of Christ. 

1007 YOUNG (John, LL.B.) The Christ of History. Enlarged 
edition. Gr. 8vo. 6s. Lond., Daldy, Isbister & Co. 
1860. 
"A work of great mceellence, eloquence, and logical compactness." 

British Quarterly Beview. 



MIRACLES OF OTJE LORD. 

[Here, also, we cannot attempt a complete list.] 

1008 COLLTEK (William Bbngo, D. D., F. A. S.) Lectures 

on Scripture Miracles. 8vo. Lend., 1812. 2a. 6d. 
While reading we seem to hear the rustling of a sjlk gown. The lec- 
tures are by no means to be despised, but they are far too fine for our 
taste, 

1009 GUMMING (John, D. D.) Lectures on our Lord's Miracles, 

as earnests o| the age to come. 12mo. Lond., 1851. 
S. 2s. 
Below the doctor's usual mark, which is none too high. 

1010 HOWSON (J. S., D. D., Dean of Chester). Meditations on 

the Miracles. F'cap. 8vo. 3a. Loud., B. Tract Society. 
[1871.] 
Short, simple, but deeply spiritual and suggestive. 

1011 KNIGHT (James, A. M.) Discourses on the principal - 

Miracles. 8vo. Lond., 1831. 4s. 6d. 
Mediocre discourses much appreciated by the clergy who borrow their 
sermons, 

1012 MACDONALD (Gbokgb, LL. D.) The Miracles of our 

Lord. Cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond., W. Isbister & Go. 1870. 
ContEuns many fresh, childlike, and, we had almost said, dreamy 
thoughts. It suggests side- walks of laeditation. 

1013 MAGUIRE (Robert, M. A.) The Miracles of Christ. Sq. 

12mo. Lond., Weeks & Co. 1863. S. Is. 6d. 
We have been agreeably disappointed in this book. The bad paper 
offends the eye, but the page bears many living, stirring thoughts. If the 
author preaches in this fashion we do not wonder at his popularity. 



320 PAKABLES OF OUR LORD. 

1014 STEINMETER (P. L., D. D., Prof. Theol., Berlin). . The 

Miracles of our Lord in relation to Modem Criticism. 

Translated from the German by L. A. Wheatley. 8vo. 

7s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1875. 
No donbt a very scholarly book, and jisefal to those whose heads have 
been muddled by other Germans, but we are weary of Teutonic answers 
to Teutonic scepticisms. We suppose it was needful to hunt down tbe 
jiationalists, for farmers hunt down rats, but the game does not pay for the 
trouble. 

1015 TRENCH (R. C, D. D., Abp. of Dublin). Notes on the 

Miracles of our Lord. 8vo. 12s. Lond., Macmillan. 
1870. 

Brimming with instruction. Not always to our taste 

in doctrine ; but on the whole a work of highest merit. 



PAKABLES OF OUR LORD. 

[A Selection from a long list, for which see No. 1026]. 

1016 ANDERSON (Chaklbs, M. A.) New Readings of Old 

Parables. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. Lond., 1876. 
We paid four precious shillings for this book, and find seventy pages 
of rubbish and fifty more of advertisements. Our readers will, we hope, 
profit by our experience. 

1017 ARNOT (William, D. D. Died 1875). The Parables of 

our Lord. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., T. Nelson. 1865. 

We do not consider this to be up to our lamented 
friend's usual high mark of excellence, but it is of 
great value. 

1018 B0T7RDILL0N (Francis, M. A.) The Parables explained 

and applied. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6(1. Lond., Religious Tract 
Society. [N. D.] 
Sufficiently common and commonplace. Platitudes sleepily worded. 

1019 COLLTER (William Bengo, D. D.) Lectures on Scripture 

Parables. 8vo. Lond., 1815. 2s. (See No. 1008). 

1020 CUMMING (John, D. D.) Foreshadows ; or Lectures on 

our Lord's Parables. Cr. 8vo. Lond., 1853. 2s. (See 
No. 1009). 
The Doctor evidently prints his sermons without much revision. They 
are pleasing, popular, and (of course) rather prophetic. 



PAEABIES OF OUB LOED. 231 

1031 QRESWELL (B., B. D.) Exposition of the Parables, etc. 
Five vols, in six, 8vo. Oxt, 1834 37s. 

A vsst heap of leaming^ and langaage. The ■work, thongti padded oat, 
stilted in style, and often fanciful, is a mine for other writers. 

1033 GUTHKIE (Thomas, D. D.) The Parables read in the 
Light of the Present Day. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., 
Strahan. 1874. 

Twelve Parables treated in Dr. Guthrie's lively, sparkling manner. 
Flowers in abundance; 

1033 KEACH (Benj.) Exposition. Folio. Lond., 1801. S. 

10s.; also four vols., 8vo. S. 10s.; and one vol., Imp. 
8vo. 1856. lOs. 

Although our honored predecessor makes metaphors run on as many 
legs as a centipede, he has been useful to thousands. His work is old- 
fashioned, but it is not to be sneered at. 

1034 KNIGHT (James, A. M.) Discourses on the Principal 

Parables. 8vo. Lond., 1829. 4s. 6d. (See No. 1011). 

1035 LISCO (Pkbdekick Gustav). Parables Explained. Fcap. 

8vo. 58. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1840. S. 3s. 6d. 

Largely composed of citations from Luther and Calvin. The remarks 
will assist in eluddating the design of the parables. 

1036 TRENOH(R. C.,D. D.) Notes on the Parables. Eleventh 

edition. 8vo. 13s. Lond., Macmillan & Co. 1870. 

We do not like Trench's theology in many places, 
bjit he is a capital writer. The student will find a very 
complete list of expositions on the Parables in the appen- 
dix at the close of Trench's work, 

1037 UPJOHN (W.) Discourses on the Parables. Three vols., 

sm. Svo. 1834. 

Earnestly Calvinistio sermons, fall of old-fashioned Gospel. Not very 
original. 



322 MATTHEW. 



MATTHEW. 

[See also works on the Four Gospels.] 

1028 ABBOTT (Lyman, U. S. A.) New Testament. Vol. I. 

Matthew and Mark. Sq. 8TO.,9a. liOnd., Hodder. 1875. 
Intended for workers, and likely to be nsefU to them. 

1029 ADAMSON (H. T., B. D.) Matthew expotinded. Thick 

8vo. 12s. Lend., Sampson Low. 18T1. 
This hook reads to ns like utter nonsense. We question if any one 
except the author win ever he 'ahle to make head or tail of it, and he had 
better be quick about it, or he will forget what he meant. 

1030 ALEXANDER (Joseph Addison, D. D.) Matthew 

Explained. Post 8vo. Ss. Lond., Nisbet. 1870. S. 
3s. ed. 

Dr. Alexander's last work. He died befol'e it was 

quite finished. It is complete to Chapter XVI. Its 

Talue is great. 

1031 BEAUSOBRE (IsiAC BB, 1659—1738), and L'te5srPANT 

(Jaques, 1661 — 1728). A New Version, with a Commen- 
tary. 8vo. Camb., 1790^ Lond., 1823, etc. Is. 6d. to 3s. 
The brief notes are purely literal or iMustrative, and are remarkably 

pertinent. The mass of the volume is taken up with an introduction to 

the New Testament. 

1032 BENHAM (W.) Matthew, with Notes. Cr. 8v6. Lond., 

National SoMfety. [1861]. S. la. 
With this in his band a teacher would be much mded in conduoting 
his class. It is written by a teacher for teachers. The remarks are not 
very profound, nor always such as we should endorse, but they are well 
fitted for their purpose. 

1033 BLACKWOOD (Chbistofher). An Exposition upon the 

Ten First Chapters of Matthew. 4to. 1649. 9b. 
This learned divine became a B^tist throngh studying the arguments 
against believers' baptism, ^is proves his oaadoh Bis comment is 
somewhat out of date, but it is still good. 

1034 CLARKE (George W.) Notes. Cr. Svo. New York, 

1870. 
Good notes for teachers. Well compiled. A fit companion to No, 
985. 



MATTHEW. 333 

1035 DICKSON (David). A Briefe ExpoBition of Matthew. 

870. 1651. 73. 6d. 

A perfect gem. The work is, to men of our school, 
more suggestive of sermons than almost any other we 
have met with. 

1036 GODWIN (John H.) New Translation, with Brief Notes. 

Cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Bagsters. 1863. 
Dr. Godwin is a painstaking eluoidator of the word, and his plan is an 
excellent one. Students in college will value him. 

1037 GOODWIN (Hakvet, D. D., Bishop of Carlisle). Com- 

mentary. Cr. 8vo. 12s. Lond., G. Bell & Sons. 1857. 
S. 4s. to 5s. 6d. 
An important work, which may be eonsulted with advantage. 

1038 KELLY (Wiluam). Lectures on the Gospel of Matthew. 

6b. Lohd., G. Morrish. 1868. 
We cannot accept the forced and fanciful interpretations here given. 

1039 MARLOKATUS [MARLORAT] (AuGiTSTmE. 1560—1562). 

Exposition. Translated by Thomas Tymme. Folio. 

Loud., 1570. 
Marlorate was an eminent French reformer, preacher, and martyr. His 
commentaries contain the cream of the older writers, and are in much 
esteem, hut, are very rare., He wrote on the whole New Testament, hut 
we have in English only the Gospels and Jude. 

1040 MORISON (Jameb, D. D.) Matthew's Memoirs of Jesua 

Christ. 8vo. 14s. Lond., Hamilton. 1870. 

"We dilEer greatly in doctrinal views from Dr. Morison, 
but we set a great price upon his Matthew and Mark, 
which deserve the utmost praise. 

1041 OVERTON (Chablbs). Expository Preacher. Course of 

Lectures on Matthew. Two voIb., 8vo. Lond., Nisbet. 

1850, S. 6s. 6d. Scarce. 
Solid, sound, soporific sermons ; intended for lay helpers to read, with 
the prayers appended. They will not make the hearers lie awake at nights, 
or cause them palpitations of heart through excess of original and strik- 
ing thought. 

1042 Parker (JosEPHi D., D.) Homiletio Analysis. Matthew. 

8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., 1870. 3b. 6d. 

Dr. Parker is an able though somewhat . But stop, he is a near 

neighbor of ours. 



224 KABE. 

1043 PENROSE (John). Leeturea on Matthev. ISmo. Loud., 

1833. Is. 6d. 
The author says of his work, " no novelty of any kind, no originality 
either of thought or research will he found in it." Why, then, did he 
print it ! 

1044 THOMAS (David, D. D.) Oenius of the Gospel. Homi- 

letical Commentary. 8to. Lond., Dickinson. 1873. 
8s. 6d. 

We hardly know a more suggestive book. 

1045 WARD (Richard). Tlieologicall Questions, Dogmatical! 

Observations, and Evangelicall Essays upon the Gospel 
according to Matthew. Wherein about two thoasand six 
hundred and fifty profitable Questions are discussed ; 
and five hundred and eighty points of Doctrine noted, 
etc., etc. Folio. Lond.,, 1640. 12s. 
A huge mass of comment, in which are thousands of good things mostly 

set forth by way of question and answer. Few could ever read it through ; 

bat to a wise minister it would be a mine of wealth. 



MAEK. 

1046 ALEXANDER (Joseph Addison, D. D.) Mark Ex- 

plained. PostSvo: 5s. Lond., Nisbet. 1866. S:3s.6d-. 

Alexander expounds Mark as an independent record, 
and does not constantly tell us to "see Matthew and 
Luke." Hence the book is complete in itself, and the 
author's learning and care have made it invaluable. 

1047 B. (G.) Practical Commentary on Mark, in Simple and 

Familiar Language. 13mo. 3s. Lond., Nisbet. 1863. 
The different paragraphs are treated under most suggestive headings, 
which are the most useful parts of the book. Infant baptism is far too 
prominent ; but the little work is likely to be very helpftil. 

1048 GODWIN (John H.) Mark. A New Translation, with 

Notes and Doctrinal Lessons. Cr. 8vo. 4s. 6d. Lond., 

Hodder & Stoughton. 1869. S. 2s. 
We like the brief doctrinal lessons, which are rather a new feature. 
They will serve admirably well as sermon-hints. The notes and transla- 
tion are really good. 



. LUKE. 335 

1049 GOODWIN (Harvet, D. D., Bishop of Carlisle). Com- 

mentary. Cr. 8vo. 78. 6d. Lond., G. Bell & Sons. 1860. 
Contains much very helpful comment. Produced in connection with 
the Cambridge Working Men's College. 

1050 laORISON (James, D. D.) A Commentary. Large Svo. 

14s. Lond., Hamilton, Adams & Co. 1873. 

A deeply learned work ; we know of none more 
thorough. Differing as we do from this author's theol- 
ogj, we nevertheless set a , high price upon this pro- 
duction. 

1051 FETTER (Geokge). Commentary on Mark. Two vols., 

folio. Lond., 1661. £5 12s. 6d. 

Mr. J. C. Eyle says of this worli : " For laborious investigation of the 
meaning of every word, for patient discussion of every question bearing 
on the text, for fulness of matter, for real thoughtfniness, and for con- 
tinued practical application, there is no work on 6t. Mark which, in my 
opinion, bears comparison with Fetter's. Like Goliath's sword, there is 
nothing like it." We have found far less fresh thought in it than we 
expected, and think it rather tedious reading. 



LUKE. 

[S«e also on the Gospels. Oosterzee in Lange is excellent.] 

1052 POOTE (Jambs, M. A.) Lectures on Luke. Two vols. 

Svo. Third edition. Edinb., Ogle & Murray, and Oliver 
& Boyd ; Lond., Hamilton, Adams & Co. 1858. S. 9s. 

We frequently consult this work, and never without 

finding in it things new and old. To preachers who 

will not steal the lectures, but use them suggestively, 

they will be extremely serviceable. 

1053 GODET (F., Professor of Theology, Neuchatel). Com- 
. mentary on Luke. Translated by E. W. Shelders, B. A., 

and M. D. Cusin. Two vols., 8vo. 21s. Edinb., Clark. 
1875. 
Dr. Meyer says : " To an immense erudition, to a liv- 



336 JOHN. 

ing piety, Godet unites a profound feeling of rfeality ; 
there is here a vivifying breath, an ardent love for the 
Saviour, which helps the disciple to comprehend the 
work, the acts, the words of his Divine Master." 

1054 GOODWIN (Harvbt, D. D.) Commentary on Luke. Cr. 

8vo. 9s. Lond., G. Bell & Sons. 1865. 
This writer endeavora to give the results of learning in snch a manner 
that working men may understand them. He Bays many good things. 

1055 MAJOR (J. R., M. A.) Luke, with English iJotes. 8vo. 

Lond., 1836. 3s. 
Notes compiled with a view to the divinity examinations at Cambridge, 
containing a considerable amount of information. 

1056 THOMSON (James, D. D.) Exposition of Luke, in a 

Series of Lectures. Three vols., 8vo. Edinb., A. & C. 
Black ; Lond., Longmans. 1849. 6s. to 8s. 

Eminently instructive. Clear good sense, freshness, 

and earnestness are well combined. We have had great 

pleasure in examining these lectures. 

1057 VAN DOREN (W. H., of Chicago). Suggestive Com- 

mentary on the New Testament, on an original plan. 
[Luke, two vols., er. Svo.t 8s.- nett.-] Loud., Dickinson. 
1871. 

Well named " suggestive " ; it is all suggestions. 

It teems and swarms with homiletical hints. 



JOHN. 

1058 ANDERSON (Robert. 1793—1843). Practical Exposition 

of John. Two vols., 13mo. Lond., 1841. 48. 
By an evangelical clergyman : sound, but not very original. 

1059 AUGUSTINE. Commentary on John. Two vols, of Works 

of Augustine, now in course of issue by T. & T. Clark. 
Edinb. 

1060 Homilies on the Gospel and First Epistle qf John. 

Two vols, of the Library of the Fathers, 30b. ; or to sub- 
scribers, 32s. 6d. Lond. and Oxf., Jas. Parker & Co. 

To the wise a mine of treasure. Augustine is often fanciful ; but- even 



JOHN. sa? 

iiis fancies shows a master-mind. Mluch that passes for new is stolen &om 
this prince of theologians. 

1061 BEITH (Albxandpk, D. D.) Expository Discourses. Cr, 
8vo. Lond., Nisbet. 1857. 3b. 6d. 
Discourses which mast have been very profitable to the hearers. Stu- 
dents will do better with works which are more condensed. 

1063 BESSER (Rudolph, D. D.) Biblical Studies on John. 
Translated from the German by M. G. Huxtable. Two 
vols. cr. 8vo. 12s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1861—62. 

' ' The character of this commentary is practical and devotional. There 
are often very exquisite devotional passages, and a vein of earnest piety 
runs through the whole work." — tiiterary Churchman. 

1063 BROWN (George J., M. A.) Lectures, forming a Contin- 

uous Commentary. Two vols., 8vo. Lond., Bivlngtons. 
1863. S. 5s. 6d. 

The plan of this work will prevent its being widely used ; but its exe- 
cution strikes us as being uncommonly able. It is a gathering up of other 
men's materials and an amalgamation of them. It is intensely Episcopa- 
lian, even to Baptismal Begeneration, yet it brings a good deal of light to 
tear on the Gospel of John, and, if to be met with at a very low figure, it 
is not to be passed by. 

1064 DRUMMOND (D. T., K., B. A.) Exposition of the Last 

Kine Chapters of John. 12mo. Seeleys, 1850. 3s. 
Good, but not very striking. 

1065 DITNWELL (Fkahcis Henkt, B. A.) Commentary on the 

Authorized Version of John, compared with the Sinaitic, 
Vatican, and Alexandrian Manuscripts, and also with 
Dean Alford's revised translation. 8vo. 15s. Lond., 
J. T. Hayes. 1872. S. 10s. 
The notes from various authors are good, and the various readings are 
useful ; but we fail to see any very special value in the volume. The in- 
terpretation of the Third of John is eminently unsatisfactory ; Mr. Dun- 
well teaches Baptismal Begeneration. 

1066 FAWCETT (John, A. M. 1769—1851). Exposition of 

John. Three vols., 8vo., 31s. Lond., Hatchards. 1860. 
S. 8s. 
Good evangelical sermons. 

1067 HENGSTENBERG (E. W., D. D.) Commentary on John. 

Two vols., 8vo. 21s. Edinb., Clark. 1868. S. 8s. 6d. 
Like others of this author's works : solid, but dry. 



328 JOHN. 

1068 HUTCHESON (Georgb). Exposition of Jolin. Folio. 

Lond., 1657. Eeprinted, roy. 8vo. Lond., Ward. 1841. 

4a. to 6s. 
Excellent; beyond all praise. It is a full-stored 
treasury of sound theology, holy thought, and marrowy 
doctrine. 

1069 METER (H. A. W., D. D.) See No. 929. 

1070 O'CONOE (W. A.) Commentary. Cr. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 

Loud., Longmans. 1872. 
In this translation the first verse rims thus : " la origin the Word was 
and the Word was the Deity, and the Word was Deity." Who likes this, 
or understands it. The notes do not charm ns. 

1071 SHEPHEED (E., D. D.) Notes on the Gospel and Epistles 

of John. 4to. Lond., 1796. Imp. 8vo. Lond., Murray. 
1841. S. 3s. 6d. 
Though the author opposed Sooiuianism, we cannot but regard his views 
as an introduction to that heresy. The spirit of the book is vicious. 

1072 THOLUCE (Augustus F., D. D., Ph. D.) Commentary. 

8vo. 9s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1860. S. 4s. 6d. 

More spiritual than is usual with German theologians, 
and quite as scholarly as the best of them. 

1073 TITTMANN (K. C, Theol. Prof. 1744—1820.) Commen- 

tary. Two vols., cr. 8vo. 8s. Bib. Cab. Edinb., T. & 

T. ClarK. 1844. S. 4s. 6d. 
Home, in speaking of this work in the German, without endorsing all 
Tittmann's opinions, declares it to he the most valuable commentary on 
John extant in so small a form. Our judgment is less commendatory. 

1074 TBAHERON (BAitTHOMMEW. Died 1716.) An Exposition 

of a Parte of S. Johannes Gospel made in sondrie read- 
ings in the English Congregation. 12mo. 1558. Very 
rare, 30a. 
A little quaiut old.book. Kot intrinsically worth the price, nor a tenth 
of it. 

1075 VAN DOREN (W. H., D. D.) Suggestive Commentary 

on John, Vol. I., containing chap. i. — ek. Cr. 8vo. 5s. 
nett. Vol. II. in the press. Lond., Dickinson. 1872. 

If men who read this volume do not preach the better 

for so doing, it is not Mr. Van Doren's fault ; they must 

be Van Dolts by nature, though they may ignore the 

family name. 



PAETS OF JOHK. 239 



PARTS OF JOHN. 

[A selection of authors is all' we can give.] 

1076 HILDERSHAM (Abthub). Lectures on John IV. Folio. 

Lond., 1628 and 1656. 43. to 6s. 

A mass of godly teaching ; but rather heavy reading. 

1077 TURNER (Samuel H., D. D.) Essay on our Lord's Dis- 

course at Capernaum, recorded in John VI. Cr. 8vo. 
New York, 1851. S. 3s. 

Written with the immediate view of comhating the errors of Dr., after- 
wards Cardinal, Wiseman, who appeals to this chapter for proofs of " the 
real presence." 

1078 PATTERSON (John B., of Falkirk). Lectures on John 

XIV., XV. and XVI. Cr. 8vo. Edinb., T. Clark. 1859. 
S. 2s. 

Solid discourses, containing maoh thought happily expressed. Yet 
withal somewhat laborious reading. 

1079 AIiEZANDER (Thomas, D. D.) Great High Priest 

within the Vail. John XVIL ISmo. Lond., 1857. 
Is. 3d. 

Sound theology and honest exposition. Multum in 

paryo. 

1080 BROWN (John, D. D.) Exposition of John XVII. 8vo. 

Lond., Hamilton, 1850. S. 5b. 

Dr. Brown is always deep, full, and overflowing. 

1081 BURGESS (Anthony). One Hundred and Forty-five 

Sermons on John XVII. Folio. Loud., 1656. 7s. 6d. 

A standard work by a great Puritan. Somewhat 
prolix. 

1083 LANDELS (William, D. D.) The Saviour's Parting 
Prayer for his Disciples. 12mo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Elliot 
Stock. 1873. 

Sermons of a high order : style admirable, but rather diffuse. To be 
estimated rather from a horniletical than an expository point of view. 



230 ACTS OS' THE APOSTLES. 

1083 NEWTON (Gkohge. 1603—1681). John XVII. Un- 

folded. Folio. Lond., 1660, Reprinted in Nichol's 

Commentaries. Cr. 4to. 7s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet. 1867. 

S. 4s. 

If not one of the chief of the Puritans, ilfewton was 

but little behind the front rank in ability. Joseph 

AUeine was his assistant miiiister at Taunton. His 

writings are plain and profitable. 

1084 PIERCE! (Samttei. Etles). Exposition of the Lord's 

Prayer, in John XVU. 8vo. 1813. 43. 6d. 

Always sweet as honey to those of strong Calyinistie 
views. 



ACTS OP THE APOSTLES. 

[See also under Gospels.] 

1085 AUESZANDER {Joseph Addison, D. D.> The Acta 

Explained. Two vols., 8vo. ISs. Lond., Kisbei. 1869. 

In all respects a work of the highest merit. 

1086 AIiFORI) (Henbt, D. D.) HomUiea on the former part 

of the Acts of the Apostles. Ch. 1. — ^X. 8vo. 8s. 
Lond., Eivingtons. 1358. S. 3a. 6d. 

Not SO good as his critical notes ; but such an author 

always deserves attention. 

1087 ARNOT (William, D. D.) The Church in the Honse. 

Post 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet. 1873, 

Intended to be read in families on Sabbath after- 
noons ; but all who are acquainted with Dr. Arnot will 
know that even his simplest expositions are rich and 
full. He hath dust of gold. 

1088 BAUMGARTEN (M., Ph. D.) Apostolic History. Three 

Tols.,8vo. 27s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1854. S. 10s. 6d. 
"An exposition at once profoundly soientifio and sublimely Christian, 
one of the most pressing wants of our times." — Ecleotic Eeview. Alford 
caUs it excellent, tliongh somewhat fanciful. 



ACTS OF THE APOSTiBS. 231 

lOto BENNETT (.^ame^, D. D.) Lefetures oh the Acts. 8to. 
Lond., 1847. 3a. 6d. to 4s. 
A good Bpecimen of plain and popular pulpit exposition. Dr. Bennett 
fights very eamesitly for the Congregatiohalist view of Baptism, for -which 
we do not blame him ; for common humanity leads us to admire a man 
who struggles for a weak cause. 

1090 BENSON (George, D. D. 1699—1763). History of tho 

first planting of the Christian Religion. Three vols., 
4to. Lond., 1756. 4s. to 6a. 6d. 
Dull, but displaying considerable research. Benson was an Arian. 

1091 BONAS(H.iD.D.) Light and Truth. Vol. III. See No. 7. 

1093 BQUCHIEE (Barton, A. M.) Manna in the House: or 
Daily Expositions of the Acts. 13mo. Loud., 1858. S. 
Is. 6d. to 2a. 6d. 
Superior &mily reading. Bouchier did not write for students, bilt for 

households, yet bven the more advanced may learn from him. 

1093 BREWSTER (John, M. A.) Lectures on the Acts. 8vo. 

1830. 3a. 6d. 
A sip of Howson or Hackett is worth a barrel of these weak and watery 
prelections. 

1094 CAIiVIN (John). Commentaries upon the Acts. Trans- 

lated by C. Featherstone. 4to. Lond., 1585. 6s. 

This forms the basis of bhe Calvin Translation So- 
ciety's edition. 

1095 COOK (P. C, M. A., Canon of Chester). The Acts, with a 

Commentary. 8vo. 128. 6d. Lond., Longfinans. 1866. 
S. 2b. 6d. 
Contains many useful notes, instructive to fairly educated readers, 

1096 CRADOCK (Samuel, B. D.) The Apostolical History, con- 

taining the Ats, Labours, Travels, Sermons, etc., of the 

Apostles. Folio. Lond., 1763. 5a. 
TillotSon, Eeynolds, Doddridge, and others highly commended the 
works of this Puritan writer. The style in which the " Apostolical His- 
tory " is got up is most uninviting ; the book is nearly all itali(!s. Mahy 
modem works far excel it. 

1097 DENTON (W., M. A.) Commentary on the Acts. Two 

vols., 8vo. [Vol. I. only issued. 18s.] Lond., G. Bell. 
1874. 
A complete list of all authors upon the Acts will be 
found in this very learned and exhaustive work. We do 



233 ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

not always agree with the author, but he has done his 
work thoroughly well. 

1098 DICK (John, D. D. 1764—1833). Lectures on the Acta. 

Sm. 8vo. Glasg., 1848. 43. 

Interesting lectures upon selected portions of the Acta. This work has 
been reprinted in America, whence we obtained a copy of the second edi- 
tion ; this shows that it has been highly esteemed. 

1099 DU VEIL (C. M., D. D. A learned converted Jew. Died 

abont 1700). Explanation of the Acts. 8vo. Lond., 
168§. Reprinted by Hansard KnoUys Society, 8to. 
1851. 4s. to 6s. 
Claude's prefatory letter highly commends this work. The author 
defends the immersion of believers with earnestness. 

1100 FAWOETT (John, M. A.) Exposition of the Acta. 

Three vols., 8vo. 21s. Lond., Hatchards. 1860. S. 5s. 

A fine series of expository discourses. Sometimes 
we differ. 

1101 FORD (J., M. A.) The Acts, illustrated from Ancient and 

Modern Authors. 8vo. 13s. Lond., Masters. 1856. 
(See No. 957.) 

1102 GIiOAG (Paton J., D. D.) Commentary on the Acts. 

Two vols., demy 8vo. 21a. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1870 

Dr, Hackett says of Dr. Gloag's work : " I have 
examined it with special care. For my purposes I have 
found it unsurpassed by any similar work in the English 
language. It shows a thorbugh mastery of the material, 
philology, history, and literature pertaining to this range 
of study, and a skill in the use of this knowledge, which 
places it in the first class of modem expositions." 

1103 GUALTHERUS (RODTOPHns. 1529—1586). A Hundred 

Threescore and Fifteen Homelyes or Sermons vppon the 
Actes of the Apostles, made by Radulphe Gualthere, of 
Tigurine, and Translated out of Latine [by John Bridges, 
Vicare of Heme]. Folio. Black Letter. Lond., 1572. 
30s. 
Full of Protestantism. The author judged that, as Luke who wrote the 
Acts, woa a physician, his book was mciint to be medicine to the Church. 



lACTS OF THE APOSTLES. , 333 

1104 HAOKETT (Hokatio B., D. D.) Commentary on the 

Original Text of the Acts. [Several American editions. 
Reprinted in two vols., in The Banyan Library.] 7s. to 
10a. 

Hackett occupies the first position among comAen- 

tators upon the Acts. The Bunyan Library edition 

omits some of his most valuable critical observations. 

1105 HODGSON (Robert, D. D., Dean of Carlisle). Lectures 

upon the first Seventeen Chapters of the Acts. 8vo. 
Loud., 1843. Is. 6d. 
Deficient in Gospel clearness, and in every other respect, except ardent 
ohiirohiam. 

1106 HUMPHRY (William Gilsobt, B. D.) Commentary on 

the Acts. Second edition. 8vo. Loud., J. W. Parker & 
Son. 1854. 3s. 
Exegetical remarks npon the Greek text. Very good from a philologi- 
cal point of view, but professedly of an elementary character. 

1107 KELLY (W.) Lectures Introductory to the Study of the 

Acts, Catholic Epistles, and Revelation. Cr. 8vo. 5s. 
Lond., Broom. 1870. S. 3s. 
By a man " who, bom fbr the universe, narrowed his mind " by Darby- 
ism. 

1108 LANQE (J. P.) Commentary : from the German of Lechler 

andGerock. Two vols., 8 vo. 31s. Edinb., Clark. 1864. 
S. 10s. 6d. Also one vol.. Imp. 8vo. 21s. (See page 38). 
Adds nothing to our knowledge of the Acts ; but the homiletioal hints 
are useful. 

1109 LIQHTFOOT (John, D. D. 1603—1675). Commentary. 

Edited by J. R. Pitman, A. M. 8vo. 1823. [Vol. VIIL 
of Lightfoot's Works.] 
Few now-ardays will care for this author, whose learning ran mostly in 
Tahnudical channels. He was profound, but not always discreet. 

1110 MAGBRIDE (John David, D. D.) Lectures on the Acts 

and Epistles. 8vo. Oxf., 1858. 2s. 6d. 
This author simply gives a continuous narrative. He has also written 
on the Gospels. We mention him that the student may not purchase his 
work as a Commentary. 

1111 MASKEW (T. R., B. A.) Annotations on the Acts. With 

College and Senate-House Examination Papers. 12mo, 
Camb., 1847. Is. 6d. 
A handbook to the Acts, viewing it simply as a Greek book ; prepared 
for the use of students passing through the university. 



334 ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

111^ MIMPEISS (B.) The Acts and Epistles/according toGres- 
well's Arrangement. 8vo. 1837. 3s. 
A handy book for teachers. 

1116 NEANDER (J. A. W.) History of the Planting land Train- 
ing of the Christian Church by the Apostles. Translated 
by J. B. Kyland. Two vols., cr. 8vo. 3b. 6d. each. 
Lond., Bohn's Library, Bell & Sons. 1851. S. 4s. 6d. 
Also in Cabinet Library. 
The work rather of an historian than of a commentator. Sold, devoat, 

learned, and, on the whole, sound. The result of wide researcli, and deep 

learning. 

1114 NORRIS (J. P., M. A.) Key to the Acts. Sm. 8vo. Ss. 6d. 

Lond., Rivingtons. 1871. 
A well executed sketch of the Acts of the Apostles, (^ving the student 
a clear idea of the run of the hook. Like the same author's " Key to the 
Gospels " (No. 965), it would he most useful in Bible classes. 

1115 OLSHAUSEN (H., D. D.) See No. 966. 

Denton says that " this is a brief, hasty, and not well-digested supple- 
ment to Olshausen's Tolnmes on the Gospels." He thinks all the Gterman 
writers to be much overrated, and we are much of his mind. 

1116 PYLE (T., k. A. 1674—1756). Paraphrase. Two vols., 

8vo. 1795. 2s. 
This pile of printed paper may safely be left on the hookseller's shelves. 

1117 STIER (RtJDOLPH, A D.) The Words of the Apostles. 

8vo. 10s. 6d. Edihb., T. & T, Clark. 1869. 

Devout, sctolairly, full of thought. To be used 
discreetly. 

1118 STOCK (Eugene). Lessons on the Acts. For Sunday 
» School Teachers and other Religious Instructors. 8vo. 

2s. 6d. Lond., Ch. of England S. School Institute. 1874. 

For half-a-crown the teacher may here obtain one 
of the niost useful books known to us. Though prodticed 
for members of the Church oif England, we recommend 
it heartily to ministers and others who are preparing 
addresses to the young. 

1119 THOMAS (DAVID, D. D.) Homiletic Commentary on the 

Acts. 8vo. Lond., Dickinson. 1870. 6s. 6d. 
Many of the homiletic outlines strike hs as " much ado about nothing " ; 
still, Lf a man should read this work and get no help &om it, it would be 
his own fault. 



LIVES OF THE APOSTLES. 335 

USD THOMSON <James, D. D.) Exposition of the Acta. evo. 
Lond., A. Hall, Virtue & Co. 1854. S. 2s. 6d. 
We fail to see maeh here of service to a preacher. 

1131 TBOLLOPE (W., M. A.) Commentary on the Acts, with 
Examination Questions, for the B. A. Degree. 12mo. 
Camb., 1854. 3s. 6d. 
Well adapted to accomplish the design indicated in the title. 

1133 VATJGHAtl (Chables J., D. D.) Lectures. Three vols.. 
F'cap. Svo. 4s. 6d. each. Lond., Macmillan, 1864, etc. 

Not only does Dr. Vaughan expound his texts in the 

ablest manner, but he introduces passages of Scripture 

so aptly that he suggests discourses. Bating his Church- 

ianity, we cannot too highly commend him. 



LIVES OP THE APOSTLES, &c. 

1133 KiTTO (JOHN, D. D.) "The Apostles and the Early 

Church." Daily Bible Illustrations. (See No. 43.) 

1134 BAUB (Ferdinand Chbistian, D. D.) Paul, his Life and 

Works. From the German. Two vols., 8vo. 21s. 
Lond., William & Norgates. 1873-75. 
Of the veiy Binad Church school. Not at all to our mitad. 

1125 BEVAN (Joseph Gurnet). Life of Paul. 8vd. Lond., 

1807. 2b. 
For the Society of Friends. Contains nothing which adds to our infor- 
mation upon the life of Paul. It may halve been useful in its day, but it is 
superseded. 

1126 BINNBY (Thomas, D. D.) Paul : his Life and Ministry. 

Cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Nisbet. 1870. 
Mr. Binney says; " This work is strictly an outline of the life of St. Paul 
and it is nothing more." It is a capital preparation for Heading Lewin 
and Conybeare and Howson. 

1127 BLUNT (HBljBti A. M.) Lectures upon the History of St. 

Paul. Two vols., 13mo. Sixth edition. Lond.i 1835. 
2s. 6d. 
Printed in such large and widely-leaded type that a very little matter 
goes a long way. Very good, but not striking. 



336 LIVES OF THE APOSTLES. 

1138 CONYBEARE (W. J., M. A.) and HOWSON (J. S.. D. D., 

Bean of Chester). Life and Epistles of St. Paul. Library 
edition. Two vols., 4to. 48s. Intermediate edition, 
two vols., sq. cr. 8vo. 31s. Student's edition, condensed, 
one vol., cr. 8to. 9s. Lond., Macmillaa & Co. 

Far superior to any other work on the subject. It 
stands like some o'ertopping Alp, a marvel among 
Scriptural biographies. We have not space to mention 
Howson's minor works connected with Paul, but they 
are all good. 

1139 HADIE (Joror, D. D., LL. D.) Paul, the Preacher. An 

Exposition of his Discoarses and Speeches, as recorded 
in the Acts. Cr. 8vo. Lond., Griffin. 1859. S. 3s. 6d. 

Designed to give ordinary readers a juster and fuller 

conception of the doctrine and life-work of the apostle. 

An able work. 

1130 LBWIN (Thomas, M. A., P. S. A., Barrister-at-Law). 

Life and Epistles of St. Paul. Second edition, much 
enlarged. Two vols., demy 4to. 43a. Lond., Q. Bell & 
Sons. 1875. [Second-hand copies of first edition. 1851. 
6a. to 9a.]; 

Dr. Gloag in his Commentary on the Acts says : . 
" Two works are especially instructive, and deserve care- 
ful perusal. The Life and Epistles of St. Paul, by 
Lewin, and the classical work on the same subject by 
Conybeare and Howson. In the former the historical ^ 
connections of the Acts are chiefly stated, and in the 
latter its geographical relations." 

1131 LYTTLETON (Geokoe, Loed). Observations on the Con- 

version and Apostleship of St. Paul. In a letter to 
Gilbert West, Esq. .8vo. Lond., 1747. [Numerous 
editions. The Tract Society's edition. F'cap. 8vo. 3s.] 

Gilbert West and his friend Lord Lyttleton, both men of acknowledged 
talents, had imbibed the prinoiplea of infidelity from a snperfimal view of 
the Scriptures. Fully persuaded that the Bible was an imposture, they 
were determined to expose the cheat. Mr. West chose the Besrfr- 
rection of Christ, and Lord Lyttleton the Conversion of St Paul, for the 



LIVES OF THE APOSTLES. 237 

subject of hostile criticism. Both sat down to their respective tasks, full 
of prejudice, and a contempt for Christianity. The result of their separate 
attempts was that they were both converted by their endeavors to over" 
throw the truth of Christianity 1 They came together, not as they expected, 
to exult over an imposture exposed to ridicule, but to lament their folly, 
and to congratulate each other on their joint conviction, that the Bible was 
the word of God. Their able inquiries have furnished two most valuable 
treatises in favor of revelation ; one, entitled " Observations on the Con- 
version of St. Paul," and the other " Observations on the Eesnrrection of 
Christ." 

1133 MACDUFF (J. B., D. D.) St. Paul in Rome. Or. 8vo. 4s. 
6d. Lond., Nisbet. 1871. S. 2s. 6d. 
Sermons preached in Borne, into which are ably introduced eloquent 
mention of .the existing traditions and remains which associate the Apostle 
with that great city. 

1133 BISCOE (ElCHARD, M. A., Preb. of St. Paul's. Died 1748). 

History of the Acts of the Apostles. Confirmed from 
other Authors, and considered as full evidence of the 
Truth of Christianity. 8vo. 0x1, 1840. 43. 

1134 PALEY (William, D. D. 1743—1805). Horse Paulinas. 

Numerous editions. The Religious Tract Society pub- 
lishes the Horse Paulinse, with Notes, and Horse Apos- 
tolicse, by Rev. T. Birks. 13mo. 3s. 

1135 TATE (Jambs, Canon of St. Paul's). The Horse Paulinse 

carried out and illustrated. 8vo. Lond., 1840. 
Though not commentaries, the three works just mentioned are sources 
of information not to be ne^ected by the student of the Acts. 

I],g6 RIVINGTON (Fbancis). Life and Writings of St. Paul. 
Cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Sampson Low & Co. 1874. S. 2s. 
Nobody possessing Conybeare and Howson will need this work, though 
in the absence of better this would have been serviceable. 

1137 SMITH (Thoeitlet). Saul of Tarsus. Ss. and 2s. 6d. 

Lond., J. Blackwood & Co. S. Is. 3d. 
Thomley Smith always deserves attentive reading. 

1138 BLUNT (Henkt, A. M.) Lectures upon the History of St. 

Peter. 12mo. Lend., 1830. Is. (For remarks, see 
No. 1137). 

1139 GREEN (Samuel Q., D. D., President of Rawdon College). 

The Apostle Peter: his Life and Lessons. 13mo. 3a. 
Lond., S. School Union. 1873. 
Contains a large amount of needful information, con- 



238 THE APOSTOLICAL EPISTLES. 

densed and well arranged. Dr. Green is the writer on 
Peter's biography. 

1140 KRXTMMACHEE (F. W., D. D.) St. John the Evangelist. 

12mo. Bib. Cabinet. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. S. 3s. 
The author's name ia a sufficient guarantee. He has. also written on 
Cornelius and Stephen. 

1141 QOULBURN (Edwakd Mbtrick, D. D., Dean of Norwich). 

Acts of the Deacons: Lectures on Acts VI. — IX. Sm. 
8vo. 6s. Lond., Bivingtons. 1869. S. 2s. 9d. 
An interesting topic well handled. 



THE APOSTOLICAL EPISTLES. 

1143 BENSON (Gborgb, D. D. 1699--1763). Paraphrase and 
Notes on 1 and 3 Thessalonians, 1 and 2 Timothy, Phile- 
mon, Titus, and the Seven Catholic Epistles. Two vols., 
4to. 1734. 6s. to 8s. 

Benson has closely followed Locke's method, though scarcely with 
equal ibotgteps, and has paraphrased those Epistles, which Locke did not 
live to complete. In the consecutive reading of an Epistle Locke and Ben- 
son are great assistants, hut as Benson was an Arian he must he read \7ith 
great caution. (See No. IISO). 

1143 DENTON (W,) Commentaries on the Epistles for Sundays 

and Holy Days. Two vols., 8vo. 86s. Lond., G. Bell & 
Co. 1869—71. S. 31s. 
WQl he a treasure to Churchmen. Denton is a good author. 

1144 DICKSON (David). Exposition of all the Epistles. Folio. 

Lond., 1659. 13s. to 15s. 

Dickson is a writer after our own heart. For preach- 
ers he is a great ally. There is nothing brilliant or 
profound ; but everything is clear and well arranged, 
and the unction runs down like the oil from Aaron's 
head. In this volume the observations are brief. 



THE APOSTOLICAL EPISTLES. - 239 

1145 EIiLIOOTT (Chablbs J., D, D., Bishop of Gloucester and 

Bristol). Commentary on St. Paul's Epistles. Five' 
vols., 8vo. Galatians, 8s, 6d. ; Ephesians, Ss. 6d. j Pas- 
toral Epistles, 10s. 6d ; Philippians, Colossians, and 
Philemon, 10s. 6d. ; Thessalonians, 7s. 6d. Lond., Long- 
mans. 1861-64. S. 31s. 6d. 

Dr. Eadie says, "EUicott is distinguished by close 
and uniform adherence to grammatical canon, without 
much expansion into exegesis." Dr. Kiddle thinks EUi- 
cott to be in many respects without an English rival. 
Eor scholars only. 

1146 FERGUSON (James). Exposition of the Epistles to the 

Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and Thes- 
salonians. 8vo. Ediub., 1659-74. 8s. to 10s. 6d. Re- 
printed, one vol., large 8vo. Lond., 1841. 3s. to 5s. 6d. 

He who possesses this work is rich. The author. 

handles his matter in the same manner as Hutcheson and 

Dickson, and he is of their class— a grand, gracious, 

savory divine. 

1147 QLOAQ (Patoit J., D. D.) Introduction to the Pauline 

Epistles. 8vo. 12s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1874. ' 

Not an exposition, but an exceedingly valuable in- 
troduction, illustrating the design, date, and circum- 
stances of the inspired letters. 

1148 JOWBTT (Benjamin, M. A„ Begins Professor, Oxford). 

Epistles to the Thessalonians, Galatians, and Romans 
[Greek and English]; with Critical Notes. Two vols., 
8vo. Lond., Murray. 1859. S. £2 3s. to £2 lOs. 
Professor Jowett's mo3t unseemly attack on Paul, as an apostle, as a 
thinker, as a writer, and aa a man, only proves his o^n incapacity for form- 
ing a jnst judgment either of the apostle or of himself. 

1149 KELLY (Wilmam). Lectures Introductory to the Study 

of Paul's Epistles. Demy 8vo. 5s. Loud., G. Morrish. 
1869. S. 3s. 
Of the same character as Mr. Kelly's other works. (See No. 1222). 



240 THE APOSTOLICAL EPISTLES. 

1150 LOCKE (John, M. A. 1632—1704). Paraplirase and Notes 

on the Epistles to the Qalatians, Corinthians, Romans 

and Ephesians. 4to. Lond., 1733. Also 8vo. editions. 

2s. 6d. 

Anything from such a man is worthy of attention, and tliia piecse, as a 

protest against rending texts from their connection, is most judicious. 

The paraphrase, though open to criticism, is executed with great candor, 

and really illuminates the text. (See Benson, No. 1142.) 

1151 LYTH (John, D. D. The Homiletical Treasury. Romans 

to Philippians. Or. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Elliot Stock. 1869. 
The plan of this hooli is surpassingly useful, hut Dr. Lyth does not 
cany it out to our satisfaction. It is easy to divide an egg by letting it 
drop on the floor, and in this &shion this author divides texts. 

1152 MACKNIGHT (J., D. D. 1721—1800). Translation with 

Commentary and Notes. Six vols., 8to., 1816; also four 
vols., 8vo., and one vol., royal 8vo. 10s. 
To he read with great caution. We do not admire this author. 

1153 MAESTON (Charles Dallas, M. A.) Expositions on the 

Epistles. 12mo. 3s. 6d. Lond., J. F. Shaw & Co. 1868. 

S. Is. 9d. 
Expositions of each Epistle as a whole. An admirable method of in- 
struction. To do this in a popular style is as praiseworthy as it is difS- 
cult. Mr. Maiston has succeeded. 

1154 PAGET (Alfred T., M. A.) On the Unity and Order of 

the Epistles of St. Paul. 8vo. Lond., Rivingtons. 
1851. Is. 
Suggests a rich vein for the student's own working. Few, we fear will 
carry it out, but these will prize the Epistles more than others. 

1155 PEILE (T. W., D. D.) Annotations on the Apostolical 

Epistles, for the use of Students of the Greek Text. 
Four vols., 8vo. Lond., 1848-52. 
AnIiKialvinistic in doctrine, and in style involved, obscure, and terribly 
parenthetical. The purchase of the volumes would be a heavy investment. 

1156 PEICHARD (C. E., M. A.) Commentary. Ephesians, 

Philippians, and Colossians. Lond., Rivingtons. 1865. 
. S. Is. 6d. 
Not too difinse : among the notes are some admirable hints which may 
be worked out. The book is a small one for so large a subject. 

1157 SLADE (James, M. A.) Annotations on the Epistles. For 

the use of Candidates for Holy Orders. Two vols., 8vo. 
Lond., 1836. 5s. 
This is practically a continuation of Elsley's work (No. 956), . which 
closed with the Acts. Notes dry and sapless, but from a literary point of 
view respectable. 



ROMANS. 241 



EOMANS. 

[Our space does not permit ua to repeat the names of authors mentioned 
under Acts and Apostolical EpisUes, but we urge the student care- 
fully to refer thereto.] 

1158 ADAM (Thomas). Paraphrase on Romans I. to XI. 8vo. 

1774 ; 12mo. 1805. Is. 6d. to 2s. 
A poor paraphrase ; veiy correct and evangelical, but thin as Adam's 
ale. We are disappointed, for the " Private Thoughts " of the same au- 
thor are highly esteemed. 

1159 ANDERSON (Robert, of Brighton. 1792—1843). Expo- 

sition of Romans. 12mo. Lond., 1837. 3s. 6d. 
After the manner of Charles Bridges. Full of holy unction and devout 
meditation. 

1160 BROWN (John, of Wamphray). Exposition of Romans. 

4to. Edinb., 1766. 10s. to 13s. 
By a Calvinist of the old school. Heavy, perhaps ; bnt precious. 

1161 BROWN (John, D. D., Edinb.) Analytical Expositions of 

, Romans. Large 8vo. 143. Edinb., W. Oliphaut & Co. 
1857. S. 7s. to 9s. 

Dr. Brown's work must be placed among the first of 

the first-class. He is a great expositor. 

1163 OAIiVIN (John). Commentary on Romans. Translated 
by Christopher Roodell. 4to., Black Letter. 1583. 9s. 
Also sm. 8vo., with Life, by Beza. 1834. 2s. 9d. 

1163 CHALLIS (Jambs, M. A., F. R. S., P. R. A. S.) Transla- 

tion of Romans, with Notes. 8vo. 4s. Lond., G. Bell & 
Sons. 1871. 
The translation is made in the current language of the day. The notes 
are mainly critical. 

1164 CHALMERS (T., D. D.) Lectures on Romans. Four vols., 

8vo. 1827. Four vols., 13mo. Edinb., Edmonston & Co. 
1854. S. 8s. 6d. 
Our preferences as to expositions lie in another direction ; but we can- 
not be insensible to the grandeur and childlike simplicity which were com- 
bined in Chalmers. 

1165 EDWARDS (TfMOTHT, A. M.) Paraphrase, with Annota- 

tions, on Romans and Galatians. 4to. Lond., 1752. 3s. 6d. 
Watt calls this a judiciously compiled work from the best comments. 
We judge it to be poor as poverty itself. 



242 ROMANS. 

1166 EWBANK (W. W.) Commentary, with. Translation and 

Notes. Two vols., post 8vo. Iiond., J. W. Parker. 1850. 
S. 38. 
A Bound evangelical comment, very good and gracions. In condensed 
thonght this work is not ricli : it is adapted for general reading. 

1167 FORD (J., M. A.) Romans. Illustrated from Churcli of 

England Divines. 8vo. 13s. Masters, 1862. S. 7s. 
(See No. 957). 

1168 FORBES (John, LL. D.) Analytical Commentary, tracing 

the Train of Thought by the Aid of Parallelism, with 
Notes, etc. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1868. 

"We think Dr. Forbes carries the idea of parallelism 
farther than it should go. It can only be applied 
strictly to poetical books, which Romans is not. He tries 
to bring out the other side of the truths taught in Hodge, 
Edwards, and Calvin ; but we confess our preference of 
those authors to himself. The work will greatly edify 
those whom it does not confuse. 

1169 FRY (John, B. A. Lectures. 8vo. Lond., 1816. 2s. 
Having no theory to serve in this instance, Fiy writes to edification. 

1170 GODWIN (John H., Hon. Prof., New Coll., Lond.) New 

Translation, with Notes. 8vo. 6s. 6d. Lond,, Hodder & 
Stoughton. 1873. 

Snch a book as students need while studying the Greek text in college. 

1171 HALDANE(R. 1764—1842). Exposition : with Remarks 

on the Commentaries of Macknight and others. 8vo. 
12/ 6d. Edinb., W. OUphant & Co. 1874. S. 9s. 

Dr. Chalmers styled this " a well-built commentary," 

and strongly recommended it to students of theology. 

In his " Sabbath Eeadings " he writes : " I am reading 

'Haldane's Exposition of the Epistle to the Romans,' 

and find it solid and congenial food." 

1172 HINTON (J. HowAKD). Exposition. 8vo. 6s. Lond., 

1863. S. Is. 6d. 
Not believing in the constant parejlelism of the Epistles, we care very 
little for this treatise, much as we esteem the author. 



EOMAKS. 243 

H73 HODGE (Chaklks). Commentary. 8vo. Philadelphia, 
1835, etc. Reprinted by Bel. Tract Society, 13mo. 3s. 

Hodge's method and matter make him doubly useful 
in commenting. He is singularly clear, and a great 
promoter of thought. 

1174 KELLY (Wixmam). Notes. 13mo. 2s. 6d. Lond., Q. 

Morrish. 1873. 
Many of the remarks are admirable, but the theories supported are un- 
tenable. 

1175 KNIGHT (Robert). Commentary. 8vo. Lond., 1854. 

3s. 6d. 
Kot at all to our mind, The author often seems to us rather to becloud 
the text than to explain it. 

1176 LANGE (J. P., D. D.) and FAY (F. R.). Commentary on 

Romans. (See page 38, and No. 934). 

1177 MARTYR (Peter. 1500—1563). A most learned and 

fruitful Commentary on Romans. Folio. 1568. 30s. 

Being in black letter, and very long, few will ever read it ; but it con- 
tains much that will repay the laborious book-worm. 

1178 OLSHAUSEN (H., D. D.) Commentary on Romans. 8vo. 

10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1850. 

Nobody seems very enthusiastic aa to Olshausen, but some authors 
have borrowed from his pages more than they have confessed. Personally 
we do not care for him,, but many prize and all respect him. 

1179 PARR (Elnathan, B. D.) A Short View of the Epistle 

to the Romans. [Chap. I. ; II., 1, 2 ; and VIU. to XVI.] 
This Exposition forms nearly the whole of "The 
Workes " of Parr. Fourth edition. Small folio. 1651. 
10s. The quartos do not contain the Exposition of Chap. 
I. and II. 

The style is faulty, but the matter is rich and full of 
suggestions. "We regret that the work is not complete, 
and is seldom to be met with except in fragments. 

1180 PLUMER (William S., D. D., LL. D.) Commentary, with 

Introduction on the Life, Times, Writings, and Character 
of Paul. Imp. 8vo. 14s. Edinb., W. Oliphant. [N. D.] 

Plumer is a laborious compiler, and to most men his works will be of 
more use than those of a more learned writer. 



244 ROMANS. 

1181 PBIDHAM(Akthur). Notes. Cr. 8vo. So. Lond.,T»pp. 
1862. 
Bound and gracious, but Bomewliat doll. 

1183 PURDUE (E., A. M.) Commentary on Romans. 8to. 
Dub., 1855. Is. 6d. 
Not important. 

1183 ROBINSON (T., D. D.) Suggestive Commentary on 

Bomans. [Van Doren Series of Commentaries.] Two 
vols., cr. 8vo. 8s. nett. Lond., Dickinson & Higham. 
1871. 

A good book in a good style. Worth any amount to 

preachers. 

1184 STEPHEN' (Johk, A. M.) Expositions on Romans. A 

Series of Lectures. 13mo. Aberd., 1857. 2s. 6d. 

Sound in doctrine, pracUcal in tone ; above mediocrity. 

1185 STUART (Moses.) Commentary on Bomans. 8vo. 6s. 

Lond., W. Tegg & Co. S. 3s. 6d. 

Moses Stuart is judged to have been at bis best in Bomans and Hebrews. 
Tbe present work is in some points unsatisfactory, on account of certain 
philosopbico-theological views wbicb he endeavors to maintain. Mr. Hal- 
dane denounced him as by false criticism " misrepresenting the divine 
testimony in some of the most momentous points of the Christian scheme." 
The charge was too true. 

1186 TERROT (C. H., A. M., Bishop of Edinburgh). Romans 

[in Greek], with Introduction, Paraphrase, and Notes. 
8vo. Lond., 1838. Is. 6d. 
Anti-Calviiustic. Why do not such writers let Bomans alone ! 

1187 THOLUCK (A. F.) Exposition of Romans. Two vols., 

f'cap. 8vo. 8s. Bib. Cabinet Series. Edinb., T. Clark. 

1842. S. 4s. 
Moses Stuart confesses his great obligations to this eminent divine, 
who far exceeds the most of his German brethren in spirituality, and is 
not behind them in scholarsbip ; yet even he is none too orthodox nor too 
reverent in his treatment of Holy Scripture. 

1188 VAUGHAN (Chakles Johw, D. D.) Romans. The 

Greek Text, with English Notes. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 
Lond., Macmillan & Co. 1874. S. 4s. 

Very valuable to students of the Greek. The result 
of independent study and honest labor. 



EOMANS. 245 

1189 WALFORD (W.) Curae Romans. 12mo. Lond., 1846. 

ls.6d. 
Walford makes comments of considerable valao ; ho does not ettind in 
the ih>nt rank, but his mediocrity is respectable. 

1190 WARDLAW (Ralph, D. D.) Lectures on Romans. Three 

vols., cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. each. Lond., Fullarton & Co. 1861. 
Wardlaw interprets with great sobriety and spirituality, and we never 
consult him in VMn, though we do not always agree with him. 

1191 WILLET (Andkew). Hexapla : that is, a Sixfold Com- 

mentary' upon Romans. Folio. 1611. 6s. to 7b. 6d. 
(See No. 143). 

1193 WILLIAMS (H. W., Wesleyan Minister). Exposition. 

Cr.Svo. 6s. Lond., 66 Paternoster Row. 1869. S.3s. 6d. 

This epistle has a fascination for Arminian writers ; it affords them 

an opportunity for showing their courage and ingenuity. Mr. Williams's 

book is instructive. 

1193 WILSON (Thomas. Puritan. Died 1631). Commentary 

on Romans. 4to. Lond., 1614. Folio, 1637 and 1653. 

3s. 6d. to 5s. 6d. 
Intended for the less-instraoted among the preacher's hearers, and put 
into the form of a dialogue. It is very solid, but does not contain much 
which is very striking or original. 

1194 SCLATER (W., D. D. Died 1636). A Key to the Key of 

Scripture ; or an Exposition, with Notes, upon the 
Romans, Chap. I., II., III. 4to. 1611 and 1629. 4b. 

An antique, but precious book. 

1195 MORISON (James, D. D.) Exposition of the Third Chapter 

of Romans. 8vo. 13s. 6d. Lond., Hamilton. 1866. S. 
7s. 6d. 
A scholarly and exhaustive exposition. When we do not agree with 
Dr. Morison, we pay homage to his great learning and critical skill. 

1196 FRASER (Jambs. 1700—1796). The Doctrine of Sancti- 

fication. Explication of Romans VI. to VIII. 1 — 4. 8vo. 
Edinb., 1880. Offered, new, by Ogle & Murray, 3s. 6d. 

Dr. John Brown says : " Eraser's Scripture Doctrine 

of Sanctification is well worth studying. The old Scotch 

divine is rude in speech, but not in knowledge." 

1197 ELTON (Edward, B. D.) Sundry Sermons upon Romans 

VII., VIII., and IX. Folio. Lond., 1653. 8s. to 10a. 

The style is plain and homely, but the matter is of 



846 I. & II. COKINTHIANS. 

the choicest kind. This old folio is like an old skin 
bottle, with a rough exterior, but filled within with the 
product of the rarest vintage. Such books as this we 
never tire of reading. 

1198 KOHLBRUGGE (H. P., D. D., of Elberfeld). Romans VII. . 

paraphrased. 12mo. Loud., 1854. S. Is. 6d. 
An instrnctive rendering of this deeply experimental chapter. 

1199 BINNING (Hugh. 1637—1653). The Sinner's Sanctuary. 

Forty-eight Sermons on Romans Vllt. 4to. 1670. Also 
Vols. I. and II. of his Works. Three vols., 12mo. Edinb., 
1839. 3b. to 4s. 6d. 

The writer of Binning's Memoir says : " There is a 
pure stream of piety and learning running through the 
whole, and a very peculiar turn of thought, which ex- 
ceeds the common rate of writers on this choice part of 
the Holy Scriptures." 

1200 HORTON (Thomas, D. D.) Forty-six Sermons on Romans 

VIII. Lond. Folio. 1674. 3s. 

Full of matter, weU, but rather too formally, arranged. 
The sermons are very prim and orderly. 

1201 WINSLOW (OcTAVitrs, D. D.) No Condemnation in Christ. 

[On Romans VIII.] Cr. 8vo. 7s. Lond., Shaw. 1860. 
Dr. Winslow is always sound and sweet; bnt his works are better 
adapted for general readers than for students. He is extremely diffuse. ' 



I. &II. COEINTHIANS. 

[See also nnder Apostolical Epistles.] 

1203 BILLROTH (Dr. Gtjstav. 1808—1886). Commentary on 
the Epistles to the Corinthians. Two vols., 13mo. 8b. 
Bib. Cabinet Series. Edinb., T. & T.' Clark. S. 3s. 9d. 
To be prized for its critioism. The author trios to bring forth from 
each passage the sense which the Apostle intended it to convey. Obser- 
vations and reflections there are none ; but we are not among those who 
throw away " the dry bones of critioism " — ^bones are as needful as meat 
though not so nourishing. 



I. & II. COEIIS-THIAN-S. 247 

1303 OAIiVIN (John). Commentarie upon Corinthians. Trans- 
lated by Thomas Tymme. 4to. 1577. 15s. 

Tymme seems to have been constantly occupied in 
translating the Reformers, and to have done his work 
well. 

1204 HOBGE (Charles, D. D.) Exposition of I. Corinthians. 

Post 8vo. 5s. 1868. Exposition of II. Corinthians. 
Post 8vo. 5s. 1869. Lond., Nisbet. 

The more we use Hodge, the more we value him. 
This applies to all his commentaries. 

1205 IiANGE (S. P.) Commentary on I. and II. Corinthiana, by 

C. F. Kluig, D. D. (See page 38.) 

1206 LOTHIAK (W.) Lectures on I. and II. Corinthians. 8vo. 

Edinb., 1828. 

This work must have done good service in its day, as in some degree 
an antidote to Macknight ; it is good and sound ; but the student need not 
distress himself if he cannot procure it, for it is not indispensable. 

1207 OLSHAUSEN (H.. D. D.) Commentary on I. and 11. Corin- 

thians. 8vo. 9s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1851. 

Br. Xindsay Alexander says that this comment is highly esteemed for ' 
its happy combinations of grammatico-historical exegesis, with spiritual 
insight into the meaning of the sacred writers. 

1208 PKIDHAM (Abthuk). Notes and Reflections on I. and II. 

Corinthians. Two vols., cr. 8vo. 5s. each. Loud., 
Nisbet. 1866. 

We do not always agree with Mr. Pridham, but we always admire the 
quiet, candid, and unaffected manner in which he writes. 

1209 ROBERTSON (Fbederick W., M. A. 1816—1853). Ex- 

pository Lectures. 12mo. 53. Lond., King. 1872. 

Eobertson's doctrinal vagaries are well known ; yet he is a great thinker 
and a prompter of thought in other men, Eead with discretion. 

1210 STANLEY (Abthub Pbnkhtn, T>. D., P. R. S. , Dean of 

Westminster.) Corinthians. 8vo. 18s. Lond., Murray. 

1876. 
We do not advise the purchase of these volumes ; for although Dean 
Stanley is an instructive writer, our perusal of his notes does not impress 
US with any sense either of their value or soundness. 



248 GALATIAKS. 

1211 COLET (John. D. D., Dean of St. Paul's. 1466—1519). 
Treatise on I. Corinthians. With Translation. Demy 
8vo. 10s. 6d. Lond., G. Bell & Sons. 1874. 
A onriosity and nothing more. Thia same ancient Dean Colet, the 

friend of Erasmus, wrote also on the Bomans. 

1213 PEARCB (Zachaky, D. D.) Translation of I. Corinthians, 
with Paraphrase and Notes. In Vol. II. of Commentary. 
(No. 968.) 
We onght to value this work greatly, for the author was a renowned 

scholar ; but we oonfeas we do not think much of his productions. 

[The writers on small portions of these Epistles are too namerons to ha 
mentioned in our short Catalogue. Bmgess, Branston, Thomas Fnller, 
Sibhes, Manton, Watson, and other masterly writers have all left a oon- 
tribation to the expository stores of the Church of Christ.] 



GALATIANS. 
[Do not fbrget to consult works irom No. 1142 to 1157.} 

1213 BAGGE (Hknky T. J., B. A.) Galatiana. 8vo. Load., 

1856. S.3s. 
Simply a revised text and critical notes. 

1214 BAYIiET (Sir E.) Commentary on Galatians. Thick 

post 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lend., Nisbet. 1869. S. 3b. 

Upon each portion there is a commentary, a para- 
phrase, and a sermon, and thus the author conveys a 
considerable amount of instruction. He is thoroughly 
evangelical, and his style clear. 

1215 BROWN (John, D. D. Edinburgh). Exposition of Gala- 

tians. 8vo. Edinb., 1853. S. 6s. 

Brown is a modern Puritan. AH his expositions are 
of the utmost value. The volume on Galatians is one 
of the scarcest books in the market. 

1316 CALVIN (John). Forty-two Sermons on Galatians. 4to. 
Lond., 1574. [A different work from his Commentary.] 



fiAlATIASTB. 249 

1217 EAJXCE John, D. D.) Commentary on the Greek Text of 

Galatiana. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., CUrk. 1869. S. 
7s. 6d. 

This is a most careful attempt to ascertain the mean- 
ing of the Apostle by a painstaking analysis of his words. 
The author is not warped by any system of theology, but 
yet he does not deviate from recognized evangelical 
truth. As a piece of honest grammatical exegesis the 
value of this commentary is very great, though there is 
room to differ from it here and there. 

1218 EDMUNDS (John. M. A.) Galatiana. With Explanatory 

Notes. Crown 8vo. Edinb., Oliver & Boyd. 1874. 
Thoronghly ritualistic. See remarks on tliis author's work on Thessa- 
louiEina. 

1219 GODWIN (John H.) Galatiana. Translation, with Notes 

and Doctrinal Lessons. Cr. 8vo. 3b. Lond., Hodder. 
1871. 
A helpful translation, with good textual notes. 

1220 HALDANE (James Alexandeb. 1768—1851). Exposition 

of Galatians. 12mo. 1848. 28. 6d. 
This work has never been popular, because the author in the third 
chapter discusses the question of baptism. This is a fault of which we 
may say as the Papist said of venial sin : " It deserved to be forgiven." 

1221 HAWKEE (JOhn, M. A.) Bible Thoughts in Quiet Hours. 

Commentary on Galatians. 2a. Lond., Yapp & Hawkins. 
1874. 
These " thoughts " are sound and edifying. The book does not profess 
to be a thorough exposition, 

1222 KELLY (William). Lectures on Galatians. 12mo. Is. 

6d. and 2s. Lond., G. Morrish. [N. D.] 
Mr. Kelly's authoritative style has no weight with us. We do not call 
these lectures expounding, but confounding. 

1223 IiANGE (J. P.) Commentary on Galatians, by Otto 

Schmoller, Ph. D. Ephesians, Philippiana, and Coloa- 
sians, by Karl Braune, D. D. (See page 88.) 

1224 UGHTFOOT (J. B., D. D., Canon of St. Paul's). Gala- 

tians. Revised Text, with Introductions, Notes, and 
Dissertations. 8vo. 12a. Lond., Macmillan. 1874. 

The Spectator says : " There is no commentator at 



250 GALATIANS. 

once of sounder judgment, and more liberal, than Dr. 
Lightfoot." ■ 

1235 LTJSHINGTON (Thomas. Died 1661). The Justification 
of a Sinner : tUe Main Argument of the Epistle to the 
Galatians. Folio. 1650. 5s. 6d. 

A translation from Crellios, a Sociuian divine, made by Laaliington, who 
was far gone towards the same error. We mention the book to warn our 
readers of its character ; for bad works of the Puritan period are few. 

1226 LUTHER (Maktin). Commentary on Galatians. [Numer- 
ous editions — folio, quarto, and octavo.] 

" I prefer this book of Martin Luther's (except the 

Bible) before all the books that I have ever seen, as most 

fit for a wounded conscience." — Bunyan. This is a 

great historic work, and is beyond criticism, on account 

of its great usefulness. As a comment its accuracy 

might be questioned ; but for emphatic utterances and 

clear statements of the great doctrine of the Epistle it 

remains altogether by itself, and must be judged per se. 

1237 OLSHA0SEN (H., D. D.) Commentary on Galatians, 
Ephesiaus, Colossians, and Thessalonians. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 
Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1851. (For remarks see No. 966.) 

1228 PEAESON (Samttel, Minister of Gt. George St. Chapel, 
Liverpool). Sermons on Galatians. Cr. 8vo. Ss. 6d. 
Lond., Clarke. 1874. 
Discourses worthy of the successor of Spencer and Baffles. 

1329 PERKINS (Wilmam. 1558—1602.) Commentarie on the 

First five Chapters of Galatians, vrith a Supplement on 
the Sixth Chapter, by Ralfe Cud worth. Thick 4to. 1604. 
2r. 6d. to 4s. 
Perkins was jnstly esteemed by his cotemporaries as a master in the- 
ology. This commentary is deeply theological, and reads like a body of 
divinity : tratli compels us to confess that we find it doll. 

1330 PRIDHAM (A.) Galatians. Cr. 8vo. Ss. Lond., Nisbet. 

1872. 
Pridham is, we snppose, of the moderate Brethren school, bnt he is not 
carried away by any theory, being essentially a man of sober mind. 



EPHESIAITS. S51 

EPHESIANS. 

[See also under Apostolical Spikes.] 

1231 BAYNE (Paul, A. M. Puritan. Died 1617). Commentary 

on Bphesians. Folio. 1643, etc. 6s. [Reprinted in 

Nichol's Commentaries. Cr. 4to. 7s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet. 

1866.] 

Sibbes says of this work : " The greatest shall find matter to exercise 

themselves in ; the meaner, matter of sweet comfort and holy instruction ; 

and all confess that he hath brought some light to this Scripture. 

1332 CALVIN (John). Sermons on Ephesians, Translated by 

A. Gelding. Black Letter. 4to. Loud., 1577. 9s. 

Not the same as the exposition. The Sermons are 
priceless. 

1333 EADIE (John, D. D.) Commentary on the Greek text of 

Ephesians. 8vo. 14s. Lond., Griffin. 1861. S. 7s. 6d. 

" This book is one of prodigious learning and re- 
search. The author seems to have read all, in every 
language, that has been written upon the Epistle. It is 
also a work of independent criticism, and casts much 
new light upon many passages." 

1234 GRAHAM (William, D. D., of Bonn, Prussia). Lectures 

on Ephesians. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., Partridge & Co. 
1870. 
Dr. Graham is an earnest opponent of the German Neologians and fre- 
quently writes with their negations before his eye. He is a commentator 
of considerable learning and much spirituality of mind. 

1235 HEMMINGE (Nicholas, D. D.) Commentary on Ephe- 

sians, translated. 4to. Lond., 1581. (See No. 554.) 

1386 HODGE (Chaklks, D. D.) Commentary on Ephesians. 
Cr. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet. 1870. 

Most valuable. With no writer do we more fully 

agree. 

1237 KELLY (W.) Lectures. 12mo. 23. Lond., G. Morrish. 
(See No. 1258.) 



253 BPHESIAKS. 

1238 LATHROP (Joseph, D. D., of America. 1731—1820). 

ExpoBition of the Epistle to the Ephesians, in a Series of 
Discourses. Thick 8to. Philadelpliia, 1864. 
Tlieae discourses are sure to be of the liighest class. We have not been 
able to procure a copy.' 

1239 M'GHEE (R., A. M., M. R. I. A.) Lectures on Ephesians. 

Two vols., 8vo. Fourth edition. Lond., Saunders & 

Otley. 1861. S. lOs. 6d. 
^"IdTely, warmhearted, estemporaneons sermons, full of good teaching. 
The preacher aimed to edify the many, rather than to write a critical work 
for the few, and he has sncoeeded. 

1240 NEWLAND (HianiT, M. A.) A New Catena of St. Paul's 

Epistles. Commentary on Ephesians, in which is exhib- 
ited the Results of the most learned Theological Criti- 
cisms, from the Age of the Early Fathers down to the 
Present Time. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., J. Parker & Co. 
1866. S. 3b. 
TTsed discreetly, this Catena of patriatio, mediseval and modem Church 
interpreters, may be very helpful ; without discretion it wiU mislead. 

1241 PATTISON (R. E., D. D., late Pres. of Waterville Col.) 

Commentary on Ephesians. 8vo. Boston, U. S. 1859. 

A book to instruct intelligent, experienced believers. 
It is a model for a class-book, plain and yet profound. 

1242 PERCEVAL (A. P.) Lectures on Ephesians. 12mo. 

Lond., 1846. Is. 6d. 
Good, but not likely to produce headache by overloading the brain with 
thought. 

1243 PRIDHAM (A.) Ephesians. 12mo. 4s. 6d. Lond., Yapp. 

S. 2s. 6d. 
Style heavy, matter weighty. 

1244 PULSFORD (John). Christ and his Seed ; Central to all 

things : being a Series of Expository Discourses on Paul's 
Epistle to the Ephesians. 4to. 8s. 6d. Lond., Hamil- 
ton, Adams & Co. 1872. 
Contains a great deal of deep thought, but is too mystical and often too 
cloudy to be of much Bcrvioo to those who wish to explain Scripture. 

1245 RIDLEY (Lancelot. About 1540.) Commentaries on 

Ephesians, Philippians, and part of Jude. [Reprinted in 

Richmond's Fathers.] 
John Bale wrote in 1543 : " The Commentary which that virtuous, 
learned man. Master Lancelot Bidley, made upon St. Paul's Epistle to the 
Ephesians, for the true erudition of his Christian brethren, hath my Lord 



PHlLlPPlAlfS. 2b3 

Bonner here also condemned for heresy. But what the oanse is I cannot 
ten, unless it be for advancing the Gospel as the thing whereby we are 
made righteons." Our author is equally fierce against Anabaptists and 
Papists, but is not much of a commentator. 

1346 TURNER (Samuel H., D. D.) Ephesians, in Greek and 

English; with Analysis and Commentary. 8vo. New 
York, 1856. 
A learned work ; good, but not very attractive. 

1347 EVANS (James Haebington, A. M. 1785—1849). Chris- 

tian Solicitude, aa exemplified in Epbegiana III. 16mo. 

Lend., J. F. Shaw. 1856. S. la. 3d. 

Harrington Evans was a great teacher. A more sound, earnest, and 

instructive divine never lived. This book consists of notes of sermons 

preserved by a hearer. It is well worthy of study. His. Memoir contains 

fragmentary remarks upon Ephesians I. 

1348 BOLLOCK (Robert. 1585—1598). An Exposition of part 

of the fift and sixt chapters of S. Pavle'a Epistle to the 
Ephesians. 4to. Lond., 1630. [In a volume containing 
sundry fragments of Expositiona.] 13s. 
This renowned Scotchman's writings generally come to ns as transla- 
tions from the Latin, and have been made pretematurally dull in the pro- 
cess of interpretation ; but this appears to have been written in English 
by himself. It is practical to a high degree, and goes into minute details 
of the married life, etc. It will not be much appreciated in these days, 
though Dr. MoCrie styles Bollock's works " succinct and judidous." 



PHILIPPIANS. 

[See also under Epistles,] 

1249 ACASTER (J.) Expository Lectures on Philippians. 8vo. 

Loud., 1837. 3s. 
TIseiU in showing the preacher how not to do it. By a violent effort 
we forced ourselves to read one lecture ; but we have done nothing to 
deserve to read another. The author was domestic chaplain to an earl, 
meant well, and did his little best. 

1250 AIRAT (Henry. 1559—1617). Lectures on Philippians. 

4to. Lond., 1618, 5s. 6d. [Reprinted, with Cartwright 
on Colossians, in Nichol's Commentaries. Cr. 4to. 7b. 6d. 
Lond., Nisbet. 1864.] 
Mr. Giosart says : " You will look in vain in this commentary for 



254: PHILIPPIANS. 

erudite criticism or subtle exegesis in tlie modem sense : bnt there seems 
to ns to be an instnictively trne following np of the Apostolic thonghts, 
and a qnick insight into their bearings and relative force. 

1251 CALVIN (John). Commentarie on Philippians. Trans- 

lated b7 Wm. Eecket. 4to. Lend., 1584. 10s. 6d. 

1252 CALVIN AND STORR. Expositions of PhUippians and 

Colossians. By J. Calvin and Gottlob Storr. Translated 
by R. Johnston. 12mo. 4s. Bib. Cabinet. Edinb., 
Clark. 1842. 3s. 
A sort of sandwich, with Calvin for the meat, and Storr for very hard 

black bread. Students who can enjoy both spiritnal exposition and stem 

criticism with equal relish will make fine expositors. 

1253 DAILLE (Jean. 1594—1670). Exposition of Philippians. 

Translated by Rev. James Sherman. Imp. Svo. Lond., 
1841. [This Exposition, together with Daille on Colos- 
sians, and Jenkyn on Jade, have been issued in one 
thick volume by Mr. Nichol, of Edinburgh. 10s. 6d. 
Lond., Nisbet. 1863.] 
Written in a delicionsly florid style. Very sweet and evangelical : 
after the French manner. 

1254 EASIE (John, D. D.) Commentary on the Greek text of 

Philippians. 8vo., IDs. 6d. Lond., Griffin. 1859. S. 6s. 

A standard work. Essential to the scholarly student. 

1255 EASTBURN (M.) Lectures. Svo. New Tork, 1858. 

2s. 6d. 
Designed for family reading. Moderately good. 

1256 HALL (Robert, A. M. 1764—1831). Exposition of Philip- 

pians, in twelve Discourses. Svo. Lond., 1843. 2s. 6d. 

Bobert Hall does not shine so mnch upon the printed page as he did 

when he blazed from the pulpit. These discourses were pnblished after 

his death, from the notes of a hearer. They are good as sermons, but not 

remarkable as expositions. 

1257 JOHNSTONE (Robekt, LL. B., of Glasgow). Lectures 

on Philippians, with revised Translation, and Notes on 
the Greek text. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Edinb., Oliphant. 1875. 

A noble volume. A real boon to the man who pur- 
chases it. 

1258 KELLY (W.) Philippians and Colossians. 12mo. 23. 

Lond., Morrish. 1869. 
Much that is excellent placed in " darkness visible.^' 



PHIUPPIANS. 355 

1359 LANGE(J. P.) See No. 934, and also page 38. 

1360 UGHTFOOT (J. B., D. D.) A revised text, with Notes, 

etc. 8vo. 13s. Lond., Macmillan & Co. 1873. 

Deservedly regarded as a standard work. The more 
instructed student will appreciate it. 

1261 MEYER (Dr. H. A. W.) Critical and Exegetical Hand- 
book to the Epistles to the Philippiaus and Colossians. 
(See No. 939.) 

No doubt wonderfully learned, but we cannot get on with it. Quota- 
tions from heretics we have happily never heard of before are of no great 
use to simple believers like ourselves. 

1363 NEAT (Chablks). Discourses from Philippians. Sm.8vo. 
Lond., 1841. Is. 6d. 
Strongly Calvinistio, and correct to a hair ; but utterly devoid of origin- 
ality either of thought or expression. 

1363 NEANDER (Johann August Wilhelm. 1789—1850). 

Philippians and James, practically and historically ez- 
plained. Post 8vo. 3s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1851. 
S. Is. 9d. 
Without dwelling npon the wording of the Epistle, Neanderreproduces 

its spirit in other language, and so expounds it. The little work will be 

greatly appreciated by a certain order of minds. 

1364 NEWLAND (H., M. A.) New Catena. Philippians. 8vo. 

7s. 6d. J. Parker. 1860. S. 3s. 6d. (See No. 1340.) 

1365 PIERCE (James. Died 1736). Paraphrase on Philippians, 

Colossians, and Hebrews. 4to. Lond., 1733. 

Had he but known the Lord, his writings would have been admirable. 
He conceals his Arianism, but it is fatal to his acceptance with believers. 
He wrote after the manner of Mr. Locke. 

1366 ROBERTSON (J. S. S., M. A.) Lectures on Philippians. 

13mo. Lond., 1849. 
Lectures which will never set the Thames on fire. 

1367 TODD (Jambs F., M. A.) Apostle Paul and the Church at 

Philippi. Acts XVI., and Philippians. 8vo. 9s. Lond., 

Bell & Daldy. 1864. 
A respectable work. The author is sound in doctrine and valorous in 
controverting error, and he says many good things ; but he rather uses the 
text than expounds it. He deserves a reading ; but men with whom 
money is scarce need not purchase this book. 



256 C0L08SU.NS. 

1268 TOLLER (Thomas). Diflcoursea on Philippians. 12mo. 

Lond., 1855. 29. 
A very favorable specimen of plain, popular exposition. Nothing either 
deep, or new, or critically accurate ; but sensible and practical. 

1269 VAUGHAN (C. J., D. D.) Lectures on Philippians. 

Extra F'cap. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Macmillan. 1864, etc. 

Deservedly esteemed. Dr. Vaughan gives a literal 
translation of his text from the original Greek, and then 
expounds it, believing it, as he says, " to be the duty of 
every Christian teacher to assist his congregation in 
drinking not of the stream only, but at the spring of 
revealed truth." 

1270 WIESINGER (Lie. August). Commentary on Philip- 

pians, Titus, and 1 Timothy ; in continuation of the 
work of Olshauaen. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. 
Clark. 1857. S. 4s. 6d. 

Many mistake this for Olshansen's. It is of the critical and giammatioal 
school, and bristles all over with the names of the German band. We pre- 
fer the Puritanic gold to the Gtorman silver which is now in fashion. 



COLOSSIANS. 



1271 BATNXS (Paul, A. M.) Commentary on Colossians I. and 

II. 4to. Lond., 1634. 6s. 

On the two first chapters only. Edifying and very 
rare. 

1272 BTPIELD (Nicholas, Puritan. 1579—1622.) Exposition 

upon Colossians ; being the Substance of near seven 
years' week-day sermons. Folio. 1615 and 1617. 6s. 6d. 
[Reprinted in Nichol's Commentaries, Cr. 4to., 7s. 6d. 
Lond., Nisbet. 1869.] 

The author lived in intense pain, and died at 44, yet 
he produced quite a mountain of literature. He writes 
like an earnest, faithful man, resolved to keep back 
nothing of the counsel of God ; but he too little studies 



COLOSSIANS. 357 

brevity, and consequently he wearies most readers. He 
is always worth consulting. 

1373 CALVIN. (See Nos. 1251, 1252). 

1374 CARTWKIGHT (Thomas, B. D. Puritan. 1535—1603). 

Commentaiy on Colossians. 4to. Lond., 1612. 7s. 6d. 

[Reprinted In Nichol's Commentaries. See No. 1250.] 
This is but a small affitir, consisting of scanty and second-rate " notes " 
by a hearer. Yet what there is of it has the tme ring, and is rioh in 
spirituality. 

1275 DAILLE(J.) See No. 1253. 

1276 DAVENANT (John, Bishop of Salisbury. 1572—1641.) 

Exposition of Colossians. Translated from the Latin, by 
Josiah AUport. Two vols., 8vo. Lend., 1881. 4a. to 
6s. 6d. 

" I know no exposition upon a detached portion of 
Scripture (with the single exception of Owen on the 
Hebrews) that will compare with it in all points. Leigh- 
ton is superior in sweetness, but far inferior in depth, 
accuracy, and discursiveness." — 0. Bridges. 

1277 EADIE (John, D. D.) Commentary on the Greek text of 

Colossians. 8vo., 10s. 6d. Lond., Griffin. 1856. S. 6s. 

Very full and reliable. A work of the utmost value. 

1278 ELTON (Edwabd, B. D.) Exposition of Colossians. 

Third edition. Folio. Lond., 1637. 7s. to 9s. 

A Puritan work ; strongly Calvinistic, popular, and 
very full. 

1279 GISBORNE (Thomas, Prebendary of Durham. 1758—1846). 

Exposition of Colossians. 12mo. Lond., 1816. Is. 
Sermons which very mnch remind us of those of Heniy Melvill, but 
■vrith less of the Gospel in them. Gisborne was a preacher of considerable 
repute, but he was more at home upon moral than spiritual topics. 

1280 GUTHRIE (Thomas, D. D.) Christ the Inheritance of the 

Saints. Discourses from Colossians. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 
Edinb., A. & C. Black. 1859. S. 4s. 
Not so much an exposition as a series of biUliant discourses, or prose 
poems. Dr. Guthrie has only touched upon tha first chapter. 



258 coLossiAsrs. 

1381 UGHTPOOT (J. B., D. D.) Colossians and Philemon. 
A revised Text, with Introductions, Notes, etc. 8vo., 
12s. Macmillan & Co. 1875. 

For remarks, see No. 1260. Lightfoot writes for 

scholars. 

1383 MIIjKER (Joseph, M. A.) Sermons on Colossians, 1 Thes- 
salonians V., and James I. 870. Lond., 1841. 3s. 

Eespectable sermona by the Church historian. 

1283 BOLLOCK (K.) Lectures on Colossians. 4to. Lond., 

1603. 10s. 

It is said that when this great divine died the entire popniatiou of 
Edinburgh attended Ids faneraL His Lectures on Colossians were once 
very popular, but are now extremely scarce. The style is very simple and 
colloquial, and the matter &t &om profound. 

1284 SFENCE (Jambs, D. D.) Disconrses on Colossians. Cr. 

8vo. 7s. 6d. Lond., Hodder. 1875. 

A good specimeh of honest, popular expounding. 
Intended for a congregation, but useful to the student. 

1285 WATSON (Thomas, B. A.) Discourses on Colossians. 8vo. 

Lond., 1838. 2s. 6d. 

Thoroughly evangelical and remarkably commonplace. 

1286 WILSON(Danibl,D.D., Bishop of Calcutta). Explanatory 

Lectures on Colossians. 8vo. Lond., 1845. 2s. 6d. 

By a famous modem evangelical, who shows much ability in wielding 
this Scripture against Tractarians and others. The work conttuns little 
original exegesis. 

1287 LOCKYER (Nicholas, Puritan. 1613—1684-5). England 

Faithfully Watcht with in her Wounds. [Lectures on 
Colossians I.] 4to. Lond., 1646. 5s. 

Eich, full, simple. A fair specimen of plain Puritan 
preaching. 



I. &, II. THESSALOKIAKS. 259 



I. &. II. THESSALONIAKS. 

1388 EDMUNDS (J., M. A.) Commentary on 1 and 3 Thessalon- 
ians. Cr. 8vo. Lond., Bell & Daldy. 1858. S. 2s. 

For Sohool Teachers. The author's notion of a Commentary, wMoh he 
fully carreia out, is contained in his preface. " My idea of the Middle- 
dasa Commentary is, that it should be in strict accordance with the doc- 
trine and ritual of the Church, should illustrate her ritual, and should 
recommend her to the esteem and aftection of her children, by proving her 
adherence to the Word of God." 

1289 JEWEL (John, Bishop of Salisbury. 1532—1571). Expo- 

silions upon I. and II. Thessalonians. Sm. 8vo. Black 

Letter. Lend., 1583. Reprinted 1811 and 1841. Is. 6d. 
Also in his Works. 

Hooker calls Jewel " the jewel of bishops." This work is in the usual 
style of the first Eeformers, but rather more lively than most of them. 
Many of the topics touched upon were peculiar to the times in .which the 
exposition was written. It will serve as a good specimen of the .preaching 
of the Fathers of the English Church. 

1390 IiANOE (J. P.) Commentary on Thessalonians, by Drs. 
Auberlen and Riggenbach. Translated by Dr. Lillie. 
Timothy, Titus and Philemon, by Prof. Von Oosterzee. 
Hebrews, by Dr. C. B. Moll. Edited by Dr. Schaff. 
Imp. 8vo. 21b. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1809. 

" Lillie's Thessalonians will be found to be one of 
the best executed portions of the American edition of 
Lange. The translation is remarkably accurate and ele- 
gant, and the additions from his own researches, and the 
best English Commentaries, are carefully selected and 
yaluable."— Dr. P. Schaff. 

1291 LILLIB (JOHX, D. D., Kingston, New York. 1813—1867). 

Lectures on Thessalonians. Large 8vo. 9s. Edinb., W. 
Oliphant & Co. 1863. 

Eemarks on the preceding will apply here. 

1292 EOLLOCK (Robert). Lectures on the Epistles to the 

Thessalonians, preached by R. R. 4to. Edinb., 1696. 

For remarks, see No. 1243. 



260 PASTOBAL EPISTLES. 

1393 SCLATER (William, D. D.) Exposition upon 1 and 8 

Thessalonians. 4to. Lend., 1637. Sa. 6d. to 7s. 
Sclater is antiqne ; but, in the asnal Puritanio manner, he gives very 
instructive disquisitions upon a vast variety of topics suggested by the 
text. 

1394 PATTERSON (Alexander Simpson, D. D., Glasgow). 

Commentaries on 1 Thessalcnians, James, and 1 John. 
ISmo. Edinb., 1857. 3s. 6d. to 4s. 6d. 
Notes of disoouraes, witli mnch in them. Hints may be gleaned here 
in abundance by students who open their eyes. 

1395 PHILLIPS (J.) The Greek of Thessalonians explained. 

4to. Lond., 1751. 
Short, but not particularly sweet. Very scarce. 

1396 BRADSHAW W., Puritan. 1571—1618). A Plaine and 

Pithy Exposition of 3 Thessalonians ; published since his 
decease by T. Gataker. 4to. 1630, 3s. 6d. 
As we cannot get a sight of this, perhaps some reader will present ns 
with a copy. 

1397 MANTON (Thomas, D. D.) Eighteen Sermons on 3 

Thessalonians II., concerning Antichrist. 8vo. 1679. 4s. 

Here Manton smites heavily at Popery. Eiehard 
Baxter wrote a eommendatory preface to this valuable 
exposition. 

1398 SQUIRE (John, M. A.) A Plaine Exposition on 3 Thessa- 

lonians II., 1 — 13, proving the Pope to be Antichrist. 
4to. Lond., 1630. 5s. to 8s. 

Sqture works out the point of the Pope's being Antichrist with very 
great cogency of reasoning. The exposition of the Epistle is lost in the 
point umed at : but that point is of the utmost importance. i 



PASTORAL EPISTLES ; 

Or, the Epistles of Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. 

1399 OAIiVIN (John). C Sermons on the Epistles of S. Paule 
to Timothie and Titus, translated out of the French, by 
L. T. 4to. Lond., 1579. 15a. 

Quite a different work from Calvin's Commentaries. 



I. &. n. TIMOTHY. 261 

1300 FAIRBAIRN (Patkick, D. D.) The Pastoral Epistles, 
Greek Text, Translation, Introductions, Expository- 
Notes, etc. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 
1874. 

What with a good translation, full defence of the 
Apostolic authorship of the Epistles, fruitful comments, 
and profitable dissertations, this volume is about as com- 
plete a guide to the smaller epistles as one could desire. 



I. &. II. TIMOTHY. 

[See also nuder Faatoral Epistles.] 

1301 BICKBRSTETH (B.) See No. 1388. 

1303 PATTERSON (Alex. S., D. D.) Commentary on Timothy 

and Titus. 18mo. 1848. (See our remarks on No. 1294.) 

1803 SLADE (Henry Rapes, LL. B.) Pulpit Lectures on the 
Epistles to Timothy. Cr. 8vo. 1837. Is. 

Utter rubbish. Dear at a gift, 

1304 WIBSINGBR (L. A.) See No. 1270. 

1305 FINDER (J0HifH.,M. A.) The Candidate for the Ministry. 

Lectures on 1 Timothy. 13mo. Lond., 1837. Is. 

Of no consequence. 

1306 BARLOW (John. Puritan). Exposition of 3 Timothy, I 

and II. Folio. Lond., 1633. 4b. to 7b. 6d. 

By a master in Israel. Thoroughly practical, deeply 
experimental, and soundly doctrinal. 

1307 _ HAIiI. (Thomas). Commentary on 3 Timothy III. and IV. 

Folio. Lond., 1633—1658. Ss. 

Hall is often found in union with Barlow, complet- 
ing the Commentary on 2 Timothy, as he completed 
Amos, (No. 841.) He is a masterly expositor, of the 
old-fashioned school. 



262 XITUS— PHILEMOISr. 



TITUS. 

[See also under Pastoral Epistles.] 

1308 GBAHAM (W., D. D.) Titus. 12mo. 2s. 6d. Lond. 

Nisbet. 1860. 
Dr. Graham endeaTois to malce critidsm intelli^ble, and the resnlta of 
learning reallf edifying. We have oar doubts as to some of his criticisms, 
and he is quite dogmatic enongh, but on the whole good. 

1309 TAYLOR (Thomas, D. D. Puritan. 1579—1633). Com- 

mentarie upon Titus. 4to. Camb., 1619. 4s. to 6a. 
Folio. 1668. 10s. Also in Works. 

The title-page calls Thomas Taylor " a famous and 

most elaborate divine." He was a preacher at Paul's 

Cross during the reigns of Elizabeth and James I., and 

a voluminous writer. This Commentatory will well 

repay the reader. 



PHILEMON. 

1310 ATTERSOIiIi (Wiluam. Puritan). Commentary upon 

Philemon. Second Edition. Folio. Lond., 1633. 4s. 6d. 

A long comment upon a short epistle. The pious 
author labors to keep to his text, and succeeds in bringing 
out of it a mass of quaint practical teaching. 

1311 OOX (Samuel). Philemon. In " The Private Letters of 

St. Paul and St. John." 13mo. 8s. Lond., Miall. 1867. 

Such exposition as this adds interest to the epistles, 
and makes their writers live again before our eyes. 
Mr. Cox delivered this work in public on certain week 
evenings. Happy are the people who are thus instructed.- 

1313 DTKB (Daniel, B. D. Puritan. Died about 1614). A 

most fruitful Exposition upon Philemon. Lond., 4to. 

1618. 4s. to 7s. 

Dyke's remarks are memorably practical'and full of common sense. He 

abounds in proverbs. The work is not very valuable as an exposition of 

the words, but excels in making use of them. , 



HEBREWS. 263 

1313 JQNES (William, D. D., of East Bergholt). Commen- 

tary upon Philemon, Hebrews, and 1 and 2 John. Folio. 
Lond., 1636. 9s. to 13s. 

Very lively, sprightly, colloquial lectures, by a Suffolk 
divine, who thinks the Brownists and Dissenters were 
not persecuted. " Christ was whipped, that was perse- 
cution; Christ whipped some out of the temple, that 
was no persecution." Despite his intolerance he says 
some uncommonly racy things. 

1314 LIGHTFOOT (J. B., DD.) See No 1381. 



HEBEEWS. 

1315 BROWN (JoHir, D. D.) Exposition of Hebrews. Two 
vols., 8vo. 18s. Edinb., 1863. S. 9s. 6d. 

Dr. David Smith says of this work : " There is not 
a single instance of carelessness in investigating the true 
meaning of a text, or of timidity in stating the conclu- 
sion at which the author had arrived." What more 
could be said in praise of any exposition ? 

1816 OALVIN (John). Commentary on Hebrews, translated 
by Clement Cotton. 4to. Lond., 1605. lOs. to ISs. 
Another edition, 13mo. Lond., 1841. Is. 6d. 

1317 DALE (R. W., M. A.) The Jewish Temple and the Chris- 

tian Church. Discourses on Hebrews. Cr. 8vo. 6s. 

Lond., Hodder and Stoughton. 1871. S. 3S. 6d. 
Among modem divines few. rank so highly as Mr. Dale. Daring and 
bold in thought, and yet for the most part warmly on the side of ortho- 
doxy, his works command the appreciation of cultured minds, 

1318 DELITZSCH (P., D. D.) Commentary on Hebrews. Two 

vols., 8vo. 21s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1868. S. 12s. 

Bemarks formerly made upon Delitzsoh apply here also. (Nob. 413, 
and 723.) 



264 HEBREWS. 

1819 DICKSON (David.) Short Explanation of Hebrews. 8vo. 
Aberd., 1635 ; Camb., 1649 i and Lond., 1839. 

This is generally to be found in connection "with the 

author's "Brief Exposition on Matthew." (N"o. 1035.) 

We need say no more than — ^get it, and you will find 

abundance of suggestions for profitable trains of thought. 

1320 DUNCAN (Robert, of Tillicultry. 1699—1739). Exposi- 

tion of Hebrews. 8vo. 1731. 3s. 6d. New edition, cr. 
8vo. 2s. (published at 5s.) Edinb., Ogle & Murray. 
" An excellent condensation of Dr. Owen's valnable work, and giving 
the pith and marrow of the great commentator." 

1321 EBRARD (John H. A., Prof. Theol. Erlangen). Commen- 

tary on Hebrews. Svo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 

1858. S. 5s. 
This is intended as a continuation of Olshanaen, but it is an improve- 
ment thereon. Ebrard is at once learned and spiritual, and we prefer him 
to almost any other author whose works the Messrs. Clark have issued. 

1322 GOUGE (William, D. D. Puritan.) Commentary on 

Hebrews. Two vols. Folio. Lond., 1655. [Reprinted 
in Nichol's Commentaries. Three vols., Cr. 4to. 7s. 6d. 
each. Lond., Nisbet. 1866-7.] 

We greatly prize Gouge. Many will think his sys- 
tem of observations cumbrous, and so, perhaps, it is ; 
but upon any topic which he touches he gives outlines 
which may supply sermons for months. 

1823 HALPANE (James Alex. 1768—1851.) Notes On Ex- 
position of Hebrews. 12mo. 4b. 6d. Lend., Nisbet. 
1860. 

A posthumous work, and issued, not as a finished ex- 
position, but as "Notes of an intended Exposition." 
Very valuable for all that. 

1834 HOWARD (J. E.) Hebrews. A Revised Translation, with 
Notes. Demy, 12mo. Is. 6d. Lond., S. W. Partridge & 
Co. 1873. 

Contiuns a few suggestive observations ; but is a small affair in all re- 
spects. 

1325 JONES (W., D. D.) See No. 1313. 



HEBREWS. 365 

1326 JONES (W., M. A. 1736—1800). Four Lectures on the 

Relation between the Old and New Testaments as set 
forth in Hebrews. 8vo. 1811. Is. 6d. 
Very little of it, and bound up with a work of an ingenious, but fanci- 
ful character. 

1327 KNOX (J. Spencer, A. M.) The Mediator of the New 

Covenant. Sermons on Hebrews. 8vo. Dublin, 1884. 3s*- 
Thirteen Sermons on select passages. Mediocrity highly polished. 

1328 LANGE(J.P.) See No. 1390. 

1829 LAWSON (G.) Exposition of Hebrews. Wherein the 
Socinian Comment te examined. Folio. Lond., 1663. 
Scarce. 7s. to 10s. 
Eiohard Baxter says : " I must thantfolly acknowledge that I learned 

more from Mr. Lawson than from any divine that ever I conversed with." 

1380 LINDSAY (W., D. D., Prof. Theol. Glasgow). Lectures 
on Hebrews. Two vols. - Demy 8vo. 31b. Edinb., 
Oliphant. 1867. lOs. 

One of those great expository works with which the 

Scotch ministry has so frequently enriched the Church. 

"We wonder if any one ever read this excellent exposition 

through ; we should not like to be sentenced to do so. 

1881 [LUSHINGTON (Thomas, M. A.).] The Expiation of a 
Sinner. Commentary upon Hebrews. Folio. 1646. 6s. 
This work was published anonymously, and is charged with Socinian- 
ism. 

1833 M'CAUL (Joseph B., Hon. Canon of Rochester). Hebrews. 
A- Pharaphrastic Commentary, with Illustrations from 
Philo, the Targums, etc. 8vo. 12s. 6d. Lond., Long- 
mans. 1871. S. 6s. 
Mr. M'Caul attacks the gentlemen of the higher criticism with great 
plainness of speech and some asperity. We hardly think his work will 
attain a great circulation, it has so much Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Ger- 
man in it, that only men of learning and leisure cau use it. 

1333 MACLEAN (A. 1732—1813). Paraphrase and Commen- 

tary on Hebrews. Two vols., 13mo. Lond., 1847. 3s. 

One of the most judicious and solid expositions ever 
written. 

1334 NELSON (Robert). Comments on Hebrews. Cr. 8vo. 6s. 

Lond., Morgan & Scott. 1868. S. 3s. 6d. 
By a thoughtful and devout man, but we cannot endorse some of his 



266 HEBBBW& 

interpretations, ITie fednt of a certain modem school appears in passages 
BKeh as this ; " Had Panl been preaching holiness of life as essential to 
seeing the tord, ■werald he not have been advocating the very principle on 
■Whieh the lawwas based?" We are afrtud of this covert Antinomiamsm ; 
its presenee eats as doth a canker, 

138S [NEWTON (Adelaide L.).] Hebrews compared vcith the 

Old Testament. Cr. 8vo, 3b. 6d. Lond., Niabet, 1873. 

S, Is. 6d. 

Bevost, simple, and instractive. The authoress was an invalid, and 

died ere she had finished her work. She worked ont a good idea with 

far mote of expository matter than could have been expected of her. 

1339 OWEN (JoHH, D. D.) Exposition of Hebrews. Four 
vols. Folio. Lond., 1668-74. 14b. Also seven vols., 
8vo. Edited by Dr. Goold. £3 2s. Edinb., T. & T. 
Clark. S. 25s. There is an abridgment of Owen's work, 
executed by Dr. Williams. Four Tola., 8vo. 1790, etc. 
4s. 6d. to 7s. 6d. 

Out of scores of commendations of this colossal work 

we select but one. Dr. Chalmers pronounced it "a 

work of gigantic strength as well as gigantic size ; and 

he who hath mastered it is very little short, both in 

respect to the doctrinal and practical of Christianity, 

of being an erudite and accomplished theologian." 

1337 PAKRY (Thomas, M. A., Bishop of Barbadoes). Hebrews, 

in a Series of Lectures. 12mo. Lond., 1834. Is. 6d. 
So feeble that we wonder how it got through the press. A sermonized 
paraphrase. 

1338 PATTERSON (Albxandek Simpson, D. D.) Commentary 

on Hebrews. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 

1855. 6b. 
Lectures delivered in the course of the author's ministrations. Excel- 
lent for the public ; the student should consult other authors for learning ; 
but Patterson has savor and spirituality. 

1339 PRIDHAM (A.) Hebrews. Cr. 8vo. 5a. Lond., Niabet. 



Itather mystified with expressions peculiar to " dispensational truth," 
whatever that may mean ; but devout, candid, sober, and sound. 

1340 SAMPSON (Francis S., D. D. Prof. Orient. Lit., Prince 
Edward, Va.) Commentary on Hebrews. 8vo. New 
York, 1856. S. 5s. 6d. 
A respectable production, but we know many which we value fer more. 



HEBREWS. 367 

As a set of lectures to a college class these comments would be of no great 
Talne, bat the author did well not to print them, although it was natural 
and fitting that his surviving colleague should do so. 

1341 SAMPSON ((J. V.) Translation, with Notes. 8vo. Lond., 

1828. Is. 6d. 

Dr. Kendrick says that Sampson is candid and sensible, but scarcely 
grapples with the difficult points of the Epistle. Perhaps he was not 
strong enough. 

1342 SAPHIR (Adolph). Lectures on Hebrews. First Series. 

Chapters I. — VII. [Second and concluding volume in 
preparation]. Cr. 8vo. 6s. 6d. Lond., J. F. Shaw & Co. 
1874. 
Mr. Saphir has always something to say worthy of the attention of 
spiritual minds. His mind finds a track of its own, but he is never specu- 
lative. We always enjoy his remarks, though he is not specially terse or 
brilliant. 

1343 STEWARD (George). Argument of the Epistle to the 

Hebrews. 8vo. 10s. 6d. Bdinb., T. & T. Clark. 1872. 

Unhappily the author died before he had quite completed this " argu- 
ment." The work is most helpful. 

1344 STUART (Moses, M. A.) Commentary on Hebrews. 8vo. 

Lond., 1837. Also 1853. 7s. 6d. Tegg & Co. S. 3s. 6d. 

We are constantly differing from Moses Stuart, but 
are bound to consult him. He is one of the greatest of 
American scholars, and this is one of his best comments. 

1345 TAIT (William, M. A.) Meditationes Hebraicae. Two 

vols., Cr. 8vo. Lend., Hamilton, Adams & Co. 1855. 

S. 6s. 
A noteworthy series of lectures. If Gouge, Owen, and others, had not 
done all for Hebrews that one could well need, this would have been of 
first-class value ; and though we have much better it is still a worthy com- 
panion to them. 

1346 THOLUCK (A. F.) Commentary on Hebrews. Two vols., 

12mo. 12s. Biblical Cabinet. Edinb., Clark. 1843. 
S. 4s. to 5s. 6d. 
Delitzsch speaks highly of this work; but, for our port, we understand 
the Epistle better without Tholuok than with him. Clouds of smoke and 
volleys of hard words destroy our equanimity. 



268 PABTS OF HEBBEWS. 

1347 TURNER (Samuel H., D. D.) Hebrews, in Greek and 

English; witli Commentary. 8vo. New York, 1853. 
S. 4s. 6d. 
CareftOly done. Written for those who really wish to nnderstand the 
Epistle. 

1348 WILLIAMS (H. W.) Exposition of Hebrews. Cr. 8vo. 

6s. Lond., 66 Paternoster Row. 1872. 
The anthor has evidently been a diligent reader and stadent Apart 
&om its Wesleyan peculiBrities, we can commend this book as editing and 
instrnotiTe, thoagh we do not place it in the first class. 



PAETS OF HEBREWS. 



1349 DEERINO (Edward, B. D. Puritan. Died 1576). 

Twenty-seven Lectures upon Hebrews [chap. 1.-^1.] 
4to. 1590. 5s. 6d. 

Mainly aimed at the errors of the Church of Eome, 

and at the practical questions of the Reformation period. 

A learned but antiquated set of lectures. 

1350 MANCHESTER (Georob Montagtje, Duke of.) Horse 

Hebraicae. An Attempt to discover how the Argument 

of the Epistle to the Hebrews [I — IV. 11] must have been 

understood by those therein addressed. Royal 8vo. 

Lond., 1835. 3a. 

A peculiar hook, altogether em generis, written by a man who did his 

own thinking. The Duke would be an unreliable guide, bat he ftequently 

strikes out new paths, and suggests novel trains of thought. 

1351 ANDERSON (James S. M., M. A.) Discourses on the 11th 

and part of the 12th chapters of Hebrews. Two vols., 
8vo. Lond., 1839-43. 8s. 6d. 
Good Church sermons. Of very slight value for commenting purposes. 

1353 MANTON (T., D. D.) Sixty-six Sermons on Hebrews XI, 
in vol. III. of Manton's Works. Folio edition. 

Exhaustive. Manton piles up his matter heaps upon 

heaps. 

1353 PERKINS (William). A Cloud of Faithful Witnesses. 
Commentary on Hebrewes XI. 4to. 1623. 2s. 6d ; and 
Works, vol. III. 
Good in its day, but now superseded. Very many points are discussed 



CATHOLIC EPISTLES — JAMES. 269 

which wonld now be regarded as ridicnlons : as for instance, whether a 
man may travel in a foreign country. It is terribly proay. 

1354 ANDREWS (G.) Sermons upon Hebrews XII. 4to. 1711. 9s. 
Thoroughly Scotch. Sound, but somewhat prolix and commonplace. 

1355 PHILLIPS (W. Spenceb, B. D.) The Triumphs of a 

Practical Faith. [On Hebrews XI.] 13mo. Loud., 
1840. la. 
Cloudy discourses on the clond of witnesses. Will quicken no one's pace, 

1356 SYLVESTER (Matthew). The Christian's Race and 

Patience. Sermons on Hebrews XII. Two vols., 8vo. 
1703—1708. 3s. 6d. 
Not of the first class ; yet respectable sermons. 



CATHOLIC EPISTLES. 



1357 EBRAIUD (J. H. A.) See No. 1389. 

1358 LANGE (J. P.) Commentary on James, by Prof. Van 

Oosterzee. Epistles of Peter, by Dr. C. P. Fronmiiller. 

Epistles of John, by Dr. K. Braune. Epistle of Jude, by 

Dr. C. F. Fronmiiller. Edited by Dr. Schaff, Imp. Svo. 

21s. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 
In his comment on the First Epistle of John, Dr. Braune teaches bap- 
tismal regeneration in a very decided manner. This plague-spot of sac- 
ramentarianism should put the reader on his guard. 



JAMES. 

1359 ADAM (John, D. D., of Aberdeen). Exposition of James. 

8vo. 9b. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1867. 
Good, plain discourses, for which the author acknowledges his in- 
debtedness to various eminent writers who have discussed the Epistle. 
Our readers had better make similar discourses of their own — ^if they can. 

1360 HEMMINGE (Nicholas, D. D.) A Learned and Fruitful 

Coramentarie upon James, translated by W. G. Black 
Letter. 4to. 1577. 21s. 
The price which this book fetches is preposterous. It is hard antique 
reading. 



270 JAMES. 

1361 JACOBI (Berkakd, of Peterahagen, Prussia), tieetures on 
James. ISmo. Beligious Tract Society. 1838. S. Is. 6d. 

A good, simple, practical set of expository Lectures. 'Safe in doctrine, 
or the Beligious Tract Society would not have issued it. 

1363 JOHNSTONE (Robert, LL. B. Glasgow.) Lectures on 
James. Extra cr. 8vo., 7s. 6d. Edinb., Oliphant. 1871. 

A very useful, scholarly, and readable book. 

1363 MANTON (Thomas, D. D.) Commentary on James. 4to. 

Lond., 1651 ; 3s. 8vo. 1842 ; also in vol. IV. of Manton's 
Works, Nichol's edition. 

In Manton's best style. An exhaustive work, as far 
as the information of the period admitted. Few such 
books are written now. 

1364 MATER (John, D. D.) Praxis Theologica: or the Epistle 

of James Resolved, Expounded, and Preached upon. 
4to. 1629. 7s. 6d. (See pages 25 and 26.) 

1365 NEANDER (J. A. W.) James, practically explained. 

Translated by Mrs. Conant. 12mo. New Tork, 1852. 
2s. 6d. 
See also No. 1263. 

1366 NELSON (Robert). James. Thincr.Svo. 2s. 6d. Lond.. 

Bagsters. 1872. 

Setting out with the notion that the epbtle is only written to the Jews, 
this author's remarks are too much warped by this and other theories to 
be of any value to students. 

1367 STIER (E.. D. D.) See No. 974. 

1368 PATTERSON (A. S., D. D.) Commentary on James. 18mo. 

Paisley, 1851. Is. (See remarks on No. 1294.) 

1369 TTTRNBTTLL (Richard, M. A.) Expositions of James and 

Jude. Thick 12mo., 1592 ; and 4to., 1605. 6s. to 14s. 

Old and occupied with Popish controvetsies. Good, solid, and tedious. 

1370 WARDLAW (Ralph, D. D.) Lectures on James. Cr. 

8vo. 3s 6d. PuUerton & Co. 1862. 

The lectures are noteworthy specimens of expository 
preaching. They were Wardlaw's last work, and are 
fully up to the mark. 



I. * IL. PETBE. — I. PBTEE. 271 



L &. IL PETER. 

1371 AMES (WrM-iAK, D. D. 1576—1633). Expositioa of tlie 

EpiBtles of Peter. 4jto. Lond., 1641. 5s. 
Too much divided and subdivided, chopped up and eat iato dice pieces 
and laid in order ; fer after all, there is vety little meat mit, It is an aa- 
alyeis, and little more. 

1372 BENSON (GBORaK). Epistles of P«ter. 4to. 1742. 

2s. 6d. 
The author was an Ariao. " Benson possessed oonsideiraMe learning, 
bat no great portion of genius." This is a paraphrase with notes. 

1373 UXLH: (John, D. D. Kingston, N. r.) Lectures on 1 

»nd 2 Peter, 8vo. 8s. 6d. New T<irk, 1889. Lo«i, 
Hod4er and Stoughton. S. Ss. 6d. 

Dr, Sehaff says : — " Though very different from the 

immortal work of Archbishop Leightoa ou the First 

Epistle of Peter, these lectures breathe the sam« rev«ren- 

tial spirit and devotional fervor, while they are much 

more full and thorough as an exposition." 

1374 IiUTHER (Martin). Coramentarie upon tbe Two Epistles 

of St. Peter and that of St. Jude, gathered eut of the 
lectures of Martin Luther. Translated hy Thomas New- 
ton. 4to. Load., 1581. Black letter. 15s. 

In Luther's racy style. One of his best productions. 

Copies are scarce as white elephants, and consequently 

expensive. 

1375 mSBET (Alexandks). ExposiU«n of 1 amd 3 Peter. 

Svo. Kdiab., 1658. 5s. to 7s. 6d. 

A judicious and gracious Scotch oommentai^, after 
the style of Dickson and Huteheson. 



L PETEK. 

1376 ALLEY (Wiiaiam, Bishop of Exeter. Died 1571). Expo- 
sition of 1 Peter. [In "Poore Man's LiJsraiie.'' Folio. 
Lond., 1560]. 18s. very rare. 
A carious old Black Letter Folio. The exposition on Peter is mainly 

occupied with the (Questions and oomtcoversies «f the Sefoiming period. 

So ibot buy it. 



273 I. PETEE. 

1377 BROWN (John, D. D. Bdinburgli). Expository Dis- 

courses on 1 Peter. Three vols. Cr. 8vo. 18s. Edinb., 
W. Oliphant & Co. 1866. S. 10s. 6d. to 13s. 6d. 

The epistle is divided into paragraphs, and these are 
made the themes of discourses. Thus Dr. Brown pro- 
duced what is substantially a commentary, and one of 
the best. It affords us a grammatical interpretation, 
together with an exposition, at once exegetieal, doctrinal 
and practical. It is a standard work, and the indices 
increase its value. 

1378 BTFIELD (Nicholas). Commentary upon 1 Peter 1. 11. III. 

Folio. 1637. 9s. to 15s. 

Byfield is an able and pions divine, but he is not very vivaoions, and 
neither in manner nor matter is he at all ori^nal. 

1379 KOHLBRUQQE (H. P., D. D., of Elberleld). Sermons on 

1 Peter. 12mo. Lond., 1853. 2s. 

Strictly orthodox and deeply spiritual. No German neology may be 
expected from this author. He is very happy in his practical remarks. 

1380 LEIGHTON (Robert, D. D. Abp. of Glasgow. 1613— 

1684). Commentary upon 1 Peter. Two vols. 18mo. 
8s. 6d. Boyal edition, with portrait, 5s. Religious Tract 
Society. 

Dr. Henry Mills thus wrote of Leighton's works : — 
" There is a spirit in them I never met with in any other 
human writings, nor can I read many lines in them 
without being moved." We need scarcely commend 
this truly heavenly work. It is a favorite with all 
spiritual men. 

1881 ROGERS (John. A. M. Puritan. Died 1636). Fruitful 
Exposition upon all the First Epistle of Peter. Folio. 
Lond., 1650. 14s. to 16s. Very rare. 

Rogers was a true Boanerges, - His style is earnestly 

practical and wisely experimental. This is one of the 

scarcest and liveliest of the Puritan expositions. 



II. PBTEB. 273 

1383 STEIGER (Wilhelm, Prof. Theol. Geneva. 1809—1836). 

Exposition of 1 Peter. Translated by Dr. Fairbairn. 

Two vols., 13mo. 8s. Biblical Cabinet. Edinb., T. & T. 

Clark. 1836. 3s. 
Steiger was a sound German divine. His criticism is good, but like all 
the Germans he is far too fond of dragging in learned names. 

1383 GOMBRSALL (R.) Sermons on St. Peter fchap. II., 13— 
16]. 4to. 1634. 53. 
Teaches absolute submission to rulers. Only worth notice from its 
age. 



II. PETEK. 

1384 ADAMS (Thomas). Commentary upon the 2d Epistle of 
Peter. Folio. Loud., 1633. New Edition, revised by 
Rev. James Sherman, in imp. 8vo., 1839 ; now incladed 
in Nichol's Commentaries ; 10s. 6d. Loud., Nisbet. 1863. 

Full of quaintnesses, holy wit, bright thought, and 

deep instruction. We like Adams better in commenting 

than in preaching. His great work is quite by itself, 

and in its own way remains unrivalled. We know no 

richer and racier reading. 

1885 SYMSON (Aechibald). Exposition upon the Second 

Epistle Generall of St. Peter. 4to. Lond., 1633. 6s. 
Abundance of matter, pithily expressed. Symson is among the oldest 
and rarest of the English divines. 

1886 BROWN (John, D. D.) Parting Counsels ; an Exposition 

of 3 Peter I. 8vo. 83. Edinb., Oliphaut. 1856. S. 43. 

We always think of Brown as a Puritan born out of 
due time. Eve'rything he has left us is massive gold. 
He is both rich and clear, profound and perspicuous. 

1387 WILSON' (William, of Musselburgh). Second Epistle of 
Peter. 13mo. 5s. ; offered at 8s. 6d. by Ogle & Murray, 
Edinb. 
" Thoughtful and fresh in its matter, fine and polished an its style, lay- 
ing hold of us at once, and tightening its grasp on our sympathies the 
longer we read." — B. and For. Evan. Review, [Too laudatory.] 



274 jokn's epistles. — ^i. johit. 



JOHN'S EPISTLES. 

1388 BICKERSTETH (Edward. 1786—1850). Exposition on 

the Epistlea of John and Jude, and of Paul to Timothy. 

12mo. Lond., 1853. Is. 6d. ' 

Notes taken by his children of Mr. Bickersteth's expositionB at family 
prayer. Simple, devout, sonadly evangelical, and, we most add, super- 
ficial and commonplace. 

1389 EBRARD (J. H. A.) Commentary on the Epistles of St. 

. John. With an Appendix on the Catholic Epistles. 
8vo. 10s. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1860. S. 5s. 

Dr. Candlish, in his Exposition on 1 John, says : " I 

must acknowledge my obligation to Dr. Lucke. But it 

is Dr. Ebrard who has helped me most. Ebrard is 

especially valuable, and for an English reader, acquainted 

with theology, very easily intelligible." 

1390 HAWKINS (Thomas). Commentary on John's Epistles. 

8vo. Halifax, 1808. 2s. 

Very excellent. The writer has upon eyery verse 
something to say worth the saying. 

1391 LUCKE (G. C. F. Bonn). Epistles of John. 13mo. BibU- 

cal Cabinet. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1837. S. 2s. 6d. 
Dr. Graham, of Bonn, says that " Lucke is impartial, learned, and criti- 
cally in earnest ; yet the attentive reader soon discovers a very decided 
onti-evangelioal tendency. 1 say anti-evangelical in our sense of the word, 
for in Germany he has done much to overthrow the cold kingdom of ra- 
tionalism and unbelief.* Graham is severe, and a discount may be allowed 
flrom this judgment. Let it serve as a warning. 

1393 SHEPHERD (E.) See No. 1071. 



I. JOHN. 

1393 APOSTOLIC INSTRUCTION, exempli6ed in the First 
Epistle of John. [Anon.] 13mo. Lond., 1840. 3s. 

Fpon two chapters only, but thoroughly good, and 

full of sweetness and light. 



I, JOHK. 275 

1394 BINNING (Hcbh. 1637—1653). Fellowshiii Witt Gfod, 

or Twenty-eight Sermons on 1 Jolin I. and II, 1 — 3. In 
his Works, vol. II. (See No. 1199). Reprinted in 18mo. 
by Beligioua Tract Society. 1833. 

Milk for babes, and meat for men ; calls to backslid- 
ers, and comforts for mourners. " There is no speaking," 
says Durham, " after Mr. Binning ; truly he had the 
tongue of the learned, and knew how to speak a word 
in season." 

1395 CAIiVIN (John). Conlmentaries upon the First Epistle 

of John, and upon the £pistle of Jude. Translated by 
W. H. 8vo. [1560.] 

1396 CANDIiISH (Robert, D. D.) First Epistle of John, 

expounded. Two vols. Sm. cr. 8vo. 10s. 6d, Edinb., 
A. & C. Black. 1870. S. 6s. to 79. 6d. 

We set great store by these lectures. A man hardly 
needs anything beyond Candlish. He is devout, can- 
did, prudent and forcible. 

1397 COTTON (John, B. D., Pastor of Boston, N. E. 1585— 

1653). Commentary upon the First Epistle of John. 
Folio, Lond., 1656. 6s. to 9s. 

Calamy puts his imprimatur upon this book, and 

speaks of the author's name as "deservedly precious 

among the saints of . God." In doctrine and experience 

he is a noble teacher. 

1398 GRAHAM (W.) The Spirit of Love. Commentary on 1 

John. Sm. 8vo. Lond., 1857. S. 2s. 
Graham is sonnd and vigoroua, and does not mince matters in dealing 
with Eemi-scepticB ; hence he brings upon himself violent reviews from 
opponents. The literary Churchman denottnoea his book as containing 
" controversy withoat argument, criticism without proof, citation without 
reference, a show of scholarship without the fruits of it, and denunciation 
without deoornm." To say the least of it, this review is far too severe. 

1399 HANDCOCK (W. J.) Exposition of 1 John. Cr. 8vo. 3s. 

6d. Lond., Hamilton, Adams & Co. 1861. 
The author has carefully studied the original, and has his own ideas as 
to its meaning ; but either he has not the power of communicating them 
or else we are slow of apprehension. Very frequently we are at a loss to 
know what he means. 



276 I. JOHN. 

1400 HABST (Nathanibi,, D. D. 1618—1670). First Epistle 

of John unfolded and applied. Two vols., 4to. 1656-59. 
7s. 6d. to 10s. Reprinted in Nichol's Commentaries. Cr. 
4to. 7s. 6d. Lond., Nisbet. 1865. 

The Editor of Nichol's Edition says, ^"This Exposi- 
tion is only a fragment. It was intended to consist of 
five parts, corresponding generally with the five chapters 
of the Epistle ; but only two of them were accomplished. 
In matter, the sermons are purely evangelical ; in spirit, 
they are earnest and affectionate ; in manner, they ai-e 
eloquent and impressive." This is rather too ardent a 
commendation. 

1401 MORGAN (James, D.D., Belfast). Exposition of 1 Jolin. 

8vo. 9s. Edinb.. T. & T. Clark. 1866. S. 4s. 6d. 

Dr. Candlish says that this is a work " of great prac- 
tical interest and value," and that had it appeared at an 
earlier date, " he might have abstained from issuing " 
his own Lectures on this Epistle. "We are glad to pos- 
sess both works. 

1403 NEANDER (J. A. W.) First Epistle of John explained. 
Translated by Mrs. Conant. Sm.8vo. New York, 1852. 5s. 
Mrs. Conant in her preface says : " The treasures of genius and learn- 
ing which enrich his more scientific works, here seem vivified by a new 
element, and melt, under the fervor of his inner spiritnal life, into a glow- 
ing stream of eloquent practical instruction." 

1403 PATTERSON(A. S., D.D.) Commentary on 1 John. 18mo. 

1843. (See No. 1294.) 

1404 FIERCS (Samuel Etlks). Exposition of 1 John, in 

Ninety-three Sermons. Two vols., 8vo. Lond., 1835. 73. 

This devout author was highly Calvinistic, but with- 
al fuU of spiritual power and unction. He loved the 
deep things of God, and wrote upon them in a gracious 
manner. 

1405 STOCK (John, M. A., of Finchiugfield). Exposition of 1 

John. 8vo. lOs. Lend., Bivingtons. 1865. S. 5s. 

"Written by a well-instructed man of God. For 



278 THE EEVELATIOir. 

1415 OTES (Sauusi^ the elder). Explanation of Jade in forty- 

one Sermons. Folio. Lond., 1633. 5s. to 8s. 
Of the confoTming Puritan style, full of qnaintnesses and singalarities 
of learning. A book by no means to be despised. 

1416 PERKINS (William, D. D.) Exposition of Jude. 4to. 

1606. 5s. 6d. 
Perkins was regarded by his cotemporaries as a paragon of learning, bat 
his writiDgs fail to interest the generality of readers. 

1417 TURNBULL (Richabd, M. A.) Exposition of Jude. See 

No. 1369. 

1418 WUiIiET (Akdbew). A Catliolicon ; gathei;ed ont of the 

Catholike Epistle of Jude. Folio. Load., 1614. 

This book is in the Museam, but we caanot procure 
a copy. 



THE EEVELATIOK 



The works npon Bevil^ion are so extremely nmneroos (Darling's 
list contains 52 columns)^ and the views entertained are so many, so differ- 
ent, and BO speculative, that after completing oar List we resolved not to 
occnpy oor space with it, bat merely to mention a few works of repute. As 
for the lucubrations upon parts of the book, they lie at the booksellers' 
" thick as leaves in Vallambrosa." Numbers of these prophecyings have 
been disproved by the lapse of time, and others will in due season share 
their &te. The following remarks may help the student, and at the same 
time prove the difficulty of making a selection. 

Davidson distinguisheB a fourfold maimer of apprehending Apocalyp- 
tic Prophecy. 

1. Preterista. The prophecies contained in the Apocalypse were fill- 
filled with the destruction of Jerusalem and the fall of heathen Borne. 
This is the view of Bossuet, Grotius, Hammond, Wetstein, Eichhom, 
Ewald, De Wette, Lucke, and others, among whom is the American ex- 
positor, Moses Stuart. 

2. Continnists. The Apocalyptic prophecies are predictive of progres- 
sive history, being partly fulfilled, partly unfulfilled. Thus Mede, Bright- 
man, Isaac Newton, Woodhoase, CaDningham, Birks, Elliott (and many 
Germans.) 

8. Simple Futurists. According to these, only the first three chapters 
relate to the historical present of the Seer, all else liaving reference to the 



THE REVELATION. 279 

abeolate future of the Lord's Appearing. Tbua, Bargli, Maitland, Benja- 
min Newton, Todd, and others. 

4. Extreme Futurists. Even the first three chapters of Revelation are 
a prophecy relative to the absolute future of Christ's, Coming — being a 
prediction of the condition of the Jews after the first Resurrection. Eelly, 
and some Irish authors. 



1419 BENQEL (John Albekt). Introduction to hia Exposition 

of the Apocalypse, with his preface to that work, and 

the greatest part of the conclusion of it, and also his 

marginal notes on the text, which are a summary of the 

whole Exposition. Translated from the High Dutch, by 

John Robertson, M. D. 8vo. Lond., 1757. 

This great author was rather too precise in his dates. The end of the 

forty-two months was settled for the 21st of May, 1810, and the destruction 

of the beast for June 18th, 1836. When so princely an expositor maunders 

in this fashion it should act as a caution to less able men. 

1430 BONAR (H., D. D.) Light and Truth, vol. V. (See No. 7.) 

1431 BRIGHTMAN (Thomas). The Revelation of St. John. 

Thick 8vo. Leyden, 1644. 4to. Amsterdam, 1611. 

[See Nos. 650 and 776.] 
Brightman'a admirers called him " the English Prophet," and this work 
they styled the "Apocalypse of the Apocalypse ; " but it survives only as 
a noteworthy monument of the failure of the most learned to expound the 
mysteries of this book. Elliott says " his Commentary is one of great 
vigor both in thought and language, and deservedly one of the most popu- 
lar with the Protestant Churches of the time." 

1432 BUKGH [or, DE BURGH] (William, M. A.) An Exposi- 

tion of the Revelation. 13mo. Dublin, 1857. 3s. 
Good in its own line. 

1433 COWPER (William, of Galloway. 1566—1619). Patmos; 

or a Commentary on the Revelation. 4to. Lond., 1619 ; 
and in Works, folio, 1639. 
The simple piety and vigorous style of Cowper have preserved his old-, 
fashioned work, and will preserve it. 

1434 CRADOCK (Samuel, B. D. 1630—1760). Exposition. 

8vo. 1696. 
Dr. Doddridge and Job Orton were very fond of this old author. We 
are not. 



280 THE BBVELATIOK. 

1425 GUMMING (J.) Apocalyptic Sketches. Two vols., lamo. 

S. 5s. 
Here the views of Elliott are admirably popnlarized. 

1426 DAUBUZ (Charles. 1670—1740). A Perpetual Commen- 

tary on the Revelation. Abridged by Peter Lancaster, 

A. M. 4to. Lond., 1730. 3s. 6d. 
Subsequent writers have drawn much from this work : we have heard 
it highly commended by competent judges. There is also a larger un- 
abridged edition, which we have not seen. This is said to be stUl more 
valuable. 

1427 DURHAM (James. 1622—1658). A Learned and Com- 

plete Commentary. 4to. O-lasg., 1788. Original edition, 
folio, 1658. 
After all that has been written, it would not be easy to find a more sen- 
sible and instructive work than this old-fashioned exposition. We cannot 
accept its iuterpretations of the mysteries, but the mystery of the gospel 
fills it with sweet savor. 

1428 ELLIOTT (C. B., A. M. Died 1875). Horse Apocalyptic^ ; 

or a Commentary on the Apocalypse, critical and histori- 
cal. Four vols. Svo., Lond., Seeleys. 1862. S. 18s.' 

The standard work on the subject. 

1429 GARKATT (Samuel, M. A.) Commentary. Svo. 7s. 6d. 

Lond., Seeleys. 1866. S. 2s. to 3s. 6d. 
This author mainly follows Elliott, but differs as he proceeds. He is 
an esteemed author, 

1430 FULLER (Andrew. 1754—1815). Expository Discourses. 

Two vols., Svo. 1815. Also in Works. 
Fuller is too judicious to run into speculations. The work is both oon- 
densed and clear. Fuller called Faber " the Fortune-teller of the Chmoh," 
and there are others who deserve the name. 

1431 GLASGOW (James, D. D.) Apocalypse Translated and 

Expounded. Svo. as. 6d. Edinb., T. & T. Clark. 1862. 
We do not care much for the translation, and think some of the inter- 
pretations speculative and forced ; yet the work is important. 

1432 HENGSTENBERG (E. W., D. D.) The Revelation ex- 

pounded for those who search the Scriptures. Translated 
by Patrick Fairbairn, D. D. Two vols., Svo. Edinb., 
1851-52. S. 14s. 6d. Scarce. 
Highly esteemed by the best judges. 

1433 MEDE (Joseph, D. D., 1586—1638). A Key to the Apoc- 

alypse ; [a Translation of Mede's Clavis Apocalyptica. 

By R. Bransby Cooper, Esq.] Svo. Lond., 1833. 3s. 6d. 

There oi-e several other works on the Apocalypse by this author, who, 



THE KEVELATION. 281 

says Elliott, " was looked upon and written of as a man almost inspired 
for the solution of the Apooalyptio mysteries. Tet I think his success 
was at first over-estimated as an Apocalyptic expositor. 

1434 NEWTON (Benjamin Wills.) Thoughts on the Apoc- 

alypse. 8vo. Lend., 1853. S. 3b. 
Of the Futurist School. Condensed and instructive. 

1435 ROGERS (Geokgb, Principal of the " Pastor's College.") 

Lectures on the Book of Revelation. Four vols., 13mo. 

1844-51. 6a. 
Not half BO well known as it ought to be : a mass of judicious remarks. 
"We do not subscribe to the author's system of interpretation, bat his ex- 
positions always command our respect, 

1436 STUART (Moses). A Commentary on the Apocalypse. 

Two vols., royal 8vo. Lond., 1845 ; one vol., 8vo. Edinb., 
1847 ; one vol., 8vo., 8b. liond., W. Tegg & Co. 1850. 
S. 3a. 6d. 
Stuart rejects the historical interpretations generally given ; but his 

textual criticism and his preliminary disquisitions are very helpful. This 

work has laid us under great obligations, 

1437 VATJGHAN (C. J., D. D.) Lectures on the Revelation. 

Two vols. F'cap. 8vo. 9s. Lond., Macmillan & Co. 
1875. 
Does not grapple with the difficulties, but inculcates the lessons of the 
book, A sensible course, 

1438 WILLIAMS (Isaac). The Apocalypse, with Notes and 

Reflections. Cr. 8vo. 5s. Lond., Rivingtons. 1873. 
8.3s. 
Considering the High Church School to which he belongs, this author 
is marvellously rich in exposition. The whole is tinged with the medieeval 
spirit. 

1439 WOODHOITSE ( John Chappel, D. D., Dean of Lichfield. 

1751—1834). Translation, with Notes. Royal 8vo. 1805. 

3s. 6d. 
Bishop Hnrd says, " This is the best book of the kind I have seen." 
We give no opinion, for we are too much puzzled with these Apooalyptio 
books, and are glad to write Finis. 



ECOENTEIO PREACHEES. 

AN ADDRESS DELIVERED AT THE ANNUAL MEETING 
OP THE PASTOR'S COLLEGE, MARCH, 1876. 

By Chables H. Sfckgeon. 

I am almost sorry I haTe to speak to you- on the sub- 
ject of eccentric preachers, because somebody was rude 
enough to observe that he wondered if I should consider 
myself to be one. Of course I do not at all. Anybody 
who has been able to see any eccentricity about me must, 
I am sure, have looked at me with yery strange eyes. 
I think I have really lived so long in this world — in this 
particular South of London world for twenty-one or 
twenty-two years — and so many have run in my particu- 
lar circumference, that I am hardly eccentric now at all. 
I may have been years ago, but that is long ago. I can 
produce several in this Tabernacle who are eccentric, and 
I may show them up before I have done. I intend, how- 
ever, to speak in favor of eccentric people, hence I. do 
not include myself. From the earliest period of the 
Christian ministry it has been found impossible for the 
men whom God has sent with His message, to please all 
people. In every generation there have been objiections 
raised, not to some of a certain class, but to all or any 
who have been at all useful. John the Baptist comes 
neither eating nor drinking — ^he is a Good Templar and 
a Baptist — (laughter) — but they say, " He hath a devil " ; 
Jesus Christ comes eating and drinking ; He does not 



284 ECCEIfTEIC PEEACHEES. 

belong to the first, though certainly he is the founder of 
the second — and they say He is a glutton and a wine- 
bibber. Neither the one nor the other would exactly 
suit, and they could not endure Him — the man among 
men. So now the preacher is either too blunt or else too 
flowery, too dull or too argumentative ; but nevertheless 
•wisdom is justified of all her children. At this time the 
one common charge brought against men who succeed in 
the ministry is, that they are eccentric. If they say any- 
thing that strikes and sticks — and, I take it, the main 
business of the ministry is to do so — ^then men try to 
escape from the striking and the sticking by saying the 
preacher is eccentric. This great crime of eccentricity is 
often supported by falsehood. I wonder what preacher 
of the Gospel whom God has owned, has escaped alto- 
gether from falsehood ? Look at the stories told to this 
day of Rowland Hill — emphatically stories. That of 
Mi-s. Hill coming in a little late one morning, and Mr. 
Hill remarking what wonderful creatures women were — 
" Here's Mrs. Hill coming in with a chest of drawers 
on her head," insinuating that money which had been 
put by for purchasing drawers had been spent on a new 
bonnet. Why, any fool who had any brains still, might 
see it could not be true. Bowland Hill was the son of a 
baronet — a man to whom money was of no importance, 
and was a perfect gentleman, who never did or said any- 
thing to his wife other than what a gentleman would 
do, and the supposition was absurd, showing that per- 
sons who told it could not have known Rowland Hill. 
I remember a story about a young man that he slid down 
the banisters — (a laugh) — to show how the people would 
backslide, and so on, when at that time his pulpit was 
in the wall, and there were no banisters, and one could 



ECCBNTIIIC PEEACHEKS. 385 

not get down except into the vestry ; no one therefore 
could have seen him slide down. (Cheers.) I remem- 
ber reading of a young man, too, that he on one occasion 
told the ladies not to send him any slippers because he 
had so many. (Laughter.) I knew him, and he never 
had a solitary pair ; he was always such a rough, gruff 
sort of person that no young lady made him a present, 
except one, and she was close upon seventy. Things 
which were lies a hundred years ago are invented and 
appended to people now, who are consequently called 
eccentric — yet things as hostile to their very nature as 
they could possibly be. I don't know whether you like 
lies told about you ; if you do, I can only trust you 
may have your desires gratified. , This is the way the 
world tries to prove that some ministers of the Gospel 
are eccentric. 

WHAT IS ECCEKTEICITT ? 

What is it to be eccentric ? Will you look in the 
dictionary ? I won't give you the exact dictionary ex- 
planation in so many words, but a thing eccentric has 
not the same centre as that to which you compare it. 
There is a circle ; another takes up part of the space of 
that circle, but it has not the same centre, and the one 
eccentric to the other. Men who have to do with ma- 
chinery know what it is for one wheel to be eccentric to 
the other. Well, that does not look very horrible, that 
a man should be eccentric. I suppose it means that he 
is ofi the circle, or if it were a square — and it is difficult 
to square a circle — ^it would mean he is off the square. 
(Laughter.) But the point is, gentlemen — and ladies 
too — who is to tell us what the square is, and what the 
particular centre is ? This circle is not concentric with 



286 ECCEKTEIC PEEACHEE3, 

the other, but eccentric, yet the other is eccentric to it. 
Suppose I am eccentric to you. Granted, but you are 
eccentric to me. (Laughter and cheers.) A man called 
me a Dissenter the Other day, but I do not own it at all. 
He belonged to the Established Church, and he was a 
Dissenter as he dissented from me. He said I was Non- 
conformist. " No, I am not, I am Conformist," I sajd, 
"you do not conform to me." Is it not so ? Who is 
to say what you are to conform to or dissent from, and 
who is to put down this centre so that the compass legs 
open so far, and they say if you dare push it the breadth 
of a hair, you shall be eccentric ? Then, I say, there is 
my centre, and if you do not keep to that you shall be 
eccentric, and there will be two of us. (Laughter.) To 
all those learned men, therefore, who tell us certain 
preachers are eccentric, we say who is to fix the centre ? 
Shall those gentlemen fix it who buy their sermons at 
ninepence each ? You say to me. " Do they do it ?" 
I sent the other day to a bookseller's shop where certain 
clergy get their theology, and I have got specimens at 
home of the sermons they preach, from a shilling down 
to sixpence each— sermons which are nicely marked with 
little spaces between the words to show you how long 
you should pause between them, and emphasized with 
one mark or two to show the brother — the Conformist 
brother — (laughter) — ^where he is to put the emphasis. 
I wonder they do not have a machine made to do the 
whole thing. The next best thing is that for ten shil- 
lings and sixpence you can be supplied with aU the spir- 
itual food your people want for one quarter ! Now if 
we make our own sermons and preach them from our 
own hearts, I suppose we are eccentric ? Well if the 
purchase of sermons is to constitute the circle, I pray 



ECCEJTTRIC PEEAGHEKS, 387 

God that we may have no end of eccentricity, and that 
all ministers may become eccentric. Are the high-flying 
brethren to fix it, brethren who preach high in the 
clouds, sublime and wonderful, so that no man under- 
standeth or doth comprehend ; the philosophical gentle- 
man, men like those who preached at the TJniTersity 
Chapel, in Cambridgeshire, where Bishop Blomfleld tells 
that the verger said to him, " I have been verger of this 
place for fifty years, and have heard all the great men 
preach, and yet I am a Christian still." Well, are these 
men to fix the centre ? If so, we intend to be eccentric, 
and blessed be God, there are some who will preach 
plainly the things which make for the everlasting peace 
of men's souls. If the centre is to be fixed in the clouds, 
let the few who care for something practical stop below. 
But, where is the centre to be found ? Oh, the centre 
is to be found in the vestry — ^in the vestry. Do you 
open that door, it is fall-,of cupboards. If you look in, 
you see what ? A laundry ? (Laughter. ) What have 
we come to ? No, not a laundry — here are black gowns, 
white gowns, green gowns, and pink gowns ; what they 
call albs, birettas, and so on. I am nob up in all the 
orthology of these drapery establishments. (Laughter.) 
I know therein abideth much grace, and very mach for 
the establishment of the saints ; but if this be the centre, 
young men of our college, do you be eccentric, and do 
not touch a rag of the rubbish — (cheers) — ^not even the 
white boiled rag round the necks which is the last relic 
of an abominable Popery. When I wore one, I was 
crossing the river by a penny boat, when some rude 
fellow came up to me and said : " How are you getting 
on at Hitchcock's ? " (Loud laughter.) The man sup- 
posed I was a draper. I do not want to be taken for an 



288 ECCENTEIC PREACHERS. 

undertaker, or a draper, or parson ; I am neither, but a 
simple preacher of the Gospel among my brethren, and 
not distinguished by any garb ; and may we ever be 
eccentric if the centre be in Eitualism. (Applause.) 
My idea is that the circle is fixed by the dullest persons 
in the world. Anything over common sense, beyond 
that of an idiot, anything like originality, anything like 
genius, anything like a sparkle of wit— ^give your soul 
up to your work and you will be eccentric directly, be- 
cause the concentric thing is to prose away — [the speaker 
assuming a monotonous tone] — and never say anything 
that could offend anybody by any possibility. (Laugh- 
ter.) And say it in as dreary a way as you possibly 
can ; do that, and you wiU be eccentric to the great 
authorities of the domain of Domus. But give your 
soul ever so little to your subject, and some one will say, 
" Oh, dear, it is a pity he is so eccentric." (Laughter.) 
Some hundi'ed or hundred-and-fifty years ago, when 
John Wesley stood on his father's grave in Epworth 
churchyard, he was thought eccentric to preach in the 
open air. But Jesus Christ and His apostles preached 
there, and no one said that of them. And if any one of 
us were to go and stand — only we must not stand on a 
gravestone, nor lie under it ; we are forbidden — (a 
laugh) — ^those holy worms that have fed on saints so 
long, they would be taken ill if they fed on Dissenters — 
(laughter and cheers) — ^but if Tve should stand anywhere 
in the open air, nobody would call us eccentric. As the 
times roll on, that which is eccentric to-day is not eccen- 
tric to-morrow. Fashion changes. Mr. Whitefield and 
Wesley were accused of eccentricity, but there is one 
very remarkable thing which wiU strike you as eccentric. 
Eead the history of Jeffery Woodhouse, and his friends, 



ECCBISTTKIC PBEACHEES. 289 

and you will see what was attributed to them. One 
thing was that they actually wore their own hair. 
(Laughter.) liTow anything so demoniacal as that one 
can hardly imagine. Up to that time every preacher of 
every time wore a wig, and these good men did not care 
about being smothered with other people's hair, and 
they were eccentric. (Laughter.) The other day a per- 
son in Holland wrote to me and said, having read my 
sermons and books, he thought he should like, to hear 
me ; so he came to the Tabernacle, but he was sorry he 
should be unable to hear me or read my sermons any 
longer, because I was carnal and worldly, wearing a 
moustache. (Laughter.) But it really is so small an 
afEair, I think he might have overlooked it. He added 
that every holy man in the land shaved his whiskers, 
and they wear about a quarter of a yard of collar ; but 
that is not eccentric. (Laughter. ) If you let your hair, 
that Grod gives you, grow, however, that is eccentric, 
and you are carnal and worldly. What is eccentric in 
Holland, you see, is not so in England, so the centre of 
this wonderful circle to which everybody should keep, 
changes not only according to tiine but also according to 
places. Who shall know where on earth it is fixed ? 

ON BEING ONESELE. 

There is a kind of toleration, also, which is some- 
times relaxed, and is sometimes removed altogether. I 
believe many men escape the charge of eccentricity who 
ought to be pulled up for it. On reading, for instance, 
the excellent discourses of our friend Moody — whom 
perhaps I approve more than any one else — I think he is 
eccentric, yet nobody has been down on him. There 
was Eichard Weaver and Joshua Poole, they were slightly 



290 ECCEKTKIC PEBACHEKS. 

eccentric, but nobody said so. "We are relaxing the bands 
for other people, and quite right too. If Joshua Poole 
had preached to you Londoners at one time, you would 
have been horrified, and if our American brethren had 
come twenty years ago, you would not have borne it at 
all, but now you give liberty, and brethren escape the 
charge. It is a great pity that the centre of the circle 
ever should be fixed. If we could settle what is concen- 
tric and eccentric it would be a very serious evil, for the 
differences of utterance and modes of address are truly 
useful. When John Owen said he would have given all 
his learning to be able to preach like the tinker John 
Bunyan, I think he was unwise, because Owen's solid, 
weighty, probably heavy matter, suited some people 
better than Bunyan's pleasant, graceful, parabolical, 
simple preaching of the Gospel. Mr. Owen, you had 
better be Owen, you will be very awkward as the tinker, 
and certainly" Bunyan, the tinker, may be happy to be 
Bunyan, and should never wish to be Owen. Eobert 
Eobinson, of Cambridge, was succeeded by Robert Hall ; 
to one the style of the first would be perfection, to an- 
other that of the other. But one should not try to be 
the other ; every one in his own order or disorder, who 
has something to say in God's eternal purpose, let him 
keep himself. How many souls were won to God by 
Rowland Hill's eccentricities, as they called them. You 
have heard the story of the young man who was about 
to go to India, and his friends were anxious he should 
not go unconverted, so they induced him to stay a week 
in London. Godly, pious friends,- took him to hear 
the minister of their choice. He listened to the sermon 
of one very able man, and something in passing might 
have been said which struck his conscience ; he called it 



ECGBKTEIO PKEACHEES. 291 

an excellent discourse, and there was an end of it. They 
took him to another, where the minister was very earn- 
est, and pious, and a graceful preacher, but no result 
came of it ; and when the last night came, they in a 
sort of desperation, took him to Surrey Chapel to hear 
Mr. Hill, and prayed earnestly that Mr. Hill might say 
nothing funny ; instead of which, however, he was more 
overflowing than ever with his funny things, telling, 
among the rest, about pigs being taken to the slaugh- 
ter-house. He said he could not think how they were 
induced to go until he saw the butcher enticing them 
with peas, and they followed. And so, Mr. Hill said, 
it was with the devil by the pleasures of this life, which 
he used to draw people right into his slaughter-house. 
The friends who brought the young man were shocked, 
horrified at Mr. Hill's witticisms, and grieved to think 
they brought the young man, until they got to the door, 
when he took them by the hand, and said, "I shall 
never forget the story of the pigs." It had reached his 
heart, touched his conscience, and was the means of 
bringing him to the Saviour. If God moved the preacher 
to do so, he had better have talked about pigs than 
angels, if talking about the angels would only have 
tickled people's ears. (Cheers.) Who are these out- 
the-centre, off-the-square people ? There have been 
some, no doubt, who have been out of centre very 
wrongly ; their eccentricity has been bad. If you find 
me a man who tries to attract attention by oratory not 
his own, but aped and mimicked, I have not a word to 
say in his defence, and I give him over as a dead horse 
to the dogs of criticism, who may rend and do as they 
like with him. Find the man who wishes to gain noto- 
riety by condescending to biiffooneiy, who goes out of 



392 EOCEifTEie PEEACHBRS. 

his way to make a joke or to say a fine tWng, who has 
any object in the world in what he says but the glory of 
God and the winning of souls — he is the man out of cen- 
tre, and I have not a word to say in his defence. If you 
discover a man who is vulgar, who says things that may 
make the cheeks of modesty tingle, like Mr. Slapdash 
in Kowland Hill's book, descending like a swallow touch- 
ing the water and then up and away, loving nothing hut 
the mud and the mire — then I say wring the dog's neck if 
you like, I have nothing to say for him. I do not care 
whether he preaches in the parish church or in the cave 
of AduUam ; his eccentricity I will not defend. If it 
ever was true that a man, down in Northamptonshire, in 
order to gain a congregation, gave out one Sunday morn- 
ing that he would at night explain how to make a pair 
of shoes, and afterwards did so by cutting the tops off a 
pair of boots, then I say down with him, he does not 
come in my list. 

CURIOSITIES OF MILUlfrEET. 

There are curious people. I know a curious bishop 
who has written a commentary, and this great and 
learned man says, in reference to the text, " Friend, how 
earnest thou here without a wedding garment ? " that 
the wedding garment is intended for the outward ordi- 
nances of religion and as the people who have no out- 
ward sacraments are the quakers it is written concern- 
ing them, "Friends, etc." (Laughter.) That is an 
eccentric bishop ; I give him up to you to do what you 
like with him. (Laughter.) I have lately been reading 
a great deal of the pretty accounts of the EituaUstic 
mystics of the present time, and their explanations of 
Scripture are very wonderful indeed — something like 



ECOElfrTRIC PREACHERS. 293 

this : " David in his great sorrow says, ' All the night 
make I my bed to swim.'" "The bed," say they, 
" means original sin, the night means the darkness of 
the sonl, and the way to make this original sin swim is 
by baptism. (Loud laughter.) You would not have 
thought of that, would you ? (Laughter.) That is 
spiritualizing Scripture to an extent of which I could 
not have dreamt men of education and intelligence to 
be capable. Those kind of people I have not much faith 
in, and give them over to you. If a man will adopt a 
curious dress I will not defend him; why cannot he 
dress like a gentleman, not like a woman ? (Cheers.) 
Even our brethren who preach the Gospel come out 
rather smarter than I like — in a black gown or white 
gown, with red pieces of something or other around it 
^(laughter) — but I am not learned in their eccentrici- 
ties. I believe we shall see these things in a museum 
some day, including that bib and piece of lawn said "to 
represent cloven tongues as it were fire," and I venture 
to prophesy our grandchildren will not believe it when 
they are told those are the things men used to wear a 
hundred years ago. (Laughter.) They will say, "Why 
I have heard of people worshipping gods of wood and 
stone, and I cannot believe that in worshipping the true 
God they ever thought it important to put on these na- 
peries and draperies." And when the children are told 
that ministers who dressed like ordinary Christian gen- 
tlemen and tried to speak English were called eccentric, 
they will say, "Why, what a benighted generation it 
must have been! (Laughter.) Mr. Spurgeon then 
proceeded to give amusing instances of other eccentric 
characteristics found in some ministei's in regard to 
their sonorous and afEected style of reading in the pulpit. 



294 EOCENTKIC PEEACHEBS. 

"If," he continued, "men were to talk like that in the 
House of Commons or at the Bar, they would cause a 
roar of laughter, as I haye done in their imitation. 
Yet it is common enough to meet with them in the pul- 
pits, and I will not defend them. We have plenty of 
eccentric people of all sorts, and if they caU some of us 
eccentric, we throw back the charge and say, ' No, gen- 
tlemen of afEected tone, pretty dresses, high-blown talk, 
and spread eagle nonsense, you are eccentric ; for, if we 
be so, we are certain so to remain.' " 

IKSTANCES AND TYPES OE ECCENTEIC PKEACHBES. 

Still, there have been eccentric men, and who were 
they ? I won't'mention Dean Swift, nor Sydney Smith, nor 
Laurence Sterne, nor some others of them, who I have no 
doubt were all very well, though I should not suppose 
they were over-done with Gospel ; but those we recognize 
as good men. "Who are the eccentric ministers that 
would occur to your memory among the reformation 
times ? There is blessed old Latimer, whose name strikes 
such a homely sound on the English ear. We admire 
most of them, but if you are like me and I am like you, 
we love Latimer ; there was something so genuine about 
that dear old servant of God, whether living or dying, 
we cannot help feeling our hearts going out towards him. 
He was very eccentric. He used to say to business men, 
when warning them of sin, " If you in selling an old cow 
which you know does not give milk, run a calf by her 
side in order to deceive the purchaser, you will perish 
everlastingly." Coming farther down to the times of 
Wesley and Whitefleld, we find John Berridge, and what 
a lump of quaintness was he ! You cannot read his let- 
ters without laughing ; he could not have lived but for 



ECCENTRIC PREACHERS. 395 

being funny. And I remember that in the space of 
twelve months there is credible information of six hun- 
dred souls having been brought to Christ by the preach- 
ing of Hicks and Berridge. ' Further down we turn to 
Rowland Hill, WiUiam Dawson, otherwisfe " Billy Daw- 
son " ; Matthew Wilks, and then looking across the 
water, we have Peter Garrett, the backwoods preacher ; 
and Father Taylor, the sailors' preacher. These are the 
most eccentric preachers that would occur to you, if you 
were making out a list, and yet it is rather singular that 
if you want to pick out for another list those most use- 
ful you must put them in. Is not that odd ? Those 
wicked eccentric people — whom may we never imitate 
• but heartily condemn — (a laugh) — have nevertheless 
been among the most useful in the ministry. (Cheers.) 
Matthew Wilks' way of meeting objections to his oddi- 
ties was not bad. In reply to some who expostulated 
with him, he would fetch several rolls of paper filled 
with names, and on their reading them would say," All 
those precious souls pjofess to have found the Saviour 
and everlasting life through my whims and oddities. If 
you can show me a list of as many souls saved by the 
excellences of any other man without whims and oddi- 
ties I will get rid of the latter, but until you do so I shall 
keep to them." (Cheers.) I do not say that the end 
justifies the means, but the means do not want justifying 
if leading to such an end. 

WHAT MAKES A MAN ECCENTRIC ? 

What then makes a man eccentric ? Several things. 
"One is, some have been so because they were natural, 
they were themselves and not drilled to walk in rank, 
but stood alone fighting like brave knights and served 



296 ECCEKTEIC PBEACHEBS. 

God in their own way. For instance, Berridge was 
quaint by nature. I quoted from his letters purpogely, 
rather than from sermons or didactic works. He could 
not help it : he lived, thought, and dreamt quaintly, 
probably everything about his house was quaint. One 
picture, for instance, he called the devil, and on a friend 
going up to look at it he found it to be a looking-glass, 
and saw himself. (Laughter.) You do not suppose he 
used to leave himself at the bottom of the pulpit stairs 
as some men have told me they could not help feeling 
they did ? What sights there must have been at Everton 
to hear Berridge preach ? People seem to have crowded 
on the beams and windows of the church, and even got 
ladders against the open windows and anywhere where 
they could catch a word. Berridge was eccentric because 
he was Berridge, and what God made him, and used the 
gifts God had given him. And I say as to objections to 
wit in preaching, what South said to Sherlock, " Sup- 
pose God had given you any wit ? What would you 
have done with it ? " (Laughter.) You blame this man 
Berridge, but supposing you had happened to have been 
witty, and such an awkward endowment as thatj you 
would probably have used it too. It might be said of 
some what Sam Hicks said to one who remarked it was 
wrong to make people laugh, " Yon can neither make 
folk laugh nor cry." Many cannot tpuch the heart- 
strings at all, and they will condemn those who can. I 
love above all, for a man who serves his God, altogether 
to forget himself into the work, letting his whole nature 
come into play ; then he surely will become an eccen- 
tric individual. Some men have been eccentric because • 
essentially truthful — and do not, when up stairs, send a 
message to a friend calling, that they are not at home, nor 



ECCBNTBIC PKEACHEBS. 297 

when writing to their direst enemy address him as " My 
Dear Sir " and say " Yonrs very truly," — so they are 
"eccentric." Father Taylor, of Boston, got a lot of 
sailors together to a prayer-meeting, when a gentleman 
" from up town " made a speech, and told them of the 
kindness of the Christian gentlemen of Boston to the 
sailors, in fact gave them enough condescension to last six 
weeks. When he had finished Father Taylor asked " if any 
o"ther old sinner from up town had got anything to say." 
(Laughter. ) The eccentricity there lay in the truthful- 
ness of the statement. The bladder was pricked and the 
gas soon dispersed. If anybody here will make up his 
mind that he never will say anything but what is strictly 
true, many people will say he is eccentric. Some, too, 
have been eccentric because they have been manly. 
Dissenters, unlike the Church of England, have no ru- 
bric and are not governed by *ule, and some ministers 
refusing to be so governed will inquire " Who made the 
regulations ? " and on finding them lath and plaster, put 
their legs through them. Mr. Eowland Hill called his 
horses Order and Decorum, saying he rode on the back 
of them. But these things had become deadly sins, so 
much decorum and so very orderly that the church had 
become like a vault in which the dead lay in his place', 
and none dared to move them or to lift his voice loud 
enough to be called a voice. A certain divine got a ser- 
mon — no doubt cheap — (a laugh) — and delivered it, in 
which he described a terrible plague as having come 
upon the people because of their sins and neglect of the 
House of God. After he had finished, the village doctor 
went to inquire at what house the plague existed, and 
the minister replied, " I don't know ; it was in my ser- 



398 ECCENTEIO PEEACHEES. 

mon, and I read it." (Laughter.) Some were consid- 
ered eccentric because they were really in earnest, 

EAESTESTlfESS AKD THE PEOPKIETIES. 

An earnest man cannot always be proper. I do not 
believe it is possible for a man in downright earnest to be 
always " proper." I suppose a lady may be got out of a 
chamber properly in ordinary times, though I suspect 
many a fireman in saying a lady from fire has occa- 
sionally sinned against decorum. And in pulling a 
drowning person out of the water, I have known it done • 
by the hair of the head. Get in earnest, and proprieties 
will vanish. A man may wear gloves in the pulpit, and 
they may fit very, very, very beautifully indeed, and 
when he gets to work, if he is going to save any souls, 
he will burst the gloves, for he cannot do with them. 
He may be very proper, when in earnest he will get car- 
ried beyond the proprieties, and somebody will hold 
up the hands, and say, "How dreadfully eccentric." 
(Laughter.) Some men have been eccentric on account 
of the vast amount of dramatic energy in them. It is 
their way to be dramatic. Some talk dramatically. 
Look at a Frenchman, how he uses his hands and arms — 
talking with his hands, body, and mouth. Some persons 
were born dramatic. Billy Dawson could not help it. 
I have heard of his preaching about Noah's Ark, and 
coming out of the pulpit to begin sawing planks, and 
hammering away at the pulpit as if at the ark. The 
people became excited. When the ark was made on dry 
land, he said there was no hope unless they got in to be 
saved. They would not go in, and he went up and fin- 
ished, and afterwards said, " Shut him in," which they 
did, whereupon he described the chapel as filling with 



ECCBSTTEIC PEBACHEES. 399 

the flood ; the floods burst, the ceilings fell in, and cata- 
racts leaped from the skies in torrents, and Dawson was 
still all alive crying out, " It is too late now." Getting 
them thus excited and interested, he preached Jesus 
Christ to them, and he said, he never should forget it. 
And why should he not do so ? God gave him the bump 
of dramatizing, and why not use it ? Sometimes it may 
be used well. Dawson also described in a similar man- 
ner the Goliah and David contest. In throwing his 
pocket-handkerchief as if at the giant, he struck the 
village blacksmith at the foot of the pulpit, who cried 
out, " That's right, Billy ! now off with the hat." (Laugh- 
ter.) I have seen Mr. Gough, at Exeter Hall, describe 
Vesuvius, his feet going into the ashes. It was grandly 
done, and no one had any right to object. If that 
faculty is consecrated to God, then -make more use of it. 
I shall never get it, I dare say — (laughter) — and must 
make such shift as I can. Sometimes men had become 
eccentric by being practical. They intended to save 
men's souls somehow, and resolved to do anything and 
everything, by which they could get at men, and the 
things they have done, have been heard and not seen ; 
the circumstances and occasion put aside, and the design 
of the preacher forgotten, so that the thing has seemed 
to be eccentric, though had you .been there and heard 
the preacher's ready wit, and had the preacher's intense 
earnestness before you, you would have felt justified in 
the same. Let me give you one or two instances, some 
of which may be jusbified, while others may or may not 
be. Eowland Hill preaches in a field. Lady Ann 
Askayne sees a crowd of people, and stops her carriage 
to listen. The preacher spies her and says, " I am going 
to have an auction, here is a lady to be sold, who bids 



300 ECOENTKIC PEEACHEES. 

for her ? " And then the World bids for her. " I will 
give her all the pleasures of life ; I will give her honor 
and rank." "Ah, she is worth more than that." The 
Flesh and the Devil bid, but she is too precious for this, 
and Jesus Christ says, " I have given for her my precious 
blood, my heart's blood, and I love her ; she shall be 
mine for ever, and wear a crown for me." "Lor4 
Jesus," said Eowland Hill, "Thou shalt have her — 
Lady Askayne, will you close with the bargain ? " She 
bows her head,, and frpm that moment the Christian 
church has not had a better helper. (Cheers.) But 
she little dreamt of the "eccentric" man being the 
means of leading her within the circle of the knowledge 
of Jesus Christ. The following is a yet more eccentric 
thing. I will leave you to justify it. "We are told of a 
certa,in Methodist prgacher going to a town in the north, 
and having to preach once oj^ twice with very few 
hearers, so he said, "This town is responsible for the 
possession of the means of grace which are not being 
used. They shall not live under it any longer ; I am 
going to break this pulpit and pews up, and knock the 
chapel down." He then commenced at the pulpit by 
splitting it up before their eyes; People soon went 
home and told their friends ; at night the chapel was 
filled, and he preached Christ to them — laa eccentric 
man, only, however, sacrificing a little deal and a few 
boards ; and in a short time, Methodism lifted its head 
in the town, and the house was filled. Why, if this place 
were empty and we could not get it full otherwise, we 
might run the risk of being considered eccentric for the 
first time in our lives. (Laughter.) Everything looks 
ridiculous when not according to its surroundings. Was 
that not extraordinary of the French preacher. Father 



ECCE2JTKIC PKEACHEES, 301 

Andre, who, in upbraiding the people for the careless- 
ness they displayed in regard to the religious education 
of their children, he caused to fly out of his sleeve, when 
speaking, a pack of cards, and, on the children running 
to pick them up, he questioned them as to the names of 
the various cards, which they soon told him, whereupon 
he followed with the catechism, and they did not know 
a word. So he drove home the truth to the parents; I 
neither justify that nor condemn it, but I can imagine 
a man driven to it. Again, like the old Dutch Court 
preacher, who, being accustomed to see the people asleep 
during his preaching, played with a battledore and shut- 
tlecock in the pulpit, and said in reply, to their sur- 
prise : " I see when I make a fool of myself I have your 
attention ; when I preach the precious Word of God you 
don't give it. What fools, you must be ! " You never 
judge of a man under certain circumstances unless you 
are in his circumstances. Sometimes a man has been 
condemned for doing what would be outrageous at 
ordinary times, but what is pardonable on exceptional 
occasions. Mr. Spurgeon here narrated the story of a 
certain preacher who, being earnestly desirous of doing 
good amongst a superstitious people in the country, 
overtook a laboring man going to, his employment, and 
finding, in reply to many questions, that he was entirely 
ignorant of God, but a believer in witchcraft, closed a 
bargain with the man by paying him half-a-crown for a 
promise never to pray in his life-time. On proceeding 
to his work, however, the man seems to have bethought 
himself that he would one day be ill and want to pray. 
He became miserable, could not work, and therefore 
went home and told his wife what he had done. His 
wife, also densely superstitious and a believer in witch- 



302 EOCENTKIC PEEACHEES. 

craft, desiring to explain the incident from the latter 
view, began to inquire about the man who had given her 
husband the money. " Did you look at his hat ? " 
"Don't know he had a hat." "One of those high 
chimney-pots?" "Don't know." "Did you look at 
his feet? "No, didn't." "Well, I shouldn't wonder 
if he'd got boots on that was to hide his feet. You 
have sold your body and soul to the devil, John — I know 
ye have." (Laughter.) The poor fellow was there- 
upon knocked over altogether, could not work, and fell 
ill ; so did his wife. He happened just then to hear of 
a man going to preach in a barn close at hand in the 
village, and that he would go. He did so and was very 
delighted to find the very man who had paid him the 
half-crown. The sermon was " What shall it profit a man 
if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul ? " and 
the preacher referred to the fact of a man having sold his 
soul for half-a-crown, so that he remarked, " Souls were 
cheap." The discourse touched Hodge's heart and he 
came forward begging the preacher to take back the 
money, and on demur he pleaded, " Ah, but you can't 
stick to such a bargain with a poor man." They prayed 
together, and the man never afterwards left ofE praying. 
Now I, continued Mr. Spurgeon, could not have done 
that nor commend it, but there may have been an im- 
pression on that minister's mind which led him to it. I 
doubt not there was guidance from heaven, and he saw 
further into the mind of the man than you and I, and 
what appears eccentric may have been wisely thought 
of. (Cheers.)- 

CONCLUDIlfG ADVICE. 

I have talked to you chiefly about eccentric preachers. 



ECCENTKIO PfiEACHERS. 303 

But if you knew sometimes how we desire to lay hold on 
men, and how willingly we would be as solemn and 
serious as death itself, if that would do it, and how 
little we care to speak extravagantly except that men 
ramble, and we must ramble after them, you might 
often excuse us if something is said that does not com- 
mend itself to your taste, and you might say, probably, 
the man knows best what he is at, and is using his 
strength most naturally, and in that way in which God's 
blessing will rest upon him. Judge the preacher, but 
do remember there is something better to be done, 
namely, to get all the good you can out of him ; and if 
odd and strange — as men take pearls out of oyster shells, 
and pick treasures out of earthen vessels, so do you take 
what God sends, whatever may be the infirmity of the 
preacher. And to brethren engaged in winning souls, 
I say, by the memories of those good men who were ac- 
counted eccentric, fear no man's frown, and court no 
man's smile : say the right thing and the true, and say 
it as best you can, asking God's help to say it so that it 
shall make men feel its stings even to anger ; for blessed 
is the man who has discharged his conscience before the 
living god. Do you think England would ever be going 
back to Eome if the thousands of ministers we have 
were preaching the Gospel as they ought to be ? With 
such a mass of preaching — twice every Sunday besides 
week-day services — ought not England to be guaranteed 
a defence against the inroads of Popery such as would 
be impregnable ? I trow it would. With more life, 
love, and eagerness, then I may believe there would be 
more eccentricity. I think it is very likely, and I pray 
God to send it. (Applause.) 



A COMPLETE LIST 



8I>TJIiaEON^'8 SERMON'S 

PUBLISHED IN THIS COUNTRT, TOQBTHEB WITH THE SUBJECT 
AND THE TEXT OF SCRIPTURE USED FOK EACH SERMON. 



Inteoduction. page 

Sehuon I. — Sovereignty and Salvation 1 

"Look nnto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth : for 
I am Grod, and there is none else." — Isaiah xlv. S3. 

Sebmon Ti.—The Bible 83 

*' I have written to him the great things of my law, httt they were 
connted aB a strange thing.*'— Hosea viii- 12. 

Sebmoh m. — The JPeraonality of the Soly Ghost ... 45 

" And I will pray the Father, and he shall give yon another Com- 
forter, that he may abide with ^on forever ; even the Spirit of truth ; 
whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither 
knoweth him ; but ye know him ; for he dwelleth with you, and shall 
he in you." — John xiv. 16, 17. 

Sekmon W.—Tfie Comforter 66 

"But the Comforter, which Is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father 
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things and bring all things 
to your remembrance, whatsoever I haye said unto yqa. "—John xiv. 86. 

Sebmok Y. — Christ Crucified r B5 

" But we preach Christ crucified, nnto the Jews a stumblipg-blopk, 
and unto the Greeks foolishness ; but unto them which are called, 
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of 
God."— 1 Cob. i. 23, 24. 

Sebmon YL—Xhe Fower of the Moly Ghost 113 

" The power of the Holy Ghost."- Romans xv. 13. 
Sebmon yXl.—The Church of Christ ....... 134 

" And I vrill make them and the places round about my hill a bless- 
ing ; and I will cause the shower to come down in his season ; 
there shall be showers of blessing."- Ezekqil xxxiv. 36. 

Sebmon VVJ.—Xhe Mternal Name 154 

" His name shall endure forever."— Psalms Ixzli. 17. 

Sebmon IX.— Jowl's First Frayer 170 

" For behold he prayeth."— AOTS Is. H. 



306 LIST OF SPUEGE03Sr'S SEBMONS. 

Seemon X.—J'oseph A.ttaeUed by the Archers . . . PAGE 198 
" The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at Wm, and hated 
him • but his bow abode in strength ; and the arms of his hands 
were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; from 
thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel."— Gekesis xlix. 23, iti. 

Seemon XI.— Tfte Tomb of tTesug 211 

" Come and see the place where the Lord lay."— JIatt. xxvili. 6. 
Sekhoh Xn.— 27ie Carnal Mind Enmity Against God . . 230 

** The carnal mind is enmity against God." — Romans viii. 7. 
Sermoh "SMI.— Christ's People— Imitators of Him, . . . 252 
" Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and per- 
ceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled ; 
and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus." — 
Acts iv. 13. 

Sekmoh HTV.— Thoughts on the last Battle 274 

" The sting of death is sin ^ and the strength of sin is the law. 
Bnt, thanks be nnto God, which giveth ns the victory through our 
Lord Jesus Christ." — 1 Cob. xv. 56, 57. 

Sebmon xv. — Hea^ven and Sell 296 

'* And I say .unto, yon, that many shall come from the east and west, 
and shall 'sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the king- 
dom of heaven. Bat the children of the kingdom shall be cast out 
into outer darkness ; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." 
— Matthew viii. 11, 12. 

Sbbmoit Xn.— Gospel Missions 331 

" And the word of the Lord was published throughout all the re- 
gion."— Acts xiii. 40. 

Sebmon XYIL—The Enchanted Ground 344 

" Therefore let ns not sleep, as do others ; but let us watch and be 
sober." — 1 Thes. v. 6. 

Sermon iL\ ill.— Faith . . . . ' 364 

"Without faith it is impossible to please God."— Hebbews vi. 6. 



SECOND SERIES OF SERMONS. 
Fbeface. 
Sebmon I.— The Glorious Habitation 



*^Lord, thou hast been our dwelling-place in all generations." — 
Psalms xc. 1. 

Sebmon II. — Healing for the Wounded: A. Sermon for the 

Crimean Soldiers Ig 

" He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds." 

PsAT.va cxliii. 8. ' 

Sebmon III. — The Peculiar Sleep of the JSeloved .... 34 
"For so he giveth his beloved sleep."— Psauis cx^rli. 8. 

.Sebmon W.—The Sin of XTnbelief BO 

"And that lord answered the man of God, and said. Now behold 
if the Lord should make windows in heaven, might such a tLins be h 
And he said. Behold, thou sHalt see it with thine eyes, but Shalt not 
eat thereof."— 3 Eihss vii. 19. 



LIST OF SPUBGEOlir'S SERMOITS. 307 

Sebmon Y.— Election page 66 

" But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren 
beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen 
you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the 
■truth : whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining the 
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ."— 2 Thbs. 11. 13, 14. 

Sbemon YT. — The Bouse of Mourning and the Bowse of 

X'easting 88 

" It Is better to go to the house of mourning, than to the house of 
feasting."— BccLE. vii. 2. 

Sekmon VII.— T7te X>ay of A.tonement 104 

" This .phall be an evjerlasting, statute unto you, to make an atone- 
ment for the children of Israel for all their sins once a year."— Lbvit- 
icus xvi. 34. 

Seemon VIII.— TAe Allegories of Sarah and Bagar ... 120 

*• These are the two covenants." — Galatxans Iv. 24. 
Seemon IX.— Tfte Elealtation of Christ 136 

" Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a 
name which is above every name : that at the name of Jesus every 
liuee should bow, of things in heaven and things in earth, and things 
under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus 
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."— Philippiaks 11. 9-11. 

Sermon X.—The Saints' Beritage and. Watchword . . .168 
- "No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every 
tongue that shall rise against tfaee in judgibent thou shalt condemn. 
This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteous- 
ness is of me, aaith the Lord." — Isaiah liv. 17. 

Sebuon XI.— Songs in the Night 167 

" But none siiih. Where is God my maker, who giveth songs in the 
night 1 "—Job xxxv. 10. 

Sebuoh XII.— God's Providence 188 

*' Now, as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the 
earth by the living creatures, with his four faces. The appearance of 
the wheels and their work was like unto the color of a beryl : and they 
four had one likeness ; and their appearance and their work was as it 
were a wheel in the middle of a wheel. When they went, they went 
upon their four sides ; and they returned not when they went. As 
for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful : and their 
rings were full of eyes round about them four. And when the living 
creatures went, the wheels went by them ; and when the living crea- 
tures were lift up from the earth, the wheels were lift up." — Ezekiel 
1. 15-19. 

Sebmon Xm.— ^ Tiew of God's Glory 204 

"And he Bald, I beseech thee, show me thy glory."— BxoDns 
zxxill. 18. 

Sermon XTV. — Confirming the Witness of Christ .... 317 

" Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you."— 1 Corin- 
thians i. 6. 

Sermon XV. — Barvest Time 232 

" Is, it not wheat harvest to-day ?" — 1 Samuel xii. 17. 
Sermon XVI.- Sweet Comfort for Feeble Saints . . . .246 
" A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not 
quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. "—Matthew xii. 20. 



308 LIST OF SPURGEOS'S SESMOfTS. 

Beioioii XVn.— 27ie Meaurreetion of the Dead . . . riax 2S2 
" There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the Just and un- 
just."— Acts xxiv. 16. 
Sbkkon XVTU.—The Ctirse JCemoved 280 

" Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a 
curse for us ; for it is written. Cursed is every one that hangeth on a 
tree." — G^juitians iii. 13. 

BsBHOir XIX. — Xhe Comer's Conflict with Satan . . . , 29S 

'** And as he was yet -a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare 
him. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and 
delivered.him again to his father." — JiUKS ix. 42. 

Sekkoh "SX.— Christ the JBoefc 312 

" And that Sock was Christ."—! Cob. x. 4. 

Seemon XXI.— .a Tieit to Calvary 328 

" And filate saith unto them. Behold the man 1 "— JosN ziz. 6. 

Sebuok XXn. — TeaehiTig Children 345 

" Come, ye children, hearken unto me : I will teach you the fear of 
the Lord."— PsAUi xxxiv. 11. 

Sebkoh 'XXm.—The Qod of the A.ged 361 

" Even to your old age I am he ; and even to hoary hairs I will carry 
yon. I have made, and I wUl bear; even 1 will carry, and will deliver 
yon."- Isaiah xlvi. 4. 

Sebuoh XXIV.— Omniscience 380 

*^ Thou God seest me.".M3}ENE&is xvi. 13. 
Bebhon XXV.— Christ in the Covenant 395 

" I will give thee for a covenant of the people."— Isaiah zUx. 8. 
Sebkoh XXVI.— Xoee's Commendation 410 

" But God commendeth his love toward us, In that, while we were 
yet sinners, Christ died for us." — ^Romans v. 8. 

Sebmon XXVII.— Turn or Burn 42S 

" If he turn not, he will whet his sword ; he hath bent his bow, and 
made it ready."— Fsaui vii. 12. 

THIRD SERIES OF SERMONS. 
Fbeface. 
Sekhoh I.— a. Faithful Friend 11 

** There is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.** — ^Pbovehbs 
xviii. 24. 

Sermon II. — The I^eafless Tree 37 

" But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and it shall be 
eaten as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when 
they cast their leaves ; so the holy seed shall be the substance there- 
of." — ^Isaiah vi. 13. 
Sebmox m. — The Snare of the Fowler .-•,., 42 
'^Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler." — ^Fsalu 
xci. 3. 

Bebmos TV.— The FnUtful Vine 68 

" And the word of the Lord came nnto me, saying. Son of man. 
What is the vine-tree more than any tree, or than a branch which is 
among the trees of the forest } " — Esskiel xv. 1, 3, 



LIST Oo? SPUKS'EOS'iJ- SEKMOS'S. 309 

Sbiukok y.Spiritual Sevival the Want of the Chmreh . pass 74 
" O Lord, revive thy work,"— Has. lii. gi 

Sebmoh VI. — The A.nxi<yua Inquirer 90 

" O that I knew where I might find him." — Job xxiU. 3. 

Sermon VII.— T?ie Sinner's Itefuge 106 

" Then ye Bhall appoint yon cities to he cities of refuge for yon : 
that the slayer may flee hither, wliichkilleth asy person at unawares." 
— Ndmbbrs xxxt. H. 

Sebxoh VIII. — The Vumh Singing 119 

"Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the 
deaf shall be nnstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, 
and the tongue of the dumb sing; for in the wilderness shall waters 
break .out, and streams in the desert."— IsAiah xxxv. 5, 6. 

Sebmon IX. — Foretastes of the Seavenly Iiife .... 138 

" And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and brought 
it down rnito us, and brought ns word again, and said. It is a good 
land which the Lord our God doth give us.';- Dbut, 1. 86. 

Sermon X. — Freachjing for the Foor .149 

4 ** The poor have the gospel preached to them." — "Watt, xi. 5. 

Sermon XI.— Secret Sins 164 

*' Cleanse thou me from secret faults." — PsAxja xix. 12. 
Sermon XlL—FHiJaJi's Appeal to the Undecided .... 179 
"How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, 
follow him ; if Baal, then follow him."— 1 EiHSS xviii. 21. 

Sebuon XIII. — Salvation of the Zord 194 

" Salvation is of the Lord." — Jonah ii. 9. 

Sermon XIV. — Megeneration 210 

"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." 
John iii. 3. 

Sermon XV.— Spiritual Hesurreetion 825 

" And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and 
sins." — Efhesians ii. 1. 

Sermon XVl.— Confession of Sin ....••• 241 
A sermon with seven texts. 
The Mardened Sinner: 

Pharaoh— "I have sinned."— ExoDr 8 Ix. 27. 
The Jtouble-Jtfinded Man. 

Baaiajt- " I have sinned."— Ntjmbers xxil, 34. 
The Insincere Man, 

Saui/— " I have sinned." — 1 Samuel xt. 24. 
The I>oubtful Fenitent. 

AcBAN — " I have sinned." — Joshua vii. 20. 
Th^ Repentance of Despair. 

Judas— "I have sinned."— Matt, xxvii. 4. 
The IRepentance of tiie Sadnt, 

Job— "I have sinned."— Job vlt 20. 
The JBtessed Confession, 

The PBODioAii— " I have sinned."— Luxe xv. 18. 



310 LIST OF spuegbok's sermohs. 

Sbbmon XVn.— Fattfc . . ... . . • • - ^^^^ ^^ 

" Without faith it is impossible to please God."— Hbbbkws xi. 6. 

Sebmon XVIIL— JJafta6'» Faith 269 

" By faith the harlot Kahab perishes not with them that believed 
not, when she had received the spies with peace." — Hbbbbws xi. 31, 

Sebhoh XIX The JBlood-ahedditiff 283 

" Without shedding of blood is no remission." — Hebkbws ix. 23. 

Sbbmon XX. — trustification by Grace 395 , 

" Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that 
is in Christ Jesus."— Romahs iil. 24. 

Sbkmok XXI. — Manasseh 311 

" Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God."— 2 Cbbon. 
Tfxxiii. 13. 

» » Sbbmon XXSI.—Why are Men Saved 328 

"Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake."— PsAUt cvi. 8. 
Sbbmon XXIII.— Particwlaj' Election 343 

"Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your call- 
- ing and election sure : for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall : * 
for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the 
everlasting -kingdom of oxir Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ." — 
2 Pbtee i. 10, 11. 

Sbbmon XXrV, — Mcrcyj Omnipotence, and tTustice . . , 359 
" The Lord is slow to anger^ and great in power, and will not at all 
acquit the wicked."— Nahom i. 3. 

SBEMpN 'X^y.—Chriet^The Power and Wisdom of God . . 375 
" Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God."— 1 Cob. i. 24. 

Sebmon XXVI. — Going- Some : A. Christmas Sermon . . . 389 
" Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord 
hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee."— Mask v. 10. 

Sbbmon XXVII.— .4 Mighty Saviour 404 

" Mighty to save."— Isaiah Ixiii. 1. 
Sebmon XXVIII.— J»r««l in Egypt 419 

■" Anfl thSy elrtg thfi song of Moses the servant of God, and the song 
of the Lamb, saying. Great and mjarvellous are thy works, Lord God 
Almighty ; just and true are thy ways, thou king of saints."— REVBr 

I.ATIONB XV. 3. 

Sbbmon HXlX.-^JPresumptuotis Sins 432 

" Keep back tby servants also from presumptuous sins."— Psalm 
xix. 13. 

FOURTH SERIES OF SERMONS. 

Pbefaob. 

Sebmon I.— The Parable of the A.rlc 1 

"And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, 
wherein is the breath of life."- Genesis vii. 15. 

Sebmon II. — Proving God • ' . • 31 

" Prove me now."— Malachi iil. 10. 



LIST OF spubgeon's sermoks. 311 

Sermon III. — Meditation on God PAOS 39 

'• My meditation of him shall be sweet."— Psalm civ. 34. 

Seruok rv. — JPardon and tTuatification 58 

** Blessed is he whose transgressiou is forgiven, whose sin is 
covered."— Psalm xxxii. 1. 

Sermon V.—Tfie Good Shepherd 75 

" The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want,"— Psalm xxiii. 1. 
SERtiON VT. — The Gracious lAps of J'esus 93 

" Grace is poured into thy lips." — Psalm xlv. 2. 
Sermon YII.— ^ Time of Finding for Zost Sheep . . .111 

*'I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was 
driven away\ and will bind up that which was broken, and will 
strengthen that which was sick : but I will destroy the fat and the 
strong ; I will feed them with judgment." — Ezsk. xxxiv. 16. 

Sermon VIII.— TAe Ikvo Talents .,129 

"He also that had received two talents came and said. Lord, thou 
deliverest unto me two talents : behold, I have gained two other 
talents beside them. His lord said unto him. Well done, good and 
faithful servant ; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will 
make thee ruler over many things : enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord."— Matt. xxv. 23, 33. 

Sermon IX.—TIie Prodigal's Return . . ... , , .145 
*' But when he was yet a great way off, his. father saw him, and had 
compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him." — ^Lttke 

XV. 30. ■ 

Sermon X.—God, the A.ll~seeing One 161 

" Hell and destruction are before the Lord : how much more then 
the hearts of the children of men ? "-Proverbs xv. 11. 

Sermon XI. — The Intmntability of Christ 178 

" Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever."— He- 
brews xiii. 8. 

Sermon 'Sll.—FauVs Sermon before Felix 193 

**■ And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment 
to come, Felix trembled, and answered. Go thy way for this time ; 
when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee. "^AcTsxxiv. 25. 
Sermon Xlll.—The Death of Christ . . , ... . .309 
*' Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him ; he hath put him to grief, 
when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his 
seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall 
prosper in his hand. "-Isaiah liii. 10. 

Sermon XIV. — JL Call to the Vnconverted 323 

" For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse : 
for it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things 
which are written in the book of the law to do them."— Gal. iii. 10. 

Sermon XV. — The Warning Neglected 240 

"He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning ; his 
blood shall be upon him,"— Ezekiel xxxiii. 5. 

Sermon XVT.— What Have I Done ? 258 

" What have I done ? "—Jeremiah viii. 6. 
Sermon X\tII. — Light at JEvening Time ...... 275 

"^It shall come to pass thatat evening time it shall be light."— Zbch- 
ARIAH xiv. 7. 



312 LIST OF SPUKGEOir'S SEEMOKS. 

Sermoh XVrn.—Th^ Redeemer '■^"*" ^^ 

" And thy redeemer, the Holy One."— Isaiah xli. M. 
Sebmon XIX.— Tfte X'lrst and Great Contmandment ... 301 
" Thou Shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all 
thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength : this is the 
first commandment." — ^Mask xil. 30. 

Sbkmon XX. — ^leaUe ! AwaJce I 316 

" Therefore let na not sleep as do others ; hat let ns watch and he 
sober."— 1 Tkess. v. 6. 

Sebuon XXI. — The Zoved Ones Chastened 333 

"As many as I lore, I rehuke and chasten : be zealous, therefore, 
and repent."— Ebtelatioh ill. 19. 

Sermon XXn.—Fear Not 350 

"Fear not, Ihon worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel ; I will help 
thee, saith the Lord, and thy redeemer the Holy One of Israel."— 
Isaiah xll. 14. 

Sermon XXIII.— Tfte Condescension of Christ . . . .364 
" For ye know the grace of onr Lord Jesns Christ, that, though he 
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty 
might be rich." — 3 Cor. viii. 9. 

Sermon XXIV.— TAe Great JBeservoir 381 

" Keep thy heart with all diligence ; for out of it are the issues of 
life."— Proverbs It. 33. 

SebmAn XXV. —Bow to Keep the SCeart 397 

" The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep 
yout hearts and minds, through Christ JesUs."- Phuippians Iv. 7. 

Sermon XXVI. — Snman Inability 410 

" No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me 
draw him."— John vi. 44. 

Sermon XXVII.— Io«e Thy Neighbor 422 

"Thou Shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."— Matt. six. 19. 

FIFTH SERIES OF SERMONS. 
Preface. 

Sermon I. — Bis If ante : Wonderful 15 

" His name shall be called Wonderful."— Isaiah ix. 6. 

Sermon II. — Bis Name : The Counsellor .31 

" For unto us a child is bom, unto us a son is given : and the gov- 
ernment shall be upon his shoulder : and his name shall be Wonder- 
ful Counsellor."- Isaiah iv. 6. 

Sermon IIL — As Thy JDays, so shall thy Strength be . . .49 

'* As thy days, so shall thy strength be." — Deht. xzxiii. 25. 
Sermon IV.— Tfte Voice of the Blood of Christ .... 65 

*' The blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of 
Abel." — Hebrews xii. 34. 

Sermon V. — TJie New Beart 81 

" A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will 1 pnl with- 
in you ; and I will take away the stony heart out of yonr flesh, and I 
will give you an heart of flesh." — ^Ezssiel xxxvi. 26. 



LIST OF spurgeon's seemons. 313 

Sermon VI.— Tfte Fatlierhood, of God page 96 

" Oar Father, which art in heaven."— Matx. ti. 9. 
SsRMON YIl.—JE!veryhody>a Sermon 118 

"I have multiplied visioua, and used similitudes."— HosEA xii. 10. 
Sermon VIII.— ^ Lecture for Zlttle-FaitJi va 

" We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is 
meet, because that your faith groweth exceeding, and the charity of 
every one of you all toward each other aboundeth."— 3 Thess. i. 3. 

Sermon IX. — Confession and Absolution 147 

" And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as 
his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be mer- 
ciful to me a sinner."— "Luke xviii. 13. 

Sermon X.—I>eclension from First lyove 164 

"Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast 
left thy first love."— Rev. ii. 4. - , 

Sermon XI.— God's Barriers against Mian's Sin . . , .180 
"Fear ye not me ? saith the Lord ; will ye not tremble at my pres- 
ence, which have placed the saud for the bound of the sea by a perpet- 
ual decree, that it can not pass it : and though the waves thereof toss 
themselves, yet they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not 
pass over it ! But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; 
they are revolted and gone.^'— Jeremiah v. 22, 23. 

Sermon XH.— Comfort Proclaimed 197 

" Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God."— Isaiah xl. 1. 
Sermon XTTT . — The Christian's Heaviness and Mejoicing . 211 
"Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, 
ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations." — 1 Peter i. 6. 

Sermon XIV.— ^BoiJ and its S,em,edy 232 

" The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judahis exceeding great." 
EZEKIEL ix. 9. 

" The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanseth ns from all ein." 
— 1 John i. 7. 

Sermon X'V.—Sam.son Conquered 236 

" And she said, the Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he 
awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times be- 
fore, and shake myself. And he wist not that the Lord was departed 
from him. But the Philistines took liim, and put out his eyes, and 
brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass ; and 
he did grind in the prison house."— Judges xvi. 20, 21. 

Sermon XVI. Xiookvng unto tTesus 253 

" They looked unto him, and were lightened : and their faces were 
not ashamed." — Psalm xxxiv. 5. 

Sermon XVII.— Satan's Sanquet 270 

" The governor of the feast called 'the bridegroom, and saith unto 
him, every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine j and when 
men have well drunk, then that which is worse ; but thou hast kept 
the good wine until now."— John ii. 9, 10. 

Sermon XVIII.— TAe Feast of the Ijord 289 

" The governor of the feast called the bridegroom, and saith unto 
him, every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine ; and when 
men have well drank, then that which is worse ; but thou hast kept 
the good wine until now."— John ii. 9, 10. 



314 LIST QP SPtTBGEOlf'S SEEMONS. 

Sbbbon XSX.—The Blood PASB 303 

" When I see the Mood, I Mdll pass over yon."— BxoDua til. 13. 

Sbbmon XS~—lMve . . ■ 319 

" We love him, bocanee he first loved ns."--! John iv. 19. 

Sbbkon XXI,— 27ie Great Bcvival 336 

" The Lord hath made bare his holy ana In the eyes of all the na- 
tions : and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvAtion of onr 
God. —Isaiah lii. 10. 

Sbbmdn "KXn.—Xhe Worm and Spirit of ICeHgion .... 353 

" Let us fetch the ark, of the covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh 
unto us, that, when it coflneth among us, it may save us out of the 
hand of our enemies."— 1 Samuel iv. 3. 

Sebuon XXni.— JPro»i<JeM«« 370 

" But the very hairs of your head are all numbered."— Matt. x. 30. 

Sebmon XXrV.— Tfte Vangtiard and Xereivard of the Church. 387 
" The Lord will go before you ; and the God of Israel will be your 
rereward."— Isaiah lii, 18. 

Sebhok XXV. — The World Turned Upside Jioten .... 408 

"These that have tmnied the world npside down are come hither 
also."— Acts xvii. 6, 

Sekhoh XXVI.— Zfwnuin Jtesponaibility .,.'... 420 
" If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin ; 
but now they have no clohe for their sin." — JoHii xv. S2. 

Sbbmoh XX.\U.— Faith in Perfection 437 

*' The Lord will perfect that which concemeth me. Thy mercy, O 
Lord, endureth for ever : forsake not the works of thine own hands." 
— PSAX.M czxxviii. 8. 

SIXTH SERIES OF SERMONS. 

PKEFAeS. 

Sbkiiok I.— The Story of Bod's Mighty A^cts 13 

"We have heard with our ears, O (xod, our fathers have told us, what 
work; thou ^dst in their days in the times of old."— Psaim xliv. 1. 

Sebmoh II.— TAe OtUpouring of the Moly Spirit .... 31 
" While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all 
them which heard the Word."— Acts x. 44. 

SEJUtON ni. — The Sympathy of the tmo Worlds .... 47 

*' There is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner 
thatrepenteth. '— Ldkb.xv. 10. 

Sebhon IV. — The Conversation of Saul of Tarsus ... 61 

•' And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speak- 
ing unto me, and saying, in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why per- 
eecutest thou me i it is uard for thee to kick against the pricks." — 
Acts xxvi, 14. 

Sebhon V. — JOistinguishing Grace 78 

" For who maketh thee to differ from another."— 1 Cob. iv. 7. 

Sebhon VI.— Tfce Mission of the Son of Mwn .... 93 

" For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was 
lost."— LrKB lix. 10. 



LIST OF SPUEGEOSr'S SERMONS. 315 

SximoK Vn.— ^m JEamest Invitation T^at 109 

" Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish -from the way, when 
his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their 
trust in him." — ^Psalm ii. 12. 

Skkston YlU.— How Saints tnay Melp the I>evil .... 125 

" That thou mayet bear thine own shame, and mayst be confounded 
in all that tbon hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them." — 

EZBKIEL zvi. .54 

Sebmon IX.— BTt* Siame : The mighty tfoej 143 

" The mighty God."— Isaiah ix. 6. 

Sbbmon X.— TAe Believef'a Challenge ....... 16G 

" Who is he that Condemneth 1 It is Christ that died, yea rather, 
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also 
maketh intercession for us."— iloiiiANa viii. 34. 

Sebmou XI.— .^ Faaltn of Bememhranee 171 

"We have known and believed the love of God hath to us." — 
1 John iv. 16. 

Sebhon XTL—The Jfeeeasity of the Spirit's Worh .... 186 

" And I will put my Spirit within you."— Ezekibl xxxvl. 87. 

SEBUOtr 'S.m.—IAttle Sins 103 

" Is it not a little one f "— GmrasiS xlx. 20. 
Sebhon XIV.— .4 Vision of the Jjatter-Day Glories , . .216 
. '* And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of 
the Lordls house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and 
shall be exalted above the hills : and all nations shall flow into It." — 
Isaiah ii. 2, and Micah iv. 1. 

Sebmon XY. — Covenant Slessingi 230 

"He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be 
mindful of his covenant." — Psalm cxi. 5. 

Sebmon HTL—The Hew of Christ's Youth 249 

" Thou hast the dew of thy youth."- Psalm ex. 8. 

Sermon Xyn.— 3%e aigh Bock . 266 

" From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is 
overwhelmed : lead me to the roek that ii higher than I."— Fs. lid. 2. 

Sebmon XYHI.— Spiritual Seligion 283 , 

" It is the spirit that qulckeneth : the flesh proflteth nothing." — 
John vi. 63. 

Sermon XIX. — The Saviour resting in Sis JJove , , . , 297 

" He will rest in his love."— Zbphaniah ill. 17. 

Sebmon XX. — Suffering without the Camp 309 

" Whejefore Jesus also, that he might Sanctify the people with his 
blood, Bflfflered without the gate. "—Hebrews xiii. 12. 

Sebmon "S^l.—Growth in Grace . , 319 

" But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savloor 
Jesus Christ."— S Pbteb ill. 18. 

Sebmon 'S:S.'[l.—X[ypovrisy 334 

" Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy."— 
Luke xii. 1. 



366 



316 LIST OF spuegeon's SEEMOKS. 

Sekmon XXin..— Christ Freelotu to JBeUevera . . . fagb 350 
" Unto you therefore wMcli believe he is precious."—! Pbtbb ii. 7. 

Sebuon XXIV. — The Meek and Imvly One 

" Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest. Take my yoke upon yon, and learn of me ; for I am 
meek and lowly in heart ; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For 
my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." — ^Matt. xi. 2&-30. 

Sbumon XXV. — Weak Bands and Weehle Xnees .... 383 
" Strengthen ye the weak hands and conflnn the feeble knees."— 
Isaiah xxx. 3. 

Sekmon XXVL— 27je Blind Beggar 399 

"And they came to Jericho : and as he went out of Jericho with his 
disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimens, the son of 
Timeus, sat by the highway side begging. And when he heard that 
it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, thou 
son. of David, have mercy on me. And many charged him that he 
should hold his peace ; but he cried the more, a great deal, Thon son 
of David, have mercy on me. And Jesus stood stillj and commanded 
him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying unto him. Be 
of good comfort, rise ; he cJalleththee. And he, casting away his gar- 
mentLTOse, and caine to Jesus. And Jesus answered and said unto 
him. What wilt thou that I should do unto thee ? The blind man mi. 
unto him. Lord, that I might receive my sight. And Jesus said unto 
him. Go thy way ; thy faith hath made thee whole. And immediately 
he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way."— Mask x. 46-SS. 

Sbbmon XXVn.— CArist's Manifestation to Mary Magdalene. 413 
" Jesus saith unto her. Touch me not ; for I am not yet ascended to 
my Father ; but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto 
my Father and yonr Father ; and to my God and your God."— John 
XX. 17. 

SaRMON XXVm.— 27te S'lght of Iniquity 482 

" Why doet thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold griev- 
ance 1 " — Has; i. 3. 

Seemon XXIX.— X/»e Tahernaele of tlie Most Sigh . . .437 
" In whom ye are also builded together for an habitation of God 
through the Spirit."— Bphesians ii. S2. 

SEVENTH SERIES OF SERMONS. 

Seruok 1. — -A New Year's Senediction 11 

"Bat the God of all grace who hath called ns onto his eternal glory 
by Christ Jeeus, after tliat ye have suftered awhile, make you perfect, 
establish, strengthen, settle you." — 1 Peteh v. 10. 

Sermon U.—The ILing's JSlghway Opened 28 

"And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt 
be saved, and thy house." — Acts xvl. 31. 
Sebmon in.— Piety JReproved and trustified . . . . . 45 

"Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the 
daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said. How glorious was 
the King of Israel to-day, who uncovered himself to-day in the eyes 
of haniunaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly 
uncoverech himself [ And David said unto Michal, It wiis before the 
Lordj which chose me before my father, and before all his house, to 
ai)pomt me ruler over the people of the Lord, over Israel ; therefore 
will I play before the Lord. And I will be more vile than thus, and 
will be base in my own sight; and of the maidservants which, thou 
hast spoken of, of them shall I be had in honor."— 3 Samuel vi. SO-^. 



LISi Ot 8PUEQB0K S SEEMOIS'S.^ 317 

Sbbmoit rV — 27»e Treasures of Grace . . . : • VXas 68 
" fhe fotglveneBs of sins, according to the riches of his grace."— 
E^HESIASS 1. 7. 

Sebmon v.— Faith Htustratea 79 

"For the which c&ilse I Ubo sntfer these things : nevertheless I AtU 
not ashamed ; for I know whom I have believed, and 4m perstti^ed 
that he is able to keep that which 1 have committed unto him against 
that day."— 2 Tjmotht i, 12. 

Sbbmon VI.— ^ Mome Question i . j 94 

"Bnt are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord 
your God."-^ Chboh. xxviii. 10. 

Sbbmon YH.— Christ Triuinphant 110 

"And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of 
them openly, triumphing over theM in It."— CoLoasiAlts ii. 15. 

SebmOj* VIII.— Be«ie«4-6er Death i 126 

" O that they were Wise, that they Understood this, that they would 
consider their latter end."— fiisn*. ±zxii. 29. 

Sebmon is..— Maries of Faith 141 

"Then said Jesus nnto him. Except ye see signs and wonders, ye 
will not believe."— -John Iv. 48. 

Sebmon X.—The Frecious from the Vile 160 

"That ye maj; know how that the Lord hath put a difference be- 
tween the Egyptians and Israel."- BxoDtrs xi. 7. 

Sermon XI. — A. Ulast against False Peace 177 

" Peace, peace, when there is no peace." — Jebemxah vi. 14. 
Sebhon Xn.— Tfte Kesurreetton 194 

'' Biit somfe man will Say, How are the dead raised up f and with 
what body do they come. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not 
qiiickfened, except it die : and that which thoil sowest, thou sowest 
not that body that shall be, but baregrain^ it may chance of wheat, or 
of some other grain i bat God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, 
and to every seed his own body." — 1 Cob. xv. 35-3S. 

S£bmok Xni.— 2^e Blood of the Covenant 212 

" The blood of the everlasting covenant."— HeSSbws xiii. 20. 

Seemon XIV. — ^ Mevival Sernhon 227 

" Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the plowman shall 
overtake the reaper, and the trader of grapes him that soweth Seed ; 
and the moiintains Shall drop sweet wi&e, and all the hills shall melt." 
Amos ix. 13. 

Sebmon XV. — Bin Immeasurahle 245 

" Who eta understand his errors."— Psalm *ix. 12. 
Sebmon XVT. — None hut tfestts 259 

" He that belicveth on him is not condemned."— John iii. 18. 
Sebmon XVII.— JVorae but Jesus— Fa/rt II 277 

"He that believeth on him is not condemned. "—John iii. 18. 
Sebmon XVIII.- 27ie Chaff Driven A.way 293 

" The uiigodly are not so; bnt are like the chaff which the wind 
driveth a\vay.''-"PsAija i. 4. 



318 LIST OF SPTJRGEOIf'S SBEMOKS. 

Sebhon XrK.~Cleansing the leper page 311 

" And U a leprosy break out abroad In the skin, and the leprosy 
cover all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to 
his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh ; then the priest shall con- 
sider : and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall 
pronounce him clean that hath the plague : it is all turned white : he 
IS clean."— LETiTions xiii. 12, 13. 

Sebmoh XX.— 27se Wailing of Jtisca 328 

" Suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment." — 
Jexeemiah Iv. 20. 

ysBMOK XSI. — Come and Welcome 344 

"And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth 
say. Come. And let him that is atbirst come. And whosoever will, 
let him take the water of life freely."— Kevblationb xxil. 17. 

Sebhos XXIL—Ihe First Mesurrection 361 

"And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was' 
given unto them : and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for 
the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not 
worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his 
mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands ; and they lived and 
reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived 
not again until the thousand years' were finished. This is the first re- 
surrection.- Blessed and holy is hQ that hath part in the first resur- 
rection ; on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be 
priests of Qod and of Christ, and shall reign with Mm a thousand 
years."— Rev. xx. 4, 5, 6. 

"^n9 I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God ; and the 
books were opened ; and another book was opened, which is the 
book of life ; and the dead were judged out of those things which 
were written in the books, according to their works." — Ret. xx. 12, 

EIGHTH SERIES OF SERMONS. 

Sermon l.—Jiaptisnial Regeneration . . 11 

" And he said unto them^o ye into all the world, and preach the 
gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be 
saved ; but he that believeth not shall be damned." — ^Mabk xvi. 15, 16, 

Sekmok II. — Children Jirought to Christ, not to tlie Font . 36 

"And they brought young children unto him, that he should touch 
them : and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when 
Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them. Suffer the 
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such 1~ 
the kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you, 'Whosoever shall not 
receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter there- 
in. And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and 
blessed them." — Mauk x. 13-16. 

Sermon ni.—" 2%M« Saitft t/ic Xortf " 55 

" Thus saith the Lord."— Ezekiel xi. 5. 
Sermon IV. — ^ Searer in JDisguise .79 

"And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feut, as she 
came in at the door, that he said. Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam ; 
why felgnest thou thyself to be another f for I am sent to thee with 
heavy tidings."— 1 Kings xiv. 6. 

Sermon V. — Eacpiation 96 

" Thou Shalt make his soul an offering for sin."- Isaiah liii. 10. 



LIST OF spurgeon's SEEJIOSrS. 319 

Sebmon VI.— 27i.e Sarley-Field on Fire page 113 

"Absalom sent for Joab, to liave him sent to the king, bnt he 
would not come. Therefore he said unto his servants, See, Joab's 
field is near mine, and he hath barley there : go and set it on Are. 
And Absalom's servants set the field on fire. Then Joab arose, and 
came to Absalom unto his house, and said unto him, Wherefore have 
thy servants set my field on fire ! "—2 Samuel xiv. 39-81. 

Sbkmow VII — Christ is Glorious : let us make Sim Known. 13] 

" And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the 
majesty of the name of the Lord his God ; and they shall abide : for 
now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth."— Mioah v. 4. 

Sekmos Yin..—X!nduring to the Mnd 150 

" He that endureth to the end shall be saved."— Matt. x. 83. 

Sebmos is..— Nothing hut Zeaves 168 

"He found nothing but leaves."— Makk xi. 13. 

Sebmon X.—The Great Idberator 187 

" If the son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." 
— JoHNviii.36. 

Sebmon Xl.—The Sinner's Friend ... ... 306 

** A friend of publicans and sinners." — Matt. xi. 19. 
Sebmon XII. — Flection no Discouragement to Seeking Souls, 822 
" I will be gracious upon whom I will be gracious, and will show 
mercy upon whom I will show mercy." — ^Exodus xxxiii. 19. 

Sekmon XIII.T^T7ie Cripple at Zystra 241 

" The same heard Paul speak : who steadfastly beholding him, and 
.perceiving that he had faith to be healed, said with a loud voice, 
btand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and walked."— Acts 
xiv. 9, 10. 

Sebmojt XIV.— ^ Bundle of Myrrh 259 

"A bundle of myrrh is my well-beloved nnto me ; he shall lie all 
night betwixt my breasts." — Canticles i. 13. 

SbemonXV.— T/ie Xamb ; T/te itcfftt 878 

" And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine 
in it : for the glory of God did lighten it, aud the lamb is the light 
thereof."— Eev. xxi. 23. 

Sebmon XVI.— God's Strange Choice 297 

** For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men 
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called ; but God 
hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise ; 
and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the 
things which are mighty ; and base things of the world, and things 
which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, 
to set at nought things that are ; that no fiesh should glory in his 
presence." — 1 Cob. i. 26"29. 
Seemon XYU.—What God Can Not Bo . . . . . .316 

" God, that cannot lie."— Titds i. 2. 

Sebmon XVIII. — Lahor in Vain 335 

" Jonah said unto them, take me up, and cast me forth into the sea ; 
so shall the sea becalm unto you : for 1 know tliat for my sake' this 
great tempest is upon you. Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring 
It to the land ; but they could not, for tlie sea wrought, and was tem- 
pestuous against them.'l^oNAii i. 12, 13. 

Sebmon XIX.— Gfo(Z is With Us 354 

" If God be for us, who can be against us 1 "—Romans viii. 31. 



320 LIST OP SPUEGEOU'S SBKMOJsTS. 



NINTH SERIES OF SERMONS. 

iNTKODtrOTION. **™ 

SsKHOH 1,— Travailing for Souls " 

" As soon as Zlon travailed, she brought forth her ohildren."— 
Isaiah Ixvl. 8. 

SsKnas JX.—" Your Own Salvation " 34 

'4 Your own Balvatlou."^PHiLippiAKB ii. 13. 
Sebmok 111.— Continuance with J^esua Possible . . ,54 

" But Jesus said unto them. They need not depart."— HaOT?. xIt. 16. 
Seemon IV.— lV»e Sin of Gadding About . .... TO 

" Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way."— .Tkee- 
miAH ii. 36. 

Skkmon v.— TAe Broad Wall 89 

" The broad wall."— Nkhbmiah iii. S. 
Sermon VI.— Tfte Star of Jaco6 101 

" There shall cornea star out of Jacob."— NtiMBERS xriv. 17. 
Sekmon VII.— TAe TTnalterabte Statute ' 117 

"Without shedding of blood there is no remission."- Hebbkwb 
ix. 22. 

&£BM0N VIII. — Fathomless - - 131 

" Thy judgments are a great deep."— Psalm xxxvl. 6. 
Sebmox lX.-^Meat Indeed and l>rink Indeed .... 143 
" For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed." — 
John vi. 55. 

Sebmon X, — Tlioughis and their IE*ruit ...•". 157 

" The fruit of their thoughts,"- Jer. vi. 19. 
Sermon XI. — Tlie Covenant * . • 172 

" For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel 
after those days, saith the Lord ; I will put my laws into their mind, 
and write them in their hearts ; and I -will be to them a God, and they 
shall be to me a people. "—Hebrews viii. 10. 

Sermon XII. — A. Sermon to Open Neglectors and Nominal 

Followers of Meligion . 186 

" But what think ye ? A certain man had two sons ; and he came ; 
to the first, and said. Son, go work to day in my vineyard. He 
answered and said, I will not : but afterward he repented, and went. 
And he came to the second and said likewise. Ancf he answered and 
said, I go, sir : and went not. Whether of them twain did the will of 
his father ! They said unto him. The first. Jesus saith unto them, 
Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the 
luugdom of God before you. For John came unto you in the way of 
righteousness, and ye believed him not : but the publicans and the 
harlots believed hiin : and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not 
,■ afterwards, that ye might believe him.'' — Matt. xxi. 28-32. 

Sermon 'SMl.'^Ephraim JBemoaning Himself .... 206 

" I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus ; Thou hast 
chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the 
yoke : Turn thou me, and I slrnll be turned ; For thou art tho Lord 
my God."— Jeremiah xxxi. 18. 



Chi 



LIST OF SPURGEON'S SERMON'S. 321 

Sbbmon XIV. — J'esus at Bethesdaj or Waiting Changed for 

Relieving page S25 

" After this there was a feast of the Jews: and Jesus went up to 
Jerusalem. Now there is at Jerusalem by ihe sheep market a pool, 
which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches. 
In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, 
withered, waiting for the moving of the water. For an angel went 
down at a certain season into the pool, and ti'oubled the water : who- 
soever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in was made 
whole of whatsoever disease he had. And a certain man was there, 
which had an infirmity thirty and eight years. When Jeffus saw him 
lie, and knew that he had been a long time in that case, he saith unto 
him, Wilt thou be made whole ? The impotent man annwered him. 
Sir, I have no man. when tlie water is troubled, to put me into the 
pool : but while I am coming, 'another stcppeth down before me. 
Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take iip thy bed, and walk. And immedi- 
ately the man was made whole, ana took up his bed, and walked : and 
on the same day was the Sabbath."— John v. 1-9. 

Sermon XV.— T/te UnsearcUahle Miches of Christ . . . 345 

'"'' Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace 
given, that I preach among VaA GentUes the unsearchable riches of 
Uhrist."~EpHBsiAKa iii. 8. 

Session 'S.Yl.—The End of the Itighteous Desired . . . 365 

"' Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like 
his ! "— Numbers xxiil. 10. 

Sbbmon XVn. — N'umber One Thousand; or, '' Sread Enough 

and to Spare '' 284 

" And when he came to himself, he said, how many hired servants 
of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perlsji with hun- 
ger ? " — LtTKE XV. 17. 

Sbbmok XVIIL— Xove's Logic 304 

" We love him because he first loved us."— 1 John iv. 19. 
Sermon XIX. — Altogether JOovely • 333 

"Yea, he is altogether lovely."— Canticles v. 16. 
Sermon XX. — The Alarum 343 

" I myself will awake early."— Psalm Ivii. 8. 

Sermon XXI.— I7ie Wit7iering Worh of the Holy Spirit , . 362 

*' The voice said, Cry. — ^And he said^ What shall I cry ? All fleshls 
grass,:— and q}\ the goodllness thereof is as the flower of the field : the 

frass withereth, the flower fadeth : because the spirit of the Lord 
lowcth not upon it : surely the people is grass. The grass wither- 
eth, the flower fadeth : but the word of our God shall stand forever." 
JSAIAH ±i. 6-8. 

"Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, 
by the word of God. which liveth and abideth forever. For all flesh 
is as grass, and all tne glory of man as the flower of the grass. Tbe 
grass withereth, .and the flower thereof f alleth away' ; But the word of 
the Lord endurcth forever And this is the word which by the gospel 
is preafihed unto you." — 1 Peter i. 23-25. 

Sermon XXTf. — Marah; or, the Sitter Waters Sweetened. . 382 

*'And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters 
of Marah, for they were bitter : therefore the name of it was called 
Marah, And the people murmured against Moses, saying, what shall 
we drink ? And he cried unto the Lord ; and the Lord showed him a 
tree, which when he had cast into the. waters, the waters were made 
sweet."— ExoDTJS XV. 23, 24, 25. ■ 



322 LIST OF spuegeok's sekm:ois"S. 

Serbton XXJlI.—jyegotiations for Peace .... PAtt* 403 

" Preacbing peace by Jesas Cbrist : (be is Lord of all)."*— AcfrS X. 36. 

Sermon XXIV.— J«*«» Onlp *,...»... 419 

" And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save 
Jesns only."^IA*.TT. xvii. 8. 

Sermon XXV. -JBe*«, Jtest 436 

'* Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you regt. Take my yoke upon yon, and learn of me ; for I am 
meek and lowly in heart ; and ye shall find rest onto your souls, for 
my yoke is easy, and my burden is ligbt." — Matt. xi. 28-30. 

Sermon XXVI.— Carried by Four 456 

" And he withdrew himself into the Wilderness^ and prayed. And 
it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that there were 
Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were come out of 
every town of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem : and the power of 
the Lord was present to heal them. And, behold, men brought in a 
bed a man which was taken with a palsy : and they sought means to 
bring him in, and to lay him before him. And when they could not 
find hy what way they might bring him in because of the multitndOf 
they went upon the house-top, and let him obwn through the tiling 
with bis couch into the midst befcn'e Jesns. And wlien lie 6aw thelS 
faith he said unto him, Man, thyeins are forgiven thee. And the 
scribes and the Pbarisees began to reason, saying, who is this which 
speaketb blasphemies ? Who can forgive sins, but God alone ¥ But 
when Jesns perceived their thoni^ts, he answering said unto them. 
What reason ye in your hearts? whether is easier to say, Thy sins 
be forgiven thee ; or to- say, Rise up and walk ? But that ye may 
know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive «ins (he 
said unto the sick of the palsy), I say unto thee^ Arise, and take up 
thy couch, and go into thine house. And immediately he rose up be- 
fore them, ^nd took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own 
house, glorifying God. And they were all amazed, and they glorified 
God, and were filled with fear, saying. We have seen strange things 
to-day."— LuKB v. 16-26. 

Sermon XXVII.— «7csm« 2fo Phantom 476 

'' And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, tbey were 
troubled, saying, it is a spirit ; ^nd they cried out for fear."— Matt. 
xiv. 26. 

Sermon XXVin.— Fcry Singular 496 

" He put his household in order and hanged himself ."—S Samubl 
xvii. 26. 



TYPES AND EMBLEMS : 

A COLLECTION OF SERMONS PREACHED ON SUNDAY AND 

THURSDAY EVENINGS. 

Sermon I. — The Star of cTacob ,...,.. paoe 7 

" There shall come a star out of Jacob. "^Nxjmbers xxxiv. 17. 

Sermoi* II.— T/te Broad Wall . 22 

" The broad wall."— Nbhemiah iii. 8. 



LISI OE SPUEOIOK'S SEBMQIirS.. 323 

Sbbmon m.—The Only Door page 41 

" I am the door : toy me if any man enter In, he shall be saved, and 

shall go In and oat, and find pasture."— John x. 9. 

Sebmon IV. — Hpyal Emblems fop JRoyal Subjects ... 61 

" And he shall he as the light of the morning, when the snn riseth, 

even a morning without clouds ; as the tender grass ^ringeth out or 

the earth by clear shining after rain."— g SAMnBi, xxifl. 4. 

Sebmon Y.—Jl Frail Leaf 78 

" Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro ? "—Jon xiii. 25. 

Sermon VI.— Tfte Helmet 93 

" And for a helmet, the hope of salvation."—! Thess. v. 8. 

Sermon Vn.— Owe Trophy for Two Exploits 112 

*' For by thee I have ran through a troop ; and by my God have I 
leaped over a waII."— Psalm xvin. 29'. 

Sermon YITL.— Christ the Tree of Life 184 

' ' In the midst of the st.ceet of it, and on either side of the river, was 
there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fraits, and yielded 
her fruit every month ; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing 
of the nations." —Rev. xxii. 3. 

Sermon IX.— ^ Silly Dove 148 

" Ephraim also is like a silly dove without heart."— Hosba vii. S. 

Sermon X.—Our Banner 164 

"Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be 
displayed because of the truth." — Psalm Ix. 4. 

Sermon. XI. — Owr Champion 179 

" And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the 
doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away vrith 
them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them 
np to the top of an hill that is before Hebron."— Judges xvi. 3. 

Sermon XII.— iTfte Fainting JSTero 194 

" He was sore athirst, and called on the Lord, and said. Thou hast 
given this great deliverance into the hands of thy servant : and now 
shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uucircumcised." — 
Judges xv. 18. 

SxBMON Xin. Woman's Mights. A. Parable S09 

" And Moses brought their cause before the Lord."— Num. xxvli. 5. 
Sermon XIV.^-JBIacfc Clouds and Sright Slessings . . . 235 
** If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the 
earth."— BcoLEs. xi. 3. 

Sermon XV.— I>ai)id'» First Victory 247 

"So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a 
stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him ; but there was no 
sword in the hand of David," — 1 Samuel xvii, 50. 

Sermon XVI. — David, and Mis Volunteers 270 

"And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David into 
the hold of the wilderness, men of might, and men of war fit for the 
battle, that could' handle shield and Duckler, whose faces were like 
the faces of lions, and were as swift as the roes upon the mountains ; 
£zer the first, Obadiah ^e second, EUab the third, Mishmannah the 
fonrth, Jeremiah the fifth, Athai the sixth, Eliel the seventh, Johanan 
the eighth, Elzabad the ninth, Jeremiah the tenth, Machbanai the 
eleventh. These were the sons of Gad, captains of the host : one 
of the least was over an hundred, and the greatest over a. thousand. 
These are they that went over Jordan in the first mouth, when it had 
overflown all his banks ; and they put to flight all them of the valleys, 
both toward the east ana toward the west."— 1 Chboh. xii. 8-15. 



324 LIST OF spurgeok's sermons. 



THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR; 

OR, THE PROGRESS OF THE SOUL IN THE KNOWLEDGE OF 

JESUS. 
Preface. r^«= 
Chapter I. — The Despised Friend 9 

" We esteemed Mm not."— Isaiah liii. 3. 
Chapter H.— Faithful Wounds 43 

" Faithful are the wounds of a friend."— Proverbs xxvii. 6. 
Chapter III, — J'esus Desired 99 

" O that I knew where I might find him." — Job xxiii. 3. 
Chapter IV. — J'esus Pardoning 3S5 

"The blood of Jesus Christ Ms Son cleanBethusfromall sin."— 
UoHN i. 7. 
Chapter "V.—ifoy at Conversion 175 

" The Lord hath done great things for us ; whereof we are glad."— 
Psalm cxxvi. 3. 

Chapter VI. — Complete in Christ 217 

" Ye are complete in Him."— Colossians ii. 10. 

Chapter VII. — Love to Jesus 241 

" Lordj thou knowest all things ; then knowest that I love thee." — 
John xxi. 17. 

Chapter 'Sf III. —Love's Logic 272 

*' The upright love thee." — Sol. Song, i. 4. 
Chapter IX. — J'esus in the Sour of Trouble 315 

" Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well ; the rain 
also fiUeth the pools."- Psalm Ixxxiv. 6. 

Chapter 'K.—Jesus Siding Simself 354 

" Thou didst Mde thy face, and I was troubled." — Pbalm xxx. 7. 
Chapter XL— Tft-e Causes of Apparent. Desertion . , . 378 
"Show me wherefore thon contendest with me." — Job x. 2. 

Chapter XIT. — Communion Preserved 413 

. *' But they constrained him, saying. Abide with us, for it is toward 
evening, and the day is far spent."- Luke xxiv. 29. 

In addition to the above there have been pnblished of Spargcon's Works 
in this country, ''Morning l>y Morning,'* or Dailt Readings for the 
Family or the Closet. For each day of the year is selected a passage 
of Scripture, with practical comments on it to the extent of one page. 

** Evening hy Evening," or Readings at Eventide for thb Pamilt 
OR THE Closet. This book is similar to "Morning by Morning." There are 
probably no devotional books in the language equal to them, nnless It be 
'* Jay's Exercises." 

Lectures to my Students, being Lectures delivered by Mr. Spurgeon 
to the Students of the Pastor's College. 

John Floughman's Talhs, or Plain Advice por Plain People. 



