Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.arGhive.org/details/commentpastorsOOspuruoft 


Cmm«^i(t«tjj  I  f^rnmm(tetlU$^ 


TWO    LECTURES 

ADDRESSED   TO   THE    STUDENTS   OF 


9'i 


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE,  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE, 


TOGETHER    WITH 


A    CATALOGUE 

OF 
BY 

C.    H.    SPURGEON, 

PRESIDENT. 

[Tenth  Thousand.) 


ILontion : 

PASSMORE  &   ALABASTER,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS. 

1876. 


i  0  8  9  0  G  3 


PREFACE 


When  I  issued  the  first  volume  of  "Lectures  to  my  Students'' 
it  was  my  intention  to  prepare  another  series  as  soon  as  time  per- 
mitted, and  I  meant  to  include  two  addresses  upon  Commenting  in 
the  proposed  selection.  It  struck  me,  however,  that  a  better  thing 
was  possible.  The  two  lectures  might  introduce  the  topic  of  exposi- 
tion, and  then  a  catalogue  of  Commentaries  miglit  help  the  student 
to  carry  the  advice  into  practice.  The  making  of  that  catalogue 
would,  of  course,  be  no  small  labour ;  but,  once  accomplished,  it 
might  be  of  service  to  many,  and  effect  more  in  the  direction 
aimed  at  than  the  most  earnest  exhortations.  I  therefore  resolved 
to  attempt  the  work,  and  here  is  the  result. 

It  would  be  easy  to  point  out  the  deficiencies  of  tlie  modern 
pulpit,  and  hold  up  one's  own  ideal  of  what  preaching  ought  to 
be,  but  this  has  been  so  often  attempted  by  others  with  such  slender 
results  that  we  decline  the  task.  A  judicious  critic  would  probably 
complain  that  many  sermons  are  deficient  in  solid  instruction, 
Biblical  exposition,  and  Scriptural  argument :  they  are  flashy, 
rather  than  fleshy ;  clever,  rather  than  solid ;  entertaining,  rather 
than  impressive.  He  would  point  to  rhetorical  discourses  in  which 
doctrine  is  barely  discernible,  and  brilliant  harangues  from  which 
no  food  for  the  soul  could  ever  be  extracted.  Having  done  this,  he 
would  probably  propose  that  homilies  should  flow  out  of  texts,  and 
should  consist  of  a  clear  explanation,  and  an  earnest  enforcement 
of  the  truths  which  the  texts  distinctly  teach.  Expository  preach- 
ing he  would  advocate  as  the  great  need  of  the  day,  its  best  pro- 
tection against  rising  errors,  and  its  surest  means  of  spiritual 
edification.  To  such  observations  most  of  us  would  offer  no  oppo- 
sition ;  we  should  confess  them  to  be  full  of  wisdom,  and  worthy 
of  being  pondered.  We  should  not  unite  in  any  indiscriminate 
censuring  of  hortatory  addresses,  or  topical  sermons,  nor  should 
we  agree  with  the  demand  that  every  discourse  should  be  limited 
to  the  range  of  its  text,  nor  even  that  it  should  have  a  text  at 
all ;  but  we  should  heartily  subscribe  to  the  declaration,  that  more 
expository  preaching  is  greatly  needed,  and  that  all  preachers 
would  be  the  better  if  they  were  more  able  expounders  of  the 
inspired  Word. 

To  render  such  a  result  more  probable,  every  inducement  to 
search  the  Holy  Scriptures  should  be  placed  in  the  way  of  ou^ 
ministers,  and  to  the  younger  brethren  some  guidance  should  be 


IV  rREFACr. 

proffered  as  to  the  works  most  likely  to  aid  them  m  their  studies. 
Many  are  persuaded  that  lliey  should  expound  the  AVord,  but 
Ijeinij;  iniversed  in  the  orii^inal  toii^ues  they  can  only  fall  hack 
upon  Ihc  help  of  their  English  Concordances,  and  are  left  floun- 
dering about,  \vhen  a  sound  comment  would  direct  their  thoughts. 
True,  the  Holy  Spirit  will  instruct  the  seeker,  but  he  works  by 
means.  The  Ethiopian  eunuch  might  have  received  divine  illumi- 
nation, and  doubtless  did  receive  it,  but  still,  when  asked  whether 
he  understood  the  Scripture  which  he  read,  he  replied,  "  How  can  I 
mdess  some  man  shall  guide  me?"  The  guiding  man  is  needed 
still.  Divines  who  have  studied  the  Scriptures  have  left  us  great 
stores  of  holy  thought  which  we  do  well  to  use.  Their  expositions 
can  never  be  a  substitute  for  our  own  meditations,  but  as  water 
poured  down  a  dry  pump  often  sets  it  to  Avork  to  bring  up  water  of 
its  own,  so  suggestive  reading  sets  the  mind  in  motion  on  its  own 
account.  Here,  however,  is  the  difficulty.  Students  do  not  find 
it  easy  to  choose  which  works  to  buy,  and  their  slender  stores  are 
often  Avastcd  on  books  of  a  comparatively  w^orthless  kind.  If  I 
can  save  a  poor  man  from  spending  his  money  for  that  which  is 
not  bread,  or,  by  directing  a  brother  to  a  good  book,  may  enable 
him  to  dig  deeper  into  the  mines  of  truth,  I  shall  be  well  repaid. 
For  this  i)urpose  I  have  toiled,  and  read  much,  and  passed  under 
review  some  three  or  four  thousand  volumes.  From  these  I  have 
compiled  my  catalogue,  rejecting  many,  yet  making  a  very  varied 
selection.  Though  I  have  carefully  used  such  judgment  as  I 
possess,  I  have  doubtless  made  many  errors ;  I  shall  certainly  find 
very  few  who  will  agree  with  all  my  criticisms,  and  some  persons 
may  be  angry  at  my  remarks.  I  have,  however,  done  my  best, 
and,  w'itli  as  much  impartiality  as  I  can  command,  I  have  nothing- 
extenuated  nor  set  down  aught  in  malice.  He  who  finds  fault 
Avill  do  well  to  execute  the  work  in  better  style ;  only  let  him  re- 
member that  he  will  have  my  heifer  to  plough  with,  and  therefore 
ought  in  all  reason  to  excel  me. 

I  have  used  a  degree  of  pleasantry  in  my  remarks  on  the  Com- 
mentaries, for  a  catalogue  is  a  dry  affair,  and,  as  much  for  my  own 
sake  as  for  that  of  my  readers,  I  have  indulged  the  mirthful  vein 
here  and  there.  For  this  I  hope  I  shall  escape  censure,  even  if  I 
do  not  win  commendation. 

The  j^reface  to  ihc  Catalogue  will  be  found  on  pages  33  and  34, 
wdiich  the  reader  is  requested  to  peruse  before  attempting  to  use 
the  list. 

To  God  I  commend  this  labour,  which  has  been  undertaken  and 
carried  out  with  no  motive  but  that  of  honouring  his  name,  and 
edifying  his  Church  by  stimulating  the  study  of  his  AYord.  May 
he,  for  his  Son's  sake,  grant  my  heart's  desire. 


^t  ^m\m'  MltQt 


The  preparation  of  the  present  work  was  suggested  by  the  author's 
connection  with  the  Pastors'  College,  and  the  Library  of  that 
Institution  has  in  a  high  degree  assisted  in  its  execution,  therefore 
the  reader  must  permit  the  College  to  be  noticed  in  these  pages  in 
the  same  manner  as  in  the  former  volume  of  this  series.  To  make 
it  known,  and  to  win  for  it  willing  friends  is  confessedly  one  object 
of  these  publications,  which  may  indeed  be  viewed  as  merely  the 
giving  forth  to  a  wider  area  the  instruction  carried  on  within  the 
College  walls. 

Tlie  Institution  is  intended  to  aid  useful  preachers  in  obtaining 
a  better  education.  It  takes  no  man  to  make  him  a  minister,  but 
requires  that  its  pupils  should,  as  a  rule,  have  exercised  their  gifts 
for  at  least  two  years  and  have  won  souls  to  Jesus.  These  we  receive, 
however  poor  or  backward  they  may  be,  and  our  endeavours  are 
all  turned  towards  the  one  aim  that  they  should  be  instructed  in 
tlie  things  of  God,  furnished  for  their  work,  and  practised  in  the 
gift  of  utterance.  Much  prayer  is  made  by  the  Church  that  this 
end  may  bo  accomplished,  nor  has  the  prayer  been  in  vain,  for  some 
330  men  are  now  declaring  the  gos])el  of  Jesus  who  were  trained 
in  this  manner.  Besides  the  students  for  the  regular  ministry, 
several  hundreds  of  street  preachers,  city  missionaries,  tea-diers, 
and  workers  of  all  kinds  have  passed  through  our  evening  clas.-cs, 


VI  THE    PASTORS     COLLEGE. 

nnil  a  liand  of  2r)0  sucli  111011  arc  now  witli  iis,  pursuing  their  callings 
hy  (lay  and  studying  in  the  evening.  We  ask  for  inucli  prayer 
from  all  our  hretliivn,  that  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  may  sanctify 
the  teaching,  and  anoint  every  "svorker  for  the  service  of  the  Lord. 

As  it  Avould  he  quite  unwarrantable  for  us  to  interfere  with  the 
arrangements  of  other  bodies  of  Christians,  who  have  their  own 
methods  of  training  their  ministers,  and  as  it  is  obvious  that  we 
could  not  find  spheres  for  men  in  denominations  with  which  we 
Jiavc  no  ecclesiastical  connection,  we  confine  our  college  to 
l>aptists ;  and  in  order  not  to  1)0  harassed  with  endless  contro- 
versies, we  invite  those  only  who  ludtl  those  views  of  divine  truth 
which  are  popularly  known  as  Cahinistic, — not  that  we  care  for 
rnmes  and  phrases,  but  as  wc  wish  to  be  understood,  we  use  a  term 
Avhich  conveys  our  meaning  as  nearly  as  any  descriptive  word  can 
do.  Believing  the  grand  doctrines  of  grace  to  be  the  natural 
accompaniments  of  the  fundamental  evangelical  truth  of  redemp- 
tion by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  we  hold  and  teach  them  not  only  in 
our  ministry  to  the  masses,  but  in  the  more  select  instruction  of 
the  class  room.  Latitudinarianism  Avith  its  infidelity,  and  unsec- 
tarianism  with  its  intolerance,  are  neither  of  them  friends  of  ours : 
we  delight  in  the  man  avIio  believes,  and  therefore  speaks.  Our 
Lord  has  given  us  no  permission  to  be  liberal  Avith  Avhat  is  none 
of  ours.  Wc  are  to  giA'c  an  account  of  CA'cry  truth  Avith  Avhich  Ave 
are  put  in  trust. 

Our  means  for  conducting  this  work  arc  Avitli  tlie  most  High 
God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth.  We  haA-e  no  list  of  subscri- 
bers or  roll  of  cndoAvments.  Our  trust  is  in  Him  Avhom  Ave  desire 
to  serA'C.  He  has  supported  the  Avork  for  many  years,  by  moving  his 
stcAvards  to  send  us  help,  and  Ave  are  sure  that  he  Avill  continue  to 
do  so  as  long  as  he  desires  us  to  pursue  this  labour  of  loA^e.  We  need, 
at  least,  £100  CA-ery  Aveek  of  the  year.  Since  our  service  is  gratui- 
tous in  CAery  sense,  Ave  the  more  freely  appeal  to  those  Avho  agree 
Avith  us  in  believing  that  to  aid  an  earnest  young  minister  to  equip 
himself  for  his  life-Avork  is  a  AA'orthy  effort.  No  money  yields  so 
large  a  return,  no  Avork  is  so  important,  just  noAv  none  is  so 
absolutely  needful. 

Nightingale  Lane, 

Clapham,  Surrey, 


CONTENTS. 


LECTURE  I. 


PAGE. 

A  Chat  about  Commentaries      ---«■-        1 

LECTURE  II. 

On  Commenting        -        -        -        -        -        -  -21 

Remarks  upon  the  Catalogue  of  Commentaries     -  -       33 

Catalogue  of  Commentaries  on  the  Whole  Bible    -  -      35 

,,                       „           on  the  Old  Testament  ...       44 

„  „  on  the  separate    Books    of 

the  Old  Testament        -       45 

,,  „  On  the  New  Testament      -     141 

^j  „  on  the   separate    Books   of 

the  New  Testament      -     147 


The  present  volume  is  the  second  of  a  series  of  works  useful 
to  Students  and  Ministers  prepared  by  Mr.  Spuegeon  ;  and 
published  at  2s,  6d.  The  first  volume  is  "Lectures  to  my 
Students  :  a  Selection  from  Addresses  delivered  to  the  Students 
of  the  Pastors'  College,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle."  Passmoie 
and  Alabaster,  Paternoster  Buildings. 

Mr.  Spuegeon  has  other  works  of  a  similar  character  in 
contemplation,  which  will  be  issued,  if  the  Lord  will.  It  is 
hoped  that  The  CoiiLEOE  Seeies  may  render  efficient  service  to 
preachers  of  the  gospel  Friends  who  appreciate  the  books 
will  greatly  oblige  by  making  them  known  to  others.  The  same 
motive  which  prompted  the  author  to  write,  leads  him  to  desire 
a  large  circle  of  readers. 


LECTURE  L 


In  order  to  be  able  to  expound  the  Scriptures,  and  as  an  aid  to  your 
pulpit  studies,  you  will  need  to  be  familiar  with  the  commentators: 
a  glorious  army,  let  me  tell  you,  whose  acquaintance  will  be  your 
delight  and  profit.  Of  course,  you  are  not  such  wiseacres  as 
to  think  or  say  that  you  can  expound  Scripture  without  assistance 
from  the  works  of  divines  and  learned  men  who  have  laboured  before 
you  in  the  field  of  exposition.  If  you  are  of  that  opinion,  pray 
remain  so,  for  you  are  not  worth  the  trouble  of  conversion,  and  like 
a  little  coterie  who  think  with  you,  would  resent  the  attempt  as  an 
insult  to  your  infallibility.  It  seems  odd,  that  certain  men  who 
talk  so  much  of  what  the  Holy  Spirit  reveals  to  themselves,  should 
think  so  little  of  what  he  has  revealed  to  others.  My  chat  this 
afternoon  is  not  for  these  great  originals,  but  for  you  who  are  con- 
tent to  learn  of  holy  men,  taught  of  God,  and  mighty  in  the 
Scriptures.  It  has  been  the  fashion  of  late  years  to  speak  against 
the  use  of  commentaries.  If  there  were  any  fear  that  the  expo- 
sitions of  Matthew  Henry,  Gill,  Scott,  and  others,  would  be  exalted 
into  Christian  Targums,  we  would  join  the  chorus  of  objectors,  but 
the  existence  or  approach  of  such  a  danger  we  do  not  suspect.  The 
temptations  of  our  times  lie  rather  in  empty  pretensions  to  novelty 
of  sentiment,  than  in  a  slavish  following  of  accepted  guides.  A 
respectable  acquaintance  with  the  opinions  of  the  giants  of  the 
past,  might  have  saved  many  an  erratic  thinker  from  wild  inter- 
pretations and  outrageous  inferences.  Usually,  we  have  found  the 
despisers  of  commentaries  to  be  men  who  have  no  sort  of  acquaint- 
ance with  them;  in  their  case,  it  is  the  opposite  of  familiarity 
which  has  bred  contempt.  It  is  true  there  are  a  number  of  expo- 
sitions of  the  whole  Bible  which  are  hardly  worth  shelf  room ;  they 
aim  at  too  much  and  fail  altogether ;  the  authors  have  spread  a 
little  learning  over  a  vast  surface,  and  have  badly  attempted  for  the 

2 


^l  A    rilAT    ABOUT    COMMENTARIES. 

(Mitire  Scriptures  Avliat  they  mi^lit  have  accomplished  for  one  book 
with  tolerable  success;  bui, -who  will  deny  the  pre-eminent  value 
of  such  expositions  as  those  of  Calvin,  Ness,  Henry,  Trapp,  Poole, 
and  Ben^el,  which  are  as  deep  as  they  are  broad  V  and  yet 
further,  who  can  pretend  to  biblical  learning  who  lias  not  made 
Jiimself  familiar  with  the  great  writers  who  spent  a  life  in 
explaining  some  one  sacred  book  ?  Caryl  on  Job  will  not  exhaust 
tlie  patience  of  a  student  who  loves  every  letter  of  the  Word;  even 
CoUinges,  with  his  nine  hundred  and  nine  pages  upon  one  chapter 
of  the  Song,  w  ill  not  be  too  full  for  the  preacher's  use ;  nor  will 
^Manton's  long— metre  edition  of  the  hundred  and  nineteenth 
Psalm  be  too  profuse.  No  stranger  could  imagine  the  vast  amount 
of  real  learning  to  be  found  in  old  commentaries  like  the  follow- 
ing:— Durham  on  Solomon's  Song,  Wilcocks  on  Psalms  and 
Proverbs,  Jermin  on  Ecclesiastes  and  Proverbs,  Greenhill  on 
Ezekiel,  Burroughs  on  Hosea,  Ainsw^orth  on  the  Pentateuch, 
King  on  Jonah,  Hutcheson  on  John,  Peter  Martyr  on  Pomans, 
&c.,"and  inAVillett,  Sibbes,  Bayne,  Elton,  ByfiekCDaill^,  Adams, 
Taylor,  Barlow,  Goodwin,  and  others  on  the  various  epistles. 
Without  attempting  to  give  in  detail  the  names  of  all,  I  intend  in 
a  familiar  talk  to  mention  the  more  notable,  wdio  wrote  upon  the 
whole  Bible,  or  on  either  Testament,  and  I  especially  direct  your 
attention  to  the  titles,  which  in  Puritan  writers  generally  give  in 
brief  the  run  of  the  work. 

First  among  the  mighty  for  general  usefulness  we  are  bound  to 
mention  the  man  wdiose  name  is  a  household  word,  LIattiiew 
Henry.*  He  is  most  pious  and  pithy,  sound  and  sensible, 
suggestive  and  sober,  terse  and  trustworthy.  You  will  find  him 
to  be  glittering  with  metaphors,  rich  in  analogies,  overflowing  with 
illustrations,  superabundant  in  reflections.  He  delights  in  apposition 
and  alliteration;  he  is  usually  plain,  quaint,  and  full  of  pith;  he 
sees  right  through  a  text  directly;  apparently  he  is  not  critical,  but 
he  quietly  gives  the  result  of  an  accurate  critical  knoAvledge  of  the 
original  fully  up  to  the  best  critics  of  his  time.  He  is  not  versed  in 
the  manners  and  customs  of  the  East,  for  the  Holy  Land  was  not 
so  accessible  as  in  our  day;  but  he  is  deeply  spiritual,  heavenly, 
and  profitable;  finding  good  matter  in  every  text,  and  from  all 
deducing  most  practical  and  judicious  lessons.     His  is  a  kind  of 

*  An  Exposition  of  all  the  Books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  By  Matthew 
IIe.vrt,  late  minister  of  the  gospel  in  Chester.  (Many  editions ;  to  be  met  with  at 
very  low  prices.) 


A   CHAT   ABOUT    COMMENTARIES.  3 

commentary  to  be  placed  where  I  saw  it,  in  the  old  meeting-house 
at  Chester — chained  in  the  vestry  for  anybody  and  everybody  to 
read.  It  is  the  poor  man's  commentary,  the  old  Christian's  com- 
panion, suitable  to  everybody,  instructive  to  all.  His  own  account 
of  how  he  was  led  to  write  his  exposition,  affords  us  an  ex- 
ample of  delighting  in  the  law  of  the  Lord.  "  If  any  desire  to 
know  how  so  mean  and  obscure  a  person  as  I  am,  who  in  learning, 
judgment,  felicity  of  expression,  and  all  advantages  for  such  a 
service,  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  my  Master's  servants,  came  to 
venture  upon  so  great  a  work,  I  can  give  no  other  account  of 
it  but  this.  It  has  long  been  my  practice,  what  little  time  I  had 
to  spare  in  my  study  from  my  constant  preparations  for  the  pulpit, 
to  spend  it  in  drawing  up  expositions  upon  some  parts  of  the  New 
Testament,  not  so  much  for  my  own  use,  as  purely  for  my  own 
entertainment,  because  I  know  not  how  to  employ  my  thoughts 
and  time  more  to  my  satisfaction.  Traliit  sua  quemque  voluptas; 
every  man  that  studies  hath  some  beloved  study,  which  is  his  de- 
light above  any  other;  and  this  is  mine.  It  is  that  learning  wliich 
it  was  my  happiness  from  a  child  to  be  trained  up  in  by  my  ever 
honoured  father,  whose  memory  must  always  be  very  dear  and 
precious  to  me.  He  often  minded  me,  that  a  good  textuary  is  a 
good  divine;  and  that  I  should  read  other  books  with  this  in  my 
eye,  that  I  might  be  the  better  able  to  understand  and  apply  the 
Scripture."  You  are  aware,  perhaps,  that  the  latter  part  of  the 
New  Testament  was  completed  by  other  hands,  the  good  man 
having  gone  the  way  of  all  flesh.  The  waiters  were  Messrs. 
Evans,  Brown,  Mayo,  Bays,  Rosewell,  Harriss,  Atkinson,  Smith, 
Tong,  Wright,  Merrell,  Hill,  Reynolds,  and  Billingsley — all 
Dissenting  ministers.  They  have  executed  their  work  exceedingly 
well,  have  worked  in  much  of  the  matter  which  Henry  had  collected, 
and  have  done  their  best  to  follow  his  methods,  but  their  combined 
production  is  far  inferior  to  Matthew  Henry  himself,  and  any 
reader  will  soon  detect  the  difference.  Every  minister  ought  to 
read  ISIatthew  Henry  entirely  and  carefully  through  once  at  least. 
I  should  recommend  you  to  get  through  it  in  the  next  twelve 
months  after  you  leave  college.  Begin  at  the  beginning,  and 
resolve  that  you  will  traverse  the  goodly  land  from  Dan  to 
Beersheba.  You  will  acquire  a  vast  store  of  sermons  if  you  read 
with  your  note-book  close  at  hand;  and  as  for  thoughts,  they  will 
swarm  around  you  like  twittering  swallows  around  an  old  gable 
towards  the  close  of  autumn.  If  you  publicly  expound  the  chapter 
^ou  have  just  been  reading,  your  people  will  wonder  at  the  novelty 


4  A  niAT  AnoFT  ro:\niF,\TAiJiES. 

of  your  remarks  and  ilio  (l('j)tli  of  your  thouglits,  aud  then  you 
may  tcdl  tliem  wluit  a  treasure  Henry  is.  Mr.  Jay's  sermons  bear 
indubitalile  evidence  of  his  liavin<^  studied  Mattliew  Henry  almost 
daily.  Many  of  the  quaint  things  in  Jay's  sermons  are  cither 
directly  traceable  to  Matthew  Henry  or  to  his  familiarity  with  that 
writer.  I  have  thought  that  the  style  of  Jay  was  founded  upon 
Matthew  Henry :  Matthew  Henry  is  Jay  writing,  Jay  is  Matthew 
Henry  preaching.  What  more  could  I  say  in  commendation 
eitlier  of  the  preacher  or  the  author? 

It  would  not  be  possible  for  me  too  earnestly  to  press  upon  yon 
the  importance  of  reading  the  expositions  of  that  prince  among 
men,  John  Calvin!*  I  am  afraid  that  scant  purses  may  debar 
you  from  their  purchase,  but  if  it  be  possible  procure  them,  aud 
meanwhile,  since  they  are  in  the  College  library,  use  them  diligently. 
I  have  often  felt  inclined  to  cry  out  with  Father  Simon,  a  Ilomau 
Catholic,  "  Calvin  possessed  a  sublime  genius,"  and  with  Scalig(,>r, 
"  Oh!  how  well  has  Calvin  reached  the  meaning  of  the  prophets — 
no  one  better."  Yon  will  find  forty-two  or  more  goodly  volumes 
worth  their  weight  in  gold.  Of  all  commentators  I  belicAe  John 
Calvin  to  be  the  most  candid.  In  his  expositions  he  is  not  always 
what  moderns  would  call  Calvinistic;  that  is  to  say,  Avhere 
8ei-i})ture  maintains  the  doctrine  of  predestination  and  grace  he 
flhiclies  in  no  degree,  but  inasmuch  as  some  Scriptures  bear  the 
impress  of  human  free  action  and  responsibility,  he  does  not  shun 
to  exj)ound  their  meaning  in  all  fairness  and  integrity.  He  was  no 
trimmer  and  pruner  of  texts.  He  gave  their  meaning  as  far  as 
he  knew  it.  His  honest  intention  was  to  translate  the  Hebrew  and 
the  Greek  originals  as  accurately  as  he  possibly  could,  and  then  to 
give  the  meaning  which  would  naturally  be  convej^ed  by  such 
Greek  and  Hebrew  words:  he  laboured,  in  fact,  to  declare,  not  his 
own  mind  upon  the  Spirit's  words,  but  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  as 
couched  in  those  words.  Dr.  King  very  truly  says  of  him,  "No 
writer  ever  dealt  more  fairly  and  honestly  by  the  AVord  of  God. 
He  is  scrupulously  careful  to  let  it  speak  for  itself,  and  to  guard 
against  every  tendency  of  his  own  mind  to  put  upon  it  a  question- 
al)le  meaning  for  the  sake  of  establishing  some  doctrine  Avhich  he 


*  The  Works  of  John  Calvin,  in  51  volumes.  Messrs.  Clark,  of  Edinburgh,  announce 
that  they  possess  the  copyright  of  the  works  of  Calvin  originally  published  by  the 
Calvin  Translation  Society,  and  issue  them  on  the  following  terms  :  —Complete  sets  in 
51  volumes,  £9  Os.  The  "Letters,"  edited  by  De.  Bo.vnet,  2  vols.,  10s.  Gd.,  additional, 
Complete  sets  of  Commentaries,  45  vols.,  £7  17s.  Gd.     The  "Institutes,"  3  vols.,  243. 


A   CHAT    ABOUT    COMMENTARIES.  5 

feels  to  be  important,  or  some  theory  which  he  is  anxious  to  vaphold. 
This  is  one  of  his  prime  excellences.  He  will  not  maintain  any 
doctrine,  however  orthodox  and  essential,  by  a  text  of  Scripture 
which  to  him  appears  of  doubtful  application,  or  of  inadequate 
force.  For  instance,  firmly  as  he  believed  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  he  i^efuses  to  derive  an  argument  in  its  favour  from  the 
plural  form  of  the  name  of  God  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis.  It 
were  easy  to  multiply  examples  of  this  kind,  which,  whether  we 
agree  in  his  conclusion  or  not,  -^annot  fail  to  produce  the  conviction 
that  he  is  at  least  an  honest  commentator,  and  will  not  make  any 
passage  of  Scripture  speak  more  or  less  than,  according  to  his 
view,  its  divine  Author  intended  it  to  speak." 

The  edition  of  John  Calvin's  works  which  was  issued  by  the 
Calvin  Translation  Society,  is  greatly  enriched  by  the  remarks  of 
the  editors,  consisting  not  merely  of  notes  on  the  Latin  of  Calvin, 
and  the  French  translation,  or  on  the  text  of  the  original  Scriptures, 
but  also  of  weighty  opinions  of  eminent  critics,  illustrative  manners 
and  customs,  and  observations  of  travellers.  By  the  way,  gentle- 
men, what  a  pity  it  is  that  people  do  not,  as  a  rule,  read  the 
notes  in  the  old  Puritan  books  !  If  you  purchase  old  copies  of  such 
writers  as  Brooks,  you  will  find  that  the  notes  in  the  margin  are 
almost  as  rich  as  the  books  themselves.  They  are  dust  of  gold,  of 
the  same  metal  as  the  ingots  in  the  centre  of  the  page.  But  to 
return  to  Calvin.  If  you  needed  any  confirmatory  evidence  as  to 
the  value  of  his  writings,  I  might  summon  a  cloud  of  witnesses, 
but  it  will  suffice  to  quote  one  or  two.  Here  is  the  opinion  of 
one  who  is  looked  upon  as  his  great  enemy,  namely,  Arminius : 
"  Next  to  the  perusal  of  the  Scriptures,  which  I  earnestly  incul- 
cate, I  exhort  my  pupils  to  peruse  Calvin's  commentaries,  Avliich 
I  extol  in  loftier  terms  than  Hehnich*  himself ;  for  I  affirm  that 
he  excels  beyond  comparison  in  the  interpretation  of  Scripturey  and 
that  his  commentaries  ought  to  be  more  highly  valued  than  all  that  is 
handed  doivn  to  us  by  the  Library  of  the  Fathers  ;  so  that  I  acknow- 
ledge him  to  have  possessed  above  most  others,  or  rather  above  all 
other  men,  what  may  be  called  an  eminent  gift  of  prophecy." 

Quaint  Robert  Robinson  said  of  him,  "  There  is  no  abridging 
this  sententious  commentator,  and  the  more  I  read  him,  the  more 
does  he  become  a  favom'ite  expositor  with  me."  Holy  Baxter 
wrote,  "  I  know  no  man  since  the  apostles'  days,  whom  I  value  and 
honour  more  than  Calvin,  and  whose  judgment  in  all  things,  one 
with  another,  I  more  esteem  and  come  nearer  to." 

*  Werner  Helmich,  a  Dutch  Protestant  divine,  a.d.  1551 — 1G08. 


(J  A    rilAT    ABOUT    COM. MENTA HIES. 

If  you  arc  well  t'n<)U<rh  versed  in  Latin,  you  will  find  in  Poole's 
Synoi'SIS,*  a  marvellous  collection  of  all  the  wisdom  and  folly  of 
the  critics.  It  is  a  lar<re  cyclopa'dia  worthy  of  the  days  when 
thcoloirians  could  be  cyclopean,  and  had  not  shrunk  from  folios  to 
octavos.  Query — a  query  for  which  1  will  not  demand  an  answer — 
has  one  of  you  ever  beaten  the  dust  from  the  venerable  copy  of 
Poole  which  loads  our  library  shelves?  Yet  as  Poole  spent  no  less 
than  ten  years  in  compiling  it,  it  should  be  worthy  of  your  fre- 
quent notice — ten  years,  let  me  add,  spent  in  Amsterdam  in  exile 
for  the  truth's  sake  from  liis  native  land. 

Ilis  work  was  based  upon  an  earlier  compilation  entitled  Critici 
Suc7-i,  containing  the  concentrated  light  of  a  constellation  of  learned 
men  who  have  never  been  excelled  in  any  age  or  country. 

^Matthew  Poole  also  wrote  Annotations!  upon  the  Word  of 
God,  in  English,  which  are  mentioned  by  Matthew  Henry  as 
having  passed  through  many  impressions  in  his  day,  and  he  not 
only  highly  praises  them,  but  declares  that  he  has  in  his  own  work 
all  along  been  brief  upon  that  which  Mr.  Poole  has  more  largely 
discussed,  and  has  industriously  declined  what  is  to  be  found  there. 
The  three  volumes,  tolerably  cheap,  and  easily  to  be  got  at,  are 
necessaries  for  your  libraries.  On  the  whole,  if  I  must  have  only 
one  commentary,  and  had  read  Matthew  Henry  as  I  have,  I  do 
not  know  but  what  I  should  choose  Poole.  He  is  a  very  prudent 
and  judicious  commentator ;  and  one  of  the  few  who  could  honestly 
say,  "  We  liave  not  willingly  balked  any  obvious  difficulty,  and 
have  designed  a  just  satisfaction  to  all  our  readers ;  and  if  any 
knot  remains  yet  untied,  we  have  told  our  readers  Avhat  hath  been 
most  probably  said  for  their  satisfaction  in  the  untying  of  it." 
Poole  is  not  so  pithy  and  witty  by  far  as  Matthew  Henry,  but  he  is 
perhaps  more  accurate,  less  a  commentator,  and  more  an  expositor. 
You  meet  with  no  ostentation  of  learning  in  Matthew  Poole,  and 
that  for  the  simple  reason  that  he  was  so  profoundly  learned  as  to 
be  able  to  give  results  without  a  display  of  his  intellectual  crockery. 
A  pedant  who  is  for  ever  quoting  Ambrose  and  Jerome,  Piscator 
and  CEcolampadius,  in  order  to  show  what  a  copious  reader  he  has 
been,  is  usually  a  dealer  in  small  wares,  and  quotes  only  what  others 


*  Synopsis  Criticorum  aliorumque  S.  Scripturaj  Intei-pretum.  Opera  Mattlu-ci 
Poll.     Londinensis,  mdclxix. 

t  Annotations  upon  the  Holy  Bible.  Wherein  the  sacred  test  is  inserted,  and 
various  readings  annexed,  together  with  the  parallel  Scriptures.  The  more  difficult 
terms  in  each  Torse  explained;  seeming  contradictions  reconciled;  questions  and 
doubts  resolved ;  and  the  whole  text  opened.  By  the  late  Rev.  and  learned  divine, 
Mr.  Matthew  Poole.     1700. 


A    CHAT   ABOUT    COMMENTARIES.  7 

have  quoted  before  him,  but  he  who  can  give  you.  the  result  and 
outcome  of  very  extensive  reading  without  sounding  a  trumpet 
before  him  is  the  really  learned  man.  Mind  you  do  not  confound 
the  Annotations  with  the  Synopsis ;  the  English  work  is  not  a 
translation  of  the  Latin  one,  but  an  entirely  distinct  performance. 
Strange  to  say,  like  the  other  great  Matthew  he  did  not  live  to 
complete  his  work  beyond  Isaiah  Iviii. ;  other  hands  united  to  finish 
the  design. 

Would  it  be  possible  to  eulogise  too  much  the  incomparably 
sententious  and  suggestive  folios  of  John  Trapp"?*  Since  Mr. 
Dickinson  has  rendered  them  accessible,!  I  trust  most  of  you  have 
bought  them.  Trapp  will  be  most  valuable  to  men  of  discernment,  to 
thoughtful  men,  to  men  who  only  want  a  start  in  a  line  of  thought, 
and  are  then  able  to  run  alone.  Trapp  excels  in  witty  stories  on 
the  one  hand,  and  learned  allusions  on  the  other.  You  will  not 
tlioroughly  enjoy  him  unless  you  can  turn  to  the  original,  and  yet 
a  mere  dunce  at  classics  will  prize  him.  His  writings  remind  me 
of  himself :  he  was  a  pastor,  hence  his  holy  practical  remai-ks ; 
he  was  the  head  of  a  public  school,  and  everywhere  we  see  his 
profound  scholarship;  he  was  for  some  time  amid  the  guns  and 
drums  of  a  parliamentary  garrison,  and  he  gossips  and  tells  queer 
anecdotes  like  a  man  used  to  soldier-life ;  yet  withal,  he  comments 
as  if  he  had  been  nothing  else  but  a  commentator  all  his  days. 
Some  of  his  remarks  are  far-fetched,  and  like  the  far-fetched  rari- 
ties of  Solomon's  Tarshish,  there  is  much  gold  and  silver,  but  there 
are  also  apes  and  peacocks.  His  criticisms  would  some  of  them  be 
the  cause  of  amusement  in  these  days  of  greater  scholarship ;  but 
for  all  that,  he  who  shall  excel  Trapp  had  need  rise  veiy  early  in 
the  morning.  Trapp  is  my  especial  companion  and  treasure  ;  I  can 
read  him  when  I  am  too  weary  for  anything  else.  Trapp  is  salt, 
pepper,  mustard,  vinegar,  and  all  the  other  condiments.     Put  him 

*  Annotations  upon  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  in  five  distinct  volumes.  Whereof 
the  first  is  upon  the  five  Books  of  Moses,  and  upon  the  following  l^ooks,  of  Joshua, 
Judges,  Ruth,  Samuel,  Kings,  and  Chronicles.  The  second  is  upon  Ezra,  Neliemiah, 
E4her,  Job,  and  Psalms.  The  third  is  upon  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  Solomon's  Song, 
and  the  four  major  prophets,  with  a  treatise  called,  "  The  righteous  Man's  Recom- 
pense." The  fourth  is  upon  the  twelve  minor  prophets,  the  fifth  and  last  is  upon  the 
whole  New  Testament,  with  a  Decade  of  Divine  Discourses,  or  Common-places,  there- 
unto annexed.  By  John  Trapp,  M.A.,  pastor  and  preacher  of  the  word  of  God  at 
Weston-upon-Avon,  in  Gloucestershire.     16G2. 

f  The  reprint  by  Mr.  R.  D.  Dickinson  is  edited  by  Rev.  W.  Webster,  and  Rev. 
Hugh  Mahtin,  with  a  Memoir  of  the  Author,  by  Rev.  A.  B.  Grosart,  5  vols.,  super 
royal  8vo.,  cloth ;    £3  2s.  6d.  to  Subscribers. 


H  A    CHAT    AHOUT    COMMKNTARIES. 

(Ml  tlu'  table  when  you  study,  and  when  you  have  your  disli 
ri-ady,  use  hhn  by  way  of  spicing  tiie  wliole  thing.  Yes,  gentlemen, 
read  Tra])])  certainly,  and  if  you  catch  the  infection  of  his  con- 
secrated luunoui',  so  much  the  better  for  your  hearers. 

A  vi'ry  distinguisluMl  place  is  due  to  Dr.  Gill,.*  Beyond  all 
controversy,  (iill  was  one  of  the  most  able  Hebraists  of  his  day,  and 
ill  other  matters  no  mean  ])roficient.  AVhen  an  o])ponent  in  con- 
i  i-oversy  had  ventured  to  call  liim  "  a  botcher  in  divinity,"  the  good 
doctor,  bi'ing  compelled  to  become  a  fool  in  glorying,  gave  such  a 
list  of  his  attainments  as  must  have  covered  his  accuser  with 
coniusion.  His  great  work  on  the  Holy  Scriptures  is  greatly 
prized  at  the  present  day  by  the  best  authorities,  which  is  conclu- 
sive evidence  of  its  value,  since  the  set  of  the  current  of  theo- 
logical thought  is  quite  contrary  to  that  of  Dr.  Gill.  No  one  in 
these  days  is  likely  to  be  censured  for  his  Arminianism,  but  most 
modern  divines  affect  to  sneer  at  anything  a  little  too  highly  Cal- 
vinistic :  however,  amid  the  decadence  of  his  own  rigid  system,  and 
the  disrepute  of  even  more  moderate  Calvinism,  Gill's  laurels  as 
an  expositor  are  still  green.  His  ultraism  is  discarded,  but  his 
learning  is  respected  :  the  Avorld  and  the  church  take  leave  to  ques- 
tion his  dogmatism,  but  they  both  bow  before  his  erudition.  Probably 
no  man  since  Gill's  days  has  at  all  equalled  him  in  the  matter  of 
Eabbinical  learning.  Say  wdiat  you  will  about  that  lore,  it  has  its 
value :  of  course,  a  man  has  to  rake  among  perfect  dunghills  and 
dustheaps,but  there  are  a  few  jewels  which  the  world  could  not  afford 
to  miss.  Gill  was  a  master  cinder-sifter  among  the  Targums,  the 
Talmuds,  the  Mishna,  and  the  Gemara.    Richly  did  he  deserve  the 

*  An  Exposition  of  the  Old  Testament,  in  which  arc  rccordeil  the  origin  of  man- 
kind, of  the  several  nations  of  the  world,  and  of  the  Jewish  nation  in  particular ;  the 
lives  of  the  patriarchs  of  Israel;  the  journey  of  that  people  from  Egypt  to  the  land  of 
Canaan,  and  tlicir  settlement  in  that  land:  their  laws,  moral,  ceremonial,  and  judicial; 
their  government  and  state  under  judges  and  kings;  their  several  captivities,  and 
their  sacred  books  of  devotion :  in  the  exposition  of  which,  it  is  attempted  to  give  an 
account  of  their  several  books  and  the  writers  of  them;  a  summary  of  each  chapter, 
and  the  genuine  sense  of  each  verse,  and,  throughout  the  whole,  the  original  text  and 
the  versions  of  it,  are  inspected  and  compared ;  interpretation  of  the  best  note,  both 
Jewish  and  Christian,  consulted ;  difBcult  places  at  large  explained,  seeming  contra- 
dictions reconciled,  and  various  passages  illustrated  and  confirmed  by  testimonies 
of  writers  as  well  Gentile  as  Jewish.     By  John  Gill,  D.D. 

An  Exposition  of  the  New  Testament,  in  which  the  sense  of  the  sacred  text  is  taker; 
doctrinal  and  practical  truths  are  set  in  a  plain  and  easj'  light,  difficult  passages  ex- 
plained ;  seeming  contradictions  reconciled  ;  and  whatever  is  material  in  the  various 
readings  and  several  Oriental  versions  is  observed.  The  whole  illustrated  with  notes 
t:;l;cn  from  the  most  ancient  Jewish  writings.     By  John  Gill,  D.D. 


A   CHAT   ABOUT    COMMENTARIES.  9 

degree  of  which  he  said,   "  I  never  bought  it,  nor  thought  it,  nor 
sought  it." 

He  was  always  at  work ;  it  is  difficult  to  say  when  he  slept,  for  he 
wrote  10,000  folio  pages  of  theology.  The  portrait  of  him  which 
belongs  to  this  church,  and  hangs  in  my  private  vestry,  and  from 
which  all  the  published  portraits  have  been  engraved,  represents  him 
after  an  interview  with  an  Arminian  gentleman,  turning  up  his 
nose  in  a  most  expressive  manner,  as  if  he  could  not  endure  even 
the  smell  of  free-will.  In  some  such  a  vein  he  M^rote  his  commen- 
tary. He  hunts  Arminianism  throughout  the  whole  of  it.  He  is 
far  from  being  so  interesting  and  readable  as  INIatthew  Henry. 
He  delivered  his  comments  to  his  people  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath, 
hence  their  peculiar  mannerism.  His  frequent  method  of  animad- 
version is,  "  This  text  does  not  mean  this,"  nobody  ever  thought  it 
did ;  "  It  does  not  mean  that,"  only  two  or  three  heretics  ever 
imagined  it  did ;  and  again  it  does  not  mean  a  third  thing,  or  a 
fourth,  or  a  fifth,  or  a  sixth  absurdity;  but  at  last  he  thinks 
it  does  mean  so-and-so,  and  tells  you  so  in  a  methodical,  sermon- 
like manner.  This  is  an  easy  method,  gentlemen,  of  filling  up 
the  time,  if  you  are  ever  short  of  heads  for  a  sermon.  Show 
your  people  firstly,  secondly,  and  thirdly,  what  the  text  does  not 
mean,  and  then  afterwards  you  can  go  back  and  show  them  what 
it  does  mean.  It  may  be  thought,  however,  that  one  such  a  teacher 
is  enough,  and  that  what  was  tolerated  from  a  learned  doctor  would 
be  scouted  in  a  student  fresh  from  college.  For  good,  sound, 
massive,  sober  sense  in  commenting,  who  can  excel  Gill?  Very 
seldom  does  he  allow  himself  to  be  run  away  with  by  imagination, 
except  now  and  then  when  he  tries  to  open  up  a  parable,  and  finds 
a  meaning  in  every  circumstance  and  minute  detail ;  or  when  he 
falls  upon  a  text  which  is  not  congenial  with  his  creed,  and 
hacks  and  hews  terribly  to  bring  the  word  of  God  into  a  more 
systematic  shape.  Gill  is  the  Coryphaeus  of  hyper-Calvinism, 
but  if  his  followers  never  went  beyond  their  master,  they  would 
not  go  very  far  astray. 

I  have  placed  next  to  Gill  in  my  library  Adam  Clarke,*  but 
as  I  have  no  desire  to  have  my  rest  broken  by  wars  among  the 
authors,  I  have  placed  Doddridge  between  them.     If  the  spirits  of 

*  The  Holy  Bible,  containing  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  The  text  carefully 
printed  from  the  most  correct  copies  of  the  present  Authorised  Translation,  including 
the  Marginal  Readings  and  Parallel  Texts.  With  a  Commentary  and  Critical  Notes ; 
designed  as  a  help  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  Sacred  Writings.  By  Adam 
Clarke,  LL.D,,  F.S.A.,  &c.  A  new  edition  with  the  Author's  final  corrections. 
Loudon:  Printed  for  Thomas  Togg,  &c.     (7  volumes.) 


10  A    rilAT    Anorr    rDMMKNTAPvTES, 

till-  two  wDrthii-'s  cuukl  doscciul  to  tlic  earth  in  the  same  mood  in 
which  the'V  departed,  no  oner  liousc  avouUI  he  ahle  to  liold  them. 
Aihim  Chirkc  is  the  great  annotator  of  our  Wesleyan  friends; 
and  tliey  have  no  reason  to  ho  ashamed  of  liim,  for  he  takes 
rank  amon^  the  chief  of  expositors.  Ilis  mind  was  evidently 
fa-^cinated  hy  the  singularities  of  learning,  and  hence  his  com- 
mentarv  is  rather  too  much  of  an  old  curiosity  shop,  but  it  is  filled 
with  valuable  rarities,  such  as  none  but  a  great  man  coidd  have 
collected.  Like  Gill,  he  is  one-sided,  only  in  the  opposite  direction 
to  our  friend  the  Baptist.  The  use  of  the  two  authors  may  help 
to  i)reservc  the  balance  of  your  judgments.  If  you  consider  Clarke 
wanting  in  unction,  do  not  read  hhn  for  savour  but  for  criticism, 
and  then  you  will  not  be  disappointed. 

The  cauthor  thought  that  lengthy  reflections  were  rather  for  the 
])reaehcr  than  the  commentator,  and  hence  it  was  not  a  part  of  his 
])lan  to  Avrite  such  observations  as  those  wdiich  endear  Matthew 
llt-nry  to  the  million.  If  you  have  a  copy  of  Adam  Clarke,  and 
exercise  discretion  in  reading  it,  you  will  derive  immense  advantage 
from  it,  for  frequently  by  a  sort  of  side-light  he  brings  out  the 
meaning  of  the  text  in  an  astonishingly  novel  manner.  I  do  not 
wonder  that  Adam  Clarke  still  stands,  notwithstanding  his  pecu- 
liarities, a  prince  among  commentators.  I  do  not  find  him  so 
helpful  as  Gill,  but  still  from  his  side  of  the  question,  with  which 
I  have  personally  no  sympathy,  he  is  an  important  writer,  and 
deserves  to  be  studied  by  every  reader  of  the  Scriptures.  He  very 
judiciously  says  of  Dr.  Gill,  "  He  was  a  very  learned  and  good  man, 
but  has  often  lost  sight  of  his  better  jiidgment  in  spiritualising  the 
text ;"  this  is  the  very  verdict  w  hich  we  pass  upon  himself,  only 
altering  the  last  sentence  a  word  or  two ;  "  He  has  often  lost  sight 
of  his  better  judgment  in  following  learned  singularities;"  the 
monkey,  instead  of  the  serpent,  tempting  Eve,  is  a  notable  instance. 

As  I  am  paying  no  sort  of  attention  to  chronological  order, 
I    shall   noAv  Avander  back  to  old  Master  Mayeii,*  a  rare  and 

*  A  Commentary  upon  the  whole  "  Old  Testament,"  added  to  that  of  the  same 
author  upon  the  whole  "  Xew  Testament,"  published  many  years  before,  to  make  a 
complete  work  upon  the  whole  Bible.  Wherein  the  divers  Translations  and  Exposi- 
tions, Literall  and  Mysticall,  of  all  the  most  famous  Commentators,  both  Ancient  and 
Modern,  are  propounded,  examined,  and  judged  of,  for  the  more  full  satisfaction  of  the 
studious  reader  in  all  things,  and  many  most  genuine  notions  inserted  for  edifica- 
tion in  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  A  work,  the  like  unto  which  hath  never 
yet  been  published  by  any  man,  yet  very  necessaiy,  not  only  for  students  in  divinity, 
but  also  f«r  every  Christian  that  loveth  the  knowledge  of  divine  things,  or  humane, 
whereof  this  comment  is  also  full,  &c.  By  John  Mayer,  Doctor  of  Divinity. 
London,     mdclih. 


A    CHAT   ABOUT    COMMENT AEIE3.  H 

valuable  author.  I  have  been  in  London  a  long  time  now,  but  1 
have  only  of  late  been  able  to  complete  my  set.  The  fii'st  volume 
especially  is  rare  in  the  extreme.  The  six  volumes,  folio,  are  a 
most  judicious  and  able  digest  of  former  commentators,  enriched 
with  the  author's  own  notes,  forming  altogether  one  of  the  fvillest 
and  best  of  learned  English  commentaries;  not  meant  for  popular 
use,  but  invaluable  to  the  student.  He  is  a  link  between  the 
modern  school,  at  the  head  of  which  I  put  Poole  and  Henry,  and 
the  older  school  who  mostly  wrote  in  Latin,  and  were  tinctured 
with  the  conceits  of  those  schoolmen  who  gathered  like  flies  around 
the  corpse  of  Aristotle.  He  appears  to  have  written  before 
Diodati  and  Trapp,  but  lacked  opportunity  to  publish.  I  fear  he 
will  be  forgotten,  as  there  is  but  little  prospect  of  the  republication 
of  so  diffuse,  and  perhaps  heavy,  an  author.  He  is  a  very  Alp  of 
learning,  but  cold  and  lacking  in  spirituality,  hence  his  lack  of 
popularity. 

Li  1653,  Arthur  Jackson,*  Preacher  of  God's  Word  in 
Wood  Street,  London,  issued  four  volumes  upon  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, which  appear  to  have  been  the  result  of  his  pulpit  ex- 
positions to  his  people.  Valuable  his  works  would  be  if  there  were 
no  better,  but  they  are  not  comparable  to  others  already  and  after- 
wards mentioned.  You  can  do  without  him,  but  he  is  a  reputable 
author.  Far  more  useful  is  Ness's  History  and  Mystery  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament,  |  a  grand  repository  of  quaint  remarks 
upon  the  historical  books  of  Scripture.  You  will  find  it  contaiired 
in  four  thin  folio  volumes,  and  you  will  have  a  treasure  if  you 
procure  it. 

Need  I  commend  Bishop  Hall's  ContemrlationsI  to  your 

*  a  help  for  the  understanding  of  the  Holy  Scripture.  Intended  chiefly  for  the 
assistance  and  information  of  those  that, use  constantly  every  day  to  read  some  part  of 
the  Bible,  and  would  gladly  always  understand  what  they  read  if  they  had  some  man 
to  help  them.  The  first  part.  Containing  certain  short  notes  of  exposition  upon  the 
five  books  of  Moses,  &c.  By  Arthur  Jackson,  preacher  of  God's  Word  in  Wood  Street, 
London.     Anno  Dom.  MDCDLm. 

t  A  Complete  History  and  Mystery  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  logically  dis- 
cussed, and  theologically  improved.  In  three  distinct  volumes.  The  first  beginning 
at  the  Creation  of  the  World,  and  ending  at  Moses.  The  second  continuing  the 
History  from  Joshua  till  the  Birth  of  Christ.  The  third  from  the  Birth  of  Christ,  to 
the  Death  of  the  last  and  longest  living  Apostle,  John  the  Divine.  The  like  under- 
taking (in  such  a  manner  and  method)  being  never  attempted  before.  By  Mr. 
Christopher  Ness,  ministsr  of  the  gospel  in  London.     1690.     3  vols.,  thin  folio. 

X  Contemplations  on  the  historical  passages  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  By 
the  right  Rev.  Joseph  Hall,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Norwich.  Numerous  editions  ;  the  one 
before  us  has  "  a  memoir  of  the  author,  by  James  Hamilton,  M.B.S.,"  and  was 
published  by  Mr.  Nelson  of  Edinburgh. 


IJ  A    CHAT    AHOUT    COMMENTAUIES. 

aftVctiouate  attciilioii?  >\'hut  wit!  What  sound  sense!  AVliat 
(•<>iK'i-;iU'(l  li'arnini;!  His  style  is  us  pithy  and  witty  as  lliat  of 
Thomas  Fuller,  and  it  has  a  sacred  unction  aljout  it  U)  which 
I'ldli-r  has  no  pretension. 

IIaak's  Annotations*  come  to  us  as  the  offspring  of  the 
famous  Synotl  of  Dort,  and  the  WiosTMiNSTEU  Annotations t 
as  the  production  of  a  still  more  venerable  assembly;  but  if,  with 
my  hat  off,  bowing  profoundly  to  those  august  conclaves  of  master 
minds,  I  may  venture  to  say  so,  I  would  observe  that  they  furnish 
another  instance  that  connuittees  seldom  equal  the  labours  of 
individuals.  The  notes  are  too  short  and  fragmentary  to  be  of  any 
great  \alue.     The  volumes  are  a  heavy  investment. 

Among  entire  commentators  of  modern  date,  a  high  place  is 
usually  awarded  to  Thomas  Scott,:]:  and  I  shall  not  dispute  his 
right  to  it.  He  is  the  expositor  of  evangelical  Episcopalians,  even 
as  Adam  Clarke  is  the  prophet  of  the  Wcsleyans,  but  to  me  he  has 
seldom  given  a  thought,  and  I  have  almost  discontinued  consulting 
him.  The  very  first  money  I  ever  received  for  pulpit  services  in 
London  was  invested  in  Thomas  Scott,  and  I  neither  regretted  the 
investment  nor  became  exhilarated  thereby.  His  work  has  always 
been  popular,  is  very  judicious,  thoroughly  sound  and  gracious; 
but  for  suggestiveness  and  pith  is  not  comparable  to  Matthew 
Henry.  I  know  I  am  talking  heresy,  but  I  cannot  help  saying 
that  for  a  minister's  use,  Scott  is  mere  milk  and  water — good  and 
trustworthy,  but  not  solid  enough  in  matter  for  f ull-grovvii  men. 

*  Tli(^  Dutch  Annotations  upon  the  -whole  Bible  ;  or,  all  the  Holy  Canonical  ScrijD- 
tuios  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  together  with,  and  according  to,  their  own 
translation  of  all  the  text :  as  both  the  one  and  the  other  were  ordered  and  appointed 
by  the  Synod  of  Dort,  1G18,  and  published  by  authority,  1G37.  Now  faithfully 
communicated  to  the  use  of  Great  Britain,  in  English,  &c.  By  Theodore  Haak,  Esq. 
London,  1C57.     2  volumes  folio. 

+  Annotations  upon  all  the  Books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  This  third, 
above  the  first  and  second,  edition  so  enlarged,  as  they  make  an  entire  commentary 
on  the  sacred  Scriptures,  the  like  never  before  published  in  English.  Wherein  the 
text  is  explained,  doubts  resolved.  Scriptures  paralleled,  and  various  readings  observed. 
By  the  labour  of  certain  learned  divines,  thereunto  appointed,  and  therein  employed, 
as  is  expressed  in  the  preface.     London,  1057. 

J  The  Holy  Bible,  containing  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  according  to  the 
authorised  version,  with  explanatory  notes,  practical  observations,  and  copious  mar- 
ginal references.  By  Thomas  Scott,  rector  of  Ashton  Sandford,  Bucks.  A  new 
edition,  with  the  author's  last  corrections  and  improvements,  with  tenmaps.  London: 
L.  B.  Seeley  and  Son.     1827. 


A   CHAT   ABOUT    COMMENT AKIES.  13 

In  the  family,  Scott  will  hold  his  place,   but  in    the  study  you 
want  condensed  thought,  and  this  you  must  look  for  elsewhere. 

To  all  young  men  of  light  purses  let  me  recommend  The  Tract 
Society's  Commentary,*  in  six  volumes,  which  contains  the 
marrow  of  Henry  and  Scott,  with  notes  from  a  hundred  other 
authors.  It  is  well  executed,  and  for  poor  men  a  great  Godsend. 
I  believe  the  Society  has  some  special  arrangement  for  poor 
students,  that  they  may  have  these  volumes  at  the  cheapest  rate. 

Gentlemen,  if  you  want  something  full  of  marrow  and  fatness, 
cheering  to  your  own  hearts  by  way  of  comment,  and  likely  to 
help  you  in  giving  to  your  hearers  rich  expositions,  buy  Dr. 
Hawker's  Poor  Man's  Commentary,  f  Dr.  Hawker  was  the 
very  least  of  commentators  in  the  matter  of  criticism ;  he  had  no 
critical  capacity,  and  no  ability  whatever  as  an  interpreter  of  the 
letter;  but  he  sees  Jesus,  and  that  is  a  sacred  gift  which  is  most 
precious  whether  the  owner  be  a  critic  or  no.  It  is  to  be  confessed 
that  he  occasionally  sees  Jesus  where  Jesus  is  not  legitimately  to 
be  seen.  He  allows  his  reason  to  be  mastered  by  his  affections, 
which,  vice  as  it  is,  is  not  the  worst  fault  in  the  world.  There  is 
always  such  a  savour  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  Dr.  Hawker 
that  you  cannot  read  him  without  profit.  He  has  the  peculiar 
idea  that  Christ  is  in  every  Psalm,  and  this  often  leads  him  totally 
astray,  because  he  attributes  expressions  to  the  Saviour  which 
really  shock  the  holy  mind  to  imagine  our  Lord's  using.  However, 
not  as  a  substantial  dish,  but  as  a  condiment,  place  the  Plymouth 
vicar's  work  on  the  table.  His  writing  is  all  sugar,  and  you  will 
know  how  to  use  it,  not  devouring  it  in  lumps,  but  using  it  to 
flavour  other  things. 

"  Albert  Barnes,"  say  you,  "  what  do  you  think  of  Albert 
Barnes  1"  Albert  Barnes  is  a  learned  and  able  divine,  but  his 
productions  are  unequal  in  value,  the  gospels  are  of  comparatively 
little  worth,  but  his  other  comments  are  extremely  useful  for 
Sunday-school  teachers  and  persons  with  a  narrow  range  of  reading, 

*  The  Holy  Bible ;  the  text  according  to  the  authorised  version ;  and  a  Gommon- 
tary  from  Henry  and  Scott,  with  numerous  Observations  and  Notes  from  other 
Authors;  also,  the  Marginal  References,  Maps  of  the  Countries  mentioned  in 
Scripture,  and  various  useful  Tables.  London:  The  Religious  Tract  Society. 
(6  volumes.) 

t  The  Poor  Man's  Commentary  on  the  Bible.  By  Robekt  Hawkeb,  D.D.,  Vicar  of 
Charles,  Plymouth,  1822.     (3  vols,  folio,  or  10  vols.  8vo.) 


M  A    CHAT    AIJOUT    COMMKNTARIES. 

mtlowcd  with  (.'uouiili  f^ood  sense  to  discriminate  between  good  and 
ivil.  If  a  controversial  eye  had  been  turned  upon  Barnes's  Notes 
years  ago,  and  liis  inaccuracies  sliown  up  by  some  uns2)aring  hand, 
he  would  never  liave  liad  tlie  popularity  ■wliich  at  one  time  set 
rival  ]»ublisliers  advertising  liim  in  every  direction.  His  Old 
Testament  volumes  are  to  be  greatly  commended  as  learned  and 
laborious,  and  the  epistles  are  useful  as  a  valuable  collection  of  the 
-various  opinions  of  learned  men.  Placed  by  the  side  of  the  great 
masters,  Barnes  is  a  lesser  light,  but  taking  Iiis  work  for  Avhat  it 
is  and  professes  to  be,  no  minister  can  afford  to  be  without  it,  and 
this  is  no  small  praise  for  works  wliich  were  only  intended  for 
tSunday-school  teachers.* 

Upon  the  New  Testament  Doddridge's  ExrosiTORJ  is  worthy 
of  a  far  more  extensive  reading  than  is  nowadays  accorded  to  it. 
It  is  all  in  the  form  of  a  paraphrase,  with  the  text  in  italics ;  a 
mode  of  treatment  far  from  satisfactory  as  a  rule,  but  exceedingly 
well  carried  out  in  this  instance.  The  notes  are  very  good,  and 
reveal  the  thorougli  scholar.  Our  authorised  version  is  placed  in 
the  margin,  and  a  new  translation  in  the  paraphrase.  The  four 
e\-angelists  are  thrown  into  a  harmony,  a  plan  which  has  its 
advantages  but  is  not  without  its  evils.  The  practical  improve- 
ments at  the  end  of  each  chapter  generally  consist  of  pressing 
exhortations  and  devout  meditations,  suggested  by  the  matter 
under  discussion.  It  is  sadly  indicative  of  the  Socinianism  of  the 
age  in  which  this  good  man  lived,  that  he  feels  called  upon  to 
apologise  for  the  evangelical  strain  in  which  he  has  written.  He 
appears  to  have  barely  finished  this  work  in  shorthand  at  the  time 
of  his  death,  and  the  later  books  were  transcribed  under  the  care 
of  Job  Orton.  No  Life  Insurance  Society  should  accept  the 
proposals  of  a  commentator  on  the  whole  of  either  Testament,  for 


*  There  are  several  English  editions  of  Barnes's  Notes;  the  one  before  us  is  thus 
advertised  :  "The  Rev.  Albert  Barnes's  Notes  (Explanatory  and  Practical),  designed 
for  the  Heads  of  Families,  Students,  Bible  Classes,  and  Sunday  Schools.  Edited,  and 
carefully  revised,  by  the  Rev.  John  Gumming,  D.D.,  ^linister  of  the  Scotch  Chiirch, 
Crown  Court."  The  Notes  on  the  Entire  New  Testament,  in  11  vols.,  on  the  Book  of 
Isaiah,  in  3  vols.,  on  the  Book  of  Job,  in  2  vols.,  on  the  Book  of  Daniel,  in  2  vols.,  or 
in  11  douhk  vols.  The  "Notes  on  the  Book  of  Psalms"  are  now  being  issued  in  3 
vols,  by  Messrs.  Gall  and  Inglis. 

t  The  Family  Expositor ;  or  a  Paraphrase  and  Version  of  the  New  Testament; 
\Yiih  Critical  Notes,  and  a  Practical  Improvement  of  each  Section.  By  P.  Doddridge, 
D.D.  To  which  is  prefixed  a  Life  of  the  Author,  By  Andrew  Kippis,  D.D.,  F.R.S., 
and  S.A.     London :  Longman,  Orme,  and  Co.,  1840.     (4  vols.  8vo.) 


A    CHAT   ABOUT    COMMENTARIES.  ]5 

it  seems  to  be  the  rule  that  such  Students  of  the  Word  should  be 
taken  up  to  their  reward  before  their  task  is  quite  completed. 

Then,  of  course,  gentlemen,  you  will  economise  rigidly  until  you 
have  accumulated  funds  to  purchase  Kitto's  Pictorial  Bible. 
You  mean  to  take  that  goodly  freight  on  board  before  you  launcli 
upon  the  sea  of  married  life.  As  you  cannot  visit  the  Holy  Land, 
it  is  well  for  you  that  there  is  a  work  like  the  Pictorial  Bible,  in 
which  the  notes  of  the  most  observant  travellers  are  arranged  under 
the  texts  which  they  illustrate.  For  the  geography,  zoology, 
botany,  and  manners  and  customs  of  Palestine,  this  will  be  your 
counsellor  and  guide.  Add  to  this  noble  comment,  which  is  sold 
at  a  surprisingly  low  price,  the  eight  volumes  of  Kitto's  Daily 
Readings.*  They  are  not  exactly  a  commentary,  but  Avhat 
marvellous  expositions  you  have  there !  You  have  reading  more 
interesting  than  any  novel  that  was  ever  written,  and  as  instructive 
as  the  heaviest  theology.  The  matter  is  quite  attractive  and 
fascinating,  and  yet  so  weighty,  that  the  man  who  shall  study  those 
eight  volumes  thoroughly,  will  not  fail  to  read  his  Bible  intelli- 
gently and  with  gi'owing  interest. 

The  Gnomon  of  the  New  Testament,  by  John  Albert 
Bengel,-]-  is  the  scholar's  delight.  He  selected  the  title  as  modest 
and  appropriate,  intending  it  in  the  sense  of  a  pointer  or  indicator, 
like  the  sun-dial;  his  aim  being  to  point  out  or  indicate  the  full 
force  and  meaning  of  the  words  and  sentences  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. He  endeavours  to  let  the  text  itself  cast  its  shadow  on  his 
page,  believing  with  Luther  that  "the  science  of  theology  is 
nothing  else  but  grammar  exercised  on  the  words  of  the  Holy 
Spirit."  The  editor  of  the  translation  published  by  Messrs.  Clarke, 
says  in  his  preface,  ''  It  is  quite  superfluous  to  write  in  praise  of 
the  Gnomon  of  Bengel.  Ever  since  the  year  in  which  it  was  first 
published,  A.D.  1742,  up  to  the  present  time,  it  has  been  growing 
in  estimation,  and  has  been  more  and  more  widely  circulated 
among  the  scholars  of  all  countries.  Though  modern  criticism  has 
furnished    many   valuable    additions   to   our   materials   for   New 

*  Daily  Bible  Illustrations,  being  Original  Readings  for  a  Year,  on  subjects  from 
Sacred  History,  Biography,  Antiquities,  and  Theology.  Especially  designed  for  the 
family  circle.  By  John  Kttto,  D.D.,  F.S.A.  8  volumes,  small  8vo.  (A  New  Anno- 
tated edition  has  just  been  brought  out  by  Messrs.  Oliphant  of  Edinburgh.) 

t  Gnomon  of  the  New  Testament,  by  John  Albert  Bengel.  Now  first  translated 
dnto  English,  with  original  notes  explanatory  and  illustrative.  Revised  and  edited  by 
Rev.  Andrew  R.  Fausset,  M.A.,  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  Edinburgh:  T.  &  T. 
Clarke,  38,  George-street,  18G3.     (Five  vols,  demy  Svo. ;  Subscription,  31s.  Gd.) 


K!  A    CM  AT    AHOIT    COMMENTAIUES. 

T».'stainont  exeiro.sis,  yet,  in  some  respects,  IJengel  stands  out  still 
^facile  princt'pn '  anionfr  all  who  have  laboured,  or  who  as  yet 
labour  in  that  inij)<)i-tant  field.  lie  is  unrivalled  in  felicitous 
brevity,  combined  with  what  seldom  accompanies  that  excellence, 
namely,  perspicuity.  Terse,  weighty,  and  sufjgestive,  he  often,  as  a 
modern  writer  observes,  'condenses  more  matter  into  a  line,  than 

can  be  extracted  from  ]iages  of  other  writers. ' " "In  the 

passan;es  which  form  the  subject  of  controversy  between  Calvinists 
and  Armlnians,  Beuf^el  takes  the  view  adopted  by  the  latter,  and 
in  tliis  respect  I  do  not  concur  with  him.  But  whilst  he  thus  gives 
an  undue  i)rominence,  as  it  would  seem  to  me,  to  the  responsibility 
aiul  freedom  of  man  in  these  passages,  yet,  in  the  general  tenor  of 
his  work,  there  breathe  such  a  holy  reverence  for  God's  sovereignty, 
and  such  spiritual  unction,  that  the  most  extreme  Calvinist  would, 
for  the  most  part,  be  unable  to  discover  to  what  section  of  opinions 
he  attached  himself,  and  as  to  the  controverted  passages  Avoukl 
feel  inclined  to  say,  'Qunm  talis  sis,  utinam  noster  esses.'" 

Men  with  a  dislike  for  thinking  had  better  not  purchase  the  five 
precious  volumes,  for  they  will  be  of  little  use  to  them ;  but  men 
who  love  brain-work  will  find  fine  exercise  in  spelling  out  the  deep 
meaning  of  Bengel's  excessively  terse  sentences.  His  principles  of 
interpretation  stated  in  his  "  Essay  on  the  Right  Way  of  Handling 
Divine  Subjects,"  are  such  as  will  make  the  lover  of  God's  word 
feel  safe  in  his  hands:  "  Put  nothing  into  the  Scriptures,  but  draw 
everything />o??i  them,  and  suffer  nothing  to  remain  hidden,  that  is 
really  in  them."  "  Though  each  inspired  writer  has  his  own  manner 
and  style,  one  and  the  same  Spirit  breathes  through  all,  one  grand 
idea  pervades  all."  "  Every  divine  communication  carries  (like  the 
diamond)  its  own  light  with  it,  thus  showing  whence  it  comes ;  no 
touchstone  is  required  to  discriminate  it."  "  The  true  commentator 
will  fasten  his  primary  attention  on  the  letter  (literal  meaning), 
but  never  forget  that  the  Sjyirit  must  equally  accompany  him;  at 
the  same  time  we  must  never  devise  a  more  spiritual  meaning  for 
Scripture  passages  than  the  Holy  Spirit  intended."  "  The  historical 
matters  of  Scripture,  both  narrative  and  prophecy,  constitute  as  it 
Avere  the  hones  of  its  system,  whereas  the  spiritual  matters  are  as 
its  muscles,  blood-vessels,  and  nerves.  As  the  hones  are  necessary 
to  the  human  system,  so  Scripture  must  have  its  historical  matters. 
The  expositor  who  nullifies  the  historical  ground-work  of  Scripture 
for  the  sake  of  finding  only  spiritual  truths  everywhere,  brings 
death  on  all  correct  interpretations.  Those  expositions  are  the 
safest  which  keep  closest  to  the  text." 


A    CHAT   ABOUT    COMMENTARIES.  17 

His  idea  of  the  true  mode  of  dying  touched  me  much  when  I 
first  saAv  it.  He  declared  that  he  would  make  no  spiritual  parade 
of  his  last  hours,  but  if  possible  continue  at  his  usual  works,  and 
depart  this  life  as  a  person  in  the  midst  of  business  leaves  the  room 
to  attend  to  a  knock  at  the  door.  Accordingly  he  was  occupied 
Nvith  the  correction  of  his  proof-sheets  as  at  other  times,  and  the 
last  messenger  summoned  him  to  his  rest  while  his  hands  were  full. 
This  reveals  a  calm,  well-balanced  mind,  and  unveils  many  of  those 
singular  characteristics  which  enabled  him  to  become  the  laborious 
recensor  of  the  various  MSS.,  and  the  pioneer  of  true  Biblical 
criticism. 

The  Critical  English  Testament.* — "  A  Critical  New 
Testament,  so  compiled  as  to  enable  a  reader,  unacquainted  with 
Greek,  to  ascertain  the  exact  English  force  and  meaning  of  the 
language  of  the  New  Testament,  and  to  appreciate  the  latest 
results  of  modern  criticism."  Such  is  the  professed  aim  of  this 
commentary,  and  the  compilers  have  very  fairly  carried  out  their 
intentions.  The  whole  of  Bengel's  Gnomon  is  bodily  transferred 
into  the  work,  and  as  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  have  elapsed 
since  the  first  issue  of  that  book,  it  may  be  supposed  that  much 
has  since  been  added  to  the  wealth  of  Scripture  exposition ;  the 
substance  of  this  has  been  incorporated  in  brackets,  so  as  to  bring 
it  down  to  the  present  advanced  state  of  knowledge.  We  strongly 
advise  the  purchase  of  this  book,  as  it  is  multum  in  jyarvo,  and  will 
well  repay  an  attentive  perusal.  Tischendorf  and  Alford  have 
contributed  largely,  with  other  German  and  English  critics,  to  make 
this  one  of  the  most  lucid  and  concise  commentaries  on  the  text 
and  teachings  of  the  New  Testament. 

Alford's  Greek  Testament,!  "for  the  use  of  Theological 
Students  and  Ministers,"  is  an  invaluable  aid  to  the  critical  studv 
of  the  text  of  the  New  Testament.  You  will  find  in  it  the  ripened 
results  of  a  matured  scholarship,  the  harvesting  of  a  judgment, 
generally  highly  impartial,  always  worthy  of  respect,  which  has 
gleaned  from  the  most  important  fields  of  Biblical  research,  both 

*  Tile  Critical  English  Testament. — Being  au  adaption  of  Bengel's  Gnomon, 
witli  numerous  Notes,  showing  Precise  Results  of  J\Iodern  Criticism  and  Exegesis. 
Edited  by  Rev.  W,  L.  Blackley,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  James  Hawes,  M.A.  Published 
by  Messrs.  Isbister  and  Co,  Ludgate  Hill,  London.     (Three  vols.  I83.) 

t  The  Greek  Testament :  with  a  Critically  Revised  Text ;  a  Digest  of  various 
Readings ;  Marginal  References  to  Verbal  and  Idiomatic  Usage  ;  Prolegomena ;  and 
a  Critical  and  Esegetical  Commentary.  For  the  uso  of  Theological  Students  and 
Ministers.  By  Henry  Alford,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury.  In  four  volumes. 
London  :  Rivingtons,  Waterloo  Place  ;   and  Deighton,  Bell,  and  Co.,  C.imbridgo.    1861, 

3 


IH  A  THAT  Ar.orr  f()MMr:NTAi;ii:?5. 

iiioili-rn  anil  aiicicnt,  at  hoiiu-  and  ahruad.  You  will  iK^t  look  hero 
for  auv  spirituality  of  th()U<^lit  or  tenderness  of  feeling;  you  will 
find  tlic  learned  I)can  does  not  forget  to  do  full  justice  to  his  own 
views,  and  is  quite  able  to  express  himself  vigorously  against  his 
opponents;  but  for  what  it  i)rofesses  to  be,  it  is  an  exceedingly 
able  and  successful  work.  The  later  issues  are  by  far  the  most 
desirable,  as  the  autluu-  has  considera1)ly  revised  the  work  in  the 
fourth  edition. 

What  I  have  said  of  his  Greek  Testament  applies  equally  to 
Alfoud's  New  Testament  for  English  Readers,*  which  is 
also  a  standard  work. 

I  must  confess  also  a  very  tender  side  towards  Bloomfield's 
(lUEEK  Testament,!  Jind  I  am  singular  enough  to  prefer  it  in 
some  respects  to  Alford ;  at  least,  I  have  got  more  out  of  it  on 
some  passages,  and  I  think  it  does  not  deserve  to  be  regarded  as 
superseded. 

The  Commentary  by  Patrick,  Lowtii,  Arnald,  Whitby, 
and  LowMAN,!  is  said  by  Darling  to  be  of  standard  authority, 
but  you  may  do  without  it  with  less  loss  than  in  the  case  of 
several  others  I  have  mentioned.  The  authors  were  men  of  great 
learning,  their  association  in  one  commentary  is  remarkable,  and 
their  joint  production  has  a  place  in  all  complete  libraries. 

Dr.  Wordsworth's  Holy  Bible,  with  Notes  and  Intro- 
DUCTI0NS,||  is  a  valuable  addition  to  our  stores,  but  it  is  rendere<l 
much  more  bulky  and  expensive  than  it  needed  to  be  by  the  printing 
of  the  text  at  large.  It  gives  many  precious  hints,  and  much  of 
the  choicest  thought  of  mediaeval  writers,  besides  suggesting 
catch-words  and  showing  connections  betw^een  various  passages. 

*  Tho  New  Testament  for  English  Readers  ;  containing  the  Authorized  Version, 
with  a  revised  English  Text ;  Marginal  References  ;  and  a  Critical  and  Explanatory 
Commentary;  By  Hekry  Alford,  D.D.,  late  Dean  of  Canterbury.  New  edition.  4 
vols.  8vo.  54/6.  London,  Oxford,  and  Cambridge.  Rivingtons,  and  G.  Bell  and 
Sons,  1872. 

t  Tho  Greek  Testament,  with  English  Notes,  Critical,  Philological,  and  Explana- 
tory; partly  selected  and  arranged  from  the  best  Commentators,  ancient  and  modern, 
but  chiefly  original.     Fourth  edition,  revised.    2  vols.  8vo.     London.      18-41. 

J  A  Critical  Commentary  and  Paraphrase  on  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  and  tbe 
Apocrypha.  By  Patrick,  Lowtii,  Arnald,  Whitby,  and  Lowmax.  A  new  edition, 
&c.,  in  -i  vols.     William  Tegg  and  Co. 

II  The  Holy  Bible ;  with  Notes  and  Introductions  [Old  Testament  only].  6  vols, 
imp.  Svo.  £G. — Tho  New  Testament  in  the  original  Greek;  with  Notes,  Introductions, 
and  Indexes.  By  CiiR.  Wordsworth,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Lincoln.  2  vols.  imp.  Svo. 
£o.     London,  O.xford,  and  Cambiidcre.     Rivingtons.     1872,  etc. 


A    CHAT    ABOUT    COMMENTARIES.  19 

although  it  is  occasionally  marred  by  the  characteristic  weaknesses 
of  the  Bishop,  and  has  here  and  there  foolishnesses  at  which  one 
cannot  but  smile,  it  is  a  great  work,  such  as  only  an  eminent 
scholar  could  have  produced. 

I  am  not  so  enamoured  of  the  German  writers  as  certain  of  my 
brethren  appear  to  be,  for  they  are  generally  cold  and  hard,  and 
unspiritual.  As  Dr.  Graham  says,  "  there  are  about  twenty  or 
thirty  names  in  the  literary  world  who  have  gained  a  conspicuous 
place  in  theological  circles ;  and  in  German  commentaries  these  are 
perpetually  introduced.  In  some  of  them  the  bulk  of  the  work  is 
made  up  of  these  authoritative  names,  and  quotations  from  their 
works.  This  gives  their  writings  the  appearance  of  prodigious 
learning  and  research.  Every  page  is  bristling  with  hard  words 
and  strange  languages,  and  the  eye  of  the  common  reader  is  terrified 
at  the  very  appearance,  as  the  peaceful  citizen  is  at  the  pointed 
cannon  of  a  fortress."  I  do,  however,  greatly  prize  the  series 
lately  produced  under  the  presidency  of  Dr.  Lange.*  These 
volumes  are  not  all  of  equal  value,  but,  as  a  whole,  they  are  a 
grand  addition  to  our  stores.  The  American  translators  have 
added  considerably  to  the  German  work,  and  in  some  cases  these 
additions  are  more  valuable  than  the  original  matter.  For  homi- 
letical  purposes  these  volumes  are  so  many  hills  of  gold,  but,  alas, 
there  is  dross  also,  for  Baptismal  Regeneration  and  other  grave 
errors  occur. 

The  Speaker's  Commentary  f  is  issued  (August,  1875)  as  far 
as  the  Lamentations.  It  is  costly,  too  costly  for  your  pockets,  and 
I  am  therefore  somewhat  the  less  sorry  to  add  that  it  is  not  what 
I  hoped  it  would  be.  Of  course  it  is  a  great  work,  and  contains 
much  which  tends  to  illustrate  the  text ;  but  if  you  had  it  you 
would  not  turn  to  it  for  spiritual  food,  or  for  fruitful  suggestion, 
or  if  you  did  so,  you  would  be   disappointed.     The  object  of  the 

*  A  Commentary  on  tho  Holy  ScripturGS,  Critical,  Doctiinal,  and  Homiletical,  with 
special  reference  to  Ministers  and  Students,  by  JonN  Peter  Lange,  D.D.,  in  connection 
■with  a  number  of  eminent  European  divines.  Translated  from  the  GeiTaan,  and 
edited,  -with  additions,  by  Phillip  Sciiaff,  D.D.,  in  connection  with  American 
scholars  of  various  Evangelical  denominations.  Imperial  8vo.  Edinburgh,  T.  &  T. 
Clark.     1868,  etc.     [18  volumes,  price  21s.  each,  or  to  subscribers  15s.] 

f  Tho  Holy  Bible,  according  to  tho  Authorized  Version  (A.D.  Kill),  with  anEiipla- 
natory  and  Critical  Commentary,  and  a  Revision  of  the  Translation  by  Bishops  and 
other  Clergy  of  the  Anglican  Church.  Edited  by  F.  C.  Cook,  51. A.,  Canon  of  Exeter, 
Preacher  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  and  Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  the  Queen.  Medium  8vo. 
liOndon,  John  Mun-ay.  1871,  etc.  [5  volumes  published,  Genesis  to  Lamentations. 
Vol.  I  in  2  parts,  SOs.     Vols.  II  and  III,  363.     Vol.  IV,   24s.     Vol.  V,  20o.] 


-M)  A    C'lIAT    ATiOUT    COM  MKNTAKIE-^. 

work  is  ti)  lu'li)  till"  i;iMUM-;il  reader  to  know  wliat  the  Scriptures 
leally  say  and  mean,  and  to  remove  some  of  the  ditHculties.  It 
kt'eps  to  its  desiirn  and  in  a  measure  accomplislies  it. 

1  must  also  add  to  the  list  A  Commentary,  critical,  ex- 

rKKIMEXTAL,  AND  TRACTICAL,  ON  THE  OlD  AND  NeW  TESTA- 
MENTS.* Of  this  I  have  a  very  hii^h  opinion.  It  is  the  joint 
work  of  Dr.  Jamieson,  A.  R,  Fausset,  and  Dr.  David  Brown.  It 
is  to  some  extent  a  compiUition  and  condensation  of  other  men's 
thouglitrj,  but  it  is  suthciently  original  to  claim  a  place  in  every 
ministers  library:  indeed  it  contains  so  great  a  variety  of  information 
that  if  a  man  had  no  other  exposition  he  would  find  himself  at 
no  great  loss  if  he  possessed  this  and  used  it  diligently. 

ScA-eral  other  works  I  omit,  not  because  they  are  worthless,  or 
unknown  to  me,  but  because  for  scant  purses  the  best  will  be  best. 
I  must  not  omit  upon  the  New  Testament  the  goodly  volume  of 
BuRKiTT.f  If  you  can  get  him  cheap,  buy  him.  He  is  the  cele- 
brated "  Rector"  whom  Keach  "  rectified"  in  the  matter  of  infant 
baptism.  Burkitt  is  somewhat  pithy,  and  for  a  modern  rather  rich 
and  racy,  but  he  is  far  from  deep,  and  is  frequently  common-place. 
I  liked  him  well  enough  till  I  had  read  abler  works  and  growm 
older.  Some  books  grow  upon  us  as  we  read  and  re-read  them, 
but  Burkitt  does  not.  Yet  so  far  from  depreciating  the  good  man, 
I  should  be  sorry  to  liavo  missed  his  acquaintance,  and  would 
bespeak  for  him  your  attentive  perusal. 

The  best  commentators,  after  all,  are  those  who  have  written 
upon  only  one  book.  Few  men  can  comment  eminently  well  upon 
the  whole  Bible,  there  are  sure  to  be  some  weak  points  in  colossal 
Avorks ;  prolixity  in  so  vast  an  undertaking  is  natural,  and  dulness 
follows  at  its  heels — but  a  life  devoted  to  one  of  the  inspired 
volumes  of  our  priceless  Bible  must  surely  yield  a  noble  result. 
If  I  find  myself  able  to  do  so,  at  some  future  time  I  Avill  introduce 
yovi  to  a  selection  of  the  great  one-book  Avriters.  For  the  present 
this  much  must  suffice. 

*  A  Commentary,  Critical,  Experimental,  and  Practical,  on  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments.  By  the  Rev.  Robert  Jasiieson,  D.D.,  St.  Paul's,  Glasgow  ;  Rev.  A.  R. 
Fausset,  A.M.,  St.  Cuthbert's,  York  ;  and  the  Rev.  David  Bkow-n,  D.D.,  Professor 
of  Theology,  Aberdeen.  6  vols,  medium  8vo.  £S  128.;  or  separately  at  14s.  each 
vol.     London,  Glasgow,  and  Edinburgh.     W.  Collins,  Sons,  &  Co.     1871. 

f  Expository  Notes,  with  Practical  Observations,  on  the  New  Testament  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  wherein,  &c.  Endeavoured  by  "William  Burkitt,  M.A. 
Late  Yicar  and  Lecturer  of  Dedham,  in  Essex.   (Numerous  editions,  folio  and  quarto.) 


LECTURE  II. 


Having  introduced  you  to  the  commentators,  I  must  now  press 
upon  3^ou  one  of  the  most  practical  uses  of  them,  namely,  your 
own  public  commenting  upon  the  Scriptures  read  during  divine 
service.  Preaching  in  the  olden  time  consisted  very  much  more 
of  exposition  than  it  does  now.  I  suppose  that  the  sermons  of  the 
primitive  Christians  were  for  the  most  part  expositions  of  lengthy 
passages  of  the  Old  Testament;  and  when  copies  of  the  gospels,  and 
the  epistles  of  Paul,  had  become  accessible  to  the  churches,  the  chief 
work  of  the  preacher  would  be  to  press  home  the  apostolical 
teachings  by  delivering  an  address,  the  back-bone  of  which  would 
be  a  complete  passage  of  Scripture  :  there  would  probably  be  but 
faint  traces  of  divisions,  heads  and  points,  such  as  we  employ  in 
modern  discoursing,  but  the  teacher  would  follow  the  run  of  the 
passage  which  M^as  open  before  him,  commenting  as  he  read.  I 
suppose  this  to  have  been  the  case,  because  some  of  the  early 
Christian  modes  of  worship  were  founded  very  much  upon  that  of 
the  synagogue.  I  say  some  of  the  modes,  since  I  suppose  that  as 
the  Lord  Jesus  left  his  disciples  free  from  rubrics  and  liturgies, 
each  church  worshipped  according  to  the  working  of  the  free 
Spirit  among  them ;  one  "with  the  open  meeting  of  the  Corinthians, 
and  another  with  a  presiding  minister,  and  a  third  with  a  mixture 
of  the  two  methods.  In  the  synagogue,  it  was  the  rule  of  tlie 
Rabbis  that  never  less  than  twenty-two  verses  of  the  law  should 
be  read  at  one  time,  and  the  preaching  consisted  of  notes  upon  a 
passage  of  that  length.  Such  a  rule  would  be  a  mere  superstition 
if  we  were  slavishly  bound  by  it,  but  I  could  almost  wish  that  the 
custom  were  re-established,  for  the  present  plan  of  preaching  from 
short  texts,  together  with  the  great  neglect  of  commenting  publicly 


•J-J  ox    COMMKNTINC. 

uixiii  tlio  word  is  very  unsatisfactory.  We  cannot  expect  to  deliver 
imicli  of  tlie  teacliini^  of  Holy  Scrii)ture  l)y  picking  out  verse  by 
verse,  and  holding  these  u})  at  random.  The  process  resemhles  tliat 
of  showing  a  house  hy  exhibiting  separate  bricks.  It  would  be  an 
astounding  absurdity  if  our  friends  used  our  private  letters  in  this 
fashion,  and  interpreted  them  by  short  sentences  disconnected  and 
taken  away  from  the  context.  Such  expositors  would  make  us  out 
to  say  in  every  letter  all  we  ever  thought  of,  and  a  great  many  things 
besides  far  enough  from  our  minds;  wdiile  the  real  intent  of  our 
ejiistles  woidd  probably  escape  attention.  Nowadays  since  ex- 
pository preaching  is  not  so  common  as  it  ought  to  be,  there  is  the 
more  necessity  for  our  commenting  during  the  time  of  our  reading 
the  Scriptures.  Since  topical  preaching,  hortatory  preaching, 
exi)erimental  preaching,  and  so  on — all  exceedingly  useful  in  their 
^vay — have  almost  pushed  proper  expository  preaching  out  of  place, 
there  is  the  more  need  that  we  should,  when  Ave  read  passages  of 
Holy  "Writ,  habitually  give  running  comments  upon  them. 

I  support  my  opinion  with  this  reason,  that  the  imhlic  reading 
of  the  ahstruser  parts  of  Scripture  is  of  exceedingly/  little  use  to  the 
majority  of  the  people  listening.  I  can  recollect  hearing  in  my 
younger  days  long  passages  out  of  Daniel,  which  might  have  been 
exceedingly  instructive  to  me  if  I  had  obtained  tlie  remotest  con- 
ception of  what  they  meant.  Take  again,  parts  of  the  prophecy  of 
Ezekiel,  and  ask  yourselves  what  profit  can  arise  from  their  perusal 
l)y  the  illiterate,  "unless  some  man  shall  guide  them"?  What 
more  edification  can  come  from  a  chapter  in  English  which  is  not 
understood  than  from  the  same  passage  in  Hebrew  or  Greek? 
The  same  argument  which  enforces  translation  demands  exposition. 
If  but  a  few"  explanatory  words  are  thrown  in  by  a  judicious 
reader,  it  is  wonderful  how  luminous  obscure  portions  may  be 
made.  Two  or  three  sentences  will  often  reveal  the  drift  of  a 
whole  chapter;  the  key  of  a  great  difficulty  may  be  presented  to  the 
hearer  in  half-a-score  words,  and  thus  the  public  reading  may  be 
made  abundantly  profitable.  I  once  saw  a  school  of  blind  children 
among  the  charming  ruins  of  York  Abbey,  and  could  not  help 
pitying  their  incapacity  to  enjoy  so  much  beauty :  how  willingly 
^^'ould  I  have  opened  their  eyes!  Are  ignorant  people  wandering 
among  the  glories  of  Scripture  much  less  to  be  pitied?  Who  will 
refuse  them  the  light  ? 

Abundant  evidence  has  come  before  me  that  hvief  comments 
upon  Scripture  in  our  ordinary  services  are  most  acceptable  and 
instructive  to  our  p>eople.     I  have  often  heard  from  working  men, 


ON    COMMENTING.  23 

and  their  wives,  and  from  merchants  and  their  famihes,  that  my 
own  expositions  have  been  most  helpful  to  them.  They  testify 
that  when  they  read  the  Bible  at  home  in  the  family,  the  exposi- 
tion makes  it  doubly  precious  to  them;  and  the  chapter  which  they 
had  unprofitably  read  in  course  at  family  prayers,  when  they  peruse 
it  the  next  time,  recollecting  what  their  minister  has  said  upon 
it^  becomes  a  real  delight  to  them.  The  mass  of  our  hearers,  in 
London  at  least,  do  not,  to  any  appreciable  extent,  read  com- 
mentaries or^  any  other  books  which  throw  a  light  upon  the 
Scriptures.  They  have  neither  the  money  nor  the  time  to  do  so, 
and  if  they  are  to  be  instructed  in  the  AVord  of  God  in  things 
which  they  cannot  find  out  by  mere  experience,  and  are  not  likely 
to  have  explained  to  them  by  their  associates,  they  must  get  that 
instruction  from  us,  or  nowhere  else ;  nor  do  I  see  how  we  are 
to  give  them  such  spiritual  assistance  except  through  the  regular 
practice  of  exposition. 

Besides,  if  you  are  in  the  habit  of  commenting,  it  loill  give  you 
an  ojyportunit}/  of  saying  many  things  ivhich  are  not  of  siijicient 
importance  to  become  the  theme  of  a  whole  sermon,  and  therefore 
v/ould  probably  remain  unnoticed,  to  the  gi'eat  loss  of  the  Lord's 
people  and  others.  It  is  astounding  what  a  range  of  truth,  doc- 
trinal, practical,  and  experimental.  Holy  Scripture  brings  before 
us ;  and  equally  worthy  of  admiration  is  the  forcible  manner  in 
which  that  truth  is  advanced.  Hints  given  in  the  way  in  Avhicli 
the  word  of  God  offers  them  are  always  wise  and  opportune  ;  as, 
for  instance,  the  rebukes  which  the  word  administers  might  have 
seemed  too  severe  had  they  been  made  by  the  pastor,  unsustained 
by  the  word  and  unsuggested  by  it,  but  arising  out  of  the  chapter 
they  cannot  be  resented.  You  can  both  censure  sins  and  encourage 
virtues  by  dilating  upon  the  histories  which  you  read  in  the 
inspired  records,  whereas  you  might  never  have  touched  upon  them 
had  not  the  chapter  read  brought  the  matter  before  you.  If  you 
want  to  make  full  proof  of  your  ministry,  and  to  leave  no  single  point 
of  revelation  untouched,  yom-  easiest  mode  will  be  to  comment  upon 
Scripture  habitually.  Without  this  much  of  the  word  will  be 
utterly  unknown  to  many  of  your  people.  It  is  a  very  sad  fact 
that  they  do  not  read  so  much  as  they  should  at  home ;  the  ungodly, 
in  England,  scarcely  read  the  Bible  at  all ;  and  if  only  that  part 
which  we  preach  upon  be  expounded  to  them,  how  little  of  the 
Bible  can  they  ever  know !  If  you  will  mark  your  Bibles  with 
Hnes  under  the  texts  from  which  you  have  spoken,  as  I  have  always 
done  with  an  old  copy  which  I  keep  in  my  study,  you  will  discover 


•J  I  0\    rOMMENTINO. 

that  in  twelve  or  fourteen  years  very  little  of  the  book  has  been 
<,f<)ne  throuii;h;  a  very  lar^e  proportion  of  it  remains  unmarked, 
like  a  field  iuii)louirlied.  Try,  then,  by  exposition  to  give  your 
jiiiiple  a  fair  view  of  the  entire  compass  of  revelation;  take  them 
as  it  were  to  the  top  of  Nebo,  and  show  them  the  whole  land  from 
Dan  to  IJeersheba,  and  prove  to  them  that  everywhere  it  flowoth 
with  milk  and  honey. 

Earnestly  do  I  advocate  commenting.  It  is  unfashionable  in 
England,  though  somewhat  more  usual  beyond  the  Tweed.  The 
practice  was  hardly  followed  up  anywhere  in  England  a  few  years 
ago,  and  it  is  very  uncommon  still.  It  may  be  pressed  upon 
you  for  one  other  reason,  namely,  that  in  order  to  execute  it  xcdl, 
the  commenting  minister  toill  at  first  have  to  study  twice  as  much 
as  the  mere  preacher,  because  he  Mill  be  called  upon  to  prepare 
both  his  sermons  and  his  expositions.  As  a  rule,  I  spend  much 
more  time  over  the  exposition  than  over  the  discourse.  Once 
start  a  sermon  with  a  great  idea,  and  from  that  moment  the 
discourse  forms  itself  -without  much  labour  to  the  preacher,  for 
truth  naturally  consolidates  and  crvstallises  itself  around  the  main 
subject  like  sweet  crystals  around  a  string  hung  up  in  sjTup ;  but 
as  for  the  exposition,  you  must  keep  to  the  text,  you  must  face  the 
difficult  points,  and  must  seai'ch  into  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  rather 
than  your  own.  You  will  soon  reveal  your  ignorance  as  an  ex- 
positor if  you  do  not  study;  therefore  diligent  reading  will  be  forced 
upon  you.  Anything  which  compels  the  preacher  to  search  the 
grand  old  Book  is  of  immense  sendee  to  him.  If  any  are  jealous 
lest  the  labour  should  inju.re  their  constitutions,  let  them  remember 
that  mental  work  up  to  a  certain  point  is  most  refreshing,  and 
M'here  the  Bible  is  the  theme  toil  is  delight.  It  is  only  when 
mental  labour  passes  beyond  the  bounds  of  common  sense  that 
the  mind  becomes  enfeebled  by  it,  and  this  is  not  usually  reached 
except  by  injudicious  persons,  or  men  engaged  on  topics  wdiich 
are  unref resiling  and  disagreeable ;  but  our  subject  is  a  recreative 
one,  and  to  young  men  like  ourselves  the  vigorous  use  of  our 
faculties  is  a  most  healthy  exercise.  Classics  and  mathematics 
may  exhaust  us,  but  not  the  volume  of  our  Father's  grace,  the 
charter  of  our  joys,  the  treasure  of  our  wealth. 

A  man  to  comment  well  should  be  able  to  read  the  Bible  in  the 
original.  Every  minister  should  aim  at  a  tolerable  proficiency  both 
in  the  Hebrew  and  the  Greek.  These  two  languages  will  give  him 
a  library  at  a  small  expense,  an  inexhaustible  thesaurus,  a  mine 
of  spiritual  wealth.     Really,  the  eifort  of  acquiring  a  language  is 


ON    COMMENTING.  25 

not  so  prodigious  that  brethren  of  moderate  abilities  shoukl  so 
frequently  shrink  from  the  attempt.  A  minister  ought  to  attain 
enough  of  these  tongues  to  be  at  least  able  to  make  out  a  passage 
by  the  aid  of  a  lexicon,  so  as  to  be  sure  that  he  is  not  mis- 
representing the  Spirit  of  God  in  his  discoursings,  but  is,  as  nearly 
as  he  can  judge,  giving  forth  what  the  Lord  intended  to  reveal 
by  the  language  employed.  Such  knowledge  would  prevent  his 
founding  doctrines  upon  expressions  in  our  version  when  nothing 
at  all  analagous  is  to  be  found  in  the  inspired  original.  This  has 
been  done  by  preachers  time  out  of  mind,  and  they  have  shouted 
over  an  inference  drawn  from  a  ahall,  or  an  if  gathered  out  of  the 
translation,  with  as  much  assurance  of  infallibility  and  sense  of 
importance  as  if  the  same  language  had  occurred  in  the  words 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  used.  At  such  times,  we  have  been  re- 
minded of  the  story  told  by  the  late  beloved  Henry  Craik,  in  his 
book  on  the  Hebrew  language.  At  one  time,  the  Latin  Vulgate 
was  so  constantly  spoken  of  as  the  very  word  of  God,  that  a  Roman 
Catholic  theologian  thus  commented  upon  Genesis  i.  10 : — ^'  The 
gathering  together  of  the  waters  called  he  seas."  The  Latin  term 
for  seas  is  Maria.  On  this  ground,  the  writer  asks,  "  What  is  the 
gathering  together  of  waters  but  the  accumulation  of  all  the  graces 
into  one  place,  that  is,  into  the  Virgin  Mary  {Maria)  ?  But  there 
is  this  distinction,  that  Maria  (the  seas)  has  the  (i)  short,  because 
that  which  the  seas  contain  is  only  of  a  transitory  nature,  while  the 
gifts  and  graces  of  the  blessed  Virgin  {Maria)  shall  endure  for 
ever."  Such  superlative  nonsense  may  be  indulged  in  if  wo 
forget  that  translations  cannot  be  verbally  inspired,  and  that  to 
the  original  is  the  last  appeal. 

Fail  not  to  be  expert  in  the  use  of  your  Concordance.  Every 
day  I  live  I  thank  God  more  and  more  for  that  poor  half-crazy 
Alexander  Cruden.  Of  course  you  have  read  his  life,  which  is 
prefixed  to  the  concordance ;  it  exhibits  him  as  a  man  of  diseased 
mind,  once  or  twice  the  inmate  of  a  lunatic  asylum,  but  yet  for  all 
that  successfully  devoting  his  energies  to  producing  a  work  of 
absolutely  priceless  value,  which  never  has  been  improved  upon, 
and  probably  never  will  be ;  a  volume  which  must  ever  yield  the 
greatest  possible  assistance  to  a  Christian  minister,  being  as  neces- 
sary to  him  as  a  plane  to  the  carpenter,  or  a  plough  to  the  husband- 
man. Be  sure  you  buy  a  genuine  unabridged  Cruden,  and  none 
of  the  modern  substitutes ;  good  as  they  may  be  at  the  price,  they 
are  a  delusion  and  a  snare  to  ministers,  and  should  never  be  toler- 
ated in  the  manse  library.     To  consider  cheapness  in  purchasing 


20  ON    rOMMKNTING. 

n  ooncnnlancc  i?  folly.  You  need  only  one :  have  none  but  the 
l)v>st.  At  the  lioiul  of  each  notable  word,  Cruden  gives  you  its 
moaning,  and  very  often  all  its  particular  shades  of  meaninf;;,  so 
that  he  even  helps  you  in  sermonising.  When  you  have  read  his 
headings,  by  following  out  the  concordance,  you  will  observe  con- 
nections in  which  the  word  occurs,  which  most  advantageously  and 
correctly  fix  its  meaning.  Thus  will  the  word  of  God  be  its  own 
key.  A  good  textuary  is  a  good  theologian;  be  then  well  skilled 
ill  using  Cruden. 

I  make  but  small  account  of  most  reference  Uiblcs;  they  would 
be  very  useful  if  they  were  good  for  anything;  but  it  is  extremely 
easy  to  bring  out  a  reference  Bible  which  has  verbal  and  apparent 
references,  and  nothing  more.  You  will  often  turn  to  a  reference, 
and  will  have  to  say,  "  Well,  it  is  a  reference,  certainly,  in  a  way, 
for  it  contains  the  same  word,  but  there  is  no  reference  in  the 
sense  that  the  one  text  will  explain  the  otlier."  The  useful  re- 
ference cuts  the  diamond  with  a  diamond,  comparing  spiritual 
things  with  spiritual;  it  is  a  thought-reference,  and  not  a  word- 
reference.  If  you  moet  with  a  really  valuable  reference  Bible,  it 
Mill  be  to  you  what  I  once  heard  a  countryman  call  "  a  reverence 
Bible,"  for  it  will  lead  you  to  prize  more  and  more  the  sacred 
\olume.  The  best  reference  Bible  is  a  thoroughly  good  concord- 
ance. Get  the  best,  keep  it  always  on  the  table,  use  it  hourly, 
and  you  will  have  found  your  best  companion. 

Need  I  after  my  previous  lectures  commend  to  you  the  judicious 
reading  of  commentaries!  These  are  called  "dead  men's  brains" 
by  certain  knowing  people,  who  claim  to  give  us  nothing  in  their 
sermons  but  what  they  pretend  the  Lord  reveals  direct  to  themselves. 
Yet  these  men  are  by  no  means  original,  and  often  their  supposed 
inspiration  is  but  borrowed  wit.  They  get  a  peep  at  Gill  on  the  sly. 
The  remarks  which  they  give  forth  as  the  Spirit's  mind  are  very 
inferior  in  all  respects  to  what  they  affect  to  despise,  namely,  the 
mind  of  good  and  learned  men.  A  batch  of  poems  was  sent  me 
some  time  ago  for  The  Sword  and  the  Troioel,  which  were  written 
])y  a  person  claiming  to  be  under  the  immediate  influence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  He  informed  me  that  he  was  passive,  and  that  what 
was  enclosed  Avas  written  under  the  direct  physical  and  mental 
influence  of  the  Spirit  upon  his  mind  and  hand.  My  bookshelves 
can  show  many  poems  as  much  superior  to  these  pretended  inspir- 
ations as  angels  are  to  blue-bottles ;  the  miserable  doggrel  bore  on 
its  face  the  evidence  of  imposture.  So  when  I  listen  to  the  sense- 
less twaddle  of  certain  wise  gentlemen  who  are  always  boasting 


ON   COMMENTING.  27 

that  tliey  alone  are  ministers  of  the  Spirit,  I  am  ashamed  of  their 
pretensions  and  of  them.  No,  my  dear  friends,  you  may  take  it 
as  a  rule  that  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  usually  do  for  us  what 
we  can  do  for  ourselves,  and  that  if  religious  knowledge  is  printed 
in  a  book,  and  we  can  read  it,  there  is  no  necessity  for  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  make  a  fresh  revelation  of  it  to  us  in  order  to  screen  our 
laziness.  Read,  then,  the  admirable  commentaries  Avhich  I  have 
already  introduced  to  you.  Yet  be  sure  you  use  your  own  minds 
too,  or  the  expounding  will  lack  interest.  Here  I  call  to  mind  two 
wells  in  the  courtyard  of  the  Doge's  palace  at  Venice,  upon  which 
I  looked  with  much  interest.  One  is  filled  artificially  by  water 
brought  in  barges  from  a  distance,  and  few  care  for  its  insipid 
contents ;  the  other  is  a  refreshing  natural  Avell,  cool  and  delicious, 
and  the  people  contend  for  every  drop  of  it.  Freshness,  natural- 
ness, life,  will  always  attract,  whereas  mere  borrowed  learning  is 
flat  and  insipid.  Mr.  Cecil  says  his  plan  was,  when  he  laid  a 
hold  of  a  Scripture,  to  pray  over  it,  and  get  his  own  thoughts  on 
it,  and  then,  after  he  had  so  done,  to  take  up  the  ablest  divines 
who  wrote  upon  the  subject,  and  see  what  their  thoughts  were. 
If  you  do  not  think  and  think  much,  you  will  become  slaves  and 
mere  copyists.  The  exercise  of  your  own  mind  is  most  healthful 
to  you,  and  by  perseverance,  with  divine  help,  you  may  expect  to 
get  at  the  meaning  of  every  understandable  passage.  So  to  rely 
upon  your  own  abilities  as  to  be  unwilling  to  learn  from  others  is 
clearly  folly ;  so  to  study  others  as  nat  to  judge  for  yourself  is 
imbecility. 

What  should  be  the  manner  of  youv puMic  commenting?'  One  rule 
should  be  always  to  point  out  very  carefully  loherever  a  word  bears 
a  special  sense;  for  rest  assured  in  Holy  Scripture  the  same  word 
does  not  always  mean  the  same  thing.  The  Bible  is  a  book  meant 
for  human  beings,  and  therefore  it  is  written  in  human  language ; 
and  in  human  language  the  same  word  may  signify  two  or  three 
things.  For  instance,  " a  pear  fell  from  the  tree  ; "  "a  man  fell 
into  drunken  habits."  There  the  meaning  of  the  second  word,  "fell," 
is  evidently  different  from  the  first,  since  it  is  not  literal,  but 
metaphorical.  Again,  "the  cabman  mounted  the  box;"  "the 
child  was  pleased  with  his  Christmas  box ;"  "  his  lordship  is  stay- 
ing at  his  shooting  box."  In  each  case  there  is  the  same  word,  but 
who  does  not  see  that  there  is  a  great  difference  of  meaning?  So 
it  is  in  the  word  of  God.  You  must  explain  the  difference  be- 
tween a  word  used  in  a  peculiar  sense,  and  the  ordinary  meaning 
of  the  word,  and  thus  you  will  prevent  your  people  falling  into 


28 


ox    COMMKNTINO. 


mistakes.  If  people  will  s;iy  tliat  the  same  word  in  Scripture 
always  means  the  same  tliini;,  as  I  have  heard  some  assert  publiclv^, 
they  will  make  nonsense  of  the  word  of  God,  and  fall  into  error 
throuf^h  their  own  irrational  maxims.  To  set  up  canons  of  inter- 
pretation for  the  Book  of  God  which  would  be  absurd  if  applied  to 
other  writin<:fs  is  egrcfrious  folly:  it  has  a  show  of  accuracy,  but 
inevitably  leads  to  confusion. 

The  obvious  literal  meaning  of  a  Scripture  is  not  always  the 
true  one,  and  ignorant  persons  are  apt  enough  to  fall  into  the 
most  singular  misconceptions — a  judicious  remark  from  the  pulpit 
will  be  of  signal  service.  Many  persons  have  accustomed  them- 
selves to  misunderstand  certain  texts;  they  have  heard  wrong 
interpretations  in  their  youth,  and  will  never  know  better  unless  tlie 
correct  meaning  be  indicated  to  them. 

We  must  make  sure  in  our  pu1)lic  expositions  that  obscure  and 
involved  sentences  are  explained.    To  overleap  difficulties,  and  only 
expound  what  is  already  clear,  is  to  make  commenting  ridiculous. 
WJien  we  speak  of  obscure  sentences,  Ave  mean  such  as  are  mostly 
to  be  found  in  the  prophets,  and  are  rendered  dark  throuo-h  the 
translation,  or   the    Orientalism    of  their   structure,    or   throno-h 
their  intrinsic  weight  of  meaning.  Involved  sentences  most  abound 
in  the  writings  of   Paul,   wliose    luxuriant  mind  was  not  to  be 
restrained  to  any  one  line  of  argument.      He  begins  a  sentence, 
and  does  not  finish  it  perhaps  until  eight  verses  further  on,  and 
all  the  interstices  between   the  commencement  and  the  end  of 
the  sentence  are  packed   full   of  compressed  truth,   which  it  is- 
not  always  easy  to  separate  from  the  general  argument.     Hints 
consisting  of  but  two  or  three  words  Avill  let  your  hearers  know- 
where  the  reasoning  breaks  off,  and  where  it  is  taken  up  ao-ain.    In 
many  poetical  parts  of  the  Old  Testament  the  speakers  change;  as 
in  Solomon's  Song,  Avhich  is  mostly  a  dialogue.  Here  perfect  non- 
sense is  often  made  by  reading  the  passage  as  if  it  Avere  all  spoken 
by  the  same  person.    In  Isaiah  the  strain  often  Agarics  most  suddenly, 
and  Avhile  one  verse  is   addressed  to  the  Jew^s,  the  next  may  be 
spoken  to  the  Messiah  or  to  the  Gentiles.     Is  it  not  always  Avell 
to  notify  this  to  the  congregation?    If  the  chapters  and  verses  had 
been  divided  Avith  a  little  common  sense,  this  might  be  of  less 
importance,  but  as  our  version  is  so  clumsily  chopped  into  frag- 
ments, the  preacher  must  insert  the  proper  paragraphs  and  divi- 
sions as  he  reads  aloud.     In  fine,  your  business  is  to  make  tlie 
Avord  plain.     In  Lombardy  I  observed  great  heaps  of  huge  stones  in 
the  fields,  Avhich  had  been  gathered  out  from  the  soil  by  diligent 


ON   COMMENTING.  29 

liands  to  make  room  for  the  crops;  your  duty  is  to  "  gather  oiit  the 
stones,"  and  leave  the  fruitful  field  of  Scriptui-e  for  your  people 
to  till.  There  are  Orientalisms,  metaphors,  peculiar  expressions, 
idioms,  and  other  verbal  memorabilia  which  arise  from  the  Bible 
having  been  written  in  the  East ;  all  these  you  will  do  well  to 
explain.  To  this  end  be  diligent  students  of  Oriental  life.  Let 
the  geography  of  Palestine,  its  natural  history,  its  fauna  and  its 
flora,  be  as  familiar  to  you  as  those  of  your  own  native  village. 
Then  as  you  read  you  will  interpret  the  word,  and  your  flock  will 
be  fed  thereby.* 

The  chief  part  of  your  commenting,  however,  sJwuld  consist  in 
applying  the  truth  to  the  hearts  of  your  hearers,  for  he  who  merely 
comprehends  the  meaning  of  the  letter  without  understanding  how 
it  bears  upon  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men,  is  like  a  man 
who  causes  the  bellows  of  an  organ  to  be  blown,  and  then  fails  to 
place  his  fingers  on  the  keys ;  it  is  of  little  service  to  supply  men 
with  information  unless  we  urge  upon  them  the  practical  inferences 
therefrom.  Look,  my  brethren,  straight  down  into  the  secret 
chambers  of  the  human  soul,  and  let  fall  the  divine  teaching 
through  the  window,  and  thus  light  will  be  carried  to  the  heart 
a!ul  conscience.  Make  remarks  suitable  to  the  occasion,  and  appli- 
cable to  the  cases  of  those  present.  Show  how  a  truth  which 
was  first  heard  in  the  days  of  David  is  still  forcible  and  pertinent 
in  these  modern  times,  and  you  will  thus  endear  the  Scriptures  to 
the  minds  of  your  people,  who  prize  your  remarks  much  more  than 
you  imagine.  Clean  the  grand  old  pictures  of  the  divine  masters; 
hang  them  up  in  new  frames ;  fix  them  on  the  walls  of  your 
people's  memories,  and  their  well-instructed  hearts  shall  bless  you. 

Is  a  caution  needed  amongst  intelligent  men  ?  Yes,  it  must  be 
given.  Be  sure  i(o  avoid  p)rosiness.  Avoid  it  everywhere,  but  espe- 
cially in  this.  Do  not  be  long  in  your  notes.  If  you  are  supremely 
gifted  do  not  be  long ;  people  do  not  appreciate  too  much  of  a  good 
thing ;  and  if  your  comments  are  only  second-rate,  why,  then  be 
shorter  still,  for  men  soon  weary  of  inferior  talking.  Very  little 
time  in  the  service  can  be  afforded  for  reading  the  lessons ;  do  not 
rob  the  prayer  and  the  sermon  for  the  sake  of  commenting.  This 
robbing  Peter  to  pay  Paul  is  senseless.  Do  not  repeat  common- 
place things  which  must  have  occurred  even  to  a  Sunday-school 


*  For  suggestions  as  to  interpretation  the  student  is  referred  to  tlie  Bible  Hand- 
hook  by  Dr.  Joseph  Angus.  From  page  150  of  that  work  and  onwards  the  most 
\-aUiable  hints  will  be  met  with.  Much  that  we  would  otherwise  have  inserted  in 
this  volume  is  admirably  stated  by  our  learned  friend. 


30  ON   COMMKNTING. 

child.  Do  not  remind  your  hearers  of  wliat  tlicy  could  not 
possibly  have  forgotten.  Give  them  somethinii;  -weighty  if  not 
new,  so  that  an  iutellifrent  listener  may  fet-l  when  the  service  is 
over  that  he  has  learned  at  least  a  little. 

Again,  avoid  all  pfdantri/.  As  a  t^eneral  rule,  it  may  be  observed 
that  those  gentlemen  who  know  the  least  Greek  are  the  most  sure 
to  air  their  rags  of  learning  in  tlie  pulpit;  they  miss  no  chance  of 
saying,  "  The  Greek  is  so-and-so."  It  makes  a  man  an  inch  and 
a-lialf  taller  by  a  foolometer,  if  he  everlastingly  lets  fall  bits 
of  Greek  and  Hebrew,  and  even  tells  the  people  the  tense  of  the 
verb  and  the  case  of  the  noun,  as  I  have  known  some  do.  Those 
who  have  no  learning  usually  make  a  point  of  displaying  the  pegs 
on  which  learning  ought  to  hang.  Brethren,  the  whole  process  of 
interpretation  is  to  be  carried  on  in  your  study ;  you  are  not  to 
show  your  congregation  the  process,  but  to  give  them  the  result; 
like  a  good  cook  who  would  never  think  of  bringing  up  dishes,  and 
pans,  and  rolling  pin,  and  spice  box  into  tlie  dining  hall,  but  with- 
out ostentation  sends  up  the  feast. 

Never  strain  passages  token  you  are  expounding.  Be  thoroughly 
honest  with  the  word :  even  if  the  Scriptures  were  the  writing  of  mere 
men,  conscience  would  demand  fairness  of  you ;  but  when  it  is  the 
Lord's  own  word,  be  careful  not  to  pervert  it  even  in  the  smallest 
degi-ee.  Let  it  be  said  of  you,  as  I  have  heard  a  venerable  hearer  of 
Mr.  Simeon  say  of  him,  "  Sir,  he  was  very  Calvinistic  when  the  text 
Avas  so,  and  people  thought  him  an  Anninian  when  the  text  was 
that  way,  for  he  alw^ays  stuck  to  its  plain  sense."  A  very  sound 
neighbour  of  oui's  once  said,  by  way  of  depreciating  the  gi'and  old 
reformer,  "  John  Calvin  was  not  half  a  Calvinist,"  and  the  remark 
was  correct  as  to  his  expositions,  for  in  them,  as  we  have  seen,  he 
always  gave  his  Lord's  niuid  and  not  his  own.  In  the  church 
of  St.  Zeno,  in  Verona,  J  saw  ancient  frescoes  which  had  been 
plastered  over,  and  then  covered  wdth  other  designs ;  I  fear  many 
do  this  with  Scripture,  daubing  the  text  with  their  owm  glosses, 
and  laying  on  their  own  conceits.  There  are  enough  of  these 
plasterers  abroad,  let  us  leave  the  evil  trade  to  them  and  follow  an 
honest  calling.     Remember  Cowper's  lines — 

"A  critic  on  tlie  sacred  text  should  be 
Candid  and  learn'd,  dispassionate  and  frtc ; 
Free  from  the  wayward  bias  bigots  feci, 
From  fancy's  influence  and  intemperate  zeal  ; 
For  of  all  arts  sagacious  dupes  invent, 
To  cheat  themselves  and  gain  the  world's  assent, 
The  worst  is — Scripture  warped  from  its  intent." 


ON    COMMENTING.  31 

Use  your  judgment  more  than  your  fancy.  Flowers  are  Avell 
enough,  but  hungry  souls  prefer  bread.  To  allegorize  with  Origen 
may  make  men  stare  at  you,  but  your  work  is  to  fill  men's  mouths 
with  truth,  not  to  open  them  with  wonder. 

Do  not  he  carried  away  ivith  new  meanings.  Plymouth  Brethren 
delight  to  fish  up  some  hitherto  undiscovered  tadpole  of  inter- 
pretation, and  cry  it  round  the  town  as  a  rare  dainty ;  let  us  be 
content  with  more  ordinary  and  more  wholesome  fishery.  No  one 
text  is  to  be  exalted  above  the  plain  analogy  of  faith ;  and  no 
solitary  expression  is  to  shape  our  theology  for  us.  Other  men 
and  wiser  men  have  expounded  before  us,  and  anything  undis- 
covered by  them  it  were  well  to  put  to  test  and  trial  before  we 
boast  too  loudly  of  the  treasure-trove. 

Do  not  needlessly  amend  our  authorized  version.  It  is  faulty  in 
many  places,  but  still  it  is  a  grand  work  taking  it  for  all  in  all, 
and  it  is  unwise  to  be  making  every  old  lady  distrust  the  only 
Bible  she  can  get  at,  or  what  is  more  likely,  mistrust  you  for  falling 
out  with  her  cherished  treasure.  Correct  where  correction  must 
be  for  truth's  sake,  but  never  for  the  vainglorious  display  of  your 
critical  ability.  When  reading  short  psalms,  or  connected  passages 
of  the  other  books,  do  not  split  up  the  author^ s  utterances  by  inter- 
jecting your  notes.  Read  the  paragraph  through,  and  then  go  over 
it  again  with  your  explanations ;  breaking  it  up  as  you  may  think 
fit  at  the  second  reading.  No  one  would  dream  of  dividing  a 
stanza  of  a  poet  with  an  explanatory  remark ;  it  would  be  treason  to 
common  sense  to  do  so :  sound  judgment  will  forbid  your  thus  marring 
the  word  of  God.  Better  far  never  to  comment  than  to  cut  and 
carve  the  utterances  of  inspiration,  and  obscure  their  meaning  by 
impertinently  thrusting  in  untimely  remarks  of  your  own.  Upon 
many  passages  comments  would  be  gross  folly:  never  think  of 
painting  the  lily  or  gilding  refined  gold;  leave  the  sublime 
sentences  alone  in  their  glory.  I  speak  as  unto  wise  men  ;  pro^'e 
your  wisdom  in  this  thing  also. 

If  I  were  bound  to  deliver  a  sermon  upon  the  subject  in  hand, 
I  could  not  desire  a  better  text  than  Nehemiah  viii.  8:  "So 
they  read  in  the  book  in  the  law  of  God  distinctly,  and  gave 
the  sense,  and  caused  them  to  understand  the  reading."  Here 
is  a  hint  for  the  reader  as  to  his  reading.  Let  it  always  be 
distinct.  Aim  to  be  good  readers,  and  be  the  more  anxious  about 
it  because  few  men  are  so,  and  all  preachers  ought  to  be  so.  It  is 
as  good  as  a  sermon  to  hear  our  best  men  read  the  Scriptures  ; 
they  bring  out  the  meaning  by  their  correct  emphasis  and  tone. 


32 


ox    COMMKNTIXO. 


Never  full  into  the  idea  that  the  miTe  utterance  of  the  words 
before  you  is  all  that  is  required  of  you  in  reading ;  good  reading  is 
a  liigli,  but  rare  attainment.  Even  if  you  do  not  comment,  yet 
road  the  c'hai)ter  previously,  and  become  familiar  with  it;  it  is 
inexcusable  for  a  man  to  betray  the  fact  that  he  is  out  of  liis 
latitude  in  the  reading,  traversing  untrodden  ground,  floundering 
:ind  i)icking  his  way  across  country,  like  a  huntsman  who  has  lost 
his  bearings.  Never  open  the  liible  in  the  pulpit  to  read  the 
cha])ter  for  the  first  time,  but  go  to  the  familiar  page  after  many 
rehearsals.  You  Avill  be  doubly  useful  if  in  addition  to  this  you 
''oive  the  sense"  You  will  then,  by  God's  blessing,  be  the  pastor 
(•f  an  intelligent,  IJiblc-loving  people.  You  vnll  hear  in  your 
meeting-house  that  delightful  rustle  of  Bible  leaves  which  is  so 
dear  to  the  lover  of  the  AYord ;  your  people  will  open  their  Bibles, 
looking  for  a  feast.  The  Word  will  become  increasingly  precious 
to  youi-self,  your  knowledge  will  enlarge,  and  your  aptness  to 
teach  will  become  every  day  more  apparent.  Try  it,  my  brethren, 
for  even  if  you  should  see  cause  to  discontinue  it,  at  least  no  harm 
will  come  of  the  attempt. 

In  all  that  I  have  said  I  have  given  you  another  reason  for 
peeking  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  you  do  not  understand  a 
book  by  a  departed  writer  you  are  unable  to  ask  him  his  meaning, 
but  the  Spirit,  who  inspired  Holy  Scripture,  lives  for  ever,  and  he 
delights  to  open  up  the  Word  to  those  who  seek  his  instruction. 
He  is  always  accessible:  *' he  dwelleth  with  you  and  shall  be  in 
you."  Go  to  him  for  yourselves  and  cry,  "  Open  thou  mine  eyes 
that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law ";  and,  this 
being  granted  you,  entreat  him  to  send  forth  his  light  and  power 
with  the  Word  when  you  expound  it,  that  your  hearers  also  may 
be  led  into  all  truth.  Commentaries,  expositions,  interpretations, 
are  all  mere  scaffolding ;  the  Holy  Ghost  himself  must  edify  you 
uud  help  you  to  build  up  the  church  of  the  living  God 


33 


llmmr^s  irpit  i\]t  M^h^xu  of  (^mmmkxm. 


This  Catalogue  is  compiled  for  the  use  of  ministers  of  average 
attainments,  and  the  brief  reviews  are  written  from  that  stand- 
point. Other  useful  lists  have  been  published,  specially  those  by- 
Darling,  Orme,  and  Hartwell  Home,  but  these  are  not  easily 
procurable,  and  are  not  quite  what  is  needed ;  and  therefore  as 
the  furnishing  of  the  Pastors'  College  Library  necessitated  a 
Catalogue,  and  afforded  an  opportunity  for  purchasing  books,  the 
present  work  has  been  produced.  Few  can  conceive  the  amount  of 
toil  which  this  compilation  has  involved,  both  to  myself  and  my 
industrious  amanuensis,  Mr.  J.  L.  Keys.  In  almost  eyery  case  the 
books  have  been  actually  examined  by  myself,  and  my  opinion, 
whatever  it  may  be  worth,  is  an  original  one.  A  complete  list  of 
all  comments  has  not  been  attempted.  Numbers  of  volumes  have 
been  left  out  because  they  were  not  easily  procurable,  or  were 
judged  to  be  worthless,  although  some  of  both  these  classes  have 
been  admitted  as  specimens,  or  as  warnings. 

The  titles  have  been  abbreviated  to  gain  space,  but  it  is  believed 
that  in  every  case  they  are  full  enough  for  recognition.  The 
prices,  which  relate  to  second-hand  books,  have  been  placed  as 
proximate  valuations,  and  have  either  been  taken  from  actual 
invoices,  and  catalogues,  or  have  been  kindly  filled  in  by  the  aid 
of  various  booksellers,  to  whom  we  tender  our  thanks  for  th& 
kindly  int^arest  they  have  taken  in  this  work.  Prices  vary  according 
to  the  condition  of  the  book,  the  binding,  the  ever-changing 
demand,  and  the  bookseller's  mode  of  trade.  The  abbreviation  S 
stands  for  second-hand.  That  mark  is  not  inserted  where  the  date 
is  remote,  and  where  the  price  can  only  refer  to  second-hand  copies,, 
since  there  are  no  others. 

The  reader  will  please  observe  that  the  books  most  heartily 
recommended  are  printed  in  the  largest  type  with  the  remarks  in, 
italics.  Good,  but  more  ordinary,  works  are  in  medium  type,  and 
the  least  desirable  are  in  the  smallest  letter.  Thus  we  hope  the 
eye  will  be  caught  at  once  by  volumes  best  worthy  of  attention. 

4 


;il         KKMAltKS    T'I'ON    THE    CATALOGUE    OF   COMMENTARIES. 

Latin  autliors  are  not  inserted,  because  few  can  procure  tliem, 
and  fewer  still  can  read  them  with  case.  Wc  arc  not,  however, 
ignorant  of  tln'ir  value.  Hosts  of  family  Bibles,  discourses,  and 
])araj)hrases  are  omitted,  because  they  would  luive  wasted  our  limited 
si)ace,  and  we  couhl  only  liave  admitted  them  by  raising  the  ])rice 
of  our  book,  which  we  resolved  not  to  do,  lest  it  should  be  out  of 
llic  reach  of  men  of  slender  incomes.  The  first  volume  of  tiiis 
series*  has  had  so  excellent  a  circulation  that  we  are  able  to  issue 
this  second  one,  although  we  know  from  the  nature  of  the  work 
that  its  sale  will,  in  all  ])robability,  never  cover  the  cost  of  pro- 
<luction.  We  (jire  the  labour  to  our  brethren  freely,  only  wishing 
that  we  could  with  it  confer  upon  our  poorer  friends  the  means 
of  purchasing  the  choicest  of  the  comments  here  mentioned. 

It  is  to  be  specially  noted,  that  in  no  case  do  we  cnJorse  all  that 
<imj  author  has  xvritten  in  his  commentary.  We  could  not  read  the 
works  through,  it  would  have  needed  a  Methuselah  to  do  that; 
nor  have  we  thought  it  needful  to  omit  a  book  because  it  contains 
ii  measure  of  error,  provided  it  is  useful  in  its  own  way ;  for  this 
catalogue  is  for  thoughtful,  discerning  men,  and  not  for  children. 
Wc  have  not,  however,  knowingly  mentioned  works  whose  main 
<lrift  is  sceptical,  or  Socinian,  except  with  a  purpose ;  and  where 
Ave  have  admitted  comments  by  writers  of  doubtful  doctrine,  because 
of  their  supei'ior  scholarship  and  the  correctness  of  their  criticisms. 
Ave  have  given  hints  Avhich  will  be  enough  for  the  Avise.  It  is  some- 
times very  useful  to  knoAv  what  our  opponents  haA'e  to  say. 

The  Avriters  on  the  Prophetical  Books  have  completely  mastered 
ns,  and  after  almost  completing  a  full  list  Ave  could  not  in  our  con- 
science believe  that  a  tithe  of  them  Avould  yield  anything  to  the 
student  but  bewilderment,  and  therefore  Ave  reduced  the  number 
to  small  dimensions.  We  re\-erence  the  teaching  of  the  prophets, 
iind  the  Apocalypse,  but  for  many  of  the  professed  expounders  of 
those  inspired  books  we  entertain  another  feeling. 

May  God  bless  this  laborious  endeavour  to  aid  his  ministers  in 
searching  the  Scriptures.  If  Biblical  studies  shall  be  in  any 
measure  promoted,  Ave  shall  be  more  than  repaid. 


*  Lectures  to  my  Students :  a  Selection  from  Addresses  delivered  to  the  Students 
of  the  Pastors'  College,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  By  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  President. 
London  :  Passmore  and  Alahaster,  4,  Paternoster  BuUdings.     Price  2s.  6d. 


B5 


CATALOGUE 


{Ht(ttti*Httt«4S 


xinr${Jwi|$. 


COMMENTARIES   ON   THE  WHOLE   BIBLE. 


1  ALLEN  (John). — A  Spiritual  Exposition  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments ;  or, 

The  Christian's  Gospel  Treasure.     Three  vols.  8vo.     1816.     4/6. 
Spiritual  reflections  after  the  High  Calvinistic  School.     Some  preachers  cannot 
see  Christ  where  he  is,  but  Allen  finds  him  where  he  is  not.     There  is  in  these  reflec- 
tions much  godly  savour,  but  very  little  exposition. 

2  ASSEMBLY  OF  DIVINES,  Westminster.— Annotations.  Two  vols. 

Folio.      Lond.,   1657.     10/-  to  16/- 
Contain  valuable  remarks,  but  are  somewhat  out  of  date.    The  work  is 
probably  less  esteemed  than  it  should  be.    (See  page  12). 

3  EARTH     (Dr.  C.  G.,    of  Calw,    Wtirtemberg).  —  Practical 

Commentary  on  the  Books  of  Holy  Scripture,   arranged 

in  Chronological  Order  ;    being  a  Bible  Manual  for  the 

use  of  Students  of  the  Word  of  God.     Translated   from 

the  German.  Imp.  8vo.,  12/-.   Loud.,  Nisbet  &  Co.  S.  7/- 

HelpfiU  in  shozving  the  Justorical  position  of  the  books,  and  in 

assisting  to  illnstrate  them  by  the  circumstances  under  zvhich  they 

were  written.      We  have  referred  to  it  with  benefit. 

4  BENSON  (Joseph,   1748— 1821.     An  etnincnt  Methodist  Preacher) . 

Notes,  Critical,  Explanatory,  and  Practical.    Six  vols.   Imp.  8vo. 

10/6  each.     Lond.,  Wesleyan  Conference  Office.     S.  37/6. 

Adopted   by  the  Wesleyan  Conference    as   a    standard    work,  and 

characterized  by  that  body  as  marked  by  "  solid  learning,  soundness  of 

theological   opinion,  and  an  edifying  attention    to    experimental  and 

practical  religion."     Necessary  to  Methodist  Students. 


3G  WIKJLK    BIliLK. 

5  BIBLICAL  MUSEUM.     (James   Comper  Gray).      Old 

'rc.^laniciU  poll  ion  to  be  issued   in   8   vols.,  at  4/6  each. 
New  Testament  already  out,  5  vols.,  4/6  each.     Loud., 
Elliot  Stock. 
We  can  only  speak  of  the  Neiv    Testament ;  it  is  surpassingly 
useful,  sententious  and  sensible.     Buy  the  zvork  at  once. 

6  BONAR(IIORATius,  D.D.)— Light   and    Truth:    or,    Bible 

ThouL;hts     and     Themes.       Vol.     L,     Old    Testament. 

Vol.  II.,  Gospels.     Vol.  III.,  Acts  and  Larger  Epistles. 

Vol.    IV.,      Lesser    Epistles.      Vol.    V,    Revelation    of 

St.  John.  Crown  8vo.  5s.  each.  Land.,  Nisbet. 
One  volume  is  rather  short  space  in  which  to  bring  out  the 
"  light  and  truth''''  of  the  Old  Testament.  If  Dr.  Bonar  req?iired 
four  volunies  for  the  Neiv,  we  zvish  he  had  felt  the  same  need 
for  the  Old.  The  passages  selected  are  popularly  exp07inded, 
but  the  thougJit  is  not  deep.  The  volumes  will  be  viore  prized  by 
the  ordinary  reader  than  by  the  minister. 

7  BOOTHROYD  (Benjamin,  D.D.,  1768—1836.—/^  learned  Indepen- 

dent Minister  and  eminent  Hebrezo  scholar.) — Family  Bible. 
Improved  Version.  Notes,  and  reflections  on  each  chapter  : 
introduction  on  the  authenticity  and  inspiration  of  the  sacred 
books,  and  a  complete  view  of  the  Mosaic  laws,  &c.  Three 
vols.  Royal  4to,  1824,  16/-,  or  one  vol.,  thick  8vo.,  1853,  7/- 
Good,  but  may  be  dispensed  with,  now  that  the  East  has  been  more 
fully  explored. 

8  BROWN  (John,  1722— 1787).— Self-Interpreting  Bible.     6/- to  15/- 
Useful  in  its   day,   and  still  popular.      Notes   on  New  Testament 

an  undisguised  plagiarism  from  Guyse.     Not  a  Student's  bcok. 

9  BURDER    (Samuel,    A.M.)      The  Scripture    Expositor;    a  New 

Commentary,  Critical  and  Practical.  Four  vols.,  4to.   181 1.    20/- 
Well  selected  notes.     Those  upon  Eastern  manners,  geography,  &c.,. 
are  collected  very  judiciously. 

10  CALVIN  (John,  1509 — 1564).     In  the  Avorks   of    Calvin,. 

published  by  the  Calvin  Translation  Society,  are  the 
Commentaries,  in  45  volumes.  Messrs.  T.  &  T.  Clark, 
of  Edinburgh,  now  issue  sets  of  45  vols.,  at  ;^7  17s.  6d.  ; 
or  six  vols,  for  One  Guinea,  excepting  Psalms,  vol.  5,  and 
Habakkuk.  Separate  volumes,  6s.  each.  Old  copies  of 
Calvin's  comments  are  to  be  met  with  at  second-hand 
book  stores.  We  have  entered  most  of  them  in  their 
proper  places,  but  cannot  afford  space  for  separate 
mention  of  the  volumes  of  the  C.  T.  Society, 
Of  priceless  value.     (See  pages  4  and  5  of  this  work). 


WHOLE   BIBLE.  37 

1 1  CHALMERS  (Thomas,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  1780— 1847).     Daily 

Scripture  Readings  (3  vols.)  and  Sabbath  Scripture 
Readings  (2  vols.)  being  vols.  I.  to  V.  of  the  "  Post- 
humous Works "  of  Dr.  Chalmers,  edited  by  Rev.  W. 
Hanna,  D.D.  Loud.,  Hamilton,  Adams  &  Co.  ;  Edinb., 
Edmonston  &  Douglas,  in  whose  catalogue  they  are 
priced  as  follows  :  D.  S.  Readings,  3  vols.,  crown  8vo., 
£1  IIS.  6d.  ;  cheap  edition,  2  vols,  los.  S.  S-  Readings, 
2  vols.,  £\  IS.  ;  cheap  edition,  2  vols.,  los. 
Those  acquainted  ivith  the  ivritings  of  Chalmers  will  know  what 
to  expect  from  his  pen  zvJien  guided  by  fervent  devotion. 

12  CLARKE  (Adam,  LL.D.,  1760— 1832).— A  New  Edition, 

with  the  Author's  final  corrections.     Six  vols..  Imp.  8vo. 
Lond.,    1844.      W.   Tegg's   edition,   new,  ;^3  3s.     S.  38/- 
Also  printed  on  large  paper,  6  vols.,  4to. 
Despite  some  fezu  oddities,  this  is  one  of  the  most  learned  of 
English  expositions.     (See  page  9.) 

13  CLARKE  (.Samuel.     Died  i  701).— The  Old  and  New  Testament, 

with  Annotations  and  Parallel  Scriptures.    Folio.    Loud..,  1690, 

7/- 
Notes  very  brief,  but  judicious.      Author  one  of  the  ejected  ministers, 
an  exceedingly  learned  man.      This  work   v/as    highly  commended  by 
Owen,  Baxter,  Howe,  and  others,  but  is  now  superseded, 

14  CLASS  AND  THE  DESK,  The — By  J.  Comper  Gray, 

of  Halifax  ;    and  C.  Stokes  Carey,  of  London.     Four 
vols.     Crown  8vo,  12s.     Lond.,  J.  Sangster  &  Co. 
Condensed  thought.     Suited  for  Teachers  and  Local  Preachers. 

15  COBBIN,  (Ingram).— Evangelical  Synopsis.      The  Holy  Bible, 

with   Notes    Explanatory   and    Practical,    selected    from    the 
writings  of  the  most  esteemed  divines  and  Biblical  critics.  Three 
vols.     Imp.  4to.     Loud.,  George  Berger.     S.  24/-  or  less. 
An  admirable  collection  of  notes.     Men  with  small  means  will  find 
it  a  miniature  library.     We  have  heard  brethren  who  have  had  no  com- 
mentary but  Cobbin's  speak  of  the  work  with  much  enthusiasm. 

x6     COBBIN   (Ingram).     A   condensed  Commentary  on  the  Bible. 
Second  edition.     Imp.  8vo.     Lend.,  1839.      12/- 
An  excellent  makeshift  for  a  poor  man. 

17      COKE   (Thomas,   LL.D.      Wcsleyan  Methodist  Mmister.    Died  \%\£,.)    A  Com- 
mentary on  the  Old  and  New  Testament.     6  vols.  4to.    Zo«(/.,  1803.    17/6. 
A  Wesleyan  comment.     Too  big  :    ought  to  have   been  put  in  half  the  space. 
Moreover,  it  is  next  door  to  a  fraud,  for  it  is  "in  the  main  a  reprint   of  the  work  of 
Dr.  Dodd,"  without  that  author's  name.     Ah,  Dr.  Coke,  this  is  a  burning  shame  ! 


38  WHOLK    151 HLK. 

iS     COMMENTARY,  WHOLLY   BIBLICAL,  The  :    An  Exposition 
in   the   very   wortls  of  Scripture.     3    vols.,  4to.,  £^2  i6s.  od. 
Lo/u/.,  S.  Bagster  and  Sons.     S.  26;- 
It  is  very  Iiandy  to  have  explanatory  passages  thus   presented  to  the 

eye.     In  general  the  work  is  excellently  done  ;  but  ministers  with  scanty 

purses  can  make  a  Biblical  exposition  for  themselves. 

19  COMPREHENSIVE    BIBLE,   The.     (Edited  by  W.  Greenfield, 

ALR.A.S.).  'i'he  Old  and  New  Testaments,  with  the  various 
readings  and  marginal  notes,  parallel  passages  systematically 
arranged,  numerous  philological  and  explanatory  notes,  &c., 
&c.  Medium  4to.,  pica  type,  ;£i  15s.  in  cloth  ;  crown  4to., 
small  pica  type,  ^i  is.,  cloth.     Loud.,  S.  Bagster  &  Sons. 

Generally  used  as  a  Pulpit  Bible.  Said  to  contain  4,000  notes  and 
500,000  parallel  passages,  being  all  those  of  Blayney,  Scott,  Clarke, 
and  others.    The  tables,  notes,  introductions,  &c.,  are  of  standard  value. 

20  DIODATI  (John,  1576 — 1649).     Annotations  plainly  expounding 

the  most  difficult  places.  Third  edition.  Folio.  Loud.  1651. 
[Quarto  editions  exist,  but  the  folio  is  best.     4/6.] 

Bicker stcih  says  :  "  The  spiritual  and  evangelical  remarks  are  of  much 
value."     Diodati's  notes  are  short  and  worth  consulting. 

21  DODD  (William,  D.D.)     A  Commentary  on  the  Books  of  the  Old  and  New 

Testament;  in  which  are  inserted  the  notes  and  colleclions  of  John  Locke, 

Esq.  ;  Daniel  Waterland,  D.D.  ;  the  Earl  of  Clarendon,  and  other  learned 

persons;  with  practical  improvements,  &c.  3  vols.   Folio.  Land.,  1770.  18/- 

An  almost  forgotten  production  of   tlie  unhappy  Dodd.     It   is  founded   on  the 

manuscript  collections  of  Cudworth,  Waterland,  Clarendon,  and  others.       Not   very 

likely  to  quicken  piety,  or  inspire  spiritual  thought ;  yet,   as  Adam  Clarke  thought 

very  highly  of  it,  and  Dr.  Coke  appropriated  it,  it  must  have  some  value. 

2  2     D'OYLY    AND    MANT.      Notes,   taken   principally   from    the 

Church    of    England    writers.       Published   by   the   S.P.C.K. 

Prepared    by   the   Rev.  Geo.    D'Oyly,    D.D.,    and   the   Rev. 

R.  Mant,  D.D.     3  vols.     Royal  8vo.,  with  the  text,  S.  15/-;  or 

in  I  vol.,  without  the  text,  6/-      1845,  (Sec. 
Of   moderate   value.       More  fitted  for  the  family  than  the  study, 
A  compilation  most  appreciated  among  Episcopalians. 

23  DUTCH   ANNOTATIONS  upon  the  whole  Bible,  as  ordered  by 

the    Synod    of    Dort,     16 18,  and  published    in    English,    by 
Theodore  Uaak,  Esq.     2  vols.     Folio.     Loud.,  1657.     12/- 
Similar  to  the  Westminster  Assembly's  Annotations.     (See  page  12). 

24  FAUSSET  (A.R.,  A.M.— See  Jamieson,  and  page  20.) 

25  FOURFOLD    UNION  COMMENTARY,   The.      Con- 

taining, I.  Parallel  Texts,  in  full.  H.  Commentary  of 
Matthew  Henry,  &c.  III.  Scott's  Commentary  con- 
densed. IV.  Commentary  by  Jamieson,  Fausset,  and 
Brown.     To  which  is  added  the  Biblical  Cyclopaedia,  by 


WHOLE   BIBLE.  39 

Dr.  John  Eadie,  a  Biblical  Atlas,  &c.     Two  handsome 
volumes.  Royal   4to.  ;^3  3s.  net.  Lond.,\Ves\ey.     1872. 
A  Christian  man  zvishing  for  the  cream  of  expository  writers 

could  not  make  a  better  purchase.     Ministers,  as  a  rnle,  should  not 

buy  condensations,  but  get  the  tvorks  themselves. 

26  FRASER  (Donald,   D.D.)      Synoptical  Lectures  on  the 

Books    of   Holy    Scripture.       First    Series — Genesis   to 

Canticles.      Second  Series — Isaiah  to  Acts.     Post  8vo. 

6/-  each.     Land.,  Nisbet  and  Co. 

Dr.  Fraser  has  observed,  like  many  others  of  lis,  the  mischief 

which  resjilts  from  cutting  the  Bible  into  fragments,  and  using  it 

piecemeal.     In  these  volumes  he  discourses  of  the  Bible  at  laige, 

indicates  the  scope  of  each  book,  and  furnishes  a  brief  digest  of  its 

contents.     He  has  compressed  rigorously.      The  design  was  in  itself 

most  laudable,  and  it  has  been  zvell  carried  out. 

27  GILL  (John,  D.D.     1697 — 1771).     An  Exposition  of  the 

Old  and  New  Testament.     9  Vols.     Folio.     Lond.,  \'j6'i,. 
S.  £S-    9  Vols.,  4to.,  1 8 10.  S.  A  15s.  6  Vols.,  Royal  8vo., 
1852.   £z  3s. 
Invaluable  in  its  ozvn  line  of  things.       (For  full  title  and  ex- 
tended remarks  see  pages  8  and  9.) 

28  HAAK  (Theodore).      See  under  "  Dutch  A7iJwtations." 

29  HALL    {]O^Y.VU,  T).!).  Bishop  of  Noriuich.     1574— 1656). 

Contemplations.     Several   editions  ;    the   one   published 
by  T.  Nelson,  Edinb.,  1844,  has  a  memoir  of  the  good 
Bishop  by  the  late  Dr.  James  Hamilton.     S.  4/- 
The  work  can  be  readily  procured ;  hit  if  its  price  were  raised 

in  proportion  to  its  real  value,  it  zvould  become  one  of  the  most 

costly  books  extant.     (See  page  11.) 

30  HALL  (Joseph)     A  Plain  and  Familiar  Explication,  by  way  of 

Paraphrase,  of  all  the  Hard  Texts  of  the  whole  Divine  Scrip- 
tures. Small  Folio,  1633.  S.  5/-  Also  forming  Vols.  HI.  and  IV. 
of  the  Svo.  edition  of  Hall's  works  in  12  vols.     Oxford,  1837. 
Not  so  pithy  as  the  Contemplations  ;  nor,  indeed,  could  it  be  expected 
to  be  so.     It  is  not  necessary  to  the  Student,  but  might  be  useful. 

31  HAWEIS    (Thomas.     1734— 1820).     The   Evangelical   Expositor.      2  vols. 

Folio.     1765-6.     12/- 
Partakes  of  the  author's  character ;  for  of  him   it  has  been  said,  that    ''he  was 
rather  useful  than  eminent."     The  work  is  mainly  an  abridgment  of  Henry. 

32  HAWKER   (Robert,    D.D.      1753— 1827).      The    Poor    Man's 

Commentary.     9  vols.  Svo.,  and  3  vols.  4to.     1843.     S.  30/- 
Full  of  devotion  and  sweetness.     {Seepage  13.) 


40  WHOLE    BIBLE. 

33  HENRY     (Matthew.     1662 — 17 14).     Exposition.      The 

followinj::^  arc  recent  editions.  The  prices  refer  to  new 
coi)ies.  Blackic's,  3  vols.,  Royal  4to.,  £^  los.  ;  Cassell's, 
3  vols.,  demy  4to.,  £2  12s.  6d.  ;  Griffin'.s,  3  vols.,  Super- 
royal  8vo.,  £2  10s.  ;  Nisbct's,  9  vols.,  Imp.  Svo.,  £s  3^- 
S.  from  20/-  to  30/-  according  to  condition. 
(For  title  and  remarks  see  pages  3,  4,  5.) 

34  IIOLDEN  (Georc.e,  M.A.)     Chi islian  Expositor,     2  vols.,  Svo.      1837.     4/- 
Notcs  highly  spoken  of;  we  consider  ihcm  the  most  ordinary  of  platitudes. 

35  JAMIESON   (Rev.   Dr..   Glasc^oii^.     FAUSSET    (Rev. 

A.R.  JVr/-),  and  BROWN (REV.DR.D.,yi/^m/rr;/).  THE 
LIBRARY  COMMENTARY,  Critical,  Experimental, 
and  Practical.    6  vols.  Medium  8vo.,  £}^  123.;  or  14  -each 
vol.     Collins  &  Co.,  Edinb. 
A  really  standard  work.      We  consult  it  continually,  and  zvith 

grozving  interest.     Mr.   Fanssefs   portion  strikes  us  as  being  of 

the  liighest  order.     (See  page  20.) 

The  following  are  different  forms  or  abridgments  of  the  same 
work,  each  of  which  we  can  highly  recommend  : — 

36  JAMIESON.     The  Complete  Commentaiy.    2  vols.,  Royal 

4to.,  with  maps,  £2  los.    Much  the  same  as  the  Fourfold 
Commentary.     Edinb.,  W.  Collins.     (See  No.  25.) 

37  „         The  Student's  Commentary.     4  vols.,  foolscap  Svo. 

36  per  vol.    W.  Collins. 

38  „         The  Portable  Commentary.     2  vols.,  post  Svo.      ']\6 

each.     W.  Collins,  Sons,  &  Co. 

39  KITTO   (John,  D.D.,  F.S.A.,  1804— 1850).     The  Pictorial 

Bible.     4  vols..  Imp.  Svo.,  ;^i   los.     1855.      Lond.   and 
Edinb.,  Chambers.    S.  20/- 
A  tvork  of  art  as  ivell  as  learning.     (See  page  15.) 

40  KITTO.     The  Illustrated  Commentary  of  the  Old  and  New 

Testaments.     A  reproduction  of  the   Notes,  &c.,   of  the 
Pictorial  Bible.     5  vols.,  Svo.     1840.     S.  10/6 
The  omission  of  the  text  renders  the  work  cheaper. 

41  KITTO'S  Daily  Bible  Illustrations :  being  Original  Readings 

for  a  Year,  on  subjects  relating  to   Sacred    History,  Bio- 
graphy,   Geography,   Antiquities,   and    Theology.     New  - 
edition,  edited  and  revised  by  J.  L.  Porter,  D.D.    8  vols., 
£2  8s.     Edinb.,  Oliphant  &  Co.     S.  20/- 
May  alii'ays  be  obtained,  both  new  and  second-hand.  (See  page  15.) 


WHOLE   BIBLE.  41 

42  LANGE  (J.  P.,  D.D.)     Translations  of  the  Commentaries 

of  Dr.  Lange,  and  his  CoUaborateurs.     Edited  by  Dr. 
Schaff.     T.  &  T.  Clark. 

There  are  now  ready  eight  volumes  on  the  Old 
Testament,  viz.,  Genesis,  i  vol. ;  Joshua,  Judges,  and 
Ruth,  I  vol. ;  Kings,  i  vol. ;  Job,  i  vol. ;  Psalms,  i  vol. ; 
Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  and  the  Song  of  Solomon,  i  vol ; 
Jeremiah  and  Lamentations,  i  vol.  ;  Minor  Prophets, 
I  vol.  The  other  Books  of  the  Old  Testament  are  in 
active  preparation. 

New  Testainient,  complete  in  10  vols. 
The  volumes  greatly  differ  in  excellence,  yet  none  could  be  spared. 
We  have  nothing  equal  to  them  as  a  series.     (See  page  19.) 

43  LEES   (Fred.  R.,  Ph.D.)  and  BURNS   (Dawson,    M.A.).     The 

Temperance   Bible  Commentary.      Demy  8vo.,   6/-       Lend., 

S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.     1872. 
Readers  will  probably  estimate  the  value  of  this  work  according  to 
their  views  upon  Total  Abstinence.    This  question  appears  to  be  one 
which  renders  both  advocates  and  opponents  too  warm  either  to  give 
or  accept  a  cool,  impartial  verdict ;  we  shall  not  therefore  offer  one, 

44  LEIGH   (Sir  Edward.     1602-3 — 1^7 1)-    Annotations  from  Job 

to  Canticles.    Folio.    Lond.,  1657.     2>l^- 

Annotations  upon  all  the  New  Testament.     Philological  and 
Theological.      Folio.  Lend.,   1650.  3/6.  Frequently  associated 
with  Richardson  on  the  Old  Testament.     (See  No.  71.) 
Good,  brief  notes.     Antique,  but  still  prized. 

Critica  Sacra.      In  two  parts :    I.    Observations  on   all  tlie 

primitive  Hebrew  words  of  the  Old  Testament.  II.  Philological 

and  Theological  Observations  on  all  the  Greek  words  of  the 

New  Testament.     Folio.     Loud.,  1662.     3/6. 

Home  says  this  is  ''  a  very  valuable  help  to  the  understanding  of 

the  original  languages."     Parkhurst  valued  it. 

45  MANT.     (See  D'Oyly). 

46  MAYER  (John,  D.D.)     Commentary.     6  vols,  folio,  and  i  vol. 

4to.   Lond.,     1653.       [The  seventh    volume,    containing    the 
Catholic  Epistles  and  Revelation,  was  published  in  4to.  only] 
;Q6  6s.     (For  full  title  and  remarks  see  pages  10  and  11.) 
Laborious  writing  and  heavy  reading. 

47  MILLINGTON  (Thomas  S.)     The  Testimony  of  the  Heathen  to 

the  Truths  of  Holy  Writ.     Compiled  almost  exclusively  from 
Greek  and  Latin  Authors  of  the   Classical  Ages  of  Antiquity. 
4to.     Lond.,  Seeley,  Jackson,  &  Halliday.     1863.     S.  8/- 
It  was  a  capital  idea  to  lay  the  heathen  under  contribution.     The 
author  is  at  home  in  the  Classics,  and  has  performed  his  work  well. 


42  WHOLE   BIBLE, 

4S     NESS  (CllRISTOPHF.R.    1621— 1705).   History  and  Mystery. 
4  vols.,  Folio.     Lond.,  1690 — 96.     S.  £^\.o  £'i. 
Qitaiiit,  pithy,  SH{!;gcstivc.     Full  of  remarks  such  as  arc  to  be 
found  in  Thomas  Fuller  and  Bishop  Hall.     (Sec  page  11.) 

49  NEW  BIBLE    COMMENTARY,  The.     [Sometimes   spoken  of 

as     "  The    Speaker's     Co>nma!fary."'\       In  progress.      Lend., 
Murray.      187 1,  etc.     (For  full  title  see  page  ig.) 
The  proverb  concerning  too  many  cooks  applies  also  to  Commentators. 
The  work  is  good,  but  it  might  have  been  better. 

50  PATRICK  &  LOWTH.   A  Critical  Commentary.     Cor- 

rected by  the  Rev.  f.  R.  Pitman.  6  \'ols.,  Royal  4to. 
1822.  [There  arc  other  editions,  but  some  of  them  do  not 
contain  the  whole  of  the  Commentary  ;  the  above  is  one 
of  the  best.  Good  edition  in  smaller  type,  4  vols.,  Imp. 
8vo.,  £3  3s.  Lond.,  W.  Tcgg.]    S.  24/-     lSee/>a£-e  18.) 

51  POOLE  (Matthew.   1624 — 1679).  Annotations.  Our  copy 

is  dated  1853.  Lond.,  Nisbet  &  Co.  S.  21/-  Old  folios,  14/- 
See  title  and  remarks  on  pages  6  and  7. 

52  rURVER  (Anthony.     1702— 1777).      A  New  and  Litsial  Translation,  with 

Notes.     2  vols.,  Folio.     Zand.,  1^64.     10/- 
A  Quaker  Translation.     Often  ungrammatical  and  unintelligible.     Not  without  its 
good  points,  but  much  more  curious  than  useful. 

53  RELIGIOUS  TRACT  SOCIETY'S  COMMENTARY.      From 

Henry    and    Scott,   with   numerous   observations   from    other 
writers.     Witli  the  text  and  maps,   6  vols.,  Super-royal    8vo., 
JQ2  6s.      Without  the  text,  6  vols.,  i2mo.,  ;^i  4s.     S.  9/- 
The  Society  kindly  allows  Students  to  purchase  this  work  at  a  reduced 
rate.     The  abridgements  are  carefully  executed. 

54  SCOTT  (Thomas.      1747— 182 i).     The  Holy  Bible.     A 

New  Edition.  6  vols.,  4to.  £2  10.  Loud.,  Nisbet  &  Co. 
S.  20/-  (For  title  and  remarks  see  page  12.) 
J.  M.  Neale  says  of  Seotfs  praetical  observations,  "  They  are 
sueh  as  some  men  zvonld  not  take  the  trouble  of  even  thinking,  many 
zvould  not  be  at  the  pains  of  speaking,  and — one  sJiould  have 
imagined,  ivere  not  the  fact  as  it  is — such  as  no  man  %vould  have 
condescended  to  write  dozun."  This  judgment  is  far  too  severe,  and 
reveals  the  High  Churchman  :  it  raises  Scott  in  our  esteem. 

55  SIMEON    (Charles,  M.A.     1759— 1S36).     Horae  Homireticce ; 

or,  Discourses  digested  into  one  continued  series,  and  forming 
a  Comment  upon  every  book  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  ; 
21  vols.  8vo.  Seventh  edition.  Lend.,  H.  G.  Bohn.  1845. 
S.  £,2  I  OS.  [Being  the  entire  works  of  Charles  Simeon, 
with  Copious  Indexes,  prepared  by  T.  Hartwell  Home.] 
Not  Commentaries,  but  we  could  not  exclude  them.  They  have 
been  called  "  a  valley  of  dry  bones"  :  be  a  prophet  and  they  will  live. 


WHOLE   BIBLE.  43 

56  SPEAKER'S  COMMENTARY,The.  (See  Netu Bible  Commentary). 

57  SUTCLIFFE     (Joseph,    M.A.       Wesley  an   Minister).     A    Com- 

mentary; containing  Copious  Notes.     Imp.  Svo.,  12/6.   Lond., 

66,  Paternoster  Row,  E.C.     S.  7/- 
To  comprise  the  whole  Bible  in  one  volume  necessitated  notes  few 
and  brief.     Sutcliffe,  though  an  Arminian,  is  in  general  so  good  that  we 
wish  we  had  more  of  him;  his  style  is  vivacious  and  forcible. 

58  TEMPERANCE  BIBLE  COMMENTARY,  (The).    {^tQ  Lees  R.) 

59  TRAPP     (John.     161  r — 1669).     Commentary.     5    vols,, 

Folio.  1654,  etc.  There  are  also  4to.  editions  of  parts 
of  the  Commentary.  Reprinted  by  Mr.  R.  D.  Dickinson, 
Farringdon  Street,  E.C,  in  5  vols..  Super-royal  8vo.,  price 
£2  i8s.  6d.  (published  at;^3  15s.)  ;  or,  12/6  each  vol.  nett. 
Oh,  rare  John  Trapp!     (See  pages  7  and  8.) 

60  WALL  (William,  D.D.     1646— 1720).     Critical  Notes  on  the  Old  and  New 

Testament.     3  vols.,  Svo.     Lond.,  1730-34.     S.  3/6. 
Dr.  Wall  was  the  great  champion  of  infant  baptism  against  the  learned  Gale.     His 
notes  are  good,  but  out  of  date. 

61  WELLS     (Edward,    D.D.,     Died  1724).       Help  for  the  more 

easy  and  clear  understanding  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.     6  vols., 
4to.     Oxford,  1724,  etc.     18/- 
Seldom  to  be  met  with  complete,  but  this  need  not  be  regretted,  for 
though  somewhat  useful,  it  is  not  of  primary  importance. 

62  WESLEY  (John,  A.M.     1703— 1791).      Notes  on  Old  and  New 

Testament.  4  vols.,  4to.  Lond.,  1764.    S.  20/-    [Editions  of  the 

New  Test.,  with  Wesley's  Azotes,  are  published  at  the  Wesleyan 

Conference  Office.      iSmo.,  2/-;   8vo.,    4/-] 

The  Notes  on  the  New  Testament  are  esteemed,  but  Dr.  Clark  says 

that  those  on  the  Old  are  meagre  and  unsatisfactory.     He  is  quite  right. 

6t,     WILSON   (Thomas,  D.D.     1663— 1755.     Bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man).     The 
Holy  Bible,  with  Notes  and  various  renderings.     By  the  Rev.  C.  Crutwell. 
3  vols.,  4to.     Lond.,  1785. 
The  good  Bishop's  notes  are  brief  hints,  only  intended  for  the  explanation  or  practical 

improvement   of  certain  passages  ;  their  value  to   Biblical  Students  is  inconsiderable. 

Crutwell's  various  readings  are  numerous.     We  gave  no  less  than  £-i>  3S-  for  the  copy 

by  which  we  have  been  able  to  fonn  this  estimate  ;  but  for  our  own  use  we  should  be 

sorry  to  give  half-a-guinea  for  it. 

64  WORDSWORTH  (Christopher,  D.D.    Bishop  of  Lin- 

coin).     See  page  18. 

65  YOUNG   (Robert,    LL.D.)      Commentary   on   the   Bible,  as   Literally   and 

Idiomatically  Translated.     Crown  Svo.     Lond.,  FuUarton  &  Co.     S.  3/6. 
Too  small  to  be  of  any  use.     You  cannot  put  the  sea  into  a  tea  cup. 


-11  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

OLD  TESTAMENT,  OR  CONSIDERABLE  PORTIONS 

THEREOF. 

66  AINSWORTH  (IlKNKV,  7J/6V/  1622).     Annotations  upon 

the  Five  15ookcs  of  Moses,  the   Bookc  of  Psahnes,  and 
the    Son[j    of  Songs :  wherein    the   Hebrew  words  and 
sentences  are  compared  with   the  Grcekc  and  Chaldce 
versions.    Folio.  Loud.,    \62y  and  1639.     7/- 
"  A  inswortJi  iv.is  a   celebrated  scholar  and  an  excellent  divine. 
His  Jinconinion  skill  in  Hebrczu  learninq;  and  his  excellent  Com- 
mentaries on  the  Scriptures  are  held  in  high  reputation  to   this 
day!' — Brook's  Lives  of  the  Puritans. 

67  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.  D.D.),  Christology  of  the  Old  Testa- 

ment :  a  Comnicntary  on  the  Messianic  Predictions.  4  vols., 
£z  2s.  Ediiib.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1858.  S.  20/- 
This  great  work  deals  with  a  most  vital  theme  in  a  masterly  manner  ; 
it  has  always  been  held  in  high  esteem.  We  confess,  however,  that  we 
can  only  read  it  as  a  task,  for  the  dry  scholastic  style  repels  us,  and  it 
seems  to  us  that  in  answering  a  number  of  sceptical  doctors,  whose 
opinions  are  ridiculous,  the  author  has  made  much  ado  about  nothing. 

68  HORSLEY  (Samuel,  LL.D.,   F.R.S.,  and  F.A.S.     Bishop  of  St. 

Asaph.     1733 — 1806).     Biblical  Criticism  on  the  first  fourteen 

Historical  Books  of  the  Old  Testament ;  also  on  the  first  nine 

Prophetical  Books.      Second  edition.     2  vols.,   Svo.      ZoKa., 

1844.     S.  7;'6. 

These  criticisms  will  be  of  more  interest  to  the  scholar  than  of  value 

to  the  minister.     Horslcy  was  far  too  ready  to  invent  new  readings;  yet 

he  was  a  master  in  his  own  line.     He  writes  very  dogmatically  and  with 

a   violent    bias  toward  a  theory  of  interpretation    which,   with  all  its 

excellencies,  cannot   be   everywhere   maintained.      Numbers  of  other 

writers  have  followed  in  his  track,  but  none  with  equal  footsteps. 

69  JACKSON    (Arthur,  M.A.      1593— 1666).      A    Help  for   the 

Understanding  of  the   Holy  Scriptures   (Genesis    to  Isaiah). 
4  vols.  4to.     1643,  etc.     10/  to  20/- 
Rather  tame,  but  will  well  repay  quiet  reading.     His  works  are  now 
somewhat  rare.     (Seepage  11.) 

70  ORTON    (Job,    D.D.       1717— 17S3).      Exposition   of  the  Old 

Testament,  with  Devotional  and  Practical  Reflections,  Published 
from  the  Author's  Manuscripts,  by  Robert  Gentleman.     6  vols. 
Svo.     Shrciusbury,  178S.     Reprinted,  1S22.     S.  6/- 
A  sort  of  paraphrase,  after  the  manner  of  Doddridge  s  Family  Exposi- 
tor, which  it  was  intended  to  accompany.     Not  a  very  able  production. 

71  RICHARDSON  (John,  .^/j/^^/^/^;7/.^^^//.    Z>/V^- 1654).     Choice 

Observations  and  Explanations  upon  the  Old  Testament,  con- 
taining in  them  many  remarkable  matters,  additional  to  the 
large  Annotations  made  by  some  of  the  Assembly  of  Divines. 
Folio,  1655.  S.  26. 
Of  secondary  importance,  and  very  short ;  yet  good.  Frequently 
bound  \\\)  witli  Zr/c//  (No.  /j). 


PENTATEUCH.  45 

PENTATEUCH    AND  OTHER  HISTORICAL   BOOKS  OF 
THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

72  AINS WORTH  (Henry),  Annotations  on  the  Pentateuch 

{See  also  No.  66).     4to.     1616.     2/6. 
Thoroughly  learned.     Though  old,  not  out  of  date. 

73  ALEXANDER  (William).     The  Pentateuch,  with  Notes.     S.  1/6. 
A  book  of  no  importance. 

74  BABINGTON  (Gervase,  ^/j-//^/o/?F^;r^j/^r.     Died    1610).    In   Bahin^c^ton's 

Worl's,  folio,  1622,  there  are  "  Certaineplain,  brief,  and  comfortable  notes" 
upon  the  five  boohs  of  Moses.     Whole  \\-orks  20/. 

Our  copy  is  in  the  old  Black  Letter.  It  contains  little  to  repay  the  student  for  toil- 
ing through  the  old-fashioned  expressions. 

75  BARRETT  (R.  A.   F.,  M.A.).     A  Synopsis   of  Criticisms  upon 

those  passages  of  the  Old  Testament  in  which  modern  commen- 
tators have  differed  from  the  Authorized  Version.  2  vols,  in 
2  parts  each,  and  vol.  III.  part  i,  large  8vo.,  1847.  [Only 
extends  from  Genesis  to  Esther.]    S.  10/6, 

The  object  of  this  Avork  is  to  lay  before  the  reader  the  principal 
alterations  which  modern  critics  have  proposed  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  together  with  the  reasons  for  or  against  such  emendations. 
Many  of  the  notes  are  in  Latin.     Of  small  use  to  the  average  minister. 

76  BATE      (Julius,    M.A.      1711— 1771).      New    Literal    Translation   of    the 

Pentateuch  and  Historical  Books  to  end  of  2  Kings.  With  Notes.  .4to. 
Lond.,  1773.     4/- 

Paper  spoiled.      We  greatly  grudge  the  four  shillings  which  we  gave  for  it. 

77  BIBLE  TEACHINGS;    or,  Remarks  on  Genesis,   Exodus,  and 

Leviticus.       With   Recommendatory  Preface  by  Rev.  W.  B. 

Mackenzie.     8vo.     Lond.,  1855.     S.  2/6, 
This  book  was  written  by  the    Three  Misses  Bird,  of  Taplow.     The 
Remarks  are  very  plain  and  practical,  and  a  spirit  of  earnest  piety  and 
fervent  prayer  pervades  them  throughout. 

78  BLUNT   (Henry,  A.M.      Died  1843).       Family  Exposition    of 

Pentateuch.  1844.  3  vols.,  izmo.  6/-  each.  Hatchards. 
S.  3  vols.  5/- 

See  remarks  under  each  separate  volume. 

79  BRIGHTWELL   (T.)     Notes  selected  from  the  exegetical  parts 

of  RosemniUlei-'' s  Scholia,  and   of  Dathe's  Notes   to   his  Latin 

version ;    also  from  Schrank,   Michaelis,   Le  Clerc,  Ainsworth, 

Poole,  and  other  authors.     8vo.     Land.,  1840.     S.  1/6. 

This  writer  worked  very  industriously  at  the   almost  impossible  task 

of  condensing  the  twenty-eight  volumes  of  Rosenmiiller''s  Notes.    Besides 

the  remarks  from  authors  mentioned  in  the  text,  there  are  observations 

from  the  manuscripts  of  yoseph  Kinghor?i,  of  Norwich.     It  is  not  a 

didactic  or  spiritual  work,  but  almost  entirely  explanatory  and  illustrative. 


4G  rr:NTATKUCII. 

80  CHRIST  IN  THE  LAW;   or  the  (lospcl   foreshadowed  in   the  Pentateuch. 

Compiled    by    a    Priest   of  tlic  Church    of    England.       CllRisr    in    the 
Pnorii  1:1s.— Joshua  to  Kings.      2  vols.,  l'"oolscap  8vo.     3/6  each.     Land. 
Masters,  1872  and  1873. 
Of  the  High  Church  order,  and  praised  by  the   Saturday  Review.     What  worse 

need  be  saiil  ?     Vet  will  we  add  that  the  savour   of  Christ  in  these  books  saves  them 

from  unqualified  condemnation. 

81  DKLGADO  (Isaac.  Jc7cish7\'achcr).    New  Translation.  4to.  Loud.,  1789.  2/- 
Thc  author  modestly  says,  that  his  work  is  highly  useful.     This  is  another  instance 

of  paternal  partiality,  and  of  "great  cry  and  little  wool." 

82  ETIIERIDGE  Q.  W.,  M.A.).     The  Targums  of  Onkelos  and  Jonathan  Ben 

U/.ziel  on  the  Pentateuch,  with  tlie   Fragments  of  the  Jerusalem  Targum. 

Leviticus,  Numbers,  and  Deuteronomy.      8vo.      Land.,  Longmans,    1865. 

S.  7,6. 
Comparatively  few  of  our  readers  will  set  much  store  by  the  Targums  of  Onkelos 
and  Jonathan  Ben  Uzziel;  but  those  who  desire  to  read  them  will  find  here  a  good 
literal  version. 

83  GEDDES  (Alexander,  LL.D.— yi  Roman  Catholic  f//i/w.— 1737— 1802.)-- 

Translation  from  corrected  texts  with  various  Readings  and  Notes.     [Genesis 
to  Ruth  only  published.]     3  vols  ,  410.,  1792— 1800.     12/- 
The  author  was  a  Hebraist  of  considerable  repute,  but  treated  the  inspired  word  far 
too  flippantly.     His  style  of  criticism  is  essentially  sceptical. 

84  GERLACH  (Otto  Von.    1801— 1849).     Pentateuch.    Translated 

by   the   Rev.    Henry   Downing.     Demy   8vo.,  10/6.     Edinb., 

T.  &  T.  Clark. 
Very  different  from  other  German  authors.  Plain,  clear,  and  instructive. 
Not   choked   up   with   metaphysical   bewilderments   and  long  lists  of 
sceptical  authors  whose  names  defile  the  pages  which  bear  them. 

85  HAVERNICK  (Dr.  II.  A.  Ch.)     Historico-Critical  Introduction  to  the  Penta- 

teuch.    Translated  by  A.  Thomson,  A.M.      Edinb.,  Clark.    1850.    S.  10/6. 
Almost  entirely  occupied  with  a  discussion  upon  the  genuineness  of  the  Pentateuch. 
A  check  to  the  rationalistic  and  infidel  spirit.     Those  who  have  never  taken  the 
poison  do  not  need  the  antidote. 

Zd     HENGSTENBERG  (E.W.,  D.D.)  Genuineness  of  the  Pentateuch. 
Translated  by  J.  E.  Ryland.    2  vols.,  8vo.    Edinb..,  1847.    S.  8/- 
This  great  author  contends  ably  for  the  Pentateuch,  but  the  perusal 
of  his  book  reminds  us  of  the  king  who 

"Fought  all  his  battles  o'er  again, 
And  thrice  he  routed  all  his  foes,and  thrice  he  slew  the  slain." 

87  „  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses  ;  or,  the  Books  of  Moses 
Illustrated  by  the  Monuments  of  Egypt.  8vo.  7/6.  Edinb., 
1845.     T.&  T.Clark. 

Dr.  Hengstenberg,  as  Professor  at  Berlin,  had  access  to  the  rich 
collection  of  Egyptian  antiquities  in  the  Museum,  and  he  has  made 
noble  use  of  his  advantages. 

88  HOWARD  (The  Hon.  E.  J.,  D.D..  Dean  of  Lichfield.)     1.    Genesis  according 

to  the  LXX.     Translated    into    English,    with    Notes  on    the   Passages  in 
which  it  dilTers  from  our  Authorized  Version.     Cr.  8vo.     8/6.     2.    Exodus 
and    Leviticus,     10/6.      3.    Numbers    and    Deuteronomy,    10/6.      Camb., 
Macmillan,   1857,  etc.      S.  3/6  each. 
Of  no   particular  use  to  preachers  ;  but   the   Guardian  says,  "It  is  an  excellent 

introduction  to  the  comparative  study  of  God's  word,  in  those  three  laiiguages  with 

which  an  ordinary  English  student  is  mainly  concerned." 


PENTATEUCH.  47 

89  JAMIESON(r.,  LL.D.)     The  Pentateuch,  with  Notes,  &c.     [Anon.]     Folio, 

Lond.,  174S.      S.  6/- 
Published  anonymously.     Mainly  a  compilation,  in  which  more  industry  was  shown 
in  the  collection  than  discretion  in  the  selection. 

90  KALISCH  (M.M.,  Ph.D.)     Historical  and  Critical   Commentary 

on  the  Old  Testament ;  with  a  New  Translation.    8vo.    Vol.  I. 

Genesis,  i8/-j  or,  adapted  for  the  general  reader,   12/-     Vol.  11. 

Exodus,    15/-,    12/-      Vol.    in.     Leviticus,    part    i,   15/-,  8/- 

Vol.  IV.  Leviticus,  part  2,  15/-,  8/.  Lond.,  Longmans.  1858. 
Contains  a  large  amount  of  historical  illustration,  shedding  new  light 
upon  the  letter  of  the  Word.  The  author  has  used  the  fresh  informa- 
tion which  has  come  to  us  from  the  Euphrates  and  the  Nile.  At  the 
same  time  he  sows  scepticisms  broadcast,  and  we  cannot  recommend  him. 

91  KEIL  (Carl    Friedrich,  D.D.,  Ph.D.)     Pentateuch.     3  vols., 

8vo.     31/6.     ^^//z^^-.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1864. 
A  work  for  the  learned.     It  has  receive4-the-highest  commendations 
from  competent  scholars.     But  it  is  somewhat  dull  and  formal. 

92  KELLY   (William).      Introductory  Lectures.     Cr.  8vo.,  4/6.    Load..,  W.  H. 

Broom. 
By  a  leading  writer  of  the  exclusive  Plymouth  school.     Not  to  our  mind. 

ijl      KIDDER  (Richard,  D.D.,  Bp.  of  Bath  and  Wells.— Ti\&ii  1703).     Five  Books 
of  Moses.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Lond.,  1694.     4/. 
Of  no  importance :  a  chip  in  the  porridge :  mild  as  a  modern  bishop. 

94  KINGSLEY     (Charles,    M.A.,    Canon   of    Westminster.      Died 

1875).    The  Gospel  of  the  Pentateuch.  [18  sermons].  Foolscap 

8vo.     3/6,     Lond.,  Macmillan. 
A  small  volume  of  Kingslefs  usual  sort.     Not  over-freighted  with 
what  is  usually  known  as  the    Gospel ;  but  plain  and  practical,  with 
common-sense  remarks  for  common  people. 

95  LAW  (Henry,  M.A.,  Dean  of  Gloucester).     "  Christ  is  All." 

The  Gospel  of  the  Old  Testament.     Several  editions ;  a 
recent  one  is  published  by  the  Religious  Tract  Society, 
in  4  vols.,  Cr.  8vo.     2/-  each. 
Deservedly  popular.     Simple,  instructive,  full  of  Christ.     Law 
abounds  in  gospel. 

96  MACDONALD  (Donald,  M.A.)     Introduction,  and  an  enquiry 

into   the   genuineness,   authority   and   design   of  the    Mosaic 
writings.     2  vols.,  demy  8vo.     21/-     Edinb.,  Clark.     1861. 
"A  full  review  of  the  evidence,  external  and  internal,  for  the  genuine- 
ness, authenticity,  and  Divine  character  of  the  Pentateuch.     Its  special 
attention  is  devoted  to  the  connection  between  the  Pentateuch  and  the 
great  scheme  of  revelation,  of  which  it  forms  the  basis." — Guardian. 

97  MORISON  (James,  1762— 1809).     Introductory  Key  to  the  first  four  Books  of 

Moses;  being  an  attempt   to  show   that  the   great   desigii    of  the  things 
recorded  therein  was  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  following  glory.     8vo. 
Perth,  1 8 10.     S.  3/- 
Plain,  forcible,  and  instructive  remarks,  realizing  the  title— an  Introductory  Key. 


48  PENTATEUCH. 

9S      TAKKKR    (,Samui:i.,  son   of  /./.    Samtid   J'urL-r).     Bibliotlicca  Biblica  ;  a 

Commentary  gathered   out   of  tlie   writings   of  fathers   and    ecclesiastical 

historians,   &c.     [Anonymous.]     5  vols.,   4to.     Ox/.,  1720,  etc.     [Genesis 

to  Deuteronomy  only  completed.]     35/- 

Z?(7;7/«^'- says,  that  this  is  "a  commentary  of  profound  learninij  and  research;"  but 

it  Seems  to  us  to  be  mainly  filled  with  that  archaic  learning  which  is  nov/  out  of  date. 

99  PIERCK    (Samuei,   Eyles).     Discourses  on   the  several  Revelations  of  the 

Lord  Jesus,  from  the  Fall,  to  Moses,  &c.     8vo.     Loud.,  1S15.     S.  3/- 
Dr.  Iliucker  says,  that  "these  Discourses  carry  with  them  testimonies  of  being 
written  under  Divine  teaching."     Sweet,  but  not  very  expository. 

100  rVLE  (Thomas,  M. A.     1674— 1756).     Paraphrase,  with  Notes.   4vols.,  8vo. 

1717—28.     S.  3/-     [Genesis  to  Esther  only.] 
A  pile  of  paper,  valuable  to  housemaids  for  lighting  fires. 

101  ROBERTSON  (James,  A.M.)     Clavis  Pentateuchi.     Analysis  of  the  Hebrew 

words  in  the  Pentateuch,  with  Notes.     Reprinted,  edited  by  Kittghorn,  at 
Norwich,  1824.     Svo.     S.  9/- 
Almost  entirely  in  Latin,  and  therefore  useful  only  to  those  who  can  readily  read 
that  language.     The  work  was  in  good  repute  in  its  day. 

102  SAURIN    (James.      1677—1730).      Dissertations   on   the   most  memorable 

events  of  the  Bible.     [Vol.  I.,  The  Books  of  Moses,  was  all  ever  published 
in  English.     Folio.     Loud.,  1723].     S.  5/- 
More  eloquent  than  accurate.     Florid  rather  than  solid. 

103  SHEPHEARD  (H.,  M.A.)   Traditions  of  Eden  ;  or,  Proofs  of  the 

Historical   Truth  of  the  Pentateuch,  from   existing  facts,  and 
from  the  Customs  and  Monuments  of  all  Nations.     Demy  Svo. 
lo/-     Lofid.,  Nisbet  &  Co. 
A  very  interesting  and  curious  work.  Good  lectures  might  be  gathered 
from  it  for  week-night  instruction.     Not  a  Commentary. 

104  STANLEY    (Arthur  Penrhyn,    D.D.,  Dean  of  Westminster). 

Lectures  on  the  History  of  the  Jewish  Church.    Part  I.  Abraham 

to   Samuel.     Part  H.    Samuel  to  the  Captivity.     2  vols.,  Svo 

32'-     Lofid.,  1870.     S.  18/- 

A  fascinating  book,  which  no  one  can  read  without  being  the  better 

able  to  realize  the  scenes  of  Scripture  history.      The  author's  broad 

views  are  known  and  deplored  :  that  he  has  equal  breadth  of  learning 

we  cheerfully  admit. 

105  THISTLEWAITE  (W.,  M.A.)     Expository  Sermons.    4  vols.,  i2mo.     Loud, 

1837-8.     S.  2/6. 
Sermons  as  good  as  these  are  plentiful  as  blackberries.     "Why  were  they  printed  ? 

106  TO\YNSEND  (George,  D.D.,  Canon  of  Durham).     The  Pentateuch  and  the 

Book  of  Job,  arranged  in  Chronological  Order,  with  Prayers  and  Notes. 
2  vols.,  Svo.     Loud.,  1849.     10/- 
A  singular  combination  of  family  prayers,  essays  and  rotes,  by  an  able  but  singular 
writer. 

107  WRIGHT  (Abraham).     A  Practical  Commentary,  wherein  the 

Text  of  every  Chapter  is  Practically  expounded,  in  a  way  not 

usually  trod  by  Commentators.     Folio.     1662.     10/6  to  20/- 

An  extremely  rare  book.     The  style  and  matter  are  after  the  manner 

of  Christof/ier  A''ess.     Wright  does  not  comment  upon  every  verse,  but 

after  indicating  the  run  of  the  chapter  gives  little  sermons  upon  the 

more  salient  points.     He  is  very  quaint  ahd  pithy. 


GENESIS.  49 

GENESIS. 

io8     ALFORD  (Henry,    Dean  of  Canterbury.      1 8 lo— 1 871). 

The  Book  of  Genesis  and  part  of  the  Book  of  Exodus 

[Ch.  I. — XXV.]  :  a  revised  version,  with  Commentary. 

Demy  8vo.     12/-     Lond.,  W.  Isbister  &  Co.     1872. 

TJie  zvorks  of  this  eminent  scholar  are  too   well  knoxvti   and 

appreciated  to  need  even  a  word  from  us, 

109     BLUNT  (Henry,  M.A.)     Genesis  [Vol.  I.  of  a  Family  Exposi- 
tion of  the  Pentateuch,   ismo.  Lo?id.,  Hatchards.  1841].  S.  1/6. 
Simple  Expositions  for  family  reading.     Good,  but  not  brilliant. 

no    BURROUGHS  (W.  K.,  M.A.)     Lectures  on  Genesis.     8vo.     ZP/^^.,  1848. 
Useful  to  grocers  and  buttermen.     Worth  nothing  to  students. 

1 1 1  BUSH    (George.     Frof.  of  Heb.  and  Orient.  Lit..,  New    York). 

Notes   on   Genesis.     2    vols.,    small    8vo.     New    York,   1852. 

Reprinted  in  London  in  i  vol.,  8vo.  S.  5/- 
Bush  has  in  the  most  barefaced  manner  taken  copious  verbatim  extracts 
from  Andrew  Fuller,  without  acknowledgment,  and  he  has  also  plagiarized 
Lazuson  on  Joseph  by  wholesale,  without  even  mentioning  his  name. 
For  such  a  scholar  to  be  guilty  of  wholesale  plunder  is  inexcusable. 
It  is  one  of  the  worst  cases  of  robbery  we  have  ever  met  with,  and 
deserves  a  far  stronger  denunciation  than  our  gentle  pen  and  slender 
space  will  permit. 

112  CALVIN  (John).     Genesis,  translated  by  Tho.  Tymme. 

Black  letter.     4to.     Lond.,  i^J^.     9/- 
Participates  in  the  gejteral  excellencies  of  Calvin  s  zvorks. 

113  OANDLISH  (Robert  S.,  D.D.)    Lectures.    New  edition. 

2  vols.,  8vo.     10/6.     Edinb.,  Adam  Black.      1842. 
We  venture  to  characterize  this  as  THE  work  7ipon  Genesis,  so 
far  as  lectures  can  make  up  art  exposition  ;  we  have  greatly  profited 
by  its  perusal.     It  should  be  in  every  Biblical  library. 

114  CLOSE  (Francis,  D.D.,   A.M.,  Dean  0/ Carlisle).     Historical  Discourses. 

i2mo.     Loud.,  1828.     S.  2/6. 
A  course  of  smoothly-flowing,  respectable,  quiet,  evangelical  sermons.     Nobody 
could  be  so  wicked  as  to  call  them  sensational. 

115  COGHLAN  (C.  L.)     Genesis  and  St.  Matthew.    2  vols.,  8vo.      1832.      2>l^- 
Consists  entirely  of  parallel  and  illustrative  passages  of  Scripture  printed  in  full; 

it  is  superseded  by  the  Commentary  Wholly  Biblkal. 

116  GUMMING  (John,    D.D.,    F.R.S.E.)     Scripture   Readings   on 

Genesis.     Small  8vo.     Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.     1853.     S.  2/- 
Dr.  Cmnmings  works  are  not  very  criginal,  but  his  style  is  flowing, 
his  teachings  are  always  evangelical,  and  he  puts  other  men's  thoughts 
into  p.leasing  language. 

5 


50  GENESIS. 

117  DANVSON    (AnRAHAM).     New  Translation   of  Genesis   [I.— XVIT.],    with 

Notes.     4to.      I.ond.,  1763.     2/6. 
Tainted  with  infidelity.     A  writer  of  the  Gcddcs  school. 

1 18  DIMOCK  (Hknry).     Notes.     4to.      Gloucester,  \%Oi,.     2/- to  4/- 

Chiefly  taken  up  with  the  various  readings  of  Hebrew  MS.S.     The  young  student 
will  not  value  it.     The  same  author  has  written  on  E.xodus  and  the  Prophets. 

119  FRANKS  (James,  A.M.)     Sacred  Literature;  or,  Remarks  on  Genesis.    8vo. 

Halifax,  1802.      S.  2/-  to  4/- 
This  writer  collected  notes  from  various  authors.     As  the  sources  from  which  he 
drew  his  extracts  are  within  reach,  we  can  select  for  ourselves. 

120  FULLER  (Andrew,  1754— 1 81 5).  Expository  Discourses 

on   Genesis.      One  small  vol.,    1/6.      (Also   in   Fuller  s 
IVor/cs.) 
Weighty,  judicious,  and  full  of  Gospel  truth.     One  of  the  very 
best  series  of  discourses  extant  upon  Genesis,  as  Bush  also  thought. 

131      GIBBENS  (Nicholas).     Questions  and  Disputations  concerning  Holy  Scrip- 
ture.    Genesis.     410.     1602.     3/- 
In  his  own  fashion  this  antique  writer  tries  to  answer  curious  questions  which  are 
suggested  by  Genesis.     His  day  is  over. 

122  GREENFIELD  (William,  M.R.A.S.     Editor  of  the  Covtprchen- 

sive  Bible).     Genesis  in   English  and   Hebrew,  with  an  Inter- 
linear Translation,  Notes,  and  Grammatical  iDtroduction.     8vo. 
Land.,  1862.     S.  3/- 
Tliis    work  will  not  only  enable  the   Student  to  get  at  the  literal 
meaning  of  the  text,  but  may  be  used  as  an  introduction  to  the  Hebrew 
language.     The  plan  is  most  admirable,  and  we  earnestly  commend  it 
to  the  attention  of  those  uninstructed  in  the  sacred  tongue. 

123  GROVES  (Henry  Charles,  M.A.)     Commentary  on  Genesis, 

for  readers  of  the  English  version.  Small  8vo.  Lond.  and  Camb., 
Macmillan  &  Co.     1861.     S.  2/-  to  6/- 
Physical    science,   the   discoveries  of   travellers,   and  the  results  of 
criticism,  so  far  as  they  bear  upon  Genesis,  are  here  brought  within  the 
reach  of  the  general  reader. 

124  HARWOOD  (T.)     Annotations.     8vo.     Lond.,  1789.      1/6. 

The  author  professed  to  offer  his  work  with  great  diffidence,  and  he  had  just  cause 
to  do  so  :  he  had  better  have  burned  his  manuscript. 

125  HAWKER    (John,    M.A.)     Bible   Thoughts   in    Quiet   Hours. 

Genesis.     Small  Cr.  Svo.     3/-    Lond.,  Yapp.     1873. 

Deeply  spiritual  reflections,  not  without  learning  and  critical  power. 
The  preacher  will  find  here  many  hints  for  sermons. 
ia6      HEAD  (F.  A.)     The  World  and  its  Creator.     Cr.  Svo.     Lond.,\%i,'].     2/. 

One  of  the  razxvy  good  \>oqV%  which  from  lack  of  vigour  are  only  "born  to  die." 

127    HUGHES  (George,  B.D.,P;/r/V^;/,  1603— 1667).     Analy- 
tical Exposition  of  Genesis,  and  of  XXIII.  chapters  of 
Exodus.     Folio.     1672.     10/6  to  15/- 
T/ic  deductions  which  Hughes  draws  from  the  text  are  of  the 
vaiure  of  homilctical  hints,  and  for  this  reason  he  zvill  be  a  treasure 
to  the  minister.     He  belongs  to  the  noble  arvuj  of  Puritans. 


GENESIS.  51 

128  JACOBUS     (Melancthon    W.,    Professor  of    Biblical 

Literature,  Alleghany,   U.  S).     Notes.     2  vols.  sm.  8vo. 

Neiv  York,  1866.      S.  8/- 
A   very  vabiable  work,   in   whicJi   Colenso  is    boldly  met  and 
answered.     It  contains  much  Gospel  teaching,  and  aids  the  preacher 
greatly.     Not  easily  to  be  obtained.     It  ought  to  be  reprinted. 

129  JERVIS-WHITE-JERVIS  (John)    Genesis  :  a  New  Translation 

collated  with  the  Samaritan,  Septuagint,  and  Syriac,  with  Notes, 

8vo.     12/-     Lottd.,  Bagsters.     1852.     S.  5/- 
Brings  out  very  vividly  the  oriental  character  of  Genesis,  and  although 
we  cannot  reconcile  ourselves  to  Abh-rauhaum,  Is'hauk,  and  Y'aakobh, 
and  find  it  hard  to  believe  in  Saurauh  and  Ifaug/iaur,  we  have  been 
glad  of  the  light  which  the  East  and  its  languages  have  here  afforded. 

130  JUKES  (Andrew).    Types  of  Genesis.    8vo.    7/6.    Lond.,  Long- 

mans.    1858.     S.  3/6. 
In  many  places  far  too  forced,  and  therefore  to  be  read  with  caution ; 
but  in  its  own  spiritualizing  way  very  masterly.     Jukes  dives  deep. 

131  LANGE'S  COMMENTARY  edited  by  Dr.  Schafif.  Vol.  I. 

Commentary  on   Genesis.     Imp.  8vo.,  21/-;   or  to  sub- 
scribers, 15/-     Edinb.,T.%iT.C\^xk.     1868. 
The  best  of  the  series,  and  in  all  respects  beyond  price. 

132  M[ACKINTOSH]  (C.  H.).  Notes  on  Genesis.  By  C.  H.  M. 

i2mo.     Second  Edition.    2/6.     Lond.,  G.  Morrish.     1858. 
Precious  and  edifying  reflections  marred  by  peculiarities. 

133  MACGREGOR  (Sir  C.,  Bart.,   M.A.)     Notes  for  Students  in 

Divhiity.  Parti.  [Chap,  i.-xi.]  8vo.  Zc"?/^/.,  Parker.  1853.  S.  3/- 
Contains  a  great   deal   of  learning,   of  small  use  to  the  preacher. 
Many  curious  and  knotty  points  which  arise  in  the  first  eleven  chapters 
of  Genesis  are  discussed  with  considerable  ability. 

134  MURPHY  {]K^iY.'~>G.X'^^.,Professor  of  Hebreiv,Bclfast). 

Commentary  on  Genesis,  with  a  New  Translation.     8vo. 
10/6.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1863.     S.  5/6. 
'M  work  of  massive  scholarship,  abounding  in  rich  and  noble 
thought,  and  remarkably  fresh  and  suggestive!' — Evangelical  Mag. 

135  OSBURN  (William).     Israel  in  Egypt ;  or,  the  Books  of  Genesis 

and  Exodus  illustrated  by  existing  Monuments.     Small  8vo.   5/- 
Lond.,  Seeleys.     1856.     S.  2/- 
Not  a  Commentary ;  but  a  volume  full  of  interest,  which  should  be 
studied  by  all  who  would  understand  this  portion  of  history. 

136  PAUL  (William,  A.M.)     Analysis  and  Critical  Interpretation  of  the  Hebrew 

Text,    preceded    by    a    Hebrew    Grammar.      8vo.      Edinb.   and  Lottd., 
W.  Blackwood  &  Sons.     1852.     S.  8/- 
Designed  to  promote  the  study  of  Hebrew.     Not  a  comment,  but  rather  a  gram- 
matical exercise.     Useful  to  students  of  the  sacred  tongue. 


.V2      GENESIS- EARLY  CHAPTERS,  AND  PATRIARCHS. 

137  rUKSTON  (TiiF.ODORK,  M.A.)     riiraicoloj^ical  Notes  on  the  Hebrew  Test. 

8vo.     I.omi.,  1S53.     S.  4/- 
Intenilcd  to  explain  and  illustiate  the  most  remarkable  peculiarities  and  anomalies 
of  matter,  style,  and  phrase  in  the  Book  of  Genesis.     It  may  interest  Ilcbrais'.s,  but 
can  little  aid  the  preacher. 

138  .SIHTIIORl'E  (RiciiARn  Wai.do,  U.D.)     Genesis,  with  Brief  Observations. 

Imp.  8vo.     Land.,  1S35.     ^-  2/6. 
Merc  platitudes.     Paper  spoiled. 

139  TURNER  (Samuel  H.,  D.D.,  Prof.  Columbia  Coll.,  Neiu  York). 

A  companion  to  Genesis.     8vo.     Nav  York,  1851.     S.  4/6. 
In  Home's  Introduction  we  read  : — "  Though  not   designed  to  be  a 
Commentary,   this  valuable  work  furnislies  the  Biblical  student  with 
abundant  aid  for  the  exact  and   literal  interpretation  of  the  Book  of 
Genesis." 

140  WARNER  (Richard).     Exposition.    i2mo.  Lond.,  Longmans.    1840.  S.  2/- 
Common-place  remarks;  intended  to  be  used  at  family  worship.     Likely  to  send 

the  servants  to  sleep. 

141  WHATELEY  (Wilu.vm).   Prototypes;  or,  the  Primaric Precedent 

Presidents  out  of  the   Booke   of  Genesis.     Shewing   the  Good 

and  Bad  Things  they   Did  and  Had.     Practically  adapted  to 

our  Information  and  Reformation.     Folio.     Lond.,  1640.     5/6. 

A  queer  old  book.      The  oddity  of  the  title  is  borne  out  by  the 

singularity  of  the  matter.     It  does  not  expound  each  verse  ;  but  certain 

incidents  are  dwelt  upon. 

142  WILLET     (Andrew.      1562 — 162 1).       Hexapla.       A    sixfold 

Exposition  of  Genesis.  Folio.  1605.  5/- to  8/- 
This  work  is  called  by  its  author  a  Hexapla,  because  he  treats  his 
subject  under  six  heads,  giving  "a  sixfold  use  of  every  chapter,  showing, 
I.  The  method,  or  argument.  2.  The  divers  readings.  3.  The  expla- 
nation of  difficult  questions  and  doubtful  places.  4.  The  places  of 
doctrine.  5.  Places  of  confutation.  6.  Moral  observations."  Willet 
is  tedious  readii^g  ;  his  method  hampers  him.  In  all  his  Commentaries 
he  lumbers  along  in  his  six-wheeled  wagon. 

143  WRIGHT  (C.  H.  H.)     Book  of  Genesis  in  Hebrew,  with  various  Readings, 

Notes,  etc.     8vo.      5/-     Z(7«^.,  Williams  &  Norgate.     S.  3/6. 
Intended  to  assist  the  student  who  has  mastered  the  elements  of  Hebrew  Grammar 
to  acquire  a  better  knowledge   of  that  language.     Rather  a  class-book  than  a  Com- 
mentary. 


GENESIS— EARLY  CHAPTERS,  AND  PATRIARCHS. 

144  BON AR  (HORATIUS.D.D.)  EartlVsMorning;  or, Thoughts 
on  Genesis.  i2mo.  5/-  Loud.,  Nisbet  &  Co.  1875. 
An  expositioji  of  the  first  six  chapters  only.  The  antJior  endea- 
vours "  to  ijivestigate  the  vieanijtg  of  each  verse  and  word ;  that, 
having  done  so,  the  exact  revelation  of  God  in  these  may  be  bronglct 
out,  and  the  spiritual  tritth  evolved."  He  has  in  a  great  measure 
attained  his  object.      What  more  could  be  said  in  his  praise  f 


GENESIS— EARLY  CHAPTEilS,  AND  PATRIARCHS.     53 

145  BUNYAN  (John).     Tea  first  chapters  of  Genesis,  and  part  of  the  eleventh. 

[In  Biinyaris  IVorks^     Complete  works,  S.  30/- 
AUegorical  and  spiritual.     Bunyan's  characteristics  are  very  prominently  manifest. 

146  EDERSHEIM  (Alfred,  D.D.)     World  before  the  Flood,  and 

History  of  the  Patriarchs.    Small  sq.  8vo.  2/6.  Lo?id.,  Religious 

Tract  Society.     1875. 

The  author  has  mainly  aimed  at  giving  instruction  to  the  Sunday 

School  Teacher,  and  the  Bible  Class  Student.     He  may  be  read  Avith 

profit  by  students  of  a  higher  grade.     The  work  is  not  a  Commentary, 

but  is  full  of  instruction. 

147  HENRY  (Philip,  M.A.     1631 — 1696).     Exposition  of  the  first 

eleven  chapters  of  Genesis.     iSmo.     Loud.,  1839.     S.  i/- 
Interesting  as  the  exposition  of  Mattheiv  Henry's  father,  taken  down 
from  his  lips  at  family  prayer  by   Matthew,  his  son.     This  probably 
suggested  the  famous  Commentary. 

148  HURDIS  (James).     Select  Critical  Remarks  upon  the  English  version  of  the 

first  ten  chapters  of  Genesis.     8vo.     Loud.,  1793.     2/- 
"  Judicious  observations";  but  it  is  so  easy  to  hz  judicious.      Unimportant. 

149  LUTHER   (Martin).     On   the    first    five  chapters  of  Genesis, 

translated  by  Dr.  Henry  Cole.     8vo.     Edinb.,  1858.    S.  5/6. 
Cole  made  a  choice  selection.     Luther  left  four  volumes  upon  Genesis 
in  Latin.     How  these  Reformers  worked  ! 

150  MACDONALD   (D.)     Creation   and  the  Fall.      The  first  three 

chapters  of  Genesis.     8vo.    Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     12/- 
"  We  do  not  hesitate  to  designate  this  volume  as  the  most  complete 
examination  of  the  literature  and  the  exegesis  of  the  Creation  and  the 
Fall  which  has  appeared  in  England." — journal  of  Sacred  Lito-ature. 

151  KEEDLER  (Ben'jamin).     Expositoiy  Notes,  with  Observations,  towards  the 

openingofthefivefirst  chapters  of  Genesis.    Small  8vo.    ZisW.,  1655.    3/- 
Nccdler  was   one  of  the  eminent  divines  who  took  part  in  the  famous  Morning 
Exercises.     The  little  work  is  a  curiosity,  but  nothing  more. 

152  ROSSE  (Alexander).     Exposition  of  the  fourteen  first  chapters  of  Genesis. 

8vo.     Land.,  1626.     4/6. 
A  very  scarce  catechism  by  that   Scotch  divine   who  is  mentioned  in  Iliidibras  in 
the  lines — 

"  There  was  an  ancient  sound  philosopher 
That  had  read  Alexander  Ross  over." 

153  WHITE  (John,  M.A.    A  Puritan  Divine,  called  "  The  Patriarch 

of  Dorchester."     Died  1648.)      The  Three   First    Chapters  of 

Genesis.     Folio.     1656.     7/-  to  10/6, 
A   folio  upon  three  chapters  !      There  were  giants  in  those  days. 
Manton  says,  "  To  speak  of  the  worth  of  the  author  is  needless,  his 
praise  being  already  in  all  the  churches,"  and  he  adds  that  he  had  been 
greatly  refreshed  by  the  perusal  of  this  book. 

154  WILLIAMS  (Isaac,  B.D.)      Beginning   of  Genesis,  with 

Notes.     Sm.  8vo.     yj^.     Loud.,  Rivingtons.      1861. 
A  very  remarkable  ivork  by  a  high  cJmrchvian,  opening  tip  in  a 
masterly  manner  the  mystical  teachings  of  the  early  chapters  of 
Genesis.     To  be  read  cum  grano  salis. 


5-4     GENESIS— EARLY  CH AFTERS,  AND  PATRLVRCHS. 

[The  following  works  arc  placed  in  chronological  order.] 

155  BONNET  (L.)     The  Exile  from  Eden;  Meditations  on  the  Third 

Chapter  of  Genesis,  translated  from  the  French,  by   Rev,   W. 

I  Lire.     Small  Svo.     Loud.,  1839.     S.  5/- 
Afier  the  French  manner.     In  nine  meditations  the  salient  points  in 
the  all-important  story  of  the  Fall  are  touched  upon.     One  of  the  best 
separate  treatises  upon  the  subject. 

156  OLM.STEAD  (J., //wrr/VrtM.)     Noah  and  his  Times.     2/-     Edinb.,  Qo\Xm%. 
One  of  the  dreariest  works  ever  written.     We  have  often  wondered  why  it  was 

reprinted,  or  even  printed  at  all.     It  is  as  dry  as  Noah  in  the  ark. 

157  BLUNT    (Henry,  A.M.)     Twelve  Lectures  on  the  History  of 

Abraham.     i2mo.    5/6.     Eight    Lectures    on   the  History  of 
Jacob.     4/6.     Lond.,  Hatchards.     1842.     S.  1/6  each. 
Like  the  rest  of  this  author's  lectures.     Good,  plain  addresses. 

15S     SHUTE   (JosiAS,  B.D.     ''Above    three-and-tJdrty    years    Rector 

of  St.  Maty,  IVooInot/i.")     Sarah  and  Hagar  ;  or,  Genesis  xvi. 

opened  in  Twenty  Sermons.    FoUo.     1649.     5/- 

In  shape,  the  editor  tells  us,  "  this  book  is  somewhat  slender,  like  the 

encouragements  of  learning."     He  informs  us  that  the  author  was  "  one 

of  tlie  five  famous  brother-preachers,  somewhat  like  the  five  fingers  on 

the  right  hand  of  fellowship  ; "  and  that  Chrysostotn  did  so  much   lie  in 

his  bosom  that  he  became  like  him  in  his  flowing  style  and  golden 

eloquence.  He  writes  like  a  learned  man,  and  treats  the  Scriptures  as  if 

"  each  book  were  a  course,  each  chapter  a  Benjamin's  mess,  and  every 

verse  a  morsel  of  the  food  of  angels." 

159  BOUCHIER  (Barton,  M.A.)     History  of  Isaac,     izrao.    Lend, 

Houlston.    S.  2/- 
A  charming  book,  in  BoucJiiers  gracious  style. 

160  ROLLINSON  (Francis,  B.D.)     Twelve   Prophetical  Legacies  ;  or,  Twelve 

Sermons  upon  Jacob's  Last  Will,  recorded  in  the  45th  chapt.  of  Genesis. 
4to.,  Zc«(/.,  1612.     Scarce.     Hardly  to  be  priced.     Say  5,'- 
Old-fashioned  learning,  and  singular  remarks  ;  its  rarity  is  no  groat  calamity. 

161  GUMMING  (John,  D.D.,  F.R.S.E.)     The  Last  of  the  Patriarchs; 

or,  Lessons  from  Life  of  Joseph.     Sm.  Svo.      1S56.     S.  2/- 
Fitted  for  popular  reading  :  ministers  need  more  thought. 

1C2      GIBSON  (T.)     Lectures  on  Joseph.      Svo.    Z<7«</.,  1848.     i/- 
Very  respectable  sermons,  bringing  out  the  gospel  of  Joseph's  history. 

163  LAWSON  (George,  D.D.,  1749— 1820).  Lectures  on 
Joseph.  2  vols.,  i2mo.  Edinb.,  1807  &  18 12.  4/- 
Dr.  Lazvson  had  a  fertile  mind,  and  a  heart  alive  both  to  the 
human  and  divine  side  of  trnth.  He  zurites  with  pleasing  sim- 
plicity of  style.  One  of  the  highest  compliments  to  this  book  is 
found  in  the  fact  that  a  distinguished  A  mcrican  scholar  issued  much 
of  it  as  his  oivn. 


EXODUS.  55 

164  SMITH  (Thornley).     History  of  Joseph  viewed  in  con- 

nection with  the  Antiquities  of  Egypt,   and  the  times  in 

which  he  Hved.   Cr.  8vo.    4/-    Ediul>.,W.  OUphant   1875. 

"  Written  under  the  full  light  of  the  most  recent  archceological 

discoveries,  modern  scholarship,  and  theological  science,  it  is  THE 

book  on  the  subject.     Now  zve  have  it,  we  cannot  dispense  with 

it." — Homilist. 

165  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.D.)     Life  of  Joseph  and  the  Last  Years 

of  Jacob.     i2mo.     1845.     S.  2/3. 
Wardlaw,  though  rather  wordy,  is  ahvays  instructive. 


EXODUS. 

166  BIRKS  (T.  R.,   M.A.)     The  Exodus  of  Israel;  its  Difficuhies 

explained  and  its  Truth  confirmed.     8vo.     1863.     S.  2,1  (^^ 
A  reply  to  Dr.  Cole/ISO's  famous  assault  upon  the  Pentateuch,     The 
great  abilities  of  the  author  are  known  to  all. 

167  BLUNT    (Henry,  M.A.)      Exodus  and   Leviticus.     Vol.   2   of 

A  Family  Exposition  of  the  Pentateuch.      i2mo.     6/-     Lojid,, 
Hatchards.     1842.     S.  i/- 
Prontable  for  household  and  private  reading  :  not  very  striking. 

168  BUSH  (George).     Notes  on  Exodus.     2  vols.,  sm.  Svo.     A^ezu 

York,  1856,  etc.     S.   5/6. 
Of  considerable  value.     AVe  do  not  know  that  it  is  a  plagiarism. 

169  COTTAGE  READINGS    on  the  Book   of  Exodus.      [Anon.] 

Sm.  cr.  8vo.     5/-    Lend.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     S.  2/- 
Not  at  all  a  student's  book  ;  yet  many  preachers  might  learn  from  it 
how  to  put  things  plainly.     There  is  a  similar  volume  on  Genesis. 

170  GUMMING    (John,    D.D.)      Sabbath   Morning   Readings    on 

Exodus.     Sm.  8vo.     Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.     1853.     S.  2/- 
Dr.  Cumming's  style  is  a  model,  but  his  matter  seldom  verges  upon 
originality.     He  ahvays  gives  you  the  gospel  when  he  is  not  prophesying. 

1 71  EXELL    (Joseph    S.)      Homiletic    Commentary    on    Exodus. 

[Being  Part  i  of  The  Preacher's  Commentary,  publishing 
by  Dickinson  in  monthly  parts.     1875.     i/-  each.] 
It  excels,  so  far  as  we  have  seen. 

172  HUGHES  (George).     See  No.  127. 

173  JACKSON  (Thomas,    D.D.,    Dean   of  Peterborough.— iS']^— 164.0).     Para- 

phrase   on    the    eleven   first    chapters    of  Exodus,    with   Annotations,    &c. 

Works,   8vo.,  IX.,  384.     Folio,   III.,    191.      3  vols,  folio  35/-;  12  vols. 

Svo.  50/- 
George  Herbert  set  great  store  by  Dr.  Jacksofis  writings,  for  he  said, — "  I  bless  God 
for  the  confirmation  Dr.  Jackson  has  given  me  in  the  Christian  religion,  against  the 
Atheist,  Jew,  and  Socinian,  and  in  the  Protestant  against  Rome."  It  would  hardly 
repay  a  student  to  purchase  three  folio  volumes  to  obtain  the  small  portion  allotted  to 
liis  Paraphrase.     So  far  as  commenting  is  concerned  it  is  not  important. 


^G  EXODUS— LIVES  OF  MOSES. 

174  M[ACKINTOSH]C.H.)  Notes.    ]?y  C.  II.  M.     12 mo.  2/6. 

/.(>/!(/.,  ('..  Morrish.      1S58. 
Not  free  fyoui  PlyiiioiitJi  errors,  yet  remarkably  suggestive. 

175  MILLINGTON  (Thomas  S.)     Signs  and  Wonders  in  the 

Land  of  Ham.      A   Description  of  the  Ten  Plagues  of 
Lgypt.     Post  8vo.     yl6.     Loud.,  Murray.      1873. 
//  lias  been  an  intellectual  treat  to  read  this  interesting  work. 
On  the  sajne  subject  there   is   an    old  ivork    by   James  Bryant, 
1 794  ;  but  Millington  is  enough. 

176  MURPHY  (James  G.,  LL.D.)      Commentary  on  Exodus. 

New  Translation.    8vo.    Edinb.,  Cldivk.     1866.     9/- 
The  result  of  laborious  study  by  a  scholar  of  ripe  learning. 

177  WILLET  (Andrew).     Hexapla;  or,  Sixfold  Commentarie  upon 

Exodus.     Folio.     Land.,  1608.     6/-  to  10/- 
See  No.  142.     Full,  exhaustive,  and  exhausting. 


LIVES    OF    MOSES. 


178  HAMILTON  (James,  D.D,  F.L.S.    1814—1867).    Moses, 

the  Man  of  God.     Sm.  cr.  8vo.     5/-     Lond.,  Nisbet. 
Beautiful  as  a  poem,  like  everything  which  fell  from  Dr.  Hamil- 
ton's pe7i.     It  would  be  impossible  to  study  it  without  profit. 

179  OOSTERZEE  (J.  J.  Vax,  D.D.)     The  Life  of  Moses.     Edinb., 

T.  &  T.  Clark.     [In  preparation]. 

iSo     SMITH    (Thornley).      History    of    Moses;    viewed    in 
connection  with  Egyptian  Antiquities,  and  the  times  in 
which  he  lived.     Cr.  8vo.     'i,!^.     Z<?;/^.,  Hamilton.      1862. 
Of  the  same  class  as  Kittds  Daily  Readings  :  zvell  execiitcd. 

181      SPONG  (James).     Moses.— The  Hero  of  the  Desert.     Cr.  8vo.     3/6.     Lend., 
Partridge  &  Co. 
A  book  for  the  public.     Not  for  students. 


JOURNEYINGS  OF  THE  CHILDREN  OF  ISRAEL. 

182     BUDDICOM   (R.   P.,    M.A.,    F.A.S.)     The  Christian  Exodus, 
in  a  Series  of  Discourses.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Loud.,  1826.     S.  3/- 
Able  discourses,  using  the  Exodus  spiritually  and  wisely. 

1S3      CARDALL  (WiLt,iAM,  M.A.)     Israel's  Journeys,   illustrative   of  the  Divine 
Pilgrimage.     8vo.     Land.,  Hatchards.      1848.      S.  2/6. 
Twenty  evangelical  lectures  manifesting  respectable  ability. 


JOURNEYINGS  OF  THE  CHILDREN  OF  ISRAEL.        57 

184  FOESTER  (Charles,  B.D.)     "Israel  in  the  Wilderness  " ;  or, 

Gleanings  from  the   Scenes  of  the  Wanderings.     8vo.     LoiuL, 

Richard  Bentley.     1865.     S.  2/- 
If  the  author's  renderings  of  the  desert  inscriptions  are  indeed  cor- 
rect, this  is  a  wonderful  book.     That,  however,  is  a  question  for  the 
learned,  and  they  have  pronounced  against  him. 

185  JOURNEYINGS    OF   THE  CHILDREN  OF  ISRAEL,  and  their  Settle- 

ment  in  the  Promised  Land.     (Anon.)     i8mo,     1/6.     Land,,   Reh'gious 
Tract  Society.     1832. 
Useful  to  the  young,  but  the  engravings  are  of  almost  Pre-Adamite  antiquity,  and 
nearly  as  ugly  as  the  profoundest  master  of  the  ridiculous  could  have  made  them. 

186  KRUMMACHER  (Gottfried  Daniel.    1774— 1837).    Israel's 

Wanderings.     2  vols.,  Sm.  8vo.    Lond.,  Nisbet.     1837.     S.  7/6. 
Written  by  the  uncle  of  the  author  of  Elijah  the  Tishbite.     A  good, 
thought-breeding  work. 

1 87  OSBURN  (W.)     See  under  Genesis,  No.  135. 

188  SEATON  (W.)     Church  in  the  Wilderness.    2  vols.     i2mo. 

S.2/-    2nd  edition,  Zt^;/,^.,  1 82 1.  Enlarged.  2vols.,8vo.  S.4/- 
Of  the  thoroughly  evangelical  school,  fraught  ivith  much  experi- 
mental truth  and  sound  doctrine  soberly  discussed. 

189  WAGNER  (George).     The  Wanderings  of  the  Children 

of  Israel.     Cr.  8vo.     6/-     Lond.,  Nisbet  &  Co.      1862. 
A  book  zuhich  zve  have  read  ivith  great  pleasure  and  profit.,  and 
very  heartily  recomme7id. 


THE   DECALOGUE. 


[This  list  does  not  include  comments  contained  in  Bodies  of 
Divinity,  &c.,  but  those  forming  separate  volumes.  In  many 
theological  works  there  are  lengthy  portions  set  apart  for  tlie 
Commandments.] 

190    ANDRE  WES  (Lancelot,  ^/.^/ J  F^r^^j/rr.  1555— 1626). 

The  Patterne  of  Catechisticall  Doctrine  at  large ;  or  a 

Learned  and  Pious  Exposition  of  the  X  Commandments. 

Folio.     1675.     TJQ  to  10/- 

Jhis  is  a  book  indeed;  it  is  a  Joy  to  read  it,  for  it  flashes  with 

thought   and  illustration,    and  sparkles   ivith  ingenious  remarks. 

Profoiuid  learning  did  not  lead  the  Bishop  into  the  depths  of  dul- 

ness,  as  it  has  done  ma?iy  anotlier  divine  ;  he  manifests  the  happy 

quaint ness  of  Latimer  side  by  side  with  great  scholarship.    He  was 

highly  esteemed  by  his  contemporaries  ;  but  zve  can  hardly  believt. 

that  his  death 

"  Left  the  dim  face  of  our  dull  hemisphere 
All  one  great  eye  all  drown'd  in  one  great  tear." 

Vet  so  zve  are  informed  at  the  foot  of  his  effigies. 


58  THE  DKCALOGUE. 

191  ]}ARKER  (Peter).     A  Learned  and  Familiar  Exposition.     4to. 

1624.     5/- 
Old-fashioncd,  remarkably  quaint,  and  even  coarse  in  places.     Barker's 
work  abounds  in  Scriptural  illustrations,  but  it  is  almost  forgotten, 

192  DALE  (R.   W.,  M.A.,  of  Birmingham.)      The  Ten  Command- 

ments.    Cr.  8vo.    3/6.     Z^z/rt'.,  Hodder  and  Stoughton.     1873. 

Written  in  a  clear,  bold,  and  trenchant  style.  We  could  not  sub- 
scribe to  all  the  author's  views,  but  we  admire  his  practical  remarks, 
and  their  outspoken  manner. 

193  DOD  (John)  &  CLEAVER   (Robert).      Familiar  Exposition. 

Eighteenth  edition.  4to.  Lond.,  1632.  S.  2/6. 
This  work  was  published  hy  John  Dod  and  Robert  Cleaver,  with  an 
intimation  that  the  name  of  the  author  was  purposely  suppressed.  Our 
edition,  dated  1632,  is  the  eighteenth,  so  that  the  work  enjoyed  a  rare 
popularity  in  its  own  time.  It  has  been  frequently  reprinted  since. 
The  book  has  been  long  held  in  high  esteem. 

194  DOWNAME,  OR   DOWNIIAM  (George,   D.D.,  Bishop  oj  Derry.      DieJ 

1634).     Abstract  of  the  Duties  Commanded  and  Sinnes  Forbidden  in  the 
Law  of  God.     Svo.     Loud.,  1635.     1/6. 
A  sort  of  catalogue  of  sins,  airanged  in  a  tabular  form  under  the  Ten  Command- 
ments.    These  are  the  heads  and  divisions  of  a  larger  treatise,  wliicli  does  not  appear 
to  have  been  published.     Tliese  mighty  men  could  afford  to  leave  in  the  oblivion  of 
manuscript  works  which  would  cost  modern  weaklings  half  a  life-lime  to  write. 

195  DURHAM  (James.     1622 — 1658.)      Exposition,   with   a 

resolution  of  several  momentous  questions,  and  cases  of 
conscience.     4to.     Loud.,  1675.     8vo.,  1735,  2/6  to  4/- 
Whatever  Durham  has  written  is  very  precious.     He  has  the 
pen  of  a  ready  writer,  and  indites  good  matter. 

196  ELTON  (Edward,   B.D.)     God's  Holy  Minde,  Touching  Matters  Morall ; 

which  himself  uttered  in  Ten  Commandments.     4to.     Zt^W.,  1648.     3/6. 
This  work  discusses  the  Decalogue  in  question  and  ans\\er,  in  a  somewhat  dull 
manner  ;  but  touches  many  cases  of  conscience,  and  deals  wisely  with  them.     Belief 
in  witchcraft  comes  out  very  strongly  in  some  passages. 

197  FISHER  (Edward,  A.M.     Born  about  1600.)     A  plain,  pithy, 

and  spiritual  Exposition  of  the  Ten  Commandments.    [Marrow 

of  Modern  Divinity.     Numerous  editions.]     i2mo.     2/- 

This  exposition  is  part  of  the  work  which  occasioned  the  famous 

Marrow  Controversy.     One  fails  to  see  anything  calculated  to   stir  up 

such  a  strife.     Fisher  might  have  said  that  the  lines  had  fallen  to  him 

in  troubled  water.'^. 

198  HOOPER    (John.      Bishop   and  Martyr.       i495— 1554)-      A 

Declaration   of  the   Ten  Holy  Commandments   of  Almighty 
God.     1 5 48,  1550,  etc.     [Reprinted  in  Hooper's  IVorhs.] 
After  the  manner  of  the  English  Reformers.     The  style  is  harsh  to 
the  modern  ear,  and  the  matter  too  much  occupied  with  the  contro- 
versies raging  in  the  author's  times  to  be  very  interesting  now. 


THE  DECALOGUE— THE  TABERNACLE.      59 

199  HOPKINS  (EzEKiEL,  D.D.    Bp.  of  London-Deny.    1633— 1690). 

An  Exposition  of  the  Ten  Commandments.    4to.     1692.     [Re- 
printed in  Hopkins'  Works.] 
Hopkins  in  this  exposition  searches  the  heart  thoroughly,  and  makes 
very  practical  application  of  the  Commandments  to  the  situations  and 
circumstances  of  daily  life.     His  homely  eloquence  will  always  make  his 
works  valuable. 

200  KNEWSTUB  (John).     Lectures  on  Exodus  XX.     4to.     1584.     7/6. 
More  valuable  for  its  antiquity  than  for  anything  else. 

201  McCAUL  (Joseph  B.,  Chaplain  to  the  Bp.  of  Rochester).     The 

Ten  Commandments  ;  the  Christian's  Rule  of  Daily  Life.     8vo. 
Lond.,  Saunders,  Otley  &  Co.     1861.     S.  3/- 
The  author  says,  "There  is  nothing  deep  in  the  following  pages 
except  their  subject ":  a  modest  estimate. 

202  NEWTON  (Richard,  D.D.)    The  King's  Highway.  Post 

8vo.     2/6.     Loud.,  Nelson.     Also  161110.     1/6.     Nisbet. 
Though  intended  for  children,  ministers  ivill  find  it  useful,  for 
it  teons  with  illustration,  and  brings  up  little  points  of  conduct  worth 
touching  tipon.     Dr.  N'ezvton  is  the  prince  of  preachers  to  children. 

203  TUDOR  (Richard,  B.A.)     Decalogue  viewed  as  the  Christian's 

Law.  Cr.  8vo.  10/6,  Lond.,  Macmillan.  i860,  S.  6/- 
The  author  attemipts  to  give  the  Christian  sense  of  the  Decalogue  in 
its  application  to  present  needs  and  questions.  With  much  moderation 
he  discusses  many  of  the  disputed  points  of  the  day,  such  as  the 
legislative  enforcement  of  the  Sabbath,  marriage  with  a  deceased  wife's 
sister,  &c.  He  usually  takes  the  view  which  is  natural  to  a  clergyman ; 
but  he  says  some  capital  things. 

204  WEEMSE  (John.     Died  about  1636).     The  Morail  Laws.     [In 

Vol.  I.  of  Weemse's  Works;  2  vols.,  4to.    Lond.,  1632,  &c.]    3/- 

Solid,    sober,    weighty.       Orme    says   of    Weemse :    "  He   was   well 

acquainted   with   the   original    Scriptures,   with   Jewish    manners   and 

antiquities,  and  with  the  best  mode  of  interpreting  the   Bible.     The 

style  is  quaint,  but  always  intelligible."     (See  No.  225.) 

205  WHATELEY    (William.     Puritan.     1583— 1639).     A  Pithie, 

Short,  and  Methodicall  Opening  of  the  Ten  Commandments. 
i2mo.     Lond.,  1622.     (Not  often  in  the  market.) 
Exceedingly  scarce,  but  as  rich  as  it  is  rare. 


THE    TABEHNACLE. 


[Of  works  on  this  subject  it  is  not  possible  to  give  more  than 
a  selection.] 

2c6     BROWN  (W.)     The  Tabernacle  and  its  Services  in  relation  to 
Christ  and  the  Church.  8vo.    3/6.    ^^////^.,  Ohphant  &  Co.  1874. 
An  instructive  interpretation  of  the  types  of  the  Tabernacle. 


CO  THE  TABERNACLE— LEVITICUS. 

207  GARRATT  (S.)    Scripture  Symbolism.    Sm.  8vo.    1848.    S.  1/6. 
Most  unexceptionable  in  doctrine  and  style.    It  dealsmainly  with  the 

sacred  vessels. 

208  KITTO  (John,  D.U.)    Tabernacle  and  its  Furniture.    4(0.    1849, 
Artistic  illustrations  with  a  little  letterpress.     Soiiau  well  supplies  the 

place  of  this  rare  work. 

ro9  MUDGE  (William).  The  Tabernacle  in  the  Wilderness,  ismo. 
Land.,  Simpkin  &  Marshall.  1861.  S.  2/6. 
The  writer,  a  thoroughly  evangelical  second-advent  clergyman,  makes 
some  very  admirable  remarks  in  tlicse  Lectures,  which  were  delivered  in 
liis  parish  church.  Our  copy  is  in  llie  third  edition.  We  are  not  sur- 
l^rised  to  find  the  work  thus  popular. 

210  SOLTAU   (H.  W.)       The  LI oly  Vessels  and  Furniture    of  the 

Tabernacle  of  Israel.     [With  Ten  Chromo-Lithographic  Illus- 
trations.]    Imp.  oblong  Svo,     16/-     Load.,  Yapp  &  Hawkins, 
and  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co. 
A  series  of  sumptuous   pictures,  executed  in  the  best  style  of  art, 
impressing  the  mind  far  more  vividly  than  any  letter-press  could  do. 

2 1 1  SOLTAU  (H.  W.)    The  Tabernacle,  the  Priestly  Garments, 

and  the  Priesthood.    Svo.    4/6.     Loud.,  Morgan  &  Scott. 
Richly  stiggestivc.     Exceedingly  ivell  -worked  out  in  details  ;  but 
not  so  wire-drati'u  as  to  prevent  thought  on  the  reader  s  part. 

212  WHITE    (Frank  H.)      Christ   in    the  Tabernacle,   with   some 

Remarks  on  the   Offerings.      Illustrated  by  Twelve  Cliromo- 
Lithographs.     Cr.  8vo.,  5/-     Lo/id.,  S.  W.  Partridge.     1S73. 
Written  for  the  private  Christian.     Full  of  instruction  and  ccvjtion. 


LEVITICUS. 


213  BONAR  (Andrew  A.)  Leviticus.   With  Notes.    Svo.    ^16. 

Lond.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1861. 
Very  precious.     Mr.  Andrezv  Bonar  has  a  keen  eye  for  a  typical 
analogy,  but  he  always  keeps  the  rein  upon  his  imagination,  and  is 
tJicrefore  safe  to  follow.     He  is  a  master  in  Israel. 

214  BUSH  (George).     Notes  on  Leviticus.     Sm.  Svo.     New 

York,  1857.     3/- 
The  author  read  extensively  to  produce  this  volume.     In  his  later 
years  he  became  a  Szucdenborgian,  but  there  is  no  trace  of  that 
leaning  in  this  or  his  other  comjnents.     He  inserts  the  notes  of  the 
Pictorial  Bible,  but  handsomely  acknozulcdges  them. 

215  GUMMING    (John,    D.D.)      Sabbath    Morning   Readings    on 

Leviticus.     Sm.  Svo.     Loud.,  J.  F.  Shaw.     1S54.     2/- 
For  popular  reading.     The  author  wrote  too  much  to  be  profound. 


LEVITICUS.  61 

216  GUMMING  (John,  D.D.)     The  Great  Sacrifice;  or,  the  Gospel 

according  to  Leviticus.     2/- 
A  companion  to  the  volume  last  mentioned. 

217  JAMES   (Horatio,    M.A.)      Sermons  on    the  Levitical  Types.     Sm.   8vo. 

Lond.,  1847.     1/6. 
Very  attenuated.     These  sermons,  like  the  lean  kine,  have  eaten  up  the  fat  kine  of 
the  types  and  are  never  the  fatter. 

218  JUKES  (Andrew).    The  Law  of  the  Offerings  [Leviticus, 

chap.  I-Vll].     Cr.  8vo.    3/-     Zt^//^.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1854. 
A  very  condensed,  instrnctive,  refreshing  book.     It  zvill  open  up 
nnv  trains  of  thought  to  those  tinversed  i7i  the  teaching  of  the  types. 

219  M[ACKINTOSH]  (C.  H.)     Notes  on  Leviticus.     By  C.  H.  M. 

izmo.     2/6.     Lond.,  G.  Morrish.     i860. 
We  do  not  endorse  the  Plymouthism  which  pervades  these  notes, 
but  they  are  frequently  suggestive.     Should  be  read  cautiously. 

220  MATHER  (Samuel.     1626 — 1671).     The  Figures  or  Types  of 

the  Old  Testament.     Second  edition.    4to.    7/6.    Land.,  1705. 
Though  this  is  a  work  upon   all    the    types,  it    contains    so  much 
instructive  matter  upon  the  Levitical  sacrifices  that  we  cannot  forbear 
mentioning  it  here.     It  is  one  of  the  old  standard  books  of  our  fathers. 

221  YiEACH.  (QE-i^]AMm,  Baptist Fasto?:     1640 — 1704).    Tropologia. 

Folio  and  Roy.  8vo.     8/-  to  18/- 
This  is  avast  cyclopaedia  of  types  and  metaphors  of  all  sort«;,  and  was 
once  very  popular.     It  is  a  capital  book,  though  too  often  the  figures  not 
only  run  on  all-fours  but  on  as  many  legs  as  a  centipede.      It  is  not 
strictly  upon  Leviticus,  but  we  felt  bound  to  insert  it  in  this  place. 

222  MICHAELIS    (Sir  John  David.      1717— 1791).        The  Laws  of  Moses. 

Translated  by  Alexander  Smith,  D.D.     4  vols.,  Svo.     20/-     Lond.,  1814. 
However  much  of  learning  there  may  be  here,  we  are  not  prepared  to  recommend 
a  work  which  treats  so  sacred  a  subject  with  levity  and  coarseness. 

223  NEWTON  (Benjamin  Wills).     Thoughts  on  Parts  of  Leviticus. 

i2mo.  Lond.,  Houlston.     1857.     S.  2/- 
This  touches  only  the  first  six  chapters ;  but  it  treats  of  the  offerings 
in  a  manner  deeply  spiritual  and  helpful.     This  writer  has  some  pecu- 
liarities of  style  and  thought ;  but  in  matter  and  spirit  he  is  far  removed 
from  the  Darby  school. 

224  SEISS    (Joseph    A.,    D.D.)      The   Gospel   in    Leviticus.      Svo. 

6/-     Edinb.,  Thomas  C.  Jack.     i860. 
Twenty-one  very  admirable  lectures,  founded  upon  Bush  and  BoJiar, 
but  containing  much  original  matter.     The  work  deserves  attention. 

225  WEEMSE  (John).     Exposition  of  the  Laws  of  Moses,    Moral,  Ceremonial, 

Judicial,  &c.     2  vols.,  4to.     Lond.,  id'i,^.     ij^  or  3/- 
This  contains  many  useful  and  curious  things,  together  with  fancies  and   rabbinical 
trifles.      Weemse  may  generally  be  bought  very  clieap,  and  we  should  think  his  work 
is  very  little  read  or  cared  for.      (See  Orvie's  opinion,  I^o.  204.) 


62  NUMBERS— DEUTERONOMY. 

226  WILLET  (Andrew).  Ilcxapla ;  Leviticus.  Folio,  1631.  5/6. 
riodding  along  with  his  six-fold  load,  Wil/d  gives  us  a  comparison  of 
ten  versions,  "  handles  well  nigh  two  thousand  theological  questions," 
and  quotes  "above  forty  authors,  old  and  new."  He  sums  up  all  pre- 
ceding commentaries,  both  Protestant  and  Romish. 


NUMBERS. 


[Seaton,  Wagner,  and  other  writers  whom  we  have  placed  under  Exodus 
are  equally  upon  Numbers,  and  should  be  referred  to.] 

227  ATTERSOLL   (William).      A   Commentarie    upon   Numbers, 

Folio.     Lo?id.,  16 1 8.     10/-  to  14/- 
A  stupendous  work,  well  fitted  to  make  a  headstone  for  the  author's 
grave.     It  is  so  huge  tliat  it  might  have  been  the  work  of  a  lifetime,  and 
yet  the  same  writer  has  also  given  us  Philemon.     Think  of  127 1  folio 
pages  on  Numbers  ! 

228  BLUNT  (Henry,  M.A.)     Numbers  and  Deuteronomy,     [Vol.  3 

of  Pentateuch.]     i2mo.,  6/-     Zt?;/^,,  Hatchards,     1843,    S.  1 '6, 
Intended  for  families,  but  not  without  value  to  the  preacher. 

229  BUSH  (George).     Notes  on  Numbers.     Thick  small  8vo. 

Neiv  York,  1858.     4/- 
AlthougJi  Bush  is  indebted  to  in  any  authors,  he  is  by  no  means  a 
tncrc  collector ;  his  remarks  repay  you  for  co7isiiltation,  and  we  hope 
that  in  this  case  they  are  his  oivn. 

230  GUMMING  (John,  D.D.)    Readings  on  Numbers.    8vo.    Loud., 

J.  F.  Shaw.     1855.     S.  1/9. 
Good,  as  usual. 

231  M[ACKINTOSH]  (C.  H.)     Notes  on  Numbers.     By  C.  H.  M. 

Lond.,  G.  Morrish.     1862.     2/- 
Like  the  other  notes  of  C.  H.  M.,  they  need  filtering.     Good  as  they 
are,  their  Darbyism  gives  them  an  unpleasant  and  unhealthy  savour. 


DEUTERONOMY. 

[As  so  few  expositions  have  been  written  upon  Deuteronomy  alone, 
the  reader  will  do  well  to  use  the  Commentaries  upon  the  Pentateuch 
and  the  whole  Old  Testament.] 

232  CALVIN  (John).  Sermons  upon  Deuteronomie.  Trans- 
lated out  of  French  by  A.  Gelding.  Folio.  1583.  15/- 
This  is  not  the  same  as  that  zvhich  is  co?itained  in  the  "  Calvin 
Translation  Society  s  Commentaries!'  Everything  that  Calvin 
•wrote  by  way  of  exposition  is  priceless ;  even  those  who  differ 
from  him  in  theology  admit  this. 


JOSHUA.  63 

233     GUMMING  (John,  D.D.)      Readings   in  Deuteronomy.     Sm. 
8vo.     Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.     1856.     S.  2/3. 
Pretty,  popular,  profitable. 


JOSHUA. 

234  BLACKWOOD  (Stevenson  A.)     Heavenly  Places.    Addresses. 

Sm.  cr.  Svo.     2/-  and  2/6.     Lond.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1873. 
Ml-.  Blackwood  has  illustrated  passages  from  the  first  five  chapters 
only.      He  has  a  beautifiilly  quiet  way  of  saying  very  sweet  things. 
This  little  book  will  be  useful  if  it  shows  the  young  preacher  how  to 
expound  Scripture  with  unction  and  power. 

235  BUSH  (George).    Notes.    Sm.  8vo.   New  York.   1852.    3/- 
Bush  is  a  careful  illustrator  of  the  Word,  and  apt  at  giving  the 

practical  lesson.     His  zvorks  are  tvell  compiled. 

236  CALVIN  (John).    Commentarie  upon  Joshue.  Translated 

by  W.  F.     4to.     Lo7id.,\^'jZ.     9/- 
We  have  said  enough  tipon  Calvin  in  general.     His  expositions 
are  more  eqical  in  excellence  than  those  of  other  men  ;  other  men  rise 
and  fall,  but  he  is  almost  uniformly  good. 

237  CHRIST  IN  THE  PROPHETS.— Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel,  Kings.    [Anon.j 

Foolscap  Svo.     3/6.     Loud.,  Masters.     1873. 
See  Christ  in  the  Law,  No.  80.     Needs  well  sifting.     There  is  much  rubbish. 

238  GUMMING  (John,  D.D.)     Readings   on   Joshua  and  Judges. 

Sm.  8vo.     Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.     1857.     2/- 
Dr.  Cumming  keeps  up  to  his  average  of  value. 

239  GROSER  (W.  H.)     Joshua  and  his  Successors :  an  Introduction 

to  Joshua,  Judges,  Ruth,  and  Samuel  I.,  with  Notes.     Parts 
I.  and  n.     Svo.     2/- each.     Z(?;;</.,  S.  S.  Union.      1874. 
A  very  useful  condensed  book  for  teachers. 

240  KEIL  (Karl  Friedrich,  D.D.,  Ph.D.)      Joshua,  Judges,  and 

Ruth.  I  vol.  Svo.  10/6.  Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1865.  S.  5/- 
"  Let  our  biblical  students  not  only  master  the  facts  and  logic,  but 
catch  the  spirit  of  these  commentaries,  and  we  can  have  no  fear  for  the 
issue  of  that  conflict  with  Rationalism  and  Popery  united,  by  which 
Protestantism  in  this  country  seems  to  be  threatened." — Wesleyan 
Methodist  Magazine. 

241  KELLY    (William).      Lectures    Introductory  to   the  Study  of  the  earlier 

Historical  Books  [Joshua  to  II  Samuel].    Svo.    3/6.    Lond.,V>roora.     1874. 
After  the  manner  of  Plymouth  commenting  in  general  ;  quite  sufficiently  taken 
up  with  spiritualizing  and  nice  points  :  but  yet,  read  with  half  a  ton  of  salt,  a  book 
likely  to  arouse  thought,  and  suggest  topics. 


r.i  JOSHUA— JUDGES. 

242  LANGE'S    COMMENTARY.— Joshua  (by  F.  R.  Fay)  ; 

Judges,  Ruth  (In-  P.  Casscl,  D.D.)     luHtcd  by  Dr.  Schaft". 
One  vol.     Imp.  8vo.     21/-    iiV/;/Z'.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.    1872. 
T/iis  is  a  standard  ivork.     No  minister  s  library  is  furnished 
without  the  ivholc  set.      Joshua  hozvever  is  inferior  to  Judges. 

243  MARCH.\NT  (F.   G.)     Commentary  on  Joshua.     [Part  III.  of 

Preacher's  Commentary,     i/.]     Land.,  Dickinson.     1875. 
While  writing  this  we  have  only  one  number  before  us,  but  it  promises 
well,  and  we  feel  sure  its  quality  will  be  sustained,  for  we  know  the 
author's  industrious  habits. 

244  THE  GOSPEL  IN  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.     [.\non.]     Cr.  8vo.     1/6. 

Lond.,  Partiidge  &  Co.    1867. 
Pious  remarks,  such  as  anyone  would  make. 

245  BEATON  (W.)     The  Church  in  Canaan;  or,  heirs  in  possession 

receiving  the  promises.     Vol.1.     i2mo.     Lond.,  1^2^.     2/- 
A  sequel  to  No.  188. 

246  SMITH  (Thorn LEY).     The  History  of  Joshua,  viewed  in 

connection  with    the    Topography   of   Canaan,  and  the 
Customs  of  the  Times  in  which  he  lived.     Cr.  8vo.     4^6. 
Edinb.,  W.  Oliphant  &  Co.     1870. 
Although  not  a  commentary,  it  zuill  a7iswer  the  same  purpose  ; 
for  almost  every  event  is  fully  illustrated.     A  capital  work. 


JUDGES. 

[See  also  wndQX  fosliua."] 

247  BUSH    (George).     Notes  on  Judges.      Sm.  8vo.      Netu 

York,   1852.     S.  3/6. 
Like  other  works  of  this  author — of  considerable  value. 

248  DODS  (Marcus,  M.A.,  D.D.)     Israel's  Iron  Age  :  Sketches  from  the  Period 

of  the  Judges.     Crown  8 vo.     5/-     Zc«^.,  Hodder  &  Stoughton.     1874. 
Dr.  Dods  considers  that  to  find  in  Samson  and   other  judges  types  of  our   Lord 
Jesus  is  mere  fancy,  and   he  interprets  upon    "  a   rational   principle "    which  renders 
his  book  dry  and  unspiritual ;  at  the  same  time  his  sketches  are  not  without  value. 

249  HENGSTENBERG  rE.W.)    Time  of  the  Judges.    (See  No.  86.) 

250  KITTO  (John,  D.D.)    '' The  ]\.\dgQs;' \n  Daily  Bible  Illus- 

tratiojis.     (See  No.  4L) 
Exceedingly  -meritorious.     Refer  to  it  frequently. 

251  MARTYR  (Peter.     1500 — 1562).     Most  Fruitful  and  Learned  Commentarie 

upon  the  Book  of  Judges.  Black  Letter.  Folio.  1560.  Rare.  18/- 
This  would  seem  to  be  a  profound  work.  Rogers  says  oi  Peter  Martyr: — "Few 
private  men  can  understand  his  works,  and  few  ministers  who  understand  them  can 
obtain  them  ;  nor  if  they  can  will  they  find  in  them  much  that  will  benefit  their 
simple  hearers."  This  has  not  been  our  experience  with  Peter  Martyr's  works ;  on 
the  contrary,  we  have  read  them  with  interest. 


JUDGES.  65 

252  NOBLE  (Samuel).     Sermons  on  the  singular  histories  recorded  in  the  first 

eleven  chapters.     8vo.     3/6.     ZoW.,  J.  S.  Hodson.     1856.     S.  1/6. 
Swedenborgian  mysticism.     Exposition  in  a  trance. 

253  ROGERS    (Richard.      Puritan)     The   whole   Book  of 

Judges.    [103  Sermons.]    Foho.    Lond.,  161$.    12/- to  15/- 
This  for  the  Puritan  period  is  THE  work  upon  Judges.     It  is 
thorotighly  plain  and  eminently  p}'actical. 

254  WISEMAN     (Luke  H.,    M.A.    Died  1875).      Men  of 

Faith  ;  or,  Sketches  from  the  Book  of  Judges.     Cr.   8vo. 

3/6.     Lond.,  Hodder  &  Stoughton.     1874. 
Mr.    Wiseman  in  this  zuork  tells  "of  Gideon  and  Barak,  of 
Samson  and  of  Jephthah  ",  and  he  does  it  in  a  powerful  style.     He 
zvas  one  of  the  best  preachers  in  the  Weslcyan  body.     A  man  of 
fulness,  and  judicioicsness ;  in  fact,  a  wise  man. 


255  BRUCE  (John,  D.D.)      The  Life  of  Gideon.      Fcap.  8vo.     5/- 

Edifib.,  Edmonston  &  Douglas.     1870. 
The  author  deserves  attention,  both  for  matter  and  style.    Note  Hugh 
Millet^ s   high   opinion   of  his    "Biography   of  Samson:"   (No.    259). 
Gideon  is  a  better  work,  but  both  are  over-estimated. 

256  ELWIN  (Fountain).     Sermons  on  the  character  of  Gideon.     i2mo.     Lond.,. 

Hatchards.     1844.     S.  2/- 
Seven  sermons,  containing  nothing  remarkable. 

257  HOWARD  (Lady).    Gideon  the  Mighty  Man  of  Valour.     [Anon].    Lond.y 

Hatchards.    1841.     S.  1/6. 
Of  small  use  to  the  preacher. 

258  ROGERS  (George  Albert,  M.A.)    The  Valour  of  Faith ; 

or,  the  Gospel  in  the  Life  of  Gideon.    i2mo.    2/6.    Lond., 
Wertheim,  Macintosh  &  Hunt.     1859. 
A  thoroughly  lively  little  book.     Each  of  the  eight  chapters  is 
fill  of  thougJit. 

259  BRUCE  (John,  D.D.)     The  Biography  of  Samson.     i8mo.    2/- 

Edinb.,  Edmonston  &  Douglas.  1870. 
Hugh  Miller  said  :  "  There  is  a  poetic  richness  in  the  style,  which  at 
one  time  reminds  us  of  Chalmers,  and  at  another  of  fere?7iy  Taylor,  but 
which  in  reality  is  Dr.  Brace's  own,  that  does  not  seem  poor  or  bald 
beside  even  the  blank  verse  of  the  great  master  of  Enghsh  song."  We 
think  this  eulogy  is  greatly  overdone. 

260  QUARLES  (Francis.     1592— 1644).    The  Historic  of  Samson. 

4to.  Lend.,  1 63 1.  5/- 
This  queer,  quaint,  odd  volume  of  rhymes  is  far  from  despicable. 
Kitto  frequently  quotes  Qtiarles  upon  Samson,  and  says  of  him  that  he 
was  a  poet  of  no  mean  order.  We  are  glad  to  have  his  testimony  to 
confirm  our  own  opinion.  Refined  tastes  will  be  offended,  but  those 
who  wish  for  quaint  thought  will  be  gratified.     The  book  is  very  rare. 

G 


GG  RUTH. 

RUTH. 

[See  also  under  "yosJiiia^ 

261     BERNARD  (RiCHArxO.      PurUan.      Died   1641).      Ruth's    Re- 
compense.    4to.     1628.     3/6. 
Mr.  Grosart  is  enthusiastic  in  his  praise  of  this  work,  and  says  "  that 
it  abounds  with  apophthegms  and  compressed  thoughts."     We   defer  to 
so  high  an  authority,  but  we  are  not  much  fascinated  by  the  book. 

2C2  FULLER  (Thomas,  D.D.  1608— 166 i).  A  Comment  on 
Ruth,  with  two  Sermons.     8vo.     1650. 

Not  one  of  Fuller's  best ;  but  still  quaint  and  pithy,  and  lit  up  with 
flashes  of  his  irrepressible  wit.  The  above  works  of  Bernard  and 
Fuller  have  been  reprinted  in  NichoPs  Series  of  Commentaries,  in  one 
volume.     Cr.  4to.     7/6.     Land.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1865. 

Mr.  Tegg,  Pancras  Lane,  London,  has  also  published  a  reprint  of 
Fuller's  Comment  on  Ruth,  and  Notes  upon  Jonah.     Cr.  8vo.     4/6. 

263  BRADEN  (William).     The  Beautiful  Gleaner.     Cr.  Svo.     2/6. 

Lond.,  James  Clark  &  Co.     1874. 
Mr.  Braden  is  an  able  preacher.     His  sermons  upon  Ruth  are  popu- 
lar and  practical,  though  not  very  remarkable. 

264  LAVATER  (Lewis.     A  Swiss  Protestant  Divine.     1527— 15S6.)     Ruth  ex- 

pounded, in  28  Sermons.     Translated  from  the  Latin  by  E.  Pagett.     Svo. 

Lond.,  15S6. 
Lavater  was  a  Reformer  of  high  repute,  son-in-law  of  Bullingcr.     He  wrote  a 
curious  work  on  spectres,  and  made  a  catalogue  of  comets,  thus  shewing  himself  to 
be  both  philosopher  and  divine.     His  book  is  seldom  met  with. 

265  LAWSON    (George,  D.D.)    Lectures   on   the    Book    of 

Ruth.     i2mo.     Eelinb.,  1805.      3/- 
By  a  man  of  great  ge^iiiis.    Simple,  fresh,  and  gracious.    Nothing 
critical  or  profound  may   be   looked  for,    but  zvise    and    sound 
teaching  may  be  gleaned  in  these  pages. 

266  MACARTNEY  (H.  B.)     Observations  on  Ruth.     i2mo.      Lond.,  1842.     9d. 
A  nice  little  book,  little  in  all  ways. 

267  MACGOWAN  (John.     1726— 1780.)     Discourses  on  Ruth,  and 

other  important  subjects.     Svo.     Land..,  i']2>i.     2/6. 
Macgowan,  the  author  of  the  Dialogue  of  Devils,  is  well  known  for 
originality  and  force.     In  this  case  his  sermons  are  full  of  Gospel  truth, 
but  the  texts  are  too  much  accommodated  and  spiritualized.     The  dis- 
courses are  good  reading. 

268  OXENDEN  (A.     Bp.  of  Montreal).     Story  of  Ruth.    iSmo.    i/-     Hatchards. 
A  very  tiny  affair,  of  no  great  moment  to  the  expositor. 

269  PHILPOT  (B.,  A.M.)     Six  Lectures.     Square  Fcap.   2/6.  Z^W.,  Nisbet  &  Co. 
A  very  small  book,  containing  good,  simple  lectures— not  an  exposition. 


RUTH— I.  AND  II.  SAMUEL.  67 

270  PRICE  (Aubrey  C,  B.A.)      Six  Lectures  on  the  Book  of  Ruth. 

izmo.     2/6.     Lond.,  Hatchards.     1869. 
Sermons  of  remarkable  power,  both  of  doctrine  and  diction.     Not  so 
expository  as   practical.       Mr.  Price  is  an   earnest  and  large-hearted 
clergyman  of  the  thoroughly  evangelical  school. 

271  TOPSELL  (Edward).    The  Reward  of  Religion.   Lectures 

upon  Ruth.     8vo.     Loud.,  161^.     7/6  to  10/- 

A  very  choice  old  zvork.     A  ttcrsol  in  his  rhy tiling  preface  says 

of  it— 

"  Go  little  Booke,  display  thy  golden  title, 
(And  yet  not  little  though  thou  little  bee)  ; 
Little  for  price  and  yet  in  price  not  little, 
Thine  was  the  Paine,  the  gaine  is  ours  I  see  : 
(Although  our  gaine  thou  deem'st  no  paine  to  thee). 
If  then,  O  reader,  little  paine  thou  take, 
Thou  greatest  gaine  with  smallest  paine  shall  make." 

272  TYNG  (Stephen,  D.D.,  of  Nnv  York).     The  Rich  Kinsman;  or,  the  History 

of  Ruth.     Small  8vo.     Lond.,\%^b.     S.  1/6. 
Written  for  young  people,  and  suitable  for  their  reading,  though  none  too  lively. 

273  WRIGHT  (C.  H.  H.,  M.A.)     Ruth,  in  Hebrew;  with  gramma- 

tical and  critical  Commentary.     8vo.     7/6.     Z^/zrt'.,  Williams  & 

Norgate.     1864. 
For  Hebraists  only.     The  author  has  selected  the  book  of  Ruth  as  a 
study  for  beginners  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  because  of  the  simplicity  of 
the  language. 


I.  &  II.  SAMUEL. 


[Expositions  upon  these  books  being  few,  the  student  should  consult 
works  on  Scripture  characters,  and  also  comments  on  the  Old  Testament 
as  a  whole.] 

274  KEIL  (C.  F.,  D.D.)  and  DELITZSCH  (F.,  D.D.)     The  Books 

of  Samuel.     Translated  from  the  German  by  the  Rev.  James 
Martin,  B.A.     8vo.     10/6.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1872. 
Like  most  of  Clark's  series,  KeiVs  works  are  valuable  helps  towards 
obtaining  the  meaning  of  the  text;   but   for   spiritual  r^Hections  and 
fruitful  hints  we  must  look  elsewhere. 

275  LINDSAY    (Henry,    M.A.)     Lectures  on  the  Historical  Books  [i  and  2 

Samuel  only].     2  vols.     i2mo.     Loud.,  1828.    2/6. 
Practical  sermons  on  a  few  of  the  more  prominent  events. 

276  WILLET    (Andrew).      An    Harmonie  upon   the  First 

Booke  of  Samuel,  and  an  Harmonie  upon  the  Seconde 

Booke  of  Samuel.    Folio.     1614.     10/6  to  12/-     [There  is 

also  a  4to.  edition  upon  i  Samuel.     1607.] 

TJie  zvork  continues  the  Hcxapla  to  %vJiich  zve  have  referred  in 

Nos.  1^2  and  777.     It  is  unusnally  brief  for  the  age  of  its  conipo- 

siiwUf  and  full  of  variety.     Under  every  verse,  and  often  clause  of 


f,8  I.  AND  II.  SAMUEL— SAMUEL,  SAUL,  DAVID. 

a  I'crsc,  the  learned  antJior  proposes  a  question,  and  proceeds  to 
ansK'er  it.  These  are  such  as  t/ie  folloiuing  : — "  What  a  daughter 
of  Belial  is  ?  "  "  Whether  any  may  be  said  to  sin  %vith  the  %vill  of 
God/  "  "  What  doors  of  the  house  of  Jehovah  Samuel  opened?  " 
"  JVhat  is  to  be  thought  of  Elis  state  before  God?  " 

277     GUILD  (William,  D.D.      1586— 1657).     The  Throne  of  David. 

An  Exposition  of  the   2nd  Samuel,  wherein  is  set  down  the 

Pattern  of  a  Pious  and  Prudent  Prince.      Oxf,  1659.     11/- 

Thc  MSS.  of  tliis  rare  book  was  sent  to  Dr.  fohn  Owen  by  the  widow 

of  the  author,  with  a  letter  of  her  own,  informing  him  that  her  dying 

Inisband  desired  it  to  be  so  forwarded.     Dr.  Oiocn  says,  that  he  found 

the  treatise  "written  with  perspicuity  and  clearness,  handling  a  subject 

cf  great  and  delightful  variety,  with  a  choice  mixture  of  spiritual,  moral, 

niui  ])olitical  observations,  tempered  by  a  good  and  sound  judgment 

unto  common  capacities."     We  do  not  presume  to  criticize  where  Owen 

commends,  but  we  should  not  have  originated  such  a  commendation. 


SAMUEL,  SAUL,  DAVID. 

2 78  KITTO.     Daily  Bible  Illustrations,   "Samuel,   Saul,   and 

David."     (See  No.  41.) 
Shoidd  always  be  coiisiUted. 

279  PLUMPTRE  (Helen).     The  History  of  Samuel.     i8mo- 

1/6.     Loud.,  Nisbet  and  Co.     1S42. 
A  childreji's  book,  and  childlike  men  will  be  thankfd  for  the 
many  very  useful  hints  wJiich  it  throws  out.      We  Jiave  got  7nore 
out  of  it  than  we  Jiave  found  in  huge  and  learned  tomes. 

280  STEEL  (Robert).    Samuel  the  Prophet.  8vo.  4/6.   Loud., 

Nelson  &  Sons,  1861.  S.  2/- 
TJie  author  lias  done  his  work  zuell,  and  has  shozvn  an  evident 
desire  to  excite  others  to  a  greater  knowledge  of  the  subject  than  he 
could  impart.  Hence  he  gives  a  list  of  the  writers  ttpoji  Samuel, 
and  such  accounts  of  them  as  were  ivithin  his  reach.  Yojing  readers 
will  find  this  book  a  great  help  to  them. 

281  MILLER  (J.  A.)     Saul,  The  First  King  of  Israel.     Fcap, 

8vo.     1/6.     Loud.,  Snow  &  Co.     1866. 
Eminently  thoughtful,  Jtseful,  practical  sermons.      We  do  not  se^ 
how  SauTs  life-failure  could  be  more  profitably  set  forth. 

282  BLAIKIE  (William  G.,  A.M.)     David,  King  of  Israel ; 

the  Divine  Plan  and  Lessons  of  his  Life.    8vo.    5/-  Lond., 
Nisbet  &  Co.     1861. 
Dr.  Blaikie  is  a  good  zvriter.     This  Life  of  David  has  supplied 
a  great  lack. 


SAMUEL,  SAUL,  DAVID  69 

283  CHANDLER  (Samuel,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  and  F.A.S.     1693— 1766). 

A  Critical  History  of  the  Life  of  David.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Loud., 

1766.     S.  5/-     1  vol.,  Svo.     J.  H.  &  J.  Parker.     1853.     S.  5/- 

This  is  a  masterpiece  as  a  critical  history,  and  the  best  of  Chandler's 

productions.     Many  of  the  Psalms  are  explained  with  commendable 

learning,  but  the  spiritual  element  is  absent. 

284  DELANY  (Patrick,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Down.     1686— 1768).     An  Historical 

Account  of  the  Life  and  Reign  of  David.     [Anon.]     2  vols.,  Svo.     Loud., 

1745-    4/- 
Delany  was  a  friend  of  Swift,  no  great  recommendation  for  a  commentator.     He 
defends  David  in  a  way  which  David  would  have  sternly  repudiated.      Chandler  is  far 
preferable  to  Delany,  but  both  are  devoid  of  the  evangelical  spirit. 

285  KINGSLEY  (Charles,  M.A.)     David.     Four  Sermons.     Fcap. 

Svo.  2/6.  Loud.,  Macmillan  &  Co. 
In  his  usual  free  and  easy  manner  Kingsley  speaks  of  David's  strength 
and  his  weakness,  his  anger  and  his  deserts.  The  character  of  this 
writer  is  supposed  to  be  well  understood,  but  we  question  if  many  have 
formed  a  true  estimate  of  him.  For  commenting  purposes  these  sermons 
are  of  small  value  ;  they  are  plain,  practical  discourses. 

286  KRUMMACHER  (F.  W.,  D.D.)    David,  the  King  of  Israel.    Cr. 

8vo.,  7/6.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark. 
Anything  by  Krummacher  is  worthy  of  patient  reading. 

287  LAWSON  (George,  D.D.     1749 — 1820.)     Discourses  on 

the  History  of  David.      i2mo.     Berivick,  iZ^i.     S.  3/6. 
Here   the  life   of  David  is  piously    turned  to   practical  use. 
Delany  and  Chandler  are  biU  bones,  and  Lazvson  the  marrozv. 

288  MARBECK  (John).    The  whole  History  of  King  David.    4to.     1579. 

This  is  in  English  metre,  and  was  written  by  the  famous  organist  of  the  Royal 
Chapel  in  Windsor,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  He  narrowly  escaped  martyrdom. 
His  work  entitled  "  Booke  of  Common  Praier  noted,"  is  the  groundwork  of  the  plain- 
song  used  in  our  Cathedrals  from  the  Reformation  to  the  present  day.  Marbeck's 
History  of  David  is  very  rare.     We  cannot  therefore  set  a  price. 

289  [ROGERS  (Mrs.)]     The  Shepherd  King.     By  the  Authoress  of 

" The  Folded  Lamb."  i2mo.  3/6.  Z(?/;^.,  Nisbet.    1856.    S.i/6. 
This  authoress  writes  well  for  the  young,  and  her  book  will  be  useful 
to  those  who  teach  them. 

290  SMITH  (George,  LL.D.  and  F.A.S.)     The  Life  and  Reign  of 

David.     Cr.  8vo.,  7/6.     Loud.,  Longmans.     1867.     S.  3/6. 

David's  life  is  here  concisely  written,  with  such  of  the  Psalms  inter- 
woven as  can  be  referred  to  special  periods.  It  cannot  be  read  without 
ministering  instruction. 

291  TAYLOR  (William  M.,  D.D.     Of  the  Broadzvay  Taber- 

nacle, Neiu  York).      David  :    his   Life,   and    its   Lessons. 
Cr.Svo.    d>l6.    Z£?«^., Sampson  Low,  Marston&  Co.    1875. 
A  grand  work  zvhich  should  be  in  every  library. 


70  SAMUEL,  SAUL,  DAVID— L  and  IL   KINGS. 

292  THOMPSON  (Henry,  M. A.)     Davidica.     Twelve  Sermons  on  the  Life  and 

Charnclcr  of  David.     8vo.     Lond.,  1827.      1/6. 
Discourses  of  the  kind  which  are  usually  published  by  subscription ;  rather  pre- 
tentious, but  with  notliing  in  them.     The  process  of  subscribing  to  print  sermons  is 
one  suggested  by  kindness,  but  seldom  directed  by  reason. 

293  VINCE  (Charles, />^7///.i-/iI/////V/tv',  of  Binningham.  Died 

1S75).     Lights  and  Shadows  in  the  Life  of  King  David. 
Cr.  8vo.     5/-     Loud.,  Elliot  Stock.     1871. 
Sermons  of  the  highest  order  iipon  a  few  incidents  in  David's 
life.      They  are  models  of  ehaste,  snbdned,  bnt  poiuerfnl preaching. 


I.  and  II.  KINGS. 


294  GENESTE  (Maximilian,  M.A.)    The  Tarallel  Histories  of  Judah 

and  Israel.     2  vols.,  Roy.  8vo.    £1  iis.  6d.    Loud.,  S.  Bagster 

&  Sons.     1843.     S.  6/-  to  8/- 
Thc  explanatory  notes  are  mostly  from  other  authors.    The  work  has  a 
very  noble  appearance,  and  may  be  useful  as  showing  the  run  of  Biblical 
history  ;  but  Barlh's  Bible  Manual  {^o.  3)  would  answer  every  purpose. 

295  JUKES  (Andrew).    The  Mystery  of  the  Kingdom,  traced  through 

the  Books  of  Kings.     Part  I.     1/6.     Loud.,  Longmans.      1858. 
This  author  is  more  mystical  than  we  could  wish,  but  never  writes 
without  being  instructive. 

296  KEIL  (K.  F.)  and   BERTHEAU   (E.)      Commentary   on   the 

Books   of  Kings.       By   K.    F.    Keil.      Translated   by   James 

Murphy,    LL.D.       Supplemented   by   a    Commentary  on   the 

Books  of  Cluonicles.     By  Ernst  Bertheau,  Professor  in  Goettin- 

gen.     Translated  by  James  Martin,  B.A.     2  vols.     10/6  each, 

Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1857.     S.  10/- 

Distinguished  by  careful  investigation  of  the  meaning  of  the  text. 

This  is  a  most  important  help  to  the  expositor.     The  student  will  not, 

however,  find  much  in  the  way  of  reflections  and  doctrines. 

297  KEIL  and  DELITZSCH.     The  Books  of  the  Kings.     By  C.  F. 

Keil.    Translated  by  James  Martin,  B.A.     i  vol.    10/6.    Edinb., 
T.  &  T.  Clark.     1865. 
This  appears  to  be  another  form  of  the  work  mentioned  above.    At 
least  there  can  be  no  necessity  for  purchasing  both.      This  is  the  better. 

298  KITTO.      Daily  Bible  Illnsi rations,    "Solomon    and   the 

Kings."     {See  No.  41.) 
/'"■////  of  deeply  interesting  matter. 

299  LANGE'S  COMMENTARIES.     Edited  by  Dr.  Schaff. 

Kings.  ByDr.Bahr.  i  vol..  Imp.  Svo.  21/-,  or  to  subscribers 

15/-     ^^/;/^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1 872. 

It  innst  have  cost  gi-eat  effort  to  make  the  homiletical part  of  this 

volnme  as  good  as  it  is.     It  is  a  treasnry  to  the  preacher,  and  is  all 

the  more  precious  because  we  have  next  to  nothing  npon  the  books  of 

the  Kings.     (See  No.  42). 


SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE— ELIJAH,  ELISHA,  &c.  71 

SOLOMON'S  TEMPLE. 

300  BUNYAN    (John).      Solomon's  Temple  Spiritualized.      Lond., 

1688.     [In  Bunyan's  Works,  Offer's  edition.  III.,  460.] 
A  marvellous  display  of  allegorizing  genius :    full  of  Gospel  truth. 
Biinyan  hammers  away  at  each  type,  but  no  one  may  call  it  tinkering. 

301  EDERSHEIM  (A.,  D.D.)     The  Temple  :  its  Ministry  and 

Sei-vices.     Imp.  i6mo.     5/-     Rclig.  Tract.  Soc.    1874. 
This  zvill  supply  the  student  zvith  all  that  he  needs  upon  the 
subject  in  hand. 

302  LEE  (Samuel,  M.A.     1625 — 1691.)     Orbis  miraculum ;  or,  the 

Temple  of  Solomon  pourtrayed  by  Scripture  light.     [Anon.] 

Folio.     1659.     12/-  to  14/- 
Of  course,  as  will  be  inferred  from  its  date,  this  work  is  of  the  antique 
order,  but  it  is  profoundly  learned,    and  goes  into  architectural  and 
ritualistic  details,  explaining  them  spiritually  with  much  sweetness  and 
suggestiveness. 


ELIJAH,  ELISHA,  &c. 

303  ANDERSON  (James,  S.  M.,  M.A.)    Discourses  on  Elijah,  &c.    8vo.    Lond., 

1835-     2/- 
Ordinary  sermons  by  a  "  Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  the  Queen."     Rhetorical  and 
grandiose,  but  not  expository. 

304  BAYNE  (Peter).     The  Days  of  Jezebel.     An  Historical  Drama. 

i2mo.     6/-    Lond.,  Strachan  &  Co.     1S72. 
A  fine  poetic  drama,  worthy  of  quotation  by  preachers;  but  hardly  in 
the  line  of  works  contemplated  by  this  Catalogue. 

305  EDERSHEIM  (Alfred,  D.D.)      Elisha  the  Prophet,  a  Type  of 

Christ.     Cr.  Svo.     3/6.     Lond,  W.  Hunt  &  Co.     1873. 
This  author  is  always  interesting,  shewing  close  acquaintance  with 
Jewish  customs,  and  knowing  how  to  utilize  his  information. 

306  HOWAT(H.  T.)  Elijah,  the  Desert  Prophet.  Cr.  Svo.  5/-  Edinh.y 

Johnstone  &  Hunter,     1868. 
Very  picturesque  and  poetical.     A  work  to  be  read  for  enjoyment. 

307  KRUMMAOHER  (F.  W.,  D.D.)      Elijah  the  Tishbite. 

Translated  from  the  German.     [Numerous  editions  ;  one 
has  lately  been  issued  by  the  Religious  Tract  Society. 
Cr.  Svo.     3/-]     S.  1/6. 
Too  well  known  and  approved  to  need  any  commendation  from  us. 

308  MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.D.)    The  Prophet  of  Fire.    Post  8vo. 

6j6.     Lond.,  James  Nisbet  &  Co.     1863. 
Dr.  Macduff  writes  popularly,  yet  he  is  by  no  means  weak  or 
shalloiv.     He  is  to  the  young  minister  all  the  more  tiseful,  because 
he  has  zuorked  out  the  problem  of  making  sound  thought  intelligible 
to  the  multitude. 


72  ELIJAH,  ELISHA,  &zc. 

309  M[ACINTOSII]    (C  H.)     Reflections  on  the  Life  and  Times  of  Elijah.     By 

C.  II.  M.     I/-     Lorn/.,  G.  Morrish. 
Strongly  riymouthibtic.     A  small  affair. 

310  BLUNT  (Henry,  M. A.)     Lectures  upon   the  History  of  Elisha. 

i2nio.  5/6.  Lond.,  llatchards.  1S39.  S-  2/- 
We  like  Blunt  better  upon  Elisha  than  upon  any  other  portion  of 
Scripture.  He  says  that,  had  he  known  of  Krummacher  s  having  written 
upon  the  subject,  he  should  not  have  attempted  it  himself.  A  wise 
observation.  What  shall  he  do  that  cometh  after  a  King,  or  after  a 
Krummacher  1 

311  DOTHIE  (W.  P.,  M.A.)     The  History  of  the  Prophet  Elisha. 

Cr.  8vo.     2/6.     Lond.,  Hodder  &  Stoughton.     1872. 
Sketchy.     Not  very  deep,  but  interesting. 

312  GLYN  (George  L.,  Bart.)    Life  of    Elisha,  in  eleven  plain  dis- 

courses.    8vo.     Lond.,  Wertheim  &  Macintosh.      1857.     S.  i/- 
Evangelical  and  simple.     Ministers  do  not  need  it. 

313  KRUMMACHER    (F.  W.,  D.D.)      Elisha.      Translated 

from  the  German.     Lojid.,   Nisbet  &  Co.     1 838.     S.  1/6. 
Of  this  ive  may  say  as  zve  did  of  the  same  author  s  Elijah, — it 
needs  no  commendiiig  from  lis. 

314  BULLOCK  (Charles).      The  Syrian  Leper.      Fcap.  8vo.      2/6. 

Lond.,  Wertheim  &  Macintosh.      1862.     S.  1/3. 
Telling  in  style,  and  earnestly  evangelical.     These  chapters  are  good 
specimens  of  popular  expounding. 

315  MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.D.)     The  Healing  Waters  ;  or,  The 

Story  of  Naamaii.     An  Old  Testament  Chapter  on  Provi- 
dence and  Grace.    Cr.  8vo.     3/6.     Lond.,  Nisbet.     1873. 
In  Dr.  Maeduff's  best  manner:  the  story  of  Naaman  is  admirably 
handled,  and  made  to  teach  the  gospel  with  imteh  fresJiness. 

316  ROGERS  (Daniel,  B.D.     Puritan.    1573— 1652).     Naa- 

man the  Syrian,  his  disease  and  cure  ;  discovering  lively 

to  the  reader  the  spiritual  leprosie  of  sinne  and  selfe-Iove; 

together  with  the  remedies,  viz.,  selfe-denial  and  faith. 

Folio.     Lond.,  1 642.     7/-  to  10/- 
A  huge  volume  of  Sg8  folio  pages,  almost  large  enough  to  have 
loaded  one  of  Naaman' s  imdes.     It  is  a  work  wJiicJi  exhausts  the 
subject  and  turns  it  to  earnest  evangelical  uses. 

317  WOODWARD  (Henry,  A.M.)     The  Shunamite.     Svo.     10/6.     Jiotid.   and 

Camb.,  Macmillan  &  Co.  1863.  S.  3/- 
We  scarcely  remember  a  more  flagrant  case  of  high-sounding  verbiage.  Here  is 
the  author's  way  of  describing  a  hen  which  has  hatched  ducklings.  —  "That  much 
tried  bird,  whose  hard  allotment  it  has  been  to  hatch  and  rear  a  brood  of  aliens,  and 
who  seems  as  if  melancholy  had  marked  her  for  her  own,  M'hen  her  charge,  with 
unanimous  consent,  hurry  to  some  tempting  pool  of  water,  and  viokte  her  feelings  and 
shock  her  instincts,  by  casting  themselves  upon  that  hostile  element." 


CHRONICLES— EZRA,  NEHEMIAH,  and  ESTHER.        73 
I.  and  II.  CHRONICLES. 

318  BERTHEAU  (E.)     See  Keil  2svd.  Beri/teau,  No.  296. 

319  KEIL  (K.  F.)     The  Book  of  the  Chronicles.     Translated  from 

the  German,     By  Andrew  Harper,  B.D.     8vo.    10/6.     Edinb., 

T.  &  T.  Clark.     1872. 
Without  indicating  either  the  spiritual  lesson  or  the  moral  of  the  his- 
tory, Keil  simply  explains  the  facts,  and  in  so  doing  aids  the  reader  to 
realize  them.     We  confess  we  should  like  something  more. 


EZRA,  NEHEMIAH,  and  ESTHER. 

320  KEIL  (K.  F.)     Commentary  on    Ezra,   Nehemiah,  and  Esther. 

Translated  by  Sophia  Taylor.     8vo.     10/6.     Edlnb.,  T.  &.  T. 

Clark.  F.  T.  L.  1873. 
Just  the  kind  of  book  in  which  Keil's  method  of  commenting  appears 
to  the  best  advantage.  He  gives  much  needful  information,  and  thus 
supplements  more  didactic  works.  We  cannot  read  Keil  with  pleasure, 
for  we  want  spiritual  meat,  but  yet  it  is  most  desirable  for  us  to  know 
what  the  text  really  means. 

321  PILKINGTON  (James,  B.D.   Bishop  of  Durham.    1520—1575). 

A   GodUe    Exposition   upon  certeine  chapters  of  Nehemiah. 

1585,  Reprinted  in  the  Parker  Society's  edition  of  Pilkington's 

Works.  8vo.  Camb.,  1842. 
Very  old  fashioned  and  singular,  somewhat  in  the  style  of  Latimer  and 
perhaps  a  little  coarser.  Pilkingtoiis  downright  onslaughts  upon  the  vices 
and  follies  of  his  times  are  fine  instances  of  personal,  faithful  preaching; 
they  are,  however,  so  minutely  descriptive  of  the  manners  which  then 
prevailed  that  they  are  the  less  useful  now.  The  style  is  cramped,  and 
even  grotesque  in  places,  yet  Pilkington  is  a  grand  old  author.  He  has 
only  written  upon  five  chapters. 

322  RANDALL  (J.  Montague,  A.K.C.)     Nehemiah,  the  Tirshatha: 

his  Life  and  Lessons.  Post  8vo.  3/6.  Loud.,  Nisbet.  1874. 
The  substance  of  thirteen  Sunday  evening  addresses  to  a  village  con- 
gregation, "dictated  by  the  author,  who  is  nearly  blind,  on  the  following 
Monday."  These  familiar  and  almost  chatty  discourses  are  full  of 
gospel  teaching,  and  while  they  give  a  fair  idea  of  Nehemiah  and  his 
times,  they  are  also  enlivened  by  anecdote,  and  made  exceedingly 
interesting.  Students  will  not  learn  much  from  these  sermons,  but  they 
may  see  how  rustic  preaching  should  be  done. 

323  SCENES  FROM  THE  LIFE  OF  NEHEMIAH;  or,  Chapters 

for   Christian   Workers.      [Anon.]      Fcap.   8vo.      i/-      Loud., 
66,  Paternoster  Row,  E.C 
The  heads  of  these  chapters  would  serve  exceedingly  well  for  the  key- 
notes of  a  series  of  sermons. 


74  EZRA,  NEHEMIAH,  and  ESTHER. 

324     STOWELL  (Hugh,  M.A.)     A  Model  for  Men  of  Business ;  or, 

Lectures    on    the    Character    of    Nehemiah.       8vo.      Land., 

Hatcliards.     1855.     S.  3/- 

The  author  does  not  attempt  a  full  exposition,  but  aims  at  furnishing 

a  plain,  j^ractical  handbook  for  men  of  business  and  others  whose  time 

is  limited.     He  gives  fourteen  good,  sensible  lectures  on  the  Book. 

3:5     WOODWARD  (Henry,  M.A.)     Thoughts  on  the  Character  and  History  of 
Nehemiah.      121110.     Land.,  1849. 
Words,  and  only  words. 


ESTHER. 

3:6      COOPER    (Thom.\s).     The   Churches  Deliverance ;   containing  Meditations 
and  short  Notes  upon  the  Booke  of  Hester.     4to.     Loud.,  1609.     5/-  to  7/- 
Wc  have  not  been  able  to  meet  with  this  work. 

327  DAVIDSON  (Alexander  D.,D.D.)    Lectures  on  Esther.   Cr.Svo. 

5/6.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.      1859. 

Helpful  lectures.  The  Book  of  Esther  is  here  used  for  instruction  in 
doctrine  and  practice.  The  work  is  not  so  much  for  the  study  as  for 
the  family. 

328  HUGHES    (John).      Esther  and   her  People.      Ten   Sermons. 

i8mo.     1842.     S.  1/3. 
Good  evangelical  discourses,  but  nothing  very  special. 

329  LA WSON  (George,  D.D.)     Discourses  on  Esther.    l2mo. 

Edinb.,  1804.    S.  3/6. 
Intended  for  the  general  reader.      The  discourses  are  as  spiritual 
and  miaffectcd  as  their  exxellcnt  author.      Dr.    John  Brown,  in 
commending  all  the  Laivson  books,  says  that  "  he  has  rendered 
subjects,  apparently  barren,  full  of  instruction^ 

?3o  McCRIE  (Thomas).  Lectures  on  Esther.  i2mo.  1838. 
S.  1/6. 
Dr.  Davidson  says  of  Dr.  McCrie:  "  There  is  an  ancient  fable 
of  a  king  %vJio  ivas  gifted  zuith  the  poiver  of  turning  every  tiling  he 
touched  into  gold;  and  this  eminent  divine  and  historian  possessed 
remarkably  the  gift  of  rendering  every  subject  he  handled  so  precious, 
as  at  least  to  discourage  any  one  from  attempting  to  folloiv  in  his 
track.  In  his  Lectures  upon  the  book  of  Esther,  he  has  certainly 
left  little  for  any  to  say  zvho  may  come  after  him." 

331      MORGAN  (R.C.)     The  Book  of  Either  typical  of  the  Kingdom.      Sm.  8vo. 
1855.     S.  1/6. 
An  allegorical  interpretation,   which  commences  with  these  words:     "Thetnie 
scene  of  this  beautiful  book  opens  in  heaven."     Is  heaven  under  the   dominion   of 
Ahasuerus  ?     Who  then  is  Vashti  ? 


THE  POETICAL  BOOKS— JOB.  75 

THE  POETICAL  BOOKS. 

332  DURELL  (D.,  D.D.)     Critical  Remarks  on  the  Books  of  Job,  Prov.,  Psalms, 

Eccles.,  and  Canticles.     4to.     Oxf.,  1772.     4/-  to  6/- 
A  critic  who  is  for  ever  mending  the  text,  who  contends  for  the  modern  origin  of 
Job,  thinks  the  Canticles  to  be  a  love  song,  and  considers  the  imprecatory  Psalms  to 
be  ebullitions  of  passion,  is  not  one  whom  our  readei-s  need  consult. 

333  IIOLDEN  (Lawrence).     Paraphrase  on  the  Books  of  Job,  Psalms,  Proverbs, 

and  Ecclesiastes,  with  Notes.  4  vols.,  8 vo.  1763.  5/- 
An  atrocious  instance  of  bombastic  verbosity.  Job  ii.  2  is  thus  expanded:  — 
"  Heaven  and  earth's  gi-eat  Lord  and  guardian,  the  instant  Satan  appeared  observed, 
and  thus  demanded  of  him  :  '  from  what  quarter  proceedest  thou  ?  or  in  what  district, 
and  to  what  purpose  hast  thou  lately  employed  thy  perverted,  and  subtle,  wicked 
abilities  and  arts  ? '  To  whom  the  destroyer  answers  :  '  my  last  station,  or  rather,  un- 
settled, wandering  motion,  has  been  upon  earth  ;  various  districts  whereof  I  have  made 
short  visits  to,  being  sometimes  with  the  inhabitants  of  one  region  or  climate,  some- 
times with  those  of  another.' "  Paraphrases  generally  mean  the  text  padded  out  with 
superfluous  words,  and  this  is  an  emphatic  instance. 

334  KITTO.     Daily  Bible  IlhLstrations/' ]oh  and  the  Poetical 

Books."     (See  No.  41.) 
Worthy  of  attentive  reading. 

335  LEIGH  (Edward),     ^ttww^tx  Whole  Bible,  Ylo.  a,^. 

336  WILCOCKS    (Thomas,   A.M.     Puritan.     1549— 1908).      The 

Works  of  that  Reverend  and  Learned  Divine,  Mr.  Thomas 
\Vilcocks,  Minister  of  God's  Word  :  containing  an  Exposition 
upon  the  whole  booke  of  David's  Psahiies,  Solomon's  Proverbs, 
the  Canticles,  and  part  of  the  eighth  chapter  of  St.  Paul's  Epistle 
to  the  Romans.  Folio.  Land.,  1589,  1620  and  1624.  9/- 
to  12/- 
Very  old.     The  notes  are  brief,  but  furnish  many  hints  for  sermons. 


JOB. 

337  ABBOT  (George.     Died  1648).    The  whole   Book  of  Job  Paraphrased,  or 

made  Easie  for  any  to  Understand.     4to.     Lond.,\b\i.     3/6. 
This  is  not  by  Archbishop  Abbot,  neither  is  the  work  of  any  value.      This  Ahhot 
was    a  Member  of    Parliament,    and    his  paraphrase  is   better  tli:ia  we  could   have 
expected  from  an  M.P.  ;  but  still  it  is  a  heavy  performance. 

338  AMERICAN  BIBLE  UNION.     The  Book  of  Job.     A  Trans- 

lation from  the  Original  Hebrew  ;  on,  the  Basis  of  the  Common 
and  Earher  English  Versions.  By  Thomas  J.  Conant,  D.D., 
Professor  of  Sacred  Literature  in  Rochester  TheologicalSeminary, 
4to.  New  York,  1867.  Loud.,  Trubner.  S.  3/6. 
An  excellent  translation.  The  design  did  not  allow  of  more  than 
slender  notes,  but  those  notes  are  good. 

339  BARNES  (Albert.    1798— 1870).     Notes  on  Job.  7?^///- 

ledges  edition,  edited  by  Dr.  Gumming.    2  vols.,  8vo.    5/* 

Blackies  edition.     2  vols.,  post  8vo.     7/- 
Exceediiigly good.     One  of  the  best  of  this  authors  generally 
valuable  productions.     The  student  should  purchase  this  zuork  at 
07ice,  as  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  his  library. 


76  JOB. 

340  BELLAMY  (D.)    Paraphrase,  with  observations.     4to.     Z<7«(/.,  1748.     4/- 
A  collection  of  notes  from  other  authors.     Original  works  are  far  better. 

341  UEZA     (Th£odore.       1519 — 1605.)      Job    expounded.       8vo. 

1590-     7/- 
Bcza  was  the  great  friend  and  assistant  of  Calvin.     As  acomn-.entator 
he  lacked  the  i)rofound  insight  and  comprehensive  grasp  of  Calvin,  but  as 
a  critical  scholar  he  is  said  to  have  been  his  cfj^ual  if  not  his   superior. 
This  work  on  Job  is  rare. 

342  BLACKMORE  (Sir  R.)     rarajihrase  on  the  Book  of  Job,  the  Songs  of  Moses, 

Deborah,  and  Uavid,  four  select  Psalms,  some  Chapters  of  Isaiah,  and  the 

3rd  Chapter  of  I labakkuk.     Folio.     1700.     3/- 

Grandiose  poetry.     Po/e  speaks  of  the  power  of  Blcickin:iyes  numbers  "  to  soothe 

(lie  soul  in  slumbers."     The  worthy  knight  is  not  the  worst  of  the  poetical  expositors, 

hut  he  is  bad  enough.     Miserable  paraphrasers  are  ye  all,   ye  brethren  of  jingling 

rhyme  and  doubtful  measure. 

343  CALVIN  (John).    Sermons  on  the  Booke  of  Job.    Trans- 

lated out  of  French.     ByA.GoIding.    Folio.    Zt?;/^.,  1584. 
Not  tJic  same  as  the  Commentary,  but  equally  ricJi. 

344  CAREY  (Cateret   Priaulx,  M.A.)     Book  of  Job  translated, 

explained  by  Notes,  and  illustrated  by  extracts  from  works  on 
Antiquities,  Science,  &c.    Roy.  8vo.     1858.     5/- to  7/6. 
Purely  critical  and  exegetical.     The  author  has  grappled  manfully 
with  all  difficulties,  and  has  stored  up  a  mass  of  precious  materials  with 
which  to  illuminate  a  book  dark  from  its  antiquity. 

345  CARYL  (Joseph.     1602— 1673).     Exposition,  with  Prac- 

tical Observations.      12  vols.,  4to.     1648 — 1666.      55/- 

Also  in  2  vols.,  folio.  1676.  50/- 
Caryl  must  have  inJieritcd  the  patience  of  Job  to  have  completed 
his  stupendous  task.  It  ivould  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  he  is  at 
all  prolix  or  redundant ;  he  is  only  full.  In  the  course  of  his 
expounding  he  has  illustrated  a  very  large  portion  of  the  whole 
Bible  with  great  clearness  and  pozuer.  He  is  deeply  devotional  and 
spiritual.  He  gives  us  much,  but  none  too  much.  His  work  can 
scarcely  be  supsrseded  or  surpassed. 

346  „  An  Abridgment  of  Caryl's  Exposition. 
8vo.     Edinb.,  1836.     1/6. 

We  do  not  believe  in  abridgmefits  of  a  book  which  is  good 
throughout.  Think  of  twelve  large  volumes  condensed  into  one  small 
one  I     An  ox  in  a  gallipot  is  nothing  to  it. 

347  CHAPPELOW  (Leonard,  B.D.)     A  Commentary,  in  which  is  inserted  the 

Hebrew  Text  and  English  Translation.  2  vols.,  4to.  6/-  Canib.,  i']<-)2. 
ChappeliTdj  is  great  upon  Arabic  etymologies,  but  he  is  dreadfully  verbose,  and 
really  says  nothing  of  any  consequence.  Chappelow  and  several  other  authors  follow 
Scliultens  in  the  belief  that  the  Hebrew  can  only  be  read  by  the  light  of  the  Arabic  ; 
they  even  imagine  that  the  Book  of  Job  was  originally  composed  in  Arabic  by  Job 
himself  and  then  translated  by  someone  else  into  the  Hebrew  tongue.  This  opened 
a  fine  field  for  parading  their  learning. 


JOB.  77 

348  COLEMAN  (J.Noble).     The  Book  of  Job  ;  from  the  Hebrew. 

With  Notes.    4to.    7/6.    Lond.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1869.     S.  4/- 
We  do  not  value  this  so  much  as  the  same  author's  "  Psahiis,"  but  it  is 
serviceable  in  its  own  way. 

349  CONANT  (T.  J.)     ^Qt  American  Bible  Union.     (No.  338.) 

350  DAVIDSON  (A.  B.,  M.A.     Hebrew  Tutor,  Neiu  Coll.,  Edinb.) 

A  Commentary  Grammatical  and  Exegetical ;  with  a  Transla- 
tion.    Vol.  I.     8vo.     7/6.    Lond.,  Williams  &  Norgate.     1862. 
Strict   grammatical  treatment  of  Scripture  is  always  commendable, 
and  in  this  case  the  results  are  highly  valued  by  advanced  scholars. 

351  DELITZSCH  (Franz).     Biblical  Commentary  on  Job.     2  vols., 

8vo.     21/-     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.      1866.     S.  12/- 
"  Unquestionably  the  most  valuable  work  on  this  inexhaustibly  interest- 
ing Scripture  that  has  reached  us  from  Germany." — Nonconfor^nist, 

352  DURHAM  (James.     1622— 1658).      Exposition   of  Job. 

i2mo.     1659.     hX'&o  Glasgoiv,\'ji^(^.     Say  4/- 
This  is  a  small  book,  and  ive  have  been  tinable  to  pi'ocnre  it. 
Orme  only  mentions  it  upon  the  antlioidty  of  Watfs  Bibliothcca. 
It  is  certain  to  be  good,  for  DnrJiani  is  always  admirable. 

353  EVANS  (Alfred  Bowen).     Lectures  on  the  Book  of  Job.     8vo, 

Lo7id.,  Bosworth  &  Harrison.  1856.  S.  2/- 
Discourses  from  fourteen  single  verses  from  different  parts  of  the 
patient  patriarch's  history.  They  are  quite  out  of  the  usual  run  of 
Church  of  England  preaching,  and  are  full  of  thought  and  originality. 
They  would  have  been  all  the  better  for  a  little  gospel,  for  even  if  his 
text  does  not  look  that  way,  we  do  expect  a  Christian  minister  to  have 
something  to  say  about  his  Master. 

354  FENTON  (Thomas,  M.A.)    Annotations  on  Job  and  the  Psalms, 

collected  from  several  Commentators,  and  methodized  and  im- 
proved.    8vo.     Lond.,  1732.     3/- 
All  that  will  be  found  here  is  taken  from  others,  but  well  selected. 

355  FRY    (John).      New  Translation    and    Exposition,   with 

Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  1827.  4/6. 
Written  in  a  devont,  enquiring  spirit,  with  dne  respect  to  learned 
writers,  bnt  not  %uith  a  slavish  follozving  of  their  fancies.  Frys 
ivork  is  somewhat  of  the  same  character  as  Good's  (No.  358).  We 
greatly  esteem  this  exposition  for  its  own  sake,  and  also  for  the 
evangelical  tone  which  pervades  it. 

356  GARDEN  (Charles,  D.D.)  An  Improved  Metrical  Version,  with  preliminary 

dissertation  and  notes.     8vo.     Cx/".,  1796.     3/- 
This  author  has  not  attempted  a  Commentary,  but  he  has  consulted  a  vast  array  of 
authors,  and  from  them  gathered  a  large  number  of  notes.     His  work  is  of  very 
moderate  value. 

357  GARNETT  (John.     Bishop  of  Clogho^.     A  Dissertation  on  the  Book  of  Job, 

&c.     4to.     Lond.,  1749.     2/6. 
Rubbish.     This  Bishop  ascribes  the  authorship  of  Job  to  Ezekiel ! 


78  JOB. 

35S     GOOD  (John  Mason,  M.D.,  F.R.S.     1764— 1827).    The  Book 
of  Job  literally  translated.  With  Notes,  &c.   8vo.   Loiid.,1%12.  5/- 
A  very  valuable  contribution  to  sacred  literature.     Dr.  Good's  learn- 
ing was,  however,  more  extensive  than  accurate,  and  it  would  be  dangerous 
to  accept  his  translations  without  examination. 

359  GREGORY    THE    GREAT.      On   the   Book   of  Job.      [The 

Magna    Moralia.]      Translated,   with    Notes    and    Indices. 

Library  of  i)ie  Fathers.     4  vols.     j[^z  15s.,  or  to  subscribers 

jQ2  2S.     Loud.,  James  Parker  &  Co. 

The  Fathers  are  of  course  beyond  criticism,  and  contain  priceless 

gems  here  and  there ;  but  they  spiritualize  at  such  a  rate,  and  also  utter 

so  many  crudities  and  platitudes,  that  if  they  were  modern  writers  they 

would  not  be  so  greatly  valued  as  they  are.    Antiquity  lends  enchantment. 

360  HEATH  (Thomas).     Essay  toward  a  New  English  Version  of  the  Book  of 

Job.     With  a  Commentary.     410.     Lond.,  1756.     2/6. 
All  that  is  good  in  this  book  is  marred  by  its  utterly  untenable  conjectures.     It 
treats  Job  with  slender  reverence.     Do  not  lumber  your  shelves  with  it. 

361  HODGES  (Walter,  D.D.)     Elihu:  an  Enquiry  into  the  Scope  and  Design 

of  the  Book  of  Job.  4to.  LoiuL,  1750.  i2mo.,  third  edition,  1756.  2/- 
Based  upon  the  absurd  supposition  that  Elihu  was  the  Son  of  God  himself,  and 
Job  a  type  of  the  Saviour.  Poor  Job's  book  has  been  the  subject  of  trials  as  numerous 
as  those  of  its  hero,  and  Hodges  has  given  the  finishing  stroke.  The  course  of  dreaming 
can  no  further  go.  Hodge  the  village  Methodist  could  never  have  raved  at  the  rate 
of  Dr.  Hodge,  Provost  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford. 

362  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.)     See  under  Ecdesiastes. 

1(^1    HULBERT  (Charles  Augustus,  M.A.,  Perpetual  Otratc 

of  Harthwaitc,   Yorks)     The   Gospel   Revealed  to  Job. 

Thirty  Lectures,  with  Notes.     8vo.     Loud.,  Longmans. 

1S53.     S.  3/6. 

An  wuLsually  good  book ;  exceedingly  eompreJiensive  and  Jielpfnl 

in  many  ivays.      The  antJior  aimed  at  jtsefnlncss  and  has  siiceceded 

ivondcrfnily.     Wc  iconder  that  his  zvork  has  not  been  better  known. 

364  HUTCHESON  (George).      An    Exposition   upon   Job, 

being  the  sum  of  316  Lectures.      Folio.      12/-  to   14/- 

Lond.,  1669. 
Whenever  the  student  sees  a  Commentary  by  Huteheson  let  hint 
buy  it,  for  zve  know  of  no  author  who  is  more  thot'oughly  helpful  to 
the  minister   of   the    Word.      He  distils  the  text,  and  gives  his 
readers  the  q?cintessence,  ready  for  tise. 

365  HUTCHINSON  (R.  E.,  M.D.,  M.R.C.S.E.,  Surgeon-Major  Bengal  Arm)). 

Thoughts  onthe  Book  of  Job.  Zt^Wi/.,  S.  Bagster&  Sons.  [In  the  press.  1875.] 

366  KITTO  (JOHN,  D.D.)     "Job  and  the  Poetical  Books."    In 

Daily  Bible  Illustrations.     (See  No.  41.) 
Exceedingly  instructive.     Most  charming  reading. 


JOB.  79 

367  LANGE'S   COMMENTARY.     The  Book  of  Job.      A 

Commentary  by  Otto  Zockler,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Theo- 
logy   at  Greifswald.     Translated  from  the  German,  with 
Additions  by  Prof.  L.  J.  Evans,  D.D.,  Lane  Theological 
Seminary,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.     Imp.   8vo.     21/-,  or  to  sub- 
scribers   15/-     ^^z;^(5.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1874. 
Contains  a  large  collection  of  available  material,  and,  if  within 
a  minister  s  means,  should  be  a  foitndation  book  in  Ids  library.    We 
are  very  far  from  endorsing  all  Zockler  s  remarks,  bnt  the  volume 
is  an  important  one. 

368  LEE  (Samuel,  D.D.   1713—1853).    The  Book  of  Job  translated ; 

with  Introduction  and  Commentary.  8vo.  Lofid.,  1837.  7/6. 
Barnes  says,  "  This  work  is  not  what  might  have  been  expected  from  the 
learning  and  reputation  of  Prof.  Lee.  It  abounds  with  Arabic  learning, 
which  is  scattered  with  ostentatious  profuseness  through  the  volume,  but 
which  often  contributes  little  to  the  elucidation  of  the  text.  It  is  designed 
for  the  critical  scholar  rather  than  the  general  reader." 

369  NOYES  (G.  R.,  D.D.)     A  New  Translation,  with  Notes.     i2mo. 

Boston,  U.S.  [N.D.]  S.  3/- 
We  have  been  informed  that  Dr.  iV^^<fj- belongs  to  the  Unitarian  body, 
but  we  fail  to  see  any  trace  of  Arian  or  Socinian  views  in  this  volume. 
We  do  not  agree  with  all  that  he  says,  but  he  strikes  us  as  being  an 
honest,  able,  and  accurate  translator  and  commentator,  worthy  to  stand 
in  the  foremost  rank. 

370  PETERS  (Charles,  A.M.     Died  iljl).     A  Critical  Dissertation  on  the  Book 

of  Job.     Wherein  the  Account  given  in  that  book  by  the  author  of  The 

Divine  Legation   of   Moses  Demonsb-ated,  dr'c.,  is  particularly  considered  ; 

and  a  Future  State  shewn  to  have  been  the  Popular  Belief  of  the  Ancient 

Hebrews.     4to.     Land.,  1751.     2/6. 
Of  a  controversial  character  ;  mainly  written  against  Warhiirton  and  Le  Clcrc,  and 
as  those  authors  are  now  almost  forgotten,   answers  to  them  have  lost   their  interest. 
Peters  was  an  eminently  learned  man,  and  well  versed  in  argument ;  but  his  work  is 
of  very  small  use  for  homiletical  purposes. 

371  QUARLES  (Francis).     Job  Militant,'  with  Meditations,  Divine 

and  Moral.     4to.     1624.     5/- 
A  Poem  in  Quarks'  usual  inflated,  but  withal  instructive,  manner. 

372  ROBINSON    (T.,  D.D.)      A   Homiletic  Commentary  on  Job. 

[In  progress.     1875.     Being  Part  IV.  of  the  Preacher's  Com- 
mentary,    i/-]     Land.,  Dickinson. 
This  we  hope  will  be  of  use  to  preachers,  but  we  have  hardly  enough 
before  us  to  judge  of  it. 

373  SCOTT  (Thomas).     The  Book  of  Job  in  English  Verse,  with  Remarks.    4to. 

Land.,  lyji.     Reprinted,  8vo.,  1733.     S.  2/3. 
Here  we  have  Job  in  rhyme — 

"There  lived  an  Arab  of  distinguish'd  fame, 
In  Idumean  Uz  ;  and  Job  his  name. 
Of  spotless  manners,  with  a  soul  sincere, 
Evil  his  hate,  and  God  alone  his  fear. " 
This  •will  hardly  do.     To  translate  Job  in  metre  needed  a  Po/e  or  a  Drydcn,   and 
Thomas  Scott  was  neither :  he  has,  however,  done  his  best,   the  best  could  have  done 
no  more.      This  is  not  Thomas  Scott  the  great  Expositor,  but  a  Dissenting  Minister  at 
Ipswich. 


80  JOB. 

374  SEXAULT  (J.  F.)      A  raraphrase.     4to.    Land.,  164S.     3/6. 

Seuault  was  a  famous  preacher  of  the  Oratory  in  Paris,  -who,  from  the  character  of 
his  works,  woukl  seem  to  have  been  almost  a  Protestant.  His  writings  were  highly 
«bteemeil  in  their  clay,  and  translated  into  English. 

375  SMITH   (Ei-izABETii).     The  Book  of  Job   translated  from  the 

Hebrew,  with  Annotations.     8vo.    Loud.,  18 10.     1/6. 
"A  good   ICnglish  version  of  Job,  produced  chiefly  by   the  aid  of 
Farkhurst's  Lexicon." — Ortiic. 

376  STATIIER  (Lieut. -Col.,   W.    C.)     The  Book  of  Job,  in  English  Verse; 

with  Notes.     i2mo.     Loiid.,  E.  Marlborough  &  Co.     1859.     S.  i/- 
We  do  not  like  Job  in  rhyme.     We  know  of  no  rhyming  version  of  any  part  of 
Scrijiture,  except  the  Psalms,  which  can  be  called  a  success.     Certainly  this  is  not  one. 
The  author's  notes  deserve  consideration. 

377.  STOCK  (Joseph,  D.D.  BisJwp  of  Killalla).  The  Book  of  Job,  Metrically 
arranged,  and  newly  translated,  with  Notes.  4to.  1S05.  4/- 
The  work  of  six  weeks  !  Well  may  Magee^^y  that  it  is  full  of  "precipitances, 
mistakes,  and  mutilations."  This  was  a  bishop  and  a  Doctor  of  Divinity  !  It  takes 
a  great  man  to  perpetrate  a  very  great  folly.  A  metrical  translation  of  Job  with  Notes 
in  si.\  weeks  !  In  that  time  stocks  bloom  to  perfection.  Perhaps  that  fact  operated 
on  our  author.     Let  this  blundering  haste  serve  as  a  warning  to  young  divines. 

378  UMBREIT    (Friedrich,  W.  K.     Prof,  of  TheoL  in  Heidelberg. 

1795 — 1860).     A   New  Version  of  the   Book  of  Job;    with 
Notes.     Translated  by  the  Rev.  John   Hamilton   Gray,  M.A. 
2   vols.,   i2mo.       8/-    ^^//;//^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark. 
Useful  philologically ;   but  Barnes  would  supply  far  more  in  that 
direction,  and  spiritual  exposition  besides. 

379  VAN  HAGEN  (Mrs.  Henry).     Evenings  in  the  Land  of  Uz;  a 

Comment  on  Job,  Second  Edition.  121110.  1843.  1/6. 
Isaac  Taylor  commends  this  volume  as  one  which  "  disclaiming  all 
purpose  of  critical  exposition,  aims  only  under  the  guidance  of  Christian 
feeling  and  experience  to  follow  and  to  unfold  the  spiritual  intention  of 
this  rich  portion  of  Holy  Scripture."  Such  an  introduction  must  have 
helped  to  sell  the  work  and  carry  it  speedily  to  the  second  edition. 

380  WAGNER  (George).     Sermons  on  the  Book  of  Job.     Cr.  8vo, 

Land.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1863.     S.  3/- 
Wagfier's  sermons  are  simple  and  plain,  devout  and  instructive.     We 
have  here  nothing  very  fresh,  but  everything  is  sound  and  good. 

381  WEMYSS  (Thomas).     Job  and  his  Times.     New  Version,  with 

Notes,  8vo.  Zond.,  1S39.  2/6. 
Barnes  says  : — "  This  is  designed  to  be  a  popular  work.  It  is  not  sO' 
much  of  the  nature  of  a  Commentary  as  a  collection  of  fragments  and 
brief  essays  on  various  topics  referred  to  in  the  Book  of  Job.  It  is 
chiefly  valuable  for  its  illustration  of  the  religion  of  the  time  of  Job,  the 
arts  and  sciences,  the  manners  and  customs,  &c."  It  lacks  lucid 
arrangement,  and  furnishes  comparatively  little  illustration  of  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  text. 


PSALMS.  81 

PSALMS. 

382     ABBOT    (George).      Brief  Notes.      Being  a  pithie  and   clear 

opening  of  the  Scope  and  Meaning  of  the  Text,  to  the  capacitie 

of  the  Weakest.     4to.     Loud.,  16^1.     sh 

An  experimental  exposition  by  a  Member  of  Parliament  under  the 

Commonwealth.     Though  not  of  the  first  order,  many  of  his  remarks 

are  good.      Abbot  was  nephew  to  the  Archbishop  of  the  same  name. 

3S3    ALEXANDER   (Joseph  Addison,  D.D.,  Professor  of 
Theology,  Princeton,  U.S.)     The  Psalms  Translated  and 
Explained.  8vo.  8/6.  iiVzV;^.,  Andrew  Elliot.   1864.  S.5/6. 
Occupies  a  first  place  among  expositions.     It  is  a  clear  and  judi- 
cious explanation  of  the  text,  and  cannot  be  dispensed  zvith. 

384  ALEXANDER  (William   Henry).     The  Book  of  Praises.     The  Psalms, 

with  Notes.    Sm.  8vo.    Zwz^/.,  Jackson,  Walford  &  Hodder.     1867.   S.  2/6. 
The  Notes  are  mostly  from  other  authors,  and  are  selected  with  discretion.     They 
do  not  appear  to  have  been  designed  by  their  collector  for  use  beyond  his  own  family 
circle,  and  they  were  published  after  his  death  by  his  friends.     We  question  the  wis- 
dom of  the  publication. 

385  AUGUSTINE.     Expositions.     Translated,  with  Notes.     6  vols., 

8vo.      Oxf.,  1847.     \y^  The  Library  of  the  Fathers,  published 

by  Messrs.  J.  Parker  &  Co.,  Oxf.  and  Lond?^     £1  15s.,   or  to 

subscribers  ^2  i6s.  6d. 

As  a  Father  he  is  beyond  ordinary  criticism,  or  we  would  venture  to 

say  that  he  is  too  frequently  mystical,  and  confounds  plain  texts.     No 

theological  hbrary  is  complete  without  this  work,  for  there  are  grand 

thoughts  in  it  like  huge  nuggets  of  Australian  gold, 

386  BAKER  (Richard,  D.D.)    The  Psalms  Evangelized.     8vo.     181  r.     2/6. 
Very  pious  ;  but  if  the  work  should  ever  disappear  from  literature  its  absence  will 

not  leave  a  very  great  gap.     BisJiop  Home  and  Dr.  Hawker  between  them  more  than 
cover  the  space. 

387  BARNES  (Albert).      Notes.     3  vols.,  post  8vo.     13/6. 

Loud.,  Edinb.,  and  Glasgozv,  Blackie  &  Sons.    1868. 
Thoroughly  good.      Using  these  notes  constantly,  we  are  more  and 
more  struck  zvith  their  value.     For  the  general  run  of  preachers 
this  is  probably  the  best  commentary  extant. 

388  BELLARMINE  (Robert.      Cardinal.     1542 — 1621.)     A  Com- 

mentary.    Translated  from  the  Latin,  by  the  Ven.  John  O'Sul- 
livan,  D.D.    Sm.  4to.     Loud.,  James  Duffy.    1866.     S.  4/- 
Popish,  but  marvellously  good  for  a  Cardinal.      He  is  frequently  as 
evangelical  as  a  Reformer.     He  follows  the  Vulgate  text  in  this  comment. 

3S9      BELLET  (J.  G.)     Short  Meditations  on  the  Psalms,  chiefly  in  their  Prophetic 
character.     2/-     Loud.,  W.  H.  Broom.     1871. 
Mere  fragments,  in  a  style  which  we  do  not  admire,  which  seems  to  be  peculiar  to- 
certain  brethren.     Only  the  initiated  can  understand  what  such  writers  mean. 

7 


8-'  PSALMS. 

390  BINNIE  (William,  D.D.)     The  Psalms  :  Their  History, 

Teachings,  and  Use.  8vo.  yjG.  Z^;/^.,  T.  Nelson.  1870. 
A  highly  Vixluable  ivork.  It  is  not  an  exposition,  but  can 
readily  be  used  as  such,  for  it  possesses  a  good  index  to  the 
passages  treated  of.  Dr.  Binnie  revieivs  luith  great  skill  and 
intense  devotion  the  various  sacred  poems  contained  in  the  Book  of 
Psalms,  and  gives  the  general  run  and  character  of  each  one.  His 
7cork  is  unlike  any  other,  and  supplies  a  great  desideratum. 

391  BONAR  (Andrew  A.)     Christ  and  his   Church   in  the 

Book  of  Tsalms.    Demy  8vo.     io,'6.    Z^«^.,  Nisbet.   1859. 

Of  the  highest  order  of  merit.      The  author  docs  not  strain  the 

text,  but  gives  its  real  meaning.     His  remarks  are  ahvays  weighty, 

spiritual,  and  suggestive ;  we  only  luish  there  zvere  more  of  them. 

He  has  cultivated  brevity. 

392  EOUCHIER  (Barton,  A.M.)     Manna  in  the  Heart;  or,  Dally 

Comments  on  the  Psalms,  for  the  Use  of  Families.     2  vols., 
Sm.  8vo.     Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.      1856.    S.  5/- 
Among  the  best  books  ever  written  for  family  reading.     Evangelical, 
devotional,  and  expository.     Preachers  will  find  good  thought  here. 

393  BURTON   (John).     The  Book  of  Psalms  in  English  Verse.     Cr.   8vo.     6/- 

Lottd.,  John  .Shaw  &  Co.      1871. 
I  The  Ps.alins  rhymed  in  a  New  Testament  spirit :  they  are  better  in  prose. 

394  BUSH  (G.)     A  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Psalms.     With  a 

new  literal  version.     Svo.     A^ew  York,  183S. 
Does  not  appear  to  have  been  reprinted  in  England. 

395  BYTHNER  (Victor.     Died  1670).     The  Lyre  of  David; 

or,  an  Analysis  of  the  Psalms,  Critical  and  Practical  ;  to 

which  is   added  a  Hebrew  and   Chaldee  Grammar.     To 

which  are  added  by  the  Translator  a  Praxis  of  the  first 

eight  Psalms.      Translated  by  the  Rev.   Thomas   Dee, 

A.B.     8vo.     1836.     S.  7/6. 

We  agree  zuith  the  statement  found  in  the  Preface  of  this  work  : 

*'  Nearly  two  centuries  have  passed  away,  sijice  Bythner,  uncertain 

of  its  reception,  first  committed  his  Lyra  to  public  light ;  during 

%vhich  time,  instead  of  sinking,  it  has  advanced  in  estimation ;  being 

admitted  by  all  the  learned  to  be  the  very  best  tvork  on  the  Psalms 

in  Hebrezv.     The  number  of  Hebrciu  radical  words  is  iSSy;  of 

these,  iiSjj.  occur  in  the  Psalms ;  it  follozvs  then,  that  a  thorougJt 

knozulcdge  of  the  Psalms  very  nearly  amounts  to  a  thorough  knozv- 

ledge  of  the  language,  and  that  BytJiners  Lyra,  in  being  the  best 

zvork  on  the  Psalms,  must  be  the  best  zvork  on  Hebrezv  in  general^ 

Our  readers  zvill  scarcely  need  us  to  add  that  By  timer  s  work  is  only 

useful  to  those  zvho  study  the  Hebrezv. 


PSALMS.  83 

396  CALVIN  (John).     The  Psalms  of  David  and  others,  with 

Commentaries.     Translated  by  Arthur  Golding.    2  vols., 
4to.     Loud.,  1571. 

397  »  A  Commentary  on  the  Psalms.     Translated. 
3  vols.,  8vo,     Oxf.,  1840.     S.  7/- 

Cahin  is  a  tree  ivhose  "  leaf  also  shall  not  luither'" ;  lu/mtever  he 
has  written  lives  on,  and  is  never  out  of  date,  because  he  expounded 
the  word  zvitJiout  bias  or  partiality. 

398  CARTER  (Charles.    Missionary  to  Ceylon).    The  Psalms,  newly 

translated  from  the  Hebrew.    i2mo.    2/6.    Z^";///.,  J,  Snow.   1869. 
The  emendations  are  carefully  made  by  the  translator,  who  has  been 
for  many  years  engaged  upon  the  Singalese  version.     A  helpful  book. 

399  CAYLEY  (C.B.,  B.A.)     The   Psalms  in   Metre.     [With  Notes]. 

i2mo.     6/-     Loud.,  Longmans,     i860. 
We  do  not  think  much  of  the  metrical  rendering,  which  often  jars  on 
the  ear.     There  are  a  few  good  notes  at  the  end. 

400  CHAMPNEY    (H.    N.,    Esq.)       A    Textual    Commentary  on   the    Psalms. 

Sq.  i6mo.     3/-     Load.,  S.  Bagster  &  Sons.     1852.     S.  i/- 
Merely  a  collection  of  parallel  texts.     Make  one  for  yourself. 

401  CHANDLER  (Samuel,  D.D.)     See  No.  283. 

402  CLAY  (William  Keatinge,  B.D.)     Expository  Notes   on  the 

Prayer  Book  Version  of  the  Psalms.      Sm.  8vo.     Lond.,  John 
W.  Parker.     1839.     S.  2/6. 
Commendable  in  its  way,  but  not  important.     ISIost  of  its  matter  is  to 
be  found  elsewhere. 

403  COLEMAN    (John   Noble,    M.A.)       Psalterium    Messianicum 

Davidis  Regis   et  Prophetae.     A  Revision  of  the  Authorized 
Version,  with   Notes,   original  and  selected ;    vindicating  the 
prophetic  manifestations  of  Messiah  in  the  Psalms,  &c.     Imp. 
8vo.   12/-     Z^;///.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1S65.     S.  5/- 
Useful  for  its  quotations  from  the  Fathers  and  ancient  writers.     The 

large  type  swells  out  a  small  quantity  of  material  to  a  needless  size,  and 

so  puts  purchasers  to  an  unnecessary  expense. 

404  CONANT  (Thomas  J.)     The  Psalms.     The  Common  Version, 

revised  for  the  American  Bible  Union.     4to.     1871.     Lo/id., 
Triibner  &  Co.     S.  4/- 
A  trustworthy  translation  with  a  few  notes. 

405  CONGLETON  (Lord),     The  Psalms.     A  New  Version,  with  Notes,     Thick 

i2mo.     Loud.,  James  E.  Hawkins.     1875. 
The    translation   is  mainly   that  of  Rogers   (No.  464),  and  the    Notes  refer  tlic 
Psalms  to  historic  and  prophetic  subjects.  We  see  no  use  whatever  in  this  production. 

406  C0WLE3  (Henry,  D.D.)    The  Psalms  ;  with   Notes.  8vo. 

New  York,  i^y2.     Worth  about  5/- 
Ahuays  repays  for  consulting,  though  it  does  not  contain  much 
that  is  nezv,  original,  or  profound.       It  might   be  reprinted  in 
England,  ivith  the  probability  of  a  large  sale. 


81  PSALMS. 

407  CRKSSWELL    (Daniel,   D.D.,   F.R.S.)     Psalms  of  David,  ac- 

cording to  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer ;  with  Notes.  Sm.  8vo. 
Lofiif.,  Rivinglons.     1843.     S.  2/- 
The  explanatory  notes  are    neither    prolix    nor  commonplace,    but 
show  much  clear  insight.     They  are  deservedly  held  in  esteem. 

408  CRITICAL  TRANSLATION    (A)  of  the   Psalms,    in   Metre. 

Cr.  8vo.     5/6.     Lorid.,  S.  Bagster  &  Sons. 
The  author  has  laboured  hard  to  arrive  at  the  correct  meaning  of  the 
Hdbvcw,  and  to  7<crsi/y  it.     The  work  is  very  carefully  done,   but  few 
preachers  can  afford  to  spend  their  money  on  a  book  of  this  kind. 

409  DALLAS  (A.  R.  C.,  M.A.)     The  Book  of  Psalms  arranged  in  Daily  Portions 

for  Devotional  Reading.  Cr.  8vo.  3/6.  Loncl.,  Nisbet  &  Co.  i860.    S.  1/6. 
A  new  arrangement  :  the  old  one  is  good  enough  for  us. 

410  DARBY  Q.N.)     Practical  Reflections.    Cr.  8vo.     Lotid.,  R.  k.  AXlen.     1870. 
Too  mystical  for  ordinary  minds.     If  the  author  would  write  in  plain  English  his 

readers  would  probably  discover  that  there  is  nothing  very  valuable  in  his  remarks. 

411  DE  BURGH  (William,  A.M.)     Commentary;  Critical,  Devo^ 

tional,  and  Prophetical.     2  vols.,  Svo.     28/-     Dublin,  Hodges, 
Smith  &  Co.     i860.     S.  12/6. 
A  second-advent  interpreter ;  and  one  of  the  best  of  his  class.   Highly 
esteemed  by  those  who  are  enthusiastic  upon  prophetical  subjects. 

412  DELITZSCH  (Franz).     Commentary  on  the  Psalms.     3  vols. 

10/6  each,     ^^//f^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     187 1.     S.  5/- each. 

Thoroughly  learned,  but  wants  unction.  Not  adapted  for  common 
readers,  but  scholars  will  prize  it  greatly. 

The  Princeton  Ra'iew  says  of  it :  "We  commend  this  commentary  ar, 
a  valuable  aid  to  preachers  and  exegetes  in  elucidating  the  Psalms." 

4 1 3  DICKSON  (David.  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the  University 

of  Edinb.   1583 — 1662).  A  brief  explanation  of  thePsalms. 

3  vols.,  Svo.     Lond.,  1655.     Reprinted  in  2  vols.,  i2mo. 

Glasg.,  1834.  3/-  to  6/- 
A  rich  volume,  dropping  fatness.     Invaluable  to  the  preacher. 
Having  read  and  re-read  it,  ive  can  speak  of  its  holy  savour  and 
suggcstiveness.      We  commend  it  zvith  much  fervour. 

414  DBIOCK  (11.)     Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory,  on  the  Book  of  Psalms,  &c. 

4to.      1 79 1.     3/- 
The  notes  mainly  concern  the  various  readings,  and  exhibit  considerable  learning  ; 
but  we  do  not  think  much  of  a  homiletical  kind  can  be  got  out  of  them. 

415  DUNWELL  (F.  H.,  B.A.)     Parochial   Lectures  on  the  Psalms, 

from    the   Fathers   of    the    Primitive   Church.      Svo.      Loud., 
J.  H.  Parker.     1855.     z',^. 
This  author  spiritualizes  far  too  much.     His  metaphors  are  overdone. 

^16      EDWARDS  (Joseph,  M.A.)    Devotional  Exposition.  8vo.  Lond.,  iSso.   1/6, 
A  paraphrase  of  no  great  value.     Even  Masters  of  Arts  may  fail. 


PSALMS.  85 

417  EDWARDS  (T.)     New  Translation,  with  Notes,  &c.     8vo.     Zc7«r/.,  1755. 
The  writer  was  an  able  man,  but  his  book  is  of  small  worth. 

418  EWART  (J.,  A.M.)   Lectures  on  the  Psalms.    3  vols.,  Bvo.    Loud.,  1826.     5/- 
The   author  was  a  Presbyterian  Minister  of  the  time  of  the  Pretender,  and  we 

suspect  that  he  was  a  high  and  dry  Moderate.  His  comments  were  given  at  the 
public  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  and  altiiough  destitute  of  spirituality  and  Gospel 
clearness,  they  are  not  without  a  measure  of  originality. 

419  EXTON  (Richard  Brudenell).     Sixty  Lectures  on  the  Psalms,  as  appointed 

to  be  read  in  the  Services  of  the  Church  of  England.  8vo.  Lottd.,  1847.   3/- 
Very  poor  and  prosy.     We  pity  the  hearer  who  sat  out  these  sixty  lectures. 

420  FENTON  (Thomas,  M.A.)     Annotations  on  Job  and    Psalms, 

from  several  Commentators.     8vo.     Loud.,  1732.     3/- 
The  Annotations  are  choice,  but  will  be  found  in  easily  accessible  works. 

421  FENWICK  (George,  B.D.)     Thoughts  on  the  Hebrew  Titles  of 

the  Psalms,  &c,     8vo.     Loud.,  1749.     6/- 

422  ,,  The  Psalter  in  its  original  form  .  .  .  with  Arguments 
and  Notes.     [Anon.]     Bvo.    Zoud.,  1789.     3/- 

These  two  works  are  praiseworthy  in  design,  but  they  are  too  fanciful. 

423  FORBES  (Granville)   The   Voice  of  God  in  the  Psalms.     Cr.  8vo.     616. 

Lond.,  Macmillan.     S.  3/6. 
Sermons  by  a  Northamptonshire  Rector  of  the  Broad  School.     They  do  not  strike 
us  as  being  anything  very  wonderful;  certainly  "  The  Voice  of  God  "  is  not  remark- 
ably audible  in  them. 

424  "FOUR  FRIENDS."     The  Psalms  of  David  Chronologically  arranged,  with 

Notes.  By  Four  Friends.  Cr.  8vo.  8/6.  Loud.,  Macmillan.  1867. 
Here  the  Psalms  are  thrust  out  of  their  usual  order,  and  treated  after  the  manner 
c;f  the  Broad  School  of  thought.  We  do  not  attach  any  great  value  to  this  production. 
With  some  persons  perversity  passes  for  profundity,  and  if  a  man  differs  from  every- 
body else  they  are  persuaded  that  he  must  be  an  original  genius  :  the  "four  friends  " 
will  stand  high  in  the  esteem  of  sucli  critics.  We  neither  believe  in  their  chronology, 
their  theology,  nor  their  philology. 

425  FRENCH  (William,  D.D.)  and  SKINNER   (George,   M.A.) 

Translation,  with  Notes.     8vo.     Lond.,  Parker.    1842.     2/6. 
A  version  held  in  high  esteem.     Notes  very  short. 

426  FRY  (John,  B.  A.)     A  Translation  and  Exposition  of  the  Psalms  ; 

on  the  principles  adopted  in  the  posthumous  work  of  Bishop 

Horsley ;  viz.,  that  those  sacred  oracles  have  for  the  most  part 

an  immediate  reference  to   Christ  and  to  his  first  and  second 

advents.     8vo.     Lond.,  Hamilton,  Adams  &  Co.     1842.     5/- 

Fry  follows  Bishop  LTorsley  and  looks  much  to  the  second  advent. 

The  work  is  not  fair  either  as  a  translation,  or  as  an  exposition.     It  is 

useful  in  its  own  direction,  as  showing  how  a  peculiar  theory  has  been 

supported  by  an  able  man  ;   but  it  must  not  be  implicitly  relied  upon. 

42  7     FYSH  (Frederic,  M.A.)     A  Lyrical,  Literal  Version  [with  Notes]. 
2  vols.,  i2mo.     Lond.,  Seeleys.     1851.     2/6. 
A  valuable  literal  version.     Notes  scant,  but  scholarly. 


86  PSALMS. 

428  GEDDES    (Alexander,  LL.D.     A  Roman  Catholic  divine.     1737— 1802). 

New  Translation,  with  Various  Readings  and  Notes.    8vo.    Lond.,\%oi.  3/- 
This  is  said  to  be  "a  careful  rendering,  aiming  at  the  primary  meaning  of  the 
psalmists."     Dr.    Jfmdcrson  speaks  of  Gcddcs  as  flagrantly  disfiguring  his   Biblical 
labours  with  profanity.     He  was  a  singular  mixture  of  Romanist  and  free-thinker. 

429  GOOD  (John  Mason,  M.D.,  F.R.S.)     Historical  Outline 

of  the  Book  of  Psalms.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  Johii  Mason 
Ncale,  B.A.  Loud.,  W.  H.  Dalton.  1842.  3/- 
TJiis  is  not  a  commentary,  but  may  be  regarded  as  an  introduc- 
tion to  the  ivork  next  mentioned,  by  the  same  autJior.  Historical 
light  is  frequently  the  very  best  which  can  be  east  upon  a  passage, 
and  Dr.  Good  has  known  how  to  apply  it.  He  may  sometimes  be 
thought  fanciful,  but  he  is  never  really  speculative,  and  he  almost 
always  says  something  ivorth  noting. 

430  GOOD  (J.  M.)    The  Book  of  Psalms  ;  a  New  Translation, 

with  Notes.     Edited  by  the  Rev.   E.   Henderson,  D.D, 

8vo.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1854.  4/- 
Dr.  Good  was  a  medical  gentleman  zvith  a  large  practice,  and  yet  lie 
managed  to  produce  tins  learned  volume.  "  /  save  every  quarter  of 
an  Jiour  for  it,"  said  he,  ''for  my  heart  is  in  it."  He  zuas  a  man 
of  great  attainments  and  genuine  piety.  The  progress  made  in 
Hcbrezo  philology  a?id  exegesis  since  his  day  has  been  great;  but  his 
work  has  not  beeji  altogether  superseded.  It  is  of  a  high  class,  fi'om 
a  literary  point  of  view,  but  must  not  be  blindly  followed. 

431  GREEN  (William,  M.A.)     A  Translation,  with  Notes.      8vo.      1762.      3/- 
A  translation  with  meagi-e  notes. 

432  HAMMOND  (Henry,  D.D.      1605— 1660).      Paraphrase   and 

Annotations.    Folio.    1659.    7/6.    2vols.  8vo.   Oxf.,\Z^o.    8.6/- 

Much  esteemed,  and  deservedly  so.     Hammond''s  weighty  tome  is 

somewhat  dry,  and  many  of  his  remarks  are  rather  those  of  a  linguist 

than  of  a  divine,  but  he  touches  on  many  matters  which  others  omit,  and 

is,  upon  the  whole,  an  expositor  of  singular  merit. 

433  HAPSTONE  (Dalman,  M.A.)     The  Psalms  in  appropriate  Metres  ;  a  strictly 

literal  Translation,  with  Notes.    8vo.    7/6.     Edinb.,  Oliphant.     1867. 
We  prefer  our  own  version,  and  do  not  think  many  of  Mr.  Hapslone's  stanzas  suc- 
cessful as  attempts  at  poetry. 

434  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.D.)     Commentary.     3  vols.,  8vo. 

£x  13s.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1845-8.     S.  15/- 
A  masterly  work ;  but  about  as  dry  as  Gideon's  unwetted  fleece. 

435  HILLER  (O.  Prescott.    Mi7iister  of  the  Ncv  Jenisalem  Church,  Cross  Street, 

London.)      Notes  on  the  Psalms   [I. — LXXVIL]     Explanatory  of  their 
Spiritual  Sense.     8vo.     Lond.,  James  Spiers.     1869.     S.  4/- 
Swedenborgian,  and  frequently  absurd.     The  author  rc^wfounds  rather  than  ^.rpounds. 

436  HORNE    (George,   D.D.      Bishop  of  Norwich.     1730 — 

1792).       Commentary.        [Numerous    editions:     among 
others  a  Glasgow  edition,  3  vols.,  i2mo.,  with  Introductory 


PSALMS.  87 

Essay  by  Edward  Irving,  M.A.,  which  is  one  of  Irving's 
best  efforts.  Tegg's  edition,  i  vol.,  8vo.  6/-]  S.  3/- 
//  has  been  said  that  this  author  had  no  qualification  for  a  coin- 
tnevitator  except  piety.  This  is  not  true,  for  he  had  natural  poetry 
in  his  sold;  and  even  if  it  were  true,  his  work  ivould  go  far  to 
sJiozv  hozu  abinidantly  piety  compensates  for  other  deficiencies.  He 
is  among  the  best  of  our  English  zvriters  ojt  this  part  of  Scriptut^e, 
and  certainly  one  of  the  most  popular. 

437  HORSLEY  (Samuel.    Bishop  of  Norwich).    The  Book  of  Psahns. 

With  Notes  Explanatory  and  Critical.  8vo.  Zw/rt'.,  1833.  4/- 
Vigorous  writing,  with  a  propensity  to  indulge  in  new  readings,  and 
a  persistent  twist  in  one  direction.  The  notes  show  the  hand  of  a 
master,  and  have  exerted  much  influence  in  directing  thoughtful  minds 
to  the  subject  of  the  Second  Advent,  as  foreshadowed  in  the  Old 
Testament,  but  they  must  be  used  with  extreme  caution. 

438  J  EBB  (John).      Literal  Translation  ;  with  Dissertations  on  the 

word  Selah,  and  on  the  Authorship,  Order,  Titles,  and  Poetry 
of  the  Psalms.  2  vols.,  Svo.  Zc^W.,  Longmans.  1846.  4/- 
yebb  takes  for  his  motto  in  translating,  that  saying  of  Hooker :  "  I 
hold  it  for  an  infallible  rule  in  expositions  of  sacred  Scripture,  that  where 
a  literal  construction  will  stand,  the  farthest  from  the  letter  is  commonly 
the  worst."  His  notes  are  scant,  but  his  dissertations  in  the  second 
volume  are  most  admirable. 

439  JENNLNGS  (A.  C,  B.A.)  and  LOWE  (W.  H.,  ALA.)      The 

Psalms,  with  Introductions   and   Critical  Notes.     Books  III. 
and  IV.     [Psalms   LXXIIL   to  CVL]     Cr.  Svo.     6/-     Lond., 
Macmillan  &  Co.      1874. 
Learned,  but  more  occupied  with  mere  verbal  criticisms  than  with  any 
useful  suggestions  which  could  be  turned  to  account  by  a  preacher. 

440  JONES  (Joseph,  M.A.)     The  Psalms;  with  Reflections.  i2mo.  Land.,  1846. 

i/-  to  2/- 
Pious,  but  poor. 

441  KAY  (William,  D.D.)     The  Psalms  translated  from  the 

Hebrew.     With   Notes,  chiefly  Exegetical.     Svo.     12/6. 

Lond.,  Rivingtons.     1871. 
A  refreshing  book;  the  notes  being  out  of  the  ordinary  run,  and 
casting  much  light  on  many  passages.     To  thoroughly  appreciate 
this  author  one  should  be  a  Hebrezv  scholar. 

442  KEBLE  (John,  M.A.    Author  of ''The  Christian  Year P    1792— 

1869).    The  Psalter,  in  English  Verse.    Fcap.  Svo.    6/-    Lojid., 
Parker  &  Co.     1869. 
A  poet's  version  of  a  grand  series  of  poems. 

443  LANGE'S  COMMENTARY.     Edited  by  Dr.  P.  Schafif.     Imp. 

Svo.      21/-     Subscribers  15/-     Z'^'/;;;^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1872. 
Comparatively  feeble.    Not  up  to  the  usual  standard  of  this  admirable 
series.     Still,  it  is  among  the  best  of  modern  commentaries. 


88  PSAT.MS. 

4.(4      LINTON  (Henry,  M.A.)     The  Psalms  of  David  and   Solomon   explained. 
Fcap.,  8vo.     3/-     Lond.,  Bagsters.     1871. 
A  small  affair  in  all  ways. 

445     LUTHER  (Martin).     A  Manual  of  the  Book  of  Psalms  ;  or  the 
subject-contents  of  all  the  Tsalms.     Translated  by  Rev.  Henry 
Cole.     8vo.    Loud.,  1S23.    [Also  a  volume  of"  llie  Christians 
Family  Library P     i2mo.     Z^z/rt'.,  Seeleys.]     2/- 
I'^ragmentary,  a  mere  table  of  contents,  but  truly  Lutheran. 

44^^     MANT  (Richard,  D.D.     Bishop  of  Doivn.     1776— 1849). 

The  Book  of  Psalms  in  an   English   Metrical  Version, 

uilh  Notes.     8vo.     6>^/.,  1824.     3/- 
A  bold  version,  witJi  important  notes.     In  this  instance  %ve  con- 
fess that  there  may  be  real  poetry  in  a  metj'ieal  version,  and  though 
the  flame  docs  not  in  each  composition  burn  tvith  equal  brilliance, 
yet  in  some  verses  it  is  the  true  poetic  fire.    JMant  is  no  mean  zvriter. 

447  MARSH  (Edward  Garrard,  M.A.)     The  Book  of  Psalms  translated  into 

English  verse,  with  Notes.     Svo.     Land.,  1832.     2,'6. 
Contains  nothing  of  any  consequence  to  an  expositor,  though  the  verse  is  consider- 
ably above  the  average  of  such  productions. 

448  MERRICK    (James,    M.A.      1720—1769).       The    Psalms   Paraphrased   in 

English  verse.     i2mo.     Reading,  1766.     1/6. 
„  Annotations  on  the  Psalms.     4to.     Reading,  1778.     3/- 

These  two  works  are  scarce.  They  are  rather  more  suited  for  the  admirers  of 
poetry  than  for  ministers  of  the  Word.  It  is  said  that  some  of  the  notes  are  by 
ArchbisJiop  Seeker,  and  that  Loivth  also  aided  in  the  exposition ;  but  the  combined 
result  is  of  no  great  value  to  the  preacher. 

449  MORISON   (John,    D.D.)     Exposition   of   the  Book  of 

Psalms,  explanatory,    critical,    and   devotional.     2  vols., 
Svo.     1829.     3  vols.,  Svo.     1832.     8/-  to  10/- 
T he  first  volume  is  the  best.      There  is  nothing  very  original,  but 
it  is  an  instructive  exposition,  and  ougJit  to  be  better  ktioivn. 

450  MUDGE  (Zachary.    Prebendary  of  Exeter.    Died  i"]  60).     An  Essay  towards 

a  New  English  Version.     4to.     Lend.,  1744.    3/- 
Elcgant  in  taste  rather  than  sound  in  scholarship.     Mudge  was  highly  esteemed  by 
Dr.  j'oluison,  and  he  was  no  doubt  a  very  worthy  man ;  but  his  exposition  can  be  dis- 
pen^.d  with. 

451  MURPHY  (James  G.,  LL.D.)    A  Critical  and  Exegetical 

Comment.  Svo.  15/'-  Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1S75. 
This  may  be  called  a  vobime  of  compressed  thought.  The  autJior 
Jias  aimed  at  neitJier  being  too  long  nor  too  short.  He  has  succeeded 
in  producing  a  very  useful  and  usable  work,  tvith  many  points  of 
unusual  value.  Dr.  Murphy  is  well  knozvn  as  an  accomplished 
Hebraist  and  a  lucid  expositor.  We  have  already  noticed  his  zvorks 
on  Genesis  (134)  and  Exodus  (176). 

452  NEALE    (John    Mason,    D.D.)    and  (LITTLEDALE,   R.  F., 

LL.D.)    A  Commentary,  from  Primitive  and  Mediaeval  Writers. 

4  vols.,  post  Svo.     10/6  each.    Land.,  Masters  &  Co.     1860-74. 

Unique,  and  to  very  high  churchmen  most  precious.     We  admire  the 


PSALMS.  89 

learning  and  research ;  but  the  conceits,  the  twistings,  and  allegorical 
interpretations  surpass  conception.  As  a  collection  of  mediaeval  mysti- 
cisms it  is  unrivalled. 

453  NICHOLSON    (William.      Bishop  of  Gloucester.     Died  167 1). 

David's  Harp  Strung  and  Tuned ;  or,  An  Easie  Analysis  of  the 
Whole  Book  of  Psalms.  Folio.  Loud.,  1662.  21/- 
*'  Wholly  practical  and  explanatory.  In  his  explications  the  author 
steers  between  the  two  extremes  of  literal  and  spiritual  interpretation. 
Dr.  Adam  Clark  has  inserted  Bishop  Nicholsoiis  Analysis  in  his  com- 
mentary on  the  Psalms,  omitting  his  prayers." — Home.  This  book 
fetches  a  high  price  when  complete,  and  we  cannot  advise  a  poor  man 
to  lay  out  so  much  money  upon  it,  good  as  it  is. 

454  NOYES  (G.  R.,  D.D.)     A  New  Translation,  with  Notes.     i2mo. 

Boston,  U.  S.,  183 1  and  1846.     2/6  to  4/- 
Dr.  Noyes  was  the  Hebrew  Professor  in  Harvard  University.     His 
Introduction  is  full  of  information ;  the  new  translation  is  useful,  and 
the  notes  are  brief  and  pertinent. 

455  OXENDEN  (Ashton,   D.D.     Bishop  of  Montreal).     A   Simple  Exposition. 

2  vols.,  cr.  8vo.     3/6  each.     Lond.,  Hatchards. 
For  reading  at  family  prayers.     Alas,  poor  families!     Ye  have  need  of  patience. 

456  PEROWNE  (J.  J.  Stewart,  B.D.,  Canon  Res.  of  Llan- 

daff).     The   Book  of  Psalms  ;  a  New  Translation,  with 
Introductions  and  Notes.    8vo.    Vol.  I.  18/-    Vol.  IL  16/- 
[Abridged  edition  for  Schools  and  Private  Students.     Cr, 
8vo.     10/6.]     Lond.,  George  Bell  &  Sons.     1864-68. 
A    masterpiece    of   extraordinary   learning  and  critical  skill, 
although  not  altogether  tuhat  we  woidd  desire.      The  "Saturday 
Review  "  said : — "  Mr.  Perozvne  is  probably  as  capable  as  any  one  in 
England  of  doing  all  that  Hebrew  scholarship  can  do  totvards  a 
better  knozuledge  of  the  Psalms.     The  learning  which  he  has  brought 
together  gives  a  value  of  its  oivn  to  his  book,  and  makes  it  an  im- 
portant contribution  to  a  department   of  Biblical  scholarship   in 
zvJiich  we  are  at  present  ratlier  poorly  ftirnishedy 

457  PIERCE  (Samuel  Eyles).     The  Book  of  Psalms.     2  vols.,  8vo. 

1817.  Very  scarce.  24/- 
This  author  is  held  in  high  esteem  for  the  "sound  and  savoury" 
character  of  his  works.  On  the  Psalms  he  writes  to  comfort  and' 
edification.  The  work  is  regarded  as  superexcellent  by  our  extra- 
calvinistic  friends,  but  we  do  not  think  it  quite  worth  the  fancy  price 
wiiich  is  now  asked. 

45S     PPIILLIPS    (George,  B.D.)      The    Psalms   in    Hebrew;   with 
Commentary.     2  vols.,  8vo.     21/-     Lond.,  J.  W.   Parker,  and 
Williams  &  Norgate.      1846.     S.  7/- 
This  Commentary  will  be  valued  by  Hebrew  scholars ;  but  it  is  be- 
yond the  general  attainments  of  those  for  whom  this  Index  is  compiled. 


90  PSALMS. 

459  PLAIN  COMMENTARY  (A)  on  the  Book  of  Psalms 

(P.  P>.  \'crsion),  chiefly  ^rounded  on  the  Fathers.  2  vols., 

Fcap.  8vo.     io/6.     Oxf.^Lond.    Parker.    1859.    S.  4/6, 

Of  tJte  High  Church  school,  and  ratJicr  strained  in  places,  but 

abounding  in  sivcet  spiritual  thoughts.      IVc  have  read  it  zvith 

pleasure  and  profit,  though  loith  some  caution. 

460  PLUiMER  (William  S.,  DD.,  LL.D.)      Studies  in  the  Eook  of 

Psahns.    Imp.  8vo.    28/-  Edinb.,  A.  «Sc  C.  Black.    1867.   S.  18/- 
A  huge  volume,  compiled  from  such  works  as  were  accessible  to  the 
author  in  the  United  States.     Full  of  instructive  comment,  but  not  very 
original,  or  remarkably  learned. 

461  PRACTICAL  ILLUSTRATION  (A)  of  the  Book  of  Psalms ;  by  the  Author 

of  the  Family  Commentary  on  the  New  Testament.     [?  Mrs.  Thomson.] 
2  vols.     8vo.      York,  1826.     2/-  to  3/- 
For  families.     Consisting  of  remarks  which  would  occur  to  any  motherly  person. 

462  PRIDHAM  (Arthur).     Notes  and  Reflections  on  the  Book  of 

Psalms.   Cr.  8vo.    8/6.   Z^;/^.,  James  Nisbet  &  Co.    1869.  S.  4/- 
Spiritual  reflections  of  an  excellent  kind,  but  not  very  striking. 

463  REMARKS  upon  the  Psalms  as  Prophetic  of  the  Messiah.  8vo.  Lond.,\%i,i.   2/- 
Mere  outlines :  of  no  consequence. 

464  ROGERS  (J.,  M.A.)     The  Book  of  Psalms  in  Hebrew,  metrically  arranged; 

with  Selections  from  the  various  Readings  of  Kennicott  and  De  Rossi,  and 
from  the  Ancient  Versions.     2  vols.,  i2mo.     Oxf.,  1833.     2/6  to  4/. 
For  the  Hebrew  scholar  only. 

465  ROSENMiJLLER  (Ernest  F.  C.     176S— 1835).     Annotations 

on  tlie  Messianic  Psalms.  Translated.  i2mo.  7/6.  Edinb., 
T.  &  T.  Clark.  1841. 
It  may  be  altogether  our  own  fault,  but  we  cannot  make  any  use  of 
this  volume.  No  doubt  these  scholastic  notes  have  a  value  ;  but  com- 
mentaries upon  inspired  Scripture  written  in  the  same  style  as  one  might 
write  upon  Ovid  or  Horace  are  not  to  our  taste.  Gcsenius  praises  this 
work  for  its  criticisms.  We  wish  there  had  been  a  little  religion  in  it,  but 
perhaps  if  there  had  been  it  would  have  been  the  religion  of  neology. 

466  RYLAND    (R.  H.,   M.A.)      The  Psalms  restored  to   Messiah. 

Sm.  8vo.     6/.     Land.,  Nisbet.     1853.     S.  2/6. 
Written  with  an  admirable  design.     Good,  but  not  very  able.     The 
subject  still  demands  the  pen  of  a  master. 

467  SHERIFFE  (Mrs.)     Practical  Reflections.     2  vols,,  i2mo.   Lond.,  1820.    2/- 
We  hope  they  benefited  the  printer ;  they  will  not  help  the  reader  much. 

468  SPURGEON  (Charles  Haddon).      The  Treasury  of  David: 

containing  an  Original  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Psalms ;  a 
Collection  of  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  whole  range  of 
literature  ;  a  Series  of  Homiletical  Hints  upon  almost  every 
verse;  and  Lists  of  W^riters  upon  each  Psalm.  [In  progress.] 
Vol.  I.  containing  Psalms  I.— XXVI.  ;  Vol.  II.  Pss.  XXVIL— 


PSALMS.  91 

LII.  ;  Vol.  III.  Pss.  LIIL— LXXVIII.;  Vol.  IV.  Pss. 
LXXIX.— cm.  8/-  each.  LoJid.,  Passmore  &  Alabaster. 
1870,  etc. 

To  be  completed  in  six  volumes,  if  God  permit.  Reviewers  have 
handled  this  book  with  remarkable  kindness,  and  the  public  have 
endorsed  their  judgment  by  largely  purchasing  the  volumes  already 
issued.     It  would  not  become  us  to  say  more. 

469  STREET  (Stephen,  AI.A.)     A  Mew  Literal  Version;  with  a  Preface  and 

Notes.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Loud.,  i'j<)o.     2il- 
One  hardly  desires  a  rigidly  literal  translation  of  a  poetic  book,  for  the  beauty  and 
spirit  are  lost.     The  notes  are  purely  critical  and  are  superseded  by  later  works 

470  THOLUCK  (Augustus  R,  D.D.,  Ph.D.)     A  Translation  and 

Commentary.     Translated  from  the  German  by  J.  Isidor  Mom- 
bert.     8vo.     Zond.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1856.     S.  5/6. 
Tholuck  is  one  of  the  most  spiritual  of  German  interpreters.     Though 

we  cannot  say  that  this  is  equal  to  some  others  of  his  works,  yet  he  is  a 

great  writer,  and  always  deserves  attention. 

471  THRUPP  (Joseph  Francis,   M.A.)     An  Introduction  to  the 

Study  and  Use  of  the  Psalms.      2  vols.,  8vo.     21/-     Lond.  and 
G?;//^.,  Macmillan  &  Co.     i860.     S.  12/- 
Though  not  the  best,  it  is  still  a  learned  and  helpful  work  of  its  class. 

472  TUCKER  (William  Hill,  M.A.)     The  Psalms  [P.  B.  Version], 

with  Notes,  showing  their  Prophetic  and  Christian  Character. 
Post  8vo.     6/-    Lond.,  1840.     S.  2/6 
The  waiter  refers  all  the  Psalms  to  Christ,  and  writes  many  weighty 
things,  but  we  cannot  place  him  in  the  front  rank  among  expositors. 

473  V/AKE  (W.  R.)     A  Literal  Version  of  the  Psalms  into  Modern  Language, 

according  to  the  Liturgy  translation.     2vols.,  Cr.  8vo.     Batk.,  i-jgT,.     3/- 
Think  of  a  translation  of  a  translation.     The  author  was  Wake,  but  not  awake,  or 
he  would  never  have  wasted  so  much  good  paper. 

474  WAI-FORD  (William.      Late   Classical  and  Hcbreiu   Tu/or  at 

Homerto7i).     A  New  Translation,  with  Notes,  Explanatory  and 
Critical.     8vo.     Lond.,  1837.     2/3  to  3/- 
Contains  some  useful  notes,  good,  but  not  specially  remarkable. 

475  WEISS    (Benj.     Missionary  to  the  Jnus,  Algiers).     A  New  Translation,  Ex- 

position,   and   Chronological   Arrangement  of  the  Boole  of  Psahns,    with 
Critical  Notes.     8vo.     ^V/;/;^.,  W.  Oliphant  &  Co.    1852.     S.  2/6 
The  Psalms  are  arranged  in  a  new  order,  and  are  very  hard  to   find.     The  author 
is  dogmatic  to  the  last  degi-ee.     Our  estimate  of  his  work  is  not  so  high  as  his  own. 

476  WILCOCKS  (Thomas,  A.M.     Puritan.     1549— 1608).     Avery 

godly  and  learned  exposition  upon  the  .whole  Book  of  Psalms. 
[Works.     Folio.]     See  JVb.  ^^6. 
Short  spiritual  remarks,  followed  by  many  doctrinal  inferences,  calcu- 
lated to  suggest  topics  to  preachers. 


92  PSALMS. 

477     WILSON  (W.,  D.D.)     The  Psalms  ;  with  an  Exposition, 

T}i)ical  and  Prophetical,  of  the  Christian  Dispensation. 

2  vols.     8vo.     i6/-     Lond.,  Nisbct.     i80o.     S.  5/- 

Wchavc  consulted  Wilson  witJi  advantage  and  often  quoted  from 

him  in  tJic  "  Treasury  of  David','     He  is  a  clear,  gospel  Expositor, 

and  has  ivrittcn  much  that  is  weighty  and  precious. 

47S      WOODFORD  (Samuel).     A  Paraphrase.    410.     Loud.,  1667.     3/- 
Poor  rhymes  j  though  the  preface  says  of  the  author — 
"At  Icngtli  the  skilful  way  you  found, 
With  a  true  car  judg'd  the  melodious  sound, 
And  with  a  nimble  hand  run  descant  on  the  Hebrew  ground." 
It  would  seem  from  this  tliat  the  poem  scrambles  on  all-fours,  and  we  think  it  does. 

479  WRIGHT  (Abraham).     A  Practical  Commentary,  wherein  the 

Text  of  every  Psalme  is  Practically  expounded,  according  to 
the  Doctrine  of  the  Catholick  Church,  in  a  way  not  usually  trod 
by  Commentators  ;  and  wholly  applyed  to  the  Life  and  Salva- 
tion of  Christians.     Very  thin  folio.      1661. 
Wright  selects  the  more  remarkable  verses,  and  comments  upon  them 

in  a  deeply  spiritual,  quaint,  and  suggestive  manner.      His  work  is 

extremely  rare. 

480  ZILLWOOD  (J.  O.)  The  Psalms,  arranged  in  Parallelisms,  with  Notes,  chiefly 

from  Bishops  Home  and  Horsley.     2vols.,8vo.     Lo/id.,  lii^S-     3/' 
Tlie  student  had  better  get  Home  and  Horsley  for  himself,  and  he  will  have  no  need 
of  this. 


CONSIDERABLE  PORTIONS  OF  THE  PSALMS. 

481  BAKER  (Sir  Richard.     1568— 1645).     Meditations  and 

Disquisitions  on  the  First,  and  Seven  Penitential  Psalms, 

viz.,  the  6,  32,  38,  51,102,  130,  &  143.  4to.  Loud.,  1640.  5/- 
Meditations  and  Disquisitions  on  the  Seven  Consolitarie 

Psalms,  viz.,  the  23,  27,  30,   34,   84,   103,  and  I16.     4to. 

Lond.,  1640.  5/- 
O  rare  Sir  Richard  Baker  !  Knight  of  the  flowing  pen.  His 
^^  Meditations  and  Disquisitions''  are  altogether  niarroiv  and  fat- 
ness. We  have  often  tried  to  quote  from  him  and  have  fou)id  our- 
selves so  embarrassed  ivitJi  riches  that  ive  have  been  inclined  to  copy 
the  whole  book.  Why  it  has  not  been  reprinted,  and  made  to  pass 
through  fifty  editions,  lue  cannot  tell.  Poor  vtan,  he  became  a  surety 
and  smarted,  dying  in  poverty  in  the  Fleet.  Were  there  any 
Christians  alive  in  those  days? 

482  BARKER  (Frederick,  M.A.)     Thirty-six  Psalms  ;   with  Commeniary  and 

Prayer,  for  use  in  families.     Cr.  8vo.    Jackson,  1854.     1/6. 
What  platitudes  people  will  write  for  the  use  of  families.     Families  will  best  use 
these  commentaries  and  prayers  by  lining  their  cake  tins  with  them. 


PSALMS.  03 

483  BERTRAM  (R,  A.)     The  Imprecatory  Psalms.     Six  Lectures. 

1 2 mo.     Land.,  Elliot  Stock.     1867.     S.  1/6. 
Contains  some  very  sensible  remarks  upon  a  subject  which  no  doubt 
bewilders  certain  of  the  weaker  sort. 

484  BOWMAN  (Hetty).      Studies  in  the  Psalms.      l2mo.      Land.,    The  Book 

Society,  and  John  Snow  &  Co.      1869. 
Outlines  of  teaching  upon  a  few  Psalms.     The  authoress  begs  that  these  "  Studies  '■' 
may  not  in  any  sense  be  considered  as  a  commentary  :  we  do  not  so  consider  them. 

485  BOYS  (John,  D.D.     Dean  of  Canterbury.      1 571—1625). 

Workes.      Folio,   1629.       An   Exposition   of  the  Proper 
Psalms  used  in  our  English   Liturgy.     (See  under  New 
Testament)     1 2/- 
One  of  the  richest  of  zvriters.     From  his  golden  pen  flozvs  con- 
densed zvisdom.     Many  of  his  sentences  are  tvorthy  to  be  quoted  as 
gems  of  the  Christian  classics. 

486  COPE  (Sir  Anthony.     Chamberlain  to  Queen  Catherine  Par}-).     Meditations 

on  Twenty  Select  Psalms.     Reprinted  from  the  edition  of  1547.     Small 
squai-e  8vo.     Lond.,  John  Ollivier.     1848.    2/6. 
More  curious  than  valuable.     The  style  is  scholastic  and  pointless. 

487  DIDHAM    (R.    Cunningham,    M.A.)    I.— XXXVI.— New   Translation: 

made  by  means  of  Arabic  Lexicons,  Syriac  New  Testament  Words,  the 
Ancient  Versions,  Bishop  Lowth's  Parallelisms,  and  Pai-allel  Places,  whereby 
the  Scriptural  Messianic  Canon  that  our  Lord  Christ  is  the  Key  to  the 
Psalm  is  upheld,  &c.  8vo.  15/-  Zc?;?^/.,  Williams  &  Norgate.  1870.  S.  1/9. 
Principally  consists  of  denunciations  of  other  writers.  As  the  price  has  descended 
from  15/-  to  1/9  for  new  copies,  the  verdict  of  the  public  is  pretty  definite. 

488  LUTHER  (Martin).     A  Commentary  on  Psalms  I. — XI.  ;  and 

on  Psalm  LL,  in  Vol.  3  ;  on  Psalms  XIL — XXII.  and  on 
Psalm  II.  in  Vol.  4,  of  Select  Works  of  Luther.  Translated  by 
Rev.  H.  Cole.     [4  vols.     8vo.     i^;/^.,  1824.     18/-] 

A  Commentary  on  the  Psalms,  commonly  called  the  Psalms 
of  Degrees  [CXX.— CXXXIV].     8yo.     Lewes,  1S23.     Also  a 
black  letter  410.,  1577,  and  other  editions  of  this  work. 
Lidher  needs  no  trumpeter. 

489  PITMAN  (J.  R.,  M.A.)     A  Course  of  Sermons  on  some  of  the  Chief  Subjects 

in  the  Book  of  Psalms ;  abridged  from  eminent  divines  of  the  Established 
Church.     8vo.     Land.,  Longmans.      1S46.     3/- 
We  have  seldom  obtained  much  from  these  sermons.     A  far  better  selection  might 
have  been  made  ;  at  the  same  time,  some  of  the  discourses  are  admirable. 

490  ROLLOCK    (Robert.      1555 — 1598).      An    Exposition    upon 

some  select  Psalms.     121110.     1600. 
RollocKs  works  are  rare.     He  wrote  in  Latin,  and  his  language  is  made 
more  dull  than  need  be  by  the  translator.    All  his  writings  are  masterly. 

491  STRIGELLIUS     (Victorinus.       1524—1569).      Part    of   the 

Harmony  of  King  David's  Harp.     Translated  by  R.  Robinson. 

[In  four  parts.]     4to.     1582  to  1596. 
This  volume  the  expositor  is  not  at  all  likely  to  see,  and  there  is,  there- 
fore, the  less  need  for  us  to  speak  of  it.     Strigcllius  was  the  friend  of 
Luther  and  Melancthon,  and  a  man  of  sound  sense  and  vast  learning. 


9i  PSALMS. 


492     WILLIAMS  (Isaac,  B.D.)      The  Tsalms  interpreted  of  ■ 

Christ.      [Vol.    I.,    Psalms    L— XXVI.]      Thick    i2mo.  . 

Lond.,  Rivingtons.      1864.     S.  3/-  \ 

This  zvritcf  is  of  the  High  Church  school,  but  he  is  very  spiritual  | 

and  deep,  and  Zi'e  seldom  turn  to  him  ivithout  profit.  j 


THE  PENITENTIAL  PSALMS. 

[The  Penitential  Psalms  are  seven  in  number.     Psalms  6,  32,  38,  51, 
102,  130,  and  143.     For  102  some  substitute  25.] 

493  BAKER  (Sir  R.)     Sec  No.  481. 

494  DONNE   (John.     1573 — 163 1).      Sermons  on  the  Peni- 

tential Psalms.     In  Vols.  II.  and  III.  of  his  Works.  [6  vols., 

8vo.,  y;2.    1839.] 

A  right  royal  zvritcr,  whose  every  line  is  a  pearl. 

495  FISHER  (John.     1459—1535)-     Fruytful  saynges  of  Dauid.     Black  Letter. 

4to.,  1509;  Svo.,  1555.     Reprinted  ill  121110.,  1714.     5/- 
Dry  and  tedious :  in  the  stiff  antique  style. 

496  HAYWARD  (Sir  John,  LL.D.     Died  1627;.     David's  Tears. 

[On  VI.,   XXXIL,  and  CXXX.   only.]      4to.,    1623;    i2mo., 
1649.     3/- to  5/- 
After  the  Puritanic  method  :  full  of  point  and  pith. 

497  OXENDEN  (Charles).    Sermons  on  the  Seven  Penitential  Psalms,  preached 

during  Lent.     i2mo.      1838.     1/6. 

To  listen  to  these  sermons  must  have  afforded  a  suitable  Lenten  penance  to  those 
who  went  to  church  to  hear  them.     There  their  use  began  and  ended. 

498  SYMSON  (Archibald).      A  Sacred   Septenarie ;    or,    a 

Godly  and  FruitfuU  Exposition  on  the  Seven  Psalmes  of 
Repentance.     4to.     1638.     5/-  to  7/- 
A  marrowy  anther,  full  of  instriietion. 


SEPARATE    PSALMS. 

[The  following  works  are  arranged  according  to  the  order  of  the 
Psalms,  to  assist  reference.  We  have  not  attempted  to  include  all 
writers  in  this  list]. 

499     Psalm  I.— SMITH  (Samuel.    1583— 1665).  David's  Blessed  Man. 
Ninth  edition,  iSmo.     1635.     1/6103/-     Reprinted  in  Nichol's 
Commentaries,  with  Picrson    (No.  527  ) ;  and  Gouge  (No.  560). 
Very  popular  in  its  day,  and  v/orthily  so. 


SEPARATE  PSALMS.  95 

500  I. — STONHAM  (Matthew),     A  Treatise  on  the  First  Psalme. 

4to.     1610. 
Somewhat  dry,  scholastic  and  out  of  date ;  but  still  an  interesting 
and  instructive  piece  of  old  divinity. 

501  II.,  XLV.,  ex.— HARPUR  (George,  B.A.)  Christ  in  the  Psalms. 

A  Series  of  Discourses.     Cr.  8vo.    6/-     Lond.,  Wertheim  &  Co. 
1862.     S.  2/- 
Discourses  of  a  high  order  as  to  abiHty,  but  the  historico-prophetic 
interpretations  here  given  do  not  commend  themselves  to  us. 

502  II.— PITCAIRN  (David).    Zion's  King.    Cr.  8vo.    7/6.    Lond., 

J.  H.  Jackson.     185 1.     S.  2/6. 
This  author  does  not  err  on  the  side  of  conciseness.     His  book  is 
a  meritorious  effort,  but  we  have  found  it  somewhat  heavy  reading. 

503  IV.,   XLII.,    LI.,    LXIIL— HORTON    (Thomas,    D.D. 

Died  1673),     Choice  and  Practical  Expositions.     Folio. 
1675.     5/- to  7/- 
A    inarvcllous  Jioinilctical  exposition.      Horton's  discourses  are 
very  full  of  divisions,  but  then  he  akvays  has  plenty  of  solid  matter 
to  divide.     Ministers  ivill  find  teeming  suggestions  here. 

504  XV.— CART  WRIGHT    (Christopher).      Commentary.      4to. 

1658.     7/6._ 
A  learned  and  weighty  work ;  not  readily  met  with. 

.505     XV.— DOWNAME  (George,  D.D.)    Lectures.    4to.    1604.  6/6. 
Lectures  by  one  of  the  race  of  giant  divines. 

506  XV.— TURNBULL  (Richard).     Four  Sermons  on  Psalm  :Iy. 

4to.     1606.     Forming  last  part  of  volume  on  James  and  Jude. 

9/-  to  14/- 
By  a  popular  and  edifying  preacher  of  the  olden  times 

507  XVI.— DALE  (Thomas,  ]M.A.     Canon  of  St.  Paul's.)    The  Golden   Psalm. 

l2mo.     1S47.     S.  2/-  to  3/- 
Good,  simple  discourses  ;  the  headings  might  suggest  a  course  of  sermons. 

508  XVI.— FRAME    (James).      Christ   in   Gethsemane.      Cr.   8vo. 

1858.    S.  2/- 
A  sterling,  well-intentioned  and  well-executed  comment.    The  text  has 
to  be  a  litde  tw^isted  to  suit  the  theory  of  the  interpreter,  but  we  do  not 
suppose  that  Mr.  Frame  is  conscious  of  it.     He  is  one  of  the  best  of 
modern  discoursers  upon  the  Psalms. 

509  XVII I.— BROWN    (John,    D.D.)      The  Sufferings   and 

Glories  of  the  Messiah.     8vo.     Ediiih.,  iZ^i. 
Like  all  Dr.  Brozvn's  productions,  this  is  a  work  of  the  highest 
order.     Clear,  full,  and,  in  the  best  manner,  exegetical. 


on                                     SF.PARATK   PSAT.MS.  \ 

510     XIX.— REEVE    (J.    W.)      Lectures   on    the    Nineteenth  ; 

r.salm.      Cr.  8vo.      5/-      1 863.     S.  2/3.  ' 

I>j'  one  of  the  ablest  preachers  among  the  Evangelical  Episco-  I 

palians.     Scriptural,  tkoiig/itful,  and  original.  | 

Sii     XIX.— RICHARDSON  (J.  WiLr.ERFORCE).    Illustrations  of  the  | 

Nineteenth  Psalm.     Cr.   8vo.     3/6.     Lond.,  John  Snow  &  Co.  \ 

1870.     S.  2/-  I 

Sound  in  doctrine,  but  verbose  and  common-place.  \ 

1 

512  XX.,  verses  i — 6. — BOWND  (Nicholas,  D.D.)     Medicines  for  \ 

the  Plague  [Twenty-one  Sermons].     4to.     1604.     5/6.  j 

Racy,  quaint,  extremely  rare.  : 

513  XXII.— FRAME  (James).  The  Song  of  the  Cross.    Cr.  8vo.    5/-  \ 

Loud.,  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.     1872.     S.  2/6.  j 

This  is  valuable,  as  Mr.  Frame's  books  generally  are.  ] 

514  XXII.— STEVENSON  (John,  D.D.,^^«.  Cfl-;;^;/ </C^;//^;-^//;j).  | 

Christ  on  the  Cross  :  an  Exposition  of  the  Twenty-second  Psalm.  'i 

Post  8vo.     5/-     Land.,  Bagsters.     S.  1/6.  ; 

The  b.'J'ot  of  Dr.  Streenson's  books.     Exceedingly  precious  in  its  un-  1 

veiling  of  the  Redeemer's  sorrows.     We  have  derived  personal  spiritual  , 

benefit  from  the  perusal  of  this  gracious  exposition,  and  are  unable 

to  judge  it  critically.  ' 

515  XXIIL— STEVENSON  (John,  D.D.,  Hon.  Canon  of  Canterbury).  j 

The   Lord  our  Shepherd  :  An  Exposition  of  the  Twenty-third  ' 

Psalm.     Post  Svo.     3  '6.     Lond.,  Bagsters.  ; 

Too  wire-drawn,  but  it  is  golden  wire.  1 

516  XXIIL— BAKER   (Sir  R.)     Sec  No.  a,^i. 

517  XXIIL— DALE  (Thomas,  M.A.)     The  Good  Shepherd  and  the 

Chosen  Flock.     i2mo.     1847.     S.  2/6. 

Somewhat  ordinary  evangelical  discourses.  j 

5  iS     XXIIL,  LXII.,  LXXIII.—LXXVII.— HOOPER  (John,  Bishop  and  Mir/yr}..  I 

Certain  Comfortable  Expositions.     [In  Parker  Society's  edition  of  Hooper's  \ 

Works.]  I 

The  cramped  style  and  antiquated  matter  repel  the  reader.  1 

519  XXIIL— MILLER  (Andrew).    Meditations  on  Twenty-third  and  ; 

Eighty-fourth  Psalms.     i2mo.     Zo n d.,  G.Movrish.  ' 
Discursive,  but  devout;  more  useful  to  the  heart  than  the  head. 

520  XXIIL— PATON  (James,  B.A.)    The  Children's  Psalm  :  Twelve  '. 

Meditations    and    Twelve    Spiritual    Songs.       i2mo.      Lond.,  ; 

Passmore  &  Alabaster.      1870.     S.  1/6.  i 

Worthy  of  much  commendation.     It  is  unfortunate  that  the  title  leads  ! 

the  reader  to  expect  a  book  for  children,  whereas  the  author  intended  to  ! 

edify  the  children  of  God  of  an  older  growth.  \ 


SEPARATE  PSALMS.  97 

521  XXIII.— SEDGWICK  (Obadiah,  B.D.)   The  Shepherd  of  Israel. 

4to.     1658.     7/6.  to  10/6. 
Sedgwick  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  preachers  of  the  time  of  the 
Commonwealth.     His  commenting  is  solid  and  lively. 

522  XXIIL— SMITH  (Samuel).    The  Chiefe  Shepheard;  or  An  Ex- 

position on  ye  XXIII  Psalme.     i8mo.     1625. 
All  the  writings  of  Samuel  Smith  are  good,  but  not  so  full  of  memorable 
sentences  and  pithy  sayings  as  certain  others  of  their  date. 

523  XXIIL— STOUGHTON  (John,   D.D.)     The   Song  of  Christ's 

Flock.     i2mo.     5/-     Lond.^  i860.     S.  3/- 
Devout  practical  meditations,  but  we  don't  see  how  a  flock  can  sing. 

524  XXIIL— THORNTON  (J.,  of  BUlencay).     The  Shepherd  of  Israel.     121110. 

1826. 
We  need  no  longer  wonder  how  spiders  make  such  long  threads  with  such  little 
material,  for  here  is  an  equally  amazing  instance  of  spinning.     Plentiful  quotations  of 
Scripture,  and  venerable  anecdotes  are  here  used  as  substitutes  for  thought,  not  as  aids 
to  It. 

525  XXV.— HALKET    (Lady   Anne.     1622— 1699.)     Meditations. 

8vo.     Edinb.,  1778.     1/6. 
This  lady  was  eminent  for   medicine  as  well  as  theology ;  she  left 
tw:nty-one  volumes:  this  and  another  book  of  meditations  appear  to  be 
all  that  have  been  reprinted. 

526  XXV.— MOSSOM  (Robert,  BisJwp  of  Londonderry.    Died 

1679).      The  Preacher's  Tripartite,  contains  Divine  Medi- 
tations upon  Psalm  XXV.     Folio.     1657.     3/6  to  5/- 
Thoroiighly  devotional,  eminently  consolatory,  and  deeply  experi- 
mental.    Mossoin  is  a  fruitful  writer. 

527  XXVII.,LXXXIV.,LXXXV.,  LXXXVIL— PIERSON  (Thomas, 

M.A.     1570 — 1633).    Excellent  Encouragements  against  Afitlic- 
tions.     4to.     1647.     5/-    [Reprinted  in  Nichol's  Commentaries, 
with  Smith,  No.  499  ;  and  Gouge,  No,  560]. 
Fierson  was  not  the  richest  or  most  overflowing  of  the  old  divines, 
but  yet  one  who  stood  in  the  front  rank. 

328    XXXII.— BINGHAM  (Charles  H.,  B.  A.)    Lectures.    Post  8vo.    1836.    2/- 
Tame  sermons.     Faultlessly  feeble.     Good,  but  no  good. 

529     XXXIL— LEIGHTON  (Robert,  Archbishop  of  Glasgoiv. 

161 1 — 1684). 

In  some  editions  ofLeighton's  collected  works  zvill  be  found  choice 

meditations  on  this  Psalm,  and  also  on  Psalms  IV.  and  CXXX. 

Everything  that  fell  from  his  pen  is  zvorth  its  weight  in  diamonds. 


98  SEPARATE   PSA  I.MS. 

530  XXXir.— TAYLOR  (Thomas,  D.D.)    David's  Learning,  or  Way 

to  True  Happiness.      410.     161 7.      7/-     Also  in   his    IVorks. 

Folio.     1660. 
On  account  of  Taylor's  great  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  he  was 
commonly  called  "  the  illuminated  Doctor."     Fuller  calls  him  "a  grave 
tiivine,  a  painful  preacher,  and  a  profitable  writer."     He  is  one  of  the 
richest  in  matter  of  all  the  Puritans. 

531  XXXIL— REEVE    (J.  W.,    M.A.)     Lectures.      Cr.    8vo.      3/6. 

Lend.,  Nisbet.     1S59.     S.  2/- 
Orthodox,  spiritual,  and  suggestive  lectures,  by  an  evangelical  clergy- 
man. 

532  XXXIL— WILLARD     (Samuel).       The    Truly   Blessed    Man. 

8vo.     Boston,  N.E.     31/6.     Rare. 
One  of  the  first  books  printed  in  the  United  States.     An  old-fashioned 
exposition.     The  price  is  caused  by  its  rarity  rather  than  its  value. 

533  XL.— FRAME  (James).     Christ  and  his  Work.     Cr.   8vo.     6/- 

Lond.,  Snow  &  Co.     1869.     S.  2/6. 
Well  done.    Though  differing  from  the  author  at  times,  we  are  grateful 
for  such  real  help. 

534  XLIL— MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.D.)     The  Hart  and  the  Water- 

brooks.     Sm.  cr.  8vo.     Loud.,  Nisbet.     i860.     S.  2/- 
See  remarks  on  other  books  by  this  copious  writer.    {Nos.  308,  3 1 5,  &c.) 

535  XLIL,   XLIIL— MARCH   (H.)      Sabbaths   at    Home.      8vo. 

1823.     1/6. 
Profitable  reading,  rendered  all  the  more  pleasing  by  the  introduction 
of  very  choice  poetry.     Not  important  to  the  expositor. 

536  XLIL— SIBBES  (Richard,  D.D.)     The  Soul's  Conflict 

and  Victory  over  itself  by  Faith.      i2mo.      1635,  etc. 
1/6  to  3/-      Works,  Vol.  I.,  Nichol's  edition. 
Mainly  upon  verses  5  and  11.     Sibbes  never  zvastes  the  student's 
time;  he  scatters  pearls  and  diamonds  zuith  both  hands. 

537  XLV.— BENNETT    (Thomas).       Semions    on    the   Forty-fifth 

Psalm.     Sm.  8vo.     Ediiib.,  1781. 
Twenty-four  sermons  after  the  manner  of  Ralph  Erskinc,  in  which 
Jesus  is  all  in  all.     What  more  need  be  said  in  their  praise.'' 

53S     XLV.— PENNEFATHER  (William,  M.A.)     The  Bridegroom 

King.     A  Meditation  on  the  Forty-fifth  Psalm.     i8mo.     1/6. 

Loud.,  J.  F.  Shaw  &  Co. 

Rather  a  meditation  than  an  exposition.    A  fitting  book  for  a  sick  bed. 

The  little  chapters  might  lie,  like  wafers  made  with  honey,  upon  the 

praiseful  tongue  of  the  suffering  believer.     The  beloved  writer  has  now 

gone  to  see  the  King  in  his  beauty,  of  whom  he  had  those  glimpses 

here  which  enabled  him  to  pen  this  tiny  volume. 


SEPARATE  PSALMS.  99 

539  XLV.— TROUGHTON(W.)  The  Mystery  of  the  Marriage  Song.  i2mo.  1656. 
An  old  work  with  nothing  new  or  striking  in  it.     Remarkably  tame  and  meagre 

for  a  work  of  that  exuberant  period.     Let  it  alone. 

540  XLV.— PITCAIRN    (David).     The  Anointed  Saviour.     i2mo. 

1846. 

Contains  an  exposition  of  part  of  Psalm  XLV.,  as  applied  to  Messiah's 
first  and  second  advents.     Good,  yet  it  reads  rather  wearily  to  us. 

541  LI.— ALEXANDER   (Thomas,  M.A.)     The  Penitent's  Prayer. 

Cr.  8vo.     3/6.-    Loud.,  Nisbet.     1861.     S.  1/9. 
Our  friend  the  late  Dr.  Alexander  of  Chelsea  handled  this  Psalm  well. 

542  LI.— DE    COETLOGON  (Charles  Edward,   A.M.      Died   1820).      The 

Portraiture  of  the  Christian  Penitent.     2  vols.,  i2mo.      1775.     S.  2/6  to  4/- 
Very  proper.     We  see  nothing  in  the  book  but  platitudes  decorously  expressed. 

543  LL— BIDDULPH  (Thomas  T.,  A.M.,  1763— 1838).     Lectures 

on  Psalm  LI,     8vo.,  1S30;   i2mo.,  1835.     S.  1/6  to  2/6. 
Lectures  far  above  the  average  of  such  lucubrations,  making  up  a  very 
fair  exposition. 

544  LL — BULL  (John,  M.A.)    Sermons  on  the  Fifty-first  Psalm.    8vo.    1824.    1/6. 
Another  specimen  of  sermons  published  by  subscription.     The  poor  curate  was  no 

<loubt  the  better  for  the  profits,  and  nobody  was  any  the  worse.  Clipston  church  was 
not  set  on  fire  by  the  flaming  eloquence  of  the  preacher,  nor  was  the  country  disturbed 
Ijy  any  fanatical  excitement  produced  by  his  excessive  zeal. 

545  LL— HIERON  (Samuel.  ,  1572—1617).      David's  Penitentiall 

Psalme  opened.     4to.     1617.     5/6. 
Hieron  was  a  conforming  Puritan.     His  works  were  once  exceedingly 
popular  and  they  are  still  esteemed. 

546  LL—HILDERSHAM  (Arthur.   Puritan.   1563— 1631). 

One  Hundred  and  Fifty-tvi^o  Lectures  upon  Psalm  LI. 

Folio.     1635  and  1642.     6/-  to  10/- 
Hildcrsham  zvas  one  of  the  most  tried  of  the  Nonconfoi-ming 
eninisters,  and  at  the  same  time  one  of  the  most  able.     He  is  copious 
■and  discursive,  we  had  almost  said  long-zvinded.    Both  Willet  and 
Preston  speak  of  hint  in  the  highest  terms. 

547  LL— MORGAN   (James,    D.D.)     The  Penitent.     i2mo. 

Belfast,  M'Comb  ;  Loud.,  Hamilton.     1855. 
TJie  excellent   doctor  first  wrote   this   exposition  for  his  ozvn 
spiritual  benefit,  then  preached  it  for  the  edification  of  his  flock,  and 
lastly  published  it  for  the  good  of  ns  all.     This  is  a  zuorthy  pedigree 
for  a  book,  and  the  book  itself  is  worthy  of  the  pedigree. 

548  LL— PAGE  (Samuel,  DD.    Died  1630).    David's  Broken 

Heart.     4to.     1637  and  1646.     5/- 
Evcry  page  is  like  a  bank  note  for  valne.     Here  arc  homiletical 
materials  in  abundance. 


100  SKPARATE  PSALMS. 

549  LI. — SMITH    (Samukl).      David's   Repentance.      iSmo.      i6lh 

I'Milion.      1655.     {See  Nos.  ^()()  and  e^22). 

It  will  be  scon  from  the  numerous  editions  that  tliis  work  was  well 
received  in  its  author's  lifetime.  He  tells  us  that  he  spent  the  spare 
hours  of  a  long  sickness  in  publishing  this  short  exposition,  and  thus  the 
world  is  all  the  healthier  for  his  illness. 

550  LXVIIL,    ex.— DIXOX    (Richard,   A.M.,    F.R.S.)     A   New 

Interpretation  of  the  Sixty-eighth  Psalm  :  with  an  Exposition  of 
the  Hundred  and  Tenth  Psalm.     4to.     Ox/.,  i^ii.     2/- 

This  author,  in  a  most  interesting  manner,  traces  out  the  analogy 
between  this  Psalm  and  the  Song  of  Deborah.  Those  who  Hke  choice 
l)icces  of  writing  upon  the  literature  of  Scripture  will  be  gratified  by  the 
perusal  of  this  exposition. 

551  LXXIIL— PARRY    (Edward.     Bis/wp    of  Killabc).       David 

Restored  ;  or  an  Antidote  against  the  Prosperity  of  the  Wicked 
and  the  Aftlictions  of  the  Just.     8vo.      1660.     4/6  to  8/- 
Not  super- excellent,  nor  free  from  blemishes,  but  containing  much  of 
sterling  value. 

552  LXXXIL— HALL  (Thomas,  B.D.     1610— 1665).     The  Beauty 

of  Magistracy.    An  Exposition  of  Psalm  LXXXIL    4to.    1660- 

[In  Vol.  IV.  of  Swinnock's  Works,  Nichol's  edition.  ] 

This   exposition   has  always  nestled   in  the   bosom   of    Swinnoc/is 

works.     ^Ve   agree   with   Dr.   Jenkyii's   criticism — "  The  style  is  terse 

and  clear,  though  grave  and  theological,  and  the  matter  is  solid  and 

judicious." 

553  LXXXIV.— HEMINGE     (Nicholas.      1513— 1600).       The   Faith  of  the 

Church  Militant.     8vo.     1581. 

A  Danish  divine  of  high  repute  in  his  own  day.  Some  of  his  works  were 
turned  into  English;  but  the  translations,  lilce  the  originals,  are  now  left  in  undeserved 
oblivion. 

554  XC. — SMITH  (Samuel).     Moses,  his  Prayer.     iSmo.     1656. 
See  our  notes  on  Nos.  499,  522,  and  549. 

555  XCIX.,  CL,  CIL— EDERSHEIM  (Alfred,  D.D.)    The  Golden 

Diary  of  Heart  Converse  with  Jesus.     1S73.     Contains  Exposi- 
tions of  Psalms  XCIX.,  CL,  CH. 

Sweet  and  spiritual ;  worth  purchasing. 

556  CIII— STEVENSON  (John,  D.D.    Hou.  Canon  of  Canterbury). 

Gratitude.     An  Exposition  of  the  Hundred  and  Third  Psalm. 
Post  Svo.     3/'6.     Lofid.,  S.  Bagster  &  Sons. 

Somewhat  diffuse,  but  at  the  same  time  too  good  to  be  criticized. 


SEPARATE  PSALMS.  1 01 

557  CVIL— HYPERIUS  (Andrew  Gerard.  i 511— 1564).  A 
Special  Treatise  of  God's  Providence  and  Comfort  against  all 
kinds  of  Crosses  and  Calamities,  to  be  drawn  from  the  same ; 
with  an  Exposition  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Seventh  Psalme. 
From  the  Latin.  Black  Letter.  8vo.  1602.  15/-  Scarce. 
This  author  has  written  in  Latin  upon  many  subjects,  but  his  works 

are  now  little  known.     He  was  a  learned  Lutheran. 

55S     CVn.—ROMAINE  (William,  M.A.   1714— 1795).    A  Practical 

Comment  on  Psalm  CVH.      8vo.     Fifth  edition.      1767.     1/6 

to  4/-     Also  in  Works,  IV. 

Romamis  doctrine  and  style  of  writing  are  well  known.     He  could 

not   be  accused   of  overlaying  the  truth   with   much   learning.     The 

thought  is  gracious,  sound,  and  practical,  but  the  style  is  just  a  little  dull. 

559  ex.— REYNOLDS  (Edward,  D.D.     Bishop  of  Norwich, 

1599 — 1676).      Explication  of  the    One    Hundred   and 
Tenth  Psalm.     4to.,   1632   and   1635  ;  i2mo.,  1837.     2/- 
to  3/6.     Also  in  Works. 
Surpassingly  clear  and  elaborate.      Reynolds  zuas  a  man  of  vast 
learning  and  tJioronghly  evangelical  spirit. 

560  CXVI.— GOUGE  (William,  D.D.   Puritan.    1575—1653).    The 

Saints' Sacrifice.  4to.   1632.  Scarce.   3/6.   Reprinted  in  Nichol's 
Commentaries,  with  Smith,  No.  499;  and  Pierson,  No.  527. 
Gouge's  method  of  cutting  up  his  exposition  into  sections  and  dis- 
cussing everything  in  propositions,  is  very  tedious  to  the  reader,  but  we 
judge  it  to  be  advantageous  to  the  preacher.     At  any  rate  Gotige  has 
often  given  us  a  hint.     He  was  a  man  of  great  learning. 

561  CXIX.— BRIDGES     (Charles,     M.A.)       Exposition. 

Twenty-second  edition.     Cr.  8vo.     Lond.,  1857. 
Worth  its  lueight  in  gold.    A  Ibeit  that  the  tuork  is  neither  learned 
nor  very  original  zve  prize  it  for  its  surpassing  grace  and  nnction. 

562  CYiiyL.-— (ZO\NVY.'^i^\\AAk\\.  Bp.  of  Galloway.     1566- 1619). 

A  Holy  Alphabet  for  Sion's  Scholars.     A  Commentary  upon 
CXIX Psalm.    Folio.  Bond.,  161;^ ;  audin Works.    Folio.   1629. 

Z>r.  JlPCr/e  gives  a  high  character  to  all  Caliper's  works,  and  says 
that  a  vein  of  practical  piety  runs  through  them,  while  the  style  is 
remarkable  for  ease  and  fluency.  This  remark  applies  emphatically  to 
the  "Holy  Alphabet."     We  have  found  it  very  delightful  reading. 

563  CXIX.— GREENHAM  (Richard.  Puritan.    1531— 1591).    An 

Exposition  of  the  119  Psalme.    Works.    Folio.  Bond.,  1612. 

We  regret  that  this  comment  is  not  published  separately,  and  is 
only  to  be  procured  by  purchasing  the  rest  of  Grcenham's  works.  The 
-style,  however,  is  antique  and  cramped,  and  Manton  and  Bridges  are 
quite  enough. 


102  SEPARATE  PSALMS. 

564     CXIX.— MANTON  (Thomas,  D.D.     1620— 1677).     One 

luiiuliLd  and  ninety  Sermons  on  the  One  Hundred    and 

Nineteenth   P^iulm.      Folio,   LoiuL,    1725  ;    3   vols.,    8vo., 

Loud.,  1842  ;  3  vols  (with  Life),  1845.     7/- 

Ful/y  up  to  Man  toil  s  Jiighcst  viark,  and  he  is  well  knoxvn  to  Jiave 

been  one  of  the  chief  of  the  Pnritan  brotherhood.     The  zuork  is  long; 

but  that  results  only  from  the  abundance  of  matter. 

5G5      CXIX— SANDERSON  (R.  B.,  Esq.,  B.A.)      Lord's  Day  Literature:    or, 
Jllustiations  of  the  Book  of  Psalms  from  the  Hundred  and  Nineteenth 
Tsahn  consecutively.     i2mo.     Loud.,  1842. 
We  cannot  call  this  an  exposition,  its  title  far  more  accurately  describes  it.     The 

autlior  takes  occasion  from  the  text  to  plead  for  those  points  of  doctrine  and  practice 

into  which  he  had  hcen  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.     He  was  an  eminently  conscientious 

man,  a  bold  believer,  and  a  Baptist. 

566  CXX.— CXXXIV.— ARMFIELD  (H.  T.,  M.A.      Vice-Prijicipal, 

Thcol.  Coll.,    Vicar  of  the  Close,  and  Minor  Canon  of  Sariim). 

The   Gradual   Psalms :    a   Treatise  on  the   Fifteen   Songs   of 

Degrees,  with  Commentary,  based  on  Ancient  Hebrew,  Chaldee, 

and  Christian  Authorities.     8vo.     Lond.,  J.  T.  Hayes.     1874. 

A  wonderfully  interesting  book  from  a  literary  point  of  view  ;  perhaps 

more  singular  than  profitable;  but  in  many  respects  a  publication  which 

we  should  have  been  sorry  to  have  missed.     The  homiletical  student 

will  not  be  able  to  make  much  use  of  it. 

567  CXX.— CXXXIV.— COX  (Samuel).   The  Pilgrim  Psalms; 

an  Exposition  of  the  Songs  of  Degrees.     8vo.     Lond., 

Daldy,  Isbister  &  Co.     1874. 
This  will  be  greatly  valued  by  intelligent  readers.    A  noble  series 
of  sermons  would  be  pretty  sure  to  grow  out  of  its  attentive  perusal. 
Mr.  S.  Cox  is  a  great  expositor. 

568  CXX.— CXXXIV.— LUTHER  (Martin).     See  No.  a^%. 

569  CXX.— CXXXIV.— M'MICHAEL(N., D.D.)  ThePilgrim 

Psalms.     Cr.  8vo.     Edinb.,  Oliphant.     i860.     S.  3/- 
A  capital  ivork,  full  of  sound  doetriiie perfumed  with  devotion. 

570  CXX.— CXXXIV.— NISBET  (Robert,   D.D.)      The  Songs  of 

the  Temple  Pilgrims.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1863. 
Dr.  Nisbet  regards  the  "  Songs  of  Degrees  as  affording  so  complete 
an  exhibition  of  the  phases  of  religious  sentiment,  as  to  make  these 
short  poems  a  transcript  of  the  feelings  of  the  whole  Church ;  a  miniature 
Bible  for  the  use  of  all."  He  has  expounded  in  this  spirit,  with  well- 
chosen  language,  and  produced  a  very  valuable  and  mstructive  book. 

571  CXXn.—WILLET  (Andrew).     In  JF/Z/t'/V  Harmonic  and  Exposition  of '.he 

Books  of  Samuel  there  is  "  a  brief  exposition  of  the  122  Psalm." 
IVilUt  ought  to  have  known  better  than  to  twist  a  psalm  to  the  honour  and  glory  of 
James  I.     As  a  learned  man  he  says  good  things,  and  as  a  courtier  foolish  things. 


SEPARATE  PSALMS— SOLOMON.  103 

572  CXXX.— HUTCHESON  (George).    Forty-five  Sermons 

Psalm  CXXX.     8vo.     Edinb.,  1691.     Scarce.     5/- 
We  have  already  advised  the  pnrchase  of  anything  and  every- 
thing by  Hutchesoii.     Be  sure  not  to  confound  this  witJi  Hntchi7ison. 

573  CXXX.— LEIGHTON  (Robert).    See  No.  529. 

574  CXXX.— OWEN  (John,  D.D.)     A  Practical  Exposition 

on  the  One  Hundred  and  Thirtieth  Psalm.  Lo7id.  4to. 
1669  and  1680.  R.  Tract  Society's  edition.  iSmo.  2/- 
One  of  the  best  known  and  most  esteemed  of  John  Ozven's  zvorks. 
It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  he  is  the  prince  of  divines.  To  master 
his  works  is  to  be  aprofound  theologian.  Owen  is  said  to  be  prolix, 
but  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that  he  is  condensed.  His  style  is 
heavy  because  he  gives  notes  of  what  he  might  have  said,  and  passes 
on  zvithout  fully  developing  the  great  thoiigJits  of  his  capacious  mind. 
He  requires  hard  study,  and  none  of  us  ought  to  grudge  it. 

575  CXXX.— SIBBES    (Richard,   D.D.)      The   Saints'    Comforts. 

i8mo.    1638.     Works,Vo\.N\.    Nichol's  Edition.    3/6  per  vol. 

Notes  on  five  verses  only.     Published  without  the  author's  sanction,  it 

is  incomplete,  but  very  full  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  considering  its  brevity. 

576  CXXX.— WINSLOW  (Octavius,  D.D.)     Soul-Depths  and  Soul- 

Heights  ;  an  Exposition  of  Psalm  CXXX.     Cr.  Svo.     Lo7id., 
J.  F.  Shaw.     1874. 
Not  very  deep  nor  very  high,  but  pleasant  spiritual  reading. 


BOOKS  OF  SOLOMON. 

577  KEIL  and  DELITZSCH'S  Commentaries.     Salomonic  Writings. 

3  vols.  [In  preparation],  10/6  each.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark. 

578  LANGE'S    Commentaries.      Proverbs,   Ecclesiastes,   and 

Song  of  Solomon.     By  Dr.   Otto  Zockler.      Imp.  Svo. 

21/-,  or  to  subscribers  15/-    Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1870. 

We  cannot  say  that  we  admire  Zockler  s  interpretation  of  the 

Song  of  Solofnon.     The  vohime  contains  much  that  we  do  not  like, 

but%s  value  is  considerable.     It  is  a  pity  thai  the  value  of  the 

volumes  in  this  series  varies  so  much. 

579  NOYES  (G.  R.,  D.D.)     A  Translation  of  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes, 

and  Canticles,  with  Notes,  &c.  i2mo.  Boston,  U.S.  1846. 
Of  Noyes  upon  Ecclesiastes,  Dr.  Hamilton  says  : — "  This  interpreta- 
tion is  clear  and  straightforward,  but  the  American  Professor  gives  to 
the  book  an  air  of  theological  tenuity  and  mere  worldly  wisdom  which 
carries  neither  our  conviction  nor  our  sympathy."  Noyes  is  a  good 
literary  expositor,  but  his  theological  views  render  him  a  very  poverty- 
stricken  commentator  from  a  spiritual  point  of  view. 


lOi  PROVERBS. 


PEOVERBS. 

550  ALLEN  (RonERT.     Puri/an).     Concordances  of  the  Proverbs  and  Ecclesiastcj 

4to.     1 61 2.     2/6. 
An  ordinary  concordance  will  answer  the  purpose  far  better;  but  the  wonderfully 
V  iso,  half-crazy  Cnidcn  had  not  compiled  his  invaluable  work  in  AlleiCs  days. 

551  ARNOT  (William,  D.D.    Died  I'^.jt,).    Laws  from  Heaven 

for  Life  on  Earth.  2  vols.,  cr.  8vo.  8,7/6.  1858.  Also 
I  vol.,  cr.  8vo.  ']j6.  £(//;il?.,  Nelson.  1869.  S.  5/- 
IVc  wish  Dr.  Arnot  had  gone  steadily  through  the  whole  book, 
for  his  mind  was  of  an  order  peculiarly  adapted  for  sueh  a  task. 
Those  passages  which  he  dilates  upon  are  set  in  a  clear  and  beautiful 
light.  For  a  happy  blending  of  illustrative  facility,  practical  sound 
sense,  and  spirituality,  Dr.  A  mot  zuas  almost  unrivalled. 

552  BRIDGES  (Charles,  M.A.)    An  Exposition.     2  vols., 

I2mo.     Lond.,  Seeleys.     1850.    S.  6/, 
The  best  work  on  the  Proverbs.      The  Scriptural  method  of  expo- 
sition so  zuell  carried  out  by  Bridges  renders  all  his  writings  very 
suggestive  to  ministers.      While  explaining  the  passage  in  hand,  he 
sets  other  portions  of  the  word  in  neiv  lights. 

583      BROOKS  (J.  W.,  M.A.)     A  New  Arrangement  of  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon. 
l2mo.     Loud.,  Sccleys.     i860,     i/- 
We  do  not  see  the  use  of  the  arrangement ;  but  those  who  want  the  Proverbs 
classified  have  the  work  done  for  them  here. 

554  CASE  (R.  J.)     A  Commentary.     i2mo.     Lond.,  1822.     S.  6d. 

The  Proverbs  themselves  are  plainer  than  this  author's  exposition  of  them. 

555  DAY  (William.     Fonncrly  Missionary  to  the  South  Seas).     A  Poetical  Com- 

mentary.   Svo.    14/-    Lond.,  Simpkin,  Marshall  &  Co.     1862.     S.  3/- 
The  author  says,  he  has  "  a  taste  for  building  rhymes,"  and  he  has  here  gratified  it. 
That  is  all  we  can  say  for  his  book. 

556  DELITZSCH  (Franz,  D.D.)    Biblical  Commentary.    Translated 

from  the  German,  by  ]\L  G.  Easton,  D.D.     Vol.  I.     [In  pro- 
gress.]    JE.dinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1875. 

557  DOD    (John.     Puritan.     Died  1645).     A  Plaine  and  Familial 

Exposition  of  Proverbs,  Chapters  IX.  to  XVII.  4to.  Lond., 
1608-9.  [The  comment  on  Chapters  XIll.  and  XIV.  appears 
to  have  been  the  work  of  Robert  Cleaver.  In  our  copy,  con- 
taining Chapters  XXVIIL— XXX.,  the  names  of  both  Dod  and 
Cleaver  dxt  given,  and  the  last  chapter  was  "  penned  by  a  Godly 
and  learned  man,  now  with  God."] 
Both  Dod  and  Cleaver  were  popular  as  preachers,  and  their  joint 
works  were  widely  circulated.    This  book  can  rarely  be  met  with  entire. 

58S     FRENCH  (W.,  D.D.)  and  (SKINNER,  G.,   M.A.)      A   New 

Translation,  with  Explanatory  Notes.    Svo.    Loud.,  1 83 1 .    S.  1/3. 

_  These  translators  endeavour  to  produce  faithful  renderings  of  the  text, 

giving  to   each  word  the  same  sense  in  all  places.     They  are  calm, 

dispassionate,  judicious,  and  able. 


PROVERBS.  105 

5S9      HODGSON  (Bernard,  LL.D.)    The  Proverbs  of  Solomon,  with  Notes.   4to, 
Oxf.,  1788.     2/6. 
Darling  SZ.Y5: — "  A  good  translation;  the  notes  are  chiefly  philological."     We  set 
no  store  by  this  mass  of  letter-press,  and  we  question  whether  any  one  else  does. 

590  HOLDEN  (George,  M.A.)     An  attempt  towards  an  improved  Translation, 

with  Notes,  &c.     Svo.     Liverpool,  18 19.    4/6. 
ZTi^rw^' says  of  this  work : — "It  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  helps  to  the  critical 
understanding  of  this  book."     It  is  certainly  one  of  the  best  of  Holden's  productions. 
We  may  be  wrong,  but  we  could  not  conscientiously  subscribe  to  Home's  opinion. 

591  JACOX   (Francis).     Scripture  Proverbs,  illustrated,  annotated, 

and  applied.  Thick  cr.  Svo.  10/6.  Loud.,  Hodder  &  Stoughton. 
1874.  S.  6/- 
This  work  illustrates  many  of  the  proverbs  scattered  throughout  the 
Scriptures,  and  some  of  those  collected  by  Solomon.  Mr.  Jacox  seems 
to  have  read  everything  good  and  bad,  and  hence  he  pours  forth  a 
medley  of  fact  and  fictior.  more  entertaining  than  edifying.  He  renrinds 
us  of  the  elder  Disraeli  and  his  "Curiosities  of  Literature." 

592  JERMIN  (Michael,  D.D.     Died  1659).  _  Paraphrastical  Medi- 

tations upon  the  Book  of  Proverbs.     Folio.     1638.     9/6. 
Very  antique,  and  full  of  Latin  quotations.    Jermin  does  not  err  in 
excessive  spirituality,  but  the  reverse.     Those  who  can  put  up  with  his 
style  will  be  repaid  by  his  quaint  learning. 

593  LANGE.     {See  No.  578.) 

594  LAWSON  (George,  D.D.      1749 — 1820).      Exposition   of  the 

Book  of  Proverbs.     2  vols.,  121110.     Edinb.  1^21.     6/- to  7/- 
A  thoroughly  sound  and  useful  commentary.     Lazvson  wrote  popu- 
larly and  vigorously. 

595  MILLER  (John.    Princefcn,  N.J.)    A  Commentary,  with  a  New  Translation, 

and  with  some  of  the  Original  Expositions  Re-examined.     Demy  Svo.     7/- 

Dickinson  &  Higham.  1S75. 
This  author's  interpretations  are  new,  and  in  our  judgment  very  far  removed  from 
accuracy.  Certainly  the  old  interpretations  are  better  in  many  ways.  His  theory  tlmt 
the  Proverbs  are  spiritual  and  not  secular  will  not  hold  water.  He  needs  reading  with 
very  great  discrimination  :  if  read  at  all.  "  Too  great  innovation  "  is  the  author's  own 
suspicion  of  his  work,  and  we  quite  agree  with  him,  only  we  go  beyond  mexe  suspicion. 

596  MUFFET  (Peter).      A  Commentary  on   the   whole   Book   of 

Proverbs.      Svo.     1596.     [Reprinted,  with  Cotton's  Commen- 
taries on   Ecclesiastes  and  Song  of  Solomon,  in  one  of  the 
volumes  of  Nichol's  series.    Cr.  4to.    7/6.  Z^//^.,  Nisbet.   1868.] 
Homely,  but  not  very  striking.     Mr.  Nichol's  choice  of  commentators 
for  reprinting  was  not  a  wise  one, 

597  NEWIM  AN  (William.,  D.D.    Formerly  Prcndent  of  Stepney  Theol.  Instihitioii). 

An  improved  version.     i8mo.     Lond.,  1839.     l/- 
Merely  the  corrected  text.     A  very  small  affair. 

598  NICHOLLS  (Benjamin  Elliott,  M.A.)    The  Book  of  Proverbs, 

explained  and  illustrated  from  Holy  Scripture.      i2mo.     Lond.^ 

Rivingtons.     1858.     1/3. 
Contains  very  sensible  suggestions  for  the  interpretation  of  proverbs, 
and  gives  instances  of  explanations  by  geography,  natural  history,  &c. 
It  is  a  somewhat  helpful  work. 


106  PROVERBS. 

599     NO  YES.     {See  No.  si  9) 

Ooo  STUART  (Moses).  A  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Proverbs. 
8vo.  New  York,  1852.  4/-  to  5/- 
We  have  not  met  with  any  Enghsh  reprint  of  tliis  useful  volume. 
Dr.  S(uari  purposely  adapted  his  work  to  beginners  in  Hebrew  study. 
He  has  set  himself  to  prepare  a  commentary  of  explanation  only, 
believing  that  a  hortatory  and  practical  comment  every  minister  ought 
to  be  able  to  make  for  himself.  Stuart's  introductory  matter  is  highly 
instructive,  though  no  reader  should  blindly  accept  it  all. 

601  TAYLOR  (Francis,  B.D.)     Observations  upon  the  three 

first  chapters  of  Proverbs.     4to.     Loud.,  1645. 

An  Exposition  [as  above]  upon  The  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9 
Chapters,  &c.     4to.     1657.     18/-  to  25/- 
T^vo  volumes  (in  one)  of  rich,  old-fashioned  Pnritan  divinity. 

602  THOMAS  (David,  D.D.)  The  Practical  Philosopher.   Thick  Svo. 

12/6  nett  (published  at  17/6).  Lond.,  Dickinson.  1873. 
Dr.  Thomas  of  the  "  Homilist "  is  a  well-known  writer,  and  a  man 
capable  of  great  things.  This  work  does  not  equal  his  "  Genius  of  the 
Gospel."  It  contains  a  large  amount  of  practical  comment,  written  in  a 
rather  grandiose  style.  We  can  hardly  fancy  men  of  business  reading 
this  book  from  day  to  day  as  the  author  proposes. 

603  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.D.)     Lectures.     3  vols.,  cr.  Svo. 

3/6  each.     Edinb.,  Fullarton.    1 86 1.     S.  6,6. 
Wardlaiu  is  diffuse,  and  his  vieivs  upon  "  ivisdoni  "  are  peculiar; 
but  he  akvays  repays  the  reader,  and  neither  Bridges  nor  A  mot  have 
rendered  him  obsolete,  for  he  works  a  different  vein,  and  expounds 
in  a  manner  peculiar  to  himself. 

604  WILCOCKS  (Thomas,     Puritan.     1549— 1608).     A  Short  yet 

Sound  Commentarie.     \_Works.     See  No.  2,z(>\ 
IVilcocks  briefly  sums  up  the  teaching  of  the  verses,  and  so  aids  in 
suggesting  topics ;  in  other  respects  he  is  rather  wearying. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


605  ANNOTATIONS  on  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.     [i2mo.]    Lend.  Vuni&i.\>y 

y.  Strcater.     1669. 
By  no  means  remarkable,  except  for  extreme  rarity. 

606  BEZA  (Theodore).      Ecclesiastes.      Solomon's  Sermon  to  the 

People,  with  an  Exposition.     Small  Svo.     Caw^.,  [1594].     7/6. 
Sure  to  be  weighty  and  instructive.     It  is  exceedingly  rare. 

607  BRIDGES  (Charles,  M.A.)    Exposition  of  Ecclesiastes. 

Sq.  Svo.     6/-    Lo7id.,  Seeley  &  Co.     i860.     S.  3/- 
After  the  manner  of  other  works  by  this  devout  author,  who  is 
akvays  worth  cofisulting,  though  he  gives  us  nothing  very  nezv. 


ECCLESIASTES.  107 

608  BROUGHTON    (Hugh.      1549— 1612).      A   Comment  upon   Ecclesiastes, 

framed  for  the  Instruction  of  Prince  Henry.     4to.      1605. 
Broiighton  was  a  far-famed  and  rather  pretentious  Hebraist  whom  Dr.  Gill  quoted 
as  an  authority.     His  work  is  nearly  obsolete,  but  its  loss  is  not  a  severe  one. 

609  BUCHANAN  (Robert,  D.D.)     Ecclesiastes ;  its  Mean- 

ing and  its  Lessons,  explained  and  illustrated.      Sq.  8vo. 

-jie.  Loud.,  Glasg.,  &  Edinb.,  Blackie  &  Sons.  1859.  S.  3/6. 

Dr.  Buchanan  has  endeavoured  in  every  instance  to  give  the  true 

meaning  of  the  text.    His  explanations  were  composed  for  the  pulpit 

and  delivered  there.     The  zvork  is  most  important,  but  strikes  us  as 

lacking  in  liveliness  of  style, 

610  CHOHELETH,  or  "The  Royal  Preacher,  a  Poem."     First  published  in  the 

year  1768.  4to.  3/-  Reprinted,  8vo.,  1830.  1/6. 
This  is  the  work  of  which  Mr.  Weshy  wrote  :— "Monday,  Feb.  8,  1768.  I  met 
with  a  surprising  poem,  intituled  Choheleth,  or  the  Preacher:  it  is  a  paraphrase  in 
tolerable  verse  on  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  I  really  think  the  author  of  it  (a  Turkey 
merchant)  understands  both  the  difficult  expressions  and  the  connection  of  the  whole, 
better  than  any  other,  either  ancient  or  modern,  writer  whom  I  have  seen."  We  defer 
to  Mi:  Wesley's  opinion,  but  it  would  not  have  occurred  to  us  to  commend  so  warmly. 

611  COLEMAN  (John  Noble,  M. A.)     Ecclesiastes.     A  New  Trans- 

lation, with  Notes.  Imp.  8vo.    5/-   Zf«^.,  Nisbet.   1867.  S.  2/6. 
A  scholarly  translation  with  important  observations. 

612  COTTON     (John.       1585—1652).      A   briefe  exposition,  with 

practical  observations.     Small  8vo.     Loud.,  1654.     [Reprinted 
in  Nichol's  series  of  Commentaries.     See  Muffet,  No.  596.] 
By  a  great  linguist  and  sound  divine.     Ecclesiastes  is  not  a  book  to 
be  expounded  verse  by  verse ;  but  Cotton  does  it  as  well  as  anyone. 

613  COX    (Samuel).     The   Quest  of  the  Chief  Good  :  Expository 

Lectures.     Sq.  8vo.     7/6.     Loud.,  Isbister.     1868.     S.  zld. 
We  should  find  it  hard  to  subscribe  to  Mr.  Cox's  views  of  Ecclesiastes, 
for,  to  begin  with,  we  cannot  admit  that  its  author  was  not  Solomon,  but 
some  unnamed  Rabbi :  nevertheless,  "  The  Quest  of  the  Chief  Good" 
is  full  of  valuable  matter,  and  abundantly  repays  perusal. 

614  DALE  (Thomas  Pelham,  M.A.)    Ecclesiastes.    With  a  running  Commentary 

and  Paraphrase.  8vo.  7/6.  Loml,  Rivingtons.  1873. 
This  author  makes  all  that  he  can  out  of  the  errors  of  the  Septuagint,  which  he 
seems  to  value  almost  as  much  as  the  corrett  text  itself.  The  new  translation  is  a 
sort  of  stilted  paraphrase,  which  in  a  remarkable  manner  darkens  the  meaning  of  the 
wise  man's  words.  Mr.  Dale  says  he  is  a  man  of  one  book,  and  we  are  glad  to  hear  it: 
for  we  should  be  sorry  for  another  book  to  suffer  at  his  hands. 

615  DESVOEUX  (A.  V.)     A  Philosophical  and  Critical  Essay  on  Ecclesiastes. 

4to.    Lotid.,  1760.     2/6. 
A  curious  and  elaborate  production.     Neither  in  criticism,  nor  in  theology,  is  the 
author  always  sound,  and  his  notes  are  a  very  ill-arranged  mass  of  singular  learning. 

616  GINSBURG  (Christian  D.)     Coheleth,  or  Ecclesiastes ;  trans- 

lated,  with  a  Commentary.  8vo.  Lo?id.,'Lor\gma.x\s.  1857.  S.  12/- 
The  author  does  not  believe  that  Solomon  wrote  the  book,  and  his 
view  of  its  design  is  not  the  usual,  nor,  as  we  think,  the  right  one.     His 
outline  of  the  literature  of  the  book  is  very  complete. 


ins  ECCLESIASTES. 

617     GRANGICR  (Thomas).      A    Familiar    Exposition,   wherein   the 
World's  Vanity  and  the  true   Felicitie  are   plainly  deciphered. 
4to.     Lond. ,  1G21.     5/- to  7/6. 
Very   antique,   containing  many  obsolete   and  coarse    phrases ;  but 

jiilhy  and  quaint. 

OiS      GREENAWAY  (Stephen).     New  Translation.    8vo.    Leicester,  17S1.    3/6. 
Confused,  eccentric,  and  happily  very  rare. 

619    HAMILTON  James,  D.D.   (1814-1867).  Royal  Preacher: 
Lectures  on   Ecclesiastcs.      Cr.  8vo.     3/6.     Also    i2mo., 
185 1 ;   i6mo.,  1854.      Zw/^/.,  Nisbet.     S.  1/6  to  2/6. 
IVc  Jiave  had  a  great  treat  in  reading  tins  prose  poem.     It  is  a 

cJiarDiing  production. 

O20    HENGSTENBERG    (E.   W.,    D.D.)      Commentary   on 

Ecclcsiastes.     To  which  are  appended  :  Treatises  on  the 

Song  of  Solomon  ;  on  the  Book  of  Job  ;  on  the  Prophet 

Isaiah,  &c.   8vo.    g/-  Edind.,  T.  8c  T.Clark,    i860.    S.4/6. 

Scholarly  of  course,  and  also  more  vivacioics  than  is  tisnal  with 

Ilengstenberg. 

•621      HODGSON  (Bernard,  LL.D  )     New  Translation.    4to.     Ox/.,  1791.     4/- 
Notes  neither  long,  numerous,  nor  valuable. 

■622  HOLDEN  (George,  M.A.)  An  Attempt  to  illustrate  the  Book 
of  Ecclcsiastes.  8vo.  Loud.,  1822.  2)\^. 
Bridges  says  that  JJolden  "  stands  foremost  for  accuracy  of  critical 
•exegesis,"  and  G^/;;i-/v^r^  considers  his  Commentary  to  be  the  best  in  our 
language.  We  may  therefore  be  wrong  in  setting  so  little  store  by  it  as 
-vve  do,  but  we  are  not  convinced. 

Ciz     JERMIN  (Michael,  D.D.)     Ecclcsiastes.     Folio.     1639.     6/6. 
The  school  to  which  yennin  belonged  delighted  to  display  their 
learning,  of  which  they  had  no  small  share  ;  they  excelled  in  wise 
sayings,  but  not  in  unction.     The  fruit  is  ripe,  but  lacks  flavour. 

624     KEIL  «&  DELITZSCH.    {S^^  Books  of  Solomon.  No.  577.) 

O25     LANGE.     {See  Books  of  Solomon.     No.    578.) 

626  LLOYD  (J.,  M.A.)     An  Analysis  of  Ecclcsiastes  :  with  reference 

to  the  Hebrew  Grammar  of  Gesenius,  and  with  Notes  ;  to  which 

is  added  the  Book  of  Ecclcsiastes,  in  Hebrew  and  English,  in 

parallel  columns.     4to.     7/6.     Land.,  Bagsters.     1874. 

This  will  be  esteemed  by  men  who  have  some  knowledge  of  the 

Hebrew.     The  repeated  references  to  Gesenius  would  render  the  book 

tedious  to  the  ordinary  reader,  but  they  make  it  all  the  more  valuable 

to  one  who  aspires  to  be  a  Hebraist. 

627  [LUTHER].     An  Exposition  of  Salomon's  Booke,  called  Ecclc- 

siastes, or  the  Preacher.     8vo.     Printed  by  J.  Da)'.    Lend..,  1573. 
Even  the  British  Museum  authorities  have  been  unable  to  find  this 
octavo  for  us,  though  it  is  mentioned  in  their  catalogue. 


ECCLESIASTES.  109 

628  MACDONALD    (James    M.,    D.D.      Princeton,    N.   y.) 

Ecclesiastes.    Thick  i2mo.    New  York.    1856.    S.  4/6. 
ThorongJdy  exegetical,  tuith  excellent  "scopes  of  argument"  fol- 
lozving  each  division  :  to  be  piircJiased  if  it  can  be  met  zvit/i. 

629  MORGAN    (A.  A.)      Ecclesiastes  metrically  Paraphrased,   with 

Illustrations.     4to.     21/-     Land.,  Bosworth.     1856. 
This  is  an  article  deluxe,  and  is  rather  for  the  drawing-room  than  for 
the  study.     A  graphic  pencil,   first-class  typography,   and  a  carefully 
written  metrical  translation  make  up  an  elegant  work  of  art. 

630  MYLNE  (G.  W.)     Ecclesiastes  ;  or,  Lessons  for  the  Christian's- 

Daily  Walk.     i6mo.     Land.,  1859.     1/6. 
The  author  in  this  little  publication  does  not  comment  upon  the- 
•\vhole  Book ;  but  the  passages  he  touches  are  ably  explained. 

631  NISBET  (Alexander.     Died  about  xd^'S).     An  Exposition,  with. 

Practical  Observations.     4to.    Edinb.,  1694.     4/6  to  10/6. 
One  of  those  solid  works  which  learned  Scotch  divines  of  the  seven 
teenth  century  have  left  us  in  considerable  numbers.     In  our  judgment 
it  is  as  heavy  as  it  is  weighty. 

632  NOYES.     (^^^A^^.  579). 

633  PEMBLE  (William,  M.A     1591 — 1623).     Salomon's  Recanta- 

tion and  Repentance  ;  or,  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  briefly  and 
fully  explained.  Thin  4to.  Lend.,  1628.  3/6. 
Anthony  d  Wood  calls  Pemble  "  a  famous  preacher,  a  skilful  linguist, 
a  good  orator,  and  an  ornament  to  society."  Moreover,  he  was  a  learned 
Calvinistic  divine.  This  "  Recantation  "  is  a  minor  production.  The 
style  is  scholastic,  Avith  arrangements  of  the  subjects  such  as  render  it 
hard  to  read.     We  confess  we  are  disappointed  with  it. 

634  PRESTON  (Theodore,  M.A.)    A  translation  of  the  Commentary 

of   Mendelssohn  from  the  Rabbinic  Hebrew ;  also  a  newly- 
arranged  English  Version.     8vo.    Loud.,  1845.     5/- 
A  book  more  prized  by  linguists  than  by  preachers.     We  might  with 
propriety  have  named  this  Mendelssohti s  Commentary,  for  so  it  is. 

635  PROBY  (W.  H.  B.,  M.A.)     Ecclesiastes  for  English  Readers.     Thin  8vo. 

4/6.  Lotid.,  Rivingtons.  1S74.  S.  2/3. 
About  45  pages,  and  these  are  quite  enough.  What  has  come  to  a  man's  brain 
viien  he  prophecies  that  Antichrist  will  take  away  the  daily  sacrifice,  that  is,  "forbid 
tlie  eucharistic  bread  and  wine,"  and  then  adds:  "To  this  awful  time  there  is  probably 
a  mystical  reference  in  the  words  of  our  present  book  (XII.  6),  'While  the  silver  cord 
is  not  loosed,  or  the  golden  bowl  broken,  or  the  pitcher  broken  at  the  fountain,  or  the 
wheel  broken  at  the  cistern.'  For  silver  and  gold  signify  respectively,  in  the  symbolic 
language  of  Scripture,  love  and  truth  :  thus  the  loosening  of  the  silver  cord  will  mean 
the  love  of  many  waxing  cold,  and  the  breaking  of  the  golden  bowl  will  mean  the 
failure  of  truth  from  the  earth  ;  and  we  understand,  then,  that  in  the  last  awful  time 
there  will  be  no  longer  any  speaking  of  the  truth  in  love.  And  as  the  'wells  of  salva- 
tion' in  Isaiah  XII.  3,  are  the  sacraments  and  other  means  of  grace,  so  the  breaking 
of  the  pitcher  and  -the  wheel  may  signify  the  cessation  of  those  ministries  by  which 
the  sacraments  and  other  means  of  grace  are  dispensed." 


110  ECCLESIASTES. 

636     REYNOT-DS  (Edward,  D.D.    Bis/iop  of  Noncich.    1599— 1676). 
Annotations.      ]Vorks.    Vol,  IV.    8vo.  Lo/id.,  1826.  Reprinted, 
by  Dr.  Washburn.     Svo.     Lond.,  \Z\\.     2/6. 
See  Westminster  Assembly's  Annotations  {No.  2),  for  which  Reynolds 
wrote  this  :  he  is  always  good. 

C37      SERRANUS,   or,    DE  SERRES    (John.       1540- 1598).      A   Godlic  and 

Lcaincd   Conimciitaiy  upon  Ecclesiastcs,    newly  turned  into  English,  by 

John  Slockwood,  Schoolmaster  of  Tunbridge.     Svo.     Z<?«rt'.,  1585.     7/6. 

Scrranus  was  a  Protestant  pastor  at  Nismes,  of  such  moderate  opinions,  and  siich 

objectionable  modes  of  stating  them,  that  he  was  about  equally  abhorred  by  Romanists 

and  Protestants.     He  is  said  to  have  been  very  inaccurate  in  his  learning. 

O3S    STUART    (Moses).      A   Commentary   on   Ecclesiastcs. 
1 2 mo.     6/-     NrcuYork.,l^^\.     S.  3/- 
Fiill  and  minute,  with  most   instrnctive  introductions.      It  is 
unnecessary  to  say  that  Moses  Stuart  is  a  great  authority,  tJiough 
not  all  zve  could  wish  as  to  spirituality. 

•639  TYLER  (Thomas,  M.  A.)  Ecclesiastcs;  a  Contribution  to  its  Interpretation. 
Svo.  7/6.  Lond.,  Williams  &  Norgate.  1875. 
This  writer  is  no  doubt  a  profound  thinker,  but  we  do  not  set  much  store  by  the 
result  of  his  thinkings.  lie  maintains  that  the  writer  of  Ecclesiastcs  was  a  Jew  who 
had  travelled  abroad,  and  heard  the  Stoic  philosophers  and  their  opponents  at 
Athens.  Pie  seems  to  think  that  his  point  is  proved,  but  it  is  the  merest  surmise 
possible.     The  work  is  not  at  all  to  our  taste. 

640  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.D.)     Lectures  on  Ecclesiastes. 

2  vols.,  Svo.  1821.    2vols.,  l2mo.  1838.    Oliphant  &  Co.'s 
edition,  in  I  vol.,  8/6.     1871.     S.  4/6. 
IVardlaw  is  ahvays  good,  though  not  very  brilliant.     He  may  be 
relied  upon,  when  not  critical,  and  he  generally  excites  thought. 

64 1  WEISS   (Benjamin).      New   Translation   and  Exposition,  with 

Critical  Notes.    i2mo.    4/-  Land.,  Nisbet  &  Co.    1856.    S.  1/6. 
It  is  pleasing  to  find  a  converted  Jew  engaged  upon  this  Book.     Mr. 
Weiss  says  many  good  things,   but  frequently  his  interpretations  and 
remarks  are  more  singular  than  wise. 

642  YCARD  (Fr.     Dean  of  Achonry).     Paraphrase.    Svo.     Lond.,  1701.     1/6. 
The  dean  supposes  the  Royal  Preacher  to  have  been  interrupted  by  an  impudent 

sensualist,  and  so  he  gets  rid  of  the  difficulty  of  certain  passages  by  putting  them  into 
the  scoffer's  mouth.     The  theory  is  not  to  be  tolerated  for  a  moment. 

^43  YOUNG  (Loyal,  D.D.)  Commentary,  with  introductory 
Notices  by  McGill  and  Jacobus.  8vo.  Philadelphia,  1^6$. 
This  American  comment  is  highly  spoken  of  by  eminent  judges, 
wid  appears  to  have  been  carefully  executed.  It  is  able  and  solid, 
£ind  at  the  same  time  enlivened  with  originality  of  thought,  vivacity 
of  expression,  and  practical  pimgency. 

644  SMITH  (John,  M.D.,  M.R.C.P.L.)  King  Solomon's  Portraiture 
of  Old  Age,  wherein  is  contained  A  Sacred  Anatomy  both  of 
Soul  and  Body,  with  an  account   of  all  these  Mystical  and 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  '  111 

Enigmatical  Symptomes,  expressed  in  the  six  former  verses  of 

the  1 2th  Chap,  of  Ecclesiastes,  made  plain  and  easie  to  a  mean 

Capacitie.     8vo.     Lond.,  1666.     2/6  to  5/- 

A  curious  book  by  a  Physician,  who  brings  his  anatomical  knowledge 

to  bear  upon  the  twelfth  chapter  of  Ecclesiastes,  and  tries  to  show  that 

Solomon  understood  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  &c.     Matthew  Poole 

introduced  the  substance  of  this  treatise  into  his  Synopsis,  and  in  that 

huge  compilation  he  speaks  eulogistically  of  the  author,  with  whom  he 

resided.     We  mention  it  because  of  its  singularity. 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

645  AINSWORTH.     (See  under  Pentateuch,  No.  72). 

646  AVRILLON  (John  Baptist  Elias.     1652— 1729).      The  Year 

of  Affections ;  or,  Sentiments  on  the  love  of  God,  drawn  from 

the   Canticles,  for  every  day  of  the  year.     Fcap.   8vo.     6/6. 

Lond.  and  Oxf.,  Parker  &  Co.     1847.     S.  4/- 

One  of  the  series  of  Romish  authors,  issued  by  Dr.  Pusey.      It  is  a 

deeply  spiritual  work,  after  the  manner  of  the  mystics.     It  might  have 

been  written  by  Madame  Guyon.      Despite  its  occasional  Popery  and 

sacramentarianism,  it  contains  much  choice  devotional  matter. 

647  BEZA  (Theodore).     Sermons  upon  the  three  first  chap- 

ters of  Canticles,  translated  out  of  the  French,  by  John 

Harmar.  4to.  Oxf.,  1587. 
These  thirty-one  sermons  are  a  well  of  instruction,  very  precious 
and  refreshing.  The  unabbreviated  title  indicates  a  controversial 
use  of  the  Song,  and  we  zvere  therefore  prepared  to  lament  the 
invasion  of  the  doves  nest  of  the  Canticles  by  the  eagle  of  debate; 
hit  we  were  agreeably  disappointed,  for  we  found  much  less  of 
argument,  and  much  more  of  the  Well- Beloved,  than  we  looked  for. 

648  BEVERLEY  (T.)     An  Exposition  of  the  Divinely  prophetick  Song  of  Songs, 

which  is  Solomon's  ;  beginning  with  the  reign  of  David,  and  ending  in  the 

glorious  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     4to.      1687.      5/- 

This  maundering  author  finds  in  Canticles  the  history  of  the  church  from  David  to 

our   Lord,   and  rhymes  no  end  of  rubbish  thereon.     Truly  there  is  no  end  to  the 

foolishness  of  expositors.     We  suppose  there  must  be  a  public  for  which  they  cater, 

and  a  very  foolish  public  it  must  be. 

649  BRIGHTMAN  (Thomas).     A  Commentary  on  the  Canticles,  wherein  the 

Text  is  Analised,  the  Native  Signification  of  the  Words  Declared,   the 

Allegories   Explained,    and   the   Order  of  Times  whereunto   they   relate 

Observed.     4to.     Z^«</.,  1644.     [See  under  i?a«zV/ and  iPis^-f/fl/ww.] 

Brightman  was  a  writer  of  high  renown  among  the  prophetic  students  of  the 

seventeenth  century.     With  singular  strength  of  the  visionary  faculties  he  sees  in  the 

Canticles  ' '  the  whole  condition  of  the  church  from  the  time  of  David,  till  time  shall 

be  no  mere."     Expounding  on  this  theory  needs  an  acrobatic  imagination. 


112  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

650  BURRO  WES    (Gi:«jR(;i:.       Prof.    Lafaydtc    Coll.    U.S.) 

Commentary.  Cr.  Svo.  Philadelphia,  1853.  3/^- 
Mr.  Moody  Slnarl  says : — "  The  excellent  zvork  of  Dr.  Burroivcs 
is  specially  fitted  to  retnove  the  prejudices  of  men  of  taste  against  the 
Song  of  Solomon,  as  the  medium  of  spiritual  communion  betzueen 
the  sold  and  Christ.  We  zcelcome  it  as  a  valuable  contributiGU  to 
us  from  our  transatlantic  brethren!' 

651  BUSH  (Joseph,  M.A.)     The  Canticles  of  the  Song  of  Solomon. 

A  Metrical  Paraphrase,  with   Explanatory  Notes  and  Practical 
Comments.     Post  Svo.     Lond.,  Hatchards.     1867.     S.  1/6. 
A  good  compilation,  with  a  helpful  translation.     For  popular  use. 

652  CLAPHAM  (Enoch).     Salomon;  his  Songs  expounckl.     4to.     LonJ. ,  iSoy 
Claphani  was  a  voluminous  author  of  very  remarkable  attainments.     He  wrote  also 

on  the  first  fourteen  chapters  of  Genesis.     This  work  is  rare  as  angels'  visits. 

653  COLLINGES  (John,   D.D.      1623— 1690).      The    Inter- 

courses of  Divine  Love  betwixt  Christ  and  his  Church, 

metaphorically  expressed  by  Solomon  in  Canticles  I.  and 

II.     2  vols.,  4to.    Lond.,  1676.     lo/-  to  14/- 

Nine  hundred  and  nine  quarto  pages  upon  one  chapter  is  moi'e 

than   enough.      The   materials   are  gathered  from   many  sources 

and  make  up  a  mass  of  zvealth.     On  the  second  chapter  there  are 

five  hundred  and  thirty  pages.     It  zvould  try  the  constitutions  of 

many  modern  divines  to  read  zvhat  these  Puritans  found  it  a 

pleasure  to  write.      When  shall  we  see  their  like  ? 

654  COTTON  (John,    B.D.      1585—1652).      A  Brief  Exposition,  describing  the 

estate  of  the   Church  in  all  ages  thereof,  both  Jewish  and  Christian,   and 
modestly  pointing  at  the  gloriousness  of  the  restored  estate  thereof.     Svo. 
Lond.,  1642.     [Reprinted  in  Nichol's  Series.     See  Miiffet,  N'o.  596.] 
Cotton  explains  the  sacred  love-song  historically,  and  misses  much  of  its  sweetness 

by  so  doing.     We  should  never  care  to  read  his  exposition  while  Durham,  and  Gill, 

and  Moody  Stuart  are  to  be  had. 

65s     DAVIDSON  (William,  Esq.)     A  Brief  outline  of  an  Examina- 
tion of  the  Song  of  Solomon.     Svo.     Lond.,  1817.     2/-  to  2)l'^- 
A  precious  work  by  one  whose  heart  is  warm  with  the  good  matter. 
He  sees  in  the  Song  the  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

656  DOVE  (John,  D.D.)     The  Conversion  of  Solomon,  a  Direction  to  holiness  of 

Life  ;  handled  by  way  of  Commentarie  upon  the  whole  Booke  of  Canticles. 
Profitable  for  young  men  which  are  not  yet  mortified,  for  old  men  which  are 
decrepit  and  have  one  foote  in  the  grave,  and  for  all  sorts  of  men  which  have 
an  intent  to  renounce  the  vanities  of  this  world,  and  to  follow  Jesus  Christ. 
4to.  Lond.,  1613.  6/-  to  8/- 
A  quaint  old  work.  The  student  will  do  better  with  the  moderns.  Moreover,  this 
Doz'c  is  rare,  and  seldom  lights  on  poor  men's  shelves. 

657  DURHAM  (James.     1622 — 1658).      Clavis  Cantici ;    or, 

an   Exposition  of  the  Song  of  Solomon.     4to,     Lond., 

1668  and  1723.     Also  i2mo.,  Aberdeen.  1840.     2/6  to  6/- 

Durham  is  always  good,  and  he  is  at  his  best  upon  the  Canticles. 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  113 

He  gives  iis  tJie  essence  of  the  good  matter.     For  practical  7isc  tJiis 
zvork  is  perhaps  more  valuable  tJian  any  other  Key  to  the  Song. 

658  FENNER  (Dudley).     The  Song  of  Solomon,  in  Vevse,  with  an  Exposition. 

Middh-burgh.     8vo.     1587.     4to. 
Mocdy  Stiiai't  says  : — "This  is  a  faithful  and  excellent  translation,  accompanied  by 
an  admirable  exposition.     There  is  no  poetry  in  it,  but  the  renderings  are  often  good, 
and  the  comment  valuable. "     We  have  not  met  with  it. 

659  FLEMING  (Robert.     Died  1716).     The  Mirrour  of  Divine  Love  mivail'd, 

in  a  Poetical  Paraphrase  of  the  Song  of  Solomon.  Sm.  8vo.  1691.  3/6. 
The  poetry  is  after  the  same  manner  as  that  of  Quarks^  and  though  not  without 
merit,  it  is  too  antiquated  to  be  admired  in  the  present  day.  This  is  the  Fleming  who 
interpreted  the  Apocalyptic  vials,  and  was  fortunate  enough  to  hit  upon  the  date  of  the 
French  revolution  and  other  events  connected  with  the  decline  of  the  Papal  power. 
His  prophetic  work  has  been  reprinted,  but  not  this  limping  poetry. 

660  FRANCIS  (Ann.     Died  rSoo).     A  Poetical  Translation;  with  Notes,  Plis- 

torical,  Critical,  and  Explanatory.    4to.     Land.,  \1%l.     1/6  to  2/6. 
Framed  on  a  fanciful  theory.     Verses  flowing  and  feeble.     Insignificant. 

661  FRY  (John,  A.B.)    New  Translation,  with  Notes,  and  an  attempt 

to  interpret  the  sacred  allegories.  8vo.    Lo7id.,  \Z\\.    2/- to  3/- 

Fry's  work  may  be  called  the  supplement  and  complement  of  Dr. 

Good's.     He  divides  the  Songs  into  idyls,  and  gives  notes  in  the  same 

manner  as  Good;  but  he  also  plunges  into  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the 

blessed  Song,  and  so  far  is  to  be  preferred. 

662  GIFFORD  (Mr.)   A  Dissertation  on  the  Song  of  Solomon.   8vo.    Lond^i'ji^x. 
Worthless  rhymes.     This  man  dares  to  say  that  the  Song  is  a  pastoral,  composed 

by  Solomon  for  the  amusement  of  his  lighter  hours,  before  God  had  given  him  the 
divine  wisdom  for  which  he  was  afterwards  so  eminent. 

663  GILL    (John,    D.D.)      An   Exposition   of  the   Book   of 

Solomon's  Song.   Folio.    Lond.,  1728.   5/-   Not  contained 
in  the  author's  Exposition  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment.    An  8vo.  edition  was  published  by  Collingridge, 
Lond.,  1854.     S.  3/6. 
The  best  thing  Gill  ever  did.     He  could  not  exhaust  his  theme, 
hit  he  zvent  as  far  as  he  could  tozvards  so  doing.    He  is  occasionally 
fanciful,  but  his  work  is  precious.     Those  who  despise  it  have  never 
read  it,  or  ai'e  incapable  of  elevated  spiritual  feelings. 

664  GINSBURG     (Christian    D.)        A    Translation,    with    a    Commentary,. 

Historical  and  Critical.  Svo.  lo/-  Lond.,  Longmans.  1857.  5/-  to  6/- 
Written  upon  an  untenable  theory,  viz.,  that  the  Song  is  intended  "to  record  an 
example  of  virtue  in  a  young  woman,  who  encountered  and  conquered  the  greatest 
temptations,  and  was  eventually  rewarded."  This  grovelling  interpretation  needed  the 
aid  of  great  liberties  with  the  text,  and  a  kv^'  interpolations,  and  the  author  has  not 
hesitated  to  use  them.  However  learned  the  book  may  be,  this  vicious  theory 
neutralizes  all. 

665  GOOD    (John   Mason,    M.D.,    F.R.S.)      Song  of  Songs;    or,   Sacred   Idyls- 

translated;   with  Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory.    Svo.    Lond,  1803.    4/- 
By  a  man  of  great  learning.     It  is   not  at   all  spiritual,  or  even  expository,  in  the 
theological  sense,  but  treats  the  Canticles  as  an  Oriental  drama,  explaining  its  scenery 
and  metaphors  from  a  literary  point  of  view. 


Ill  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

666  GREEN   (William,  M.A.)     Song  of  Solomon.     In  " The  Poclical  Parts  of 

the  Old  Testament  transLited,  with  Notes."     4to.      1781. 
Critic.il  only.     Crw/^says,  "the  translations  are  in  general  veiy  accurate  and  elegant 
specimens  of  biblical  interpretation." 

667  GUILD    (William,    D.D.      1586— 1657).      Love's    Intercourse 

between  the  Lamb  and  his  Lride.    8vo.    Loud.,  1658.    5/-  to  7/- 
A  rare  old  work  :  but  we  prefer  Durham.     The  author  was  one  of 
the  better  sort  of  the  Scotch  Episcopahans. 

068  GYFFARD  (George).  Fifteen  Sermons  upon  the  Song  of 
Solomon.  Svo.  1598  to  161 2. 
We  have  several  times  met  with  this  writer's  name  coupled  with  that 
of  Bright  man  as  in  his  day  regarded  as  a  very  learned  writer,  but  we 
cannot  procure  his  work.  Possibly  some  reader  of  this  Catalogue  m.ay 
yet  present  us  with  it.  We  beg  to  assure  him  of  the  gratitude  which  we 
already  feel,  in  the  form  of  "a  lively  sense  of  favours  to  come." 

669  HARMER  (Thomas.     1715— 1788).     Outlines  of  a  New  Com- 

mentary on  Solomon's  Song,  drawn  by  the  help  of  instructions 
from  the  East.     Svo.     Loud.,  1768.     1/6  to  2/6, 
"  This  book  is  not  well  arranged,  but  is  otherwise  one  of  the  most 
ingenious,  modest,  and  interesting  of  all  the  treatises  on  the  outward 
sense  of  the  Song." — Moody  Stuart. 

670  HENGSTENBERG.     (See  under  Ecclcsiastcs,  No.  620.) 

671  HODGSON  (Bernard,  LL.D.)    Solomon's  Song  translated  from 

the  Hebrew.  4to.  Ox/.,  1786.  2/6. 
Moody  Stuart  says  that  this  is  "  a  good  translation,"  and  therefore 
we  suppose  it  is  so,  but  we  do  not  admire  it.  It  does  not  even  refer  to 
the  mystical  sense,  and  it  mars  the  poetry  of  the  Song.  Dr.  Hodgson 
renders  ch.  vi.  ver.  9: — "  My  pigeon,  my  undefiled  is  but  one."  This  is 
an  alteration,  but  certainly  not  an  emendation.  The  name  of  the  bride's 
mother  he  discovers  to  have  been  Talmadni.     Wonderful ! 

672  HOMES    (Nathaniel.     Died  1678).      A  Commentary  on  the 

Canticles.      IVorhs.     Folio.     1652.     6/-  to  10/- 
This  goes  to  the  very  marrow  of  spiritual  teaching,  and  uses  every 
■word  and  syllable  in  a  deeply  experimental  manner  with  great  unction 
and  power.     Homes,  however,  spiritualizes  too  much,  and  is  both  too 
luscious  in  expression  and  too  prolix  for  these  degenerate  days. 

673  HOUGHTON    (Wm.)     Translation.     Svo.     2/6.     Lo>id.,  Triibner.     1865. 
Useless.     The  Song  is  viewed  as  a  secular  poem  on  chaste  love. 

674  IBN    EZRA    (Abraham).      Commentary  on  the    Canticles,    after   the   first 

recension.     Edited  from  two  MSS.,  with  a  Translation,  by  H.  J.  Matthews, 
B.A.     i2mo.     Lo)id.,  Triibner  &  Co.     1874. 
The  original  Hebrew  of  the  Song,  with  a  Jewish  comment,  which  conveys  but  little 
instruction.     In  this  small  book  the  student  will  have  a  specimen  of  Jewish  exposition. 

675  IRONS  (Joseph,  (7/Gr;//<^rrw^//.    1786— 1852).    Nymphas. 

A  Paraphrastic  Exposition.     i6mo.     Z^;/<;/.,  1844.    S.  1/6. 
Outside  of  his  own  circle  we  fear  that  this  zvork  by  the  late 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  115 

jfoseph  Irons  is  little  knotvn.  It  is  a  parapJirase  in  blank  verse, 
rendered  in  a  very  spiritual  niamier.  We  confess  that  zve  look  upon 
the  little  book  tvith  admiring  eyes,  thong Jl  ive  know  that  the  critics 
will  sneer  both  at  us  and  it. 

676  KEIL  &  DELITZSCH.     {SteBooksofSolomon,No.^77.) 

677  KRUMMACHER  (F.  W.,  D.D.)     Solomon  and  the  Shulamite. 

Sermons  on  the  Book  of  Canticles.     i6mo.    Zond.,i2>2,^.    S.  i/- 
Touches  only  upon  a  few  portions.     Short  and  sweet. 

678  LANGE.     {S&&  Books  of  Solomon,  No.  sy'i) 

679  LITTLEDALE  (R.  F.)     A  Commentary.     From  Ancient  and 

Mediaeval  Sources.  i2mo.  7/-  Z^«^.,  J. Masters.  1869.  S.  4/6. 
Littledale  is  a  close  follower  of  yohn  Mason  Neale,  and  here  repro- 
duces the  beauties  and  the  deformities  of  mediaeval  spiritualizing. 
Great  judgment  will  be  needed  to  extract  the  good  and  true  from  the 
mass  of  semi-popish  comment  here  heaped  together.  If  discretion 
be  used,  jewels  of  silver  and  jewels  of  gold  may  be  extracted. 

680  MACP  HERSON  (Peter,  A.M.)    The  Song  of  Songs  shown  to  be  constructed 

on  Architectural  Principles.     Post  8vo.     Edinb.,  1856.     4/- 
"His  supposition  that  this  song  consists  of  verses  written  round  an  archway,  is  so 
entirely  gratuitous,  that  it  is  only  misguiding  and  deceptive." — A.  Moody  Stuart. 

681  METRICAL  MEDITATIONS  on  the  Canticles.   [Anon.] 

i6mo.     Lond.,  Wertheim.     1856.     S.  i/- 
Exceedingly  well  rendered :  noteworthy  both  from  a  literary  and 
religions  point  of  view.     The  author  seizes  the  meaimig  of  the  Song, 
and  repeats  it  in  well-chose7i  words. 

682  MILLER  (Andrew).    Meditations.    i2mo.    1/6.    Lofid.,yioxx\%\\. 
First  published  in  the  Plymouthite  magazine,  "Things  New  and  Old." 

Devotional,  and  glowing  with  the  light  of  fellowship  with  Jesus. 

683  MOORE  (Daniel,  M.A.)      Christ  and   his  Church.      A 

Course  of  Lent  Lectures  on  the  Song  of  Solomon.     Sm. 
or.  8vo.     3/6.     Lond.,  H.  S.  King  &  Co.     1875. 
These  lectures  treat  upon  the  first  chapter  only,  bnt  they  do  so  in 
an  admirable  manner.     Moore  has  evangelized  Littledale. 

684  [NEALE   (John  Mason,   D.D.)]      Sermons   on    the  Canticles, 

preached  in  a  Religious  House.  By  a  Priest  of  the  Church  of 
England.  i2mo.  Land.,  Masters,  1857.  S.  2/6. 
By  that  highest  of  high  churchmen,  Dr.  Neale.  These  sermons  smell 
of  Popery,  yet  the  savour  of  our  Lord's  good  ointment  cannot  be  hid. 
Our  Protestantism  is  not  of  so  questionable  a  character  that  we  are 
afraid  to  do  justice  to  Papists  and  Anglicans,  and  therefore  we  do  not 
hesitate  to  say  that  many  a  devout  thought  has  come  to  us  while  reading 
these  "  sermons  by  a  Priest  of  the  Church  of  England." 


11 G  SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

655  NI-IU'TON  (Adki.aii)!':  L.)     Tlic  Song  of  Solomon  compared  with 

other  parts  of  Scripture.     Cr,  8vo.     3/6.     Z^w^.,  Nisbet.     1871. 

['i'lie  earlier  editions  were  published  anonymously.] 
^fiss  A^n(i/()//'s  book  is  very  dear  to  spiritual  minds  ;  it  is  full  of  that 
quiet  power  which  comes  from  the  Spirit  of  God  through  deep  experience 
and  precious  fellowship  with  the  Well-Ueloved. 

656  NOYICS.     (St-e  M>.  S79-) 

This  author  sees  in  the  Canticles  nothing  but  a  collection  of  amatory 
songs,  written  without  e.xpress  moral  or  religious  design.     Blind  ! 

657  PERCY  (Thomas,  D.D.     Bishop  of  Dromore.     1729— 1811).     New  Transla- 

tion: with  a  Commentary  ami  Annotations.  [Anon.]   8vo.    Load.,  l-jbi^.   6/- 
Ilis  theory  of  the  sacred  Song  is  dead,  and  not  wortliy  of  a  monument  in  our  pages. 
\Vc  trust  that  not  a  relic  will  remain.     J^iry  did  very  well  with  his  ballads,  but  he  had 
better  have  let  the  Song  of  Songs  alone. 

688  POAVER    (Philip    Bennet,    M.A.)       Failure    and   Discipline: 

Thoughts  on  Canticles  V.     i6mo.     1/6     Loud.,  Wertheim. 
Upon  the  fifth  chapter  only.     Mr.  Power  always  writes  attractively. 
His  book  is  "  linked  sweetness,"  but  not  "  long  drawn  out." 

689  REFLECTIONS  ON  CANTICLES  ;  or,  the  Song  of  Solomon, 

with     Illustrations    from    IModern    Travellers   and    Naturalists, 
[Anon.]     i2mo.     Loud.,  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.     1870.   S.  1/3, 
Has  much  sweetness,  and  a  fair  measure  of  freshness. 

690  ROBOTHAM  (John).    Exposition.    4to.    Loud,  16^2.    6/-to8/- 
Very  solid;  but  not  to  be  compared  with  Diir/mfn,  No.  657.      It  is 

just  a  little  dull  and  commonplace. 

691  ROMAINE  (William,  M.A.)     Discourses  upon  Solomon's  Song. 

8vo.     Lond.,  1789.     2/6. 
Twelve  excellent  sermons  from  verses  taken  out  of  the  Song.     They 
do  not  summarize  the  book,  nor  form  a  commentary,  but  are  simply  a 
selection  of  spiritual  discourses  by  one  of  the  most  eminent  Calvinistic 
divines  of  the  last  century. 

692  SIBBES  (Richard,  D.D.    1577— 1635).    Bowels  Opened  ; 

or,  a  Discov^ery  of  the  Neere  and  Deere  Love,  Union  and 
Communion  betwixt  Christ  and  the  Church.     Sermons 
on  Canticles  IV.,  V.,  and  VI.     4to.     1639,  etc.     6/-  to  9/- 
[  Works  II.    Nichol's  edition.] 
Sibbcs  never  writes  ill.     His  repute  is  such  that  zve  need  only 

mention  him.     His  title  is  most  unfortunate,  but  in  all  else  his 

"  discovery  "  is  worthy  of  our  commendation. 

693  SKINNER  (John.    Bishop  of  Aberdeeii.    1721— 1806).    Essay  towards  a  literal 

or  time  radical  Exposition.     Works  11.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Aberdeen,  \%0^.    4/- 
Not  very  important.     The  Bishop  closes  his  exposition  with  the  following  prayer 
for  those  who  do  not  believe  in  the  mystical  sense  : — "  God  forgive  the  fools  and  open 
their  eyes."     Pretty  strong  for  a  Bishop  ! 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON.  117 

694  STUART  (A.  Moody,  M.A)     Exposition,  with  Critical 

Notes.  8vo.  12/-  Lond.,  Nisbet  i860.  S.  6/- 
Althongh  this  admirable  author  exp07inds  the  Song  tipon  a  theory 
which  zve  do  not  quite  endorse,  zve  do  not  know  where  to  find  a  book 
of  equal  value  in  all  respects.  He  has  poetry  in  his  soul,  and, 
beyond  that,  a  heart  like  that  of  Rutherford,  fired  with  love  to  the 
Altogether  Lovely  One.      We  thank  him  for  this  noble  vohime. 

695  THE  BRIDE  OF  CHRIST ;  or,  Explanatory  Notes  on  the  Song  of  Solomon. 

[Anon.]     i8mo.     Lond.,  Seeleys.     1861.     S.  6d. 
A  little  book  for  general  use ;  not  for  students. 

696  THE  THREEFOLD  MYSTERY  :  Hints  on  the  Song  of  Songs,  viewed  as 

a  Prophecy  of  the  Double  United  Church  of  Jew  and  Gentile.     By  the 
authorof" The  Gathered  Lily."    i2mo.    3/6.  Zi7«(/. ,  Partridge  &  Co.    1869. 
It  seems  to  us  to  be  a  wild  fancy  that  all  ecclesiastical  history  is  condensed  into 
the  Canticles  ;  hence  we  do  not  value  this  book. 

697  THRUPP    (John     Francis).      New   Translation,   with 

Commentary.  Cr.  8vo.  7/6.  Lond.,  Macmillan.  1862. 
We  are  highly  pleased  with  this  zvork.  Lt  defends  the  usual 
Christian  interpretation  by  the  conclusions  of  sober  criticism,  and 
shows  that  the  spiritual  sense  is  confirmed  by  the  investigations  of 
modern  scholarship.  Ln  the  introduction  the  author  deals  heavy 
blozus  at  the  sceptical  school,  and  at  those  zvho,  like  Ginsburg,  con- 
tent themselves  zvith  imputing  a  merely  moral  meaning  to  the  blessed 
Canticle  of  love. 

698  WEISS  (Benjamin).    The  Song  of  Songs  unveiled:  a  New  Translation  and 

Exposition.     Cr.  8vo.     W.  Oliphant  &  Co.     1859.     S.  1/6  to  2/6. 
This  author  believes  that  the  Song  sets  forth  the  history  of  Israel  and  her  relation  to 
the  Covenant  Angel  from  Horeb  to  Calvary.  Beyond  a  few  Eastern  illustrations,  nothing 
of  value  is  contributed  to  existing  materials.     The  work  is  thoroughly  evangelical. 

699  WILCOCKS  (Thomas).    Exposition.    Works.  Folio.   1624.    12/- 
Short,  and  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  a  paraphrase.     This  venerable 

author  gives  a  doctrinal  summary  of  each  verse,  and  from  this  we  have 
frequently  been  directed  to  a  subject  of  discourse. 

700  WILLIAMS  (Thomas).     A  New  Translation,  with  a  Commentary 

and  Notes.    8vo.    Lend.,  \Zo\.     Second  edition,  1828.     S.  2/- 
This  volume  is  little  known,  but  its  value  is  above  the  average  of 
Canticles  literature.     We  have  read  many  of  the  remarks  with  pleasure, 
but  most  of  them  are  to  be  found  in  the  standard  commentaries. 

701  WOODFORD  (Samuel,  D.D.)     Paraphrase  in  Verse.   8vo.    1679.    1/6  to  3/- 
Better  than  many  poetical  paraphrases,  but  still  below  the  mark  of  true  poetry. 

702  WRIGHT  (M.)     The  Beauty  of  the  Word  in  the  Song  of  Solo- 

mon.    Cr.  8vo.     6/-    Z(?//^.,  Nisbet  &  Co.     1872. 
A  purely  spiritual  commentary,   casting  no  light  upon  the  text,  but 
drawing  much  from  it.     More  devotional  than  expository.     The  figures 
of  the  allegory  are  pressed  as  far  as  they  should  be,  perhaps  furthcT. 


118  WORKS  ON  PROPHECY. 

WORKS    ON    PROPHECY. 

[Volumes  upon  this  subject  arc  so  extremely  numerous  and  so  varied 
in  their  o])inions  that  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  kw  which  follow.  The 
reader  is  also  referred  to  works  upon  the  Apocalypse.] 

703  DAVISON    (John,    B.D.     1777— 1834).      Discourses   on 

Prophecy  ;  its  Structure,  Use,  and  Inspiration.  [  ]Varl?ur- 
tonian  Lectures?^  8vo.  Oxf.,  1845.  S.  5/6. 
Elliott  calls  tJiis  ^'Davison's  noble  Work  on  PTOphccy!'  This  is 
one  of  the  Warbiirtonian  lectures,  and  zve  zvould  here  note  that  those 
lectures  are  all  upon  propJiecy,  and  are  many  of  them  by  first-class 
men,  and  therefore  zuorthy  of  study.  Of  eonrse  they  greatly  vary 
in  value  according  to  the  ability  of  the  lecturers. 

704  FABER  (George  Stanley,  B.D.     1773—1854).     Calendar  of 

Prophecy,  or  a  Dissertation  on  the  Prophecies  which  treat  of 

the   Seven  Times,  and  especially  of  the  latter  Three  Times  and 

a  Half.     3  vols.,  8vo.    Lo7id.,  1828.    7/6,     i2mo.  editions,  3/6. 

Faber  is  one   of  the  great  rabbis  of  prophecy.     He  was  a  man  of 

almost  boundless  learning  and  industry.     His   characteristics  are  said 

to  have  been   "  strong  masculine  sense,  extensive  classical   erudition, 

and  a  hearty  love  of  hypothesis."     This  last  quality,  no  doubt,  led  him  to 

expound  prophecy,  and  also  disqualified  him  for  doing  it  well. 

705  FAIRBAIRN  (Patrick,  D.D.)    Prophecy:  its  Distinctive 

Nature,    Special    Functions,   and   Proper  Interpretation, 
8vo.     10/6.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1856.     S.  5/6. 
A  standard  work  by  one  who  is  at  home  ivith  the  subject. 

706  FLEMING  (Robert.  1630— 1694).     The  Fulfilling  of  the  Scrips 

ture.     Fifth  edition.     Folio.     Land.,  1726,  5/63  2  vols.,   8vo., 

1801,  ■^l(>  ;  2  vols.,  i2mo,,  1845,  3/- 
This  we  mention  because  it  is  generally  placed  under  this  head,  but 
it  is  not  an  exposition  of  prophecy  at  all.  It  is  an  elaborate  treatise 
upon  the  fact  that  the  Scriptures  are  fulfilled,  and  the  word  of  the 
Lord  is  true.  As  such  it  deserves  the  high  encomiums  so  freely 
showered  upon  it  by  the  eminent  divines  of  Fleming's  own  time,  and 
it  abundantly  justifies  the  issue  of  so  many  editions. 

707  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.)    The  Messianic  Prophecies  of 

Isaiah  and  the  other  Prophets. 
TJiese    remarks   are   contained   in  Hengstenberg' s  Christology, 
which  is  a  standard  work  on  the  subject.     (See  No.  6"]) 

70S  KEITH  (Alexander,  D.D.)  Evidence  of  the  Truth  of 
the  Christian  Religion,  derived  from  the  literal  Fulfilment 
of  Prophecy  ;  as  illustrated  by  the  History  of  the  Jews, 
and  by  the  Discoveries  of  recent  Travellers.  Thirty- 
sixth  edition.  Thick  8vo.  1848.  S.  4/-  to  6/- 
Horne  says,  "  The  multiplied  editions  which  have  been  required 


THE  PROPHETS.  Ill) 

unthin  a  very  few  years  stifficiejitly  attest  the  high  estimation  in 
wJiich  Mr.  Keith's  zvork  is  deservedly  held ;"  and  zve  may  add  that 
the  improvements  and  additions  have  increased  its  value,  and  that 
fresh  editions  have  shown  that  it  is  still  appreciated. 

709    NEWTON  (Thomas,  D.D,  Bp.  of  Bristol.     1704— 1782). 

Dissertations  on  the  Prophecies  which  have  been  fulfilled, 

and  are  fulfilling.    Numerous  editions.    2  and  3  vols.,  8vo. 

Also,  I  vol.,  8vo.,  tIG.     Lond.,  W.  Tegg. 

A   standard  work  of  a  laborioiis  and  learned  antJior;    rather 

laborious  reading.     The  Bishop  imist  not  he  trusted  upon  the  Nczv 

Testament  prophecy.     Theologically  his  standing  is  very  didnous. 


THE    PROPHETS. 


710  KITTO  (John,  D.D.)      "Isaiah  and  the  Prophets."     In 

Daily  Bible  Illustrations.     (See  No.  41). 
Should  be  considted  wherever  the  readings  touch  upon  a  passage. 

711  LOWTH  (Bishop)  and  others.      A  Literal  Translation  of  the 

Prophets  from  Isaiah  to  Malachi,  with  Notes  by  Lowth,  Blay. 
ney,  Newcome,  &c.     5  vols.     8vo.    Land.,  1836.     10/-  to  15/. 
Concerning  each  of  the  five  volumes  we  refer  the  reader  to  our 
notices  under  the  separate  books. 

712  LOWTH  (William,  B.D.,  1661— 1732,  i^.?///dr  of  Bp.  LozvtJi). 

Commentary  on  the  Prophets.     4  vols.     4to.     Zo?id.,  i^x^. 
This  is  Lozvt/cs  part  of  Patrick  {No.  50).    He  was  more  spiritual  than 
those  with  whom  he  became  associated,  which  is  not  saying  much. 

713  NOYES  (George  R.,  D.D.).    A  New  Translation  of  the  Hebrew 

Prophets.     3  vols.,  i2mo.     New  York^  1849. 
We  are  bound  to  counnend  this  author's  learning,  taste,  and  candour, 
even  though  we  differ  widely  from  him.     The  reader  must  not  look  for 
savour  or  spiritual  quickening,  but  use  the  work  as  a  literary  help  only. 

714  WILLIAMS  (Rowland,  D.D.)     The  Hebrew  Prophets  during  the  Assyrian 

and  Babylonian  Empires.    Translated  afresh  from  the  Original,  with  Illustra- 
tions.    2  vols.,  8 vo.      22/6.      Z(7«<:?'.,  Williams  &  Norgate.     1866—71. 
The  author  does  not  admit  that  there  are  references  to  the  Messiah  in  the  Prophets. 
Whatever  he  may  have  written,  this  fatal  error  deprives  it  of  value.     A  man  writing 
in  that  fashion  should  have  been  a  rabbi  in  the  synagogue,  and  not  a  minister  among 
professed  Christians. 


ISAIAH. 

715    ALEX  ANDER  (Joseph  Addison).   Prophecies  of  Isaiah, 

earlier  and  later.    T.Clark.    2  vols.     17/-     1874.     S.  12/- 

Dr.  Hodge  says  of  the  author :  "/  regard  Dr.   Joseph  Addison 


U'O  ISAIAH. 

Alcxanihr  as  incomparably  the  greatest  man  I  ever  knew — as 
incomparably  t/te  greatest  man  onr  ChnrcJi  has  ever  produced^'  He 
icastes  no  space,  bat  gives  the  essence  of  exposition. 

716  ALEXANDER   (JOSEril  Addison).     Isaiah  Translated 

and    Explained.      An    Abridgment    of    the    preceding. 

2  vols.     1 2 mo.     Nczo  York,  1858.     S.  6/- 
Jhis  abridgment  of  the  larger  work  is  by  no  means  a  small 
affair.     For  all  ordinary  purposes  it  is  voluminous  enongh.      We 
cannot  too  strongly  recommend  it. 

717  BARNES  (Albert).     Notes  on  Isaiah.     Edited  by  Dr. 

Gumming.     3  vols.     Sm.  8vo.     'j16.      Routlcdge,  1850. 
Cobbin's  Edition,  2  vols.,  1852.     S.  4/6. 
A  good  popular  exposition,  tfiongfi  not  tfie  most  learned. 

7 1 8  BIRKS  (T.  R.,  M.A.)  Commentary  on  Isaiah,  and  a  revised  Trans- 

lation,    8vo.     12 j-     Land.,  Rivingtons.     1871.     S.  6/- 
Written   for   the   Speaker's  Commentary,  and,   though   not  inserted 
therein,  it  strikes  us  as  being  far  superior  to  that  work.     It  is  a  great 
treasure  to  the  student  of  this  much  neglected  prophet. 

719  CALVIN  (John).     Commentarie  on  Isaiah.     Translated  by  C. 

Cotton.     Folio,     Loud.,  1609.     9/- 
The  translation  of  the  Calvin  Translation  Society  will  be  better. 

720  CHEYNE  (T.  K.,  M.A.)     The  Book  of  Isaiah  chronologically  arranged.    An 

Amended  Version.     Cr.  Svo.     7/6.     Land.,  Macmillan  &  Co.     1870. 

We  do  not  as  a  rule  believe  in  these  re-arrangements ;  the  book  of  Isaiah  is  best  as 

we  have  it.     The  tone  of  the  interpretation  in  this  instance  is  not  such  as  we  can 

delight  in;  what  the  evangelical  teacher  has  a  right  to  expect  is  totally  absent.     The 

work  is  of  the  Broad  School;  the  notes  are,  however,  learned  and  somewhat  suggestive. 

721  ,,  ,,  Notes  and  Criticisms  on  the  Hebrew  Text  of  Isaiah. 
Cr.  Svo.     2/6.     Loud.,  Macmillan  &  Co. 

The  JVishnins/er  Reiieiv  speaks  of  it  as  "a  piece  of  scholarly  work,  very  carefully 
and  considerately  done."     It  may  be  so. 

722  COWLES   (Henry,   D.D.)     Isaiah,  with    Notes.      i2mo. 

New  York,  D.  Appleton  &  Co.     1869.     S.  6j6. 
Cozvles  writes  more  popularly  tfian  Alexander,  and,  tfwugh  fie  is 
not  so  profound  an  autfiority,  we  fiave  read  fiim  with  pleasure. 

723  DAY(William).  AnExpositionofthe  Book  of  Isaiah.  Folio.  1654.  i2/6toi4/- 
Day  does  not  throw  much  light  upon  the  text :  he  says  he  wrote  for  his  children, 

and  certainly  he  is  childish  enough. 

724  DELITZSCH  (Franz.)    Biblical  Commentary  on  Isaiah.    2  vols. 

Svo.  21/-  Edifib.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1862. 
"  The  author  has  long  been  honourably  distinguished  among  the 
scholars  of  Germany.  He  occupies,  indeed,  a  position  always  peculia'r 
to  himself ;  for,  whilst  his  attainments  in  Hebrew  philology  and  Talmu- 
dical  lore  are  of  the  highest  order,  he  unites  with  these  a  genuine 
appreciation  of  evangelical  truth  and  godliness."  So  says  the  Literary 
Churchman.     For  our  own  part,  we  are  not  enraptured  with  Delitzsch. 


ISAIAH.  12] 

725  EWALD    (H.)      The   Prophet  Isaiah.      Chapters  I. -XXXIII.      From  the 

Gemian.    By  Octavius  Glover.     Cr.  8vo.    6/-    Loud.,  Bell  &  Sons.    1869. 
Decidedly  sceptical ;  but  yet  it  may  be  useful  as  leading  the  reader  to  appreciate 
the  poetic  beauty  of  the  book.     Question  if  the  good  to  be  gained  equals  the  risk 
incurred.     Oiir  verdict  is  to  the  contrary. 

726  FRASER  (ALEX.A.NDER).     Paraphrase  with  Notes.    Svo.    Edinb.,  1800.    2/- 
Of  very  small  value. 

727  GALLOWAY    (William    Brown,    M.A.)      Isaiah's    Testimony 

for  Jesus.      A   Series    of  Discourses.     Svo.     14/-     Loud.,   G- 
Bell  &  Sons.     1864.     S.  2/-  to  4/- 
A  congregation  which  would  listen  to  such  lectures  as  these  must  be 
a  very   select   one   indeed.      The  writer  goes   most   thoroughly  and 
learnedly  into  his  subject. 

728  HENDERSON  (Ebenezer,  D.D.)     Isaiah,  translated  from  the 

Hebrew;  with  a  Commentary.  Svo.  1840.  Second  and  best 
edition.  1857.  S.  8/6.  Scarce  {pub.  at  16/-). 
The  author  has  given  no  doctrinal  or  practical  observations,  as 
he  conceived  that  others  had  furnished  these  in  abundance ;  he  has 
confined  himself  to  eliciting  the  real  meaning  of  the  words,  and  has 
thereby  rendered  great  service  to  all  expositors  who  have  wit  enough  to 
make  use  of  his  critical  assistance.  To  the  less  instructed  reader,  Dr. 
Henderson's  \\oxk\Y\\\  appear  to  be  dull  and  savourless;  but  to  those 
who  only  need  to  have  the  language  translated,  and  are  able  to  supply 
reflections  for  themselves,  it  will  be  of  much  service. 

729  GOVETT  (R.  Junior,  M.A.)     Isaiah  Unfulfilled.     Exposition, 

with  new  Version  and  Critical  Notes.    8vo.    Z^//^/.,  1841.    S.  5/- 
Scholarly  and  conscientious.     The  prophecy  is  interpreted  literally. 

730  JENOUR  (Alfred,  M.A.).    The  Book  of  Isaiah,  translated,  with 

Notes  and  Practical  Remarks.     2  vols.,  8vo.    Loud.,  1830.    3/- 
This  appears  to  us  to  be  a  faithful  translation ;  the  commentary  and 
practical  reflections  are  instructive  and  gracious. 

731  KEITH  (Alexander,  A.M.).     Isaiah  as  it  is;  or,   Judah  and 

Jerusalem  the    subjects    of   Isaiah's   prophesying.       Cr.    8vo. 
Edinb.,  1850.     3/- 
The  student  will  consult  with  benefit  this  valuable  contribution  to 
the  explanation  of  a  most  important,  but  neglected  book. 

732  KELLY  (WiLLlASi).     Lectures  on  Isaiah.     2/6.     Lond.,  G.  Morrish.     1871. 
This  eminent  divine  of  the  Brethrm  school  sometimes  expounds  ably,  but  with  a 

twist  towards  the  peculiar  dogmas  of  his  party. 

733  LOWTH  (Robert,  D.D.,  F.R.S.,  Bp.  of  Londoft.     1710-1787). 

Isaiah,  Translation  with    Notes.      Svo.      Numerous  editions, 

S.  2/- ;  a  modern  one,  Svo.,  4/6.    Zand.,  W.  Tegg.    See  No.  711. 

Smith's  Dictionary^  remarks  that  Bp.  LowtKs  incessant  correction  of 

the    Hebrew   text    is    constantly   to   be    mistrusted.     This    seriously 

diminishes  Lowth's  value,  but  this  is  a  grand  work  notwithstanding. 


122  ISAIAH. 

734  LVTII    (John,    D.D.)      Ilomiletical   Trcasuiy.      i2mo.       l/-      LonJ.,  Elliot 

Stock.      1868. 
This  should  have  been  to  the  preacher  a  book  of  the  utmost  value,  for  it  consists 
wholly  of  outlines  and  hints  for  sermons,  but  these  are  frequently  poor  and  common- 
place.     The  design  is  superlatively  practical,  and  had  the  execution  been  better  we 
sliould  have  rejoiced  in  it. 

735  MACCULLOCH  (Rop.frt,  D.D.)     Lectures  on  Isaiah.     4  vols. 

8vo.     Lotid.  1791 — 1805.     12/- to  18/- 

In  these  days  we  need  condensation.  This  author  would  have  been 
far  more  valued  if  he  had  compressed  his  matter  into  one  volume.  He 
is  good,  but  verbose.  Some  authors  toil  not,  but  they  spin ;  MacciiUoch 
both  toils  and  spins. 

736  MACLACIILAN  (Mrs.,  of  Maclachlan).    Notes  on  the  unfulfdled  Prophecies 

of  Isaiah.     [Anon.]     8vo.     8/6.     Zo«^.,  Nisbet.      1868. 
This  authoress  treats  Isaiah  as  a  Jewish  book  only,  and  refers  all  the  prophecies  to 
that  nation.     We  do  not  agree  with  her  fundamental  principle. 

737  MANCHESTER  (George  Montague,  Duke  of).    Short  Notes  on  Isaiah, 

chap,  v.— XII.     8vo.     1852.     2/- 
We  confess  that  we  cannot  enjoy  the  very  singular  style  of  .the  Duke's  prelections, 
but  there  are  some  who  set  great  store  by  them.     We  wonder  why. 

738  NO  YES  (G.  R.)     See  No.  713. 

739  STOCK  (Joseph,  M.A.,  BisJwp  of  All  la  I h).     Isaiah  in  Hebrew  and  English. 

With  Notes.    4to.     1803.    4/- 
The  notes  are  few,  but  are  said  by  the  British  Critic  to  be  "uncommonly  valuable 
for  their  depth  and  acuteness."     We  should  not  have  thought  so.     .S/t^t/.- alters  the 
renderings  of  Lowth,  but  seldom  improves  them.    We  judge  him  to  be  over  estimated. 

740  SMITH  (R.  Payne,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury).     The  Authen- 

ticity and  Messianic  Interpretation  of  the  Prophecies  of  Isaiah 
Vindicated,  in  Sermons  before  the  University  of  Oxford.     8vo. 
10/6.     Oxf.  and  Loud.,  J.  H.  &  J.  Parker.     1862.    S.  5/6 
A  work  which  would   be  invaluable  in  a  discussion  with  Jews.     It 

meets  their  objections,  and  also  those  advanced  by  neologians,  and  by 

the  writers  of  Essays  and  Reinai's. 

741  VERNEY   (Lady).      Practical    Thoughts   on   the    First    Forty 

Chapters  of  Isaiah.     8vo.     Lond.,  Nisbet.     1858.     S.  2/6. 
Some  sensible  spiritual  hints  will  be  found  in  these  remarks.     As  an 
exposition  it  is  one  of  the  least. 

742  WHISH  (J.  C,  M.A.)     A  Paraphrase  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  with 

Notes.     i2mo.     3/6.     Zt?;;^.,  Seeley  &  Co.     1862.     S.  1/3. 
Somewhat  helpful.     The  paraphrasing  is  not  prolix,  and  it  does,  as 
a  rule,  aid  the  reader  in  getting  at  the  literal  sense.     With  the  spiritual 
teaching  Mr.   Whish  has  not  intermeddled. 

743  WHITE  (Samuel,  M.A.)     Commentary  on  Isaiah,  wherein  the 

literal  sense  is  briefly  explained.     4to.    Lond.,  1709.     2/6. 
This  author  keeps    to    the    literal  sense  and   is    very  severe  upon 
spiritualizers,  of  whose  vagaries  he  gives  specimens.     In  aiming  at  one 
excellence  he  misses  others,  and  fails  to  see  Christ  where  he  certainly 
is,  thus  rendering  his  remarks  less  valuable  to  the  Christian  mind. 


PARTS  OF  ISAIAH.  123 


PARTS    OF   ISAIAH. 

[There  are  many  works  upon  separate  chapters  of  this  book,  but  it 
does  not  fall  in  with  our  plan  to  go  so  much  into  detail  as  to  enumerate 
them  all.  We  thought  it  would  be  useful  to  our  readers  if  we  mentioned 
a  few.l 

744  MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.D.)     '' Comfort  ye,  Comfort  ye  :"  God's 

words  of  comfort  addressed  to  his  Church  in  the  last  twenty- 
seven  chapters  of  Isaiah.  Cr.  8vo.  5/-  Z^«^.,  Nisbet.  1872. 
Dr.  Macduff  translates  into  popular  language  the  teachings  of  great 

expositors,  and  does  it  to  perfection.     For  an  hour's  pleasant  and  holy 

reading  commend  us  to  Dr.  Macduff. 

745  CALVERT   (Thomas).      Mel  Coeli,  Medulla  Evangelii ; 

or,  The  Prophet  Isaiah's  Crucifix.     An  Exposition  of  the 
Fifty-third  Chapter  of  Isaiah.     4to.      1867.     5/- to  7/6. 
Precious  and  practical.     Jtist  ivJiat  the  title  ivonld  lead  7is  to 
expect — marrow  and  fatness  ;  Jioncy  from  the  Rock,  Christ  Jesns. 

746  DURHAM  (James).     Christ  Crucified;  or,  the  Marrow 

of  the  Gospel,  holden  forth  in  Seventy-two  Sermons  on 
Isaiah  liii.     Editions,  folio,  4to.,  and  8vo.     3/-  to  5/- 
This  is  marrozv  indeed.      We  need  say  no  more :  Durham  is  a 
prince  among  spiritual  expositors. 

747  MACDONOGH  (T.  M.)  Messiah  as  revealed  in  Is.  liii.    Founded 

upon  Manton  (748).     i2mo.     Loud.,  1858.      1/6. 
This  is  a  serving  up  of  the  next  work  in  the  form  of  lectures.     We 
do  not  admire  abridgments,  and  especially  those  which  make  altera- 
tions and  additions  ;  still  it  is  likely  that  many  have   read  MacdonogK s 
Manton  who  might  never  have  fallen  in  with  Mantotis  Manton. 

748  MANTON   (Thomas,  D.D.)     A  Practical  Exposition  on 

the  whole  Fifty-third   Chapter  of  Isaiah.     8vo.     LoJid., 

1703.    Also  in  Works,  Yo\.  III.     Nichol's  Puritan  Series. 

Manton  needs  no  praise  from  ns.      Whatever  he  does  is  done  in 

a    style  zvorthy  of  a  chief  among  theologians.      He  is,  however, 

seldom  too  brief,  and  Jiis  own  bulk  hinders  Jus  being  read.  Preachers 

of  long  sermons  should  take  a  hint  from  this. 

749  MARGOLIOUTH  (Moses,  B.A.)     Six  Lectures  on  Isaiah  liii., 

&c.     Svo.     Land.,  Hatchards.     1846.     2/- 
Well  worth  a  careful  reading. 

750  STEWART  (James  Haldane,  M.A.)     Lectures  upon  Isaiah  LV. 

i2mo.     Lond.,  Hatchards.     1846.     1/6. 
Nine  sweet  evangelical  discourses,  in  a  lively,  impressive  style. 


124  JEREMIAH  AND  LAMENTATIONS. 


JEREMIAH   AND    LAMENTATIONS. 

[We  would  call  special  attention  to  the  volume  of  the  Speaker's 
Commentary  upon  this  Book.  It  is  by  Dr.  Payne  Smith,  Dean  of 
Canterbury,  and  deserves  much  praise.] 

751  BLAYNEY   (Benjamin,    D.D.      Died   i8or).      Jeremiah    and 

Lamentations.     New  Translation,  with  Notes.      8vo.     Lond., 

1836.     2/6.     {See  No.  'J  w.) 
Blayncy  belonged  to  a  past  school  of  clever  men,  too  apt  to  suggest 
new  readings,    and    more    able    to    appreciate   literary  beauties  than 
spiritual  teachings.     He  was  a  zealous  follower  o{  Lowth,  but  he  lacked 
the  fine  taste  and  poetic  genius  of  his  master. 

752  HENDERSON  (E.,  D.D.)     Jeremiah  and  Lamentations.     8vo. 

Land.,  1851.     8/6. 
A  work  of  the  same  character  as  No.  728. 

753  HULL   (John,   D.D.)     Exposition  upon  part  of  Lamen- 

tations.    4to.     Loud.,  161 8.     7/6. 
F7>ll  of  qiiaintncsscs.     JMarroxvy  tJiro7igJiout. 

754  KEIL   (K.   F.      1754 — 18 18).     Commentary  on  Jeremiah  and 

Lamentations.    2  vols.,  8vo.    21/.   jS"^/;//^.,  T.  tS:  T.  Clark.    1874. 
We  have  already  indicated  the  direction  in  which  Keil  is  serviceable. 
For  exact  interpretation  he  is  esteemed,  but  he  is  too  cold  and  formal 
ever  to  be  a  favourite. 

755  LANGE'S  COMMENTARY.     Jeremiah  and   Lamenta- 

tions.    By  Dr.    C.  W.    Niigelsbach.     i   vol.,    Imp.   8vo. 

21/-     Edinb.,  T.  Clark.     1871. 
"  Whoever  becomes  possessed  of  this  great  zvork  will  have,  in  a 
compreJiensive  form,  the  results  of  all  ancient  and  modern  exegesis, 
iv'.tiL   an   apparatus  eritieus  of  surprising  copiousness." — British 
Quarterly  Review. 

756  LOWTH   (William,   M.A.)     A  Commentary  on  Jeremiah  and 

Lamentations.    4to.    Lo?id.,  i^iZ.     1/6.    ( Jr<? i\^j-.  50  and  7 1 2). 

This  forms  a  part  of  what  is  known  as  Bp.  Patrick's   Commentary. 

Ormc  says  that  Lowth  is  "  one  of  the  most  judicious  commentators  on 

the  prophets,  and  he  never  prophesies  himself."     We  wish  we  could  say 

this  of  all  writers  on  prophetic  subjects. 

757  SMITH  (Thornlev).     The  Prophet  of  Sorrow;    or.   Life   and 

Times  of  Jeremiah.     Cr.  8vo.     4/6.     Edi?ib.,  0\\\A-\^r\\..     1875. 
Not  a  commentary ;  but  as  it  casts  light  on  the  character  and  times 
of  the  prophet  it  deserves  a  place  here. 

758  SWIFT  (Daniel).     Zion's  sufferings :  an  Exposition  of  Lameii' 

tations  V.     i2mo.     Loud.,  1654.     4/- 
Strong,  rough,  coarse.     Excessively  rare. 


EZEKIEL.  1-25 

759     UDALL    (John)     A   Commentarie   upon   the  Lamentations  of 
Jeremy.     [Anon.]     4to.     Loud.,  i^gg.     4/- or  5/. 
In  this  extremely  rare  work  the  author  has  laboured  after  brevity,  and 
has  given  the  abridgment  of  many  discourses  ;  hence,  "to  those  who  can 
procure  it,  it  is  all  the  more  useful. 


EZEKIEL. 


760  ALLEINE  (William).     The  nine  last  chapters  of  Ezekiel  un- 

folded.    8vo.      1679.     5/6 
Very  rare  ;  will  interest  interpreters  of  prophecy. 

761  COWLES    (Henry,   D.D.)      Ezekiel   and    Daniel;    with 

Notes,  Critical,  Explanatory,  and  Practical.  Thick  cr.  8vo. 

Ne%v  York,  D.  Appleton  &  Co.     1867.     S.  616. 
In  his  oivn  way  this  author  is  one  of  the  most  instructive  of 
American  writers;  he  is  clear  and  definite,  and  leaves  his  meaning- 
impressed  upon  the  mind.     His  scholarship  is  respectable.    ■ 

762  FAIRBAIRN (Patrick,  D.D.)    Ezekiel.  Exposition;  with 

New  Translation.  8vo.  10/6.  £^/;^^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  185 1. 
This  exposition  has  passed  through  three  editions,  and  has  gained 
for  its  anthor  a  high  place  among  elucidators  of  diffictdt  parts  of 
Scripture.  Dr.  Fairbairn  has  a  cool  judgment  and  a  warm  heart; 
he  has  cast  much  light  upon  Ezekiel' s  xvheels,  and  has  evidently  felt 
the  touch  of  the  live  coal,  ivhicJi  is  better  still. 

763  GREENHILL  (William,  M.A.    i  591-1677).   Exposition 

of  Ezekiel.     5  vols.     4to.      1645 — 1667.     Reprinted  in  a 

thick  imp.  8vo.  volume,  1827,  and  now  issued  in  Nichol's 

Commentaries.     10/6.     Lond.,  Nisbet.     1863. 

We  always  get  something  out  of  Greenhill  whenever  we  refer  to 

him.     He  had  not,  of  course,  the  critical  skill  of  the  present  day, 

but  his  spir-itual  insight  zvas  keen.     He  rather  commented  on  a 

passage  tJian  expounded  it. 

764  GUTHRIE  (Thomas,  D.D.)     The  Gospel  in  Ezekiel.     Cr.  8vo. 

3/6.     Zc"//^.,  Daldy  &  Isbister.     1864. 
Very  little  of  Ezekiel,  and  a  great  many  of  those  flowers  of  eloquence 
which  rendered  Dr.  Guthrie  so  famous.     We  can  hardly  regard  it  as' 
an  exposition.     It  only  dwells  upon  the  latter  part  of  the  36th  chapter. 

765  HENDERSON  (Ebenezer,  D.D.)     Ezekiel.     With  Com- 

mentary.    8vo.     Lond.,  Hamilton.     1855.     5/- 
Valuable  condensed  notes. 


12G  EZEKI  EL— DANIEL. 

766  HENC.STENBKRG   (K.  W.,  D.U.)     The  Prophecies  of  Ezekiel 

elucidated.     Demy  8vo.     10/6.    Edinb.,  T.  &  'W  Clark.     1869. 

We  have  frequently  characterised  this   author's  writings.     They  are 

clear,  cold,  and  dry,  like  a  fine  moonlight  night  in  the  middle  of  v/inter. 

A  man  needs  a  peculiar  mind  to  enjoy  Jlf/igsk-iibcrg;  but  all  educated 

students  caxi  pivjit  by  him. 

767  KEIL  (K.  F.)     Ezekiel  [2  vols.,  in  preparation].    Ed'uib.  T.Clark. 

768  LANGE.     Commentaries  on  Ezekiel  and  other  Books  of 

Old  Testament.     [In  preparation.]    ir^/;/(5'.,  T.  &T.  Clark. 

769  NEWCOME  (William,   D.D.,  ^Z-/.  ^/ ^r;;/^.!^//.      1729— 1800). 

Improved  version,  metrical  arrangement,  and  explanation.   4to. 

Z>//M>/,  1728.     8vo.     Zf//^/.,  1836,  &c.     i^Sce  Lo7vth  and  oihcrs, 

No.  711). 
Dr.  Fairbairn  says  : — "  The  notes  are  of  a  very  brief  description, 
chiefly  explanatory  of  the  meanings  given  in  the  translation ;  and  both 
the  translation  and  the  notes  proceed  to  a  large  extent  on  the  vicious 
principle,  very  prevalent  at  the  time,  of  getting  rid  of  difficulties  in  the 
sense  by  proposed  emendations  of  the  text."  Yet  JVewcofne  showed 
both  learning  and  diligence  in  this  improved  version. 


DANIEL. 

770  AMNER  (R.)     Essay  towards  interpretation.     8vo.     Lond.,  \']'J^. 

Written  on  the  absurd  hypothesis  that  the  prophecies  were  all  fulfilled  before  the 
death  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes. 

771  AUBERLEN  (Carl  August,  Ph.D.)    The  Prophecies  of  Daniel 

and  the  Revelation,  by  C.  A.  A.    Translated  by  Adolphe  Saphir. 

8vo.  ^^/V//!'.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1856.  5/- 
Not  a  textual  commentary,  but  a  treatise  upon  the  mysterious  pro- 
phecies. Atibeiien^s  spirit  is  reverential  and  his  views  are  evangelical, 
or  we  should  not  have  found  Mr.  Saphir  translating  it.  He  acknow- 
ledges his  indebtedness  to  Roos,  No.  799.  We  must  leave  the  inter- 
pretations to  be  judged  by  those  who  are  learned  in  such  subjects. 

772  BARNES  (Albert).     Notes.     Blackie's  edition.     2  vols., 

post  8vo.  7/-  S.  3/6. 
Dr.  Wardlaiv  said  of  this  work: — "/  Jiave  examined  the  ^Notes' 
of  the  Rev.  Albert  Barnes  on  a  considerable  variety  of  testing 
passages  ;  and,  so  far  as  my  examination  has  gone,  I  feel  confident 
in  projwuncing  them  to  be  cliaractcrizcd,  in  no  ordinary  dcg  ree,  by 
discriminative  judgment,  sound  theology,  nnostentations  learning, 
practical  zvisdom,  and  evangelical  piety  y 

"i-j'^     BIRKS  (T.   R.,   M.A.)     Exposition  of  the  first  two  Visions  of 
Daniel.     Fcap.  8vo.     6/-     Loud.,  Seeleys.     1845.     S.  2/6. 


DANIEL.  127 

774  BIRKS  (T.  R.,  M.A.)     The    Two    Later    Visions    of    Daniel 

historically  explained.     Fcap.  8vo.     6/-     Loud.,  Seeley.    1846. 
We  must  leave  judgment  upon  this  work  and  the  preceding  one  to 
those  skilled  in  prophetic  interpretation. 

775  BRIGHTMAN    (Thomas.      Puritan.      1557—1607).      A   most   comfortable 

Exposition  of  the  last  and  most  difficult  part  of  the  Prophecie  of  Daniel, 
from  the  26th  verse  of  the  nth  Chapter  to  the  end  of  the  I2th  Chapter, 
wherein  the  restoring  of  the  Jewes  and  their  calling  to  the  faith  of  Christ 
after  the  utter  overthrow  of  their  three  last  enemies  is  set  forth  in  lively- 
colours.     4to.     Loud.,  1644. 
This  exposition  and  the  author's  commentary  on  Canticles  are  appended  to  his  work 
on  Revelation,  and  do  not  appear  to  have  been  published  separately.    In  his  title-page 
Brightman  is  called  a  brigJit  and  worthy  man,  and  in  the  preface  we  are  told  that  "he 
shined  every  way  and  was  a  Brightman  indeed."     His  work  is  rather  a  curiosity  than 
a  treasure. 

776  BROUGHTON  (Hugh.     1549— 1612).     Daniel's  Chaldee  Visions.     Works. 

Folio.     Loud.,  1662. 
This  author  was  pedantic  and  eccentric,  but  yet  a  man  of  real  learning.    His  works 
have  almost  disappeared.     In  his  own  day  some  considered  him  a  sage  and  others  a 
quack.     He  was  a  little  of  both. 

777  CALVIN    (John).      Commentaries    upon    Daniel.      4to. 

Loud.,  John  Day.     1570.     10/- 
Also  in  Calvin's  cojnplete  works. 

778  COLEMAN  (Thomas).     Decision,  exemplified  in  Daniel.    8vo.    Zo«rf.,  1858. 
This  is  by  the  author  of  "  Memorials  of  Independent  Churches."     It  is  intended 

for  children  and  is  suitable  for  them. 

779  COWLES  (Henry,  D.D.)     See  under  E.zekicl,  No.  761. 

780  DANIEL:  Statesman  and  Prophet.    [Anon].    8vo.     3/6.     Loud., 

Religious  Tract  Society.  [N.D.] 
A  valuable  popular  addition  to  the  literature  of  the  book  of  Daniel. 
Objections  to  its  authenticity  and  inspiration  are  met,  and  the  assaults 
of  infidels  are  made  to  bring  out  the  evidences  of  Divine  authority  with 
all  the  greater  clearness.  We  are  delighted  with  the  volume,  which  is 
beautifully  got  up.    Every  student  and  minister  should  have  a  copy. 

781  DARBY   (John   Nelson).      Studies,     i/-     Lond.,  W.  H.  Broom. 
The  name  of  the  writer  sufficiently  indicates  the  character  of  the  book. 

782  DESPREZ  (Philip  S.,  B.D.)     Daniel ;  or,  the  Apocalypse  of  the  Old  Testa- 

ment.   8vo.    5/-    Loud..,  Williams  &  Norgate.     1865. 
This  work  is  of  the  Essays  and  Reviews  school.    The  author  cannot  see  the  Messiah 
in  Daniel.     It  is  worse  than  useless. 

783  ELLIOTT  (E.  B.)     See  tender  Revelation. 

784  FRERE  (James  Hatley,  Esq.)     A   Combined  View  of  the  Prophecies  of 

Daniel,  Ezra,  and  St.  John.     8vo.     Loud.,  1826.     S.  2/6. 
This  has  been  esteemed  by  many  in  its  day,  but  we  do  not  recommend  its  purchase. 

785  GAUSSEN  (S.  R.  Louis).     Daniel,  explained  for  Young 

Persons.    2  vols.    8vo.    9/-    Z^;/^.,  J.  &  C.  Mozley.    1874. 

TJiis  is  a  zvork  for  children  only.      We  hope  it  ivill  not  set  our 

Sunday  School  teachers  explaining  to  their  little  ones  the  image  and 

its  toes,  the  he-goat,  and  all  the  other  marvels.     If  they  do  attempt 

it  we  wish  them  as  zvell  through  their  task  as  Professor  Gaussen. 


128  DANIEL, 

756  HARRISON    (Bknjamin,   M.A.,     Archdeacon  of  Maid- 

stone).    Prophetic  Outlines  of  the  Christian  Church  and 

the  Antichristian  Power,  as  traced  in  the  Visions  of  Daniel 

and  St.  John.    \_]Varburtonian  Lectures.']    8vo.    1849.    3/- 

Wc  like  the  manfier  of  this  book.      The  author  has  been  content 

tliroughojit  to  trace  the  true  outline  of  interpretation  zcitJiout  entering 

on  a  detailed  examination  of  counter  theories;  and  he  has  done  this 

in  the  spirit  of  Bishop  RidUy,  who  said  upon  a  kindred  subject, 

"Sir,  in  these  matters  I  am  so  fearful,  that  I  dare  not  speak  further 

than  the  very  text  doth,  as  it  zvere,  lead  me  by  the  ha? id." 

757  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.)     Dissertations  oh  the  Genuineness 

of  Daniel  and  the  Integrity  of  Zachariah.     Svo.     12/-     Edinb., 

T.  &  T.  Clark.     1848.     S.  5/6. 
Much  valuable  matter  is  brought  out  by  the  discussion  ;  but  few  of 
us   have  time  to  go  into  it,  or  any  need  to  do  so ;  for  we  are  fully 
persuaded  of  the  integrity  of  all  the  prophets,  and  of  their  books  too. 

788  HUIT  (Ephraim.     Puritan).      The  whole  Prophecie  of  Daniel 

Explained.     4to.     Loud.,  1643.      5/6. 
Hiiifs  short  doctrinal   summaries  of  the  verses  will  bring  useful  sub- 
jects before  the  preacher's  mind;  otherwise  Huif'xs  not  very  remarkable. 

789  IRVING  (Edward,  M.A.    1792 — 1S34).    Babylon  and  Infidelity 

foredoomed  of  God ;   A  Discourse  on  Daniel  and  the  Apo- 
calypse.   2  vols.,  i2mo.     Glasg.,  1826;  also  one  vol.  Svo.    3/6. 
More  of  rolling  sound  than  anything  else. 

790  KEIL  (K.  F.)     Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel.    Svo. 

10/6.     Edi7ib.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1872. 
"  We  have  just  had  occasion  to  make  ourselves  acquainted  with 
Keils  book  on  Daniel,  and  zve  can  speak  of  it  in  very  high  terms. 
It  is  marked  by  great  erudition,  rare  accuracy,  and  much  spiritual 
tho7ightfulnessy — Evangelical  Magazine. 

791  KELLY  (Willam).    Notes.    lamo.    1/6.    Lond.,\\Qxx\%\\.    1870. 
It  needs  minds  of  a  peculiar  organization  to  enjoy  Plymouth  writings. 

They  abound  in  peculiar  phraseology,  which  only  the  initiated  can 
understand.  We  are  sorry  to  see  such  a  mind  as  Mr.  Kelly's  so 
narrowed  to  party  bounds. 

792  KNOX  CJ.)     Reflections  on  Daniel.     Small  Svo.      1849. 
This  book  is  unknown  to  us. 

793  MANCHESTER  (George  Montague,  Duke  of).     The  Times  of  Daniel, 

Chronological  and  Prophetical.      Svo.     Loud.,  1845.     3/" 
This  work  has  received  the  most   enthusiastic  praise   from    German   writers,  who 
dwell  with  pleasure  upon  his  being  "erudite  and  illustrious."     The  duke's  writing  is 
certainly  sui  generis.     He  is  by  no  means  a  favourite  author  with  us. 

794  MILES     (Charles    Popham,    B.A.)      Lectures,   with    Notes. 

[Chap.  I — VII J.    2  vols.    i2nio.    Lond.,Kisbet.    1840-41.   3/6. 
Commendable  sermons  and  good  notes. 


DANIEL.  129 

795  MORE    (Henry,    D.D.,    F.R.S.      1614— 1687).      A  Plain   and    Continued 

Exposition  of  the  several  Prophecies  of  Daniel.     4to.     Lo»d.,  1681.     2/6. 
If  a  man  had  no  more  than  A/i)rc  on  Daniel  he  would  certainly  long  for  more,  and 
need  a  work  more  spiritual  and  more  suggestive. 

796  NEWTON  (Sir  Isaac,  F.R.S.     1642—1727).     Observations  on 

Daniel  and  the  Apocalypse.  4to.  Lond.,  1733  ;  8vo.,  183 1. 
2/-  or  3/- 
The  author's  name  will  always  keep  this  bonk  in  repute.  The  spiritual 
student  will  not  glean  much  from  it.  Sir  Isaac's  fame  does  not  rest  on 
his  expositions.  The  following  extract  we  cannot  forbear  inserting  in 
this  place  : — "  The  folly  of  interpreters  has  been,  to  foretell  times  and 
tilings  by  this  prophecy  [the  Apocalypse],  as  if  God  designed  to  make 
tlicm  prophets.  By  this  rashness  they  have  not  only  exposed  themselves, 
but  brought  the  prophecy  also  into  contempt.  The  design  of  God  v/as 
much  otherwise.  He  gave  this  and  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, not  to  gratify  men's  curiosities  by  enabling  them  to  foreknow 
things,  but  that  after  they  were  fulfilled  they  might  be  interpreted  by  the 
event ;  and  hi;,;  own  providence,  not  the  interpreter's  wisdom,  be  then 
manifested  thereby  to  the  world." 

797  PARKER  (Thomas.  /'«;•//(?;?.    Died  i(i-,i).    Daniel  expounded.    4to.    Loud. 

1646. 
This  learned  book  is  enough  to  perplex  and  distract  any  ordinary  mortal,  but  pro- 
bably Dr.  Cumming  and  brethren  of  his  school  would  revel  in  it.     We  had  sooner 
read  a  table  of  logarithms. 

798  PUSEY  (Edward  Bouverie,  D.D.     Regius  Professor  of 

Hebrew).     Daniel  the  Prophet.      Nine  Lectures.      8vo. 
10/6.     Loud.,  J.  Parker  &  Co.     1869. 
To  Dr.  Puseys  work  o?i  Daniel  all  siibseqiient  writers  viust  be 
deeply  indebted,  hoivever  7nnch  they  may  differ  from  him  in  other 
departments  of  theological  study. 

799  ROOS  (Magnus  Frederick.     1727 — 1803).    Exposition 

of  such  of  the  Prophecies    of   Daniel    as   receive  their 

accomplishment  under  the  New  Testament.     Translated 

by  E.  Henderson.     8vo.     Edinb.,  \Zi\.     1/6  and  2/- 

Dr.  Hendersott  gently  chides  those  who  arc  not  sufficiently  intent 

upon  prophetical  interpretation.     There  ivould  be  feiver  of  such 

delinquents  if  expositors  were  more  reasonable.     Roos,  hoivever,  is 

dull  to  a  dreadful  degree :  ive  should  say  that  fiobody  ever  read  hint 

through,  except  his  translator.     He  is  very  devout,  and  this  is  the 

saving  point  about  his  book.      We  cannot  tell  wliether  the  vietvs  of 

Roos  are  correct  or  not,  for  zve  cannot  keep  awake  while  readijig 

him.     As  far  as  zve  have  gone  we  have  seen  some  reasoji  to  question. 

Soo    RULE  (William  Harris,  D.D.).     Historical  Exposition 
of  Daniel.     Cr.  8vo.     Lond.,  Seeley  &  Co.     1869.     3/- 
A  notably  interesting  exposition,  bringing  historical  facts  and 
mevwrials  to  bear  upon  the  prophecy.     Jt  is  not  merely  readable,  but 
attractive. 

10 


ir.O  DANIEL— MINOR  PROPHETS. 

8oi     STRONG  (Leonaud).   Lectures.    121110.   2/-  Zcv/^.,  Yapp.   1871, 
Notes  of  instructive  lectures. 

502  STUART  (.MosFs).      A   Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel, 

8vo.     Boslo/i,  U.  S.      1S50.     S.  9/6. 
Sttiiirt  gives  quite  an  independent  interpretation,  and  f^iils  to  see  the 
r,'/>f  a\M.\  his  Cardinals  in  Daniel,  for  which  we  like  him  all  the  better. 
We  do  not  accept  his  conclusions,  but  he  is  always  woriliy  of  respect. 

503  TREGELLES  (S.  Prideaux,  LL.D.)    Remarks  on  the  Prophetic 

Visions  of  Daniel.     Cr.  8vo.     5/-     Lond.,  Bagsters.     1852. 
Treadles  is  deservedly  regarded  as  a  great  authority  upon  prophetical 
subjects. 

804  WELLS  (Edward,  D.D.)     Daniel  cxplaineJ.     4(0.     Lond,  i-]iG.     1/6. 
This  is  a  different  work  to  that  mentioned  in  No.  61.     It  ii  of  no  great  value. 

805  WILLET  (Andrew).  Hexapla  in  Danielem.  Folio.  1610.  8/6. 
Dr.  Williams  says  that  this  is  a  work  of  much  information,  as  it  con- 
tains the  "opinions  of  many  authors  on  each  point  of  difficulty."  He  adds 
that  in  none  of  his  expositions  does  Willct  "  discover  more  skill  and 
judgment  than  in  the  present  work." 

So6     WILSON  (Joseph,  A.M.)  Horce  Propheticje  ;  or  Dissertation  on 
the  Book  of  Daniel.     8vo.     Onndle,  1824.     2/- 
We  consider  this  to  be  of  more  than  average  worth. 

£07      WINTLE   (Thomas,   B.D.     1737—1814).      Daniel,  an   Improved  Version,  ' 
with  Notes.     4to.     C.r/:,  1792  ;  8vo.,  Zi'Wi^/.,  1836.     2/-     {See  No.  ^ll.) 
Learned  notes,  mainly  philological,  with  a  translation  on  the  plan  ol  Lcnvth. 

808      AVODROW    (Robert).     Destiny  of  Israel,   as  unfolded  in  the  Eighth  and 
succeeding  Chapters  of  Daniel.     l2mo.      Blackie  &  Son.     1844.     1/6. 
This  devout  author  follows  the  system  of  Sir  Isaac  N'ezvton  and  Bishop  Nactcn. 
Ilis  calculations  as  to  the  year  1843  M-ere  disproved  by  history. 

S09      WOOD  (William,  A.M.)     Lectures  on  the  first  Seven  Chapters  of  Daniel. 
i2mo.     Loud.,  Cleaver.     1S47.      'z^- 
Plain  sermons  of  no  great  expository  value. 


MINOR   PROPHETS. 


810  BARLEE  (Edward).     Explanatory  Version  of  the   Minor  Pro- 

phets.     i2mo.     Loud.,  Pickering.     1839.      1/6. 
One  of  the  best  paraphrases  we  have  ever  met  w^ith. 

811  COWLES  (Henry,  D.D.)     The  Minor   Prophets,  with  Notes. 

Cr.  8vo.     Nm  York,  D.  Appleton  &  Co.     1S67.     S.  7/- 
"  This  work  is  designed  for  both  pastor  and  people.     It  embodies 
the  results  of  much  research,  and  elucidates  the  text  of  sacred  Scripture 
with  admirable  force  and  simplicity."' — Nao  York  Christian  Intelligencer. 


MINOR  PROPHETS.  131 

812  DAN^liUS,   or  DANEAU   (Lambert.     Eminent  French  Protestant  Diiinc. 

1530-  1596).     A  fiuitfuU  Commentaiie  upon  the  Twelve  Small  Prophets. 
Translated  by  John  Stockwood,  Mmister  at  Tunbridge.    4to.    Land.,  1594. 
A  translation  of  a  work  famous  in  its  day,  but  of  small  service  now. 

813  HENDERSON  (Ebenezer,  D.D.)    The  Twelve  Minor  Prophets. 

Large  8vo.     Z^?//^.,  Hamilton  &  Co.     1845.     Scarce.     S.  10/- 
A  learned  critical  work,  not  spiritually  or  doctrinally  suggestive,  but 
simply  explanatory  of   the  text.     This   author  denounces  the  theory 
of  a  double  sense  in  prophecy;  we,  none  the  less,  believe  it  to  be  a  fact. 

814  HUTCHESON    (George).      Briefe   Exposition    of    the 

12    Small  Prophets.      3   vols.,    sm.   8vo.      Loud.,   1655  ; 
I  vol.,  folio,  1657.     7/6  to  10/- 
Get  it.     Hntcheson  is  ahvays  rich.     He  resembles  Dickson. 

815  KEIL  (K.  F.)  Commentary  on  the  Minor  Prophets.    2  vols., 

8vo.  21/-  £"^/«<^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1871. 
"  Dr.  Keil  is  at  his  best  in  this  Commentary ;  and  to  all  who 
have  ventured  on  this  obscure  region  zve  can  promise  an  intelligent 
guide  and  a  serviceable  light  in  this  zvork.  We  ourselves,  under 
his  guidance,  have  resumed  the  study  of  these  beautiful  and  in- 
structive Scriptures  zvith  renevucd  vigour  and  growing  delight." — 
Nonconformist. 

816  KELLY   (William).      Lectures.     Cr.  8vo.     4/6.    Lond.,  Broom.     1871. 
Mr.  Kelly  finds  in  the  Minor  Prophets  a  great  many  things  which  we  cannot  see  a 

trace  of — for  instance,  he  here  discovers  that  we  shall  lose  India.     It  is  a  pity  that  a 
man  of  such  excellence  should  allow  a  very  superior  mind  to  be  so  warped. 

817  LANGE.     Commentary  on  the  Minor  Prophets.     Edited 

by  Dr.  Schaff.    Imp.  Svo.    21/-   ^^/>/<^.,  T.  T.  Clark.    1874. 
The  commentaries   on   the  different  prophets   are    by   various 
authors;  hence  their  value  differs.      As  a   whole   the   volume   is 
excellent,  but  not  so  good  as  Keil. 

818  NEWCOME  (William,  D.D.     Abp.  of  Armagh.     1729— iSooj. 

Improved   Version,    Metrical   Arrangement,   and    Explanation. 
With  all  the  Principal  Notes  of  Horsley  on  Hosea,  and  Blayncy 
on  Zechariah.     Svo.     Loud.,  1836.     2/6.     {See  No.  711.) 
A  celebrated  critical  work  of  a  past  age,  but  not  expository.    Newcome 
was  too  fond  of  new  readings  to  be  safely  followed. 

819  PUSEY    (E.   B.,  D.D.)      The  Minor  Prophets.      With  a 

Commentary.     4to.,  sezved,  5/-  each  part.     Part  I.,  Hosca 
to  Joel;   II.,  Joel  to  Amos,  vi.  6;   III.,  Amos,  vi.  6  to 
Micah,  i.  12;  IV.,  Micah,  i.  13  to  Nahum;  V.  \in  the press\ 
Habakkuk  to  Haggai.    Zw/^.,  J.  Parker,     i860— 1871. 
All  authorities  speak  of  this  zvork  with  great  respect  a?id  so 

-would  zve ;    but  it   is  evident  that  Dr.  Pusey  is  far  too  much 

swayed  by  patristic  and  mcdiceval  commentators. 


\:\2  MINOR  PROPHETS— HOSEA. 

820  RANDALL   (James,   M.A.)     Sermons   on   the    Books  of  Joel, 

Jonah,  Ndium,  Micah,  and  Habakkuk.    8vo.    Z^^//^/.,  1843.    2/6. 
Superior  sermons  ;  but  what  are  they  among  so  many  prophets  ? 

821  STOKES  (David,  D.D.)     Paraphrase.     8vo.     Zond.,  1659.     4/- 
Of  no  importance. 


HOSEA. 

S22     BURROUGHES    (Jeremiah.     Puritan.      1599— 1646). 

Exposition    of   the   Prophesie    of  Hosea.     4  vols.     4to. 

Lo7id.,  1643 — 165 1.     [The  oriL^inal  work  does  not  include 

Chapter  XIV.,  upon   which  there  is   an   Exposition  by 

Sibbes,  and  another  by  Bp.  Reynolds.     The  reprint,  by 

Jatnes  Slicnnan,  contains  the  Exposition  completed  by 

Hall  and   Reynolds.     Nichol's  Series  of  Commentaries. 

I  vol.,  imp.  8vo.     10/6.     Nisbet,  1863. 

]\Iasterly.     A    vast   treasure-house  of  experimental  exposition. 

With   the  exception  of  Adams,  we  prefer  it  to  any  other  of  the 

cxpositio7is  reprinted  under  the  editorship  of  Mr.  Sherman. 

823  HORSLEY  (Samuel,  ^/>/^^/ ^/^/'.^.rrt//^j.    Hosea.    Translated 

from  the  Hebrew;   with  Notes.     4to.      Land.,  1804.     S.   3/- 

And  in  Vol.  2  of  Biblical  Criticism. 
Horsley  occasionally  succeeds  in  elucidating  obscurities,  but  frequently 
his  treatment  of  the  text  reminds  one  of  the  old  army  surgeons  who  cut 
and  hacked  their  patients  without  mercy.    This  translation  is  still  valued, 
but  is  to  be  followed  with  discretion. 

824  DOWNAME   (John,  B.D.     Died  1644).     Lectures  upon 

the  Four  First  Chapters  of  Hosea.   4to.   Lond.,  1608.    3/6. 
A  n  exposition  of  the  richest  kind.     Get  it  by  all  means,  if  you 
can. 

825  DRAKE  (William,  M.A.)    Notes,  critical  and  explanatory,  on  the  Prophecies? 

of  Jonah  and  Hosea.     8vo.     Catnb.,  Macmillan  &  Co.     1853. 
For  Hebraists  only. 

826  NEALE  (James,  M.A.)     Hosea.     Translation,  Commentary,  and 

Notes.     Royal   8vo.     Lond.,    1850.     S.  1/6  to  2/6. 
We  do  not  think  many  ministers  will  value  it  for  homiletical  purposes. 

827  POCOCK (Edward,  D.D.    1604— 1691).  Commentary  on  Hosea. 

In  Vol.  2  of  his  IVorks ;  2  vols,  folio.     Lond.,  i']:\o.    12/6. 
Orme  says  Pocock  was  "  one  of  the  finest  Oriental  scholars,  and  cer- 
tainly the  first  Arabic  scholar  of  his  age."     His  book  is  a  treasury  filled 
with  the  products  of  laborious  research. 


HOSEA— JOEL.  103 

828  WOLFENDALE  (J.)     Homiletical  Commentary  on  Hosea.    [In 

progress:  being  Part  5  of  the  Preacher's  Commentary.]     i/- 

Lond.,  R.  D.  Dickinson.     [1875.] 
On   an   excellent  plan,  and  moderately  well  executed.     With  Bur- 
rong/ies  and  others  to  quarry  from,  and  so  good  a  method  to  work  by, 
Mr.  Wolfendale  ought  to  have  produced  a  better  book ;  but  even  as  it 
is  he  deserves  a  measure  of  commendation. 

829  SMITH  (Samuel).   An  Exposition  upon  the  Sixth  Chapter 

of  the  Prophesie  of  Hosea.     4to.     Lond.,  1616.     5/- 
lu  Sutit/is  usual  quiet,  ricli,  expository  vianner. 

830  IMARGOLIOUTH   (Moses,   B.A.)     Genuine  Repentance,  and 

its  Effects.    Exposition  of  Hosea  XIV.    8vo.    Lond.,  1854.   3/- 
Respectable  discourses. 

831  REYNOLDS  (Edward,  D.D.,  Bp.  of  Norwich.     1599— 

1676).  An  Explication  of  the  Fourteenth  Chapter  of 
Hosea,  in  Seven  Sermons.  4to.  1649.  2/-  Reprinted 
by  the  Religious  Tract  Society.  i8mo.  1/6.  See  also 
under  Burroughes,  No.  822. 
Reynolds  zvas  one  of  the  greatest  theological  writers  in  an  age  of 
great  divines.     He  zvorthily  takes  place  zvith  Burroughes. 

832  SIBBES  (Richard,  D.D.)     The  Returning-  Backslider,  or 

a  Commentary  upon  Hosea  XIV.  4to.  1639,  etc.  2/- 
AIso  in  Vol  n.  of  his  Works,  Nichol's  edition. 
Manton  says  of  Sibbes,  that  he  had  a  peculiar  gift  in  unfolding 
the  great  mysteries  of  the  Gospel  in  a  szveet  and  mellifluous  manner, 
and  therefore  he  zvas  by  his  hearers  usually  termed  the  Sweet 
Dropper,  "  szveet  and  heavenly  distillations  ustially  dropping  from 
him  with  such  a  native  elegance  as  is  not  easily  to  be  imitated^ 
This  covunentary  on  Hosea  is  a  fair  specimen  of  Ids  style. 


JOEL. 

^2>l  CHANDLER  (Sa^iuel,  D.D.)  A  Paraphrase  and  Critical  Com- 
mentary on  Joel.  4to.  Lond.,  i^TtS-  2/6. 
Chandler  makes  very  few  remarks  of  a  spiritual  kind,  but  explains  the 
letter  of  the  word  Avitli  considerable  skill.  In  writing  upon  Joel  he  does 
not  appear  to  the  same  advantage  as  in  his  "  Life  of  David."  He  does 
not  effect  much  in  clearing  up  the  "  things  hard  to  be  understood  "  in 
the  prophet,  and  he  is  of  the  old  broad  school., 

834      HUGHES    (Joseph,    B.A.)     The   Prophecy  of  Joel.      The   Hebrew  Text 
metrically  arranged,  with  a  New  Translation  and  Critical  Notes.     Fc.-ip. 
Svo.     2/6.     Lond.,  Bagsters. 
A  purely  literary  treatise,  useful  to  Hebraists  only. 


i;!i  JOEL— AMOS. 

s^^5     rOC()CIv(Ki)WAKD,D.D.)  A  Commtnlaiy  on  Joel.    lF<?r/.-s,\o\.L 
Folio.     Ox/.,  1691.     [The  same  volume  contains  his  commen- 
taries on  Micah  and  Malachi.] 
Full   of  antique   learning.     Holds  a   high    i)lacc  among   the  older 

comments,  but  will  never  again  be  popular. 

836  ROWLEY  (Ad.\m  Clarke,  M.A.)     Joel.    Metrical  Translation. 

Sq.  8vo.     Lond.,  Hamilton.      1867.     S.  1/6. 
The  translation  has  been  carefully  executed.     The  notes  arc  illustra- 
tive and  literary  only ;  they  do  not  profess  to  open  up  the  moral  and 
spiritual  teaching  of  the  prophet.     Could  Adam  Clarke  rise  from  the 
dead,  he  would  rejoice  to  fmd  his  grandson  following  in  his  footsteps. 

837  TOPSELL    (Edward).      Times    Lamentations;    or,    An 

Exposition  on  the  Prophet  Joel.     4to.     Loud.,  1599.     9/- 
A  iiwiig  the  old  English  conuncntarics  Topscll  is  the  ivritcr  on 
Joel.     He  has  the  usual  force,  homeliness,  piety,  and  fulness  of  the 
Puritan  period. 

838  UDALL  (John).     The  true  remedie  against  Famine  and  Wavres. 

Fiue  Sermons  vpon  the  first  Chapter  of  the  prophesie  of  Joel. 
Loud.  i2mo.  1586.  15/- 
AVe  gave  so  high  a  price  for  this  small  black  Idler  volume  that  we 
should  Hke  to  make  it  profitable  to  our  brethren,  and  therefore  we  com- 
mend to  the  more  starchy  of  them  the  following  extract,  which  will  also 
serve  to  show  how  the  old  preachers  lashed  witli  vigour  the  fashions  of 
the  times.  Udall  says  :  "  For  the  feeding  of  our  monstrous  humour  of 
vanity,  how  many  thousands  of  quarters  of  the  finest  wheat,  which  God 
ordained  for  the  food  of  man,  are  yearly  converted  into  that  most  devilish 
dreice  of  starch.  A  sin  so  abominable  that  it  doth  cry  so  loudly  in  the 
Lord's  ears  for  vengeance,  as  his  justice  must  needs  proceed  against  us 
for  it,  without  speedy  repentance." 


AMOS. 

S39     BENEFIELD  (Sebastian,  D.D.    1559— 1630).    A  Commentary 
upon  the  first  Chapter  of  the  Prophecie  of  Amos.     Delivered 
in  twenty-one  Sermons.     4to.    Lond.,  \6zg.     Upon  the  second 
chapter,  in  twenty-one  Sermons,  1620.    Upon  the  third  chapter, 
in  seventeen  Sermons,   1629.     [Sometimes  to  be  met  with  in 
one  volume.]     9/-,  or  with  Hall  (No.  S40),  2  vols.,  18/-  to  20/- 
Z)r.  Bcntfield  was  Lady  Margaret  Professor  in  Oxford,  a  Puritan  and 
thorough  Calvinist.     His  volume  was,  in  its  time,  the  standard  Com- 
mentary on  Amos.      It  is  somewhat  prolix  and  plentifully  sprinkled  with 
Latin;  it  only  discusses  three  chapters  in  953  pages. 

840  HALL  (Thomas,  'Q.T>.,  Furitau,  Born  1610).  An  Exposition; 
by  way  of  Supplement,  on  the  fourth,  fifth,  sLxth.  seventh,  eighth, 
and  ninth  Chapters  of  Amos.     4to.     Lend.,  1661. 


AMOS— OBADIAH— JONAH.  J  35 

Hall  took  up  Amos  where  Bcnefidd  left  off.  He  says  he  studied 
brevity,  and  perhaps  he  succeeded,  for  he  does  not  quite  fill  600  pages 
with  six  chapters.  The  two  quartos  make  up  a  complete  work,  of  an 
antique  type,  not  suitable  to  modern  tastes,  nor  up  to  the  mark  of  present 
criticism,  but  still  instructive.     What  Puritan  is  not? 

841     RYAN  (Vincent  William,  M.A.)     Lectures  on  Amos.     lamo. 
Lond.,  Seeleys.     1850.     2/- 
A  commendable  series  of  Lectures ;  the  more  valuable  because  so 
few  moderns  have  ventured  to  touch  the  subject. 


OBADIAH. 


843     MARBTJRY  (Edward,  A.M.  Died  about  i6ss)-  Obadiah. 
4to.    Loud.,  i64.().    4/6.    Reprinted,  with  his  Commentary 
upon  Habakkuk,  in  Nichol's  Scries.    Cr.  4to.    y/6.    Lond., 
Nisbet.     1865. 
Far  more  lively  than  Rainolds.     His  spirituality  of  mind  pre- 
vents his  learning  becoming  dull.     He  says  in  the  preface,  "all  my 
desire  is  to  do  all  the  good  I  can','  and  he  writes  in  that  spirit. 

843  PILKINGTON  (James,  B.D.,  Bp.  of  Durham.     1520— 1575). 

In  the  "  Works  of  Bishop  Pilkington,"  reprinted  by  the  Parker 
Society,   there   are   Commentaries   on    Haggai,    Obadiah,    and 
Nehemiah.     S.  3/- 
Full  of  the  minor  as  well  as  the  major  controversies  of  the  Reforma- 
tion period,  and  therefore  the  less  interesting  to  us.     In  its  own  day  it 
was  the  master-work  on  the  two  prophets,  Haggai  and  Obadiah. 

844  RAINOLDS   (John,    D.D.     1549— 1607).     The   Prophecie   of 

Obadiah  opened  and  applyed.     4to.     1613.     3/-  to  4/6.     Re- 
printed, with  his  Avork  on  Haggai,  and  King  on  Jonah,  in  one 
volume  of  Nichol's  Series.    Cr.  4to.    7/6.   Z^«^.,  Nisbet.    1864. 
Full  of  classical  stories  and  learned  allusions;  but  more  useful  when 
first  written  than  now.     The  author  was  one  of  the  most  learned  men 
the  world  ever  produced,  but  he  is  not  hkely  to  be  a  favourite  with 
modern  readers. 


JONAH. 

[This  unloveable  Prophet  has  found  more  Commentators  than  any 
other;  partly  we  suppose  because  the  angles  of  his  character  excite 
greater  interest,  but  mainly  because  we  have  some  knowledge  of  his  life, 
and  therefore  are  able  to  realise  his  personality.  He  has  received  quite 
as  much  attention  as  he  deserves  in  proportion  to  other  Prophets.] 

845  ABBOTT  (George,  Abp.  of  Canterbury.  1562— 1633). 
An  Exposition  upon  the  Prophet  Jonah.  4to.  1613.  5/- 
New  edition,  published  at  12/-,  offered  for  3/-,  by  Ogle 
&  Murray,  Edinb. 


136  JONAH. 

Abbott  tuas  a  rcuozvncd  Calvin istic  divhie,  and  one  of  the  trans- 
lators of  the  present  version  of  the  Bible.  No  set  of  ivorks  on 
Jonah  zvould  be  complete  without  this  learned,  laborious,  and  eor/- 
prehensive  exposition.  It  is,  of  course,  very  antique  in  style  ;  but, 
like  "  old  tvine,"  it  is  none  the  worse  for  its  age. 

846  BENJOIN  (George).     Jonah.    Translation,  wilh  Notes.    4to.     Camb.,  !";(/>. 
Plenty  of  paper.     Home  says  this  Tork  "  is  literally  good  for  nothing." 

847  CALVIN    (John).      Lectures   upon   the    Prophet   Jonas. 

Translated  by  N.  Baxter.     4to.     Lond.,  1578,     9/- 
This  of  course  is  f  idler  than  the  Commoitary,  and,  as  the  work 
of  a  revered  master,  is  beyond  our  criticism. 

848  CUNNINGHAM  (J.  W.,  A.M.)     Six  Lectures  on  the  Book  of 

Jonah.     Fcap.  boards.     3/-     Lond.,  Hatchards.     1833. 
Good  simple  Lectures. 

849  DESPREZ  (P.  S.,  D.D.)     Tiie  Book  of  Jonah.     Ilhistratcd  by 

Discoveries  at  Nineveh.      lamo.     1857.     1/6. 
To  make  Layard  ilkistrate  Jonah  was  a  good  idea,  and  it  has  been 
well  carried  out  by  this  author. 

850  DRAKE  (William,  M.A.)     Notes  on  Jonah  and  Hosea.     Svo. 

9/-     Camb.,  Macmillan  &  Co.     1853.     S.  1/6. 
Entirely  critical.     Only  useful  to  Hebrew  scholars. 

851  EDWARDS  (Henry).     Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Jonah.    1 21110. 

Zong  Suttan,  Swain.     1837.     2/- 
Fourteen  plain,  earnest,  practical  sermons. 

852  EPHRAEM  SYRUS.     {Died  about  i-<:)).    A  Metrical  Homily  on  the  Mission 

of  Jonah.     Translated  from  the  original  Syriac,  by  Henry  Burgess,  LL.D. 
Cr.  Svo.     10/6.     Z(7«^.,  Sampson  Low  &  Co.     1853.     1/6  itezv. 
A  literary  curiosity — nothing  more. 

853  EXELL  (Joseph  S.)     Practical  Readings  on  the  Book  of 

Jonah.     Cr.  Svo.     3/6.     Lond.,  Elliot  Stock.     1874. 
Mr.  Exell,  in  a  very  unpretending  but  able  zvay,  brings  to  light 
the  practical  lessons  of  Jonah.     Paxton  Hood  calls  these  readings 
"  admirable,"  and  ive  concur  in  the  verdict. 

854  FAIRBAIRN   (Patrick,  D.D.)    Jonah:  Life,  Character, 

and  Mission.      i2mo.     Edinb.,  Johnstone.      1849.     S.  2/- 
The  life  and  times  of  the  prophet  are  set  in  a  clear  light;  and  the 
nature  and  design  of  his  mission  fully  explained.     The  work  is  well 
done,  and  is  by  far  the  ablest  English  treatise  on  this  prophet. 

855  FULLER   (Thomas,    D.D.)      Notes    upon   Jonah.      [In 

"A   Collection   of  Stfrmons."     Sm.   8vo.     Lond.,    1656.] 

T^Ir.  Tegg  has  reprinted  Fuller's  Comment  on  Ruth,  and 

Notes  upon  Jonah,  in  one  small  Svo.  vol.  4;'6.   1 868.  S.  2/6. 

Full  of  wisdom,  and  fuller  of  wit ;  in  fact,  too  full  of  the  soul 

of  the  latter,  for  they  are  far  too  short. 


JONAH.  137 

856  GAUSSEN  (S.  R.  Louis,  Theol.  Prof.,  Geneva).    Jonah,  the  Prophet.    Lessons 

on  his  Life.    i8mo.     1/6  and  2/-    Loud.,  Religious  Tract  Society.    [N.  D.] 
Addresses  to  a  Sunday  School  at  Geneva. 

857  HARDING  (Thomas).     Expository  Lectures.     i2mo.    Zond.,  iS^S.     S.  i/- 
What  intelligent  man  in  this  kingdom  could  learn  anything  from  these  lectures  ? 

The  worthy  man  writes  only  such  self-evident  tniisnis  as  must  have  occurred  to 
anybody  and  everybody  who  has  read  his  Bible. 

858  HOOPER  (John.      Bishop  and  Martyr).      An  oversyghte  and  deliberacion 

uppon  the  holy  propliet  Jonas  :  made  and  uttered  before  the  Kingcs 
Majesty  and  his  most  honorable  Councell,  by  Jhon  Hoper,  in  Lent  last  past. 
Comprehended  in  seuen  Sermons.  i6mo.  Lond.,  1550.  Reprinted  by 
the  Parker  Society.  Svo.  Camb.,  1843.  S.  3/- 
It  would  not  repay  the  student  to  buy  Hooper's  works  for  this  short  piece.  Tlie 
language  is  antique,  and  the  thought  not  of  the  newest. 

S59  JONES  (Thomas,  <7/'Or(7/^//).  Jonah's  Portrait.  i2mo.  1827.  2/- 
" Jonah's  Portrait"  was  very  popular  fifty  years  ago,  and  deservedly 
so,  for  Mr.  yones  sketches  it  with  considerable  power.  We  should 
fancy  that  Jonah's  portrait,  as  he  sat  under  his  withered  gourd,  was  not 
a  thing  of  beauty,  or  a  joy  for  ever. 

860  KING  (John,  Bp.  of  London.     1559 — 1621).     Lectures  upon 

Jonas.     4to.     Oxf,    1600,   etc.     S.   3/-  to   5/-     Reprinted  in 
Nichol's  Series  of  Commentaries.     {See  Rainolds,  No.  844). 
Quaint  and  rich,  with  a  little  occasional  quiet  niirth.    It  was  the  book 
of  its  time.     Some  will  think  it  out  of  date,  others  will,  like  Grosart,. 
prize  the  work  of  "  the  Bishop  Avith  the  royal  name." 

861  MACPHERSON    (A.)     Lectures.     i8mo.     Edinb.,  1849.     r/- 
Far  superior  to  the  general  run  of  lectures. 

862  MARTIN  (Hugh).     The  Prophet  Jonah.     Cr.  Svo.     6/- 

Lond.,  W.  Isbister  &  Co.  1866. 
A  first-class  exposition  of  jfonah.  No  one  xvho  has  it  will  need 
any  other.  It  is  not  a  small  treatise,  as  most  of  the  Jonah  books 
are ;  but  it  contains  460  pages,  all  rich  with  good  matter.  It  is 
out  of  print,  and  ought  to  be  republished.  What  are  publishers  at 
to  let  such  a  book  slip  out  of  the  viarkct  f 

863  MUIR  (A.  S.)    Lessons  from  Jonah.    Cr.  Svo.    Lond.,  1857.    1/6. 
A  lively,  popular,  and  earnest  book,  in  a  specially  florid  style.     The 

author  talks  a  great  deal  about  "the  Son  of  Amittai ; "  why  not  say 
Jonah?  We  are  tempted  to  pull  the  finery  to  pieces;  but  we  stay  our 
hand,  for  there  is  really  something  good  in  these  "  lessons." 

864  PEDDIE  (James,  D.D.    1759—1845).     A  Practical  Expo^ 

sition  of  the  Book  of  Jonah.      i2mo.     Edinb.,  1842.     2/- 
"  The  pungent  remarks  peculiar  to  the  Ralph  Erskine  school 
viake  the  Jonah  of  Dr.  Peddie  a  favourite  wherever  it  is  knozvn." 

865  PRESTON  (Matthew  Morris,  M.A.)     Lectures.    Svo.    Lottd.,  1840.     i/- 
Ordin.-iry  sermons.     Better  «nes  can  be  bought  for  a  penny. 


1  -s  JONAH— MICAH—HABAKKUK—HAGGAI. 

SCO     QUARI.KS  (Francis).     A  Feast  for  Wormcs.     A  rocin  on  the 
History  of  Jonah.     4to.     Land.,  xdzo. 
Quaint  and  rather  bombastic  verse,  but  full  of  meaning. 

867  RALEIGH   (Alexander,   D.D.)     The  Story  of  Jonah. 

Cr.  8vo.     6/-     Edinb.,  A.  &  C.  Black.     1875. 
Dr.  Ro/dg/i  calls  your  attention  to  every  to7ich  of  the  strange 
ficture  ivliich  hangs  before  ns  in  the  life  of  Jonah.     Although  ive 
do  not  akvays  endorse  the  Doctor's  remarks,  xue  can  but  marvel  at 
the  beauty  and  power  of  his  descriptions  and  reflections. 

868  TWEEDIE  (W.  K.)     Man  by  Nature  and    Grace;  or,  Lessons 

from  Jonah.   i2mo.  /;V////;.,  Johnstone  &  Hunter.    1S50.   S.  1/6. 
A  good  practical  work,  expounding  the  book  of  Jonah  for  Christian 
edification. 

869  SIMPSON  (James).     Discourses  from  Jonah  I.     8vo.     Edinh.,  \%\Q,.     2/6. 
Very  little  in  the  sermons,  but  their  titles  are  singularly  happy,  and  in  themselves 

oueh  to  afford  subiects  of  discourse  to  Dreachers. 


V  eiy  luiii;  iii  luc  bermons,  Dui  ineir  uues  are  < 
enough  to  afford  subjects  of  discourse  to  preachcn 


MICAH, 

[Since  there  is  so  very  little  upon  this  book  the  student  should  refer 
to  works  on  the  Minor  Prophets  as  a  whole.  There  are  some  exces- 
sively rare  authors  and  also  works  in  Latin ;  but  these  do  not  fall 
within  our  range.] 

S70     POCOCK  (Edward,  D.D.)     See  No.  835. 


HABAKKUK. 


87 1     MARBURY  (Edward,  A.M.)   Commentarle.  4to.  Lend., 
1650.      3/6  to  5/-     For  Reprint,  See  No.  842. 
Here  Ularbnry  holds  the  field  alone  among  old  English  authors, 
and  he  does  so  luorthily.     There  is  about  him  a  vigorous,  earnest 
freshness  ivhicJi  ma.kes  his  pages  glou'. 


HAGGAL 

S-2      GRVN/EUS  (John  James,   D.D.     1540— 1617).     Ilnggeus,  the  Prophet; 

a  most  plentiful  Commentary,   gathered  out  of  the  I'ublique  Lectures  of 

Dr.  J.  J.  Grynatus.      i2mo.     Z^W.,  1586. 
Gryiio'us  was  a  voluminous  author,  and   commented   on   most   of  the    books  of 
Scripture,  but  only  this  work  has  been  turned  into  English,  and  it  is  now  seldom 


HAGGAI— ZECHARIAH.  139 

873  MOORE  (T.  v.,  D.D,  of  Richmond,  Va.,  U.S.)  '  Haggai, 

Zechariah,  and  Malachi.    A  New  Translation,  with  Notes. 
8vo.     AVzc  Vor/.',  1856;  Loud.,  1858.     5/- to  6/6. 
A  capital  book.     Most  useful  to  ministers. 

874  PILKINGTON  (Bishop).     See  under  Obadiah,  No.  843. 

875  RAINOLDS  (John,  D.D.)     Haggai ;  Interpreted  and  Applyed. 

4to.     1613  and  1649.     For  Reprint,  See  No.  844. 

Rainolds  was  the  tutor  of  Hooker,  and  had  a  main  hand  in   our 

authorised  version  of  the  Bible.     Bishop  Hall  says,  ''the  memory,  the 

reading  of  that  man  were  near  a  miracle."     We  ought  to  be  enraptured 

with  a  Commentary  from  such  a  divine,  but  we  confess  that  we  are  not. 


ZECHAEIAH. 


876     BLAYNEY  (Benjamin,  D.D.)     Zechariah.     A  New  Translation, 
widi  Notes.     4to.     Oxf.,  1797.     2ii^- 
This  learned  author  writes  after  the  manner  of  Lowth,  but  has  neither 
LowtlCs  taste  nor  poetic  vein.     His  notes  will  not  suggest  sermons,  but 
will  be  philologically  useful  if  cautiously  read. 

'i-n     HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.) 

In  his  "  Christology  "  (for  which  See  No.  67)  Haigstenherg  has  given 
a  thorough  and  elaborate  exposition  of  the  greater  part  of  Zechariah 
and  Malachi.    He  is  too  grammatical  and  dry  to  be  generally  interesting. 

878  KIMCHI   (David.     A   celebrated  Spanish   Rabbi.     Died  about 

1240).      Commentary   on    Zechariah.      Translated   from   the 
Hebrew  by  Rev.  A.  M'Caul,  A.M.     8vo.     Land.,  1837.     1/6. 
This  enables  the  English  reader  to  see  how  the  Jews  themselves 
understood  the  Prophets,  and  this  is  worth  knowing. 

879  MOORE  (T.  V.)     See  under  Haggai,  No.  873. 

880  PARK  (I.  R.,  M.D.)     An  Amicable  Controversy  with  a  Jewish 

Rabbi  on  the  Messiah's  coming ;  with  an  entirely  new  Exposi- 
tion of  Zechariah.     8vo.     Z^;/^/.,  1832.     2/- 
The  words  "entirely  new  exposition  "  put  us  on  our  guard,  and  did  not 
entice  us  to  read.     The  caution  was  needful.     This  author  explains  the 
prophecy  spiritually,  and  asserts  that  "  the  spiritual  is  the  most  literal 
interpretation."     We  more  than  doubt  it. 

881  PEMBLE  (William,  M.A.     Puritan.     1591— 1623).     A  Short 

and  Sweet  Exposition  upon  the  First  Nine  Chapters  of  Zechariah. 

In  his  Works.  Folio.  Oxf.,  1659,  and  Lond.,  1635.  3/6  to  5/- 
Richard  Capel  says:  "Amongst  the  hardest  bookes  of  Scripture  the 
Prophets  may  have  place,  and  amongst  the  Prophets,  Zechary  is  a  deepe, 
wherein  an  elephant  may  swimme,  and  therefore  I  cannot  but  commend 
the  wisdom  of  that  man  of  God  (the  author  of  this  booke),  who  bestowed 
his  learning  and  his  paines  to  open  the  mysteries  of  this  Prophecie.    Death 


no  ZECHARIAH— MALACHI. 

ended  his  daycs  ere  he  could  quite  finish  his  worke,  and  great  weakness 
hindered  an  intemled  supplement."  Pcmble  was  a  learned  Calviiiistic 
divine,  and  his  writings  are  highly  esteemed,  but  not  very  captivating. 

S82      .STONARD  (John,  D.D.     1769— 1849).     Commentary  on  Zechariah,  with 
a  Corrected  Translation,  and  Criiical  Notes.     8vo.     Lond.,  1824-    4/- 
An  earnest  attempt  to  expound  this  prophecy  ;  we  do  not  think  the  author  has 
succce^lcd,  but  he  lias  written  some  good  things. 

883     "WARDLAW   (Ralph,   D.D.)      Lectures   on    Zec'nariali. 

[Posthumous  Works,  Vol.  III.]     Cr.  8vo.     3/6.     Edinb., 

A.  FuUerton  &  Co.     1862.     S.  2/6. 
Written  in  the  Doctor  s  old  age ;   but  zue  prefer  it,   in  some 
respects,  to  other  volumes  of  his  Uctures.      We  ahvnys  consult  it. 


MALACHI, 

884  MOORE  (T.  v.,  D.D.)     .SV^  under  ILiggai,  No.  873. 

885  POCOCK  (Edward,  D.D.)     5^^  under  'Joel,  No.  Z^S- 

886  SCLATER   (William,    D.D.)       Brief  and   Plain   Commentary 

upon  Malachy.  4to.  Lond.,  1650.  5/-  or  6/- 
Not  equal  to  the  general  standard  of  Puritan  comments.  The  editor 
of  the  work  rightly  says,  "  the  method  is,  for  the  chapters  themselves, 
analytical;  for  the  practical  observations,  synthetical."  We  are  quaintly 
told  tliat  he  would  start  the  hare  with  any  man;  that  is  to  say,  he  would 
suggest  thought  and  leave  others  to  pursue  its  track. 

887  STOCK  (Richard,  M.A.     1568— 1626).     A  Commentary  upon 

Malachy.     Whereunto  is  added  an  Exercitation  upon  the  same 
Prophecy   by   Samuel    Torshell.     Folio.     Lond.,    1641.     [Re- 
printed, together  with  Bernard  and  Fuller  on  Ruth.     Cr,  4to. 
7/6.     Lond.,K\shet.     1865.]     See  No.  262. 
Contains  a  stock  of  knowledge,  and  more  than  a  sufficient  stock  of 
quotations  from  the  fathers.     Torshell  printed  the  book  fifteen  years 
after  Stoclcs  death,  and  finding  it  to  be  written  for  a  popular  audience 
only,  be  added  an  examination  of  the  original  and  a  few  notes  in  a  more 
learned  style,  to  make  a  complete  commentary.     The  two  authors  have 
thus  composed  the  work  upon  Malachi, 

838     WATSON  (Thomas.     Puritati).     Notes  on  :\Ialachy  III.     8vo- 

1682, 

This  would  be  a  great  find  if  we  could  only  come  at  it,  for  Watson  is 

one  of  the  clearest  and  liveliest  of  Puritan  authors.     ^Ve  fear  we  shall 

never  see  this  commentarv,  for  we  have  tried  to  obtain  it,  and  tried  in  vain. 


May  God  bless  this  effort  to  assist  his  ministers  in  the  study 
of  the  Old  Testament. 


141 


COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

[See  also  under   Whole  Bible  Nos.  i — 65.      In  many  cases  the  New 
Testament  may  be  had  separately.] 

889  ALFORD    (Henry,    D.D.,   Dean   of  Canterbury).      The 

Greek  Testament  ;  with  a  Critically  Revised  Text,  &c. 
4  vols.,  8vo.  £s  2s.  Lond.,  1856 — 61.  (^-f^  page  17  of 
this  work).     Rivingtons,  and  G.  Bell  &  Sons. 

890  „  „  The  New  Testament  for  English  Readers. 
4  parts,  8vo.  £2  14s.  6d.  Rivingtons,  and  G.  Bell 
and  Sons.     1872.     (^^-^  page  1 8). 

891  „  „  The  New  Testament  Authorized  Version 
Revised.  Long  Primer,  Cr.  8vo.,  6/-  ;  Brevier,  Fcap.  8vo., 
3/6  ;  Nonp.  Sm.  8vo.,  1/6.    Rivingtons,  and  Isbister  &  Co. 

892  „  „  How  to  Study  the  New  Testament.  Part  I, 
Gospels  and  Acts  ;  Part  2,  Epistles  (first  section)  ;  Part  3, 
Epistles  (second  section)  and  Revelation.  Sm.  8vo. 
3/6  each.     Lo7id.,  W.  Isbister  &  Co.     1868. 

All  critics  speak  of  A  If  or d  with  respect,  though  they  consider  that 
something  better  than  his  Greek  Testament  is  still  needed.  He  is, 
for  the  present  at  any  rate,  indispensable  to  the  studejit  of  the 
original.  With  some  faults,  he  has  surpassing  excellencies.  We 
specially  commend  892  to  the  careful  reading  of  young  ministers. 

893  ASH    (Edward,  M.D.)       Notes  and   Qjmments  on  the  New  Testament. 

3  vols.     Sm.  8vo.     Lond.,  1849 — 50. 
Remarks  such  as  any  plain,  thoughtful  reader  would  make  offhand. 

894.    BARNES    (Albert).      Notes   on   the   New   Testament. 

Blackie's  edition.       ii    vols..    Post    8vo.      £l     14s.    6d. 

Routledge's  edition,  10  vols.,  £l. 
Everybody  has  this  zvork,  and  therefore  can  judge  for  himself, 
or  zve  would  both  cornmend  and  criticize.     (See  page  13). 

895  BAXTER  (Richard.     1615— 1691).     Paraphrase  on  the  New 

Testament,  with  Notes.     410.,  1685.     8vo.,  1810.     4/- or  5/- 
The  notes  are  in  Baxter's  intensely  practical  and  personal  style,  and 
show  the  hortatory  use  of  Scripture ;  but  they  are  not  very  explanatory. 

896  BENGEL  (John  Albert.    1687 — 1752).    Gnomon-ofthe 

New  Testament,  translated  into  English.     With  Original 
Notes.     5   vols..  Demy  8vo.       Subscription   price,   31/6. 
Cheap  issue,  the  5  vols,  bound  in  3,  24/-,  to  subscribers. 
Edtnb ,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     {See  also  No.  909.) 
See  our  remarks  upon  pages  75  a?id  16. 


142  NEW  Ti:STAMENT. 

S97     BEZA  (TillioDoKi;).     Ncwc  Testament,  Translated  out  of 
Greekc,  by  Theod.  Beza.     Sm.  fol.     Loud.,  1596.     25/- 
T/ic  compact  viar  spinal  Jiotcs  arc  still  most  useful.      'J  he  possessor 
of  this  old  black  Utter  'J'cstainent  may  think  hiuisclf  happy. 

898  BIBLICAL  MUSEUM   (The).     A  complete  Commen- 

tary on    an   Original    Flan.      By  James   Comper  Gray, 

5  \ols.,  Cr.  8vo.    4/6  each.     Loud..,  Elliot  Stock.     187 1-3. 

]\[ost  Jielpful  in  sugo;csting  divisions,  and  furnishing  anecdotes. 

Jilultuiii  in  parvo.     Our  opinion  of  it  is  very  high.     It  is  not 

critical,  but  popular.      The  author  has  used  abbreviations  in  order 

to  croivd  in  as  much  matter  as  possible.     (See  No.  5.) 

899  BLOOMFIELD  (S.  T.,  D.D.)    The  Greek  Testament,  with 

English   Notes  ;    chiefly  original.     2   vols.,  8v'o.     Lond., 
1 84 1.     SjS  to  14/- 

900  „  „  Additional  Annotations  (^n  the  New 
Testament.     8\-o.     Lond.,  1850.     2/6. 

]Vc  frcqjiently  get  more  from  Bloomfield  tJian  from  Alford, 
tJiough  he  is  not  so  fashionable.     His  notes  are  full  of  teacJiing. 

901  „  „  Reccnsio  Synoptica  Annotationis  Sacrae ; 
being  a  Critical  Digest  of  the  most  important  Annota- 
tions on  the  New  Testament.     8  vols.,  8vo.     Lond.,  1826. 

•  15/-  to  21/-     [A  considerable  part  of  this  work  was  in- 
cluded   in   recent    editions    of   the    editor's   Greek    New 
Testament.] 
"//  zvould  be  impossible  to  convey  to  our  readers  an  adequate  idea 
of  the  mass  of  information  which   the  learned  author  has  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  7iumerous  passages  ivhich  he  has  undertaken  to 
illustrate,  and  we  can  safely  say,  that  the  enquirer  zvill  find  very 
feiv  of  xvhieh  Mr.  Bloomfield  has  not  given  a  complete  and  satis- 
factory expositioji." — Quarterly  Theological  Rcvieiv. 

902  BOW YER  (William,  F.S.  A.     1699— 1777).    Critical  Conjecttires  and  Obser- 

vations  on   the    New  Testament.      From  various  authors.     410.     Lond., 
1812.     2/6. 
According  to  Orme,  the  best  that  can  be  said  for  these  conjectures  is,  that  they  are 
ingenious  ;  but  who  wants  conjectures  at  all  ? 

903  BOYS  (John,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury.     1571— 1625). 

Exposition  of  the  Dominicall  Epistles  and  Gospels  used 

in    our   English   Liturgie    throughout    the  whole   yeere. 

Folio.     Lond.,  1638.     14/- 

Racy,  rich,  and  running  over.      Wc  marvel  that  it  has  not  been 

reprinted.     English  churchmen  ought  not  to  leave  such  a  book  in 

its  present  scarcity,  for  it  is  specially  adapted  for  their  2ise.     Boys 

is  all  essence.      What  a  difference  betzveen  the  John  Boys  of  i6j8 

and  the  Thomas  Boys  of  182"] I     Note  well  the  name. 


NEW  TESTAMENT.  143 

904  BOYS   (Thomas,  M.A.)      The  New  Testament,  with  a  plain  exposition  for 

the  use  of  families.     4to.     Lcnid.,  1827.      5/- 
Ordinary  readers  might  be  benefited  by  the  practical  observations  and  evangelical 
applications  and  exhortations  ;  but  students  do  not  require  this  Boys'  exposition. 

905  BURKITT    (William.        1650 — 1703).        Expository    Notes. 

Numerous  editions,  folio,  4to.,  and  8vo.     Mr.  Tegg  publishes 
it  in  2  vols.,  8vo.      15/-     S.  5/-  to  8/-     {See  page  20). 
We  liked  Burkitt  better  when  we  were  younger.     He  is,  however,  a 
homely  and  spiritual  writer,  and  his  work  is  good  reading  for  the  man}'. 

906  CHALMERS  (Thomas,  D.D.,  LL.D.)    Sabbath  Scripture 

Readings.     Posthumous  Works,  vol.  IV.     {See  No.  1 1). 
The  readings  are  not  upon  every  portion  of  Scripture,  neither 
can  they  be  vieivcd  as  a  full  expositioji  of  any  part  thereof      They 
are preciojis  fragments  of  ininwrtal  thought. 

907  CHRYSOSTOM.     Homilies  on  Matthew,   3  vols.,   36/-;  John, 

2  vols.,  24/6;  Acts,  2  vols.,  21/-;  Romans,   i  vol.;  i  and  2 

Corinthians,   3   vols.,   28/6;    Commentaries  on  Galatians  and 

Homilies  on  Ephesians,   i  vol. ;  Philippians,  Colossians,  and 

Thessalonians,  i  vol.  ;  Timothy,   Titus,  and  Philemon,  i  vol., 

12/-     8vo.     Library  of  the  Fathers.     Land.,  J.  Parker  &  Co. 

The  price  of  the  volumes  to  subscribers  is  considerably  less. 

Secondhand  volumes  about  5/-  each. 

Enough  of  solid  truth  and  brilliant  utterance  will  be  found  here  to 

justify  this  father's  title  of  "  Golden  Mouth  ";  but  still  all  is  not  gold 

which  fell  from  his  lips,  and  to  modern  readers  Chrysostom  is  not  so 

instructive  as  he  was  to  his  own  age. 

908  CHURTON  (Edward,  M.A.),  and  JONES(WiLLiAM  Basil, M.A.) 

The  New  Testament.     With  a  Plain  Explanatory  Comment. 
2  vols.,  Cr.  8vo.     21/-    Land.,  Murray.      1869.     S.  13/6. 
Meant  for   private  or  family  reading;    with  brief  notes  and  well- 
executed  engravings.     An  elegant  work. 

909  CRITICAL    ENGLISH    TESTAMENT,    (The).     An 

Adaptation   of  Bengel's   Gnomon,   with  Notes,  showing 
the  Results  of  Modern  Criticism  and  Exegesis.     3  vols., 
Cr.  8vo.     6/- each.     Zf?^^.,  Isbi.ster.     1869.    S.  9/- to  11/- 
"  The  editors  of  this  valuable  work  have  put  before  the  English 
reader  the  results  of  the  labours  of  more  tha?i  tzvejity  cjuincnt  com- 
mentators.    He  who  uses  the  book  will  find  that  he  is  reading 
Bengel's  sjiggcstive  'Gno7?io?i,'  modifying  it  by  the  critical  investi- 
gations of  Tischendorf  a?td  A  If  or d,  and  comparing  it  zuith  the 
exegctical  -works  of  De  IVette,  Meyer,  Olshausen,   and  others,  and 
adding  to  it  also  profound  ronarks  and  gloxving  sayings  front 
Trench  and  Stier." — Evangelical  Magazine. 

We  have  heard  this  opinion  questioned ;  but  zvith  all  discounts 
the  book  is  a  (rood  one. 


144  Nl-.V  TKSTAMICxNJT. 

910  GUMMING  (Joiix,  D.D.)     Sabhatli  Kvening  Readings.     Issued 

as  follows: — The    Four  Ciospels,  in  4  vols.,   20/-;    Acts,   7/-; 

Romans,   4/6  ;    Gorinthians,   5/- ;    Galatians,    Ephesians,    and 

Philippians,  6/-;  James,  Peter,  and  Judc,  6/-;  Revelation,  7/6. 

LoiuL,  Arthur  Plall,  Virtue  &  Go.      1S53,  &c.     S.  2/-  each. 
Z?/-.  Ciu/i/fiing  is  always  evangelical,  and  his  style  is  very  attractive. 
These  works  are  rather  for  popular  reading  than  for  students  ;  but  they 
are  good  as  a  whole,  and   their  spirit  is  excellent.     The  doctor    has 
written  too  fast,  and  borrowed  too  much ;  but  he  interests  and  edifies. 

911  DALLAS  (Alkxahder,  A.M.)    The  Cottager's  Guide  to  the  New  Testament. 

6  vols.      i2mo.     Land.,  Nisbet.     1839—45.     7/6. 
Six  volumes  for  cott.ngeis !     How  could  they  ever  buy  them?     If  bought,  how  could 
they  refrain  from  sleeping  while  trying  to  read  them?     The  "Guide"  could  be  of  no 
lios^iblc  use  to  a  sensible  man,  except  as  an  opiate. 

912  DALTON    (W.,   A.^^)     Commentary.     Edited  by  Rev.  W.   Dalton,  A.M. 

2  vols.     8vo.     Loud.,  Seeleys.      1848.     5/6. 
Nut  of  use  to  preachers.      Prepared  for  family  reading,   and  mainly  taken  from 
Jlciuy  and  Scott.    There  are  quite  enough  of  these  compilations. 

913  DAVIDSON  (David).     Critical  Notes.     2  vols.,  i8mo.     Edinb.,  1834.    3/- 
'i'wo  small  thick  volumes  :  really  a  pocket  commentary.     Although  the  notes  are 

good,  the  student  had  better  spend  his  money  on  larger  and  better  books. 

914  DODDRIDGE  (Philip,  D.D.    11702— 1751).    Family  Expositor; 

With  Gritical  Notes.     Many  editions.     6  vols.,  4to. ;  5  vols. 

8vo. ;  4  vols.  8vo.]  and  i  vol.,  imp.  8vo.,  10/6.  Lond.,  Tegg. 
"The  late  Dr.  Barringfon,  Bishop  of  Durham,  in  addressing  his 
clergy  on  the  choice  of  books,  characterises  this  masterly  work  in  the 
following  terms  : — '  I  know  no  expositor  who  unites  so  many  advantages 
as  Doddridge  \  whether  you  regard  the  fidelity  of  his  version,  the  fulness 
and  perspicuity  of  his  composition,  the  utility  of  his  general  and  historical 
information,  the  impartiality  of  his  doctrinal  comments,  or,  lastly,  the 
piety  and  pastoral  earnestness  of  his  moral  and  religious  applications.'" 
Later  interpreters  have  somewhat  diminished  the  value  of  this  work. 

915  ERASMUS  (Desiderius.     1467 — 1536).      Paraphrase.      Black 

Letter.     2  vols.     Folio.     Lond.,  1548  and  1551. 
This  paraphrase  was  appointed  by  public  authority  to  be  placed  in  all 
churches  in  England,  and  the  clergy  were  also  ordered  to  read  it.     The 
volumes  are  very  rare,  and  expensive  because  of  their  rarity. 

916  GELL  (Robert,  D.D.     Died  1665).      Cell's  Remains  ;  or,  Select  Scriptures 

explained,     i  or  2  vols.     Folio.     Lond.,  1676.     7/6  to  10/- 
A  queer  collection  of  remarks,  criticisms,  and  fancies,  in  a  huge  volume.     Baxter 
called   Gdl  ''one  of  the   sec*: -makers."     He  was,    no   doubt,   a    singular    man,    an 
Arminian,  and  one  who  had  great  respect  for  "the  Learned  Societie  of  Astrologers." 

917  GILPIN  (William,  A.M.    1724—1804).    Exposition  of  the  New  Testament. 

4to.     1790.     Fourth  edition.     2  vols.     8vo.     1811.     3/6. 
Half  paraphrase,  half  very  free  translation.     Notes  meagre.     Useful  to  buttermen. 

918  GIRDLESTONE  (Gharles,  M.A.)     New  Testament.     Lectures 

for  Families.     2  vols.     8vo.     Lond.,  1835.     5/- 
Profitable  household  readinar. 


NEW  TESTAMENT.  145 

919  GUYSE  (John,  D.D,     1680— 1671).     The  Practical  Expositor.     3  vols.,  4to., 

1739—52;  6  vols.,  8vo.,  1775,  &c.     8/6  to  15/- 
The  day  of  paraphrases  is  past.    Dr.  Guysewf2iS  ponderous  in  style,  and  we  question 
if  at  this  date  he  is  ever  read.     Doddridge's  Expositor  is  far  better. 

920  HAMMOND    (Henry,    D.D.)      Paraphrase    and   Annotations. 

Folio.     Land.,  1675.      Works,  vol.  III.     Also  in  4  vols.,  8vo. 
Ox/.,  1845.     9/- to  12/- 
Though  Hammond  gives  a  great  deal  of  dry  criticism,  ^nd  is  Arminian, 
churchy,  and  peculiar,  we  greatly  value  his  addition  to  our  stores  of 
biblical  information.     Use  the  sieve  and  reject  the  chaff. 

921  HEYLYN  (John,  D.D.)     Theological  Lectures  at  Wesminster  Abbey  ;  with 

an  Interpretation  of  the  New  Testament.    2voIs.,4to.    Zc«^/.,  1749— 61.  4/- 
Five  volumes  with  absolutely  nothing  in  them  beyond  a  spinning  out  of  the  text. 

922  KNATCHBULL (Sir  Norton,  ^ar/.    Died\(iZ\).    Annotations 

upon  some  Difficult  Texts.     8vo.     Car?ib.,  \6gT,.     2/- 
Much  valued  in  its  day ;  but  far  outdone  by  more  recent  critics. 

923  LANGE  (J.  P.,  D.D.)    Translations  of  the  Commentaries  of 

Dr.  Lange  and  his  Collaborateurs.      10  vols.,  imp.  8vo. 
21/-,  or  to  subscribers,  15/-  each.     Edmb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark. 
See  under  separate  books. 

924  LEIGH  (Sir  Edward).     See  No.  44. 

925  LINDSAY  (John).    New  Testament ;  with  Notes.   [Selected  from 

Grotius,  Hammond,  &c.]      2  vols,  folio.     Lotid.,  1736.     4/6. 
A  condensation  of  other  writers — very  well  done. 

926  McCLELLAN  (John  Brown,  M.A.)     New  Testament.     A  New 

Translation,  Analyses,  Copious  References,  and  Illustrations 
from  Original  Authorities,  Harmony  of  the  Gospels,  Notes,  and 
Dissertations.  In  2  vols.,  8vo.  Vol.  I.  The  Gospels,  with  the 
Harmony.  30/-  Z^«^.^  Macmillan  &  Co.  1875.  S.  12/- 
This  work  is  what  it  professes  to  be,  and  we  need  say  no  more.  It 
is,  however,  a  very  expensive  luxury  at  the  publishing  price. 

927  MAYER  (John,  D.D.)     New  Testament.     2  vols.,  Folio. 

1631.     16/-     {See pages  10  and  II.) 

928  MEYER  (Dr.  H.  A.  W.     Oberconsistorialrath,  Hannover').     Commentary  on 

the  New  Testament.     Messrs.  T.  &  T.  Clark  are  issuing  a  Translation  of 

Meyer's   Commentary.      They  have  issued  Romans,   2  vols.;    Galatians, 

1  vol.;  John's  Gospel,  I  vol.     Average  price  to  non-subscribers,  10/6  per 

vol. ;  subscription  price,  2i/-  for  4  vols.     S.  5/-  each. 

A  very  learned  Commentary,  of  which  Bp.  Ellicoit  speaks  in  the  highest  terms. 

Meyer  must  be  placed  in  the  first  class  of  scholars,  though  somewhat  lower  down  in 

the  class  than  his  admirers  have  held.     Apart  from  scholarship  we  do  not  commend 

him.     Alfordwd^s  certainly  no  very  rigid  adherent  of  orthodoxy,  yet  he  says  oi  Meyer 

that  he  is  not  to  be  trusted  where  there  is  any  room  for  the  introduction  of  rationalistic 

opinions.     Whatever  credit  may  be  due  to  him  for  accurate  interpretation,  this  is  a 

terribly  serious  drawback.     It  is  well  to  be  warned. 

929  NEWCOME   (William,  D.D.,   Abp.  of  Armagh.     1729— 1800).     Attempt 

towards  revising  our  English  Translation  and  Illustrating  the   Sense  by 
Notes.     2  vols.,  royal  8vo.     Dubl.,   1796.     10/-  to  13/- 
Newcome  was  a  critical  scholar  whose  works  enjoyed  a  high  repute.      Unhappily, 


146  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

the  Unitarians  brought  out  an  "  Improved  Version,"  professedly  based  upon  Neivcome^i 
nnd  this  led  the  public  to  question  Nrwcome's  orthodoxy,  but  there  was  little  reason 
for  doing  so.     Few  of  our  readers  will  care  for  this  cold  literal  interpretation, 

930      PENN  (Granville,   F.S.A.)    The  Book  of  the  New  Covenant;   being  a 
Critical  Revision  of  the  ICnglish  Version.     8vo.     Lofid.,  iS 2,6.     3/6. 

031  ,,  „  Annotations  on  the  Book  of  the  New  Covenant.    8vo.    1837. 

932  ,,  ,,  Supplemental  Annotations.     Lond.,  1838. 

These  books  are  too  learned  for  much  to  be  learned  from  them  ;  perhaps  if  they 
had  been  more  learned  still  they  would  have  been  useful. 

933  BLATTS  yoHN).   Self-Interpreting  Testament.  4  vols.,  8vo.  Z^W.,  1827.  7/6. 
A  sort  of  Biblical  Commentary.     A  concordance  will  answer  the  purpose. 

934  QUESNELL  (Pasquier.    1634 — 1719).  New  Testament.   4vols., 

8vo.     Lond.,  17 19 — 1725.     [The  Gospels  have  been  reprinted. 
3  vols.,  i2mo,     Glasg.,  1830.     S.  7/6.] 
A  sweet  and  simple  French  writer  who  says  many  good  things  of  a 
very  harmless  character. 

935  SUMNER  (John  Bird,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury).    Practical  Exposition  of  the 

Gospels,  Acts,  Epistles  of  Paul,  James,  Peter,  John,  and  Jude.     9  vols., 
8vo.     1833  to  1 85 1.     1/6  to  2/6  per  vol. 
Sumner^s  Expositions  are  very  mild  and  can  generally  be  bought  very  cheap.     The 
public  are  pretty  good  judges,  and  the  price  indicates  the  value.     The  qualities  which 
procure  an  archbishopric  are  not  such  as  qualify  a  man  to  be  an  eminent  expositor. 

936  TOWNSEND  (George,  M.A.)     New  Testament.     Arranged  in 

Chronological  Order.  Notes.    2  vols.,  8 vo.    Lond.,  i2>t,?>.   S.  5/6. 
This  harmony  has  always  been  in  repute ;  but  we  confess  we  like  the 
New  Testament  best  as  we  find  it. 

937  TROLLOPE  (William,  M.A.)     Analecta  Theologica.     2  vols., 

8vo.     Lond.,  1830 — 35.     5/- 
A  condensation  of  the   opinions  of  eminent  expositors,  very  well 
executed,  and  useful  except  so  far  as  superseded  by  more  modern  works. 

938  WALL  (William,  D.D.  1645—1727-8).  Brief  Notes.  8vo.  Lotid.,  iT^o.  1/6. 
Explains  some  difficulties,  but  is  far  surpassed  by  other  annotators. 

939  WESLEY  (John).     See  No.  62. 

940  WHEDON  (D.  D.,  D.D.     Meth.  Epis.  Ch.,  Ameiica).    Popular  Commentary. 

To  be  completed  in  5  vols.,  cr.  8vo.     5/-  each.     Hodder  &  Stoughton. 
Dr.    IVhedon   lacks  common  sense,  and  is  no  expositor.      He  is  furiously  anti- 
calvinistic,  and  as  weak  as  he  is  furious. 

941  WHITBY  (Daniel,  D.D.     1638— 1726).     ^^^A^^.  50. 
This  is  a  part  of  Patrick,  Loivth,  &c. 

942  WILSON  (William,   B.D.      1762— 1800).     Explanation  of  the 

New  Testament  by  the  early  opinions  of  Jews  and  Christians 
concerning  Christ.     8vo.      Catnb.,  1838.     3/- 
Follows  a  deeply  interesting  line  of  investigation.     It  is  not  a  com- 
mentary, but  is  too  good  to  be  omitted. 

943  WORSLEY  (John).     Translation,  with  Notes.     8vo.     Lond.,  1770.     2/- 
Translation  second  rate,  criticism  none,  notes  very  short. 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS.  U: 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS. 

944  ADAM  (Thomas.     1701 — 1784.     0/  Winiringham).    Exposition 

of  the  Gospels.     2  vols.,  8 vo.     Land,,  iSt,'].     4/6. 
Short  and  sweet ;  but  Adam  is  not  the  first  man  as  an  expositor. 

945  AQUINAS   (Thomas.      1224 — 1274).      Catena  Aurea.      Com- 

mentary, collected  out  of  the  Fathers.     6  vols.,  8vo.     ^2  2s. 

Loud,  and  Ox/.,  Parker.     1870. 
The  Fathers  are  over-estimated,  by  a  sort  of  traditionary  repute,  for 
we  question  if  they  are  much  read.     This  collection  of  extracts  we 
always  look  into  with  curiosity,  and  sometimes  we  find  a  pearl. 

946  BONAR  (HORATIUS,  D.D.)    Light  and  Truth.    {See  No.  6.) 

947  BOUCHTER  (Barton,  A.M.)     Manna  in  the  House.    Vol.  L,  Matthew  and 

Mark;  Vol.  II.,  Luke;  Vol.  III.,  John.    Thick  i2mo.    Lond.,].  F.  Shaw. 
1853-4-     5/- 
Mr.  Bouchier  writes  sweetly,  and  his  books  aid  the  devotions  of  many  families. 
Ministers  may  read  them  with  profit ;  but  they  are  not  exactly  intended  for  them. 

948  BROWN  (John,  D.D.,  of  Edinburgh).     Discourses  and 

Sayings  of  our   Lord.      Three  large  8vo.  vols.      31/6. 
Edinb.,  Oliphant  &  Co.     1852.     S.  18/- 
Of  the  noblest  order  of  exposition.     Procure  it. 

949  BURGON  (J.   W.,   D.D.)      Plain  Commentary  for  devotional 

reading.  5  vols.,  fcap.  8vo.    21/-    Loud.,  Parker.     1870.    S.  12/- 
Ryle  says  :  "  This  is  an  excellent,  suggestive,  and  devout  work  ;  but 
I  cannot  agree  with  the  author  when  he  touches  upon  such  subjects  as 
the  Church,  the  sacraments,  and  the  ministry." 

950  CAMPBELL  (George,  D.D.,  F.R.S.  .^rt'/;/^.    1719—1796).   The 

Gospels  translated,  with  Notes.     4  vols.,  8vo.    Aberd.,  1814.    4/- 
Clear  and  cold.      Ort?ie  says  it  is  *'  one  of  the  best  specimens  of  a 
translation  of  the  Scriptures  in  any  language."     The  preliminary  disser- 
tations are  valuable ;  the  notes  are  purely  critical. 

951  CHOICE    NOTES    on   Matthew,  drawn   from   Old   and   New 

Sources.    [Also  on  Mark,  Luke,  and  John.]    Cr.  8vo.    4/6  each. 

Loftd.,  Macmillan  &  Co.     1868—69. 
These  are  taken  from    the  grander  treasuries  of  Prebendary  Ford 
{No.  955).     We  have  mentioned  them  because  those  who  could  not 
afford  to  buy  Ford's  books  might  be  able  to  get  these. 

952  CLARKE  (Samuel,  D.D.     1673— 1729).     Paraphrase,  with  Notes.     2  vols., 

8vo.     Lond.,  1741  ;  Oxf.^  181 6.     2/- 
We  do  not  care  for  paraphrases.     Clarke  was  a  learned  man,  but  an  unsafe  guide. 

953  DENTON  (W.,  M.A.)     The  Gospels  for  the  Sundays  and  other 

Holy  Days  of  the  Christian  year.     3  vols.,  8vo.      15/-,  14/-, 
and  13/-  each  respectively.     Lond.,  G.  Bell  &  Co.     i860 — 63. 
Curates  will  find  this  just  the  thing  they  need  for  sermonizing. 


148  THE  FOUR  GOSPELS. 

954  [ELSLEY.]     Annotations  on   the  Gospels  and   Acts.     3   vols., 

8vo.     Land.,  1827.     S.  2/6  to  4/. 
Wholly  critical  and  philological. 

955  FORD    (James,    M.A.)      The    Gospels,    illustrated    from 

Ancient  and   Modern  Authors.     4  vols.,  8vo.     Matthew, 
1 1/- ;  Mark,  10/-  ;  Luke,  12/  ;  John,  12/-     Loud.,  Masters! 
1856—72.     S.  7/-  each. 
Those  2u/io  wish  to  see  what  the  Fathers  said  upon  the  Gospels^ 
and  to  read  the  choicest  sayings  of  the  early  Anglican  bishops,  ca?i~ 
not  do  better  than  consult  Ford,  who  has  made  a  very  rich  collec- 
tion.   Some  of  the  extracts  do  not  materially  illustrate  the  text,  but 
they  are  all  worth  readijig. 

956  FORSTER  (John,  M.A.)     The  Gospel  Narrative,  with  a  Con- 

tinuous Exposition.  Imp.  8vo.   Z,?;///.,  J.  W.  Parker.  1845.    S.  3/- 
A  paraphrase  upon  a  good  system,  carefully  executed,  and  instructive. 
Thoroughly  Anglican, 

957  GILBY  (William  S.,  M.A.)     Spirit  of  the  Gospel.    8vo.    Lond.,  i%i%.    2/- 
Interesting  remarks  on  certain  texts.     All  can  be  found  in  other  writers, 

958  HALL   (Charles   H.)     Notes,  for   the  use  of  Bible   Classes. 

2  vols.,  8vo.     New  York  and  Lend.,  1857.     S.  8/- 

This  book  is  as  full  of  reverence  to  Bishops  and  other  Episcopal 
arrangements  as  if  it  had  been  "  appointed  to  be  read  in  Churches." 
American  Episcopalians  can  evidently  be  very  thorough.     Notes  poor. 

959  JACOBUS    (Melancthon    W.,  Pennsylvania).      Notes. 

3  vols.,  or.  8vo.  2/6  each.  ^(fzV//^.,  W.  Oliphant.    1868 — 69. 
Jacobus  is  sound  and  plain,  and  is  therefore  a  safe  guide  to 

Sunday-School  teachers  aiid  others  ivho  need  to  see  the  results  of 
learning  ivithout  the  display  of  it. 

960  JUKES    (Andrew).      Characteristic    Dififereiices   of  the 

Gospels  considered,  as   revealing  various  relations  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.    Cr.  8vo.    2/6.    Z^;/^.,  Nisbet,    1853.    S.  1/6. 
Remarks  prompting  thought ;  containing  in  a  small  compass  a 
mass  of  instruction. 

961  LANGE(J.  P.)     SeeNo.giT,. 

The  Gospels  are  afnojig  the  best  of  the  series. 

962  LYTTLETON  (Lord  George),     Gospels  and  Acts,  with  Notes.     Sm.  8vo- 

Lo7td.,  Rivingtons.     1856.     S,  3/- 
Such  remarks  as  most  teachers  could  make  for  themselves. 

963  NORRIS  (John,  Canon  of  Bristol).     Key  to  the  Gospel  Narra- 

tive.    Sm,  8vo,     2/6.     Zand.,  Rivingtons.     187 1.     S.  1/6. 

"  Canon  Norn's  writes  primarily  to  help  '  younger  students'  in  studying 

the  Gospels.     But  the  unpretending  volume  is  one  which  all  students 

may  peruse  with  advantage.     It  is  an  admirable  manual  for  those  who. 

take  Bible  Classes  through  the  Gospels." — So  says  the  London  Quarterly. 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS.  149 

964  OLSHAUSEN  (Hermann,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  the  Gospels 

and  Acts.    4  vols.,  demy  8vo.    ;^2  2s.    Cheap  edition,  4  vols., 

cr.  8vo.     24/-     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.      1848— 1860. 

Olshauseii  is  mentioned  by  Alford  as  so  rich  in  original  material,  that 

he  has  often  cited  him  in  his  "  New  Testament  for  English  Readers." 

He  is  one  of  the  most  devout  of  the  Germans,  and  a  great  scholar ;  but 

we  are  not  enamoured  of  him. 

965  OXENDEN   (AsHTON,  Bishop).      Short  Lectures  on  the  Sunday  Gospels. 

2  vols.,  l2mo.     2/6  each.     Loud.,  Hatchards.     1869,  &c.     S.  3/- 
Why  Oxendcn^s  books  sell  we  do  not  know.     We  would  not  care  to  have  them 
for  a  gift.     "  Milk  for  babes  "  watered  beyond  measure. 

966  VEAKCE  {ZKCYlK-e..Y,'D.T>.,  Bishop  of  J^ochester.    1690— 1774).    Commentary. 

Gospels,  Acts,  and  i  Corinthians.     2  vols.,  royal  4to.     Land.,  1777.     5/6. 
A  huge  mass  of  learning,  said  by  great  divines  to  be  invaluable.     To  most  men 
these  volumes  will  simply  be  a  heap  of  lumber. 

967  RIDDLE  g.  E.,  M.A.)     Commentary.     Royal  8vo.     1843.     S.  3/- 

Choice  extracts  selected  by  the  author  of  the  well-known  Latin  Dictionary. 
Ministers  should  make  such  collections  for  themselves  rather  than  purchase  them. 

968  RIPLEY   (Henry  J.     Prof.  Neivto7i  Theol.  Listit.    U.S.)     The 

Gospels,  with  Notes.   2  vols.,  post  8vo.  Boston,  U.S.,  iS^^.  S.  2/- 
Adapted  for  Sunday-School  use.     Simple,  brief,  and  practical. 

969  RYLE  (J.  C,  B.A.)     Expository  Thoughts.     For  Family 

and   Private   Use.      Matthew,   6/-  ;    Mark,    5/-  ;    Luke 

(2  vols.),   12/6  ;    John,  (3  vols.),  20/-     8vo.     Lond.,  W. 

Hunt  &  Co.    [N.  D.] 

We  prize  these  volumes.     They  are  diffuse,  but  not  more  so  than 

family  reading  requires.     Mr.  Ryle  has  evidently  studied  all  pre- 

vio7is  writers  iipon  the  Gospels,  and  has  given  forth  ati  individual 

utterance  of  considerable  value. 

970  STABBACK  (Thomas,  A.B.)    Gospels  and  Acts,  with  Annotations.    2  vols., 

8vo.     Falmouth,  1809.     3/6. 
Very  useful  in  its  day,  but  quite  out  of  date. 

971  STIER  (Rudolph,  D.D.)     The  Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

8  vols,  in  4.     8vo.     42/-     T.  &  T.  Clark.     1869. 

972  „  „  The  Words  of  the  Risen  Saviour,  and 
Commentary  on  the  Epistle  of  St.  James.  8vo.  10/6. 
Edinb.,  Clark.     1859. 

No  one  can  be  expected  to  receive  all  that  Stier  has  to  say,  but  he 
viust  be  didl  indeed  zvho  cajmot  learn  much  from  him.  Read  zvith 
care  he  is  a  great  instructor. 

973  STOCK  (Eugene).     Lessons  on  the  Life  of  our  Lord. 

For  the  Use  of  Sunday  School  Teachers.      8vo.     4/6. 

Loud.,  Ch.  of  England  S.  S.  Institute.     1875. 
For  real  use  a  thoroughly  commendable  book.     Teachers  and 
preachers  have  here  '>nore  matter  give?i  them  on  the  lesson  than  they 
are  likely  to  use.     Admirable  I 


150  THE  FOUR  GOSPELS. 

974  TOWNSON   (YwouK?.,  Archdeacon  of  Richmond.      17 15 — 1792). 

Discourses  on  the  Gospels.      2  vols.,  8vo.      1810.      1/6  to  5/- 
Bishop  Lo7vth  welromed  this  as  "a  capital  performance."     It  is  only 
so  from  Loxcth's  point  of  view. 

975  TRAPP  (Joseph,  D.D.     1679—1747).     Notes.     8vo.     1748.     1/6. 

'J'liis  'J'lapf^,  gmndson  of  the  famous  commentator,  is  the  author  of  a  wretched 
pam])hkt  u])oii  "the  nature,  folly,  sin,  and  daiicjer  of  being  righteous  overmuch."  He 
i>|)i)oscd  Whitfield  and  Wesley  with  more  violence  than  sense.  His  work  is  utterly 
worthless,  and  we  only  mention  it  to  warn  the  reader  against  confounding  it  with  the 
jiroductions  of  the  real  old  Trapp. 

976  TRENCH  (R.  CiiENEVix,  D.D.,  Ahp.  of  Dublhi).    Studies 

on  the  Gospels.    8vo.    8/6.  Z(7«r/.,  Macmillan  &  Co.   1874. 
Masterly  studies  oil  important  topics.     Students  will  do  well  to 
7-cad  also  Trenc/is  "  Sermon  on  the  Mount."      We  do  not  ahvays 
agree  with  this  author,  but  zve  ahvays  learn  from  him. 

977  WARREN  (Israel,  D.D.)     Sunday-School  Commentary.   8vo.    7/6.    187^. 
An  American  work  imported  by  Hodder  and  Stoughton.     Notes  slender. 

978  WATSON    (Richard).      Exposition    of    Matthew   and   Mark. 

Demy  8vo,,  6/-;  i2mo.,  3/6.     Lond,,  66,  Paternoster  Row. 
Arminian  views  crop  up  at  every  opportunity.     The  notes  are  meant 
to  elucidate  difficulties  in  the  text,  and  frequently  do  so. 

979  WESTCOTT  (Brooke  Foss,  M.A.)     Introduction  to  the 

Study  of  the  Gospels.    Cr.  8vo.     10/6.    Zci;/^.,  Macmillan 

&  Co.  i860.  S.  61- 
Worthy  of  high  commendation.  The  author  knoivs  the  German 
writers,  but  is  not  defiled  by  their  scepticism.  He  is  a  7nan  of  deep 
thought,  but  displays  no  pride  of  intellect.  A  man  had  Jieed  be  a 
thorough  student  to  vahie  this  Introduction :  it  is  not  an  introduc- 
tion to  the  Gospels,  or  to  the  reading  of  them,  but  to  their  study. 

980  WIESELER  (Karl).     Chronological  Synopsis  of  the  Gospels.     8vo.     13/- 

Lond.,  Bell  &  Dakly.  1864.  S.  4/- 
This  important  work  formed  the  basis  both  of  the  Synopsis  Evatigelica  of  TischeU' 
dorf,  and  of  the  Historical  Lectures  on  the  Life  of  our  Lord  by  Bishop  Ellicott.  It  is 
much  to  be  regretted  that  so  many  novel  interpretations  and  baseless  hypotheses 
should  have  marred  the  book  ;  but,  notwithstanding  all  drawbacks,  it  must  be  a 
masterly  work  to  have  received  the  heartiest  commendation  of  the  greatest  scholars  of 
the  day.     Only  the  more  advanced  student  will  care  for  this  Synopsis. 

981  WILLIAMS  (Isaac,  E.D.)     Devotional  Commentary.     8  vols., 

cr.  Svo.     5/-  each,  viz :  Thoughts  on  the  Study  of  the  Gospels. 

Harmony  of  the  Evangelists.    The  Nativity.    Second  Year  of 

the  Ministry,     Third  Year  of  the  Ministry.     The  Holy  Week. 

The  Passion.  The  Resurrection.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1873. 
Anglican  popery  for  quartz,  and  sparkling  grains  of  precious  gospel 
largely  interspersed  as  gold.  We  cannot  imagine  any  spiritual  man, 
reading  these  works  without  benefit,  if  he  knows  how  to  discriminate. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  GOSPELS.  151 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  GOSPELS. 

[As  these  are  somewhat  aside  from  our  plan,  we  mention  but  few. 
That  they  are  very  numerous  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  list 
givenm  Smith's  Dictionary. — Osiander,  1537  ;  Jansen,  1549;  Stephanus, 
1553;  Calvin,  1553;  Cluver,  1628;  Calov,  1680;  Chemnitz,  1593 
(continued  by  Leyser  and  Gerhard,  1704);  Calixt,  1624;  Cartwright, 
1627;  Lightfoot,  1654;  Cradock,  1668;  Lancy,  1689;  Le  Clerc,  1699; 
Tomard,  1707;  Burmann,  1712  ;  Whiston,  1702  ;  Rus,  1727-8 — 30; 
Bengel,  1736;  Hauber,  1737;  Biisching,  1766;  Doddridge,  1739 — 4°  i 
Pilkington,  1747;  Macknight,  1756;  Berthing,  1767;  Griesbach, 
1776,  97,  1809,  22;  Newcome,  1778;  Priestly,  1777,  in  Greek,  and 
1780,  in  EngHsh ;  Michaelis,  1788,  in  his  Introduction;  White,  1799; 
Planck,  1809;  Keller,  1802;  Mutschelle,  1806;  De  Wette  and  Lucke, 
1818;  Hess,  1822  j  Sebastiani,  1806;  Matthaei,  1826;  Kaiser,  1828; 
Roediger,  1829;  Clausen,  1829;  Greswell,  1830;  Chapman,  1836; 
Carpenter,  1838;  Reichel,  1840;  Gehringer,  1842;  Robinson,  1845, 
in  Greek,  1846,  in  English;  Stroud,  1853;  Anger,  1851  ;  Tischendorf, 
1851.] 

982  CALVIN   (John).     A  Harmony  of  Matthew,  Mark,  and 

Luke.     Translated  by  Rev.  W.   Pringle.     3  vols.,  8vo. 

[Calvin Trans.  See]  ^^w<^.,T.&T.  Clark.  1845.  S.io/6. 
There  are  older  translatiGns  of  this  noble  work,  but  they  are  less 
suitable  to  modern  taste  than  Mr.  Pringle  s.  Calvin  only  harmo- 
nized three  of  the  evangelists,  but  lie  did  his  work  in  Ids  visual 
superb  manner. 

983  CLARKE  (George  W.)     Harmony,  with  Notes,  etc.     Cr. 

8vo.     Neiv  York,   1870.      Worth  3/- 
Tliis  A  merican  author  is  greatly  indebted  to  other  luorks.     He 
has  produced  a  very  handy  book  for  teachers  of  youth. 

984  DODDRIDGE  (Philip,  D.D.)     ^^^iVb.  914. 

985  DUNN  (Samuel).     Gospels  Harmonized,  with  Notes  :  formmg 

a  complete  Commentary  on  the  Evangelists.     Chiefly  by  Adam 

Clarke.  Thick  8vo.  Z^;/^.,  1838.  3/6. 
Samuel  Dimn  has  taken  Ada?n  Clarke  as  his  basis,  and  then  built 
thereon  with  stones  from  Lightfoot,  Macknight,  Doddridge,  Greswell,  and 
others.  It  is,  of  course,  a  Wesleyan  harmony,  and  the  reader  is  not  long 
before  he  discovers  that  fact ;  but  the  names  of  those  concerned  are  a 
sufficient  guarantee  that  it  is  by  no  means  a  despicable  production. 

986  GREENLEAF  (Simon,  LL.D.,  Dane  Professor  of  Law  in  LLar- 

vard  University').  Examination  of  the  Testimony  of  the 
EvangeHsts  by  the  Rules  of  Evidence  administered  in  Courts 
of  Justice.  With  an  account  of  the  Trial  of  Jesus.  Thick  8vo. 
Lotid.,  1847.     5/- 


152  HARMONIES  OF  THE  GOSPELS. 

The  author  is  an  American  lawyer,  very  learned  in  his  profession. 
He  has  issued  a  treatise  upon  the  laws  of  evidence,  which  is  a  standard 
work  among  his  brethren.  It  was  a  happy  thought  on  his  part  to  apply 
the  laws  of  evidence  to  the  narratives  of  the  evangelists.  To  thoughtful 
men  of  all  sorts,  but  to  lawyers  especially,  this  book  is  commended. 

9S7     GRESWELL  (Edward,  B.D.)      Dissertations  upon  the 

rrinciplcs   and   Arrangement   of    an    Harmony   of  the 

Gospels.     4  vols.,  8vo.     Oxf.,\Zij.     6/- to  15/- 

"  The  learned  writer  has  greatly  distinguished  himself  as  the 

most  laborious  of  modern  harmonists.     His  work  is  the  most  eopious 

that  has  appeared,  at  least  since  the  days  of  Chemnitz  s  folios y 

So  says  Dr.  S.  Davidson.     To  us  it  seems  to  be  prolix  and  tedious. 

988     LIGHTFOOT    (John,  D.D.     1602— 1675).     Harmony,   Chro- 
nicle, and  Order  of  the  New  Testament.     Folio.     1654,     2/6. 
Lightfoot  was  a  member   of  the   Assembly  of  Divines,   profoundly 
skilled  in  scriptural  and  Talmudical  lore.     He  never   completed  this 
harmony,  for  his  plan  was  too  comprehensive  to  be  finished  in  a  lifetime. 

9S9      MACKNIGHT   (James,    D.D.     1721— 1800).       Harmony  of  the  Gospels, 
with  Paraphrase  and  Notes.   Fifth  edition.    2vols.,  Svo.   Loud. ,iSig.   3/6. 
This  author  has  enjoyed  considerable  repute  and  is  still  prized  by  many,  but  we 
can  never  bring  our  soul  to  like  him,  he  always  seems  to  us  to  be  so  graceless. 

990  INHMPRISS    (Robert).     The  Treasury  Harmony  of  the  Four 

Evangelists.     Thick  demy  4to.,  16/-     Also  cr.  8vo.,  two  vols, 
in  one,  6/-     S.  3/6.     Zoud.,  Partridge  &  Co. 
Condensed  and  compressed.     Wonderfully  useful. 

991  NEWCOME  (William,  Archbishop  of  Armagh).     English  Harmony,  with 

Notes.     Svo.     Lond.,  S.  Bagster.     1827.     4/- 
Merely  the  text  arranged  and  a  few  rather  ordinary  notes.     We  do  not  see  what  a 
man  can  get  out  of  it.     But,  hush  !     It  is  by  an  archbishop  ! 

992  ROBINSON  (Edward,  D.D.,  Prof  Bib.  Lit.,  New  York). 

Harmony  on  the  Authorized  Version.      Following  the 

Harmony  in  Greek,  by  Dr.  E.  Robinson.      With  Notes. 

Svo.     Lond.,  Religious  Tract  Society,     S.  1/6. 

Robinson's  Harmojiy  is  a  zvork  zvhieh  has  met  with  great  aceefit- 

ance,  and  the  Tract  Society  did  well  to  bring  out  this  zvork  for 

those  unacquainted  zvith  Greek.     The  Notes  are  mainly  those  of 

Robinson ;  but  Wieseler,  Greswell,  and  others  have  also  been  laid 

-under  contribution  by  the  Editor,  zvho  has  cxcc7ited  his  zvork  well. 

993  STROUD  (William,  M.D.)    Greek  Harmony,  with  Synop- 

sis and  Diatessaron.    4to.     15/-     Z^;/<^.,  Bagsters.     1853. 
S.  5/6. 
One  of  the  best  of  the  Harmonies. 

994  WILLIAMS  (Isaac).     Sec  JVo.  <)?>i. 

Jklerely  the  text  arranged,  without  note  or  comment. 


LIVES  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST.  153 

LIVES  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST. 

[Here  also  Ave  can  only  mention  a  few  leading  works.] 
See  under  Gospels,  especially  Nos.  971,  972,  973,  and  981. 

995     ANDREWS  (Samuel).     The  Life  of  our  Lord  upon  the 

Earth,  in  its  Historical,  Chronological,  and  Geographical 

Relations.     Cr.  8vo.     zl^.     Loud.,  Strahan  &  Co.     1863. 

A  good  book  for  a  student  to  read  through  before  taking  tip 

larger  works.     It  is  a  standard  work. 

gg6     BEECHER  (Henry  Ward).      Life  of  Jesus,  the  Christ.    Earlier 
scenes.     Thick  8vo.     7/6.     Loud.,  Nelson.      1872. 
Here  the  great  genius  of  Beecher  glows  and  burns ;  but  we  are  dis- 
appointed with  his  book  as  a  biography  of  our  Lord. 

997  BENNETT    (James,  D.D.)     Lectures  on  the  History  of  Jesus 

Christ.     Second  edition.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Land.,  1828.     6/6. 
Lively  popular  lectures,  full  of  matter,  well  expressed,  and  possessing 
sterhng  excellence. 

998  ELLICOTT    (C.  J.,  D.D.,  Bp.  of  Gloucester  and  Bristol).      His- 

torical Lectures.     Svo.     12/-     Loud.,  Longmans.      1869. 
This  great  author  stands  in  the  highest  place  of  honour  ;  but  having 
no  sympathy  with  what  he  calls  "  the  popular  theology,"  he  should  be 
read  with  considerable  caution. 

999  FARRAR  (F.  W.,  D.D.,  F.R.S.)     Life  of  Christ.     2  vols., 

demy  Svo.    24/-    Z*?;/^/.,  Cassell,  Petter  &  Galpin.    1874. 
THE  work  upon  the  subject.    Fresh  and  full.    The  price  is  very 
high,  ajid  yet  the  sale  has  been  enormous. 

jooo      FLEETWOOD  (John,  D.D.)   Life  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.   Also  the  Lives 
of  the  Apostles  and  Evangelists.     Imp.  Svo.     Z^wi:/.,  Mackenzie.     S.  6/- 
This  has  had  a  great  ran,  and  is  to  be  found  in  farm  houses  and  cottages.     Why 
■we  cannot  tell,  except  that  the  sellers  of  parts  and  numbers  are  fine  hands  at  pushing 
the  trade,  and  plates  and  pictures  have  caught  the  simple  purchasers. 

looi     KITTO  (John,  D.D.)     "Life  and  Death  of  our  Lord." 
Daily  Bible  Illustrations.     (See  No.  41.) 
Abounds  in  instructive  matter, 

1002     LANGE  (J.  P.,  D.D.)     Life  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
With    Additional    Notes,  by  Rev.   Marcus  Dods,  D.D, 
4  vols.,  demy  Svo.     28/-     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1864. 
We  constantly  readLange,  and  though  frequently  differing  frotn 

him,  we  are  more  and  more  grateful  for  so  much  thoughtful  teaching. 


154  MIRACLES  OF  OUR  LORD. 

1003  NEANDKR  (J.  A.  W.)    The  Life  of  Jesus  Christ  in  its  Historical 

Develoi)mcnt.      Translated    by    Professors    McClintock    and 
Blumenthal.     Sm.  8vo.     3/6.     Lond.,  Bohn.     1853. 
Good  as  an  answer  to  S/rauss,  but  unsatisfactory  from  the  standpoint 
of  evangelical  theology. 

1004  PRESSENSE  (Edmond  DE,  D.D.)     Jesus  Christ :  his  Times, 

Life,  and  Work.     Cr.  Svo.     9/-     Lond.,  Hodder  &  Stoughton. 

1875.     The  above  work  "abridged  by  the  author,  and  adapted 

for  general  readers."  Cr.  8vo.  5/- 
There  have  been  many  discussions  upon  the  orthodoxy  of  this  work, 
but  it  is  a  noble  production,  and  is  written  in  an  adoring  spirit.  The 
acconi]  lished  author  has  made  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  cause  of 
truth.  Yet  we  are  inclined  to  agree  Avith  the  writer  who  said,  "  to 
write  a  life  of  Christ  is  to  paint  the  sun  with  charcoal."  The  life  of  a 
Christian  is  the  best  picture  of  the  life  of  Christ. 

1005  YOUNG  (John,    LL.D.)    The  Christ  of  History.     Enlarged 

edition.     Cr.  Svo.     6/-     Lond.,  Ualdy,  Isbister  &  Co.     1869. 
"  A  work  of  great  excellence,  eloquence,  and  logical  compactness." 
British  Quarterly  Rci'itiv. 


MIRACLES  OF  OUR  LORD. 

[Here,  also,  we  cannot  attempt  a  complete  list.] 

1006  COLLYER    (William    Bexgo,    D.D.,    F.A.S.)      Lectures   on   Scripture 

Miracles.     Svo.     Lond.,  181 2.     2/6. 
While  reading  we  seem  to  hear  the  ntstling  of  a  silk  gown.     The  lectures  are  by 
no  means  to  be  despised,  but  they  are  far  too  fine  for  our  taste. 

1007  GUMMING  (John,  D.D.)     Lectures  on  our  Lord's  Miracles, 

as  earnests  of  the  age  to  come.     i2mo.     Lond.,  1851.     S.  2/- 
Below  the  Doctor's  usual  mark,  which  is  none  too  high. 

1008  HOWSON  (J.  S.,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Chester).     Meditations  on  the 

Miracles.     Fcap.  8vo.     3/-    Lond.,  R.  Tract  Society.     [187 1.] 
Short,  simple,  but  deeply  spiritual  and  suggestive. 

1009  KNIGHT   (James,   A.M.)      Discourses   on   the   principal   Miracles.      Svo. 

Lond.,  1831.     4/6. 
Mediocre  discourses  much  appreciated  by  the  clergy  who  borrow  their  sermons. 

loio     MAC  DONALD  (George,  LL.D.)     The  Miracles  of  our  Lord. 
Cr.  8vo.     5/-     Lojid.,  W.  Isbister  &  Co.     1870. 
Contains  many  fresh,  childlike,   and,  we  had  almost  said,  dreamy 
thoughts.     It  suggests  side-walks  of  meditation. 

ion     MAGUIRE  (Robert,  M.A.)    The  Miracles  of  Christ.   Sq.  121110. 
Lojid,  Weeks  &  Co.     1863.     S.  1/6. 
We  have  been  agreeably  disappointed  in  this  book.     The  bad  paper 
offends  the  eye,  but  the  page  bears  many  living,  stirring  thoughts.     If 
the  author  preaches  in  this  fashion  we  do  not  wonder  at  his  popularity. 


PARABLES  OF  OUR  LORD.  155 

1012  STEINMEYER  (F.   L.,  D.D.,  Prof.  Tkeo!.,  Berlin).     The  Miracles  of  our 

Lord  in  relation  to  Modem  Criticism.     Translated  from  the  German  by 
L.  A.  Wheatley.     8vo.     7/6.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1875. 
No  doubt  a  very  scholarly  book,  and  useful  to  those  whose  heads  have  been  mud- 
dled by  other  Germans,  but  we  are  weary  of  Teutonic  answers  to  Teutonic  scepticisms. 
We  suppose  it  was  needful  to  hunt  down  the  rationalists,  for  farmers  hunt  down  rats, 
but  the  game  does  not  pay  for  the  trouble. 

1013  TRENCH  (R.  C,  D.D.,  Abp.  of  Dublin).     Notes  on  the 

Miracles  of  our  Lord.   8vo.    12/-  Z(?;/(/.,  Macmillan.    1870. 
Brimming  zuith  instruction.    Not  always  to  our  taste  in  doctrine; 
but  on  the  whole  a  zuork  of  highest  merit. 


PARABLES  OF  OUR  LORD. 

[A  Selection  from  a  long  list,  for  which  see  No.  1024]. 

1014  ANDERSON  (Charles,  M.A.)     New  Readings  of  Old  Parables.     Cr.  8vo. 

4/6.     Land.,  1876. 
We  paid  four  precious  shillings  for  this  book,  and  find  seventy  pages  of  rubbish 
and  fifty  more  of  advertisements.     Our  readers  will,  we  hope,  profit  by  our  experience. 

1015  ARNOT  (William,  D.D.     Died  1875).     The  Parables 

of  our  Lord.     Cr.  8vo.     ^16.     Z^;/^.,  T.  Nelson.     1865. 
We  do  not  consider  this  to  be  np  to  our  lamented  friend's  usual 
high  mark  of  excelloice,  but  it  is  of  great  value. 

1016  BOURDILLON  (Francis,  M.A.)      The   Parables   explained  and  applied. 

Cr.  8vo.     3/6.     Lond.,  Religious  Tract  Society.     [N.D.] 
Sufficiently  common  and  commonplace.      Platitudes  sleepily  worded. 

1017  COLLYER  (William  Bengo,  D.D.)  Lectures  on  Scripture  Parables.   8vo. 

Lond.,  181 5.     2/-     (^See  No.  1006). 

1018  GUMMING  (John,  D.D.)     Foreshadows ;  or.  Lectures  on  our 

Lord's  Parables.     Cr.  8vo.     Land.,  i^^z.     2/-    (^Sif^  iV^.  1007). 
The   Doctor  evidently  prints   his  sermons  without  much  revision. 
They  are  pleasing,  popular,  and  (of  course)  rather  pro^^hetic. 

1019  GRESWELL    (E.,    B.D.)      Exposition   of  the    Parables,   &c. 

5  vols,  in  6,  Svo.     Oxf.,  1834.     27/- 
A  vast  heap  of  learning  and  language.     The  work,  though  padded  out, 
stilted  in  style,  and  often  fanciful,  is  a  mine  for  other  writers. 

1020  GUTHRIE  (Thomas,  D.D.)     The  Parables  read  in  the  Light 

of  the  Present  Day.     Cr.  Svo.     2>l^-     Lond.,Str3hdin.     1874. 
Twelve  Parables  treated  in  Dr.  Guthrie's  lively,  sparkling  manner. 
Flowers  in  abundance. 

102 1  KEACH    (Benj.)    Exposition.     Folio.    Lond.,   1701.     S.  10/-; 

also  4  vols.,  8vo.     S.  10/-;  and  i  vol.,  imp.  Svo.     1856.     10/- 
Although  our  honoured  predecessor  makes  metaphors  run  on  as  many 
legs  as  a  centipede,  he  has  been  useful  to  thousands.     His  work  is  old- 
fashioned,  but  it  is  not  to  be  sneered  at. 


156  PARABLES  OF  OUR  LORD.— MATTHEW. 

1022  KNIGHT  CJames,    A.M.)     Discourses   on    the    Principal    Parables.      8vo. 

Linui. ,  l%2^.     4/6.     {See  No.  looci). 

1023  LISCO    (Frederick    Gustav).      Parables    Explained.      Fcap. 

8vo.     5/-     EdhilK,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1840.     S.  2/6. 
Largely  composed  of  citations  from  Luther  and  Calvin.    The  remarks 
vill  assist  in  elucidating  the  design  of  the  parables. 

1024  TRENCH  (R.  C,  D.D.)  Notes  on  the  Parables.  Eleventh 

edition.     8vo.     12/-     Loud.,  Macmillan  &  Co.     1870. 
We  do  not  like  Trench's  theology  in  many  places,  hit  he  is  a 
capital  writer.     The  student  will  jitid  a  very  complete  list  of  exposi- 
tions on  the  Parables  in  the  appendix  at  the  close  of  Trench's  ivork. 

4025      UPJOHN  (W.)     Discourses  on  the  Parables.     3  vols.,  sm.  8vo.     1824. 
Earnestly  Calvinistic  sermons,  full  of  old-fashioned  Gospel.     Not  very  original. 


MATTHEW. 

[See  also  works  on  the  Four  Gospels.] 

1026  ABBOTT  (Lyman,  U.S.A.)    New  Testament.    Vol.  I.  Matthew 

and  Mark.     Sq.  8vo.,  9/-     Lond.,  Hodder.     1875. 
Intended  for  workers,  and  likely  to  be  useful  to  them. 

1027  ADAMSON  (H.  T.,  B.D.)    Matthew  expounded.    Thick  Svo.    12/-   Lond., 

Sampson  Low.     1 871. 
This  book  reads  to  us  like  utter  nonsense.     We  question  if  anyone  except  the 
•author  will  ever  be  able  to  make  head  or  tail  of  it,  and  he  had  better  be  quick  about 
it,  or  he  will  forget  what  he  meant. 

1028  ALEXANDER    (Joseph   Addison,   D.D.)      Matthew 

Explained.    Post  Svo.     5/-    Zw^.,  Nisbet.     1870.    S.  3/6. 
Dr.  Alexander  s  last  work.    He  died  before  it  was  quite  finished. 
Jt  is  complete  to  Chapter  X  VI.     Its  value  is  great. 

1029  BEAUSOBRE    (Isaac    de,    1659— 1738),    and    L'ENFANT 

(Jaques,  1661 — 1728).     A  New  Version,  with  a  Commentary. 

8vo.     Camb.,  1790;  Lofid.,  1823,  &c.     1/6  to  3/- 
The  brief  notes  are  purely  literal  or  illustrative,  and  are  remarkably 
pertinent.     The  mass  of  the  volume  is  taken  up  with  an  introduction 
to  the  New  Testament. 

1030  BENHAM     (W.)      Matthew,    with   Notes.      Cr.  Svo.      Lond, 

National  Society,     [1861].     S.  i/- 
With  this  in  his  hand  a  teacher  would  be  much  aided  in  conducting 
his  class.     It  is  written  by  a  teacher  for  teachers.     The  remarks  are  not 
very  profound,  nor  always  such  as  we  should  endorse,  but  they  are  well 
fitted  for  their  purpose. 


MATTHEW.  157 

103 1  BLACKWOOD  (Christopher).     An  Exposition  upon  the  Ten 

First  Chapters  of  Matthew.     4to.      1 649.     9/- 
This  learned  divine  became  a  Baptist  through  studying  the  arguments 
against  beUevers'  baptism.     This  proves  his  candour.     His  comment  is 
somewhat  out  of  date,  but  it  is  still  good. 

1032  CLARKE  (George  W.)     Notes.     Cr.  8vo.     Netv  York,  1870. 
Good  notes  for  teachers.    Well  compiled.    A  fit  companion  to  No.  983. 

1033  DICKSON  (David).     A  Brief  Exposition  of  Matthew. 

8vo.     165 1.     7/6. 
A  perfect  gem.     The  work  is,  to  men  of  our  school,  more  suggestive 
of  sermojis  than  almost  any  other  we  have  met  zuith. 

1034  GODWIN    (John    H.)      New  Translation,  with   Brief  Notes. 

Cr.  8vo.     5/-     Lond.,  Bagsters.     1863. 
Dr.  Godwin  is  a  painstaking  elucidator  of  the  word,  and  his  plan  is 
an  excellent  one.     Students  in  college  will  value  him. 

1035  GOODWIN  (Harvey,  D.D.,  Bp.  of  Carlisle).      Commentary. 

Cr.  8vo.     12/-     LoTid.,  G.  Bell  &  Sons.     1857.     S.  4/-  to  5/6. 
An  important  work,  which  may  be  consulted  with  advantage. 

1036  KELLY    (William).     Lectures   on   the  Gospel  of  Matthew.     6/-     Lond.^ 

G.  Morrish.      1868. 
We  cannot  accept  the  forced  and  fanciful  interpretations  here  given. 

1037  MARLORATUS  [MARLORAT]  (Augustine.     1560— 1562). 

Exposition.  Translated  by  Thomas  Tymme.  Folio.  Z^wrt'.,  1570. 
Marlorate  was  an  eminent  French  reformer,  preacher,  and  martyr. 
His  commentaries  contain  the  cream  of  the  older  writers,  and  are  in 
much  esteem,  but  are  very  rare.     He  wrote  on  the  whole  New  Testa- 
ment, but  we  have  in  English  only  the  Gospels  and  Jude. 

1038  MORISON  (James,  D.D.)     Matthew's  Memoirs  of  Jesus 

Christ.     8vo.     14/-     Lond.,  Hamilton.     1870. 
We  differ  greatly  in  doctrinal  viezvs  from  Dr.  Al orison,  but  we 
set  a  great  price  upon  his   Matthew  aftd  Mark,  which  deserve  the 
utmost  praise. 

1039  OVERTON    (Charles).      Expository   Preacher.      Course   of  Lectures   on 

Matthew.     2vols.,8vo.     Zi?«(/.,  Nisbet.     1850.     S.  6/6.     Scarce. 
Solid,  sound,  soporific  sermons  ;  intended  for  lay  helpers  to  read,  with  the  prayers 
appended.       They   will  not  make  the   hearers  lie  awake   at  nights,  or  cause  them 
palpitations  of  heart  through  excess  of  original  and  striking  thought. 

1040  PARKER   (Joseph,    D.D.)      Homiletic   Analysis.       Matthew. 

8vo.     7/6.     Lond.,  1870.     3/6. 

Dr.  Parker  is  an  able  though  somewhat .     But  stop,  he  is  a  near 

neighbour  of  ours. 

1041  PENROSE  (John).     Lectures  on  Matthew.     i2mo.     Loid.,  1832.     1/6. 
The  author  says  of  his  work,  "no  novelty  of  any  kind,  no  originality  either  of 

thought  or  research  will  be  found  in  it."     Why,  then,  did  he  print  it  ? 


158  MATTHEW.— MARK. 

1042  THOMAS  (David,  D.D.)    Genius  of  the  Gospel.    Ilomi- 

letical  Commentary.    8vo.    Loud.,  Dickinson.    1873.    8/6. 
We  hardly  kfiozv  a  viore  suggestive  book. 

1043  WARD  (Richard).   Theologicall  Questions,  Dogmaticall  Obser- 

vations, and  Evangelicall  Essays  vpon  the  Gospel  according  to 

Matthew.     Wherein  about  two  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty 

profitable  Questions  are  discussed  ;  and  five  hundred  and  eighty 

points  of  Doctrine  noted,  &c.,  &c.     Folio.    Lond.,  1640.     12/- 

A  huge  mass  of  comment,  in  which  are  thousands  of  good  things 

rnostly  set  forth  by  way  of  question  and  answer.     Few  could  ever  read 

it  through ;  but  to  a  wise  minister  it  would  be  a  mine  of  wealth. 


MARK. 

1044  ALEXANDER  (Joseph  Addison,  D.D.)     Mark  Ex- 
plained.   Post  Svo.    5/-    Loud.,  Nisbet.     1866.     S.  3/6. 

Alexander  expoiinds  Mark  as  an  tJidependent  record,  and  does 
not  constantly  tell  ns  to  ''see  MattJieiv  and  Luke."  Hence  the  book 
is  complete  in  itself,  and  the  authors  learning  and  care  have  made  it 
invaluable. 

1045  B.  (G.)    Practical  Commentary  on  Mark,  in  Simple  and  Familiar 

Language.     i2mo.     3/-     Lend.,  Nisbet.     1863. 
The  different  paragraphs  are  treated  under  most  suggestive  headings, 
which  are  the  most  useful  parts  of  the  book.     Infant  baptism  is  far  too 
prominent ;  but  the  little  work  is  likely  to  be  very  helpful. 

1046  GODWIN  (John  H.)     Mark.     A  New  Translation,  with  Notes 

and  Doctrinal  Lessons.      Cr.    Svo.     4/6.     Loud.,   Hodder  & 

Stoughton.     1869.     S.  2/- 
We  like  the  brief  doctrinal  lessons,  which  are  rather  a  new  feature. 
They  will  serve  admirably  well  as  sermon-hints.     The  notes  and  trans- 
lation are  really  good. 

1047  GOODWIN   (Harvey,  D.D.,  Bp.  of  Carlisle).     Commentary. 

Cr.  Svo.     7/6.     Land.,  G.  Bell  &  Sons.     i860. 
Contains  much  very  helpful  comment.     Produced  in  connection  with 
the  Cambridge  Working  IVIen's  College. 

1048  MORISON    (James,    D.D.)      A    Commentary.      Large 

8vo.      14/-     Lond.,  Hamilton,  Adams  &  Co.      1873. 
A    deeply   learned  zvork ;    we  know   of  none  viore    thoroiigh. 
Differing  as  zue  do  from  this  author  s  theology,  zve  tievertheless  set 
a  high  price  upon  this  production. 

1049  PETTER  (George).     Commentary  on  Mark.     2  vols.,  folio. 

Land.,  1661.     ;£^  12s.  6d. 
Mr.  f.  C.  Ryle  says  of  this  work  :  "  For  laborious  investigation  of  the 
meaning  of  every  word,  for  patient  discussion  of  every  question  bearing 


MARK.— LUKE.  159 

on  the  text,  for  fulness  of  matter,  for  real  thoughtfulness,  and  for  con- 
tinued practical  application,  there  is  no  work  on  St.  Mark  which,  in  my 
opinion,  bears  comparison  with  Fetter's.  Like  Goliath's  sword,  there  is 
nothing  like  it."  We  have  found  far  less  fresh  thought  in  it  than  we 
expected,  and  think  it  rather  tedious  reading. 


LUKE. 

[See  also  on  the  Gospels.     Oosterzee  in  Lange  is  excellent.] 

1050  FOOTE  (James,  M.A.)    Lectures  on  Luke.    2  vols.    8vo. 

Third   edition.     Edinb.,   Ogle  &   Murray,  and  Oliver  & 
Boyd  ;  Loud.,  Hamilton,  Adams  &  Co,     1858.     S.  9/- 
We  frequently  consult  this  work,  and  never  without  finding  in  it 
things  new  and  old.     To  preachers  %vho  will  7iot  steal  the  lectures, 
but  use  them  suggestively,  they  will  be  extremely  serviceable. 

105 1  GODET  (F.,  Professor  of  Theology,  Neuchatet).    Commen- 

tary on  Luke,     Translated  by  E.  W.  Shelders,  B.A.,  and 

M.  D.  Cusin.     2  vols.,  8vo.     21/-     Edi7ib.,  QXzxk.     1875. 

Dr.  Meyer  says :  "  To  an  immense  erudition,  to  a  living  piety, 

Godet  tmites  a  prof ound  feeling  of  reality ;  there  is  here  a  vivifying 

breath,  an  ardent  love  for  the  Saviour,  which  helps  the  disciple  to 

comprehend  the  work,  the  acts,  the  words  of  his  Divine  Master T 

1052  GOODWIN  (Harvey,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  Luke.    Cr.  8vo. 

9/-     Land.,  G.  Bell  &  Sons.     1865. 
This  writer  endeavours  to  give  the  results  of  learning  in  such  a  manner 
that  working  men  may  understand  them.     He  says  many  good  things. 

1053  MAJOR  (J.  R.,  M.A.)    Luke,  with  English  Notes.     8vo.     Loud.,  1826.    3/- 
Notes  compiled  with  a  view  to  the  divinity  examinations  at  Cambridge,  containing 

a  considerable  amount  of  information. 

1054  THOMSON  (James,  D.D.)     Exposition  of  Luke,  in  a 

Series  of  Lectures.     3  vols.,  8vo.     Edinb.,  A.  &  C.  Black  ; 

Lond.,  Longmans.     1849.     6/-  to  8/- 
Eminently  instructive.    Clear  good  sense,  freshftess,  and  earnest- 
ness are  well  combined.     We  have  had  great  pleasure  in  examinitig 
these  lectures. 

1055  VAN  DOREN    (W.  H.,  of  Chicago).     Suggestive  Com- 

mentary on  the  New  Testament,  on  an  original  plan 
[Luke,  2  vols.,  cr.  8vo.,  8/-  nett]     Lond.,  Dickinson.    1871. 
Well  named  "  suggestive "/  it  is  all  suggestions.     It  teetns  and 
swarms  with  homiletical  hints. 


160  JOHN. 


JOHN. 

1056  ANDERSON    (Rop-f.rt.     1792 — 1843).     Practical   Exposition 

of  John.     2  vols.,  izmo.     Lotid.,  1841.     4/- 
By  an  evangelical  clergyman  :  sound,  but  not  very  original. 

1057  AUGUSTINE.      Commentary  on  John.     2  vols,  of  Worlis  of 

Augustine,  now  in  course  of  issue  by  T.  &  T,  Clark.     Edinb. 

105S  „  Homihes  on  the  Gospel  and  First  Epistle  ot 

John.     2  vols,  of  tlie  Library  of  the  Fathers,  30/- ;  or  to  sub- 
scribers, 22/6.     Lo7id.  and  Oxf,  Jas.  Parker  &  Co. 
To  the  wise  a  mine  of  treasure.    Augjistirte  is  often  fanciful ;  but  even 

his  fancies  show  a  master-mind.     Much  that  passes  for  new  is  stolen 

from  this  prince  of  theologians. 

1059  BEITH  (Alexander,  D.D.)     Expository  Discourses.    Cr.  8vo. 

Loud.,  Nisbet.     1857.     3/6. 
Discourses  which  must  have  been  very  profitable  to  the  hearers. 
Students  will  do  better  with  works  which  are  more  condensed. 

1060  BESSER  (Rudolph,  D.D.)     Biblical  Studies  on  John.     Trans- 

lated  from  the  German  by  M.  G.  Huxtable.     2  vols.  cr.  8vo. 
12/-     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1S61— 62. 
"  The   character   of  this   commentary  is   practical  and  devotional. 
There  are  often  very  exquisite  devotional  passages,  and  a  vein  of  earnest 
piety  runs  through  the  whole  work." — Literary  Churchinaji. 

xo6i  BROWN  (George  J.,  M.A.)  Lectures,  forming  a  Continuous 
Commentary.  2  vols.,  8vo.  Loud.,  Rivingtons.  1863.  S.  5/6. 
The  plan  of  this  work  will  prevent  its  being  widely  used ;  but  its 
execution  strikes  us  as  being  uncommonly  able.  It  is  a  gathering  up  of 
other  men's  materials  and  an  amalgamation  of  them.  It  is  intensely 
Episcopalian,  even  to  Baptismal  Regeneration,  yet  it  brings  a  good  deal 
of  light  to  bear  on  the  Gospel  of  John,  and,  if  to  be  met  with  at  a  very 
low  figure,  it  is  not  to  be  passed  by. 

1062  DRUMMOND  (D.  T.  K.,  B.A.)     Exposition  of  the  Last  Nine 

Chapters  of  John.     i2mo.     Seeleys.     1850.     2/- 
Good,  but  not  very  striking. 

1063  DUNWELL   (Francis   Henry,   B.A.)      Commentary  on  the  Authorised 

Version  of  John,  compared  with  the  Sinaitic,  Vatican,  and   Alexandrian 

Manuscripts,  and  also  with  Dean  Alford's  revised  translation.     Svo.     15/- 

ZoM(/.,  J.  T.  Hayes.     1872.     S.  10/- 

The  notes  from  various  authors  are  good,  and  the  various  readings  are  useful ;  hut 

wc  fail  to  see  any  very  special  value  in  the  volume.     The  interpretation  of  the  Third 

of  John  is  eminently  unsatisfactory  ;  Mr.  Dunwell  teaches  Baptismal  Regeneration. 

1064  FAWCETT  (John,  A.M.     1769— 1851).     Exposition  of  John. 

3  vols.,  8vo.,  21/-     Lond.,  Hatchards.    i860.     S.  8/- 
Good,  evangelical  sermons. 


JOHN.— PARTS  OF  JOHN.  Ifil 

1065  HENGSTENBERG   (E.    W.,    D.D.)      Commentary   on   John. 

2  vols.,  8vo.     21/-     Edinb.,  Clark.     1868.     S.  8/6. 
Like  others  of  this  author's  works  :  solid,  but  dry. 

1066  HUTCHESON  (George).     Exposition  of  John.    Folio. 

Loud.,  1657.     Reprinted,  roy.  8vo.    Zc*;/*^.,  Ward.     1841. 
4/-  to  6/. 
Excellent;    beyond  all  praise.     It  is  a  full-stored  treasury  of 
sound  theology,  holy  thought,  and  niarrotvy  doctrine. 

1067  MEYER  (H.  A.  W.,  D.D.)     Sec  No.  928. 

1068  O'CONOR  (W.  A.)  Commentary.  Cr.  8vo.   ro/6.    Loud.,  Longmans.     1872. 
In  this  translation  the  first  verse  runs  thus  :   "In  origin  the  Word  was,  and  the 

Word  was  the  Deity,  and  the  Word  was  Deity."     Who  likes  this,  or  understands  it  ? 
The  notes  do  not  charm  us. 

1069  SHEPHERD   (R.,  D.D.)     Notes  on  the  Gospel  and  Epistles  of  John.     4to. 

Loud.,  1796.     Imp.  8vo.     Lond.,  Murray.      1841.     S.  3/6. 
Though  the  author  opposed   Socinianism,  we  cannot  but  regard  his  views  as  an 
introduction  to  that  heresy.    The  spirit  of  the  book  is  vicious. 

1070  THOLUCK  (Augustus  F.,  D.D.,  Ph.D.)     Commentary. 

8vo.     9/-     Edinb. ,i:.&ii:.C\2irk.     i860.     S.  4/6. 
More  spiritual  than  is  usual  zvith  German  theologians,  and  quite 
as  scholarly  as  the  best  of  them. 

107 1  TITTMANN  (K.  C,  r/^^^/.  Z';-^/:    1744— 1820).   Commeotary. 

2  vols.,  cr.  8vo.    8/-   Bib.  Cab.   ^^/Z^-^-.,  T.  Clark.   1844.    S.  4/6. 
Horne,  in  speaking  of  this  work  in  the  German,  without  endorsing  all 
Tiitmamis  opinions,  declares  it  to  be  the  most  valuable  commentary  on 
John  extant  in  so  small  a  form.     Our  judgment  is  less  commendatory. 

1072  TRAHERON   (Bartholomew.    Died  1716.)     An   Exposition  of   a  Parte 

of  S.  Johannes  Gospel  made  in  sondrie  readinges  in  the  Englisli  Congre- 
gation.     i2mo.     1558.      Voy  ra7-e,  30/- 
A  little  quaint  old  book.      Not  intrinsically  worth  the  price,  nor  a  tenth  of  it. 

1073  VAN  DOHEN  (W.  H.,  D.D.)     Suggestive  Commentary 

on  John,  Vol.  I.,  containing  chap.  I. — IX.     Cr.  8vo.     5/- 
nett.     Vol  II.  in  the  press.     Lov.d.,  Dickinson.      1872. 
If  men  tvho  read  this  volume  do  not  preach  the  better  for  so  doing, 
it  is  not  Mr.  Van  Dorens  fault ;  they  must  be  Van  Dolts  by  nature, 
thougJi  they  may  ignore  the  family  name. 


PARTS  OP  JOHN. 

[A  selection  of  authors  is  all  we  can  give.] 

1074  HILDERSHAM    (Arthur).      Lectures   on   John    IV. 

Folio.     Lond.,  1628  and  1656.     4/-  to  6/- 
A  mass  of  godly  teaching ;  but  rather  heavy  reading. 

1075  turner  (Samuel,  H.,  D.D.)     Essay  on  our  Lord's  Discourse  at  Caper- 

naum, recorded  in  John  VI.     Cr.  8vo.     Nav  York,  1S51.     S.  2/- 
Written   with  the    immediate    view    of   combating  the   errors    of  Dr.,   afterwards 
Cardinal,   Wiseman,  who  appeals  to  this  chapter  for  proofs  of  "  the  real  presence." 


162  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

1076  PATTERSON  (John  B.,  of  Falkirk).     Lectures  on  John  XIV, 

XV,  and  XVL     Cr.  8vo.     Edinb.,  T.  Clark.      1859.     S.  2/- 
Solid  discourses,  containing  much  thought  happily  expressed.     Yet 
withal  somewhat  laborious  reading. 

1077  ALEXANDER   (Thomas.    D.D.)      Great    High    Priest 

within  the  Vail.    John  XVIL     i8mo.    Loud.,  1857.      V3- 
Sound  theology  and  honest  exposition.     Miiltum  in  parvo. 

107S     BROWN  (John,  D.D.)    Exposition  of  John  XVIL    Svo. 
Lond.,  Hamilton,  1850.     S.  S/- 
Dr.  Broivn  is  always  deep,  full,  and  ovofloiviug. 

1079  BURGESS  (Anthony).     One  Hundred  and  Forty-five 

Sermons  on  John  XVH.     Folio.     Lond.,  1656.     yfS. 
A  standard  zuork  by  a  great  Puritan.     SoniewJiat  prolix. 

1080  LAN  DELS  (William,  D.D.)     The  Saviour's  Parting  Prayer  for 

his  Disciples.      i2mo.     3/6.      Lond.,  Elliot  Stock.      1872. 
Sermons  of  a  high  order:  style  admirable,  but  rather  diffuse.     To  be 
estimated  rather  from  a  homiletical  than  an  expository  point  of  view. 

loSi     NEWTON    (George.       1602— 168 i).       John     XVH. 

Unfolded.     Folio.     Lond.,  1660.     Reprinted   in  Nichol's 

Commentaries.  Cr.  4to.  7/6.- Zc-;/^.,  Nisbet.   1867.   S.  4/. 

If  not  one  of  the  chief  of  the  Puritans,  Newton  zvas  hut  little 

behind  the  frojit  rank  in  ability.     Joseph  A  Heine  zuas  his  assistant 

minister  at  Taunton.     His  writings  are  plain  and  profitable. 

1082     PIERCE  (Samuel  Eyles).     Exposition  of  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  in  John  XVIL     Svo.      18 12.     4/6. 
A  Iways  sweet  as  honey  to  those  of  strong  Calvinistic  views. 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

[See  also  under  Gospels.'] 

1083  ALEXANDER   (Joseph  Addison,  D.D.)     The  Acts 

Explained.     2  vols.,  8vo.      15/-     Lond.,  W\shei.     1869. 
I?i  all  respects  a  work  of  the  highest  merit. 

1084  ALFORD  (Henry,  D.D.)     Homilies  on  the  former  part 

of  the   Acts   of  the  Apostles.      Ch.   L— X.      8vo.     8/- 
Lond.,  Rivingtons.      1858.     S.  2I6. 
Not  so  good  as  his  critical  notes ;   but  such  an  author  akvays 
deserves  attention. 

1085  ARNOT  (William,  D.D.)     The  Church  in  the  House. 

Post  8vo.     yjG.     Lond.,  Nisbet.     1873. 
Intended  to  be  read  in  families  on  Sabbath  afternoons ;  but  all 
who  arc  acqiiaintcd  tvith    Dr.  Arnot   zuill  know  that  even   his 
simplest  expositions  are  rich  and  full.     He  hath  dust  of  gold. 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  1C3 

1086  BAUMGARTEN  (M.,  Ph.D.)    Apostolic  History.    3  vols.,  8vo. 

27/-     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1854.     S.  10/6. 
"  An  exposition  at  once  profoundly  scientific  and  sublimely  Christian, 
one  of  the  most  pressing  wants  of  our  times." — Eclectic  Rcvieiv.     Alford 
calls  it  excellent,  though  somewhat  fanciful. 

1087  BENNETT  (James,  D.D.)     Lectures  on  the  Acts.   8vo.   Lond., 

1847.     2/6  to  4/- 

A  good  specimen  of  plain  and  popular  pulpit  exposition.  Dr.  Bennett 
fights  very  earnestly  for  the  Congregationalist  view  of  Baptism,  for 
which  we  do  not  blame  him  ;  for  common  humanity  leads  us  to  admire 
a  man  who  struggles  for  a  weak  cause. 

1088  BENSON  (George,  D.D.     1699— 1763).     History  of  the  first  planting  of 

the  Christian  Religion.     3  vols.,  4to.     Lond.,  1756.     4/-  to  6/6. 
Dull,  but  displaying  considerable  research.      Benson  was  an  Arian. 

1089  BONAR  (H.,  D.D.)  Light  and  Truth.  VoI.IIL  {SceNo.6) 

1090  BOUCHIER    (Barton,  A.M.)      Manna   in   the   House;    or, 

Daily  Expositions  of  the  Acts.   i2mo.  Lond.,  1858.  S  1/6  to  2/6. 

Superior  family  reading.  Bouchier  did  not  write  for  students,  but 
for  households,  yet  even  the  more  advanced  may  learn  from  him. 

109 1  BREWSTER  (John,  M.A.)     Lectures  on  the  Acts.     8vo.     1830.     3/6. 

A  sip  of  Hotvson  or  Hackett  is  worth  a  barrel  of  these  weak  and  watery  prelections. 

1092  OALVIN  (John).    Commentaries  upon  the  Acts.    Trans- 

lated by  C.  Featherstone.     4to.     Loud.,  1585.     6/- 

T his  forms  the  basis  of  the  Calvin  Translation  Society s  edition. 

1093  COOK  (F.   C,   M.A.,   Canon  of  Chester).     The  Acts,  with  a 

Commentary.    8vo.     12/6.     Lond.,  Longmans.     1866.    S.  2/6. 
Contains  many  useful  notes,  instructive  to  fairly  educated  readers. 

1094  CRADOCK  (Samuel,  B.D.)     The  Apostolical  History,  containing  the  Acts, 

Labours,  Travels,  Sermons,  &c.,  of  the  Apostles.    Folio.    Lond.,  i"] 62.    5/- 

Tiltotson,  Reynolds,  Doddridge,  and  others  highly  commend  the  works  of  this 
Puritan  writer.  The  style  in  which  the  "Apostolical  History"  is  got  up  is  most 
uninviting  ;  the  book  is  nearly  all  italics.     Many  modern  works  far  excel  it. 

1095  DENTON  (W.,  M.A.)    Commentary  on  the  Acts.    2  vols., 

8vo.     [Vol.  L  only  issued.     18/-]     Z^;/^.,  G.  Bell.     1874. 
A  complete  list  of  all  authors  upon  the  Acts  will  be  found  in  this 
very  learned  and  exhaustive  tvork.      We  do  not  ahvays  agree  zvith 
the  author,  but  he  has  done  his  work  thoroughly  well. 

1096  DICK   (John,   D.D.      1764— 1833).      Lectures   on   the  Acts. 

Sm.  8vo.      Glasg.,  1848.     4/- 
Interesting  lectures  upon  selected  portions  of  the  Acts.     This  work 
has  been  reprinted   in  America,  whence  we  obtained  a  copy  of  the 
second  edition;  this  shows  that  it  has  been  highly  esteemed. 


{■A  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

1097     DU  VKIL(C.  M.,  D.D.     A  learned  converted  J tiv.   Died  about 
1700).    Exjilanation  of  the  Acts.    8vo.    Lend.,  \6?>$.    Reprinted 
hy  I/ansard  Kno/tys  Society.     8vo.     1851.     4/- to  6/- 
Claude's  prefatory  letter  highly  commends  this  work.     The  author 
(.lefends  the  immersion  of  believers  with  earnestness. 

109S     FAWCETT    (John,    M.A.)      Exposition   of  the   Acts. 
3  vols.,  8vo.     21/-     Loud.,  Hatchards.     i860.     S.  5/- 
A  fine  series  of  expository  discourses.     Sovietivies  zve  differ. 

1:599     FORD  (J.,  M.A.)      The   Acts,    illustrated   from   Ancient   and 

Modern  Authors.  Svo.  12/-  Z^;/</.,  Masters.   \Z$6.  {SecNo.^e^s) 

lioo     GLOAG  (Paton  J.,  D.D.)     Commentary  on    the  Acts. 

2  vols.,  demy  Svo,     21/-     Ediub.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1870. 

Dr.  Hackctt  says  of  Dr.  Gloag's  zvork:  "I  have  examined  it  with 

s/'eeial  care.     For  my  purposes  I  have  found  it  tinsuipasscd  by  any 

similar  ivork  in  the   Ejiglish    language.      It  shows   a  thorough 

:nastery  of  the  material,  philology ,  history,  and  literature  pertaining 

to  this  range  of  study,  and  a  skill  in  the  use  of  this  knowledge^ 

which  places  it  in  the  first  class  of  modern  expositions.'' 

1 1 01  GUALTHERUS    (Rodulphus.      1529— 1586).      A  Hundred 

Threescore  and  Fifteen  Homclyes  or  Sermons  vppon  the  Actes 
of  the  Apostles,  made  by  Radulphe  Gualthere,  of  Tigurine,  and 
Translated  out  of  Latine  [by  John  Bridges,  Vicare  of  Heme]. 
Folio.  Black  Letter.  Z^;/^.,  1572.  30/- 
FuU  of  Protestantism.  The  author  judged  that,  as  Luke  who  wrote 
the  Act  was  a  physician,  his  book  was  meant  to  be  medicine  to  the  Church. 

1 102  HACKETT  (Horatio  B.,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  the 

Original  Text  of  the  Acts.     [Sev^eral  American  editions. 

Reprinted  in  2  vols.,  in  The  Bunyan  Library^  7/-  to  10/- 
Haekett  occupies  the  first  position  a7nong  commentators  upon  the 
Acts.  The  Bunyan  Library  edition  omits  some  of  his  most 
variable  critical  observations. 

U03      HODGSON    (Robert,   D.D.,  Dean  of  Carlisle).      Lectures  ujion  the  first 
Seventeen  Chapters  of  the  Acts.     Svo.     Lond.,  1845.     1/6. 
Deficient  in  Gospel  clearness,  and  in  every  other  respect,  except  ardent  churchism. 

1 104  HUMPHRY  (William  Gilson,  B.D.)     Commentary  on  the  Acts.     Second 

edition.     Svo.     Loud.,  J.  W.  Parker  &  Son.     1854.     3/- 
Exegelical  remarks  upon  the  Greek  text.     Very  good  from  a  philological  point  of 
view,  but  professedly  of  an  elementary  character. 

1105  KELLY  (W.)     Lectures  Introductory  to  the  Study  of  the  Acts,   Catholic 

Epistles,  and  Revelation.     Cr.  Svo      5/-    Lond.,  Broom.     1S70.     S.  3/- 
By  a  man  *•  who,  born  for  the  universe,  narrowed  his  mind  "  by  Darbyism. 

1 106  LANGE  (J.  P.)     Commentary:  from  the  German  of  Lechler 

and  Gerock.    2  vols.,  Svo.    21/-    Edinb.,  CXzixk.    1864.    S.  10/6. 
Also  I  vol.,  imp.  Svo.     21/-     {Seepage  19.) 
Adds  nothing  to  our  knowledge  of  the  Acts;  but  the  homiletical 
hints  are  useful. 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  1C5 

1 107  LIGHTFOOT    (John,     D.D.       1602—1675).       Commentary.     Edited    by 

J.  R.  Pitman,  A.M.     8vo.     1823.     [Vol.  VIII.  of  Lightfoot's  Works.] 
Few  no\v-a-days  will  care  for  this  author,  whose  learning  ran  mostly  in  Talmudical 
channels.     He  was  profound,  but  not  always  discreet. 

1 108  MACBRIDE  (John  David,  D.D.)     Lectures  on  the  Acts   and  Eoistlcs. 

Svo.      Oxf.,  1858.     2/6. 
This   author  simply  gives   a  continuous  narrative,      lie   has  also  written   on  the 
Gospels.  We  mention  him  that  the  student  may  not  purchase  his  work  as  a  Commentar}-. 

1109  MASKEW  (T.  R.,  B.A.)     Annotations  on  the  Acts.     With  College  and 

Senate- House  Examination  Papers.      i2rao.      Canib.,  1847.     1/6. 
A  handbook  to  the  Acts,  viewing  it  simply  as  a  Greek  book ;  prepared  for  the 
use  of  students  passing  through  the  university. 

11 10  MIMPRISS  (R.)     The  Acts  and  Epistles,  according  to  Gres- 

well's  Arrangement.     Svo.     1837.     2/- 
A  handy  book  for  teachers. 

11 11  NEANDER  (J.  A.  W.)     History  of  the  Planting  and  Training 

of    the    Christian    Church   by   the   Apostles.     Translated    by 

J.    E.   Ryland.     2  vols.,   cr.    Svo.     3/6   each.     Loud.,    Bohiis 

Library,    Bell  &  Sons.   1851.    S.  4/6.    Also  in  Cabinet  Library. 

The  work  rather  of  an   historian  than  of  a  commentator.      Bold, 

devout,  learned,  and,  on  the  whole,  sound.    The  result  of  wide  research, 

and  deep  learning. 

11 12  NORRIS    (J.   P.,   M.A.)     Key  to   the  Acts.     Sm.   Svo.     2/6. 

Load.,  Rivingtons.     1S71. 
A  well-executed  sketch  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  giving  the  student 
a  clear  idea  of  the  run  of  the  book.     Like  the  same  author's  "  Key  to 
the  Gospels  "  {No.  963),  it  would  be  most  useful  in  Bible  classes. 

1 1 13  OLSHAUSEN  (H.,  D.D.)     See  No.  Q)(^\. 

Denton  says  that  "  this  is  a  brief,  hasty,  and  not  well-digested  supple- 
ment to  Olshansen's  volumes  on  the  Gospels."  He  thinks  all  the 
German  writers  to  be  much  overrated,  and  we  are  much  of  his  mind. 

1114  PYLE  (T.,  M.A.     1674— 1756).    Paraphrase.      2  vols.,  8vo.     1795.     2/- 
This  pile  of  printed  paper.may  safely  be  left  on  the  bookseller's  shelves. 

11 15  STIER  (Rudolph,  D.D.)     The  Words  of  the  Apostles. 

8vo.    10/6.     Edinb.,T.Sci:.Q\^x\i.     1869. 
Devout,  scholarly,  full  of  thought.      To  be  used  discreetly. 

1 1 16  STOCK  (Eugene).     Lessons  on  the  Acts.     For  Sunday 

School  Teachers   and   other  Religious  Instructors.     Svo. 

2/6.     Loud.,  Ch.  of  England  S.  School  Institute.     1874. 
For  half-a-croivn  the  teacher  may  here  obtain  one  of  the  most 
useful  books  knozvn  to  us.     Though  produced  for  members  of  the 
Church  of  England,  zve  recommend  it  heartily  to  ministers  and 
others  ivho  are  preparing  addresses  to  the  young. 

H17     THOMAS    (David,    D.D.)      Homiletic   Commentary   on    the 
Acts.     Svo.     Lond.,  Dickinson.     1870.     6  6, 
Many   of  the   homiletic   outlines    strike   us   as    "much    ado   about 
nothing  ";  still,  if  a  man  should  read  this  work  and  get  no  help  from  it, 
it  Avould  be  his  own  fault. 


I'-f'.  LIVES  OF  THE  APOSTLES,  &c. 

niS       IIIUMSOX  (JAMKS,  D.D.)    Kxposilionof  the  AcU.     8vo.     Lofic/.,  A.  UaW, 
Viiluc,  cS:  Co.     1854.     S.  2 [6. 
Wc  fail  to  sec  much  here  of  service  to  a  preacher. 

my      TROLLOPE  (W.,   M.A.)     Commentary   on   the   Acts,  with    Examination 
Questions,  for  the  B.  A.  Degree.     l2mo.      Caw<5.,  1854.     2/6. 
Well  adapted  to  accomplish  the  design  indicated  in  the  title. 

1120  VAUGHAN  (Charles  J.,  D.D.)  Lectures.  3  vols. 
Fcap.  8vo.  46  each.  Loud.,  Macmillan.  1864,  etc. 
Not  only  docs  Dr.  Vaughan  expound  his  texts  in  tJic  ablest 
manner,  bnt  Jie  introduces  passages  of  Scripture  so  aptly  that  he 
suggests  discourses.  Bating  his  Churchianify,  zve  cannot  too 
highly  commend  Jiim. 


LIVES  OF  THE  APOSTLES,  &c. 

ii-M     KITTO    (John,  D.D.)     "The  Apostles  and  the   Eafly 
Church."     Daily  Bible  Illustrations.     (See  No.  41.) 

wzz    LAUR  (Ferdinand  Christian,  D.D.)    Paul,  his  Life  and  Works.     From 
the  German.     2  vols.,  Svo.  21/-     ZfjW.,  William  &  Norgates.     1873—75. 
Of  the  very  Broad  Church  school.     Not  at  all  to  our  mind. 

1123  BEVAN  (Joseph  Gurney).     Life  of  Paul.     Svo.    Loud.,  1S07.     2/- 

For  the  Society  of  Friends.     Contains  nothing  which  adds  to  our  information  upon 
the  life  of  Pr.ul.     It  may  have  been  useful  in  its  day,  but  it  is  superseded. 

1 1 24  BINNEY    (Thomas,    D.D.)      Paul:    his    Life   and    Ministry. 

Cr.  Svo.     5/-     Lend.,  Nisbet.      1870. 
]\[r.  Binney  says,  "  This  work  is  strictly  an  outline  of  the  life  of  St. 
Paul,  and  it  is  nothing  more."     It  is  a  capital  preparation  for  reading 
LcK'in  and  Cotiybeare  and  Howson. 

1125  BLUNT   (Henry,  A.M.)     Lectures  upon  the   History  of  St. 

Paul.     2  vols.,  i2mo.     Sixth  edition.     Lond.,  1835.     2/6. 
Printed  in  such  large  and  widely-leaded  type  that  a  very  little  matter 
goes  a  long  way.     Very  good,  but  not  striking. 

1 1 26  CONYBEARE  (W.  J.,  M.A.)  and  HOWSON  (J.  S.,  D.D.. 

Dean  of  Chester).    Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.     Librar}- 

edition.     2vols.,  4to.     48/-     Intermediate  edition,  2  vols., 

sq.  cr.  Svo.     21/-     Student's   edition,   condensed,   i   vol., 

cr.  Svo.     9/-     Lond.,  Macmillan  &  Co. 

Far  superior  to  any  other  tvork  on  the  subject.     It  stands  like 

some  dertopping  Alp,  a  marvel  among  Scriptural  biographies.     We 

have  not  space  to  mention  Howson's  minor  zvorks  connected  with 

Paul,  but  the)'  are  all  good. 

1 127  EADIE  (John,  D.D.,  LL.D.)     Paul,  the  Preacher.     An 

Exposition  of  his  Discourses  and  Speeches,  as   recorded 
in  the  Acts.     Cr.  Svo.     Loud.,  Griffin.     1859.     S.  2,l<^- 
Designed  to  give  ordinary  readers  a  j lister  and  fuller  conception 
of  the  doctrine  atid  life-zvork  of  the  apostle.     An  able  work. 


LIVES  OF  THE  APOSTLES,  &c.  167 

1 128  LEWIN  (Thomas,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  Barristcr-at-Law).    Life 

and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.     Second  edition,  much  enlarged. 

2  vols.,  demy  4to.     42/-     Z^;/^.,  G.  Bell  &  Sons.     1875. 

[Second-hand  copies  of  first  edition.  1851.  6/-  to  9/-] 
Dr.  Gloag  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Acts  says :  "  Two  zvorks 
are  especially  instructive,  and  deserve  careful  perusal.  The  Life 
and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  by  Lezuin,  and  the  classical  zvork  on  the 
same  subject  by  Conybeare  a7id  Hozvson.  In  the  former  the 
historical  corinections  of  the  Acts  are  chiefly  stated,  and  iji  the  latter 
its  geographical  relations!' 

1 129  LYTTLETON   (George,    Lord).      Observations   on    the  Conversion  and 

Apostleship  of  St.  Paul.  In  a  letter  to  Gilbert  West,  Esq.  8vo.  Loud., 
1747.  [Numerous  editions.  The  Tract  Society's  edition.  Fcap.  8vo.  3/-] 
Gilbert  West  and  his  friend  Lord  Lyitleton,  both  men  of  acknowledged  talents,  lird 
imbibed  the  principles  of  infidelity  from  a  superficial  view  of  the  Scriptures.  Fu  ly 
persuaded  that  the  Bible  was  an  imposture,  they  were  determined  to  expose  the  cheat. 
3fr.  West  chose  the  Resurrection  of  Christ,  and  Lord  Lyttleton  the  Conversion  of 
St.  Paul,  for  the  subject  of  hostile  criticism.  Both  sat  down  to  their  respective  tasks, 
full  of  prejudice,  and  a  contempt  for  Christianity.  The  result  of  their  separate 
attempts  was  that  they  were  both  converted  by  their  endeavours  to  overthrow  the 
truth  of  Christianity  !  They  came  together,  not  as  they  expected,  to  exult  over  an 
imposture  exposed  to  ridicule,  but  to  lament  their  folly,  and  to  congratulate  each  other 
on  their  joint  conviction,  that  the  Bible  was  the  word  of  God.  Their  able  enquiries 
have  furnished  two  most  valuable  treatises  in  favour  of  revelation  ;  one,  entitled 
"Observations  on  the  Conversion  of  St.  Paul,"  and  the  other,  "Observations  on  the 
Resurrection  of  Christ." 

1 130  MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.D.)     St.  Paul  in  Rome.     Cr.  8vo.     4/6. 

Land.,  Nisbet.     187 1.     S.  2/6. 
Sermons  preached  in  Rome,  into  which  are  ably  introduced  eloquent 
mention  of  the  existing  traditions    and   remains  which  associate  the 
Apostle  with  that  great  city. 

1131  BISCOE  (Richard,  M.A.,  Preb.  of  St.  PauVs.      Died  1748). 

History  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Confirmed  from  other 
Authors,  and  considered  as  full  evidence  of  the  Truth  of 
Christianity.     8vo.      Oxf.,  1840.     4/- 

1132  PALEY    (William,     D.D.       1743 — 1805).      Horae    Paulinse. 

Numerous  editions.  The  Religious  Tract  Society  publishes  the 
Horse  Paulinse,  with  Notes,  and  Horse  Apostolicse,  by  Rev.  T. 
Birks.     1 2  mo.     3/- 

11 33  TATE    (James,    Canon   of  St.   PauPs).      The    Horse    Paulinse 

carried  out  and  illustrated.     8vo.     Loud.,  \  840. 
Though  not  commentaries,  the  three  works  just  mentioned  are  sources 
of  information  not  to  be  neglected  by  the  student  of  the  Acts. 

1 1 34  RIVINGTON  (Francis).     Life  and  Writings  of  St.  Paul.     Cr. 

8vo.     5/-     Land.,  Sampson  Low  &  Co.     1874.     S.  2/- 
Nobody  possessing  Conybeare  and  Hozvson  will  need  this  work,  though 
in  the  absence  of  better  this  would  have  been  serviceable. 

H35     SMITH  (Thornley).     Saul  of  Tarsus.     2/- and  2/6.     Lond.,]. 
Blackwood  &  Co.     S.  1/3. 
Thornley  Smith  always  deserves  attentive  reading. 


108  THE  APOSTOLICAL  EPISTLES. 

1 1 7,6     r.LUNT  (Hf.nry,  A.M.)    Lectures  upon  the  History  of  St.  Peter. 
i2mo.     Lofi(f.,  1830.      i/-     {For  remarks,  see  A^o.  1125). 

1137     GREEN  (Samu el  G.,  D.D.,  President  of  Rawdon  College). 

Tlic  Apostle  Peter:  his  Life  and  Lessons.      i2mo.     3/- 

Lond.,  S.  School  Union.      1873. 
Coiitaitis  a  large  amount  of  needful  information,  condensed  and 
icell  arranged.     Dr.  Green  is  the  ivriter  on  Peter  s  biography. 

113S     KRUMMACHER    (F.  W.,   D.D.)     St.  John  the  Evangelist. 
1 2  mo.     Bib.  Cabinet,     ^rt'///^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     S.  3/- 
The  author's  name  is  a  sufficient  guarantee.     He  has  also  written  on 
Cornelius  and  Stephen. 

1139     GOULBURN    (Edward  Meyrick,   D.D.,  Dean  of  Norwich). 
Acts  of  the  Deacons  :  Lectures  on  Acts  VI. — IX.    Sm.  8vo.    6/- 
Z^//^/.,  Rivingtons.     1S69.    S.  2/9. 
An  interesting  topic  well  handled. 


THE  APOSTOLICAL  EPISTLES. 

1 140  BENSON    (George,    D.D.       1699 — 1763).      Paraphrase   and 

Notes  on  I  &  2  Thessalonians,  i  &  2  Timothy,  Philemon,  Titus, 
and  the  Seven  Catholic  Epistles.  2  vols.,  4to.  1734.  6/- to  8/- 
Benson  has  closely  followed  Locke's  method,  though  scarcely  with 
equal  footsteps,  and  has  paraphrased  those  Epistles  which  Locke  did  not 
live  to  complete.  In  the  consecutive  reading  of  an  Epistle  Locke  ■axiCi 
Benson  are  great  assistants,  but  as  Benson  was  an  Arian  he  must  be  read 
with  great  caution.     {See  No.  1148). 

1 141  DENTON  (W.)     Commentaries  on  the   Epistles   for    Sundays 

and  Holy  Days.      2  vols.,    8vo.     36/-     Land.,   G.  Bell  &  Co. 
1869 — 71.    S.  21/- 
Will  be  a  treasure  to  Churchmen.     Denton  is  a  good  author. 

1142  DICKSON    (David).      Exposition    of  all   the    Epistle-. 

Folio.      Lond.  16^9.     12/- to  15/- 
Dickson  is  a  writer  after  our  own  heart.     For  preachers  he  is  a 
great  ally.      There  is  Jiothing  brilliant  or  profound  ;  but  everything 
is  clear  and  well  arranged,  and  the  miction  runs  dozvn  like  the  oil 
from  Aaron's  head.     In  this  volume  the  observations  are  brief. 

1 143  ELLICOTT   (Charles  ].,   D.D.,  Bp.  of  Gloucester  and 

Bristol).     Commentary  on   St.    Paul's  Epistles.     5  vols., 

8vo.     Galatians,  8/6  ;  Ephesians,  8/6  ;  Pastoral  Epistles, 

10/6 ;     Philippians,     Colossians,    and    Philemon,     10/6  ; 

Thessalonians, 7/6.    Z^«^., Longmans.   1861 — 64.    S.31/6. 

Dr.  Eadie  says,  "  Ellicott  is  distinguished  by  close  and  ujiifonn 

adherence   to  grammatical  canon,   without   much    expansion    into 

exegesis."    Dr.  Riddle  thinks  Ellicott  to  be  in  many  respects  witJiout 

an  English  rival.    For  scholars  only. 


THE  APOSTOLICAL  EPISTLES.  160 

T144    FERGUSON  (James).    Exposition  of  the  Epistles  to  the 
Galatians,  Ephesians,  Philippians,   Colossians,  and  Thes- 
salonians.     8vo.     Edinb.,   1659 — 74.     8/-  to   10/6.     Re- 
printed, I  vol.,  large  8vo.     Loud.,  1841.     3/-  to  5/6. 
He  who  possesses  this  luork  is  rich.     The  author  handles  his 

matter  in  the  same  manner  as  Hiitcheson  and  Dickson,  and  he  is 

of  their  class — a  grand,  gracious,  savoury  divine. 

1 145  GLOAG  (Paton  J.,  D.D.)     Introduction  to  the  Pauline 

Epistles.     8vo.     12/-     ^^zV/Z^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1874. 
Not  an   exposition.,    but   an   exceedingly   valuable   ifitroduction, 
illustrating  the  design,  date,  and  circumstances   of  the   inspired 
letters. 

1 146  JOWETT    {Benjamin,  M. A.,  Regius  Professor,   Oxford).      Epistles  to   the 

Thessalonians,  Galatians,  and  Romans  [Greek  and  English] ;  vnlh  Critical 
Notes.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Land.,  Murray.     1859.     S.  £2  2s.  to  ;,{^2  los. 
Professor  fowcti's  most   unseemly  attack  on  Paul,  as  an  apostle,  as  a  thinker,  as  a 

writer,  and  as  a  man,    only  proves   his   own  incapacity   for  forming  a  just  judgment 

either  of  the  apostle  or  of  himself. 

1 147  KELLY  (William).     Lectures  Introductory  to  the  Study  of  Paul's  Epistles. 

Demy  Svo.     5/-     Lond.,  G.  Morrish.     1869.     S.  3/- 
Of  the  same  character  as  ^[r.  Kelly's  other  works.      (See  No.  1220). 

1 148  LOCKE  (John,  M.A.     1632 — 1704).     Paraphrase  and  Note.s 

on  the  Epistles  to  the  Galatians,   Corinthians,   Romans,  and 

Ephesians.     4to.     Land.,  1733.     Also  Svo.  editions.     2/6. 

Anything  from  such  a  man  is  worthy  of  attention,  and  this  piece,  as  a 

protest  against  rending  texts  from  their  connection,  is  most  judicious. 

The  paraphrase,  though  open  to  criticism,  is  executed  with  great  candour, 

and  really  illuminates  the  text.     {See  Benso7i,  No.  1140). 

1149  LYTH  (John,  D.D.)     The  Homiletical  Treasury.     Romans  to  Philippians. 

Cr.  Svo.     5/-     Lond.,  Elliot  Stock.     1869. 
The  plan  of  this  book  is  surpassingly  useful,  but  Dr.  Lyth  does  not  carry  it  out  to 
our  satisfaction.     It  is  easy  to  divide  an  egg  by  letting  it  drop  on  the  floor,  and  in  this 
fashion  this  author  divides  texts. 

1150  MACKNIGHT  (J.,  D.D.     1721— 1800).  Translation  with  Commentaiy  and 

Notes.     6  vols.,  8vo.,  1816  ;  also  4  vols.,  8vo.,  and  i  vol.,  royal  Svo.     10/- 
To  be  read  with  great  caution.     We  do  not  admire  this  author. 

1 15 1  MARSTON    (Charles    Dallas,    M.A.)     Expositions    on    the 

Epistles.    i2mo.    3/6.    Land,,  J.  F.  Shaw  &  Co.    1868.    S.  1/9. 
Expositions  of  each  Epistle  as  a  whole.     An  admirable  method  of 
instruction.     To  do  this  in  a  popular  style  is  as  praiseworthy  as  it  is 
difficult.     Mr.  Marsfon  has  succeeded. 

1 152  PAGET  (Alfred  T.,  M.A.)     On  the  Unity  and  Order  of  the 

Epistles  of  St.  Pauh     Svo.     Z^;/^''.,  Rivingtons.     1851.     i/- 
Suggests  a  rich  vein  for  the  student's  own  working.     Few,  we  fear, 
will  carry  it  out,  but  these  will  prize  the  Epistles  more  than  others. 

1153  PEILE  (T.  W.,  D.D.)     Annotations  on  the  Apostolical  Epistles,  for  the  use 

of  Students  of  the  Greek  Text.     4  vols.,  Svo.     Lond.,  1848—52. 
Anticalvinistic  in  doctrine,   and  in  style  involved,    obscure,    and  terribly  paren- 
thetical.    The  purchase  of  the  volumes  would  be  a  heavy  investment. 


i:<|  11 1 1:  APOSTOLICAL  EPISTLES.— ROMANS. 

I  154     PRICIIARD  (C.  E.,  M.A.)     Commentary.     Ephcsians,  Philip- 
pians,  and  (rolossians.     Lotid.,  Rivingtons.     1865.     S.  1/6. 
Not  too  diffuse  :  amon<r  the  notes  are  some  admirable  hints  which 
ni.i\-  be  worked  out.     The  book  is  a  small  one  for  so  large  a  subject. 

1 155      SLADE    (James,   M.A.)     Annotations  on  the   Epistles.      Eor  the  use  of 
C-iiidiiiates  for  Holy  Orders.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Land.,  1836.     5/- 
This  is  practic.-illy  a  continuation  q{  Elsleys  work  {No.  954),  which  closed  with  the 
Acts.     Notes  dry  and  sapless,  but  from  a  literary  point  of  view  respectable. 


ROMANS. 

[Our  space  does  not  permit  us  to  repeat  the  names  of  authors  men 
tioned  under  Ads  and  Apostolical  Epistks,  but  we  urge  the  student 
carefully  to  refer  thereto.] 

115G      ADAM    (Thomas).     Paraphrase  on  Romans  I.  to  XI.     Svo.     1774;  l2mo. 
1805.     1/6  to  2/- 
A  poor  paraphrase  ;  very  correct  and  evangelical,  but  Ihiu  as  Adam's  ale.     We 
are  disappointed,  for  the  "  Private  Thoughts"  of  the  same  author  are  highly  esteemed. 

1 157  ANDERSON  (Robert,  ^/^;7>///'^/z.    1792— 1843).    Exposition 

of  Romans.     i2mo.     Lond.,  1837.      2/6. 
After  the  manner  of  Cliarlts   Bridges.      Full   of  holy  unction  and 
devout  meditation. 

1 158  BKO\Y]>i  {]oiiy:,  0/ Wamph ray).     Exposition  of  Romans.     4to. 

Edinb.,  1766.      10/- to  12/- 
By  a  Calvinist  of  the  old  school.     Heavy,  perhaps  ;  but  precious. 

1159  BROWN  (John,  D.D.,  .£"^///^.)    Analytical  Expositions 

of  Romans.    Large  Svo.    14/-    £"^///;^.,  W.  Oliphant  &  Co. 
1857.     S.  7/-to9/- 
Dj:  Brozu?i's  work  mjcst  be  placed  avioiig  the  first  of  the  first- 
class.     He  is  a  great  expositor. 

1160  CALVIN  (John).      Commentary  on    Romans.     Trans- 

lated by  Christopher  Roodell.     4to.,  Black  Letter.     1583. 
9/-    Also  sm.  Svo.,  with  Life,  by  Beza.     1834.     2/9. 

1 161  CHALLIS    (James,   M.A.,   F.R.S.,   F.R.A.S.)     Translation   ot 

Romans,  with  Notes.     Svo.    4/-    Zi?//^/.,  G.  Bell  &  Sons.    1871. 
The  translation  is  made  in  the  current  language   of  the  day.     The 
notes  are  mainly  critical. 

1 162  CHALMERS  (T.,  D.D.)     Lectures  on  Romans.     4  vols.,  8vo. 

1827.    4vols,i2mo.    Z^i-//;/*^.,  Edmonston  &  Co.    1854.   S.  8/6. 
Our  preferences  as  to   expositions  lie  in  another  direction ;  but  we 
cannot   be  insensible  to   the  grandeur  and  childlike  simplicity  which 
were  combined  in  Chalmers. 

11C3      EDWARDS   (Timothy,   A.M.)     Paraphrase,  with  Annotations,  on  Romans 
and  Galatians.     4to.     Lond.,  1752.      2/6. 
Wall  calls  this  a  judiciously  compiled  work  from  the  best  comments.     We  judge 
it  to  be  poor  as  poverty  itself. 


ROMANS.  171 

1 164  EWBANK  (W.  W.)     Commentary,  with  Translation  and  Notes. 

2  vols.,  post  8vo.     Lond.,  J.  W.  Parker.     1850.     S,  3/- 
A  sound  evangelical  comment,  very  good  and  gracious.    In  condensed 
thought  this  work  is  not  rich :  it  is  adapted  for  general  reading. 

1 165  FORD  (J.,  M.A.).     Romans.    Illustrated  from  Ch.  of  England 

Divines.     Svo.     12/-     Masters,  1862.     S.  7/-     {See  No.  955). 

1166  FORBES  (John,  LL.D.)    Analytical  Commentary,  tracing 

the  Train  of  Thought  by  the  Aid  of  Parallelism,  with 
Notes,  &c.  Svo.  10/6.  Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1868. 
We  tJiink  Dr.  Forbes  carries  the  idea  of  parallelism  further  than 
it  should  go.  It  can  only  be  applied  strictly  to  poetical  books,  which 
Romans  is  not.  He  tries  to  bri)ig  out  the  other  side  of  the  truths 
tiiughi  in  Hodge,  Edivards,  and  Calvin;  but  we  confess  our 
preference  of  those  authors  to  himself  The  work  will  greatly 
edify  those  zvhom  it  does  not  confise. 

1 167  FRY  (John,  B.A.)     Lectures.     Svo.     Land.,  iZid.     2/- 
Having  no  theory  to  serve  in  this  instance,  Fry  writes  to  edification. 

1 168  GODWIN  (John  H.,  Hon.  Prof,  Nezv  Coll.,  Lond.)   New  Trans- 

lation, with  Notes.  Svo.  6/6.  Z(?;z^.,  Hodder  &  Stoughton.  1873. 
Such  a  book  as  students  need  while  studying  the  Greek  text  in  college. 

1169  HALDANE       (R.      1764 — 1842).      Exposition:     with 

Remarks  on  the  Commentaries  of  Macknight  and  others. 

Svo.     12/6.      ^^/;/<^.,  W.  Oliphant  &  Co.     1874.      S.  9/- 

Dr.  Chalmers  styled  this  "  a  well-built  commentary,''  and  strongly 

recommended  it  to  students  of  theology.    In  his  "Sabbath  Readings'' 

he  tvrites :    "/  am  reading  'Haldane's  Exposition  of  the  Epistle 

to  the  Romans',  and  find  it  solid  and  congenial  food." 

1 170  HINTON    (J.Howard.)     Exposition.     Svo.     6/-     Lond.,  \Z(ii.     S.  1/6. 
Not  believing  in  the  constant  parallelism  of  the  Epistles,  we  care  very  little  for 

this  treatise,  much  as  we  esteem  the  author. 

11 71  HODGE  (Charles).    Commentary.    Svo.    Philadelphia, 

1835,  etc.     Reprinted  by  Rel.  Tract  Society,  i2mo.     3/- 
Hodges  method  and  matter   make  hint  doubly  useful  in  com- 
menting.    He  is  singularly  clear,  and  a  great  promoter  of  thought. 

1172  KELLY  (William).     Notes.     i2mo.    2/6.    Zw?^.,  G.  Morrish.     1873. 
Many  of  the  remarks  are  admirable,  but  the  theories  supported  are  untenable. 

1 173  KNIGHT  (Robert).     Commentary.     Svo.     Lo7id.,  1854.     2/6. 

Not  at  all  to  our  mind.     The  author  often  seems  to  us  rather  to  becloud  the  text 
than  to  explain  it. 

1174  LANGE   (J.  P.,  D.D.)   and  FAY  (F.  R.)      Commentary 

on   Romans.     {See page  \%  and  No.  (^2-}^). 

H75     MARTYR  (Peter.     1500 — 1562).     A  most  learned  and  fi-uit- 
ful  Commentary  on  Romans.     Folio.     1568.     30/- 
Being  in  b/ack  letter,  and  very  long,  few  will  ever  read  it ;  but  it  con^ 
tiins  much  that  will  repay  the  laborious  book-worm. 


172  ROMANS. 

1176  OLSHAUSKN(H.,D.D.)  Commentary  on  Romans.   8vo.    lo/O. 

i?^/«^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1850. 
Nobody  seems  very  enthusiastic  as  to  Olshaiism,  but  some  authors 
liavc  borrowed  from  his  pages  more  tlian  they  have  confessed.  Personally 
we  do  not  care  for  him,  but  many  prize  and  all  respect  him. 

1 177  PARR  (Elnatiian,  B.D.)     A  Short  View  of  the  Epistle 

to  the  Romans.  [Chap.  I. ;  II.,  i,  2  ;  and  VIII.  to  XVI.  | 
This  Exposition  forms  nearly  the  whole  of  "  The  Workes" 
of  Parr.  Fourth  edition.  Small  folio.  165 1.  10/-  The 
quartos  do  not  contain  the  Exposition  of  Chap.  I.  and  11. 
77/6'  style  is  faulty,  but  the  matter  is  rieh  and  full  of  suggestions. 

We  regret  that  the  luork  is  not  complete,  and  is  seldom  to  be  met 

tvith  exeept  in  fragments. 

1 1 78  PLUMER     (William   S.,    D.D.,    LL.D.)      Commentary,  with 

Introduction  on  the  Life,  Times,  Writings,  and  Character   of 
Paul.     Imp.  8vo.     14/-     Edinb.,  W.  Oliphant.     [N.  D.] 

Plumer  is  a  laborious  compiler,  and  to  most  men  his  works  will  be  of 
more  use  than  those  of  a  more  learned  writer. 

1179  PRIDHAM  (Arthur).     Notes.     Cr.  8vo.     5/-    Zc7«^.,  Yapp.     1862. 
Sound  and  gracious,  but  somewhat  dull. 

1180  PURDUE  (E.,  A.M.)      Commentary  on  Romans.     Svo.     Z)//^.,  1855.     1/6. 
Not  important. 

1 181  ROBINSOlSr    (T.,  D.D.)       Suggestive    Commentary   on 

Romans.    {Van  Doren  Series  of  Commentaries.]    2  vols., 
cr.  Svo.     8/-  nett.     Lond.,  Dickinson  &  Higham.     1871. 
A  good  book  in  a  good  style.      Worth  any  amount  to  preaehers. 

1182  STEPHEN  (John,  A.M.)     Expositions  on  Romans.     A  Scries 

of  Lectures.     t2mo.     Aberd.,  1857.     2/6. 
Sound  in  doctrine,  practical  in  tone  ;  above  mediocrity. 

1 183  STUART  (MosES.)    Commentary  on  Romans.   Svo.   6/-  Lond, 

W.  Tegg  &  Co.  S.  ^16. 
Moses  Stuart  is  judged  to  have  been  at  his  best  in  Romans  and 
Hebrews.  The  present  work  is  in  some  points  unsatisfactory,  on 
account  of  certain  philosophico-theological  views  which  he  endeavours 
to  maintain.  Mr.  Haldane  denounced  him  as  by  false  criticism  "  mis- 
representing the  divine  testimony  in  some  of  the  most  momentou.<5 
points  of  the  Christian  scheme."     The  charge  was  too  true. 

1184  TERROT  (C.   H.,    A.M.,   Bp.  of  Edinhiirgh).     Romans  [in  Greek],  with 

Introduction,  Paraphrase,  and  Notes.     8vo.     Land.,  1828.      1/6. 
Anti-Calvinistic.     Why  do  not  such  writers  let  Romans  alone  ? 

1 1 85  THOLUCK   (A.  F.)     Exposition    of  Romans.     2  vols.,  fcap. 

8vo.    8/-   Bib.  Cabinet  Series.    EdtJib.,  T.  Clark.     1 842.    S.  4/. 
Moses  Stuart  confesses  his  great  obligations  to  this  eminent  divine, 
who  far  exceeds  the  most  of  his  German  brethren  in  spirituality,  and  is 
not  behind  them  in  scholarship ;  yet  even  he  is  none  too  orthodox  nor 
too  reverent  in  his  treatment  of  Holy  Scripture. 


ROMANS.  173 

ii86    VAUGHAN    (Charles   John,    D.D.)     Romans.     The 
Greek  Text,  with  English  JNotes.     Cr.  8vo.     yjG.    Loud., 
Macmillan  &  Co.     1874.     S.  4/- 
"Very  valuable  to  students  of  the  Greek.      The  result  of  indepen- 
dent study  and  honest  labour. 

1 187  WALFORD  (W.)     Curse  Romanje.     i2mo.    Z*?;/^.,  1846.    1/6. 
Walford  makes  comments  of  considerable  value ;  he  does  not  stand 

in  the  front  rank,  but  his  mediocrity  is  respectable. 

1 188  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.D.)     Lectures  on  Romans.     3  vols., 

cr.  8vo.    3/6  each.     Loud.,  Fullarton  &  Co.      1861. 
Wardlaw  interprets  with  great  sobriety  and  spirituality,  and  we  never 
consult  him  in  vain,  though  we  do  not  always  agree  with  him. 

1 1 89  WILLET  (Andrew).     Hexapla:  that  is,  a  Sixfold  Commentary 

upon  Romans.     Folio.     161 1.     6/- to  7/6.     (See  No.  xit"^.) 

1190  ^llAAKWSy  (^.^.,  Wesley  an  Minister).    Exposition.    Cr.  8vo. 

6/-     Land.,  66,  Paternoster  Row.      1869.     S.  2/6. 
This  epistle  has  a  fascination  for  Arminian  writers  ;  it  affords  them  an 
opportunity  for  showing  their  courage  and  ingenuity.     Mr.  Williams's 
book  is  instructive. 

1 191  WILSON  (Thomas.     Puritan.     Died  1621).     Commentary  on 

Romans.   4to.  Land.,  1614.   Folio,  1627  and  1653.   3/6  to  5/6. 
Intended  for  the  less-instructed  among  the  preacher's  hearers,  and 
put  into  the  form  of  a  dialogue.     It  is  very  solid,  but  does  not  contain 
much  which  is  very  striking  or  original. 

1 192  SOLATER  (W.,  D.D.    Died  1626).     A  Key  to  the  Key 

of  Scripture  ;  or  an  Exposition,  with   Notes,  upon  the 
Romans,  Chap.  I.,  IL,  IIL      4to.     161 1  and  1629.     4/- 
An  antique,  but  precious  book. 

1 1 93  MORISON  (James,  D.D.)     Exposition  of  the  Third  Chapter 

of  Romans.     8vo.     12/6.     Z^;/^'.,  Hamilton.      1866.     S.  7/6. 
A   scholarly  and  exhaustive  exposition.     When  we  do  not  agree  with 
Dr.  Morison,  we  pay  homage  to  his  great  learning  and  critical  skill. 

1 1 94  FRASER    (James.       1700 — 1796).      The    Doctrine    of 

Sanctification.   Explication  of  Romans  VL  to  VIII.  i — 4. 

8vo.  Edinb.,  1830.  Offered,  new,  by  Ogle  &  Murray,  2/6. 
Dr.  John  Brown  says :  "  Eraser's  Seripture  Doctrine  of  Sancti- 
fication is  well  zvorth  studying.  The  old  Scotch  divine  is  rude  in 
speech,  but  not  in  knoivledgeT 

1195  ELTON  (Edward,  B.D.)   Sundry  Sermons  upon  Romans 

VII.,  VIIL,  and  IX.     Folio.     Lond.,  1653.     8/-  to  10/- 
The  style  is  plain  and  homely,  but  the  matter  is  of  the  choicest 
kind.     This  old  folio  is  like  an  old  skin  bottle,  zvith  a  rough  exte- 
rior, but  filled  within  with  the  product  of  the  rarest  vintage.    Such 
books  as  this  we  never  tire  of  reading. 


174  ROMANS.— I.  &  II.  CORINTHIANS. 

1196  KOIILBRUGGK  (H.   F.,   V)X).,  of  FJbcrfeld).      Romans  VII., 

paraphrased.     121110.     Loud.,  1854.     S.  1/6. 
An  instructive  rendering  of  this  deeply  experimental  cliapter. 

1197  BINNING   (Hugh.     1627— 1653).     The  Sinner's  Sanc- 

tuary.   Forty-eight  Sermons  on  Romans  VIII.    4to.   1670. 

Also  Vols.  I.  and  II.  of  his  Works.     3  vols.,  i2mo.    Edifib., 

1839-     3/- to  4/6. 
T/ic  ivriter  of  Binning  s  Memoir  says  :  "  There  is  a  pure  stream 
of  piety  and  learning  running  tJirough  the  luho/e,  and  a  very  pecu- 
liar turn  of  thought,  which  exceeds  the  common  rate  of  writers  cu 
this  choice  part  of  the  Holy  Scriptures." 

1198  HORTON    (Thomas,    D.D.)       Forty-six    Sermons    on 

Romans  VIII.     Lond.     Folio.      1674.     3/- 
Full  of  matter,  zvell,  but    rather  too  formally,  arranged.      T/u 
sermons  are  very  prim  and  orderly. 

1 199  WINSLOW    (OcTAVius,   D.D.)     No  Condemnation  in   Christ. 

[On  Romans  VIII.]     Cr.  8vo.     7/-    Lond.,  Shaw.     i860. 
jDr.  IViusloTc  is  always  sound  and  sweet ;  but  his  works  are  better 
adapted  for  general  readers  than  for  students.     He  is  extremely  diffuse. 


I.  &  II.  CORINTHIANS. 

[See  also  under  Apostolical  Epistles.\ 

1200  BILLROTH   (Dr.   Gustav.     1808 — 1836).     Commentary  on 

the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.    2  vols.,  1 2mo.    8/-   Bib.  Cabinet 

Series.  Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  S.  2/9. 
To  be  prized  for  its  criticism.  The  author  tries  to  bring  forth  from 
each  passage  the  sense  which  the  Apostle  intended  it  to  convey. 
Observations  and  reflections  there  are  none ;  but  we  are  not  among 
those  who  throw  away  "  the  dry  bones  of  criticism '' — bones  are  as 
needful  as  meat  though  not  so  nourishing. 

1201  CALVIN    (John).       Commentarie    upon    Corinthians. 

Translated  by  Thomas  Tymme.     4to.      1577.      15/- 
Tymme  seems  to  have  been  constantly  occupied  in  translating  the 
Reformers,  and  to  have  done  his  work  well. 

1202  HODGE  (Charles,  D.D.)     Exposition  of  I.  Corinthians. 

Post  8vo.      5/-      1868.     Exposition   of   II.   Corinthians. 

Post  Svo.     5/-      1869.     Lond.,  Nisbet. 
The  more  zee  use  Hodge,  the  more  we  value  him.      This  applies 
to  all  his  commentaries. 
^203     LANGE  (J.  P.)     Commentary  on  I.  and  II.  Corinthians, 

by  C.  F.  Kluig,  D.D.     {Seepage  19.) 

1204      LOTHIAN  (\V.)     Lectures  on  I.  &  II.  Corinthians.     Svo.     Edinb.,  1^2^. 

This  work  must  have  done  good  service  in  its  day,  as  in  some  degree  an  antidoic 
to  Macknight ;  it  is  good  and  sound  ;  but  the  student  need  not  distress  himself  if  i.c 
cannot  procure  it,  for  it  is  not  indispensable. 


CORINTHIANS.— GALATIANS.  175 

1205  OLSHAUSEN  (H.,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  I.  and  II.   Corin- 

thians.    8vo.     9/-     £^/«^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1851. 
Dr.  Lindsay  Alexander  says  that  this  comment  is  highly  esteemed  for 
its  happy  combinations  of  grammaticohistorical  exegesis,  with  spiritual 
insight  into  the  meaning  of  the  sacred  writers. 

1206  PRIDHAM  (Arthur).     Notes  and  Reflections  on  I.  and  II. 

Corinthians.    2  vols.,  cr.  8vo.    5/-  each.    Lond.,  Nisbet.    1866. 
We  do  not  always  agree  with  Mr.  Pridham,  but  we  always  admire 
the  quiet,  candid,  and  unaffected  manner  in  which  he  writes. 

1207  ROBERTSON  (Frederick  W.,  M.A.     1816— 1853).     Exposi- 

tory Lectures.     i2mo.      5/-     Lofid.,  King.     1872. 
Robertson's  doctrinal  vagaries  are  well  known;  yet  he  is  a  great  thinker 
and  a  prompter  of  thought  in  other  men.     Read  with  discretion. 

1208  STANLEY  (Arthur  Penrhyn,   D.D.,  F.R.S.,  Dean  of  West- 

minster.) Corinthians.     8vo.     18/-     Lond.,  Murray.     1876. 
We  do  not  advise  the  purchase  of  these  volumes ;  for  although  Dean 
Stanley  is  an  instructive  writer,  our  perusal  of  his  notes  does  not  impress 
us  with  any  sense  either  of  their  value  or  soundness. 

1209  COLET    (John,    D.D.,   Dean   of  St.   PaiiVs.     1466-1519).     Treatise  on 

I.  Corinthians.     With  Translation.     Demy  8vo.     10/6.     Lond.,  G.  Bell  & 
Sons.     1874. 
A  curiosity  and  nothing  more.     This  same  ancient  Dean   Colet,  the  friend  of 
Erasmus,  wrote  also  on  the  Romans. 

1210  PEARCE  (Zachary,  D.D.)     Translation  of  I.  Corinthians,  with 

Paraphrase  and  Notes.    In  Vol.  II.  of  Commentary.  {No.  966.) 
We  ought  to  value  this  work  greatly,  for  the   author  was  a  renowned 
scholar ;  but  we  confess  we  do  not  think  much  of  his  productions. 

[The  writers  on  small  portions  of  these  Epistles  are  too  numerous  to 
be  mentioned  in  our  short  Catalogue.  Burgess,  Bra?iston,  Thomas 
Fuller,  Sibbes,  Manton,  Watson,  and  other  masterly  writers  have  all  left 
a  contribution  to  the  expository  stores  of  the  Church  of  Christ.] 


GALATIANS. 

[Do  not  forget  to  consult  works  from  No.  1140  to  1155.] 

1211  BAGGE(H£NRyT.J.,B.A.)  Galatians.  8vo.  Z^;/^.,  1856.  S.3/ 
Simply  a  revised  text  and  critical  notes. 

121 2  BAYLEY  (Sir  E.)     Commentary  on  Galatians.     Thick 

post  8vo.     yl6.     Lond.,  Nisbet.     1869.     S.  3/- 
Upon  each  portion  there  is  a  commentary,  a  paraphrase,  and  a 
sermon,  and  thus    the    author  conveys  a  considerable  amojint  of 
instruction.     He  is  thoroughly  evangelical,  and  his  style  ckar. 

12 1 3  BROWN    (John,    D.D.      Edinburgh).      Exposition    of 

Galatians.     Svo.     Edinb.,  1853.     S.  6/-  _ 
Brown  is  a  modern  Puritan.     All  his  expositions  are  of  the 
utmost  value.     The  volume  oji  Galatians  is  one  of  the  scarcest  books 
in  the  tnarkct. 


17«i  GALATIANS. 

1211     CALVIN  (JuilN).   Forty-two  Sermons  on  Galatians.    4to. 

Loud.,  1574.  [A  different  work  from  his  Commentary.] 
1215  EADIE  (John,  D.D.)  Commentary  on  the  Greek  Text 
of  Galatians.  8vo.  10/6,  £dhid.,  ClsLvk.  1869.  S.  7/6. 
77/ /j-  is  a  most  careful  attempt  to  ascertain  the  meaning  of  the 
Apostle  by  a  painstaking  analysis  of  his  words.  The  author  is  not 
ivarpcd  by  any  system  of  theology ,  but  yet  lie  does  not  deviate  from 
recognized  evangelical  truth.  As  a  piece  of  honest  grammatical 
exegesis  the  value  of  this  commentaty  is  very  great,  thougJi  there  is 
room  to  differ  from  it  here  and  there. 

I2t6      EDMUNDS  (John,    M.A.)     Galatians.     With  Explanatory  Notes.     Crown 
8vo.     Eitinb.,  Oliver  &  Boyd.     1874. 
Thoroughly  ritualistic.     See  remarks  on  this  author's  work  on  Thessalonians. 

1217  GODWIN  (John  H.)     Galatians.     Translation,  with  Notes  and 

Doctrinal  Lessons.     Cr.  8vo.     3/-     Land.,  Hodder.     1871. 
A  helpful  translation,  with  good  textual  notes. 

1218  HALDANE   (James   Alexander.      176S— 1851).     Exposition 

of  Galatians.     12 mo.      1848.     2/6. 
This  work  has  never  been  popular,  because  the  author  in  the   third 
chapter  discusses  the  question  of  baptism.     This  is  a  fault  of  which  we 
may  say  as  the  Papist  said  of  venial  sin  :  "  It  deserved  to  be  forgiven." 

1 219  HAWKER  GoHN,    M.A.)     Bible   Thoughts   in   Quiet   Hours. 

Commentary  on  Galatians.   2/-  Z^;///.,  Yapp  &  Hawkins.    1874. 
These  "  thoughts  "  are  sound  and  edifying.  The  book  does  not  profess 
to  be  a  thorough  exposition. 

1220  KELLY  (William).     Lectures  on  Galatians.     i2mo.     1/6  and  2]-     Lond., 

G.  Morrish.     [N.D.J 
Air.  Kdlys  authoritative  style  has  no  weight  with  us.     We  do  not  call  these 
lectures  expounding,  but  confounding. 

1 22 1  LANGE  (J.   P.)      Commentary   on    Galatians,  by  Otto 

Schmoller,  Ph.D.     Ephesians,  Philippians,  and  Colossians, 
by  Karl  Braune,  D.D.     {See page  19.) 

1222  LIGHTFOOT   (J.  B.,  D.D.,  Canon  of  St.  Pauts).     Gala- 

tians.     Revised  Text,  with    Introductions,    Notes,    and 
Dissertations.     Svo.     12/-    Lond.,  Macmillan.     1874. 
TJie  Spectator  says :  "  There  is  no  commentator  at  once  of  sounder 
judgment,  and  more  liberal,  than  Dr.  Lightfoot.'' 

1223  LUSHINGTON  (Thomas.    Died  1661).      The  Justification   of  a  Sinner: 

the  Main  Argument  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.     Folio.  1650.     5/6. 
A  translation  from  Crellius,  a  Socinian  divine,  made  by  Lushingio7t,  who  was  far 
'^owQ  towards  the  same  error.      We  mention  the  book   to  warn  our  readers  of  its 
character  ;  for  bad  works  of  the  Puritan  period  are  few. 

1224  LUTHER     (Martin).        Commentary    on     Galatians. 

[Numerous  editions — folio,  quarto,  and  octavo.] 
"  I  prefer  this  book  of  Martin  Luther's  (except  the  Bible)  before 
all  the  books  that  I  have  ever  seen,  as  most  fit  for  a  wounded  co?i- 
scicncc." — Bunyan.      This  is  a  great  historic  zvork,  and  is  beyond 


GALATIANS— EPHESIANS.  177 

criticism,  on  account  of  its  great  iisefubicss.  As  a  comment  its 
accuracy  might  be  questioned;  but  for  emphatic  titter ances  and  clear 
statements  of  the  great  doctrine  of  the  Epistle  it  remains  altogether 
by  itself,  and  must  be  judged  per  se. 

1225  OLSHAUSEN  (H.,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  Galatians,   Ephe- 

sians,    Colossians,   and    Thessalonians.      8vo.      10/6.     Edifib., 
T.  &  T.  Clark.      185 1.     (For  i-emarks,  see  No.  964  J 

1226  PEARSON   (Samuel,  Minister  of  Gt.  George  St.  Chapel,  Liver- 

pool). Sermons  on  Galatians.  Cr.  Svo.  2)\^-  Lond.^QXdjkt.  1874. 
Discourses  worthy  of  the  successor  of  Spencer  and  Raffles. 

1227  PERKINS   (William.      1558 — 1602.)      Commentarie   on   the 

First  Five  Chapters  of  Galatians,  with  a  Supplement  on  the  Sixth 
Chapter,  by  Ralfe  Cud  worth.     Thick  4to.     1604.    2/6  to  4/. 
Perkins  was  justly  esteemed  by  his  cotemporaries  as  a  master  in 
theology.     This  commentary  is  deeply  theological,  and  reads  like  a 
body  of  divinity  :  truth  compels  us  to  confess  that  we  find  it  dull. 

1228  PRIDHAM(A.)   Galatians.    Cr.  8vo.   5/-  Z^?;;^.,  Nisbet.   1872. 
Pridham  is,  we  suppose,  of  the  moderate  Brethren  school,  but  he  is 

not  carried  away  by  any  theory,  being  essentially  a  man  of  sober  mind. 


EPHESIANS. 

[See  also  under  Apostolical  Epistles. '\ 

1229  BAYNE  (Paul,  A. M.   Puritan.    Died  161"]).     Commentary  on 

Ephesians.     Folio.     1643,    &c.     6/-      [Reprinted  in  NichoVs 
Commentaries.     Cr.  4to.     7/6.     Loftd.,  Nisbet.     1866.] 
Sibbes  says  of  this  work  :  "  The  greatest  shall  find  matter  to  exercise 
themselves  in  ;  the  meaner,  matter  of  sweet  comfort  and  holy  instruc- 
tion ;  and  all  confess  that  he  hath  brought  some  light  to  this  Scripture." 

1230  CALVIN   (John).     Sermons  on   Ephesians,  Translated 

by  A.  Golding.     Black  Letter.     4to.     Lond.,  iS77-     9/- 
Not  the  same  as  the  exposition.     The  Sermons  are  priceless. 

1 23 1  EADIE  (John,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  the  Greek  text 

of  Ephesians.    Svo.     14/.    Z^//^/.,  Griffin.     1861.      S.  7/6, 

"  This  book  is  one  of  prodigious  learning  and  research.     The 

author  seems  to  have  read  all,  in  every  language,  that  has  been 

written   upoji   the  Epistle.      It   is  atso   a   work  of    independent 

criticism,  and  casts  much  new  light  upon  ma?iy  passages." 

1232  GRAHAM  (William,  D.D.,  of  Bonn,  Prussia).     Lectures  on 

Ephesians.     Cr.  8vo.     7/6.     Lond.,  Partridge  &  Co.     1870. 
Dr.  Graham  is  an  earnest  opponent  of  the  German  Neologians  and 
frequently  writes  with  their  negations  before  his  eye.     He  is  a  commen- 
tator of  considerable  learning  and  much  spirituality  of  mind. 

13 


178  EPHESIANS. 

1233  IILMMINGE  (Nicholas,  D.D.)     Conimcntary  on  Ephcsians,    translated. 

4to.     Lond.,  1581.     (See  No.  553.) 

1234  HODGE  (Charles,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  Ephcsians. 

Cr.  8vo.    3/6.     Land.,  Nisbet.     1870. 
Most  valuable.     With  no  zvriter  do  we  more  fully  agree. 

1235  KELLY  (W.)  Lectures.   i2mo.  2/-  Z>«(/.,  G.  Morrish,     (See  N^o.  1256). 

1236  LATHROP  (Joseph,  D.D.,  </^;//mV^.     1731— 1820).     Expo- 

sition of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephcsians,  in  a  Series  of  Discourses. 
Thick  8vo.     Philadelphia,  1864. 
These  discourses  are  sure  to  be  of  the  highest  class.     We  have  not 
been  able  to  procure  a  copy. 

1237  M'GHEE  (R.,  A.M.,  M.R.I.A.)    Lectures  on  Ephesians.    2  vols., 

8vo.    Fourth  edition.    Lond.,  Saunders  &  Otley.    1861.   S.  10/6. 
Lively,  warmhearted,  extemporaneous  sermons,  full  of  good  teaching. 
The  preacher  aimed  to  edify  the  many,  rather  than  to  write  a  critical 
work  for  the  few,  and  he  has  succeeded. 

1238  NEWLAND  (Henry,  M.A  )      A   New   Catena  of  St.   Paul's 

Epistles.  Commentary  on  Ephesians,  in  which  is  exhibited  t)ie 
Results  of  the  most  learned  Theological  Criticisms,  from  the 
Age  of  the  Early  Fathers  down  to  the  Present  Time.  8vo. 
7/6.  Land.,  J.  Parker  &  Co.  1866.  S.  3/- 
Used  discreetly,  this  Catena  of  patristic,  mediaeval,  and  modern  Church 
interpreters,  may  be  very  helpful  ;  without  discretion  it  will  mislead. 

1239  PATTISON    (R.E.,   D.D.,   late  Prcs.  of  Waterville  Col.) 

Commentary  on  Ephesians.     8vo.     Boston,    U.S.     1859. 
A   book  to  instruct   intelligent,  experienced  believers.      It  is  a 
model  for  a  class-book,  plain  and  yet  prof ound. 

1240  PERCEVAL  (A,  P.)    Lectures  on  Ephesians.     i2mo.     Loud.,  1846.     1/6. 
Good,  but  not  likely  to  produce  headache  by  overloading  the  brain  with  thought. 

1 241  PRIDHAAt  (A.)    Ephesians.    i2mo.  4;'6.  Lond.,  Yapp.  S.  2/6. 
Style  heavy,  matter  weighty. 

1242  PULSFORD  (John).    Christ  and  his  Seed;  Central  to  all  things: 

being  a  Series  of  Expository  Discourses  on  Paul's  Epistle  to  the 

Ephesians.    4to.    8/6.    Lond.,  Hamilton,  Adams  &  Co.    1872. 

Contains  a  great  deal  of  deep  thought,  but  is  too  mystical  and  often 

too  cloudy  to  be  of  much  service  to  those  who  wish  to  explain  Scripture. 

1243  RIDLEY  (Lancelot.  About  i$^o.)  Commentaries  on  Ephesians,  Philippians, 

and  part  of  Jude.  [Reprinted  in  Richmond's  Fathers.] 
John  Bale\\\o\.<t  in  1543  :  "The  Commentary  which  tliat  virtuous,  learned  man. 
Master  Lancelot  Ridley,  made  upon  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  for  the  true 
erudition  of  his  Christian  brethren,  hath  my  Lord  Bonner  here  also  condemned  for 
heresy.  But  what  the  cause  is  I  cannot  tell,  unless  it  be  for  advancing  the  Gospel  as 
the  thing  whereby  we  are  made  righteous."  Our  author  is  equally  fierce  against 
Anabaptists  and  Papists,  but  is  not  much  of  a  commentator. 

1244  TURNER  (Samuel  H.,  D.D.)  Ephesians,  in  Greek  and  English; 

with  Analysis  and  Commentary.    8vo.    New  York,  1856. 
A  learned  Am^ican  work  ;  good,  but  not  very  attractive. 


I 


EPHESIANS— PHILIPPIANS.  170 

1245  EVANS  (James  Harrington,  A.M.     1785 — 1849).     Christian 

Solicitude,  as  exemplified  in   Ephesians  III.      i6ino.     Loud., 

J.  F.  Shaw.     1856.     S.  ilz- 

Harrington  Evans  was  a  great  teacher.     A  more  sound,  earnest,  and 

instructive  divine  never  lived.     This  book  consists  of  notes  of  sermons 

preserved  by  a  hearer.      It  is  well  worthy  of   study.      His    Memoir 

contains  fragmentary  remarks  upon  Ephesians  I. 

1246  ROLLOCK  (Robert.     1855 — 1598).     An  Exposition  of  part 

of   the   fift  and  sixt  chapters  of  S.    Pavle's    Epistle    to    the 
Ephesians.    4to.   Lond. ,  i6t,o.    [In  a  volume  containing  sundry 
fragments  of  Expositions.]     12/- 
This  renowned  Scotchman's  writings  generally  come  to  us  as  transla- 
tions from  the  Latin,   and  have  been  made  preternaturally  dull  in  the 
process  of  interpretation  ;  but  this  appears  to  have  been  written  in  English 
by  himself     It  is  practical  to  a  high  degree,  and  goes  into  minute  details 
of  the  married  life,  &c.     It  will  not  be  much  appreciated  in  these  days, 
though  Dr.  McCrie  styles  RollocUs  works  "succinct  and  judicious." 


PHILIPPIANS. 

[See  also  under  Epistles^ 


1247  ACASTER  (J.)    Expository  Lectures  on  Philippians.    8vo.    Lond.,  1827.    2/- 
Useful  in  showing  the  preacher  how  not  lo  do  it.     By  a  violent  effort  we  forced 

ourselves  to  read  one  lecture  ;  but  we  have  done  nothing  to  deserve  to  read  another. 
The  author  was  domestic  chaplain  to  an  earl,  meant  well,  and  did  his  little  best. 

1248  AIRAY  (Henry.    1559 — 1617).    Lectures  on  Philippians.    4to. 

Land.,  1618.     5/6.    [Reprinted,  with  Cartwrighi  on  Colossians, 

m  Nichors  Commentaries.    Cr.  4to.   7/6.  Z^z/rt'.,  Nisbet.    1864.] 

Mr.  Grosart  says :  "  You  will  look  in  vain  in  this  commentary  for 

erudite  criticism  or  subtle  exegesis  in  the  modern  sense :   but   there 

seems  to  us  to  be  an  instructively  true  following  up  of  the  ApostoHc 

thoughts,  and  a  quick  insight  into  their  bearings  and  relative  force. 

1249  CALVIN   (John).     Commentarie  on  Philippians.     Translated 

by  Wm.  Becket.     4to.    Z^//^.,  1584.    10/6. 

1250  CALVIN  AND  STORR.     Expositions  of  Philippians  and  Colos- 

sians.   By  J.  Calvin  and  Gottlob  Storr.    Translated  by  R.  John- 
ston.    1 2 mo.     4/-     Bib.  Cabinet.    Edinb.,  Clsuk.     1842.     3/- 
A  sort  of  sandwich,  with  Calvin  for  the  meat,  and  Storr  for  very  hard 
black  bread.     Students  who  can  enjoy  both  spiritual  exposition  and 
stern  criticism  with  equal  relish  will  make  fine  expositors. 

1 25 1  DAILLE   (Jean.      1594— 1670).      Exposition  of  Philippians. 

Translated  by  Rev.  James  Sherman.  Imp.  Svo.  Lond.,  1841. 
[This  Exposition,  together  with  Dai/le  on  Colossians,  and 
Jenkyn  on  Jude,  have  been  issued  in  one  thick  volume  by  Mr. 
iV7V/?^/ of  Edinburgh.  10/6.  Zr?;///.,  Nisbet.  1863.] 
Written  in  a  deliciously  florid  style.  Very  sweet  and  evangelical : 
after  the  French  manner. 


KSO  PHIIJPPIANS. 

1252  EADIE  (John,   D.D.)     Commentary  on  the  Greek  text 

of  riiilippians.     8vo.,  10/6.    Loud.,  Griffin.     1859.    S.  6/. 
A  standard  work.     Essential  to  iJic  scholarly  student. 

1253  EASTBURN  (M.)     Lectures.     8vo.     Nejv  York,  \Z^i.     2/6. 
Designed  for  flimily  reading.     Moderately  good. 

1254  HALL  (Robert,  A.M.     1764 — 1831).     Exposition  of  Philip- 

pians,  in  twelve  Discourses.     8vo.     Loud.,  1843.     2/6. 
Robert  Hall  docs  not  shine  so  much  upon  the  printed  page  as  he  did 
when  he  blazed  from  the  pulpit.     These  discourses  were  published  after 
his  death,  from  the  notes  of  a  hearer.     They  are  good  as  sermons,  but 
not  remarkable  as  expositions. 

1255  JOHNSTONE  (Robert,  LL.B.,  of  Glasgow).     Lectures 

on   riiilippians,  with  revised  Translation,  and   Notes   on 
the  Greek  text.    8vo.     'Jl6.     Edi>ib.,  Oliphant.     1875. 
A  noble  volume.     A  real  boon  to  the  man  ivJio  purchases  it. 

1256  KELLY  (W.)  Philippians  and  Colossi.ms.    i2mo.  2/-  Lond.,  Moriish.    1869. 
Much  that  is  excellent  placed  in  "darkness  visible." 

1257  LANGE  (J.  p.)     See  No.  923,  and  also  page  19. 

1258  LIGHTFOOT  (J.  B.,  D.D.)     A  revised  text,  with  Notes. 

&c.     8vo.     12/.     Lond.,  Macmillan  &  Co.   1873. 
Deservedly  regarded  as  a  standard  zvork.      The  7nore  instructed 
student  tvill  appreciate  it. 

1259  MEYER  (Dr.  H.  A.  W.)     Critical  and  Exegetical  Handbook 
to  the  Epistles  to  the  Philippians  and  Colossians.    {See No.  928). 

No  doubt  wonderfully  learned,  but  we  cannot  get  on  with  it.  Quota- 
tions from  heretics  we  have  happily  never  heard  of  before  are  of  no 
great  use  to  simple  believers  like  ourselves. 

1260  NEAT  (Charles).  Discourses  from  Philippians.  Sm.Svo.   Loud.,  184T.    1/6. 
Strongly  Calvinistic,  and  correct  to  a  hair  ;    but  utterly  devoid  of  originality  either 

of  thought  or  expression. 

1261  NEANDER  (JoHANN  August  WiLHELM.   1789— 1850).  Philip- 

pians  and  James,  practically  and  historically  explained.     Post 
8vo.     3/-    Edl/ib.,T.  &cT.  C\3.xk.     1851.     S.  1/9. 
Without  dwelling  upon  the  wording  of  the   Epistle,  Neander  repro- 
duces its  spirit  in  other  language,  and  so  expounds  it.      The  little  work 
will  be  greatly  appreciated  by  a  certain  order  of  minds. 

1262  NEWLAND    (H.,   M.A.)      New  Catena.      Philippians.       8vo. 

-jld.     J.Parker.     1S60.     S.  2/6.     {^See  No.  121^). 

1263  PEIRCE  (James.    Died  \-, 2b).     Paraphrase  on  Philippians,   Colossians,  and 

Hebrews.     4to.     Loud.,  1733. 
Had  he  but  known  the  Lord,  his  writings  would  have  been  admirable.     He  con- 
ceals his  Arianism,  but  it  is  fatal  to  his  acceptance  with  believers.     He  wrote  after 
the  manner  of  Air.  Locke. 

1264  ROBERTSON  (J.  S.  S.,  M.A.)  Lectures  on  Philippians.   l2mo.   Lond.,  1S49. 
Lectures  which  will  never  set  the  Thames  on  fire. 


PHILIPPIANS— COLOSSIANS.  ISI 

1265  TODD   (James  F.,  M.A.)     Apostle  Paul  and  the   Church  at 

Philippi.  Acts  XVI.  and  Philippians.    8vo.    9/.     Lond.,  Bell  & 

Daldy.     1864. 
A  respectable  work.     The  author  is  sound  in  doctrine  and  valorous 
in  controverting  error,  and  he  says  many  good  things;  but  he  rather 
uses  the  text  than  expounds  it.     He  deserves  a  reading ;  but  men  with 
whom  money  is  scarce  need  not  purchase  this  book. 

1266  TOLLER    (Thomas).       Discourses   on    Philippians.       12 mo. 

Loud.,  1855.     2/- 
A  very  favourable  specimen  of  plain,  popular  exposition.     Nothing 
either  deep,  or  new,  or  critically  accurate ;  but  sensible  and  practical. 

1267  VAUGHAN    (C.  J.,  D.D.)      Lectures   on    Philippians- 

Extra  Fcap.  8vo.  5/.  Loud.,  Macmillan.  1864,  &c. 
Deservedly  esteemed.  Dr.  Vaiighan  gives  a  literal  translation 
of  his  text  from  the  original  Greek,  and  then  expotmds  it,  believing 
it,  as  he  says,  "  to  be  the  duty  of  every  Christian  teacher  to  assist 
his  congregation  in  drinking,  not  of  the  stream  only,  but  at  the 
spring  of  revealed  truth!' 

1268  WIESINGER   (Lie.  August).     Commentary  on   Philippians, 

Titus,  and  i  Timothy ;  in  continuation  of  the  work  of  Olshausen. 

8vo.     10/6.     £^//;^'.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1857.     S.  4/6. 
Many  mistake  this  for  Olshausen' s.     It  is  of  the  critical  and  gram- 
matical school,  and  bristles  all  over  with  the  names  of  the  German  band. 
We  prefer  the  Puritanic  gold  to  the  German  silver  which  is  now  in  fashion. 


COLOSSIANS. 


1269  BAYNE    (Paul,   A.M.)      Commentary   on    Colossians 

I.  and  IL     4to.     Lo7id.,  1634.     6/. 
On  the  tivo  first  chapters  only.     Edifying  and  very  rare. 

1270  BYFIELD   (Nicholas,  Puritan.  1579 — 1622.)     Expo< 

sition   upon   Colossians  ;    being  the  Substance   of  near 

seven  years'  week-day  sermons.     Folio.      161 5  and  1617. 

6/6       [Reprinted   in    Nicholas   Commentaries.      Cr.  4to., 

yie.  Lo?id.,  Nisbet.  1869.] 
The  author  lived  in  intense  pain,  and  died  at  44,  yet  he  produced 
quite  a  mountain  of  literature.  He  ivrites  like  an  earnest,  faithful 
man,  resolved  to  keep  back  nothing  of  the  counsel  of  God ;  but  he 
too  little  studies  brevity,  afid  consequently  he  wearies  most  readers. 
He  is  akvays  worth  considting, 

1271  CALVIN.     {SceNos.  1249,  1250). 

1272  CARTWRIGHT      (Thomas,   B.D.      Puritan.      1535— 1603). 

Commentary  on  Colossians.     4to.     Lond.,   16 12.     7/6.     [Re- 
printed in  NichoVs  Commentaries.     See  No.  1248.] 
This    is    but  a  small    affair,  consisting   of  scanty  and   second-rate 

"  notes  "  by  a  hearer.     Yet  what  there  is  of  it  has  the  true  ring,  and  is. 

rich  in  spirituality. 


1H-'  COLOSSI  ANS. 

1273  DAILLI'  (J.^     (SWA'o.  1251). 

1274  DAVENANT    (Joiix,    /,>.  0/  Salisbury.     1572— 1641.) 

Expo-sition  of  Colossians.      Translated  from  the  Latin, 

by  Josiah  Allport.    2  vols.,  8vo.     Lond.,\^i\.     4/- to  6/6. 

"  /  know  no  cxpositioji  7ip07i  a  detached  portio7i   of  Scripture 

{ivith  the  single  exception  of  Owen  on  the  Hebrews)  that  zcill  compare 

with  it  in  all  points.     Leigh  ton  is  superior  in  sweetness,  but  far 

inferior  in  depth,  accuracy,  and  discursivenessr — C.  Bridges. 

12-J5     EADIE   (John,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  the  Greek  text 
of  Colossians.     8vo.,  10/6.     Lond.,  Griffin.     1856.     S.  6/. 
Very  full  ajid  reliable.     A  zuork  of  the  utmost  value. 

1276     ELTON    (Edward,    B.D.)      Exposition   of    Colossians. 
Third  edition.     Folio.     Lond.,  1637.     7/-  to  9/. 
A  Puritan  zvork;  strongly  Calvinistic,  popular,  and  very  full. 

IC77     GISBORNE  (Thomas,  Prebendary  of  Durham.   1758— 1846). 
Exposition  of  Colossians.     i2mo.     Zond.,  1816.     i/- 
Sermons  which  very  much  remind  us  of  those  of  Henry  Melvill,  but 
with  less  of  the  Gospel  in  them.     Gisborne  was  a  preacher  of  considerable 
repute,  but  he  was  more  at  home  upon  moral  than  spiritual  topics. 

1278  GUTHRIE   (Thomas,   D.D.)      Christ  the  Inheritance  of  the 

Saints.     Discourses  from  Colossians.     Cr.  8vo.     7/6.     Edinb., 
A.  &  C.  Black.     1859.     S.  4/- 
Not  so  much  an  exposition  as  a  series  of    brilliant  discourses,  or 
prose  poems.     P>r.  Guthrie  has  only  touched  upon  the  first  chapter. 

1279  LIGHTFOOT  (J.  B.,  D.D.)     Colossians  and  Philemon. 

A  revised   Text,  with   Introductions,  Notes,  &c.     8vo., 
12/.     Macmillan  &  Co.     1875. 

For  remarks,  see  No.  1258.     LigJitfoot  writes  for  scholars. 

1280  MILNER  (Joseph,  M.A.)    Sermons  on  Colossians,  i  Thessa- 
lonians  V.,  and  James  I.     8vo.     Land.,  1841.     3/- 

Respectable  sermons  by  the  Church  historian. 

1281  ROLLOCK  (R.)  Lectures  on  Colossians.  4to.  Lond.,  iSot,.  10/- 
It  is  said  that  when  this  great  divine  died  the  entire  population  of 

Edinburgh  attended  his  funeral.  His  Lectures  on  Colossians  were  once 
very  popular,  but  are  now  extremely  scarce.  The  style  is  very  simple 
and  colloquial,  and  the  matter  far  from  profound. 

1282  SPENCE  (James,  D.D.)     Discourses  on  Colossians.     Cr. 

8vo.    yl6.     Lond.,  Hodder.     1875. 
A  good  specimen  of  Jionest,  popular  expounding.     Lntended  for  a 
congregation,  but  iiscfd  to  the  student. 

12S3      WATSON  (Thomas,  B. A.)  Discourses  on  Colossians.  Svo.  Lond.,  1S3S.  2/6. 
Tlwronglily  evangelical  and  remarkably  commonplace. 


COLOSSIANS— I.  &  II.  THESSALONIANS.  183 

1284  WILSON  (Daniel,  D.D.,  Bp.  of  Calcutta).  Explanatory  Lectures 

on  Colossians.      8vo.     Land.,  1845.     2/6. 
By  a  famous  modern  evangelical,  who  shows  much  ability  in  wielding 
this  Scripture  against  Tractarians  and  others.     The  work  contains  little 
original  exegesis. 

1285  LOCKYER  (NiCH.,  Puritan.   1612— 1684-5).      England 

Faithfully  Watcht  with  in  her  Wounds.     [Lectures  on 
Colossians  L]     4to.     Loud.,  1646.     5/. 
RicJi,  full,  simple.     A  fair  specimen  of  plain  Puritan  preaching-^ 


I.  &  II.  THESSALONIANS. 

t286  EDMUNDS  (J.,  M.A.)  Commentary  on  i  and  2  Thessalonians.  Cr.  8vo. 
Loud.,  Bell  &  Daldy.  1858.  S.  2/- 
For  school  Teachers.  The  author's  notion  of  a  Commentary,  which  he  fully 
carries  out,  is  contained  in  his  preface.  "My  idea  of  the  Middle-class  Commentary 
is,  that  it  should  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the  doctrine  and  ritual  of  the  Church, 
should  illustrate  her  ritual,  and  should  recommend  her  to  the  esteem  and  affection  of 
her  children,  by  proving  her  adherence  to  the  Word  of  God." 

1287  JEWEL  (John,  Bp.  of  Salisbury.     1522 — 1571).     Expositions 

upon  I.  &  11.  Thessalonians.     Sm.  8vo.     Black  Letter.     Land., 
1583.     Reprinted  1811  and  1 841,     1/6.     Also  in  his  Works. 
LLooker  calls  J^ewel  "  the  jewel  of  bishops."     This  work  is  in  the  usual 

style  of  the  first  Reformers,  but  rather  more  lively  than  most  of  them. 

Many  of  the  topics  touched  upon  were  peculiar  to  the  times  in  which  the  ' 

exposition   was  written.      It   will,  serve   as   a  good  specimen  of  the 

preaching  of  the  Fathers  of  the  English  Church. 

1288  LANGE  (J.  P.)     Commentary  on  Thessalonians,  by  Drs. 

Auberlen  and   Riggenbach.      Translated  by  Dr.   Lillie. 

Timothy,  Titus  and  Philemon,  by  Prof.  Von  Oosterzee. 

Hebrews,  by  Dr.   C.  B.  Moll.      Edited   by  Dr.  Schaff. 

Imp.  8vo.  21/.  Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1869. 
"  Lillie s  Thessalonians  will  be  found  to  be  one  of  the  best 
execicted  portions  of  the  American  edition  of  Lange.  The  trans- 
lation is  remarkably  accurate  a7id  elegant,  and  the  additions  from 
his  own  researches,  and  the  best  English  Commentaries,  are  care- 
fully selected  and  valuable!^ — Dr.  P.  Schaff. 

1289  lAIJlAYi  {^ow.Y<,Y).'D.,  Kingston,  Neiv  York.  1812 — 1867). 

Lectures   on   Thessalonians.     Large  8vo.      9/.     Edinb., 
W.  Oliphant  &  Co.      1863. 
Remarks  on  the  preceding  tvill  apply  here. 

1290  ROLLOCK    (Robert).      Lectures   on    the    Epistles    to   the 

Thessalonians,  preached  by  R.  R.     4to.     Edinb.,  1606. 
For  remarks,  see  No.  1246. 
T291     SCLATER   (William,    D.D.)       Exposition    upon    i    and    2 
Thessalonians.     4to.    Land.,  1627.     3/6  to  7/- 
Sclater  is  antique ;   but,  in  the  usual  Puritanic  manner,  he  gives  very 
instructive  disquisitions  upon  a  vast  variety  of  topics  suggested  by  the  text. 


]M  PASTORAL  EnSTLES-I.  c'l-  II.  TIMOTHY. 

1392     r-ATTRRSON  (Alkxandkr  .Simpson,  D.D.,  G/as^!^o7e>).     Com- 
mentaries on    I   Thcssalonians,  James,   and   i    John.     i2mo. 
Juiinb.,  1857.     2/6  to  4/6, 
Notes  of  discourses,  with  much  in  them.     Hints  may  be  gleaned  licre 

in  abundance  by  students  who  open  their  eyes. 

1293  PHILLIPS  (J.)    The  Greek  of  Thcssalonians  explained.    4to.     Lond.,\']l\. 
Sliort,  but  not  particularly  sweet.      Very  scarce. 

1294  BRADSIIAW  (W.,  Puritan.  1571—1618).  A  Plaine  and  Pithy  Exposition  of 

2  Thcssalonians;  published  since  his  decease  by  T.  Gataker.  4to.    1620.  3/6. 
As  we  cannot  get  a  sight  of  this,  perhaps  some  reader  will  present  us  with  a  copy. 

1295  MANTON  (Thomas,   D.D.)      Eighteen   Sermons  on  2 

Thcssalonians  II.,  conccfning  Antichrist.    8vo,    1679.   4/. 
IJcre  ]\Ianion  smites  heavily  at  Popery.     Richard  Baxter  zvrote 
a  commendatory  preface  to  this  valuable  expositioji. 

J2C)6     SQUIRE  (John,   M.A.)      A  Plaine  Exposition  on  2  Thcssa- 
lonians II.,  I — 13,  proving  the  Pope  to  be  Antichrist.     4to. 
Land.,  1630.     5/-  to  8/- 
Squire  works  out  the  point  of  the  Pope's  being  Antichrist  with  very 
great  cogency  of  reasoning.       The  exposition  of  the  Epistle  is  lost  in 
the  point  aimed  at ;  but  that  point  is  of  the  utmost  importance. 


PASTORAL  EPISTLES; 

Or,  the  Epistles  of  Timothy,  Titus,  and  Philemon. 

1297  CALVIN  (John).       C  Sermons  on  the  Epistles  of   S. 

Paule   to    Timothie    and    Titus,    translated    out    of    the 
French,  by  L.  T.     4to.     Lotid.,  1579.     15/. 
Quite  a  different  ivork  from  Calvin's  Commentaries. 

1298  FAIRBAIRN  (Patrick,  D.D.)     The  Pastoral  Epistles, 

Greek  Text,  Translation,  Introductions,  Expository  Notes, 
&c.     Cr.  8vo.     7 16.     Edinb.,1:.  ^T.Cldirk.     1874. 
What  ivith  a  good  translation^  full  defetice  of  the  Apostolic 
authorship  of  the  Epistles,  fruitful  comments,  and  profitable  dis- 
sertations, this  volume  is  about  as  complete  a  guide  to  the  smaller 
epistles  as  one  could  desire. 


I.  &  II.  TIMOTHY. 

[See  also  under  Pastoral  Epistles.'] 

1299  BICKERSTETH  (E.)     {See  No.  1 1^6). 

1300  PATTERSON  (Alex.  S.,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  Timothy  and 

Titus.     i8mo.     1848.      {See  our  retnarks  on  No.  12^2.) 

1301  SLADE  (Henry  Rai'er,  LL.B.)  Pulpit  Lectures  on  the  Epistles  to  Timothy. 

Cr.  8vo.     1837.     i/- 
Ulter  rubbish.     Dear  at  a  gift. 


I.  &  II.  TIMOTHY.— TITUS.— PHILEMON.  185 

1302  WIESINGER  (L.  A.)     (See  A'o.  1268). 

1303  PINDER  (John  H.,  M.A.)     The  Candidate  for  the  Ministry.     Lectures  on 

I  Timotiiy.      i2mo.     ZonJ.,  1837.      i/- 
Of  no  consequence. 

1304  BARLOW  (John.   Puritan)     Exposition  of  2  Timoth}', 

I.  and  II.     Folio.     Loud.,  1632.     4/-  to  yl^. 
By  a  viasier  in  Israel.      ThorougJily  practical,   deeply  experi- 
mental, and  soicndly  doctrinal. 

1305  HALL  (Thomas).     Commentary  on  2  Timothy  III.  and 

IV.     Folio.     Lond.,  1632— 1658.     8/. 
Hall  is  often  found  in    nnion    zuith   Barlow,    completijig   the 
Commentary  on  2  Timothy,  as  lie  completed  A  mos,  (No.  840.  j     He 
is  a  masterly  expositor,  of  the  old-fashioned  school. 


TITUS. 

[See  also  under  Pastoral  Episilesi] 

1306  GRAHAM  (W.,  D.D.)  Titus-.    i2mo.  2/6.  Zand.,  Nisbet.   i860. 
P)r.  Graham  endeavours  to  make  criticism  intelligible,  and  the  results 

of  learning  really  edifying.      We  have  our  doubts  as  to  some   of  his 
criticisms,  and  he  is  quite  dogmatic  enough,  but  on  the  whole  good. 

1307  TAYLOR  (Thomas,  D.D.  P?/;7V^«.  1579— 1632).    Com- 

mentarie   upon   Titus.      4to.     Camb.,  1619.      4/-   to   6/. 

Folio.     1668.     10/.     Also  in  Works. 
The  title-page  calls  Thomas  Taylor  "  a  famous  and  most  elabo- 
rate divined      He   %vas   a  preacher  at  Pauls  Cross  during  the 
reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  fames  I.,  and  a  voluminous  zuriter.     This 
Commentary  zvill  zucll  repay  the  reader. 


PHILEMON. 


1308  ATTERSOLL  (William.   Purita?i).    Commentary  upon 

Philemon.     Second  Edition.     Folio.     Lond.,  1633.     4/6. 

A  long  eonmient  tip  on  a  short  epistle.  The  pious  author  labours 
to  keep  to  his  text,  and  succeeds  in  bringing  out  of  it  a  mass  of 
quaint  practical  teaching. 

1309  COX  (Samuel).     Philemon.    In  "  The  Private  Letters  of 

St.  Paul  and  St.  John."    i2mo.     3/-     Lond.,  M\3.\\.     1867. 

Such  exposition  as  this  adds  interest  to  the  epistles,  and  makes 

their  zuriters  live  agaiji  before  our  eyes.     Mr.  Cox  delivered  this 

zvork  in  public  on  certain  zveek  evenings.     Happy  are  the  people 

who  are  thus  instructed. 


\6G  PI  1 1  LEMON.  - 1 1 ICBREWS. 

1310  DYKE  (Daniicl,  B.D.     PiirUan.     Died  about  iGi^).     A  most 

fruitful  Exposition  upon  Philemon.    Loud.    4to.    16 18.    4/- to  7/- 
Jhkcs  remarks  are  memorably  practical  and  full  of  common  sense- 
He  abounds  in  i)roverbs.     The  work  is  not  very  valuable  as  an  exposi- 
tion of  the  words,  but  excels  in  making  use  of  them. 

1311  JONES  (William,  D.D.,  ^/  TT^j/  /?rr^7/(;//'.;     Commen- 

tary upon  Philemon,  Hebrews,  and  i  and  2  John.    P^olio. 

Loud.,  1636.  9/-  to  12/. 
Vciy  lively,  sprigJitly,  colloquial  lectures,  by  a  Suffolk  divine, 
icho  thinks  the  Broivnists  and  Disscfiters  were  not  persecuted. 
"  Christ  was  ivhipped,  that  ivas  persecution  ;  Christ  wJnpped  some 
out  of  tJie  temple,  that  7vas  710  pcj'seeution.'"  Despite  his  intolerance 
lie  says  some  7inconimouly  racy  tilings. 

13 1 2  LIGHTFOOT  (J.  V>.,  D.D.)     See  No.  1279. 


HEBREWS. 


1 3 13  BROWN  (John,  D.D.)    Exposition  of  Hebi-ews.    2  vols., 

8vo.     18/-     Edinb.,  1^62.     S.  9/6. 
Dr.  David  Smith  says  of  this  work:   "  There  is  not  a  single 
instance  of  carelessness  in  investigating  the  true  ineajiitig  of  a  text, 
or  of  timidity  in  stating  the  cojiclusion  at  zvhich  the  author  had 
iirrivcd."      What  more  could  be  said  in  praise  of  any  exposition  ? 

13 14  OALVIN  (John).     Commentary  on  Hebrews,  translated 

by  Clement  Cotton.      4to.      Loud.,   1605.     10/-  to   13/. 
Another  edition,  12 mo.     Loud.,  1841,     1/6. 

131 5  DALE  (R.  W.,  M.A.)     The  Jewish  Temple  and  the  Christian 

Church.     Discourses  on  Hebrews.     Cr.  8vo.    6/-    Land. ,  Hod- 

der  &  Stoughton.     1871.     S.  3/6. 
Among  modern  divines  few  rank  so  highly  as  Mr.  Dale.     Daring  and 
bold  in  thought,  and  yet  for  the  most  part  warmly  on  the  side  of  ortho- 
doxy, his  works  command  the  appreciation  of  cultured  minds. 

1 3 16  DELITZSCH  (F.,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  Hebrews.     2  vols., 

Svo.     21/-     ^^/;/(^.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     186S,     S.  12/- 
Remarks  formerly  made  upon  Dclitzsch  apply  here  also.     (yN'os.  412, 
and  724.) 

1 317  DICKSON   (David.)     Short   Explanation  of   Hebrews. 

Svo.     Aberd.,  1635  ;   Camb.,  1649  ;  and  Lond.,  1839. 
This  is  generally  to  be  found  in  connection  with  the  author's 
*^  Brief  Exposition  on  MattJiezuy  (No.   1033.)      We  7teed  say  no 
more  than — get  it,  and  you   will  find  abundance  of  suggestions 
for  profitable  trains  of  thought. 


HEBREWS.  187 

13 1 8  DUNCAN  (Robert,  <?/ 7'////t7///o'.     1699— 1729).     Exposition 

of  Hebrews.     8vo.      1731.     3/6.     New  edition,  cr.   8vo.     2/- 
(publishcd  at  5/-).     Edinb.,  Ogle  &  Murray. 
"  An  excellent  condensation  of  Dr.  Oweti's  valuable  work,  and  giving 
the  pith  and  marrow  of  the  great  commentator." 

1319  EBRARD  (John  H.  A.,  Prof.    Thcol.   Erlangen).     Commentary 

on  Hebrews.    8vo.    10/6..  if ^/;//J.,  T.  &.  T.  Clark.    1853.   S.  5/- 
This  is  intended  as  a  continuation  of  Ohhausen,  but  it  is  an  improve- 
ment thereon.    Ebrard  is  at  once  learned  and  spiritual,  and  we  prefer  him 
to  almost  any  other  author  whose  works  the  Messrs.  Clark  have  issued. 

1320  GOUGE  (William,  D.D.    Ptiritajt)     Commentary  on 

Hebrews.     2   vols.    Folio.     Loud.,  1655.     [Reprinted    in 
Nichors  Commentaries.      3    vols.,    Cr.  4to.       'jl6   each. 
Loud.,  Nisbet.     1866-7.] 
We  greatly  prize  Gouge.     Many  zvill  think  his  system  of  obser- 
vations cumbrous,  and  so,  perhaps,  it  is  ;  but  Jipon  any  topic  which 
he  touches  he  gives  outlines  which  may  supply  sermons  for  months. 

1321  HALDANE  (James  Alex.   1768— 185 1.)    Notes  on  Ex- 

position of  Hebrews.    i2mo.    4/6,     Zci/z^/.,  Nisbet.     i860. 

A  posthumous  work,  and  issued,  not  as  a  finished  exposition,  but 

as  ^^  Notes  of  an  intended  Exposition"     Very  valuable  for  all  that. 

1322  HOWARD  (J.  E.)     Hebrews.     A  Revised  Translation,  with  Notes.     Demy 

i2mo.     1/6.     Land.,  S.  W.  Partridge  &  Co.     1872. 
Contains  a  few  suggestive  observations  ;  but  is  a  small  affair  in  all  respects. 

1323  JONES  (W.,  D.D.)     ^-^^iV^^.  1311. 

1324  JONES  (W.,  M.A,    1726— 1800).      Four  Lectures  on  the  Relation  between 

the  Old  and  New  Testaments  as  set  forth  in  Hebrews.     Svo.     181 1.    1/6. 
Very  little  of  it,  and  bound  up  with  a  work  of  an  ingenious,  but  fanciful  character 

1325  KNOX  (J.  Spencer,  A.M.)     The  Mediator  of  the  New  Cove- 

nant.    Sermons  on  Hebrews.     8vo.     Dublin,  1834.     2/- 
Thirteen  Sermons  on  select  passages.     Mediocrity  highly  poHshed. 

1326  LANGE  (J.  P.)     SeeNo.i2^^. 

1327  LAWSON  (G.)     Exposition  of  Hebrews.    Wherein  the  Socinian 

Comment  is  examined.    Folio.    Loud.,  1662.    Scarce.    7/- to  10/- 

Richard  Baxter  1,2^^%  :  "I  must  thankfully  acknowledge  that  I  learned 

more  from  Air.  Lawson  than  from  any  divine  that  ever  I  conversed  with." 

1328  LINDSAY  (W.,  D.D.,  Prof  TheoL  Glasgozv.)     Lectures 

on    Hebrews.       2    vols.     Demy    Svo.       21/.       Edi7ib., 

Oliphant.     1867.     10/. 

One  of  those  great  expository  works   zvith   tuhich   the   Scotch 

ministry  has  so  frequently  enriched  the  CJiurch.      We  zvonder  if 

-any  one  ever  read  this  excellent  exposition  tJirough  ;  tve  should  not 

like  to  be  sentenced  to  do  so. 


188  HEBREWS. 

1329  [LUSIIINGTON  (Thomas,  M.A.).]  The  Expiation  of  a  Sinner.  Commentary 

111)011  Hebrews.     Folio.      1646.     5/- 
Tiiis  work  was  publislicd  anonymously,  and  is  charged  with  Socinianism. 

1330  M'CAUL  (Joseph  B.,  Hon.  Canon  of  Rochcsler).     Hebrews.     A 

Paraphrastic  Commentary,   with   Illustrations  from   Philo,  the 

Targums,  &c.     8vo.      12/6.     Z^//^/.,  Longmans.     187 1.     S.  6/- 

Mr.  i^/'G/w/ attacks  the  gentlemen  of  the  higher  criticism  with  great 

plainness  of  speech  and  some  asperity.     We  hardly  think  his  work  will 

attain  a  great  circulation,  it  has  so  much   Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  and 

(German  in  it,  that  only  men  of  learning  and  leisure  can  use  it. 

1331  MACLEAN    (A.      1732— 1812.)     Paraphrase  and  Com- 

mentary on  Hebrews.     2  vols.,  i2mo.     Lond.,  iS^y.    2/. 
One  of  the  most  judicious  and  solid  expositions  ever  zurittcn. 

1333  NELSON  (Robert).  Comments  on  Hebrews.  Cr.  8vo.  6/-  Loud., 
Morgan  &  Scott.  1868.  S.  3/6. 
By  a  thougluful  and  devout  man,  but  we  cannot  endorse  some  of  his  interpretations. 
'I  he  taint  of  a  certain  modern  school  appears  in  passages  sucli  as  this  :  "  Had  Paul 
been  preaching  holiness  of  life  as  essential  to  seeing  the  Lord,  would  he  not  have  been 
advocating  the  very  principle  on  which  the  law  was  based?''  We  are  afraid  of  this. 
covert  Antinomianism  ;  its  presence  eats  as  doth  a  canker. 

1333  [NEWTON  (Adelaide  L.)]    Hebrews  compared  with  the  Old 

Testament.     Cr.  8vo.     3/6.     Land.,  Nisbet.     1872.     S.  1/6. 
Devout,  simple,  and  instructive.     The  authoress  was  an  invalid,  and 
died  ere  she  had  finished  her  work.     She  worked  out  a  good  idea  with 
far  more  of  expository  matter  than  could  have  been  expected  of  her. 

1334  OWEN  (John,  D.D.)     Exposition  of  Hebrews.     4  vols. 

Folio.     Loud.,  1668-74.    14/-    Also  7  vols.  Svo.     Edited 

by  Dr.  Goold.     £2  2s.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     S.  25/- 

There  is  an   abridgment   of   Ozven's  work,  executed  by 

Dr.  Williams.     4  vols.,  Svo.      1790,  etc.     4/6  to  y/G. 

Out  of  scores  of  commendations  of  this  colossal  work  xve  select 

but  one.     Dr.  Chalmers  pronounced  it  "  a  luork  of  gigajitic  strength 

as  ivell  as  gigantic  size  ;  and  he  wlio  hath  mastered  it  is  very  little 

short,  both  in  respect  to  the  doctrinal  and  practical  of  Christianity, 

of  being  an  erudite  and  accomplished  theologian.'^ 

1335  PARRY    (Thomas,   M.A.,   Bp.  of  Barbadoes).      Hebrews,    in   a    Series   of 

Lectures.     i2mo.     Land.,  1834.      1/6. 
So  feeble  that  we  wonder  how  it  got  through  the  press.    A  sermonized  paraphrase. 

1336  PATTERSON  (Alexander  Simpson,  D.D.)     Commentary  on 

Hebrews.     8vo.      10/6.     Edifib.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1856.     6/. 
Lectures  delivered   in   the   course    of    the    author's    ministrations. 
Excellent  for  the  public ;  the  student  should  consult  other  authors  for 
learning ;   but  Patterson  has  savour  and  spirituality. 

1337  PRIDHAM    (A.).  Hebrews.   Cr.  Svo.  5/-  Lond.,  Nisbet.   1862. 
Rather  mystified  with  expressions  peculiar  to  "  dispensational  truth." 

whatever  that  may  mean  ;  but  devout,  candid,  sober,  and  sound. 


HEBREWS.  189 

133S  SAMPSON  (Francis  S.,  D.D.  Prof.  Orient.  Lit,  Pnnce  Edward,  Va.) 
Commentary  on  Hebrews.  8vo.  New  York,  1856.  S.  5/6. 
A  respectable  production,  but  we  know  many  which  we  value  far  more.  As  a 
set  of  lectures  to  a  college  class  these  comments  would  be  of  great  value,  but  the 
author  did  well  not  to  print  them,  although  it  was  natural  and  fitting  that  his  surviving 
colleague  should  do  so. 

1339  SAMPSON  (G.  V.)     Translation,  with  Notes.     8vo.     Loud.,  1828.     1/6. 
Dr.  Kendrick  says  that  Sampson  is  candid  and  sensible,  but  scarcely  grapples  with 

the  difficult  points  of  the  Epistle.     Perhaps  he  was  not  strong  enough. 

1340  SAPHIR     (Adolph).      Lectures  on    Hebrews.      First   Series. 

Chapters  I — VH.     [Second  and  concluding  volume  in  prepara- 
tion].    Cr.  8vo.     6/6.     Z^^rt^.,  J.  F.  Shaw  &  Co.     1874. 
Mr.  Saphir  has  always  something  to  say  worthy  of  the  attention   of 
spiritual  minds.     His   mind  finds  a  track  of  its  own,  but  he  is  never 
speculative.     We  always  enjoy  his  remarks,  though  he  is  not  specially 
terse  or  brilliant. 

1 34 1  STEWARD    (George).      Argument    of    the    Epistle    to    the 

Hebrews.     8vo.     10/6.     Z:^//>z^. ,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1872. 
Unhappily   the   author   died   before   he   had   quite  completed  this 
"  argument."     The  work  is  most  helpful. 

1342  STUART  (Moses,    M.A.)      Commentary   on  Hebrews. 

8vo.  Loud.,  1837.    Also  1853.    Tje.    Tegg  &  Co.    S.  zl6. 
We  are  constantly  differing  from  Moses  Stuart,  bict  are  bound 
to  considt  him.     He  is  07ie  of  the  greatest  of  A  merican  scholars, 
and  this  is  one  of  his  best  coinments. 

1343  TAIT   (William,    M.A.)      Meditationes    Hebraicse.      2  vols. 

Cr.  8vo.    Zf?//^'.,  Hamilton,  Adams  &  Co.     1855.     S.  6/- 
A  noteworthy  series  of  lectures.      If  Gouge,    Owen,  and  others,  had 
not  done  all  for  Hebrews  that  one  could  well  need,  this  would  have 
been  of  first-class  value ;  and  though  we  have  much  better  it  is  still  a 
worthy  companion  to  them. 

1344  THOLUCK  (A.  F.)     Commentary  on  Hebrews.     2vols.,  i2mo. 

12/-     Biblical  Cabinet.     Edinb.,Q\?a\i.     1842.     S.  4/- to  5/6. 
Delitzsch  speaks  highly  of  this  work  ;  but,  for  our  part,  we  understand 
the  Epistle  better  without  Tholuck  than  with  him.    Clouds  of  smoke  and 
volleys  of  hard  words  destroy  our  equanimity. 

1345  TURNER  (Samuel  H.,  D.D.)     Hebrews,  in  Greek  and  English  ; 

with  Commentary.     8vo.     Neiv  York,  1852,     S.  4/6. 
Carefully  done.     Written  for  those  who  really  wish  to  understand  the 
Epistle. 

1346  WILLIAMS   (H.W.)      Exposition  of  Hebrews.     Cr.  8vo.     6/- 

Lond.,  66,  Paternoster  Row.     1872. 
The  author  has  evidently  been  a  diligent  reader  and  student.     Apart 
from  its  Wesleyan  peculiarities,  we  can  commend  this  book  as  edifying 
and  instructive,  though  we  do  not  place  it  in  the  first  class. 


190       PARTS    OF    HEBREWS.— CATHOLIC  EPISTLES. 

PARTS  OF  HEBREWS. 

1347  DEERING     (Edward,   B.D.     Piiritan.      Died    1576). 

Twcnty-scvcn    Lectures   upon    Hebrews   [chap    I. — VL] 

4to.     1 590.     5/6. 
Mainly  aimed  at  the  errors  of  the  ChiircJi  of  Route,  and  at  the 
practical  questions   of    the   Reformation  period.     A   learned  but 
antiquated  set  of  lectures. 

1348  MANCHESTER     (George    Montague,   Duke  of).        Hera; 

Hebraicce.     An  Attempt  to  discover  how  the  Argument  of  the 

Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  [I — IV.  11]  must  have  been  understood 

by  those  therein  addressed.     Royal  8vo.    Land.,  1835.     3/- 

A  peculiar  book,  altogether  sui  generis,  written  by  a  man  who  did  his 

own  thinking.    The  Uuke  would  be  an  unreliable  guide,  but  he  frequently 

strikes  out  new  paths,  and  suggests  novel  trains  of  thought. 

1349  ANDERSON  (James   S.  M.,  M.A.)     Discourses  on  the  nth  and  part  of 

the  1 2th  chapters  of  Hebrews.      2  vols.,  8vo.    Loud.,  1839-43.     8/6. 
Good  Church  sennons.     Of  very  slight  value  for  commenting  purposes. 

1350  MANTON  (T.,  D.D.)  Sixty-six  Sermons  on  Hebrews  XI, 

in  vol.  HI  of  Manton's  Works.    Folio  edition. 
Exhaustive.     M anion  piles  up  his  matter  heaps  upon  heaps. 

1351  PERKINS  (William).     A  Cloud  of  FaithfulWitnesses.     Com- 

mentary on  Hebrewes  XI.   4to.   1622.   2/6;  and /F^rX'j-,  vol.  III. 
Good  in  its  day,  but  now  superseded.    Very  many  points  are  discussed 
which  would  now  be  regarded  as  ridiculous  :    as  for  instance,  whether  a 
man  may  travel  iji  a  foreign  coitniry.     It  is  terribly  prosy. 

1352  ANDREWS  (G.).    Sermons  upon  Hebrews  XIL  4to.    171 1.    9/. 
Thoroughly  Scotch.     Sound,  but  somewhat  prolix  and  commonplace. 

1353  PHILLIPS    (W.  Spencer,  B.D.)     The   Triumphs  of  a  Practical  Faith. 

[On  Hebrews  XL]     i2mo.     Lov.d.,  1840.     i/- 
Cloudy  discourses  on  the  cloud  of  witnesses.     Will  quicken  no  one's  pace. 

1354  SYLVESTER  (Matthew).   The  Christian's  Race  and  Patience. 

Sermons  on  Hebrews  XII,     2  vols.,  Svo.     1702 — 1708.     ^jd. 
Not  of  the  first  class ;  yet  respectable  sermons. 


CATHOLIC  EPISTLES. 

1355  EBRARD  (J.  H.  A.)     See  No.  1387. 

1356  LANGE  (J.  P.)    Commentary  on  James,  by  Prof.  Van  Oosterzee. 

Epistles  of  Peter,  by  Dr.  C.  F.  Fronmiillcr.     Epistles  of  John, 

by  Dr.  K.  Braune.     Epistle  of  Jude,  by  Dr.  C.  F.  Fronmiiller. 

Edited  by  Dr.  Schaff.  Imp.  8vo.    21/-    Edinh.,  T.  &  T.  Clark. 

In  his  comment  on  the  First  Epistle  of  John,  Dr.  Braune  teaches 

baptismal  regeneration  in  a  very  decided  manner.     This  plague-spot  of 

sacramentarianism  should  put  the  reader  on  his  guard. 


JAMES.  ■      191 


JAMES. 

1357  ADAM  (John,  D.D.,  of  Aberdeen).     Exposition  of  James.     8vo. 

9/-     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1867. 
Good,  plain  discourses,  for  which  the  author  acknowledges  his  in- 
debtedness to  various  eminent  writers  who  have  discussed  the  P'lpistle. 
Our  readers  had  better  make  similar  discourses  of  their  own — if  they  can. 

1358  HEMMINGE  (Nicholas,   D.D.)     A  Learned  and  Fruitful  Commentarie 

upon  James,  translated  by  W.  G.     Black  Letter.     4to.     1577.     21/- 
Tlie  price  which  this  book  fetches  is  preposterous.     It  is  hard  antique  reading. 

1359  JACOBI    (Bernard,    of  Fetershagen,   Prussia).      Lectures   on 

James.     i2mo.     Religious  Tract  Society.     1838.     S.  1/6. 
A  good,  simple,  practical  set  of  expository  Lectures.    Safe  in  doctrine, 
or  the  Religious  Tract  Society  would  not  have  issued  it. 

1360  JOHNSTONE    (Robert,    LL.B.      Glasgozv)      Lectures 

on  James.     Extra  or.  8vo.,  7/6.     ^c//w(^.,  Oliphant.    1871. 
A  very  useful,  scholarly,  and  readable  hook. 

1 36 1  MANTON    (Thomas,   D.D.)      Commentary  on  James. 

4to.     Loud.,   165 1  ;  3/.     8vo.,  1842  ;   also    in  vol.  IV.  of 

Manton's  Works,  Nichol's  edition. 
In  Manton's  best  style.     An  exhattstive  tuork,  as  far  as  tJw 
information  of  the  period  admitted.     Fezu  snek  books  are  written 
nozv. 

1362  MAYER   (John,  D.D.)     Praxis  Theologica :  or  the  Epistle  of 

James  Resolved,  Expounded,  and  Preached  upon.    4to.     1629. 
7/6.     {Seepages  10  a7id  11.) 

1363  NEANDER  (J.  A.  W.)     James,  practically  explained.     Trans- 

lated by  Mrs.  Conant.     i2mo.     New  York,  1852.     2\6. 
See  also  No.  1261. 

1364  NELSON  (Robert).    James.     Thin  cr.  8vo.     2/6.     Loud.,  Bagsters.     1S72. 
Setting  out  witia  the  notion  that  the  epistle  is  only  written  to  the  Jews,  this  author's 

remarks  are  too  much  warped  by  this  and  other  theories  to  be  of  any  value  to  students. 

1365  STIER  (R.,  D.D.)     See  No.  972. 

1366  PATTERSON  (A.  S.,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  James.     i8mo. 

Paisley,  1 8  5 1 .     i  /-     {See  remarks  on  No.  1292.) 

r367      TURNBULL  (Richard,  M.A.)     Expositions  of  James  and  Jude.     Thick 
l2mo.,  1592  ;  and  4to.,  1605.     6/-  to  14/. 
Old  and  occupied  with  Popish  controversies.     Good,  solid,  and  tedious. 

13G8    WARDLAW     (Ralph,    D.D.)       Lectures    on    James. 
Cr.  8vo.     3/6.     Fullerton  &  Co.      1S62. 
The  lectures  are  noteworthy  specimens  of  expository  preaching: 
They  were  Wardlaiv  s  last  zvork,  and  are  fully  ttp  to  the  mark. 


VJ2  I.  &  TI.   Pl'/FKR.— I.  PKTER. 


I.  &  II.  PETER. 

1369  A.MF.S    (\Vii,Li.\M,    D.I).       1576  — 1633).       Kxpojition  of    the    Epistles   of 

I'ctcr.     4to.     Loud.,  1641.     5/- 
Too  much  divided  and  subdivided,  chopped  up  and  cut  into  dice  pieces  and  laid  in 
Older  ;  for,  after  all,  there  is  very  little  meat  in  it.     It  is  an  analysis,  and  little  more. 

1370  BENSON  (George.)     Epistles  of  Peter.    4to.     1742.     2/6. 

Tlic  author  was  an  Arian.     '■'Benson  possessed  considerable  learning,  but  no  great 
puruuii  of  genius."     This  is  a  paraphrase  with  notes. 

137 1  LILLIE     (John,  D.D.     Kingston,  N.Y.)      Lectures  on 

I    and    2    Peter.     8vo.     8/6.      Neiv  York,  1869.      Lond., 

Hodder  and  Stoughton.     S.  5/6. 

Dr.  ScJiaff  says : — "  Thongh  very  different  frotn  the  immortal 

ivork  of  Archbishop  Lcighton  on  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter,  these 

lectures  breathe  the  same  reverential  spirit  and  devotional  fervotir, 

li'Jiilc  they  are  mnch  more  full  and  thorojigh  as  an  expos ition^ 

iZ7^     LUTHER    (Martin).       Commentarie    upon    the    Two 

Epistles  of  St.  Peter  and  that  of  St.  Judc,  gathered  out 

of  the  lectures  of  Marthi  Luther.     Translated  by  Thomas 

Newton.     4to.     Lond.,  i^B,!.     Black  letter.     15/, 

In  Luther  s  racy  style.     One  of  his  best  productio7is.     Copies  are 

scarce  as  white  elephants,  and  consequently  expensive. 

1373     NISBET   (Alexander).     Exposition  of  i  and  2  Peter. 
8vo.     Edinb.,  1658.     5/-  to  7 16. 
A  judicious  and  gracious  Scotch  commentary,  after  the  style  of 
Dickson  and  Hutcheson. 


I.  PETER. 


1374  alley  (William,  Bp.   of  Exeter.     Died   1571).     Exposition  of  i   Peter. 

[In  "  Poore  Man's  Librarie."     Folio.     Loud.,  \'~,^d\.    iS/-     Very  rare. 
A  curious  old   Black   Letter  Folio.      The  exposition  on  Peter  is  mainly  occupied 
with  tlie  questions  and  controversies  of  the  Reforming  period.     Do  not  buy  it. 

1375  BROWN    (John,   D.D.      Edinburgh)     Expository   Dis- 

courses on  I  Peter.     3  vols.     Cr.  8vo.     18/.     Edi?ib.,  W. 

Oliphant  &  Co.  1866.  S.  10/6  to  12/6. 
The  epistle  is  divided  into  paragraphs,  and  these  are  made  the 
themes  of  discourses.  Thus  Br.  Broivn  produced  what  is  sub- 
stantially a  commentary,  and  one  of  the  best.  It  affords  us  a 
grammatical  interpretation,  together  witJi  an  exposition,  at  once 
exegetical,  doctrinal,  and  practical.  It  is  a  standard  work,  arid  the 
indices  increase  its  value. 


I.  PETER.— II  PETER.  193 

1376  BYFIELD  (Nicholas).     Commentary  upon  i  Peter  I.  II.  III. 

Folio.     1637.     9/-  to  15/- 

Byfield  is  an  able  and  pious  divine,  but  he  is  not  very  vivacious,  and 
neither  in  manner  nor  matter  is  he  at  all  original. 

1377  KOHLBRUGGE  (H.   F.,  D.D.,  of  Elberfeld).      Sermons   on 

I  Peter.     i2mo.     Loud.,  1853.     2/- 
Strictly  orthodox  and  deeply  spiritual.     No  German  neology  may  be 
expected  from  this  author.     He  is  very  happy  in  his  practical  remarks. 

1378  LEIGHTON  (Robert,  D.D.     Abp.  of  Glasgow.      1613 

— 1684.)     Commentary  upon    i    Peter.     2  vols.      i8mo. 

3/6.  Royal  edition,  with  Portrait,  5/.  Rel.  Tract  See. 
Dr.  Henry  Mills  thus  zvrote  of  Leightons  works : — "  TJiere  is 
a  spirit  in  thcni  I  never  met  ivith  in  any  other  hnman  zuritings, 
nor  can  I  read  many  lines  in  them  zvithoict  being  moved."  We 
need  scarcely  commend  this  truly  heavenly  tvork.  It  is  a  favourite 
with  all  spiritual  men. 

1379  ROGERS  (John,  A.M.    Puritan.    Died  1636.)     Fruitful 

Exposition  upon  all  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter.     Folio. 
Lond.,  1650.     14/-  to  16/.      Very  rare. 
Rogers  was  a  true  Boanerges.     His  style  is  earnestly  practical 
and  wisely  experimental.     This  is  one  of  the  scarcest  and  liveliest 
of  the  Puritan  expositions. 

1380  STEIGER  (WiLHELM,  Prof  Theol.  Geneva.     1809— 1836).    Ex- 

position of  I  Peter.    Translated  by  Dr.  Fairbairn.    2  vols.,  i2mo. 
8/-     Biblical  Cabinet.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1836     3/- 
Steiger  was  a  sound  German  divine.     His  criticism  is  good,  but  like 
all  the  Germans  he  is  far  too  fond  of  dragging  in  learned  names. 

J381     GOMERSALL  (R.)  Sermons  on  St.  Peter  [chap.  II.  13—16].  4to.   1634.  5/- 
Teaches  absohite  submission  to  ralers.     Only  worth  notice  from  its  age. 


II.  PETER. 

J382  ADAMS  (Thomas).  Commentary  upon  the  2nd  Epistle 
of  Peter.  Folio.  Lond.,  1633.  New  Edition,  revised  by 
Rev.  James  Sherman,  in  imp.  8vo.,  1839;  now  included 
in  Nicholas  Commentaries ;  10/6.     Lofid.,  Nisbet.     1862. 

Full  of  quaiutnesses,  holy  wit,  bright  thought,  and  deep  instruc- 
tion. We  like  Adams  better  in  commenting  thafi  in  preaching. 
His  great  zuork  is  quite  by  itself,  and  in  its  oivn  way  remains 
unrivalled.      We  know  no  richer  and  racier  reading. 


191  II.  PETER.— JOHN'S  EPISTLES. 

1383  SVNISON   (Archibald).     Exposition  upon  the  Second  Epistle 

Gcncrall  of  St.  Peter.     4to.     Lotid.,  i6t,2.    6j- 
Abundance  of  matter,  pithily  expressed.     Symson  is  among  the  oldest 
and  rarest  of  the  ICnglish  divines. 

1384  BROWN  (John,  D.D.)    Parting  Counsels;  an  Exposition 

of  2  Peter  I.    8vo.    8/-   iiV/;/^.,  Oliphant.     1856.    S.  4/- 
J/V  akvays  think  of  Broivn  as  a  Puritan  born  out  of  due  time. 
Everything  he  has  left  tis  is  massive  gold.     He  is  both  rich  and 
elear,  profound  and  per'spicuous. 

13S5     W'lh'&O^  {\Yu.\.\x^A,  of  Musselburgh).    Second  Epistle  of  Peter. 
i2mo.   5/- ;  offered  at  2/6  by  Ogle  &  Murray,  Edinb. 
"  Thoughtful  and  fresh  in  its  matter,  fine  and  polished  in  its  style,- 
laying  hold  of  us  at  once,  and  tightening  its  grasp  on  our  sympathies^ 
the  longer  we  read." — B.  and  For.  Evan.  Reviav.     [Too  laudatory.] 


JOHN'S  EPISTLES. 


13S6      BICKERSTETH  (Edward.     1786— 1850).     Exposition  on  the  Epistles  of 
John  and  Jude,  and  of  Paul  to  Timothy.     i2mo.     Z<7«a''.,  1853.     1/6. 
Notes  taken  by  his  children  of   Mr.  BickerstetKs  expositions  at  family  prayer.- 
Simple,  devout,  soundly  evangelical,  and,  we  must  add,  superficial  and  commonplaco 

1387  EBRARD  (J.  H.  A.)     Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of 

St.  John.     With  an  Appendix  on  the  Catholic  Epistles. 

8vo.     10/6.     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark,     i860.     S.  5/. 

Dr.   Candlish,  in  his  Exposition  on    i    Johji,  says :     "  /  vinst 

acknozvledge  my   obligatioji  to  Dr.  Li'icke.     Bnt  it  is  Dr.  Ebrard 

ivJio  has  helped  me  most.     Ebrard  is  espeeially  valuable,  and  for  ait 

English  reader,  aequainted  zvith  theology,  very  easily  intelligible!' 

1388  HAWKINS  (Thomas).  Commentary  on  John's  Epistles, 

8vo.     Halifax,  1808.     2/. 
Very  excellent.     The  writer  has  upon  every  verse  something  ta 
say  worth  the  saying. 

1389  LUCKE(G.  C.F.     Bonn).     Epistles  of  John.     i2mo.    Biblica? 

Cabinet.  ^^///<5.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.  1837.  S.  2/6. 
Dr.  Graham,  of  Bonn,  says  that  "  Liick^  is  impartial,  learned,  anJ 
critically  in  earnest ;  yet  the  attentive  reader  soon  discovers  a  very- 
decided  anti-evangelical  tendency.  I  say  anti-evangelical  in  our  sense 
of  the  word,  for  in  Germany  he  has  done  much  to  overthrow  the  cold 
kingdom  of  rationalism  and  unbeUef."  Grahain  is  severe,  and  a  discount 
may  be  allowed  from  this  judgment.     Let  it  serve  as  a  warning. 

?390      SHEPHERD  (R.)     Sec  No.  1069. 


I.  JOHN.  19i 


I.  JOHN. 

139 1  APOSTOLIC  INSTRUCTION,  exemplified  in  the  First 

Epistle  of  John.     [Anon.]     i2mo.     Loud.,  iZAfi.     2/. 
Upon  tivo  chapters  only,  but  thorougJily  good,  and  full  of  sweet- 
ness and  light. 

1392  BINNING  (HuCzH.   1627— 1653).    Fellowship  with  God  , 

or  Twenty-eight  Sermons  on  i  John  I  and  II,  i — 3.      In 
his  Works,  vo\.\\  {See  No.  1197).     Reprinted  in  i8mo. 
by  Religious  Tract  Society.      1833. 
Milk  for  babes,  and  meat  for  men  ;  calls  to  backsliders,  and  com- 
forts for  mourners.     "  There  is  no  speaking^'  says  Durham,  "  after 
Mr.  Binning ;  truly  he  had  the  tongue  of  the  learned,  and  knew 
Jioiv  to  speak  a  word  in  season^ 

1393  CALVIN  (John).    Commentaries  upon  the  First  Epistle 

of  John,  and  upon  the  Epistle  of  Jude.     Translated  by 
W.  H.     8vo.      [1560.] 

11394     CANDLISH    (Robert,  D.D.)     First    Epistle   of  John, 
expounded.      2   vols.       Sm.  cr.    8vo.       iO/'6.       Edinb., 
A.  &  C.  Black.     1870.     S.  5/-  to  yjS. 
We  set  great  store  by  these  lectures.     A  man  hardly  needs  any- 
thing beyond  Candlish.     He  is  devout,  candid,  prudent,  and  forcible. 

i395     QOTlOl^  {]OYi.Yi,^ly.,  Pastor  of  Boston,  N.E.     1585— 

1652).      Commentary  upon   the  First  Epistle  of  John. 

Folio.     Loud.,  1656.     6/-  to  9/- 

Calamy  puts  his  imprimatur  upon  this  book,  and  speaks  of  the 

mithor  s  name  as  "  deservedly  precious  among  the  saints  of  God." 

Jn  doctrine  and  experience  lie  is  a  noble  teacher. 

1396  GRAHAM  (W.)     The  Spirit  of  Love.     Commentary  on  i  John. 

Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  1857.  S.  2/- 
Graham  is  sound  and  vigorous,  and  does  not  mince  matters  in  dealing 
with  semi-sceptics ;  hence  he  brings  upon  himself  violent  reviews  from 
opponents.  The  Literary  Churchman  denounces  his  book  as  containing 
"  controversy  without  argument,  criticism  without  proof,  citation  without 
reference,  a  show  of  scholarship  without  the  fruits  of  it,  and  denunciation 
without  decorum."     To  say  the  least  of  it,  this  review  is  far  too  severe. 

1397  HANDCOCK  (W.  J.)      Exposition   of    i   John.      Cr.  8vo.      3/6.      Loud., 

Hamilton,  Adams  &  Co.      1S61. 
The  author  has   carefully   studied   the  original,    and  has  his  own  ideas  as  to  its 
meaning  ;  but  either  he   has  not  the  power  of  communicating  them,  or  else  we   are 
slow  of  apprehension.     Very  frequently  we  are  at  a  loss  to  know  what  he  means. 


196  I.  JOHN. 

139S  HARDY  (Nathaniel,  D.D.  1618— 1670).  First  Epistle 
of  John  unfolded  and  applied.  2  vols.  4to.  1656-59. 
7/6  to  10/-  Reprinted  in  A^'/c/io/'s  Couiiiicntarks.  Cr. 
4to.     TiG.     Loud.,  Nisbet.     1SO5. 

The  Editor  of  NicJioVs  Edition  says,  "  This  Exposition  is  only  a 
fragment.  It  was  intended  to  consist  of  five  parts,  corresponding 
generally  ivitJi  the  five  chapters  of  the  Epistle  ;  bnt  only  two  of  them 
were  accomplished.  In  matter,  the  sermons  are  purely  evangelical ; 
in  spirit,  they  are  earnest  and  affectionate ;  in  manner,  they  are 
cloqnent  and  impressive."  This  is  ratJicr  too  ardent  a  commenda- 
tion. 

1399  MORGAN  (James,  D.D.,  Belfast).    Exposition  of  i  John. 

8vo.     9/-     Edinb.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.     1866.     S.  4/6. 
Dr.  Candlish  says  that  this  is  a  work  ''  of  great  practical  interest 
and  value,"  and  that  had  it  appeared  at  an  earlier  date,  "  he  might 
have  abstained  from  issuing"  his  ozvn  Lectures  on  this  Epistle. 
We  are  glad  to  possess  both  works. 

1400  NEANDER  (J.  A.  W.)   First  Epistle  of  John  explained.    Trans- 

lated by  Mrs.  Conant.     Sm.  8vo.     Neiv  York,  iZ'-^z.     5/- 
Mrs.   Conant  in  her  preface  says  :  "  The  treasures  of  genius  and 
learning  which  enrich  his  more  scientific  works,  here  seem  vivified  by  a 
new  element,  and  melt,  under  the  fervor  of  his  inner  spiritual  life,  into  a 
glowing  stream  of  eloquent  practical  instruction." 

1401  PATTERSON  (A.  S.,  D.D.)     Commentary  on  i  John.     iSmo, 

1842.     See  No.  1292. 

1402  PIERCE   (Samuel  Eyles).     Exposition  of  i  John,  in 

Ninety-three  Sermons.     2  vols.,  8vo.     Lond.,  1835.     7/- 
TJiis  devout  autJior  zvas  highly  Calvinistic,  but  withal  full  of 
spiritual pozvcr  and  unction.     He  loved  the  deep  things  of  God,  and 
zvrote  upon  them  in  a  gracious  manner. 

1403  STOCK  (John,  M.A.,.of  Finchi?igficld).     Exposition  of 

I  John.     8vo.     10/-     Lond.,  Rivingtons.     1865.     S.  5/- 
Written   by  a    tvell-instriicted   man   of    God.      For  spiritual 
teaching  the  zvork  is  second  to  none.  Dr.  Candlish  prized  it  greatly. 

1404  COX   (Samuel).     St.   John's  Letter  to   Kyria,  and    St. 

John's  Letter  to  Caius.     See  No.  1309. 

1405  JONES  (W.,  D.D.)     See  No.  i^i i. 


JUDE. 


197 


JUDE. 

1406  BICKERSTETH  (E.)     See  J^o.  12,S6. 

1407  GARDINER  (F.,   M.A.)      The  Last  of  the   Epistles.      Com- 

mentary on  Jude.     Cr.  8vo.     Boston,  U.S.     1856.     2/6. 
An  interesting,  straightforward,  instructive  commentary. 

1408  JENKYN  (William.   1612— 1685).  Exposition  of  Jude. 

2  vols.,  4to.,   1652,  4/-;    folio,   1656,  3/6.     Rev.  J.  Sher- 
man's reprint,  imp.  8  vo.      1839.     See  No.  \2'^i. 
Earnest  and  popular,  but  very  full,  and  profoundly  learned.     A 
treasure-house  of  good  things. 

1409  LUTHER.     See  No.  1^2- 

1410  McGILVRAY   (Walter).     Lectures  on  Jude.     Svo.     Glasg.-, 

1855-     3/-     Scarce. 
Vigorous,  popular  addresses  by  a  Free  Church  divine. 

141 1  MANTON  (Thomas,  D.D.)    Commentary  on  Jude.    4to. 

Land.,  1658.  4/- 
Manton  at  first  gave  up  all  idea  of  printing  this  book  on  Jude, 
zvhen  he  fojind  that  Jenkyn  had  taken  tip  the  subject ;  but  he  after- 
wards cJianged  his  mind.  He  tells  us :  "  /  consulted  zvith  my 
reverend  brothers  book,  and  ivhen  I  found  any  point  at  large  dis- 
cussed by  Jiini,  I  either  omitted  it  or  mentioned  it  very  briefly  ; 
so  that  his  labotirs  zvill  be  necessary  to  S7tpply  the  weaknesses  of 
mine.''     Manton's  zvork  is  most  commendable. 

1412  MUIR  (William,  D.D.)     Discourses  on  Jude.     Svo.     Glasg.,  \Z22.     2/6. 
Sermons  which  do  not  rise  above  mediocrity. 

141 3  OTES  (Samuel,  the  elder).     Explanation  of  Jude  in  forty-one 

Sermons.     Folio.     Lo7id.,  1633.     5/-  to  8/- 
Of  the  conforming  Puritan  style,  full  of  quaintnesses  and  singularities 
of  learning.     A  book  by  no  means  to  be  despised. 

1414  PERKINS  (William,  D.D.)  Exposition  of  Jude.  4to.  1606.  5/6. 
Perkins  was  regarded  by  his  cotemporaries  as  a  paragon  of  learning, 

but  his  writings  fail  to  interest  the  generality  of  readers. 

1415  TURNKULL  (Richard,  M.A.)     Exposition  of  Jude.     See  No.  i-'^b']. 

1416  WILLET  (Andrew).     A  CathoHcon  ;   gathered  out  of 

the  Catholike  Epistle  of  Jude.     Folio.     Land.,  16 14. 
This  book  is  in  the  Museum,  but  we  cannot  procure  a  copy. 


198  THE  REVELATION. 


THE    REVELATION. 

The  works  upon  Revelation  are  so  extremely  numerous  (Darling's 
list  contains  52  columns),  and  the  views  entertained  are  so  many,  so 
different,  and  so  speculative,  that  after  completing  our  List  we  resolved 
ndt  to  occupy  our  space  with  it,  but  merely  to  mention  a  few  works  of 
repute.  As  for  the  lucubrations  upon  parts  of  the  book,  they  lie  at  the 
booksellers'  "thick  as  leaves  in  Vallambrosa."  Numbers  of  these 
])roi)hccyings  have  been  disproved  by  the  lapse  of  time,  and  others  wil 
in  due  season  share  their  fate.  The  following  remarks  may  help  the 
student,  and  at  the  same  time  prove  the  difficulty  of  making  a  selection. 

Davidson  distinguishes  a  fourfold  manner  of  apprehending  Apocalyptic 
Prophecy. 

1.  Pretcrists.  The  prophecies  contained  in  the  Apocalypse  were 
fulfilled  with  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  fall  of  heathen 
Rome.  This  is  the  view  of  Bossiict,  Grotius,  Ha)n7?iond,  IVelsteiii, 
Eichhorn,  Eioald,  De  Wette,  Liicke,  and  others,  among  whom  is  the 
American  expositor,  Moses  Stuart. 

2.  Continuists.  The  Apocalyptic  prophecies  are  predictive  of  pro- 
gressive history,  being  partly  fulfilled,  partly  unfulfilled.  Thus  Mede, 
Brightman,  Isaac  Nezvton,  IVood/iouse,  Ctaifiiiigham,  Birks,  Elliott  (and 
many  Germans). 

3 .  Simple  Futurists.  According  to  these,  only  the  first  three  chapters 
relate  to  the  historical  present  of  the  Seer,  all  else  having  reference  to 
the  absolute  future  of  the  Lord's  Appearing.  Thus,  Burgh,  Maitland, 
Benjamin  Neicton,  Todd,  and  others. 

4.  Extreme  Futurists.  Even  the  first  three  chapters  of  Revelation 
are  a  prophecy  relative  to  the  absolute  future  of  Christ's  Coming — 
being  a  prediction  of  the  condition  of  the  Jews  after  the  first  Resurrec- 
tion.    Kelly,  and  some  Irish  authors. 


1417  BENGEL(JOHN  Albert).     Introduction  to  his  Exposition  of  the  Apocalypse, 

with  his  preface  to  that  work,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  conclusion  of  it, 

and  also  his  marginal  notes  on  the  text,  which  are  a  summary  of  the  whole 

Exposition.     Translated  from  the  High  Dutch,  by  John  Robertson,  M.D. 

8vo.     Lond.,  1757. 

This  great  author  was  rather  too  precise  in  his  dates.     The  end  of  the  forty-two 

months  was  settled  for  the  21st  of  May,  1810,  and  the  destruction  of  the  beast  for 

June  18th,  1836.     When  so  princely  an  expositor  maunders  in  this  fashion  it  should 

act  as  a  caution  to  less  able  men. 

1418  BONAR  (H.,  D.D.)    Light  and  Truth,  vol.  V.  {Sec  No.  6.) 

1419  BRIGHTMAN    (Thomas).       The   Revelation  of    St.  John.       Thick  8vo. 

Leyden,  1644.  4to.  Amsterdam,  1611.  [See  Nos.  649  and  775.] 
Brightmaiis  admirers  called  him  "the  English  Prophet,"  and  this  work  they 
styled  the  "Apocalypse  of  the  Apocalypse  ;  "  but  it  survives  only  as  a  noteworthy 
monument  of  the  failure  of  the  most  learned  to  expound  the  mysteries  of  this  book. 
Elliott  says  "  his  Commentary  is  one  of  great  vigour  both  in  thought  and  language' 
and  deservedly  one  of  the  most  popular  with  the  Protestant  Churches  of  the  time.'^ 


THE    REVELATION.  199 

1420  BURGH  [or,  DE  BURGH]  (William,  M.A.)     An  Exposition 

of  the  Revelation.     lamo.     Dublin,  185  7'     2/- 
Good  in  its  own  line. 

1421  COSNVY.'K  {^NiiAAKU,  of  GaUotvay.     1566— 1619),     Pathmos ; 

or,  a  Commentary  on  the  Revelation. j     4to.      Loud.,    1619  ; 
and  in  Works,  folio,  1629. 
The  simple  piety  and  vigorous   style  of  Cowper  have  preserved  his 
old-fashioned  work,  and  will  preserve  it. 

1422  CRADOCK  (Samuel,  B.D.     1620— 1760).     Exposition.     8vo.     1696. 
Dr.  Doddridge  and  fob  Orton  were  very  fond  of  this  old  author.     We  are  not. 

1423  GUMMING  (J.)    Apocalyptic  Sketches.     2  vols.,  ismo.    S.  5/. 
Here  the  views  of  Elliott  are  admirably  popularized. 

1424  DAUBUZ  (Charles.    1670 — 1740).    A  Perpetual  Commentary 

on  the  Revelation.     Abridged  by  Peter  Lancaster,  A.M.      4to. 

Lond.,  1730.     3/6. 

Subsequent  writers  have  drawn  much  from  this  work ;  we  have  heard 

it  highly  commended   by  competent  judges.       There  is  also  a  larger 

unabridged  edition,  which  we  have  not  seen.     This  is  said  to  be  still 

more  valuable. 

1425  DURHAM  (James.     1622 — 1658).     A  Learned  and  Complete 

Commentary.    4to.    Glasg.,  1788.    Original  edition,  folio,  1658. 

After  all  that  has  been  written,  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  a  more 

sensible  and  instructive  work  than  this  old-fashioned  exposition.     We 

cannot  accept  its  interpretations  of  the  mysteries,  but  the  mystery  of  the 

gospel  fills  it  with  sweet  savour. 

1426  ELLIOTT    (C.  B,   A.m.      Died   1875).       Horse   Apoc- 

alypticae  ;  or,  a  Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse,  critical 
and  historical.    4  vols.  8vo.,   Loud.,  Seeleys.   1862.  S.  18/- 
The  standard  zvork  on  the  subject. 

1427  GARRATT  (Samuel,  M.A.)    Commentary.    8vo.    7/6.    Lond., 

Seeleys.     1866.     S.  2/-  to  zl^- 
This  author  mainly  follows  Elliott,  but  differs  as  he  proceeds.     He  is 
an  esteemed  author, 

1428  FULLER    (Andrew.     1754—1815).     Expository   Discourses. 

2  vols.,  8vo.     181 5,     Also  in  Works. 
Fuller  is  too  judicious  to'  run  into   speculations.     The  work  is  both 
condensed  and  clear.     Ftdler  called  Faber  "  the  Fortune-teller  of  the 
Church,"  and  there  are  others  who  deserve  the  name. 

1429  GLASGOW    (James,   D.D.)     Apocalypse  Translated  and  Ex- 

pounded.    8vo.     2/6.     Ediiih.,  T.  &  T.  Clark.      1862. 
We  do  not  care  much  for  the  translation,  and  think  some  of  the 
interpretations  speculative  and  forced ;  yet  the  work  is  important. 


200  THE   REVELATION. 

1430  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.D.)    The  Revelation  expounded 

for  tliosc  who  search  Uic  Scrii)tures.      Translated  by  Patrick 
Fairbairn,  D.D.    2  vols.,  8 vo.    ii>// //(J-.,  1851-52.    S.  14J 6.  Scarce. 
Highly  esteemed  by  the  best  judges. 

1431  MEDE  (Joseph,  13. D.,  1586— 1638).  A  Key  to  the  Apocalypse ; 

[a  Translation  of  Mode's  Clavis  Apocalyptica.     By  R.  Bransby 

Cooper,  Esq.]     8vo.     Loud.,  1833.     3/6. 
There  are  several  other  works  on  the  Apocalypse  by  this  author,  who, 
says  Elliott,  "  was  looked  upon  and  written  of  as  a  man  almost  inspired 
for  the  solution  of  the  Apocalyptic  mysteries.     Yet  I  think  his  success 
was  at  first  over-estimated  as  an  Apocalyptic  expositor." 

1432  NEWTON  (Benjamin  Wills.)     Thoughts  on  the  Apocalypse. 

8vo.     Loud.,  1853.     S.  3/- 
Of  the  Futurist  School.     Condensed  and  instructive. 

1433  ROGERS  (George,   Principal  of  the  "  Pastors' College^')    Lec- 

tures on  the  Book  of  Revelation.    4  vols.,  i2mo.     1844-51.   6/- 
Not  half  so  well  known  as  it  ought  to  be  :  a  mass  of  judicious  remarks. 
We  do  not  subscribe  to  the  author's  system  of  interpretation,  but  his 
expositions  always  command  our  respect. 

1434  STUART     (Moses).       A    Commentary    on    the  Apocalypse. 

2  vols.,  royal  8vo.      Lond.,    1845;   i   vol.  8vo.     Edi/ib.,    1847; 

1  vol.  8vo.,  8/-.     Lo?id.,  W.  Tegg  and  Co.    1850.     S.  3/6. 
Stuart  rejects  the  historical  interpretations  generally  given  ;  but  his 

textual  criticism  and  his  preliminary  disquisitions  are  very  helpful.    This 
work  has  laid  us  under  great  obligations. 

1435  VAUGHAN     (C.  J.,   D.D.)       Lectures    on    the    Revelation. 

2  vols.     Fcap.  8vo.     9/-     Z^;/^.,  Macmillan  &  Co.    1875. 
Does  not  grapple  with  the  difficulties,  but  inculcates  the  lessons  of 

the  book.     A  sensible  course. 

1436  WILLIAMS  (Isaac).     The  Apocalypse,  with  Notes  and  Reflec- 

tions.    Cr.  8vo.     5/-     Loud.,  Rivingtons.     1873.     S.  3/- 
Considering  the  High  Church  School  to  which  he  belongs,  this  author 
is   marvellously  rich   in    exposition.     The   whole   is    tinged   with   the 
mediaeval  spirit. 

1437  WOODHOUSE    (John    Chappel,    D.D.,   Dean   of  Lichfield. 

1751 — 1834).    Translation,  with  Notes.    Roy.  8vo.    1805.     2/6. 
Bishop  Jlurdsdiys,  "  This  is  the  best  book  of  the  kind  I  have  seen." 
We  give  no  opinion,  for  we  are  too  much  puzzled  with  these  Apocalyptic 
books,  and  are  glad  to  write 

FINIS. 


VLAliASTER,    STEAM    TKINTEKS,    LITTLE   CKIT/ 


BlNDlr^^  S'tCf*      i- Lti     ^^  t980 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


BS 

Spurgeon,  Charles 

482 

Haddon,  1834-1892 

S6 

Commenting  and 

1876 

commentaries : 

n 


