$ 


# 


% 


* 


► 


* 


. 


- 


COMMENTING  AND  COMMENTARIES 

LECTURES 


ADDRESSED  TO  THE  STUDENTS  OF  THE 

PASTOR’S  COLLEGE,  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE, 

WITH  A LIST  OF  THE  BEST 


BIBLICAL  COMMENTARIES  AND  EXPOSITIONS, 

ALSO 

A LECTURE  ON  ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS, 

WITH  A COMPLETE  LIST  OP  ALL  OP  SPURGEON’S  SERMONS, 
WITH  THE  SCRIPTURE  TEXTS  USED. 


BT 

\ ' ^ A ;l>  ,, 

C.  H.  SPURGEON, 

* * 

PRESIDENT. 


NEW  YORK: 

Si-ieldon  & Company. 

NO.  8 MURRAY  STREET. 

187G. 


The  present  volume  is  the  second  of  a series  of  works  useful 
to  Students  and  Ministers  prepared  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  ; and  pub- 
lished at  $1.25.  The  first  volume  is  “Lectures  to  my  Students  : 
% > 
a Selection  from  Addresses  delivered  to  the  Students  of  the 

Pastor’s  College,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.” 

Mr.  Spurgeon  has  other  works  of  a similar  character  in  con- 
templation, which  will  be  issued,  if  the  Lord  will.  It  is  hoped 
that  The  College  Series  may  render  efficient  service  to 
preachers  of  the  gospel.  Friends  who  appreciate  the  books  will 
greatly  oblige  by  making  them  known  to  others.  The  same 
motive  which  prompted  the  author  to  write,  leads  him  to  desire 
a large  circle  of  readers. 


486555 

JUL  2 3 1942 


2^  ' r 3 


PREFACE. 


When-  I issued  the  first  volume  of  “Lectures  to  my 
Students  ” it  was  my  intention  to  prepare  another  series 
as  soon  as  time  permitted,  and  I meant  to  include  two 
addresses  upon  commenting  in  the  proposed  selection. 
It  struck  me,  however,  that  a better  thing  was  possible. 
The  two  lectures  might  introduce  the  topic  of  exposition, 
and  then  a list  of  Commentaries  might  help  the  student 
to  carry  the  advice  into  practice.  The  making  of  that 
list  would,  of  course,  be  no  small  labor ; but,  once  ac- 
complished, it  might  be  of  service  to  many,  and  effect 
more  in  the  direction  aimed  at  than  the  most  earnest 
exhortations.  I therefore  resolved  to  attempt  the  work, 
and  here  is  the  result. 

It  would  be  easy  to  point  out  the  deficiencies  of  the 
modern  pulpit,  and  hold  up  one’s  own  ideal  of  what 
preaching  ought  to  be,  but  this  has  been  so  often  at- 
tempted by  others  with  such  slender  results  that  we 
decline  the  task.  A judicious  critic  would  probably 
complain  that  many  sermons  are  deficient  in  solid  in- 
struction, Biblical  exposition,  and  Scriptural  argument : 
they  are  flashy,  rather  than  fleshy ; clever,  rather  than 
solid  ; entertaining,  rather  than  impressive.  He  would 
point  to  rhetorical  discourses  in  which  doctrine  is  barely 
discernible,  and  brilliant  harangues  from  which  no  food 


4 


PREFACE. 


for  the  soul  could  ever  be  extracted.  Having  done  this, 
he  would  probably  propose  that  homilies  should  flow  out 
of  texts,  and  should  consist  of  a clear  explanation,  and 
an  earnest  enforcement  of  the  truths  which  the  texts 
distinctly  teach.  Expository  preaching  he  would  advo- 
cate as  the  great  need  of  the  day,  its  best  protection 
against  rising  errors,  and  its  surest  means  of  spiritual 
edification.  To  such  observations  most  of  us  would 
offer  no  opposition ; we  should  confess  them  to  be 
full  of  wisdom,  and  worthy  of  being  pondered.  We 
should  not  unite  in  any  indiscriminate  censuring  of 
hortatory  addresses,  or  topical  sermons,  nor  should  we 
agree  with  the  demand  that  every  discourse  should  be 
limited  to  the  range  of  its  text,  nor  even  that  it  should 
have  a text  at  all ; but  we  should  heartily  subscribe  to 
the  declaration,  that  more  expository  preaching  is  greatly 
needed,  and  that  all  preachers  would  be  the  better  if 
they  were  more  able  expounders  of  the  inspired  Word. 

To  render  such  a result  more  probable,  every  induce- 
ment to  search  the  Holy  Scriptures  should  be  placed  in 
the  way  of  our  ministers,  and  to  the  younger  brethren 
some  guidance  should  be  proffered  as  to  the  works  most 
likely  to  aid  them  in  their  studies.  Many  are  persuaded 
that  they  should  expound  the  Word,  but  being  unversed 
in  the  original  tongues  they  can  only  fall  back  upon  the 
help  of  their  English  Concordances,  and  are  left  floun- 
dering about,  when  a sound  comment  would  direct  their 
thoughts.  True,  the  Holy  Spirit  will  instruct  the  seeker, 
but  he  works  by  means.  The  Ethiopian  eunuch  might 
have  received  divine  illumination,  and  doubtless  did 
receive  it,  but  still,  when  asked  whether  he  understood 
the  Scripture  which  he  read,  he  replied,  “How  can  I 
unless  some  man  shall  guide  me  ?”  The  guiding  man 


PREFACE. 


5 


is  needed  still.  Divines  who  have  studied  the  Scriptures 
have  left  us  great  stores  of  holy  thought  which  we  do 
well  to  use.  Their  expositions  can  never  be  a substitute 
for  our  own  meditations,  but  as  water  poured  down  a 
dry  pump  often  sets  it  to  work  to  bring  up  water  of  its 
own,  so  suggestive  reading  sets  the  mind  in  motion  on 
its  own  account.  Here,  however,  is  the  difficulty. 
Students  do  not  find  it  easy  to  choose  which  works  to 
buy,  and  their  slender  stores  are  often  wasted  on  books 
of  a comparatively  worthless  kind.  If  I can  save  a poor 
man  from  spending  his  money  for  that  which  is  not 
bread,  or,  by  directing  a brother  to  a good  hook,  may 
enable  him  to  dig  deeper  into  the  mines  of  truth,  I shall 
be  well  repaid.  For  this  purpose  I have  toiled,  and 
read  much,  and  passed  under  review  some  three  or  four 
thousand  volumes.  From  these  I have  compiled  my 
catalogue,  rejecting  many,  yet  making  a very  varied 
selection.  Though  I have  carefully  used  such  judgment 
as  I possess,  I have  doubtless  made  many  errors  ; I shall 
certainly  find  very  few  who  will  agree  with  all  my 
criticisms,  and  some  persons  may  be  angry  at  my 
remarks.  I have,  however,  done  my  best,  and,  with  as 
much  impartiality  as  I can  command,  I have  nothing 
extenuated  nor  set  down  aught  in  malice.  He  who  finds 
fault  will  do  well  to  execute  the  work  in  better  style  : 
only  let  him  remember  that  he  will  have  my  heifer  to 
plough  with,  and  therefore  ought  in  all  reason  to  excel  me. 

I have  used  a degree  of  pleasantry  in  my  remarks  on 
the  Commentaries,  for  a catalogue  is  a dry  affair,  and, 
as  much  for  my  own  sake  as  for  that  of  my  readers,  I 
have  indulged  the  mirthful  vein  here  and  there.  For 
this  I hope  I shall  escape  censure,  even  if  I do  not  win 
commendation. 


6 


PREFACE. 


The  preface  to  the  List  will  be  found  on  pages  60  and 
61  which  the  reader  is  requested  to  peruse  before  at- 
tempting to  use  the  list. 

To  God  I commend  this  labor,  which  has  been  under- 
taken and  carried  out  with  no  motive  but  that  of  hon- 
oring his  name,  and  edifying  his  Church  by  stimulating 
the  study  of  his  Word.  May  he,  for  his  Son’s  sake, 
grant  my  heart’s  desire. 

The  preparation  of  the  present  work  was  suggested 
by  the  author’s  connection  with  the  Pastors’  College,  and 
the  Library  of  that  Institution  has  in  a high  degree 
assisted  in  its  execution,  therefore  the  reader  must  per- 
mit the  College  to  be  noticed  in  these  pages  in  the  same 
manner  as  in  the  former  volume  of  this  series.  To  make 
it  known,  and  to  win  for  it  willing  friends  is  confessedly 
one  object  of  these  publications,  which  may  indeed  be 
viewed  as  merely  the  giving  forth  to  a wider  area  the 
instruction  carried  on  within  the  College  walls. 

The  Institution  is  intended  to  aid  useful  preachers 
in  obtaining  a better  education.  It  takes  no  man  to 
make  him  a minister,  but  requires  that  its  pupils  should, 
as  a rule,  have  exercised  their  gifts  for  at  least  two  years, 
and  have  won  souls  to  Jesus.  These  we  receive,  how- 
ever poor  or  backward  they  may  be,  and  our  endeavors 
are  all  turned  toward  the  one  aim,  that  they  should  be 
instructed  in  the  things  of  God,  furnished  for  their 
work,  and  practised  in  the  gift  of  utterance.  Much 
prayer  is  made  by  the  Church  that  this  end  may  be 
accomplished,  nor  has  the  prayer  been  in  vain,  for  some 
330  men  are  now  declaring  the  gospel  of  Jesus  who  were 
trained  in  this  manner.  Besides  the  students  for  the 
regular  ministry,  several  hundreds  of  street  preachers, 
city  missionaries,  teachers,  and  workers  of  all  kinds 


PREFACE. 


7 


have  passed  through  our  evening  classes,  and  a band  of 
250  such  men  are  now  with  us,  pursuing  their  callings 
by  day  and  studying  in  the  evening.  We  ask  for  much 
prayer  from  all  our  brethren,  that  the  supply  of  the 
Spirit  may  sanctify  the  teaching,  and  anoint  every  worker 
for  the  service  of  the  Lord. 

As  it  would  be  quite  unwarrantable  for  us  to  interfere 
with  the  arrangements  of  other  bodies  of  Christians,  who 
have  their  own  methods  of  training  their  ministers,  and 
as  it  is  obvious  that  we  could  not  find  spheres  for  men 
in  denominations  with  which  we  have  no  ecclesiastical 
connection,  we  confine  our  college  to  Baptists ; and  in 
order  not  to  be  harassed  with  endless  controversies,  we 
invite  those  only  who  hold  those  views  of  divine  truth 
which  are  popularly  known  as  Calvinistic, — not  that  we 
care  for  names  and  phrases,  but  as  we  wish  to  be  under- 
stood, we  use  a term  which  conveys  our  meaning  as 
nearly  as  any  descriptive  word  can  do.  Believing  the 
grand  doctrines  of  grace  to  be  the  natural  accompani- 
ments of  the  fundamental  evangelical  truth  of  redemp- 
tion by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  we  hold  and  teach  them  not 
only  in  our  ministry  to  the  masses,  but  in  the  more  select 
instruction  of  the  class-room.  Latitudinarianism  with 
its  infidelity,  and  unsectarianism  with  its  intolerance, 
are  neither  of  them  friends  of  ours  : we  delight  in  the 
man  who  believes,  and  therefore  speaks.  Our  Lord  has 
given  us  no  permission  to  be  liberal  with  what  is  none  of 
ours.  We  are  to  give  an  account  of  every  truth  with 
which  we  are  put  in  trust. 

Our  means  for  conducting  this  work  are  with  the 
most  High  God,  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth.  We 
have  no  list  of  subscribers  or  roll  of  endowments.  Our 
trust  is  in  Him  whom  we  desire  to  serve.  He  has  sup- 


8 


PREFACE. 


ported  the  work  for  many  years,  by  moving  his  stewards 
to  send  us  -help,  and  we  are  sure  that  he  will  continue  to 
do  so  as  long  as  he  desires  us  to  pursue  this  labor  of  love. 
We  need,  at  least,  £100  every  week  of  the  year.  Since 
our  service  is  gratuitous  in  every  sense,  we  the  more 
freely  appeal  to  those  who  agree  with  us  in  believing 
that  to  aid  an  earnest  young  minister  to  equip  himself 
for  his  life-work  is  a worthy  effort.  No  money  yields  so 
large  a return,  no  work  is  so  important,  just  now  none 
is  so  absolutely  needful. 

C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

Nightingale  Lane, 

Clapham,  Surrey. 


CONTENTS 


LECTURE  I. 

PAGE 

A Chat  about  Commentaries 11 

LECTURE  II. 

On  Commenting 42 

Remarks  upon  the  List  of  Commentaries 60 

List  of  Commentaries  on  the  Whole  Bible 63 

,,  „ on  the  Old  Testament 74 

,,  „ on  the  separate  Books  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment  75 

,,  ,,  on  the  New  Testament 201 

,,  ,,  on  the  separate  Books  of  the  New 

Testament 209 

Eccentric  Preachers 283 

A Complete  Index  to  all  of  Mr.  Spurgeon’s  Works,  including 
the  Text  of  Scripture  from  which  he  preached,  etc 305 


LECTURE  I. 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 

In  order  to  be  able  to  expound  the  Scriptures,  and 
as  an  aid  to  your  pulpit  studies,  you  will  need  to  be 
familiar  with  the  commentators  : a glorious  army,  let  me 
tell  you,  whose  acquaintance  will  be  your  delight  and 
profit.  Of  course,  you  are  not  such  wiseacres  as  to  think 
or  say  that  you  can  expound  Scripture  without  assistance 
from  the  works  of  divines  and  learned  men  who  have 
labored  before  you  in  the  field  of  exposition.  If  you  are 
of  that  opinion,  pray  remain  so,  for  you  are  not  worth 
the  trouble  of  conversion,  and  like  a little  coterie  who 
think  with  you,  would  resent  the  attempt  as  an  insult 
to  your  infallibility.  It  seems  odd,  that  certain  men 
who  talk  so  much  of  what  the  Holy  Spirit  reveals  to 
themselves,  should  think  so  little  of  what  he  has  revealed 
to  others.  My  chat  this  afternoon  is  not  for  these  great 
originals,  but  for  you  who  are  content  to  learn  of  holy 
men,  taught  of  God,  and  mighty  in  the  Scriptures.  It 
has  been  the  fashion  of  late  years  to  speak  against  the 
use  of  commentaries.  If  there  were  any  fear  that  the 
expositions  of  Matthew  Henry,  Gill,  Scott,  and  others, 
would  be  exalted  into  Christian  Targums,  we  would  join 
the  chorus  of  objectors,  but  the  existence  or  approach 
of  such  a danger  we  do  not  suspect.  The  temptations 
of  our  times  lie  rather  in  empty  pretensions  to  novelty 
of  sentiment,  than  in  a slavish  following  of  accepted 


12  A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 

guides.  A respectable  acquaintance  with  the  opinions 
of  the  giants  of  the  past,  might  have  saved  many  an 
erratic  thinker  from  wild  interpretations  and  outrageous 
inferences.  Usually,  we  have  found  the  despisers  of 
commentaries  to  be  men  who  have  no  sort  of  acquaint- 
ance with  them  ; in  their  case,  it  is  the  opposite  of 
familiarity  which  has  bred  contempt.  It  is  true  there 
are  a number  of  expositions  of  the  whole  Bible  which  are 
hardly  worth  shelf-room  ; they  aim  at’ too  much  and  fail 
altogether  ; the  authors  have  spread  a little  learning  over 
a vast  surface,  and  have  badly  attempted  for  the  entire 
Scriptures  what  they  might  have  accomplished  for  one 
book  with  tolerable  success  ; but  who  will  deny  the  pre- 
eminent value  of  such  expositions  as  those  of  Calvin,  Ness, 
Henry,  Trapp,  Poole,  and  Bengel,  which  are  as  deep  as 
they  are  broad  ? and  yet  further,  who  can  pretend  to 
biblical  learning  who  has  not  made  himself  familiar  with 
the  great  writers  who  spent  a life  in  explaining  some  one 
sacred  book  ? Caryl  on  Job  will  not  exhaust  the  patience 
of  a student  who  loves  every  letter  of  the  Word  ; even 
Collinges,  with  his  nine  hundred  and  nine  pages  upon 
one  chapter  of  the  Song,  will  not  be  too  full  for  the 
preacher’s  use  ; nor  will  Man  ton’s  long-metre  edition  of 
the  hundred  and  nineteenth  Psalm  be  too  profuse.  Ho 
stranger  could  imagine  the  vast  amount  of  real  learning 
to  be  found  in  old  commentaries  like  the  following  : — 
Durham  on  Solomon’s  Song,  Wilcocks  on  Psalms  and 
Proverbs,  Jermin  on  Ecclesiastes  and  Proverbs,  Green- 
hill  on  Ezekiel,  Burroughs  on  Hosea,  Ainsworth  on  the 
Pentateuch,  King  on  Jonah,  Hutcheson  on  John,  Peter 
Martyr  on  Romans,  etc.,  and  in  Willett,  Sibbes,  Bayne, 
Elton,  Byfield,  Daille,  Adams,  Taylor,  Barlow,  Goodwin, 
and  others  on  the  various  epistles.  Without  attempting 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


13 


to  give  in  detail  the  names  of  all,  I intend  in  a familiar 
talk  to  mention  the  more  notable,  who  wrote  upon  the 
whole  Bible,  or  on  either  Testament,  and  I especially 
direct  your  attention  to  the  titles,  which  in  Puritan 
writers  generally  give  in  brief  the  run  of  the  work. 

First  among  the  mighty  for  general  usefulness  we' 
are  bound  to  mention  the  man  whose  name  is  a house- 
hold word,  Matthew  Henry.*  He  is  most  pious  and 
pithy,  sound  and  sensible,  suggestive  and  sober,  terse 
and  trustworthy.  You  will  find  him  to  be  glittering 
with  metaphors,  rich  in  analogies,  overflowing  with  illus- 
trations, superabundant  in  reflections.  He  delights  in 
apposition  and  alliteration  ; he  is  usually  plain,  quaint, 
and  full  of  pith  ; he  sees  right  through  a text  directly ; 
apparently  he  is  not  critical,  but  he  quietly  gives  the 
result  of  an  accurate  critical  knowledge  of  the  original 
fully  up  to  the  best  critics  of  his  time.  He  is  not  versed 
in  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  East,  for  the  Holy 
Land  was  not  so  accessible  as  in  our  day ; but  he  is 
deeply  spiritual,  heavenly,  and  profitable  ; finding  good 
matter  in  every  text,  and  from  all  deducing  most  prac- 
tical and  judicious  lessons.  His  is  a kind  of  commentary 
to  be  placed  where  I saw  it,  in  the  old  meeting-house  at 
Chester — chained  in  the  vestry  for  anybody  and  every- 
body to  read.  It  is  the  poor  man’s  commentary,  the  old 
Christian’s  companion,  suitable  to  everybody,  instructive 
to  all.  His  own  account  of  how  he  was  led  to  write  his 
exposition,  affords  us  an  example  of  delighting  in  the 
law  of  the  Lord.  “If  any  desire  to  know  how  so  mean 

* An  Exposition  of  all  tlie  Books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ments. By  Matthew  Henry,  late  minister  of  the  gospel  in 
Chester.  (Many  editions ; to  be  met  with  at  very  low  prices.) 


14 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


and  obscure  a person  as  I am,  who  in  learning,  judgment, 
felicity  of  expression,  and  all  advantages  for  such  a ser- 
vice, am  less  than  the  least  of  all  my  Master’s  servants, 
came  to  venture  upon  so  great  a work,  I can  give  no 
other  account  of  it  but  this.  It  has  long  been  my 
practice,  what  little  time  I had  to  spare  in  my  study  from 
my  constant  preparation  for  the  pulpit,  to  spend  it  in 
drawing  up  expositions  upon  some  parts  of  the  New 
Testament,  not  so  much  for  my  own  use,  as  purely  for 
my  own  entertainment,  because  I know  not  how  to 
employ  my  thoughts  and  time  more  to  my  satisfaction. 
Trahit  sua  quemque  voluptas ; every  man  that  studies 
hath  some  beloved  study,  which  is  his  delight  above  any 
other ; and  this  is  mine.  It  is  that  learning  which  it 
was  my  happiness  from  a child  to  be  trained  up  in  by 
my  ever  honored  father,  whose  memory  must  always  be 
very  dear  and  precious  to  me.  He  often  minded  me, 
that  a good  textuary  is  a good  divine  ; and  that  I should 
read  other  books  with  this  in  my  eye,  that  I might  be 
the  better  able  to  understand  and  apply  the  Scripture.” 
You  are  aware,  perhaps,  that  the  latter  part  of  the  New 
Testament  was  completed  by  other  hands,  the  good  man 
having  gone  the  way  of  all  flesh.  The  writers  were 
Messrs.  Evans,  Brown,  Mayo,  Bays,  Rosewell,  Iiarriss, 
Atkinson,  Smith,  Tong,  Wright,  Merrell,  Hill,  Reynolds, 
and  Billingsley — all  Dissenting  ministers.  They  have 
executed  their  work  exceedingly  well,  have  worked  in 
much  of  the  matter  which  Henry  had  collected,  and 
have  done  their  best  to  follow  his  methods,  but  their 
combined  production  is  far  inferior  to  Matthew  Henry 
himself,  and  any  reader  will  soon  detect  the  difference. 
Every  minister  ought  to  read  Matthew  Henry  entirely 
and  carefully  through  once  at  least.  I should  recom- 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


15 


mend  you  to  get  through,  it  in  the  next  twelve  months 
after  you  leave  college.  Begin  at  the  beginning,  and 
resolve  that  you  will  traverse  the  goodly  land  from  Dan 
to  Beersheba.  You  will  acquire  a vast  store  of  sermons 
if  you  read  with  your  note-book  close  at  hand  ; and  as 
for  thoughts,  they  will  swarm  around  you  like  twittering 
swallows  around  an  old  gable  toward  the  close  of  autumn. 
If  you  publicly  expound  the  chapter  you  have  just  been 
reading,  your  people  will  wonder  at  the  novelty  of  your 
remarks  and  the  depth  of  your  thoughts,  and  then  you 
may  tell  them  what  a treasure  Henry  is.  Mr.  Jay’s 
sermons  bear  indubitable  evidence  of  his  having  studied 
Matthew  Henry  almost  daily.  Many  of  the  quaint 
things  in  Jay’s  sermons  are  either  directly  traceable  to 
Matthew  Henry  or  to  his  familiarity  with  that  writer. 
I have  thought  that  the  style  of  Jay  was  founded  upon 
Matthew  Henry  : Matthew  Henry  is  Jay  writing,  Jay  is 
Matthew  Henry  preaching.  What  more  could  I say  in 
commendation  either  of  the  preacher  or  the  author  ? 

It  would  not  be  possible  for  me  too  earnestly  to  press 
upon  you  the  importance  of  reading  the  expositions  of 
that  prince  among  men,  John  Calvin  ! * lam  afraid 
that  scant  purses  may  debar  you  from  their  purchase, 
but  if  it  be  possible  procure  them,  and  meanwhile,  since 
they  are  in  the  College  library,  use  them  diligently.  I 
have  often  felt  inclined  to  cry  out  with  Father  Simon,  a 
Roman  Catholic,  “ Calvin  possessed  a sublime  genius,” 

* The  works  of  John  Calvin,  in  51  volumes.  Messrs.  Clark, 
of  Edinburgh,  announce  that  they  possess  the  copyright  of  the 
works  of  Calvin  originally  published  by  the  Calvin  Translation 
Society,  and  issue  them  on  the  following  terms: — Complete  sets 
in  51  volumes,  £9  9s.  The  “Letters,”  edited  by  Dr.  Bonnet,  2 
vols.,  10s.  6d.,  additional.  Complete  sets  of  Commentaries,  45  vols., 
£7  17s.  6d.  The  “ Institutes,”  3 vols.,  24s. 


16  A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 

and  with  Scaliger,  “Oh!  how  well  has  Calvin  reached 
the  meaning  of  the  prophets — no  one  better.”  You  will 
find  forty-two  or  more  goodly  volumes  worth  their  weight 
in  gold.  Of  commentators  I believe  John  Calvin  to  be 
the  most  candid.  In  his  expositions  he  is  not  always  what 
moderns  would  call  Calvinistic  : that  is  to  say,  where 
Scripture  maintains  the  doctrine  of  predestination  and 
grace  he  flinches  in  no  degree,  but  inasmuch  as  some 
Scriptures  bear  the  impress  of  human  free  action  and 
responsibility,  he  does  not  shun  to  expound  their  mean- 
ing in  all  fairness  and  integrity.  He  was  no  trimmer 
and  pruner  of  texts.  He  gave  their  meaning  as  far  as  he 
knew  it.  His  honest  intention  was  to  translate  the 
Hebrew  and  the  Creek  originals  as  accurately  as  he 
possibly  could,  and  then  to  give  the  meaning  which 
would  naturally  be  conveyed  by  such  Greek  and  Hebrew 
words  : he  labored,  in  fact,  to  declare,  not  his  own  mind 
upon  the  Spirit’s  words,  but  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  as 
couched  in  those  words.  Dr.  King  very  truly  says  of 
him,  “No  writer  ever  dealt  more  fairly  and  honestly  by 
the  Word  of  God.  He  is  scrupulously  careful  to  let  it 
speak  for  itself,  and  to  guard  against  every  tendency  of 
his  own  mind  to  put  upon  it  a questionable  meaning  for 
the  sake  of  establishing  some  doctrine  which  he  feels  to 
be  important,  or  some  theory  which  he  is  anxious  to 
uphold.  This  is  one  of  his  prime  excellences.  He  will 
not  maintain  any  doctrine,  however  orthodox  and  essen- 
tial, by  a text  of  Scripture  which  to  him  appears  of 
doubtful  application,  or  of  inadequate  force.  For 
instance,  firmly  as  he  believed  the  doctrine  of  the  Trini- 
ty, he  refuses  to  derive  an  argument  in  its  favor  from 
the  plural  form  of  the  name  of  God  in  the  first  chapter 
of  Genesis.  It  were  easy  to  multiply  examples  of  this 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTAKIES. 


17 


kind,  which,  whether  we  agree  in  his  conclusion  or  not, 
cannot  fail  to  produce  the  conviction  that  he  is  at  least 
an  honest  commentator,  and  will  not  make  any  passage 
of  Scripture  speak  more  or  less  than,  according  to  his 
view,  its  divine  Author  intended  it  to  speak.” 

The  edition  of  John  Calvin’s  works  which  was  issued 
by  the  Calvin  Translation  Society,  is  greatly  enriched  by 
the  remarks  of  the  editors,  consisting  not  merely  of  notes 
on  the  Latin  of  Calvin,  and  the  French  translation,  or 
on  the  text  of  the  original  Scriptures,  but  also  weighty 
opinions  of  eminent  critics,  illustrative  manners  and 
customs,  and  observations  of  travellers.  By  the  way, 
gentlemen,  what  a pity  it  is  that  people  do  not,  as  a 
rule,  read  the  notes  in  the  old  Puritan  books  ! If  you 
purchase  old  copies  of  such  writers  as  Brooks,  you  will 
find  that  the  notes  in  the  margin  are  almost  as  rich  as 
the  books  themselves.  They  are  dust  of  gold,  of  the 
same  metal  as  the  ingots  in  the  centre  of  the  page.  But 
to  return  to  Calvin.  If  you  needed  any  confirmatory 
evidence  as  to  the  value  of  his  writings,  I might  summon 
a cloud  of  witnesses,  but  it  will  suffice  to  quote  one  or 
two.  Here  is  the  opinion  of  one  who  is  looked  upon  as 
his  great  enemy,  namely,  Arminius  : “ Next  to  the 
perusal  of  the  Scriptures,  which  I earnestly  inculcate,  I 
exhort  my  pupils  to  peruse  Calvin’s  commentaries, 
which  I extol  in  loftier  terms  than  Helmich  * himself  ; 
for  I affirm  that  he  excels  beyond  comparison  in  the  inter - 
preiation  of  Scripture , and  that  his  commentaries  ought 
to  be  more  highly  valued  than  all  that  is  handed  down  to 
us  by  the  Library  of  the  Fathers ; so  that  I acknowl- 
edge him  to  have  possessed  above  most  others,  or  rather 

* Werner  Helmich,  a Dutch  Protestant  divine,  a.d.  1551 — 1608. 


18 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


above  all  other  men,  what  may  be  called  an  eminent 
gift  of  prophecy.  ” 

Quaint  Robert  Robinson  said  of  him,  “ There  is  no 
abridging  this  sententious  commentator,  and  the  more  I 
read  him,  the  more  does  he  become  a favorite  expositor 
with  me.”  Holy  Baxter  wrote,  “I  know  no  man  since 
the  apostles’  days,  whom  I value  and  honor  more  than 
Calvin,  and  whose  judgment  in  all  things,  one  with 
another,  I more  esteem  and  come  nearer  to.” 

If  you  are  well  enough  versed  in  Latin,  you  will  find 
in  Poole’s  Synopsis,*  a marvellous  collection  of  all  the 
wisdom  and  folly  of  the  critics.  It  is  a large  cyclopaedia 
worthy  of  the  days  when  theologians  could  be  cyclopean, 
and  had  not  shrunk  from  folios  to  octavos.  Query — a 
query  for  which  I will  not  demand  an  answer — has  one  of 
you  ever  beaten  the  dust  from  the  venerable  copy  of  Poole 
which  loads  our  library  shelves  ? Yet  as  Poole  spent  no 
less  than  ten  years  in  compiling  it,  it  should  be  worthy  of 
our  frequent  notice — ten  years,  let  me  add,  spent  in  Am- 
sterdam in  exile  for  the  truth’s  sake  from  his  native  land. 

His  work  was  based  upon  an  earlier  compilation 
entitled  Critici  Sacri,  containing  the  concentrated  light 
of  a constellation  of  learned  men  who  have  never  been 
excelled  in  any  age  or  country. 

Matthew  Poole  also  wrote  Annotations  f upon 

* Synopsis  Criticorum  aliorumque  S.  Scripturae  Interpretum. 
Opera  Mattliaei  Poli.  Londinensis,  MDCLxrx. 

f Annotations  upon  the  Holy  Bible.  Wherein  the  sacred  text 
is  inserted,  and  various  readings  annexed,  together  with  the 
parallel  Scriptures.  The  more  difficult  terms  in  each  verse 
explained ; seeming  contradictions  reconciled ; questions  and 
doubts  resolved ; and  the  whole  text  opened.  By  the  late  Rev. 
and  learned  divine,  Mr.  Matthew  Poole.  1700. 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


19 


the  Word  of  God,  in  English,  which  are  mentioned  by 
Matthew  Henry  as  having  passed  through  many  impres- 
sions in  his  day,  and  he  not  only  highly  praises  them,  but 
declares  that  he  has  in  his  own  work  all  along  been  brief 
upon  that  which  Mr.  Poole  has  more  largely  discussed, 
and  has  industriously  declined  what  is  to  be  found  there. 
The  three  volumes,  tolerably  cheap,  and  easily  to  be  got 
at,  are  necessaries  for  your  libraries.  On  the  whole,  if  I 
must  have  only  one  commentary,  and  had  read  Matthew 
Henry  as  I have,  I do  not  know  but  what  I should  choose 
Poole.  He  is  a very  prudent  and  judicious  commen- 
tator ; and  one  of  the  few  who  could  honestly  say,  “ We 
have  not  willingly  balked  any  obvious  difficulty,  and 
have  designed  a just  satisfaction  to  all  our  readers  ; and 
if  any  knot  remains  yet  untied,  we  have  told  our  readers 
what  hath  been  most  probably  said  for  their  satisfaction  in 
the  untying  of  it. ” Poole  is  not  so  pithy  and  witty  by  far 
as  Matthew  Henry,  but  he  is  perhaps  more  accurate,  less 
a commentator,  and  more  an  expositor.  You  meet  with 
no  ostentation  of  learning  in  Matthew  Poole,  and  that 
for  the  simple  reason  that  he  was  so  profoundly  learned 
as  to  be  able  to  give  results  without  a display  of  his 
intellectual  crockery.  A pedant  who  is  forever  quoting 
Ambrose  and  Jerome,  Piscator  and  CEcolampadius,  in 
order  to  show  what  a copious  reader  he  has  been,  is 
usually  a dealer  in  small  wares,  and  quotes  only  what 
others  have  quoted  before  him,  but  he  who  can  give  you 
the  result  and  outcome  of  very  extensive  reading  without 
sounding  a trumpet  before  him  is  the  really  learned  man. 
Mind  you  do  not  confound  the  Annotations  with  the 
Synopsis ; the  English  work  is  not  a translation  of  the 
Latin  one,  but  an  entirely  distinct  performance. 
Strange  to  say,  like  the  other  great  Matthew  he  did  not 


20 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


live  to  complete  his  work  beyond  Isaiah  lviii. ; other 
hands  united  to  finish  the  design. 

AVouldit  he  possible  to  eulogize  too  much  the  incom- 
parably sententious  and  suggestive  folios  of  John 
Trapp  ? * Since  Mr.  Dickinson  has  rendered  them 
accessible,  f I trust  most  of  you  have  bought  them. 
Trapp  will  be  most  valuable  to  men  of  discernment,  to 
thoughtful  men,  to  men  who  only  want  a start  in  a line 
of  thought,  and  are  then  able  to  run  alone.  Trapp 
excels  in  witty  stories  on  the  one  hand,  and  learned 
allusions  on  the  other.  You  will  not  thoroughly  enjoy 
him  unless  you  can  turn  to  the  original,  and  yet  a mere 
dunce  at  classics  will  prize  him.  His  writings  remind 
me  of  himself  : he  was  a pastor,  hence  his  holy  practical 
remarks  ; he  was  the  head  of  a public  school,  and  every- 
where we  see  his  profound  scholarship  ; he  was  for  some 
time  amid  the  guns  and  drums  of  a parliamentary  garri- 
son, and  he  gossips  and  tells  queer  anecdotes  like  a man 

* Annotations  upon  tlie  Old  and  New  Testament,  in  five 
distinct  volumes.  Whereof  the  first  is  upon  the  five  Books  of 
Moses,  and  upon  the  following  Books,  of  Joshua,  Judges,  Ruth, 
Samuel,  Kings,  and  Chronicles.  The  second  is  upon  Ezra,  Nelie- 
miah,  Esther,  Job  and  Psalms.  The  third  is  upon  Proverbs, 
Ecclesiastes,  Solomon’s  Song,  and  the  four  major  prophets,  with 
a treatise  called,  “The  righteous  Man’s  Recompense.”  The 
fourth  is  upon  the  twelve  minor  prophets,  the  fifth  and  last  is 
upon  the  whole  New  Testament,  with  a Decade  of  Divine  Dis- 
courses, or  Common-places,  thereunto  annexed.  By  John 
Trapp,  M.A.,  pastor  and  preacher  of  the  word  of  God  at  Weston- 
upon-Avon,  in  Gloucestershire.  1662. 

f The  reprint  by  Mr.  R.  D.  Dickinson  is  edited  by  Rev.  W. 
Webster,  and  Rev.  Hugh  Martin,  with  a Memoir  of  the  Author, 
by  Rev.  A.  B.  Grosart,  5 vols.,  super- royal  8vo.,  cloth ; £3  2s.  6d. 
to  subscribers. 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


21 


used  to  soldier- life ; yet  withal,  he  comments  as  if  ho 
had  been  nothing  else  hut  a commentator  all  his  days. 
Some  of  his  remarks  are  far-fetched,  and  like  the  far- 
fetched rarities  of  Solomon’s  Tarshish,  there  is  much 
gold  and  silver,  but  there  are  also  apes  and  peacocks. 
His  criticisms  would  some  of  them  be  the  cause  of 
amusement  in  these  days  of  greater  scholarship  ; but  for 
all  that,  he  who  shall  excel  Trapp  had  need  rise  very 
early  in  the  morning.  Trapp  is  my  especial  companion 
and  treasure  ; I can  read  him  when  I am  too  weary  for 
anything  else.  Trapp  is  salt,  pepper,  mustard,  vinegar, 
and  all  the  other  condiments.  Put  him  on  the  table 
when  you  study,  and  when  you  have  your  dish  ready, 
use  him  by  way  of  spicing  the  whole  thing.  Yes,  gen- 
tlemen, read  Trapp  certainly,  and  if  you  catch  the 
infection  of  his  consecrated  humor,  so  much  the  better 
for  your  hearers. 

A very  distinguished  place  is  due  to  Dr.  Gill.* 

* An  Exposition  of  tlie  Old  Testament,  in  which  are  recorded 
the  origin  of  mankind,  of  the  several  nations  of  the  world,  and 
of  the  Jewish  nation  in  particular ; the  lives  of  the  patriarchs  of 
Israel ; the  journey  of  that  people  from  Egypt  to  the  land  of 
Canaan,  and  their  settlement  in  that  land : their  laws,  moral, 
ceremonial,  and  judicial;  their  government  and  state  under 
judges  and  kings ; their  several  captivities,  and  their  sacred 
books  of  devotion : in  the  exposition  of  which,  it  is  attempted  to 
give  an  account  of  their  several  books  and  the  writers  of  them ; 
a summary  of  each  chapter,  and  the  genuine  sense  of  each  verse, 
and,  throughout  the  whole,  the  original  text  and  the  versions  of 
it,  are  inspected  and  compared ; interpretation  of  the  best  note, 
both  Jewish  and  Christian,  consulted ; difficult  places  at  large 
explained,  seeming  contradictions  reconciled,  and  various  passages 
illustrated  and  confirmed  by  testimonies  of  writers  as  well  Gentile 
as  Jewish.  By  John  Gill,  D.D. 


22 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


Beyond  all  controversy,  Gill  was  one  of  the  most  able 
Hebraists  of  his  day,  and  in  other  matters  no  mean 
proficient.  When  an  opponent  in  controversy  had  ven- 
tured to  call  him  “a  botcher  in  divinity,”  the  good 
doctor,  being  compelled  to  become  a fool  in  glorying, 
gave  such  a list  of  his  attainments  as  must  have  covered 
his  accuser  with  confusion.  His  great  work  on  the 
Holy  Scriptures  is  greatly  prized  at  the  present  day  by 
the  best  authorities,  which  is  conclusive  evidence  of  its 
value,  since  the  set  of  the  current  of  theological  thought 
is  .quite  contrary  to  that  of  Dr.  Gill.  No  one  in  these 
days  is  likely  to  be  censured  for  His  Arminianism,  but 
most  modern  divines  affect  to  sneer  at  anything  a little 
too  highly  Oalvinistic  : however,  amid  the  decadence  of 
his  own  rigid  system,  and  the  disrepute  of  even  more 
moderate  Calvinism,  Gill’s  laurels  as  an  expositor  are 
still  green.  His  ultraism  is  discarded,  but  his  learning 
is  respected  : the  world  and  the  church  take  leave  to 
question  his  dogmatism,  but  they  both  bow  before  his 
erudition.  Probably  no  man  since  Gill’s  days  has  at  all 
equalled  him  in  the  matter  of  Rabbinical  learning.  Say 
what  you  will  about  that  lore,  it  has  its  value  : of  course, 
a man  has  to  rake  among  perfect  dunghills  and  dust- 
heaps,  but  there  are  a few  jewels  which  the  world  could 
not  afford  to  miss.  Gill  was  a master  cinder-sifter  among 
the  Targums,  the  Talmuds,  the  Mishna,  and  the  Gemara. 

An  Exposition  of  the  New  Testament,  in  which  the  sense  of 
the  sacred  text  is  taken ; doctrinal  and  practical  truths  are  set  in 
a plain  and  easy  light,  difficult  passages  explained  ; seeming  con- 
tradictions reconciled ; and  whatever  is  material  in  the  various 
readings  and  several  Oriental  versions  is  observed.  The  whole 
illustrated  with  notes  taken  from  the  most  ancient  Jewish  writ- 
ings. By  John  Gill,  D.D. 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


23 


Richly  did  he  deserve  the  degree  of  which  he  said,  “ I 
never  bought  it,  nor  thought  it,  nor  sought  it.” 

He  was  always  at  work ; it  is  difficult  to  say  when 
he  slept,  for  he  wrote  10,000  folio  pages  of  theology. 
The  portrait  of  him  which  belongs  to  this  church,  and 
hangs  in  my  private  vestry,  and  from  which  all  the  pub- 
lished portraits  have  been  engraved,  represents  him  after 
an  interview  with  an  Arminian  gentleman,  turning  up 
his  nose  in  a most  expressive  manner,  as  if  he  could  not 
endure  even  the  smell  of  free-will.  In  some  such  a vein 
he  wrote  his  commentary.  He  hunts  Arminianism 
throughout  the  whole  of  it.  He  is  far  from  being  so 
interesting  and  readable  as  Matthew  Henry.  He  deliv- 
ered his  comments  to  his  people  from  Sabbath  to  Sab' 
bath,  hence  their  peculiar  mannerism.  His  frequent 
method  of  animadversion  is,  “ This  text  does  not  mean 
this,”  nobody  ever  thought  it  did ; “It  does  not  mean 
that,”  only  two  or  three  heretics  ever  imagined  it  did ; 
and  again  it  does  not  mean  a third  thing,  or  a fourth, 
or  a fifth,  or  .a  sixth  absurdity  ; but  at  last  he  thinks  it 
does  mean  so-and-so,  and  tells  you  so  in  a methodical, 
sermon-like  manner.  This  is  an  easy  method,  gentle- 
men, of  filling  up  the  time,  if  you  are  ever  short  of  heads 
for  a sermon.  Show:  your  people  firstly,  secondly,  and 
thirdly,  what  the  text  does  not  mean,  and  then  after- 
wards you  can  go  back  and  show  them  what  it  does  mean. 
It  may  be  thought,  however,  that  one  such  a teacher  is 
enough,  and  that  what  was  tolerated  from  a learned 
doctor  would  be  scouted  in  a student  fresh  from  college. 
For  good,  sound,  massive,  sober  sense  in  commenting, 
who  can  excel  Gill  ? Very  seldom  does  he  allow  himself 
to  be  run  away  with  by  imagination,  except  now  and 
then  when  he  tries  to  open  up  a parable,  and  finds  a 


24 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


meaning  in  every  circumstance  and  minute  detail ; or 
when  he  falls  upon  a text  which  is  not  congenial  with 
his  creed,  and  hacks  and  hews  terribly  to  bring  the  word 
of  God  into  a more  systematic  shape.  Gill  is  the  Cory- 
phoeus  of  hyper-Calvinism,  hut  if  his  followers  never 
went  beyond  their  master,  they  would  not  go  very  far 
astray. 

I have  placed  next  to  Gill  in  my  library  Adam 
Clarke,*  but  as  I have  no  desire  to  have  my  rest  broken 
by  wars  among  the  authors,  I have  pladed  Doddridge 
between  them.  If  the  spirits  of  the  two  worthies  could 
descend  to  the  earth  in  the  same  mood  in  which  they 
departed,  no  one  house  would  be  able  to  hold  them. 
Adam  Clarke  is  the  great  annotator  of  our  Wesleyan 
friends  ; and  they  have  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  him, 
for  he  takes  rank  among  the  chief  of  expositors.  His  mind 
was  evidently  fascinated  by  the  singularities  of  learning, 
and  hence  his  commentary  is  rather  too  much  of  an  old 
curiosity  shop,  but  it  is  filled  with  valuable  rarities,  such 
as  none  but  a great  man  could  have  collected.  Like 
Gill,  he  is  one-sided,  only  in  the  opposite  direction  to  our 
friend  the  Baptist.  The  use  of  the  two  authors  may  help 
to  preserve  the  balance  of  your  judgments.  If  you  consid- 
er Clarke  wanting  in  unction,  do  not  read  him  for  savor 
but  for  criticism,  and  then  you  will  not  be  disappointed. 

* The  Holy  Bible,  containing  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 
The  text  carefully  printed  from  the  most  correct  copies  of  the 
present  Authorised  Translation,  including  the  Marginal  Readings 
and  Parallel  Texts.  With  a Commentary  and  Critical  Notes  ; 
designed  as  a help  to  a better  understanding  of  the  Sacred  Writ- 
ings. By  Adam  Clarke,  LL.  D.,  F.  S.  A„  &c  . A new  edition 
with  the  Author’s  final  correction.  London:  Printed  for  Thomas 
Tegg,  etc.  (7  volumes.) 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


25 


The  author  thought  that  lengthy  reflections  were 
rather  for  the  preacher  than  the  commentator,  and  hence 
it  was  not  a part  of  his  plan  to  write  such  observations 
as  those  which  endear  Matthew  Henry  to  the  million. 
If  you  have  a copy  of  Adam  Clarke,  and  exercise  discre- 
tion in  reading  it,  you  will  derive  immense  advantage 
from  it,  for  frequently  by  a sort  of  side-light  he  brings 
out  the  meaning  of  the  text  in  an  astonishingly  novel 
manner.  I do  not  wonder  that  Adam  Clarke  still  stands, 
notwithstanding  his  peculiarities,  a prince  among  com- 
mentators. I do  not  find  him  so  helpful  as  Gill,  but 
still,  from  his  side  of  the  question,  with  which  I have 
personally  no  sympathy,  he  is  an  important  writer,  and 
deserves  to  be  studied  by  every  reader  of  the  Scriptures. 
He  very  judiciously  says  of  Dr.  Gill,  “ He  was  a very 
learned  and  good  man,  but  has  often  lost  sight  of  his 
better  judgment  in  spiritualizing  the  text ; ” this  is  the 
very  verdict  which  we  pass  upon  himself,  only  altering 
the  last  sentence  a word  or  two  ; “He  has  often  lost 
sight  of  his  better  judgment  in  following  learned  singu- 
larities the  monkey,  instead  of  the  serpent,  tempting 
Eve,  is  a notable  instance. 

As  I am  paying  no  sort  of  attention  to  chronological 
order,  I shall  now  wander  back  to  old  Master  Mayer,* 

* A commentary  upon  tlie  whole  “ Old  Testament,”  added  to 
that  of  the  same  author  upon  the  whole  “ New  Testament,”  pub- 
lished many  years  before,  to  make  a complete  work  upon  the 
whole  Bible.  Wherein  the  divers  Translations  and  Expositions, 
Liter  all  and  Mysticall,  of  all  the  most  famous  Commentators,  both 
Ancient  and  Modern,  are  propounded,  examined,  and  judged  of, 
for  the  more  full  satisfaction  of  the  studious  reader  in  all  things, 
and  many  most  genuine  notions  inserted  for  edification  in  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  A work,  the  like  unto  which 
hath  never  yet  been  published  by  any  man,  yet  very  necessary, 


26 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


a rare  and  valuable  author.  I have  been  in  London  a long 
time  now,  but  I have  only  of  late  been  able  to  complete 
my  set.  The  first  volume  especially,  is  rare  in  the  ex- 
treme. The  six  volumes,  folio,  are  a more  judicious  and 
able  digest  of  former  commentators,  enriched  with  the 
author’s  own  notes,  forming  altogether  one  of  the  full- 
est and  best  of  learned  English  commentaries  ; not 
meant  for  popular  use,  but  invaluable  to  the  student. 
He  is  a link  between  the  modern  school,  at  the  head  of 
which  I put  Poole  and  Henry,  and  the  older  school  who 
mostly  wrote  in  Latin,  and  were  tinctured  with  the  con- 
ceits of  those  schoolmen  who  gathered  like  flies  around 
the  corpse  of  Aristotle.  lie  appears  to  have  written 
before  Diodati  and  Trapp,  but  lacked  opportunity  to 
publish.  I fear  he  will  be  forgotten,  as  there  is  but  little 
prospect  of  the  republication  of  so  diffuse,  and  perhaps 
heavy,  an  author.  He  is  a very  Alp  of  learning,  but  cold 
and  lacking  in  spirituality,  hence  his  lack  of  popularity. 

In  1653,  Arthur  Jackson,*  Preacher  of  God’s  Word 
in  Wood  Street,  London,  issued  four  volumes  upon  the 
Old  Testament,  which  appear  to  have  been  the  result  of 

not  only  for  students  in  divinity,  but  also  for  every  Christian  that 
loveth  the  knowledge  of  divine  things,  or  humane,  whereof  this 
comment  is  also  full,  &c.  By  John  Mayer,  Doctor  of  Divinity. 
London,  mdcliti. 

* A help  for  the  understanding  of  the  Holy  Scripture.  Intended 
chiefly  for  the  assistance  and  information  of  those  that  use  con- 
stantly every  day  to  read  some  part  of  the  Bible,  and  would  gladly 
always  understand  what  they  read  if  they  had  some  man  to  help 
them.  The  first  part.  Containing  certain  short  notes  of  exposi- 
tion upon  the  five  books  of  Moses,  etc.  By  Arthur  Jackson, 
preacher  of  God’s  Word  in  Wood  Street,  London.  Anno  Dom. 
MDCCLIII. 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


27 


liis  pulpit  expositions  to  his  people.  Valuable  liis  works 
would  be  if  there  were  no  better,  but  they  are  not  com- 
parable to  others  already  and  afterward  mentioned. 
You  can  do  without  him,  but  he  is  a reputable  author. 
Far  more  useful  is  Ness’s  History  and  Mystery  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament,*  a grand  repository  of  quaint 
remarks  upon  the  historical  books  of  Scripture.  You 
will  find  it  contained  in  four  thin  folio  volumes,  and  you 
will  have  a treasure  if  you  procure  it. 

Need  I commend  Bishop  Hall’s  Contemplations  f 
to  your  affectionate  attention  ? What  wit ! What  sound 
sense  ! What  concealed  learning  ! His  style  is  as  pithy 
and  witty  as  that  of  Thomas  Fuller,  and  it  has  a sacred 
unction  about  it  to  which  Fuller  has  no  pretension. 

Haak’s  Annotations  J come  to  us  as  the  offspring 

* A Complete  History  and  Mystery  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment, logically  discussed,  and  theologically  improved.  In  three 
distinct  volumes.  The  first  beginning  at  the  Creation  of  the 
World,  and  ending  at  Moses.  The  second  continuing  the  History 
from  Joshua  till  the  Birth  of  Christ.  The  third  from  the  Birth  of 
Christ,  to  the  Death  of  the  last  and  longest  living  Apostle,  John 
the  Divine.  The  like  undertaking  (in  such  a manner  and  method) 
being  never  attempted  before.  By  Mr.  Christopher  Ness,  min- 
ister of  the  gospel  in  London.  1690.  3 vols.,  thin  folio. 

f Contemplations  on  the  historical  passages  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament.  By  the  right  Rev.  Joseph  Hall,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of 
Norwich.  Numerous  editions  ; the  one  before  us  has  “ a memoir 
of  the  author,  by  James  Hamilton,  M.B.S.,”  and  was  published 
by  Mr.  Nelson  of  Edinburgh. 

\ The  Dutch  Annotations  upon  the  whole  Bible ; or,  all  the 
Holy  Canonical  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  together 
with,  and  according  to,  their  own  translation  of  all  the  text : as 
both  the  one  and  the  other  were  ordered  and  appointed  by  the 
Synod  of  Dort,  1618,  and  published  by  authority,  1637.  Now 


28 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


of  the  famous  Synod  of  Dort,  and  the  Westminster 
Annotations  * as  the  production  of  a still  more  vener- 
able assembly ; but  if,  with  my  hat  off,  bowing  pro- 
foundly to  those  august  conclaves  of  master  minds,  I may 
venture  to  say  so,  I would  observe  that  they  furnish  an- 
other instance  that  committees  seldom  equal  the  labors  of 
individuals.  The  notes  are  too  short  and  fragmentary  to 
be  of  any  great  value.  The  volumes  are  a heavy  investment. 

Among  entire  commentators  of  modern  date,  a high 
place  is  usually  awarded  to  Thomas  Scott,!  and  I shall 
not  dispute  his  right  to  it.  He  is  the  expositor  of  evan- 
gelical Episcopalians,  even  as  Adam  Clarke  is  the  proph- 
et of  the  Wesleyans,  but  to  me  he  has  seldom  given  a 
thought,  and  I have  almost  discontinued  consulting  him. 
The  very  first  money  I ever  received  for  pulpit  services 
in  London  was  invested  in  Thomas  Scott,  and  I neither 
regretted  the  investment  nor  became  exhilarated  thereby. 
His  work  has  always  been  popular,  is  very  judicious, 

faithfully  communicated  to  the  use  of  Great  Britain,  in  English, 
etc.  By  Theodore  Haak,  Esq.  London,  1657.  2 volumes  folio. 

* Annotations  upon  all  the  Books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ments. This  third,  above  the  first  and  second,  edition  so  enlarged, 
as  they  make  an  entire  commentary  on  the  sacred  Scriptures,  the 
like  never  before  published  in  English.  Wherein  the  text  is  ex- 
plained, doubts  resolved,  Scriptures  paralleled,  and  various  read- 
ings observed.  By  the  labor  of  certain  learned  divines,  thereunto 
appointed,  and  therein  employed,  as  is  expressed  in  the  preface. 
London,  1657. 

f The  Holy  Bible,  containing  the  Old  and  New  Testaments, 
according  to  the  authorized  version,  with  explanatory  notes,  prac- 
tical observations,  and  copious  marginal  references.  By  Thomas 
Scott,  rector  of  Ashton  Sandford,  Bucks.  A new  edition,  with 
the  author’s  last  corrections  and  improvements,  with  ten  maps. 
London  : L.  B.  Seeley  and  Son.  1837. 


A CIIAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


29 


thoroughly  sound  and  gracious ; but  for  suggestiveness 
and  pith  is  not  comparable  to  Matthew  Henry.  I know 
I am  talking  heresy,  but  I cannot  help  saying  that  for  a 
minister’s  use,  Scott  is  mere  milk  and  water — good  and 
trustworthy,  but  not  solid  enough  in  matter  for  full- 
grown  men.  In  the  family,  Scott  will  hold  his  place, 
but  in  the  study  you  want  condensed  thought,  and  this 
you  must  look  for  elsewhere. 

To  all  young  men  of  light  purses  let  me  recommend 
The  Tract  Society’s  Commentary,*  in  six  volumes, 
which  contains  the  marrow  of  Henry  and  Scott,  with 
notes  from  a hundred  other  authors.  It  is  well  executed, 
and  for  poor  men  a great  godsend.  I believe  the  Soci- 
ety has  some  special  arrangement  for  poor  students,  that 
they  may  have  these  volumes  at  the  cheapest  rate. 

Gentlemen,  if  you  want  something  full  of  marrow  and 
fatness,  cheering  to  your  own  hearts  by  way  of  comment, 
and  likely  to  help  you  in  giving  to  your  hearers  rich  ex- 
positions, buy  Dr.  Hawker’s  Poor  Man’s  Commen- 
tary, f Dr.  Hawker  was  the  very  least  of  commenta- 
tors in  the  matter  of  criticism  ; he  had  no  critical  capa- 
city, and  no  ability  whatever  as  an  interpreter  of  the 
letter  ; but  he  sees  Jesus , and  that  is  a sacred  gift  which 
is  most  precious  whether  the  owner  be  a critic  or  no. 

* The  Holy  Bible ; the  text  according  to  the  authorized  ver- 
sion ; and  a Commentary  from  Henry  and  Scott,  with  numerous 
Observations  and  Notes  from  other  Authors : also,  the  Marginal 
References,  Maps  of  the  Countries  mentioned  in  Scripture,  and 
various  useful  Tables.  London  : The  Religious  Tract  Society.  (0 
volumes.) 

f The  Poor  Man’s  Commentary  on  the  Bible.  By  Robert 
Hawker,  D.  D.,  Vicar  of  Charles  Plymouth,  1822.  (3  vols.  folio, 
or  10  vols.  8vo.) 


30 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


It  is  to  be  confessed  that  he  occasionally  sees  Jesus 
where  Jesus  is  not  legitimately  to  be  seen.  He  allows 
his  reason  to  be  mastered  by  his  affections,  which,  vice 
as  it  is,  is  not  the  worst  fault  in  the  world.  There  is 
always  such  a savor  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  Dr. 
Hawker  that  you  cannot  read  him  without  profit.  He 
has  the  peculiar  idea  that  Christ  is  in  every  Psalm,  and 
this  often  leads  him  totally  astray,  because  he  attributes 
expressions  to  the  Saviour  which  really  shock  the  holy 
mind  to  imagine  our  Lord’s  using.  However,  not  as  a 
substantial  dish,  but  as  a condiment,  place  the  Plymouth 
vicar’s  work  on  the  table.  His  writing  is  all  sugar,  and 
you  will  know  how  to  use  it,  not  devouring  it  in  lumps, 
but  using  it  to  flavor  other  things. 

“ Albert  Barnes,”  say  you,  “what  do  you  think 
of  Albert  Barnes  ?”  Albert  Barnes  is  a learned  and 
able  divine,  but  his  productions  are  unequal  in  value, 
the  gospels  are  of  comparatively  little  worth,  but  his 
other  comments  are  extremely  useful  for  Sunday-school 
teachers  and  persons  with  a narrow  range  of  reading, 
endowed  with  enough  good  sense  to  discriminate  be- 
tween good  and  evil.  If  a controversial  eye  had  been 
turned  upon  Barnes’s  Notes  years  ago,  and  his  inaccura- 
cies shown  up  by  some  unsparing  hand,  he  would  never 
have  had  the  popularity  which  at  one  time  set  rival 
publishers  advertising  him  in  every  direction.  His  Old 
Testament  volumes  are  to  be  greatly  commended  as 
learned  and  laborious,  and  the  epistles  are  useful  as  a 
valuable  collection  of  the  various  opinions  of  learned 
men.  Placed  by  the  side  of  the  great  masters,  Barnes  is 
a lesser  light,  but  taking  his  work  for  what  it  is  and 
professes  to  be,  no  minister  can  afford  to  be  without  it. 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


31 


and  this  is  no  small  praise  for  Works  which  were  only 
intended  for  Sunday-school  teachers.* 

Upon  the  New  Testament  Doddrige’s  Expositor  f 
is  worthy  of  a far  more  extensive  reading  than  is  nowa- 
days accorded  to  it.  It  is  in  all  the  form  of  a paraphrase, 
with  the  text  in  italics  ; a mode  of  treatment  far  from 
satisfactory  as  a rule,  but  exceedingly  well  carried  out  in 
this  instance.  The  notes  are  very  good,  and  reveal  the 
thorough  scholar.  Our  authorized  version  is  placed  in 
the  margin,  and  a new  translation  in  the  paraphrase. 
The  four  evangelists  are  thrown  into  a harmony,  a plan 
which  has  its  advantages  but  is  not  without  its  evils. 
The  practical  improvements  at  the  end  of  each  chapter 
generally  consist  of  pressing  exhortations  and  devout 
meditations,  suggested  by  the  matter  under  discussion. 
It  is  sadly  indicative  of  the  Socinianism  of  the  age  in 
which  the  good  man  lived,  that  he  feels  called  upon  to 
apologize  for  the  evangelical  strain  in  which  he  has 
written.  He  appears  to  have  barely  finished  this  work 

* There  are  several  English  editions  of  Barnes’s  Notes ; the  one 
before  us  is  thus  advertised  : “ The  Rev.  Albert  Barnes’s  Notes 
(Explanatory  and  Practical),  designed  for  the  Heads  of  Families, 
Students,  Bible  Classes,  and  Sunday  Schools.  Edited,  and  care- 
fully revised,  by  the  Rev.  John  Cumming,  D.  D.,  Minister  of  the 
Scotch  Church,  Crown  Court.”  The  Notes  on  the  Entire  New 
Testament,  in  11  vols.,  on  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  in  3 vols.,  on  the 
Book  of  Job,  in  2 vols.,  on  the  Book  of  Daniel  in  2 vols.,  or  in  11 
double  vols.  The  “ Notes  on  the  book  of  Psalms  ” are  now  being 
issued  in  3 vols.  by  Messrs.  Gall  and  lnglis. 

f The  Family  Expositor;  or  a Paraphrase  and  Version  of  the 
New  Testament ; with  Critical  Notes,  and  a Practical  Improve- 
ment of  each  Section.  By  P.  Doddridge,  D.  D.  To  which  is 
prefixed  a Life  of  the  Author,  By  Andrew  Kippis,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S., 
and  S.  A.  London:  Longman,  Orme,  and  Co.,  1840.  (4  vols. 
8vo.) 


32 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


in  shorthand  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  the  later 
books  were  transcribed  under  the  care  of  Job  Orton. 
No  Life  Insurance  Society  should  accept  the  proposals 
of  a commentator  on  the  whole  of  either  Testament,  for 
it  seems  to  be  the  rule  that  such  students  of  the  Word 
should  be  taken  up  to  their  reward  before  their  task  is 
quite  completed. 

Then,  of  course,  gentlemen,  you  will  economise 
rigidly  until  you  have  accumulated  funds  to  purchase 
Kitto’s  Pictorial  Bible.  You  mean  to  take  that 
goodly  freight  on  board  before  you  launch  upon  the  sea 
of  married  life.  As  you  cannot  visit  the  Holy  Land,  it 
is  well  for  you  that  there  is  a work  like  the  Pictorial 
Bible,  in  which  the  notes  of  the  most  observant  travellers 
are  arranged  under  the  texts  which  they  illustrate. 
For  the  geography,  zoology,  botany,  and  manners  and 
customs  of  Palestine,  this  will  be  your  counsellor  and 
guide.  Add  to  this  noble  comment,  which  is  sold  at  a 
surprisingly  low  price,  the  eight  volumes  of  Kitto’s 
Daily  Readings.*  They  are  not  exactly  a commen- 
tary, but  what  marvellous  expositions  you  have  there ! 
You  have  reading  more  interesting  than  any  novel  that 
was  ever  written,  and  as  instructive  as  the  heaviest  theol- 
ogy. The  matter  is  quite  attractive  and  fascinating, 
and  yet  so  weighty,  that  the  man  who  shall  study  those 
eight  volumes  thoroughly,  will  not  fail  to  read  his  Bible 
intelligently  and  with  growing  interest. 

* Daily  Bible  Illustrations,  being  Original  Readings  for  a 
Year,  on  subjects  from  Sacred  History,  Biography,  Antiquities, 
and  Theology.  Especially  designed  for  the  family  circle.  By 
JonN  Kitto,  D.  D.,  F.  S.A.  8 volumes,  small  8vo.  (A  New  An- 
notated edition  has  just  been  brought  out  by  Messrs.  Oliphant  of 
Edinburgh.) 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


33 


The  Gnomon  of  the  New  Testament,  by  John  Al- 
bert Bengel,*  is  the  scholar’s  delight.  He  selected  the 
title  as  modest  and  appropriate,  intending  it  in  the  sense 
of  a pointer  or  indicator,  like  the  sun-dial ; his  aim  being 
to  point  out  or  indicate  the  full  force  and  meaning  of 
the  words  and  sentences  of  the  New  Testament.  He 
endeavors  to  let  the  text  itself  cast  its  shadow  on  his 
page,  believing  with  Luther  that  “ the  science  of  theol- 
ogy is  nothing  else  but  grammar  exercised  on  the  words 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.”  The  editor  of  the  translation  pub- 
lished by  Messrs.  Clarke,  says  in  his  preface,  “ It  is 
quite  superfluous  to  write  in  praise  of  the  Gnomon  of 
Bengel.  Ever  since  the  year  in  which  it  was  first  pub- 
lished, A.  D.  1742,  up  to  the  present  time,  it  has  been 
growing  in  estimation,  and  has  been  more  and  more 
widely  circulated  among  the  scholars  of  all  countries. 
Though  modern  criticism  has  furnished  many  valuable 
additions  to  our  materials  for  New  Testament  exegesis, 
yet  in  some  respects,  Bengel  stands  out  still  ( facile  'prin- 
cess 9 among  all  who  have  labored,  or  who  as  yet  labor 
in  that  important  field.  He  is  unrivalled  in  felicitous 
brevity,  combined  with  what  seldom  accompanies  that 
excellence,  namely,  perspicuity.  Terse,  weighty,  and 
suggestive,  he  often,  as  a modern  writer  observes,  ‘ con- 
denses more  matter  into  a line,  than  can  be  extracted 
from  pages  of  other  writers.’” “ In  the  pas- 

sages which  form  the  subject  of  controversy  between 
Calvinists  and  Arminians,  Bengel  takes  the  view  adopted 

* Gnomon  of  the  New  Testament,  by  John  Albert  Bengel. 
Now  first  translated  into  English,  with  original  notes  explanatory 
and  illustrative.  Revised  and  edited  by  Rev.  Andrew  R.  Faus- 
set,  M.  A.,  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  Edinburgh;  T.  & T. 
Clarke,  39  George-street,  18G3.  (5  vols.  demy  8vo.  ; Subscription 
31s.  Gd.) 


34 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


by  the  latter,  and  in  this  respect  I do  not  concur  with 
him.  But  whilst  he  thus  gives  an  undue  prominence, 
as  it  would  seem  to  me,  to  the  responsibility  and  free- 
dom of  man  in  these  passages,  yet,  in  the  general  tenor 
of  his  work,  there  breathe  such  a holy  reverence  for 
God’s  sovereignty,  and  such  spiritual  unction,  that  the 
most  extreme  Calvinist  would,  for  the  most  part,  be  un- 
able to  discover  to  what  section  of  opinions  he  attached 
himself,  and  as  to  the  controverted  passages  would  feel 
inclined  to  say,  4 Quum  talis  sis , utinam  noster  esses.’  ” 
Men  with  a dislike  for  thinking  had  better  not  pur- 
chase the  five  precious  volumes,  for  they  will  be  of  little 
use  to  them  ; but  men  who  love  brain- work  will  find 
fine  exercise  in  spelling  out  the  deep  meaning  of  Bengel’s 
excessively  terse  sentences.  His  principles  of  interpre- 
tation stated  in  his  “ Essay  on  the  Right  Way  of  Han- 
dling Divine  Subjects,”  are  such  as  will  make  the  lover 
of  God’s  word  feel  safe  in  his  hands  : “ Put  nothing  into 
the  Scriptures,  but  draw  every  thing  from  them,  and 
suffer  nothing  to  remain  hidden,  that  is  really  in  them.” 
“ Though  each  inspired  writer  has  his  own  manner  and 
style,  one  and  the  same  Spirit  breathes  through  all, 
one  grand  idea  pervades  all.”  “ Every  divine  communi- 
cation carries  (like  the  diamond)  its  own  light  with  it, 
thus  showing  whence  it  comes ; no  touchstone  is  re- 
quired to  discriminate  it.”  “The  true  commentator 
will  fasten  his  primary  attention  on  the  letter  (literal 
meaning),  but  never  forget  that  the  Spirit  must  equally 
accompany  him  ; at  the  same  time  we  must  never  devise 
a more  spiritual  meaning  for  Scripture  passages  than 
the  Holy  Spirit  intended.”  “The  historical  matters  of 
Scripture,  both  narrative  and  prophecy,  constitute  as  it 
were  the  bones  of  its  system,  whereas  the  spiritual  mat- 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


35 


ters  are  as  its  muscles,  blood-vessels,  and  nerves.  As 
the  bones  arc  necessary  to  the  human  system,  so  Scrip- 
ture must  have  its  historical  matters.  The  expositor 
who  nullifies  the  historical  ground-work  of  Scripture 
for  the  sake  of  finding  only  spiritual  truths  everywhere, 
brings  death  on  all  correct  interpretations.  Those  ex- 
positions are  the  safest  which  keep  closest  to  the  text.” 

His  idea  of  the  true  mode  of  dying  touched  me  much 
when  I first  saw  it.  He  declared  that  he  would  make  no 
spiritual  parade  of  his  last  hours,  but  if  possible  continue 
at  his  usual  works,  and  depart  this  life  as  a person  in 
the  midst  of  business  leaves  the  room  to  attend  to  a knock 
at  the  door.  Accordingly  he  was  occupied  with  the  cor- 
rection of  his  proof-sheets  as  at  other  times,  and  the  last 
messenger  summoned  him  to  his  rest  while  his  hands 
were  full.  This  reveals  a calm,  well-balanced  mind,  and 
unveils  many  of  those  singular  characteristics  which 
enabled  him  to  become  the  laborious  recensor  of  the 
various  MSS.,  and  the  pioneer  of  true  Biblical  criticism. 

The  Critical  English  Testament.* — A Criti- 
cal Hew  Testament,  so  compiled  as  to  enable  a reader, 
unacquainted  with  Greek,  to  ascertain  the  exact  English 
force  and  meaning  of  the  language  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  to  appreciate  the  latest  results  of  modern 
criticism.”  Such  is  the  professed  aim  of  this  commen- 
tary, and  the  compilers  have  very  fairly  carried  out  their 
intentions.  The  whole  of  Bengel’s  Gnomon  is  bodily 
transferred  into  the  work,  and  as  one  hundred  and 

* Tiie  Critical  English  Testamemt. — Being  an  adaption 
of  Bengel’s  Gnomon,  with  numerous  Notes,  allowing  Precise 
Results  of  Modern  Criticism  and  Exegesis.  Edited  by  Rev.  W.  L. 
Blackley,  M.  A.,  and  Rev.  James  Hawes,  M.  A.  Published  by 
Messrs.  Isbister  and  Co.,  Ludgate  Hill,  London.  (Three  vols,  18s.) 


36 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


twenty  years  have  elapsed  since  the  first  issue  of  that 
book,  it  may  be  supposed  that  much  has  since  been 
added  to  the  wealth  of  Scripture  exposition  ; the  sub- 
stance of  this  has  been  incorporated  in  brackets,  so  as  to 
bring  it  down  to  the  present  advanced  state  of  knowledge. 
We  strongly  advise  the  purchase  of  this  book,  as  it  is 
multum  in parvo,  and  will  well  repay  an  attentive  peru- 
sal. Tischendorf  and  Alford  have  contributed  largely, 
with  other  German  and  English  critics,  to  make  this 
one  of  the  most  lucid  and  concise  commentaries  on  the 
text  and  teachings  of  the  New  Testament. 

Alford’s  Greek  Testament,  * “ for  the  use  of 
Theological  Students  and  Ministers,”  is  an  invaluable 
aid  to  the  critical  study  of  the  text  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. You  will  find  in  it  the  ripened  results  of  a 
matured  scholarship,  the  harvesting  of  a judgment,  gen- 
erally highly  impartial,  always  worthy  of  respect,  which 
has  gleaned  from  the  most  important  fields  of  Biblical 
research,  both  modern  and  ancient,  at  home  and  abroad. 
You  will  not  look  here  for  any  spirituality  of  thought 
or  tenderness  of  feeling  ; you  will  find  the  learned  Dean 
does  not  forget  to  do  full  justice  to  his  own  views,  and 
is  quite  able  to  express  himself  vigorously  against  his 
opponents  ; but  for  what  it  professes  to  be,  it  is  an  ex- 
ceedingly able  and  successful  work.  The  later  issues  are 

* Tlie  Greek  Testament ; with  a Critically  Revised  Text ; a 
Digest  of  various  Readings  ; Marginal  References  to  Verbal  and 
Idiomatic  Usage ; Prolegomena : and  a Critical  and  Exegetical 
Commentary.  For  the  use  of  Theological  Students  and  Ministers. 
By  Henry  Alford,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury.  In  four  vol- 
umes. London:  Rivingtons,  Waterloo  Place;  and  Deighton, 
Bell,  and  Co.,  Cambridge.  1861. 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


37 


by  far  the  most  desirable,  as  the  author  has  considerably 
revised  the  work  in  the  fourth  edition. 

What  I have  said  of  his  Greek  Testament  applies 
equally  to  Alford’s  New  Testament  for  English 
Readers,*  which  is  also  a standard  work. 

I must  confess  also  a very  tender  side  towards  Bloom- 
field’s Greek  Testament,  f and  I am  singular  enough 
to  prefer  it  in  some  respects  to  Alford  ; at  least,  I have 
got  more  out  of  it  on  some  passages,  and  I think  it  does 
not  deserve  to  be  regarded  as  superseded. 

The  Commentary  by  Patrick,  Lowth,  Arnald, 
Whitby,  and  Lowman,J  is  said,  by  Darling,  to  be  of 
standard  authority,  but  you  may  do  without  it  with  less 
loss  than  in  the  case  of  several  others  I have  mentioned. 
The  authors  were  men  of  great  learning,  their  associa- 
tion in  one  commentary  is  remarkable,  and  their  joint 
production  has  a place  in  all  complete  libraries. 

Dr.  Wordsworth’s  Holy  Bible,  with  Notes  and 
Introductions,  ||  is  a valuable  addition  to  our  stores, 

* The  Greek  Testament,  with  English  Notes,  Critical,  Philo- 
logical, and  Explanatory  ; partly  selected  and  arranged  from  the 
best  Commentators,  ancient  and  modern,  but  chiefly  original. 
Fourth  edition,  revised.  2 vols.  8vo.  London.  1841. 

f A Critical  Commentary  and  Paraphrase  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament,  and  the  Apocrypha.  By  Patrick,  Lowth,  Arnald, 
Whitby,  and  Lowman.  A new  edition,  &c.,  in  4 vols.  William 
Tegg  and  Co. 

% The  New  Testament  for  English  Readers  ; containing  the 
Authorized  Version,  with  a revised  English  Text ; Marginal  Refer- 
ences ; and  a Critical  and  Explanatory  Commentary  ; By  Henry 
Alford,  D.  D.,  late  Dean  of  Canterbury.  New  edition.  4 vols. 
8 vo.  54s.  6d.  London,  Oxford,  and  Cambridge.  Rivingtons,  and 
G.  Bell  and  Sons,  1872. 

| The  Holy  Bible ; with  Notes  and  Introductions  [Old  Testa- 


38 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


but  it  is  rendered  much  more  bulky  and  expensive  than 
it  needed  to  be  by  the  printing  of  the  text  at  large.  It 
gives  many  precious  hints,  and  much  of  the  choicest 
thought  of  mediaeval  writers,  besides  suggesting  catch- 
words and  showing  connections  between  various  passa- 
ges, although  it  is  occasionally  marred  by  the  character- 
istic weaknesses  of  the  Bishop,  and  has  here  and  there 
foolishnesses  at  which  one  cannot  but  smile,  it  is  a great 
work,  such  as  only  an  eminent  scholar  could  have  pro- 
duced. 

I am  not  so  enamored  of  the  German  writers  as  cer- 
tain of  my  brethren  appear  to  be,  for  they  are  generally 
cold  and  hard,  and  unspiritual. ' As  Dr.  Graham  says, 
“there  are  about  twenty  or  thirty  names  in  the  literary 
world  who  have  gained  a conspicuous  place  in  theologi- 
cal circles  ; and  in  German  commentaries  these  are  per- 
petually introduced.  In  some  of  them  the  bulk  of  the 
work  is  made  up  of  these  authoritative  names,  and  quo- 
tations from  their  works.  This  gives  their  writings  the 
appearance  of  prodigious  learning  and  research.  Every 
page  is  bristling  with  hard  words  and  strange  languages, 
and  the  eye  of  the  common  reader  is  terrified  at  the  very 
appearance,  as  the  powerful  citizen  is  at  the  pointed 
cannon  of  a fortress.”  I do,  however,  greatly  prize  the 
series  lately  produced  under  the  presidency  of  Dr. 
Lange.*  These  volumes  are  not  all  of  equal  value, 

ment  only].  6 vols.  imp.  8vo.  £6.— The  New  Testament  in  the 
original  Greek  ; with  Notes,  Introductions,  and  Indexes.  By 
Chr.  Wordsworth,  D.  I).,  Bishop  of  Lincoln.  2 vols,  imp.  8vo. 
£3.  London,  Oxford,  and  Cambridge.  Rivingtons.  1872,  etc. 

* A Commentary  on  the  Holy  Scriptures,  Critical,  Doctrinal, 
and  Ilomiletical,  with  special  reference  to  Ministers  and  Students, 
by  Peter  John  Lange,  D.  D.,  in  connection  with  a number  of  emi- 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


39 


but  as  a whole,  they  are  a grand  addition  to  our  stores. 
The  American  translators  have  added  considerably  to 
the  German  work,  and  in  some  cases  these  additions  are 
more  valuable  than  the  original  matter.  For  homileti- 
cal  purposes  these  volumes  are  so  many  hills  of  gold,  but, 
alas,  there  is  dross  also,  for  Baptismal  Begeneration  and 
other  grave  errors  occur. 

The  Speaker’s  Commentary  * is  issued  (August, 
1875)  as  far  as  the  Lamentations.  It  is  costly,  too 
costly  for  your  pockets,  and  I am  therefore  somewhat 
the  less  sorry  to  add  that  it  is  not  what  I hoped  it  would 
be.  Of  course  it  is  a great  work,  and  contains  much 
which  tends  to  illustrate  the  text ; but  if  you  had  it 
you  would  not  turn  to  it  for  spiritual  food,  or  for  fruit- 
ful suggestion,  or  if  you  did  so,  you  would  be  disap- 
pointed. The  object  of  the  work  is  to  help  the  general 
reader  to  know  what  the  Scriptures  really  say  and  mean, 
and  to  remove  some  of  the  difficulties.  It  keeps  to  its 
design  and  in  a measure  accomplishes  it. 

I must  also  add  to  the  list  A Commentary,  critical, 

rent  European  divines.  Translated  from  the  German,  and  edited, 
with  additions,  by  Philip  Schaff,  D.  D.,  in  connection  with 
American  scholars  of  various  Evangelical  denominations.  Imperial 
8vo.  Edinburgh,  T.  &.  T.  Clarke.  1868,  etc.  [18  volumes,  price 
21s.  each,  or  to  subscribers  15s.] 

* The  Holy  Bible,  according  to  the  Authorized  Version  (A.  D. 
1611),  with  an  Explanatory  and  Critical  Commentary,  and  a Revis- 
ion of  the  Translation  by  Bishops  and  other  Clergy  of  the  Angeli- 
can  Church.  Edited  by  F.  C.  Cook,  M.  A.,  Canon  of  Exeter, 
Preacher  at  Lincoln’s  inn,  and  Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  the  Queen. 
Medium  8vo.  London,  John  Murray.  1871,  etc.  [5  volumes  pub- 
lished. Genesis  to  Lamentations,  Vol.  1 in  2 parts,  30s.  Vols.  H, 
and  III,  36s.  Vol.  IV,  24s.  Vol.  V,20s.] 


40 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


EXPERIMENTAL,  AND  PRACTICAL,  ON  THE  OLD  AND 

New  Testaments.*  Of  this  I have  a very  high  opin- 
ion. It  is  the  joint  work  of  Mr.  Jamieson,  A.  R.  Faus- 
set,  and  Dr.  David  Brown.  It  is  to  some  extent  a com- 
pilation and  condensation  of  other  men’s  thoughts,  but 
it  is  sufficiently  original  to  claim  a place  in  every  minis- 
ter’s library  ; indeed  it  contains  so  great  a variety  of 
information  that  if  a man  had  no  other  exposition  he 
would  find  himself  at  no  great  loss  if  he  possessed  this 
and  used  it  diligently. 

Several  other  works  I omit,  not  because  they  are  worth- 
less, or  unknown  to  me,  but  because  for  scant  purses 
the  best  will  be  best.  I must  not  omit  upon  the  New 
Testament  the  goodly  volume  of  Burkitt.  f If  you  can 
get  him  cheap,  buy  him.  He  is  the  celebrated  “ Rec- 
tor” whom  Keacli  “ rectified”  in  the  matter  of  infant 
baptism.  Burkitt  is  somewhat  pithy,  and  for  a modern 
rather  rich  and  racy,  but  he  is  far  from  deep,  and  is 
frequently  common-place.  I liked  him  well  enough  till 
I had  read  abler  works  and  grown  older.  Some  books 
grow  upon  us  as  we  read  and  re-read  them,  but  Burkitt 
does  not.  Yet  so  far  from  depreciating  the  good  man,  I 

* A Commentary,  Critical,  Experimental,  and  Practical,  on  tlie 
Old  and  New  Testaments.  By  the  Rev.  Robert  Jamieson,  D.  D., 
St.  Paul’s,  Glasgow  ; Rev.  A.  R.  Fausset,  A.  M.,  St.  Cuthbert’s, 
York  ; and  the  Rev.  David  Brown,  D.  D.,  Professor  of  Theology, 
Aberdeen.  6 vols.  medium  8vo.  £3  12s. ; or  separately  at  14s. 
each  vol.  London,  Glasgow,  and  Edinburgh.  W.  Collins,  Sons, 
& Co.  1871. 

\ Expository  Notes,  with  Practical  Observations,  on  the  New 
Testament  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  wherein,  etc. 
Endeavored  by  William  Burkitt,  M.A.  Late  Vicar  and  Lec- 
turer of  Dedham,  in  Essex.  (Numerous  editions,  folio  and  quarto.) 


A CHAT  ABOUT  COMMENTARIES. 


41 


should  be  sorry  to  have  missed  his  acquaintance,  and 
would  bespeak  for  him  your  attentive  perusal. 

The  best  commentators,  after  all,  are  those  who  have 
written  upon  only  one  book.  Few  men  can  comment 
eminently  well  upon  the  whole  Bible  ; there  are  sure  to 
be  some  weak  points  in  colossal  works  ; prolixity  in  so 
vast  an  undertaking  is  natural,  and  dulness  follows  at 
its  heels — but  a life  devoted  to  one  of  the  inspired  vol- 
umes of  our  priceless  Bible  must  surely  yield  a noble 
result.  If  I find  myself  able  to  do  so,  at  some  future 
time  I will  introduce  you  to  a selection  of  the  great 
one-book  writers.  For  the  present  this  much  must 
suffice. 


LECTURE  II. 


ON  COMMENTING. 

Having  introduced  you  to  tlie  commentators,  I must 
now  press  upon  you  one  of  the  most  practical  uses  of 
them,  namely,  your  own  public  commenting  upon  the 
Scriptures  read  during  divine  service.  Preaching  in  the 
olden  time  consisted  very  much  more  of  exposition  than 
it  does  now.  I suppose  that  the  sermons  of  the  primi- 
tive Christians  were  for  the  most  part  expositions  of 
lengthy  passages  of  the  Old  Testament ; and  when  copies 
of  gospels,  and  the  epistles  of  Paul,  had  become  accessi- 
ble to  the  churches,  the  chief  work  of  the  preacher  would 
be  to  press  home  the  apostolical  teachings  by  deliv- 
ering an  address,  the  back-bone  of  which  would  be  a 
complete  passage  of  Scripture  : there  would  probably  be 
but  faint  traces  of  divisions,  heads  and  points,  such  as 
we  employ  in  modern  discoursing,  but  the  teacher  would 
follow  the  run  of  the  passage  which  was  open  before 
him,  commenting  as  he  read.  I suppose  this  to  have 
been  the  case,  because  some  of  the  early  Christian  modes 
of  worship  were  founded  very  much  upon  that  of  the 
synagogue.  I say  some  of  the  modes,  since  I suppose 
that  as  the  Lord  Jesus  left  his  disciples  free  from  rubrics 
and  liturgies,  each  church  worshipped  according  to  the 
working  of  the  free  Spirit  among  them ; one  with  the 
open  meeting  of  the  Corinthians,  and  another  with  a 
presiding  minister,  and  a third,  with  a mixture  of  the 


ON  COMMENTING. 


43 


two  methods.  In  the  synagogue,  it  was  the  rule  of  the 
Eabbis  that  never  less  than  twenty-two  verses  of  the  law 
should  be  read  at  one  time,  and  the  preaching  consisted 
of  notes  upon  a passage  of  that  length.  Such  a rule 
would  be  a mere  superstition  if  we  were  slavishly  bound 
by  it,  for  the  present  plan  of  preaching  from  short  texts, 
together  with  the  great  neglect  of  commenting  publicly 
upon  the  word  is  very  unsatisfactory.  We  cannot  expect 
to  deliver  much  of  the  teaching  of  Holy  Scripture  by 
picking  out  verse  by  verse,  and  holding  these  up  at  ran- 
dom. The  process  resembles  that  of  showing  a house 
by  exhibiting  separate  bricks.  It  would  be  an  astound- 
ing absurdity  if  our  friends  used  our  private  letters  in 
this  fashion,  and  interpreted  them  by  short  sentences 
disconnected  and  taken  away  from  the  context.  Such 
expositors  would  make  us  out  to  say  in  every  letter  all 
we  ever  thought  of,  and  a great  many  things  besides  far 
enough  from  our  minds ; while  the  real  intent  of  our 
epistles  would  probably  escape  attention.  Nowadays 
since  expository  preaching  is  not  so  common  as  it  ought 
to  be,  there  is  the  more  necessity  for  our  commenting 
during  the  time  of  our  reading  the  Scriptures.  Since 
topical  preaching,  hortatory  preaching,  experimental 
preaching,  and  so  on — all  exceedingly  useful  in  their 
way — have  almost  pushed  proper  expository  preachings 
out  of  place,  there  is  the  more  need  that  we  should, 
when  we  read  passages  of  Holy  Writ,  habitually  give 
running  comments  upon  them. 

I support  my  opinion  with  this  reason,  that  the  pub- 
lic reading  of  the  abstruser  parts  of  Scripture  is  of  ex- 
ceedingly little  use  to  the  majority  of  the  people  listening. 
I can  recollect  hearing  in  my  younger  days  long  passa- 
ges out  of  Daniel  which  might  have  been  exceedingly 


44 


Otf  COMMEXTIITG. 


instructive  to  me  if  I had  obtained  the  remotest  concep- 
tion of  what  they  meant.  Take,  again,  parts  of  the 
prophecy  of  Ezekiel,  and  ask  yourselves  what  profit  can 
arise  from  their  perusal  by  the  illiterate  “ unless  some 
man  shall  guide  them  ” ? What  more  edification  can 
come  from  a chapter  in  English  which  is  not  understood 
than  from  the  same  passage  in  Hebrew  or  Greek  ? The 
same  argument  which  enforces  translation  demands 
exposition.  If  but  a few  explanatory  words  are  thrown 
in  by  a judicious  reader,  it  is  wonderful  how  luminous 
obscure  portions  may  be  made.  Two  or  three  sentences 
will  often  reveal  the  drift  of  a whole  chapter  ; the  key 
of  a great  difficulty  may  be  presented  to  the  hearer  in 
lialf-a-score  words,  and  thus  the  public  reading  may  be 
made  abundantly  profitable.  I once  saw  a school  of 
blind  children  among  the  charming  ruins  of  York  Abbey, 
and  could  not  help  pitying  their  incapacity  to  enjoy  so 
much  beauty  : how  willingly  would  I have  opened  their 
eyes  ! Are  ignorant  people  wandering  among  the  glories 
of  Scripture  much  less  to  be  pitied  ? Who  will  refuse 
them  the  light  ? 

Abundant  evidence  has  come  before  me  that  brief 
comments  upon  Scripture  in  our  ordinary  services  are 
most  acceptable  and  instructive  to  our  people.  I have  of- 
ten heard  from  working  men,  and  their  wives,  and  from 
merchants  and  their  families,  that  my  own  expositions 
have  been  most  helpful  to  them.  They  testify  that  when 
they  read  the  Bible  at  home  in  the  family,  the  exposition 
makes  it  doubly  precious  to  them  ; and  the  chapter 
which  they  had  unprofitably  read  in  course  at  family 
prayers,  when  they  peruse  it  the  next  time,  recollecting 
what  their  minister  has  said  upon  it,  becomes  a real  de- 
light to  them.  The  mass  of  our  hearers,  in  London  at 


ON  COMMENTING. 


45 


least,  do  not,  to  any  appreciable  extent,  read  commentaries 
or  any  other  books  which  throw  a light  upon  the  Script- 
ures. They  have  neither  the  money  nor  the  time  to  do 
so,  and  if  they  are  to  be  instructed  in  the  Word  of  God 
in  things  which  they  cannot  find  out  by  mere  experience, 
and  are  not  likely  to  have  explained  to  them  by  their 
associates,  they  must  get  that  instruction  from  us,  or 
nowhere  else  ; nor  do  I see  how  we  are  to  give  them  such 
spiritual  assistance  except  through  the  regular  practice 
of  exposition. 

Besides,  if  you  are  in  the  habit  of  commenting,  it 
will  give  you  an  opportunity  of  saying  many  things  which 
are  not  of  sufficient  importance  to  become  the  theme  of  a 
whole  sermon , and  therefore  would  probably  remain  un- 
noticed, to  the  great  loss  of  the  Lord’s  people  and  others. 
It  is  astounding  what  a range  of  truth,  doctrinal,  practi- 
cal, and  experimental,  Holy  Scripture  brings  before  us  ; 
and  equally  worthy  of  admiration  is  the  forcible  manner 
in  which  that  truth  is  advanced.  Hints  given  in  the 
way  in  which  the  word  of  God  offers  them  are  always 
wise  and  opportune  ; as,  for  instance,  the  rebukes  which 
the  word  administers  might  have  seemed  too  severe  had 
they  been  made  by  the  pastor,  unsustained  by  the  word 
and  unsuggested  by  it,  but  arising  out  of  the  chapter 
they  cannot  be  resented.  You  can  both  censure  sins 
and  encourage  virtues  by  dilating  upon  the  histories 
which  you  read  in  the  inspired  records,  whereas  you 
might  never  have  touched  upon  them  had  not  the  chap- 
ter read  brought  the  matter  before  you.  If  you  want  to 
make  full  proof  of  your  ministry,  and  to  leave  no  single 
point  of  revelation  untouched,  your  easiest  mode  will  be 
to  comment  upon  Scripture  habitually.  Without  this 
much  of  the  word  will  be  utterly  unknown  to  many  of 


46 


ON  COMMENTING. 


your  people.  It  is  a very  sad  fact  that  they  do  not  read 
so  much  as  they  should  at  home ; the  ungodly,  in 
England,  scarcely  read  the  Bible  at  all  ; and  if  only  that 
part  which  we  preach  upon  be  expounded  to  them,  how 
little  of  the  Bible  can  they  ever  know  ! If  you  will  mark 
your  Bibles  with  lines  under  the  texts  from  which  you 
have  spoken,  as  I have  always  done  with  an  old  copy 
which  I keep  in  my  study,  you  will  discover  that  in 
twelve  or  fourteen  years  very  little  of  the  book  has  been 
gone  through  : a very  large  proportion  of  it  remains 
unmarked,  like  a field  unploughed.  Try,  then,  by  ex- 
position to  give  your  people  a fair  view  of  the  entire 
compass  of  revelation ; take  them  as  it  were  to  the  top 
of  Nebo,  and  show  them  the  whole  land  from  Dan  to 
Beersheba,  and  prove  to  them  that  everywhere  it  fioweth 
with  milk  and  honey. 

Earnestly  do  I advocate  commenting.  It  is  un- 
fashionable in  England,  though  somewhat  more  usual 
beyond  the  Tweed.  The  practice  was  hardly  followed 
up  anywhere  in  England,  a few  years  ago,  and  it  is  very 
uncommon  still.  It  may  be  pressed  upon  you  for  one 
other  reason,  namely,  that  in  order  to  execute  it  well , the 
commenting  minister  will  at  first  have  to  study  twice  as 
much  as  the  mere  preacher,  because  he  will  be  called  upon 
to  prepare  both  his  sermons  and  his  expositions.  As  a 
rule  I spend  much  more  time  over  the  exposition  than 
over  the  discourse.  Once  start  a sermon  with  a great 
idea,  and  from  that  moment  the  discourse  forms  itself 
without  much  labor  to  the  preacher,  for  truth  naturally 
consolidates  and  crystallizes  itself  around  the  main  sub- 
ject like  sweet  crystals  around  a string  hung  up  in  syrup  ; 
hut  as  for  the  exposition,  you  must  keep  to  the  text,  you 
must  face  the  difficult  points,  and  must  search  into  the 


ON  COMMENTING. 


47 


mind  of  the  Spirit  rather  than  your  own.  You  will 
soon  reveal  your  ignorance  as  an  expositor  if  you  do  not 
study  ; therefore  diligent  reading  will  be  forced  upon 
you.  Anything  which  compels  the  preacher  to  search 
the  grand  old  Book  is  of  immense  service  to  him.  If  any 
are  jealous  lest  the  labor  should  injure  their  constitutions, 
let  them  remember  that  mental  work  up  to  a certain 
point  is  most  refreshing,  and  where  the  Bible  is  the 
theme  toil  is  delight.  It  is  only  when  mental  labor 
passes  beyond  the  bounds  of  common  sense  that  the  mind 
becomes  enfeebled  by  it,  and  this  is  not  usually  reached 
except  by  injudicious  persons,  or  men  engaged  on  topics 
which  are  unrefreshing  and  disagreeable  ; but  our  sub- 
ject is  a recreative  one,  and  to  young  men  like  ourselves 
the  vigorous  use  of  our  faculties  is  a most  healthy  exer- 
cise. Classics  and  mathematics  may  exhaust  us,  but  not 
the  volume  of  our  Father's  grace,  the  charter  of  our 
joys,  the  treasure  of  our  wealth. 

A man  to  comment  well  should  be  able  to  read  the 
Bible  in  the  original . Every  minister  should  aim  at  a 
tolerable  proficiency  both  in  the  Hebrew  and  the  Greek. 
These  two  languages  will  give  him  a library  at  a small 
expense,  an  inexhaustible  thesaurus,  a mine  of  spiritual 
wealth.  Really,  the  effort  of  acquiring  a language  is 
not  so  prodigious  that  brethren  of  moderate  abilities 
should  so  frequently  shrink  from  the  attempt.  A minis- 
ter ought  to  attain  enough  of  these  tongues  to  be  at  least 
able  to  make  out  a passage  by  the  aid  of  a lexicon,  so  as 
to  be  sure  that  he  is  not  misrepresenting  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  his  discoursings,  but  is,  as  nearly  as  he  can  judge, 
giving  forth  what  the  Lord  intended  to  reveal  by  the 
language  employed.  Such  knowledge  would  prevent 
his  founding  doctrines  upon  expressions  in  our  version 


48 


ON  COMMENTING. 


when  nothing  at  all  analogous  is  to  be  found  in  the 
inspired  original.  This  has  been  done  by  preachers  time 
out  of  mind,  and  they  have  shouted  over  an  inference 
drawn  from  a shall,  or  an  if  gathered  out  of  the  transla- 
tion, with  as  much  assurance  of  infallibility  and  sense 
of  importance  as  if  the  same  language  had  occurred  in 
the  words  which  the  Holy  Ghost  used.  At  such  times, 
we  have  been  reminded  of  the  story  told  by  the  late 
beloved  Henry  Craik,  in  his  book  on  the  Hebrew  language. 
At  one  time,  the  Latin  Vulgate  was  so  constantly  spoken 
of  as  the  very  word  of  God,  that  a Roman  Catholic  theo- 
logian thus  commented  upon  Genesis  i.  10  : — “ The 
gathering  together  of  the  waters  called  he  seas.”  The 
Latin  term  for  seas  is  Maria.  On  this  ground,  the 
writer  asks,  “ What  is  the  gathering  together  of  water’s 
but  the  accumulation  of  all  the  graces  into  one  place, 
that  is,  into  the  Virgin  Mary  (Maria)  ? But  there  is 
this  distinction,  that  Maria  ( the  seas)  has  the  (i)  short, 
because  that  which  the  seas  contain  is  only  of  a transi- 
tory nature,  while  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  blessed 
Virgin  (Maria)  shall  endure  for  ever.”  Such  superlative 
nonsense  may  be  indulged  in  if  we  forget  that  transla- 
tions cannot  be  verbally  inspired,  and  that  to  the  origi- 
nal is  the  last  appeal. 

Fail  not  to  be  expert  in  the  use  of  your  Concordance. 
Every  day  I live  I thank  God  more  and  more  for  that 
poor  half-crazy  Alexander  Cruden.  Of  course  you  have 
read  his  life,  which  is  prefixed  to  the  concordance ; it 
exhibits  him  as  a man  of  diseased  mind,  once  or  twice 
the  inmate  of  a lunatic  asylum,  but  yet  for  all  that  suc- 
cessfully devoting  his  energies  to  producing  a work  of 
absolutely  priceless  value,  which  never  has  been  im- 
proved upon,  and  probably  never  will  be ; a volume 


ON  COMMENTING. 


49 


which  must  ever  yield  the  greatest  possible  assistance  to 
a Christian  minister,  being  as  necessary  to  him  as  a plane 
to  the  carpenter,  or  a plough  to  the  husbandman.  Be 
sure  you  buy  a genuine  unabridged  Cruden,  and  none  of 
the  modern  substitutes ; good  as  they  may  be  at  the 
price,  they  are  a delusion  and  a snare  to  ministers,  and 
should  never  be  tolerated  in  the  manse  library.  To 
consider  cheapness  in  purchasing  a concordance  is  folly. 
You  need  only  one  : have  none  but  the  best.  At  the 
head  of  each  notable  word,  Cruden  gives  you  its  mean- 
ing, and  very  often  all  its  particular  shades  of  meaning, 
so  that  he  even  helps  you  in  sermonizing.  When  you 
have  read  his  headings,  by  following  out  the  concordance, 
you  will  observe  connections  in  which  the  word  occurs, 
which  most  advantageously  and  correctly  fix  its  mean- 
ing. Thus  will  the  word  of  God  be  its  own  key.  A 
good  textuary  is  a good  theologian  ; be  then  well  skilled 
in  using  Cruden. 

I make  but  small  account  of  most  reference  Bibles  ; 
they  would  be  very  useful  if  they  were  good  for  any- 
thing ; but  it  is  extremely  easy  to  bring  out  a reference 
Bible  which  has  verbal  and  apparent  references,  and 
nothing  more.  You  will  often  turn  to  a reference,  and 
will  have  to  say,  “ Well,  it  is  a reference,  certainly,  in  a 
way,  for  it  contains  the  same  word,  but  there  is  no  refer- 
ence in  the  sense  that  the  one  text  will  explain  the  other.  ” 
The  useful  reference  cuts  the  diamond  with  a diamond, 
comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual;  it  is  a 
thought-reference,  and  not  a word-reference.  If  you 
meet  with  a really  valuable  reference  Bible,  it  will  be  to 
you  what  I once  heard  a countryman  call  “ a reverence 
Bible,”  for  it  will  lead  you  to  prize  more  and  more  the 
sacred  volume.  The  best  reference  Bible  is  a thorough- 
3 


50 


OX  COMMEifTIKO. 


ly  good  concordance.  Get  the  best,  keep  it  always  on 
the  table,  use  it  hourly,  and  you  will  find  your  best  com- 
panion. 

Need  I after  my  previous  lectures  commend  to  you 
the  judicious  reading  of  commentaries  ! These  are  called 
“ dead  men’s  brains  ” by  certain  knowing  people,  who 
claim  to  give  us  nothing  in  their  sermons  but  what  they 
pretend  the  Lord  reveals  direct  to  themselves.  Yet 
these  men  are  by  no  means  original,  and  often  their  sup- 
posed inspiration  is  but  borrowed  wit.  They  get  a peep 
at  Gill  on  the  sly.  The  remarks  which  they  give  forth 
as  the  Spirit’s  mind  are  very  inferior  in  all  respects  to 
what  they  affect  to  despise,  namely,  the  mind  of  good 
and  learned  men.  A batch  of  poems  was  sent  me  some 
time  ago  for  The  Sivord  and  the  Trowel , which  were 
written  by  a person  claiming  to  be  under  the  immediate 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  informed  me  that  he 
was  passive,  and  that  what  was  enclosed  was  written 
under  the  direct  physical  and  mental  influence  of  the 
Spirit  upon  his  mind  and  hand.  My  bookshelves  can 
show  many  poems  as  much  superior  to  these  pretended 
inspirations  as  angels  are  to  blue-bottles  ; the  miserable 
doggrel  bore  on  its  face  the  evidence  of  imposture.  So 
when  I listen  to  the  senseless  twaddle  of  certain  wise 
gentlemen  who  are  always  boasting  that  they  alone  are 
ministers  of  the  Spirit,  I am  ashamed  of  their  preten- 
sions and  of  them.  No,  my  dear  friends,  you  may  take 
it  as  a rule  that  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  usually  do  for 
us  what  we  can  do  for  ourselves,  and  that  if  religious 
knowledge  is  printed  in  a book,  and  we  can  read  it, 
there  is  no  necessity  for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  make  a fresh 
revelation  of  it  to  us  in  order  to  screen  our  laziness. 
Read,  then  the  admirable  commentaries  which  I have 


ON  COMMENTING. 


51 


already  introduced  to  you.  Yet  be  sure  you  use  your 
own  minds,  too,  or  the  expounding  will  lack  interest. 
Here  I call  to  mind  two  wells  in  the  courtyard  of  the 
Doge’s  palace  at  Venice,  upon  which  I looked  with  much 
interest.  One  is  filled  artificially  by  water  brought  in 
barges  from  a distance,  and  few  care  for  its  insipid  con- 
tents ; the  other  is  a refreshing  natural  well,  cool  and 
delicious,  and  the  people  contend  for  every  drop  of  it. 
Freshness,  naturalness,  life,  will  always  attract,  whereas 
mere  borrowed  learning  is  flat  and  insipid.  Mr.  Cecil 
says  his  plan  was,  when  he  laid  a-hold  of  a Scripture,  to 
pray  over  it,  and  get  his  own  thoughts  on  it,  and  then, 
after  he  had  so  done,  to  take  up  the  ablest  divines  who 
wrote  upon  the  subject,  and  see  what  their  thoughts 
were.  If  you  do  not  think  and  think  much,  you  will 
become  slaves  and  mere  copyists.  The  exercise  of  your 
own  mind  is  most  healthful  to  you,  and  by  perseverance, 
with  divine  help,  you  may  expect  to  get  at  the  meaning 
of  every  understandable  passage.  So  to  rely  upon  your 
own  abilities  tfs  to  be  unwilling  to  learn  from  others,  is 
imbecility. 

Wliat  should  he  the  manner  of  your  'public  comment- 
ing? One  rule  should  be  always  to  point  out  very  care- 
fully wherever  a word  hears  a special  sense ; for  rest 
assured  in  Holy  Scripture  the  same  word  does  not 
always  mean  the  same  thing.  The  Bible  is  a book 
meant  for  human  beings,  and  therefore  it  is  written  in 
human  language;  and  in  human  language  the  same 
word  may  signify  two  or  three  things.  For  instance, 
“ a pear  fell  from  the  tree  ; ” “a  man  fell  into  drunken 
habits.”  There  the  meaning  of  the  second  wTord, 
“ fell,”  is  evidently  different  from  the  first,  since  it  is 
not  literal,  but  metaphorical.  Again,  “ the  cabman 


52 


ON  COMMENTING. 


mounted  the  box ; ” “ the  child  was  pleased  with  his 
Christmas  box  “ his  lordship  is  staying  at  his  shoot- 
ing box.”  In  each  case  there  is  the  same  word,  but 
who  does  not  see  that  there  is  a great  difference  of 
meaning  ? So  it  is  in  the  word  of  God.  You  must 
explain  the  difference  between  a word  used  in  a peculiar 
sense,  and  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word,  and  thus 
you  will  prevent  your  people  falling  into  mistakes.  If 
people  will  say  that  the  same  word  in  Scripture  always 
means  the  same  thing,  as  I have  heard  some  assert  pub- 
licly, they  will  make  nonsense  of  the  word  of  God,  and 
fall  into  error  through  their  own  irrational  maxims. 
To  set  up  canons  of  interpretation  for  the  Book  of  God 
which  would  be  absurd  if  applied  to  other  writings,  is 
egregious  folly  ; it  has  a show  of  accuracy,  but  inevi- 
tably leads  to  confusion. 

The  obvious  literal  meaning  of  a Scripture  is  not 
always  the  true  one,  and  ignorant  persons  are  apt 
enough  to  fall  into  the  most  singular  misconceptions — a 
judicious  remark  from  the  pulpit  will  be  of  signal  ser- 
vice. Many  persons  have  accustomed  themselves  to 
misunderstand  certain  texts ; they  have  heard  wrong 
interpretations  in  their  youth,  and  will  never  know 
better  unless  the  correct  meaning  be  indicated  to  them. 

We  must  make  sure  in  our  public  expositions  that 
obscure  and  involved  sentences  are  explained . To  over- 
leap difficulties,  and  only  expound  what  is  already  clear, 
is  to  make  commenting  ridiculous.  When  we  speak  of 
obscure  sentences,  we  mean  such  as  are  mostly  to  be 
found  in  the  prophets,  and  are  rendered  dark  through 
the  translation,  or  the  Orientalism  of  their  structure,  or 
through  their  intrinsic  weight  of  meaning.  Involved 
sentences  most  abound  in  the  writings  of  Paul,  whose 


OK  COMMENTING. 


53 


luxuriant  mind  was  not  to  be  restrained  to  any  one  line 
of  argument.  He  begins  a sentence,  and  does  not  finish 
it  perhaps  until  eight  verses  further  on,  and  all  the  in- 
terstices between  the  commencement  and  the  end  of  the 
sentence  are  packed  full  of  compressed  truth,  which  it 
is  not  always  easy  to  separate  from  the  general  argu- 
ment. Hints  consisting  of  but  two  or  three  words  will 
let  your  hearers  know  where  the  reasoning  breaks  olf, 
and  where  it  is  taken  up  again.  In  many  poetical  parts 
of  the  Old  Testament  the  speakers  change ; as  in  Solo- 
mon’s Song,  which  is  mostly  a dialogue.  Here  perfect 
nonsense  is  often  made  by  reading  the  passage  as  if  it 
were  all  spoken  by  the  same  person.  In  Isaiah  the 
strain  often  varies  most  suddenly,  and  while  one  verse  is 
addressed  to  the  Jews,  the  next  may  be  spoken  to  the 
Messiah  or  to  the  Gentiles.  Is  it  not  always  well  to 
notify  this  to  the  congregation  ? If  the  chapters  and 
verses  had  been  divided  with  a little  common  sense,  this 
might  be  of  less  importance,  but  as  our  version  is  so 
clumsily  chopped  into  fragments,  the  preacher  must 
insert  the  proper  paragraphs  and  divisions  as  he  reads 
aloud.  In  fine,  your  business  is  to  make  the  word  plain. 
In  Lombardy  I observed  great  heaps  of  huge  stones  in 
the  fields,  which  had  been  gathered  out  from  the  soil  by 
diligent  hands  to  make  room  for  the  crops  : your  duty 
is  to  “ gather  out  the  stones,”  and  leave  the  fruitful  field 
of  Scripture  for  your  people  to  till.  There  are  Orien- 
talisms, metaphors,  peculiar  expressions,  idioms,  and 
other  verbal  memorabilia  which  arise  from  the  Bible 
having  been  written  in  the  East ; all  these  you  will  do 
well  to  explain.  To  this  end  be  diligent  students  of 
Oriental  life.  Let  the  geography  of  Palestine,  its 
natural  history,  its  fauna  and  its  tlora,  be  as  familiar  to 


54 


ON  COMMENTING. 


you  as  those  of  your  own  native  village.  Then  as  you 
read  you  will  interpret  the  word,  and  your  flock  will  be 
fed  thereby.* 

The  chief  part  of  your  commenting,  however,  should 
consist  in  applying  the  truth  to  the  hearts  of  your  hearers , 
for  he  who  merely  comprehends  the  meaning  of  the  let- 
ter without  understanding  how  it  bears  upon  the  hearts 
and  consciences  of  men,  is  like  a man  who  causes  the 
bellows  of  an  organ  to  be  blown,  and  then  fails  to  place 
his  fingers  on  the  keys  ; it  is  of  little  service  to  supply 
men  with  information  unless  we  urge  upon  them  the 
practical  inferences  therefrom.  Look,  my  brethren, 
straight  down  into  the  secret  chambers  of  the  human 
soul,  and  let  fall  the  divine  teaching  through  the  win- 
dow, and  thus  light  will  be  carried  to  the  heart  and  con- 
science. Make  remarks  suitable  to  the  occasion,  and 
applicable  to  the  cases  of  those  present.  Show  how  a 
truth  which  was  first  heard  in  the  days  of  David  is  still 
forcible  and  pertinent  in  these  modern  times,  and  you 
will  thus  endear  the  Scriptures  to  the  minds  of  your 
people,  who  prize  your  remarks  much  more  than  you 
imagine.  Clean  the  grand  old  pictures  of  the  divine 
masters  ; hang  them  up  in  new  frames  ; fix  them  on  the 
walls  of  your  people’s  memories,  and  their  well-instructed 
hearts  shall  bless  you. 

Is  a caution  needed  among  intelligent  men  ? Yes,  it 
must  be  given.  Be  sure  to  avoid  prosiness.  Avoid  it 
everywhere,  but  especially  in  this.  Do  not  be  long  in 

* For  suggestions  as  to  interpretation  tlie  student  is  referred  to 
the  Bible  Handbook  by  Dr.  Joseph  Angus.  From  page  150  of 
that  work  and  onwards  the  most  valuable  hints  will  be  met  with. 
Much  that  we  would  otherwise  have  inserted  in  this  volume  is 
admirably  stated  by  our  learned  friend. 


0 N COMMENTING. 


55 


your  notes.  If  you  are  supremely  gifted,  do  not  be  long  ; 
people  do  not  appreciate  too  much  of  a good  thing  ; and 
if  your  comments  are  only  second-rate,  why,  then  be 
shorter  still,  for  men  soon  weary  of  inferior  talking. 
Very  little  time  in  the  service  can  be  afforded  for  read- 
ing the  lessons  ; do  not  rob  the  prayer  and  the  sermon 
for  the  sake  of  commenting.  This  robbing  Peter  to  pay 
Paul  is  senseless.  Do  not  repeat  common-place  things 
which  must  have  occurred  even  to  a Sunday-school  child. 
Do  not  remind  your  hearers  of  what  they  could  not  pos- 
sibly have  forgotten.  Give  them  something  weighty  if 
not  new,  so  that  an  intelligent  listener  may  feel  when 
the  service  is  over  that  he  has  learned  at  least  a little. 

Again,  avoid  all  pedantry.  As  a general  rule,  it  may 
be  observed  that  those  gentlemen  who  know  the  least 
Greek  are  the  most  sure  to  air  their  rags  of  learning  in 
the  pulpit ; they  miss  no  chance  of  saying,  “The  Greek 
is  so-and-so.  ” It  makes  a man  an  inch  and  a half  taller 
by  a fool  me  ter,  if  he  everlastingly  lets  fall  bits  of  Greek 
and  Hebrew,  and  even  tells  the  people  the  tense  of  the 
verb  and  the  case  of  the  noun,  as  I have  known  some  do. 
Those  who  have  no  learning  usually  make  a point  of 
displaying  the  pegs  on  which  learning  ought  to  hang. 
Brethren,  the  whole  process  of  interpretation  is  to  be 
carried  on  in  your  study  ; you  are  not  to  show  your 
congregation  the  process,  but  give  them  the  result ; like 
a good  cook  who  would  never  think  of  bringing  up 
dishes,  and  pans,  and  rolling  pin,  and  spice  box  into  the 
dining  hall,  but  without  ostentation  sends  up  the  feast. 

Never  strain  passages  when  you  are  expounding.  Be 
thoroughly  honest  with  the  word  : even  if  the  Scriptures 
were  the  writing  of  mere  men,  conscience  would  demand 
fairness  of  you ; but  when  it  is  the  Lord’s  own  word, 


56 


ON  COMMENTING. 


be  careful  not  to  pervert  it  even  in  the  smallest  degree. 
Let  it  be  said  of  you,  as  I have  heard  a venerable  hearer 
of  Mr.  Simeon  say  of  him,  “ Sir,  he  was  very  Calvinis- 
tic  when  the  text  was  so,  and  people  thought  him  an 
Arminian  when  the  text  was  that  way,  for  he  always 
stuck  to  its  plain  sense.”  A very  sound  neighbor  of  ours 
once  said,  by  way  of  depreciating  the  grand  old  reformer, 
“ John  Calvin  was  not  half  a Calvinist,”  and  the  remark 
w’as  correct  as  to  his  expositions,  for  in  them,  as  we  have 
seen,  he  always  gave  his  Lord’s  mind  and  not  his  own. 
In  the  church  of  St.  Zeno,  in  Verona,  I saw  ancient 
frescoes  which  had  been  plastered  over,  and  then  covered 
with  other  designs  ; I fear  many  do  this  with  Scripture, 
daubing  the  text  with  their  own  glosses,  and  laying  on 
their  own  conceits.  There  are  enough  of  these  plaster- 
ers abroad,  let  us  leave  the  evil  trade  to  them  and  follow 
an  honest  calling.  Remember  Cowper’s  lines — 

“ A critic  on  the  sacred  text  should  he 
Candid  aud  learn’d,  dispassionate  and  free  ; 

Free  from  the  wayward  bias  bigots  feel, 

From  fancy’s  influence  and  intemperate  zeal ; 

For  of  all  arts  sagacious  dupes  invent, 

To  cheat  themselves  and  gain  the  world’s  assent. 

The  worst  is — Scripture  warped  from  its  intent.” 

Use  your  judgment  more  than  your  fancy . Flowers 
are  well  enough,  but  hungry  souls  prefer  bread.  To 
allegorize  with  Origen  may  make  men  stare  at  you,  but 
your  work  is  to  fill  men’s  mouths  with  truth,  not  to 
open  them  with  wonder. 

Do  not  be  carried  away  with  new  meanings.  Ply- 
mouth Brethren  delight  to  fish  up  some  hitherto  undis- 
covered tadpole  of  interpretation,  and  cry  it  around  the 
town  as  a rare  dainty  ; let  us  be  content  with  more  ordi- 


ON  COMMENTING. 


57 


nary  and  more  wholesome  fishery.  No  one  text  is  to  be 
exalted  above  the  plain  analogy  of  faith  ; and  no  solitary 
expression  is  to  shape  our  theology  for  us.  Other  men 
and  wiser  men  have  expounded  before  us,  and  anything 
undiscovered  by  them  it  were  well  to  put  to  test  and 
trial  before  we  boast  too  loudly  of  the  treasure-trove. 

Do  not  needlessly  amend  our  authorized  version.  It 
is  faulty  in  many  places,  but  still  it  is  a grand  work, 
taking  it  for  all  in  all,  and  it  is  unwise  to  be  making 
every  old  lady  distrust  the  only  Bible  she  can  get  at,  or 
what  is  more  likely,  mistrust  you  for  falling  out  with 
her  cherished  treasure.  Correct  where  correction  must 
be  for  truth’s  sake,  but  never  for  the  vain-glorious  dis- 
play of  your  critical  ability.  When  reading  short  psalms, 
or  connected  passages  of  the  other  books,  do  not  split  up 
the  author's  utterances  by  interjecting  your  notes.  Read 
the  paragraph  through,  and  then  go  over  it  again  with 
your  explanations  ; breaking  it  up  as  you  may  think  fit 
at  the  second  reading.  No  one  would  dream  of  dividing 
a stanza  of  a poet  with  an  explanatory  remark  ; it  would 
be  treason  to  common  sense  to  do  so  : sound  judgment 
will  forbid  you  thus  marring  the  word  of  God.  Better 
far  never  to  comment  than  to  cut  and  carve  the  utter- 
ances of  inspiration,  and  obscure  their  meaning  by  im- 
pertinently thrusting  in  untimely  remarks  of  your  own. 
Upon  many  passages  comments  would  be  gross  folly  : 
never  think  of  painting  the  lily  or  gilding  refined 
gold  ; leave  the  sublime  sentences  alone  in  their  glory. 
I speak  as  unto  wise  men ; prove  your  wisdom  in  this 
thing  also. 

If  I were  bound  to  deliver  a sermon  upon  the  subject 
in  hand,  I could  not  desire  a better  text  than  Nehemiah 
viii.  8 : “ So  they  read  in  the  book  in  the  law  of  God 


58 


ON  COMMENTING. 


distinctly,  and  gave  the  sense,  and  caused  them  to  un 
derstand  the  reading.”  Here  is  a hint  for  the  reader  as 
to  his  reading.  Let  it  always  be  distinct.  Aim  to  be 
good  readers,  and  be  the  more  anxious  about  it  because 
few  men  are  so,  and  all  preachers  ought  to  be  so.  It 
is  as  good  as  a sermon  to  hear  our  best  men  read  the 
Scriptures  ; they  bring  out  the  meaning  by  their  correct 
emphasis  and  tone.  Never  fall  into  the  idea  that  the 
mere  utterance  of  the  words  before  you  is  all  that  is  re- 
quired of  you  in  reading ; good  reading  is  a high,  but 
rare  attainment.  Even  if  you  do  not  comment,  yet  read 
the  chapter  previously,  and  become  familiar  with  it ; it 
is  inexcusable  for  a man  to  betray  the  fact  that  he  is  out 
of  his  latitude  in  the  reading,  traversing  untrodden 
ground,  floundering  and  picking  his  way  across  country, 
like  a huntsman  who  has  lost  his  bearings.  Never  open 
the  Bible  in  the  pulpit  to  read  the  chapter  for  the  first 
time,  but  go  to  the  familiar  page  after  many  rehearsals. 
You  will  be  doubly  useful  if  in  addition  to  this  you 
“give  the  sense  ” You  will  then,  by  God’s  blessing,  be 
the  pastor  of  an  intelligent,  Bible-loving  people.  You 
will  hear  in  your  meeting-house  the  delightful  rustle  of 
Bible  leaves  which  is  so  dear  to  the  lover  of  the  Word  ; 
your  people  will  open  their  Bibles,  looking  for  a feast. 
The  Word  will  become  increasingly  precious  to  yourself, 
your  knowledge  will  enlarge,  and  your  aptness  to  teach 
will  become  every  day  more  apparent.  Try  it,  my  breth- 
ren, for  even  if  you  should  see  cause  to  discontinue  it, 
at  least  no  harm  will  come  of  the  attempt. 

In  all  that  I have  said  I have  given  you  another  rea- 
son for  seeking  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  you  do 
not  understand  a book  by  a departed  writer  you  are  un- 
able to  ask  him  his  meaning,  but  the  Spirit,  who  in- 


ON  COMMENTING. 


59 


spired  Holy  Scripture,  lives  forever,  and  he  delights  to 
open  up  the  Word  to  those  who  seek  his  instruction. 
He  is  always  accessible  : “he  dwelleth  with  you  and  shall 
be  in  you.”  Go  to  him  for  yourselves  and  cry,  “Open 
thou  mine  eyes  that  I may  behold  the  wondrous  things 
out  of  thy  law  ; ” and,  this  being  granted  you,  entreat 
him  to  send  forth  his  light  and  power  with  the  Word 
when  you  expound  it,  that  your  hearers  also  may  be  led 
into  all  truth.  Commentaries,  expositions,  interpreta- 
tions, are  all  mere  scaffolding ; the  Holy  Ghost  himself 
must  edify  you  and  help  you  to  build  up  the  church  of 
the  living  God. 


REMARKS  UPON  THE  LIST  OF  COM- 
MENTARIES. 


This  List  is  compiled  for  the  use  of  ministers  of  aver- 
age attainments,  and  the  brief  reviews  are  written  from 
that  stand-point.  Other  useful  lists  have  been  published, 
specially  those  by  Darling,  Orme,  and  Hartwell  Horne, 
but  these  are  not  easily  procurable,  and  are  not  quite 
what  is  needed  ; and  therefore  as  the  furnishing  of  the 
Pastor’s  College  Library  necessitated  a Catalogue,  and 
afforded  an  opportunity  for  purchasing  books,  the  pre- 
sent work  has  been  produced.  Few  can  conceive  the 
amount  of  toil  which  this  compilation  has  involved,  both 
to  myself  and  my  industrious  amanuensis,  Mr.  J.  L. 
Keys.  In  almost  every  case  the  books  have  been  actu- 
ally examined  by  myself,  and  my  opinion,  whatever  it 
may  be  worth,  is  an  original  one.  A complete  list  of  all 
comments  has  not  been  attempted.  Numbers  of  volumes 
have  been  left  out  because  they  were  not  easily  procura- 
ble, or  were  judged  to  be  worthless,  although  some  of 
both  these  classes  have  been  admitted  as  specimens,  or 
as  warnings. 

The  titles  have  been  abbreviated  to  gain  space,  but  it 
is  believed  that  in  every  case  they  are  full  enough  for 
recognition.  The  prices,  which  relate  to  second-hand 
books,  have  been  placed  as  proximate  valuations,  and 
have  either  been  taken  from  actual  invoices,  and  cata- 
logues, or  have  been  kindly  filled  in  by  the  aid  of  vari- 
ous booksellers,  to  whom  we.  tender  our  thanks  for  the 


REMARKS  UPON  THE  LIST  OF  COMMENTARIES.  61 


kindly  interest  they  have  taken  in  this  work.  Prices 
vary  according  to  the  condition  of  the  book,  the  binding, 
the  ever-changing  demand,  and  the  booksellers’  mode  of 
trade.  The  abbreviation  S stands  for  second-hand. 
That  mark  is  not  inserted  where  the  date  is  remote,  and 
where  the  price  can  only  refer  to  second-hand  copies, 
since  there  are  no  others. 

The  reader  will  please  observe  that  the  books  most 
heartily  recommended  are  printed  in  black  faced  type, 
with  the  remarks  in  larger  type.  Good,  but  more  ordi- 
nary works  are  in  medium  type,  and  the  least  desirable 
are  in  the  smallest  letters.  Thus  we  hope  the  eye  will 
be  caught  at  once  by  volumes  best  worthy  of  attention. 

Latin  authors  are  not  inserted,  because  few  can  pro- 
cure them,  and  fewer  still  can  read  them  with  ease. 
We  are  not,  however,  ignorant  of  their  value.  Hosts  of 
family  Bibles,  discourses,  and  paraphrases  are  omitted 
because  they  would  have  wasted  our  limited  space,  and 
we  could  only  have  admitted  them  by  raising  the  price 
of  our  book,  which  we  resolved  not  to  do,  lest  it  should 
be  out  of  the  reach  of  men  of  slender  incomes.  The 
first  volume  of  this  series  * has  had  so  excellent  a circu- 
lation that  we  are  able  to  issue  this  second  one,  although 
we  know  from  the  nature  of  the  work  that  its  sale  will,  in 
all  probability,  never  cover  the  cost  of  production.  We 
give  the  labor  to  our  brethren  freely,  only  wishing  that 
we  could  with  it  confer  upon  our  poorer  friends  the 
means  of  purchasing  the  choicest  of  the  comments 
here  mentioned. 

* Lectures  to  my  Students;  a selection  from  Addresses  deliv- 
ered to  the  Students  of  the  Pastor’s  College,  Metropolitan  Taberna- 
cle. By  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  President.  New  York,  Sheldon  and  Co. 
Price  $1.25. 


62  REMARKS  UPON  THE  * LIST  OF  COMMENTARIES. 

It  is  to  be  specially  noted,  that  in  no  case  do  we  en- 
dorse all  that  any  author  has  written  in  his  commentary. 
We  could  not  read  the  works  through,  it  would  have 
needed  a Methuselah  to  do  that ; nor  have  we  thought  it 
needful  to  omit  a book  because  it  contains  a measure  of 
error,  provided  it  is  useful  in  its  own  way ; for  this 
catalogue  is  for  thoughtful,  discerning  men,  and  not  for 
children.  We  have  not,  however,  knowingly  mentioned 
works  whose  main  drift  is  sceptical,  or  Socinian,  except 
with  a purpose  ; and  where  we  have  admitted  comments 
by  writers  of  doubtful  doctrine,  because  of  their  superior 
scholarship,  and  the  correctness  of  their  criticism,  we 
have  given  hints  which  will  be  enough  for  the  wise.  It 
is  sometimes  very  useful  to  know  what  our  opponents 
have  to  say. 

The  writers  on  the  Prophetical  Books  have  completely 
mastered  us,  and  after  almost  completing  a full  list,  we 
could  not  in  our  conscience  believe  that  a tithe  of  them 
would  yield  anything  to  the  student  but  bewilderment, 
and  therefore  we  reduce  the  number  to  small  dimensions. 
AVe  reverence  the  teaching  of  the  prophets,  and  the 
Apocalypse,  but  for  many  of  the  professed  expounders 
of  those  inspired  books  we  entertain  another  feeling. 

May  God  bless  this  laborious  endeavor  to  aid  his 
ministers  in  searching  the  Scriptures.  If  Biblical  stud- 
ies shall  be  in  any  measure  promoted,  we  shall  be  more 
than  repaid. 

N.  B.  Many  of  the  works  in  this  list  are  published 
in  the  United  States  ; and  the  English  books , which  arc 
obtainable  can  be  imported  by  any  bookseller  at  about 
AOcts.  to  the  shilling  of  the  price  given . 


LIST 


OF 


iiHital  Cflnuntntarws  anb  dfopjsitwns. 


COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  WHOLE  BIBLE. 

1 ANNOTATED  PARAGRAPH  BIBLE,  THE.  According 

to  the  Authorized  Version,  arranged  in  Paragraphs  and 
Parallelisms,  with  Explanatory  Notes  and  Prefaces  to  the 
several  Books.  An  issue  of  the  London  Religious  Tract 
Society,  republished,  and  containing  numerous  maps. 
Library  sheep,  in  one  vol.  8vo.  . . . 8 00 

Library  sheep,  in  three  vols 10  00 

“ Never  before  has  so  much  important  information 
respecting  the 3  4 Word  of  God’  been  condensed  in  a sin- 
gle volume.” 

2 ALLEN  (John).  A Spiritual  Exposition  of  the  Old  and  New 

Testaments ; or,  The  Christian’s  Gospel  Treasure.  Three 
vols.  8vo.  1816.  4s.  6d. 

Spiritual  reflections  after  the  High  Calvinistic  School.  Some  preach- 
ers cannot  see  Christ  where  he  is,  but  Allen  finds  him  where  he  is  not. 
There  is  jn  these  reflections  much  godly  savor,  but  very  little  exposition. 

3 ASSEMBLY  OF  DIVINES,  Westminster.  Annotations.  Two 

vols.  Folio.  Lond.,  1657.  10s.  to  16s. 

Contain  valuable  remarks,  hut  are  somewhat  out  of  date.  The  work 
is  probably  less  esteemed  than  it  should  be.  (See  page  28). 

4 BARTH  (Dr.  C.  G.,  of  Calw,  Wurtemberg). — Practical  Com- 

mentary on  the  Books  of  Holy  Scripture,  arranged  in  Chrono- 
logical Order  ; being  a Bible  Manual  for  the  use  of  Students 
of  the  Word  of  God.  Translated  from  the  German.  Imp. 
8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  S.  7s. 


64 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


Helpful  in  showing  the  historical  position  of  the 
hooks,  and  in  assisting  to  illustrate  them  by  the  circum- 
stances under  which  they  were  written.  We  have  re- 
ferred to  it  with  benefit. 

5 BENSON  (Joseph,  1748 — 1821.  An  eminent  Methodist 

Preacher).  Notes,  Critical,  Explanatory,  and  Practical. 
Six  vols.  Imp.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  each.  Lond.,  Wesleyan  Con- 
ference Office.  S.  87s.  6d. 

Adopted  by  the  Wesleyan  Conference  as  a standard  work,  and  charac- 
terized by  that  body  as  marked  by  “ solid  learning,  soundness  of  theolo- 
gical opinion,  and  an  edifying  attention  to  experimental  and  practical 
religion.  Necessary  to  Methodist  Students. 

6 BIBLICAL  MUSEUM.  (James  Comper  Gray).  Old  Testa- 

ment portion  to  be  issued  in  eight  vols.,  at  4s.  6d.  each. 
New  Testament  already  out,  five  vols.,  4s.  6d.  each.  Lond., 
Elliot  Stock. 

We  can  only  speak  of  the  Hew  Testament ; it  is  sur- 
passingly useful,  sententious,  and  sensible.  Buy  the 
work  at  once. 

7 BONAR  (Horatius,  D.  D.)  Light  and  Truth ; or,  Bible 

Thoughts  and  Themes.  Vol.  I.,  Old  Testament.  Vol.  II., 
Gospels.  Vol.  III.,  Acts  and  Larger  Epistles.  Vol.  IV., 
Lesser  Epistles.  Vol.  V.,  Revelation  of  St.  John.  Crown 
8vo.  5s.  each.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 

One  volume  is  rather  short  space  in  which  to  bring 
out  the  “ light  and  truth  ” of  the  Old  Testament.  If  Dr. 
Bonar  required  four  volumes  for  the  New,  we  wish  he 
had  felt  the  same  need  for  the  Old.  The  passages 
selected  are  popularly  expounded,  but  the  thought  is  not 
deep.  The  volumes  will  be  more  prized  by  the  ordinary 
reader  than  by  the  minister. 

8 BOOTHROYD  (Benjamin,  D.D.,  1768-1836.  A learned  Inde- 

pendent Minister  and  eminent  Hebrew  scholar).  Family 
Bible.  Improved  Version.  Notes,  and  reflections  on  each 
chapter  ; introduction  on  the  authenticity  and  inspiration 
of  the  sacred  books,  and  a complete  view  of  the  Mosaic  laws, 
&c.  Three  vols.  Royal  4to.,  1824, 16s.,  or  one  volume,  thick 
8vo.,  1858,  7s. 

Good,  but  may  be  dispensed  with,  now  that  the  East  has  been  more 
fully  explored. 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


65 


9 BROWN  (John,  1722-1787).  Self-Interpreting  Bible.  6s.  to  15s. 
Useful  in  its  day,  and  still  popular.  Notes  on  New  Testament 

an  undisguised  plagiarism  from  Guyse.  Not  a Student’s  book. 

10  BURDER  (Samuel,  A.  M.)  The  Scripture  Expositor ; a New 

Commentary,  Critical  and  Practical.  4vols.,4to.  1811  20s. 
Well  selected  notes.  Those  upon  Eastern  manners,  geography,  &c., 
are  collected  very  judiciously. 

11  CALVIN  (John,  1509-1564).  In  the  works  of  Calvin,  pub- 

lished by  the  Calvin  Translation  Society,  are  the  Comment- 
aries, in  45  volumes.  Messrs.  T.  & T.  Clark,  of  Edinburgh, 
now  issue  sets  of  45  vols.  at  £7  17s.  6d.,  or  six  vols.  for  One 
Guinea,  excepting  Psalms,  vol.  V , and  Habakkuk.  Sepa- 
rate volumes,  6s.  each.  Old  copies  of  Calvin’s  comments 
are  to  be  met  with  at  second-hand  book  stores.  We  have 
entered  most  of  them  in  their  proper  places,  but  cannot 
afford  space  for  separate  mention  of  the  volumes  of  the 
C.  T.  Society. 

Of  priceless  value.  (See  pages  15  and  16  of  this  work). 

12  CHALMERS  (Thomas,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  1780-1847).  Daily 

Scripture  Readings  (3  vols.)  and  Sabbath  Scripture  Read- 
ings (2  vols.),  being  vols.  I.  to  V.  of  the  “Posthumous 
Works”  of  Dr.  Chalmers,  edited  by  Rev.  W.  Hanna,  D.I). 
Lond.,  Hamilton,  Adams  & Co. ; Edinb.,  Edmonston  & Doug- 
lass, in  whose  catalogue  they  are  priced  as  follows  : D.  S. 
Readings,  three  vols.,  crown  8vo.,  £1  11s.  6d. ; cheap  edi- 
tion, two  vols.,  10s.  S.  S.  Readings,  two  vols.,  £1  Is.; 
cheap  edition,  two  vols.,  10s. 

Those  acquainted  with  the  writings  of  Chalmers  will 
know  what  to  expect  from  his  pen  when  guided  by  fer- 
vent devotion. 

13  CLARKE  (Adam,  LL.  D.,  1760-1832).  A New  Edition,  with 

the  Author’s  final  corrections.  Six  vols.,  Imp.  8vo.  Lond., 
1844.  W.  Tegg’s  edition,  new,  £3  3s.  S.  38s.  Also 
printed  on  large  paper,  six  vols.,  4to. 

Despite  some  few  oddities,  this  is  one  of  the  most 
learned  of  English  expositions.  (See  page  24.) 

14  CLARKE  (Samuel.  Died  1701).  The  Old  and  New  Testa- 

ment, with  Annotations  and  Parallel  Scriptures.  Folio. 
Lond!,  1690.  7s. 

Notes  very  brief,  but  judicious.  Author  one  of  the  ejected  minis- 
ters, an  exceedingly  learned  man.  This  work  was  highly  commended 
by  Owen,  Baxter,  Howe,  and  others,  but  is  now  superseded. 


66 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


15  CLASS  AND  THE  DESK,  THE.  By  J.  Comper  Gray,  of 

Halifax,  and  C.  Stokes  Carey,  of  London.  Four  vols. 
Crown  8vo.,  12s.  Lond.,  J.  Sangster  & Co. 

Condensed  thought.  Suited  for  Teachers  and  Local 

Preachers. 

16  COBBIN  (Ingram).  Evangelical  Synopsis.  Tlie  Holy  Bible, 

with  Notes  Explanatory  and  Practical,  selected  from  the 
writings  of  the  most  esteemed  divines  and  Biblical  critics. ^ 
Three  vols.  Imp.  4to.  Lond.,  George  Berger.  S.  24s.  or 
less. 

An  admirable  collection  of  notes.  Men  with  small  means  will  find  it 
a miniature  library.  We  have  heard  brethren  who  have  had  no  commen- 
tary but  Cobbin’s  speak  of  the  work  with  much  enthusiasm. 

17  COBBIN  (Ingram).  A condensed  Commentary  on  the  Bible. 

Second  edition.  Imp.  8vo.  Lond.,  1839.  12s. 

An  excellent  makeshift  for  a poor  man. 

18  COKE  (TnoMAS,  LL.  D.  Wesleyan  Methodist  Minister. 

Died  1814).  A Commentary  on  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment. Six  vols.  4to.  Lond.,  1803.  17s.  6d. 

A Wesleyan  comment.  Too  big:  ought  to  have  been  put  in  half  the 
space.  Moreover,  it  is  next  door  to  a fraud,  for  it  is  “ in  the  main  a reprint 
of  the  work  of  Dr.  Dodd,”  without  that  author’s  name.  Ah,  Dr.  Coke, 
this  is  a burning  shame  1 

19  COMMENTARY,  WHOLLY  BIBLICAL,  THE.  An  Exppsi- 

tion  in  the  very  words  of  Scripture.  Three  vols.,  4to. 
£2  16s.  Lond.,  S.  Bagster  and  Sons.  S.  26s. 

It  is  very  handy  to  have  explanatory  passages  thus  presented  to  the 
eye.  In  general  the  work  is  excellently  done ; but  ministers  with  scanty 
purses  can  make  a Biblical  exposition  for  themselves. 

20  COMPREHENSIVE  BIBLE,  THE.  (Edited  by  W.  Green- 

field, M.R.A.S.)  The  Old  and  New  Testaments,  with  the 
various  readings  and  marginal  notes,  parallel  passages 
systematically  arranged,  numerous  philological  and  ex- 
planatory notes,  etc.,  etc.  Medium  4to.,  pica  type,  £1  15s. 
in  cloth  ; crown  4to.,  small  pica  type,  £1  Is.,  cloth.  Lond., 
S.  Bagster  and  Sons. 

Generally  used  as  a Pulpit  Bible.  Said  to  contain  4,000  notes  and 
500,000  parallel  passages,  being  all  those  of  Blaney,  Scott,  Clarke,  and 
others.  The  tables,  notes,  introductions,  etc.,  are  of  standard  value. 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


67 


21  DIOD ATI  (John,  1576 — 1G49).  Annotations  plainly  expound- 

ing the  most  difficult  places.  Third  edition.  Folio.  Lond. 
1651.  [Quarto  editions  exist,  but  the  folio  is  best.  4s.  6d.J 

Bickersteth  says : “ The  spiritual  and  evangelical  remaika  are  of  much 
value.”  Diodati’s  notes  are  short  and  worth  consulting. 

22  DODD  (Willtam,  D.  D.)  A Commentary  on  the  Books  of 

the  Old  and  New  Testament;  in  which  are  inserted  the 
notes  and  collections  of  John  Locke,  Esq. ; Daniel  Water- 
land,  D.  D. ; the  Earl  of  Clarendon,  and  other  learned 
persons ; with  practical  improvements,  etc.  Three  vols. 
Folio.  Lond.,  1770.  18s. 

An  almost  forgotten  production  of  the  unhappy  Dodd.  It  is  founded 
on  the  manuscript  collections  of  Cudworth,  Waterland,  Clarendon,  and 
others.  Not  very  likely  to  quicken  piety,  or  inspire  spiritual  thought; 
yet,  as  Adam  Clarke  thought  very  highly  of  it,  and  Dr.  Coke  appropriated 
it,  it  must  have  some  value. 

23  D’OYLY  AND  MANT.  Notes,  taken  principally  from  the 

Church  of  England  writers.  Published  by  the  S.P.C.K. 
Prepared  by  the  Rev.  Geo.  D’Oyly,  D.  D.,  and  the  Rev.  R. 
Mant,  D.  D.  Three  vols.  Royal  8vo.,  with  the  text,  S. 
15s. ; or  in  one  vol.,  without  the  text,  6s.  1845,  etc. 

Of  moderate  value.  More  fitted  for  the  family  than  the  study.  A 
compilation  most  appreciated  among  Episcopalians. 

24  DUTCH  ANNOTATIONS  upon  the  whole  Bible,  as  ordered 

by  the  Synod  of  Dort,  1618,  and  published  in  English,  by 
Theodore  Haak,  Esq.  Two  vols.  Folio.  Lond.,  1657.  12s. 

Similar  to  the  Westminster  Assembly’s  Annotations.  (See  page  27). 

25  FAUSSET  (A.  R.,  A.  M.— See  Jamieson,  and  page  40.)  * 

26  FOURFOLD  UNION  COMMENTARY,  THE.  Contain- 

ing, 1.  Parallel  Texts,  in  full.  11.  Commentary  of  Matthew 
Henry,  etc.  111.  Scott’s  Commentary  condensed.  IV. 
Commentary  by  Jamieson,  Fausset,  and  Brown.  To  which 
is  added  the  Biblical  Cyclopaedia,  by  Dr.  John  Eadie,  a 
Biblical  Atlas,  etc.  Two  handsome  volumes.  Royal  4to. 
£3  3s.  net.  Lond.,  Wesley.  1872. 

A Christian  man  wishing  for  the  cream  of  expository 
writers  couid  not  make  a better  purchase.  Ministers, 
as  a rule,  should  not  buy  condensations,  but  get  the 
works  themselves. 


68 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


27  FRASER  (Donald,  D.  D.)  Synoptical  Lectures  on  the 

Books  of  Holy  Scripture.  First  Series — Genesis  to  Canti- 
cles. Second  Series — Isaiah  to  Acts.  Post  8vo.  6s.  each. 
Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co. 

Dr.  Fraser  has  observed,  like  many  others  of  us,  the 
mischief  which  results  from  cutting  the  Bible  into  frag- 
ments, and  using  it  piecemeal.  In  these  volumes  he 
discourses  of  the  Bible  at  large,  indicates  the  scope  of 
each  book,  and  furnishes  a brief  digest  of  its  contents. 
He  has  compressed  rigorously.  The  design  was  in  itself 
most  laudable,  and  it  has  been  well  carried  out. 

28  GILL  (John,  D.  D.  1697 — 1771).  An  Exposition  of  the  Old 

and  New  Testament.  Nine  vols.  Folio.  Lond.,  1763.  S. 
£5.  Nine  vols.,  4to.,  1810.  S.  £4  15s.  Six  vols.,  Royal 
8vo.,  1852.  £3  3s. 

Invaluable  in  its  own  line  of  things.  (For  full  title 
and  extended  remarks  see  pages  21  and  22.) 

29  HAAK  (Theodore).  See  under  “ Dutch  Annotations.” 

30  HALL  (Joseph,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Norwich.  1574 — 1656). 

Contemplations.  Several  editions ; the  one  published  by 
T.  Nelson,  Edinb.,  1844,  has  a memoir  of  the  good  Bishop 
by  the  late  Dr.  James  Hamilton.  S.  4s. 

The  work  can  be  readily  procured  ; but  if  its  price 
were  raised  in  proportion  to  its  real  value,  it  would  become 
one  of  the  most  costly  books  extant.  (See  page  27.) 

31  HALL  (Joseph).  A plain  and  familiar  Explication,  by  way 

of  Paraphrase,  of  all  the  Hard  Texts  of  the  whole  Divine 
Scriptures.  Small  Folio,  1633.  S.  5s.  Also  forming  Vols. 
Ill,  and  IV.  of  the  8vo.  edition  of  Hall’s  works  in  twelve 
vols.  Oxford,  1837. 

Not  so  pithy  as  the  Contemplations ; nor,  indeed,  could  it  be  expected 
to  be  so.  It  is  not  necessary  to  the  Student,  but  might  be  useful. 

32  HAWEIS  (Thomas.  1734—1820).  The  Evangelical  Expos- 

itor. Two  vols.  Folio.  1765-6.  12s. 

Partakes  of  the  author’s  character ; for  of  liim  it  has  been  said,  that 
“ he  was  rather  useful  than  eminent.”  The  work  is  mainly  an  abridg 
ment  of  Henry. 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


69 


33  HAWKER  (Robert,  D.  D.  1753—1827).  Tlie  Poor  Man’s 

Commentary.  Nine  vols.  8vo.,  and  three  vols.  4to.  1843. 
S.  30s. 

Full  of  devotion  and  sweetness.  (See  page  29). 

34  HENRY  (Matthew.  1663—1714).  Exposition.  The  fol- 

lowing are  recent  editions.  The  prices  refer  to  new  copies. 
Blackie’s,  three  vols.,  Royal  4to.,  £3  10s. ; Cassell’s,  three 
vols.,  demy  4to.,  £2  12s.  6d.  ; Griffin’s,  three  vols.,  Super- 
royal 8vo.,  £2  10s.;  Nisbet’s,  nine  vols.,  Imp.  8vo.,  £3  3s. 
S.  from  20s.  to  30s.  according  to  condition. 

For  title  and  remarks  see  pages  13,  14,  15.) 

35  HOLDEN  (George,  M.  A.)  Christian  Expositor.  Two  vols., 
8vo.  1837.  4s. 

Notes  highly  spoken  of;  we  consider  them  the  most  ordinary  of 
platitudes. 

36  JAMIESON  (Rev.  Dr.,  Glasgow).  FAUSSET  (Rev.  A.  R., 

York),  and  BROWN  (Rev.  Dr.  D.,  Aberdeen).  THE 
LIBRARY  COMMENTARY,  Critical,  Experimental, 
and  Practical.  Six  vols.  Medium  8vo.,  £3  12s. ; or  14s. 
each  vol.  Collins  & Co.,  Edinb. 

A really  standard  work.  We  consult  it  continually, 
and  with  growing  interest.  Mr.  Fausset’s  portion  strikes 
us  as  being  of  the  highest  order.  (See  page  40.) 

The  following  are  different  forms  or  abridgments 
of  the  same  work,  each  of  which  we  can  highly  recom- 
mend : — 

37  JAMIESON.  The  Complete  Commentary.  Two  vols., 

Royal  4to.,  wTitli  maps,  £2  10s.  Much  the  same  as  the 
Fourfold  Commentary.  Edinb.,  W.  Collins.  (See  No.  25.) 

38  The  Student’s  Commentary.  Four  vols.,  foolscap  8vo. 

3s.  6d.  per  vol.  W.  Collins. 

39  The  Portable  Commentary.  Two  vols.,  post  8vo.  7s. 

6d.  each.  W.  Collins,  Sons,  & Co. 

40  KITTO  (John,  D.  D.,  F.  S.  A.,  1804-1850).  The  Pictorial 

Bible.  Four  vols.,  Imp.  8vo.,  £1  10s.  1855.  Lond.  and 

Edinb.,  Chambers.  S.  20s. 

A work  of  art  as  well  as  learning.  (See  page  32. ) 


70 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


41  KITTO.  The  Illustrated  Commentary  of  the  Old  and  New 

Testaments.  A reproduction  of  the  Notes,  etc.,  of  the 
Pictorial  Bible.  Five  vols.  8vo.  1840.  S.  10s.  6d. 

The  omission  of  the  text  renders  the  work  cheaper. 

42  KITTO’S  Daily  Bible  Illustrations:  being  Original  Readings 

for  a Year,  on  subjects  relating  to  Sacred  History,  Biog- 
raphy, Geography,  Antiquities,  and  Theology.  New 
edition,  edited  and  revised  by  J.  L.  Porter,  D.  D.  Eight 
vols.,  £2  8s.  Edinb.,  Oliphant  & Cp.  S.  20s. 

May  always  be  obtained,  both  new  and  second-hand. 
(See  page  32.) 

43  LANGE  (J.  P.,  D.  D.)  Translations  of  the  Commentaries  of 

Dr.  Lange,  and  his  Collaborateurs.  Edited  by  Dr.  Schaff. 
T.  & T.  Clark. 

There  are  now  ready  eight  volumes  on  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, viz.,  Genesis,  1 vol.  ; Joshua,  Judges,  and  Euth, 
1 vol.  ; Kings,  1 vol.  ; Job,  1 vol.  ; Psalms,  1 vol.  ; 
Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  and  the  Song  of  Solomon,  1 vol.  ; 
Jeremiah  and  Lamentations,  1 vol.  ; Minor  Prophets, 
1 vol.  The  other  Books  of  the  Old  Testament  are  in 
active  preparation. 

New  Testament,  complete  in  10  vols. 

The  volumes  greatly  differ  in  excellence,  yet  none 
could  be  spared.  We  have  nothing  equal  to  them  as  a 
series.  (See  page  38.) 

44  LEES  (Fred.  R„  Pli.  D.)  and  BURNS  (Dawson,  M.  A.)  The 

Temperance  Bible  Commentary.  Demy  8vo.,  6s.  Lond., 
S.  W.  Partridge  & Co.  1872. 

Readers  will  probably  estimate  the  value  of  this  work  according  to 
their  views  upon  Total  Abstinence.  This  question  appears  to  be  one  which 
renders  both  advocates  and  opponents  too  warm  either  to  give  or  accept  a 
cool,  impartial  verdict ; we  shall  not  therefore  offer  one. 

45  LEIGH  (Sir  Edward.  1602-3 — 1671).  Annotations  from 

Job  to  Canticles.  Folio.  Lond.,  1657.  3s.  6d. 

Annotations  upon  all  the  New  Testament.  Philological 
and  Theological.  Folio.  Lond.,  1650.  3s.  6d.  Frequently 
associated  with  Richardson  on  the  Old  Testament.  (See 
No.  71.) 

Good,  brief  notes.  Antique,  but  still  prized. 


WHOLE  BIBLE, 


n 


Critica  Sacra.  In  two  parts : I.  Observations  on  all  the 
primitive  Hebrew  words  of  the  Old  Testament.  II.  Philo- 
logical aud  Theological  Observations  on  all  the  Greek 
words  of  the  New  Testament.  Folio.  Lond.,  1662.  8s.  6d. 
Home  says  this  is  “ a very  valuable  help  to  the  understanding  of  the 
original  languages.”  Parkhurst  valued  it. 

46  MANT.  (See  D’Oyly.) 

47  MAYER  (John,  D.  D.)  Commentary.  Six  vols.  folio,  and 

one  vol.  4to.  Lond.,  1653.  [The  seventh  volume,  contain- 
ing the  Catholic  Epistles  and  Revelation,  was  published  in 
4to.  only.]  £66s.  (For  full  title  and  remarks  see  page  25.) 
Laborious  writing  and  heavy  reading. 

48  MILLINGTON  (Tiiomas  S.)  The  Testimony  of  the  Heathen 

to  the  Truths  of  Holy  Writ.  Compiled  almost  exclusively 
from  Greek  and  Latin  Authors  of  the  Classical  Ages  of 
Antiquity.  4to.  Lond.,  Seely,  Jackson  & Halliday.  1863. 
S.  8s. 

It  was  a capital  idea  to  lay  the  heathen  under  contribution.  The  author 
is  at  home  in  the  Classics,  and  has  performed  his  work  well. 

49  NESS  (Christopher.  1621 — 1705).  History  and  Mystety. 

Four  vols.,  Folio.  Lond.,  1690-6.  S.  £4  to  £5. 

Quaint,  pithy,  suggestive.  Full  of  remarks  such  as 
are  to  be  found  in  Thomas  Fuller  and  Bishop  Hall. 
(See  page  27.) 

50  NEW  BIBLE  COMMENTARY,  THE.  [Sometimes  spoken 
• of  as  “ The  Speaker’s  Commentary.”]  In  progress.  Lond., 

Murray.  1871,  etc.  (For  full  title  see  page  39.) 

The  proverb  concerning  too  many  cooks  applies  also  to  Commentators. 
The  work  is  good,  but  it  might  have  been  better. 

51  PATRICK  & LOWTH.  A Critical  Commentary.  Corrected 

by  the  Rev.  J.  R.  Pitman.  Six  vols.,  Royal  4to.  1822. 
[There  are  other  editions,  but  some  of  them  do  not  contain 
the  whole  of  the  Commentary : the  above  is  one  of  the 
best.  Good  edition  in  smaller  type,  four  vols.,  Imp.  8vo., 
£3  3s.  Lond.,  W.  Tegg.]  S.  24s.  (See  page  37.) 

52  POOLE  (Matthew.  1624 — 1679).  Annotations.  Our  copy 

is  dated  1853.  Lond.,  Nisbet  &Co.  S.  21s.  Old  folios,  14s 

See  title  and  remarks  an  page  18. 


72 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


53  PURVER  (Anthony.  1702—1777).  A New  and  Literal 

Translation,  with  Notes.  Two  vols.,  Folio.  Lond.,  1764.  10s. 

A Quaker  Translation.  Often  ungrammatical  and  unintelligible.  Not 
without  its  good  points,  but  much  more  curious  than  useful. 

54  RELIGIOUS  TRACT  SOCIETY’S  COMMENTARY.  From 

Henry  and  Scott,  with  numerous  observations  from  other 
writers.  With  the  text  and  maps,  six  vols.,  Super  royal 
8vo.,  £2  6s.  Without  the  text,  six  vols.,  12mo.,  £1  4s.  S.  9s. 

The  Society  kindly  allows  Students  to  purchase  this  work  at  a reduced 
rate.  The  abridgments  are  carefully  executed. 

55  SCOTT  (Thomas.  1747—1821).  The  Holy  Bible.  A New 

Edition.  Six  vols.,  4to.  £2  10s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  S. 
20s.  (For  title  and  remarks  see  page  28.) 

J.  M.  Neale  says  of  Scott’s  practical  observations, 
“ They  are  such  as  some  men  would  not  take  the  trouble 
of  even  thinking,  many  would  not  be  at  the  pains  of 
speaking,  and — one  should  have  imagined,  were  not  the 
fact  as  it  is — such  as  no  man  would  have  condescended 
to  write  down.”  This  judgment  is  far  too  severe,  and 
reveals  the  High  Churchman  : it  raises  Scott  in  our 
esteem. 

56  SIMEON  (Charles,  M.  A.  1759 — 1836).  Horae  Homileticae ; 

or  Discourses  digested  into  one  continued  series,  forming 
a Comment  upon  every  book  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment ; twenty-one  vols.  8vo.  Seventh  edition.  Lond.,  H.  G. 
Bohn.  1845.  S.  £2  10s.  [Being  the  entire  works  of 
Charles  Simeon,  with  Copious  Indexes,  prepared  by  T. 
Hartwell  Horne. J 

Not  Commentaries,  but  we  could  not  exclude  them.  They  have  been 
called  “ a valley  of  dry  bones  ” : be  a prophet  and  they  will  live. 

57  SPEAKER’S  COMMENTARY,  THE.  (See  New  Bible  Com- 

mentary.) 

58  SUTCLIFFE  (Joseph,  M.  A.  Wesleyan  Minister).  A Com- 

mentary ; containing  Copious  Notes.  Imp.  8vo.,  12s.  6d. 
Lond.,  66  Paternoster  Row,  E.  C.  S.  7s. 

To  comprise  the  whole  Bible  in  one  volume  necessitated  notes  few  and 
brief.  Sutcliffe , though  an  Arminian,  is  in  general  so  good  that  we  wish 
we  had  more  of  him ; his  style  is  vivacious  and  forcible. 

59  TEMPERANCE  BIBLE  COMMENTARY,  THE.  (See 

Lees  R.) 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


73 


60  TRAPP  (John.  1611 — 1669).  Commentary.  Five  vols., 

Folio.  1654,  etc.  There  are  also  4to.  editions  of  parts  of 
the  Commentary.  Reprinted  by  Mr.  R.  D.  Dickinson,  Far- 
ringdon  Street,  E.  C.,  in  five  vols..  Super- royal  8vo.,  price 
£2  18s.  6d.  (published  at  £3  15s.);  or,  12s.  6d.  each  vol.  nett. 

Oh,  rare  John  Trapp  ! (See  page  20.) 

61  WALL  (William,  D.  D.  1646 — 1720).  Critical  Notes  on  the 

Old  and  New  Testament.  Three  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1730-4. 
S.  3s.  6d. 

Dr.  Wall  was  the  great  champion  of  infant  baptism  against  the  learned 
Gale.  His  notes  are  good,  but  out  of  date. 

62  WELLS  (Edward,  D.  D.  Died  1724).  Help  for  the  more 

easy  and  clear  understanding  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Six 
vols.,4to.  Oxford,  1724,  etc.  18s. 

Seldom  to  he  met  with  complete,  hut  this  need  not  be  regretted,  for 
though  somewhat  useful,  it  is  not  of  primary  importance. 

63  WESLEY  (John,  A.  M.  1703—1791).  Notes  on  Old  and 

New  Testament.  Four  vols.,  4to.  Lond.,  1764.  S.  20s. 
[Editions  of  the  New  Test.,  with  Wesley’s  Notes,  are  pub- 
lished at  the  Wesleyan  Conference  Office.  18mo.,  2s.; 
8vo.,  4s.] 

The  Notes  on  the  New  Testament  are  esteemed,  but  Dr.  Clark  says 
that  those  on  the  Old  are  meagre  and  unsatisfactory.  He  is  quite  right. 

64  WILSON  (Thomas,  D.  D.  1663—1755.  Bishop  of  Sodor  and 

Man).  The  Holy  Bible,  with  Notes  and  various  renderings. 
By  the  Rev.  C.  Crutwell.  Three  vols.,  4to.  Lond.,  1785. 

The  good  Bishop’s  notes  are  brief  hints,  only  intended  for  the  explana- 
tion or  practical  improvement  of  certain  passages ; their  value  to  Biblical 
Students  is  inconsiderable.  Crutwell’s  various  readings  are  numerous. 
We  gave  no  less  than  £3  3 s.  for  the  copy  by  which  we  have  been  able  to 
form  this  estimate  ; but  for  our  own  use  we  should  be  sorry  to  give  half-a- 
guinea  for  it. 

65  WORDSWORTH  (Christopher,  D.  D.  Bishop  of  Lincoln.) 

See  page  37. 

66  YOUNG  (Robert,  LL.  D.)  Commentary  on  the  Bible,  as 

Literally  and  Idiomatically  Translated.  Crown  8vo.  Lond., 
Fullarton  & Co.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Too  small  to  be  of  any  use.  You  cannot  put  the  sea  into  a tea  cup. 


74 


WHOLE  BIBLE. 


OLD  TESTAMENT,  OR  CONSIDERABLE  POR- 
TIONS THEREOF. 

67  AINSWORTH  (Henry,  Died  1622).  Annotations  upon  the 

Five  Bookes  of  Moses,  the  Booke  of  Psalmes,  and  the  Song 
of  Songs : wherein  the  Hebrew  words  and  sentences  are 
compared  with  the  Greeke  and  Chaldee  versions.  Folio. 
Lond.,  1627  and  1639.  7s. 

“ Ainsworth  was  a celebrated  scholar  and  an  excellent 
divine.  His  uncommon  skill  in  Hebrew  learning,  and 
his  excellent  Commentaries  on  the  Scriptures  are  held 
in  high  reputation  to  this  day.” — Brook’s  Lives  of  the 
Puritans. 

68  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.  D.),  Christology  of  the  Old 

Testament : a Commentary  on  the  Messianic  Predictions. 
Four  vols.,  £2  2s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1858.  S.  20s. 

This  great  work. deals  with  a most  vital  theme  in  a masterly  manner. 
It  has  always  been  held  in  high  esteem.  We  confess,  however,  that  we 
can  only  read  it  as  a task,  for  the  dry  scholastic  style  repels  us,  and  it 
seems  to  us  that  in  answering  a number  of  sceptical  doctors,  whose  opin- 
ions are  ridiculous,  the  author  has  made  much  ado  about  nothing. 

69  HORSLEY  (Samuel,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  and  F.  A.  S.  Bishop 

of  St.  Asaph.  1733 — 1806).  Biblical  Criticism  on  the  first 
fourteen  Historical  Books  of  the  Old  Testament ; also  on 
the  first  nine  Prophetical  Books.  Second  edition.  Two 
vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1844.  S.  7s.  6d. 

These  criticisms  will  be  of  more  interest  to  the  scholar  than  of  value  to 
the  minister.  Horsley  was  far  too  ready  to  invent  new  readings ; yet  he 
was  a master  in  his  own  line.  He  writes  very  dogmatically  and  with  a 
violent  bias  toward  a theory  of  interpretation  which  with  all  its  excel- 
lencies, cannot  be  everywhere  maintained.  Numbers  of  other  writers 
have  followed  in  his  track,  but  none  with  equal  footsteps. 

70  JACKSON  (Arthur,  M.  A.  1593—1666).  A Help  for  the 

Understanding  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  (Genesis  to  Isaiah). 
Four  vols.  4to.  1643,  etc.  10s.  to  20s. 

Rather  tame,  but  will  well  repay  quiet  reading.  His  works  are  now 
somewhat  rare.  (See  page  26.) 


PENTATEUCH. 


75 


71  ORTON  (Job,  D.  D.  1717—1783).  Exposition  of  the  Old 

Testament,  with  Devotional  and  Practical  Reflections,  Pub- 
lished from  the  Author’s  Manuscripts,  by  Robert  Gentle- 
man. Six  vols.  8vo.  Shrewsbury,  1788.  Reprinted,  1823. 
S.  6s. 

A sort  of  paraphrase,  after  the  maimer  of  Doddridge's  Family  Expositor , 
which  it  was  intended  to  accompany.  Not  a very  able  production. 

72  RICHARDSON  (John,  Bishop  of  Ardagh.  Died  1654). 

Choice  Observations  and  Explanations  upon  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, containing  in  them  many  remarkable  matters,  addi- 
tional to  the  large  Annotations  made  by  some  of  the 
Assembly  of  Divines.  Folio,  1655.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Of  secondary  importance,  and  very  short;  yet  good.  Frequently 
bound  up  with  Leigh  (No.  45). 


PENTATEUCH  AND  OTHER  HISTORICAL 
BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

73  AINSWORTH  (Henry),  Annotations  on  the  Pentateuch 

(See  also  No.  67).  4to.  1616.  2s.  6d. 

Thoroughly  learned.  Though  old  not  out  of  date. 

74  ALEXANDER  (William).  The  Pentateuch,  with  Notes. 

S.  Is.  6d. 

A book  of  no  importance. 

75  BABINGTON  (Gervase,  Bishop  of  Worcester.  Died  1610)* 

In  Babington’s  works,  folio,  1622,  there  are  “Certain© 
plain,  brief,  and  comfortable  notes  ” upon  the  Five  Books 
of  Moses.  Whole  works  20s. 

Our  copy  is  in  the  old  Black  Letter.  It  contains  little  to  repay  the 
student  for  toiling  through  the  old-fashioned  expressions. 

76  BARRETT  (R.  A.  F.,  M.  A.)  A Synopsis  of  Criticisms  upon 

those  passages  of  the  Old  Testament  in  which  modern  com- 
mentators have  differed  from  the  Authorized  Version. 
Two  vols.  in  two  parts  each,  and  vol.  III.  part  1,  large 
8vo.,  1847.  [Only  extends  from  Genesis  to  Esther.] 
S.  10s.  6d. 

The  object  of  this  work  is  to  lay  before  the  reader  the  principal 
alterations  which  modern  critics  have  proposed  in  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, together  with  the  reasons  for  or  against  such  emendations.  Many 
of  the  notes  are  in  Latin.  Of  small  use  to  the  average  minister. 


76 


PENTATEUCH. 


77  BATE  (Julius,  M.  A.  1711 — 1771).  New  Literal  Translation 

of  the  Pentateuch  and  Historical  Books  to  end  of  2 Kings. 
With  Notes.  4to.  Lond.,  1773.  4s. 

Paper  spoiled.  We  greatly  grudge  the  four  shillings  which  we  gave 
for  it. 

78  BIBLE  TEACHINGS ; or  Remarks  on  Genesis,  Exodus,  and 

Leviticus.  With  Recommendatory  Preface  by  Rev.  W.  B. 
Mackenzie.  8vo.  Lond.,  1855.  S.  2s.  6d. 

This  book  was  written  by  the  Three  Misses  Bird,  of  Taplow.  The 
Remarks  are  very  plain  and  practical,  and  a spirit  of  earnest  piety  and 
fervent  prayer  pervades  them  throughout. 

79  BLUNT  (Henry,  A.  M.  Died  1843).  Family  Exposition  of 

Pentateuch.  1844.  Three  vols.,  12mo.  6s.  each.  Iiatcli- 
ards.  S.  three  vols.  5s. 

See  remarks  under  each  separate  volume. 

80  BRIGHT  WELL  (T.)  Notes  selected  from  the  exegetical 

parts  of  Rosenmiiller’s  Scholia,  and  of  Datlie’s  Notes  to  his 
Latin  version ; also  from  Schrank,  Michaelis,  Le  Clerc, 
Ainsworth,  Poole,  and  other  authors.  8vo.  Lond.,  1840. 
S.  Is.  6d. 

This  writer  worked  very  industriously  at  the  almost  impossible  task 
of  condensing  the  twenty-eight  volumes  of  Ro&enmul'ler' s Notes.  Besides 
the  remarks  from  authors  mentioned  in  the  text,  there  are  observations 
from  the  manuscripts  of  Joseph  Kinghorn , of  Norwich.  It  is  not  a didactic 
or  spiritual  work,  but  almost  entirely  explanatory  and  illustrative. 

81  CHRIST  IN  THE  LAW  ; or  the  Gospel  feresliadowed  in  the 

Pentateuch.  Compiled  by  a Priest  of  the  Church  of 
England.  Christ  in  the  Prophets. — Joshua  to  Kings. 
Two  vols.,  Foolscap  8vo.  3s.  6d.  each.  Lond.,  Masters 
1872  and  1873. 

Of  the  High  Church  order,  and  praised  by  the  Saturday  Review. 
What  worse  need  be  said  ? Yet  will  we  add  that  the  savor  of  Christ  in 
these  books  saves  them  from  unqualified  condemnation. 

82  DELGADO  (Isaac.  Jewish  Teacher).  New  Translation.  4to. 

Lond.,  1789.  2s. 

The  author  modestly  says,  that  his  work  is  highly  usef  ul.  This  is  an- 
other instance  of  paternal  partiality,  and  of  “ great  cry  and  little  wool.” 

83  ETHERIDGE  (J.  W.,  M.  A.)  The  Targums  of  Onkelos  and 

Jonathan  Ben  Uzziel  on  the  Pentateuch,  with  the  Frag- 
ments of  the  Jerusalem  Targum,  Leviticus,  Numbers,  and 
Deuteronomy.  8vo.  Lond.,  Longmans,  1865.  S.  7s.  6d. 
Comparativelv  few  of  our  readers  will  set  much  store  by  the  Targums 
of  Onkelos  and  Jonathan  Ben  Uzziel;  but  those  who  desire  to  read 
will  find  here  a good  literal  version. 


PENTATEUCH. 


77 


84  GEDDES  (Alexandek,  LL.  D. — A Roman  Catholic  Divine. — 

1737 — 1802.)  Translation  from  corrected  texts  with  various 
Reading  and  Notes.  [Genesis  to  Ruth  only  published.] 
Three  vols.,  4to.,  1792 — 1800.  12s. 

The  author  was  a Hebraist  of  considerable  repute,  but  treated  the 
inspired  word  far  too  flippantly.  His  style  of  criticism  is  essentially 
sceptical. 

85  GERLACH  (Otto  Von.  1801—1849).  Pentateuch.  Trans- 

lated by  the  Rev.  Henry  Downing.  Demy  8vo.,  10s.  (id. 
Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 

Very  different  from  other  German  authors.  Plain,  clear,  and  instruc- 
tive. Not  choked  up  with  metaphysical  bewilderments  and  long  lists  of 
sceptical  authors  whose  names  defile  the  pages  which  bear  them. 

86  HAVERNICK  (Dr.  H.  A.  Ch.)  Historico-Critical  Introduction 

to  the  Pentateuch.  Translated  by  A.  Thomson,  A.  M. 
Edinb.,  Clark.  1850.  S.  10s.  6d. 

Almost  entirely  occupied  with  a discussion  upon  the  genuineness  of 
the  Pentateuch.  A check  to  the  rationalistic  and  infidel  spirit.  Those 
who  have  never  taken  the  poison  do  not  need  the  antidote. 

87  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.  D.)  Genuineness  of  the  Pen- 

tateuch. Translated  by  J.  E.  Ryland.  Two  vols.,  8vo. 
Edinb.,  1847.  S.  8s. 

This  great  author  contends  ably  for  the  Pentateuch,  but  the  perusal  of 
his  book  reminds  us  of  the  king  who 

“ Fought  all  his  battles  o’er  again, 

And  thrice  he  routed  all  his  foes,  and  thrice  he  slew  the  slain.” 

88  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses ; or  the  Books  of 

Moses  illustrated  by  the  Monuments  of  Egypt.  8vo.  7s. 
6d.  Edinb.,  1845.  T.  & T.  Clark. 

Dr.  Hengstenberg,  as  Professor  at  Berlin,  had  access  to  the  rich  collec- 
tion of  Egyptian  antiquities  in  the  Museum,  and  he  has  made  noble  use 
of  his  advantages. 

89  HOWARD  (The  Hon.  E.  J.,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Lichfield.)  1.  Gen- 

esis according  to  the  LXX.  Translated  into  English,  with 
Notes  on  the  Passages  in  which  it  differs  from  our  Author- 
ized Version.  Cr.  8vo.  8s.  6d.  2.  Exodus  and  Leviticus, 
10s.  6d.  3.  Numbers  and  Deuteronomy,  10s.  6d.  Camb., 
Macmillan,  1857,  etc.  S.  3s.  6d.  each. 

Of  no  particular  use  to  preachers ; but  the  Guardian  says,  “ It  is  an 
excellent  introduction  to  the  comparative  study  of  God’s  word,  in  those 
three  languages  with  which  an  ordinary  English  student  is  mainly  con- 
cerned.” 


78 


PENTATEUCH, 


90  JAMIESON  (J.,  LL.  D.)  The  Pentateuch,  with  Notes,  etc. 

[Anon.]  Folio.  Lond.,  1748.  S.  6s. 

Published  anonymously.  Mainly  a compilation,  in  which  more  in- 
dustry was  shown  in  the  collection  than  discretion  in  the  selection. 

91  KALISCH  (M.  M.,  Ph.  D.)  Historical  and  Critical  Commen- 

tary on  the  Old  Testament ; with  a New  Translation.  8vo. 
Vol.  I.  Genesis,  18s.  ; or  adapted  for  the  general  reader, 
12s.  Vol.  II.  Exodus,  15s.,  12s.  Vol.  III.  Leviticus,  part 
1,  15s.,  8s.  Vol.  IV.  Leviticus,  part  2,  15s.,  8s.  Lond., 
Longmans.  1858. 

Contains  a large  amount  of  historical  illustration,  shedding  new  light 
upon  the  letter  of  the  Word.  The  author  has  used  the  fresh  information 
which  has  come  to  us  from  the  Euphrates  and  the  Nile.  At  the  same  time 
he  sows  scepticisms  broadcast,  and  we  cannot  recommend  him. 

92  KEIL  (Carl  Frtedrich,  D.  D.,  Ph.  D.)  Pentateuch.  Three 

vols.,  8vo.  31s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  &.  T.  Clark.  1864. 

A work  for  the  learned.  It  has  received  the  highest  commendations 
from  competent  scholars.  But  it  is  somewhat  dull  and  formal. 

93  KELLY  (William).  Introductory  Lectures.  Cr.  8vo.,  4s. 

6d.  Lond.,  W.  H.  Broom. 

By  a leading  writer  of  the  exclusive  Plymouth  school.  Not  to  our 
mind. 

94  KIDDER  (RrcHARD,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells. — Died 

1703).  Five  Books  of  Moses.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond., 
1694.  4s. 

Of  no  importance  ; a chip  in  the  porridge : mild  as  a modem  Bishop. 

95  KINGSLEY  (Charles,  M.  A.,  Canon  of  Westminster.  Died 

1875).  The  Gospel  of  the  Pentateuch.  [18  sermons.] 
Foolscap  8 vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Macmillan. 

A small  volume  of  Kingsley' 6 usual  sort.  Not  over-freighted  with  what 
is  usually  known  as  the  Gospel ; but  plain  and  practical,  with  common 
sense  remarks  for  common  people. 

96  LAW  (Henry,  M.  A.,  Dean  of  Gloucester).  “ Christ  is  All.” 

The  Gospel  of  the  Old  Testament  Several  editions;  a 
recent  one  is  published  by  the  Religious  Tract  Society,  in 
four  vols.,  Cr.  8vo.  2s.  each. 

Deservedly  popular.  Simple,  instructive,  full  of 
Christ.  Law  abounds  in  gospel. 


PENTATEUCH. 


79 


97  MACDON  ALD  (Donald,  M.  A.)  Introduction,  and  an  inquiry 

into  the  genuineness,  authority  and  design  of  the  Mosaic 
writings.  Two  vols.,  demy  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  Clark.  1861. 

“ A full  review  of  the  evidence,  external  and  internal,  for  the  genuine- 
ness, authenticity,  and  Divine  character  of  the  Pentateuch.  Its  special 
attention  is  devoted  to  the  connection  between  the  Pentateuch  and  the 
great  scheme  of  revelation,  of  which  it  forms  the  basis.” — Guardian. 

98  MORISON  (James,  1762 — 1809).  Introductory  Key  to  the 

first  four  Books  of  Moses ; being  an  attempt  to  show  that 
the  great  design  of  the  things  recorded  therein  was  the 
sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  following  glory.  8vo.  Perth, 
1810.  S.  3s. 

Plain,  forcible,  and  instructive  remarks,  realizing  the  title — an  Intro- 
ductory Key. 

99  PARKER  (Samuel,  son  of  Bp.  Samuel  Parker).  Bibliotheca 

Biblica ; a Commentary  gathered  out  of  the  writings  of 
fathers  and  ecclesiastical  historians,  etc.  [Anonymous.] 
Five  vols.,  4to.  Oxford,  1720,  etc.  [Genesis  to  Deuteronomy 
only  completed.]  35s. 

Darling  says,  that  this  is  “ a commentary  of  profound  learning  and 
research ; ” but  it  seems  to  us  to  be  mainly  filled  with  that  archaic  learning 
which  is  now  out  of  date. 

100  PIERCE  (Samuel  Eyles).  Discourses  on  the  several  Rev- 

elations of  the  Lord  Jesus,  from  the  Fall,  to  Mosefc,  etc. 
8vo.  Lond.,  1815.  S.  3s. 

Dr.  Hawker  says,  that il  these  Discourses  carry  with  them  testimonies 
of  being  written  under  Divine  teaching.”  Sweet,  but  not  very  expository. 

101  PYLE  (Thomas,  M.  A.  1674 — 1756).  Paraphrase,  with 

Notes.  Four  vols.,  8vo.  1717 — 28.  S.  3s.  [Genesis  to 
Esther  only.] 

A pile  of  paper,  valuable  to  housemaids  for  lighting  fires. 

102  ROBERTSON  (James,  A.  M.)  Clavis  Pentateuclii.  Analy- 

sis of  the  Hebrew  words  in  the  Pentateuch,  with  Notes. 
Reprinted,  edited  by  Kinghorn,  at  Norwich,  1824.  8vo. 
S.  9s. 

Almost  entirely  in  Latin,  and  therefore  useful  only  to  those  who  can 
readily  read  that  language.  The  work  was  in  good  repute  in  its  day. 

103  SAURIN  (James.  1677 — 1730).  Dissertations  on  the  most 

memorable  events  of  the  Bible.  [Vol.  I.  The  Books  of 
Moses,  was  all  ever  published  in  English.  Folio.  Lond., 
1723.]  S.  5s. 

More  eloquent  than  accurate.  Florid  rather  than  solid. 


80 


PENTATEUCH, 


104  SHEPHEARD  (H.,  M.  A.)  Traditions  of  Eden : or  Proofs 

of  tlie  Historical  Truth  of  the  Pentateuch,  from  existing 
facts,  and  from  the  Customs  and  Monuments  of  all  Nations. 
Demy  8vo.  10s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co. 

A very  interesting  and  curious  work.  Good  lectures  might  be  gathered 
from  it  for  week-night  instruction.  Not  a Commentary. 

105  STANLEY  (Arthur  Penrhyn,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Westmin- 

ster). Lectures  on  the  History  of  the  Jewish  Church. 
Part  I.  Abraham  to  Samuel.  Part  II.  Samuel  to  the 
Captivity.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  32s.  Lond.,  1870.  S.  18s. 

A fascinating  book,  which  no  one  can  read  without  being  the  better 
able  to  realize  the  scenes  of  Scripture  history.  The  author’s  broad  views 
are  known  and  deplored : that  he  has  equal  breadth  of  learning  we  cheer- 
fully admit. 

106  THISTLE  WAITE  (W.,  M.  A.)  Expository  Sermons.  Four 

vols.,  12mo.  Lond.,  1837-8.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Sermons  as  good  as  these  are  plentiful  as  blackberries.  Why  were 
they  printed  ? 

107  TOWNSEND  (George,  D.  D.,  Canon  of  Durham).  The 

Pentateuch  and  the  Book  of  Job,  arranged  in  Chronologi- 
cal Order,  with  Prayers  and  Notes.  Two  vols.,  8vo. 
Lond.,  1849.  10s. 

A singular  combination  of  family  prayers,  essays  and  notes,  by  an  able 
but  singular  writer. 

108  WRIGHT  (Abraham).  A Practical  commentary,  wherein 

the  Text  of  every  Chapter  is  Practically  expounded,  in  a 
way  not  usually  trod  by  Commentators.  Folio.  1662. 
10s.  6d.  to  20s. 

An  extremely  rare  book.  The  style  and  matter  are  after  the  manner  of 
Christopher  Ness.  Wright  does  not  comment  upon  every  verse,  but  after 
indicating  the  run  of  the  chapter  gives  little  sermons  upon  the  more  salient 
points.  Ho  is  very  quaint  and  pithy. 


GENESIS. 


81 


GENESIS. 

109  ALFORD  (Henry,  Dean  of  Canterbury.  1810 — 1871). 

The  Book  of  Genesis  and  part  of  the  Book  of  Exodus 
[Ch.  I. — XXV.] : a revised  version,  with  Commentary. 
Demy  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  W.  Isbister  & Co.  1872. 

The  works  of  this  eminent  scholar  are  too  well  known 
and  appreciated  to  need  even  a word  from  us. 

110  BLUNT  (Henry,  M.  A.)  Genesis  [Vol.  I.  of  a Family  Ex- 

position of  the  Pentateuch.  12ino.  Loud.,  Hatchards. 
1841.]  S.  Is.  6d. 

Simple  Expositions  for  family  reading.  Good,  but  not  brilliant. 

111  BURROUGHS  (W.  K.,  M.  A.)  Lectures  on  Genesis.  8vo. 

Dublin,  1848. 

Useful  to  grocers  and  buttermen.  Worth  nothing  to  students. 

112  BUSH  (George.  Prof,  of  Heb.  and  Orient.  Lit.,  New  York). 

Notes  on  Genesis.  Two  vols.,  small  8vo.  New  York, 
1852.  Reprinted  in  London  in  one  vol.,  8vo.  S.  5s. 

Bush  has  in  the  most  barefaced  manner  taken  copious  verbatim  extracts 
from  Andrew  Fuller,  without  acknowledgment,  and  he  has  also  plagiarized 
Lawson  on  Joseph  by  wholesale,  without  even  mentioning  his  name.  For 
such  a scholar  to  be  guilty  of  wholesale  plunder  is  inexcusable.  It  is  one 
of  the  worst  cases  of  robbery  we  have  ever  met  with,  and  deserves  a far 
stronger  denunciation  than  our  gentle  pen  and  slender  space  will  permit. 

113  CALVIN  (John).  Genesis,  translated  by  Tho.  Tymme. 

Black  letter.  4to.  Lond.,  1578.  9s. 

Participates  in  the  general  excellencies  of  Calvin’s 
works. 

114  CANDLISH  (Robert  S.,  D.  D.)  Lectures.  New  Edition. 

Two  vols.,  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  Adam  Black.  1842. 

. We  venture  to  characterize  this  as  the  work  upon 
Genesis,  so  far  as  Lectures  can  make  up  an  exposition  ; 
we  have  greatly  profited  by  its  perusal.  It  should  be 
in  every  Biblical  library. 

115  CLOSE  (Francis,  D.  D.,  A.  M.,  Dean  of  Carlisle).  Histori- 

cal Discourses.  12mo.  Lond.,  1828.  S.  2s.  6d. 

A course  of  smoothly-flowing,  respectable,  quiet,  evangelical  sermons. 
Nobody  could  be  so  wicked  as  to  call  them  sensational. 

4* 


82 


GENESIS. 


116  COGHLAN  (C.  L.)  Genesis  and  St.  Matthew.  Two  vols., 

8vo.  1832.  3s.  6d. 

Consists  entirely  of  parallel  and  illustrative  passages  of  Scripture  printed 
in  full ; it  is  superseded  by  the  Commentary  Wholly  Biblical. 

117  GUMMING  (John,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.  E.)  Scripture  Readings 

on  Genesis.  Small  8vo.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1853.  S.  2s. 
Dr.  Cumming’s  works  are  not  very  original,  but  his  style  is  flowing,  his 
teachings  are  always  evangelical,  and  he  puts  other  men’s  thoughts  into 
pleasing  language. 

118  DAWSON  (Abraham).  New  Translation  of  Genesis 

I. — XVII.],  with  Notes.  4to.  Lond.,  1763.  2s.  6d. 

Tainted  with  infidelity.  A writer  of  the  Geddes  school. 

119  DIMOCK  (Henry).  Notes.  4to.  Gloucester,  1804.  2s. 

to  4s. 

Chiefly  taken  up  with  the  various  readings  of  Hebrew  MSS.  The 
young  student  will  not  value  it.  The  same  author  has  written  on  Exodus 
and  the  Prophets. 

120  FRANKS  (James,  A.  M.)  Sacred  Literature ; or  Remarks 

on  Genesis.  8vo.  Halifax,  1802.  S.  2s.  to  4s. 

This  writer  collected  notes  from  various  authors.  As  the  sources  from 
which  he  drew  his  extracts  are  within  reach,  we  can  select  for  ourselves. 

121  FULLER  (Andrew,  1754 — 1815).  Expository  Discourses 

on  Genesis.  One  small  vol.,  Is.  6d.  (Also  in  Fuller’s 
Works.) 

Weighty,  judicious,  and  full  of  Gospel  truth.  One  of 
the  very  best  series  of  discourses  extant  upon  Genesis,  as 
Bush  also  thought. 

122  GIBBENS  (Nicholas).  Questions  and  Disputations  con- 

cerning Holy  Scripture.  Genesis.  4to.  1602.  3s. 

In  his  own  fashion  this  antique  writer  tries  to  answer  curious  questions 
which  are  suggested  by  Genesis.  His  day  is  over. 

123  GREENFIELD  (William,  M.  R.  A.  S.  Editor  of  the  Com- 

prehensive Bible).  Genesis  in  English  and  Hebrew,  with 
an  Interlinear  Translation,  Notes,  and  Grammatical  intro- 
duction. 8vo.  Lond.,  1862.  S.  3s. 

This  work  will  not  only  enable  the  Student  to  get  at  the  literal  mean- 
ing of  the  text,  but  may  be  used  as  an  introduction  to  the  Hebrew  lan- 
guage. The  plan  is  most  admirable  and  we  earnestly  commend  it  to  the 
attention  of  those  uninstructed  in  the  sacred  tongue. 


I 


GENESIS.  83 

124  GROVES  (Henry  Charles,  M.  A.)  Commentary  on 

Genesis,  for  readers  of  the  English  version.  Small  8vo 
Lond.,  and  Camb.,  Macmillan  & Co.  1861.  S.  2s.  to  6s. 
Physical  science,  the  discoveries  of  travellers,  and  the  results  of  criti- 
cism, so  far  as  they  hear  upon  Genesis,  are  here  brought  within  the  reach 
of  the  general  reader. 

125  HARWOOD  (T.)  Annotations.  8vo.  Lond.,  1789.  Is.  6d. 
The  author  professed  to  offer  his  work  with  great  diffidence,  and  he 

had  just  cause  to  do  so : he  had  better  have  burned  his  manuscript. 

126  HAWKER  (John,  M.  A.)  Bible  Thoughts  in  Quiet  Hours. 

Genesis.  Small  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  Lond.,  Yapp.  1873. 

Deeply  spiritual  reflections,  not  without  learning  and  critical  power. 
The  preacher  will  find  here  many  hints  for  sermons. 

127  HEAD  (F.  A.)  The  World  and  its  Creator.  Cr.  8vo.  Lond., 

1847.  2s. 

One  of  the  many  good,  books  which  from  lack  of  vigor  are  only  “ born 
to  die.” 

128  HUGHES  (George,  B.  D.,  Puritan,  1603 — 1667).  Analytical 

Exposition  of  Genesis,  and  of  XXIII  chapters  of  Exodus. 
Folio.  1672.  10s.  6d.  to  15s. 

The  deductions  which  Hughes  draws  from  the  text 
are  of  the  nature  of  homiletical  hints,  and  for  this  rea- 
son he  will  be  a treasure  to  the  minister.  He  belongs 
to  the  noble  army  of  Puritans. 

129  JACOBUS  (Melancthon  W.,  Professor  of  Biblical  Litera- 

ture, Alleghany,  U.  S.)  Notes.  Two  vols.  sm.  8vo.  New 
York,  1866.  S.  8s. 

A very  valuable  work,  in  which  Colenso  is  boldly  met 
and  answered.  It  contains  much  Gospel  teaching,  and 
aids  the  preacher  greatly.  Hot  easily  to  be  obtained. 
It  ought  to  be  reprinted. 

130  JERVIS  WHITE-JERVIS  (John.)  Genesis : a New  Trans- 

lation collated  with  the  Samaritan,  Septuagint,  and 
Syriac,  with  Notes,  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Bagsters.  1852. 
S.  5s. 

Brings  out  very  vividly  the  oriental  character  of  Genesis,  and  although 
we  cannot  reconcile  ourselves  to  Alih-rauhaum , Is'hauk,  and  JPaakobh, 
and  find  it  hard  to  believe  in  Saurauh  and  ITaughaur,  we  have  been  glad 
of  the  light  which  the  East  and  its  languages  have  here  afforded. 


84 


GENESIS. 


131  JUKES  (Andrew).  Types  of  Genesis.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond., 

Longmans.  1858.  S.  3s.  6d. 

In  many  places  far  too  forced,  and  therefore  to  he  read  with  caution ; 
but  in  its  own  spiritualizing  way  very  masterly.  Jukes  dives  deep. 

132  LANGE’S  COMMENTARY  edited  by  Dr.  Sckaff.  Vol.  I. 

Commentary  on  Genesis.  Imp.  8vo.,  21s.  ; or  to  sub- 
scribers, 15s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1868. 

The  best  of  the  series,  and  in  all  respects  beyond  price. 

133  MACKINTOSH]  (C.  H.)  Notes  on  Genesis.  By  C.  H.  M. 

12mo.  Second  Edition.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  G.  Morrish.  1858. 

Precious  and  edifying  reflections  marred  by  peculiar- 
ities. 

134  MACGREGOR  (Sir  C.,  Bart.,  M.  A.)  Notes  for  Students 

in  Divinity.  Part  1.  [Chap.  i-xi.J  8vo.  Lond.,  Parker. 
1853.  S.  3s. 

Contains  a great  deal  of  learning,  of  small  use  to  the  preacher.  Many 
curious  and  knotty  points  which  arise  in  the  first  eleven  chapters  of  Gen- 
esis are  discussed  with  considerable  ability. 

135  MURPHY  (James  G.,  LL.  D.,  Professor  of  Hebrew, 

Belfast).  Commentary  on  Genesis,  with  a New  Transla- 
tion. 8 vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1863. 
S.  5s.  6d. 

“A  work  of  massive  scholarship,  abounding  in  rich 
and  noble  thought,  and  remarkably  fresh  and  sugges- 
tive.”— Evangelical  Mag. 

136  OSBURN  (William).  Israel  in  Egypt ; or  the  Books  of 

Genesis  and  Exodus  illustrated  by  existing  Monuments. 
Small  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1856.  S.  2s. 

Not  a Commentary ; but  a volume  full  of  interest,  which  should  be 
studied  by  all  who  would  understand  this  portion  of  history.  „ 

137  PAUL  (William,  A.  M.)  Analysis  and  Critical  Interpreta- 

tion of  the  Hebrew  Text,  preceded  by  a Hebrew  Grammar. 
8vo.  Edinb.  and  Lond.,  W.  Blackwood  & Sons.  1852. 
S.  8s. 

Designed  to  promote  the  study  of  Hebrew.  Not  a comment,  but  rather 
a grammatical  exercise.  Useful  to  students  of  the  sacred  tongue. 

138  PRESTON  (Theodore,  M.  A.)  Phraseological  Notes  on  the 

Hebrew  Text.  8vo.  Lond.,  1853.  S.  4s. 

Intended  to  explain  and  illustrate  the  most  remarkable  peculiarities 
and  anomalies  of  matter,  style,  and  phrase  in  the  Book  of  Genesis.  It 
may  interest  Hebraists,  but  can  little  aid  the  preacher. 


GENESIS. 


85 


139  SIBTHORPE  (Richard  Waldo,  B.  D.)  Genesis,  with 

Brief  Observations.  Imp.  8vo.  Lond.,  1835.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Mere  platitudes.  Paper  spoiled. 

140  TURNER  (Samuel  H.,  D.  D.,  Professor  Columbia  College, 

New  York).  A companion  to  Genesis.  8vo.  New  York, 
1851.  S.  4s.  6d. 

In  Horne's  Introduction  we  read  : — “ Though  not  designed  to  be  a 
Commentary,  this  valuable  work  furnishes  the  Biblical  student  with  abun- 
dant aid  for  the  exact  and  literal  interpretation  of  the  Book  of  Genesis.” 

141  WARNER  (Richard).  Exposition.  12mo.  Lond.,  Long- 

mans. 1840.  S.  2s. 

Common-place  remarks ; intended  to  be  used  at  family  worship.  Likely 
to  send  the  servants  to  sleep. 

142  WHATELEY  (William).  Prototypes;  or  the  Primario 

Precedent  Presidents  out  of  the  Booke  of  Genesis.  Shew- 
ing the  Good  and  Bad  Things  they  Did  and  Had.  Prac- 
tically adapted  to  our  Information  and  Reformation. 
Folio.  Lond.,  1640.  5s.  6d. 

A queer  old  book.  The  oddity  of  the  title  is  borne  out  by  the  singu- 
larity of  the  matter.  It  does  not  expound  each  verse;  but  certain  incidents 
are  dwelt  upon. 

143  WILLET  (Andrew.  1562—1621).  Hexapla.  A sixfold 

Exposition  of  Genesis.  Folio.  1605.  5s.  to  8s. 

This  work  is  called  by  its  author  a Hexapla , because  he  treats  his  sub- 
ject under  six  heads,  giving  “a  sixfold  use  of  every  chapter,  showing,  1. 
The  method,  or  argument.  2.  The  divers  readings.  3.  The  explanation 
of  difficult  questions  and  doubtful  places.  4.  The  places  of  doctrine.  5. 
Places  of  confutation.  6.  Moral  observations.”  Willet  is  tedious  read- 
ing; his  method  hampers  him..  In  all  his  Commentaries  he  lumbers 
along  in  his  six-wheeled  wagon. 

144  WRIGHT  (C.  H.  H.)  Book  of  Genesis  in  Hebrew,  with 

various  Readings,  Notes,  etc.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Williams 
& Norgate.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Intended  to  assist  the  student  who  has  mastered  the  elements  of 
Hebrew  Grammar  to  acquire  a better  knowledge  of  that  language.  Rather 
a class-book  than  a Commentary. 


86  GENESIS — EARLY  CHAPTERS,  AND  PATRIARCHS, 


GENESIS  — EARLY  CHAPTERS,  AND  PATRI- 
ARCHS. 

145  BONAR  (Horatius,  D.  D.)  Earth’s  Morning ; or  Thoughts 

on  Genesis.  12mo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1875. 

An  exposition  of  the  first  six  chapters  only.  The 
author  endeavors  “ to  investigate  the  meaning  of  each 
verse  and  word  ; that,  having  done  so,  the  exact  relation 
of  God  in  these  may  be  brought  out,  and  the  spiritual 
truth  envoi  ved.”  He  has  in  a great  measure  attained 
his  object.  What  more  could  be  said  in  his  praise  ? 

146  BUN Y AN  (John).  Ten  first  chapters  of  Genesis,  and  part 

of  the  eleventh.  [In  Bunyan’s  Works.]  Complete  works, 
S.  30s. 

Allegorical  and  spiritual.  Banyan's  characteristics  are  very  promi- 
nently manifest. 

147  EDERSHEIM  (Alfred,  D.  D.)  World  before  the  Flood, 

and  History  of  the  Patriarchs.  Small  sq.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Religious  Tract  Society.  1875. 

The  author  has  mainly  aimed  at  giving  instruction  to  the  Sunday  School 
Teacher,  and  the  Bible  Class  Student.  He  may  be  read  with  profit  by 
students  of  a higher  grade.  The  work  is  not  a Commentary,  but  is  full 
of  instruction. 

148  HENRY  (Philip,  M.  A.  1631 — 1696).  Exposition  of  the 

first  eleven  chapters  of  Genesis.  18mo.  Lond.,  1839. 
S.  Is. 

Interesting  as  the  exposition  of  Matthew  Henry's  father,  taken  down 
from  his  lips  at  family  prayer  by  Matthew , his  son.  This  probably  suggested 
the  famous  Commentary. 

149  HURDIS  (James).  Select  Critical  Remarks  upon  the  English 

version  of  the  first  ten  chapters  of  Genesis.  8vo.  Lond., 
1793.  2s. 

“ Judicious  observations  ” ; but  it  is  so  easy  to  be  judicious.  Unimpor- 
tant. 

150  LUTHER  (Martin).  On  the  first  five  chapters  of  Genesis, 

translated  by  Dr.  Henry  Cole.  8vo.  Edinb.,  1858. 
S.  5s.  fid. 

Cole  made  a choice  selection.  Luther  left  four  volumes  upon  Genesis, 
in  Latin.  How  these  Reformers  worked  1 


GENESIS — EARLY  CHAPTERS,  AND  PATRIARCHS.  87 


151  MACDONALD  (D.)  Creation  and  the  Fall.  The  first  three 

chapters  of  Genesis.  8vo.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  12s. 

“ We  do  not  hesitate  to  designate  this  volume  as  the  most  complete 
examination  of  the  literature  and  the  exegesis  of  the  Creation  and  the  Fall 
which  has  appeared  in  England.” — Journal  of  Sacred  Literature. 

152  NEEDLER  (Benjamin).  Expository  Notes,  with  Observa- 

tions, towards  the  opening  of  the  first  five  chapters  of 
Genesis.  Small  8vo.  Lond.,  1655.  8s. 

Needier  was  one  of  the  eminent  divines  who  took  part  in  the  famous 
Morning  Exercises.  The  little  work  is  a curiosity,  but  nothing  more. 

153  ROSSE  (Alexander).  Exposition  of  the  first  fourteen 

chapters  of  Genesis.  8vo.  Lond.,  1626.  4s.  6d. 

A very  scarce  catechism  by  that  Scotch  divine  who  is  mentioned  in 
Sudibras  in  the  lines — 

“ There  was  an  ancient  sound  philosopher 
That  had  read  Alexander  Ross  over.” 

154  WHITE  (John,  M.  A.  A Puritan  Divine,  called  “The 

Patriarch  of  Dorchester.  Died  1648.)  The  first  three 
chapters  of  Genesis.  Folio.  1656.  7s.  to  10s.  6d. 

A folio  upon  three  chapters  1 There  were  giants  in  those  days.  Man- 
ton  says,  “ To  speak  of  the  worth  of  the  author  is  needless,  his  praise  being 
already  in  all  the  churches,”  and  he  adds  that  he  had  been  greatly  re- 
freshed by  the  perusal  of  this  book. 

155  WILLIAMS  (Isaac,  B.  D.)  Beginning  of  Genesis,  with 

Notes.  Sm.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1861. 

A very  remarkable  work  by  a high  churchman,  open- 
ing up  in  a masterly  manner  the  mystical  teachings  of 
the  early  chapters  of  Genesis.  To  be  read  cum  grano 
salis . 

[The  following  works  are  placed  in  chronological  order.] 

156  BONNET  (L.)  The  Exile  from  Eden  : Meditations  on  the 

Third  Chapter  of  Genesis,  translated  from  the  French,  by 
Rev.  W.  Hare.  Small  8vo.  Lond.,  1839.  S.  5s. 

After  the  French  manner.  In  nine  meditations  the  salient  points  in 
the  all-important  story  of  the  Fall  are  touched  upon.  One  of  the  best 
separate  treatises  upon  the  subject. 

157  OLMSTEAD  (J.,  American).  Noah  and  his  Times.  2s. 

Edinb.,  Collins. 

One  of  the  dreariest  works  ever  written.  We  have  often  wondered 
why  it  was  reprinted,  or  even  printed  at  all.  It  is  as  dry  as  Noah  in  the 
ark. 


88  GENESIS — EARLY  CHAPTERS,  AND  PATRIARCHS. 

158  BLUNT  (Henry,  A.  M.)  Twelve  Lectures  on  the  History 

of  Abraham.  12mo.  5s.  6d.  Eight  Lectures  on  the 

History  of  Jacob.  4s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hatcliards.  1842.  S. 
Is.  6d.  each. 

Like  the  rest  of  this  author’s  lectures.  Good,  plain  addresses. 

159  SHUTE  (Josias,  B.  D.  “Above  three-and-thirty  years 

Rector  of  St.  Mary,  Woolnoth.”)  Sarah  and  Hagar ; or 
Genesis  xvi.  opened  in  Twenty  Sermons.  Folio.  1649.  5s. 
In  shape,  the  editor  tells  us,  “ this  book  is  somewhat  slender,  like  the 
encouragements  of  learning.”  He  informs  us  that  the  author  was  “ one  of 
the  five  famous  brother-preachers,  somewhat  like  the  five  fingers  on  the 
right  hand  of  fellowship ; ” and  that  Chrysostom,  did  so  much  lie  in  his 
bosom  that  he  became  like  him  in  his  flowing  style  and  golden  eloquence. 
He  writes  like  a learned  man,  and  treats  the  Scripture  as  if  “each  book 
were  a course,  each  chapter  a Benjamin’s  mess,  and  every  verse  a morsel 
of  the  food  of  angels.” 

160  BOUCHIER  (Barton,  M.  A.)  History  of  Isaac.  12mo. 

Lond.,  Houlston.  S.  2s. 

A charming  book,  in  Bouehier's  gracious  style. 

161  ROLLINSON  (Francis,  B.  D.)  Twelve  Prophetical  Leg- 

acies ; or  Twelve  Sermons  upon  Jacob’s  Last  Will, 
recorded  in  the  45th  chapter  of  Genesis.  4to.,  Lond.,  1612. 
Scarce.  Hardly  to  be  priced.  Say  5s. 

Old-fashioned  learning,  and  singular  remarks ; its  rarity  is  no  great 
calamity. 

162  CUMMING  (John,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.  E.)  The  Last  of  the 

Patriarchs ; or  Lessons  from  Life  of  Joseph.  Sm.  8vo. 
1856.  S.  2s. 

Fitted  for  popular  reading : ministers  need  more  thought. 

163  GIBSON  (T.)  Lectures  on  Joseph.  8vo.  Lond.,  1848.  Is. 
Very  respectable  sermons,  bringing  out  the  gospel  of  Joseph’s  history 

164  LAWSON  (George,  D.  D.,  1749—1820).  Lectures  on 

Joseph.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  Edinb.,  1807  and  1812.  4s. 

Dr.  Lawson  had  a fertile  mind,  and  a heart  alive  both 
to  the  human  and  divine  side  of  truth.  He  writes  with 
pleasing  simplicity  of  style.  One  of  the  highest  com 
pliments  to  this  book  is  found  in  the  fact  that  a distin- 
guished American  scholar  issued  much  of  it  as  his  own. 


EXODUS. 


89 


165  SMITH  (Thornley).  History  of  Joseph  viewed  in  connec- 

tion with  the  Antiquities  of  Egypt,  and  the  times  in  which 
he  lived.  Cr.  8vo.  4s.  Edinb.,  W.  Oliphant.  1875. 

“Written  under  the  full  light  of  the  most  recent 
archaeological  discoveries,  modern  scholarship,  and  theo- 
logical science,  it  is  the  book  on  the  subject.  Now  we 
have  it,  we  cannot  dispense  with  it.”— Homilist. 

166  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.  D.)  Life  of  Joseph  and  the  Last 

Years  of  Jacob.  12mo.  1845.  S.  2s.  3d. 

Wardlaw,  though  rather  wordy,  is  always  instructive. 


EXODUS. 

167  BIRKS  (T.  R.,  M.  A.)  The  Exodus  of  Israel ; its  Difficulties 

explained  and  its  Truth  confirmed.  8vo.  1863.  S.  3s.  6d. 
A reply  to  Dr.  Colenso’s  famous  assault  upon  the  Pentateuch.  The 
great  abilities  of  the  author  are  known  to  all. 

168  BLUNT  (Henry,  M.  A.)  Exodus  and  Leviticus.  Yol.  2 of 

A Family  Exposition  of  the  Pentateuch.  12mo.  6s. 

Lond.,  Hatchards.  1842.  S.  Is. 

Profitable  for  household  and  private  reading : not  very  striking. 

169  BUSH  (George).  Notes  on  Exodus.  Two  vols.,  sm.  8vo. 

New  York,  1856,  etc.  S.  5s.  6d. 

Of  considerable  value.  We  do  not  know  that  it  is  a plagiarism. 

170  COTTAGE  READINGS  on  the  Book  of  Exodus.  [Anon.] 

Sm.  cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  S.  2s. 

Not  at  all  a student’s  book  ; yet  many  preachers  might  learn  from  it 
how  to  put  things  plainly.  There  is  a similar  volume  on  Genesis. 

171  CUMMING  (John,  D.  D.)  Sabbath  Morning  Readings  on 

Exodus.  Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1853.  S.  2s. 

Dr.  Cumming’s  style  is  a model,  but  his  matter  seldom  verges  upon 
originality.  He  always  gives  you  the  gospel  when  he  is  not  prophesying. 

172  EXELL  (Joseph  S.)  Homiletic  Commentary  on  Exodus. 

[Being  Part  1 of  The  Preacher’s  Commentary,  publish- 
ing by  Dickinson  in  monthly  parts.  1875.  Is.  each.] 

It  excels,  so  far  as  we  have  seen. 

173  HUGHES  (George).  See  No.  128. 


90 


EXODUS — LIVES  OF  MOSES. 


174  JACKSON  (Thomas,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Peterborough.— 1579— 

1640).  Paraphrase  on  the  eleven  first  chapters  of  Exodus, 
with  Annototions,  etc.  Works,  8vo.,  IX.,  384.  Folio,  III., 
191.  Three  vols.  folio  35s. ; twelve  vols.  8vo.  50s. 

George  Herbert  set  great  store  by  Dr.  Jackson's  writings,  for  he  said, — 
“I  bless  God  for  the  confirmation  Dr.  Jackson  has  given  me  in  the  Chris- 
tian religion,  against  the  Atheist,  Jew,  and  Soeinian,  and  in  the  Protes- 
tant against  Rome.”  It  would  hardly  repay  a student  to  purchase  three 
folio  volumes  to  obtain  the  small  portion  allotted  to  his  Paraphrase.  So 
far  as  commenting  is  concerned  it  is  not  important. 

175  MACKINTOSH]  ( C.  H.)  Notes.  By  C.  H.  M.  12mo. 

2s.  6d.  Lond.,  G.  Morrish.  1858. 

Not  free  from  Plymouth  errors,  yet  remarkably  sug- 
gestive. 

176  MILLINGTON  (Thomas  S.)  Signs  and  Wonders  in  the 

Land  of  Ham.  A Description  of  the  Teu  Plagues  of 
Egypt.  Post  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Murray.  1873. 

It  has  been  an  intellectual  treat  to  read  this  interest- 
ing work.  On  the  same  subject  there  is  an  old  work  by 
James  Bryant,  1794  ; but  Millington  is  enough. 

177  MURPHY  (James  G.,  LL.  D.)  Commentary  on  Exodus. 

New  Translation.  8vo.  Edinb.,  Clark.  1866.  9s. 

The  result  of  laborious  study  by  a scholar  of  ripe 
learning. 

178  WILLET  (Andrew).  Hexapla ; or  Sixfold  Commentario 

upon  Exodus.  Folio.  Lond.,  1608.  6s.  to  10s. 

See  No.  143.  Full,  exhaustive,  and  exhausting. 


LIVES  OF  MOSES. 

179  HAMILTON  (James,  D.  D.,  F.  L.  S.  1814—1867).  Moses, 

the  Man  of  God.  Sm.  cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 

Beautiful  as  a poem,  like  everything  which  fell  from 
Dr.  Hamilton’s  pen.  It  would  be  impossible  to  study 
it  without  prophet. 

180  OOSTERZEE  (J.  J.  Van,  D.  D.)  The  Life  of  Moses.  Edinb., 

T.  & T.  Clark.  [In  preparation.] 


THE  CHILDREN  OF  ISRAEL. 


91 


181  SMITH  (Tiiornley).  History  of  Moses  ; viewed  in  con- 

nection with  Egyptian  Antiquities,  and  the  times  in  which 
he  lived.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hamilton.  1862. 

Of  the  same  class  as  Kitto’s  Daily  Readings  : well 
executed. 

182  SPONG  (James).  Moses. — The  Hero  of  the  Desert.  Cr.  8vo. 

8s.  6d.  Lond.,  Partridge  & Co. 

A book  for  the  public.  Not  for  Students. 


JOURNEYINGS  OF  THE  CHILDREN  OF  ISRAEL. 

183  BUDDICOM  (R.  P.,  M.  A.,  F.  A.  S.)  The  Christian  Exodus, 

in  a Series  of  Discourses.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1826. 
S.  3s. 

Able  discourses,  using  the  Exodus  spiritually  and  wisely. 

184  CARDALL  (Willtam,  M.  A.)  Israel’s  Journeys,  illustrative 

of  the  Divine  Pilgrimage.  8vo.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1848. 
S.  2s.  6d. 

Twenty  evangelical  lectures  manifesting  respectable  ability. 

185  FORSTER  (Charles,  B.  D.)  “ Israel  in  the  Wilderness  ” ; 

or,  Gleanings  from  the  Scenes  of  the  Wanderings.  8vo. 
Lond.,  Richard  Bentley.  1865.  S.  2s. 

If  the  author’s  renderings  of  the  desert  inscriptions  are  indeed  correct, 
this  is  a wonderful  book.  That,  however,  is  a question  for  the  learned, 
and  they  have  pronounced  against  him. 

186  JOURNEYINGS  OF  THE  CHILDREN  OF  ISRAEL,  and 

their  Settlement  in  the  Promised  Land.  (Anon.)  18mo. 
Is.  6d.  Lond.,  Religious  Tract  Society.  1832. 

Useful  to  the  young,  but  the  engravings  are  of  almost  Pre- Adamite 
antiquity,  and  nearly  as  ugly  as  the  profoundest  master  of  the  ridiculous 
could  have  made  them. 

187  KRUMMACHER  (Gottfried  Daniel.  1774—1837).  Is- 

rael’s Wanderings.  Two  vols.,  sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  Nisbet 
1837.  S.  7s.  6d. 

Written  by  the  uncle  of  the  author  of  Elijah  the  Tiskbite.  A good, 
thought-breeding  work. 

188  OSBURN  (W.)  See  under  Genesis,  No.  136. 


92 


THE  DECALOGUE. 


189  SEATON  (W.)  Clmrcli  in  tlie  Wilderness.  Two  vols. 

12mo.  S.  2s.  Second  edition,  Lond.,  1821.  Enlarged.  Two 
vols.,  8vo.  S.  4s. 

Of  the  thoroughly  evangelical  school,  fraught  with 
much  experimental  truth  and  sound  doctrine  soberly 
discussed. 

190  WAGNER  (Geokge).  The  Wanderings  of  the  Children 

of  Israel.  Cr.  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  and  Co.  1862. 

A book  which  we  have  read  with  great  pleasure  and 
profit,  and  very  heartily  recommended. 


THE  DECALOGUE. 

[This  list  does  not  include  comments  contained  in  Bodies  of  Divinity, 
&c.,  but  those  forming  separate  volumes.  In  many  theological  works 
there  are  lengthy  portions  set  apart  for  the  Commandments.] 

191  ANDRE  WES  (Lancelot,  Bp.  of  Worcester.  1555—1626.) 

The  patterne  of  Catechisticall  Doctrine  at  large  ; or  a 
Learned  and  Pious  Exposition  of  the  X Commandments. 
Folio.  1675.  7s.  6d.  to  10s. 

This  is  a book  indeed  ; it  is  a joy  to  read  it,  for 
it  flashes  with  thought  and  illustration,  and  sparkles 
with  ingenious  remarks.  Profound  learning  did  not 
lead  the  Bishop  into  the  depths  of  dulness,  as  it  has 
done  many  another  divine  ; he  manifests  the  happy 
quaintness  of  Latimer  side  by  side  with  great  scholar- 
ship. He  was  highly  esteemed  by  his  contemporaries  ; 
but  we  can  hardly  believe  that  his  death 

“ Left  the  dim  face  of  our  dull  hemisphere 
All  one  great  eye  all  drown’d  in  one  great  tear.” 

Yet  so  we  are  informed  at  the  foot  of  his  effigies. 

192  BARKER  (Peter.)  A Learned  and  Familiar  Exposition. 

4to.  1624.  5s. 

Old-fashioned,  remarkably  quaint,  and  even  coarse  in  places.  Barker’s 
work  abounds  in  Scriptural  illustrations,  bnt  it  is  almost  forgotten. 


THE  DECALOGUE. 


93 


193  DALE  (R.  W.,  M.  A.,  of  Birmingham.)  The  Ten  Com- 

mandments. Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hodder  and  Stough- 
ton. 1873.  6 

Written  in  a clear,  hold,  and  trenchant  style.  We  could  not  subscribe 
to  all  the  author’s  views,  but  we  admire  his  practical  remarks,  and  their 
outspoken  manner. 

194  DOD  (John)  & CLEAVER  (Rorert).  Familiar  Exposition. 

Eighteenth  edition.  4to.  Lond.,  1632.  S.  2s.  6d. 

This  work  was  published  by  John  Dod  and  Robert  Cleaver , with  an 
intimation  that  the  name  of  the  author  was  purposely  suppressed.  Our 
edition,  dated  1632,  is  the  eighteenth,  so  that  the  work  enjoyed  a rare 
popularity  in  its  own  time.  It  has  been  frequently  reprinted  since.  The 
book  has  been  long  held  in  high  esteem. 

195  DOWNAME  or  DOWNHAM  (George,  D.D.,  Bishop  of 

Derry.  Died  1634.)  Abstract  of  the  Duties  Commanded 
and  Sinnes  Forbidden  in  the  Law  of  God.  8vo.  Lond., 
1635.  Is.  6d. 

A sort  of  catalogue  of  sins,  arranged  in  a tabular  form  under  the  Ten 
Commandments.  These  are  the  heads  and  divisions  of  a large  treatise, 
which  does  not  appear  to  have  been  published.  These  mighty  men  could 
afford  to  leave  in  the  oblivion  of  manuscript  works  which  would  cost 
modern  weaklings  half  a life-time  to  write. 

196  DURHAM  (James.  1622 — 1658.)  Exposition,  with  a res- 

olution of  several  momentous  questions,  and  cases  of  con- 
science. 4to.  Lond.,  1675.  8vo.,  1735,  2s.  6d.  to  4s. 

Whatever  Durham  has  written  is  very  precious.  He 
has  the  pen  of  a ready  writer,  and  indites  good  matter. 

197  ELTON  (Edward,  B.  D.)  God’s  Holy  Minde,  Touching 

Matters  Morall  ; which  himself  uttered  in  Ten  Command- 
ments. 4to.  Lond.,  1648.  3s.  6d. 

This  work  discusses  the  Decalogue  in  question  and  answer,  in  a some- 
what dull  manner ; but  touches  many  cases  of  conscience  and  deals  wisely 
With  them.  Belief  in  witchcraft  comes  out  very  strongly  in  some  pas- 
sages. 

198  FISHER  (Edward,  A.  M.  Born  about  1600.)  A plain,  pithy, 

and  spiritual  Exposition  of  the  Ten  Commandments. 
[Marrow  of  Modern  Divinity.  Numerous  editions.]  12mo. 
2s. 

This  exposition  is  part  of  the  work  which  occasioned  the  famous  Mar- 
row Controversy . One  fails  to  see  anything  calculated  to  stir  up  such  a 
strife.  Fisher  might  have  said  that  the  lines  had  fallen  to  him  in  troubled 
waters. 


94 


THE  DECALOGUE. 


199  HOOPER  (John.  Bishop  and  Martyr.  1495 — 1554).  A 

Declaration  of  the  Ten  Holy  Commandments  of  Almighty 
God.  1548,  1550,  etc.  [Reprinted  in  Hooper’s  Works.] 
After  the  manner  of  the  English  Reformers.  The  style  is  harsh  to  the 
modern  ear,  and  the  matter  too  much  occupied  with  the  controversies 
raging  in  the  author’s  times  to  be  very  interesting  now. 

200  HOPKINS  (Ezekiel,  D.  D.  Bp.  of  London-Derry.  1633 — 

1690).  An  Exposition  of  the  Ten  Commandments.  4to. 
1692.  [Reprinted  in  Hopkins’  Works.] 

Hopkins  in  this  exposition  searches  the  heart  thoroughly,  and  makes 
very  practical  application  of  the  Commandments  to  the  situations  and  cir- 
cumstances of  daily  life.  His  homely  eloquence  will  always  make  his 
works  valuable. 

201  KNEWSTUB  (John).  Lectures  on  Exodus  XX.  4to.  1584. 

7s.  6d. 

More  valuable  for  its  antiquity  than  for  anything  else. 

202  McCAUL  (Joseph  B.,  Chaplain  to  the  Bp.  of  Rochester.) 

The  Ten  Commandments;  the  Christian’s  Rule  of  Daily 
Life.  8vo.  Lond.,  Saunders,  Otley  & Co.  1861.  S.  3s. 
The  author  says,  “ There  is  nothing  deep  in  the  following  pages  except 
their  subject  ” : a modest  estimate. 

203  NEWTON  (Richahd,  D.  D.)  The  King’s  Highway.  Post 

8vo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nelson.  Also  16mo.  Is.  6d.  Nisbet. 

Though  intended  for  children,  ministers  will  find  it 
useful,  for  it  teems  with  illustration,  and  brings  up  lit- 
tle points  of  conduct  worth  touching  upon.  Dr.  New- 
ton is  the  prince  of  preachers  to  children. 

204  TUDOR  (Richard,  B.  A.)  Decalogue  viewed  as  the  Chris- 

tian’s Law.  Cr.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Lond.,  Macmillan.  1860. 
S.  6s. 

The  author  attempts  to  give  the  Christian  sense  of  the  Decalogue  in  its 
application  to  present  needs  and  questions.  With  much  moderation 
he  discusses  many  of  the  disputed  points  of  the  day,  such  as  the  legisla- 
tive enforcement  of  the  Sabbath,  marriage  with  a deceased  wife’s  sister, 
etc.  He  usually  takes  the  view  which  is  natural  to  a clergyman ; but  he 
says  some  capital  things. 

205  WEEMSE  (John.  Died  about  1636).  The  Morall  Laws. 

[In  Vol.  I.  of  Weemse’s  Works  ; two  vols.,  4to.  Lond., 
1032,  &c.]  3s. 

Solid,  sober,  weighty.  Orme  says  of  Weemse:  “ He  was  well  acquainted 
with  the  original  Scriptures,  with  Jewish  manners  and  antiquities,  and 
with  the  best  mode  of  interpreting  the  Bible.  The  style  is  quaint,  but 
always  intelligible.”  (See  No.  226.) 


THE  TABERNACLE. 


95 


206  WHATELEY  (William.  Puritan.  1583—1639).  A Pitliie, 
Short,  and  Metliodicall  Opening  of  the  Ten  Command- 
ments. 12mo.  Lond.,  1622.  (Not  often  in  the  market.) 
Exceedingly  scarce,  but  as  rich  as  it  is  rare. 


THE  TABEKNACLE. 

[Of  works  on  this  subject  it  is  not  possible  to  give  more  than  a selec- 
tion.] 

207  BROWN  (W.)  The  Tabernacle  and  its  Services  in  relation 

to  Christ  and  the  Church.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Edinb.,  Oli- 
phant  & Co.  1874. 

An  instructive  interpretation  of  the  types  of  the  Tabernacle. 

208  GARRATT  (S.)  Scripture  Symbolism.  Sm.  8vo.  1848.  S. 

Is.  6d. 

Most  unexceptionable  in  doctrine  and  style.  It  deals  mainly  with  tho 
sacred  vessels. 

209  KITTO  (John,  D.  D.)  Tabernacle  and  its  Furniture.  4to- 

1849. 

Artistic  illustrations  with  a little  letter-press.  Soltau  well  supplies  the 
place  of  this  rare  work. 

210  MUDGE  (William).  The  Tabernacle  in  the  Wilderness. 

12mo.  Lond.,  Simpkin  & Marshall.  1861.  S.  2s.  6d. 

The  writer,  a thoroughly  evangelical  second-advent  clergyman,  makes 
some  very  admirable  remarks  in  these  Lectures,  which  were  delivered  in  his 
parish  church.  Our  copy  is  in  the  third  edition.  We  are  not  surprised 
to  find  the  work  thus  popular. 

211  SOLTAU  (H.  W.)  The  Holy  Vessels  and  Furniture  of  the 

Tabernacle  of  Israel.  [With  Ten  Chromo- Lithographic 
Illustrations.]  Imp.  oblong  8vo.  16s.  Lond.,  Yapp  & 
Hawkins,  and  S.  W.  Partridge  & Co. 

A series  of  sumptuous  pictures,  executed  in  the  best  style  of  art,  im- 
pressing the  mind  far  more  vividly  than  any  letter-press  could  do. 

212  SOLTAU  (H.  W.)  The  Tabernacle,  the  Priestly  Garments, 

and  the  Priesthood.  8vo.  4s.  6d.  Lond.,  Morgan  & 
Scott. 

Bichly  suggestive.  Exceedingly  well  worked  out  in 
details  ; but  not  so  wire-drawn  as  to  prevent  thought  on 
the  reader’s  part. 


96 


LEVITICUS. 


213  WHITE  (Frank  H.)  Christ  in  the  Tabernacle,  with  some 
Remarks  on  the  Offerings.  Illustrated  by  Twelve  Chromo- 
Lithographs.  Cr.  8vo.,  5s.  Lond.,  S.  W.  Partridge.  1873. 
Written  for  the  private  Christian.  Full  of  instruction  and  devotion. 


LEVITICUS. 

214  BONAR  (Andrew  A.)  Leviticus.  With  Notes.  8vo. 

8s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1861. 

Very  precious.  Mr.  Andrew  Bonar  has  a keen  eye 
for  a typical  analogy,  but  he  always  keeps  the  rein 
upon  his  imagination,  and  is  therefore  safe  to  follow. 
He  is  a master  in  Israel. 

215  BUSH  (George).  Notes  on  Leviticus.  Sm.  8vo.  New 

York,  1857.  3s. 

The  author  read  extensively  to  produce  this  volume. 
In  his  later  years  he  became  a Sweden  borgian,  but  there 
is  no  trace  of  that  leaning  in  this  or  his  other  comments. 
He  inserts  the  notes  of  the  Pictorial  Bible,  but  hand- 
somely acknowledges  them. 

216  CUMMING  (John,  D.  D.)  Sabbath  Morning  Readings  on 

Leviticus.  Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1854.  2s. 

For  popular  reading.  The  author  wrote  too  much  to  be  profound. 

217  CUMMING  (John,  D.  D)  The  Great  Sacrifice ; or,  the  Gos- 

pel according  to  Leviticus.  2s. 

A companion  to  the  volume  last  mentioned. 

218  JAMES  (Horatio,  M.  A.)  Sermons  on  the  Levitical  Types 

Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  1847.  ls.6d. 

Very  attenuated.  These  sermons,  like  the  lean  kine,  have  eaten  up 
the  fat  kine  of  the  types  and  are  never  the  fatter. 

219  JUKES  (Andrew).  The  Law  of  the  Offerings  [Leviticus, 

chap.  I-VIIJ.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1854. 

A very  condensed,  instructive,  refreshing  book.  It 
will  open  up  new  trains  of  thought  to  those  unversed  in 
the  teaching  of  the  types. 


LEVITICUS. 


97 


220  M[ACKINTOSH]  (C.  H.)  Notes  on  Leviticus.  By  C.  H.  M. 

12mo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  G.  Morrish.  1860. 

We  do  not  endorse  the  Plymoutliism  -which  pervades  these  notes,  but 
they  are  frequently  suggestive.  Should  be  read  cautiously. 

221  MATHER  (Samuel.  1626 — 1671.)  The  Figures  or  Types 

of  the  Old  Testament.  Second  edition.  4to.  7s.  6d. 
Lond.,  1705. 

Though  this  is  a work  upon  all  the  types,  it  contains  so  much  instruc- 
tive matter  upon  the  Levitical  sacrifices  that  we  cannot  forbear  mention- 
ing it  here.  It  is  one  of  the  old  standard  books  of  our  fathers. 

222  KEACH  (Benjamin,  Baptist  Pastor.  1640 — 1704).  Tropo- 

logia.  Folio  and  Roy.  8vo.  8s.  to  18s. 

This  is  a vast  cyclopaedia  of  types  and  metaphors  of  all  sorts,  and  was 
once  very  popular.  It  is  a capital  book,  though  too  often  the  figures  not 
only  run  on  all-fours  but  on  as  rn^ny  legs  as  a centipede.  It  is  not  strictly 
upon  Leviticus,  but  we  felt  bound  to  insert  it  in  this  place. 

223  MICHAEL1S  (Sir  John  David.  1717—1791).  The  Laws 

of  Moses.  Translated  by  Alexander  Smith,  D.  D.  Four 
vols.,  8vo.  20s.  Lond.,  1814. 

However  much  of  learning  there  may  be  here,  we  are  not  prepared  to 
recommend  a work  which  treats  so  sacred  a subject  with  levity  and  coarse- 
ness. 

224  NEWTON  (Benjamin  Wills).  Thoughts  on  Parts  of  Le- 

viticus. 12mo.  Lond.,  Houlston.  1857.  S.  2s. 

This  touches  only  the  first  six  chapters;  but  it  treats  of  the  offerings  in 
a manner  deeply  spiritual  and  helpful.  This  writer  has  some  peculiarities 
of  style  and  thought ; but  in  matter  and  spirit  he  is  far  removed  from  the 
Darby  school. 

225  SEISS  (Joseph  A.,  D.  D.)  The  Gospel  in  Leviticus.  8vo. 

6s.  Edinb.,  Thomas  C.  Jack.  1860. 

Twenty-one  very  admirable  lectures,  founded  upon  Bush  and  Bonar , 
but  containing  much  original  matter.  The  work  deserves  attention. 

226  WEEMSE  (John).  Exposition  of  the  Laws  of  Moses,  Mor- 

al, Ceremonial,  Judicial,  etc.  Two  vols.,  4to.  Lond., 
1632.  2s.  Od.  or  3s. 

This  contains  many  useful  and  curious  things,  together  with  fancies  and 
rabbinical  trifles.  Weemse  may  generally  be  bought  very  cheap,  and  we 
should  think  his  work  is  very  little  read  or  cared  for.  (See  Orme's  opinion, 
No.  205.) 


98  NUMBERS. 

227  WILLET  (Andrew).  Hexapla;  Leviticus.  Folio.  1631. 
5s.  6d. 

Plodding  along  with  his  six-fold  load,  Willet  gives  us  a comparison  of 
ten  versions,  “ handles  well  nigh  two  thousand  theological  questions,”  and 
quotes  “ above  forty  authors,  old  and  new.”  He  sums  up  all  preceding 
commentaries,  both  Protestant  and  Romish. 


NUMBERS. 

[Seaton,  Wagner,  and  other  writers  whom  we  have  placed  under  Exo- 
dus are  equally  upon  Numbers,  and  should  be  referred  to.] 

228  ATTERSOLL  (William).  A Commentarie  upon  Numbers. 

Folio.  Lond.,  1618.  10s.  to  14s. 

A stupendous  work,  well  fitted  to  make  a headstone  for  the  author’s 
grave.  It  is  so  huge  that  it  might  have  been  the  work  of  a lifetime,  and 
yet  the  same  writer  has  also  given  us  Philemon.  Think  of  1271  folio  pages 
on  Numbers  1 

229  BLUNT  (Henry,  M.  A.)  Numbers  and  Deuteronomy.  [Vol. 

3 of  Pentateuch.]  12mo.,  6s.  Lond.,  Hatckards.  1843. 
S.  Is.  6d. 

Intended  for  families,  but  not  without  value  to  the  preacher. 

230  BUSH  (George).  Notes  on  Numbers.  Thick  small  8vo. 

New  York,  1858.  4s. 

Although  Bush  is  indebted  to  many  authors,  he  is  by 
no  means  a mere  collector  ; his  remarks  repay  you  for 
consultation,  and  we  hope  that  in  this  case  they  are 
his  own. 

231  CUMMING  (John,  D.  D.)  Readings  on  Numbers.  8vo. 

Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  S.  Is.  9d. 

Good,  as  usual. 

232  MfACKINTOSH]  (C.  H.)  Notes  on  Numbers.  By  C.  H.  M. 

Lond.,  G.  Morrish.  1862.  2s. 

Like  the  other  notes  of  C.  H.  M.,  they  need  filtering.  Good  as  they  are, 
their  Darbyism  gives  them  an  unpleasant  and  unhealthy  savor. 


DEUTERONOMY — JOSHUA. 


99 


DEUTERONOMY. 

[As  so  few  expositions  have  been  written  upon  Deuteronomy  alone,  the 
reader  will  do  well  to  use  the  Commentaries  upon  the  Pentateuch  and  the 
whole  Old  Testament.] 

233  CALVIN  (John).  Sermons  upon  Deuteronomie.  Trans- 

lated out  of  French  by  A.  Golding.  Folio.  1583.  15s. 

This  is  not  the  same  as  that  which  is  contained  in 
the  “ Calvin  Translation  Society’s  Commentaries.” 
Everything  that  Calvin  wrote  by  way  of  exposition  is 
priceless  ; even  those  who  differ  from  him  in  theology 
admit  this. 

234  CUMMIMG  (John,  D.  D.)  Readings  in  Deuteronomy.  Sm. 

8vo.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1856.  S.  2s.  3d. 

Pretty,  popular,  profitable. 


JOSHUA. 

235  BLACKWOOD  (Stevenson  A.)  Heavenly  Places.  Ad 

dresses.  Sm.  cr.  8vo.  2s.  and  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & 
Co.  1873. 

Mr.  Blackwood  has  illustrated  passages  from  the  first  five  chapters  only. 
He  has  a beautifully  quiet  way  of  saying  very  sweet  things.  This  little 
book  will  be  useful  if  it  shows  the  young  preacher  how  to  expound  Scrip- 
ture with  unction  and  power. 

236  BUSH  (George).  Notes.  Sm.  8vo.  New  York.  1852. 

3s. 

Bush  is  a careful  illustrator  of  the  Word,  and  apt  at 
giving  the  practical  lesson.  His  works  are  well  compiled. 

237  CALVIN  (John).  Commentarie  upon  Joshue.  Translated 

by  W.  F.  4to.  Lond.,  1578.  9s. 

We  have  said  enough  upon  Calvin  in  general.  His 
expositions  are  more  equal  in  excellence  than  those  of 
other  men  ; other  men  rise  and  fall,  but  he  is  almost 
uniformly  good. 


100 


JOSHUA. 


238  CHRIST  IN  THE  PROPHETS.— Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel, 

Kings.  [Anon.]  Foolscap  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Masters. 
1873. 

See  Christ  in  the  Law,  No.  81.  Needs  well  sifting.  There  is  much 
rubbish. 

239  CUMMING  (John,'D  .D.)  Readings  on  Joshua  and  Judges. 

Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1857.  2s. 

Dr.  Cumming  keeps  up  to  his  average  of  value. 

240  GROSER  (W.  H.)  Joshua  and  his  Successors  : an  Introduc- 

tion to  Joshua,  Judges,  Ruth,  and  Samuel  I.,  with  Notes. 
Parts  I.  and  II.  8vo.  2s.  each.  Lond , S.  S.  Union.  1874. 
A very  useful  condensed  book  for  teachers. 

241  KEIL  (Karl  Friedrich,  D.  D.,  Ph.  D.)  Joshua,  Judges, 

and  Ruth.  One  vol.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 
1865.  S.  5s. 

“ Let  our  biblical  students  not  only  master  the  facts  and  logic,  but 
catch  the  spirit  of  these  commentaries,  and  we  can  have  no  fear  for  the 
issue  of  that  conflict  with  Rationalism  and  Popery  united,  by  which  Pro- 
testantism in  this  country  seems  to  be  threatened.” — Wesleyan  Methodist 
Magazine. 

242  KELLY  (William).  Lectures  Introductory  to  the  Study 

of  the  earlier  Historical  Books  [Joshua  to  II  Samuel]. 
8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Broom.  1874. 

After  the  manner  of  Plymouth  commenting  in  general ; quite  suf- 
ficiently taken  up  with  spiritualizing  and  nice  points ; but  yet,  read  with 
half  a ton  of  salt,  a book,  likely  to  arouse  thought,  and  suggest  topics. 

243  LANGE’S  COMMENTARY— Joshua  (by  F.  R.  Fay) ; 

J udges,  Ruth  (by  P.  Casse) , D.  D.)  Edited  by  Dr.  Schaff. 
One  vol.  Imp.  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1872. 

This  is  a standard  work.  No  minister’s  library  is 
furnished  without  the  whole  set.  Joshua  however  is 
inferior  to  Judges. 

244  MARCHANT  (F.  G.)  Commentary  on  Joshua.  [Part  III. 

of  Preacher’s  Commentary.  Is.]  Lond.,  Dickinson.  1875. 
While  writing  this  we  have  only  one  number  before  us,  but  it  promises 
well,  and  we  feel  snre  its  quality  will  be  sustained,  for  we  know  the 
author’s  industrious  habits. 

245  THE  GOSPEL  IN  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [Anon.]  Cr. 

8vo.  Is.  6d.  Lond.,  Partridge  & Co.  1867. 

Pious  remarks,  such  as  any  one  would  make. 


JUDGES. 


101 


246  SEATON  (W.)  The  Church  in  Canaan;  or,  heirs  in  pos- 

session receiving  the  promises.  Vol.  I.  12mo.  Lond., 
1823.  2s. 

A sequel  to  No.  189. 

247  SMITH  (Thornley).  The  History  of  Joshua,  viewed  in 

connection  with  the  Topography  of  Canaan,  and  the 
Customs  of  the  Times  in  which  he  lived.  Cr.  8vo.  4s. 
6d.  Edinb.,  W.  Oliphant  & Co.  1870. 

Although  not  a commentary,  it  will  answer  the  same 
purpose  ; for  almost  every  event  is  fully  illustrated.  A 
capital  work. 


JUDGES. 

[See  also  under  Joshua .] 

248  BUSH  (George).  Notes  on  Judges.  Sm.  8vo.  New 

York,  1852.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Like  other  works  of  this  author — of  considerable 
value. 

249  DODS  (Marcus,  M.  A.,  D.  D.)  Israel’s  Iron  Age:  Sketches 

from  the  Period  of  the  Judges.  Crown  8vo.  5s.  Lond., 
Hodder  and  Stoughton.  1874. 

Dr.  Dods  considers  that  to  find  in  Samson  and  other  judges  types  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  is  mere  fancy,  and  he  interprets  upon  “ a rational  prin- 
ciple ” which  fenders  his  book  dry  and  unspiritual ; at  the  same  time  his 
sketches  are  not  without  value. 

250  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.)  Time  of  the  Judges.  (See  No 

87.) 

251  KITTO  (John,  D.  D.)  “ The  Judges,”  in  Daily  Bible  Illus- 

trations. (See  No.  42.) 

Exceedingly  meritorious.  Refer  to  it  frequently. 

252  MARTYR  (Peter.  1500 — 1562).  Most  Fruitful  and  Learned 

Commentarie  upon  the  Book  of  Judges.  Black  Letter. 
Folio.  1560.  Rare.  18s. 

This  would  seem  to  be  a profound  work.  Rogers  says  of  Peter  Martyr  : 
— “ Few  private  men  can  understand  his  works,  and  few  ministers  who 
understand  them  can  obtain  them  ; nor  if  they  can  will  they  find  in  them 
much  that  will  benefit  their  simple  hearers.”  This  has  not  been  our 
experience  with  Peter  Martyr's  works ; on  the  contrary,  we  have  read  them 
with  interest. 


102 


JUDGES, 


253  NOBLE  (Samuel).  Sermons  on  the  singular  histories 

recorded  in  the  first  eleven  chapters.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
Lond.,  J.  S.  Hodson.  1856.  S.  Is.  6d. 

Swedenborgian  mysticism.  Exposition  in  a trance. 

254  ROGERS  (Richard.  Puritan).  The  wln^e  Book  of 

Judges.  [103  Sermons.]  Folio.  Lond.,  1615.  12s.  to  15s. 

This  for  the  Puritan  period  is  the  work  upon  Judges. 
It  is  thoroughly  plain  and  eminently  practical. 

255  WISEMAN  (Luke  H.,  M.  A.  Died  1875).  Men  of  Faith  ; 

or,  Sketches  from  the  Book  of  Judges.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Hodder  & Stoughton.  1874. 

Mr.  Wiseman  in  this  work  tells  “of  Gideon  and 
Barak,  of  Samson  and  of  Jephtliah,”  and  he  does  it  in  a 
powerful  style.  He  was  one  of  the  best  preachers  in 
the  Wesleyan  body.  A man  of  fulness,  and  judicious- 
ness ; in  fact,  a wise  man. 

256  BRUCE  (John,  D.  D.)  Life  of  Gideon.  F’cap.  8vo.  5s. 

Edinb.,  Edmonston  & Douglas.  1870. 

The  author  deserves  attention,  both  formatter  and  style.  Note  Hugh 
Miller's  high  opinion  of  his  “ Biography  of  Samson ; ” (No.  260).  Gid- 
eon is  a better  work,  but  both  are  over-estimated. 

257  ELWIN  (Fountain).  Sermons  on  the  character  of  Gideon. 

12mo.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1844.  S.  2s. 

Seven  sermons,  containing  nothing  remarkable. 

258  HOWARD  (Lady).  Gideon  the  Mighty  Man  of  Valour. 

[Anon.]  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1841.  S.  Is.  6d. 

Of  small  use  to  the  preacher. 

259  ROGERS  (George  Albert,  M.  A.)  The  Valour  of  Faith  ; 

or  the  Gospel  in  the  Life  of  Gideon.  12mo.  2s.  6d.  Lond., 
Wertlieim,  Mackintosh  & Hunt.  1859. 

A thoroughly  lively  little  hook.  Each  of  the  eight 
chapters  is  full  of  thought. 

260  BRUCE  (John,  D.  D.)  The  Biography  of  Samson.  18mo. 

2s.  Edinb.,  Edmonston  & Douglas.  1870. 

Hugh  Miller  said  “ There  is  a poetic  richness  in  the  style,  which  atone 
time  reminds  us  of  Chalmers , and  at  another  of  Jeremy  Taylor , but  which 
in  reality  is  Mr.  Bruce's  own,  that  does  not  seem  poor  or  bald  beside 
even  the  blank  verse  of  the  great  master  of  English  song.”  We  think 
this  eulogy  is  greatly  overdone. 


RUTH. 


103 


261  QUARLES  (Fuancis.  1592—1644).  The  Historie  of  Sam- 
son. 4to.  Lond.,  1631.  5s. 

This  queer,  quaint,  odd  volume  of  rhymes  is  far  from  despicable.  Kitto 
frequently  quotes  Quarles  upon  Samson,  and  says  of  him  that  he  was  a 
poet  of  no  mean  order.  We  are  glad  to  have  his  testimony  to  confirm 
our  own  opinion.  Refined  tastes  will  be  offended,  but  those  who  wish  for 
quaint  thought  will  be  gratified.  The  book  is  very  rare. 


KUTH. 

[See  also  under  Joshua .] 

262  BERNARD  (Richard.  Puritan.  Died  1641).  Ruth’s 

Recompense.  4to.  1628.  3s.  6d. 

Mr.  Grosart  is  enthusiastic  in  his  praise  of  this  work,  and  says  “that 
it  abounds  with  apophthegms  and  compressed  thoughts.”  We  defer  to 
bo  high  an  authority,  but  we  are  not  much  fascinated  by  the  book, 

263  FULLER  (Thomas,  D.  D.  1608 — 1661).  A Comment  on 

Ruth,  with  two  Sermons.  1650. 

Not  one  of  Fuller's  best ; but  still  quaint  and  pithy,  and  lit  up  with 
flashes  of  his  irrepressible  wit.  The  above  works  of  Bernard  and  Fuller 
have  been  reprinted  in  NichoVs  Series  of  Commentaries , in  one  volume. 
Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1865. 

Mr.  Tegg,  Pancras  Lane,  London,  has  also  published  a reprint  of  Ful- 
ler's Comment  on  Ruth,  and  Notes  upon  Jonah.  Cr.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

264  BRADEN  (William).  The  Beautiful  Gleaner.  Cr.  8vo. 

2s.  6d.  Lond.,  James  Clark  & Co.  1874. 

Mr.  Braden  is  an  able  preacher.  His  sermons  upon  Ruth  are  popular 
and  practical,  though  not  very  remarkable. 

265  LAVATER  (Lewis.  A Swiss  Protestant  Divine.  1527 — 

1586.)  Ruth  expounded  in  28  Sermons.  Translated  from 
the  Latin  by  E.  Pagett.  8vo.  Lond.,  1586. 

Lavater  was  a Reformer  of  high  repute,  son-in-law  of  BuUinger.  He 
wrote  a curious  work  on  spectres,  and  made  a catalogue  of  comets,  thus 
showing  himself  to  be  both  philosopher  and  divine.  His  book  is  seldom 
met  with. 

266  LAWSON  (George,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  the  Book  of  Ruth. 

12mo.  Edinb.,  1805.  3s. 

By  a man  of  great  genius.  Simple,  fresh,  and  gracious. 
Nothing  critical  or  profound  may  be  looked  for,  but 
wise  and  sound  teaching  may  be  gleaned  in  these  pages. 


104 


RUTH. 


267  MACARTNEY  (H.  B.)  Observations  on  Ruth.  12mo. 

Lond.,  1842.  9d. 

A nice  little  book,  little  in  all  ways. 

268  MACGOWAN  (John.  1726—1780).  Discourses  on  Ruth, 

and  other  important  subjects.  8vo.  Lond.,  1781.  2s.  6d. 
Macgowan , the  author  of  the  Dialogue  of  Devils,  is  well  known  for 
originality  and  force.  In  this  case  his  sermons  are  full  of  Gospel  truth, 
but  the  texts  are  too  much  accommodated  and  spiritualized.  The  dis- 
courses are  good  reading. 

269  OXENDEN  (A.  Bishop  of  Montreal).  Story  of  Ruth.  18mo. 

Is.  Hatchards. 

A very  tiny  affair,  of  no  great  moment  to  the  expositor. 

270  PHILPOT  (B.,  A.  M.)  Six  Lectures.  Square  F’cap.  2s. 

6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co. 

A very  small  book,  containing  good,  simple  lectures — not  an  exposition. 

271  PRICE  (Aubrey  C.,  B.  A.)  Six  Lectures  on  the  Book  of 

Ruth.  12mo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1869. 

Sermons  of  remarkable  power,  both  of  doctrine  and  diction.  Not  so 
expository  as  practical.  Mr.  Price  is  an  earnest  and  large-hearted  clergy- 
man of  thoroughly  evangelical  school. 

272  TOPSELL  (Edward).  The  Reward  of  Religion.  Lectures 

upon  Ruth.  8vo.  Lond.,  1613.  7s.  6d.  to  10s. 

A very  choice  old  work.  Attersol  in  his  rhyming 
preface  says  of  it — 

“ Go  little  Booke,  display  thy  golden  title. 

( And  yet  not  little  though  thou  little  bee) ; 

Little  for  price  and  yet  in  price  not  little, 

Thine  was  the  Paine,  the  gaine  is  ours  I see : 

(Although  our  gaine  thou  deem’st  no  paine  to  thee). 

If  then,  O reader,  little  paine  thou  take, 

Thou  greatest  gaine  with  smallest  paine  shall  make.” 

278  TYNG  (Stephen,  D.  D.,  of  New  York).  The  Rich  Kins- 
man; or  the  History  of  Ruth.  Small  8vo.  Lond..  1856. 
S.  Is.  6d. 

Written  for  young  people,  and  suitable  for  their  reading,  though  none 
too  lively. 

274  WRIGHT  (C.  H.  H.,  M.  A.)  Ruth,  in  Hebrew;  with  gram- 
matical -and  critical  Commentary.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond. 
Williams  & Norgate.  1864. 

For  Hebraists  only.  The  author  has  selected  the  book  of  Ruth  as  a 
study  for  beginners  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  because  of  the  simplicity  of  the 
language. 


I.  AND  II.  SAMUEL. 


105 


I.  AND  II.  SAMUEL. 

[Expositions  upon  these  books  being  few,  the  student  should  consult 
works  on  Scripture  characters,  and  also  comments  on  the  Old  Testament 
as  a whole.] 

275  KEIL  (C.  F.,  D.  D.)  and  DELITZSCH  (F.,  D.  D.)  The 

Books  of  Samuel.  Translated  from  the  German  by  the 
Rev.  James  Martin,  B.  A.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T. 
Clark.  1872. 

Like  most  of  Clark's  series,  Keil's  works  are  valuable  helps  towards 
obtaining  the  meaning  of  the  text ; but  for  spiritual  reflections  and  fruitful 
hints  we  must  look  elsewhere. 

276  LINDSAY  (Henry,  M.  A.)  Lectures  on  the  Historical 

Books  [1  and  2 Samuel  only].  Two  vols.  12mo.  Lond., 
1828.  2s.  6d. 

Practical  sermons  on  a few  of  the  more  prominent  events. 

277  WILLET  (Andrew).  An  Harmonie  upon  the  First  Booke 

of  Samuel,  and  an  Harmonie  upon  the  Seconde  Booke  of 
Samuel.  Folio.  1614.  10s.  6d.  to  12s.  [There  is  also  a 
4to.  edition  upon  1 Samuel.  1607.] 

The  work  continues  the  Hexapla  to  which  we  have 
referred  in  Nos.  143  and  178.  It  is  unusually  brief  for 
the  age  of  its  composition,  and  full  of  variety.  Under 
every  verse,  and  often  clause  of  a verse,  the  learned 
author  proposes  a question,  and  proceeds  to  answer  it. 
These  are  such  as  the  following  : — “ What  a daughter 
of  Belial  is  ?”  “ Whether  any  may  be  said  to  sin  with 

the  will  of  God  ? ” “ What  doors  of  the  house  of 

Jehovah  Samuel  opened  ?”  “ What  is  to  be  thought  of 

Eli’s  state  before  God  ? ” 

278  GUILD  (William,  D.  D.  1586—1657).  The  Throne  of  David. 

An  Exposition  of  the  2nd  Samuel,  wherein  is  set  down 
the  Pattern  of  a Pious  and  Prudent  Prince.  Oxford, 
1659.  11s. 

The  MSS.  of  this  rare  book  was  sent  to  Dr.  John  Owen  by  the  widow 
of  the  author,  with  a letter  of  her  own,  informing  him  that  her  dying  hus- 
band desired  it  to  be  so  forwarded.  Dr.  Owen  says,  that  he  found  the 
treatise  “ wr.Lten  with  perspicuity  and  clearness,  handling  a subject  of  great 


106 


SAMUEL,  SAUL,  DAVID. 


and  delightful  variety,  with  a choice  mixture  of  spiritual,  moral,  and  polit- 
ical observations,  tempered  by  a good  and  sound  judgment  unto  com- 
mon capacities.”  We  do  not  presume  to  criticise  where  Owen  commends, 
but  we  should  not  have  originated  such  a commendation. 


SAMUEL,  SAUL,  DAVID. 

279  KITTO.  Daily  Bible  Illustrations,  "Samuel,  Saul,  and 

David.”  (See  No.  42.) 

Should  always  be  consulted. 

280  PLUMPTRE  (Helen).  The  History  of  Samuel.  18mo. 

Is.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1842. 

A children’s  book,  and  childlike  men  will  be  thank- 
ful for  the  many  very  useful  hints  which  it  throws  out. 
We  have  got  more  out  of  it  than  we  have  found  in  huge 
and  learned  tomes. 

281  STEEL  (Robert).  Samuel  the  Prophet.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

Lond.,  Nelson  & Sons.  1861.  S.  2s. 

The  author  has  done  his  work  well,  and  has  shown  an 
evident  desire  to  excite  others  to  a greater  knowledge  of 
the  subject  than  he  could  impart.  Hence  he  gives  a list 
of  the  writers  upon  Samuel,  and  such  accounts  of  them 
as  were  within  his  reach.  Young  readers  will  find  this 
book  a great  help  to  them. 

282  MILLER  (J.  A.)  Saul,  The  First  King  of  Israel.  F’cap. 

8vo.  Is.  6d.  Lond.,  Snow  & Co.  1866. 

Eminently  thoughtful,  useful,  practical  sermons. 
We  do  not  see  how  Saul’s  life-failure  could  be  more  prof- 
itably set  forth. 

283  BLAIKIE  (Willtam  G.,  A.  M.)  David,  King  of  Israel: 

the  Divine  Plan  and  Lessons  of  his  Life.  8vo.  5s 
Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1861. 

Dr.  Blaikie  is  a good  writer.  This  Life  of  David 
has  supplied  a great  lack. 


SAMUEL,  SAUL,  DAVID, 


107 


284  CHANDLER  (Samuel,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  and  F.  A.  S.  1693— 

1766).  A Critical  History  of  the  Life  of  David.  Two 
vols.,  8vo.  Load.,  1766.  S.  5s.  One  vol.,  8vo.  J.  H.  & 
J.  Parker.  1853.  S.  5s. 

This  is  a masterpiece  as  a critical  history,  and  the  best  of  Chandler’s 
productions.  Many  of  the  Psalms  are  explained  with  commendable  learn- 
ing, but  the  spiritual  element  is  absent. 

285  DELANY  (Patrick,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Down.  1686—1768). 

An  Historical  Account  of  the  Life  and  Reign  of  David. 
[Anon.]  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1745.  4s. 

Delany  was  a friend  of  Swift,  no  great  recommendation  for  a com- 
mentator. He  defends  David  in  a way  which  David  would  have  sternly 
repudiated.  Chandler  is  far  preferable  to  Delany,  but  both  are  devoid  of 
the  evangelical  spirit. 

286  KINGSLEY  (Charles,  M.  A.)  David.  Four  Sermons. 

F’cap.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co. 

In  his  usual  free  and  easy  manner  Kingsley  speaks  of  David’s  strength 
and  his  weakness,  his  anger  and  his  deserts.  The  character  of  this  writer 
is  supposed  to  be  well  understood,  but  we  question  if  many  have  formed 
a true  estimate  of  him.  For  commenting  purposes  these  sermons  are  of 
small  value ; they  are  plain,  practical  discourses. 

287  KRUMMACHER  (F.  W„  D.  D.)  David,  the  King  of  Israel. 

Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 

Anything  by  Krummacher  is  worthy  of  patient  reading. 

288  LAWSON  (George,  D.  D.  1749—1820.)  Discourses  on 

the  History  of  David.  12mo.  Berwick,  1833.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Here  the  life  of  David  is  piously  turned  to  practical 
use.  Delany  and  Chandler  are  but  bones,  and  Lawson 
the  marrow. 

289  MARBECK  (John).  The  whole  History  of  King  David. 

4to.  1579. 

This  is  in  English  metre,  and  was  written  by  the  famous  organist  of 
the  Royal  Chapel  in  Windsor,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  He  narrowly 
escaped  martyrdom.  His  work  entitled  “ Booke  of  Common  Praier  noted,” 
is  the  groundwork  of  the  plain  song  used  in  our  Cathedrals  from  the  Re- 
formation to  the  present  day.  Marleck's  History  of  David  is  very  rare. 
We  cannot  therefore  set  a price. 


103 


I.  AND  II.  KINGS. 


290  [ROGERS  (Mrs.)  ] The  Shepherd  King.  By  the  Authoress 

of  “ The  Folded  Lamb.”  12mo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 
1856.  S.  Is.  6d. 

This  authoress  writes  well  for  the  young,  and  her  book  will  be  useful 
to  those  who  teach  them. 

291  SMITH  (George,  LL.  D.  and  F.  A.  S.)  The  Life  and  Reign 

of  David.  Cr.  8vo.,  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Longmans.  1867.  S. 
3s.  6d. 

David’s  life  is  here  concisely  written,  with  such  of  the  Psalms  inter- 
woven as  can  be  referred  to  special  periods  It  cannot  be  read  without 
ministering  instruction. 

292  TAYLOR  (William  M.,  D.  D.  Of  the  Broadway  Taber- 

nacle, New  York).  David  : his  Life,  and  its  Lessons.  Cr. 
8vo.  8s.  6d.  Lond.,  Sampson  Low,  Marston  & Co.  1875. 

A grand  work  which  should  be  in  every  library. 

293  THOMPSON  (Henry,  M.  A.)  Davidica.  Twelve  Sermons 

on  the  Life  and  Character  of  David.  Lond.,  1827.  Is.  6d. 
Discourses  of  the  kind  which  are  usually  published  by  subscription ; 
rather  pretentious,  but  with  nothing  in  them.  The  process  of  subscribing 
to  print  sermons  is  one  suggested  by  kindness,  but  seldom  directed  by 
reason. 

294  VINCE  (Charles,  Baptist  Minister,  of  Birmingham. 

Died  1875).  Lights  and  Shadows  in  the  Life  of  King 
David.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.  Elliot  Stock.  1871. 

Sermons  of  the  highest  order  upon  a few  incidents 
in  David’s  life.  They  are  models  of  chaste,  subdued, 
but  powerful  preaching. 


I.  and  II.  KINGS. 

295  GENESTE  (Maximilian,  M.  A.)  The  Parallel  Histories 
of  Judah  and  Israel.  Two  vols.,  Roy.  8vo.  £1  11s.  6d. 
Lond.,  S.  Bagster  & Sons.  1843.  S.  6s.  to  8s. 

The  explanatory  notes  are  mostly  from  other  authors.  The  work  has  a 
very  noble  appearance,  and  may  be  useful  as  showing  the  run  of  Biblical 
history ; but  Barth's  Bible  Manual  (No.  4)  would  answer  every  purpose. 


Solomon’s  temple. 


109 


290  JUKES  (Andrew).  The  Mystery  of  the  Kingdom,  traced 
through  the  Books  of  Kings.  Part  I.  Is.  6d.  Lond., 
Longmans.  1858. 

This  author  is  more  mystical  than  we  could  wish,  but  never  writes  with- 
out being  instructive. 

297  KEIL  (K.  F.)  and  BERTHE  A U (E.)  Commentary  on  the 

Books  of  Kings.  By  K.  F.  Keil.  Translated  by  James 
Murphy,  LL.  D.  Supplemented  by  a Commentary  on  the 
Books  of  Chronicles.  By  Ernst  Bertlieau,  Professor  in 
Goettingen.  Translated  by  James  Martin,  B.  A.  Two 
vols,  10s.  6d.  each.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1857.  S. 
10s. 

Distinguished  by  careful  investigation  of  the  meaning  of  the  text.  This 
is  a most  important  help  to  the  expositor.  The  student  will  not,  however, 
find  much  in  the  way  of  reflections  and  doctrines. 

298  KEIL  and  DELITZSCH.  The  Books  of  the  Kings.  By  C. 

F.  Keil.  Translated  by  James  Martin,  B.  A.  One  vol. 
10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1865.  , 

This  appears  to  be  another  form  of  the  work  mentioned  above.  At 
least  there  can  be  no  necessity  for  purchasing  both.  This  is  the  better. 

299  KITTO.  Daily  Bible  Illustrations.  “ Solomon  and  the 

Kings.”  (See  No.  42.) 

Full  of  deeply  interesting  matter. 

300  LANGE’S  COMMENTARIES.  Edited  by  Dr.  Scliaff. 

Kings.  By  Dr.  Balir.  One  vol..  Imp.  8vo.  21s,  or  to 
subscribers  15s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1872. 

It  must  have  cost  great  effort  to  make  the  homileti- 
cal  part  of  this  volume  as  good  as  it  is.  It  is  a treasury 
to  the  preacher,  and  is  all  the  more  precious  because  we 
have  next  to  nothing  upon  the  books  of  the  Kings. 
(See  No.  43.) 


SOLOMON’S  TEMPLE. 

301  BUNYAN  (John).  Solomon’s  Temple  Spiritualized.  Lond., 
1688.  [In  Bunyan’s  Works,  Offer’s  edition,  III.,  460.] 

A marvellous  display  of  allegorizing  genius:  full  of  Gospel  truth. 
Banyan  hammers  away  at  each  type,  but  no  one  may  call  it  tinkering. 


110 


ELIJAH,  ELISHA,  &C. 


302  EDERSHEIM  (A.,  D.  D.)  The  Temple  : its  Ministry  and 

Services.  Imp.  16mo.  5s.  Relig.  Tract.  Soc.  1874. 

This  will  supply  the  student  with  all  that  he  needs 
upon  the  subject  in  hand. 

303  LEE  (Samuel,  M.  A.  1625—1691.)  Orbis  miracnlum  ; or, 

the  Temple  of  Solomon  pourtrayed  by  Scripture  light. 
[Anon.]  Folio.  1659.  12s.  to  14s. 

Of  course,  as  will  be  inferred  from  its  date,  this  work  is  of  the  antique 
order,  but  it  is  profoundly  learned,  and  goes  into  architectural  and  ritualis- 
tic details,  explaining  them  spiritually  with  much  sweetness  and  sugges- 
tiveness. 


ELIJAH,  ELISHA,  &c. 

304  ANDERSON  (James,  S.  M.,  M.  A.)  Discourses  on  Elijah, 

etc.  8 vo.  Lond.,  1835.  2s. 

Ordinary  sermons  by  a “ Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  the  Queen.”  Rhe- 
torical and  grandiose,  but  not  expository. 

305  BAYNE  (Peter).  The  Days  of  Jezebel.  An  Historical 

Drama.  12mo.  6s.  Lond.,  Strachan  & Co.  1872. 

A fine  poetic  drama,  worthy  of  quotation  by  preachers  ; but  hardly  in 
the  line  of  works  contemplated  by  this  Catalogue. 

306  EDERSHEIM  (Alfred,  D.  D.)  Elisha  the  Prophet,  a Type 

of  Christ.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  W.  Hunt  & Co.  1873. 
This  author  is  always  interesting,  showing  close  acquaintance  with 
Jewish  customs,  and  knowing  how  to  utilize  his  information. 

307  HOW AT  (H.  T.)  Elijah,  the  Desert  Prophet.  Cr.  8vo.  5s. 

Edinb.,  Johnstone  & Hunter.  1868. 

Very  picturesque  and  poetical.  A work  to  be  read  for  enjoyment. 

308  KRUMMACHER  (F.  W.,  D.  D.)  Elijah  the  Tislibite. 

Translated  from  the  German.  [Numerous  editions  ; one 
has  lately  been  issued  by  the  Religious  Tract  Society. 
Cr.  8vo.  3s.]  S.  Is.  6d. 

Too  well  known  and  approved  to  need  any  commen- 
dation from  us. 

309  MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.  D.)  The  Prophet  oi  Fire.  Post  8vo. 

6s.  6d.  Lond.,  James  Nisbet  & Co.  1863. 

Dr.  Macduff  writes  popularly,  yet  he  is  by  no  means 


Ill 


ELIJAH,  ELISHA,  &C. 

weak  or  shallow.  He  is  to  the  young  minister  all  the 
more  useful,  because  he  has  worked  out  the  problem  of 
making  sound  thought  intelligible  to  the  multitude. 

310  MACKINTOSH]  (C.  H.)  Reflections  on  the  Life  and  Times 

of  Elijah.  By  C.  H.  M.  Is.  Lond.,  G.  Morrish. 

Strongly  Plymouthistic.  A small  affair. 

311  BLUNT  (Henry,  M.  A.)  Lectures  upon  the  History  of 

Elisha.  l2mo.  5s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1839.  S.  2s. 
We  like  Blunt  better  upon  Elisha  than  upon  any  other  portion  of 
Scripture.  He  says  that,  had  he  known  of  Krummacher's  having  written 
upon  the  subject,  he  should  not  have  attempted  it  himself.  A wise  obser- 
vation. What  shall  he  do  that  coraeth  after  a King,  or  after  a Krum- 
macher  t 

312  DOTHIE  ( W.  P. , M.  A.)  The  History  of  the  Prophet  Elisha. 

Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hodder  & Stoughton.  1872. 
Sketchy.  Not  very  deep,  but  interesting. 

313  GLYN  (George  L.,  Bart.)  Life  of  Elisha,  in  eleven  plain 

discourses.  8vo.  Lond.,  Wertheim  & Macintosh.  1857. 
S.  Is. 

Evangelical  and  simple.  Ministers  do  not  need  it. 

314  ERUMMAOHER  (F.  W.,  D.  D.)  Elisha.  Translated 

from  the  German.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1837.  S.  Is.  6d. 

Of  this  we  may  say  as  we  did  of  the  same  author’s 
Elijah, — it  needs  no  commending  from  us. 

315  BULLOCK  (Charles).  The  Syrian  Leper.  F’cap,  8vo. 

2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Wertheim  & Macintosh.  1862.  S.  Is.  3d. 
Telling  in  style,  and  earnestly  evangelical.  These  chapters  are  good 
specimens  of  popular  expounding. 

316  MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.  D.)  The  Healing  Waters  ; or,  The 

Story  of  Naaman.  An  Old  Testament  Chapter  on  Provi- 
dence and  Grace.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1873. 

In  Dr.  Macduff’s  best  manner  : the  story  of  Naaman 
is  admirably  handled,  and  made  to  teach  the  gospel  with 
much  freshness. 

317  ROGERS  (Daniel,  B.  D.  Puritan.  1573 — 1652).  Naa- 

man the  Syrian,  his  disease  and  cure  ; discovering  lively 
to  the  reader  the  spiritual  leprosie  of  sinne  and  selfe-love ; 
together  with  the  remedies,  viz.,  selfe-denial  and  faith. 
Folio.  Lond.,  1642.  7s.  to  10s. 


112  CHRONICLES,  EZRA,  NEHEMIAH,  AND  ESTHER. 


A huge  volume  of  898  folio  pages,  almost  large 
enough  to  have  loaded  one  of  Naaman’s  mules.  It  is  a 
work  which  exhausts  the  subject  and  turns  it  to  earnest 
evangelical  uses. 

318  WOODWARD  (Henry,  A.  M.)  The  Shunamite.  8vo.  10s. 
6d.  Lond.  and  Camb.,  Macmillan  & Co.  1863.  S.  3s. 

We  scarcely  remember  a more  flagrant  case  of  high-sounding  verbiage. 
Here  is  the  author’s  way  of  describing  a hen  which  has  hatched  ducklings. 
— “ That  much  tried  bird,  whose  hard  allotment  it  has  been  to  hatch  and 
rear  a brood  of  aliens,  and  who  seems  as  if  melancholy  had  marked  her 
for  her  own,  when  her  charge,  with  unanimous  consent,  hurry  to  some 
tempting  pool  of  water,  and  violate  her  feelings  and  shock  her  instincts, 
by  casting  themselves  upon  that  hostile  element.” 


I.  and  II.  CHRONICLES. 

319  BERTHEAU  (E.)  See  Keil  and  Bertheau,  No.  297. 

320  KEIL  (K.  F.)  The  Book  of  the  Chronicles.  Translated  from 

the  German.  Bv  Andrew  Harper,  B.  D.  8vo.  10s.  6d. 
Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1872. 

Without  indicating  either  the  spiritual  lesson  or  the  moral  of  the  his- 
tory, Keil  simply  explains  the  facts,  and  in  so  doing  aids  the  reader  to 
realize  them.  We  confess  we  should  like  something  more. 


EZRA,  NEIIEMIAH,  and  ESTHER. 

321  KEIL  (K.  F.)  Commentary  on  Ezra.Nehemiali,  and  Esther. 

Translated  by  Sophia  Tavlor.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T 
& T.  Clark.  F.  T.  L.  1873. 

Just  the  kind  of  book  in  which  KeiVs  method  of  commenting  appears 
to  the  best  advantage.  He  gives  much  needful  information,  and  thus 
supplements  more  didactic  works.  We  cannot  read  Keil  with  pleasure, 
tor  we  want  spiritual  meat,  but  yet  it  is  most  desirable  for  us  to  know 
what  the  text  really  means. 

322  PILKINGTON  (James,  B.  D.  Bishop  of  Durham.  1520 — 

1575).  A Godlie  Exposition  upon  certeine  chapters  of 
Neliemiali.  1585.  Reprinted  in  the  Parker  Society’s 
edition  of  Pilkington’s  Works.  8vo.  Camb.,  1842. 

Very  old  fashioned  and  singular,  somewhat  in  the  style  of  Latimer  and 


ESTHER. 


113 


perhaps  a little  coarser.  PUkington's  downright  onslaughts  upon  the  vices 
and  follies  of  his  time  are  fine  instances  of  personal,  faithful  preaching ; 
they  are,  however,  so  minutely  descriptive  of  the  manners  which  then 
prevailed  that  they  are  the  less  useful  now.  The  style  is  cramped,  and 
even  grotesque  in  places,  yet  PxUdnqton  is  a grand  old  author.  He  has 
only  written  upon  five  chapters. 

323  RANDALL  (J.  Montague,  A.  Iv.  C.)  Nehemiah,  the  Tir- 

sliatlia  : his  Life  and  Lessons.  Post  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond. , 
Nisbet.  1874. 

The  substance  of  thirteen  Sunday  evening  addresses  to  a village  con- 
gregation, “ dictated  by  the  author,  who  is  nearly  blind,  on  the  following 
Monday.”  These  familiar  and  almost  chatty  discourses  are  full  of  gospel 
teaching,  and  while  they  give  a fair  idea  of  Nehemiah  and  his  times,  they 
are  also  enlivened  by  anecdote,  and  made  exceedingly  interesting.  Stu- 
dents will  not  learn  much  from  these  sermons,  but  they  may  see  how 
rustic  preaching  should  be  done. 

324  SCENES  FROM  THE  LIFE  OF  NEHEMIAH ; or,  Chapters 

for  Christian  Workers.  [Anon.]  F’cap.  8vo.  Is.  Lond., 
66,  Paternoster  Row,  E.  C. 

The  heads  of  these  chapters  would  serve  exceedingly  well  for  the  key- 
notes of  a series  of  sermons. 

325  STOWELL  (Hugh,  M.  A.)  A Model  for  Men  of  Business, 

or.  Lectures  on  the  Character  of  Nehemiah.  8vo.  Lond., 
Hatchards.  1855.  S.  3s. 

The  author  does  not  attempt  a full  exposition,  but  aims  at  furnishing  a 
plain,  practical  handbook  for  men  of  business  and  others  whose  time  is 
limited.  He  gives  fourteen  good,  sensible  lectures  on  the  Book. 

326  WOODWARD  (Henry,  M.  A.)  Thoughts  on  the  Character 

and  History  of  Nehemiah.  12mo.  Lond.,  1849. 

Words,  and  only  words. 


- ESTHER. 

327  COOPER  (Thomas).  The  Churches  Deliverance ; containing 
Meditations  and  short  Notes  upon  the  Booke  of  Hester. 
4to.  Lond.,  1609.  5s.  to  7s. 

We  have  not  been  able  to  meet  with  this  work. 

828  DAVIDSON  (Alexander  D.,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  Esther. 
Cr.  8vo.  5s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1859. 

Helpful  lectures.  The  Book  of  Esther  is  here  used  for  instruction  in 
doctrine  and  practice.  The  work  is  not  so  much  for  the  study  as  for  tho 
family. 


114 


THE  POETICAL  BOOKS. 


329  HUGHES  (John).  Esther  and  her  People.  Ten  Sermons. 

18mo.  1842  S.  Is.  3d. 

Good  evangelical  discourses,  but  nothing  very  special. 

330  LAWSON  (George,  D.  D.)  Discourses  on  Esther.  12mo. 

Edinb.,  1804.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Intended  for  the  general  reader.  The  discourses 
are  as  spiritual  and  unaffected  as  their  excellent  author. 
Dr.  John  Brown,  in  commending  all  the  Lawson  books, 
says  that  “ he  has  rendered  subjects,  apparently  barren, 
full  of  instruction.” 

331  McCRIE  (Thomas).  Lectures  on  Esther.  12mo.  1838. 

S.  Is.  6d. 

Dr.  Davidson  says  of  Dr.  McOrie  : “ There  is  an 
ancient  fable  of  a king  who  was  gifted  with  the  power 
of  turning  everything  he  touched  into  gold  ; and  this 
eminent  divine  and  historian  possessed  remarkably  the 
gift  of  rendering  every  subject  he  handled  so  precious,  as 
at  least  to  discourage  any  one  from  attempting  to  follow 
in  his  track.  In  his  Lectures  upon  the  book  of  Esther, 
he  has  certainly  left  little  for  any  to  say  who  may  come 
after  him.” 

332  MORGAN  (R.  C.)  The  Book  of  Esther  typical  of  the  King- 

dom. Sm.  8vo.  1855.  S.  Is.  6d. 

An  allegorical  interpretation,  which  commences  with  these  words: 
“ The  true  scene  of  this  beautiful  book  opens  in  heaven.”  Is  heaven 
under  the  dominion  of  Ahasuerus  ? Who  then  is  Vashti  ? 


THE  POETICAL  BOOKS. 

333  DURELL  (D.,  D.  D.)  Critical  Remarks  on  the  Books  of 
Job,  Proverbs,  Psalms,  Ecclesiastes,  and  Canticles.  4to. 
Oxford,  1772.  4s.  to  6s. 

A critic  who  is  forever  mending  the  text,  who  contends  for  the  modern 
origin  of  Job,  thinks  the  Canticles  to  be  a love  song,  and  considers  the 
imprecatory  Psalms  to  be  ebullitions  of  passion,  is  not  one  whom  our 
readers  need  consult. 


JOB, 


115 


334  HOLDEN  (Lawrence).  Paraphrase  on  the  Books  of  Job, 

Psalms,  Proverbs,  and  Ecclesiastes,  with  Notes.  Four 
vols.,  8vo.  1763.  5s. 

An  atrocious  instance  of  bombastic  verbosity.  Job  ii.  2 is  thus  ex- 
panded : — “ Heaven  and  earth’s  great  Lord  and  guardian,  the  instant 
Satan  appeared  observed,  and  thus  demanded  of  him : ‘ from  what  quarter 
proceedest  thou  ? or  in  what  district,  and  to  what  purpose  hast  thou 
lately  employed  thy  perverted,  and  subtle,  wicked  abilities  and  arts  ? ’ To 
whom  the  destroyer  answers : ‘ my  last  station,  or  rather,  unsettled,  wan- 
dering motion,  has  been  upon  earth ; various  districts  whereof  I have  made 
short  visits  to,  being  sometimes  with  the  inhabitants  of  one  region  of 
climate,  sometimes  with  those  of  another.’  ” Paraphrases  generally  mean 
the  text  padded  out  with  superfluous  words,  and  this  is  an  emphatic  in- 
stance. 

335  BITTO.  Daily  Bible  Illustrations,  “Job  and  the  Poetical 

Books.”  (See  No.  42.) 

Worthy  of  attentive  reading. 

336  LEIGH  (Edward).  See  under  Whole  Bible,  No.  45. 

337  WILCOCKS  (Thomas,  A.  M.  Puritan.  1549—1608).  The 

Works  of  that  Reverend  and  Learned  Divine,  Mr.  Thomas 
Wilcocks,  Minister  of  God’s  Word  : containing  an  Exposi- 
tion upon  the  whole  Booke  of  David’s  Psalmes,  Solomon’s 
Proverbs,  the  Canticles,  and  part  of  the  eighth  chapter 
of  St.  Paul’s  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  Folio.  Lond.  1589, 
1620  and  1624.  9s.  to  12s. 

Very  old.  The  notes  are  brief,  but  furnish  many  hints  for  sermons. 


JOB. 

338  ABBOT  (George.  Died  1648).  The  whole  Book  of  Job 

Paraphrased,  or  made  Easie  for  any  to  Understand.  4to. 
Lond.,  1640.  3s.  6d. 

This  is  not  by  Archbishop  Abbot,  neither  is  the  work  of  any  value. 
This  Abbot  was  a Member  of  Parliament,  and  his  paraphrase  is  better  than 
we  could  have  expected  from  an  M.  P. ; but  still  it  is  a heavy  perform- 
ance. 

339  AMERICAN  BIBLE  UNION.  The  Book  of  Job.  A Trans- 

lation from  the  Original  Hebrew ; on  the  Basis  of  the 
Common  and  Earlier  English  Versions.  By  Thomas  J. 
Conant,  D.  D.,  Professor  of  Sacred  Literature  in  Rochester 
Theological  Seminary.  4to.  New  York,  1867.  Lond., 
Triibner.  S.  3s.  6d. 


116 


JOB. 


An  excellent  translation.  The  design  did  not  allow  of  more  than 
slender  notes,  hut  those  notes  are  good. 

340  BARNES  (Albert.  1798—1870).  Notes  on  Job.  Rout 

ledge’s  edition,  edited  by  Dr.  Cumming.  Two  vols.,  8vo 
5s.  Blackie’s  edition.  Two  vols.,  post  8vo.  7s. 

Exceedingly  good.  One  of  the  best  of  this  author’s 
generally  valuable  productions.  The  student  should 
purchase  this  work  at  once,  as  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
to  his  library. 

341  BELLAMY  (D.)  Paraphrase,  with  observations.  4to. 

Lond.,  1748.  4s. 

A collection  of  notes  from  other  authors.  Original  works  are  far  better. 

343  BEZA  (Theodore.  1519 — 1605.)  Job  expounded.  8vo. 
1590.  7s. 

Beza  was  the  great  friend  and  assistant  of  Calvin.  As  a commentator 
he  lacked  the  profound  insight  and  comprehensive  grasp  of  Calvin,  but  as 
a critical  scholar  he  is  said  to  have  been  his  equal  if  not  his  superior.  This 
work  on  Job  is  rare. 

343  BLACKMORE  (Sir  R.)  Paraphrase  on  the  Book  of  Job, 

the  Songs  of  Moses,  Deborah,  and  David,  four  select 
Psalms,  some  Chapters  of  Isaiah,  and  the  3d  Chapter  of 
Habakkuk.  Folio.  1700.  3s. 

Grandiose  poetry.  Pope  speaks  of  the  power  of  Blaclcmore's  numbers 
“ to  soothe  the  soul  in  slumbers.”  The  worthy  knight  is  not  the  worst 
of  the  poetical  expositors,  but  he  is  bad  enough.  Miserable  paraphrasers 
are  ye  all,  ye  brethren  of  jingling  rhyme  and  doubtful  measure. 

344  CALVIN  (John).  Sermons  on  the  Booke  of  Job.  Trans- 

lated out  of  French.  By  A.  Golding.  Folio.  Lond.,  1584. 

Not  the  same  as  the  Commentary,  but  equally  rich. 

345  CAREY  (Cateret  Priaulx,  M.  A.)  Book  of  Job  translated, 

explained  by  Notes,  and  illustrated  by  extracts  from 
works  on  Antiquities,  Science,  &c.  Royal  8vo.  1858. 
5s.  to  7s.  6d. 

Purely  critical  and  exegetical.  The  author  has  grappled  manfully  with 
all  difficulties,  and  has  stored  up  a mass  of  precious  materials  with  which 
to  illuminate  a book  dark  from  its  antiquity. 

346  CARYL  (Joseph.  1602 — 1673).  Exposition,  with  Practi- 

cal Observations.  Twelve  vols.,  4to.  1648 — 1666.  55s. 
Also  in  Two  vols.,  folio.  1676.  50s. 

Caryl  must  have  inherited  the  patience  of  Job  to 


JOB. 


117 


have  completed  his  stupendous  task.  It  would  be  a 
mistake  to  suppose  that  he  is  at  all  prolix  or  redundant ; 
he  is  only  full.  In  the  course  of  his  expounding  he  has 
illustrated  a very  large  portion  of  the  whole  Bible  with 
great  clearness  and  power.  He  is  deeply  devotional  and 
spiritual.  He  gives  us  much,  hut  none  too  much.  His 
work  can  scarcely  be  superseded  or  surpassed. 

347  — - — An  Abridgment  of  Caryl’s  Exposition.  8vo.  Edinb., 

1836.  Is.  6d. 

We  do  not  believe  in  abridgments  of  a book  which  is 
good  throughout.  Think  of  twelve  large  volumes  con- 
densed into  one  small  one ! An  ox  in  a gallipot  is 
nothing  to  it. 

348  CHAPPELOW  (Leonard,  B.  D.)  A Commentary,  in  which 
* is  inserted  the  Hebrew  Text  and  English  Translation. 

Two  vols.,  4to.  6s.  Cambridge,  1752. 

Chappelow  is  great  upon  Arabic  etymologies,  but  he  is  dreadfully  ver- 
bose, and  really  says  nothing  of  any  consequence.  Chappelow  and  several 
other  authors  follow  Schultens  in  the  belief  that  the  Hebrew  can  only  be 
read  by  the  light  of  the  Arabic  ; they  even  imagine  that  the  Book  of  Job 
was  originally  composed  in  Arabic  by  Job  himself  and  then  translated  by 
some  one  else  into  the  Hebrew  tongue.  This  opened  a fine  field  for  parad- 
ing their  learning. 

349  COLEMAN  (J.  Noble).  The  Book  of  Job;  from  the 

Hebrew.  With  Notes.  4to.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & 
Co.  1869.  S.  4s. 

We  do  not  value  this  so  much  as  the  same  author’s  “ Psalms,”  but  it  is 
serviceable  in  its  own  way. 

350  CONANT  (T.  J.)  See  American  Bible  Union.  (No.  339.) 

351  DAVIDSON  (A.  B.,  M.  A.  Hebrew  Tutor,  New  College, 

Edinb.)  A Commentary  Grammatical  and  Exegetical  ; 
with  a Translation.  Vol.  I.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Williams 
& Norgate.  1862. 

Strict  grammatical  treatment  of  Scripture  is  always  commendable,  and 
in  this  case  the  results  are  valued  by  advanced  scholars. 

352  DELITZSCH  (Franz).  Biblical  Commentary  on  Job.  Two 

vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1866.  S.  12. 

“ Unquestionably  the  most  valuable  work  on  this  inexhaustibly  inter- 
esting Scripture  that  has  reached  us  from  Germany.” — Nonconformist. 


118 


JOB. 


853  DURHAM  (James.  1622—1658).  Exposition  of  Job. 
12mo.  1659.  Also  Glasgow,  1759.  Say  4s. 

This  is  a small  book,  and  we  have  been  unable  to 
procure  it.  Orme  only  mentions  it  upon  the  authority 
of  Watts’  Bibliotheca.  It  is  certain  to  be  good,  for 
Durham  is  always  admirable. 

354  EVANS  (Alfred  Bowen).  Lectures  on  tlie  Book  of  Job. 

8vo.  Lond.  Bosworth  & Harrison.  1856.  S.  2s. 
Discourses  from  fourteen  single  verses  from  different  parts  of  the  pa- 
tient patriarch’s  history.  They  are  quite  out  of  the  run  of  Church  of  Eng- 
land preaching,  and  are  full  of  thought  and  originality.  They  would  have 
been  all  the  better  for  a little  gospel,  for  even  if  his  text  does  not  look  that 
way,  we  do  expect  a Christian  minister  to  have  something  to  say  about  his 
Master. 

355  FENTON  (Thomas,  M.  A.)  Annotations  on  Job  and  the 

Psalms,  collected  from  several  Commentators,  and  meth- 
odized and  improved.  8vo.  Lond.,  1732.  3s. 

All  that  will  be  found  here  is  taken  from  others,  but  well  selected. 

356  FRY  (John).  New  Translation  and  Exposition,  with 

Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  1827.  4s.  6d. 

Written  in  a devout,  inquiring  spirit,  with  due 
respect  to  learned  writers,  but  not  with  a slavish  follow- 
ing of  their  fancies.  Fry’s  work  is  somewhat  of  the 
same  character  as  Good’s  (No.  359).  We  greatly  esteem 
this  exposition  for  its  own  sake,  and  also  for  the  evan- 
gelical tone  which  pervades  it. 

357  GARDEN  (Charles,  D.  D.)  An  Improved  Metrical  Version, 

with  preliminary  dissertation  and  notes.  8vo.  OxfoTd, 
1796.  3s. 

This  author  has  not  attempted  a Commentary,  but  he  has  consulted  a 
vast  array  of  authors,  and  from  them  gathered  a large  number  of  notes. 
His  work  is  of  very  moderate  value. 

358  GARNETT  (John.  Bishop  of  Cloglier).  A Dissertation  on 

the  Book  of  Job,  etc.  4to.  Lond.,  1749.  2s.  6d. 

Rubbish.  This  Bishop  ascribes  the  authorship  of  Job  to  Ezekiel  1 


JOB. 


119 


359  GOOD  (John  Mason,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  S.  1764—1827).  The 

Book  of  Job  literally  translated.  With  Notes,  etc.  8vo. 
Lond.,  1812.  5s. 

A very  valuable  contribution  to  sacred  literature.  Dr.  Good’s  learning 
was,  however,  more  extensive  than  accurate,  and  it  would  be  dangerous  to 
accept  his  translations  without  examination. 

360  GREGORY  THE  GREAT.  On  the  Book  of  Job.  [The 

Magna  Moralia.]  Translated  with  Notes  and  Indices. 
Library  of  the  Fathers.  Four  vols.  £2  15s.,  or  to  sub- 
scribers £2  2s.  Lond.,  James  Parker  & Co. 

The  Fathers  are  of  course  beyond  criticism,  and  contain  priceless  gems 
here  and  there  ; but  they  spiritualize  at  such  a rate,  and  also  utter  so  many 
crudities  and  platitudes,  that  if  they  were  modern  writers  they  would  not 
be  so  greatly  valued  as  they  are.  Antiquity  lends  enchantment. 

361  HEATH  (Thomas).  Essay  toward  a New  English  Version 

of  the  Book  of  Job.  With  a Commentary.  4to.  Lond., 
1756.  2s.  6d. 

All  that  is  good  in  this  book  is  marred  by  its  utterly  untenable  con- 
jectures. It  treats  Job  with  slender  reverence.  Do  not  lumber  your 
shelves  with  it. 

362  HODGES  (Walter,  D.  D.)  Elihu : an  Enquiry  into  the 

Scope  and  Design  of  the  Book  of  Job.  4to.  Lond.,  1750. 
12mo.,  third  edition,  1756.  2s. 

Based  upon  the  absurd  supposition  that  Elihu  was  the  Son  of  God  him- 
self, and  Job  a type  of  the  Saviour.  Poor  Job’s  book  has  been  the  sub- 
ject of  trials  as  numerous  as  those  of  its  hero,  and  Hodges  has  given  the 
finishing  stroke.  The  course  of  dreaming  can  no  further  go.  Hodge  the 
village  Methodist  could  never  have  raved  at  the  rate  of  Dr.  Hodge,  Pro- 
vost of  Oriel  College,  Oxford. 

363  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.)  See  under  Ecclesiastes. 

364  HULBERT  (Charles  Augustus,  M.  A.,  Perpetual  Curate 

of  Harth waite,  Yorks.)  The  Gospel  Revealed  to  Job. 
Thirty  Lectures,  with  Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  Longmans. 
1853.  S.  3s.  6d. 

An  unusually  good  book  ; exceedingly  comprehen- 
sive and  helpful  in  many  ways.  The  author  aimed  at 
usefulness  and  has  succeeded  wonderfully.  We  wonder 
that  his  work  has  not  been  better  known. 

365  HUTCHESON  (George).  An  Exposition  upon  Job,  being 

the  sum  of  316  Lectures.  Folio.  12s.  to  14s.  Lond.,  1669. 

Whenever  the  student  sees  a Commentary  by  Hutche- 


120 


JOB. 


son  let  him  buy  it,  for  we  know  of  no  author  who  is 
more  thoroughly  helpful  to  the  minister  of  the  Word. 
He  distils  the  text,  and  gives  his  readers  the  quintes- 
sence, ready  for  use. 

366  HUTCHINSON  (R.  E.,  M.  D.,  M.  R.  C.  S.  E.,  Surgeon-Major 
Bengal  Army).  Thoughts  on  the  Book  of  Job.  Lond.,  S. 
Bagster  & Sons.  [In  the  press.  1875.J 

867  KITTO  (John,  D.  D.)  “ Job  and  the  Poetical  Books.”  In 
Daily  Bible  Illustrations.  (See  No.  42.) 

Exceedingly  instructive.  Most  charming  reading. 

368  LANGE’S  COMMENTARY.  The  Book  of  Job.  A 

Commentary  by  Otto  Zockler,  D.  D.,  Professor  of  Theo- 
logy at  Greifswald.  Translated  from  the  German,  with 
Additions  by  Prof.  L.  J.  Evans,  D.  D.,  Lane  Theological 
Seminary,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  Imp.  8vo.  21s,  or  to  sub- 
scribers 15s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clerk.  1874. 

Contains  a large  collection  of  available  material,  and, 
if  within  a minister’s  means,  should  be  a foundation 
book  in  his  library.  We  are  very  far  from  endorsing  all 
Zockler’s  remarks,  but  the  volume  is  an  important  one. 

369  LEE  (Samuel,  D.  D.  1713 — 1853).  The  Book  of  Job  trans- 

lated ; with  Introduction  and  Commentary.  8vo.  Lond., 
1837.  7s.  6d. 

Barnes  says,  “ This  work  is  not  what  might  have  been  expected  from 
the  learning  and  reputation  of  Prof.  Lee.  It  abounds  with  Arabic  learning 
which  is  scattered  with  ostentatious  profuseness  through  the  volume,  but 
which  often  contributes  little  to  the  elucidation  of  the  text.  It  is  designed 
for  the  critical  scholar  rather  than  the  general  reader.” 

370  NOYES  (G.  R.,  D.  D.)  A New  Translation,  with  Notes. 

12mo.  Boston,  U.  S.  [N.  D.]  S.  3s. 

We  have  been  informed  that  Dr.  Noyes  belongs  to  the  Unitarian  body, 
but  we  fail  to  see  any  trace  of  Arian  or  Socinian  views  in  this  volume.  We 
do  not  agree  with  all  that  he  says,  but  he  strikes  us  as  being  an  honest, 
able,  and  accurate  translator  and  commentator,  worthy  to  stand  in  the 
foremost  rank. 

371  PETERS  (Charles,  A.  M.  Died  1777).  A Critical  Disser- 

tation on  the  Book  of  Job.  Wherein  the  Account  given 
in  that  book  by  the  author  of  The  Divine  Legation  of 
Moses  Demonstrated,  etc.,  is  particularly  considered ; and 
a Future  State  shewn  to  have  been  the  Popular  Belief  of 
the  Ancient  Hebrews.  4to.  Lond.,  1751.  2s.  6d. 


JOB. 


121 


Of  a controversial  character;  mainly  written  against  Warburton  and 
Le  Clerc,  and  as  those  authors  are  now  almost  forgotten,  answers  to  them 
have  lost  their  interest.  Peters  was  an  eminently  learned  man,  and  well 
versed  in  argument ; but  his  work  is  of  very  small  use  for  homiletical  pur- 
poses. 

372  QUARLES  (Francis).  Job  Militant,  with  Meditations, 

Divine  and  Moral.  4to.  1624.  5s. 

A Poem  in  Quarles’  usual  inflated,  but  withal  instructive  manner. 

373  ROBINSON  (T.,  D.  D.)  A Homiletic  Commentary  on  Job. 

[In  progress.  1875.  Being  Part  IV  of  the  Preacher’s  Com- 
mentary. Is.]  Lond.,  Dickinson. 

This  we  hope  will  be  of  use  to  preachers,  but  we  have  hardly  enough 
before  us  to  judge  of  it. 

374  SCOTT  (Thomas).  The  Book  of  Job  in  English  Verse,  with 

Remarks.  4to.  Lond.,  1771.  Reprinted,  8vo.,  1733.  S. 
2s.  3d. 

Here  we  have  Job  in  rhyme — 

“There  lived  an  Arab  of  distinguish’d  fame, 

In  Idumean  Uz;  and  Job  his  name. 

Of  spotless  manners,  with  a soul  sincere, 

Evil  his  hate,  and  God  alone  his  fear.” 

Thi3  will  hardly  do.  To  translate  Job  in  metro  needed  a Pope  or  a 
Dryden,  and  Thomas  Scott  was  neither : he  has,  however,  done  his  best, 
the  best  could  have  done  no  more.  This  is  not  Thomas  Scott  the  great 
Expositor,  but  a Dissenting  Minister  at  Ipswich. 

375  SEN  AULT  (J.  F.)  A Paraphrase.  4to.  Lond.,  1648.  3s.  6d. 
Senault  was  a famous  preacher  of  the  Oratory  in  Paris,  who,  from  the 

character  of  his  works,  would  seem  to  have  been  almost  a Protestant,  nis 
writings  were  highly  esteemed  in  their  day,  and  translated  into  English. 

376  SMITH  (Elizabeth).  The  Book  of  Job  translated  from  the 

Hebrew,  with  Annotations.  8vo.  Lond.,  1810.  Is.  6d. 
“A  good  English  version  of  Job,  produced  chiefly  by  the  aid  of  Park- 
hurst’s  Lexicon.” — Orme. 

377  STATHER  (Lieut-Col.,  W.  C.)  The  Book  of  Job,  in  Eng- 

lish Verse ; with  Notes.  12mo.  Lond.,  E.  Marlborough 
& Co.  1859.  S.  Is. 

We  do  not  like  Job  in  rhyme.  We  know  of  no  rhyming  version  of  any 
part  of  Scripture,  except  the  Psalms,  which  can  be  called  a success.  Cer- 
tainly this  is  not  one.  The  author’s  notes  deserve  consideration. 

378  STOCK  (Joseph,  D.  D.  Bishop  of  Killalla).  The  Book  of 

Job,  Metrically  arranged,  and  newly  translated  with  Notes. 
4to.  1805.  4s. 


122 


PSALMS. 


The  work  of  six  weeks  1 Well  may  Magee  say  that  it  is  full  of 11  pre- 
cipitances, mistakes,  and  mutilations.”  This  was  a bishop  and  a Doctor 
of  Divinity ! It  takes  a great  man  to  perpetrate  a very  great  folly.  A 
metrical  translation  of  Job  with  Notes  in  six  weeks ! In  that  time  stocks 
bloom  to  perfection.  Perhaps  that  fact  operated  on  our  author.  Let  this 
blundering  haste  serve  as  a warning  to  young  divines. 

379  UMBREIT  (Friedrich,  W.  K.  Prof,  of  Theol.  in  Heidel- 

berg. 1795 — 1860).  A New  Version  of  the  Book  of  Job; 
with  Notes.  Trapslated  by  the  Rev.  John  Hamilton  Gray, 
M.  A.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  8s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 
Useful  philologically ; but  Barnes  would  supply  far  more  in  that  direc- 
tion, and  spiritual  exposition  besides. 

380  VAN  HAGEN  (Mrs.  Henry).  Evenings  in  the  Land  of  Uz  ; 

a Comment  on  Job.  Second  Edition.  12mo.  1843.  Is. 
6d. 

Isaac  Taylor  commends  this  volume  as  one  which  “ disclaiming  all  pur- 
pose of  critical  exposition,  aims  only  under  the  guidance  of  Christian  feel- 
ing and  experience  to  follow  and  to  unfold  the  spiritual  intention  of  this 
rich  portion  of  Holy  Scripture.”  Such  an  introduction  must  have  helped 
to  sell  the  work  and  carry  it  speedily  to  the  second  edition. 

381  WAGNER  (George).  Sermons  on  the  Book  of  Job.  Cr. 

8vo.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  & Co.  1863.  S.  3s. 

Wagner’s  sermons  are  simple  and  plain,  devout  and  instructive.  We 
have  here  nothing  very  fresh,  but  everything  is  sound  and  good. 

382  WEMYSS  (Thomas).  Job  and  his  Times.  New  Version, 

with  Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  1839.  2s.  6s. 

Barnes  says : — “ This  is  designed  to  be  a popular  work.  It  is  not  so 
much  of  the  nature  of  a Commentary  as  a collection  of  fragments  and  brief 
essays  on  various  topics  referred  to  in  the  Book  of  Job.  It  is  chiefly 
valuable  for  its  illustration  of  the  religion  of  the  time  of  Job,  the  arts  and 
sciences,  the  manners  and  customs,  etc.”  It  lacks  lucid  arrangement,  and 
furnishes  comparatively  little  illustration  of  the  difficulties  of  the  text. 


PSALMS. 

383  ABBOT  (George).  Brief  Notes.  Being  a pithie  and  clear 
opening  of  the  Scope  and  Meaning  of  the  Text,  to  the  ca- 
pacitie  of  the  Weakest.  4to.  Lond.,  1651.  5s. 

An  experimental  exposition  by  a Member  of  Parliament  under  the 
Commonwealth.  Though  not  of  the  first  order,  many  of  his  remarks  are 
good.  Abbot  was  nephew  to  the  Archbishop  of  the  same  name. 


rSALMS. 


123 


384  ALEXANDER  (Joseph  Addison,  D.  D.,  Professor  of 

Theology,  Princeton,  U.  S.)  The  Psalms  Translated  and 
Explained.  8vo.  8s.  6d.  Edinb.,  Andrew  Elliot.  18G4. 
S.  5s.  6d. 

Occupies  a first  place  among  expositions.  It  is  a 
clear  and  judicious  explanation  of  the  text,  and  cannot 
be  dispensed  with. 

385  ALEXANDER  (William  Henry).  The  Book  of  Praises. 

The  Psalms,  with  Notes.  Small  Svo.  Lond.,  Jackson, 
Walford  & Hodder.  1867.  S.  2s.  6d. 

The  Notes  are  mostly  from  other  authors,  and  are  selected  with  discre- 
tion. They  do  not  appear  to  have  been  designed  by  their  collector  for  use 
beyond  his  own  family  circle,  and  they  were  published  after  his  death  by 
his  friends.  We  question  the  wisdom  of  the  publication. 

386  AUGUSTINE.  Expositions.  Translated,  with  Notes.  Six 

vols.,  8vo.  Oxf.,  1847.  [In  The  Library  of  the  Fathers, 
published  by  Messrs.  J.  Parker  & Co.,  Oxf.  and  Lond.] 
£3  15s.,  or  to  subscribers  £2  16s.  6d. 

As  a Father  he  is  beyond  ordinary  criticism,  or  we  would  venture  to 
say  that  he  is  too  frequently  mystical,  and  confounds  plain  texts.  No  the- 
ological library  is  complete  without  this  work,  for  there  are  grand  thoughts 
in  it  like  huge  nuggets  of  Australian  gold. 

387  BAKER  (Richard,  D.  D.)  The  Psalms  Evangelized.  8vo* 

1811.  2s.  6d. 

Very  pious  ; but  if  the  work  should  ever  disappear  from  literature  its 
absence  will  not  leave  a very  great  gap.  Bishop  Horne  and  Dr.  Hawker 
between  them  more  than  cover  the  space. 

388  BARNES  (Albert).  Notes.  Three  vols.,  post  8vo.  13s. 

6d.  Lond.,  Edinb.,  and  Glasgow,  Blackie  & Sons.  1868. 

Thoroughly  good.  Using  these  notes  constantly,  we 
are  more  and  more  struck  with  their  value.  For  the 
general  run  of  preachers  this  is  probably  the  best  com- 
mentary extant. 

389  BELLARMINE (Robert.  Cardinal.  1542—1621.)  A Com- 

mentary. Translated  from  the  Latin  by  the  Ven.  John 
O’Sullivan,  D.  D.  Small  4to.  Lond.,  James  Duffy.  1866. 
S.  4s. 

Popish,  but  marvellously  good  for  a Cardinal.  He  is  frequently  as 
evangelical  as  a Reformer.  He  follows  the  Vulgate  text  in  this  comment. 


124 


PSALMS. 


390  BELLET  (J.  G.)  Short  Meditations  on  the  Psalms,  chiefly 

in  their  Prophetic  character.  2s.  Lond.,  W.  H.  Broom. 
1871. 

Mere  fragments,  in  a style  which  we  do  not  admire,  which  seems  to  be 
peculiar  to  certain  brethren.  Only  the  initiated  can  understand  what  such 
writers  mean. 

391  BINNIE  (William,  D.  D.)  The  Psalms : Their  History, 

Teachings,  and  Use.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  T.  Nelson. 
1870. 

A highly  valuable  work.  It  is  not  an  exposition, 
but  can  readily  be  used  as  such,  for  it  possesses  a good 
index  to  the  passages  treated  of.  Dr.  Binnie  reviews 
with  great  skill  and  intense  devotion  the  various  sacred 
poems  contained  in  the  Book  of  Psalms,  and  gives  the 
general  run  and  character  of  each  one.  His  work  is  un- 
like any  other,  and  supplies  a great  desideratum. 

392  BONAR  (Andrew  A.)  Christ  and  his  Church  in  the 

Book  of  Psalms.  Demy  8vo.  10s.  (id.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 
1859. 

Of  the  highest  order  of  merit.  The  author  does  not 
strain  the  text,  but  gives  its  real  meaning.  His  re- 
marks are  always  weighty,  spiritual,  and  suggestive  ; we 
only  wish  there  were  more  of  them.  He  has  cultivated 
brevity. 

393  BOUCHIER  (Barton,  A.  M.)  Manna  in  the  Heart ; or,  Daily 

Comments  on  the  Psalms,  for  the  Use  of  Families.  Two 
vols.,  Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1856.  S.  5s. 

Among  the  best  books  ever  written  for  family  reading.  Evangelical, 
devotional,  and  expository.  Preachers  will  find  good  thought  here. 

394  BURTON  (John).  The  Book  of  Psalms  in  English  Verse. 

Cr.  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  John  Shaw  & Co.  1871. 

The  Psalms  rhymed  in  a New  Testament  spirit : they  are  better  in 
prose. 

395  BUSH  (G.)  A Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Psalms.  With 

a new  literal  version.  8vo.  New  York,  1838. 

Does  not  appear  to  have  been  reprinted  in  England. 


PSALMS. 


125 


396  BYTHNER  (Victor.  Died  1670.)  The  Lyre  of  David ; 

or,  an  Analysis  of  the  Psalms,  Critical  and  Practical ; to 
which  is  added  a Hebrew  and  Chaldee  Grammar.  To 
which  are  added  by  the  Translator  a Praxis  of  the  first 
eight  Psalms.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Dee,  A. 
B.  8vo.  1836.  S.  7s.  6d. 

We  agree  with  the  statement  found  in  the  Preface  of 
this  work  : “ Nearly  two  centuries  have  passed  away, 
since  Bythner,  uncertain  of  its  reception,  first  committed 
his  Lyra  to  public  light ; during  which  time,  instead  of 
sinking,  it  has  advanced  in  estimation  ; being  admitted 
by  all  the  learned  to  be  the  very  best  work  on  the 
Psalms  in  Hebrew.  The  number  of  Hebrew  radical 
words  is  1867  ; of  these,  1184  occur  in  the  Psalms  ; it 
follows  then,  that  a thorough  knowledge  of  the  Psalms 
very  nearly  amounts  to  a thorough  knowledge  of  the 
language,  and  that  Bythner’s  Lyra,  in  being  the  best 
work  on  the  Psalms,  must  be  the  best  work  on  Hebrew 
in  general.”  Our  readers  will  scarcely  need  us  to  add 
that  Bythner’s  work  is  only  useful  to  those  who  study 
the  Hebrew. 

397  CALVIN  (John).  The  Psalms  of  David  and  others,  with 

Commentaries.  Translated  by  Arthur  Golding.  Two 
vols.,  4to.  Lond.,  1571. 

398  A Commentary  on  the  Psalms.  Translated.  Three 

vols.,  8 vo.  Oxford,  1840.  S.  7s. 

Calvin  is  a tree  whose  “ leaf  also  shall  not  wither  ; ” 
whatever  he  has  written  lives  on,  and  is  never  out  of 
date,  because  he  expounded  the  word  without  bias  or 
partiality. 

399  CARTER  (Charles.  Missionary  to  Ceylon).  The  Psalms, 

newly  translated  from  the  Hebrew.  12mo.  2s.  6d. 

Lond.,  J.  Snow.  1869. 

The  emendations  are  carefully  made  by  the  translator,  who  has  been 
for  many  years  engaged  upon  the  Singalese  version.  A helpful  book. 


126 


PSALMS. 


400  CAYLEY  (C.  B.,  B.  A.)  The  Psalms  in  Metre.  [With  Notes.] 

12mo.  6s.  Lond.,  Longmans.  1860. 

"We  do  not  think  much  of  the  metrical  rendering,  which  often  jars  on 
the  ear.  There  are  a few  good  notes  at  the  end. 

401  CHAMPNEY  (H.  N.,  Esq.)  A Textual  Commentary  on  the 

Psalms.  Sq.  16mo.  3s.  Lond.,  S.  Bagster  & Sons. 

1852.  S.  Is. 

Merely  a collection  of  parallel  texts.  Make  one  for  yourself. 

402  CHANDLER  (Samuel,  D.  D.)  See  No.  284. 

403  CLAY  (William  Keatinge,  B.  D.)  Expository  Notes  on 

the  Prayer  Book  Version  of  the  Psalms.  Sm.  8vo.  Lond., 
John  W.  Parker.  1839.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Commendable  in  its  way,  hut  not  important.  Most  of  its  matter  is  to 
he  found  elsewhere. 

404  COLEMAN  (JonN  Noble,  M.  A.)  Psalterium  Messianicum 

Davidis  Regis  et  Prophetae.  A Revision  of  the  Authorized 
Version,  with  Notes,  original  and  selected  ; vindicating  the 
prophetic  manifestations  of  Messiah  in  the  Psalms,  etc. 
Imp.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1865.  S.  5s. 

Useful  for  its  quotations  from  the  Fathers  and  ancient  writers.  The 
large  type  swells  out  a small  quantity  of  material  to  a needless  size,  and 
so  puts  purchasers  to  an  unnecessary  expense. 

405  CON  ANT  (Thomas  J.)  The  Psalms.  The  Common  Version, 

revised  for  the  American  Bible  Union.  4to.  1871. 
Lond.,  Triibner  & Co.  S.  4s. 

A trustworthy  translation  with  a few  notes. 

406  CONGLETON  (Lord).  The  Psalms.  A New  Version,  with. 

Notes.  Thick  12mo.  Lond.,  James  E.  Hawkins.  1875. 

The  translation  is  mainly  that  of  Rogers  (No.  465),  and  the  Notes  refer 
the  Psalms  to  historic  and  prophetic  subjects.  We  see  no  use  whatever 
in  this  production. 

407  COWLES  (Henry,  D.  D.)  The  Psalms  ; with  Notes.  8vo. 

New  York,  1872.  Worth  about  5s. 

Always  repays  for  consulting,  though  it  does  not 
contain  much  that  is  new,  original,  or  profound.  It 
might  he  reprinted  in  England,  with  the  probability  of 
a large  sale. 


PSALMS. 


127 


408  CRESS  WELL  (Daniel,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.)  Psalms  of  David, 

according  to  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer ; with  Notes. 
Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1848.  S.  2s. 

The  explanatory  notes  are  neither  prolix  nor  commonplace,  but  show 
much  clear  insight.  They  are  deservedly  held  in  esteem. 

409  CRITICAL  TRANSLATION  (A)  of  the  Psalms,  in  Metre. 

Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Gd.  Lond.,  S.  Bagster  & Sons. 

The  author  has  labored  hard  to  arrive  at  the  correct  meaning  of  the 
Hebrew,  and  to  versify  it.  The  work  is  very  carefully  done,  but  few 
preachers  can  alford  to  spend  their  money  on  a book  of  this  kind. 

410  DALLAS  (A.  R.  C.,  M.  A.)  The  Book  of  Psalms  arranged 

in  Daily  Portions  for  Devotional  Reading.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  Gd. 
Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  I860.  S.  Is.  Gd. 

A new  arrangement : the  old  one  is  good  enough  for  us. 

411  DARBY  (J.  N.)  Practical  reflections.  Cr.  8vo.  Lond., 

R.  A.  Allen.  1870. 

Too  mystical  for  ordinary  minds.  If  the  author  would  write  in  plain 
English  his  readers  would  probably  discover  that  there  is  nothing  very 
valuable  in  his  remarks. 

412  DE  BURGH  (William,  A.  M.)  Commentary ; Critical,  Devo- 

tional, and  Prophetical.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  28s.  Dublin, 
Hodges,  Smith  & Co.  1860.  S.  12s.  Gd. 

A second-advent  interpreter ; and  one  of  the  best  of  his  class.  Highly 
esteemed  by  those  who  are  enthusiastic  upon  prophetical  subjects. 

413  DELITZSCH  (Franz).  Commentary  on  the  Psalms.  Three 

vols.,  10s.  Gd.  each.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1871.  S.  5s. 
each. 

Thoroughly  learned,  but  wants  unction.  Not  adapted  for  common 
readers,  but  scholars  will  prize  it  greatly. 

The  Princeton  Review  says  of  it : “We  commend  this  commentary  as 
a valuable  aid  to  preachers  and  exegetes  in  elucidating  the  Psalms.” 

414  DICKSON  (David.  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the  University 

of  Edinb.  1583 — 1G62).  A brief  explanation  of  the 
Psalms.  Three  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1655.  Reprinted  in 
two  vols.,  12mo.  Glasgow,  1834.  3s.  to  Gs. 

A rich  volume,  dropping  fatness.  Invaluable  to  the 
preacher.  Having  read  and  re-read  it,  we  can  speak  of 
its  holy  savor  and  suggestiveness.  We  commend  it  with 
much  fervor. 


128 


PSALMS. 


415  DIMOCK  (H.)  Notes,  Critical  and  Explanatory,  on  the 

Book  of  Psalms,  etc.  4to.  1791.  3s. 

The  notes  mainly  concern  the  various  readings,  and  exhibit  consider* 
able  learning ; but  we  do  not  think  much  of  a homiletical  kind  can  be  got 
out  of  them. 

416  DUNWELL  (F.  H.,B.  A.)  Parochial  Lectures  on  the  Psalms, 

from  the  Fathers  of  the  Primitive  Church.  8vo.  Lond., 
J.  H.  Parker.  1855.  3s.  6a. 

This  author  spiritualizes  far  too  much.  His  metaphors  are  overdone. 

417  EDWARDS  (Joseph,  M.  A.)  Devotional  Exposition.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1850.  Is.  6d. 

A paraphrase  of  no  great  value.  Even  Masters  of  Arts  may  fail. 

418  EDWARDS  (T.)  New  Translation,  with  Notes,  etc.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1755. 

The  writer  was  an  able  man,  but  his  book  is  of  small  worth. 

419  EWART  (J.,  A M.)  Lectures  on  the  Psalms.  Three  vols., 

8vo.  Lond.,  1826.  5s. 

The  author  was  a Presbyterian  Minister  of  the  time  of  the  Pretender, 
and  we  suspect  that  he  was  a high  and  dry  Moderate.  His  commeuts  were 
given  at  the  public  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  and  although  destitute  of 
spirituality  and  Gospel  clearness,  they  are  not  without  a measure  of  origi- 
nality. 

i 420  EXTON  (Richard  Brudenell).  Sixty  Lectures  on  the 
Psalms,  as  appointed  to  be  read  in  the  Services  of  the 
Church  of  England.  8vo.  Lond.,  1847.  3s. 

Very  poor  and  prosy.  We  pity  the  hearer  who  sat  out  these  sixty 
lectures. 

421  FENTON  (Thomas,  M.  A.)  Annotations  on  Job  and  Psalms, 

from  several  Commentators.  8vo.  Lond.,  1732.  3s. 

The  Annotations  are  choice,  but  will  be  found  in  easily  accessible  works. 

422  FENWICK  (George,  B.  D.)  Thoughts  on  the  Hebrew 

Titles  of  the  Psalms,  etc.  8vo.  Lond.,  1749.  6s. 

423  The  Psalter  in  its  original  form.  . . with  Arguments 

and  Notes.  [Anon.]  8vo.  Lond.,  1789.  3s. 

These  two  works  are  praiseworthy  in  design,  but  they  are  too  fanci- 
ful. 

424  FORBES  (Granville).  The  Voice  of  God  in  the  Psalms. 

Cr.  8 vo.  6s.  6d.  Lond.,  Macmillan.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Sermons  by  a Northamptonshire  Rector  of  the  Broad  School.  They  do 
not  strike  us  as  being  anything  very  wonderful ; certainly  “ The  Voice  of 
God”  is  not  remarkably  audible  in  them. 


PSALMS. 


129 


425  te  FOUR  FRIENDS.”  The  Psalms  of  David  Chronologically 

arranged,  with  Notes.  By  Four  Friends.  Cr.  8vo.  8s.  6d.  . 
Lond.,  Macmillan.  1867. 

Here  the  Psalms  are  thrust  out  of  their  usual  order,  and  treated  after 
the  manner  of  the  Broad  School  of  thought.  We  do  not  attach  any  great 
value  to  this  production.  With  some  persons  perversity  passes  for  pro- 
fundity, and  if  a mau  differs  from  everybody  else  they  are  persuaded  that 
he  must  be  an  original  genius  : the  “ four  friends  ” will  stand  high  in  the 
esteem  of  such  critics.  We  neither  believe  in  their  chronology,  their  the- 
ology, nor  their  philology. 

426  FRENCH  (William,  D.  D.)  and  SKINNER  (George,  M.  A.) 

Translation,  with  Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  Parker.  1842.  2s.  6d. 
A version  held  in  high  esteem.  Notes  very  short. 

427  FRY  (John,  B.  A.)  A Translation  and  Exposition  of  the 

Psalms  ; on  the  principles  adopted  in  the  posthumous 
work  of  Bishop  Horsley ; viz.,  that  those  sacred  oracles 
have  for  the  most  part  an  immediate  reference  to  Christ 
and  to  his  first  and  second  advents.  8vo.  Lond.,  Hamil- 
ton, Adams  & Co.  1842.  5s. 

Fry  follows  Bishop  Horsley  and  looks  much  to  the  second  advent.  The 
work  is  not  fair  either  as  a translation,  or  as  an  exposition.  It  is  useful  in 
its  own  direction,  as  showing  how  a peculiar  theory  has  been  supported 
by  an  able  man  ; but  it  must  not  be  implicitly  relied  upon. 

428  FYSH  (Frederic,  M.  A.)  A Lyrical,  Literal  Version  [with 

Notes.]  Two  vols.,  12mo.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1851.  2s.  6d. 
A valuable  literal  version.  Notes  scant,  but  scholarly. 

429  GEDDES  (Alexander,  LL.  D.  A Roman  Catholic  Divine. 

1737 — 1802).  New  Translation,  with  Various  Readings 
and  Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  1807.  3s. 

This  is  said  to  be  “ a careful  rendering,  aiming  at  the  primary  meaning 
of  the  psalmists.”  Dr.  Henderson  speaks  of  Geddes  as  flagrantly  disfigur- 
ing his  Biblical  labors  with  profanity.  He  was  a singular  mixture  of 
Romanist  and  free-thinker. 

430  GOOD  (JonN  Mason,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  S.)  Historical  Outline 

of  the  Book  of  Psalms.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  John  Mason 
Neale,  B.  A.  Lond.,  W.  H.  Dalton.  1842.  3s. 

This  is  not  a commentary,  but  may  be  regarded  as 
an  introduction  to  the  work  next  mentioned,  by  the 
same  author.  Historical  light  is  frequently  the  very 
best  which  can  be  cast  upon  a passage,  and  Hr.  Good 
6* 


130 


PSALMS. 


has  known  how  to  apply  it.  He  may  sometimes  be 
thought  fanciful,  but  he  is  never  really  speculative,  and 
he  almost  always  says  something  worth  noting. 

431  GOOD  (J.  M.)  The  Book  of  Psalms ; a New  Translation, 

with  Notes.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  E.  Henderson,  P.  D. 
8vo.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1854.  4s. 

Hr.  Good  was  a medical  gentleman  with  a large  prac- 
tice, and  yet  he  managed  to  produce  this  learned  volume. 
“I  save  every  quarter  of  an  hour  for  it,”  said  he,  “ for 
my  heart  is  in  it.”  He  was  a man  of  great  attainments 
and  genuine  piety.  The  progress  made  in  Hebrew 
philology  and  exegesis  since  his  day  has  been  great ; but 
his  work  has  not  been  altogether  superseded.  It  is  of  a 
high  class,  from  a literary  point  of  view,  but  must  not 
be  blindly  followed. 

432  GREEN  (William,  M.  A.)  A Translation,  with  Notes. 

8vo.  1762.  3s. 

A translation  with  meagre  notes. 

433  HAMMOND  (Henry,  D.  D.  1605—1660).  Paraphrase  and 

Annotations.  Folio.  1659.  7s.  6d.  Two  vols.  8vo. 

Oxford,  1850.  S.  6s. 

Much  esteemed,  and  deservedly  so.  Hammond’s  weighty  tome  is  some- 
what dry,  and  many  of  his  remarks  are  rather  those  of  a linguist  than  of  a 
divine,  but  he  touches  on  many  matters  which  others  omit,  and  is,  upon 
the  whole,  an  expositor  of  singular  merit. 

434  HAPSTONE  (Dalman,  M.  A.)  The  Psalms  in  appropri- 

ate Metres  ; a strictly  literal  Translation,  with  Notes.  8vo. 
7s.  6d.  Edinb.,  Oliphant.  1867. 

We  prefer  our  own  version,  and  do  not  think  many  of  Mr.  Hapstone’s 
stanzas  successful  as  attempts  at  poetry. 

435  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.  D.)  Commentary.  Three 

vols.,  8vo.  £1 13s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1845-8.  S.  15s. 
A masterly  work  ; but  about  as  dry  as  Gideon’s  unwetted  fleece. 

436  HILLER  (O.  Prescott.  Minister  of  the  New  Jerusalem 

Church,  Cross  Street,  London.)  Notes  on  the  Psalms  [I. — 
LXXV1I.]  Explanatory  of  their  Spiritual  Sense.  8vo. 
Lond.,  James  Spiers.  1869.  S.  4s. 

Swedenborgian,  and  frequently  absurd.  The  author  confounds  rather 
than  expounds. 


PSALMS. 


131 


437  HORNE  (George,  D.  D.  Bishop  of  Norwich.  1730 — 1792.) 

Commentary.  [Numerous  editions  : among  others  a Glas- 
gow edition,  three  vols.,  12mo.,  with  Introductory  Essay 
by  Edward  Irving,  M.  A.,  which  is  one  of  Irving’s  best 
efforts.  Tegg’s  edition.  One  vol.,  8vo.  6s.]  S.  3s. 

It  has  been  said  that  this  author  had  no  qualification 
for  a commentator  except  piety.  This  is  not  true,  for 
he  had  natural  poetry  in  his  soul ; and  even  if  it  were 
true,  his  work  would  go  far  to  show  how  abundantly 
piety  compensates  for  other  deficiencies.  He  is  among 
the  best  of  our  English  writers  on  this  part  of  Scripture, 
and  certainly  one  of  the  most  popular. 

438  HORSLEY  (Samuel.  Bishop  of  Norwich).  The  Book  of 

Psalms.  With  Notes  Explanatory  and  Critical.  8vo. 
Lond.,  1833.  4s. 

Vigorous  writing,  with  a propensity  to  indulge  in  new  readings,  and  a 
persistent  twist  in  one  direction.  The  notes  show  the  hand  of  a mas- 
ter, and  have  exerted  much  influence  in  directing  thoughtful  minds  to  the 
subject  of  the  Second  Advent,  as  foreshadowed  in  the  Old  Testament,  but 
they  must  be  used  with  extreme  caution. 

439  JEBB  (Joiin).  Literal  Translation ; with  Dissertations  on 

the  word  Selah,  and  on  the  Authorship,  Order,  Titles,  and 
Poetry  of  the  Psalms.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond  , Long- 
mans. 1846.  4s. 

Jebb  takes  for  his  motto  in  translating,  that  saying  of  Hooker  : “ I hold 
it  for  an  infallible  rule  in  expositions  of  sacred  Scripture,  that  where  a 
literal  construction  will  stand,  the  farthest  from  the  letter  is  commonly  the 
worst.”  His  notes  are  scant,  but  his  dissertations  in  the  second  volume 
are  most  admirable. 

440  JENNINGS  (A.  C.,  B.  A.)  and  LOWE  (W.  H.,  M.  A.)  The 

Psalms,  with  Introductions  and  Critical  Notes.  Books  III. 
and  IV.  [Psalms  LXXII1.  to  CVL]  Cr.  8vo.  6s.  Lond., 
Macmillan  & Co.  1874. 

Learned,  but  more  occupied  with  mere  verbal  criticisms  than  with  any 
useful  suggestions  which  could  be  turned  to  account  by  a preacher. 

441  JONES  (Joseph,  M.  A.)  The  Psalms ; with  Reflections. 

12mo.  Lond.,  1846.  Is.  to  2s. 

Pious,  but  poor. 


132 


PSALMS. 


442  KAY  (William,  D.  D.)  The  Psalms  translated  from  the 

Hebrew.  With  Notes,  chiefly  Exegetical.  8vo.  12s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1871. 

A refreshing  book ; the  notes  being  out  of  the  ordi- 
nary run,  and  casting  much  light  on  many  passages. 
To  thoroughly  appreciate  this  author  one  should  be  a 
Hebrew  scholar. 

443  KEBLE  (John,  M.  A.  Author  of  “ The  Christian  Year.” 

1792—1869).  The  Psalter,  in  English  Verse.  F’cap.  8vo. 
6s.  Lond.,  Parker  & Co.  1869. 

A poet's  version  of  a grand  series  of  poems. 

444  LANGE’S  COMMENTARY.  Edited  by  Dr.  P.  Schaff.  Imp. 

8vo.  21s.  Subscribers  15s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1872. 
Comparatively  feeble.  Not  up  to  the  usual  standard  of  this  admirable 
series.  Still,  it  is  among  the  best  of  modern  commentaries. 

445  LINTON  (Henry,  M.  A.)  The  Psalms  of  David  and  Solo- 

mon explained.  F’cap.,  8vo.  3s.  Lond. , Bagsters.  1871. 
A small  affair  in  all  ways. 

446  LUTHER  (Martin).  A Manual  of  the  Book  of  Psalms  ; or 

the  subject-contents  of  all  the  Psalms.  Translated  by 
Rev.  Henry  Cole.  8vo.  Lond.,  1823.  [Also  a volume  of 
“ The  Christian’s  Family  Library.”  12mo.  Lond.,  See- 
leys.] 2s. 

Fragmentary,  a mere  table  of  contents,  but  truly  Lutheran. 

447  MANT  (Richard,  D.  D.  Bishop  of  Down.  1776—1849). 

The  Book  of  Psalms  in  an  English  Metrical  Version, 
with  Notes.  8vo.  Oxf.,  1824.  3s. 

A bold  version,  with  important  notes.  In  this  in- 
stance we  confess  that  there  may  be  real  poetry  in  a 
metrical  version,  and  though  the  flame  does  not  in  each 
composition  burn  with  equal  brilliance,  yet  in  some 
verses  it  is  the  true  poetic  fire.  Mant  is  no  mean  writer. 

448  MARSH  (Edward  Garrard,  M.  A.)  The  Book  of  Psalms 

translated  into  English  verse,  with  Notes.  8vo.  Lond., 
1832.  2s.  6d. 

Contains  nothing  of  any  consequence  to  an  expositor,  though  the  verse 
is  considerably  above  the  average  of  such  productions. 


PSALMS, 


133 


449  MERRICK  (James,  M.  A.  1720—1769).  The  Psalms  Para- 

phrased in  English  verse.  12mo.  Reading,  1766.  Is.  6d. 
Annotations  on  the  Psalms.  4to.  Reading,  1778.  3s. 

These  two  works  are  scarce*  They  are  rather  more  suited  for  the 
admirers  of  poetry  than  for  ministers  of  the  Word.  It  is  said  that  some 
of  the  notes  are  by  Archbishop  Seeker,  and  that  Lowth  also  aided  in  the 
exposition  ; but  the  combined  result  is  of  no  great  value  to  the  preacher. 

450  MORISON  (John,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  the  Book  of 

Psalms,  explanatory,  critical,  and  devotional.  Two  vols., 
8vo.  1829.  Three  vols.,  8vo.  1832.  8s.  to  10s. 

The  first  volume  is  the  best.  There  is  nothing  very 
original,  but  it  is  an  instructive  exposition,  and  ought  to 
he  better  known. 

451  MUDGE  (Zachaby.  Prebendary  of  Exeter.  Died  1760). 

An  Essay  towards  a New  English  Version.  4to.  Lond., 
1744.  3s. 

Elegant  in  taste  rather  than  sound  in  scholarship.  Mudge  was  highly 
esteemed  by  Dr.  Johnson,  and  he  was  no  doubt  a very  worthy  man  ; but 
his  exposition  can  be  dispensed  with. 

452  MURPHY  (James  G.,  LL.  D.)  A Critical  and  Exegetical 

Comment.  8vo.  15s.  Edinb.»  T.  & T.  Clark.  1875. 

This  may  be  called  a volume  of  compressed  thought. 
The  author  has  aimed  at  neither  being  too  long  nor  too 
short.  He  has  succeeded  in  producing  a very  useful 
and  usable  work,  with  many  points  of  unusual  value. 
Dr.  Murphy  is  well  known  as  an  accomplished  Hebraist 
and  a lucid  expositor.  We  have  already  noticed  his 
works  on  Genesis  (135)  and  Exodus  (177.) 

453  NEALE  (John  Mason,  D.  D.)  and  (LITTLEDALE,  R.  F., 

LL.  D.)  A Commentary,  from  Primitive  and  Mediaeval 
Writers.  Four  vols.,  post  8vo.  10s.  6d.  each.  Lond., 
Masters  & Co.  1860-74. 

Unique,  and  to  very  high  churchmen  most  precious.  We  admire  the 
learning  and  research;  but  the  conceits,  the  twistings,  and  allegorical 
interpretations  surpass  conception.  As  a collection  of  mediaeval  mysticisms 
it  is  unrivalled. 


134 


PSALMS. 


454  NICHOLSON  (William.  Bishop  of  Gloucester.  Died 

1071).  David’s  Harp  Strung  and  Tuned  ; or  An  Easie  Analy- 
sis of  the  Whole  Book  of  Psalms.  Folio.  Lond.,  1662.  21s. 
“ Wholly  practical  and  explanatory.  In  his  explications  the  author 
steers  between  the  two  extremes  of  literal  and  spiritual  interpretation.  Dr. 
Adam  Clark  has  inserted  Bishop  Nicholson’s  Analysis  in  his  commentary 
on  the  Psalms,  omitting  his  prayers.” — Horne.  This  book  fetches  a high 
price  when  complete,  and  we  cannot  advise  a poor  man  to  lay  out  so  much 
money  upon  it,  good  as  it  is. 

455  NOYES  (G.  R.,  D.  D.)  A New  Translation,  with  Notes. 

12mo.  Boston,  U.  S.,  1831  and  1846.  2s.  6d.  to  4s. 

Dr.  Noyes  was  the  Hebrew  Professor  in  Harvard  University.  His  In- 
troduction is  full  of  information  ; the  new  translation  is  useful,  and  the 
notes  are  brief  and  pertinent. 

456  OXEN  DEN  (Ashton,  D.  D.  Bishop  of  Montreal).  A Sim- 

ple Exposition.  Two  vols.,  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  each.  Lond., 
Hatchards. 

For  reading  at  family  prayers.  Alas,  poor  families ! Ye  have  need  of 
patience. 

457  PEROWNE  (J.  J.  Stewart,  B.  D.,  Canon  Res.  of  Llan- 

daff).  The  Book  of  Psalms  ; a New  Translation,  with 
Introductions  and  Notes.  8vo.  Vol.  I.  18s.  Vol.  II.  16s. 
[Abridged  edition  for  Schools  and  Private  Students.  Cr. 
8 vo.  10s.  6d.J  Lond.,  George  Bell  & Sons.  1864-68. 

A masterpiece  of  extraordinary  learning  and  critical 
skill,  although  not  altogether  what  we  would  desire. 
The  “ Saturday  Review  ” said  ' “ Mr.  Perowne  is  proba- 
bly as  capable  as  any  one  in  England  of  doing  all  that 
Hebrew  scholarship  can  do  towards  a better  knowledge 
of  the  Psalms.  The  learning  which  he  has  brought 
together  gives  a value  of  its  own  to  his  book,  and  makes 
it  an  important  contribution  to  a department  of  Biblical 
scholarship  in  which  we  are  at  present  rather  poorly 
furnished.” 

458  PIERCE  (Samuel  Eyles).  The  Book  of  Psalms.  Two  vols. 

8vo.  1817.  Very  scarce.  24s. 

This  author  is  held  in  high  esteem  for  the  “ sound  and  savory”  char- 
acter of  his  works.  On  the  Psalms  he  writes  to  comfort  and  edification. 
The  works  is  regarded  as  superexcellent  by  our  extra-calvinistic  friends, 
but  we  do  not  think  it  quite  worth  the  fancy  price  which  is  now  asked. 


PSALMS. 


135 


459  PHILLIPS  (George,  B.  D.)  The  Psalms  in  Hebrew ; with 

Commentary.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Lond.,  J.  W.  Par- 
ker, and  Williams  & Norgate.  184G.  S.  7s. 

This  commentary  will  be  valued  by  Hebrew  scholars ; but  it  is  beyond 
the  general  attainments  of  those  for  whom  this  Index  is  compiled. 

460  PLAIN  COMMENTARY  (A)  on  the  Book  of  Psalms  (P. 

B.  Version),  chiefly  grounded  on  the  Fathers.  Two  vols., 
F’cap  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Oxf.  & Lond.  Parker.  1859.  S.  4s. 
6d. 

Of  the  high  Church  school,  and  rather  strained  in 
places,  but  abounding  in  sweet  spiritual  thoughts.  We 
have  read  it  with  pleasure  and  profit,  though  with  some 
caution. 

461  PLUMER  (William  S.,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.)  Studies  in  the  Book 

of  Psalms.  Imp.  8vo.  28s.  Edinb.,  A.  & C.  Black.  1867. 
S.  18s. 

A huge  volume,  compiled  from  such  works  as  were  accessible  to  the 
author  in  the  United  States.  Full  of  instructive  comment,  but  not  very 
original,  or  remarkably  learned. 

462  PRACTICAL  ILLUSTRATION  (A)  of  the  Book  of  Psalms ; 

by  the  Author  of  the  Family  Commentary  on  the  New 
Testament.  [?  Mrs.  Thomson.]  Two  vols.  8vo.  York, 
1826.  2s.  to  3s. 

For  families.  Consisting  of  remarks  which  would  occur  to  any  moth- 
erly person. 

463  PRIDHAM  (Arthur).  Notes  and  Reflections  on  the  Book 

of  Psalms.  Cr.  8vo.  8s.  6d.  Lond.,  James  Nisbet  & Co. 
1869.  S.  4s. 

Spiritual  reflections  of  an  excellent  kind,  but  not  very  striking. 

464  REMARKS  upon  the  Psalms  as  PropTietic  of  the  Messiah. 

8vo.  Lond.,  1843.  2s. 

Mere  outlines : of  no  consequence. 

465  ROGERS  (J.,  M.  A.)  The  Book  of  Psalms  in  Hebrew,  met- 

rically arranged  ; with  Selections  from  the  various  Readings 
of  Kennicott  and  De  Rossi,  and  from  the  Ancient  Versions. 
Two  vols.,  12mo.  Oxf.,  1833.  2s.  6d.  to  4s. 

For  the  Hebrew  scholar  only. 

466  ROSENMULLER  (Ernest,  F.  C.  1768 — 1835).  Annota- 

tions on  the  Messianic  Psalms.  Translated.  12mo.  7s. 

6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1841. 

It  may  be  altogether  our  own  fault,  but  we  cannot  make  any  use  of  this 


336 


PSALMS. 


volume.  No  doubt  these  scholastic  notes  have  a value ; but  commentaries 
upon  inspired  Scripture  written  in  the  same  style  as  one  might  write  upon 
Ovid  or  Horace  are  not  to  our  taste.  Gesenius  praises  this  work  for  its 
criticisms.  We  wish  there  had  been  a little  religion  in  it,  but  perhaps  if 
there  had  been  it  would  have  been  the  religion  of  neology. 

467  HYLAND  (R.  H..,  M.  A.)  The  Psalms  restored  to  Messiah. 

Sin.  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1853i  S.  2s.  6d. 

Written  with  an  admirable  design.  Good,  but  not  very  able.  The 
subject  still  demands  the  pen  of  a master. 

468  SHERIFFE  (Mrs.)  Practical  Reflections.  Two  vols.,  12mo. 

Lond.,  1820.  2s. 

We  hope  they  benefited  the  printer;  they  will  not  help  the  reader 
much. 

469  SPURGEON  (Charles  Haddon).  The  Treasury  of  David  : 

containing  an  Original  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Psalms ; 
a collection  of  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  whole  range 
of  literature  ; a Series  of  Homiletical  Hints  upon  almost 
every  verse  ; and  Lists  of  Writers  upon  each  Psalm.  [In 
progress.]  Vol.  I.  containing  Psalms  I. — XXVI. ; Vol.  II. 
Pss.  XXVII. — LII. ; Vol.  III.  Pss.  LIII.— LXXVIII.  ; Vol. 
IV.  Pss.  LXXIX. — C1II.  8s.  each.  Lond.,  Passmore  & 
Alabaster.  1870,  etc. 

To  be  completed  in  six  volumes,  if  God  permit.  Reviewers  have 
handled  this  book  with  remarkable  kindness,  and  the  public  have  endorsed 
their  judgment  by  largely  purchasing  the  volumes  already  issued.  It 
would  not  become  us  to  say  more. 

470  STREET  (Stephen.  M.  A.)  A New  Literal  Version ; with 

a Preface  and  Notes.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1790.  3s. 
One  hardly  desires  a rigidly  literal  translation  of  a poetic  book,  for  the 
beauty  and  spirit  are  lost.  The  notes  are  purely  critical  and  are  super- 
seded by  later  works. 

471  THOLUCK  (Augustus  F.,  D.  D.,  Pli.  D.)  A Translation  and 

Commentary.  Translated  from  the  German  by  J.  Isidor 
Mombert.  8vo.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1856.  S.  5s.  6d. 
Tholuck  is  one  of  the  most  spiritual  of  German  interpreters.  Though 
we  cannot  say  that  this  is  equal  to  some  others  of  his  works,  yet  he  is  a 
great  writer,  and  always  deserves  attention. 

472  THRUPP  (Joseph  Francis,  M.  A.)  An  Introduction  to  the 

Study  and  Use  of  the  Psalms.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  21s. 
Lond.  and  Camb.,  Macmillan  & Co.  1860.  S.  12s. 

Though  not  the  best,  it  is  still  a learned  and  helpful  work  of  its  class. 


PSALMS. 


137 


473  TUCKER  (William  Hill,  M.  A.)  The  Psalms  [P.  B.  Ver- 

sion], with  Notes,  showing  their  Prophetic  and  Christian 
Character.  Post  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  1840.  S.  2s.  6d. 

The  writer  refers  all  the  Psalms  to  Christ,  and  writes  many  weighty 
things,  but  we  cannot  place  him  in  the  front  rank  among  expositors. 

474  WAKE  (W.  R.)  A Literal  Version  of  the  Psalms  into  Mod- 

ern Language,  according  to  the  Liturgy  translation.  Two 
vols.,  Cr.  8vo.  Bath.  1793.  3s. 

Think  of  a translation.  The  author  was  Wake,  but  not  awake,  or  he 
would  never  have  wasted  so  much  good  paper. 

475  WALFORD  (William.  Late  Classical  and  Hebrew  Tutor 

at  Homerton).  A New  Translation,  with  Notes,  Explana- 
tory and  Critical.  8vo.  Lond.,  1837.  2s.  3d.  to  3s. 
Contains  some  useful  notes,  good,  but  not  specially  remarkable. 

476  WEISS  (Benj.  Missionary  to  the  Jews,  Algiers).  A New 

Translation,  Exposition,  and  Chronological  Arrangement 
of  the  Book  of  Psalms,  with  Critical  Notes.  8vo.  Edinb., 
W.  Oliphant  & Co.  1852.  S.  2s.  6d. 

The  Psalms  are  arranged  in  a new  order,  and  are  very  hard  to  find. 
The  author  is  dogmatic  to  the  last  degree.  Our  estimate  of  his  work  is 
not  so  high  as  his  own. 

477  WILCOCKS  (Thomas,  A.  M.  Puritan.  1549—1608).  A 

very  godly  and  learned  exposition  upon  the  whole  Book  of 
Psalms.  [Works.  Folio.]  See  No.  337. 

Short  spiritual  remarks,  followed  by  many  doctrinal  inferences,  calcu- 
lated to  suggest  topics  to  preachers. 

478  WILSON  (W.,  D.  D.)  The  Psalms ; with  an  Exposition, 

Typical  and  Prophetical,  of  the  Christian  Dispensation. 
Two  vols.  8vo.  16s.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1860.  S.  5s. 

We  have  consulted  Wilson  with  advantage  and  often 
quoted  from  him  in  the  “ Treasury  of  David.”  He  is  a 
clear,  gospel  Expositor,  and  has  written  much  that  is 
weighty  and  precious. 

479  WOODFORD  (Samuel),  A Paraphrase.  4to.  Lond.,  1667.  3s. 
Poor  rhymes ; though  the  preface  says  of  the  author — 

“ At  length  the  skilful  way  you  found, 

With  a true  ear  judg’d  the  melodious  sound, 

And  with  a nimble  hand  run  descant  on  the  Hebrew  ground.’ * 

It  would  seem  from  this  that  the  poem  scrambles  on  all-fours,  and  we 
think  it  does. 


138 


PSALMS. 


480  WRIGHT  (Abraham).  A Practical  Commentary,  wherein 

the  Text  of  every  Psalme  is  Practically  expounded,  ac- 
cording to  the  Doctrine  of  the  Catholick  Church,  in  a way 
not  usually  trod  by  Commentators  ; and  wholly  applyed  to 
the  Life  and  Salvation  of  Christians.  Very  thin  folio.  1601. 
Wright  selects  the  more  remarkable  verses,  and  comments  upon  them 
in  a deeply  spiritual,  quaint,  and  suggestive  manner.  His  work  is  ex- 
tremely rare. 

481  ZILLWOOD  (J.  O.)  The  Psalms,  arranged  in  Parallelisms, 

with  Notes,  chiefly  from  Bishops  Horne  and  Horsley. 
Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1855.  3s. 

The  student  had  better  get  Horne  and  Horsley  for  himself,  and  he  will 
have  no  need  of  this. 


CONSIDERABLE  PORTIONS  OF  THE  PSALMS. 

482  BAKER  (Sir  Richard.  1568 — 1645).  Meditations  and 

Disquisitions  on  the  First,  and  Seven  Penitential  Psalms, 
viz.  the 6,  32,38,51,  102,  130,  & 143.  4to.  Lond.,  1640.  5s. 

Meditations  and  Disquisitions  on  the  Seven  Consolitarie 
Psalms,  viz.,  the  23,  27,  30,  34,  84,  103,  and  116.  4to. 
Lond.,  1640.  5s. 

0 rare  Sir  Richard  Baker  ! Knight  of  the  flowing 
pen.  His  “Meditations  and  Disquisitions ” are  alto- 
gether marrow  and  fatness.  We  have  often  tried  to 
quote  from  him  and  have  found  ourselves  so  embarrassed 
with  riches  that  we  have  been  inclined  to  copy  the  whole 
book.  Why  it  has  not  been  reprinted,  and  made  to 
pass  through  fifty  editions,  we  cannot  tell.  Poor  man, 
he  became  a surety  and  smarted,  dying  in  poverty  in  the 
Fleet.  Were  there  any  Christians  alive  in  those  days  ? 

483  BARKER  (Frederick,  M.  A.)  Thirty-six  Psalms;  with 

Commentary  and  Prayer,  for  use  in  families.  Cr.  8vo. 
Jackson,  1854.  Is.  6d. 

What  platitudes  people  will  write  for  the  use  of  families.  Families  will 
best  use  these  commentaries  and  prayers  by  lining  their  cake  tins  with 
them. 


PSALMS. 


139 


484  BERTRAM  (R.  A.)  The  Imprecatory  Psalms.  Six  Lectures. 

12mo.  Loud.,  Elliot  Stock.  1867.  S.  Is.  6d. 

Contains  some  very  sensible  remarks  upon  a subject  which  no  doubt 
bewilders  certain  of  the  weaker  sort. 

485  BOWMAN  (Hetty).  Studies  in  the  Psalms.  12mo.  Lond., 

The  Book  Society,  and  John  Snow  & Co.  1869. 

Outlines  of  teaching  upon  a few  Psalms.  The  authoress  begs  that  these 
“ Studies  ” may  not  in  any  sense  be  considered  as  a commentary ; we  do 
not  so  consider  them. 

486  BOYS  (John,  D.  D.  Dean  of  Canterbury.  1571—1625). 

Workes.  Folio,  1629.  An  Exposition  of  the  Proper 
Psalms  used  in  our  English  Liturgy.  (See  under  New 
Testament.)  12s. 

One  of  the  richest  of  writers.  From  his  golden  pen 
flows  condensed  wisdom.  Many  of  his  sentences  are 
worthy  to  be  quoted  as  gems  of  the  Christian  classics. 

487  COPE  (Sir  Anthony.  Chamberlain  to  Queen  Catherine 

Parr).  Meditations  on  Twenty  Select  Psalms.  Reprinted 
from  the  edition  of  1547.  Small  square  8vo.  Lond., 
John  Ollivier.  1848.  2s  6d. 

More  curious  than  valuable.  The  style  is  scholastic  and  pointless. 

488  DIDHAM  (R.  Cunningham,  M.  A.)  I.— XXXVI.— New 

Translation : made  by  means  of  Arabic  Lexicons,  Syriac 
New  Testament  Words,  the  Ancient  Versions,  Bishop 
Lowtli’s  Parallelisms,  and  Parallel  Places,  whereby  the 
Scriptural  Messianic  Canon  that  our  Lord  Christ  is  the 
Key  to  the  Psalm  is  upheld,  etc.  8vo.  15s.  Loud., 
Williams  & Norgate.  1870.  S.  Is.  9d. 

Principally  consists  of  denunciations  of  other  writers.  As  the  price  lias 
descended  from  15s.  to  Is.  9d.  for  new  copies,  the  verdict  of  the  public  is 
pretty  definite. 

489  LUTHER  (Martin).  A Commentary  on  Psalms  I. — XI. ; 

and  on  Psalm  LI.,  in  Vol.  8;  on  Psalms  XII. — XXII,  and 
on  Psalm  II.  in  Vol.  4,  of  Select  Works  of  Luther.  Trans- 
lated by  Rev.  H.  Cole.  [Four  vols.  8vo.  Lond.,  1824. 
18s.] 

A Commentary  on  the  Psalms,  commonly  called  the 
Psalms  of  Degrees  [CXX.— CXXXIV].  8vo.  Lewes,  1823. 
Also  a black  letter  4to.,  1577,  and  other  editions  of  this 
work. 

Luther  needs  no  trumpeter. 


140 


THE  PENITENTIAL  PSALMS. 


490  PITMAN  (J.  R.,  M.  A.)  A Course  of  Sermons  on  some  of 

the  Chief  Subjects  in  the  Book  of  Psalms ; abridged  from 
eminent  divines  of  the  Established  Church.  8vo.  Lond., 
Longmans.  1846.  3s. 

We  have  seldom  obtained  much  from  these  sermons.  A far  better 
selection  might  have  been  made ; at  the  same  time,  some  of  the  discourses 
are  admirable. 

491  BOLLOCK  (Robert.  1555 — 1598).  An  Exposition  upon 

some  select  Psalms.  12mo.  1600. 

Bollock’s  works  are  rare.  He  wrote  in  Latin,  and  his  language  is  made 
more  dull  than  need  be  by  the  translator.  All  his  writings  are  masterly. 

492  STRIGELLIUS  (Victorinus.  1524—1569).  Part  of  the 

Harmony  of  King  David’s  Harp.  Translated  by  R.  Robin- 
son. [In  four  parts.]  4to.  1582  to  1596. 

This  volume  the  expositor  is  not  at  all  likely  to  see,  and  there  is  there- 
fore, the  less  need  for  us  to  speak  of  it.  Strigellius  was  the  friend  of 
Luther  and  Melancthon,  and  a man  of  sound  sense  and  vast  learning. 

493  WILLIAMS  (Isaac,  B.  D.)  The  Psalms  interpreted  of 

Christ.  [Vol.  I.,  Psalms  I. — XXVI.]  Thick  12mo.  Lond., 
Rivingtons.  1864.  S.  3s. 

The  writer  is  of  the  High  Church  school,  but  he  is 
very  spiritual  and  deep,  and  we  seldom  turn  to  him  with- 
out profit. 


THE  PENITENTIAL  PSALMS. 

[The  Penitential  Psalms  are  seven  in  number.  Psalms  6,  32,  38,  51, 102, 
130,  and  143.  For  102  some  substitute  25.] 

494  BAKER  (Sir  R.)  See  No.  482. 

495  DONNE  (John.  1573 — 1631).  Sermons  on  the  Penitential 

Psalms.  In  Vols.  II.  and  III.  of  his  Works.  [Six  vols., 
8 vo.,  £2.  1839.] 

A right  royal  writer,  whose  every  line  is  a pearl. 

496  FISHER  (John.  1459 — 1535).  Fruytful  saynges  of  Dauid. 

Black  Letter.  4to.,  1509 ; 8vo.,  1555.  Reprinted  in  12mo., 
1714.  5s. 

Dry  and  tedious  : in  the  stiff  antique  style. 


SEPARATE  PSALMS. 


141 


497  HAYWARD  (Sir  John,  LL.  D.  Died  1627).  David’s 

Tears.  [On  VI.,  XXXII.,  CXXX.  only.]  4to.,  1623  ; 12mo., 
1649.  3s.  to  5s. 

After  the  Puritanic  method : full  of  point  and  pith. 

498  OXENDEN  (Charles).  Sermons  on  the  Seven  Penitential 

Psalms,  preached  during  Lent.  12mo.  1838.  Is.  6d. 

To  listen  to  these  sermons  must  have  afforded  a suitable  Lenten  pen- 
ance to  those  who  went  to  church  to  hear  them.  There  their  use  began  and 
ended. 

499  SYMSON  (Archibald).  A Sacred  Septenarie ; or  a Godly 

and  Fruitfull  Exposition  on  the  Seven  Psalmes  of  Repent- 
ance. 4to.  1638.  5s.  to  7s. 

A marrowy  author,  full  of  instruction. 


SEPARATE  PSALMS. 

[The  following  works  are  arranged  according  to  the  order  of  the  Psalms,  to 
assist  reference.  We  have  not  attempted  to  include  all  writers  in  this 
list.] 

500  Psalm  I.— SMITH  (Samuel.  1584—1665).  David’s  Blessed 

Man.  Ninth  edition,  18mo.  1635.  Is.  6d.  to  3s.  Re- 
printed in  Nichol’s  Commentaries,  with  Pierson  (No.  528) ; 
and  Gouge  (No.  561). 

Very  popular  in  its  day,  and  worthily  so. 

501  I. — STONH  AM  (Matthew).  A Treatise  on  the  First  Psalme. 

4to.  1610. 

Somewhat  dry,  scholastic  and  out  of  date ; but  still  an  interesting  and 
instructive  piece  of  old  divinity. 

502  II.,  XLV.,  CX.— HARPUR  (George,  B.  A.)  Christ  in  the 

Psalms.  A Series  of  Discourses.  Cr.  8vo.  6s.  Lond., 
Wertheim  & Co..  1862.  S.  2s. 

Discourses  of  a high  order  as  to  ability,  but  the  historico-prophetic 
interpretations  here  given  do  not  commend  themselves  to  us. 

503  II. — PITCAIRN  (David).  Zion’s  King.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 

Lond.,  J.  H.  Jackson.  1851.  S.  2s.  6d. 

This  author  does  not  err  on  the  side  of  conciseness.  His  book  is  a 
meritorious  effort,  but  we  have  found  it  somewhat  heavy  reading. 


142 


SEPARATE  PSALMS. 


504  IV.,  XLII.,  LI.,  LXIII.— HORTON  (Thomas,  D.  D.  Died 

1673).  Chioce  and  Practical  Expositions.  Folio.  1675. 
5s.  to  7s. 

A marvellous  homiletical  exposition.  Horton’s  dis- 
courses are  very  full  of  divisions,  but  then  he  always 
has  plenty  of  solid  matter  to  divide.  Ministers  wTill 
find  teeming  suggestions  here. 

505  XV.— CARTWRIGHT  (Christopher).  Commentary.  4to. 

1658.  7s.  6d. 

A learned  and  weighty  work ; not  readily  met  with. 

506  XV. — DOWNAME  (George,  D.  D.)  Lectures.  4to.  1604. 

6s.  6d. 

Lectures  by  one  of  the  race  of  giant  divines. 

507.  XV. — TURNBULL  (Richard).  Four  Sermons  on  Psalm 
XV.  4to.  1606.  Forming  last  part  of  volume  on  James 
and  Jude.  9s.  to  14s. 

By  a popular  and  edifying  preacher  of  the  olden  times. 

508  XVI. — DALE  (Thomas,  M.  A.  Canon  of  St.  Paul’s).  The 

Golden  Psalm.  12mo.  1847.  S.  2s.  to  3s. 

Good,  simple  discourses ; the  headings  might  suggest  a course  of  ser- 
mons. 

509  XVI. — FRAME  (James).  Christ  in  Gethsemane.  Cr.  8vo. 

1858.  S.  2s. 

A sterling,  well-intentioned  and  well-executed  comment.  The  text 
has  to  be  a little  twisted  to  suit  the  theory  of  the  interpreter,  but  we  do  not 
suppose  that  Mr.  Frame  is  conscious  of  it.  He  is  one  of  the  best  of  mod- 
ern discoursers  upon  the  Psalms. 

510  XVIII.— BROWN  (John,  D.  D.)  The  Sufferings  and  Glories 

of  the  Messiah.  8vo.  Edinb.,  1853. 

Like  all  Dr.  Brown’s  productions,  this  is  a work  of 
the  highest  order.  Clear,  full,  and,  in  the  best  manner, 
exegetical. 

511  XIX. — REEVE  (J.  W.)  Lectures  on  the  Nineteenth 

Psalm.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  1863.  S.  2s.  3d. 

By  one  of  the  ablest  preachers  among  the  Evangeli- 
cal Episcopalians.  Scriptural,  thoughtful,  and  original 


SEPARATE  PSALMS. 


143 


512  XIX. — RICHARDSON  (J.  Wilberforce).  Illustrations  of 

the  Nineteenth  Psalm.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  John 
Snow  & Co.  1870.  S.  2s. 

Sound  in  doctrine,  but  verbose  and  common-place. 

513  XX.,  verses  1 — 6.— BOWND  (Nicholas,  D.  D.)  Medicines 

for  the  Plague  [Twenty-one  Sermons].  4to.  1604.  5s.  6d. 
Racy,  quaint,  extremely  rare. 

514  XXII. — FRAME  (James).  The  Song  of  the  Cross.  Cr.  8vo. 

5s.  Lond.,  S.  W.  Partridge  & Co.  1872.  S.  2s.  6d. 

This  is  valuable,  as  Mr.  Frame’s  books  generally  are. 

515  XXII.— STEVENSON  (John,  D.  D.,  Hon.  Canon  of  Canter- 

bury.) Christ  on  the  Cross : An  Exposition  of  the  Twenty- 
second  Psalm.  Post  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Bagsters.  S.  Is.  6d. 
The  best  of  Dr.  Stevenson’s  books.  Exceedingly  precious  in  its  un- 
veiling of  the  Redeemer’s  sorrows.  We  have  derived  personal  spiritual 
benefit  from  the  perusal  of  this  gracious  exposition,  and  are  unable  to 
judge  it  critically. 

51G  XXIII.— STEVENSON  (John,  D.  D.,  Hon.  Canon  of  Canter- 
bury).  The  Lord  our  Shepherd:  An  Exposition  of  the 
Twenty-third  Psalm.  Post  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Bagsters. 
Too  wire-drawn,  but  it  is  golden  wire. 

517  XXIII.— BAKER  (Sir  R.)  See  No.  482. 

518  XXIII. — DALE  (Thomas,  M.  A.)  The  Good  Shepherd  and 

the  Chosen  Flock.  12mo.  1847.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Somewhat  ordinary  evangelical  discourses. 

519  XXIII..  LXII.,  LXXIII.—LXX  VII.— HOOPER  (John,  Bishop 

and  Martyr). ^ Certain  Comfortable  Expositions.  [In  Parker 
Society’s  edition  of  Hooper’s  Works.] 

The  cramped  style  and  antiquated  matter  repel  the  reader. 

520  XXIII. — MILLER  (Andrew).  Meditations  on  Twenty-third 

and  Eighty-fourth  Psalms.  12mo.  Lond.,  G.  Morrisli. 
Discursive,  but  devout ; more  useful  to  the  heart  than  the  head. 

521  XXIII.— PATON  (James,  B.  A.)  The  Children’s  Psalm: 

Twelve  Meditations  and  Twelve  Spiritual  Songs.  12mo. 
Lond.,  Passmore  & Alabaster.  1870.  S.  Is.  6d. 

Worthy  of  much  commendation.  It  is  unfortunate  that  the  title  leads 
the  reader  to  expect  a book  for  children,  whereas  the  author  intended  to 
edify  the  children  of  God  of  an  older  growth. 

522  XXIII.— SEDGWICK  (Obadiah,  B.  D.)  The  Shepherd  of 

Israel.  4to.  1658.  7s.  6d.  to  10s.  6d. 

Sedgwick  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  preachers  of  the  time  of  the 
Commonwealth.  His  commenting  is  solid  and  lively. 


144 


SEPARATE  PSALMS, 


523  XXIII.— SMITH  (Samuel).  The  Chiefe  Slieplieard  ; or  An 

Exposition  on  ye  XXIII  Psalme.  18mo.  1625. 

All  the  writings  of  Samuel  Smith  are  good,  but  not  so  full  of  memor- 
able sentences  and  pithy  sayings  as  certain  others  of  their  date. 

524  XXIII.— STOUGHTON  (John,  D.  D.)  The  Song  of  Christ’s 

Flock.  12mo.  5s.  Lond.,  1860.  S.  3s. 

Devout  practical  meditations,  but  we  don’t  see  how  a flock  can  sing. 

525  XXIII.— THORNTON  (J.,  of  Billericay).  The  Shepherd  of 

Israel.  12mo.  1826. 

We  need  no  longer  wonder  how  spiders  make  such  long  threads  with 
such  little  materia],  for  here  is  an  equally  amazing  instance  of  spinning. 
Plentiful  quotations  of  Scripture,  and  venerable  anecodotes  are  here  used 
as  substitutes  for  thought,  not  as  aids  to  it. 

526  XXV.— HALKET  (Lady  Anne.  1622—1699).  Meditations. 

8vo.  Edinb.,  1778.  Is.  6d. 

This  lady  was  eminent  for  medicine  as  well  as  theology  ; she  left 
twenty-one  volumes  : this  and  another  book  of  meditations  appear  to  be 
all  that  have  been  reprinted. 

527  XXV. — MOSSOM  (Robert,  Bishop  of  Londonderry.  Died 

1679).  The  Preacher’s  Tripartite,  contains  Divine  Medi- 
tations upon  Psalm  XXV.  Folio.  1657.  3s.  6d.  to  5s. 

Thoroughly  devotional,  eminently  consolatory,  and 
deeply  experimental.  Mossom  is  a fruitful  writer. 

528  XXVII.,  LXXXIV.,  LXXXV.,  LXXXVII.  — PIERSON 

(Thomas,  M.  A.  1570 — 1633).  Excellent  Encourage- 
ments against  Afflictions.  4to.  1647.  5s.  [Reprinted 

in  Nicliol’s  Commentaries,  with  Smith,  No.  500 ; and 
Gouge,  No.  561J. 

Pierson  was  not  the  richest  or  most  overflowing  of  the  old  divines,  but 
yet  one  who  stood  in  the  front  rank. 

529  XXXII— BINGHAM  (Charles  H.,  B.  A.)  Lectures.  Post 

8vo.  1836.  2s. 

Tame  sermons.  Faultlessly  feeble.  Good,  but  no  good. 

530  XXXII— LEIGHTON  (Robert,  Archbishop  of  Glasgow. 

1611—1684). 

In  some  editions  of  Leighton’s  collected  works  will 
be  found  choice  meditations  on  this  Psalm,  and  also  on 
Psalms  IV.  and  CXXX.  Everything  that  fell  from  his 
pen  is  worth  its  weight  in  diamonds. 


SEPARATE  PSALMS. 


145 


531  XXXII. — TAYLOR  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  David’s  Learning,  or 

Way  to  True  Happiness.  4to.  1617.  7s.  Also  in  his 
Works.  Folio.  1660. 

On  account  of  Taylor’s  great  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  he  was  com- 
monly called  “ the  illuminated  Doctor.”  Fuller  calls  him  “ a grave  divine 
a painful  preacher,  and  a profitable  writer.”  He  is  one  of  the  richest  in 
matter  of  all  the  Puritans. 

532  XXXII.— REEVE  (J.  W.,  M.  A.)  Lectures.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

Lond.,  Nisbet.  1859.  S.  2s. 

Orthodox,  spiritual,  and  suggestive  lectures,  by  an  evangelical  clergy- 
man. 

533  XXXII.— WILLARD  (Samuel).  The  Truly  Blessed  Man. 

8vo.  Boston,  N.  E.  31s.  6d.  Rare. 

One  of  the  first  books  printed  in  the  United  States.  An  old-fashioned 
exposition.  The  price  is  caused  by  its  rarity  rather  than  its  value, 

534  XL. — FRAME  (James).  Christ  and  his  Work.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

Lond.,  Snow  & Co.  1869.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Well  done.  Though  differing  from  the  author  at  times,  we  are  grate- 
ful for  such  real  help. 

635  XLII.— MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.  D.)  The  Hart  and  the  Water- 
brooks.  Sm.  cr.  8vo.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1860.  S.  2s. 

See  remarks  on  other  books  by  this  copious  writer.  (Nos.  309, 316,  etc.) 

536  XLII.,  XLIII. — MARCH  (H.)  Sabbaths  at  Home.  8vo. 

1823.  Is.  6d. 

Profitable  reading,  rendered  all  the  more  pleasing  by  the  introduction 
of  very  choice  poetry.  Not  important  to  the  expositor. 

537  XLII.— SIBBES  (Richard,  D.  D.)  The  Soul’s  Conflict  and 

Victory  over  itself  by  Faith.  12mo.  1635,  etc.  Is.  6d., 

to  3s.  Works,  Vol.  I.,  Nichol’s  edition. 

Mainly  upon  verses  5 and  11.  Sibbes  never  wastes 
the  student’s  time ; he  scatters  pearls  and  diamonds 
with  both  hands. 

538  XLV. — BENNET  (Thomas).  Sermons  on  the  Forty-fifth 

Psalm.  Sm.  8vo.  Edinb.,  1781. 

Twenty-four  sermons  after  the  manner  of  Ralph  Erskine,  in  which 
Jesus  is  all  in  all.  What  more  need  be  said  in  their  praise  ? 

539  XLV.— PENNEFATHER  (William,  M.  A.)  The  Bride- 

groom King.  A Meditation  on  the  Forty-fifth  Psalm. 
18mo.  Is.  6d.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw  & Co. 

Rather  a meditation  than  an  exposition.  A fitting  book  for  a sick  bed. 
The  little  chapters  might  lie,  like  wafers  made  with  honey,  upon  the 


146 


SEPARATE  PSALMS, 


praiseful  tongue  of  the  suffering  believer.  The  beloved  writer  has  now 
gone  to  see  the  King  in  his  beauty,  of  whom  he  had  those  glimpses  here 
which  enabled  him  to  pen  this  tiny  volume. 

540  XLV. — TROU GHTON  (W.)  The  Mystery  of  the  Marriage 

Song.  12mo.  1656. 

An  old  work  with  nothing  new  or  striking  in  it.  Remarkably  tame 
and  meagre  for  a work  of  that  exuberant  period.  Let  it  alone. 

541  XLV. — PITCAIRN  (David).  The  Anointed  Saviour.  12mo. 

1846. 

Contains  an  exposition  of  part  of  Psalm  XLV.,  as  applied  to  Messiah’s 
first  and  second  advents.  Good,  yet  it  reads  rather  wearily  to  us. 

542  LI. — ALEXANDER  (Thomas,  M.  A.)  The  Penitent’s  Pray- 

er. Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1861.  S.  Is.  9d. 

Our  friend  the  late  Dr.  Alexander  of  Chelsea  handled  this  Psalm  well. 

543  LI.— DE  COETLOGON  (Charles  Edward,  A.  M.  Died 

1820).  The  Portraiture  of  the  Christian  Penitent.  Two 
vols.,  12mo.  1775.  S.  2s.  6d.  to  4s. 

Very  proper.  We  see  nothing  in  the  book  but  platitudes  decorously 
expressed. 

544  LI.— BIDDULPH  (Thomas  T.,  A.  M.,  1763—1838).  Lectures 

on  Psalm  LI.  8vo.,  1830  ; 12mo.,  1835.  S.  Is.  6d.  to  2s. 
6d. 

Lectures  far  above  the  average  of  such  lucubrations,  making  up  a very 
fair  exposition. 

545  LI. — BULL  (John,  M.  A.)  Sermons  on  the  Fifty -first  Psalm. 

8vo.  1824.  Is.  6d. 

Another  specimen  of  sermons  published  by  subscription.  The  poor 
curate  was  no  doubt  the  better  for  the  profits,  and  nobody  was  any  the 
worse.  Clipston  church  was  not  set  on  fire  by  the  flaming  eloquence  of 
the  preacher,  nor  was  the  country  disturbed  by  any  fanatical  excitement 
produced  by  his  excessive  zeal. 

546  LI. — H1ERON  (Samuel.  1572 — 1617).  David’s  Penitentiall 

Psalme  opened.  4to.  1617.  5s.  6d. 

Hieron  was  a conforming  Puritan.  His  works  were  once  exceedingly 
popular  and  they  are  still  esteemed. 

547  LI.— HILDERSHAM  (Arthur.  Puritan.  1563—1631). 

One  Hundred  and  Fifty-two  Lectures  upon  Psalm  LI. 
Folio.  1635  and  1642.  6s.  to  10s. 

Hildersham  was  one  of  the  most  tried  of  the  Non- 
conforming  ministers,  and  at  the  same  time  one  of  the 
most  able.  He  is  copious  and  discursive,  we  had  almost 


SEPARATE  PSALMS. 


147 


said  long-winded.  Both  Willet  and  Preston  speak  of 
him  in  the  highest  terms. 

548  LI. — MORGAN  (James,  D.  D.)  The  Penitent.  12mo. 

Belfast,  M’Comb  ; Lond.,  Hamilton.  1855. 

The  excellent  doctor  first  wrote  this  exposition  for 
his  own  spiritual  benefit,  then  preached  it  for  the  edifi- 
cation of  his  flock,  and  lastly  published  it  for  the  good 
of  us  all.  This  is  a worthy  pedigree  for  a book,  and  the 
book  itself  is  worthy  of  the  pedigree. 

549  LI. — PAGE  (Samuel,  D.  D.  Died  1630).  David’s  Broken 

Heart.  4to.  1637  and  1646.  5s. 

Every  page  is  like  a bank  note  for  value.  Here  are 
homiletical  materials  in  abundance. 

550  LI. — SMITH  (Samuel).  David’s  Repentance.  18mo.  16th 

Edition.  1655.  (See  Nos.  500  and  523). 

It  will  be  seen  from  the  numerous  editions  that  this  work  was  well 
received  in  its  author’s  life  time.  He  tells  us  that  he  spent  the  spare  hours 
of  a long  sickness  in  publishing  this  short  exposition,  and  thus  the  world 
is  all  the  healthier  for  his  illness. 

551  LXYIII.,  OX.— DIXON  (Richard,  A,  M.,  P.  R.  S.)  A New 

Interpretation  of  the  Sixty-eighth  Psalm  : with  an  Exposi- 
tion of  the  Hundred  and  Tenth  Psalm.  4to.  Oxf.,  1811. 
2s. 

This  author,  in  a most  interesting  manner,  traces  out  the  analogy  be- 
tween this  Psalm  and  the  Song  of  Deborah.  Those  who  like  choice  pieces 
of  writing  upon  the  literature  of  Scripture  will  be  gratified  by  the  perusal 
of  this  exposition. 

552  LXXIII.— PARRY  (Edward.  Bishop  of  Killaloe).  David 

Restored ; or  an  Antidote  against  the  Prosperity  of  the 
Wicked  and  the  Afflictions  of  the  Just.  8vo.  1660.  4s. 
6d.  to  8s. 

Not  super-excellent,  nor  free  from  blemishes,  but  containing  much  of 
sterling  value. 

553  LXXXII.— HALL  (Thomas,  B.  D.  1610—1665).  The  Beauty 

of  Magistracy.  An  Exposition  of  Psalm  LXXXII.  4to. 
1660.  [Vol.  IV.  of  Swinnock’s  Works,  Nicliol’s  edition.] 
This  exposition  has  always  nestled  in  the  bosom  of  Swinnock’s  works. 
We  agree  with  Dr.  Jenkyn’s  criticism— “ The  style  is  terse  and  clear, 
though  grave  and  theological,  and  the  matter  is  solid  and  judicious.” 


148 


SEPARATE  PSALMS, 


554  LXXXIV. — HE  MINGE  (Nicholas.  1513  — 1600).  The 

Faith  of  the  Church  Militant.  8vo.  1581. 

A Danish  divine  of  high  repute  in  his  own  day.  Some  of  his  works 
■were  turned  into  English  ; but  the  translations,  like  the  originals,  are  now 
left  in  undeserved  oblivion. 

555  XC.— SMITH  (Samuel).  Moses,  his  Prayer.  18mo.  1656. 
See  our  notes  on  No.  500,  523,  and  550. 

556  XCIX.,  Cl.,  CII. — EDERSHEIM  (Alfred,  D.  D.)  The 

Golden  Diary  of  Heart  Converse  with  J esus.  1873.  Con- 
tains Expositions  of  Psalms  XCIX.,  CL,  CII. 

Sweet  and  spiritual ; worth  purchasing. 

557  CIII.— STEVENSON  (John,  D.  D.  Hon.  Canon  of  Canter- 

bury). Gratitude.  An  Exposition  of  the  Hundred  and 
Third  Psalm.  Post  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  S.  Bagster  & Sons. 
Somewhat  diffuse,  but  at  the  same  time  too  good  to  be  criticised. 

558  CVII.— HYPERIUS  (Andrew  Gerard.  1511—1564).  A 

Special  Treatise  of  God’s  Providence  and  Comfort  against 
all  kinds  of  Crosses  and  Calamities,  to  be  drawn  from  the 
same  ; with  an  Exposition  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Seventh 
Psalme.  From  the  Latin.  Black  Letter.  8vo.  1602. 
15s.*  Scarce. 

This  author  has  written  in  Latin  upon  many  subjects,  but  his  works 
are  now  little  known.  He  was  a learned  Lutheran. 

559  CVII. — ROMAINE  (William,  M.  A.  1714—1795).  A Prac- 

tical Comment  on  Psalm  CVII.  8 vo.  Fifth  edition.  1767. 
Is.  6d.  to  4s.  Also  in  Works,  IV. 

Romaiue’s  doctrine  and  style  of  writing  are  well  known.  He  could  not 
be  accused  of  overlaying  the  truth  with  much  learning.  The  thought  is 
gracious,  sound,  and  practical,  but  the  style  is  just  a little  dull. 

560  CX.— REYNOLDS  (Edward,  D.  D.  Bishop  of  Norwich. 

1599 — 1676).  Explication  of  the  One  Hundred  and  Tenth 
Psalm.  4to.,  1632  and  1635 ; 12mo.,  1837.  2s.  to  3s.  6d. 
Also  in  Works. 

Surpassingly  clear  and  elaborate.  Reynolds  was  a 
man  of  vast  learning  and  thoroughly  evangelical  spirit. 

561  CXVI. — GOUGE  (William,  D.  D.  Puritan.  1575 — 1653). 

The  Saints’  Sacrifice.  4to.  1632.  Scarce.  3s.  6d.  Re- 
printed in  Nichol’s  Commentaries,  with  Smith,  No.  500  ; 
and  Pierson,  No.  528. 

Gouge’s  method  of  cutting  up  his  exposition  into  sections  and  discuss- 
ing every  thing  in  propositions,  is  very  tedious  to  the  reader,  but  we 


SEPARATE  PSALMS. 


149 


judge  it  to  be  advantageous  to  the  preacher.  At  any  rate  Gouge  has  often 
given  us  a hint.  He  was  a man  of  great  learning. 

562  CXIX.— BRIDGES  (Charles,  M.  A.)  Exposition.  Twen- 

ty-second edition.  Cr.  8vo.  Lond.,  1857. 

Worth  its  weight  in  gold.  Albeit  that  the  work  is 
neither  learned  nor  very  original  we  prize  it  for  its  sur- 
passing grace  and  unction. 

563  CXIX.— COWPER  (William.  Bp.  of  Galloway.  1566— 

1619).  A Holy  Alphabet  for  Sion’s  Scholars.  A Commen- 
tary upon  CXIX  Psalm.  Folio.  Lond.,  1613  ; and  in 
Works.  Folio.  1629. 

Dr.  M’  Crie  gives  a high  character  to  all  Cowper’a  works,  and  says  that 
a vein  of  practical  piety  runs  through  them,  while  the  style  is  remarkable 
for  ease  and  fluency.  This  remark  applies  emphatically  to  the  “ Holy 
Alphabet.”  We  have  found  it  very  delightful  reading. 

564  CXIX.— GREENHAM  (Richard.  Puritan.  1531—1591). 

An  Exposition  of  the  119  Psalme.  Works.  Folio.  Lond., 
1612. 

We  regret  that  this  comment  is  not  published  separately,  and  is  only  to 
be  procured  by  purchasing  the  rest  of  Greenham’s  works.  The  style, 
however,  is  antique  and  cramped,  and  Manton  and  Bridges  are  quite 
enough. 

565  CXIX.— MANTON  (Thomas,  D.  D.  1620—1677).  One 

hundred  and  ninety  Sermons  on  the  One  Hundred  and 
Nineteenth  Psalm.  Folio,  Lond.,  1725 ; three  vols.,  8vo., 
Lond.,  1842  ; three  vols  (with  Life),  1845.  7s. 

Fully  up  to  Manton’s  highest  mark,  and  he  is  well 
known  to  have  been  one  of  the  chief  of  the  Puritan 
brotherhood.  The  work  is  long,  but  that  results  only 
from  the  abundance  of  matter. 

566  CXIX.— SANDERSON  (R.  B.,  Esq.,  B.  A.)  Lord’s  Day  Lit- 

erature  : or  Illustrations  of  the  Book  of  Psalms  from  the 
Hundred  and  Nineteenth  Psalm  consecutively.  12mo. 
Lond.,  1842. 

We  cannot  call  this  an  exposition,  its  title  far  more  accurately  describes 
it.  The  author  takes  occasion  from  the  text  to  plead  for  those  points  of 
doctrine  and  practice  into  which  he  had  been  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  lie 
was  an  eminently  c nscientious  man,  a bold  believer,  and  a Baptist. 


150 


SEPARATE  PSALMS. 


567  CXX. — CXXXIY. — ARMFIELD  (H.  T.,  M.  A.  Vice-Princi- 

pal, Tlieol.  Coll.,  Vicar  of  the  Close,  and  Minor  Canon  of 
Sarum).  The  Gradual  Psalms  : a Treatise  on  the  Fifteen 
Songs  of  Degrees,  with  Commentary,  based  on  Ancient  He- 
brew, Chaldee,  and  Christian  Authorities.  8vo.  Lond., 
J.  T.  Hayes.  1874. 

A wonderfully  interesting  book  from  a literary  point  of  view ; perhaps 
more  singular  than  profitable  ; but  in  many  respects  a publication  which 
we  should  have  been  sorry  to  have  missed.  The  homiletical  student  will 
not  be  able  to  make  much  use  of  it. 

568  CXX.— CXXXIV.— COX  (Samuel).  The  Pilgrim  Psalms ; 

an  Exposition  of  the  Songs  of  Degrees.  8vo.  Lond., 
Daldy,  Isbister  and  Co.  1874. 

This  will  be  greatly  valued  by  intelligent  readers.  A 
noble  series  of  sermons  would  be  pretty  sure  to  grow 
out  of  its  attentive  perusal.  Mr.  S.  Cox  is  a great  ex- 
positor. 

,569  CXX.— CXXXIV.— LUTHER  (Martin).  See  No.  489. 

570  CXX.— CXXXIV.— M‘MICHAEL  (N.,  D.  D.)  The  Pilgrim 

Psalms.  Cr.  8vo.  Edinb.,  Oliphant.  1860.  S.  3s. 

A capital  work,  full  of  sound  doctrine  perfumed 
with  devotion. 

571  CXX.— CXXXIV.— NISBET  (Robert,  D.  D.)  The  Songs  of 

the  Temple  Pilgrims.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1863. 

Dr.  Nisbet  regards  the  “Songs  of  Degrees  as  affording  so  complete  an 
exhibition  of  the  phases  of  religious  sentiment,  as  to  make  these  short 
poems  a transcript  of  the  feelings  of  the  whole  Church ; a miniature  Bible 
for  the  use  of  all.”  He  has  expounded  in  this  spirit,  with  well  chosen 
language,  and  produced  a very  valuable  and  instructive  book. 

572  CXXII. — WILLET  (Andrew).  In  Willet’s  Harmonie  and 

Exposition  of  the  Books  of  Samuel  there  is  “a  brief 
exposition  of  the  122  Psalm.” 

Willet  ought  to  have  known  better  than  to  twist  a psalm  to  the  honor 
and  glory  of  James  I.  As  a learned  man  he  says  good  things,  and  as  a 
courtier  foolish  things. 

573  CXXX.— HUTCHESON  (George).  Forty-five  Sermons. 

Psalm  CXXX.  8vo.  Edinb.,  1691.  Scarce.  5s. 

We  have  already  advised  the  purchase  of  anything 
and  everything  by  Hutcheson.  Be  sure  not  to  confound 
this  with  Hutchinson. 


SEPARATE  PSALMS — SOLOMON 


151 


574  CXXX.— LEIGHTON  (Robert).  See  No.  530. 

575  CXXX. — OWEN  (John,  D.  D.)  A Practical  Exposition  on 

the  One  Hundred  and  Thirtieth  Psalm.  Lond.,  4to.  1669 
and  1680.  R.  Tract  Society’s  edition.  18mo.  2s. 

One  of  the  best  known  and  most  esteemed  of  John 
Owen’s  works.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  he  is  the 
prince  of  divines.  To  master  his  works  is  to  be  a pro- 
found theologian.  Owen  is  said  to  be  prolix,  but  it 
would  be  truer  to  say  that  he  is  condensed.  His  style  is 
heavy  because  he  gives  notes  of  what  he  might  have  said, 
and  passes  on  without  fully  developing  the  great  thoughts 
of  his  capacious  mind.  He  requires  hard  study,  and 
none  of  us  ought  to  grudge  it. 

576  CXXX.— SIBBES  (Richard,  D.  D.)  The  Saints’  Comforts. 

18mo.  1638.  Works,  Vol.  VI.  Nichol’s  Edition.  3s.  6d. 
per  vol.  1874. 

Notes  on  five  verses  only.  Published  without  the  author’s  sanction, 
it  is  incomplete,  but  very  full  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  considering  its  brevity. 

577  CXXX.— WINSLOW  (Octavius,  D.  D.)  Soul-Depths  and 

Soul-Heights ; an  Exposition  of  Psalm  CXXX.  Cr.  8vo. 
Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1874. 

Not  very  deep  nor  very  high,  but  pleasant  spiritual  reading. 


BOOKS  OF  SOLOMON. 

578  KEIL  and  DELITZSCH’S  Commentaries.  Solomonic  Writ- 
ings. Three  vols.  rin  preparation],  10s.  6d.  each.  Edinb., 
T.  & T.  Clark. 

679  LANGE’S  Commentaries.  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  and 
Song  of  Solomon.  By  Dr.  Otto  Zockler.  Imp.  8vo.  21s, 
or  to  subscribers  15s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1870. 

We  cannot  say  that  we  admire  Zockler’s  interpreta- 
tion of  the  Song  of  Solomon.  The  volume  contains 
much  that  we  do  not  like,  but  its  value  is  considerable. 
It  is  a pity  that  the  value  of  the  volumes  in  this  series 
varies  so  much. 


152 


PROVERBS. 


580  NOYES  (O.  R.,  D.  D.)  A Translation  of  Proverbs,  Ecclesi- 
astes, and  Canticles,  with  Notes,  etc.  12mo.  Boston.  U. 
S.  1846. 

Of  Noyes  upon  Ecclesiastes,  Dr.  Hamilton  says  : — “ This  interpretation 
is  clear  and  straightforward,  but  the  American  Professor  gives  to  the  book 
an  air  of  theological  tenuity  and  mere  worldly  wisdom  which  carries 
neither  our  conviction  nor  our  sympathy.”  Noyes  is  a good  literary 
expositor,  but  his  theological  views  render  him  a very  poverty-stricken 
commentator  from  a spiritual  point  of  view. 


PROVERBS. 

581  ALLEN  (Robert.  Puritan).  Concordances  of  the  Proverbs 

and  Ecclesiastes.  4to.  1612.  2s.  6d. 

An  ordinary  concordance  will  answer  the  purpose  far  better ; but  the 
wonderfully  wise,  half-crazy  Cruden  had  not  compiled  his  invaluable 
work  in  Allen’s  days. 

582  ARNOT  (William,  D.  D.  Died  1875).  Laws  from  Heaven 

for  Life  on  Earth.  Two  vols.,  cr.  8vo.  S.  7s.  6d.  1858. 
Also  1 vol.,  cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Edinb.,  Nelson.  1S69.  S.  5s. 

We  wish  Dr.  Arnot  had  gone  steadily  through  the 
whole  book,  for  his  mind  was  of  an  order  peculiarly 
adapted  for  such  a task.  Those  passages  which  he 
dilates  upon  are  set  in  a clear  and  beautiful  light.  For 
a happy  blending  of  illustrative  faculty,  practical  sound 
sense,  and  spirituality,  Dr.  Arnot  was  almost  unrivalled. 

583  BRIDGES  (Charles,  M.  A.)  An  Exposition.  Two  vols., 

12mo.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1850.  S.  6s. 

The  best  work  on  the  Proverbs.  The  Scriptural 
method  of  exposition  so  well  carried  out  by  Bridges 
renders  all  his  writings  very  suggestive  to  ministers. 
While  explaining  the  passage  in  hand,  he  sets  other 
portions  of  the  word  in  new  lights. 

584  BROOKS  (J.  W.,  M.  A.)  A New  Arrangement  of  the  Prov- 

erbs of  Solomon.  12mo.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1860.  Is. 

We  do  not  see  the  use  of  the  arrangement ; but  those  who  want  the 
Proverbs  classified  have  the  work  done  for  them  here. 


PROVERBS. 


153 


585  CASE  (R.  J.)  A Commentary.  12mo.  Lond.,  1822.  S.  6d. 
The  Proverbs  themselves  are  plainer  than  this  author’s  exposition  of 

them. 

586  DAY  (William.  Formerly  Missionary  to  the  South  Seas). 

A Poetical  Commentary.  8vo.  14s.  Lond.,  Simpkin, 
Marshall  & Co.  1862.  S.  3s. 

The  author  says,  ho  has  “a  taste  for  building  rhymes,”  and  has  here 
gratified  it.  That  is  all  we  can  say  for  his  book. 

587  DELITZSCH  (Franz,  D.  D.)  Biblical  Commentary.  Trans- 

lated from  the  German,  by  M.  G.  Easton,  D.  I).  Vol.  I. 
[In  progress.]  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1875. 

588  DOD  (John.  Puritan.  Died  1645).  A Plaine  and  Familiar 

Exposition  of  Proverbs,  Chapters  IX.  to  XVII.  4to. 
Lond.,  1608-9.  [The  comment  on  Chapters  XIII.  and  XIV. 
appears  to  have  been  the  work  of  Robert  Cleaver.  In  our 
copy,  containing  Chapters  XXVIII. — XXX.,  the  names  of 
both  Dod  and  Cleaver  are  given,  and  the  last  chapter  was 
“ penned  by  a Godly  and  learned  man,  now  with  God.”] 
Both  Dod  and  Cleaver  were  popular  as  preachers,  and  their  joint  works 
were  widely  circulated.  This  book  can  rarely  be  met  with  entire. 

589  FRENCH  (W.,  D.  D.)  and  (SKINNER,  G.,  M.  A.)  A New 

Translation,  with  Explanatory  Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  1831. 
S.  Is.  3d. 

These  translators  endeavor  to  produce  faithful  renderings  of  the  text, 
giving  to  each  word  the  same  sense  in  all  places.  They  are  calm,  dispas- 
sionate, judicious,  and  able. 

590  HODGSON  (Bernard,  LL.  D.)  The  Proverbs  of  Solomon, 

with  Notes.  4to.  Oxford,  1788.  2s.  6d. 

Darling  says : — “ A good  translation ; the  notes  are  chiefly  philological.  ’ 
We  set  no  store  by  this  mass  of  letter-press,  and  we  question  whether  any 
one  else  does. 

591  HOLDEN  (George,  M.  A.)  An  attempt  towards  an  improved 

Translation,  with  Notes,  etc.  8vo.  Liverpool,  1819.  4s.  Od. 
Horne  says  of  this  work  : — “ It  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  helps  to  the 
critical  understanding  of  this  book.”  It  is  certainly  one  of  the  best  of 
Holden’s  productions.  We  may  be  wrong,  but  we  could  not  conscien- 
tiously subscribe  to  Horne’s  opinion. 

592  JACOX  (Francis).  Scripture  Proverbs,  illustrated,  anno- 

tated, and  applied.  Thick  cr.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Lond., 
Hodder  & Stoughton.  1874  S.  6s. 

This  work  illustrates  many  of  the  proverbs  scattered  throughout  the 
Scriptures,  and  some  of  those  collected  by  Solomon.  Mr.  Jacox  seems  to 
have  read  everything  good  and  bad,  and  hence  he  pours  forth  a medley  of 


154 


PROVERBS, 


fact  and  fiction  more  entertaining  than  edifying.  He  reminds  ns  of  the 
elder  Disraeli  and  his  “ Curiosities  of  Literature.” 

593  JERMIN  (Michael,  D.  D.  Died  1659).  Paraphrastical 

Meditations  upon  the  Book  of  Proverbs.  Folio.  1638. 
9s.  6d. 

Very  antique,  and  full  of  Latin  quotations.  Jermin  does  not  err  in 
excessive  spirituality,  but  the  reverse.  Those  who  can  put  up  with  his 
style  will  he  repaid  by  his  quaint  learning. 

594  LANGE.  (See  No.  579). 

595  LAWSON  (George,  D.  D.  1749—1820).  Exposition  of  the 

Book  of  Proverbs.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  Edinb.,  1821.  6s. 

to  7s. 

A thoroughly  sound  and  useful  commentary.  Lawson  wrote  popularly 
and  vigorously. 

596  MILLER  (John.  Princeton,  N.  J.)  A Commentary,  with 

a New  Translation,  and  with  some  of  the  Original  Exposi- 
tions Re-examined.  Demy8vo.  7s.  Dickinson  & Higham. 
1875. 

This  author’s  interpretations  are  new,  and  in  our  judgment  very  far 
removed  from  accuracy.  Certainly  the  old  interpretations  are  better  in 
many  ways.  His  theory  that  the  Proverbs  are  spiritual  and  not  secular 
will  not  hold  water.  He  needs  reading  with  very  great  discrimination  : if 
read  at  all.  “Too  great  innovation”  is  the  author’s  own  suspicion  of  his 
work,  and  we  quite  agree  with  him,  only  we  go  beyond  mere  suspi- 
cion. 

597  MUFFET  (Peter).  A Commentary  on  the  whole  Book  of 

Proverbs.  8vo.  1596.  [Reprinted,  with  Cotton’s  Com- 
mentaries on  Ecclesiastes  and  Song  of  Solomon,  in  one  of 
the  volumes  of  Nichol’s  series.  Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d.  Loud., 
Nisbet.  1868.] 

Homely,  but  not  very  striking.  Mr.  Nichol’s  choice  of  commentators 
for  reprinting  was  not  a wise  one. 

598  NEWMAN  (William,  D.  D.  Formerly  President  of  Stepney 

Theol.  Institution).  An  improved  version.  18mo.  Lond., 
1839.  Is. 

Merely  the  corrected  text.  A very  small  affair. 

599  NICHOLLS  (Benjamin  Elliott,  M.  A.)  The  Book  of 

Proverbs,  explained  and  illustrated  from  Holy  Scripture. 
12mo.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1858.  Is.  3d. 

Contains  very  sensible  suggestions  for  the  interpretation  of  proverbs, 
and  gives  instances  of  explanations  by  geography,  natural  history,  etc.  It 
is  a somewhat  helpful  work. 


PROVERBS. 


155 


600  NOYES.  (See  No.  580). 

601  STUART  (Mose^).  A Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Proverbs. 

8vo.  New  York,  1852.  4s.  to  5s. 

We  have  not  met  with  any  English  reprint  of  this  useful  volume.  Dr. 
Stuart  purposely  adapted  his  work  to  beginners  in  Hebrew  study.  He 
has  set  himself  to  prepare  a commentary  of  explanation  only,  believing 
that  a hortatory  and  practical  comment  every  minister  ought  to  he  able  to 
make  for  himself.  Stuart’s  introductory  matter  is  highly  instructive, 
though  no  reader  should  blindly  accept  it  all. 

602  TAYLOR  (Francis,  B.  D.)  Observations  upon  the  three 

first  chapters  of  Proverbs.  4to.  Lond.,  1645. 

An  Exposition  [as  above]  upon  The  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9 Chap- 
ters, etc.  4to.  1657.  18s.  to  25s. 

Two  volumes  (in  one)  of  rich,  old-fashioned  Puritan 
divinity. 

603  THOMAS  (David,  D.  D.)  The  Practical  Philosopher.  Thick 

8vo.  12s.  6d.  nett  (published  at  17s.  6d).  Lond.,  Dickinson. 
1873. 

Dr.  Thomas  of  the  “Homilist”  is  a well-known  writer,  and  a man 
capable  of  great  things.  This  work  does  not  equal  his  “ Genius  of  the  Gos- 
pel.” It  contains  a large  amount  of  practical  comment,  written  in  a rather 
grandiose  style.  We  can  hardly  fancy  men  of  business  reading  this  book 
from  day  to  day  as  the  author  proposes. 

604  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.  D.)  Lectures.  Three  vols.,  cr. 

8vo.  3s.  6d.  each.  Edinb.,  Fullarton.  1861.  S.  6s.  6d. 

Wardlaw  is  diffuse,  and  his  views  upon  “ wisdom  ” 
are  peculiar  ; but  he  always  repays  the  reader  and  neither 
Bridges  nor  Arnot  have  rendered  him  obsolete,  for  he 
works  a different  vein,  and  expounds  in  a manner  pecu- 
liar to  himself. 

605  WILCOCKS  (Thomas,  Puritan.  1549 — 1608).  A Short  yet 

Sound  Commentarie.  [Works.  See  No.  337.] 

Wilcocks  briefly  sums  up  the  teaching  of  the  verses,  and  so  aids  in 
suggesting  topics  ; in  other  respects  he  is  rather  wearying. 


156 


ECCLESIASTES. 


ECCLESIASTES. 

606  ANNOTATIONS  on  tlie  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.[12mo.]  Lond. 

Printed  by  J.  Streater.  1669. 

By  no  means  remarkable,  except  for  extreme  rarity. 

607  BEZA  (Theodore).  Ecclesiastes.  Solomon’s  Sermon  to 

the  People,  with  an  Exposition.  Small  8vo.  Cambridge, 
[1594].  7s.  6d. 

Sure  to  be  weighty  and  instructive.  It  is  exceedingly  rare. 

608  BRIDGES  (Charles,  M.  A.)  Exposition  of  Ecclesiastes. 

Sq.  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  Seeley  & Co.  1860.  S.  3s. 

After  the  manner  of  other  works  by  this  devout 
author,  who  is  always  worth  consulting,  though  he  gives 
us  nothing  very  new. 

609  BROUGHTON  (Hugh.  1549—1612).  A Comment  upon 

Ecclesiastes,  framed  for  the  Instruction  of  Prince  Henry. 
4to.  1605. 

Broughton  was  a far-famed  and  rather  pretentious  Hebraist  whom  Dr. 
Gill  quoted  as  an  authority.  His  work  is  nearly  obsolete,  but  its  loss  is 
not  a severe  one. 

610  BUCHANAN  (Robert,  D.  D.)  Ecclesiastes  ; its  Meaning 

and  its  Lessons,  explained  and  illustrated.  Sq.  8vo.  7s. 
6d.  Lond.,  Glasg.,  and  Edinb.,  Blackie  & Sons.  1859. 
S.  3s.  6d. 

Dr.  Buchanan  has  endeavored  in  every  instance  to 
give  the  true  meaning  of  the  text.  Ilis  explanations 
were  composed  for  the  pulpit  and  delivered  there.  The 
work  is  most  important,  but  strikes  us  as  lacking  in 
liveliness  of  style. 

611  CHOHELETII,  or  “The  Royal  Preacher,  a Poem.”  First 

published  in  the  year  1768.  4to.  3s.  Reprinted,  8vo., 
1830.  Is.  6d. 

This  is  the  work  of  which  Mr.  Wesley  wrote  : — “ Monday,  Feb.  8,  1768. 
I met  with  a surprising  poem,  intituled  Cholieleth,  or  the  Preacher : it  is 
a paraphrase  in  tolerable  verse  on  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  I really  think 
the  author  of  it  (a  Turkey  merchant)  understands  both  the  difficult  expres- 
sions and  the  connection  of  the  whole,  better  than  any  other,  either  ancient 
or  modern,  writer  whom  I have  seen.”  We  defer  to  Mr.  Wesley’s  opin- 
ion but  it  would  not  have  occurred  to  us  to  commend  so  warmly. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


157 


612  COLEMAN  (John  Noble,  M.  A.)  Ecclesiastes.  A New 

Translation,  witli  Notes.  Imp.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 
1867.  S.  2s.  6d. 

A scholarly  translation  with  important  observations. 

613  COTTON  (John.  1585 — 1652).  A briefe  exposition,  with 

practical  observations.  Small  8vo.  Lond.,  1654.  [Re- 
printed in  Nicliol’s  series  of  Commentaries.  See  Muffet, 
No.  597.] 

By  a great  linguist  and  sound  divine.  Ecclesiastes  is  not  a book  to  be 
expounded  verse  by  verse ; but  Cotton  does  it  as  well  as  any  one. 

614  COX  (Samuel).  The  Quest  of  the  Chief  Good:  Expository 

Lectures.  Sq.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Isbister.  1868.  S. 
3s.  6d. 

"We  should  find  it  hard  to  subscribe  to  Mr.  Cox’s  views  of  Ecclesiastes, 
for,  to  begin  with,  we  cannot  admit  that  its  author  was  not  Solomon,  but 
some  unnamed  Rabbi : nevertheless,  “ The  Quest  of  the  Chief  Good  ” is  full 
of  valuable  matter,  and  abundantly  repays  perusal. 

615  DALE  (Thomas  Pelham,  M.  A.)  Ecclesiastes.  With  a 

running  Commentary  and  Paraphrase.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1873. 

This  author  makes  all  that  he  can  out  of  the  errors  of  the  Septuagint, 
which  he  seems  to  value  almost  as  much  as  the  correct  text  itself.  The 
new  translation  is  a sort  of  stilted  paraphrase,  which  in  a remarkable  man- 
ner darkens  the  meaning  of  the  wise  man’s  words.  Mr.  Dale  says  he  is  a 
man  of  one  book,  and  we  are  glad  to  hear  it : for  we  should  be  sorry  for 
another  book  to  suffer  at  his  hands. 

616  DESVOEUX  (A.  V.)  A Philosophical  and  Critical  essay  on 

Ecclesiastes.  4to.  Lond.,  1760.  2s.  6d. 

A curious  and  elaborate  production.  Neither  in  criticism,  nor  in  the- 
ology, is  the  author  always  sound,  and  his  notes  are  a very  ill-arranged 
mass  of  singular  learning. 

617  GINSBURG  (Chbistian  D.)  Coheleth,  or  Ecclesiastes ; 

translated,  with  a Commentary.  8vo.  Lond.,  Longmans. 
1857.  S.  12s. 

The  author  does  not  believe  that  Solomon  wrote  the  book,  and  his  view 
of  its  design  is  not  the  usual,  nor,  as  we  think,  the  right  one.  His  out- 
line of  the  literature  of  the  book  is  very  complete. 

618  GRANGER  (Thomas).  A Familiar  Exposition,  wherein  the 

World’s  Vanity  and  the  true  Felicitie  are  plainly  deci- 
phered. 4to.  Lond.,  1621.  5s.  to  7s.  6d. 

Very  antique,  containing  many  obsolete  and  coarse  phrases  ; but  pithy 
and  quaint. 


158 


ECCLESIASTES, 


619  GREENAWAY  (Stephen).  New  Translation.  8vo.  Lei- 

cester, 1781.  3s.  6d. 

Confused,  eccentric,  and  happily  very  rare. 

620  HAMILTON  (James,  D.  D.  1814—1867).  Royal  Preacher : 

Lectures  on  Ecclesiastes.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Also  12mo., 
1851 ; 16mo.,  1854.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  S.  Is.  6d.  to  2s.  6d. 

We  have  had  a great  treat  in  reading  this  prose  poem. 

It  is  a charming  production. 

621  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on 

Ecclesiastes.  To  which  are  appended  : Treatises  on  the 
Song  of  Solomon ; on  the  Book  of  Job  ; on  the  Prophet 
Isaiah,  etc.  8vo.  9s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1860.  S. 
4s.  6d. 

Scholarly  of  course,  and  also  more  vivacious  than  is 
usual  with  Hengstenberg. 

622  HODGSON  (Bernard,  LL.  D.)  New  Translation.  4to. 

Oxford,  1791.  4s. 

Notes  neither  long,  numerous,  nor  valuable. 

623  HOLDEN  (George,  M.  A.)  An  Attempt  to  illustrate  the 

Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  8vo.  Lond.,  1822.  3s.  6d. 

Bridges  says  that  Holden  “ stands  foremost  for  accuracy  of  critical 
exegesis,”  and  Ginsburg  considers  his  Commentary  to  be  the  best  in  our 
language.  We  may  therefore  be  wrong  in  setting  so  little  store  by  it  as 
we  do,  but  we  are  not  convinced. 

624  JERMIN  (Michael,  D.  D.)  Ecclesiastes.  Folio.  1639. 

6s.  6d. 

The  school  to  which  Jermin  belonged  delighted  to  display  their  learn- 
ing, of  which  they  had  no  small  share ; they  excelled  in  wise  sayings,  but 
not  in  unction.  The  fruit  is  ripe,  but  lacks  flavor. 

625  KEIL  & DELITZSCH.  (See  Books  of  Solomon.  578.) 

626  LANGE.  (See  Books  of  Solomon.  No.  579.) 

627  LLOYD  (J.,  M.  A.)  An  Analysis  of  Ecclesiastes : with 

reference  to  the  Hebrew  Grammar  of  Gesenius,  and  with 
Notes ; to  which  is  added  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes,  in 
Hebrew  and  English,  in  parallel  columns.  4to.  7s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Bagsters.  1874. 

This  will  be  esteemed  by  men  who  have  some  knowledge  of  the  He- 
brew. The  repeated  references  to  Gesenius  would  render  the  book  tedious 
to  the  ordinary  reader,  but  they  make  it  all  the  more  valuable  to  one  who 
aspires  to  be  a Hebraist. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


159 


628  [LUTHER],  An  Exposition  of  Solomon’s  Booke,  called 

Ecclesiastes,  or  tlie  Preacher.  8vo.  Printed  by  J.  Day. 
Lond.,  1573. 

Even  the  British  Museum  authorities  have  been  unable  to  find  this 
octavo  for  us,  though  it  is  mentioned  in  their  catalogue. 

629  MACDONALD  (James  M.,  D.  D.  Princeton,  N.  J.) 

Ecclesiastes.  Thick  12mo.  New  York.  1856.  S.  4s.  6d. 

Thoroughly  exegetical,  with  excellent  “ scopes  of 
argument  ” following  each  division  : to  be  purchased  if 
it  can  be  met  with. 

630  MORGAN  (A.  A.)  Ecclesiastes  metrically  Paraphrased,  with 

Illustrations.  4to.  21s.  Lond.,  Bos  worth.  1856. 

This  is  an  article  de  luxe , and  is  rather  for  the  drawing-room  than  for 
the  study.  A graphic  pencil,  first-class  typography,  and  a carefully 
written  metrical  translation  make  up  an  elegant  work  of  art. 

631  M YLNE  (G.  W.)  Ecclesiastes  : or  Lessons  for  the  Christian’s 

Daily  Walk.  16mo.  Lond.,  1859.  Is.  6d. 

The  author  in  this  little  publication  does  not  comment  upon  the  whole 
Book ; but  the  passages  he  touches  are  ably  explained. 

632  NISBET  (Alexander.  Died  about  1658).  An  Exposition, 

with  Practical  Observations.  4to.  Edinb.,  1694.  4s.  6d. 
to  10s.  6d. 

One  of  those  solid  works  which  learned  Scotch  divines  of  the  seven- 
teenth century  have  left  us  in  considerable  numbers.  In  our  judgment  it 
is  as  heavy  as  it  is  weighty. 

633  NOYES.  (See  No.  580.) 

634  PEMBLE  (William,  M.  A.  1591 — 1623.)  Solomon’s  Recan- 

tation and  Repentance  : or  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  briefly 
and  fully  explained.  Thin  4to.  Lond.,  1628.  3s.  6d. 
Anthony  & Wood  calls  Pemble  “ a famous  preacher,  a skilfhl  linguist, 
a good  orator,  and  an  ornament  to  society.”  Moreover,  he  was  a learned 
Calvinistic  divine.  This  “ Recantation  ” is  a minor  production.  The  style 
is  scholastic,  with  arrangements  of  the  subjects  such  as  render  it  hard  to 
read.  We  confess  we  are  disappointed  with  it. 

635  PRESTON  (Theodore,  M.  A.)  A translation  of  the  Com- 

mentary of  Mendelssohn  from  the  Rabbinic  Hebrew  ; also 
a newly  arranged  English  Version.  8vo.  Lond.,  1845.  5s. 
A book  more  prized  by  linguists  than  by  preachers.  We  might  with 
propriety  have  named  this  Mendelssohn’s  Commentary,  for  so  it  is. 


160  ECCLESIASTES. 

636  PROBY  (W.  H.  B.,  M.  A.)  Ecclesiastes  for  English  Readers. 

Thin  8vo.  4s.  6d.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1874.  S.  2s.  3d. 
About  45  pages,  and  these  are  quite  enough.  What  has  come  to  a man’s 
brain  when  lie  prophecies  that  Antichrist  will  take  away  the  daily  sacri- 
fice, that  is,  “ forbid  the  eucharistic  bread  and  wine,”  and  then  adds : “ To 
this  awful  time  there  is  probably  a mystical  reference  in  the  words  of  our 
present  book  (XII.  6),  ‘ While  the  silver  cord  is  not  loosed,  or  the  golden 
bowl  broken,  or  the  pitcher  broken  at  the  fountain,  or  the  wheel  broken 
at  the  cistern.’  For  silver  and  gold  signify  respectively,  in  the  symbolic 
language  of  Scripture,  love  and  truth  : thus  the  loosening  of  the  silver  cord 
will  mean  the  love  of  many  waxing  cold,  and  the  breaking  of  the  golden 
bowl  will  mean  the  failure  of  truth  from  the  earth ; and  we  understand, 
then,  that  in  the  last  awful  time  there  will  be  no  longer  auy  speaking  of 
the  truth  in  love.  And  as  the  ‘ wells  of  salvation  ’ in  Isaiah  XII.  3,  are 
the  sacraments  and  other  means  of  grace,  so  the  breaking  of  the  pitcher  and 
the  wheel  may  signify  the  cessation  of  those  ministries  by  which  the  sac- 
rament and  other  means  of  grace  are  dispensed.” 

637  REYNOLDS  (Edward,  D.  D.  Bishop  of  Norwich.  1599— 

1676).  Annotations.  Works.  Vol.  IV.  8vo.  Lond., 
1826.  Reprinted,  by  Dr.  Washburn.  8vo.  Lond.,  1811. 
2s.  6d. 

See  Westminster  Assembly’s  Annotations  (No.  3),  for  which  Reynolds 
wrote  this  : he  is  always  good. 

638  SERRANUS,  or  DE  SERRES  (John.  1540—1598).  A 

Godlie  and  Learned  Commentary  upon  Ecclesiastes,  newly 
turned  into  English,  by  John  Stock  wood,  Schoolmaster  of 
Tunbridge.  8vo.  Lond.,  1585.  7s.  6d. 

Serranus  was  a Protestant  pastor  at  Nismes,  of  such  moderate  opinions, 
and  such  objectionable  modes  of  stating  them,  that  he  was  about  equally 
abhorred  by  Romanists  and  Protestants.  He  is  said  to  have  been  very  in- 
accurate in  his  learning. 

639  STUART  (Moses).  A Commentary  on  Ecclesiastes.  12mo. 

6s.  New  York.  1851.  S.  3s. 

Full  and  minute,  with  most  instructive  introductions. 
It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  Moses  Stuart  is  a great 
authority,  though  not  all  we  could  wish  as  to  spirituality. 

640  TYLER  (Thomas,  M.  A.)  Ecclesiastes ; a Contribution  to 

its  Interpretation.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Williams  & Nor- 
gate.  1875. 

This  writer  is  no  doubt  a profound  thinker,  but  we  do  not  set  much 
store  by  the  result  of  his  thinkings.  He  maintains  that  the  writer  of 
Ecclesiastes  was  a Jew  who  had  travelled  abroad,  and  heard  tire  Stoic 


ECCLESIASTES. 


161 


philosophers  and  their  opponents  at  Athens.  He  seems  to  think  that  his 
point  is  proved,  but  it  is  the  merest  surmise  possible.  The  work  is  not  at 
all  to  our  taste. 

641  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  Ecclesiastes. 

Two  vols.,  8vo.  1821.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  1838.  Oliphant 
& Go’s,  edition,  dn  one  vol.,  8s.  6d.  1871.  S.  4s.  6d. 

Wardlaw  is  always  good,  though  not  very  brilliant. 
He  may  be  relied  upon,  when  not  critical,  and  he  gen- 
erally excites  thought. 

642  WEISS  (Benjamin).  New  Translation  and  Exposition. 

with  Critical  Notes.  12mo.  4s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co., 
* 1856.  S.  Is.  6d. 

It  is  pleasing  to  find  a converted  Jew  engaged  upon  this  Book.  Mr. 
Weiss  says  many  good  things,  but  frequently  his  interpretations  and 
remarks  are  more  singular  than  wise. 

643  YCARD  (Fr.  Dean  of  Achonry).  Paraphrase.  8vo.  Lond., 

1701.  Is.  6d. 

The  dean  supposes  the  Royal  Preacher  to  have  been  interrupted  by  an 
impudent  sensualist,  and  so  he  gets  rid  of  the  difficulty  of  certain  passages 
by  putting  them  into  the  scoffer's  mouth.  The  theory  is  not  to  be  toler- 
ated for  a moment. 

644  YOUNG  (Loyal,  D.  D.)  Commentary,  with  introductory 

Notices  by  McGill  and  Jacobus.  8vo.  Philadelphia,  1865. 

This  American  comment  is  highly  spoken  of  by 
eminent  judges,  and  appears  to  have  been  carefully  ex- 
ecuted. It  is  able  and  solid,  and  at  the  same  time 
enlivened  with  originality  of  thought,  vivacity  of  expres- 
sion, and  practical  pungency. 

645  SMITH  (JonN,  M.  D.,  M.  R,  C.  P.  L.)  King  Solomon’s  Por- 

traiture of  Old  Age,  wherein  is  contained  A Sacred  Anatomy 
both  of  Soul  and  Body,  with  an  account  of  all  these  Mysti- 
cal and  ^Enigmatical  Symptomes,  expressed  in  the  six 
former  verses  of  the  12th  Chapter  of  Ecclesiastes,  made 
plain  and  easie  to  a mean  Capacitie.  8vo.  Lond,,  1666. 
2s.  6d.  to  5s. 

A curious  book  by  a Physician,  who  brings  his  anatomical  knowledge 
to  bear  upon  the  twelfth  chapter  of  Eoclesiastes,  and  tries  to  show  that 
Solomon  understood  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  etc.  Matthew  Poole 
introduced  the  substance  of  this  treatise  into  his  Synopsis,  and  in  that 
huge  compilation  he  speaks  eulogistioally  of  the  author,  with  whom  he 
resided.  We  mention  it  because  of  its  singularity. 


162 


SO  NG  OF  SOLOMON-. 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 

646  AINSWORTH.  (See  under  Pentateuch,  No.  73). 

647  AVRILLON  (John  Baptist  Elias.  1652—1729).  The  Year 

of  Affections ; or  Sentiments  on  the  love  of  God,  drawn 
from  the  Canticles,  for  every  day  of  the  year.  F’cap. 
8vo.  6s.  6d.  Loudon  and  Oxford,  Parker  & Co.  1847. 
S.  4s. 

One  of  the  series  of  Romish  authors,  issued  by  Dr.  Pusey.  It  is  a deeply 
spiritual  work,  after  the  manner  of  the  mystics.  It  might  have  been  writ- 
ten by  Madame  Guyon.  Despite  its  occasional  Popery  and  sacrament- 
arianism,  it  contains  much  choice  devotional  matter. 

648  BEZA  (Theodore).  Sermons  upon  the  three  first  chapters 

of  Canticles,  translated  out  of  the  French,  by  John  Harmar. 
4to.  Oxford,  1587. 

These  thirty-one  sermons  are  a well  of  instruction, 
very  precious  and  refreshing.  The  unabbreviated  title 
indicates  a controversial  use  of  the  Song,  and  we  were 
therefore  prepared  to  lament  the  invasion  of  fhe  dove’s 
nest  of  the  Canticles  by  the  eagle  of  debate ; but  we 
were  agreeably  disappointed,  for  we  found  much  less  of 
argument,  and  much  more  of  the  Well-Beloved,  than 
we  looked  for. 

649  BEVERLEY  (T.)  An  Exposition  of  the  Divinely  prophetick 

Song  of  Songs,  which  is  Solomon’s ; beginning  with  the 
reign  of  David,  and  ending  in  the  glorious  Kingdom  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  4to.  1687.  5s. 

This  maundering  author  finds  in  Canticles  the  history  of  the  church 
from  David  to  our  Lord,  and  rhymes  no  end  of  rubbish  thereon.  Truly 
there  is  no  end  to  the  foolishness  of  expositors.  We  suppose  there  must 
be  a public  for  which  they  cater,  and  a very  foolish  public  it  must  be. 

650  BRIGHTMAN  (Thomas).  A Commentary  on  the  Canticles, 

wherein  the  Text  is  Analised,  the  Native  Signification  of 
the  Words  Declared,  the  Allegories  Explained,  and  the 
Order  of  Times  wliereunto  they  relate  Observed.  4to. 
Lond.,  1644.  [See  under  Daniel  and  Revelation.] 
Briglitman  was  a writer  of  high  renown  among  the  prophetic  students 
of  the  seventeenth  century.  With  singular  strength  of  the  visionary 
faculties  he  sees  in  the  Canticles  “ the  whole  condition  of  the  church  from 
the  time  of  David  till  time  shall  be  no  more.”  Expounding  on  this  theory 
needs  an  acrobatic  imagination. 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


163 


651  BURRO  WES  (George.  Prof.  Lafayette  Coll.  U.  S.)  Com- 

mentary. Cr  8vo.  Philadelphia,  1853.  3s.  6d. 

Mr.  Moody  Stuart  says  : — “ The  excellent  work  of 
Dr.  Burrowes  is  specially  fitted  to  remove  the  prejudices 
of  men  of  taste  against  the  Song  of  Solomon,  as  the 
medium  of  spiritual  communion  between  the  soul  and 
Christ.  We  welcome  it  as  a valuable  contribution  to 
us  from  our  transatlantic  brethren.” 

652  BUSH  (Joseph,  M.  A.)  The  Canticles  of  the  Song  of  Solo- 

mon. A metrical  Paraphrase,  with  Explanatory  Notes 
and  Practical  Comments.  Post  8vo.  Lond.,  Hatchards. 
1867.  S.  Is.  6d. 

A good  compilation,  with  a helpful  translation.  For  popular  use. 

653  CLAPHAM  (Enoch).  Solomon ; his  Songs  expounded.  4to. 

Lond.,  1603. 

Clapham  was  a voluminous  author  of  very  remarkable  attainments. 
He  wrote  also  on  the  first  fourteen  chapters  of  Genesis.  This  work  is  rare 
as  angels’  visits. 

654  COLLINGES(John,D.D.  1623—1690).  The  Intercourses 

of  Divine  Love  betwixt  Christ  and  his  Church,  metaphor- 
ically expressed  by  Solomon  in  Canticles  I.  and  II.  Two 
vols.,  4to.  Lond.,  *1676.  10s.  to  14s. 

Nine  hundred  and  nine  quarto  pages  upon  one  chap- 
ter is  more  than  enough.  The  materials  are  gathered 
from  many  sources  and  make  up  a mass  of  wealth.  On 
the  second  chapter  there  are  five  hundred  and  thirty 
pages.  It  would  try  the  constitutions  of  many  modern 
divines  to  read  what  these  Puritans  found  it  a pleasure  to 
write.  When  shall  we  see  their  like  ? 

655  COTTON  (John,  B.  D.  1585 — 1652).  A Brief  Exposition, 

describing  the  estate  of  the  Church  in  all  ages  thereof, 
both  Jewish  and  Christian,  and  modestly  pointing  at  the 
gloriousness  of  the  restored  estate  thereof.  8vo.  Lond., 
1642.  [Reprinted  in  Nichol’s  series.  See  Muffet,  No.  597.] 

Cotton  explains  the  sacred  love-song  historically,  and  misses  much  of 
its  sweetness  by  so  doing.  We  should  never  care  to  read  his  exposition 
while  Durham,  and  Gill,  and  Moody  Stuart  are  to  be  had. 


1G4 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


656  DAVIDSON  (William,  Esq.)  A Brief  outline  of  an  Exam- 

ination of  tlie  Song  of  Solomon.  8vo.  Lond.,  1817.  2s.  to 
3s.  6d. 

A precious  work  by  one  whose  heart  is  warm  with  the  good  matter. 
He  sees  in  the  Song  the  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

657  DOVE  (John,  D.  D.)  The  Conversion  of  Solomon,  a Direc- 

tion to  holiness  of  Life  ; handled  by  way  of  Commentarie 
upon  the  whole  Booke  of  Canticles.  Profitable  for  young 
men  which  are  not  yet  mortified,  for  old  men  which  are 
decrepit  and  have  one  foote  in  the  grave,  and  for  all  sorts 
of  men  which  have  an  intent  to  renounce  the  vanities 
of  this  world,  and  to  follow  Jesus  Christ.  4to.  Lond., 
1613.  6s.  to  8s. 

A quaint  old  work.  The  student  will  do  better  with  the  moderns. 
Moreover,  this  Dove  is  rare,  and  seldom  lights  on  poor  men’s  shelves. 

658  DURHAM  (James.  1622—1658).  Clavis  Cantici ; or  an 

Exposition  of  the  Song  of  Solomon.  4to.  Lond.,  1668  and 
1723.  Also  12mo.,  Aberdeen.  1840.  2s.  6d.  to  6s. 

Durham  is  always  good,  and  he  is  at  his  best  upon 
the  Canticles.  He  gives  us  the  essence  of  the  good 
matter.  For  practical  use  this  work  is  perhaps  more 
valuable  than  any  other  Key  to  the  Song. 

659  FENNER  (Dudley).  The  Song  of  Solomon,  in  Verse,  with 

an  Exposition.  Middleburgh.  8vo.  1587.  4to. 

Moody  Stuart  says : — “ This  is  a faithful  and  excellent  translation,  ac- 
companied by  an  admirable  exposition.  There  is  no  poetry  in  it,  but  the 
renderings  are  often  good,  and  the  comment  valuable.”  We  have  not  met 
with  it. 

660  FLEMING  (Robert.  Died  1716).  The  Mirrour  of  Divine 

Love  unvail’d,  in  a Poetical  Paraphrase  of  the  Song  of 
Solomon.  Sm.  8vo.  1691.  3s.  6d. 

The  poetry  is  after  the  same  manner  as  that  of  Quarles,  and  though  not 
without  merit,  it  is  too  antiquated  to  be  admired  in  the  present  day.  This 
is  the  Fleming  who  interpreted  the  Apooalyptic  vials,  and  was  fortunate 
enough  to  hit  upon  the  date  of  the  French  revolution  and  other  events 
connected  with  the  decline  of  the  Papal  power.  His  prophetic  work  has 
been  reprinted,  but  not  this  limping  poetry. 

661  FRANCIS  (Ann.  Died  1800).  A Poetical  Translation  ; with 

Notes,  Historical,  Critical,  and  Explanatory.  4to.  Lond., 
1781.  Is.  6d.  to  2s.  6d. 

Framed  on  a fanciful  theory.  Verses  flowing  and  feeble.  Insignificant. 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


165 


662  FRY  (John,  A.  B.)  New  Translation,  with  Notes,  and  an 

attempt  to  interpret  the  sacred  allegories.  8vo.  Lond., 
1811.  2s.  to  3s. 

Fry’s  work  may  be  called  the  supplement  and  complement  of  Dr.  Good’s. 
He  divides  the  Songs  into  idyls,  and  gives  notes  in  the  same  manner  as 
Good ; but  he  also  plunges  into  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  blessed  Song, 
and  so  far  is  to  be  preferred. 

663  GIFFORD  (Mr.)  A Dissertation  on  the  Song  of  Solomon. 

8vo.  Lond.,  1751. 

Worthless  rhymes.  This  man  dares  to  say  that  the  Song  is  a pastoral 
composed  by  Solomon  for  the  amusement  of  his  lighter  hours,  before  God 
had  given  him  the  divine  wisdom  for  which  he  was  afterwards  so  eminent. 

664  GILL  (John,  D.  D.)  An  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Solo- 

mon’s Song.  Folio.  Lond.,  1728.  5s.  Not  contained  in 

the  author’s  Exposition  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 
An  8vo.  edition  was  published  by  Collingridge,  Lond., 
1854.  S.  3s.  6d. 

The  best  thing  Gill  ever  did.  He  could  not  exhaust 
his  theme,  but  he  went  as  far  as  he  could  toward  so 
doing.  He  is  occasionally  fanciful,  but  his  work  is  pre- 
cious. Those  who  despise  it  have  never  read  it,  or  are 
incapable  of  elevated  spiritual  feelings. 

665  GINSBURG  (Christian  D.)  A Translation,  with  a Com- 

mentary, Historical  and  Critical.  8vo.  10s.  Lond., 
Longmans.  1857.  5s.  to  6s. 

Written  upon  an  untenable  theory,  viz.,  that  the  Song  is  intended  “ to 
record  an  example  of  virtue  in  a young  woman,  who  encountered  and  con- 
quered the  greatest  temptations,  and  was  eventually  rewarded.”  Thi3 
grovelling  interpretation  needed  the  aid  of  great  liberties  with  the  text, 
and  a few  interpolations,  and  the  author  has  not  hesitated  to  use  them. 
However  learned  the  book  may  be,  this  vicious  theory  neutralizes  all. 

666  GOOD  (John  Mason,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  S.)  Song  of  Songs ; or 

Sacred  Idyls  translated  ; with  Notes,  Critical  and  Explana- 
tory. 8 vo.  Lond.,  1803.  4s. 

By  a man  of  great  learning.  It  is  not  at  all  spiritual,  or  even  expository, 
in  the  theological  sense,  but  treats  the  Canticles  as  an  Oriental  drama, 
explaining  its  scenery  and  metaphors  from  a literary  point  of  view. 

667  GREEN  (William,  M.  A.)  Song  of  Solomon.  In  “The 

Poetical  Parts  of  the  Old  Testament  translated,  with 
Notes.”  4to.  1781. 

Critical  only.  Orme  says,  “ the  translations  are  in  general  very  accu- 
rate and  elegant  specimens  of  biblical  interpretation.” 


166 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON 


668  GUILD  (William,  D.  D.  1586—1657).  Love’s  Intercourse 

between  the  Lamb  and  his  Bride.  8vo.  Lond.,  1058.  5s. 
to  7s. 

A rare  old  work  : but  we  prefer  Durham.  The  author  was  one  of  the 
better  sort  of  the  Scotch  Episcopalians. 

669  GYFFARD  (George).  Fifteen  Sermons  upon  the  Song  of 

Solomon.  8vo.  1598  to  1612. 

We  have  several  times  met  with  this  writer’s  name  coupled  with  that 
of  Brightmau  as  in  his  day  regarded  as  a very  learned  writer,  but  we  can- 
not procure  his  work.  Possibly  some  reader  of  this  Catalogue  may  yet 
present  us  with  it.  We  beg  to  assure  him  of  the  gratitude  which  we 
already  feel,  in  the  form  of  “ a lively  sense  of  favors  to  come.” 

670  HARMER  (Thomas.  1715 — 1788).  Outlines  of  a New  Com- 

mentary on  Solomon’s  Song,  drawn  by  the  help  of  instruc- 
tions from  the  East.  8vo.  Lond.,  1768.  Is.  6d.  to  2s.  6d. 
“ This  book  is  not  well  arranged,  but  is  otherwise  one  of  the  most  in- 
genious, modest,  and  interesting  of  all  the  treatises  on  the  outward  sense 
of  the  Song.” — Moody  Stuart. 

671  HENGSTENBERG.  (See  under  Ecclesiastes,  No.  621.) 

672  HODGSON  (Bernard,  LL.  D.)  Solomon’s  Song  translated 

from  the  Hebrew.  4to.  Oxf.,  1786.  2s.  6d. 

Moody  Stuart  says  that  this  is  “ a good  translation,”  and  therefore  we 
suppose  it  is  so,  but  we  do  not  admire  it.  It  does  not  even  refer  to  the 
mystical  sense,  and  it  mars  the  poetry  of  the  Song.  Dr.  Hodgson  renders 
ch.  vi.  ver.  9 : — “ My  pigeon,  my  undefiled  is  but  one.”  This  is  an  altera- 
tion, but  certainly  not  an  emendation.  The  name  of  the  bride’s  mother 
he  discovers  to  have  been  Talmadni.  Wonderful  1 

673  HOMES  (Nathaniel.  Died  1678).  A Commentary  on  the 

Canticles.  Works.  Folio.  1652.  6s.  to  10s. 

This  goes  to  the  very  marrow  of  spiritual  teaching,  and  uses  every  word 
and  syllable  in  a deeply  experimental  manner  with  great  unction  and 
power.  Homes,  however,  spiritualizes  too  much,  and  is  both  too  luscious 
in  expression  and  too  prolix  for  these  degenerate  days. 

674  HOUGHTON  (Wm.)  Translation.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  Lond., 

Triibner.  1865. 

Useless.  The  Song  is  viewed  as  a secular  poem  on  chaste  love. 

675  IBN  EZRA  (Abraham).  Commentary  on  the  Canticles,  after 

the  first  recension.  Edited  from  two  MSS.,  with  a Trans- 
lation, by  H.  J.  Matthews,  B.  A.  12mo.  Lond.,  Triibner 
& Co.  1874. 

The  original  Hebrew  of  the  Song,  with  a Jewish  comment,  which  con- 
veys but  little  instruction.  In  this  small  book  the  student  will  have  a speci- 
men of  Jewish  exposition. 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


167 


676  IRONS  (Joseph,  of  Camberwell.  1786—1852).  Nymphas. 

A Paraphrastic  Exposition.  16mo.  Lond.,  1844.  S.  Is.  6d. 

Outside  of  his  own  circle  we  fear  that  this  work  by 
the  late  Joseph  Irons  is  little  known.  It  is  a paraphrase 
in  blank  verse,  rendered  in  a very  spiritual  manner. 
We  confess  that  we  looked  upon  the  little  book  with 
admiring  eyes,  though  we  know  that  the  critics  will 
sneer  both  at  us  and  it. 

677  KEIL  & DELITZSCH.  (See  Books  of  Solomon,  No.  578.) 

678  KRUMMACHER  (F.  W.,  D.  D.)  Solomon  and  the  Shula- 

mite.  Sermons  on  the  Book  of  Canticles.  16mo.  Lond., 
1838.  S.  Is. 

Touches  only  upon  a few  portions.  Short  and  sweet. 

679  LANGE.  (See  Books  of  Solomon,  No.  578.) 

680  LITTLEDALE  (R.  F.)  A Commentary.  From  Ancient  and 

Mediaeval  Sources.  12mo.  7s.  Lond.,  J.  Masters.  1869. 
S.  4s.  6d. 

Littledale  is  a close  follower  of  John  Mason  Neale,  and  here  reproduces 
the  beauties  and  the  deformities  of  mediaeval  spiritualizing.  Great  judg- 
ment will  be  needed  to  extract  the  good  and  true  from  the  mass  of  semi- 
popish  comment  here  heaped  together.  If  discretion  be  used,  jewels  of 
silver  and  jewels  of  gold  may  be  extracted. 

681  MACPHERSON  (Peter,  A.  M.)  The  Song  of  Songs  shown 

to  be  constructed  on  Architectural  Principles.  Post  8vo. 
Edinb.,  1856.  4s. 

**  His  supposition  that  this  song  consists  of  verses  written  round  an 
archway  is  so  entirely  gratuitous,  that  it  is  only  misguiding  and  decep- 
tive.’'— A.  Moody  Stuart. 

682  METRICAL  MEDITATIONS  on  the  Canticles.  [Anon.] 

16mo.  Lond.,  Wertheim.  1856.  S.  Is. 

Exceedingly  well  rendered  : noteworthy  both  from  a 
literary  and  religious  point  of  view.  The  author  seizes 
the  meaning  of  the  Song,  and  repeats  it  in  well- chosen 
words. 

683  MILLER  (Andrew).  Meditations.  12mo.  Is.  6d.  Lond., 

Morrish. 

First  published  in  the  Plymouthite  magazine,  “ Things  New  and  Old.” 
Devotional,  and  glowing  with  the  light  of  fellowship  with  Jesus. 


168 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


684  MOORE  (Daniel,  M.  A.)  Christ  and  liis  Church.  A 

Course  of  Lent  Lectures  on  the  Song  of  Solomon.  Sm. 
cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  H.  S.  King  & Co.  1875. 

These  lectures  treat  upon  the  first  chapter  only,  but 
they  do  so  in  an  admirable  manner.  Moore  has  evan- 
gelized Littledale. 

685  [NEALE  (John  Mason,  D.  D.)  ] Sermons  on  the  Canticles, 

preached  in  a Religious  House.  By  a Priest  of  the  Church 
of  England.  12mo.  Lond.,  Masters.  1857.  S.  2s.  6d. 

By  that  highest  of  high  churchmen,  Dr.  Neale.  These  sermons  smell 
of  Popery,  yet  the  savor  of  our  Lord’s  good  ointment  cannot  be  hid.  Our 
Protestantism  is  not  of  so  questionable  a character  that  we  are  afraid  to  do 
justice  to  Papists  and  Anglicans,  and  therefore  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say 
that  many  a devout  thought  has  come  to  us  while  reading  these  “ sermons 
by  a Priest  of  the  Church  of  England.” 

686  NEWTON  (Adelaide  L.)  The  Song  of  Solomon  compared 

with  other  parts  of  Scripture.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond., 
Nisbet.  1871.  [The  earlier  editions  were  published 
anonymously.] 

Miss  Newton’s  book  is  very  dear  to  spiritual  minds  ; it  is  full  of  that 
quiet  power  which  comes  from  the  Spirit  of  God  through  deep  experience 
and  precious  fellowship  with  the  Well-Beloved. 

687  NOYES.  (See  No.  580.)- 

This  author  sees  in  the  Canticles  nothing  but  a collection  of  amatory 
songs,  written  without  express  moral  or  religious  design.  Blind ! 

688  PERCY  (Thomas,  D.  D.  Bishop  of  Dromore.  1729—1811). 

New  Translation  : with  a Commentary  and  Annotations. 
[Anon.]  8vo.  Lond.,  1764.  6s. 

His  theory  of  the  sacred  Song  is  dead,  and  not  worthy  of  a monument 
in  our  pages.  We  trust  that  not  a relic  will  remain.  Percy  did  very  well 
with  his  ballads,  but  he  had  better  have  let  the  Song  of  Songs  alone. 

689  POWER  (Philip  Bennet,  M.  A.)  Failure  and  Discipline  : 

Thoughts  on  Canticles  V.  16mo.  Is.  6d.  Lond.,  Wer- 
theim. 

Upon  the  fifth  chapter  only.  Mr.  Power  always  writes  attractively.  His 
book  is  “ linked  sweetness,”  but  not  “ long  drawn  out.” 

690  REFLECTIONS  ON  CANTICLES  ; or,  the  Song  of  Solomon, 

with  Illustrations  from  Modern  Travellers  and  Naturalists. 
[Anon.]  12mo.  Lond.,  S.  W.  Partridge  & Co.  1870.  S. 
Is.  3d. 

Has  much  sweetness,  and  a fair  measure  of  freshness. 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


160 


691  ROBOTHAM  (John).  Exposition  4to.  Lond.,  1652.  6s.  to 

8s. 

Very  solid ; bat  not  to  be  compared  with  Durham,  No.  658.  It  is  just 
a little  dull  and  commonplace. 

692  ROMAINE  (William,  M.  A.)  Discourses  upon  Solomon’s 

Song.  8vo.  Lond.,  1789.  2s.  6d. 

Twelve  excellent  sermons  from  verses  taken  out  of  the  Songs.  They  do 
not  summarize  the  book,  nor  form  a commentary,  but  are  simply  a selec- 
tion of  spiritual  discourses  by  one  of  the  most  eminent  Calvinistic  divines 
of  the  last  century. 

693  SIBBES  (Richard,  D.  D.  1577—1635).  Bowels  Opened ; 

or,  a Discovery  of  the  Neere  and  Deere  Love,  Union  and 
Communion  betwixt  Christ  and  the  Church.  Sermons 
on  Canticles  IV.,  V.,  and  VI.  4to.  1639,  etc.  6s.  to  9s. 
[Works  II.  Nichol’s  edition.] 

Sibbes  never  writes  ill.  His  repute  is  such  that  we 
need  only  mention  him.  His  title  is  most  unfortunate, 
but  in  all  else  his  “ discovery  ” is  worthy  of  our  com- 
mendation. 

694  SKINNER  (John.  Bishop  of  Aberdeen.  1721—1806).  Es- 

say towards  a literal  or  true  radical  Exposition.  Works 
II.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Aberdeen,  1809.  4s. 

Not  very  important.  The  Bishop  closes  his  exposition  with  the  follow- 
ing prayer  for  those  who  do  not  believe  in  the  mystical  sense : — “ God 
forgive  the  fools  and  open  their  eyes.”  Pretty  strong  for  a Bishop  I 

695  STUART  (A.  Moody,  M.  A.)  Exposition,  with  Critical 

Notes.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1860.  S.  6s. 

Although  this  admirable  author  expounds  the  Song 
upon  a theory  which  we  do  not  quite  endorse,  we  do 
not  know  where  to  find  a book  of  equal  value  in  all 
respects.  He  has  poetry  in  his  soul,  and,  beyond  that, 
a heart  like  that  of  Rutherford,  fired  with  love  to  the 
Altogether  Lovely  One.  We  thank  him  for  this  noble 
volume. 

696  THE  BRIDE  OF  CHRIST ; or,  Explanatory  Notes  on  the 

Song  of  Solomon.  [Anon.]  18mo.  Lond  Seeleys.  1861. 
S.  6d. 

A little  book  for  general  use ; not  for  students. 


170 


SONG  OF  SOLOMON. 


697  THE  THREEFOLD  MYSTERY  : Hints  on  the  Song  of  Songs, 

viewed  as  a Prophecy  of  the  Double  United  Church  of  Jew 
and  Gentile.  By  the  author  of  “The  Gathered  Lily.” 
12mo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Partridge  & Co.  1869. 

It  seems  to  us  to  he  a wild  fancy  that  all  ecclesiastical  history  is  con- 
densed into  the  Canticles ; hence  we  do  not  value  this  book. 

698  THRUPP  (John  Fkancis).  New  Translation,  with  Com- 

mentary. Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Macmillan.  1862. 

We  are  highly  pleased  with  this  work.  It  defends 
the  usual  Christian  interpretation  by  the  conclusions  of 
sober  criticism,  and  shows  that  the  spiritual  sense  is 
confirmed  by  the  investigations  of  modern  scholarship. 
In  the  introduction  the  author  deals  heavy  blows  at  the 
sceptical  school,  and  at  those  who,  like  Ginsburg,  con- 
tent themselves  with  imputing  a merely  moral  meaning 
to  the  blessed  Canticle  of  love. 

699  WEISS  (Benjamin).  The  Song  of  Songs  unveiled  : a New 

Translation  and  Exposition.  Cr.  8vo.  W.  Oliphant  & Co. 
1859.  S.  Is.  6d.  to  2s.  6d. 

This  author  believes  that  the  Song  sets  forth  the  history  of  Israel  and 
her  relation  to  the  Covenant  Angel  from  Horeb  to  Calvary.  Beyond  a few 
Eastern  illustrations,  nothing  of  value  is  contributed  to  existing  materials. 
The  work  is  thoroughly  evangelical. 

700  WILCOCKS  (Thomas).  Exposition.  Works.  Folio.  1624. 

12s. 

Short,  and  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  a paraphrase.  This  venerable 
author  gives  a doctrinal  summary  of  each  verse,  and  from  this  we  have  fre- 
quently been  directed  to  a subject  of  discourse. 

701  WILLIAMS  (Thomas).  A New  Translation,  with  a Com- 

mentary and  Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  1801.  Second  edition, 
1828.  S.  2s. 

This  volume  is  little  known,  but  its  value  is  above  the  average  of  Can- 
ticles literature.  We  have  read  many  of  the  remarks  with  pleasure,  but 
most  of  them  are  to  be  found  in  the  standard  commentaries. 

702  WOODFORD  (Samuel,  D.  D.)  Paraphrase  in  Verse,  8vo. 

1679.  Is.  6d.  to  3s. 

Better  than  many  poetical  paraphrases,  but  still  below  the  mark  of  true 
poetry. 


WORKS  ON  PROPHECY. 


171 


703  WRIGHT  (M.)  The  Beauty  of  the  Word  in  the  Song  of 
Solomon.  Cr.  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  Nisbet  & Co.  1872. 

A purely  spiritual  commentary,  casting  no  light  upon  the  text,  but 
drawing  much  from  it.  More  devotional  than  expository.  The  figures 
of  the  allegory  are  pressed  as  far  as  they  should  be,  perhaps  further. 


WORKS  OK  PROPHECY. 

[Volumes  upon  this  subject  are  so  extremely  numerous  and  so  varied  in 
their  opinions  that  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  few  which  follow.  The 
reader  is  also  referred  to  works  upon  the  Apocalypse.] 

704  DAVISON  (John,  B.  D.  1777—1834).  Discourses  on 

Prophecy  , its  Structure,  Use,  and  Inspiration.  [Warbur- 
tonian  Lectures.]  8vo.  Oxf.,  1845.  S.  5s.  6d. 

Elliott  calls  this  “ Davison’s  noble  Work  on  Proph- 
ecy.” This  is  one  of  the  Warburtonian  lectures,  and  we 
would  here  note  that  those  lectures  are  all  upon  proph- 
ecy, and  are  many  of  them  by  first-class  men,  and  there- 
fore worthy  of  study.  Of  course  they  greatly  vary  in 
value  according  to  the  ability  of  the  lecturers. 

705  FABER  (George  Stanley,  B.  D.  1773—1854).  Calendar 

of  Prophecy,  or  a Dissertation  on  the  Prophecies  which 
treat  of  the  Seven  Times,  and  especially  of  the  latter 
Three  Times  and  a Half.  Three  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1828. 
7s.  6d.  12mo.  editions,  3s.  6d. 

Faber  is  one  of  the  great  rabbis  of  prophecy.  He  was  a man  of  almost 
boundless  learning  and  industry.  His  characteristics  are  said  to  have  been 
“ strong  masculine  sense,  extensive  classical  erudition,  and  a hearty  love 
of  hypothesis.”  This  last  quality,  no  doubt,  led  him  to  expound  proph- 
ecy, and  also  disqualified  him  for  doing  it  well. 

706  FADRBAIRN  (Patrick,  D.  D.)  Prophecy  : its  Distinctive 

Nature,  Special  Functions,  and  Proper  Interpretation. 
8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1856.  S.  5s.  6d. 

A standard  work  by  one  who  is  at  home  with  the 

subject. 


m 


WORKS  ON  PROPHECY. 


707  FLEMING  (Robert.  1630—1694).  The  Fulfilling  of  the 

Scripture.  Fifth  edition.  Folio.  Lond.,  1726,  os.  6d. ; 
two  vols.,  8vo.,  1801,  3s.  6d. ; two  vols.,  12mo.,  1845,  3s. 

This  we  mention  because  it  is  generally  placed  under  this  head,  but 
it  is  not  an  exposition  of  prophecy  at  all.  It  is  an  elaborate  treatise  upon 
the  fact  that  the  Scriptures  are  fulfilled,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  true. 
As  such  it  deserves  the  high  encomiums  so  freely  showered  upon  it  by 
the  eminent  divines  of  Fleming’s  own  time,  and  it  abundantly  justifies  the 
issue  of  so  many  editions. 

708  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.)  The  Messianic  Prophecies 

of  Isaiah  and  the  other  Prophets. 

These  remarks  are  contained  in  Hengstenberg’s 
Christology,  which  is  a standard  work  on  the  subject. 
(See  No.  68.) 

709  KEITH  (Alexander,  D.  D.)  Evidence  of  the  Truth  of  the 

Christian  Religion,  derived  from  the  literal  Fulfilment 
of  Prophecy  ; as  illustrated  by  the  History  of  the  Jews, 
and  by  the  Discoveries  of  recent  Travellers.  Thirty-sixth 
edition.  Thick  8vo.  1848.  S.  4s.  to  6s. 

Horne  says,  “ The  multiplied  editions  which  have 
been  required  within  a very  few  years  sufficiently  attest 
the  high  estimation  in  which  Mr.  Keith’s  work  is  deserv- 
edly held  ; ” and  we  may  add  that  the  improvements  and 
additions  have  increased  its  value,  and  that  fresh  editions 
have  shown  that  it  is  still  appreciated. 

710  NEWTON  (Thomas,  D.  D.,  Bp.  of  Bristol.  1704—1782). 

Dissertations  on  the  Prophecies  which  have  been  fulfilled 
and  are  fulfilling.  Numerous  editions.  Two  and  three 
vols.,  8vo.  Also,  one  vol.,  8vo.,  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  W.  Tegg. 

A standard  work  of  a laborious  and  learned  author  ; 
rather  laborious  reading.  The  Bishop  must  not  be 
trusted  upon  the  New  Testament  prophecy.  Theologi- 
cally his  standing  is  very  dubious. 


THE  PROPHETS — ISAIAH. 


m 


THE  PROPHETS. 

711  KITTO  (John,  D.  D.)  “ Isaiali  and  the  Prophets."  In 

Daily  Bible  Illustrations.  (See  No.  42.) 

Should  be  consulted  wherever  the  readings  touch 
upon  a passage. 

712  LOWTH  (Bishop)  and  others.  A Literal  Translation  of  the 

Prophets  from  Isaiah  to  Malachi,  with  Notes  by  Lowth, 
Blayney,  Newcome,  etc.  Five  vols.  8vo.  Lond.,  1830. 
10s.  to  15s. 

Concerning  each  of  the  five  volumes  we  refer  the  reader  to  our  notices 
under  the  separate  books. 

713  LOWTH  (William,  B.  D.,  1661—1732,  Father  of  Bp.  Lowth) 

Commentary  on  the  Prophets.  Four  vols.  4to.  Lond., 
1714. 

This  is  Lowtli’s  part  of  Patrick  (No.  51).  He  was  more  spiritual  than 
those  with  whom  he  became  associated,  which  is  not  saying  much. 

714  NOYES  (George  R.,  D.  D.)  A New  Translation  of  the  He- 

brew Prophets.  Three  vols.,  12mo.  New  York,  1849. 

We  are  hound  to  commend  this  author’s  learning,  taste,  and  candor, 
even  though  we  differ  widely  from  him.  The  reader  must  not  look  for 
savor  or  spiritual  quickening,  but  use  the  work  as  a literary  help  only. 

715  WILLIAMS  (Rowland,  D.  D.)  The  Hebrew  Prophets  dur- 

ing the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  Empires.  Translated 
afresh  from  the  Original,  with  Illustrations.  Two  vols., 
8vo.  22s.  6d.  Lond.,  Williams  & Norgate.  1866-71. 

The  author  does  not  admit  that  there  are  references  to  the  Messiah  in 
the  Prophets.  Whatever  he  may  have  written,  this  fatal  error  deprives  it 
of  value.  A man  writing  in  that  fashion  should  have  been  a rabbi  in  the 
synagogue,  and  not  a minister  among  professed  Christians. 


ISAIAH. 


716  ALEXANDER  (Joseph  Addison).  Prophecies  of  Isaiah, 
earlier  and  later.  T.  Clark.  Two  vols.  17s.  1874.  S. 
12s. 

Dr.  Hodge  says  of  the  author  : “ I regard  Dr.  Joseph 
Addison  Alexander  as  incomparably  the  greatest  man  I 


174 


ISAIAH, 


ever  knew — as  incomparably  the  greatest  man  our  Church 
has  ever  produced.”  He  wastes  no  space,  but  gives  the 
essence  of  exposition. 

717  ALEXANDER  (Joseph  Addison).  Isaiah  Translated 

and  Explained.  An  Abridgment  of  the  Preceding.  Two 
vols.  12mo.  New  York,  1858.  S.  6s. 

This  abridgment  of  the  larger  work  is  by  no  means 
a small  affair.  For  all  ordinary  purposes  it  is  volum- 
inous enough.  We  cannot  too  strongly  recommend  it. 

718  BARNES  (Albert).  Notes  on  Isaiah.  Edited  by  Dr. 

Camming.  Three  vols.  Sm.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Routledge, 
1850.  Cobbin’s  Edition,  two  vols.,  1852.  S.  4s.  6d. 

A good  popular  exposition,  though  not  the  most 
learned. 

719  BIRKS  (T.  R.,  M.  A.)  Commentary  on  Isaiah,  and  a revised 

Translation.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1871.  S.  6s. 
Written  for  the  Speaker’s  Commentary,  and,  though  not  inserted 
therein,  it  strikes  us  as  being  far  superior  to  that  work.  It  is  a great  trea- 
sure to  the  student  of  this  much  neglected  prophet. 

720  CALVIN  (John).  Commentarie  on  Isaiah  Translated  by 

C.  Cotton.  Folio.  Loud.,  1609.  9s. 

The  translation  of  the  Calvin  Translation  Society  will  be  better. 

721  CHEYNE  (T.  K.,  M.  A.)  The  Book  of  Isaiah  chronologic- 

ally arranged.  An  Amended  Version.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 
Lond.,  ’Macmillan  & Co.  1870. 

We  do  not  as  a rule  believe  in  these  re-arrangements;  the  book  of 
Isaiah  is  best  as  we  have  it.  The  tone  of  the  interpretation  in  this  in- 
stance is  not  such  as  we  can  delight  in ; what  the  evangelical  teacher  has 
a right  to  expect  is  totally  absent.  The  work  is  of  the  Broad  School ; the 
notes  are,  however,  learned  and  somewhat  suggestive. 

722  Notes  and  Criticisms  on  the  Hebrew  Text  of  Isaiah. 

Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co. 

The  Westminster  Review  speaks  of  it  as  “ a piece  of  scholarly  work, 
very  carefully  and  considerately  done.”  It  may  be  so. 

723  COWLES  ( Henry,  D.  D.)  Isaiah,  with  Notes.  12mo. 

New  York,  D.  Appleton  & Co.  1869.  S.  6s.  6d. 

Cowles  writes  more  popularly  than  Alexander,  and, 
though  he  is  not  so  profound  an  authority,  we  have  read 
him  with  pleasure. 


ISAIAH. 


175 


724  DAY  (William).  An  Exposition  of  tlie  Book  of  Isaiali. 

Folio.  1854.  12s.  6d.  to  14s. 

Day  does  not  throw  much  light  upon  the  text : he  says  he  wrote  for  his 
children,  and  certainly  he  is  childish  enough. 

725  DELITZSCH  (Franz.)  Biblical  Commentary  on  Isaiah. 

Two  vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T Clark.  1862. 

“ The  author  has  long  been  honorably  distinguished  among  the  scholars 
of  Germany.  He  occupies,  indeed,  a position  always  peculiar  to  himself; 
for,  whilst  his  attainments  in  Hebrew  philology  and  Talmudical  lore  are 
of  the  highest  order,  he  unites  with  these  a genuine  appreciation  of  evan- 
gelical truth  and  godliness.”  So  says  the  Literary  Churchman.  For  our 
own  part,  we  are  not  enraptured  with  Delitzsch. 

726  EWALD  (H.)  The  Prophet  Isaiah.  Chapters  I.— XXXIII. 

From  the  German.  By  Octavius  Glover.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 
Lond.,  Bell  & Sons.  1869. 

Decidedly  sceptical ; but  yet  it  may  be  useful  as  leading  the  reader  to 
appreciate  the  poetic  beauty  of  the  book.  Question  if  the  good  to  be  gained 
equals  the  risk  incurred.  Our  verdict  is  to  the  contrary. 

727  FRASER  (Alexander).  Paraphrase  with  Notes.  8vo. 

Edinb.,  1800.  2s. 

Of  very  small  value. 

728  GALLOWAY  (William  Brown,  M.  A.)  Isaiah’s  Testimony 

for  Jesus.  A Series  of  Discourses.  8vo.  14s.  Lond.,  G. 
Bell  & Sons.  1864.  S.  2s.  to  4s. 

A congregation  which  would  listen  to  such  lectures  as  these  must  be 
a very  select  one  indeed.  The  writer  goes  most  thoroughly  and  learnedly 
into  his  subject. 

729  HENDERSON  (Ebenezer,  D.  D.)  Isaiah,  translated  from 

the  Hebrew  ; with  a Commentary.  8vo.  1840.  Second 
and  best  edition.  1857.  S.  8s.  6d.  Scarce  (pub.  at  16s.). 
The  author  has  given  no  doctrinal  or  practical  observations,  as  he  con- 
ceived that  others  had  furnished  these  in  abundance ; he  has  confined 
himself  to  eliciting  the  real  meaning  of  the  words,  and  has  thereby  rendered 
great  service  to  all  expositors  who  have  wit  enough  to  make  use  of  his 
critical  assistance.  To  the  less  instructed  reader,  Dr.  Henderson’s  work 
will  appear  to  be  dull  and  savorless ; but  to  those  who  only  need  to  have 
the  language  translated,  and  are  able  to  supply  reflections  for  themselves, 
it  will  be  of  much  service. 

730  GOVETT  (R.  Junior,  M.  A.)  Isaiali  Unfulfilled.  Exposi- 

tion, with  new  Version  and  Critical  Notes.  8vo.  Lond., 
1841.  S.  2s.  6d. 

We  have  not  met  with  this  publication. 


176 


ISAIAH. 


731  JENOUR  (Alered,  M.  A.)  Tlie  Book  of  Isaiah,  translated, 

with  Notes  and  Practical  Remarks.  Two  vols.,  8vo. 
Lond.,  1830.  3s. 

This  appears  to  us  to  be  a faithful  translation ; the  commentary  and 
practical  reflections  are  instructive  and  gracious. 

732  KEITH  (Alexander,  A.  M.)  Isaiah  as  it  is : or  Judah  and 

Jerusalem  the  subjects  of  Isaiah’s  prophesying.  Cr.  8vo. 
Edinb.,  1850.  3s. 

The  student  will  consult  with  benefit  this  valuable  contribution  to  the 
explanation  of  a most  important,  but  neglected  book. 

733  KELLY  (William).  Lectures  on  Isaiah.  2s.  6d.  Lond., 

G.  Morrish.  1871. 

This  eminent  divine  of  The  Brethren  school  sometimes  expounds  ably, 
but  with  a twist  towards  the  peculiar  dogmas  of  his  party. 

734  LOWTH  (Robert,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  Bishop  of  London.  1710— 

1787).  Isaiah,  Translation  with  Notes.  8vo.  Numerous 
editions,  S.  2s.  ; a modern  one,  8vo.,  4s.  6d.  Lond.,  W. 
Tegg.  See  No.  712. 

Smith’s  Dictionary  remarks  that  Bp.  Lowth’s  incessant  correction  of 
the  Hebrew  text  is  constantly  to  be  mistrusted.  This  seriously  diminishes 
Lowth’s  value,  but  this  is  a grand  work  notwithstanding. 

735  LYTH  (John,  D.  D.)  Homiletical  Treasury.  12mo.  Is. 

Lond.,  Elliot  Stock.  1868. 

This  should  have  been  to  the  preacher  a book  of  the  utmost  value,  for 
it  consists  wholly  of  outlines  and  hints  fbr  sermons,  but  these  are  fre- 
quently poor  and  commonplace.  The  design  is  superlatively  practical,  and 
had  the  execution  been  better  we  should  have  rejoiced  in  it. 

736  MACCULLOCH  (Robert,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  Isaiah.  Four 

vols.  8vo.  Lond.,  1791 — 1805.  12s.  to  18s. 

In  these  days  we  need  condensation.  This  author  would  have  been  far 
more  valued  if  he  had  compressed  his  matter  into  one  volume.  He  is  good, 
but  verbose.  Some  authors  toil  not,  but  they  spin ; Maccullooh  both  toils 
and  spins. 

737  MACLACHLAN  (Mrs.,  of  Maclachlan).  Notes  on  the  unful- 

filled Prophecies  of  Isaiah.  [Anon.]  8vo.  8s.  6d.  Lond., 
Nisbet.  1868. 

This  authoress  treats  Isaiah  as  a Jewish  book  only,  and  refers  all  the 
prophecies  to  that  nation.  We  do  not  agree  with  her  fundamental  prin- 
ciple. 


ISAIAH. 


m 


738  MANCHESTER  (George  Montague,  Duke  of).  Short 

Notes  on  Isaiah,  chap.  V. — XII.  8vo.  1852.  2s. 

We  confess  that  we  cannot  enjoy  the  very  singular  style  of  the  Duke’s 
prelections,  but  there  are  some  who  set  great  store  by  them.  We  wonder 
why. 

739  NOYES  (G.  R.)  See  No.  714. 

740  STOCK  (Joseph,  M.  A.,  Bishop  of  Killalla).  Isaiah  in 

Hebrew  and  English.  With  Notes.  4to.  1803.  4s. 

The  notes  are  few,  but  are  said  by  the  British  Critic  to  be  “ uncom- 
monly valuable  for  their  depth  and  acuteness.”  We  should  not  have 
thought  so.  Stock  alters  the  renderings  of  Lowth,  but  seldom  improves 
then}.  We  judge  him  to  be  over  estimated. 

741  SMITH  (R.  Payne,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury).  The 

Authenticity  and  Messianic  Interpretation  of  the  Prophe- 
cies of  Isaiah  Vindicated,  in  Sermons  before  the  University 
of  Oxford.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Oxf.  and  Lond.,  J.  H.  & J. 
Parker.  1862.  S.  5s.  6d. 

A work  which  would  be  invaluable  in  a discussion  with  Jews.  It  meets 
their  objections,  and  also  those  advanced  by  neologians,  and  by  the  writers 
of  Essays  and  Reviews. 

742  VERNEY  (Lady).  Practical  Thoughts  on  the  First  Forty 

Chapters  of  Isaiah.  8vo.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1858.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Some  sensible  spiritual  hints  will  be  found  in  these  remarks.  As  an 
exposition  it  is  one  of  the  least. 

743  WHISH  (J.  C.,  M.  A.)  A Paraphrase  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah, 

with  Notes.  12mo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Seeley  & Co.  1862. 
S.  Is.  3d.  » 

Somewhat  helpful.  The  paraphrasing  is  not  prolix,  and  it  does,  as  a 
rule,  aid  the  reader  in  getting  at  the  literal  sense.  With  the  spiritual 
teaching  Mr.  Whish  has  not  intermeddled. 

744  WHITE  (Samuel,  M.  A.  Commentary  on  Isaiah,  wherein 

the  literal  sense  is  briefly  explained.  4to.  Lond.,  1709. 
2s.  6d. 

This  author  keeps  to  the  literal  sense  and  is  very  severe  upon  spiritual- 
izes of  whose  vagaries  he  gives  specimens.  In  aiming  at  one  excellence 
he  misses  others,  and  fails  to  see  Christ  where  he  certainly  is,  thus  render- 
ing his  remarks  less  valuable  to  the  Christian  mind. 

8* 


178 


PARTS  OF  ISAIAH. 


PARTS  OF  ISAIAH. 

[There  are  many  works  upon  separate  chapters  of  this  book,  but  it  does 
not  fall  in  with  our  plan  to  go  so  much  into  detail  as  to  enumerate  them 
all.  We  thought  it  would  be  useful  to  our  readers  if  we  mentioned  a 
few.] 

745  MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.  D.)  “Comfort  ye,  Comfort  ye : ” 
God’s  words  of  comfort  addressed  to  his  Church  in  the 
last  twenty-seven  chapters  of  Isaiah.  Cr.  8vo.  5s. 
Lond.,  Nisbet.  1872. 

Dr.  Macduff  translates  into  popular  language  the  teachings  of  great  ex- 
positors, and  does  it  to  perfection.  For  an  hour’s  pleasant  and  holy  read- 
ing commend  us  to  Dr.  Macduff. 

74G  CALVERT  (Thomas).  Mel  Coeli,  Medulla  Evangelii:  or 
The  Prophet  Isaiah’s  Crucifix.  An  Exposition  of  the  Fifty- 
third  chapter  of  Isaiah.  4to.  1867.  5s.  to  7s.  6d. 

Precious  and  practical.  Just  what  the  title  would 
lead  us  to  expect — marrow  and  fatness  ; honey  from  the 
Rock,  Christ  Jesus. 

747  DURHAM  (James).  Christ  Crucified  : or  the  Marrow  of 

the  Gospel,  holden  forth  in  Seventy-two  Sermons  on 
Isaiah  liii.  Editions,  folio,  4to.  and  8vo.  3s.  to  5s. 

This  is  marrow  indeed.  We  need  say  no  more  : Dur- 
ham is  a prince  among  spiritual  expositors. 

748  MACDONOGH  (T.  M.)  Messiah  as  revealed  in  Isaiah  liii. 

Founded  upon  Manton  (749).  12mo.  Lond.,  1858.  Is.  6d. 
This  is  a serving  up  of  the  next  work  in  the  form  of  lectures.  We  do 
not  admire  abridgments,  aad  especially  those  which  make  alterations  and 
additions  ; still  it  is  likely  that  many  have  read  Macdonogh’s  Manton  who 
might  never  have  fallen  in  with  Manton’s  Manton. 

749  MANTON  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  A Practical  Exposition  on  the 

whole  Fifty-third  Chapter  of  Isaiah.  8vo.  Lond.,  1703. 
Also  in  Works,  Vol.  III.  Nichol’s  Puritan  Series. 

Manton  needs  no  praise  from  us.  Whatever  he  does 
is  done  in  a style  worthy  of  a chief  among  theologians. 
He  is,  however,  seldom  too  brief,  and  his  own  bulk  hinders 
his  being  read.  Preachers  of  long  sermons  should  take 
a hint  from  this. 


JEREMIAH  AND  LAMENTATIONS. 


179 


750  MARGOLIOUTH  (Moses,  B.  A.)  Six  Lectures  on  Isaiah  liii., 

etc.  8 vo.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1846.  2s. 

Well  worth  a careful  reading. 

751  STEWART  (James  Haldane,  M.  A.)  Lectures  upon 

Isaiah  LV.  12ino.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1846.  Is.  6d. 

Nine  sweet  evangelical  discourses,  in  a lively,  impressive  style. 


JEREMIAH  AND  LAMENTATIONS. 

[We  would  call  special  attention  to  the  volume  of  the  Speaker’s  Commen- 
tary upon  this  Book.  It  is  by  Dr.  Payne  Smith,  Dean  of  Canterbury, 
and  deserves  much  praise.] 

752  BLAYNEY  (Benjamin,  D.  D.  Died  1801).  Jeremiah  and 

Lamentations.  New  Translation,  with  Notes.  8vo.  Lond., 
1836.  2s.  6d.  (See  No.  712.) 

Blayney  belonged  to  a past  school  of  clever  men,  too  apt  to  suggest  new 
readings,  and  more  able  to  appreciate  literary  beauties  than  spiritual  teach- 
ings. He  was  a zealous  follower  of  Lowth,  but  he  lacked  the  fine  taste 
and  poetic  genius  of  his  master. 

753  BROUGHTON  (Hugh).  The  Lamentations  of  Jeremy 

translated.  With  Explications.  4vo.  1608. 
Incomprehensible.  One  of  Broughton’s  wilder  pieces.  It  may  as  well 
die. 

754  HULL  (John,  D.  D.)  Exposition  upon  part  of  Lamenta- 

tions. 4to.  Lond.,  1618.  7s.  6d. 

Full  of  quaintuesses.  Marrowy  throughout. 

755  KEIL  (K.  F.  1754 — 1818).  Commentary  on  Jeremiah  and 

Lamentations.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T. 
Clark.  1874. 

We  have  already  indicated  the  direction  in  which  Keil  is  serviceable. 
For  exact  interpretation  he  is  esteemed,  but  he  is  too  cold  and  formal  ever 
to  be  a favorite. 

756  LANGE’S  COMMENTARY.  Jeremiah  and  Lamenta- 

tions. By  Dr.  C.  W.  Nagelsbacli.  One  vol.,  Imp.  8vo. 
21s.  Edinb.,  T.  Clark.  1871. 

“ Whoever  becomes  possessed  of  this  great  work  will 
have,  in  a comprehensive  form,  the  results  of  all  ancient 


180 


EZEKIEL. 


and  modern  exegesis,  with  an  apparatus  criticus  of  sur- 
prising copiousness.” — British  Quarterly  Review. 

757  LOWTH  (William,  M.  A.)  A Commentary  on  Jeremiah 

and  Lamentations.  4to.  Lond.,  1718.  Is.  Gd.  (See  Nos. 
51  and  713.) 

This  forms  a part  of  what  is  known  as  Bp.  Patrick’s  Commentary. 
Orme  says  that  Lowth  is  “ one  of  the  most  judicious  commentators  on  the 
prophets,  and  he  never  prophesies  himself.”  We  wish  we  could  say  this 
of  all  writers  on  prophetic  subjects. 

758  SMITH  (Thornley).  The  Prophet  of  Sorrow  : or  Life  and 

Times  of  Jeremiah.  Cr.  8vo.  4s.  6d.  Edinb.,  Olipliant. 
1875. 

Not  a commentary ; but  as  it  casts  light  on  the  character  and  times  of 
the  prophet  it  deserves  a place  here. 

759  SWIFT  (Daniel).  Zion’s  sufferings:  an  Exposition  of 

Lamentations  V.  12mo.  Lond.,  1654.  4s. 

Strong,  rough,  coarse.  Excessively  rare. 

760  UDALL  (John).  A Commentarie  upon  the  Lamentations  of 

Jeremy.  [Anon.]  4to.  Lond.,  1599.  4s.  or  5s. 

In  this  extremely  rare  work  the  author  has  labored  after  brevity,  and 
has  given  the  abridgment  of  many  discourses ; hence,  to  those  who  can 
procure,  it,  it  is  all  the  more  useful. 


EZEKIEL. 

761  ALLEINE  (William).  The  nine  last  Chapters  of  Ezekiel 

unfolded.  8vo.  1679.  5s.  6d. 

Very  rare  ; will  interest  interpreters  of  prophecy. 

762  COWLES  (Henry,  D.  D.)  Ezekiel  and  Daniel : with  Notes, 

Critical,  Explanatory,  and  Practical.  Thick  cr.  8vo. 
New  York,  D.  Appleton  & Co.  1867.  S.  6s.  6d. 

In  his  own  way  this  author  is  one  of  the  most  in- 
structive of  American  writers  ; he  is  clear  and  definite, 
and  leaves  his  meaning  impressed  upon  the  mind.  His 
scholarship  is  respectable. 

763  FAIRBAIRN  (Patrick,  D.  D.  Ezekiel,  Exposition;  with 

New  Translation.  8vo.  10.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 
1851. 

This  exposition  has  passed  through  three  editions, 


EZEKIEL, 


181 


and  has  gained  for  its  author  a high  place  among  eluci- 
dators  of  difficult  parts  of  Scripture.  Dr.  Fairbairn  has 
a cool  judgment  and  a warm  heart ; he  has  cast  much 
light  upon  Ezekiel’s  wheels,  and  has  evidently  felt  the 
touch  of  the  live  coal,  which  is  better  still. 

764  GREENHILL  (William,  M.  A.  1591—1677).  Exposition 

of  Ezekiel.  Five  vols.  4to.  1645 — 1667.  Reprinted  in  a 
thick  imp.  8vo.  volume,  1827,  and  now  issued  in  Nichol’s 
Commentaries.  10s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1868. 

We  always  get  something  out  of  Greenhill  whenever 
we  refer  to  him.  He  had  not,  of  course,  the  critical 
skill  of  the  present  day,  but  his  spiritual  insight  was 
keen.  He  rather  commented  on  a passage  than  ex- 
pounded it. 

765  GUTHRIE  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  The  Gospel  in  Ezekiel.  Cr. 

8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Daldy  & Isbister.  1864. 

Very  little  of  Ezekiel,  and  a great  many  of  those  flowers  of  eloquence 
which  rendered  Dr.  Guthrie  so  famous.  We  can  hardly  regard  it  as  an 
exposition.  It  only  dwells  upon  the  latter  part  of  the  36th  chapter. 

766  HENDERSON  (Ebenezer,  D.  D.)  Ezekiel.  With  Com- 

mentary. 8vo.  Lond.,  Hamilton.  1855.  5s. 

Valuable  condensed  notes. 

767  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.  D.)  The  Prophecies  of 

Ezekiel  elucidated.  Demy  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T. 
Clark.  1869. 

We  have  frequently  characterized  this  author’s  writings.  They  are 
clear,  cold,  and  dry,  like  a fine  moonlight  night  in  the  middle  of  winter. 
A man  needs  a peculiar  mind  to  enjoy  Hengstenberg ; but  all  educated 
students  can  profit  by  him. 

768  KEIL  (K.  F.)  Ezekiel  [Two  vols.,  in  preparation].  Edinb., 

T.  Clark. 

769  LANGE.  Commentaries  on  Ezekiel  and  other  Books  of 

Old  Testament.  [In  preparation.]  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 

770  NEWCOME  (William,  D.  D.,  Abp.  of  Armagh.  1729 — 

1800).  Improved  version,  metrical  arrangement,  and  ex- 
planation. 4to.  Dublin,  1728.  8vo.  Lond.,  1836,  etc. 
(See  Lowtli  and  others,  No.  712). 

Dr.  Fairbairn  says  ; — u The  notes  are  of  a very  brief  description,  chiefly 


182 


DANIEL. 


explanatory  of  the  meanings  given  in  the  translation ; and  both  the  trans- 
lation and  the  notes  proceed  to  a large  extent  on  the  vicious  principle,  very 
prevalent  at  the  time,  of  getting  rid  of  difficulties  in  the  sense  by  proposed 
emendations  of  the  text.”  Yet  Newcome  showed  both  learning  and  dili- 
gence in  this  improved  version. 


DANIEL. 

771  AMNER  (R.)  Essay  towards  interpretation.  8vo.  Lond., 

1776. 

Written  on  the  absurd  hypothesis  that  the  prophecies  were  all  fulfilled 
before  the  death  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes. 

772  AUBERLEN  (Carl  August,  Ph.  D.)  The  Prophecies  of 

Daniel  and  the  Revelation,  by  C.  A.  A.  Translated  by 
Adolphe  Sapliir.  8vo.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1857.  5s. 
Not  a textual  commentary,  hut  a treatise  upon  the  mysterious  prophe- 
cies. Auberlen’s  spirit  is  reverential  and  his  views  are  evangelical,  or  we  ■ 
should  not  have  found  Mr.  Saphir  translating  it.  He  acknowledges  his 
indebtedness  to  Roos,  No.  800.  We  must  leave  the  interpretations  to  be 
judged  by  those  who  are  learned  in  such  subjects.' 

773  BARNES  (Albert).  Notes.  Blackie’s  edition.  Two 

vols.,  post  8vo.  7s.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Dr.  Wardlaw  said  of  this  work  : — “ I have  examined 
the  ‘ Notes 9 of  the  Rev.  Albert  Barnes  on  a considerable 
variety  of  testing  passages  ; and,  so  far  as  my  examina- 
tion has  gone,  I feel  confident  in  pronouncing  them  to 
be  characterized,  in  no  ordinary  degree,  by  discrimina- 
tive judgment,  sound  theology,  unostentatious  learning, 
practical  wisdom,  and  evangelical  piety.” 

774  BIRKS  (T.  R.,  M.  A.)  Exposition  of  the  first  two  Visions  of 

Daniel.  F’cap.  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1845.  S.2s.  6d. 

775  BIRKS  (T.  R.,  M.  A.)  The  Two  Later  Visions  of  Daniel 

historically  explained.  F’cap  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  Seeley. 
1846. 

We  must  leave  judgmeut  upon  this  work  and  the  preceding  one  to 
those  skilled  in  prophetic  interpretation. 


DANIEL. 


183 


776  BRIGHTMAN  (Thomas.  Puritan.  1557—1607).  A most 

comfortable  Exposition  of  the  last  and  most  difficult  part 
of  the  Propliecie  of  Daniel,  from  the  26th  verse  of  the 
11th  Chapter  to  the  end  of  the  12th  Chapter,  wherein  the 
restoring  of  the  Jewes  and  their  calling  to  the  faith  of 
Christ  after  the  utter  overthrow  of  their  three  last  enemies 
is  set  forth  in  lively  colors.  4to.  Lond.,  1644. 

This  exposition  and  the  author’s  commentary  on  Canticles  are  appended 
to  his  work  on  Revelation,  and  do  not  appear  to  have  been  published 
separately.  In  his  title-page  Brightman  is  called  a bright  and  worthy  man, 
and  in  the  preface  we  are  told  that  “ he  shined  every  way  and  was  a Bright- 
man indeed.”  His  work  is  rather  a curiosity  than  a treasure. 

777  BROUGHTON  (Hugh.  1549—1612).  Daniel’s  Chaldee  Vis- 

ions. Works.  Folio.  Lond.,  1662. 

This  author  was  pedantic  and  eccentric,  but  yet  a man  of  real  learning. 
His  works  have  almost  disappeared.  In  his  own  day  some  considered 
him  a sage  and  others  a quack.  He  was  a little  of  both. 

778  CALVIN  (John).  Commentaries  upon  Daniel.  4to. 

Lond.,  John  Day.  1570.  10s. 

t Also  in  Calvin’s  complete  works. 

779  COLEMAN  (Thomas).  Decision,  exemplified  in  Daniel. 

8vo.  Lond.,  1858. 

This  is  by  the  author  of  “ Memorials  of  Independent  Churches.”  It  is 
intended  for  children  and  is  suitable  for  them. 

780  COWLES  (Henry,  D.  D.)  See  under  Ezekiel,  No.  762. 

781  DANIEL : Statesman  and  Prophet.  [Anon.]  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

Lond.,  Religious  Tract  Society.  [N.  D.] 

A valuable  popular  addition  to  the  literature  of  the  book  of  Daniel. 
Objections  to  its  authenticity  and  inspiration  are  met,  and  the  assaults  of 
infidels  are  made  to  bring  out  the  evidences  of  Divine  authority  with  all 
the  greater  clearness.  We  are  delighted  with  the  volume,  which  is  beauti- 
fully got  up.  Every  student  and  minister  should  have  a copy. 

782  DARBY  (John  Nelson).  Studies.  Is.  Lond.,  W.  H. 

Broom. 

The  name  of  the  writer  sufficiently  indicates  the  character  of  the  book. 

783  DESPREZ  (Philip  S.,  B.  D.)  Daniel ; or,  the  Apocalypse  of 

the  Old  Testament.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Williams  & Nor- 
gate.  1865. 

This  work  is  of  the  Esgays  and  Reviews  school.  The  author  cannot  sec 
the  Messiah  in  Daniel.  It  is  worse  than  useless. 


184 


DANIEL. 


784  ELLIOTT  (E.  B.)  See  under  Revelation. 

785  FRERE  (James  Hatley,  Esq.)  A Combined  View  of  tlie 

Prophecies  of  Daniel,  Ezra,  and  St.  John.  8vo.  Lond., 
1826.  S.  2s.  6d. 

This  has  been  esteemed  by  many  in  its  day,  but  we  do  not  recommend 
its  purchase. 

786  GAUSSEN  (S.  R.  Louis).  Daniel,  explained  for  Young 

Persons.  Two  vols.  8vo.  9s.  Lond.,  J.  & C.  Mozley. 
1874. 

This  is  a work  for  children  only.  We  hope  it  will  not 
set  our  Sunday  School  teachers  explaining  to  their  little 
ones  the  image  and  its  toes,  the  he-goat,  and  all  the 
other  marvels.  If  they  do  attempt  it  we  wish  them  as 
well  through  their  task  as  Professor  Gaussen. 

787  HARRISON  (Benjamin,  M.  A.,  Archdeacon  of  Maidstone). 

Prophetic  Outlines  of  the  Christian  Church  and  the  Anti- 
christian Power,  as  traced  in  the  Visions  of  Daniel  and  St.  4 
John.  [Warburtonian  Lectures.)  8vo.  1849.  3s. 

We  like  the  manner  of  this  hook.  The  author  has 
been  content  throughout  to  trace  the  true  outline  of  in- 
terpretation without  entering  on  a detailed  examination 
of  counter  theories  ; and  he  has  done  this  in  the  spirit 
of  Bishop  Ridley,  who  said  upon  a kindred  subject, 

“ Sir,  in  these  matters  I am  so  fearful  that  I dare  not 
speak  further  than  the  very  text  doth,  as  it  were,  lead 
me  by  the  hand.” 

788  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.)  Dissertations  on  the  Genuine- 

ness of  Daniel  and  the  Integrity  of  Zechariah.  8vo.  12s. 
Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1848.  S.  5s.  6d. 

Much  valuable  matter  is  brought  out  by  the  discussion ; but  few  of  us 
have  time  to  go  into  it,  or  any  need  to  do  so ; for  we  are  fully  persuaded 
of  the  integrity  of  all  the  prophets,  and  of  their  books  too. 

789  HUIT  (Ephraim.  Puritan).  The  whole  Prophecie  of  Dan- 

iel Explained.  4to.  Lond,,  1643.  5s.  6d. 

Huit’s  short  doctrinal  summaries  of  the  verses  will  bring  useful  sub- 
jects before  the  preacher’s  mind ; otherwise  Huit  is  not  very  remarkable. 


DANIEL. 


185 


790  IRVING  (Edward,  M.  A.  1792—1834).  Babylon  and  Infi- 

delity foredoomed  of  God  ; A Discourse  on  Daniel  and  the 
Apocalypse.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  Glasg.,  1826 ; also  one 
vol.,  8vo.  3s.  6d. 

More  of  rolling  sound  than  anything  else. 

791  KEIL  (K.  F.)  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel.  8vo. 

10s.  Cd.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1872. 

“We  have  just  had  occasion  to  make  ourselves  ac- 
quainted with  Keiks  book  on  Daniel,  and  we  can  speak 
of  it  in  very  high  terms.  It  is  marked  by  great  erudi- 
tion, rare  accuracy,  and  much  spiritual  thoughtfulness.” 
— Evangelical  Magazine. 

792  KELLY  (William).  Notes.  12mo.  Is.  6d.,  Lond.,  Morrisli. 

1870. 

It  needs  minds  of  a peculiar  organization  to  enjoy  Plymouth  writings. 
They  abound  in  peculiar  phraseology,  which  only  the  initiated  can  under- 
stand. We  are  sorry  to  see  such  a mind  as  Mr.  Kelly’s  so  narrowed  to 
party  bounds. 

793  KNOX  (J.)  Reflections  on  Daniel.  Small  8vo.  1849. 

This  book  is  unknown  to  us. 

794  MANCHESTER  (George  Montague,  Duke  of).  The 

Times  of  Daniel,  Chronological  and  Prophetical.  8vo. 
Lond.,  1845.  3s. 

This  work  has  received  the  most  enthusiastic  praise  from  German 
writers,  who  dwell  with  pleasure  upon  his  being  “ erudite  and  illustrious.” 
The  duke’s  writing  is  certainly  sui  generis.  He  is  by  no  means  a favorite 
author  with  us. 

795  MILES  (Charles  Popham,  B.  A.)  Lectures,  with  Notes. 

[Chap.  I — VII].  Two  vols.  12mo.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1840- 
41.  3s.  6d. 

Commendable  sermons  and  good  notes. 

796  MORE  (Henry,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.  1614—1687).  A Plain  and 

Continued  Exposition  of  the  several  Prophecies  of  Daniel. 
4to.  Lond.,  1681.  2s.  6d. 

If  a man  had  no  more  than  More  on  Daniel  he  would  certainly  long  for 
more,  and  need  a work  more  spiritual  and  more  suggestive. 

797  NEWTON  (Sir  Isaac,  F.  R.  S.  1642 — 1727).  Observations 

on  Daniel  and  the  Apocalypse.  4to.  Lond.,  1733;  8vo., 
1831.  2s.  to  3s. 

The  author’s  name  will  always  keep  this  book  in  repute.  The  spiritual 
student  will  not  glean  much  from  it.  Sir  Isaac’s  tamo  does  not  rest  on  his 


18G 


DANIEL. 


expositions.  The  following  extract  we  cannot  forbear  inserting  in  this 
place  The  folly  of  interpreters  has  been,  to  foretell  times  and  things  by 
this  prophecy  [the  Apocalypse],  as  if  God  designed  to  make  them  prophets. 
By  this  rashness  they  have  not  only  exposed  themselves,  but  brought  the 
prophecy  also  into  contempt.  The  design  of  God  was  much  otherwise. 
He  gave  this  and  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  not  to  gratify  men’s 
curiosities,  by  enabling  them  to  foreknow  things,  but  that  after  they  were 
fulfilled  they  might  be  interpreted  by  the  event ; and  his  own  providence, 
not  the  interpreter’s  wisdom,  be  then  manifested  thereby  to  the  world.” 

798  PARKER  (Thomas.  Puritan.  Died  1677).  Daniel  ex- 

pounded. 4to.  Lond,.  1646. 

This  learned  book  is  enough  to  perplex  and  distract  any  ordinary  mor- 
tal, but  probably  Dr.  Cumming  and  brethren  of  his  school  would  revel  in 
it.  We  had  sooner  read  a table  of  logarithms. 

799  PUSEY  (Edward  Bouverie,  D.  D.  Regius  Professor  of 

Hebrew).  Daniel  the  Prophet.  Nine  Lectures.  8vo.  10s. 
6d.  Lond.,  J.  Parker  & Co.  1869. 

To  Dr.  Pusey’s  work  on  Daniel  all  subsequent  writers 
must  be  deeply  indebted,  however  much  they  may  differ 
from  him  in  other  departments  of  theological  study. 

800  ROOS  (Magnus  Frederick.  1727 — 1803).  Exposition  of 

such  of  the  Prophecies  of  Daniel  as  receive  their  accom- 
plishment under  the  New  Testament.  Translated  by  E. 
Henderson.  8vo.  Edinb.,  1811.  Is.  6d.  and  2s. 

Dr.  Henderson  gently  chides  those  who  are  not  suf- 
ficiently intent  upon  prophetical  interpretation.  There 
would  be  fewer  of  such  delinquents  if  expositors  were 
more  reasonable.  Roos,  however,  is  dull  to  a dreadful 
degree  : we  should  say  that  nobody  ever  read  him  through, 
except  his  translator.  He  is  very  devout,  and  this  is 
the  saving  point  about  his  book.  We  cannot  tell  whether 
the  views  of  Roos  are  correct  or  not,  for  we  cannot  keep 
awake  while  reading  him.  As  far  as  we  have  gone  we 
have  seen  some  reason  to  question. 

801  RULE  (William  Harris,  D.  D.)  Historical  Exposition  of 

Daniel.  Cr.  8vo.  Lond.,  Seeley  & Co.  1869.  3s. 

A notably  interesting  exposition,  bringing  historical 


DANIEL. 


187 


facts  and  memorials  to  bear  upon  the  prophecy.  It  is 
not  merely  readable,  but  attractive. 

802  STRONG  (Leonard).  Lectures.  12mo.  2s.  Lond.,  Yapp. 

1871. 

Notes  of  instructive  lectures. 

803  STUART  (Moses).  A Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel. 

8vo.  Boston,  U.  S.  1850.  S.  9s.  6d. 

Stuart  gives  quite  an  independent  interpretation,  and  fails  to  see  tho 
Pope  and  his  Cardinals  in  Daniel,  for  which  we  like  him  all  the  better. 
We  do  not  accept  his  conclusions,  but  he  is  always  worthy  of  respect. 

804  TREGELLES  (S.  Prideaux,  LL.  D.)  Remarks  on  the  Pro- 

phetic Visions  of  Daniel.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Bagsters. 
1852. 

Tregelles  is  deservedly  regarded  as  a great  authority  upon  prophetical 
subjects. 

805  WELLS  (Edward,  D.  D.)  Daniel  explained.  4to.  Lond., 

1716.  Is.  6d. 

This  is  a different  work  to  that  mentioned  in  number  62.  It  is  of  no 
great  value. 

806  WILLET  (Andrew).  Hexapla  in  Danielem.  Folio.  1610. 

8s.  6d. 

Dr.  Williams  says  that  this  is  a work  of  much  information,  as  it  con- 
tains the  “ opinions  of  many  authors  on  each  point  of  difficulty.'  ’ He  adds 
that  in  none  of  his  expositions  does  Willet  “ discover  more  skill  and  judg- 
ment than  in  the  present  work.” 

807  WILSON  (Joseph,  A.  M.)  Horae  Propheticae  ; or  Disserta- 

tion on  the  Book  of  Daniel.  8vo.  Oundle,  1824.  2s. 

We  consider  this  to  be  of  more  than  average  worth. 

808  WINTLE  (Thomas,  B.  D.  1737—1814).  Daniel,  an  Im- 

proved Version,  with  Notes.  4to.  Oxf.,  1792  ; 8vo., 
Lond.,  1836.  2s.  (See  No.  712.) 

Learned  notes,  mainly  philological,  with  a translation  on  the  plan  of 
Lowth. 

809  WODROW  (Robert).  Destiny  of  Israel,  as  unfolded  in  the 

Eighth  and  succeeding  Chapters  of  Daniel.  12mo.  Black- 
ie  & Son.  1844.  Is.  6d. 

This  devout  author  follows  the  system  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton  and  Bishop 
Newton.  His  calculations  as  to  the  year  1843  were  disproved  by  history. 

810  WOOD  (William,  A.  M.)  Lectures  on  the  first  Seven  Chap- 

ters of  Daniel.  12mo.  Lond.,  Cleaver.  1847.  Is.  6d. 
Plain  sermons  of  no  great  expository  value. 


188 


MINOR  PROPHETS. 


MINOR  PROPHETS. 

811  BARLEE  (Edward).  Explanatory  Version  of  the  Minor 

Prophets.  12mo.  Lond.,  Pickering.  1839.  Is.  6d. 

One  of  the  best  paraphrases  we  have  ever  met  with. 

812  COWLES  (Henry,  D.  D.)  The  Minor  Prophets,  with  Notes. 

Cr.  8vo.  New  York,  D.  Appleton  & Co.  1867.  S.  7s. 

“ This  work  is  designed  for  both  pastor  and  people.  It  embodies  the 
results  of  much  research,  and  elucidate*  the  text  of  sacred  Scripture  with 
admirable  force  and  simplicity.” — New  York  Christian  Intelligencer. 

813  DANiEUS,  or  DANEAU  (Lambert.  Eminent  French  Prot- 

estant Divine.  1530—1596).  A fruitfull  Commentarie 
upon  the  Twelve  Small  Prophets.  Translated  by  John 
Stock  wood,  Minister  at  Tunbridge.  4to.  Lond.,  1594. 

A translation  of  a work  famous  in  its  day,  but  of  small  service  now. 

814  HENDERSON  (Ebenezer,  D.  D.)  The  Twelve  Minor 

Prophets.  Large  8vo.  Lond.,  Hamilton  & Co.  1845. 
Scarce.  S.  10s. 

A learned  critical  work,  not  spiritually  or  doctrinally  suggestive,  but 
simply  explanatory  of  the  text.  This  author  denounces  the  theory  of  a 
double  sense  in  prophecy ; we,  none  the  less,  believe  it  to  be  a fact. 

815  HUTCHESON  (George).  Briefe  Exposition  of  the  Twelve 

Small  Prophets.  Three  vols.,  Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  1655  ; 
One  vol.,  folio,  1657.  7s.  6d.  to  10s. 

Get  it.  Hutcheson  is  always  rich.  He  resembles 
Dickson. 

816  KEIL  (K.  F.)  Commentary  on  the  Minor  Prophets.  Two 

vols.,  8 vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1871. 

“Dr.  Keil  is  at  his  best  in  this  Commentary;  and 
to  all  who  have  ventured  on  this  obscure  region  we  can 
promise  an  intelligent  guide  and  a serviceable  light  in 
this  work.  We  ourselves,  under  his  guidance,  have 
resumed  the  study  of  these  beautiful  and  instructive 
Scriptures  with  renewed  vigor  and  growing  delight. 
Nonconformist. 

817  KELLY  (William).  Lectures.  Cr.  8vo.  4s.  6d.  Lond., 

Broom.  1871. 

Mr.  Kelly  finds  in  the  Minor  Prophets  a great  many  things  which  we 


MINOR  PROPHETS. 


189 


cannot  see  a trace  of— for  instance,  he  here  discovers  that  we  shall  lose 
India.  It  is  a pity  that  a man  of  such  excellence  should  allow  a very  supe- 
rior mind  to  be  so  warped. 

818  LANGE.  Commentary  on  the  Minor  Prophets.  Edited 

by  Dr.  Schaff.  Imp.  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.&T.  Clark.  1874. 

The  commentaries  on  the  different  prophets  are  by 
various  authors  ; hence  their  value  differs.  As  a whole 
the  volume  is  excellent,  but  not  so  good  as  Keil. 

819  NEWCOME  (William,  D.  D.  Abp.  of  Armagh.  1729— 

1800).  Improved  Version,  Metrical  Arrangement,  and  Ex- 
planation. With  all  the  Principal  Notes  of  Horsley  on 
Hosea,  and  Blayney  on  Zechariah.  8vo.  Lond.,  1836. 
2s.  6d.  (See  No.  712.) 

A celebrated  critical  work  of  a past  age,  but  not  expository.  Newcome 
was  too  fond  of  new  readings  to  be  safely  followed. 

820  PUSEY  (E.  B.,  D.  D.)  The  Minor  Prophets.  With  a Com- 

mentary. 4to.,  sewed,  5s.  each  part.  Part  I.,  Hosea  to 
Joel ; II.,  Joel  to  Amos,  vi.  6 ; III.,  Amos,  vi.  6 to  Micah, 
i.  12  ; IV.,  Micah,  i.  13  to  Nahum  ; V.  [in  the  press].  Hab- 
akkuk  to  Haggai.  Lond.,  J.  Parker.  1860 — 1871. 

All  authorities  speak  of  this  work  with  great  respect 
and  so  would  we  ; but  it  is  evident  that  Dr.  Pusey  is  far 
too  much  swayed  by  patristic  and  mediaeval  commen- 
tators. 

821  RANDALL  (James,  M.  A.)  Sermons  on  the  Books  of  Joel, 

Jonah,  Nahum,  Micah,  and  Habakkuk.  8vo.  Lond.,  1843. 
2s.  6d. 

Superior  sermons ; but  what  are  they  among  so  many  prophets  ? 

822  STOKES  (David,  D.  D.)  Paraphrase.  8vo.  Lond.,  1659.  4s. 
Of  no  importance. 


190 


HOSEA. 


HOSEA. 

823  BURROUGHES  (Jeremiah.  Puritan.  1599—1646).  Ex- 

position of  the  Prophesie  of  Hosea.  Four  vols.  4to. 
Lond.,  1643 — 1651.  [The  original  work  does  not  include 
Chapter  XIV.,  upon  which  there  is  an  Exposition  by 
Sibbes,  and  another  by  Bp.  Reynolds.  The  reprint,  by 
James  Sherman,  contains  the  Exposition  completed  by 
Hall  and  Reynolds.  Nichol’s  Series  of  Commentaries. 
One  vol.,  Imp.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Nisbet,  1863. 

Masterly.  A vast  treasure-house  of  experimental 
exposition.  With  the  exception  of  Adams,  we  prefer  it 
to  any  other  of  the  expositions  reprinted  under  the 
editorship  of  Mr.  Sherman. 

824  HORSLEY  (Samuel,  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph).  Hosea.  Trans- 

lated from  the  Hebrew  ; with  Notes.  4to,  Lond.,  1804. 
S.  3s.  And  in  Vol.  2 of  Biblical  Criticism. 

Horsley  occasionally  succeeds  in  elucidating  obscurities,  but  frequently 
his  treatment  of  the  text  reminds  one  of  the  old  army  surgeons  who  cut 
and  hacked  their  patients  without  mercy.  This  translation  is  still  valued, 
but  is  to  be  followed  with  discretion. 

825  DOWNAME  (John,  B.  D.  Died  1664.)  Lectures  upon  the 

Four  First  Chapters  of  Hosea.  4to.  Lond.,  1608.  3s.  6d. 

An  exposition  of  the  richest  kind.  Get  it  by  all 
means,  if  you  can. 

826  DRAKE  (William,  M.  A.)  Notes,  critical  and  explanatory, 

on  the  Prophecies  of  Jonah  and  Hosea.  8vo.  Camb., 
Macmillan  & Co.  1853. 

For  Hebraists  only. 

827  NEALE  (James,  M.  A.)  Hosea.  Translation,  Commentary, 

and  Notes.  Royal  8vo.  Lond.,  1850.  S.  Is.  6d.  to  2s.  6d. 
We  do  not  think  many  ministers  will  value  it  for  homiletical  purposes. 

828  POCOCK  (Edward,  D.  D.  1604—1691).  Commentary  on 

Hosea.  In  Vol.  2 of  his  Works  ; two  vols.,  folio.  Lond 
1740.  12s.  6d. 

Orme  says  Pocock  was  “ one  of  the  finest  Oriental  scholars,  and  cer- 
tainly the  first  Arabic  scholar  of  his  age.”  His  book  is  a treasury  filled 
with  the  products  of  laborious  research. 


HOSEA. 


191 


829  WOLFENDALE  (J.)  Homiletical  Commentary  on  Hosea. 

[In  progress  : being  Part  5 of  the  Preacher’s  Commentary.] 
Is.  Lond.,  R.  D.  Dickinson.  [1875.] 

On  an  excellent  plan,  and  moderately  well  executed.  With  Burroughes 
and  others  to  quarry  from,  and  so  good  a method  to  work  by,  Mr.  Wolfen- 
dale  ought  to  have  produced  a better  book ; but  even  as  it  is  he  deserves  a 
measure  of  commendation, 

830  SMITH  (Samuel).  An  Exposition  upon  the  Sixth  Chapter 

of  the  Prophesie  of  Hosea.  4to.  Lond.,  1616.  5s. 

In  Smith’s  usual  quiet,  rich,  expository  manner. 

831  MARGOLIOUTH  (Moses.  B.  A.)  Genuine  Repentance,  and 

its  Effects.  Exposition  of  Hosea  XIV.  8vo.  Lond., 
1854.  3s. 

Respectable  discourses. 

832  REYNOLDS  (Edward,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Norwich.  1599 — 

1676).  An  Explication  of  the  Fourteenth  Chapter  of 
Hosea,  in  Seven  Sermons.  4to.  1649.  2s.  Reprinted 

by  the  Religious  Tract  Society.  18mo.  Is.  6d.  See  also 
under  Burroughes,  No.  823. 

Beynolds  was  one  of  the  greatest  theological  writers 
in  an  age  of  great  divines.  .He  worthily  takes  place 
with  Burroughes. 

833  SIBBES  (Richard,  D.  D.)  The  Returning  Backslider,  or 

a Commentary  upon  Hosea  XIV.  4to.  1639,  etc.  2s. 
Also  in  Vol.  II.  of  his  Works,  Nichol’s  edition. 

Manton  says  of  Sibbes,  that  he  had  a peculiar  gift 
in  unfolding  the  great  mysteries  of  the  Gospel  in  a sweet 
and  mellifluous  manner,  and  therefore  he  was  by  his 
hearers  usually  termed  the  Sweet  Dropper,  “ sweet  and 
heavenly  distillations  usually  dropping  from  him  with 
such  a native  elegance  as  is  not  easily  to  be  imitated.” 
This  commentary  on  Hosea  is  a fair  specimen  of  his  style. 


192 


JOEL. 


JOEL. 

834  CHANDLER  (Samuel,  D.  D.)  A Paraphrase  and  Critical 

Commentary  on  Joel.  4to.  Lond.,  1735.  2s.  6d. 

Chandler  makes  very  few  remarks  of  a spiritual  kind,  but  explains  the 
letter  of  the  word  with  considerable  skill.  In  writing  upon  Joel  he  does 
not  appear  to  the  same  advantage  as  in  his  “ Life  of  David.”  He  does  not 
elfect  much  in  clearing  up  the  “things  hard  to  be  understood”  in  the 
prophet,  and  he  is  of  the  old  broad  school. 

835  HUGHES  (Joseph,  B.  A.)  The  Prophecy  of  Joel.  The 

Hebrew  Text  metrically  arranged,  with  a New  Transla- 
tion and  Critical  Notes.  F’cap.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  Lond., 
Bagsters. 

A purely  literary  treatise,  useful  to  Hebraists  only. 

836  POCOCK  (Edward,  D.  D.)  A Commentary  on  Joel. 

Works,  Yol.  I.  Folio.  Oxf.,  1691.  [The  same  volume 
contains  his  commentaries  on  Micah  and  Malachi.] 

Full  of  antique  learning.  Holds  a high  place  among  the  older  com- 
ments, but  will  never  again  be  popular. 

837  ROWLEY  (Adam  Clarke,  M.  A.)  Joel.  Metrical  Transla- 

tion. Sq.  8vo.  Lond.,  Hamilton.  1867.  S.  Is.  6d. 

The  translation  has  been  carefully  executed.  The  notes  are  illustrative 
and  literary  only ; they  do  not  profess  to  open  up  the  moral  and  spiritual 
teaching  of  the  prophet.  Could  Adam  Clarke  rise  from  the  dead,  he  would 
rejoice  to  find  his  grandson  following  in  his  footsteps. 

838  TOPSELL  (Edward).  Times  Lamentations : or  An  Expo- 

sition on  the  Prophet  Joel.  4to.  Lond.,  1599.  9s. 

Among  the  old  English  Commentaries  Topsell  is  the 
writer  on  Joel.  He  has  the  usual  force,  homeliness, 
piety,  and  fulness  of  the  Puritan  period. 

839  UDALL  (John).  The  true  remedie  against  Famine  and 

Warres.  Fiue  Sermons  vpon  the  first  Chapter  of  the 
prophesie  of  Joel.  Lond.  12mo.  1586.  15s. 

We  gave  so  high  a price  for  this  small  black  letter  volume  that  we 
should  like  to  make  it  profitable  to  our  brethren,  and  therefore  we  com- 
mend to  the  more  starchy  of  them  the  following  extract,  which  will  also 
serve  to  show  how  the  old  preachers  lashed  with  vigor  the  fashions  of 
the  times.  Udall  says:  “For  the  feeding  of  our  monstrous  humor  of 
vanity,  how  many  thousands  of  quarters  of  the  finest  wheat,  which  God 
ordained  for  the  food  cf  man,  are  yearly  converted  into  that  most  devilish 


AMOS — OBADIAH. 


193 


device  of  starch.  A sin  so  abominable  that  it  doth  cry  so  loudly  in  the 
Lord’s  ears  for  vengeance,  as  his  justice  must  needs  proceed  against  us  for 
it,  without  speedy  repentance.” 


AMOS. 

840  BENEFIELD  (Sebastian,  D.  D.  1559—1630).  A Commen- 

tary upon  the  first  Chapter  of  the  Prophecie  of  Amos. 
Delivered  in  twenty-one  Sermons.  4to.  Lond.,  1629. 
Upon  the  second  chapter,  in  twenty-one  Sermons,  1620. 
Upon  the  third  chapter,  in  seventeen  Sermons,  1629. 
[Sometimes  to  be  met  with  in  one  volume.]  9s.,  or  with 
Hall  (No.  841),  two  vols.,  18s.  to  20s. 

Dr.  Benefield  was  Lady  Margaret  Professor  in  Oxford,  a Puritan  and 
thorough  Calvinist.  His  volume  was,  in  its  time,  the  standard  Commen- 
tary on  Amos.  It  is  somewhat  prolix  and  plentifully  sprinkled  with  Latin ; 
it  only  discusses  three  chapters  in  953  pages. 

841  HALL  (Thomas,  B.  D.,  Puritan,  Born  1610).  An  Exposition  ; 

by  way  of  Supplement,  on  the  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh, 
eighth,  and  ninth  Chapters  of  Amos.  4to.  Lond.,  1661. 
Hall  took  up  Amos  where  Benefield  left  off.  He  says  he  studied  brev- 
ity, and  perhaps  he  succeeded,  for  he  does  not  quite  fill  600  pages  with  six 
chapters.  The  two  quartos  make  up  a complete  work,  of  an  antique  type, 
not  suitable  to  modern  tastes,  nor  up  to  the  mark  of  present  criticism,  but 
still  instructive.  What  Puritan  is  not  ? 

842  RYAN  (Vincent  William,  M.  A.)  Lectures  on  Amos. 

12mo.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1850.  2s. 

A commendable  series  of  Lectures ; the  more  valuable  because  so  few 
moderns  have  ventured  to  touch  the  subject. 


OBADIAH. 

843  MARBURY  (Edward,  A.  M.  Died  about  1655).  Obadiah. 
4to.  Lond.,  1649.  4s.  6d.  Reprinted,  with  his  Commen- 
tary upon  Habakkuk,  in  Nichol’s  Series.  Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Nisbet.  1865. 

Far  more  lively  than  Rainolds.  His  spirituality  of 
mind  prevents  his  learning  becoming  dull.  He  says  in 
9 


194 


JONAH. 


the  preface,  “ all  my  desire  is  to  do  all  the  good  I can,” 
and  he  writes  in  that  spirit. 

844  PILKINGTON  (James,  B.  D.,  Bishop  of  Durham.  1520— 

1575).  In  the  “ Works  of  Bishop  Pilkington,”  reprinted 
by  the  Parker  Society,  there  are  Commentaries  on  Haggai, 
Obadiah,  and  Nehemiab.  S.  3s. 

Full  of  the  minor  as  well  as  the  major  controversies  of  the  Reformation 
period,  and  therefore  the  less  interesting  to  us.  In  its  own  day  it  was  tho 
master- work  on  the  two  prophets,  Haggai  and  Obadiah. 

845  RAINOLDS  (John,  D.  D.  1549—1607).  The  Propliecie  of 

Obadiah  opened  and  applyed.  4to.  1613.  3s.  to  4s.  6d. 
Reprinted,  with  his  work  on  Haggai,  and  King  on  Jonah, 
in  one  volume  of  Nichol’s  Series.  Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d.  Lond., 
Nisbet.  1864. 

Full  of  classical  stories  and  learned  allusions ; but  more  useful  when 
first  written  than  now.  The  author  was  one  of  the  most  learned  men  the 
world  ever  produced,  but  he  is  not  likely  to  be  a favorite  with  modern 
readers. 


JONAH. 

[This  unlovable  Prophet  has  found  more  Commentators  than  any  other ; 
partly  we  suppose  because  the  angles  of  his  chacrater  excite  greater  inter- 
est, but  mainly  because  we  have  some  knowledge  of  his  life,  and  there- 
fore are  able  to  realize  his  personality.  He  has  received  quite  as  much 
attention  as  he  deserves  in  proportion  to  other  Prophets.] 

846  ABBOTT  (George,  Abp.  of  Canterbury.  1562 — 1643). 

An  Exposition  upon  the  Prophet  Jonah.  4to.  1613.  5s. 

New  edition,  published  at  12s,  offered  for  3s.,  by  Ogle  & 

Murray,  Edinb. 

Abbott  was  a renowned  Calvinistic  divine,  and  one 
of  the  translators  of  the  present  version  of  the  Bible. 
No  set  of  works  on  Jonah  would  be  complete  without 
this  learned,  laborious,  and  comprehensive  exposition. 
It  is,  of  course,  very  antique  in  style  ; but,  like  “ old 
wine,”  it  is  none  the  worse  for  its  age. 

847  BENJOIN  (George).  Jonah.  Translation,  with  Notes. 

4to.  Camb.,  1796. 

Plenty  of  paper.  Horne  says  this  work  “ is  literally  good  for  nothing.” 


JONAH. 


195 


848  CALVIN  (John).  Lectures  upon  the  Prophet  Jonas 

Translated  by  N.  Baxter.  4to.  Lond.,  1578.  9s. 

This  of  course  is  fuller  than  the  Commentary,  and, 
as  the  work  of  a revered  master,  is  beyond  our  criticism. 

849  CUNNINGHAM  (J.  W.,  A.  M.)  Six  Lectures  on  the  Book 

of  Jonah.  F’cap.  boards.  3s.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1833. 
Good  simple  Lectures. 

850  DESPREZ  (P.  S.,  D.  D.)  The  Book  of  Jonah.  Illustrated 

by  Discoveries  at  Nineveh.  12mo.  1857.  Is.  6d. 

To  make  Layard  illustrate  Jonah  was  a good  idea,  and  it  has  been  well 
carried  out  by  this  author. 

851  DRAKE  (William,  M.  A.)  Notes  on  Jonah  and  Hosea. 

8vo.  9s.  Camb.,  Macmillan  & Co.  1853.  S.  Is.  6d. 
Entirely  critical.  Only  useful  to  Hebrew  scholars. 

852  EDWARDS  (Henry).  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Jonah. 

12mo.  Long  Sutton,  Swain.  1837.  2s. 

Fourteen  plain,  earnest,  practical  sermons. 

853  EPHRAEM  SYRUS.  (Died  about  379).  A Metrical  Homily 

on  the  Mission  of  Jonah.  Translated  from  the  original 
Syriac,  by  Henry  Burgess,  LL.  D.  Cr.  8vo.  10s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Sampson  Low  & Co.  1853.  S.  Is.  6d. 

A literary  curiosity — nothing  more. 

854  EXELL  (Joseph  S.)  Practical  Readings  on  the  Book  of 

Jonah.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Elliot  Stock.  1874. 

Mr.  Exell,  in  a very  unpretending  but  able  way, 
brings  to  light  the  practical  lessons  of  J onah.  Paxton 
Hood  calls  these  readings  “ admirable,”  and  we  concur 
in  the  verdict. 

855  FAIRBAIRN  (Patrick,  D.  D.)  Jonah:  Life,  Character, 

and  Mission.  12mo.  Edinb.,  Johnstone.  1849.  S.  2s. 

The  life  and  times  of  the  prophet  are  set  in  a clear 
light ; and  the  nature  and  design  of  his  mission  fully 
explained.  The  work  is  well  done,  and  is  by  far  the 
ablest  English  treatise  on  this  prophet. 


196 


JONAH. 


856  FULLER  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  Notes  upon  Jonah.  [In  “ A 

Collection  of  Sermons.”  Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  1656.]  Mr. 
Tegg  has  reprinted  Fuller’s  Comment  on  Ruth,  and  Notes 
upon  Jonah,  in  one  small  8vo.  vol.  4s.  6d.  1868.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Full  of  wisdom,  and  fuller  of  wit ; in  fact,  too  full 
of  the  soul  of  the  latter,  for  they  are  far  too  short. 

857  GATJSSEN  (S.  R.  Louis,  Theol.  Prof.,  Geneva).  Jonah,  the 

Prophet.  Lessons  on  his  Life.  18mo.  Is.  6d.  and  2s. 
Lond.,  Religious  Tract  Society.  [N.  D.] 

Addresses  to  a Sunday  School  at  Geneva. 

858  HARDING  (Thomas).  Expository  Lectures.  12mo.  Lond., 

1856.  S.  Is. 

What  intelligent  man  in  this  kingdom  could  learn  anything  from  these 
lectures  ? The  worthy  man  writes  only  such  self-evident  truisms  as  must 
have  occurred  to  anybody  and  everybody  who  has  read  his  Bible. 

859  HOOPER  (John.  Bishop  and  Martyr).  An  oversyghte  and 

deliberacion  uppon  the  holy  prophet  Jonas:  made  and 
uttered  before  the  Kinges  Majesty  and  his  most  honorable 
Councell,  by  Jhon  Hooper,  in  Lent  last  past.  Compre- 
hended in  seven  Sermons.  16mo.  Lond.,  1550.  Re- 
printed by  the  Parker  Society.  8vo.  Camb.,  1843.  S.  3s. 
It  would  not  repay  the  student  to  buy  Hooper’s  works  for  this  short 
piece.  The  language  is  antique,  and  the  thought  not  of  the  newest. 

860  JONES  (Thomas,  of  Creaton).  Jonah’s  Portrait.  12mo. 

1827.  2s. 

“Jonah’s  Portrait”  was  very  popular  fifty  years  ago,  and  deservedly 
so,  for  Mr.  Jones  sketches  it  with  considerable  pow'er.  We  should  fancy 
that  Jonah’s  portrait,  as  he  sat  under  his  withered  gourd,  was  not  a thing 
of  beauty,  or  a joy  forever. 

861  KING  (John,  Bishop  of  London.  1559 — 1621).  Lectures 

upon  Jonas.  4to.  Oxf.,  1600,  etc.  S.  3s.  to  5s.  Reprinted 
in  Nichol’s  Series  of  Commentaries.  (See  Rainolds, 
No.  845). 

Quaint  and  rich,  with  a little  occasional  quiet  mirth.  It  was  the  book 
of  its  time.  Some  will  think  it  out  of  date,  others  will,  like  Grosart,  prize 
the  work  of  “ the  Bishop  with  the  royal  name.” 

862  MACPHERSON  (A.)  Lectures.  18mo.  Edinb.,  1849.  Is. 
Far  superior  to  the  general  run  of  lectures. 

863  MARTIN  (Hugh).  The  Prophet  Jonah.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

Lond.,  W.  Isbister  & Co.  1866. 

A first-class  exposition  of  Jonah.  No  one  who  has 


JONAH. 


197 


it  will  need  any  other.  It  is  not  a small  treatise,  as 
most  of  the  Jonah  books  are ; but  it  contains  460 
pages,  all  rich  with  good  matter.  It  is  out  of  print,  and 
ought  to  be  republished.  What  are  publishers  at  to  let 
such  a book  slip  out  of  the  market  ? 

864  MUIR  (A.  S.)  Lessons  from  Jonali.  Cr  8vo.  Lond.,  1857. 

Is.  6d. 

A lively,  popular,  and  earnest  book,  in  a specially  florid  style.  Th* 
author  talks  a great  deal  about  “ the  Son  of  Amittai ; why  not  say  Jouab  2 
We  are  tempted  to  pull  the  finery  to  pieces  ; but  we  stay  our  hand,  for 
there  is  really  something  good  in  these  “ lessons.” 

865  PEDDIE  (James,  D.  D.  1759 — 1845).  A Practical  Exposi- 

tion of  the  Book  of  Jonah.  12mo.  Edinb.,  1842.  2s. 

“ The  pungent  remarks  peculiar  to  the  Ralph  Drskine 
school  make  the  Jonah  of  Dr.  Peddie  a favorite  wherever 
it  is  known.” 

866  PRESTON  (Matthew  Morris,  M.  A.)  Lectures.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1840.  Is. 

Ordinary  sermons.  Better  ones  can  be  bought  for  a penny. 

867  QUARLES  (Francis).  A Feast  for  Wormes.  A Poem  on 

the  History  of  Jonah.  4to.  Lond.,  1620. 

Quaint  and  rather  bombastic  verse,  but  full  of  meaning. 

868  RALEIGH  (Alexander,  D.  D.)  The  Story  of  Jonah.  Cr. 

8vo.  6s.  Edinb.,  A.  & C.  Black.  1875. 

Dr.  Raleigh  calls  your  attention  to  every  touch  of 

the  strange  picture  which  hangs  before  us  in  the  life  of 
Jonah.  Although  we  do  not  always  endorse  the  Doctor’s 
remarks,  we  can  but  marvel  at  the  beauty  and  power  of 
his  descriptions  and  reflections. 

869  TWEED1E  (W.  K.)  Man  by  Nature  and  Grace  : or  Lessons 

from  Jonah.  12mo.  Edinb.,  Johnstone  & Hunter.  1850. 
S.  Is.  6d. 

A good  practical  work,  expounding  the  book  of  Jonah  for  Christian  edi- 
fication. 

870  SIMPSON  (James).  Discourses  from  Jonah  I.  8vo.  Edinb. 

1816.  2s.  6d. 

Very  little  in  the  sermons,  but  their  titles  are  singularly  happy,  and  in 
themselves  enough  to  affor.'  subjects  of  discourse  to  preachers. 


198 


MIC  AH — HABAKKUK — HAGGAI, 


MICAH. 

[Since  there  is  so  very  little  upon  this  book  the  student  should  refer  to 
works  on  the  Minor  Prophets,  as  a whole.  There  are  some  excessively 
rare  authors  and  also  works  in  Latin  ; but  these  do  not  fall  within  our 
range.] 

871  POCOCK  (Edward,  D.  D.)  See  No.  836. 


HABAKKUK. 

872  MARBURY  (Edward,  A.  M.)  Commentarie.  4to.  Lond. 
.1650.  3s.  6d.  to  5s.  For  Reprint,  See  No.  843. 

Here  Marbury  holds  the  field  alone  among  old  Eng- 
lish authors,  and  he  does  so  worthily.  There  is  about 
him  a vigorous,  earnest  freshness  which  makes  his 
pages  glow. 


HAGGAI. 

873  GRYN2EUS  (John  James,  D.  D.  1540—1617).  Haggeus, 

the  Prophet ; a most  plentiful  Commentary,  gathered  out 
of  the  Publique  Lectures  of  Dr.  J.  J.  Grynaeus.  12mo. 
Lond.,  1586. 

Grynseus  was  a voluminous  author,  and  commented  on  most  of  the 
hooks  of  Scripture,  but  only  this  work  has  been  turned  into  English,  and 
it  is  now  seldom  met  with. 

874  MOORE  (T.  V.,  D.  D.,  of  Richmond,  Va.,  TJ.  S.l  Haggai, 

Zechariah,  and  Malaclii.  A New  Translation,  with  Notes. 
8vo.  New  York,  1856  ; Lond.,  1858.  5s.  to  6s.  6d. 

A capital  book.  Most  useful  to  ministers. 

875  PILKINGTON  (Bishop).  See  under  Obadiah,  No.  844. 

876  RAINOLDS  (John,  D.  D.)  Haggai;  Interpreted  and 

Applyed.  4to.  1613  and  1649.  For  Reprint,  See  No.  845. 
Rainolds  was  the  tutor  of  Hooker,  and  had  a main  hand  in  our  author- 
ized version  of  the  Bible.  Bishop  Hall  says,  “ the  memory,  the  reading  of 
that  man  were  near  a miracle.”  We  ought  to  be  enraptured  with  a Com- 
mentary from  such  a divine,  but  wo  confess  that  we  are  not. 


ZECHARIAH, 


199 


ZECHARIAH. 

877  BLAYNEY  (Benjamin,  D.  D.)  Zechariah.  A New  Trans- 

lation, with  Notes.  4to.  Oxf.,  1797.  3s.  6d. 

This  learned  author  writes  after  the  manner  of  Lowth,  but  has  neither 
Lowth’s  taste  nor  poetic  vein.  His  notes  will  not  suggest  sermons,  but 
will  be  philologically  useful  if  cautiously  read. 

878  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.) 

In  his  “ Christology  ” (for  which  See  No  68)  Hengstenberg  has  given  a 
thorough  and  elaborate  exposition  of  the  greater  part  of  Zechariah  and 
Malachi.  He  is  too  grammatical  and  dry  to  be  generally  interesting. 

879  KIMCHI  (David.  A celebrated  Spanish  Rabbi.  Died  about 

1240).  Commentary  on  Zechariah.  Translated  from  the 
Hebrew  by  Rev.  A.  M’Caul,  A.  M.  8vo.  Lond.,  1837. 
Is.  6d. 

This  enables  the  English  reader  to  see  how  the  Jews  themselves  under- 
stood the  Prophets,  and  this  is  worth  knowing. 

880  MOORE  (T.  V.)  See  under  Haggai,  No.  874. 

881  PARK  (I.  R.,  M.  D.)  An  Amicable  Controversy  with  a 

Jewish  Rabbi  on  the  Messiah’s  coming  ; with  an  entirely 
new  Exposition  of  Zechariah.  8vo.  Lond.,  1832.  2s. 

The  words  “ entirely  new  exposition  ” put  us  on  our  guard,  and  did 
not  entice  us  to  read.  The  caution  was  needful.  This  author  explains  the 
prophecy  spiritually,  and  asserts  that  “ the  spiritual  is  the  most  literal 
interpretation.”  We  more  than  doubt  it. 

882  PEMBLE  (William,  M.  A.  Puritan.  1591—1623).  A 

Short  and  Sweet  Exposition  upon  the  First  Nine  Chap- 
ters of  Zechariah.  In  his  Works.  Folio.  Oxf.,  1659,  and 
Lond.,  1635.  3s.  6d.  to  5s. 

Richard  Capel  says  : “Amongst  the  hardest  books  of  Scripture  the 
Prophets  may  have  place,  and  amongst  the  Prophets,  Zechary  is  a deepe, 
wherein  an  elephant  may  swimme,  and  therefore  I cannot  but  commend 
the  wisdom  of  that  man  of  God  (the  author  of  this  booke),  who  bestowed 
his  learning  and  his  paines  to  open  the  mysteries  of  this  Prophecie.  Death 
ended  his  dayes  ore  he  could  quite  finish  his  worke,  and  great  weakness 
hindered  an  intended  supplement.”  Pemble  was  a learned  Calvinistio 
divine,  and  his  writings  are  highly  esteemed,  but  not  very  captivating. 


200 


MALACHI, 


883  STONARD  (John,  D.  D.  1769—1849).  Commentary  on 

Zecliariali,  with  a Corrected  Translation,  and  Critical 
Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  1824.  4s. 

An  earnest  attempt  to  expound  this  prophecy  ; we  do  not  think  the 
author  has  succeeded,  but  he  has  written  some  good  things. 

884  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  Zechariah. 

[Posthumous  Works,  Vol.  III.]  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Edinb., 
A.  Fullerton  & Co.  1862.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Written  in  the  Doctor’s  old  age  ; but  we  prefer  it,  in 
some  respects,  to  other  volumes  of  his  lectures.  We 
always  consult  it. 


MALACHI. 

885  MOORE  (T.  V.,  D.  D.)  See  under  Haggai,  No.  874. 

886  POCOCK  (Edward,  D.  D.)  See  under  Joel,  No.  836. 

887  SCLATER  (William,  D.  D.)  Brief  and  Plain  Commentary 

upon  Malachy.  4to.  Lond.,  1650.  5s.  or  6s. 

Not  equal  to  the  general  standard  of  Puritan  comments.  The  editor  of 
the  work  rightly  says,  “ the  method  is,  for  the  chapters  themselves,  an- 
alytical; for  the  practical  observations,  synthetical.”  We  are  quaintly  told 
that  he  would  start  the  hare  with  any  man  ; that  is  to  say,  he  would  sug- 
gest thought  and  leave  others  to  pursue  its  track. 

888  STOCK  (Richard,  M.  A.  1568 — 1626).  A Commentary 

upon  Malachy.  Whereunto  is  added  an  Exercitation 
upon  the  same  Prophecy  by  Samuel  Torshell.  Folio. 
Lond.,  1641.  [Reprinted,  together  with  Bernard  and 
Fuller  on  Ruth.  Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  I860.] 
See  No.  263. 

Contains  a stock  of  knowledge,  and  more  than  a sufficient  stock  of 
quotations  from  the  fathers.  Torshell  printed  the  book  fifteen  years  after 
Stock’s  death,  and  finding  it  to  be  written  for  a popular  audience  only,  he 
added  an  examination  of  the  original  and  a few  notes  in  a more  learned 
style,  to  make  a complete  commentary.  The  two  authors  have  thus  com- 
posed the  work  upon  Malachi. 

889  WATSON  (Thomas.  Puritan).  Notes  on  Malachy  III. 

8vo.  1682. 

This  would  be  a great  find  if  we  could  only  eome  at  it,  for  Watson  i a 


COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  201 


one  of  the  clearest  and  liveliest  of  Puritan  authors.  We  fear  we  shall 
never  see  this  commentary,  for  we  have  tried  to  obtain  it,  and  tried  in  vain. 

May  God  bless  this  effort  to  assist  his  ministers  in  the  study  of  the  Old 
Testament . 


COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

[See  also  under  Whole  Bible  Nos.  1 — 66.  In  many  cases  the  New  Testa- 
ment may  be  had  separately.] 

890  ALFORD  (Henry,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury).  The  Greek 

Testament ; with  a Critically  Revised  Text,  etc.  Four 
vols.,  8vo.  £5  2s.  Lond.,  1856 — 61.  (See  page  36  of  this 
Work).  Rivingtons,  and  G.  Bell  & Sons. 

891  The  New  Testament  for  English  Readers.  Four 

parts.  8vo.  £2  14s.  6d.  Rivingtons,  and  G.  Bell  and 
Sons.  1872.  (See  page  37). 

892  The  New  Testament  Authorized  Version  Revised. 

Long  Primer,  Cr.  8vo.,  6s. ; Brevier,  F’cap.  8vo.,  3s.  6d.  ; 
Nonp.  Sm.  8vo.,  Is.  6d.  Rivingtons,  and  Isbister  & Co. 

893  Howto  Study  the  New  Testament.  Part  1,  Gospels 

and  Acts  ; Part  2,  Epistles  (first  section) ; Part  3,  Epistles 
(second  section)  and  Revelation.  Sm.  8vo.  3s  6d.  each. 
Lond.,  W.  Isbister  & Co.  1868. 

All  critics  speak  of  Alford  with  respect,  though  they 
consider  that  something  better  than  his  Greek  Testa- 
ment is  still  needed.  He  is,  for  the  present  at  any  rate, 
indispensable  to  the  student  of  the  original.  With  some 
faults  he  has  surpassing  excellencies.  We  specially 
commend  893  to  the  careful  reading  of  young  ministers. 

894  ASH  (Edward,  M.  D.)  Notes  and  Comments  on  the  New 

Testament.  Three  vols.  Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  1849-50. 
Remarks  such  as  any  plain,  thoughtful  reader  would  make  off  hand. 

895  BARNES  (Albert).  Notes  on  the  New  Testament. 

Blackie’s  edition.  Eleven  vols.,  Post  8vo.  £1  14s.  6d. 
Routledge’s  edition,  Ten  vols.,  £1. 

Everybody  has  his  work,  and  therefore  can  judge  for 
himself,  or  we  would  both  commend  and  criticise. 

(See  page  30.) 

8* 


202  COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


896  BAXTER  (Richard.  1615—1691).  Paraphrase  on  the  New 

Testament,  with  Notes.  4to.,  1685.  8vo.,  1810.  4s.  or  5s. 
The  notes  are  in  Baxter’s  intensely  practical  and  personal  style,  and 
show  the  hortatory  use  of  Scripture ; but  they  are  not  very  explanatory. 

897  BENGEL  (John  Albert.  1687—1752).  Gnomon  of  the 

New  Testament,  translated  into  English.  With  Original 
Notes.  Five  vols.  Demy  8vo.  Subscription  price,  81s. 
6d.  Cheap  issue,  the  five  vols.  bound  in  three,  24s.,  to 
subscribers.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  (See  also  No.  910.) 

See  our  remarks  upon  pages  33  and  34. 

898  BEZA  (Theodore).  Newe  Testament,  Translated  out  of 

Greeke,by  Theod.  Beza.  Sm.  fol.  Lond.,  1596.  25s. 

The  compact  marginal  notes  are  still  most  useful. 
The  possessor  of  this  old  black  letter  Testament  may 
think  himself  happy. 

899  BIBLICAL  MUSEUM  (The).  A complete  Commentary 

on  an  Original  Plan.  By  Janies  Comper  Gray.  Five 
vols.,  Cr.  8vo.  4s.  6d.  each.  Lond.,  Elliot  Stock.  1871-3. 

Most  helpful  in  suggesting  divisions,  and  furnishing 
anecdotes.  Multum  inparvo.  Our  opinion  of  it  is  very 
high.  It  is  not  critical,  but  popular.  The  author  has 
used  observations  in  order  to  crowd  in  as  much  matter 
as  possible.  (See  No.  6.) 

900  BLOOMFIELD  (S.  T.,  D.  D.)  The  Greek  Testament,  with 

English  Notes  ; chiefly  original.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond., 
1841.  8s.  fid.  to  14s. 

901  Additional  Annotations  on  the  New  Testament.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1850.  2s.  fid. 

We  frequently  get  more  from  Bloomfield  than  from 
Alfred,  though  he  is  not  so  fashionable.  His  notes  are 
full  of  teaching. 

902  Recensio  Synoptica  Annotation^  Sacrae  ; being  a Crit- 

ical Digest  on  the  most  important  Annotations  on  the  New 
Testament.  Eight  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1826.  15s.  to  21s. 

[A  considerable  part  of  this  work  was  included  in  recent 
editions  of  the  editor’s  Greek  New  Testament.] 

“ It  would  be  impossible  to  convey  to  our  readers  an 


COMMENTARIES  ON  THE 


TESTAMENT.  203 


adequate  idea  of  the  mass  of  information  which  the 
learned  author  has  brought  to  bear  upon  the  numerous 
passages  which  he  has  undertaken  to  illustrate,  and  we 
can  safely  say,  that  the  enquirer  will  find  very  few  of 
which  Mr.  Bloomfield  has  not  given  a complete  and  sat- 
isfactory exposition.” — Quarterly  Theological  Review. 

903  BOWYER  (William,  F.  S.  A.  1699—1777).  Critical  Con- 

jectures and  Observations  on  the  New  Testament.  From 
various  authors.  4to.  Lond.,  1812.  2s.  6d. 

According  to  Orme,  the  best  that  can  be  said  for  these  conjectures,  is 
that  they  are  ingenious ; but  who  wants  conjectures  at  all  ? 

904  BOYS  (John,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Canterbury.  1571 — 1625)' 

Exposition  of  the  Dominicall  Epistles  and  Gospels  used 
in  our  English  Liturgie  throughout  the  whole  yeere. 
Folio.  Lond.,  1638.  14s. 

Racy,  rich,  and  running  over.  We  marvel  that  it 
has  not  been  reprinted.  English  churchmen  ought  not 
to  leave  such  a book  in  its  present  scarcity,  for  it  is 
specially  adapted  for  their  use.  Boys  is  all  essence. 
What  a difference  between  the  John  Boys  of  1638  and 
the  Thomas  Boys  of  1827  ! Note  well  the  name. 

905  BOYS  (Thomas,  M.  A.)  The  New  Testament,  with  a plain 

exposition  for  the  use  of  families.  4to.  Lond.,  1827.  5s. 
Ordinary  readers  might  be  benefited  by  the  practical  observations  and 
evangelical  applications  and  exhortations  ; but  students  do  not  require  this 
Boys*  exposition. 

906  BURKITT  (William.  1650 — 1703).  Expository  Notes. 

Numerous  editions,  folio,  4to.,  and  8vo.  Mr.  Tegg  pub- 
lishes it  in  two  vols.,  8vo.  15s.  S.  5s.  to  8s.  (See  page  40). 
We  liked  Burkitt  better  when  we  were  younger.  He  is,  however,  a 
homely  and  spiritual  writer,  and  his  work  is  good  reading  for  the  many. 

907  CHALMERS  (Thomas,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.)  Sabbath  Scripture 

Readings.  Posthumous  Works,  vol.  IV.  (See  No.  12). 

The  readings  are  not  upon  every  portion  of  Scripture, 
neither  can  they  be  viewed  as  a full  exposition  of  any 
part  thereof.  They  are  precious  fragments  of  immortal 
thought. 


204  COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


908  CHRYSOSTOM.  Homilies  on  Matthew,  three  vols.,  36s. ; 

John,  two  vols.,  24s.  6d. ; Acts,  two  vols.,  21s. ; Romans, 
one  vol. ; 1 and  2 Corinthians,  three  vols.,  2s.  6d. ; Com- 
mentaries on  Galatians  and  Homilies  on  Ephesians,  one 
vol.  ; Philippians,  Colossians,  and  Thessalonians,  one  vol.  ; 
Timothy,  Titus,  and  Philemon,  one  vol.,  12s.  8vo.  Li- 
brary of  the  Fathers.  Lond.,  J.  Parker  & Co.  The  price 
of  the  volumes  to  subscribers  is  considerably  less.  Sec- 
ondhand volumes  about  5s.  each. 

Enough  of  solid  truth  and  brilliant  utterance  will  be  found  here  to 
justify  this  father’s  title  of  “ Golden  Mouth  ” ; but  still  all  is  not  gold 
which  fell  from  his  lips,  and  to  modern  readers  Chrysostom  is  not  so  in- 
structive as  he  was  to  his  own  age. 

909  CHURTON  (Edward,  M.  A.),  and  JONES  (William  Basil, 

M.  A.)  The  New  Testament.  With  a Plain  Explanatory 
Comment.  Two  vols.,  Cr.  8vo.  21s.  Lond.,  Murray. 
1869.  S.  13s.  6d. 

Meant  for  private  or  family  reading;  with  brief  notes  and  well  executed 
engravings.  An  elegant  work. 

910  CRITICAL  ENGLISH  TESTAMENT,  (The).  An  Adap- 

tation of  Bengel’s  Gnomon,  with  Notes,  showing  the  Re- 
sults of  Modern  Criticism  and  Exegesis.  Three  vols.,  Cr. 
8vo.  6s.  each.  Lond.,  Isbister.  1869.  S.  9s.  to  11s. 

“ The  editors  of  this  valuable  work  have  put  before 
the  English  reader  the  results  of  the  labors  of  more  than 
twenty  eminent  commentators.  He  who  uses  the  book 
will  find  that  he  is  reading  BengeTs  suggestive  ‘ Gnomon,’ 
modifying  it  by  the  critical  investigations  of  Tischendorf 
and  Alford,  and  comparing  it  with  the  exegetical  works  of 
He  Wette,  Meyer,  Olshausen,  and  others,  and  adding  to 
it  also  profound  remarks  and  glowing  sayings  from 
Trench  and  Stier.” — Evangelical  Magazine. 

We  have  heard  this  opinion  questioned  ; but  with  all 
discounts  the  book  is  a good  one. 

911  CUMMING  (John,  D.  D.)  Sabbath  Evening  Readings.  Is- 

sued as  follows: — The  Four  Gospels,  in  four  vols.,  20s.  ; 
Acts,  7s.  ; Romans,  4s.  6d.  ; Corinthians,  5s. ; Galatians, 
Ephesians,  and  Philippians,  6s. ; James,  Peter,  and  Jude, 
6s.  ; Revelation,  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Arthur  Hall,  Virtue  & Co. 
1853,  etc.  S.  2s.  each. 

Dr.  Cumming  is  always  evangelical,  and  his  style  is  very  attractive. 


COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  205 


These  works  are  rather  for  popular  reading  than  for  students  5 but  they  are 
good  as  a whole,  and  their  spirit  is  excellent.  The  doctor  has  written  too 
fast,  and  borrowed  too  much ; but  he  interests  and  edifies. 

912  DALLAS  (Alexander,  A.  M.)  The  Cottager’s  Guide  to  the 

New  Testament.  Six  vols.  12mo.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1839— 
45.  7s.  6d. 

Six  volumes  for  cottagers  1 How  could  they  ever  buy  them  ? If  bought, 
how  could  they  refrain  from  sleeping  while  trying  to  read  them  ? The 
“ Guide  ” could  be  of  no  possible  use  to  a sensible  man,  except  as  an  opiate. 

913  DALTON  (W.,  A.  M.)  Commentary.  Edited  by  the  Rev. 

W.  Dalton,  A.  M.  Two  vols.  8vo.  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1848. 
5s.  6d. 

Not  of  use  to  preachers.  Prepared  for  family  reading,  and  mainly 
taken  from  Henry  and  Scott.  There  are  quite  enough  of  these  compila- 
tions. 

914  DAVIDSON  (David).  Critical  Notes.  Two  vols.,  18mo. 

Edinb.,  1834.  3s. 

Two  small  thick  volumes  : really  a pocket  commentary.  Although  the 
notes  are  good,  the  student  had  better  spend  his  money  on  better  books. 

915  DODDRIDGE  (Philip,  D.  D.  1702—1751).  Family  Expos- 

itor;  With  Critical  Notes.  Many  editions.  Six  vols., 
4to.  ; five  vols.,  8vo. ; four  vols.,  8vo. ; and  one  vol.,  imp. 
8vo„  10s.  6d.  Lond.,  Tegg. 

“ The  late  Dr.  Barrington,  Bishop  of  Durham,  in  addressing  his  clergy 
on  the  choice  of  books,  characterizes  this  masterly  work  in  the  following 
terms  : — ‘ I know  no  expositor  who  unites  so  many  advantages  as  Dodd- 
ridge ; whether  you  regard  the  fidelity  of  his  version,  the  fullness  and  per- 
spicuity of  his  composition,  the  utility  of  his  general  and  historical  in- 
formation, tho  impartiality  of  his  doctrinal  comments,  or,  lastly,  the  piety 
and  pastoral  earnestness  of  his  moral  and  religious  applications.’  ” Later 
interpreters  have  somewhat  diminished  the  value  of  this  work. 

916  ERASMUS  (Desiderius.  1467 — 1536).  Paraphrase.  Black 

Letter.  Two  vols.  Folio.  Lond.,  1548  and  1551. 

This  paraphrase  was  appointed  by  public  authority  to  be  placed  in  all 
churches  in  England,  and  the  clergy  were  also  ordered  to  read  it.  The 
volumes  are  very  rare,  and  expensive  because  of  their  rarity. 

917  GELL  (Robert,  D.  D.  Died  1665).  Gell’s  Remains;  or, 

Select  Scriptures  explained.  One  or  two  vols.  Folio. 
Lond.,  1676.  7s.  6d.  to  10s. 

A queer  collection  of  remarks,  criticisms,  and  fancies,  in  a huge  volume. 
Baxter  called  Gell  “ one  of  the  sect-makers,”  He  was,  no  doubt,  a singu- 
lar man,  an  Arminian,  and  one  who  had  great  respect  for  u the  Learned 
Societie  of  Astrologers.” 


206  COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


918  GILPIN  (William,  A.  M.  1724—1804).  Exposition  of  the 

New  Testament.  4to.  1790.  Fourth  edition.  Two  vols. 
8vo.  1811.  8s.  6d. 

• Half  paraphrase,  half  very  free  translation.  Notes  meagre.  Useful  to 
butter-men. 

919  GIRDLESTONE  (Charles,  M.  A.)  New  Testament.  Lec- 

tures for  Families.  Two  vols.  8vo.  Lond.,  1835.  5s. 
Profitable  household  reading. 

920  GUYSE  (John,  D.  D.  1680—1671.)  The  Practical  Exposi- 

tor. Three  vols.,  4to.,  1739 — 52 ; six  vols.,  8vo.,  1775,  etc. 
8s.  6d.  to  15s. 

The  day  of  paraphrases  is  past.  Dr.  Guyse  was  ponderous  in  style, 
and  we  question  if  at  this  date  he  is  ever  read.  Doddridge’s  Expositor  is 
far  better. 

921  HAMMOND  (Henry,  D.  D.)  Paraphrase  and  Annotations. 

Folio.  Lond.,  1675.  Works,  vol.  III.  Also  in  four  vols., 
8vo.  Oxf.,  1845.  9s.  to  12s. 

Though  Hammond  gives  a great  deal  of  dry  criticism,  and  is  Arminian, 
churchy,  and  peculiar,  we  greatly  value  his  addition  to  our  stores  of  bibli- 
cal information.  Use  the  sieve  and  reject  the  chaff. 

922  HEYLYN  (John,  D.  D.)  Theological  Lectures  at  Westmin- 

ster Abbey  ; with  an  Interpretation  of  the  New  Testament. 
Two  vols.,  4to.  Lond.,  1749 — 61.  4s. 

Five  volumes  with  absolutely  nothing  in  them  beyond  a spinning  out 
of  the  text. 

923  KNATCHBULL  (Sir  Norton,  Bart.  Died  1684).  Annota- 

tions upon  some  Difficult  Texts.  8vo.  Camb.,  1693.  2s. 
Much  valued  in  its  day;  but  far  outdone  by  more  recent  critics. 

924  LANGE  (J.  P.,  D.  D.)  Translations  of  the  Commentaries 

of  Dr.  Lange  and  his  Collaborateurs.  Ten  vols.,  imp.  8vo. 
21s.,  or  to  subscribers,  15s.  each.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 

See  under  separate  books. 

925  LEIGH  (Sir  Edward).  See  No.  45. 

926  LINDSAY  (John).  Now  Testament ; with  Notes.  [Selected 

from  Grotius,  Hammond,  etc.l  Two  vols.,  folio.  Lond., 
1736.  4s.  6d. 

A condensation  of  other  writers — very  well  done. 


COMMENTARIES  OK  THE  KEW  TESTAMENT.  207 


927  MoCLELLAN  (John  Brown,  M.  A.)  New  Testament.  A 

New  Translation,  Analyses,  Copious  References,  and  Illus- 
trations from  Original  Authorities.  Harmony  of  the  Gos- 
pels, Notes,  and  Dissertations.  In  two  vols.,  8vo.  Vol.  I. 
The  Gospels,  with  the  Harmony.  80s.  Lond.,  Macmillan 
& Co.  1875.  S.  12s. 

This  work  is  what  it  professes  to  be,  and  we  need  say  no  more.  It  is, 
however,  a very  expensive  luxury  at  the  publishing  price. 

928  MAYER  (John,  D.  D.)  New  Testament.  Two  vols,, 

Folio.  1631.  16s.  (See  pages  25  and  26.) 

929  MEYER  (Dr.  H.  A.  W.  Oberconsistorialrath,  Hannover). 

Commentary  on  the  New  Testament.  Messrs.  T.  & T. 
Clark  are  issuing  a Translation  of  Meyer’s  Commentary. 
They  have  issued  Romans,  two  vols. ; Galatians,  one  vol.  ; 
John’s  Gospel,  one  vol.  Average  price  to  non-subscribers, 
10s.  6d.  per  vol.  ; subscription  price,  21s.  for  four  vols.  S. 
5s.  each. 

A very  learned  Commentary,  of  which  Bp.  Ellicott  speaks  in  the  high- 
est terms.  Meyer  must  be  placed  in  the  first  class  of  scholars,  though 
somewhat  lower  down  in  the  class  than  his  admirers  have  held.  Apart 
from  scholarship  we  do  not  commend  him.  Alford  was  certainly  no  very 
rigid  adherent  of  orthodoxy,  yet  he  says  of  Meyer  that  he  is  not  trusted 
where  there  is  any  room  for  the  introduction  of  rationalistic  opinions. 
Whatever  credit  may  be  due  to  him  for  accurate  interpretation,  this  is  a 
terribly  serious  drawback.  It  is  well  to  be  warned. 

930  NEWCOME  (William,  D.  D.,  Apb.  of  Armagh.  1729— 

1800).  Attempt  towards  revising  our  English  Translation 
and  Illustrating  the  Sense  by  Notes.  Two  vols.,  royal 
8vo.  Dubl.,  1796.  10s.  to  13s. 

Newcome  was  a critical  scholar  whose  works  enjoyed  a high  repute. 
Unhappily,  the  Unitarians  brought  out  an  “Improved  Version,”  profes- 
sedly based  upon  Newcome’s  and  this  led  the  public  to  question  New- 
come’s  orthodoxy,  but  there  was  little  reason  for  doing  so.  Few  of  our 
readers  will  care  for  this  cold  literal  interpretation. 

931  BIBLICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  NEW  TESTA- 

MENT. (By  Dr.  Hermann  Olsiiausen).  Continued 
after  his  Death  by  Ebrard  and  Wiesinger.  Carefully  re- 
vised, after  the  last  German  edition,  by  A.  C.  Kendrick, 
D.  D.,  Greek  Professor  in  the  University  of  Rochester. 
Six  volumes,  large  octavo.  Price  in  cloth,  $18. 

“ The  Commentaries  of  Olshausen  are  remarkable 
for  their  union  of  the  results  of  critical  learning  with 
devout  feeling,  and  an  insight  which  takes  up  very  effect- 


208  COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


ively  the  train  of  thought  in  the  apostle  or  evangelist. 
In  this  last  respect  he  approaches  Calvin. 

932  PENN  (Granville,  F.  S.  A.)  The  Book  of  the  New  Cove- 

nant; being  a Critical  Revision  of  the  English  Version. 
8vo.  Lond.,  1836.  3s.  6d. 

933  Annotations  on  the  Book  of  the  New  Covenant.  Svo. 

1837. 

934  Supplemented  Annotations.  Lond.,  1838. 

These  books  are  too  learned  for  much  to  be  learned  from  them ; per- 
haps if  they  had  been  more  learned  still  they  would  have  been  useful. 

935  PLATTS  (John).  Self-Interpreting  Testament.  Four  vols., 

8 vo.  Lond.,  1827.  7s.  6d. 

A sort  of  Biblical  Commentary;  A concordance  will  answer  the  pur- 
pose. 

936  QUESNELL  (Pasqtjier.  1634 — 1719).  New  Testament. 

Four  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1719 — 1725.  [The  Gospels  have 
been  reprinted.  Three  vols.,  12mo.  Glasg.,  1830.  S.  7s. 
6d.] 

A sweet  and  simple  French  writer  who  says  many  good  things  of  a very 
harmless  character. 

937  SUMNER  (John  Bird,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury).  Prac- 

tical Exposition  of  the  Gospels,  Acts,  Epistles  of  Paul, 
James,  Peter,  John,  and  Jude.  Nine  vols.,  Svo.  1833  to 
1851.  Is.  6d.  to  2s.  6d.  per  vol. 

Sumner’s  Expositions  are  very  mild  and  can  generally  be  bought  very 
cheap.  The  public  are  pretty  good  judges,  and  the  price  indicates  the 
value.  The  qualities  which  procure  an  archbishopric  are  not  such  as 
qualify  a man  to  be  an  eminent  expositor. 

938  TOWNSEND  (George,  M.  A.)  New  Testament.  Arranged 

in  Chronological  Order.  Notes.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond., 

1838.  S.  5s.  6d. 

This  harmony  has  always  been  in  repute ; but  we  confess  we  like  the 
New  Testament  best  as  we  find  it. 

939  TROLLOPE  (William,  M.  A.)  Analecta  Theologica.  Two 

vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1830 — 35.  5s. 

A condensation  of  the  opinions  of  eminent  expositors,  very  well  exe- 
cuted, and  useful  except  so  far  as  superseded  by  more  modern  works. 

910  WALL  (William,  D.  D.  1645-1727-8).  Brief  Notes.  8vo. 
Lond.,  1730.  ls.6d. 

Explains  some  difficulties,  but  is  far  surpassed  by  other  annotators. 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS, 


209 


941  WESLEY  (John).  See  No.  63. 

942  WHEDON  (D.  D.,  D.  D.  Metli.  Epis.  Ch.,  America).  Pop- 

ular Commentary.  To  be  completed  in  five  vols.,  cr.  8vo. 
5s.  each.  Hodder  and  Stoughton. 

Dr.  Whedon  lacks  common  sense,  and  is  no  expositor.  He  is  furiously 
anti-calvinistic,  and  as  weak  as  he  is  furious. 

943  WHITBY  (Daniel,  D.  D.  1638—1726).  See  No.  51. 

This  is  a part  of  Patrick,  Lowth,  etc. 

944  WILSON  (William,  B.  D.  1762—1800).  Explanation  of 

the  New  Testament  by  the  early  opinions  of  Jews  and 
Christians  concerning  Christ.  8vo.  Camb.,  1838.  3s. 
Follows  a deeply  interesting  line  of  investigation.  It  is  not  a com- 
mentary, but  is  too  good  to  be  omitted. 

945  WORSLEY  (John).  Translation,  with  Notes.  8vo.  Lond., 

1770.  2s. 

Translation  second  rate,  criticism  none,  notes  very  short. 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS. 

946  ADAM  (Thomas.  1701 — 1784.  Of  Wintringham).  Expo* 

sition  of  the  Gospels.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1837. 
4s.  6d. 

Short  and  sweet ; but  Adam  is  not  the  first  man  as  an  expositor. 

947  AQUINAS  (Thomas.  1224 — 1274).  Catena  Aurea.  Com- 

mentary, collected  out  of  the  Fathers.  Six  vols.,  8vo. 
£2  2s.  Lond.  and  Oxf.,  Parker.  1870. 

The  Fathers  are  over-estimated,  by  a sort  of  traditionary  repute,  for  we 
question  if  they  are  much  read.  This  collection  of  extracts  we  always 
look  into  with  curiosity,  and  sometimes  we  find  a pearl. 

948  BONAR  (Horatius,  D.  D.)  Light  and  Truth.  (See  No.  7.) 

949  BOUCHIER  (Barton,  A.  M.)  Manna  in  the  House.  Yol.  I., 

Matthew  and  Mark  ; Vol.  II.,  Luke  ; Vol.  III.,  John. 
Thick  12mo.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1853-4.  5s. 

Mr.  Bouchier  writes  sweetly,  and  his  books  aid  the  devotions  of  many 
families.  Ministers  may  read  them  with  profit ; but  they  are  not  exactly 
intended  for  them. 

950  BROWN  (John,  D.  D„  of  Edinburgh).  Discourses  and 

Sayings  of  our  Lord.  Three  large  8vo.  vols.  31s.  6d. 
Edinb.,  Olipliant  & Co.  1852.  S.  18s. 

Of  the  noblest  order  of  exposition.  Procure  it. 

8* 


410 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS. 


951  BURGON  (J.  W.,  D.  D.)  Plain  Commentary  for  devotional 

reading.  Five  vols.,  f’cap.  8vo.  21s.  Lond.,  Parker. 
1870.  S.  12s. 

Ryle  says : “ This  is  an  excellent,  suggestive,  and  devout  work ; but  I 
cannot  agree  with  the  author  when  he  touches  upon  such  subjects  as  the 
Church,  the  sacraments,  and  the  ministry.” 

952  CAMPBELL  (George,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  Edinb.  1719—1796). 

The  Gospels  translated,  with  Notes.  Four  vols.,  8vo. 
Aberd.,  1814.  4s. 

Clear  and  cold.  Orme  says  it  is  “ one  of  the  best  specimens  of  a trans- 
lation of  the  Scriptures  in  any  language.”  The  preliminary  dissertations 
are  valuable ; the  notes  are  purely  critical. 

953  CHOICE  NOTES  on  Matthew,  drawn  from  Old  and  New 

Sources.  [Also  on  Mark,  Luke,  and  John.]  Cr.  8vo.  4s. 
6d.  each.  Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co.  1868-69. 

These  are  taken  from  the  grander  treasuries  of  Prebendary  Ford  (No. 
957).  We  have  mentioned  them  because  those  who  could  not  afford  to  buy 
Ford’s  books  might  be  able  to  get  these. 

954  CLARKE  (Samuel.  D.  D.  1673 — 1729).  Paraphrase,  with 

Notes.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1741 ; Oxf.,  1816.  2s. 

We  do  not  care  for  paraphrases.  Clarke  was  a learned  man,  but  an 
unsafe  guide. 

955  DENTON  (W.,  M.  A.)  The  Gospels  for  the  Sundays  and 

other  Holy  Days  of  the  Christian  year.  Three  vols.,  8vo. 
15s.,  14s,  and  13s.  each  respectively.  Lond.,  G.  Bell  & Co. 
l»60-63. 

Curates  will  find  this  just  the  thing  they  need  for  sermonizing. 

956  [ELSLEY.]  Annotations  on  the  Gospels  and  Acts.  Three 

vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1827.  S.  2.  6d.  to  4s. 

Wholly  critical  and  philological. 

957  FORD  (James,  M.  A.)  The  Gospels,  illustrated  from 

Ancient  and  Modern  Authors.  Four  vols.,  8vo.  Matthew 
11s. ; Mark,  10s.  ; Luke,  12s. ; John,  12s.  Lond.,  Masters. 
1856—72.  S.  7s.  each. 

Those  who  wish  to' see  what  the  Fathers  said  upon 
the  Gospels,  and  to  read  the  choicest  sayings  of  the  early 
Anglican  bishops,  cannot  do  better  than  consult  Ford, 
who  has  made  a very  rich  collection.  Some  of  the  ex- 
tracts do  not  materially  illustrate  the  text,  but  they  are 
all  worth  reading. 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS, 


211 


958  FORSTER  (John,  M.  A.)  The  Gospel  Narrative,  with  a 

Continuous  Exposition.  Imp.  8vo.  Lond.,  J.  W.  Parker. 
1845.  S.  3s. 

A paraphrase  upon  a good  system,  carefully  executed,  and  instructive. 
Thoroughly  Anglican. 

959  GILBY  (William  S.,  M.  A.)  Spirit  of  the  Gospel.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1818.  2s. 

Interesting  remarks  on  certain  texts.  All  can  be  found  in  other  writers. 

960  HALL  (Charles  H.)  Notes,  for  the  Use  of  Bible  Classes. 

Two  vols.,  8vo.  New  York  and  Lond. , 1857.  S.  8s. 

This  hook  is  as  full  of  reverence  to  Bishops  and  other  Episcopal  arrange- 
ments as  if  it  had  been  “ appointed  to  he  read  in  Churches.”  American 
Episcopalians  can  evidently  be  very  thorough.  Notes  poor. 

961  JACOBUS  (Melancthon  W.,  Pennsylvania).  Notes. 

Three  vols.,  cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  each.  Edinb.,  W.  Olipliant. 
1868-9. 

Jacobus  is  sound  and  plain,  and  is  therefore  a safe 
guide  to  Sunday-School  teachers  and  others  who  need  to 
see  the  results  of  learning  without  the  display  of  it. 

962  JUKES  (Andrew).  Characteristic  Differences  of  the 

Gospels  considered,  as  revealing  various  relations  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  each.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1853. 
S.  Is.  6d. 

Remarks  prompting  thought ; containing  in  a small 
compass  a mass  of  instruction. 

963  LANGE  (J.P.)  See  No.  924. 

The  Gospels  are  among  the  best  of  the  series. 

964  LYTTLETON  (Lord  George).  Gospels  and  Acts,  with 

Notes.  Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1856.  S.  3s. 

Such  remarks  as  most  teachers  coulcLmake  for  themselves. 

965  NORRIS  (John,  Canon  of  Bristol).  Key  to  the  Gospel  Nar- 

rative. Sm.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1871.  S. 
Is.  6d. 

“ Canon  Norris  writes  primarily  to  help  ‘ younger  students ' in  study- 
ing the  Gospels.  But  the  unpretending  volume  is  one  which°all  students 
may  peruse  with  advantage.  It  is  an  admirable  manual  for  those  who  take 
Bible  Classes  through  the  Gospels.” — So  says  the  London  Quarterly. 


212 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS, 


966  OLS HAUSEN  (Hermann,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  the 

Gospels  and  Acts.  Four  vols.,  demy  8vo.  £2  2s.  Cheap 
edition,  four  vols.,  cr.  8vo.  24s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 
1848—1860. 

Olshausen  is  mentioned  by  Alford  as  so  rich  in  original  material,  that 
he  has  often  cited  him  in  his  “ New  Testament  for  English  Readers.’'  He 
is  one  of  the  most  devout  of  the  Germans,  and  a great  scholar ; but  we  are 
not  enamored  of  him. 

967  OXENDEN  (Ashton,  Bishop).  Short  Lectures  on  the 

Sunday  Gospels.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  2s.  6d.  each.  Lond., 

Hatchards.  1869,  etc.  S.  3s. 

Why  Oxenden’s  books  sell  we  do  not  know.  We  would  not  care  to 
have  them  for  a gift.  “ Milk  for  babes  ” watered  beyond  measure. 

968  PEARCE  (Zachary,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Rochester.  1690 — 

1774).  Commentary.  Gospels,  Acts,  and  1 Corinthians. 
Two  vols.,  royal  4to.  Lond.,  1777.  5s.  6d. 

A huge  mass  of  learning,  said  by  great  divines  to  be  invaluable.  To 
most  men  these  volumes  will  simply  be  a heap  of  lumber. 

969  RIDDLE  (J.  E.,  M.  A.)  Commentary.  Royal  8vo.  1843. 

S.  3s. 

Choice  extracts  selected  by  the  author  of  the  well-known  Latin  Dic- 
tionary. Ministers  should  make  such  collections  for  themselves  rather  than 
purchase  them. 

970  RIPLEY  (Henry  J.  Prof.  Newton  Theol.  Instit.,  U.  S.) 

The  Gospels,  with  Notes.  Two  vols.,  post  8vo.  Boston, 
U.  S.,  1837.  S.  2s. 

Adapted  for  Sunday-school  use.  Simple,  brief,  and  practical. 

971  RYLE  (J.  C.,  B.  A.)  Expository  Thoughts.  For  Family 

and  Private  Use.  Matthew,  6s.  ; Mark,  5s. ; Luke  (two 
vols.),  12s.  6d. ; John  (three  vols.),  20s.  8vo.  Lond.,  W. 
Hunt  & Co.  [N.  D.] 

We  prize  these  volumes.  They  are  diffuse,  but  not 
more  so  than  family  reading  requires.  Mr.  Ryle  has 
evidently  studied  all  previous  writers  upon  the  Gospels, 
and  has  given  forth  an  individual  utterance  of  consid- 
erable value. 

972  ST  ABB  ACK  (Thomas,  A.  B.)  Gospels  and  Acts,  with  Anno- 

tations. Two  vols.,  8 vo.  Falmouth,  1809.  3s.  6d. 

Very  useful  in  its  day,  but  quite  out  of  date. 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS. 


213 


073  STIER  (Rudolph,  D.  D.)  The  Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Eight  vols.  in.  four.  8vo.  42s.  T.  & T.  Clark.  38(59. 

974  The  Words  of  the  Risen  Saviour,  and  Commentary- 

on  the  Epistle  of  St.  James.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb., 
Clark.  1859. 

No  one  can  be  expected  to  receive  all  that  Stier  has 
to  say,  but  he  must  be  dull  indeed  who  cannot  learn 
much  from  him.  Bead  with  care,  he  is  a great  instructor. 

975  STOCK  (Eugene).  Lessons  on  the  Life  of  our  Lord.  For 

the  Use  of  Sunday  School  Teachers.  8vo.  4s.  6d.  Lond., 
Ch.  of  England  S.  S.  Institute.  1875. 

For  real  use  a thoroughly  commendable  book.  Teach- 
ers and  preachers  have  here  more  matter  given  them  on 
the  lesson  than  they  are  likely  to  use.  Admirable  ! 

976  TOWNSON  (Thomas,  Archdeacon  of  Richmond.  1715 — • 

3792).  Discourses  on  the  Gospels.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  1810. 
Is.  6d.  to  5s. 

Bishop  Lowth  welcomed  this  as  “ a capital  performance.”  It  is  only  so 
from  Lowth’s  point  of  view. 

977  TRAPP  (Joseph,  D.  D.  1679—1747).  Notes.  8vo.  1748. 

Is.  6d. 

This  Trapp,  grandson  of  the  famous  commentator,  is  the  author  of  a 
wretched  pamphlet  upon  “ the  nature,  folly,  sin,  and  danger  of  being 
righteous  overmuch.”  He  opposed  Whitfield  and  Wesley  with  more  vio- 
lence than  sense.  His  work  is  utterly  worthless,  and  we  only  mention  it 
to  warn  the  reader  against  confounding  it  with  the  productions  of  the  real 
old  Trapp. 

978  TRENCH  (R.  Chenevix,  D.  D.,  Abp.  of  Dublin).  Studies 

on  the  Gospels.  8vo.  8s.  6d.  Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co. 
1874. 

Masterly  studies  on  important  topics.  Students  will 
do  well  to  read  also  Trench’s  “ Sermon  on  the  Mount.” 
We  do  not  always  agree  with  this  author,  but  we  always 
learn  from  him. 

979  WARREN  (Israel,  D.  D.)  Sunday  School  Commentary. 

8vo.  7s.  6d.  1872. 

An  American  work,  imported  by  Hodder  and  Stoughton.  Notes 
slender. 


214 


THE  FOUR  GOSPELS, 


980  WATSON  (Richard).  Exposition  of  Matthew  and  Mark. 

Demy  8vo.,  6s. ; 12mo.,  3s.  6d.  Lond. , 66  Paternoster  Row. 

Arminian  views  crop  up  at  every  opportunity.  The  notes  are  meant  to 
elucidate  difficulties  in  the  text,  and  frequently  do  so. 

981  WESTOOTT  (Brooke  Foss,  M..A.)  Introduction  to  the 

Study  of  the  Gospels.  Cr.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Lond.,  Mac- 
millan & Co.  1860.  S.  6s. 

Worthy  of  high  commendation.  The  author  knows 
the  German  writers,  but  is  not  defiled  by  their  scepti- 
cism. He  is  a man  of  deep  thought,  but  displays  no 
pride  of  intellect.  A man  had  need  be  a thorough  stu- 
dent to^  value  this  Introduction : it  is  not  an  introduc- 
tion to  the  Gospels,  or  to  the  reading  of  them,  but  to 
their  study. 

982  WIESELER  (Karl).  Chronological  Synopsis  of  the  Gospels. 

8vo.  13s.  Lond.,  Bell  & Daldy.  1864.  S.  4s. 

This  important  work  formed  the  basis  both  of  the  Synopsis  Evangelica 
of  Tischendorf,  and  of  the  Historical  Lectures  on  the  Life  of  our  Lord 
by  Bishop  Ellicott.  It  is  much  to  be.  regretted  that  so  many  novel  interpre- 
tations and  baseless  hypotheses  should  have  marred  the  book ; but,  notwith- 
standing all  drawbacks,  it  must  be  a masterly  work  to  have  received  the 
heartiest  commendations  of  the  greatest  scholars  of  the  day.  Only  the 
more  advanced  students  will  care  for  this  Synopsis. 

983  WILLIAMS  (Isaac,  B.  D.)  Devotional  Commentary.  Eight 

vols.,  cr.  8vo.  5s.  each,  viz : Thoughts  on  the  Study  of 
the  Gospels.  Harmony  of  the  Evangelists.  The  Nativity. 
Second  Year  of  the  Ministry.  Third  Year  of  the  Ministry. 
The  Holy  Week.  The  Passion.  The  Resurrection. 
Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1873. 

Anglican  popery  for  quartz,  and  sparkling  grains  of  precious  gospel 
largely  interspersed  as  gold.  We  cannot  imagine  any  spiritual  man  read- 
ing these  works  without  benefit,  if  he  knows  how  to  discriminate. 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  GOSPELS, 


215 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  GOSPELS. 

[As  these  are  somewhat  aside  from  our  plan,  we  mention  but  few.  That 
they  are  very  numerous  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  list  given 
in  Smith’s  Dictionary. — Osiander,  1537 ; Jansen,  1549 ; Stephanus,  1553 ; 
Calvin,  1553 ; Cluver,  1628  ; Calov,  1680  ; Chemnitz,  1593  (continued  by 
Leyser  and  Gerhard,  1704);  Calixt,  1624;  Cartwright,  1627;  Lightfoot, 
1654;  Cradock,  1668;  Lancy,  1689  ; Le  Clerc,  1699  ; Tomard,  1707; 
Burmann,  1712;  Whiston,  1702  ; Rus,  1727-8 — 30 ; Bengel,  1736  ; Hauber, 
1737;  Busching,  1766;  Doddridge,  1739 — 40;  Pilkington,  1747 ; Mao- 
knight,  1756  ; Berthing,  1767  ; Griesbach,  1776,  97,  1809,  22  ; Newcome, 
1778  ; Priestly,  1777,  in  Greek,  and  1780,  in  English;  Michaelis,  1788, 
in  his  Introduction ; White,  1799 ; Planck,  1809  ; Keller,  1802 ; Mut- 
schelle,  1806  ; De  Wette  and  Lucke,  1818  ; Hess,  1822;  Sebastiani,  1806, 
Matthaei,  1 826  ; Kaiser,  1828  ; Roediger,  1829  ; Clausen,  1829 ; Greswell, 
1830  ; Chapman,  1836  ; Carpenter,  1838  ; Reichel,  1840 ; Gehringer,  1842 ; 
Robinson,  1842,  in  Greek,  1846,  in  English  ; Stroud,  1853  ; Anger,  1851 ; 
Tischendorf,  1851.J 

984  CALVIN  (John).  A Harmony  of  Matthew,  Mark,  and 

Luke.  Translated  by  Rev.  W.  Pringle.  Three  vols.,  8vo. 

[Calvin  Trans.  Soc.]  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1845.  S. 

10s.  6d. 

There  are  older  translations  of  this  noble  work,  but 
they  are  less  suitable  to  modern  taste  than  Mr.  Pringle’s. 
Calvin  only  harmonized  three  of  the  evangelists,  but  he 
did  his  work  in  his  usual  superb  manner. 

985  CLARKE  (George  W.)  Harmony,  with  Notes,  etc.  Cr. 

8 vo.  New  York,  1870.  Worth  3s. 

This  American  author  is  greatly  indebted  to  other 
works.  He  has  produced  a very  handy  book  for  teach- 
ers of  youth. 

986  DODDRIDGE  (Philip,  D.  D.)  See  No.  915. 

987  DUNN  (Samuel).  Gospels  Harmonized,  with  Notes  : form- 

ing a complete  Commentary  on  the  Evangelists.  Chiefly 

by  Adam  Clarke.  Thick  8vo.  Lond.,  1838.  3s.  6d. 

Samuel  Dunn  has  taken  Adam  Clarke  as  his  basis,  and  then  built  thereon 
with  stones  from  Lightfoot,  Macknight,  Doddrige,  Greswell,  and  others. 


216 


HARMONIES  OF  THE  GOSPELS. 


It  is,  of  course,  a Wesleyan  harmony,  and  the  reader  is  not  long  before  he 
discovers  that  fact ; but  the  names  of  those  concerned  are  a sufficient 
guarantee  that  it  is  by  no  means  a despicable  production. 

988  GREENLEAF  (Simon,  LL.  D.,  Dane  Professor  of  Law  in 

Harvard  University).  Examination  of  the  Testimony  of 
the  Evangelists  by  the  Rules  of  Evidence  administered  in 
Courts  of  Justice.  With  an  account  of  the  Trial  of  Jesus. 
Thick  8vo.  Lond.,  1847.  5s. 

The  author  is  an  American  lawyer,  very  learned  in  his  profession.  He 
has  issued  a treatise  upon  the  laws  of  evidence,  which  is  a standard  work 
among  his  brethren.  It  was  a happy  thought  on  his  part  to  apply  the  laws 
of  evidence  to  the  narratives  of  the  evangelists.  To  thoughtful  men  of  all 
sorts,  but  to  lawyers  especially,  this  book  is  commended. 

989  GRESWELL  (Edward,  B.  D.)  Dissertations  upon  tho 

Principles  and  Arrangement  of  an  Harmony  of  the  Gospels. 
Four  vols.,  8vo.  Oxf.,  1837.  6s.  to  15s. 

“ The  learned  writer  has  greatly  distinguished  him- 
self as  the  most  laborious  of  modern  harmonists.  His 
work  is  the  most  copious  that  has  appeared,  at  least 
since  the  days  of  Chemnitz’s  folios.”  So  says  Dr.  S. 
Davidson.  To  us  it  seems  to  be  prolix  and  tedious. 

990  LIGHTFOOT  (John,  D.  D.  1602—1675).  Harmony,  Chroni- 

cle, and  Order  of  the  New  Testament.  Folio.  1654. 
2s.  6d. 

Lightfoot  was  a member  of  the  Assembly  of  Divines,  profoundly  skilled 
in  scriptural  and  Talmudical  lore.  He  never  completed  this  harmony,  for 
his  plan  was  too  comprehensive  to  be  finished  in  a life  time. 

991  MACKNIGHT  (James,  D.  D.  1721—1800).  Harmony  of 

the  Gospels,  with  Paraphrase  and  Notes.  Fifth  edition. 
Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1819.  3s.  6d. 

This  author  has  enjoyed  considerable  repute  and  is  still  prized  by 
many,  but  we  can  never  bring  our  soul  to  like  him,  he  always  seems  to  us 
to  be  so  graceless. 

992  MIMPRISS  (Robert).  The  Treasury  Harmony  of  the  Four 

Evangelists.  Thick  demy  4to.,  16s.  Also  cr.  8vo.,  two 
vols.  in  one,  6s.  S.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Partridge  & Co. 
Condensed  and  compressed.  Wonderfully  useful. 

993  NEWCOME  (William,  Archbishop  of  Armagh).  English 

Harmony,  with  Notes.  8vo.  Lond.,  S.  Bagster.  1827.  4s. 
Merely  the  text  arranged  and  a few  rather  ordinary  notes.  We  do  not 
see  what  a man  can  get  out  of  it.  But,  hush  I It  is  by  an  archbishop ! 


LIVES  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST. 


217 


994  ROBINSON  (Edward,  D.  D.,  Prof.  Bib.  Lit.,  New  York). 

Harmony  on  the  Authorized  Version.  Following  the 
Harmony  in  Greek,  by  Dr.  E.  Robinson.  With  Notes. 
8vo.  Lond.,  Religious  Tract  Society.  S.  Is.  6d. 

Robinson’s  Harmony  is  a work  which  has  met  with 
great  acceptance,  and  the  Tract  Society  did  well  to 
bring  out  this  work  for  those  unacquainted  with  Greek. 
The  notes  are  mainly  those  of  Robinson  ; but  Wieseler, 
Greswell,  and  others  have  also  been  laid  under  contri- 
bution by  the  Editor,  who  has  executed  his  work  well. 

995  STROUD  (William,  M.  D.)  Greek  Harmony,  with  Synop- 

sis and  Diatessaron.  4to.  15s.  Lond.,  Bagsters.  1853. 
S.  5s.  6d. 

One  of  the  best  of  the  Harmonies. 

996  WILLIAMS  (Isaac).  See  No.  981. 

Merely  the  text  arranged,  without  note  or  comment. 


LIVES  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST. 

[Here  also  we  can  only  mention  a few  leading  works.] 

See  under  Gospels,  especially  Nos.  973,  974,  975,  and  983. 

997  ANDREWS  (Samuel).  The  Life  of  our  Lord  upon  the 

Earth,  in  its  Historical,  Chronological,  and  Geographical 
Relations.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Strahan  & Co.  1863. 

A good  book  for  a student  to  read  through  before 
taking  up  larger  works.  It  is  a standard  work. 

998  BEECHER  (Henry  Ward).  Life  of  Jesus,  the  Christ. 

Earlier  scenes.  Thick  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nelson.  1872. 
Here  the  great  genius  of  Beecher  glows  and  burns ; but  we  are  disap- 
pointed with  his  book  as  a biography  of  our  Lord. 

999  BENNETT  (James,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  the  History  of  Jesus 

Christ.  Second  edition.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1828. 
6s.  6d. 

Lively  popular  lectures,  full  of  matter,  well  expressed,  and  possessing 
sterling  excellence. 


LIVES  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST. 


218 


1000  ELLICOTT  (C.  J.,  D.  D.,  Bisliop  of  Gloucester  and  Bristol). 

Historical  Lectures.  8vo.  12s.  Loud.,  Longmans.  1869. 
This  great  author  stands  in  the  highest  place  of  honor ; but  having  no 
sympathy  with  what  he  calls  “ the  popular  theology,”  he  should  be  read 
with  considerable  caution. 

1001  FARRAR  (F.  W.,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.)  Life  of  Christ.  Two 

vols.,  demy  8vo.  24s.  Lond.,  Cassell,  Petter  & Galpin. 
1874. 

THE  work  upon  the  subject.  Fresh  and  full.  The 
price  is  very  high  and  yet  the  sale  has  been  enormous. 

1002  FLEETWOOD  (John,  D.  D.)  Life  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

Christ.  Also  the  Lives  of  the  Apostles  and  Evangelists. 
Imp.  8vo.  Lond.,  Mackenzie.  S.  6s. 

This  has  had  a great  run,  and  is  to  be  found  in  farm  houses  and  cot- 
tages. Why  we  cannot  tell,  except  that  the  sellers  of  parts  and  numbers 
are  fine  hands  at  pushing  the  trade,  and  plates  and  pictures  have  caught 
the  simple  purchasers. 

1003  KITTO  (John,  D.  D.)  “Life  and  Death  of  our  Lord.” 

Daily  Bible  Illustrations.  %(See  No.  42.) 

Abounds  in  instructive  matter. 

1004  LANGE  (J.  P.,  D.  D.)  Life  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

With  Additional  Notes,  by  Rev.  Marcus  Dods,  D.  D. 
Four  vols.,  demy  8vo.  28s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1864. 

We  constantly  read  Lange,  and  though  frequently 
differing  from  him,  we  are  more  and  more  grateful  for 
so  much  thoughtful  teaching. 

1005  NEANDER  (J.  A.  W.)  The  Life  of  Jesus  Christ  in  its  His- 

torical Development.  Translated  by  Professors  McClin- 
tock  and  Blumenthal.  Sm.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Bohn. 
1853. 

Good  as  an  answer  to  Strauss,  but  unsatisfactory  from  the  standpoint 
of  evangelical  theology. 

1006  PRESSENSE  (Edmond  de,  D.  D.)  Jesus  Christ:  his 

Times,  Life,  and  Work.  Cr.  8vo.  9s.  Lond.,  Hodder  & 
Stoughton.  1875.  The  above  work  “abridged  by  the 
author,  and  adapted  for  general  readers.”  Cr.  8vo.  5s. 
There  have  been  many  discussions  upon  the  orthodoxy  of  this  work, 
but  it  is  a noble  production,  and  is  written  in  an  adoring  spirit.  The 
accomplished  author  has  made  a valuable  contribution  to  the  cause  of  truth. 


MIRACLES  OF  OUR  LORD, 


219 


Yet  we  are  inclined  to  agree  with  the  writer  who  said,  “ to  write  a life  of 
Christ  is  to  paint  the  sun  with  charcoal.”  The  life  of  a Christian  is  the 
best  picture  of  the  life  of  Christ. 

1007  YOUNG  (John,  LL.  D.)  The  Christ  of  History.  Enlarged 
edition.  Cr.  8vo.  Os.  Lond.,  Daldy,  Isbister  & Co. 
1869. 

“ A work  of  great  excellence,  eloquence,  and  logical  compactness.” 
British  Quarterly  Review. 


MIRACLES  OF  OUR  LORD. 

[Here,  also,  we  oannot  attempt  a complete  list.] 

1008  COLLYER  (Wtlliam  Bengo,  D.  D.,  F.  A.  S.)  Lectures 

on  Scripture  Miracles.  8vo.  Lond.,  1812.  2s.  6d. 

While  reading  we  seem  to  hear  the  rustling  of  a silk  gown.  The  lec- 
tures are  by  no  means  to  be  despised,  but  they  are  far  too  fine  for  our 
taste. 

1009  CUMMING  (John,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  our  Lord’s  Miracles, 

as  earnests  of  the  age  to  come.  12mo.  Lond.,  1851. 
S.  2s. 

Below  the  doctor’s  usual  mark,  which  is  none  too  high. 

1010  HOWSON  (J.  S.,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Chester).  Meditations  on 

the  Miracles.  F’cap.  8vo.  3s.  Lond.,  R.  Tract  Society. 
[1871.] 

Short,  simple,  but  deeply  spiritual  and  suggestive. 

1011  KNIGHT  (James,  A.  M.)  Discourses  on  the  principal 

Miracles.  8vo.  Lond.,  1831.  4s.  6d. 

Mediocre  discourses  much  appreciated  by  the  clergy  who  borrow  their 
sermons. 

1012  MACDONALD  (George,  LL.  D.)  The  Miracles  of  our 

Lord.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  W.  Isbister  & Co.  1870. 
Contains  many  fresh,  childlike,  and,  we  had  almost  said,  dreamy 
thoughts.  It  suggests  side- walks  of  meditation. 

1013  MAGUIRE  (Robert,  M.  A.)  The  Miracles  of  Christ.  Sq. 

12mo.  Lond.,  Weeks  & Co.  1863.  S.  Is.  6d. 

We  have  been  agreeably  disappointed  in  this  book.  The  bad  paper 
offends  the  eye,  but  the  page  bears  many  living,  stirring  thoughts.  If  the 
author  preaches  in  this  fashion  we  do  not  wonder  at  his  popularity. 


220 


PARABLES  OP  OUR  LORD, 


1014  STEINMEYER  (F.  L.,  D.  D.,  Prof.  Theol.,  Berlin).  The 

Miracles  of  our  Lord  in  relation  to  Modem  Criticism. 
Translated  from  the  German  by  L.  A.  Wheatley.  8vo. 
7s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1875. 

No  doubt  a very  scholarly  book,  and  useful  to  those  •whose  heads  have 
been  muddled  by  other  Germans,  but  we  are  weary  of  Teutonic  answers 
to  Teutonic  scepticisms.  We  suppose  it  was  needful  to  hunt  down  the 
rationalists,  for  farmers  hunt  down  rats,  but  the  game  does  not  pay  for  the 
trouble. 

1015  TRENCH  (R.  C.,  D.  D.,  Abp.  of  Dublin).  Notes  on  the 

Miracles  of  our  Lord.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Macmillan. 
1870. 

Brimming  with  instruction.  Not  always  to  our  taste 
in  doctrine  ; but  on  the  whole  a work  of  highest  merit. 


PARABLES  OF  OUR  LORD. 

[A  Selection  from  a long  list,  for  which  see  No.  1026]. 

1016  ANDERSON  (Charles,  M.  A.)  New  Readings  of  Old 

Parables.  Cr.  8vo.  4s.  6d.  Lond.,  1876. 

We  paid  four  precious  shillings  for  this  book,  and  find  seventy  pages 
of  rubbish  and  fifty  more  of  advertisements.  Our  readers  will,  we  hope, 
profit  by  our  experience. 

1017  ARNOT  (William,  D.  D.  Died  1875).  The  Parables  of 

our  Lord.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  T.  Nelson.  1865. 

We  do  not  consider  this  to  be  up  to  our  lamented 
friend’s  usual  high  mark  of  excellence,  but  it  is  of 
great  value. 

1018  BOURDILLON  (Francis,  M.  A.)  The  Parables  explained 

and  applied.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Religious  Tract 
Society.  [N.  D.] 

Sufficiently  common  and  commonplace.  Platitudes  sleepily  worded. 

1019  COLLYER  (William  Bengo,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  Scripture 

Parables.  8vo.  Lond.,  1815.  2s.  (See  No.  1008). 

1020  CUMMING  (John,  D.  D.)  Foreshadows;  or  Lectures  on 

our  Lord’s  Parables.  Cr.  8vo.  Lond.,  1852.  2s.  (See 
No.  1009). 

The  Doctor  evidently  prints  his  sermons  without  much  revision.  They 
are  pleasing,  popular,  and  (of  course)  rather  prophetic. 


PARABLES  OF  OUR  LORD. 


221 


1021  GRES  WELL  (E.,  B.  D.)  Exposition  of  the  Parables,  etc. 

Five  vols  in  six,  8vo.  Oxf.,  1834.  27s. 

A vast  heap  of  learning  and  language.  The  work,  though  padded  out, 
stilted  in  style,  and  often  fanciful,  is  a mine  for  other  writers. 

1022  GUTHRIE  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  The  Parables  read  in  the 

Light  of  the  Present  Day.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond., 
Strahan.  1874. 

Twelve  Parables  treated  in  Dr.  Guthrie’s  lively,  sparkling  manner. 
Flowers  in  abundance. 

1023  REACH  (Benj.)  Exposition.  Folio.  Lond.,  1801.  S. 

10s.;  also  four  vols.,  8vo.  S.  10s.;  and  one  vol.,  Imp. 
8vo.  1856.  10s. 

Although  our  honored  predecessor  makes  metaphors  run  on  as  many 
legs  as  a centipede,  he  has  been  useful  to  thousands.  His  work  is  old- 
fashioned,  but  it  is  not  to  be  sneered  at. 

1024  KNIGHT  (James,  A.  M.)  Discourses  on  the  Principal 

Parables.  8vo.  Lond.,  1829.  4s.  6d.  (See  No.  1011). 

1025  LISCO  (Frederick  Gustav).  Parables  Explained.  F’cap. 

8vo.  5s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1840.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Largely  composed  of  citations  from  Luther  and  Calvin.  The  remarks 
will  assist  in  elucidating  the  design  of  the  parables. 

1026  TRENCH  (R.  C.,  D.  D.)  Notes  on  the  Parables.  Eleventh 

edition.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co.  1870. 

We  do  not  like  Trench’s  theology  in  many  places, 
hut  he  is  a capital  writer.  The  student  will  find  a very 
complete  list  of  expositions  on  the  Parables  in  the  appen- 
dix at  the  close  of  Trench’s  work. 

1027  UPJOHN  (W.)  Discourses  on  the  Parables.  Three  vols., 

sm.  8 vo.  1824. 

Earnestly  Calvinistic  sermons,  full  of  old-fashioned  Gospel.  Not  very 
original. 


222 


MATTHEW. 


MATTHEW. 

[See  also  works  on  the  Four  Gospels.] 

1028  ABBOTT  (Lyman,  U.  S.  A.)  New  Testament.  Vol.  I. 

Matthew  and  Mark.  Sq.  8vo.,  9s.  Lond.,  Hodder.  1875. 
Intended  for  workers,  and  likely  to  be  useful  to  them. 

1029  ADAMSON  (H.  T.,  B.  D.)  Matthew  expounded.  Thick 

8 vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Sampson  Low.  1871. 

This  book  reads  to  us  like  utter  nonsense.  W e question  if  any  one 
except  the  author  will  ever  be  able  to  make  head  or  tail  of  it,  and  he  had 
better  be  quick  about  it,  or  he  will  forget  what  he  meant. 

1030  ALEXANDER  (Joseph  Addison,  D.  D.)  Matthew 

Explained.  Post  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1870.  S. 
3s.  6d. 

Dr.  Alexander’s  last  work.  He  died  before  it  was 
quite  finished.  It  is  complete  to  Chapter  XYI.  Its 
value  is  great. 

1031  BEAUSOBRE  (Isaac  de,  1659—1738),  and  L’ENFANT 

(Jaques,  1661 — 1728).  A New  Version,  with  a Commen- 
tary. 8vo.  Camb.,  1790  ; Lond.,  1823,  etc.  Is.  6d.  to  3s. 
The  brief  notes  are  purely  literal  or  illustrative,  and  are  remarkably 
pertinent.  The  mass  of  the  volume  is  taken  up  with  an  introduction  to 
the  New  Testament. 

1032  BENHAM  (W.)  Matthew,  with  Notes.  Cr.  8vo.  Lond., 

National  Society.  [1861].  S.  Is. 

With  this  in  his  hand  a teacher  would  be  much  aided  in  conducting 
his  class.  It  is  written  by  a teacher  for  teachers.  The  remarks  are  not 
very  profound,  nor  always  such  as  we  should  endorse,  but  they  are  well 
fitted  for  their  purpose. 

1033  BLACKWOOD  (Christopher).  An  Exposition  upon  the 

Ten  First  Chapters  of  Matthew.  4to.  1649.  9s. 

This  learned  divine  became  a Baptist  through  studying  the  arguments 
against  believers’  baptism.  This  proves  his  candor.  His  comment  is 
somewhat  out  of  date,  but  it  is  still  good. 

1034  CLARKE  (George  W.)  Notes.  Cr.  8vo.  New  York, 

1870. 

Good  notes  for  teachers.  Well  compiled.  A fit  companion  to  No. 
985. 


MATTHEW. 


223 


1035  DICKSON  (Dayid).  A Briefe  Exposition  of  Matthew. 

8vo.  1651.  7s.  6d. 

A perfect  gem.  The  work  is,  to  men  of  our  school, 
more  suggestive  of  sermons  than  almost  any  other  we 
have  met  with. 

1036  GODWIN  (John  H.)  New  Translation,  with  Brief  Notes. 

Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Bagsters.  1863. 

Dr.  Godwin  is  a painstaking  elucidator  of  the  word,  and  his  plan  is  an 
excellent  one.  Students  in  college  will  value  him. 

1037  GOODWIN  (Harvey,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Carlisle).  Com- 

mentary. Cr.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  G.  Bell  & Sons.  1857. 
S.  4s.  to  5s.  6d. 

An  important  work,  which  may  be  consulted  with  advantage. 

1038  KELLY  (William).  Lectures  on  the  Gospel  of  Matthew. 

6s.  Lond.,  G.  Morrish.  1868. 

We  cannot  accept  the  forced  and  fanciful  interpretations  here  given. 

1039  MARLORATUS  [MARLORAT]  (Augustine.  1560—1562). 

Exposition.  Translated  by  Thomas  Tymme.  Folio. 
Lond.,  1570. 

Marlorate  was  an  eminent  French  reformer,  preacher,  and  martyr.  His 
commentaries  contain  the  cream  of  the  older  writers,  and  are  in  much 
esteem,  but  are  very  rare.  He  wrote  on  the  whole  New  Testament,  but 
we  have  in  English  only  the  Gospels  and  Jude. 

1040  MORISON  (James,  D.  D.)  Matthew’s  Memoirs  of  Jesus 

Christ.  8vo.  14s.  Lond.,  Hamilton.  1870. 

We  differ  greatly  in  doctrinal  views  from  Dr.  Morison, 
but  we  set  a great  price  upon  his  Matthew  and  Mark, 
which  deserve  the  utmost  praise. 

1041  OVERTON  (Charles).  Expository  Preacher.  Course  of 

Lectures  on  Matthew.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 
1850.  S.  6s.  6d.  Scarce. 

Solid,  sound,  soporific  sermons ; intended  for  lay  helpers  to  read,  with 
the  prayers  appended.  They  will  not  make  the  hearers  lie  awake  at  nights, 
or  cause  them  palpitations  of  heart  through  excess  of  original  and  strik- 
ing thought. 

1042  Parker  (Joseph,  D.  D.)  Homiletic  Analysis.  Matthew. 

8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  1870.  3s.  6d. 

Dr.  Parker  is  an  able  though  somewhat . But  stop,  he  is  a near 

neighbor  of  ours. 


224 


MARK. 


1043  PENROSE  (John).  Lectures  on  Matthew.  12mo.  Lond., 

1832.  Is.  6d. 

The  author  says  of  his  work,  “ no  novelty  of  any  kind,  no  originality 
either  of  thought  or  research  will  be  found  in  it."  Why,  then,  did  ho 
print  it  ? 

1044  THOMAS  (David,  D.  D.)  Genius  of  the  Gospel.  Homi- 

letical  Commentary.  8vo.  Lond.,  Dickinson.  1873. 
8s.  6d. 

We  hardly  know  a more  suggestive  book. 

1045  WARD  (Richard).  Tlieologicall  Questions,  Dogmaticall 

Observations,  and  Evangelicall  Essays  upon  the  Gospel 
according  to  Matthew.  Wherein  about  two  thousand  six 
hundred  and  fifty  profitable  Questions  are  discussed ; 
and  five  hundred  and  eighty  points  of  Doctrine  noted, 
etc.,  etc.  Folio.  Lond.,  1640.  12s. 

A huge  mass  of  comment,  in  which  are  thousands  of  good  things  mostly 
set  forth  by  way  of  question  and  answer.  Few  could  ever  read  it  through ; 
but  to  a wise  minister  it  would  be  a mine  of  wealth. 


MARK. 

1046  ALEXANDER  (Joseph  Addison,  D.  D.)  Mark  Ex- 

plained. Post  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1866.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Alexander  expounds  Mark  as  an  independent  record, 
and  does  not  constantly  tell  us  to  “see  Matthew  and 
Luke.”  Hence  the  book  is  complete  in  itself,  and  the 
author’s  learning  and  care  have  made  it  invaluable. 

1047  B.  (G.)  Practical  Commentary  on  Mark,  in  Simple  and 

Familiar  Language.  12mo.  3s.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1863. 
The  different  paragraphs  are  treated  under  most  suggestive  headings, 
which  are  the  most  useful  parts  of  the  book.  Infant  baptism  is  far  too 
prominent ; but  the  little  work  is  likely  to  be  very  helpful. 

1048  GODWIN  (John  H.)  Mark.  A New  Translation,  with 

Notes  and  Doctrinal  Lessons.  Cr.  8vo.  4s.  6d.  Lond., 
Hodder  & Stoughton.  1869.  S.  2s. 

We  like  the  brief  doctrinal  lessons,  which  are  rather  a new  feature. 
They  will  serve  admirably  well  as  sermon-hints.  The  notes  and  transla- 
tion are  really  good. 


LUKE. 


225 


1049  GOODWIN  (Harvey,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Carlisle).  Com- 

mentary. Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  G.  Bell  & Sons.  1860. 
Contains  much  very  helpful  comment.  Produced  in  connection  with 
the  Cambridge  Working  Men’s  College. 

1050  MORISON  (James,  D.  D.)  A Commentary.  Large  8vo. 

14s.  Lond.,  Hamilton,  Adams  & Co.  1873. 

A deeply  learned  work  ; we  know  of  none  more 
thorough.  Differing  as  we  do  from  this  author’s  theol- 
ogy,  we  nevertheless  set  a high  price  upon  this  pro- 
duction. 

1051  PETTER  (George).  Commentary  on  Mark.  Two  vols., 

folio.  Lond.,  1661.  £5  12s.  6d. 

Mr.  J.  C.  Kyle  says  of  this  work  : “ For  laborious  investigation  of  the 
meaning  of  every  word,  for  patient  discussion  of  every  question  bearing 
on  the  text,  for  fulness  of  matter,  for  real  thoughtfulness,  and  for  con- 
tinued practical  application,  there  is  no  work  on  St.  Mark  which,  in  my 
opinion,  bears  comparison  with  Petter’s.  Like  Goliath’s  sword,  there  is 
nothing  like  it.”  We  have  found  far  less  fresh  thought  in  it  than  we 
expected,  and  think  it  rather  tedious  reading. 


LUKE. 

[S*e  also  on  the  Gospels.  Oosterzee  in  Lange  is  excellent.] 

1052  FOOTE  (James,  M.  A.)  Lectures  on  Luke.  Two  vols. 

8vo.  Third  edition.  Edinb.,  Ogle  & Murray,  and  Oliver 
& Boyd  ; Lond.,  Hamilton,  Adams  & Co.  1858.  S.  9s. 

We  frequently  consult  this  work,  and  never  without 
finding  in  it  things  new  and  old.  To  preachers  who 
will  not  steal  the  lectures,  but  use  them  suggestively, 
they  will  be  extremely  serviceable. 

1053  GODET  (F.,  Professor  of  Theology,  Neuchatel).  Com- 

mentary on  Luke.  Translated  by  E.  W.  Shelders,  B.  A., 
and  M.  D.  Cusin.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  Clark. 
1875. 

Dr.  Meyer  says  : “ To  an  immense  erudition,  to  a liv- 


226 


JOHN, 


ing  piety,  Godet  unites  a profound  feeling  of  reality ; 
there  is  here  a vivifying  breath,  an  ardent  love  for  the 
Saviour,  which  helps  the  disciple  to  comprehend  the 
work,  the  acts,  the  words  of  his  Divine  Master.” 

1054  GOODWIN  (Harvey,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  Luke.  Cr. 

8vo.  9a.  Lond.,  G.  Bell  & Sona.  1865. 

This  writer  endeavors  to  give  the  results  of  learning  in  such  a manner 
that  working  men  may  understand  them.  He  says  many  good  things. 

1055  MAJOR  (J.  R.,  M.  A.)  Luke,  with  English  Noted.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1826.  3s. 

Notes  compiled  with  a view  to  the  divinity  examinations  at  Cambridge, 
containing  a considerable  amount  of  information. 

1056  THOMSON  (James,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  Luke,  in  a 

Series  of  Lectures.  Three  vols.,  8vo.  Edinb.,  A.  & C. 
Black  ; Lond.,  Longmans.  1849.  6s.  to  8s. 

Eminently  instructive.  Clear  good  sense,  freshness, 
and  earnestness  are  well  combined.  We  have  had  great 
pleasure  in  examining  these  lectures. 

1057  VAN  DOREN  (W.  H.,  of  Chicago).  Suggestive  Com- 

mentary on  the  New  Testament,  on  an  original  plan. 
[Luke,  two  vols.,  cr.  8vo.,  8s.  nett.l  Lond.,  Dickinson. 
1871. 

Well  named  “ suggestive  ” ; it  is  all  suggestions. 
It  teems  and  swarms  with  homiletical  hints. 


JOHN. 

1058  ANDERSON  (Robert.  1792 — 1843).  Practical  Exposition 

of  John.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  Lond.,  1841.  4s. 

By  an  evangelical  clergyman : sound,  but  not  very  original. 

1059  AUGUSTINE.  Commentary  on  John.  Two  vols.  of  Works 

of  Augustine,  now  in  course  of  issue  by  T.  & T.  Clark. 
Edinb. 

1060  Homilies  on  the  Gospel  and  First  Epistle  of  John. 

Two  vols.  of  the  Library  of  the  Fathers,  30s. ; or  to  sub- 
scribers, 22s.  6d.  Lond.  and  Oxf.,  Jas.  Parker  & Co. 

To  the  wise  a mine  of  treasure.  Augustine  is  often  fanciful ; but  even 


JOHN-. 


227 


his  fancies  shows  a master-mind.  Much  that  passes  for  new  is  stolen  from 
this  prince  of  theologians. 

1061  BEITH  (Alexander,  D.  D.)  Expository  Discourses.  Cr. 

8 vo.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1857.  3s.  6d. 

Discourses  which  must  have  been  very  profitable  to  the  hearers.  Stu- 
dents will  do  better  with  works  which  are  more  condensed. 

1062  BESSER  (Rudolph,  D.  D.)  Biblical  Studies  on  John. 

Translated  from  the  German  by  M.  G.  Huxtable.  Two 
vols.  cr.  8vo.  12s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1861 — 62. 

4‘  The  character  of  this  commentary  is  practical  and  devotional.  There 
are  often  very  exquisite  devotional  passages,  aud  a vein  of  earnest  piety 
runs  through  the  whole  work.” — Literary  Churchman. 

1063  BROWN  (George  J.,  M.  A.)  Lectures,  forming  a Contin- 

uous Commentary.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  Rivingtons. 
1863.  S.  5s.  6d. 

The  plan  of  this  work  will  prevent  its  being  widely  used ; but  its  exe- 
cution strikes  us  as  being  uncommonly  able.  It  is  a gathering  up  of  other 
men’s  materials  and  an  amalgamation  of  them.  It  is  intensely  Episcopa- 
lian, even  to  Baptismal  Regeneration,  yet  it  brings  a good  deal  of  light  to 
bear  on  the  Gospel  of  John,  and,  if  to  be  met  with  at  a very  low  figure,  it 
is  not  to  be  passed  by. 

1064  DRUMMOND  (D.  T.  K.,  B.  A.)  Exposition  of  the  Last 

Nine  Chapters  of  John.  12mo.  Seeleys.  1850.  2s. 
Good,  but  not  very  striking. 

1065  DITNWELL  (Francis  Henry,  B.  A.)  Commentary  on  the 

Authorized  Version  of  John,  compared  with  the  Sinaitic, 
Vatican,  and  Alexandrian  Manuscripts,  and  also  with 
Dean  Alford’s  revised  translation.  8vo.  15s.  Lond., 
J.  T.  Hayes.  1872.  S.  10s. 

The  notes  from  various  authors  are  good,  and  the  various  readings  are 
useful ; but  we  fail  to  see  any  very  special  value  in  the  volume.  The  in- 
terpretation of  the  Third  of  John  is  eminently  unsatisfactory  ; Mr.  Dun- 
well  teaches  Baptismal  Regeneration. 

1066  FAWCETT  (John,  A.  M.  1769—1851).  Exposition  of 

John.  Three  vols.,  8vo.,  21s.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1860. 
S.  8s. 

Good  evangelical  sermons. 

1067  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  John. 

Two  vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  Clark.  1868.  S.  8s.  6d. 
Like  others  of  this  author’s  works  : solid,  but  dry. 


228 


JOHN. 


1068  HUTCHESON  (George).  Exposition  of  John.  Folio. 

Lond.,  1657.  Reprinted,  roy.  8vo.  Lond.,  Ward.  1841. 
4s.  to  6s. 

Excellent ; beyond  all  praise.  It  .is  a full-stored 
treasury  of  sound  theology,  holy  thought,  and  marrowy 
doctrine. 

1069  MEYER  (H.  A.  W.,  D.  D.)  See  No.  929. 

1070  O’CONOR  (W.  A.)  Commentary.  Cr.  8vo.  10s.  6d. 

Lond.,  Longmans.  1872. 

In  this  translation  the  first  verse  runs  thus : li  In  origin  the  Word  was 
and  the  Word  was  the  Deity,  and  the  Word  was  Deity.”  Who  likes  this, 
or  understands  it.  The  notes  do  not  charm  us. 

1071  SHEPHERD  (R.,  D.  D.)  Notes  on  the  Gospel  and  Epistles 

of  John.  4to.  Lond.,  1796.  Imp.  8vo.  Lond.,  Murray. 
1841.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Though  the  author  opposed  Socinianism,  we  cannot  but  regard  his  views 
as  an  introduction  to  that  heresy.  The  spirit  of  the  book  is  vicious. 

1072  THOLUCK  (Augustus  F.,  D.  D.,  Ph.  D.)  Commentary. 

8vo.  9s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1860.  S.  4s.  6d. 

More  spiritual  than  is  usual  with  German  theologians, 
and  quite  as  scholarly  as  the  best  of  them. 

1073  TITTMANN  (K.  C.,  Tlieol.  Prof.  1744—1820.)  Commen- 

tary. Two  vols.,  cr.  8 vo.  8s.  Bib.  Cab.  Edinb.,  T.  & 
T.  Clark.  1844.  S.  4s.  6d. 

Horne,  in  speaking  of  this  work  in  the  German,  without  endorsing  all 
Tittmann’s  opinions,  declares  it  to  be  the  most  valuable  commentary  on 
John  extant  in  so  small  a form.  Our  judgment  is  less  commendatory. 

1074  TRAHERON  (Bartholomew.  Died  1716.)  An  Exposition 

of  a Parte  of  S.  Johannes  Gospel  made  in  sondrie  read- 
ings in  the  English  Congregation.  12mo.  1558.  Very 
rare,  80s. 

A little  quaiut  old  book.  Not  intrinsically  worth  the  price,  nor  a tenth 
of  it. 

1075  VAN  DOREN  (W.  H.,  D.  D.)  Suggestive  Commentary 

on  John,  Vol.  I.,  containing  chap.  i. — ix.  Cr.  8vo.  5s. 
nett.  Yol.  II.  in  the  press.  Lond.,  Dickinson.  1872. 

If  men  who  read  this  volume  do  not  preach  the  better 
for  so  doing,  it  is  not  Mr.  Van  Doren’s  fault ; they  must 
be  Van  Dolts  by  nature,  though  they  may  ignore  the 
family  name. 


PARTS  OP  JOHN. 


229 


PAKTS  OF  JOHN. 


[A  selection  of  authors  is  all  we  can  give.] 

1076  HILDERSHAM  (Arthur).  Lectures  on  John  IV.  Folio. 

Lond.,  1628  and  1656.  4s.  to  6s. 

A mass  of  godly  teaching  ; hut  rather  heavy  reading. 

1077  TURNER  (Samuel  H.,  D.  D.)  Essay  on  our  Lord’s  Dis- 

course at  Capernaum,  recorded  in  John  VI.  Cr.  8vo. 
New  York,  1851.  S.  2s. 

"Written  with  the  immediate  view  of  combating  the  errors  of  Dr.,  after- 
wards Cardinal,  Wiseman,  who  appeals  to  this  chapter  for  proofs  of  “ the 
real  presence.” 

1078  PATTERSON  (John  B.,  of  Falkirk).  Lectures  on  John 

XIV.,  XV.  and  XVI.  Cr.  Svo.  Edinb.,  T.  Clark.  1859. 
S.  2s. 

Solid  discourses,  containing  much  thought  happily  expressed.  Yet 
withal  somewhat  laborious  reading. 

1079  ALEXANDER  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  Great  High  Priest 

within  the  Vail.  John  XVII.  18mo.  Lond.,  1857. 
Is.  3d. 

Sound  theology  and  honest  exposition.  Multum  in 
parvo. 

1080  BROWN  (John,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  John  XVII.  8vo. 

Lond.,  Hamilton,  1850.  S.  5s. 

Dr.  Brown  is  always  deep,  full,  and  overflowing. 

1081  BURGESS  (Anthony).  One  Hundred  and  Forty-five 

Sermons  on  John  XVII.  Folio.  Loud.,  1656.  7s.  6d. 

A standard  work  by  a great  Puritan.  Somewhat 
prolix. 

1082  LANDELS  (William,  D.  D.)  The  Saviour’s  Parting 

Prayer  for  his  Disciples.  12mo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Elliot 
Stock.  1872. 

Sermons  of  a high  order  : style  admirable,  but  rather  diffuse.  To  be 
estimated  rather  from  a homiletical  than  an  expository  point  of  view. 


230 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


1083  NEWTON  (George.  1602—1681).  John  XVII.  Un- 

folded. Folio.  Lond.,  1660.  Reprinted  in  Nichol’s 
Commentaries.  Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1867. 
S.  4s. 

If  not  one  of  the  chief  of  the  Puritans,  Newton  was 
hut  little  behind  the  front  rank  in  ability.  Joseph 
Alleine  was  his  assistant  minister  at  Taunton.  His 
writings  are  plain  and  profitable. 

1084  PIERCE  (Samuel  Eyles).  Exposition  of  the  Lord’s 

Prayer,  in  John  XVII.  8vo.  1812.  4s.  6d. 

Always  sweet  as  honey  to  those  of  strong  Calvinistic 
views. 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 

[See  also  under  Gospels.] 

1085  ALEXANDER  (Joseph  Addison,  D.  D.)  The  Acts 

Explained.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  15s.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1869. 

In  all  respects  a work  of  the  highest  merit. 

1086  ALFORD  (Henry,  D.  D.)  Homilies  on  the  former  part 

of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Ch.  I. — X.  8vo.  8s. 
Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1858.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Not  so  good  as  his  critical  notes  ; but  such  an  author 
always  deserves  attention. 

1087  ARNOT  (William,  D.  D.)  The  Church  in  the  House. 

Post  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1873. 

Intended  to  be  read  in  families  on  Sabbath  after- 
noons ; but  all  who  are  acquainted  with  Dr.  Arnot  will 
know  that  even  his  simplest  expositions  are  rich  and 
full.  He  hath  dust  of  gold. 

1088  BAUMGARTEN  (M.,  Ph.  D.)  Apostolic  History.  Three 

vols.,  8vo.  27s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1854.  S.  10s.  6d. 
“An  exposition  at  once  profoundly  scientific  and  sublimely  Christian, 
one  of  the  most  pressing  wants  of  our  times.”— Eclectic  Review.  Alford 
calls  it  excellent,  though  somewhat  fanciful. 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


231 


1089  BENNETT  (James,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  the  Acts.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1847.  2s.  6d.  to  4s. 

A good  specimen  of  plain  and  popular  pulpit  exposition.  Dr.  Bennett 
fights  very  earnestly  for  the  Congregationalist  view  of  Baptism,  for  which 
we  do  not  blame  him  ; for  common  humanity  leads  us  to  admire  a man 
who  struggles  for  a weak  cause. 

1090  BENSON  (George,  D.  D.  1699—1763).  History  of  the 

first  planting  of  the  Christian  Religion.  Three  vols., 
4to.  Lond.,  1756.  4s.  to  6s.  6d. 

Dull,  but  displaying  considerable  research.  Benson  was  an  Arian. 
1001  BONAR  (H.,  D.  D.)  Light  and  Truth.  Vol.IIL  See  No.  7. 

1092  BOUCHIER  (Barton,  A.  M.)  Manna  in  the  House:  or 

Daily  Expositions  of  the  Acts.  12mo.  Lond.,  1858.  S. 
Is.  6d.  to  2s.  6d. 

Superior  family  reading.  Bouchier  did  not  write  for  students,  but  for 
households,  yet  even  the  more  advanced  may  learn  from  him. 

1093  BREWSTER  (John,  M.  A.)  Lectures  on  the  Acts.  8vo. 

1830.  3s.  6d. 

A sip  of  Howson  or  Hackett  is  worth  a barrel  of  these  weak  and  watery 
prelections. 

1094  CALVIN  (John).  Commentaries  upon  the  Acts.  Trans- 

lated by  C.  Featherstone.  4to.  Lond.,  1585.  6s. 

This  forms  the  basis  of  the  Calvin  Translation  So- 
ciety’s edition. 

1095  COOK  (F.  C.,  M.  A.,  Canon  of  Chester).  The  Acts,  with  a 

Commentary.  8vo.  12s.  6d.  Lond.,  Longmans.  1866. 
S.  2s.  6d. 

Contains  many  useful  notes,  instructive  to  fairly  educated  readers. 

1096  CRADOCK  (Samuel,  B.  D.)  The  Apostolical  History,  con- 

taining the  Ats,  Labours,  Travels,  Sermons,  etc.,  of  the 
Apostles.  Folio.  Lond.,  1762.  5s. 

Tillotson,  Reynolds,  Doddridge,  and  others  highly  commended  the 
works  of  this  Puritan  writer.  The  style  in  which  the  “ Apostolical  His- 
tory n is  got  up  is  most  uninviting ; the  book  is  nearly  all  italics.  Many 
modern  works  far  excel  it. 

1097  DENTON  (W.,  M.  A.)  Commentary  on  the  Acts.  Two 

vols.,  8vo.  [Vol.  I.  only  issued.  18s.]  Lond.,  G.  Bell. 
1874. 

A complete  list  of  all  authors  upon  the  Acts  will  he 
found  in  this  very  learned  and  exhaustive  work.  We  do 


232 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES, 


not  always  agree  with  the  author,  but  he  has  done  his 
work  thoroughly  well. 

1098  DICK  (John,  D.  D.  1764—1833).  Lectures  on  the  Acts. 

Sm.  8vo.  Glasg.,  1848.  4s. 

Interesting  lectures  upon  selected  portions  of  the  Acts.  This  work  has 
"been  reprinted  in  America,  whence  we  obtained  a copy  of  the  second  edi- 
tion ; this  shows  that  it  has  been  highly  esteemed. 

1099  DU  VEIL  (C.  M.,  D.  D.  A learned  converted  Jew.  Died 

about  1700).  Explanation  of  the  Acts.  8vo.  Lond., 
1685.  Reprinted  by  Hansard  Knollys  Society.  8vo. 
1851.  4s.  to  6s. 

Claude’s  prefatory  letter  highly  commends  this  work.  The  author 
defends  the  immersion  of  believers  with  earnestness. 

1100  FAWCETT  (John,  M.  A.)  Exposition  of  the  Acts. 

Three  vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Lond.,  Hatchards.  1860.  S.  5s. 

A fine  series  of  expository  discourses.  Sometimes 
we  differ. 

1101  FORD  (J.,  M.  A.)  The  Acts,  illustrated  from  Ancient  and 

Modern  Authors.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Masters.  1856. 
(See  No.  957.) 

1102  GLOAG  (Paton  J.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  the  Acts. 

Two  vols.,  demy  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1870 

Dr.  Hackett  says  of  Dr.  Gloag’s  work  : “ I have 
examined  it  with  special  care.  Dor  my  purposes  I have 
found  it  unsurpassed  by  any  similar  work  in  the  English 
language.  It  shows  a thorough  mastery  of  the  material, 
philology,  history,  and  literature  pertaining  to  this  range 
of  study,  and  a skill  in  the  use  of  this  knowledge,  which 
places  it  in  the  first  class  of  modern  expositions.” 

1103  GUALTFIERUS  (Rodulphus.  1529—1586).  A Hundred 

Threescore  and  Fifteen  Homelyes  or  Sermons  vppon  the 
Actes  of  the  Apostles,  made  by  Radulplie  Gual there,  of 
Tigurine,  and  Translated  out  of  Latine  [by  John  Bridges, 
Vicare  of  Herne].  Folio.  Black  Letter.  Lond.,  1572. 
30s. 

Full  of  Protestantism.  The  author  judged  that,  as  Luke  who  wrote  the 
Acts,  was  a physician,  his  book  wae  meant  to  be  medicine  to  the  Church. 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


233 


1104  HACKETT  (Horatio  B.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  the 

Original  Text  of  the  Acts.  [Several  American  editions. 
Reprinted  in  two  vols.,  in  The  Bunyan  Library.]  7s.  to 
10s. 

Hackett  occupies  the  first  position  among  commen- 
tators upon  the  Acts.  The  Bunyan  Library  edition 
omits  some  of  his  most  valuable  critical  observations. 

1105  HODGSON  (Robert,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Carlisle).  Lectures 

upon  the  first  Seventeen  Chapters  of  the  Acts.  8vo. 
Loud.,  1845.  Is.  6d. 

Deficient  in  Gospel  clearness,  and  in  every  other  respect,  except  ardent 
churchisin. 

1106  HUMPHRY  (William  Gilson,  B.  D.)  Commentary  on 

the  Acts.  Second  edition.  8vo.  Lond.,  J.  W.  Parker  & 
Son.  1854.  3s. 

Exegetical  remarks  upon  the  Greek  text.  Very  good  from  a philologi- 
cal point  of  view,  but  professedly  of  an  elementary  character. 

1107  KELLY  (W.)  Lectures  Introductory  to  the  Study  of  the 

Acts,  Catholic  Epistles,  and  Revelation.  Cr.  8vo.  5s. 
Lond.,  Broom.  1870.  S.  3s. 

By  a man  “ who,  born  for  the  universe,  narrowed  his  mind  ” by  Darby- 
ism. 

1108  LANGE  (J.  P.)  Commentary  : from  the  German  of  Lechler 

andGerock.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  Clark.  1864. 
S.  10s.  6d.  Also  one  vol..  Imp.  8vo.  21s.  (See  page  38). 
Adds  nothing  to  our  knowledge  of  the  Acts ; but  the  homiletical  hints 
are  useful. 

1109  LIGHTFOOT  (John,  D.  D.  1602—1675).  Commentary. 

Edited  by  J.  R.  Pitman,  A.  M.  8vo.  1823.  [Vol.  VIII. 
of  Lightfoot’s  Works.] 

Few  now-a-days  will  care  for  this  author,  whose  learning  ran  mostly  in 
Talmudical  channels.  He  was  profound,  but  not  always  discreet. 

1110  MACBRIDE  (John  David,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  the  Acts 

and  Epistles.  8vo.  Oxf.,  1858.  2s.  6d. 

This  author  simply  gives  a continuous  narrative.  He  has  also  written 
on  the  Gospels.  We  mention  him  that  the  student  may  not  purchase  his 
work  as  a Commentary. 

1111  MASKEW  (T.  R , B.  A.)  Annotations  on  the  Acts.  With 

College  and  Senate-House  Examination  Papers.  12mo. 
Camb.,  1847.  Is.  6d. 

A handbook  to  the  Acts,  viewing  it  simply  as  a Greek  book  ; prepared 
for  the  use  of  students  passing  through  the  university. 


234 


ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


1112  MIMPRISS  (R.)  The  Acts  and  Epistles,  according  toGres- 

well’s  Arrangement.  8vo.  1837.  2s. 

A handy  book  for  teachers. 

1113  NEANDER  (J.  A.  W.)  History  of  the  Planting  and  Train- 

ing of  the  Christian  Church  by  the  Apostles.  Translated 
by  J.  E.  Ryland.  Two  vols.,  cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  each. 
Lond.,  Bohn’s  Library,  Bell  & Sons.  1851.  S.  4s.  6d. 
Also  in  Cabinet  Library. 

The  work  rather  of  an  historian  than  of  a commentator.  Bold,  devout, 
learned,  and,  on  the  whole,  sound.  The  result  of  wide  research,  and  deep 
learning. 

1114  NORRIS  (J.  P.(  M.  A.)  Key  to  the  Acts.  Sm.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

Lond.,  Rivingtqps.  1871. 

A well  executed  sketch  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  giving  the  student 
a clear  idea  of  the  run  of  the  book.  Like  the  same  author’s  “ Key  to  the 
Gospels”  (No.  965),  it  would  be  most  useful  in  Bible  classes. 

1115  OLSHAUSEN  (H.,  D.  D.)  See  No.  960. 

Denton  says  that  “ this  is  a brief,  hasty,  and  not  well-digested  supple- 
ment to  Olshausen’s  volumes  on  the  Gospels.”  He  thinks  all  the  German 
writers  to  be  much  overrated,  and  we  are  much  of  his  mind. 

1116  PYLE  (T.,  M.  A.  1674 — 1756).  Paraphrase.  Two  vols., 

8vo.  1795.  2s. 

This  pile  of  printed  paper  may  safely  be  left  on  the  bookseller’s  shelves. 

1117  STIER  (Rudolph,  D.  D.)  The  Words  of  the  Apostles. 

8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1869. 

Devout,  scholarly,  full  of  thought.  To  be  used 
discreetly. 

1118  STOCK  (Eugene).  Lessons  on  the  Acts.  For  Sunday 

School  Teachers  and  other  Religious  Instructors.  8vo. 
2s.  6d.  Lond.,  Ch.  of  England  S.  School  Institute.  1874. 

Dor  half-a-crown  the  teacher  may  here  obtain  one 
of  the  most  useful  books  known  to  us.  Though  produced 
for  members  of  the  Church  of  England,  we  recommend 
it  heartily  to  ministers  and  others  who  are  preparing 
addresses  to  the  young. 

1119  THOMAS  (DAVID,  D.  D.)  Homiletic  Commentary  on  the 

Acts.  8vo.  Lond.,  Dickinson.  1870.  6s.  6d. 

Many  of  the  homiletic  outlines  strike  us  as  “ much  ado  about  nothing  ” ; 
still,  if  a man  should  read  this  work  and  get  no  help  from  it,  it  would  be 
his  own  fault. 


LIVES  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


235 


1120  THOMSON  (James,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  the  Acts.  8vo. 

Lond.,  A.  Hall,  Virtue  & Co.  1854.  S.  2s.  6d. 

We  fail  to  see  much  here  of  service  to  a preacher. 

1121  TROLLOPE  (W.,  M.  A.)  Commentary  on  the  Acts,  with 

Examination  Questions,  for  the  B.  A.  Degree.  12mo. 
Camb.,  1854.  2s.  6d. 

Well  adapted  to  accomplish  the  design  indicated  in  the  title. 

1122  VAUGHAN  (Charles  J.,  D.  D.)  Lectures.  Three  vols. 

F’cap.  8vo.  4s.  6d.  each.  Lond.,  Macmillan.  1864,  etc. 

Not  only  does  Dr.  Vaughan  expound  his  texts  in  the 
ablest  manner,  but  he  introduces  passages  of  Scripture 
s6  aptly  that  he  suggests  discourses.  Bating  his  Chureh- 
ianity,  we  cannot  too  highly  commend  him. 


LIVES  OF  THE  APOSTLES,  &c. 

1123  KITTO  (John,  D.  D.)  “The  Apostles  and  the  Early 

Church.”  Daily  Bible  Illustrations.  (See  No.  42.) 

1124  BAUR  (Ferdinand  Christian,  D.  D.)  Paul,  his  Life  and 

Works.  From  the  German.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  21s. 
Lond.,  William  & Norgates.  1873-75. 

Of  the  very  Broad  Church  school.  Not  at  all  to  our  mind. 

1125  BEVAN  (Joseph  Gurney).  Life  of  Paul.  8vo.  Lond., 

1807.  2s. 

For  the  Society  of  Friends.  Contains  nothing  which  adds  to  our  infor- 
mation upon  the  life  of  Paul.  It  may  have  been  useful  in  its  day,  but  it  is 
superseded. 

1126  BINNEY  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  Paul : his  Life  and  Ministry. 

Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1870. 

Mr.  Binney  says,  “ This  work  is  strictly  an  outline  of  the  life  of  St.  Paul 
and  it  is  nothing  more.”  It  is  a capital  preparation  for  reading  Lewin 
and  Conybeare  and  Howson. 

1127  BLUNT  (Henry,  A.  M.)  Lectures  upon  the  History  of  St. 

Paul.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  Sixth  edition.  Lond.,  1835. 
2s.  6d. 

Printed  in  such  large  and  widely-leaded  type  that  a very  little  matter 
goes  a long  way.  Very  good,  but  not  striking. 


236 


LIVES  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


1128  CONYBEARE  (W.  J.,  M.  A.)  and  HOWSON  (J.  S.,  D.  D., 

Dean  of  Chester).  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.  Library 
edition.  Two  vols.,  4to.  48s.  Intermediate  edition, 
two  vols.,  sq.  cr.  8vo.  21s.  Student’s  edition,  condensed, 
one  vol.,  cr.  8vo.  9s.  Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co. 

Far  superior  to  any  other  work  on  the  subject.  It 
stands  like  some  o’ertopping  Alp,  a marvel  among 
Scriptural  biographies.  We  have  not  space  to  mention 
Howson’s  minor  works  connected  with  Paul,  but  they 
are  all  good. 

1129  EADIE  (John,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.)  Paul,  the  Preacher.  An 

Exposition  of  liis  Discourses  and  Speeches,  as  recorded 
in  the  Acts.  Cr.  8vo.  Lond.,  Griffin.  1859.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Designed  to  give  ordinary  readers  a juster  and  fuller 
conception  of  the  doctrine  and  life-work  of  the  apostle. 
An  able  work. 

1130  LEWIN  (Thomas,  M.  A.,  F.  S.  A.,  Barrister-at-Law). 

Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.  Second  edition,  much 
enlarged.  Two  vols.,  demy  4to.  42s.  Lond.,  G.  Bell  & 
Sons.  1875.  [Second-hand  copies  of  first  edition.  1851. 
6s.  to  9s. Jj 

Dr.  Gloag  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Acts  says  : 
“ Two  works  are  especially  instructive,  and  deserve  care- 
ful perusal.  The  Life  and  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  by 
Lewin,  and  the  classical  work  on  the  same  subject  by 
Conybeare  and  Howson.  In  the  former  the  historical 
connections  of  the  Acts  are  chiefly  stated,  and  in  the 
latter  its  geographical  relations.” 

1131  LYTTLETON  (Geokge,  Lord).  Observations  on  the  Con- 

version and  Apostleship  of  St.  Paul.  In  a letter  to 
Gilbert  West,  Esq.  8vo.  Lond.,  1747.  [Numerous 
editions.  The  Tract  Society’s  edition.  F’cap.  8vo.  3s.] 

Gilbert  West  and  his  friend  Lord  Lyttleton,  both  men  of  acknowledged 
talents,  had  imbibed  the  principles  of  infidelity  from  a superficial  view  of 
the  Scriptures.  Fully  persuaded  that  the  Bible  was  an  imposture,  they 
were  determined  to  expose  the  cheat.  Mr.  West  chose  the  Resur- 
rection of  Christ,  and  Lord  Lyttleton  the  Conversion  of  St  Paul,  for  the 


LIVES  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 


237 


subject  of  hostile  criticism.  Both  sat  down  to  their  respective  tasks,  full 
of  prejudice,  and  a contempt  for  Christianity.  The  result  of  their  separate 
attempts  was  that  they  were  both  converted  by  their  endeavors  to  over* 
throw  the  truth  of  Christianity  ! They  came  together,  not  as  they  expected, 
to  exult  over  an  imposture  exposed  to  ridicule,  but  to  lament  their  folly, 
and  to  congratulate  each  other  on  their  joint  conviction,  that  the  Bible  was 
the  word  of  God.  Their  able  inquiries  have  furnished  two  most  valuable 
treatises  in  favor  of  revelation  ; one,  entitled  “ Observations  on  the  Con- 
version of  St.  Paul,”  and  the  other  “ Observations  on  the  Resurrection  of 
Christ.” 

1132  MACDUFF  (J.  R.,  D.  D.)  St.  Paul  in  Rome.  Or.  8vo.  4s. 

6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1871.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Sermons  preached  in  Rome,  into  which  are  ably  introduced  eloquent 
mention  of  the  existing  traditions  and  remains  which  associate  the  Apostle 
with  that  great  city. 

1133  BISCOE  (Richard,  M.  A.,  Preb.  of  St.  Paul’s.  Died  1748). 

History  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Confirmed  from 
other  Authors,  and  considered  as  full  evidence  of  the 
Truth  of  Christianity.  8vo.  Oxf.,  1840.  4s. 

1134  PALEY  (William,  D.  D.  1743—1805).  Horse  Paulin®. 

Numerous  editions.  The  Religious  Tract  Society  pub- 
lishes the  Horae  Paulin®,  with  Notes,  and  Hor®  Apos- 
tolic®, by  Rev.  T.  Birks.  12mo.  3s. 

1135  TATE  (James,  Canon  of  St.  Paul’s).  The  Hor®  Paulin® 

carried  out  and  illustrated.  8vo.  Lond.,  1840. 

Though  not  commentaries,  the  three  works  just  mentioned  are  sources 
of  information  not  to  be  neglected  by  the  student  of  the  Acts. 

1136  RIVINGTON  (Francis).  Life  and  Writings  of  St.  Paul. 

Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Sampson  Low  & Co.  1874.  S.  2s. 
Nobody  possessing  Conybeare  and  Howson  will  need  this  work,  though 
in  the  absence  of  better  this  would  have  been  serviceable. 

1137  SMITH  (Thornley).  Saul  of  Tarsus.  2s.  and  2s.  6d. 

Lond.,  J.  Blackwood  & Co.  S.  Is.  3d. 

Thornley  Smith  always  deserves  attentive  reading. 

1138  BLUNT  (Henry,  A.  M.)  Lectures  upon  the  History  of  St. 

Peter.  12mo.  Lond.,  1830.  Is.  (Fpr  remarks,  see 
No.  1127). 

1139  GREEN  (Samuel  G.,  D.  D.,  President  of  Rawdon  College). 

The  Apostle  Peter:  his  Life  and  Lessons.  12mo.  3s. 
Lond.,  S.  School  Union.  1873. 

Contains  a large  amount  of  needful  information,  con- 


238 


THE  APOSTOLICAL  EPISTLES. 


densed  and  well  arranged.  Dr.  Green  is  the  writer  on 
Peter’s  biography. 

1140  KRUMMACHER  (F.  W.,  D.  D.)  St.  John  the  Evangelist. 

12mo.  Bib.  Cabinet.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  S.  3s. 

The  author’s  name  is  a sufficient  guarantee.  He  has  also  written  on 
Cornelius  and  Stephen. 

1141  GOULBURN  (Edward  Meyrick,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Norwich). 

Acts  of  the  Deacons : Lectures  on  Acts  VI. — IX.  Sm, 
8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1869.  S.  2s.  9d. 

An  interesting  topic  well  handled. 


THE  APOSTOLICAL  EPISTLES. 

1142  BENSON  (George,  D.  D.  1699 — 1763).  Paraphrase  and 

Notes  on  1 and  2 Thessalonians,  1 and  2 Timothy,  Phile- 
mon, Titus,  and  the  Seven  Catholic  Epistles.  Two  vols., 
4to.  1734.  6s.  to  8s. 

Benson  has  closely  followed  Locke’s  method,  though  scarcely  with 
equal  footsteps,  and  has  paraphrased  those  Epistles  which  Locke  did  not 
live  to  complete.  In  the  consecutive  reading  of  an  Epistle  Locke  and  Ben- 
son are  great  assistants,  but  as  Benson  was  an  Arian  he  must  be  read  with 
great  caution.  (See  No.  1150). 

1143  DENTON  (W.)  Commentaries  on  the  Epistles  for  Sundays 

and  Holy  Days.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  36s.  Lond.,  G.  Bell  & 
Co.  1869—71.  S.  21s. 

Will  be  a treasure  to  Churchmen.  Denton  is  a good  author. 

1144  DICKSON  (David).  Exposition  of  all  the  Epistles.  Folio. 

Lond.,  1659.  12s.  to  15s. 

Dickson  is  a writer  after  our  own  heart.  For  preach- 
ers he  is  a great  ally.  There  is  nothing  brilliant  or 
profound  ; hut  everything  is  clear  and  well  arranged, 
and  the  unction  runs  down  like  the  oil  from  Aaron’s 
head.  In  this  volume  the  observations  are  brief. 


THE  APOSTOLICAL  EPISTLES. 


239 


1145  ELLICOTT  (Charles  J.,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Gloucester  and 
Bristol).  Commentary  on  St.  Paul’s  Epistles.  Five 
vols.,  8vo.  Galatians,  8s.  6d. ; Ephesians,  8s.  6d.  ; Pas- 
toral Epistles,-  10s.  6d  ; Philippians,  Colossians,  and 
Philemon,  10s.  6d. ; Thessalonians,  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Long- 
mans. 1861-64.  S.  31s.  6d. 

Dr.  Eadie  says,  “Ellicott  is  distinguished  by  close 
and  uniform  adherence  to  grammatical  canon,  without 
much  expansion  into  exegesis.  ” Dr.  Riddle  thinks  Elli- 
cott  to  be  in  many  respects  without  an  English  rival. 
For  scholars  only. 


1146  FERGUSON  (James).  Exposition  of  the  Epistles  to  the 
Galatians,  Ephesians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  and  Thes- 
salonians. 8vo.  Ediub.,  1659-74.  8s.  to  10s.  6d.  Re- 
printed, one  vol.,  large  8vo.  Lond.,  1841.  3s.  to  5s.  6d. 

He  who  possesses  this  work  is  rich.  The  author 
handles  his  matter  in  the  same  manner  as  Hutcheson  and 
Dickson,  and  he  is  of  their  class — a grand,  gracious, 
savory  divine. 


1147  GLOAG  (Paton  J.,  D.  D.)  Introduction  to  the  Pauline 

Epistles.  8vo.  12s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1874. 

Hot  an  exposition,  but  an  exceedingly  valuable  in- 
troduction, illustrating  the  design,  date,  and  circum- 
stances of  the  inspired  letters. 

1148  JOWETT  (Benjamin,  M.  A.,  Regius  Professor,  Oxford). 

Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians,  Galatians,  and  Romans 
[Greek  and  English] ; with  Critical  Notes.  Two  vols., 
8vo.  Lond.,  Murray.  1859.  S.  £2  2s.  to  £2  10s. 
Professor  Jowett’s  most  unseemly  attack  on  Paul,  as  an  apostle,  as  a 
thinker,  as  a writer,  and  as  a man,  only  proves  his  own  incapacity  for  form- 
ing a just  judgment  either  of  the  apostle  or  of  himself. 


1149  KELLY  (William).  Lectures  Introductory  to  the  Study 
of  Paul’s  Epistles.  Demy  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  G.  Morrish. 
1869.  S.  3s. 

Of  the  same  character  as  Mr.  Kelly’s  other  works.  (See  No.  1222). 


240 


THE  APOSTOLICAL  EPISTLES. 


1150  LOCKE  (John,  M.  A.  1632—1704).  Paraphrase  and  Notes 

on  the  Epistles  to  the  Galatians,  Corinthians,  Romans 
and  Ephesians.  4to.  Lond.,  1733.  Also  8vo.  editions. 
2s.  6d. 

Anything  from  such  a man  is  worthy  of  attention,  and  this  piece,  as  a 
protest  against  rending  texts  from  their  connection,  is  most  judicious. 
The  paraphrase,  though  open  to  criticism,  is  executed  with  great  candor, 
and  really  illuminates  the  text.  (See  Benson,  No.  1142.) 

1151  LYTH  (John,  D.  D.  The  Homiletical  Treasury.  Romans 

to  Philippians.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Elliot  Stock.  1869. 
The  plan  of  this  book  is  surpassingly  useful,  but  Dr.  Lyth  does  not 
carry  it  out  to  our  satisfaction.  It  is  easy  to  divide  an  egg  by  letting  it 
drop  on  the  floor,  and  in  this  fashion  this  author  divides  texts. 

1152  MACKNIGHT  (J.,  D.  D.  1721—1800).  Translation  with 

Commentary  and  Notes.  Six  vols.,  8vo.,  1816;  also  four 
vols.,  8vo.,  and  one  vol.,  royal  8vo.  10s. 

To  be  read  with  great  caution.  We  do  not  admire  this  author. 

1153  MARSTON  (Charles  Dallas,  M.  A.)  Expositions  on  the 

Epistles.  12mo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw  & Co.  1868. 

S.  Is.  9d. 

Expositions  of  each  Epistle  as  a whole.  An  admirable  method  of  in- 
struction. To  do  this  in  a popular  style  is  as  praiseworthy  as  it  is  diffi-  * 
cult.  Mr.  Marston  has  succeeded. 

1154  PAGET  (Alfred  T.,  M.  A.)  On  the  Unity  and  Order  of 

the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul.  8vo.  Lond.,  Rivingtons. 
1851.  Is. 

Suggests  a rich  vein  for  the  student’s  own  working.  Few,  we  fear  will 
carry  it  out,  but  these  will  prize  the  Epistles  more  than  others. 

1155  PEILE  (T.  W.,  D.  D.)  Annotations  on  the  Apostolical 

Epistles,  for  the  use  of  Students  of  the  Greek  Text. 
Four  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1848-52. 

Anti-calvinistic  in  doctrine,  and  in  style  involved,  obscure,  and  terribly 
parenthetical.  The  purchase  of  the  volumes  would  be  a heavy  investment. 

1156  PRICHARD  (C.  E.,  M.  A.)  Commentary.  Ephesians, 

Philippians,  and  Colossians.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1865. 

S.  Is.  6d. 

Not  too  diffuse  : among  the  notes  are  some  admirable  hints  which  may 
be  worked  out.  The  book  is  a small  one  for  so  large  a subject. 

1157  SLADE  (James,  M.  A.)  Annotations  on  the  Epistles.  For 

the  use  of  Candidates  for  Holy  Orders.  Two  vols.,  8vo. 
Lond.,  1836.  5s. 

This  is  practically  a continuation  of  Elsley’s  work  (No.  956),  which 
closed  with  the  Acts.  Notes  dry  and  sapless,  but  from  a literary  point  of 
view  respectable. 


ROMANS. 


241 


ROMANS. 

[Our  space  does  not  permit  us  to  repeat  the  names  of  authors  mentioned 
under  Acts  and  Apostolical  Epistles,  but  we  urge  the  student  care- 
fully to  refer  thereto.] 

1158  ADAM  (Thomas).  Paraphrase  on  Romans  I.  to  XI.  8vo. 

1774  ; 12mo.  1805.  Is.  6d.  to  2s. 

A poor  paraphrase ; very  correct  and  evangelical,  but  thin  as  Adam’s 
ale.  We  are  disappointed,  for  the  “Private  Thoughts”  of  the  same  au- 
thor are  highly  esteemed. 

1159  ANDERSON  (Robert,  of  Brighton.  1792—1843).  Expo- 

sition of  Romans.  12mo.  Lond.,  1837.  2s.  6d. 

After  the  manner  of  Charles  Bridges.  Full  of  holy  unction  and  devout 
meditation. 

1160  BROWN  (John,  of  Wamphray).  Exposition  of  Romans. 

4to.  Edinb.,  1766.  10s.  to  12s. 

By  a Calvinist  of  the  old  school.  Heavy,  perhaps  ; but  precious. 

1161  BROWN  (John,  D.  D.,  Edinb.)  Analytical  Expositions  of 

Romans.  Large  8vo.  14s.  Edinb.,  W.  Oliphant  & Co. 
1857.  S.  7s.  to  9s. 

Dr.  Brown’s  work  must  be  placed  among  the  first  of 
the  first-class.  He  is  a great  expositor. 

1162  CALVIN  (John).  Commentary  on  Romans.  Translated 

by  Christopher  Roodell.  4to.,  Black  Letter.  1583.  9s. 
Also  sm.  8 vo.,  with  Life,  by  Beza.  1834.  2s.  9d. 

1163  CHALLIS  (James,  M.  A.,  F.  R.  S.,  F.  R.  A.  S.)  Transla- 

tion of  Romans,  with  Notes.  8vo.  4s.  Lond.,  G.  Bell  & 
Sons.  1871. 

The  translation  is  made  in  the  current  language  of  the  day.  The  notes 
are  mainly  critical. 

1164  CHALMERS  (T.,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  Romans.  Four  vols., 

8vo.  1827.  Four  vols.,  12mo.  Edinb.,  Edmonston  & Co. 
1854.  S.  8s.  6d. 

Our  preferences  as  to  expositions  lie  in  another  direction ; but  we  can- 
not be  insensible  to  the  grandeur  and  childlike  simplicity  which  were  com- 
bined in  Chalmers. 

1165  EDWARDS  (Timothy,  A.  M.)  Paraphrase,  with  Annota- 

tions, on  Romans  and  Galatians.  4to.  Lond.,  1752.  2s.  6d. 
Watt  calls  this  a judiciously  compiled  work  from  the  best  comments. 
We  judge  it  to  be  poor  as  poverty  itself. 


242 


ROMANS. 


1166  EWBANK  (W.  W.)  Commentary,  with  Translation  and 

Notes.  Two  vols.,  post  8vo.  Lond.,  J.  W.  Parker.  1850. 
S.  3s. 

A sound  evangelical  comment,  very  good  and  gracious.  In  condensed 
thought  this  work  is  not  rich : it  is  adapted  for  general  reading. 

1167  FORD  (J.,  M.  A.)  Romans.  Illustrated  from  Church  of 

England  Divines.  8vo.  12s.  Masters,  1862.  S.  7s. 
(See  No.  957). 

1168  FORBES  (John,  LL.  D.)  Analytical  Commentary,  tracing 

the  Train  of  Thought  by  the  Aid  of  Parallelism,  with 
Notes,  etc.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1868. 

We  think  Dr.  Forbes  carries  the  idea  of  parallelism 
further  than  it  should  go.  It  can  only  be  applied 
strictly  to  poetical  books,  which  Romans  is  not.  He  tries 
to  bring  out  the  other  side  of  the  truths  taught  in  Hodge, 
Edwards,  and  Calvin  ; but  we  confess  our  preference  of 
those  authors  to  himself.  The  work  will  greatly  edify 
those  whom  it  does  not  confuse. 

1169  FRY  (John,  B.  A.  Lectures.  8vo.  Lond.,  1816.  2s. 
Having  no  theory  to  serve  in  this  instance,  Fry  writes  to  edification. 

1170  GODWIN  (John  H.,  Hon.  Prof.,  New  Coll.,  Lond.)  New 

Translation,  with  Notes.  8vo.  6s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hodder  & 
Stoughton.  1873. 

Such  a book  as  students  need  while  studying  the  Greek  text  in  college. 

1171  HALDANE  (R.  1764 — 1842).  Exposition  : with  Remarks 

on  the  Commentaries  of  Mack  night  and  others.  8vo. 
12s.  6d.  Edinb.,  W.  Oliphant  & Co.  1874.  S.  9s. 

Dr.  Chalmers  styled  this  “ a well-built  commentary,” 
and  strongly  recommended  it  to  students  of  theology. 
In  his  “ Sabbath  Readings  ” he  writes  : “ I am  reading 
‘Haldane’s  Exposition  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,’ 
and  find  it  solid  and  congenial  food.” 

1172  HINTON  (J.  Howatid).  Exposition.  8vo.  6s.  Lond., 

1863.  S.  Is.  6d. 

Not  believing  in  the  constant  parallelism  of  the  Epistles,  we  care  very 
little  for  this  treatise,  much  as  we  esteem  the  author. 


ROMANS. 


243 


1173  HODGE  (Charles).  Commentary.  8vo.  Philadelphia, 

1835,  etc.  Reprinted  by  Rel.  Tract  Society,  12mo.  3s. 

Hodge’s  method  and  matter  make  him  doubly  useful 
in  commenting.  He  is  singularly  clear,  and  a great 
promoter  of  thought. 

1174  KELLY  (William).  Notes.  12mo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.,  G. 

Morrish.  1873. 

Many  of  the  remarks  are  admirable,  but  the  theories  supported  are  un- 
tenable. 

1175  KNIGHT  (Robert).  Commentary.  8vo.  Lond.,  1854. 

2s.  6d. 

Not  at  all  to  our  mind.  The  author  often  seems  to  us  rather  to  becloud 
the  text  than  to  explain  it. 

1176  LANGE  (J.  P.,  D.  D.)  and  FAY  (F.  R.)  Commentary  on 

Romans.  (See  page  38,  and  No.  924). 

1177  MARTYR  (Peter.  1500 — 1562).  A most  learned  and 

fruitful  Commentary  on  Romans.  Folio.  1568.  30s. 

Being  in  black  letter,  and  very  long,  few  will  ever  read  it ; but  it  con- 
tains much  that  will  repay  the  laborious  book -worm. 

1178  OLSHAUSEN  (H.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  Romans.  8vo. 

10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1850. 

Nobody  seems  very  enthusiastic  as  to  Olshausen,  but  some  authors 
have  borrowed  from  his  pages  more  than  they  have  confessed.  Personally 
we  do  not  care  for  him,  but  many  prize  and  all  respect  him. 

i 

1179  PARR  (Elnathan,  B.  D.)  A Short  View  of  the  Epistle 

to  the  Romans.  [Chap.  I. ; II.,  1,  2 ; and  VIII.  to  XVI.] 
This  Exposition  forms  nearly  the  whole  of  “The 
Workes”  of  Parr.  Fourth  edition.  Small  folio.  1651. 
10s.  The  quartos  do  not  contain  the  Exposition  of  Chap. 
I.  and  II. 

The  style  is  faulty,  but  the  matter  is  rich  and  full  of 
suggestions.  We  regret  that  the  work  is  not  complete, 
and  is  seldom  to  be  met  with  except  in  fragments. 

1180  PLUMER  (William  S.,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.)  Commentary,  with 

Introduction  on  the  Life,  Times,  Writings,  and  Character 
of  Paul.  Imp.  8vo.  14s.  Edinb.,  W.  Oliphant.  [N.  D.] 

Plumer  is  a laborious  compiler,  and  to  most  men  his  works  will  be  of 
more  use  than  those  of  a more  learned  writer. 


244 


ROMANS. 


1181  PRIDHAM  (Arthur).  Notes.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Yapp. 

1862. 

Sound  and  gracious,  but  somewhat  dull. 

1182  PURDUE  (E.,  A.  M.)  Commentary  on  Romans.  8vo. 

Dub.,  1855.  Is.  6d. 

Not  important. 

1183  ROBINSON  (T.,  D.  D.)  Suggestive  Commentary  on 

Romans.  [Van  Doren  Series  of  Commentaries.]  Two 
vols.,  cr.  8vo.  8s.  nett.  Lond.,  Dickinson  & Higliam. 
1871. 

A good  book  in  a good  style.  Worth  any  amount  to 
preachers. 

1184  STEPHEN  (John,  A.  M.)  Expositions  on  Romans.  A 

Series  of  Lectures.  12mo.  Aberd.,  1857.  2s.  6d. 

Sound  in  doctrine,  practical  in  tone ; above  mediocrity. 

1185  STUART  (Moses.)  Commentary  on  Romans.  8vo.  Cs. 

Lond.,  W.  Tegg  & Co.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Moses  Stuart  is  judged  to  have  been  at  his  best  in  Romans  and  Hebrews. 
The  present  work  is  in  some  points  unsatisfactory,  on  account  of  certain 
philosophico-tbeological  views  which  he  endeavors  to  maintain.  Mr.  Hal- 
dane denounced  him  as  by  false  criticism  “ misrepresenting  the  divine 
testimony  in  some  of  the  most  momentous  points  of  the  Christian  scheme.” 
The  charge  was  too  true. 

1186  TERROT  (C.  H.,  A.  M.,  Bishop  of  Edinburgh).  Romans 

[in  Greek],  with  Introduction,  Paraphrase,  and  Notes. 
8vo.  Lond.,  1828.  Is.  6d. 

Anti-Calvinistic.  Why  do  not  such  writers  let  Romans  alone  ? 

1187  THOLUCK  (A.  F.)  Exposition  of  Romans.  Two  vols., 

f’cap.  8vo.  8s.  Bib.  Cabinet  Series.  Edinb.,  T.  Clark. 
1842.  S.  4s. 

Moses  Stuart  confesses  his  great  obligations  to  this  eminent  divine, 
who  far  exceeds  the  most  of  his  German  brethren  in  spirituality,  and  is 
not  behind  them  in  scholarship ; yet  even  he  is  none  too  orthodox  nor  too 
reverent  in  his  treatment  of  Holy  Scripture. 

1188  VAUGHAN  (Charles  John,  D.  D.)  Romans.  The 

Greek  Text,  with  English  Notes.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co.  1874.  S.  4s. 

Very  valuable  to  students  of  the  Greek.  The  result 
of  independent  study  and  honest  labor. 


ROMANS. 


245 


1189  WALFORD  (W.)  Cur®  Romanae.  12mo.  Lond.,  1846. 

Is.  6d. 

Walford  makes  comments  of  considerable  value ; he  does  not  stand  in 
the  front  rank,  but  his  mediocrity  is  respectable. 

1190  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  Romans.  Three 

vols.,  cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  each.  Lond.,  Fullarton  & Co.  1861. 
Wardlaw  interprets  with  great  sobriety  and  spirituality,  and  we  never 
consult  him  in  vain,  though  we  do  not  always  agree  with  him. 

1191  W1LLET  (Andrew).  Hexapla  : that  is,  a Sixfold  Com- 

mentary upon  Romans.  Folio.  1611.  6s.  to  7s.  6d. 

(See  No.  143). 

1192  WILLIAMS  (H.  W.,  Wesleyan  Minister).  Exposition. 

Cr.  8vo.  6s.  Lond.,  66  Paternoster  Row.  1869.  S.  2s.  Gd. 
This  epistle  has  a fascination  for  Arminian  writers ; it  affords  them 
an  opportunity  for  showing  their  courage  and  ingenuity.  Mr.  Williams’s 
book  is  instructive. 

1193  WILSON  (Thomas.  Puritan.  Died  1621).  Commentary 

on  Romans.  4to.  Lond.,  1614.  Folio,  1627  and  1653. 
3s.  6d.  to  5s.  6d. 

Intended  for  the  less-instructed  among  the  preacher’s  hearers,  and  put 
into  the  form  of  a dialogue.  It  is  very  solid,  but  does  not  contain  much 
which  is  very  striking  or  original. 

1194  SCLATER  (W.,  D.  D.  Died  1626).  A Key  to  the  Key  of 

Scripture ; or  an  Exposition,  with  Notes,  upon  the 
Romans,  Chap.  I.,  II.,  III.  4to.  1611  and  1629.  4s. 

An  antique,  but  precious  book. 

1195  MORISON  (James,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  the  Third  Chapter 

of  Romans.  8vo.  12s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hamilton.  1866.  S. 
7s.  6d. 

A scholarly  and  exhaustive  exposition.  When  we  do  not  agree  with 
Dr.  Morison,  we  pay  homage  to  his  great  learning  and  critical  skill. 

1196  FRASER  (James.  1700—1796).  The  Doctrine  of  Sancti- 

fication. Explication  of  Romans  VI.  to  VIII.  1 — 4.  8vo. 
Edinb.,  1830.  Offered,  new,  by  Ogle  & Murray,  2s.  Gd. 

Dr.  John  Brown  says  : “ Fraser’s  Scripture  Doctrine 
of  Sanctification  is  well  worth  studying.  The  old  Scotch 
divine  is  rude  in  speech,  but  not  in  knowledge.” 

1197  ELTON  (Edward,  B.  D.)  Sundry  Sermons  upon  Romans 

VII.,  VIII.,  and  IX.  Folio.  Lond.,  1653.  8s.  to  10s. 

The  style  is  plain  and  homely,  but  the  matter  is  of 


246 


I.  & II.  CORINTHIANS. 


the  choicest  kind.  This  old  folio  is  like  an  old  skin 
bottle,  with  a rough  exterior,  but  filled  within  with  the 
product  of  the  rarest  vintage.  Such  books  as  this  we 
never  tire  of  reading. 

1198  KOHLBRUGGE  (H.  F.,  D.  DM  of  Elberfeld).  Romans  VIL* 

paraphrased.  12mo.  Lond.,  1854.  S.  Is.  6d. 

An  instructive  rendering  of  this  deeply  experimental  chapter. 

1199  BINNING  (Hugh.  1627—1653).  The  Sinner’s  Sanctuary. 

Forty-eight  Sermons  on  Romans  VIII.  4to.  1670.  Also 
Vols.  I.  and  II.  of  his  Works.  Three  vols.,  12mo.  Eainb., 
1839.  3s.  to  4s.  6d. 

The  writer  of  Binning’s  Memoir  says  : “ There  is  a 
pure  stream  of  piety  and  learning  running  through  the 
whole,  and  a very  peculiar  turn  of  thought,  which  ex- 
ceeds the  common  rate  of  writers  on  this  choice  part  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures.” 

1200  HORTON  (Thomas,  D.  DO  Forty-six  Sermons  on  Romans 

VIII.  Lond.  Folio.  1674.  3s. 

Full  of  matter,  well,  but  rather  too  formally,  arranged. 
The  sermons  are  very  prim  and  orderly. 

1201  WINSLOW  (Octavius,  D.  D.)  No  Condemnation  in  Christ. 

[On  Romans  VIII.]  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  Lond.,  Shaw.  1860. 
Dr.  Winslow  is  always  sound  and  sweet;  but  his  works  are  better 
adapted  for  general  readers  than  for  students.  He  is  extremely  diffuse.  • 


I.  &II.  CORINTHIANS. 

[See  also  under  Apostolical  Epistles.] 

1202  BILLROTH  (Dr.  Gustav.  1808 — 1836).  Commentary  on 
the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  8s. 
Bib.  Cabinet  Series.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  S.  2s.  9d. 
To  be  prized  for  its  criticism.  The  author  tries  to  bring  forth  from 
each  passage  the  sense  which  the  Apostle  intended  it  to  convey.  Obser- 
vations and  reflections  there  are  none  ; but  we  are  not  among  those  who 
throw  away  “ the  dry  bones  of  criticism” — bones  are  as  needful  as  meat 
though  not  so  nourishing. 


I.  & II.  CORINTHIANS. 


247 


1203  CALVIN  (John).  Commentarie  upon  Corinthians.  Trans- 

lated by  Thomas  Tymme.  4to.  1577.  15s. 

Tymme  seems  to  have  been  constantly  occupied  in 
translating  the  Reformers,  and  to  have  done  his  work 
well. 

1204  HODGE  (Charles,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  I.  Corinthians. 

Post  8 vo.  5s.  1868.  Exposition  of  II.  Corinthians. 

Post  8vo.  5s.  1869.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 

The  more  we  use  Hodge,  the  more  we  value  him. 
This  applies  to  all  his  commentaries. 

1205  LANGE  (J.  P.)  Commentary  on  I.  and  II.  Corinthians,  by 

C.  F.  Kluig,  D.  D.  (See  page  38.) 

1206  LOTHIAN  (W.)  Lectures  on  I.  and  II.  Corinthians.  8vo. 

Edinb.,  1828. 

This  work  must  have  done  good  service  in  its  day,  as  in  some  degree 
an  antidote  to  Maeknight ; it  is  good  and  sound ; hut  the  student  need  not 
distress  himself  if  he  cannot  procure  it,  for  it  is  not  indispensable. 

1207  OLSHAUSEN  (H..  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  I.  and  II.  Corin- 

thians. 8vo.  9s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1851. 

Dr.  Lindsay  Alexander  says  that  this  comment  is  highly  esteemed  for 
its  happy  combinations  of  grammatico-historical  exegesis,  with  spiritual 
insight  into  the  meaning  of  the  sacred  writers. 

1208  PRIDHAM  (Arthur).  Notes  and  Reflections  on  I.  and  II. 

Corinthians.  Two  vols.,  cr.  8vo.  5s.  each.  Lond., 
Nisbet.  1866. 

We  do  not  always  agree  with  Mr.  Pridham,  but  we  always  admire  the 
quiet,  candid,  and  unaffected  manner  in  which  he  writes. 

1209  ROBERTSON  (Frederick  W.,  M.  A.  1816— 1853).  Ex- 

pository Lectures.  12mo.  5s.  Lond.,  King.  1872. 

Robertson’s  doctrinal  vagaries  are  well  known ; yet  he  is  a great  thinker 
and  a prompter  of  thought  in  other  men.  Read  with  discretion. 

1210  STANLEY  (Arthur  Penrhyn,  D.  D„  F.  R.  S. , Dean  of 

Westminster.)  Corinthians.  8vo.  18s.  Lond.,  Murray. 
1876. 

We  do  not  advise  the  purchase  of  these  volumes  ; for  although  Dean 
Stanley  is  an  instructive  writer,  our  perusal  of  his  notes  does  not  impress 
us  with  any  sense  either  of  their  value  or  soundness. 


248 


GALATIANS, 


1211  COLET  (John,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  St.  Paul’s.  1466—1519). 

Treatise  on  I.  Corinthians.  With  Translation.  Demy 
8vo.  10s.  6d.  Lond.,  G.  Bell  & Sons.  1874. 

A curiosity  and  nothing  more.  This  same  ancient  Dean  Colet,  the 
friend  of  Erasmus,  wrote  also  on  the  Romans. 

1212  PEARCE  (Zachary,  D.  D.)  Translation  of  I.  Corinthians, 

with  Paraphrase  and  Notes.  In  Vol.  II.  of  Commentary. 
(No.  968.) 

We  ought  to  value  this  work  greatly,  for  the  author  was  a renowned 
scholar ; but  we  confess  we  do  not  think  much  of  his  productions. 

[The  writers  on  small  portions  of  these  Epistles  are  too  numerous  to  be 
mentioned  in  our  short  Catalogue.  Burgess,  Branston,  Thomas  Fuller, 
Sibhes,  Manton,  Watson,  and  other  masterly  writers  have  all  left  a con- 
tribution to  the  expository  stores  of  the  Church  of  Christ.] 


GALATIANS. 

[Do  not  forget  to  consult  works  from  No.  1142  to  1157.] 

1213  BAGGE  (Henry  T.  J.,  B.  A.)  Galatians.  8vo.  Lond., 

1856.  S.  3s. 

Simply  a revised  text  and  critioal  notes. 

1214  BAYLEY  (Sir  E.)  Commentary  on  Galatians.  Thick 

post  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1869.  S.  3s. 

Upon  each  portion  there  is  a commentary,  a para- 
phrase, and  a sermon,  and  thus  the  author  conveys  a 
considerable  amount  of  instruction.  He  is  thoroughly 
evangelical,  and  his  style  clear. 

1215  BROWN  (John,  D.  D.  Edinburgh).  Exposition  of  Gala- 

tians. 8vo.  Edinb.,  1853.  S.  6s. 

Brown  is  a modern  Puritan.  All  his  expositions  are 
of  the  utmost  value.  The  volume  on  Galatians  is  one 
of  the  scarcest  books  in  the  market. 

1216  CALVIN  (John).  Forty-two  Sermons  on  Galatians.  4to. 

Lond.,  1574.  [A  different  work  from  his  Commentary.] 


GALATIANS. 


249 


1217  EADIE  John,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  the  Greek  Text  of 

Galatians.  8vo.  10a.  6d.  Edinb.,  Clark.  1869.  S. 
7s.  6d. 

This  is  a most  careful  attempt  to  ascertain  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Apostle  by  a painstaking  analysis  of  his  words. 
The  author  is  not  warped  by  any  system  of  theology,  but 
yet  he  does  not  deviate  from  recognized  evangelical 
truth.  As  a piece  of-  honest  grammatical  exegesis  the 
value  of  this  commentary  is  very  great,  though  there  is 
room  to  differ  from  it  here  and  there. 

1218  EDMUNDS  (John.  M.  A.)  Galatians.  With  Explanatory 

Notes.  Crown  8vo.  Edinb.,  Oliver  & Boyd.  1874. 
Thoroughly  ritualistic.  See  remarks  on  this  author’s  work  on  Thessa- 
lonians. 

1219  GODWIN  (John  H.)  Galatians.  Translation,  with  Notes 

and  Doctrinal  Lessons.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  Lond.,  Hodder. 
1871. 

A helpful  translation,  with  good  textual  notes. 

1220  HALDANE  (James  Alexander.  1768—1851).  Exposition 

of  Galatians.  12mo.  1848.  2s.  6d. 

This  work  has  never  been  popular,  because  the  author  in  the  third 
chapter  discusses  the  question  of  baptism.  This  is  a fault  of  which  we 
may  say  as  the  Papist  said  of  venial  sin : “ It  deserved  to  be  forgiven.” 

1221  HAWKER  (John,  M.  A.)  Bible  Thoughts  in  Quiet  Hours. 

Commentary  on  Galatians.  2s.  Lond.,  Yapp  & Hawkins. 
1874. 

These  “ thoughts  ” are  sound  and  edifying.  The  book  does  not  profess 
to  he  a thorough  exposition. 

1222  KELLY  (William).  Lectures  on  Galatians.  12mo.  Is. 

6d.  and  2s.  Lond.,  G.  Morrish.  [N.  D.] 

Mr.  Kelly’s  authoritative  style  has  no  weight  with  us.  We  do  not  call 
these  lectures  expounding,  but  confounding. 

1223  LANGE  (J.  P.)  Commentary  on  Galatians,  by  Otto 

Schmoller,  Ph.  D.  Ephesians,  Philippians,  and  Colos- 
sians,  by  Karl  Braune,  D.  D.  (See  page  38.) 

1224  LIGHTFOOT  (J.  B.,  D.  D.,  Canon  of  St.  Paul’s).  Gala- 

tians. Revised  Text,  with  Introductions,  Notes,  and 
Dissertations.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Macmillan.  1874. 

The  Spectator  says : “ There  is  no  commentator  at 


250 


GALATIANS. 


once  of  sounder  judgment,  and  more  liberal,  than  Dr. 
Lightfoot.” 

1225  LUSHINGTON  (Thomas.  Died  1661).  The  Justification 

of  a Sinner : the  Main  Argument  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians.  Folio.  1650.  5s.  6d. 

A translation  from  Crellius,  a Socinian  divine,  made  by  Lushington,  who 
was  far  gone  towards  the  same  error.  We  mention  the  book  to  warn  our 
readers  of  its  character  ; for  bad  works  of  the  Puritan  period  are  few. 

1226  LUTHER  (Martin).  Commentary  on  Galatians.  [Numer- 

ous editions — folio,  quarto,  and  octavo.] 

“ I prefer  this  book  of  Martin  Luther’s  (except  the 
Bible)  before  all  the  books  that  I have  ever  seen,  as  most 
fit  for  a wounded  conscience.” — Bunyan.  This  is  a 
great  historic  work,  and  is  beyond  criticism,  on  account 
of  its  great  usefulness.  As  a comment  its  accuracy 
might  be  questioned ; but  for  emphatic  utterances  and 
clear  statements  of  the  great  doctrine  of  the  Epistle  it 
remains  altogether  by  itself,  and  must  be  judged  per  se. 

1227  OLSHAUSEN  (H.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  Galatians, 

Ephesians,  Colossians,  and  Thessalonians.  8vo.  10s.  6d. 
Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1851.  (For  remarks  see  No.  966.) 

1228  PEARSON  (Samuel,  Minister  of  Gt.  George  St.  Chapel, 

Liverpool).  Sermons  on  Galatians.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Clarke.  1874. 

Discourses  worthy  of  the  successor  of  Spencer  and  Raffles. 

1229  PERKINS  (William.  1558—1602.)  Commentarie  on  the 

First  five  Chapters  of  Galatians,  with  a Supplement  on 
the  Sixth  Chapter,  by  Ralfe  Cud  worth.  Thick  4to.  1604. 
2s.  6d.  to  4s. 

Perkins  was  justly  esteemed  by  his  cotemporaries  as  a master  in  the- 
ology. This  commentary  is  deeply  theological,  and  reads  like  a body  of 
divinity  : truth  compels  us  to  confess  that  we  find  it  dull. 

1230  PRIDHAM.(A.)  Galatians.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 

1872. 

Pridham  is,  we  suppose,  of  the  moderate  Brethren  school,  bnt  he  is  not 
carried  away  by  any  theory,  being  essentially  a man  of  sober  mind. 


EPHESIANS. 


251 


EPHESIANS. 

[See  also  under  Apostolical  Epistles.] 

1231  BAYNE  (Paul,  A.  M.  Puritan.  Died  1617).  Commentary- 

on  Ephesians.  Folio.  1643,  etc.  6s.  [Reprinted  in 
Nichol’s  Commentaries.  Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 
1866.] 

Sibbes  says  of  this  work  : “ The  greatest  shall  find  matter  to  exercise 
themselves  in  ; the  meaner,  matter  of  sweet  comfort  and  holy  instruction  ; 
and  all  confess  that  he  hath  brought  some  light  to  this  Scripture. 

1232  CALVIN  (John).  Sermons  on  Ephesians,  Translated  by 

A.  Golding.  Black  Letter.  4to.  Lond.,  1577.  9s. 

Not  the  same  as  the  exposition.  The  Sermons  are 
priceless. 

1233  EADIE  (John,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  the  Greek  text  of 

Ephesians.  8vo.  14s.  Lond.,  Griffin.  1861.  S.  7s.  6d. 

“ This  book  is  one  of  prodigious  learning  and  re- 
search. The  author  seems  to  have  read  all,  in  every 
language,  that  has  been  written  upon  the  Epistle.  It  is 
also  a work  of  independent  criticism,  and  casts  much 
new  light  upon  many  passages.” 

1234  GRAHAM  (William,  D.  D.,  of  Bonn,  Prussia).  Lectures 

on  Ephesians.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Partridge  & Co. 
1870. 

Dr.  Graham  is  an  earnest  opponent  of  the  German  Neologians  and  fre- 
quently writes  with  their  negations  before  his  eye.  He  is  a commentator 
of  considerable  learning  and  much  spirituality  of  mind. 

1235  HEMMINGE  (Nicholas,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  Ephe- 

sians, translated.  4to.  Lond.,  1581.  (See  No.  554.) 

1236  HODGE  (Charles,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  Ephesians. 

Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1870. 

Most  valuable.  With  no  writer  do  we  more  fully 
agree. 

1237  KELLY  (W.)  Lectures.  12mo.  2s.  Lond.,  G.  Morrish. 

(See  No.  1258.) 


252 


EPHESIANS, 


1238  LATHROP  (Joseph,  D.  D.,  of  America.  1731—1820). 

Exposition  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  in  a Series  of 
Discourses.  Thick  8vo.  Philadelphia,  1864, 

These  discourses  are  sure  to  be  of  the  highest  class.  We  have  not  been 
able  to  procure  a copy. 

1239  M’GHEE  (R.,  A.  M.,  M.  R.  I.  A.)  Lectures  on  Ephesians. 

Two  vols.,  8vo.  Fourth  edition.  Lond.,  Saunders  & 
Utley.  1861.  S.  10s.  6d. 

Lively,  warmhearted,  extemporaneous  sermons,  full  of  good  teaching. 
The  preacher  aimed  to  edify  the  many,  rather  than  to  write  a critical  work 
for  the  few,  and  he  has  succeeded. 

1240  NEWLAND  (Henry,  M.  A.)  A New  Catena  of  St.  Paul’s 

Epistles.  Commentary  on  Ephesians,  in  which  is  exhib- 
ited the  Results  of  the  most  learned  Theological  Criti- 
cisms, from  the  Age  of  the  Early  Fathers  down  to  the 
Present  Time.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  J.  Parker  & Co. 
1866.  S.  3s. 

Used  discreetly,  this  Catena  of  patristic,  mediaeval  and  modern  Church 
interpreters,  may  be  very  helpful ; without  discretion  it  will  mislead. 

1241  fcATTISON  (R.  E.,  D.  D.,  late  Pres,  of  Waterville  Col.) 

Commentary  on  Ephesians.  8vo.  Boston,  U.  S.  1859. 

A book  to  instruct  intelligent,  experienced  believers. 
It  is  a model  for  a class-book,  plain  and  yet  profound. 

1242  PERCEVAL  (A.  P.)  Lectures  on  Ephesians.  12mo. 

Lond.,  1846.  Is.  6d. 

Good,  but  not  likely  to  produce  headache  by  overloading  the  brain  with 
thought. 

1243  PR1PHAM  (A.)  Ephesians.  12mo.  4s.  6d.  Lond.,  Yapp. 

S.  2s.  6d. 

Style  heavy,  matter  weighty. 

1244  PULSFORD  (John).  Christ  and  his  Seed  ; Central  to  all 

things  : being  a Series  of  Expository  Discourses  on  Paul’s 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  4to.  8s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hamil- 
ton, Adams  & Co.  1872. 

Contains  a great  deal  of  deep  thought,  but  is  too  mystical  and  often  too 
cloudy  to  be  of  much  service  to  those  who  wish  to  explain  Scripture. 

1245  RIDLEY  (Lancelot.  About  1540.)  Commentaries  on 

Ephesians,  Philippians,  and  part  of  Jude.  [Reprinted  in 
Richmond’s  Fathers.] 

John  Bale  wrote  in  1543:  “The  Commentary  which  that  virtuous, 
learned  man,  Master  Lancelot  Ridley,  made  upon  St.  Paul’s  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians,  for  the  true  erudition  of  his  Christian  brethren,  hath  my  Lord 


PHILIPPIANS. 


253 


Bonner  here  also  condemned  for  heresy.  But  what  the  cause  is  I cannot 
tell,  unless  it  be  for  advancing  the  Gospel  as  the  thing  whereby  we  are 
made  righteous.”  Our  author  is  equally  fierce  against  Anabaptists  and 
Papists,  but  is  not  much  of  a commentator. 

1246  TURNER  (Samuel  H.,  D.  D.)  Ephesians,  in  Greek  and 

English ; with  Analysis  and  Commentary.  8vo.  New 
York,  1856. 

A learned  work  ; good,  but  not  very  attractive. 

1247  EVANS  (James  Harrington,  A.  M.  1785—1849).  Chris- 

tian Solicitude,  as  exemplified  in  Ephesians  III.  16mo. 
Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw.  1856.  S.  Is.  3d. 

Harrington  Evans  was  a great  teacher.  A more  sound,  earnest,  and 
instructive  divine  never  lived.  This  book  consists  of  notes  of  sermons 
preserved  by  a hearer.  It  is  well  worthy  of  study.  His  Memoir  contains 
fragmentary  remarks  upon  Ephesians  I. 

1248  ROLLOCK  (Robert.  1585 — 1598).  An  Exposition  of  part 

of  the  fift  and  sixt  chapters  of  S.  Pavle’s  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians.  4to.  Lond.,  1630.  [In  a volume  containing 
sundry  fragments  of  Expositions.]  12s. 

This  renowned  Scotchman’s  writings  generally  come  to  us  as  transla- 
tions from  the  Latin,  and  have  been  made  pretematurally  dull  in  tho  pro- 
cess of  interpretation  ; but  this  appears  to  have  been  written  in  English 
by  himself.  It  is  practical  to  a high  degree,  and  goes  into  minute  details 
of  the  married  life,  etc.  It  will  not  be  much  appreciated  in  these  days, 
though  Dr.  McCrie  styles  Bollock’s  works  “ succinct  and  judicious.” 


PHILIPPIANS. 

[See  also  under  Epistles.] 

1249  ACASTER  (J.)  Expository  Lectures  on  Philippians.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1827.  2s. 

Useful  in  showing  the  preacher  how  not  to  do  it.  By  a violent  effort, 
we  forced  ourselves  to  read  one  lecture  ; but  we  have  done  nothing  to 
deserve  to  read  another.  The  author  was  domestic  chaplain  to  an  earl, 
meant  well,  and  did  his  little  best. 

1250  AIRAY  (Henry.  1559 — 1617).  Lectures  on  Philippians. 

4to.  Lond.,  1618.  5s.  6d.  [Reprinted,  with  Cartwright 
on  Colossians,  in  Nicliol’s  Commentaries.  Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Nisbet.  1864.] 

Mr.  Grosart  says  : “ You  will  look  in  vain  in  this  commentary  for 


254 


PHILIPPIAN'S. 


erudite  criticism  or  subtle  exegesis  in  the  modern  sense  : but  there  seems 
to  us  to  be  an  instructively  true  following  up  of  the  Apostolic  thoughts, 
and  a quick  insight  into  their  bearings  and  relative  force. 

1251  CALVIN  (John).  Commentarie  on  Pliilippians.  Trans- 

lated by  Wm.  Becket.  4to.  Lond.,  1584.  10s.  6d. 

1252  CALVIN  and  STORR.  Expositions  of  Pliilippians  and 

Colossians.  By  J.  Calvin  and  Gottlob  Storr.  Translated 
by  R.  Johnston.  12mo.  4s.  Bib.  Cabinet.  Edinb., 

Clark.  1842.  3s. 

A sort  of  sandwich,  with  Calvin  for  the  meat,  and  Storr  for  very  hard 
black  bread.  Students  who  can  enjoy  both  spiritual  exposition  and  stem 
criticism  with  equal  relish  will  make  fine  expositors. 

1253  DAILLE  (Jean.  1594 — 1670).  Exposition  of  Philippians. 

Translated  by  Rev.  James  Sherman.  Imp.  8vo.  Lond., 
1841.  [This  Exposition,  together  with  Daille  on  Colos- 
sians, and  Jenkyn  on  Jude,  have  been  issued  in  one 
thick  volume  by  Mr.  Nichol,  of  Edinburgh.  10s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Nisbet.  1863.] 

Written  in  a deliciously  florid  style.  Very  sweet  and  evangelical : 
after  the  French  manner. 

1254  EADIE  (John,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  the  Greek  text  of 

Philippians.  8vo.,  10s.  6d.  Lond.,  Griffin.  1859.  S.  6s. 

A standard  work.  Essential  to  the  scholarly  student. 

1255  EASTBURN  (M.)  Lectures.  8vo.  New  York,  1853. 

2s.  6d. 

Designed  for  family  reading.  Moderately  good. 

1256  HALL  (Robert,  A.  M.  1764 — 1831).  Exposition  of  Philip- 

pians, in  twelve  Discourses.  8vo.  Lond.,  1843.  2s.  6d. 
Robert  Hall  does  not  shine  so  much  upon  the  printed  page  as  he  did 
when  he  blazed  from  the  pulpit.  These  discourses  were  published  after 
his  death,  from  the  notes  of  a hearer.  They  are  good  as  sermons,  but  not 
remarkable  as  expositions. 

1257  JOHNSTONE  (Robert,  LL.  B.,  of  Glasgow).  Lectures 

on  Philippians,  with  revised  Translation,  and  Notes  on 
the  Greek  text.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Edinb.,  Oliphant.  1875. 

A noble  volume.  A real  boon  to  the  man  who  pur- 
chases it. 

1258  KELLY  (W.)  Philippians  and  Colossians.  12mo.  2s. 

Lond.,  Morrish.  1869. 

Much  that  is  excellent  placed  in  “ darkness  visible.” 


PHILIPPIANS. 


255 


1259  LANGE  (J.P.)  See  No.  924,  and  also  page  38. 

1260  LIGHTFOOT  (J.  B.,  D.  D.)  A revised  text,  witli  Notes, 

etc.  8vo.  12s.  Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co.  1873. 

Deservedly  regarded  as  a standard  work.  The  more 
instructed  student  will  appreciate  it. 

1261  MEYER  (Dr.  H.  A.  W.)  Critical  and  Exegetical  Hand- 

book to  the  Epistles  to  the  Philippians  and  Colossians. 
(See  No.  929.) 

No  doubt  wonderfully  learned,  but  we  cannot  get  on  with  it.  Quota- 
tions from  heretics  we  have  happily  never  heard  of  before  are  of  no  great 
use  to  simple  believers  like  ourselves. 

1262  NEAT  (Charles).  Discourses  from  Philippians.  Sm.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1841.  Is.  6d. 

Strongly  Calvinistic,  and  correct  to  a hair ; but  utterly  devoid  of  origin- 
ality either  of  thought  or  expression. 

1263  NEANDER  (Johann  August  Wilhelm.  1789—1850). 

Philippians  and  James,  practically  and  historically  ex- 
plained. Post  8vo.  3s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1851. 
S.  Is.  9d. 

Without  dwelling  upon  the  wording  of  the  Epistle,  Neander  reproduces 
its  spirit  in  other  language,  and  so  expounds  it.  The  little  work  will  be 
greatly  appreciated  by  a certain  order  of  minds. 

1264  NEWLAND  (H.,  M.  A.)  New  Catena.  Philippians.  8vo. 

7s.  6d.  J.  Parker.  1860.  S.  2s.  6d.  (See  No.  1240.) 

1265  PIERCE  (James.  Died  1726).  Paraphrase  on  Philippians, 

Colossians,  and  Hebrews.  4to.  Lond.,  1733. 

nad  he  but  known  the  Lord,  his  writings  would  have  been  admirable. 
He  conceals  his  Arianism,  but  it  is  fatal  to  his  acceptance  with  believers. 
He  wrote  after  the  manner  of  Mr.  Locke. 

1266  ROBERTSON  (J.  S.  S.,  M.  A.)  Lectures  on  Philippians. 

12mo.  Lond.,  1849. 

Lectures  which  will  never  set  the  Thames  on  fire. 

1267  TODD  (James  F.,  M.  A.)  Apostle  Paul  and  the  Church  at 

Philippi.  Acts  XVI.,  and  Philippians.  8vo.  9s.  Lond., 
Bell  & Daldy.  1864. 

A respectable  work.  The  author  is  sound  in  doctrine  and  valorous  in 
controverting  error,  and  he  says  many  good  things ; but  he  rather  uses  the 
text  than  expounds  it.  Ho  deserves  a reading;  but  men  with  whom 
money  is  scarce  need  not  purchase  this  book. 


256 


COLOSSI  AN  S. 


1268  TOLLER  (Thomas).  Discourses  on  Philippians.  12mo. 

Lond.,  1855.  2s. 

A very  favorable  specimen  of  plain,  popular  exposition.  Nothing  either 
deep,  or  new,  or  critically  accurate  ; hut  sensible  and  practical. 

1269  VAUGHAN  (C.  JM  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  Philippians. 

Extra  F’cap.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Macmillan.  1864,  etc. 

Deservedly  esteemed.  Dr.  Vaughan  gives  a literal 
translation  of  his  text  from  the  original  Greek,  and  then 
expounds  it,  believing  it,  as  he  says,  “ to  be  the  duty  of 
every  Christian  teacher  to  assist  his  congregation  in 
drinking  not  of  the  stream  only,  but  at  the  spring  of 
revealed  truth.” 

1270  WIESINGER  (Lie.  August).  Commentary  on  Philip- 

pians, Titus,  and  1 Timothy ; in  continuation  of  the 
work  of  Olshausen.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T. 
Clark.  1857.  S.  4s.  6d. 

Many  mistake  this  for  Olshausen’s.  It  is  of  the  critical  and  grammatical 
school,  and  bristles  all  over  with  the  names  of  the  German  band.  We  pre- 
fer the  Puritanic  gold  to  the  German  silver  which  is  now  in  fashion. 


COLOSSIANS. 

1271  BAYNE  (Paul,  A.  M.)  Commentary  on  Colossians  I.  and 

II.  4to.  Lond.,  1634.  6s. 

On  the  two  first  chapters  only.  Edifying  and  very 
rare. 

1272  BYFIELD  (Nicholas,  Puritan.  1579—1622.)  Exposition 

upon  Colossians ; being  the  Substance  of  near  seven 
years’ week-day  sermons.  Folio.  1615  and  1617.  6s.  6d. 
[Reprinted  in  Nichol’s  Commentaries.  Cr.  4to.,  7s.  6d. 
Lond.,  Nisbet.  1869.] 

The  author  lived  in  intense  pain,  and  died  at  44,  yet 
he  produced  quite  a mountain  of  literature.  He  writes 
like  an  earnest,  faithful  man,  resolved  to  keep  back 
nothing  of  the  counsel  of  God  ; but  he  too  little  studies 


COLOSSIANS. 


257 


brevity,  and  consequently  lie  wearies  most  readers.  He 
is  always  worth  consulting. 

1273  CALVIN.  (See  Nos.  1251,  1252). 

1274  CARTWRIGHT  (Thomas,  B.  D.  Puritan.  1535—1603). 

Commentary  on  Colossians.  4to.  Lond.,  1612.  7s.  6d. 
[Reprinted  in  Nichol’s  Commentaries.  See  No.  1250.] 
This  is  but  a small  affair,  consisting  of  scanty  and  second-rate  “ notes  ” 
by  a hearer.  Yet  what  there  is  of  it  has  the  true  ring,  and  is  rich  in 
spirituality. 

1275  DAILLE  (J.)  See  No.  1253. 

1276  DAVENANT  (John,  Bishop  of  Salisbury.  1572—1641.) 

Exposition  of  Colossians.  Translated  from  the  Latin,  by 
Josiah  Allport.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1831.  4s.  to 
6s.  6d. 

“ I know  no  exposition  upon  a detached  portion  of 
Scripture  (with  the  single  exception  of  Owen  on  the 
Hebrews)  that  will  compare  with  it  in  all  points.  Leigh- 
ton is  superior  in  sweetness,  but  far  inferior  in  depth, 
accuracy,  and  discursiveness.” — C.  Bridges. 

1277  EADIE  (John,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  the  Greek  text  of 

Colossians.  8vo.,  10s.  6d.  Lond.,  Griffin.  1856.  S.  6s. 

Very  full  and  reliable.  A work  of  the  utmost  value. 

1278  ELTON  (Edward,  B.  D.)  Exposition  of  Colossians. 

Third  edition.  Folio.  Lond.,  1637.  7s.  to  9s. 

A Puritan  work  ; strongly  Calvinistic,  popular,  and 
very  full. 

1279  GISBORNE  (Thomas,  Prebendary  of  Durham.  1758 — 1846). 

Exposition  of  Colossians.  12mo.  Lond.,  1816.  Is. 
Sermons  which  very  much  remind  us  of  those  of  Henry  Melvill,  but 
with  less  of  the  Gospel  in  them.  Gisborne  was  a preacher  of  considerable 
repute,  but  he  was  more  at  home  upon  moral  than  spiritual  topics. 

1280  GUTHRIE  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  Christ  the  Inheritance  of  the 

Saints.  Discourses  from  Colossians.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 
Edinb.,  A.  & C.  Black.  1859.  S.  4s. 

Not  so  much  an  exposition  as  a series  of  brilliant  discourses,  or  prose 
poems.  Dr.  Guthrie  has  only  touohed  upon  the  first  ohapter. 


258 


COLOSSIANS. 


1281  LIGHTFOOT  (J.  B.,  D.  D.)  Colossians  and  Philemon. 

A revised  Text,  with  Introductions,  Notes,  etc.  8vo., 
12s.  Macmillan  & Co.  1875. 

For  remarks,  see  No.  1260.  Lightfoot  writes  for 
scholars. 

1282  MILNER  (Joseph,  M.  A.)  Sermons  on  Colossians,  1 Tlies- 

salonians  V.,  and  James  I.  8vo.  Lond.,  1841.  3s. 

Respectable  sermons  by  the  Church  historian. 

1283  ROLLOCK  (R.)  Lectures  on  Colossians.  4to.  Lond., 

1603.  10s. 

It  is  said  that  when  this  great  divine  died  the  entire  population  of 
Edinburgh  attended  his  funeral.  His  Lectures  on  Colossians  were  once 
very  popular,  but  are  now  extremely  scarce.  The  style  is  very  simple  and 
colloquial,  and  the  matter  far  from  profound. 

1284  SPENCE  (James,  D.  D.)  Discourses  on  Colossians.  Cr. 

8vo.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Hodder.  1875. 

A good  specimen  of  honest,  popular  expounding. 
Intended  for  a congregation,  but  useful  to  the  student. 

1285  WATSON  (Thomas,  B.  A.)  Discourses  on  Colossians.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1838.  2s.  6d. 

Thoroughly  evangelical  and  remarkably  commonplace. 

1286  WILSON  (Daniel,  D.  D.,  Bishop  of  Calcutta).  Explanatory 

Lectures  on  Colossians.  8vo.  Lond.,  1845.  2s.  6d. 

By  a famous  modern  evangelical,  who  shows  much  ability  in  wielding 
this  Scripture  against  Tractarians  and  others.  The  work  contains  little 
original  exegesis. 

1287  LOCKYER  (Nicholas,  Puritan.  1612-1684-5).  England 

Faithfully  Watcht  with  in  her  Wounds.  [Lectures  on 
Colossians  I.]  4to.  Lond.,  1646.  5s. 

Rich,  full,  simple.  A fair  specimen  of  plain  Puritan 
preaching. 


I.  &.  II.  THESSALONIANS. 


259 


I.  &.  II.  THESSALONIANS. 

1288  EDMUNDS  (J.,  M.  A.)  Commentary  on  1 and  2 Tliessalon- 

iana.  Or.  8vo.  Lond.,  Bell  & Daldy.  1858.  S.  2s. 

For  School  Teachers.  The  author’3  notion  of  a Commentary,  which  he 
fully  carreis  out,  is  contained  in  his  preface.  “ My  idea  of  the  Middle- 
class  Commentary  is,  that  it  should  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the  doc- 
trine and  ritual  of  the  Church,  should  illustrate  her  ritual,  and  should 
recommend  her  to  the  esteem  and  affection  of  her  children,  by  proving  her 
adherence  to  the  Word  of  God.” 

1289  JEWEL  (John,  Bishop  of  Salisbury.  1522—1571).  Expo- 

sitions upon  I.  and  II.  Thessalonians.  Sm.  8vo.  Black 
Letter.  Lond.,  1583.  Reprinted  1811  and  1841.  Is.  6d. 
Also  in  his  Works. 

Hooker  calls  Jewel  “ the  jewel  of  bishops.”  This  work  is  in  the  usual 
style  of  the  first  Reformers,  but  rather  more  lively  than  most  of  them. 
Many  of  the  topics  touched  upon  were  peculiar  to  the  times  in  which  the 
exposition  was  written.  It  will  serve  as  a good  specimen  of  the  preaching 
of  the  Fathers  of  the  English  Church. 

1290  LANGE  (J.  P.)  Commentary  on  Thessalonians,  by  Drs. 

Auberlen  and  Riggenbach.  Translated  by  Dr.  Lillie. 
Timothy,  Titus  and  Philemon,  by  Prof.  Vc*i  Oosterzee. 
Hebrews,  by  Dr.  C.  B.  Moll.  Edited  by  Dr.  Schaff. 
Imp.  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1869. 

“ Lillie’s  Thessalonians  will  be  found  to  be  one  of 
the  best  executed  portions  of  the  American  edition  of 
Lange.  The  translation  is  remarkably  accurate  and  ele- 
gant, and  the  additions  from  his  own  researches,  and  the 
best  English  Commentaries,  are  carefully  selected  and 
valuable.”— Dr.  P.  Schaff. 

1291  LILLIE  (John,  D.  D.,  Kingston,  New  York.  1812 — 1867). 

Lectures  on  Thessalonians.  Large  8vo.  9s.  Edinb.,  W. 
Oliphant  & Co.  1863. 

Remarks  on  the  preceding  will  apply  here. 

1292  ROLLOCK  (Robert).  Lectures  on  the  Epistles  to  the 

Thessalonians,  preached  by  R.  R.  4to.  Edinb.,  1696. 

For  remarks,  see  No.  1248. 


260 


PASTORAL  EPISTLES. 


1293  SCLATER  (William,  D.  D.)  Exposition  upon  1 and  2 

Thessalonians.  4to.  Lond.,  1627.  3s.  6d.  to  7s. 

Sclater  is  antique ; but,  in  the  usual  Puritanic  manner,  he  gives  very- 
instructive  disquisitions  upon  a vast  variety  of  topics  suggested  by  the 
text. 

1294  PATTERSON  (Alexander  Simpson,  D.  D.,  Glasgow). 

Commentaries  on  1 Tliessalcnians,  James,  and  1 John. 
12mo.  Edinb.,  1857.  2s.  6d.  to  4s.  6d. 

Notes  of  discourses,  with  much  in  them.  Hints  may  be  gleaned  here 
in  abundance  by  students  who  open  their  eyes. 

1295  PHILLIPS  (J.)  The  Greek  of  Thessalonians  explained. 

4to.  Lond.,  1751. 

Short,  but  not  particularly  sweet.  Very  scarce. 

1296  BRADSHAW  W.,  Puritan.  1571—1618).  A Plaine  and 

Pithy  Exposition  of  2 Thessalonians;  published  since  his 
decease  by  T.  Gataker.  4to.  1620.  3s.  6d. 

As  we  cannot  get  a sight  of  this,  perhaps  some  reader  will  present  us 
with  a copy. 

1297  MANTON  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  Eighteen  Sermons  on  2 

Thessalonians  II.,  concerning  Antichrist.  8vo.  1679.  4s. 

Here  Man  ton  smites  heavily  at  Popery.  Richard 
Baxter  wrote  a commendatory  preface  to  this  valuable 
exposition. 

1298  SQUIRE  (John,  M.  A.)  A Plaine  Exposition  on  2 Thessa- 

lonians II.,  1 — 13,  proving  the  Pope  to  be  Antichrist. 
4to.  Lond.,  1630.  5s.  to  8s. 

Squire  works  out  the  point  of  the  Pope’s  being  Antichrist  with  very 
great  cogency  of  reasoning.  The  exposition  of  the  Epistle  is  lost  in  the 
point  aimed  at : but  that  point  is  of  the  utmost  importance. 


PASTORAL  EPISTLES  ; 

Or,  the  Epistles  of  Timothy,  Titus,  and  Philemon. 

1299  CALVIN  (John).  C Sermons  on  the  Epistles  of  S.  Paule 
to  Timothie  and  Titus,  translated  out  of  the  French,  by 
L.  T.  4to.  Lond.,  1579.  15s. 

Quite  a different  work  from  Calvin’s  Commentaries. 


I.  &.  II.  TIMOTHY. 


261 


1300  FAIRBAIRN  (Patrick,  D.  D.)  The  Pastoral  Epistles, 
Greek  Text,  Translation,  Introductions,  Expository 
Notes,  etc.  Cr.  8vo.  7s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 
1874. 

What  with  a good  translation,  full  defence  of  the 
Apostolic  authorship  of  the  Epistles,  fruitful  comments, 
and  profitable  dissertations,  this  volume  is  about  as  com- 
plete a guide  to  the  smaller  epistles  as  one  could  desire. 


I.  &.  II.  TIMOTHY. 

[See  also  under  Pastoral  Epistles.J 

1301  BICKERSTETH  (E.)  See  No.  1388. 

1302  PATTERSON  (Alex.  S.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  Timothy 

and  Titus.  18mo.  1848.  (See  our  remarks  on  No.  1294.) 

1303  SLADE  (Henry  Rarer,  LL.  B.)  Pulpit  Lectures  on  the 

Epistles  to  Timothy.  Cr.  8vo.  1837.  Is. 

Utter  rubbish.  Dear  at  a gift. 

1304  WIESINGER  (L.  A.)  See  No.  1270. 

1305  PINDER  (John  H.,  M.  A.)  The  Candidate  for  the  Ministry. 

Lectures  on  1 Timothy.  12mo.  Lond.,  1837.  Is. 

Of  no  consequence. 

1306  BARLOW  (John.  Puritan).  Exposition  of  2 Timothy,  I 

and  II.  Folio.  Lond.,  1632.  4s.  to  7s.  6d. 

By  a master  in  Israel.  Thoroughly  practical,  deeply 
experimental,  and  soundly  doctrinal. 

1307  HALL  (Thomas).  Commentary  on  2 Timothy  III.  and  IV. 

Folio.  Lond.,  1632—1058.  8s. 

Hall  is  often  found  in  union  with  Barlow,  complet- 
ing the  Commentary  on  2 Timothy,  as  he  completed 
Amos,  (No.  841.)  He  is  a masterly  expositor,  of  the 
old-fashioned  school. 


262 


TITUS — PHILEMON". 


TITUS. 

[See  also  tinder  Pastoral  Epistles.] 

1308  GRAHAM  (W.,  D.  D.)  Titus.  12mo.  2s.  6d.  Lond. 

Nisbet.  1860. 

Dr.  Graham  endeavors  to  make  criticism  intelligible,  and  the  results  of 
learning  really  edifying.  We  have  our  doubts  as  to  some  of  his  criticisms, 
and  he  is  quite  dogmatic  enough,  but  on  the  whole  good . 

1309  TAYLOR  (Thomas,  D.  D.  Puritan.  1579—1632).  Com- 

mentarie  upon  Titus.  4to.  Camb.,  1619.  4s.  to  6s. 
Folio.  1668.  10s.  Also  in  Works. 

The  title-page  calls  Thomas  Taylor  “ a famous  and 
most  elaborate  divine.”  He  was  a preacher  at  PauTs 
Cross  during  the  reigns  of  Elizabeth  and  James  I.,  and 
a voluminous  writer.  This  Commentatory  will  well 
repay  the  reader. 


PHILEMON. 

1310  ATTERSOLL  (William.  Puritan).  Commentary  upon 

Philemon.  Second  Edition.  Folio.  Lond.,  1633.  4s.  6d. 

A long  comment  upon  a short  epistle.  The  pious 
author  labors  to  keep  to  his  text,  and  succeeds  in  bringing 
out  of  it  a mass  of  quaint  practical  teaching. 

1311  OOX  (Samuel).  Philemon.  In  “ The  Private  Letters  of 

St.  Paul  and  St.  John.”  12mo.  3s.  Lond.,  Miall.  1867. 

Such  exposition  as  this  adds  interest  to  the  epistles, 
and  makes  their  writers  live  again  before  our  eyes. 
Mr.  Cox  delivered  this  work  in  public  on  certain  week 
evenings.  Happy  are  the  people  who  are  thus  instructed. 

1312  DYKE  (Daniel,  B.  D.  Puritan.  Died  about  1614).  A 

most  fruitful  Exposition  upon  Philemon.  Lond.,  4to. 
1618.  4s.  to  7s. 

Dyke’s  remarks  are  memorably  practical  and  full  of  common  sense.  He 
abounds  in  proverbs.  The  work  is  not  very  valuable  as  an  exposition  of  » 
the  words,  but  excels  in  making  use  of  them. 


HEBREWS. 


.263 


1313  JONES  (William,  D.  D.,  of  East  Bergholt,).  Commen- 

tary upon  Philemon,  Hebrews,  and  1 and  2 John.  Folio. 
Lond.,  1636.  9s.  to  12s. 

Very  lively,  sprightly,  colloquial  lectures,  by  a Suffolk 
divine,  who  thinks  the  Brownists  and  Dissenters  were 
not  persecuted.  “ Christ  was  whipped,  that  was  perse- 
cution; Christ  whipped  some  out  of  the  temple,  that 
was  no  persecution. ” Despite  his  intolerance  he  says 
some  uncommonly  racy  things. 

1314  LIGHTFOOT  (J.  B.,  DD.)  See  No  1281. 


HEBREWS. 

1315  BROWN  (John,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  Hebrews.  Two 

vols.,  8vo.  18s.  Edinb.,  1862.  S.  9s.  6d. 

Dr.  David  Smith  says  of  this  work  : “ There  is  not 
a single  instance  of  carelessness  in  investigating  the  true 
meaning  of  a text,  or  of  timidity  in  stating  the  conclu- 
sion at  which  the  author  had  arrived.”  What  more 
could  be  said  in  praise  of  any  exposition  ? 

1316  CALVIN  (John).  Commentary  on  Hebrews,  translated 

by  Clement  Cotton.  4to.  Lond.,  1605.  10s.  to  13s. 

Another  edition,  12mo.  Lond.,  1841.  Is.  6d. 

1317  DALE  (R.  W.,  M.  A.)  The  Jewish  Temple  and  the  Chris- 

tian Church.  Discourses  on  Hebrews.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 
Lond.,  Hodder  and  Stoughton.  1871.  S.  3s.  6d. 

Among  modem  divines  few  rank  so  highly  as  Mr.  Dale.  Daring  and 
bold  in  thought,  and  yet  for  the  most  part  warmly  on  the  side  of  ortho- 
doxy, his  works  command  the  appreciation  of  cultured  minds. 

1318  DELITZSCH  (F.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  Hebrews.  Two 

vols.,  8vo.  21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1868.  S.  12s. 

Remarks  formerly  made  upon  Delitzsch  apply  here  also.  (Nos.  413, 
and  725.) 


264 


HEBREWS. 


1319  DICKSON  (David.)  Short  Explanation  of  Hebrews.  8vo. 

Aberd.,  1635;  Camb.,  1649 ; and  Lond.,  1839. 

This  is  generally  to  be  found  in  connection  with  the 
author’s  “ Brief  Exposition  on  Matthew.”  (No.  1035.) 
We  need  say  no  more  than — get  it,  and  you  will  find 
abundance  of  suggestions  for  profitable  trains  of  thought. 

1320  DUNCAN  (Robert,  of  Tillicultry.  1699— 1729).  Exposi- 

tion of  Hebrews.  8vo.  1731.  3s.  6d.  New  edition,  cr. 
8 vo.  2s.  (published  at  5s.)  Edinb.,  Ogle  & Murray. 

“ An  excellent  condensation  of  Dr.  Owen’s  valuable  work,  and  giving 
the  pith  and  marrow  of  the  great  commentator.” 

1321  EBRARD  (John  H.  A.,  Prof.  Theol.  Erlangen).  Commen- 

tary on  Hebrews.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 
1853.  S.  5s. 

This  is  intended  as  a continuation  of  Olshausen,  but  it  is  an  improve- 
ment thereon.  Ebrard  is  at  once  learned  and  spiritual,  and  we  prefer  him 
to  almost  any  other  author  whose  works  the  Messrs.  Clark  have  issued. 

1322  GOUGE  (William,  D.  D.  Puritan.)  Commentary  on 

Hebrews.  Two  vols.  Folio.  Lond.,  1655.  [Reprinted 
in  Nichol’s  Commentaries.  Three  vols.,  Cr.  4to.  7s.  6d. 
each.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1866-7.] 

We  greatly  prize  Gouge.  Many  will  think  his  sys- 
tem of  observations  cumbrous,  and  so,  perhaps,  it  is  ; 
but  upon  any  topic  which  he  touches  he  gives  outlines 
which  may  supply  sermons  for  months. 

1323  HALDANE  (James  Alex.  1768—1851.)  Notes  on  Ex- 

position of  Hebrews.  12mo.  4s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 
1860. 

A posthumous  work,  and  issued,  not  as  a finished  ex- 
position, but  as  “Notes  of  an  intended  Exposition.” 
Very  valuable  for  all  that. 

1324  HOWARD  (J.  E.)  Hebrews.  A Revised  Translation,  with 

Notes.  Demy,  12mo.  Is.  6d.  Lond.,  S.  W.  Partridge  & 
Co.  1872. 

Contains  a few  suggestive  observations ; but  is  a small  affair  in  all  re- 
spects. 

1325  JONES  (W.,  D.  D.)  See  No.  1313. 


HEBREWS. 


265 


1326  JONES  (W.,  M.  A.  1726—1800).  Four  Lectures  on  the 

Relation  between  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  as  set 
forth  in  Hebrews.  8vo.  1811.  Is.  6d. 

Very  little  of  it,  and  bound  up  with  a work  of  an  ingenious,  but  fanci- 
ful character. 

1327  KNOX  (J.  Spencer,  A.  M.)  The  Mediator  of  the  New 

Covenant.  Sermons  on  Hebrews.  8vo.  Dublin,  1834.  2s. 
Thirteen  Sermons  on  select  passages.  Mediocrity  highly  polished. 

1328  LANGE  (J.P.)  See  No.  1290. 

1329  LAWSON  (G.)  Exposition  of  Hebrews.  Wherein  the 

Socinian  Comment  is  examined.  Folio.  Lond.,  1662. 
Scarce.  7s.  to  10s. 

Richard  Baxter  says  : “ I must  thankfully  acknowledge  that  I learned 
more  from  Mr.  Lawson  than  from  any  divine  that  ever  I conversed  with.” 

1330  LINDSAY  (W.,  D.  D„  Prof.  Theol.  Glasgow).  Lectures 

on  Hebrews.  Two  vols.  Demy  8vo.  21s.  Edinb., 
Oliphant.  1867.  10s. 

One  of  those  great  expository  works  with  which  the 
Scotch  ministry  has  so  frequently  enriched  the  Church. 
We  wonder  if  any  one  ever  read  this  excellent  exposition 
through  ; we  should  not  like  to  be  sentenced  to  do  so. 

1331  [LUSH1NGTON  (Thomas,  M.  A.).]  The  Expiation  of  a 

Sinner.  Commentary  upon  Hebrews.  Folio.  1646.  5s. 
This  work  was  published  anonymously,  and  is  charged  with  Socinian- 
ism. 

1332  M’CAUL  (Joseph  B.,  Hon.  Canon  of  Rochester).  Hebrews. 

A Pharaphrastic  Commentary,  with  Illustrations  from 
Philo,  the  Targums,  etc.  8vo.  12s.  6d.  Lond.,  Long- 
mans. 1871.  S.  6s. 

Mr.  M’Caul  attacks  the  gentlemen  of  the  higher  criticism  with  great 
plainness  of  speech  and  some  asperity.  We  hardly  think  his  work  will 
attain  a great  circulation,  it  has  so  much  Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  and  Ger- 
man in  it,  that  only  men  of  learning  and  leisure  can  use  it. 

1333  MACLEAN  (A.  1732—1812).  Paraphrase  and  Commen- 

tary on  Hebrews.  Two  vols.,  12mo.  Lond.,  1847.  2s. 

One  of  the  most  judicious  and  solid  expositions  ever 
written. 

1334  NELSON  (Robert).  Comments  on  Hebrews.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 

Lond.,  Morgan  & Scott.  1868.  S.  3s.  6d. 

By  a thoughtful  and  devout  man,  but  we  cannot  endorse  some  of  his 


266 


HEBREWS. 


interpretations.  The  taint  of  a certain  modern  school  appears  in  passages 
such  as  this  : “ Had  Paul  been  preaching  holiness  of  life  as  essential  to 
seeing  the  Lord,  would  he  not  have  been  advocating  the  very  principle  on 
which  the  law  was  based  ? ” We  are  afraid  of  this  covert  Antinomianism ; 
its  presence  eats  as  doth  a canker. 

1335  [NEWTON  (Adelaide  L.).]  Hebrews  compared  with  tlie 

Old  Testament.  Cr.  8vo.  3s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1872. 
S.  Is.  6d. 

Devout,  simple,  and  instructive.  The  authoress  was  an  invalid,  and 
died  ere  she  had  finished  her  work.  She  worked  out  a good  idea  with 
far  more  of  expository  matter  than  could  have  been  expected  of  her. 

1336  OWEN  (John,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  Hebrews.  Four 

vols.  Folio.  Lond.,  1668-74.  14s.  Also  seven  vols., 
8vo.  Edited  by  Dr.  Goold.  £2  2s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T. 
Clark.  S.  25s.  There  is  an  abridgment  of  Owen’s  work, 
executed  by  Dr.  Williams.  Four  vols.,  8vo.  1790,  etc. 
4s.  6d.  to  7s.  6d. 

Out  of  scores  of  commendations  of  this  colossal  work 
we  select  but  one.  Dr.  Chalmers  pronounced  it  “ a 
work  of  gigantic  strength  as  well  as  gigantic  size  ; and 
he  who  hath  mastered  it  is  very  little  short,  both  in 
respect  to  the  doctrinal  and  practical  of  Christianity, 
of  being  an  erudite  and  accomplished  theologian.” 

1337  PARRY  (Thomas,  M.  A.,  Bishop  of  Barbadoes).  Hebrews, 

in  a Series  of  Lectures.  12mo.  Lond.,  1834.  Is.  6d. 

So  feeble  that  we  wonder  how  it  got  through  the  press.  A sermonized 
paraphrase. 

1338  PATTERSON  (Alexander  Simpson,  D.  D.)  Commentary 

on  Hebrews.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 
1855.  6s. 

Lectures  delivered  in  the  course  of  the  author’s  ministrations.  Excel- 
lent for  the  public ; the  student  should  consult  other  authors  for  learning ; 
but  Patterson  has  savor  and  spirituality. 

1339  PRIDHAM  (A.)  Hebrews.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Nisbet. 

1862. 

Rather  mystified  with  expressions  peculiar  to  “ dispensational  truth,” 
whatever  that  may  mean  ; but  devout,  candid,  sober,  and  sound. 

1340  SAMPSON  (Francis  S.,  D.  D.  Prof.  Orient.  Lit.,  Prince 

Edward,  Va.)  Commentary  on  Hebrews.  8vo.  New 
York,  1856.  S.  5s.  6d. 

A respectable  production,  but  we  know  many  which  we  value  far  more. 


HEBREWS, 


2G7 


As  a set  of  lectures  to  a college  class  these  comments  would  be  of  no  great 
value,  but  the  author  did  well  not  to  print  them,  although  it  was  natural 
and  fitting  that  his  surviving  colleague  should  do  so. 

1341  SAMPgON  (G.  V.)  Translation,  with  Notes.  8vo.  Lond., 

1828.  Is.  6d. 

Dr.  Kendrick  says  that  Sampson  is  candid  and  sensible,  but  scarcely 
grapples  with  the  difficult  points  of  the  Epistle.  Perhaps  he  was  not 
strong  enough. 

1342  SAPHIR  (Adolph).  Lectures  on  Hebrews.  First  Series. 

Chapters  I. — VII.  [Second  and  concluding  volume  in 
preparation].  Cr.  8vo.  6s.  6d.  Lond.,  J.  F.  Shaw  & Co. 
1874. 

Mr.  Saphir  has  always  something  to  say  worthy  of  the  attention  of 
spiritual  minds.  His  mind  finds  a track  of  its  own,  but  he  is  never  specu- 
lative. W e always  enjoy  his  remarks,  though  he  is  not  specially  terse  or 
brilliant. 

1343  STEWARD  (George).  Argument  of  the  Epistle  to  the 

Hebrews.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1872. 

Unhappily  the  author  died  before  he  had  quite  completed  this  “ argu- 
ment.” The  work  is  most  helpful. 

1344  STUART  (Moses,  M.  A.)  Commentary  on  Hebrews.  8vo. 

Lond.,  1837.  Also  1853.  7s.  6d.  Tegg  & Co.  S.  3s.  6d. 

We  are  constantly  differing  from  Moses  Stuart,  but 
are  bound  to  consult  him.  He  is  one  of  the  greatest  of 
American  scholars,  and  this  is  one  of  his  best  comments. 

1345  TAIT  (William,  M.  A.)  Meditationes  Hebraicae.  Two 

vols.,  Cr.  8vo.  Lond.,  Hamilton,  Adams  & Co.  1855. 
S.  6s. 

A noteworthy  series  of  lectures.  If  Gouge,  Owen,  and  others,  had  not 
done  all  for  Hebrews  that  one  could  well  need,  this  would  have  been  of 
first-class  value ; and  though  we  have  much  better  it  is  still  a worthy  com- 
panion to  them. 

1346  THOLUCK  (A.  F.)  Commentary  on  Hebrews.  Two  vols., 

12mo.  12s.  Biblical  Cabinet.  Edinb.,  Clark.  1842. 

S.  4s.  to  5s.  6d. 

Delitzsch  speaks  highly  of  this  work ; but,  for  our  part,  we  understand 
the  Epistle  better  without  Tholuck  than  with  him.  Clouds  of  smoke  and 
volleys  of  hard  words  destroy  our  equanimity. 


268 


PARTS  OF  HEBREWS, 


1347  TURNER  (Samuel  H.,  D.  D.)  Hebrews,  in  Greek  and 

English;  with  Commentary.  8vo.  New  York,  1852. 
S.  4s.  6d. 

Carefully  done.  Written  for  those  who  really  wish  to  understand  the 
Epistle. 

1348  WILLIAMS  (H.  W.)  Exposition  of  Hebrews.  Cr.  8vo. 

6s.  Lond.,  66  Paternoster  Row.  1872. 

The  author  has  evidently  been  a diligent  reader  and  student.  Apart 
from  its  Wesleyan  peculiarities,  we  can  commend  this  book  as  edifying  and 
instructive,  though  we  do  not  place  it  in  the  first  class. 


PARTS  OF  HEBREWS. 

1349  DEERING  (Edward,  B.  D.  Puritan.  Died  1576). 

Twenty-seven  Lectures  upon  Hebrews  [chap..  I. — VI.] 
4to.  1590.  5s.  6d. 

Mainly  aimed  at  the  errors  of  the  Church  of  Rome, 
and  at  the  practical  questions  of  the  Reformation  period. 
A learned  but  antiquated  set  of  lectures. 

1350  MANCHESTER  (George  Montague,  Duke  of.)  Horae 

Hebraicae.  An  Attempt  to  discover  how  the  Argument 
of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  [1 — IV.  11]  must  have  been 
understood  by  those  therein  addressed.  Royal  8vo. 
Lond.,  1835.  3s. 

A peculiar  book,  altogether  sui  generis,  written  by  a man  who  did  his 
own  thinking.  The  Duke  would  be  an  unreliable  guide,  but  he  frequently 
strikes  out  new  paths,  and  suggests  novel  trains  of  thought. 

1351  ANDERSON  (James  S.  M.,  M.  A.)  Discourses  on  the  11th 

and  part  of  the  12th  chapters  of  Hebrews.  Two  vols., 
8vo.  Lond.,  1839-43.  8s.  6d. 

Good  Church  sermons.  Of  very  slight  value  for  commenting  purposes. 

1352  MANTON  (T.,  D.  D.)  Sixty-six  Sermons  on  Hebrews  XI, 

in  vol.  III.  of  Man  ton’s  Works.  Folio  edition. 

Exhaustive.  Man  ton  piles  up  his  matter  heaps  upon 
heaps. 

1353  PERKINS  (William).  A Cloud  of  Faithful  Witnesses. 

Commentary  on  Hebrewes  XI.  4to.  1622.  2s.  6d ; and 
Works,  vol.  III. 

Good  in  its  day,  but  now  superseded.  Very  many  points  are  discussed 


CATHOLIC  EPISTLES — JAMES. 


2G9 


which  would  now  he  regarded  as  ridiculous  : as  for  instance,  whether  a 
man  may  travel  in  a foreign  country.  It  is  terribly  prosy. 

1354  ANDREWS  (G.)  Sermons  upon  Hebrews  XII.  4to.  1711.  9s. 
Thoroughly  Scotch.  Sound,  but  somewhat  prolix  and  commonplace. 

1355  PHILLIPS  (W.  Spencer,  B.  D.)  The  Triumphs  of  a 

Practical  Faith.  [On  Hebrews  XI.1  12mo.  Lond., 
1840.  Is. 

Cloudy  discourses  on  the  cloud  of  witnesses.  Will  quicken  no  one’s  pace. 

1356  SYLVESTER  (Matthew).  The  Christian’s  Race  and 

Patience.  Sermons  on  Hebrews  XII.  Two  vols.,  8vo. 
1702—1708.  3s.  6d. 

Not  of  the  first  class  ; yet  respectable  sermons. 


CATHOLIC  EPISTLES. 

1357  EBRARD  (J.  H.  A.)  See  No.  1389. 

1358  LANGE  (J.  P.)  Commentary  on  James,  by  Prof.  Van 

Oosterzee.  Epistles  of  Peter,  by  Dr.  C.  F.  Fronmiiller. 
Epistles  of  John,  by  Dr.  K.  Braune.  Epistle  of  Jude,  by 
Dr.  C.  F.  Fronmiiller.  Edited  by  Dr.  Schaff.  Imp.  8vo. 
21s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark. 

In  his  comment  on  the  First  Epistle  of  John,  Dr.  Braune  teaches  bap- 
tismal regeneration  in  a very  decided  manuer.  This  plague-spot  of  sac- 
ramentarianism  should  put  the  reader  on  his  guard. 


JAMES. 

1359  ADAM  (John,  D.  D.,  of  Aberdeen).  Exposition  of  James. 

8vo.  9s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1867. 

Good,  plain  discourses,  for  which  the  author  acknowledges  his  in- 
debtedness to  various  eminent  writers  who  have  discussed  the  Epistle. 
Our  readers  had  better  make  similar  discourses  of  their  own — if  they  can. 

1360  HEMMINGE  (Nicholas,  D.  D.)  A Learned  and  Fruitful 

Commentarie  upon  James,  translated  by  W.  G.  Black 
Letter.  4to.  1577.  21s. 

The  price  which  this  book  fetches  is  preposterous.  It  is  hard  antique 
reading. 


270 


JAMES. 


1361  JACOBI  (Bernard,  of  Petersliagen,  Prussia).  Lectures  on 

James.  12mo.  Religious  Tract  Society.  1838.  S.  Is.  6d. 

A good,  simple,  practical  set  of  expository  Lectures.  Safe  in  doctrine, 
or  the  Religious  Tract  Society  would  not  have  issued  it. 

1362  JOHNSTONE  (Robert,  LL.  B.  Glasgow.)  Lectures  on 

James.  Extra  cr.  8vo.,  7s.  6d.  Edinb.,  Oliphant.  1871. 

A very  useful,  scholarly,  and  readable  book. 

1363  MANTON  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  James.  4to. 

Lond.,  1651 ; 3s.  8vo.  1842 ; also  in  vol.  IV.  of  Manton’s 
Works,  Nichol’s  edition. 

In  Manton’s  best  style.  An  exhaustive  work,  as  far 
as  the  information  of  the  period  admitted.  Few  such 
books  are  written  now. 

1364  MAYER  (John,  D.  D.)  Praxis  Theologica:  or  the  Epistle 

of  James  Resolved,  Expounded,  and  Preached  upon. 
4to.  1629.  7s.  6d.  (See  pages  25  and  26.) 

1365  NEANPER  (J.  A.  W.)  James,  practically  explained. 

Translated  by  Mrs.  Conant.  12mo.  New  York,  1852. 
2s.  6d. 

See  also  No.  1263. 

1366  NELSON  (Robert).  James.  Thin  cr.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  Lond.* 

Bagsters.  1872. 

Setting  out  with  the  notion  that  the  epistle  is  only  written  to  the  Jews, 
this  author’s  remarks  are  too  much  warped  by  this  and  other  theories  to 
be  of  any  value  to  students. 

1367  STIER  (R.,  D.  D.)  See  No.  974. 

1368  PATTERSON  (A.  S.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  James.  18mo. 

Paisley,  1851.  Is.  (See  remarks  on  No.  1294.) 

1369  TURNBULL  (Richard,  M.  A.)  Expositions  of  James  and 

Jude.  Thick  12mo.,  1592  ; and  4to.,  1605.  6s.  to  14s. 

Old  and  occupied  with  Popish  controversies.  Good,  solid,  and  tedious. 

1370  WARDLAW  (Ralph,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  James.  Cr. 

8 vo.  3s  6d.  Fullerton  & Co.  1862. 

The  lectures  are  noteworthy  specimens  of  expository 
preaching.  They  were  Wardlaw’s  last  work,  and  are 
fully  up  to  the  mark. 


L & II.  PETER. — I.  PETER. 


271 


I.  &.  II.  PETER. 

1371  AMES  (William,  D.  D.  1576—1633).  Exposition  of  tlie 

Epistles  of  Peter.  4to.  Lond.,  1641.  5s. 

Too  much  divided  and  subdivided,  chopped  up  and  cut  into  dice  pieces 
and  laid  in  order ; for  after  all,  there  is  very  little  meat  in  it.  It  is  an  an- 
alysis, and  little  more. 

1372  BENSON  (George).  Epistles  of  Peter.  4to.  1742. 

2s.  6d. 

The  author  was  an  Arian,  “ Benson  possessed  considerable  learning 
but  no  great  portion  of  genius.”  This  is  a paraphrase  with  notes. 

1373  LILLIE  (John,  D.  D.  Kingston,  N.  Y.)  Lectures  on  1 

and  2 Peter.  8vo.  8s.  6d.  New  York,  1869.  Lond., 
Hodder  and  Stoughton.  S.  5s.  6d. 

Dr.  Schaff  says  : — “ Though  very  different  from  the 
immortal  work  of  Archbishop  Leighton  on  the  First 
Epistle  of  Peter,  these  lectures  breathe  the  same  reveren- 
tial spirit  and  devotional  fervor,  while  they  are  much 
more  full  and  thorough  as  an  exposition.” 

1374  LUTHER  (Martin).  Commentarie  upon  the  Two  Epistles 

of  St.  Peter  and  that  of  St.  Jude,  gathered  out  of  the 
lectures  of  Martin  Luther.  Translated  by  Thomas  New- 
ton. 4to.  Lond.,  1581.  Black  letter.  15s. 

In  Luther’s  racy  style.  One  of  his  best  productions. 
Copies  are  scarce  as  white  elephants,  and  consequently 
expensive. 

1375  NISBET  (Alexander).  Exposition  of  1 and  2 Peter. 

8vo.  Edinb.,  1658.  5s.  to  7s.  6d. 

A judicious  and  gracious  Scotch  commentary,  after 
the  style  of  Dickson  and  Hutcheson. 


L PETER. 

1376  ALLEY  (William,  Bishop  of  Exeter.  Died  1571).  Expo- 
sition of  1 Peter.  [In  “Poore  Man’s  Librarie.”  Folio. 
Lond.,  1560].  18s.  Very  rare. 

A curious  old  Black  Letter  Folio.  The  exposition  on  Peter  is  mainly 
occupied  with  the  questions  and  controversies  of  the  Reforming  period. 
Do  not  buy  it. 


272 


I.  PETER. 


1377  BROWN  (John,  D.  D.  Edinburgh).  Expository  Dis- 

courses on  1 Peter.  Three  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  18s.  Edinb., 
W.  Oliphant  & Co.  I860.  S.  10s.  6d.  to  12s.  6d. 

The  epistle  is  divided  into  paragraphs,  and  these  are 
made  the  themes  of  discourses.  Thus  Dr.  Brown  pro- 
duced what  is  substantially  a commentary,  and  one  of 
the  best.  It  affords  us  a grammatical  interpretation, 
together  with  an  exposition,  at  once  exegetical,  doctrinal 
and  practical.  It  is  a standard  work,  and  the  indices 
increase  its  value. 

1378  BYFIELD  (Nicholas).  Commentary  upon  1 Peter  I.  II.  III. 

Folio.  1637.  9s.  to  15s. 

Byiield  is  an  able  and  pious  divine,  but  he  is  not  very  vivacious,  and 
neither  in  manner  nor  matter  is  he  at  all  original. 

1379  KOHLBRUGGE  (H.  F.,  D.  D.,  of  Elberfeld).  Sermons  on 

1 Peter.  12mo.  Lond.,  1853.  2s. 

Strictly  orthodox  and  deeply  spiritual.  No  German  neology  may  be 
expected  from  this  author.  He  is  very  happy  in  his  praotioal  remarks. 

1380  LEIGHTON  (Robert,  D.  D.  Abp.  of  Glasgow.  1613— 

1684).  Commentary  upon  1 Peter.  Two  vols.  18mo. 
3s.  6d.  Royal  edition,  with  portrait,  5s.  Religious  Tract 
Society. 

Dr.  Henry  Mills  thus  wrote  of  Leighton’s  works  : — 
‘ ‘ There  is  a spirit  in  them  I never  met  with  in  any  other 
human  writings,  nor  can  I read  many  lines  in  them 
without  being  moved.”  We  need  scarcely  commend 
this  truly  heavenly  work.  It  is  a favorite  with  all 
spiritual  men. 

1381  ROGERS  (John.  A.  M.  Puritan.  Died  1636).  Fruitful 

Exposition  upon  all  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter.  Folio. 
Lond.,  1650.  14s.  to  16s.  Very  rare. 

Bogers  was  a true  Boanerges.  His  style  is  earnestly 
practical  and  wisely  experimental.  This  is  one  of  the 
scarcest  and  liveliest  of  the  Puritan  expositions. 


II.  PETER. 


273 


1382  STEIGER  (Wilhelm,  Prof.  Tlieol.  Geneva.  1809—1836). 

Exposition  of  1 Peter.  Translated  by  Dr.  Fairbairn. 
Two  vols.,  12mo.  8s.  Biblical  Cabinet.  Edinb.,  T.  & T. 
Clark.  1836.  3s. 

Steiger  was  a sound  German  divine.  His  criticism  is  good,  but  like  all 
the  Germans  lie  is  far  too  fond  of  dragging  in  learned  names . 

1383  GOMERSALL  (R.)  Sermons  on  St.  Peter  [chap.  II.,  13 — 

16].  4to.  1634.  5s. 

Teaches  absolute  submission  to  rulers.  Only  worth  notice  from  its 
age. 


II.  PETER. 

1384  ADAMS  (Thomas).  Commentary  upon  the  2d  Epistle  of 

Peter.  Folio.  Lond.,  1633.  New  Edition,  revised  by 
Rev.  James  Sherman,  in  imp.  8vo.,  1839;  now  included 
in  Nicliol’s  Commentaries ; 10s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1862. 

Full  of  quaintnesses,  holy  wit,  bright  thought,  and 
deep  instruction.  We  like  Adams  better  in  commenting 
than  in  preaching.  His  great  work  is  quite  by  itself, 
and  in  its  own  way  remains  unrivalled.  We  know  no 
richer  and  racier  reading. 

1385  SYMSON  (Archibald).  Exposition  upon  the  Second 

Epistle  Generali  of  St.  Peter.  4to.  Lond.,  1632.  6s. 
Abundance  of  matter,  pithily  expressed.  Symson  is  among  the  oldest 
and  rarest  of  the  English  divines. 

1386  BROWN  (John,  D.  D.)  Parting  Counsels ; an  Exposition 

of  2 Peter  I.  8vo.  8s.  Edinb.,  Olipliant.  1856.  S.  4s. 

We  always  think  of  Brown  as  a Puritan  born  out  of 
due  time.  Everything  he  has  left  us  is  massive  gold. 
He  is  both  rich  and  clear,  profound  and  perspicuous. 

1387  WILSON  (William,  of  Musselburgh).  Second  Epistle  of 

Peter.  12mo.  5s.  ; offered  at  2s.  6d.  by  Ogle  & Murray, 
Edinb. 

« Thoughtful  and  fresh  in  its  matter,  fine  and  polished  in  its  style,  lay- 
ing hold  of  us  at  once,  and  tightening  its  grasp  on  our  sympathies  the 
longer  we  read.” — B.  and  For.  Evan.  Review.  [Too  laudatory.] 


274 


JOHN’S  EPISTLES. — I.  JOHN. 


JOHN’S  EPISTLES. 

1388  BICKERSTETH  (Edward.  1786—1850).  Exposition  on 

the  Epistles  of  John  and  Jude,  and  of  Paul  to  Timothy. 
12ino.  Loud.,  1853.  Is.  6d. 

Notes  taken  by  his  children  of  Mr.  Bickersteth’s  expositions  at  family 
prayer.  Simple,  devout,  soundly  evangelical,  and,  we  must  add,  super- 
ficial and  commonplace. 

1389  EBRARD  (J.  H.  A.)  Commentary  on  the  Epistles  of  St. 

John.  With  an  Appendix  on  the  Catholic  Epistles. 
8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1860.  S.  5s. 

Dr.  Candlish,  in  his  Exposition  on  1 John,  says  : “ I 
must  acknowledge  my  obligation  to  Dr.  Liicke.  But  it 
is  Dr.  Ebrard  who  has  helped  me  most.  Ebrard  is 
especially  valuable,  and  for  an  English  reader,  acquainted 
with  theology,  very  easily  intelligible.” 

1390  HAWKINS  (Thomas).  Commentary  on  John’s  Epistles. 

8vo.  Halifax,  1808.  2s. 

Very  excellent.  The  writer  has  upon  every  verse 
something  to  say  worth  the  saying. 

1391  LUCRE  (G.C.F.  Bonn).  Epistles  of  John.  12mo.  Bibli- 

cal Cabinet.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1837.  S.  2s.  6d. 

Dr.  Graham,  of  Bonn,  says  that  “Lucke  is  impartial,  learned,  and  criti- 
cally in  earnest ; yet  the  attentive  reader  soon  discovers  a very  decided 
anti-evangelical  tendency.  I say  anti- evangelical  in  our  sense  of  the  word, 
for  in  Germany  he  has  done  much  to  overthrow  the  cold  kingdom  of  ra- 
tionalism and  unbelief.”  Graham  is  severe,  and  a discount  may  be  allowed 
from  this  judgment.  Let  it  serve  as  a warning. 

1392  SHEPHERD  (R.)  See  No.  1071. 


I.  JOHN. 

1393  APOSTOLIC  INSTRUCTION,  exemplified  in  the  First 
Epistle  of  John.  [Anon.]  12mo.  Lond.,  1840.  2s. 

Upon  two  chapters  only,  but  thoroughly  good,  and 
full  of  sweetness  and  light. 


I.  JOHN-, 


275 


1394  BINNING  (Hugh.  1627 — 1653).  Fellowship  witli  God, 

or  Twenty- eight  Sermons  on  1 John  I.  and  II,  1 — 3.  In 
his  Works,  vol.  II.  (See  No.  1199).  Reprinted  in  18mo. 
by  Religious  Tract  Society.  1833. 

Milk  for  babes,  and  meat  for  men ; calls  to  backslid- 
ers, and  comforts  for  mourners.  “ There  is  no  speaking,” 
says  Durham,  “ after  Mr.  Binning ; truly  he  had  the 
tongue  of  the  learned,  and  knew  how  to  speak  a word 
in  season.” 

1395  CALVIN  (John).  Commentaries  upon  the  First  Epistle 

of  John,  and  upon  the  Epistle  of  Jude.  Translated  by 
W.  H.  8vo.  [1560.] 

1396  CANDLISH  (Robert,  D.  D.)  First  Epistle  of  John, 

expounded.  Two  vols.  Sin.  cr.  8vo.  10s.  6d.  Edinb., 
A.  & C.  Black.  1870.  S.  5s.  to  7s.  6d. 

We  set  great  store  by  these  lectures.  A man  hardly 
needs  anything  beyond  Candlish.  He  is  devout,  can- 
did, prudent  and  forcible. 

1397  COTTON  (John,  B.  D.,  Pastor  of  Boston,  N.  E.  1585— 

1652).  Commentary  upon  the  First  Epistle  of  John. 
Folio.  Lond.,  1656.  6s.  to  9s. 

Calamy  puts  his  imprimatur  upon  this  book,  and 
speaks  of  the  author’s  name  as  “ deservedly  precious 
among  the  saints  of  God.”  In  doctrine  and  experience 
he  is  a noble  teacher. 

1398  GRAHAM  (W.)  The  Spirit  of  Love.  Commentary  on  1 

John.  Sm.  8vo.  Lond.,  1857.  S.  2s. 

Graham  is  sound  and  vigorous,  and  does  not  mince  matters  in  dealing 
with  semi-sceptics ; hence  he  brings  upon  himself  violent  reviews  from 
opponents.  The  Literary  Churchman  denounces  his  book  as  containing 
“ controversy  without  argument,  criticism  without  proof,  citation  without 
reference,  a show  of  scholarship  without  the  fruits  of  it,  and  denunciation 
without  decorum.”  To  say  the  least  of  it,  this  review  is  far  too  severe. 

1399  HANDCOCK  (W.  J.)  Exposition  of  1 John.  Cr.  8vo.  3s. 

6d.  Lond.,  Hamilton,  Adams  & Co.  1861. 

The  author  has  carefully  studied  the  original,  and  has  his  own  ideas  as 
to  its  meaning ; but  either  he  has  not  the  power  of  communicating  them 
or  else  we  are  slow  of  apprehension.  Very  frequently  we  are  at  a loss  to 
know  what  he  means. 


276 


I.  JOHN. 


1400  HARDY  (Nathaniel,  D.  D.  1618—1670).  First  Epistle 

of  John  unfolded  and  applied.  Two  vols.,  4to.  1656-59. 
7s.  6d.  to  10s.  Reprinted  in  Nichol’s  Commentaries.  Cr. 
4to.  7s.  6d.  Lond.,  Nisbet.  1865. 

The  Editor  of  NichoTs  Edition  says,  “ This  Exposi- 
tion is  only  a fragment.  It  was  intended  to  consist  of 
five  parts,  corresponding  generally  with  the  five  chapters 
of  the  Epistle  ; but  only  two  of  them  were  accomplished. 
In  matter,  the  sermons  are  purely  evangelical ; in  spirit, 
they  are  earnest  and  affectionate  ; in  manner,  they  are 
eloquent  and  impressive.”  This  is  rather  too  ardent  a 
commendation. 

1401  MORGAN  (James,  D.  D.,  Belfast).  Exposition  of  1 John. 

8 vo.  9s.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1866.  S.  4s.  6d. 

Dr.  Candlish  says  that  this  is  a work  “ of  great  prac- 
tical interest  and  value,”  and  that  had  it  appeared  at  an 
earlier  date,  “ he  might  have  abstained  from  issuing  ” 
his  own  Lectures  on  this  Epistle.  We  are  glad  to  pos- 
sess both  works. 

1403  NEANDER  (J.  A.  W.)  First  Epistle  of  John  explained. 
Translated  by  Mrs.  Conant.  Sm.  8vo.  New  York,  1853.  5s. 
Mrs.  Conant  in  her  preface  says  : “ The  treasures  of  genius  and  learn- 
ing which  enrich  his  more  scientific  works,  here  seem  vivified  by  a new 
element,  and  melt,  under  the  fervor  of  his  inner  spiritual  life,  into  a glow- 
ing stream  of  eloquent  practical  instruction.” 

1403  PATTERSON  (A.  S.,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  1 John.  18mo. 

1843.  (See  No.  1294.) 

1404  PIERCE  (Samuel  Eyles).  Exposition  of  1 John,  in 

Ninety-three  Sermons.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Lond.,  1835.  7s. 

This  devout  author  was  highly  Calvinistic,  but  with- 
al full  of  spiritual  power  and  unction.  He  loved  the 
deep  things  of  God,  and  wrote  upon  them  in  a gracious 
manner. 

1405  STOCK  (John,  M.  A.,  of  Finclringfield).  Exposition  of  1 

John.  8vo.  10s.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1865.  S.  5s. 

Written  by  a well-instructed  man  of  God.  For 


jude.  , 277 

spiritual  teaching  the  work  is  second  to  none.  Dr. 
Candlish  prized  it  greatly. 

1406  COX  (Samuel).  St.  John’s  Letter  to  Kyria,  and  St.  John’s 

Letter  to  Caius.  See  No.  1311. 

1407  JONES  (W.,  D.  D.)  See  No.  1313. 


JUDE. 

1408  BICKERSTETH  (E.)  See  No.  1388. 

1409  GARDINER  (F.,  M.  A.)  The  Last  of  the  Epistles.  Com- 

mentary on  Jude.  Cr.  8vo.  Boston,  U.  S.  1856.  2s.  6d. 
An  interesting,  straightforward,  instructive  commentary. 

1410  JENKYN  (William.  1612 — 1685).  Exposition  of  Jude. 

Two  vols.,  4to.,  1652,  4s. ; folio,  1656,  8s.  6d.  Rev.  J. 
Sherman’s  reprint,  imp.  8vo.  1839.  See  No.  1253. 

Earnest  and  popular,  but  very  full,  and  profoundly 
learned.  A treasure-house  of  good  things. 

1411  LUTHER.  See  No.  1374. 

1412  McGILYRAY  (Walter).  Lectures  on  Jude.  8vo.  Glasg., 

1855.  3s.  Scarce. 

Vigorous,  popular  addresses  by  a Free  Church  divine. 

1413  M ANTON  (Thomas,  D.  D.)  Commentary  on  Jude.  4to. 

Lond.,  1658.  4s. 

Manton  at  first  gave  up  all  idea  of  printing  this  hook 
on  Jude,  when  he  found  that  Jenkyn  had  taken  up  the 
subject ; but  he  afterwards  changed  his  mind.  He  tells 
us  “ I consulted  with  my  reverend  brother’s  book,  and 
when  I found  any  point  at  large  discussed  by  him,  I 
either  omitted  it  or  mentioned  it  very  briefly  ; so  that 
his  labors  will  be  necessary  to  supply  the  weaknesses  of 
mine.”  Manton’s  work  is  most  commendable. 

1414  MUIR  (William,  D.  D.)  Discourses  on  Jude.  8vo.  Glasg., 

1822.  2s.  6d. 

Sermons  which  do  not  rise  above  mediocrity. 


278 


THE  REVELATION. 


1415  OTES  (Samuel*  tlie  elder).  Explanation  of  J ude  in  forty- 

one  Sermons.  Folio.  Lond.,  1633.  5s.  to  8s. 

Of  the  conforming  Puritan  style,  full  of  quaintnesses  and  singularities 
of  learning.  A book  by  no  means  to  be  despised. 

1416  PERKINS  (William,  D.  D.)  Exposition  of  Jude.  4to. 

1606.  5s.  6d. 

Perkins  was  regarded  by  his  cotemporaries  as  a paragon  of  learning,  but 
his  writings  fail  to  interest  the  generality  of  readers. 

1417  TURNBULL  (Richard,  M.  A.)  Exposition  of  Jude.  See 

No.  1369. 

1418  WILLET  (Andrew).  A Catholicon  ; gathered  out  of  the 

Cathol ike  Epistle  of  Jude.  Folio.  Loud.,  1614. 

This  book  is  in  the  Museum,  but  we  cannot  procure 
a copy. 


THE  REVELATION. 

The  works  upon  Revelation  are  so  extremely  numerous  (Darling’s 
list  contains  52  columns),  and  the  views  entertained  are  so  many,  so  differ- 
ent, and  so  speculative,  that  after  completing  our  List  we  resolved  not  to 
occupy  our  space  with  it,  but  merely  to  mention  a few  works  of  repute.  As 
for  the  lucubrations  upon  parts  of  the  book,  they  lie  at  the  booksellers’ 
“ thick  as  leaves  in  Vallambrosa.”  Numbers  of  these  prophecyings  have 
been  disproved  by  the  lapse  of  time,  and  others  will  in  due  season  share 
their  fate.  The  following  remarks  may  help  the  student,  and  at  the  same 
time  prove  the  difficulty  of  making  a selection. 

Davidson  distinguishes  a fourfold  manner  of  apprehending  Apocalyp- 
tic Prophecy. 

1.  Preterists.  The  prophecies  contained  in  the  Apocalypse  were  ful- 
filled with  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  fall  of  heathen  Rome. 
This  is  the  view  of  Bossuet,  Grotius,  Hammond,  Wetstein,  Eichhorn, 
Ewald,  De  Wette,  Lucke,  and  others,  among  whom  is  the  American  ex- 
positor, Moses  Stuart. 

2.  Continuists.  The  Apocalyptic  prophecies  are  predictive  of  progres- 
sive history,  being  partly  fulfilled,  partly  unfulfilled.  Thus  Mede,  Bright- 
man,  Isaac  Newton,  Woodhouse,  Cunningham,  Birks,  Elliott  (and  many 
Germans.) 

8.  Simple  Futurists.  According  to  these,  only  the  first  three  chapters 
relate  to  the  historical  present  of  the  Seer,  all  else  having  reference  to  the 


THE  REVELATION. 


279 


absolute  future  of  the  Lord’s  Appearing.  Thus,  Burgh,  Maitland,  Benja- 
min Newton,  Todd,  and  others. 

4.  Extreme  Futurists.  Even  the  first  three  chapters  of  Bevelation  are 
a prophecy  relative  to  the  absolute  future  of  Christ’s  Coming — being  a 
prediction  of  the  condition  of  the  Jews  after  the  first  Resurrection.  Kelly, 
and  some  Irish  authors. 


1419  BENGEL  (John  Albert).  Introduction  to  his  Exposition 

of  the  Apocalypse,  with  his  preface  to  that  work,  and 
the  greatest  part  of  the  conclusion  of  it,  and  also  his 
marginal  notes  on  the  text,  which  are  a summary  of  the 
whole  Exposition.  Translated  from  the  High  Dutch,  by 
John  Robertson,  M.  D.  8vo.  Lond.,  1757. 

This  great  author  was  rather  too  precise  in  his  dates.  The  end  of  the 
forty-two  months  was  settled  for  the  21st  of  May,  1810,  and  the  destruction 
of  the  beast  for  June  18th,  1836.  When  so  princely  an  expositor  maunders 
in  this  fashion  it  should  act  as  a caution  to  less  able  men. 

1420  BONAR  (H.,  D.  D.)  Light  and  Truth,  vol.  V.  (See  No.  7.) 

1421  BRIGHTMAN  (Thomas).  The  Revelation  of  St.  John. 

Thick  8 vo.  Leyden,  1644.  4to.  Amsterdam,  1611. 

[See  Nos.  650  and  776.] 

Brightman’s  admirers  called  him  “ the  English  Prophet,”  and  this  work 
they  styled  the  “ Apocalypse  of  the  Apocalypse  ; ” but  it  survives  only  as 
a noteworthy  monument  of  the  failure  of  the  most  learned  to  expound  the 
mysteries  of  this  book.  Elliott  says  “ his  Commentary  is  one  of  great 
vigor  both  in  thought  and  language,  and  deservedly  one  of  the  most  popu- 
lar with  the  Protestant  Churches  of  the  time.” 

1422  BURGH  [or,  DE  BURGH]  (William,  M.  A.)  An  Exposi- 

tion of  the  Revelation.  12mo.  Dublin,  1857.  2s. 

Good  in  its  own  line. 

1423  COWPER  (William,  of  Galloway.  1566 — 1619).  Patmos; 

or  a Commentary  on  the  Revelation.  4to.  Lond.,  1619  ; 
and  in  Works,  folio,  1629. 

The  simple  piety  and  vigorous  style  of  Cowper  have  preserved  his  old- 
fashioned  work,  and  will  preserve  it. 

1424  CRADOCK  (Samuel,  B.  D.  1620 — 1760).  Exposition. 

8vo.  1696. 

Dr.  Doddridge  and  Job  Orton  were  very  fond  of  this  old  author.  We 
are  not. 


280 


THE  REVELATION-, 


1425  CUMMING  (J.)  Apocalyptic  Sketches.  Two  vols.,  12mo. 

S.  5s. 

Here  the  views  of  Elliott  are  admirably  popularized. 

1426  DAUBUZ  (Charles.  1670 — 1740).  A Perpetual  Commen- 

tary on  the  Revelation.  Abridged  by  Peter  Lancaster, 
A.  M.  4to.  Lond.,  1730.  3s.  6d. 

Subsequent  writers  have  drawn  much  from  this  work : we  have  heard 
it  highly  commended  by  competent  judges.  There  is  also  a larger  un- 
abridged edition,  which  we  have  not  seen.  This  is  said  to  be  still  more 
valuable. 

1427  DURHAM  (James.  1622—1658).  ' A Learned  and  Com- 

plete Commentary.  4to.  Glasg.,  1788.  Original  edition, 
folio,  1658. 

After  all  that  has  been  written,  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  a more  sen- 
sible and  instructive  work  than  this  old-fashioned  exposition.  W e cannot 
accept  its  interpretations  of  the  mysteries,  but  the  mystery  of  the  gospel 
fills  it  with  sweet  savor. 

1428  ELLIOTT  (C.  B.,  A.  M.  Died  1875).  Horse  Apocalyptic®  ; 

or  a Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse,  critical  and  histori- 
cal. Four  vols.  8vo.,  Lond.,  Seeleys.  1862.  S.  18s. 

The  standard  work  on  the  subject. 

1429  GARRATT  (Samuel,  M.  A.)  Commentary.  8vo.  7s.  6d. 

Lond.,  Seeleys.  1866.  S.  2s.  to  3s.  6d. 

This  author  mainly  follows  Elliott,  but  differs  as  he  proceeds.  He  is 
an  esteemed  author. 

1430  FULLER  (Andrew.  1754 — 1815).  Expository  Discourses. 

Two  vols.,  8vo.  1815.  Also  in  Works. 

Fuller  is  too  judicious  to  run  into  speculations.  The  work  is  both  con- 
densed and  clear.  Fuller  called  Faber  “the  Fortune-teller  of  the  Church, ” 
and  there  are  others  who  deserve  the  name. 

1431  GLASGOW  (James,  D.  D.)  Apocalypse  Translated  and 

Expounded.  8vo.  2s.  6d.  Edinb.,  T.  & T.  Clark.  1862. 
We  do  not  care  much  for  the  translation,  and  think  some  of  the  inter- 
pretations speculative  and  forced ; yet  the  work  is  important. 

1432  HENGSTENBERG  (E.  W.,  D.  D.)  The  Revelation  ex- 

pounded for  those  who  search  the  Scriptures.  Translated 
by  Patrick  Fairbairn,  D.  D.  Two  vols.,  8vo.  Edinb., 
1851-52.  S.  14s.  6d.  Scarce. 

Highly  esteemed  by  the  best  judges. 

1433  MEDE  (JosEPn,  D.  D.,  1586 — 1638).  A Key  to  the  Apoc- 

alypse ; [a  Translation  of  Mede’s  Clavis  Apocalyptica. 
By  R.  Bransby  Cooper,  Esq.]  8vo.  Lond.,  1833.  3s.  6d. 
There  are  several  other  works  on  the  Apocalypse  by  this  author,  who, 


THE  REVELATION. 


281 


Bays  Elliott,  “ was  looked  upon  and  written  of  as  a man  almost  inspired 
for  the  solution  of  the  Apocalyptic  mysteries.  Yet  I think  his  success 
was  at  first  over-estimated  as  an  Apocalyptic  expositor. 

1434  NEWTON  (Benjamin  Wills.)  Thoughts  on  the  Apoc- 

alypse. 8vo.  Lond.,  1853.  S.  3s. 

Of  the  Futurist  School.  Condensed  and  instructive. 

1435  ROGERS  (George,  Principal  of  the  “ Pastor’s  College.”) 

Lectures  on  the  Book  of  Revelation.  Four  vols.,  12mo. 
1844-51.  6s. 

Not  half  so  well  known  as  it  ought  to  be  : a mass  of  judicious  remarks. 
We  do  not  subscribe  to  the  author’s  system  of  interpretation,  but  his  ex- 
positions always  command  our  respect. 

1436  STUART  (Moses).  A Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse. 

Two  vols.,  royal  8vo.  Lond.,  1845  ; one  vol.,  8vo.  Edinb., 
1847 ; one  vol.,  8vo.,  8s.  Lond.,  W.  Tegg  & Co.  1850. 
S.  3s.  6d. 

Stuart  rejects  the  historical  interpretations  generally  given ; but  his 
textual  criticism  and  his  preliminary  disquisitions  are  very  helpful.  This 
work  has  laid  us  under  great  obligations. 

1437  VAUGHAN  (C.  J.,  D.  D.)  Lectures  on  the  Revelation. 

Two  vols.  F’cap.  8vo.  9s.  Lond.,  Macmillan  & Co. 
1875. 

Does  not  grapple  with  the  difficulties,  but  inculcates  the  lessons  of  the 
book.  A sensible  course. 

1438  WILLIAMS  (Isaac).  The  Apocalypse,  with  Notes  and 

Reflections.  Cr.  8vo.  5s.  Lond.,  Rivingtons.  1873. 
S.  3s. 

Considering  the  High  Church  School  to  which  he  belongs,  this  author 
is  marvellously  rich  in  exposition.  The  whole  is  tinged  with  the  mediaeval 
spirit. 

1439  WOODHOUSE  ( John  Chappel,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Lichfield. 

1751 — 1834).  Translation,  with  Notes.  Royal  8vo.  1805. 
2s.  6d. 

Bishop  Hurd  says,  “ This  is  the  best  book  of  the  kind  I have  seen.” 
We  give  no  opinion,  for  we  are  too  much  puzzled  with  these  Apocalyptio 
books,  and  are  glad  to  write  Finis. 


. 


. 


' 


■ 


\ 


. 


ECCENTEIC  PEEACHEES. 


AN  ADDRESS  DELIVERED  AT  THE  ANNUAL  MEETING 
OF  THE  PASTOR’S  COLLEGE,  MARCH,  1876. 

By  Charles  H.  Spurgeon. 

I am  almost  sorry  I have  to  speak  to  you  on  the  sub- 
ject of  eccentric  preachers,  because  somebody  was  rude 
enough  to  observe  that  he  wondered  if  I should  consider 
myself  to  be  one.  Of  course  I do  not  at  all.  Anybody 
who  has  been  able  to^see  any  eccentricity  about  me  must, 
I am  sure,  have  looked  at  me  with  very  strange  eyes. 
I think  I have  really  lived  so  long  in  this  world — in  this 
particular  South  of  London  world  for  twenty-one  or 
twenty-two  years — and  so  many  have  run  in  my  particu- 
lar circumference,  that  I am  hardly  eccentric  now  at  all. 
I may  have  been  years  ago,  but  that  is  long  ago.  I can 
produce  several  in  this  Tabernacle  who  are  eccentric,  and 
I may  show  them  up  before  I have  done.  I intend,  how- 
ever, to  speak  in  favor  of  eccentric  people,  hence  I do 
not  include  myself.  Erom  the  earliest  period  of  the 
Christian  ministry  it  has  been  found  impossible  for  the 
men  whom  God  has  sent  with  His  message,  to  please  all 
people.  In  every  generation  there  have  been  objections 
raised,  not  to  some  of  a certain  class,  but  to  all  or  any 
who  have  been  at  all  useful.  John  the  Baptist  comes 
neither  eating  nor  drinking — he  is  a Good  Templar  and 
a Baptist — (laughter) — but  they  say,  “ He  hath  a devil  ” ; 
Jesus  Christ  comes  eating  and  drinking ; He  does  not 


284 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


belong  to  the  first,  though  certainly  he  is  the  founder  of 
the  second — and  they  say  He  is  a glutton  and  a wine- 
bibber.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  would  exactly 
suit,  and  they  could  not  endure  Him — the  man  among 
men.  So  now  the  preacher  is  either  too  blunt  or  else  too 
flowery,  too  dull  or  too  argumentative  ; but  nevertheless 
wisdom  is  justified  of  all  her  children.  At  this  time  the 
one  common  charge  brought  against  men  who  succeed  in 
the  ministry  is,  that  they  are  eccentric.  If  they  say  any- 
thing that  strikes  and  sticks — and,  I take  it,  the  main 
business  of  the  ministry  is  to  do  so — then  men  try  to 
escape  from  the  striking  and  the  sticking  by  saying  the 
preacher  is  eccentric.  This  great  crime  of  eccentricity  is 
often  supported  by  falsehood.  I wonder  what  preacher 
of  the  Gospel  whom  God  has  owned,  has  escaped  alto- 
gether from  falsehood  ? Look  at  the  stories  told  to  this 
day  of  Rowland  Hill — emphatically  stories.  That  of 
Mrs.  Hill  coming  in  a little  late  one  morning,  and  Mr. 
Hill  remarking  what  wonderful  creatures  women  were — 
“ Here’s  Mrs.  Hill  coming  in  with  a chest  of  drawers 
on  her  head,”  insinuating  that  money  which  had  been 
put  by  for  purchasing  drawers  had  been  spent  on  a new 
bonnet.  Why,  any  fool  who  had  any  brains  still,  might 
see  it  could  not  be  true.  Rowland  Hill  was  the  son  of  a 
baronet — a man  to  whom  money  was  of  no  importance, 
and  was  a perfect  gentleman,  who  never  did  or  said  any- 
thing to  his  wife  other  than  what  a gentleman  would 
do,  and  the  supposition  was  absurd,  showing  that  per- 
sons who  told  it  could  not  have  known  Rowland  Hill. 
I remember  a story  about  a young  man  that  he  slid  down 
the  banisters — (a  laugh) — to  show  how  the  people  would 
backslide,  and  so  on,  when  at  that  time  his  pulpit  was 
in  the  wall,  and  there  were  no  banisters,  and  one  could 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


285 


not  get  down  except  into  the  vestry ; no  one  therefore 
could  have  seen  him  slide  down.  (Cheers.)  I remem- 
ber reading  of  a young  man,  too,  that  he  on  one  occasion 
told  the  ladies  not  to  send  him  any  slippers  because  he 
had  so  many.  (Laughter.)  I knew  him,  and  he  never 
had  a solitary  pair  ; he  was  always  such  a rough,  gruff 
sort  of  person  that  no  young  lady  made  him  a present, 
except  one,  and  she  was  close  upon  seventy.  Things 
which  were  lies  a hundred  years  ago  are  invented  and 
appended  to  people  now,  who  are  consequently  called 
eccentric — yet  things  as  hostile  to  their  very  nature  as 
they  could  possibly  be.  I don’t  know  whether  you  like 
lies  told  about  you ; if  you  do,  I can  only  trust  you 
may  have  your  desires  gratified.  This  is  the  way  the 
world  tries  to  prove  that  some  ministers  of  the  Gospel 
are  eccentric. 


WHAT  IS  ECCENTRICITY  ? 

What  is  it  to  be  eccentric  ? Will  you  look  in  the 
dictionary  ? I won’t  give  you  the  exact  dictionary  ex- 
planation in  so  many  words,  but  a thing  eccentric  has 
not  the  same  centre  as  that  to  which  you  compare  it. 
There  is  a circle  ; another  takes  up  part  of  the  space  of 
that  circle,  but  it  has  not  the  same  centre,  and  the  one 
eccentric  to  the  other.  Men  who  have  to  do  with  ma- 
chinery know  what  it  is  for  one  wheel  to  be  eccentric  to 
the  other.  Well,  that  does  not  look  very  horrible,  that 
a man  should  be  eccentric.  I suppose  it  means  that  he 
is  off  the  circle,  or  if  it  were  a square — and  it  is  difficult 
to  square  a circle — it  would  mean  he  is  off  the  square. 
(Laughter.)  But  the  point  is,  gentlemen — and  ladies 
too — who  is  to  tell  us  what  the  square  is,  and  what  the 
particular  centre  is  ? This  circle  is  not  concentric  with 


286 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS* 


the  other,  but  eccentric,  yet  the  other  is  eccentric  to  it. 
Suppose  I am  eccentric  to  you.  Granted,  but  you  are 
eccentric  to  me.  (Laughter  and  cheers.)  A man  called 
me  a Dissenter  the  other  day,  but  I do  not  own  it  at  all. 
He  belonged  to  the  Established  Church,  and  he  was  a 
Dissenter  as  he  dissented  from  me.  He  said  I was  Non- 
conformist. “ No,  I am  not,  I am  Conformist,”  I said, 
“you  do  not  conform  to  me.”  Is  it  not  so  ? Who  is 
to  say  what  you  are  to  conform  to  or  dissent  from,  and 
who  is  to  put  down  this  centre  so  that  the  compass  legs 
open  so  far,  and  they  say  if  you  dare  push  it  the  breadth 
of  a hair,  you  shall  be  eccentric  ? Then,  I say,  there  is 
my  centre,  and  if  you  do  not  keep  to  that  you  shall  be 
eccentric,  and  there  will  be  two  of  us.  (Laughter.)  To 
all  those  learned  men,  therefore,  who  tell  us  certain 
preachers  are  eccentric,  we  say  who  is  to  fix  the  centre  ? 
Shall  those  gentlemen  fix  it  who  buy  their  sermons  at 
ninepence  each  ? You  say  to  me.  “ Do  they  do  it  ? ” 
I sent  the  other  day  to  a bookseller’s  shop  where  certain 
clergy  get  their  theology,  and  I have  got  specimens  at 
home  of  the  sermons  they  preach,  from  a shilling  down 
to  sixpence  each — sermons  which  are  nicely  marked  with 
little  spaces  between  the  words  to  show  you  how  long 
you  should jpause  between  them,  and  emphasized  with 
one  mark  or  two  to  show  the  brother — the  Conformist 
brother — (laughter) — where  he  is  to  put  the  emphasis. 
I wonder  they  do  not  have  a machine  made  to  do  the 
whole  thing.  The  next  best  thing  is  that  for  ten  shil- 
lings and  sixpence  you  can  he  supplied  with  all  the  spir- 
itual food  your  people  want  for  one  quarter  ! Now  if 
we  make  our  own  sermons  and  preach  them  from  our 
own  hearts,  I suppose  we  are  eccentric  ? Well  if  the 
purchase  of  sermons  is  to  constitute  the  circle,  I pray 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


287 


God  that  we  may  have  no  end  of  eccentricity,  and  that 
all  ministers  may  become  eccentric.  Are  the  high-flying 
brethren  to  fix  it,  brethren  who  preach  high  in  the 
clouds,  sublime  and  wonderful,  so  that  no  man  under- 
standeth  or  doth  comprehend  ; the  philosophical  gentle- 
man, men  like  those  who  preached  at  the  University 
Chapel,  in  Cambridgeshire,  where  Bishop  Blomfield  tells 
that  the  verger  said  to  him,  “ I have  been  verger  of  this 
place  for  fifty  years,  and  have  heard  all  the  great  men 
preach,  and  yet  I am  a Christian  still.”  Well,  are  these 
men  to  fix  the  centre  ? If  so,  we  intend  to  be  eccentric, 
and  blessed  be  God,  there  are  some  who  will  preach 
plainly  the  things  which  make  for  the  everlasting  peace 
of  men’s  souls.  If  the  centre  is  to  be  fixed  in  the  clouds, 
let  the  few  who  care  for  something  practical  stop  below. 
But,  where  is  the  centre  to  be  found  ? Oh,  the  centre 
is  to  be  found  in  the  vestry — in  the  vestry . Do  you 
open  that  door,  it  is  full  of  cupboards.  If  you  look  in, 
you  see  what?  A laundry?  (Laughter.)  What  have- 
we  come  to  ? No,  not  a laundry — here  are  black  gowns, 
white  gowns,  green  gowns,  and  pink  gowns  ; what  they 
call  albs,  birettas,  and  so  on.  I am  not  up  in  all  the 
orthology  of  these  drapery  establishments.  (Laughter.) 
I know  therein  abideth  much  grace,  and  very  much  for 
the  establishment  of  the  saints  ; but  if  this  be  the  centre, 
young  men  of  our  college,  do  you  be  eccentric,  and  do 
not  touch  a rag  of  the  rubbish — (cheers) — not  even  the 
white  boiled  rag  round  the  necks  which  is  the  last  relic 
of  an  abominable  Popery.  When  I wore  one,  I was 
crossing  the  river  by  a penny  boat,  when  some  rude 
fellow  came  up  to  me  and  said  : “ How  are  you  getting 
on  at  Hitchcock’s  ? ” (Loud  laughter.)  The  man  sup- 
posed I was  a draper.  I do  not  want  to  be  taken  for  an 


288 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


undertaker,  or  a draper,  or  parson  ; I am  neither,  but  a 
simple  preacher  of  the  Gospel  among  my  brethren,  and 
not  distinguished  by  any  garb ; and  may  we  ever  be 
eccentric  if  the  centre  be  in  Ritualism.  (Applause.) 
My  idea  is  that  the  circle  is  fixed  by  the  dullest  persons 
in  the  world.  Anything  over  common  sense,  beyond 
that  of  an  idiot,  anything  like  originality,  anything  like 
genius,  anything  like  a sparkle  of  wit — give  your  soul 
up  to  your  work  and  you  will  be  eccentric  directly,  be- 
cause the  concentric  thing  is  to  prose  away — [the  speaker 
assuming  a monotonous  tone] — and  never  say  anything 
that  could  offend  anybody  by  any  possibility.  (Laugh- 
ter.) And  say  it  in  as  dreary  a way  as  you  possibly 
can  ; do  that,  and  you  will  be  eccentric  to  the  great 
authorities  of  the  domain  of  Domus . But  give  your 
soul  ever  so  little  to  your  subject,  and  some  one  will  say, 
“ Oh,  dear,  it  is  a pity  he  is  so  eccentric.”  (Laughter.) 
Some  hundred  or  hundred-and-fifty  years  ago,  when 
John  Wesley  stood  on  his  father’s  grave  in  Ep worth 
churchyard,  he  was  thought  eccentric  to  preach  in  the 
open  air.  But  Jesus  Christ  and  His  apostles  preached 
there,  and  no  one  said  that  of  them.  And  if  any  one  of 
us  were  to  go  and  stand — only  we  must  not  stand  on  a 
gravestone,  nor  lie  under  it ; we  are  forbidden — (a 
laugh) — those  holy  worms  that  have  fed  on  saints  so 
long,  they  would  be  taken  ill  if  they  fed  on  Dissenters — 
(laughter  and  cheers) — but  if  we  should  stand  anywhere 
in  the  open  air,  nobody  would  call  us  eccentric.  As  the 
times  roll  on,  that  which  is  eccentric  to-day  is  not  eccen- 
tric to-morrow.  Fashion  changes.  Mr.  Whitefield  and 
Wesley  were  accused  of  eccentricity,  but  there  is  one 
very  remarkable  thing  which  will  strike  you  as  eccentric. 
Read  the  history  of  Jeffery  Woodhouse,  and  his  friends, 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


289 


and  you  will  see  what  was  attributed  to  them.  One 
thing  was  that  they  actually  wore  their  own  hair. 
(Laughter.)  Now  anything  so  demoniacal  as  that  one 
can  hardly  imagine.  Up  to  that  time  every  preacher  of 
every  time  wore  a wig,  and  these  good  men  did  not  care 
about  being  smothered  with  other  people’s  hair,  and 
they  were  eccentric.  (Laughter.)  The  other  day  a per- 
son in  Holland  wrote  to  me  and  said,  having  read  my 
sermons  and  books,  he  thought  he  should  like  to  hear 
me  ; so  he  came  to  the  Tabernacle,  hut  he  was  sorry  he 
should  be  unable  to  hear  me  or  read  my  sermons  any 
longer,  because  I was  carnal  and  worldly,  wearing  a 
moustache.  (Laughter.)  But  it  really  is  so  small  an 
affair,  I think  he  might  have  overlooked  it.  He  added 
that  every  holy  man  in  the  land  shaved  his  whiskers, 
and  they  wear  about  a quarter  of  a yard  of  collar  ; but 
that  is  not  eccentric.  (Laughter. ) If  you  let  your  hair, 
that  God  gives  you,  grow,  however,  that  is  eccentric, 
and  you  are  carnal  and  worldly.  What  is  eccentric  in 
Holland,  you  see,  is  not  so  in  England,  so  the  centre  of 
this  wonderful  circle  to  which  everybody  should  keep, 
changes  not  only  according  to  time  but  also  according  to 
places.  Who  shall  know  where  on  earth  it  is  fixed  ? 

ON  BEING  ONESELF. 

There  is  a kind  of  toleration , also,  which  is  some- 
times relaxed,  and  is  sometimes  removed  altogether.  I 
believe  many  men  escape  the  charge  of  eccentricity  who 
ought  to  be  pulled  up  for  it.  On  reading,  for  instance, 
the  excellent  discourses  of  our  friend  Moody — whom 
perhaps  I approve  more  than  any  one  else — I think  he  is 
eccentric,  yet  nobody  has  been  down  on  him.  There 
was  Richard  Weaver  and  Joshua  Poole,  they  were  slightly 


290 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


eccentric,  but  nobody  said  so.  We  are  relaxing  the  bands 
for  other  people,  and  quite  right  too.  If  Joshua  Poole 
had  preached  to  you  Londoners  at  one  time,  you  would 
have  been  horrified,  and  if  our  American  brethren  had 
come  twenty  years  ago,  you  would  not  have  borne  it  at 
all,  but  now  you  give  liberty,  and  brethren  escape  the 
charge.  It  is  a great  pity  that  the  centre  of  the  circle 
ever  should  be  fixed.  If  we  could  settle  what  is  concen- 
tric and  eccentric  it  would  be  a very  serious  evil,  for  the 
differences  of  utterance  and  modes  of  address  are  truly 
useful.  When  John  Owen  said  he  would  have  given  all 
his  learning  to  be  able  to  preach  like  the  tinker  John 
Bunyan,  I think  he  was  unwise,  because  Owen’s  solid, 
weighty,  probably  heavy  matter,  suited  some  people 
better  than  Bunyan’s  pleasant,  graceful,  parabolical, 
simple  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  Mr.  Owen,  you  had 
better  be  Owen,  you  will  be  very  awkward  as  the  tinker, 
and  certainly  Bunyan,  the  tinker,  may  be  happy  to  be 
Bunyan,  and  should  never  wish  to  be  Owen.  Robert 
Robinson,  of  Cambridge,  was  succeeded  by  Robert  Hall ; 
to  one  the  style  of  the  first  would  be  perfection,  to  an- 
other that  of  the  other.  But  one  should  not  try  to  be 
the  other  ; every  one  in  his  own  order  or  disorder,  who 
has  something  to  say  in  God’s  eternal  purpose,  let  him 
keep  himself.  How  many  souls  were  won  to  God  by 
Rowland  Hill’s  eccentricities,  as  they  called  them.  You 
have  heard  the  story  of  the  young  man  who  was  about 
to  go  to  India,  and  his  friends  were  anxious  he  should 
not  go  unconverted,  so  they  induced  him  to  stay  a week 
in  London.  Godly,  pious  friends,  took  him  to  hear 
the  minister  of  their  choice.  He  listened  to  the  sermon 
of  one  very  able  man,  and  something  in  passing  might 
have  been  said  which  struck  his  conscience  ; he  called  it 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


291 


an  excellent  discourse,  and  there  was  an  end  of  it.  They 
took  him  to  another,  where  the  minister  was  very  earn- 
est, and  pious,  and  a graceful  preacher,  but  no  result 
came  of  it ; and  when  the  last  night  came,  they  in  a 
sort  of  desperation,  took  him  to  Surrey  Chapel  to  hear 
Mr.  Hill,  and  prayed  earnestly  that  Mr.  Hill  might  say 
nothing  funny  ; instead  of  which,  however,  he  was  more 
overflowing  than  ever  with  his  funny  things,  telling, 
among  the  rest,  about  pigs  being  taken  to  the  slaugh- 
ter-house. He  said  he  could  not  think  how  they  were 
induced  to  go  until  he  saw  the  butcher  enticing  them 
with  peas,  and  they  followed.  And  so,  Mr.  Hill  said, 
it  was  with  the  devil  by  the  pleasures  of  this  life,  which 
he  used  to  draw  people  right  into  his  slaughter-house. 
The  friends  who  brought  the  young  man  were  shocked, 
horrified  at  Mr.  Hill’s  witticisms,  and  grieved  to  think 
they  brought  the  young  man,  until  they  got  to  the  door, 
when  he  took  them  by  the  hand,  and  said,  “I  shall 
never  forget  the  story  of  the  pigs.”  It  had  reached  his 
heart,  touched  his  conscience,  and  was  the  means  of 
bringing  him  to  the  Saviour.  If  God  moved  the  preacher 
to  do  so,  he  had  better  have  talked  about  pigs  than 
angels,  if  talking  about  the  angels,  would  only  have 
tickled  people’s  ears.  (Cheers.)  Who  are  these  out- 
the-centre,  off-the-square  people  ? There  have  been 
some,  no  doubt,  who  have  been  out  of  centre  very 
wrongly  ; their  eccentricity  has  been  bad.  If  you  find 
me  a man  who  tries  to  attract  attention  by  oratory  not 
his  own,  but  aped  and  mimicked,  I have  not  a word  to 
say  in  his  defence,  and  I give  him  over  as  a dead  horse 
to  the  dogs  of  criticism,  who  may  rend  and  do  as  they 
like  with  him.  Find  the  man  who  wishes  to  gain  noto- 
riety by  condescending  to  buffoonery,  who  goes  out  of 


292 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


his  way  to  make  a joke  or  to  say  a fine  thing,  who  has 
any  object  in  the  world  in  what  he  says  but  the  glory  of 
God  and  the  winning  of  souls — he  is  the  man  out  of  cen- 
tre, and  I have  not  a word  to  say  in  his  defence.  If  you 
discover  a man  who  is  vulgar,  who  says  things  that  may 
make  the  cheeks  of  modesty  tingle,  like  Mr.  Slapdash 
in  Rowland  Hill’s  book,  descending  like  a swallow  touch- 
ing the  water  and  then  up  and  away,  loving  nothing  but 
the  mud  and  the  mire — then  I say  wring  the  dog’s  neck  if 
you  like,  I have  nothing  to  say  for  him.  I do  not  care 
whether  he  preaches  in  the  parish  church  or  in  the  cave 
of  Adullam ; his  eccentricity  I will  not  defend.  If  it 
ever  was  true  that  a man,  down  in  Northamptonshire,  in 
order  to  gain  a congregation,  gave  out  one  Sunday  morn- 
ing that  he  would  at  night  explain  how  to  make  a pair 
of  shoes,  and  afterwards  did  so  by  cutting  the  tops  off  a 
pair  of  boots,  then  I say  down  with  him,  he  does  not 
come  in  my  list. 

CURIOSITIES  OF  MILLINERY. 

There  are  curious  people.  I know  a curious  bishop 
who  has  written  a commentary,  and  this  great  and 
learned  man  says,  m reference  to  the  text,  “ Friend,  how 
earnest  thou  here  without  a wedding  garment  ? ” that 
the  wedding  garment  is  intended  for  the  outward  ordi- 
nances of  religion  and  as  the  people  who  have  no  out- 
ward sacraments  are  the  quakers  it  is  written  concern- 
ing them,  “Friends,  etc.”  (Laughter.)  That  is  an 
eccentric  bishop  ; I give  him  up  to  you  to  do  what  you 
like  with  him.  (Laughter.)  I have  lately  been  reading 
a great  deal  of  the  pretty  accounts  of  the  Ritualistic 
mystics  of  the  present  time,  and  their  explanations  of 
Scripture  are  very  wonderful  indeed — something  like 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


293 


this  : “ David  in  liis  great  sorrow  says,  ‘ All  the  night 
make  I my  bed  to  swim.’”  “The  bed,”  say  they, 
“ means  original  sin,  the  night  means  the  darkness  of 
the  soul,  and  the  way  to  make  this  original  sin  swim  is 
by  baptism.  (Loud  laughter.)  You  would  not  have 
thought  of  that,  would  you  ? (Laughter.)  That  is 
spiritualizing  Scripture  to  an  extent  of  which  I could 
not  have  dreamt  men  of  education  and  intelligence  to 
he  capable.  Those  kind  of  people  I have  not  much  faith 
in,  and  give  them  over  to  you.  If  a man  will  adopt  a 
curious  dress  I will  not  defend  him;  why  cannot  he 
dress  like  a gentleman,  not  like  a woman  ? (Cheers.) 
Even  our  brethren  who  preach  the  Gospel  come  out 
rather  smarter  than  I like — in  a black  gown  or  white 
gown,  with  red  pieces  of  something  or  other  aronnd  it 
— (laughter) — but  I am  not  learned  in  their  eccentrici- 
ties. I believe  we  shall  see  these  things  in  a museum 
some  day,  including  that  bib  and  piece  of  lawn  said  “to 
represent  cloven  tongues  as  it  were  fire,”  and  I venture 
to  prophesy  our  grandchildren  will  not  believe  it  when 
they  are  told  those  are  the  things  men  used  to  wear  a 
hundred  years  ago.  (Laughter. ) They  will  say,  “ Why 
I have  heard  of  people  worshipping  gods  of  wood  and 
stone,  and  I eannot  believe  that  in  worshipping  the  true 
God  they  ever  thought  it  important  to  put  on  these  na- 
peries  and  draperies.”  And  when  the  children  are  told 
that  ministers  who  dressed  like  ordinary  Christian  gen- 
tlemen and  tried  to  speak  English  were  called  eccentric, 
they  will  say,  “Why,  what  a benighted  generation  it 
must  have  been  ! ” (Laughter. ) Mr.  Spurgeon  then 
proceeded  to  give  amusing  instances  of  other  eccentric 
characteristics  found  in  some  ministers  in  regard  to 
their  sonorous  and  affected  style  of  reading  in  the  pulpit. 


294 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


“If,”  he  continued,  “men  were  to  talk  like  that  in  the 
House  of  Commons  or  at  the  Bar,  they  would  cause  a 
roar  of  laughter,  as  I have  done  in  their  imitation. 
Yet  it  is  common  enough  to  meet  with  them  in  the  pul- 
pits, and  I will  not  defend  them.  We  have  plenty  of 
eccentric  people  of  all  sorts,  and  if  they  call  some  of  us 
eccentric,  we  throw  back  the  charge  and  say,  ‘ No,  gen- 
tlemen of  affected  tone,  pretty  dresses,  high-blown  talk, 
and  spread  eagle  nonsense,  you  are  eccentric  ; for,  if  we 
be  so,  we  are  certain  so  to  remain.’  ” 

INSTANCES  AND  TYPES  OF  ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 

Still,  there  have  been  eccentric  men,  and  who  were 
they  ? I won’t  mention  Dean  Swift,  nor  Sydney  Smith,  nor 
Laurence  Sterne,  nor  some  others  of  them,  who  I have  no 
doubt  were  all  very  well,  though  I should  not  suppose 
they  were  over-done  with  Gospel ; but  those  we  recognize 
as  good  men.  Who  are  the  eccentric  ministers  that 
would  occur  to  your  memory  among  the  reformation 
times  ? There  is  blessed  old  Latimer,  whose  name  strikes 
such  a homely  sound  on  the  English  ear.  We  admire 
most  of  them,  but  if  you  are  like  me  and  I am  like  you, 
we  love  Latimer  ; there  was  something  so  genuine  about 
that  dear  old  servant  of  God,  whether  living  or  dying, 
we  cannot  help  feeling  our  hearts  going  out  towards  him. 
He  was  very  eccentric.  He  used  to  say  to  business  men, 
when  warning  them  of  sin,  “ If  you  in  selling  an  old  cow 
which  you  know  does  not  give  milk,  run  a calf  by  her 
side  in  order  to  deceive  the  purchaser,  you  will  perish 
everlastingly.”  Coming  further  down  to  the  times  of 
Wesley  and  Whitefield,  we  find  John  Berridge,  and  what 
a lump  of  quaintness  was  he  ! You  cannot  read  his  let- 
ters without  laughing  ; he  could  not  have  lived  but  for 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


295 


being  funny.  And  I remember  that  in  the  space  of 
twelve  months  there  is  credible  information  of  six  hun- 
dred souls  having  been  brought  to  Christ  by  the  preach- 
ing of  Hicks  and  Berridge.  Further  down  we  turn  to 
Rowland  Hill,  William  Dawson,  otherwise  “ Billy  Daw- 
son ” ; Matthew  Wilks,  and  then  looking  across  the 
water,  we  have  Peter  Garrett,  the  backwoods  preacher  ; 
and  Father  Taylor,  the  sailors’  preacher.  These  are  the 
most  eccentric  preachers  that  would  occur  to  you,  if  you 
were  making  out  a list,  and  yet  it  is  rather  singular  that 
if  you  want  to  pick  out  for  another  list  those  most  use- 
ful you  must  put  them  in.  Is  not  that  odd  ? Those 
wicked  eccentric  people — whom  may  we  never  imitate 
but  heartily  condemn — (a  laugh) — have  nevertheless 
been  among  the  most  useful  in  the  ministry.  (Cheers.) 
Matthew  Wilks’  way  of  meeting  objections  to  his  oddi- 
ties was  not  bad.  In  reply  to  some  who  expostulated 
with  him,  he  would  fetch  several  rolls  of  paper  filled 
with  names,  and  on  their  reading  them  would  say,“  All 
those  precious  souls  profess  to  have  found  the  Saviour 
•and  everlasting  life  through  my  whims  and  oddities.  If 
you  can  show  me  a list  of  as  many  souls  saved  by  the 
excellences  of  any  other  man  without  whims  and  oddi- 
ties I will  get  rid  of  the  latter,  but  until  you  do  so  I shall 
keep  to  them.”  (Cheers.)  I do  not  say  that  the  end 
justifies  the  means,  but  the  means  do  not  want  justifying 
if  leading  to  such  an  end. 

WHAT  MAKES  A MAH  ECCENTRIC  ? 

What  then  makes  a man  eccentric  ? Several  things. 
One  is,  some  have  been  so  because  they  were  natural, 
they  were  themselves  and  not  drilled  to  walk  in  rank, 
but  stood  alone  fighting  like  brave  knights  and  served 


296 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


God  in  their  own  way.  For  instance,  Berridge  was 
quaint  by  nature.  I quoted  from  his  letters  purposely, 
rather  than  from  sermons  or  didactic  works.  He  could 
not  help  it : he  lived,  thought,  and  dreamt  quaintly, 
probably  everything  about  his  house  was  quaint.  One 
picture,  for  instance,  he  called  the  devil,  and  on  a friend 
going  up  to  look  at  it  he  found  it  to  be  a looking-glass, 
and  saw  himself.  (Laughter.)  You  do  not  suppose  he 
used  to  leave  himself  at  the  bottom  of  the  pulpit  stairs 
as  some  men  have  told  me  they  could  not  help  feeling 
they  did  ? What  sights  there  must  have  been  at  Everton 
to  hear  Berridge  preach  ? People  seem  to  have  crowded 
on  the  beams  and  windows  of  the  church,  and  even  got 
ladders  against  the  open  windows  and  anywhere  where 
they  could  catch  a word.  Berridge  was  eccentric  because 
he  was  Berridge,  and  what  God  made  him,  and  used  the 
gifts  God  had  given  him.  And  I say  as  to  objections  to 
wit  in  preaching,  what  South  said  to  Sherlock,  “ Sup- 
pose God  had  given  you  any  wit  ? What  would  you 
have  done  with  it  ? ” (Laughter.)  You  blame  this  man 
Berridge,  but  supposing  you  had  happened  to  have  been 
witty,  and  such  an  awkward  endowment  as  that,  you 
would  probably  have  used  it  too.  It  might  be  said  of 
some  what  Sam  Hicks  said  to  one  who  remarked  it  was 
wrong  to  make  people  laugh,  “ You  can  neither  make 
folk  laugh  nor  cry.”  Many  cannot  touch  the  heart- 
strings at  all,  and  they  will  condemn  those  who  can.  I 
love  above  all,  for  a man  who  serves  his  God,  altogether 
to  forget  himself  into  the  work,  letting  his  whole  nature 
come  into  play ; then  he  surely  will  become  an  eccen- 
tric individual.  Some  men  have  been  eccentric  because 
essentially  truthful — and  do  not,  when  up  stairs,  send  a 
message  to  a friend  calling,  that  they  are  not  at  home,  nor 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


297 


when  writing  to  their  direst  enemy  address  him  as  “ My 
Dear  Sir  ” and  say  “ Yours  very  truly,” — so  they  are 
“eccentric.”  Father  Taylor,  of  Boston,  got  a lot  of 
sailors  together  to  a prayer-meeting,  when  a gentleman 
“ from  up  town  ” made  a speech,  and  told  them  of  the 
kindness  of  the  Christian  gentlemen  of  Boston  to  the 
sailors,  in  fact  gave  them  enough  condescension  to  last  six 
weeks.  When  he  had  finished  Father  Taylor  asked  “ if  any 
other  old  sinner  from  up  town  had  got  anything  to  say.” 
(Laughter. ) The  eccentricity  there  lay  in  the  truthful- 
ness of  the  statement.  The  bladder  was  pricked  and  the 
gas  soon  dispersed.  If  anybody  here  will  make  up  his 
mind  that  he  never  will  say  anything  but  what  is  strictly 
true,  many  people  will  say  he  is  eccentric.  Some,  too, 
have  been  eccentric  because  they  have  been  manly . 
Dissenters,  unlike  the  Church  of  England,  have  no  ru- 
bric and  are  not  governed  by  rule,  and  some  ministers 
refusing  to  be  so  governed  will  inquire  “ Who  made  the 
regulations  ? ” and  on  finding  them  lath  and  plaster,  put 
their  legs  through  them.  Mr.  Rowland  Hill  called  his 
horses  Order  and  Decorum,  saying  he  rode  on  the  back 
of  them.  But  these  things  had  become  deadly  sins,  so 
much  decorum  and  so  very  orderly  that  the  church  had 
become  like  a vault  in  which  the  dead  lay  in  his  place, 
and  none  dared  to  move  them  or  to  lift  his  voice  loud 
enough  to  be  called  a voice.  A certain  divine  got  a ser- 
mon — no  doubt  cheap — (a  laugh) — and  delivered  it,  in 
which  he  described  a terrible  plague  as  having  come 
upon  the  people  because  of  their  sins  and  neglect  of  the 
House  of  God.  After  he  had  finished,  the  village  doctor 
went  to  inquire  at  what  house  the  plague  existed,  and 
the  minister  replied,  “ I don’t  know  ; it  was  in  my  ser- 


298 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


mon,  and  I read  it.”  (Laughter.)  Some  were  consid- 
ered eccentric  because  they  were  really  in  earnest . 

EARNESTNESS  AND  THE  PROPRIETIES. 

An  earnest  man  cannot  always  he  proper.  I do  not 
believe  it  is  possible  for  a man  in  downright  earnest  to  be 
always  “ proper.”  I suppose  a lady  may  be  got  out  of  a 
chamber  properly  in  ordinary  times,  though  I suspect 
many  a fireman  in  saving  a lady  from  fire  has  occa- 
sionally sinned  against  decorum.  And  in  pulling  a 
drowning  person  out  of  the  water,  I have  known  it  done 
by  the  hair  of  the  head.  Get  in  earnest,  and  proprieties 
will  vanish.  A man  may  wear  gloves  in  the  pulpit,  and 
they  may  fit  very,  very,  very*  beautifully  indeed,  and 
when  he  gets  to  work,  if  he  is  going  to  save  any  souls, 
he  will  burst  the  gloves,  for  he  cannot  do  with  them. 
He  may  be  very  proper,  when  in  earnest  he  will  get  car- 
ried beyond  the  proprieties,  and  somebody  will  hold 
up  the  hands  and  say,  “ How  dreadfully  eccentric.” 
(Laughter.)  Some  men  have  been  eccentric  on  account 
of  the  vast  amount  of  dramatic  energy  in  them.  It  is 
their  way  to  be  dramatic.  Some  talk  dramatically. 
Look  at  a Frenchman,  how  he  uses  his  hands  and  arms — 
talking  with  his  hands,  body,  and  mouth.  Some  persons 
were  born  dramatic.  Billy  Dawson  could  not  help  it. 
I have  heard  of  his  preaching  about  Noah’s  Ark,  and 
coming  out  of  the  pulpit  to  begin  sawing  planks,  and 
hammering  away  at  the  pulpit  as  if  at  the  ark.  The 
people  became  excited.  AVhen  the  ark  was  made  on  dry 
land,  he  said  there  was  no  hope  unless  they  got  in  to  be 
saved.  They  would  not  go  in,  and  he  went  up  and  fin- 
ished, and  afterwards  said,  “ Shut  him  in,”  which  they 
did,  whereupon  he  described  the'  chapel  as  filling  with 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


299 


the  flood  ; the  floods  burst,  the  ceilings  fell  in,  and  cata- 
racts leaped  from  the  skies  in  torrents,  and  Dawson  was 
still  all  alive  crying  out,  “ It  is  too  late  now.”  Getting 
them  thus  excited  and  interested,  he  preached  Jesus 
Christ  to  them,  and  he  said,  he  never  should  forget  it. 
And  why  should  he  not  do  so  ? God  gave  him  the  bump 
of  dramatizing,  and  why  not  use  it  ? Sometimes  it  may 
be  used  well.  Dawson  also  described  in  a similar  man- 
ner the  Goliah  and  David  contest.  In  throwing  his 
pocket-handkerchief  as  if  at  the  giant,  he  struck  the 
village  blacksmith  at  the  foot  of  the  pulpit,  who  cried 
out,  “ That’s  right,  Billy  ! now  off  with  the  hat.”  (Laugh- 
ter.) I have  seen  Mr.  Gough,* at  Exeter  Hall,  describe 
Vesuvius,  his  feet  going  into  the  ashes.  It  was  grandly 
done,  and  no  one  had  any  right  to  object.  If  that 
faculty  is  consecrated  to  God,  then  make  more  use  of  it. 
I shall  never  get  it,  I dare  say — (laughter) — and  must 
make  such  shift  as  I can.  Sometimes  men  had  become 
eccentric  by  being  practical.  They  intended  to  save 
men’s  souls  somehow,  and  resolved  to  do  anything  and 
everything,  by  which  they  could  get  at  men,  and  the 
things  they  have  done,  have  been  heard  and  not  seen  ; 
the  circumstances  and  occasion  put  aside,  and  the  design 
of  the  preacher  forgotten,  so  that  the  thing  has  seemed 
to  be  eccentric,  though  had  you  been  there  and  heard 
the  preacher’s  ready  wit,  and  had  the  preacher’s  intense 
earnestness  before  you,  you  would  have  felt  justified  in 
the  same.  Let  me  give  you  one  or  two  instances,  some 
of  which  may  be  justified,  while  others  may  or  may  not 
be.  Rowland  Hill  preaches  in  a field.  Lady  Ann 
Askayne  sees  a crowd  of  people,  and  stops  her  carriage 
to  listen.  The  preacher  spies  her  and  says,  “ I am  going 
to  have  an  auction,  here  is  a lady  to  be  sold,  who  bids 


300 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


for  her  ?”  And  then  the  World  bids  for  her.  “ I will 
give  her  all  the  pleasures  of  life  ; I will  give  her  honor 
and  rank.”  “ Ah,  she  is  worth  more  than  that.”  The 
Flesh  and  the  Devil  bid,  but  she  is  too  precious  for  this, 
and  Jesus  Christ  says,  “ I have  given  for  her  my  precious 
blood,  my  heart’s  blood,  and  I love  her  ; she  shall  be 
mine  for  ever,  and  wear  a crown  for  me.”  “Lord 
Jesus,”  said  Rowland  Hill,  “Thou  shalt  have  her — 
Lady  Askayne,  will  you  close  with  the  bargain  ? ” She 
bows  her  head,  and  from  that  moment  the  Christian 
church  has  not  had  a better  helper.  (Cheers.)  But 
she  little  dreamt  of  the  “ eccentric  ” man  being  the 
means  of  leading  her  witjiin  the  circle  of  the  knowledge 
of  Jesus  Christ.  The  following  is  a yet  more  eccentric 
thing.  I will  leave  you  to  justify  it.  We  are  told  of  a 
'certain  Methodist  preacher  going  to  a town  in  the  north, 
and  having  to  preach  once  or  twice  with  very  few 
hearers,  so  he  said,  “This  town  is  responsible  for  the 
possession  of  the  means  of  grace  which  are  not  being 
used.  They  shall  not  live  under  it  any  longer ; I am 
going  to  break  this  pulpit  and  pews  up,  and  knock  the 
chapel  down.”  He  then  commenced  at  the  pulpit  by 
splitting  it  up  before  their  eyes.  People  soon  went 
home  and  told  their  friends  ; at  night  the  chapel  was 
filled,  and  he  preached  Christ  to  them — an  eccentric 
man,  only,  however,  sacrificing  a little  deal  and  a few 
boards  ; and  in  a short  time,  Methodism  lifted  its  head 
in  the  town,  and  the  house  was  filled.  Why,  if  this  place 
were  empty  and  we  could  not  get  it  full  otherwise,  we 
might  run  the  risk  of  being  considered  eccentric  for  the 
first  time  in  our  lives.  (Laughter.)  Everything  looks 
ridiculous  when  not  according  to  its  surroundings.  Was 
that  not  extraordinary  of  the  French  preacher,  Father 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


301 


Andre,  who,  in  upbraiding  the  people  for  the  careless- 
ness they  displayed  in  regard  to  the  religious  education 
of  their  children,  he  caused  to  fly  out  of  his  sleeve,  when 
speaking,  a pack  of  cards,  and,  on  the  children  running 
to  pick  them  up,  he  questioned  them  as  to  the  names  of 
the  various  cards,  which  they  soon  told  him,  whereupon 
he  followed  with  the  catechism,  and  they  did  not  know 
a word.  So  he  drove  home  the  truth  to  the  parents.  I 
neither  justify  that  nor  condemn  it,  but  I can  imagine 
a man  driven  to  it.  Again,  like  the  old  Dutch  Court 
preacher,  who,  being  accustomed  to  see  the  people  asleep 
during  his  preaching,  played  with  a battledore  and  shut- 
tlecock in  the  pulpit,  and  said  in  reply,  to  their  sur- 
prise : “I  see  when  I make  a fool  of  myself  I have  your 
attention  ; when  I preach  the  precious  Word  of  God  you 
don’t  give  it.  What  fools  you  must  be  ! ” You  never 
judge  of  a man  under  certain  circumstances  unless  you 
are  in  his  circumstances.  Sometimes  a man  has  been 
condemned  for  doing  what  would  be  outrageous  at 
ordinary  times,  but  what  is  pardonable  on  exceptional 
occasions.  Mr.  Spurgeon  here  narrated  the  story  of  a 
certain  preacher  who,  being  earnestly  desirous  of  doing 
good  amongst  a superstitious  people  in  the  country, 
overtook  a laboring  man  going  to  his  employment,  and 
finding,  in  reply  to  many  questions,  that  he  was  entirely 
ignorant  of  God,  but  a believer  in  witchcraft,  closed  a 
bargain  with  the  man  by  paying  him  half-a-crown  for  a 
promise  never  to  pray  in  his  life-time.  On  proceeding 
to  his  work,  however,  the  man  seems  to  have  bethought 
himself  that  he  would  one  day  be ‘ill  and  want  to  pray. 
He  became  miserable,  could  not  work,  and  therefore 
went  home  and  told  his  wife  what  he  had  done.  His 
wife,  also  densely  superstitious  and  a believer  in  witch- 


302 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


craft,  desiring  to  explain  the  incident  from  the  latter 
view,  began  to  inquire  about  the  man  who  had  given  her 
husband  the  money.  “ Did  you  look  at  his  hat?” 
“ Don’t  know  he  had  a hat.”  “One  of  those  high 
chimney-pots?”  “Don’t  know.”  “Did  you  look  at 
his  feet  ? “No,  didn’t.”  “Well,  I shouldn’t  wonder 
if  he’d  got  boots  on  that  was  to  hide  his  feet.  You 
have  sold  your  body  and  soul  to  the  devil,  John — I know 
ye  have.”  (Laughter.)  The  poor  fellow  was  there- 
upon knocked  over  altogether,  could  not  work,  and  fell 
ill ; so  did  his  wife.  He  happened  just  then  to  hear  of 
a man  going  to  preach  in  a barn  close  at  hand  in  the 
village,  and  that  he  would  go.  He  did  so  and  was  very 
delighted  to  find  the  very  man  who  had  paid  him  the 
half-crown.  The  sermon  was  “ What  shall  it  profit  a man 
if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ? ” and 
the  preacher  referred  to  the  fact  of  a man  having  sold  his 
soul  for  half-a-crown,  so  that  he  remarked,  “ Souls  were 
cheap.”  The  discourse  touched  Hodge’s  heart  and  he 
came  forward  begging  the  preacher  to  take  back  the 
money,  and  on  demur  he  pleaded,  “Ah,  but  you  can’t 
stick  to  such  a bargain  with  a poor  man.”  They  prayed 
together,  and  the  man  never  afterwards  left  off  praying. 
Now  I,  continued  Mr.  Spurgeon,  could  not  have  done 
that  nor  commend  it,  but  there  may  have  been  an  im- 
pression on  that  minister’s  mind  which  led  him  to  it.  I 
doubt  not  there  was  guidance  from  heaven,  and  he  saw 
further  into  the  mind  of  the  man  than  you  and  I,  and 
what  appears  eccentric  may  have  been  wisely  thought 
of.  (Cheers.) 


CONCLUDING  ADVICE. 

I have  talked  to  you  chiefly  about  eccentric  preachers. 


ECCENTRIC  PREACHERS. 


303 


But  if  you  knew  sometimes  how  we  desire  to  lay  hold  on 
men,  and  how  willingly  we  would  be  as  solemn  and 
serious  as  death  itself,  if  that  would  do  it,  and  how 
little  we  care  to  speak  extravagantly  except  that  men 
ramble,  and  we  must  ramble  after  them,  you  might 
often  excuse  us  if  something  is  said  that  does  not  com- 
mend itself  to  your  taste,  and  you  might  say,  probably, 
the  man  knows  best  what  he  is  at,  and  is  using  his 
strength  most  naturally,  and  in  that  way  in  which  God’s 
blessing  will  rest  upon  him.  Judge  the  preacher,  but 
do  remember  there  is  something  better  to  be  done, 
namely,  to  get  all  the  good  you  can  out  of  him  ; and  if 
odd  and  strange — as  men  take  pearls  out  of  oyster 'shells, 
and  pick  treasures  out  of  earthen  vessels,  so  do  you  take 
what  God  sends,  whatever  may  be  the  infirmity  of  the 
preacher.  And  to  brethren  engaged  in  winning  souls,* 
I say,  by  the  memories  of  those  good  men  who  were  ac- 
counted eccentric,  fear  no  man’s  frown,  and  court  no 
man’s  smile  : say  the  right  thing  and  the  true,  and  say 
it  as  best  you  can,  asking  God’s  help  to  say  it  so  that  it 
shall  make  men  feel  its  stings  even  to  anger ; for  blessed 
is  the  man  who  has  discharged  his  conscience  before  the 
living  God.  Do  you  think  England  would  ever  be  going 
back  to  Rome  if  the  thousands  of  ministers  we  have 
were  preaching  the  Gospel  as  they  ought  to  be  ? With 
such  a mass  of  preaching — twice  every  Sunday  besides 
week-day  services — ought  not  England  to  be  guaranteed 
a defence  against  the  inroads  of  Popery  such  as  would 
be  impregnable  ? I trow  it  would.  With  more  life, 
love,  and  eagerness,  then  I may  believe  there  would  be 
more  eccentricity.  I think  it  is  very  likely,  and  I pray 
God  to  send  it.  (Applause.) 


I 


* 


A COMPLETE  LIST 


OF  ALL  OF 

SPURGEON’S  SERMONS 

PUBLISHED  IN  THIS  COUNTRY,  TOGETHER  WITH  THE  SUBJECT 
AND  THE  TEXT  OF  SCRIPTURE  USED  FOR  EACH  SERMON. 


Introduction.  pagk 

Sermon  I. — Sovereignty  and  Salvation 1 

“Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth:  for 
1 am  God,  and  there  is  none  else.” — Isaiah  xiv.  22. 

Sermon  II . — The  Bible 23 

“ I have  written  to  him  the  great  things  of  my  law,  but  they  were 
counted  as  a strange  thing.”— Hosea  viii.  12. 

Sermon  III. — The  Bersonality  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ...  45 

“ And  I will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Com- 
forter, that  he  may  abide  with  you  forever ; even  the  Spirit  of  truth  ; 
whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  him  not,  neither 
knoweth  him ; but  ye  know  him  ; for  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall 
be  in  you.” — John  xiv.  16, 17. 

Sermon  IV. — The  Comforter 66 

“But  the  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father 
will  send  in  my  name,  he  shall  teach  you  all  things  and  bring  all  things 
to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I have  said  unto  you.” — John  xiv.  26. 

Sermon  V. — Christ  Crucified 85 

“ But  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  unto  the  Jews  a stumbling-block, 
and  unto  the  Greeks  foolishness  ; but  unto  them  which  are  called, 
both  Jews  and  Greeks,  Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of 
God.”— 1 Cor.  i.  23,  24. 

Sermon  VI. — The  Bower  of  the  Holy  Ghost 112 

“ The  power  of  the  Hol)r  Ghost.” — Romans  xv.  13. 

Sermon  VII.— The  Church  of  Christ 134 

“ And  I will  make  them  and  the  places  round  about  my  hill  a bless- 
ing ; and  I will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down  in  his  season ; 
there  shall  be  showers  of  blessing.”— Ezekiel  xxxiv.  26. 

Sermon  VIII.— The  Eternal  Name 154 

“His  name  shall  endure  forever.” — Psalms  lxxii.  17. 

Sermon  IX.— Baul’s  First  Brayer 170 

“ For  behold  he  prayeth.”— Acts  ix.  11. 


306 


list  of  spurgeon’s  sermons 


« 


Sermon  X. — Joseph  Attached  by  the  Archers  . . . PAGE  198 

“The  archers  have  sorely  grieved  him,  and  shot  at  him,  and  hated 
him;  but  his  bow  abode  in  strength;  and  the  arms  of  his  hands 
were  made  strong  by  the  hands  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob  ; from 
thence  is  the  shepherd,  the  stone  of  Israel.’’ — Genesis  xlix.  23,  24. 

Sermon  XI. — The  Tomb  of  Jesus 211 

“ Come  and  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay.” — Matt,  xxviii.  6. 

Sermon  XII. — The  Carnal  Mind  Enmity  Against  God  . . 230 

“ The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God.” — Romans  viii.  7. 

Sermon  XIII. — Christ’s  People — Imitators  of  Him  . . . 252 

“Now  when  they  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  John,  and  per- 
ceived that  they  were  unlearned  and  ignorant  men,  they  marvelled  ; 
and  they  took  knowledge  of  them,  that  they  had  been  with  Jesus.” — 

Acts  iv.  13. 

Sermon  XIV. — Thoughts  on  the  East  Eattle 274 

“The  sting  of  death  is  sin;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law. 

But,  thanks  be  unto  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.” — 1 Cor.  xv.  56,  57. 

Sermon  XV. — Heaven  and  Hell - . 296 

“ And  I say  unto  you,  that  many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west, 
and  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  But  the  children  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  cast  out 
into  outer  darkness  ; there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.” 

— Matthew  viii.  11,  12. 

Sermon  XVI.—  Gospel  Missions  . , . . . . . . . 321 

“ And  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  published  throughout  all  the  re- 
gion.”— Acts  xiii.  40. 

Sermon  XVII. — The  Enchanted  Ground 344 

“ Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others  ; but  let  us  watch  and  be 
sober.” — 1 Thes.  v.  6. 

Sermon  XVIII.— Faith  . ...  • 364 

“ Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God.”— Hebrews  vi.  6. 

SECOND  SERIES  OF  SERMONS. 

Preface. 

Sermon  I. — The  Glorious  Habitation 1 

“Lord,  thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in  all  generations.” — 
Psalms  xc.  1. 

Sermon  II. — Healing  for  the  Wounded : A Sermon  for  the 

Crimean  Soldiers  . . . Ig 

“ He  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up  their  wounds.”— 
Psalms  cxliii.  3. 

Sermon  III. — The  Peculiar  Sleep  of  the  Eeloved  ....  34 

“For  so  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep.”— Psalms  cxxvii.  2. 

Sermon  IV.— The  Sin  of  Unbelief 

“ And  that  lord  answered  the  man  of  God,  and  said,  Now,  behold, 
if  the  Lord  should  make  windows  in  heaven,  might  such  a thing  be  ? 

And  he  said.  Behold,  thou  shalt  see  it  with  thine  eyes,  but  shalt  not 
eat  thereof.”— 2 Kings  vii.  19. 


list  of  spurgeon’s  sermons.  307 

Sermon  V. — Election , page  66 


Biit  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to  God  for  you,  brethren 
beloved  of  the  Lord,  because  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen 
you  to  salvation  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  belief  of  the 
truth : whereunto  he  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining  the 
glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.”— 2 Thes.  ii.  13,  14. 

Sermon  VI.  — The  House  of  Mourning  and  the  House  of 

Feasting 88 

“ It  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning,  than  to  the  house  of 
feasting.”— Eccle.  vii.  2. 

Sermon  VII. — The  Hay  of  A tonement 104 

“This  shall  be  an  everlasting  statute  unto  you,  to  make  an  atone- 
ment for  the  children  of  Israel  for  all  their  sins  once  a year.” — Levit- 
icus xvi.  34. 

Sermon  .VIII. — The  Allegories  of  Sarah  and  Hagar  . . . 120 

“ These  are  the  two  covenants.” — Galatians  iv.  24. 

Sermon  IX.— The  Exaltation  of  Christ 136 

“Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a 
name  which  is  above  every  name  : that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven  and  things  in  earth,  and  things 
under  the  earth,  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.” — Piiilippians  ii.  9-11. 

Sermon  X. — The  Saints ’ Heritage  and  Watchword  . . . 152 

“No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper  ; and  every 
tongue  that  shall  rise  against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shall  condemn. 

This  is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  their  righteous- 
ness is  of  me,  saith  the  Lord.” — Isaiah  liv.  17. 

Sermon  XI.— Songs  in  the  Night 167 

“ But  none  saith,  Where  is  God  my  maker,  who  giveth  songs  in  the 
night  ? ” — Job  xxxv.  10. 

Sermon  XII. — God’s  Frovidence 188 

“ Now,  as  I beheld  the  living  creatures,  behold  one  wheel  upon  the 
earth  by  the  living  creatures,  with  his  four  faces.  The  appearance  of 
the  wheels  and  their  work  was  like  unto  the  color  of  a beryl : and  they 
four  had  one  likeness  ; and  their  appearance  and  their  work  was  as  it 
were  a wheel  in  the  middle  of  a wheel.  When  they  went,  they  went 
upon  their  four  sides  ; and  they  returned  not  when  they  went.  As 
for  their  rings,  they  were  so  high  that  they  were  dreadful  : and  their 
rings  were  full  of  eyes  round  about  them  four.  And  when  the  living 
creatures  went,  the  wheels  went  by  them  ; and  when  the  living  crea- 
turee  were  lift  up  from  the  earth,  the  wheels  were  lift  up.”— Ezekiel 
i.  15-19. 

Sermon  XIII. — A View  of  God’s  Glory 204 

“And  he  said,  I beseech  thee,  show  me  thy  glory.”— Exodus 
xxxiii.  18. 

Sermon  XIV. — Confirming  the  Witness  of  Christ  ....  217 
“Even  as  the  testimony  of  Christ  was  confirmed  in  you.”— 1 Corin- 
thians i.  6. 

Sermon  XV. — Harvest  Time 232 

“Is  it  not  wheat  harvest  to-day  ?”— 1 Samuel  xii.  17. 

Sermon  XVI.-  Sweet  Comfort  for  Feeble  Saints  ....  246 
“ A bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  and  smoking  flax  shall  he  not 
quench,  till  he  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory.”— Matthew  xii.  20. 


308 


LIST  OF  SPURGEONS  SERMOXS 


Sermon  XVII. — The  Resurrection  of  the  Dead  . . . page  262 

“ There  shall  be  a resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  un- 
just.”—Acts  xxiv. 15. 

Sermon  XVIII. — The  Curse  Removed 280 

“Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us  ; for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a 
tree.” — Galatians  iii.  13. 

Sermon  XIX. — The  Comer’s  Conflict  with  Satan  ....  296 
“ And  as  he  was  yet  a coming,  the  devil  threw  him  down,  and  tare 
him.  And  Jesus  rebuked  the  unclean  spirit,  and  healed  the  child,  and 
delivered  him  again  to  his  father.” — Luke  ix.  42. 

Sermon  XX. — Christ  the  Rock  . 312 

“ And  that  Rock  was  Christ.”—!  Cor.  x.  4. 


Sermon  XXI. — A Visit  to  Calvary . 328 

“ And  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  Behold  the  man ! ” — John  xix.  5. 

Sermon  XXII. — Teaching  Children 345 

“ Come,  ye  children,  hearken  unto  me  : I will  teach  you  the  fear  of 
the  Lord.” — Psalm  xxxiv.  11. 

Sermon  XXIII. — The  Ood  of  the  Aged 361 

“ Even  to  your  old  age  I am  he  ; and  even  to  hoary  hairs  I will  carry 
you.  I have  made,  ana  I will  bear;  even  I will  carry,  and  will  deliver 
you.”— Isaiah  xlvi.  4. 

Sermon  XXIV.— Omniscience 380 

“ Thou  God  seest  me.”— Genesis  xvi.  13. 

Sermon  XXV.—  Christ  in  the  Covenant 395 

“ I will  give  thee  for  a covenant  of  the  people.” — Isaiah  xlix.  8. 

Sermon  XXVI. — Rove’s  Commendation 410 

“ But  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were 
yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us.” — Romans  v.  8. 

Sermon  XXVII. — Turn  or  Burn 426 

“ If  he  turn  not,  he  will  whet  his  sword ; he  hath  bent  his  bow,  and 
made  it  ready.”— Psalm  vii.  12. 


THIRD  SERIES  OF  SERMONS. 


Preface. 

Sermon  I. — A Faithful  Friend 11 

“ There  is  a friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a brother.” — Proverbs 
xviii.  24. 

Sermon  II. — The  Leafless  Tree 27 

“ But  yet  in  it  shall  be  a tenth,  and  it  shall  return,  and  it  shall  be 
eaten  as  a teil  tree,  and  as  an  oak,  whose  substance  is  in  them,  when 
they  cast  their  leaves ; so  the  holy  seed  shall  be  the  substance  there- 
of.”— Isaiah  vi.  13. 

Sermon  III. — The  Snare  of  the  Fowler 42 

“ Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler.” — Psalm 
xci.  3. 

Sermon  IV.— The  Fruitful  Vine 58 

“ And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man, 
What  is  the  vine-tree  more  than  any  tree,  or  than  a branch  which  is 
among  the  trees  of  the  forest  ?” — Ezekiel  xv.  1,  2. 


V 


309 


LIST  OF  SPCRGXOK’b  SERMONS. 


Sermon  V. — Spiritual  Revival  the  Want  of  the  Church  . page  74 
“ O Lord,  revive  thy  work.” — Hab.  iii.  2. 

Sermon  VI. — The  Anxious  Inquirer 90 

“ O that  I knew  where  I might  find  him.” — Job  xxiii.  3. 

Sermon  VII. — The  Sinner’s  Refuge 106 

“ Then  ye  shall  appoint  you  cities  to  he  cities  of  refuge  for  you : 
that  the  slayer  may  flee  hither,  which  killeth  any  person  at  unawares.” 

— Numbers  xxxv.  11. 

Sermon  VIII. — The  Dumb  Singing 119 

“ Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  and  the  ears  of  the 
deaf  shall  be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart, 
and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing;  for  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters 
break  out,  and  streams  in  the  desert.”— Isaiah  xxxv.  5,  6. 

Sermon  IX. — Foretastes  of  the  Heavenly  life  ....  138 
“ And  they  took  of  the  fruit  of  the  land  in  their  hands,  and  brought 
it  down  unto  us,  and  brought  us  word  again,  and  said,  It  is  a good 
land  which  the  Lord  our  God  doth  give  us.”— Deut.  i.  25. 

Sermon  X. — Freaching  for  the  Poor 149 

“ The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them.” — Matt.  xi.  5. 

Sermon  XI. — Secret  Sins 164 

“ Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults.” — Psalm  xix.  12. 

Sermon  XII. — Elijah’s  Appeal  to  the  Undecided  ....  179 

“How  long  halt,  ye  between  two  opinions?  If  the  Lord  be  God, 
follow  him ; if  Baal,  then  follow  him.”— 1 Kings  xviii.  21. 

Sermon  XIII. — Salvation  of  the  lord 194 

“ Salvation  is  of  the  Lord.” — Jonah  ii.  9. 

Sermon  XIV. — Regeneration  . - 210 

“ Except  a man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.” 
John  iii.  3. 

Sermon  XV. — Spiritual  Resurrection  ......  .225 

“ And  you  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins.”— Ephesians  ii.  1. 

Sermon  XVI. — Confession  of  Sin  •••••••  241 

A sermon  with  seven  texts. 

The  Hardened  Sinner. 

Pharaoh— “I  have  sinned.”— Exodus  ix.  27. 

The  Double-Minded  Man. 

Baalam— “ I have  sinned.”— Numbers  xxii.  34. 

The  Insincere  Man. 

Saul—”  I have  sinned.”— 1 Samuel  xv.  24. 

The  Doubtful  Penitent. 

Achan— “ I have  sinned.” — Joshua  vii.  20. 

The  Repentance  of  Despair. 

Judas— “I  have  sinned.”— Matt,  xxvii.  4. 

The  Repentance  of  the  Saint. 

Job — “I  have  sinned.” — Job  vii.  20. 

The  Blessed ' Confession. 

The  Prodigal—”  I have  sinned.”— Luke  xv.  18. 


310 


LIST  OF  SPURGEON’S  SERMONS. 


Sermon  XVII. — Faith page  256 

“ Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God.” — Hebrews  xi.  6. 

Sermon  XVIII. — Fahab’s  Faith 269 

“ By  faith  the  harlot  Rahab  perishes  not  with  them  that  believed 
not,  when  she  had  received  the  spies  with  peace.” — Hebrews  xi.  31, 

Sermon  XIX. — The  Flood- shedding . 283 

“ Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission.” — Hebrews  ix.  22. 

Sermon  XX.— Justification  by  Grace 295 

“Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that 
is  in  Christ  Jesus.” — Romans  iii.  24. 

Sbrmon  XXI. — Manas seh 311 

“Then  Manasseh  knew  that  the  Lord  he  was  God.” — 2 Chron. 
xxxiii.  13. 

Sermon  XXII. — Why  are  Men  Saved 328 

“Nevertheless  he  saved  them  for  his  name’s  sake.”— Psalm  cvi.  8. 

Sermon  XXIII. — Particular  Flection 343 

“ Wherefore  the  rather,  brethren,  give  diligence  to  make  your  call- 
ing and  election  sure  : for  if  re  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall : 
for  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the 
everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.” — 

2 Peter  i.  10,  11. 

Sermon  XXIV. — Mercy , Omnipotence , and  Justice  . . . 359 

“ The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  and  great  in  power,  and  will  not  at  all 
acquit  the  wicked.” — Nahum  i.  3. 

Sermon  XXV. — Christ— The  Power  and  Wisdom  of  God  . . 375 

“ Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God.”— 1 Cor.  i.  24. 

Sermon  XXVI. — Going  Home  : A Chr  istmas  Sermon  . . . 389 

“Go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them  how  great  things  the  Lord 
hath  done  for  thee,  and  hath  had  compassion  on  thee.”— Mark  v.  19. 

Sermon  XXVII. — A Mighty  Saviour 404 

“ Mighty  to  save.” — Isaiah  lxiii.  1. 

Sermon  XXVIII.— Israel  in  Egypt 419 

“ And  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song 
of  the  Lamb,  saying,  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  works,  Lord  Goa 
Almighty  ; just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  king  of  saints.” — Reve- 
lations xv.  3. 

Sermon  XXIX.— Presumptuous  Sins 432 

“ Keep  back  thy  servants  also  from  presumptuous  sins.” — Psalm 
xix.  13. 

FOURTH  SERIES  OF  SERMONS. 

Preface. 

Sermon  I. — The  Parable  of  the  Ark 1 

“And  they  went  in  unto  Noah  into  the  ark,  two  and  two  of  all  flesh, 
wherein  is  the  breath  of  life.” — Genesis  vii.  15. 


Sermon  II. — Proving  God 

“ Prove  me  now.”— Malachi  iii.  10. 


21 


LIST  OF  SPURGEON’S  SERMONS, 


311 


Sermon  III. — Meditation  on  God page  39 

“My  meditation  of  him  shall  be  sweet.” — Psalm  civ.  34. 

Sermon  IV. — Pardon  and  trustification  ......  58 

“Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is 
covered.” — Psalm  xxxii.  1. 

Sermon  V.—The  Good  Shepherd 75 

“ The  Lord  is  my  shepherd,  I shall  not  want.”— Psalm  xxiii.  1. 

Sermon  VI. — The  Gracious  Tips  of  tTesus  .....  92 

“ Grace  is  poured  into  thy  lips.”— Psalm  xlv.  2. 

Sermon  VII. — A Time  of  Finding  for  Tost  Sheep  . . . Ill 

“I  will  seek  that  which  was  lost,  and  bring  again  that  which  was 
driven  away,  and  will  bind  up  that  which  was  broken,  and  will 
strengthen  that,  which  was  sick : but  I will  destroy  the  fat  and  the 
strong  ; I will  feed  them  with  judgment.”— Ezek.  xxxiv.  16. 

Sermon  VIII. — The  Two  Talents 129 

“ He  also  that  had  received  two  talents  came  and  said,  Lord,  thou 
deliverest  unto  me  two  talents:  behold,  I have  gained  two  other 
talents  beside  them.  His  lord  said  unto  him,  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant ; thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a few  things,  I will 
make  thee  ruler  over  many  things:  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy 
Lord.” — Matt.  xxv.  22,  23. 

Sermon  IX. — The  Prodigal’s  Return 145 

“ But  when  he  wras  yet  a great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him,  and  had 
compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him.” — Luke 
xv.  20. 

Sermon  X. — God,  the  All-seeing  One 161 

“ Hell  and  destruction  are  before  the  Lord  : how  much  more  then 
the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men  ? ”— Proverbs  xv.  11. 


Sermon  XI. — The  Immutability  of  Christ 178 

“Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever.”— He- 
brews xiii.  8. 

Sermon  XII. — Paul’s  Sermon  before  Felix 193 

“ And  as  he  reasoned  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment 
to  come,  Felix  trembled,  and  answered,  Go  thy  way  for  this  time ; 
when  I have  a convenient  season,  I will  call  for  thee.” — Acts  xxiv.  25. 

Sermon  XIII. — The  Death  of  Christ ■ . 209 

“Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him  ; he  hath  put  him  to  grief, 
when  thou  shall  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he  shall  see  his 
seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days,  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall 
prosper  in  his  hand.”— Isaiah  liii.  10. 

Sermon  XIV. — A Call  to  the  Unconverted 223 

“ For  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse  : 
for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them.” — Gal.  iii.  10. 

Sermon  XV. — The  Warning  Neglected 240 

“ He  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  took  not  warning ; his 
blood  shall  be  upon  him.”— Ezekiel  xxxiii.  5. 

Sermon  XVI.—  What  Have  I Done  ? 258 

“ What  have  I done  ? ”— Jeremiah  viii.  6. 

Sermon  XVII.— Tight  at  Evening  Time 275 

“ It  shall  come  to  pass  that  at  evening  time  it  shall  be  light.”— Zech- 
ariah  xiv.  7. 


312 


LIST  OF  SPUKGEOtf’S  SERMOKS 


Sermon  XVIII  —Thy  Redeemer page  290 

“And  thy  redeemer,  the  Holy  One.” — Isaiah  xli.  14. 

Sermon  XIX. — The  First  and  Great  Commandment  . . . 301 

“ Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all 
thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength:  this  is  the 
first  commandment.” — Mark  xii.  30. 

Sermon  XX. — Awake  ! A wake  316 

“ Therefore  let  us  not  sleep  as  do  others  ; but  let  us  watch  and  he 
sober.”— 1 Tiiess.  v.  6. 

Sermon  XXI. — The  Roved  Ones  Chastened 333 

“As  many  as  I love,  I rebuke  and  chasten:  he  zealous,  therefore, 
and  repent.”— Revelation  iii.  19. 

Sermon  XXII. — Fear  Not 350 

“Fear  not.,  thou  worm  Jacob,  and  ye  men  of  Israel  ; I will  help 
thee,  saith  the  Lord,  and  thy  redeemer  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.” — 
Isaiah  xli.  14. 

Sermon  XXIII.— The  Condescension  of  Christ  . *.  . . . 364 

“ For  ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that,  though  he 
was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that  ye  through  his  poverty 
might  be  rich.” — 2 Cor.  viii.  9. 

Sermon  XXIV.— The  Great  Reservoir 381 

“ Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence  ; for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of 
life.”— Proverbs  iv.  23. 

Sermon  XXV.— How  to  Keep  the  Heart 397 

“ The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall  keep 
your  hearts  and  minds,  through  Christ  Jesus.” — Philippians  iv.  7. 

Sermon  XXVI.— Human  Inability 410 

“No  man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father  which  has  sent  me 
draw  him.”— John  vi.  44. 

Sermon  XXVII. — love  Thy  Neighbor 422 

“ Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.”— Matt.  xix.  19. 

FIFTH  SERIES  OF  SERMONS. 

Preface. 

Sermon  I. — His  Name  : Wonderful 15 

“ His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful.”— Isaiah  ix.  6. 

Sermon  II. — His  Name  : The  Counsellor 31 

“ For  unto  us  a child  is  horn,  unto  us  a son  is  given  : and  the  gov- 
ernment shall  be  upon  his  shoulder:  and  his  name  shall  he  Wonder- 
ful Counsellor.”— Isaiah  iv.  6. 

Sermon  III. — As  Thy  Rays,  so  shall  thy  Strength  be  . . .49 

“ As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be.”— Deut.  xxxiii.  25. 

Sermon  IV.— The  Voice  of  the  Flood  of  Christ  . ...  65 

“ The  blood  of  sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of 
Abel.” — Hebrews  xii.  24. 

Sermon  V.—The  New  Heart 81 

“ A new  heart  also  will  I give  you,  and  a new  spirit  will  1 put  with- 
in you  ; and  I will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I 
will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh.”— Ezekiel  xxxvi.  26. 


LIST  OF  SPURGEON’S  SERMONS. 


313 


Sermon  VI. — The  Fatherhood  of  God page  96 

“ 0ur  Father,  which  art  in  heaven.”— Matt.  vi.  9. 

Sermon  VII.— Everybody’s  Sermon 112 

“I  have  multiplied  visions,  and  used  similitudes.” — IIosEAxii.  10. 

Sermon  VIII.—  A Lecture  for  Little-Faith 129 

“ We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for  you,  brethren,  as  it  is 
meet,  because  that  your  faith  groweth  exceeding,  and  the  charity  of 
every  one  of  you  all  toward  each  other  aboundeth.” — 2 Thess.  i.  3. 

Sermon  IX.— Confession  and  Absolution 147 

“ And  the  publican,  standing  afar  oft',  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as 
his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote  upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  mer- 
ciful to  me  a sinner.”— Luke  xviii.  13. 

Sermon  X. — Declension  from  First  Love 164 

“Nevertheless  I have  somewhat  against  thee,  because  thou  hast 
left  thy  first  love.”— Rev.  ii.  4. 

Sermon  XI. — God’s  Farriers  against  Man’s  Sin  ....  180 

“ Fear  ye  not  me  ? saith  the  Lord  ; will  ye  not  tremble  at  my  pres- 
ence, which  have  placed  the  sand  for  the  bound  of  the  sea  by  a perpet- 
ual decree,  that  it  can  not  pass  it : and  though  the  waves  thereof  toss 
themselves,  yet  they  not  prevail;  though  they  roar,  yet  can  they  not 
pass  over  it  V But  this  people  hath  a revolting  and  a rebellious  heart; 
they  are  revolted  and  gone.  ”—  Jeremiah  v.  22,  23. 

Sermon  XII. — Comfort  Froclaimed 197 

“ Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God.” — Isaiah  xl.  1. 

Sermon  XIII. — The  Christian’s  Heaviness  and  Rejoicing  . 211 

“ Wherein  ye  greatly  rejoice,  though  now  for  a season,  if  need  be, 
ye  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations.” — 1 Peter  i.  6. 

Sermon  XIV. — Evil  and  its  Remedy 222 

“ The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  and  Judah  is  exceeding  great.” 
Ezekiel,  ix.  9. 

“ The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.” 

— 1 John  i.  7. 

Sermon  XV. — Samson  Conquered  . . 236 

“ And  she  said,  the  Philistines  be  upon  thee,  Samson.  And  he 
awoke  out  of  his  sleep,  and  said,  I will  go  out  as  at  other  times  be- 
fore, and  shake  myself.  And  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed 
from  him.  But  the  Philistines  took  him,  and  put  out  his  eyes,  and 
brought  him  down  to  Gaza,  and  bound  him  with  fetters  of  brass  ; and 
he  did  grind  in  the  prison  house.” — Judges  xvi.  20,  21. 

Sermon  XVI.  Looking  unto  JTesus 253 

“ They  looked  unto  him,  and  were  lightened  : and  their  faces  were 
not  ashamed.” — Psalm  xxxiv.  5. 

Sermon  XVII.—  Sa tan ’s  Eanquet 270 

“ The  governor  of  the  feast  called  the  bridegroom,  and  saith  unto 
him,  every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set  fortn  good  wine  ; and  when 
men  have  well  drunk,  then  that  which  is  worse  ; but  thou  hast  kept 
the  good  wine  until  now.”— John  ii.  9,  10. 

Sermon  XVIII.—  The  Feast  of  the  Lord 289 

“ The  governor  of  the  feast  called  the  bridegroom,  and  saith  unto 
him,  every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set  forth  good  wine  ; and  when 
men  have  well  drank,  then  that  which  is  worse ; but  thou  hast  kept 
the  good  wine  until  now.” — John  ii.  9, 10. 


314 


list  of  spuec.eon’s  sermons. 


Sermon  XIX. — The  Blood page  303 

“ When  I see  the  blood,  I will  pass  over  you.”— Exodus  xii.  13. 

Sermon  XX.— Tore 319 

“ We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us.” — 1 John  iv.  19. 

Sermon  XXI. — The  Great  Bcvival 336 


“The  Lord  hath  made  bare  his  holy  arm  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  na- 
tions : and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  salvation  of  our 
God.  — Isaiah  lii.  10. 

Sermon  XXII. — The  Form  and  Spirit  of  Religion  ....  353 

“Let  us  fetch  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  out  of  Shiloh 
unto  us,  that,  when  it  cometh  among  us,  it  may  save  us  out  of  the 
hand  of  our  enemies.”— 1 Samuel  iv.  3. 

Sermon  XXIII. — Providence 370 

“ But  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.” — Matt.  x.  30. 

Sermon  XXIV. — The  Vanguard  and  Rereward  of  the  Church.  387 

“ The  Lord  will  go  before  you  ; and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your 
rereward.” — Isaiah  lii,  12. 

Sermon  XXV. — The  World  Turned  Upside  Down  ....  402 

“These  that  have  turned  the  wrorld  upside  down  are  come  hither 
also.” — Acts  xvii.  6. 

Sermon  XXVI. — Human  Responsibility 420 

“ If  I had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not  had  sin ; 
but  now  they  have  no  cloke  for  their  sin.” — John  xv.  22. 

Sermon  XXVII. — Faith  in  Perfection 437 

“ The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  conccrneth  me.  Thy  mercy,  O 
Lord,  endureth  for  ever  : forsake  not  the  works  of  thine  own  liand3.” 

— Psalm  cxxxviii.  8. 

SIXTH  SERIES  OF  SERMONS. 

Preface. 

Sermon  I. — The  Story  of  God’s  Mighty  Acts 13 

“ We  have  heard  with  our  ears,  O God,  our  fathers  have  told  us,  what 
work  thou  didst  in  their  days  in  the  times  of  old.” — Psalm  xliv.  1. 

Sermon  II.—  The  Outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ....  31 

“ While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all 
them  which  heard  the  Word.” — Acts  x.  44. 

Sermon  III . — The  Sympathy  of  the  tivo  Worlds  . . , . 47 

“ There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner 
that  repenteth.” — Luke  xv.  10. 

Sermon  IV. — The  Conversation  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  ...  61 

“ And  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  the  earth,  I heard  a voice  speak- 
ing unto  me,  and  saying,  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  Saul,  Saul,  why  per- 
secutes! thou  me  ? it  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks.”— 

Acts  xxvi.  14. 

* Sermon  V. — Distinguishing  Grace 78 

“ For  who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another.”— 1 Cor.  iv.  7. 

Sermon  VI.— The  Mission  of  the  Son  of  Man 92 

“ For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was 
lost.”— Luke  xix.  10. 


list  of  spurgeon’s  sermons. 


315 


Sermon  YII. — An  Earnest  Invitation page  109 

“Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when 
his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a little.  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their 
trust  in  him.”— Psalm  ii.  12. 

Sermon  VIII. — Dow  Saints  may  Help  the  Devil  ....  125 

“ That  thou  mayst  bear  thine  own  shame,  and  mayst  be  confounded 
in  all  that  thou  hast  done,  in  that  thou  art  a comfort  unto  them.” — 
Ezekiel  xvi.  54. 

Sermon  IX. — Ills  Name  : The  Blighty  God  .....  142 
“The  mighty  God.”— Isaiah  ix.  6. 

Sermon  X. — The  Believer’s  Challenge 156 

“ Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ? It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather, 
that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also 
maketh  intercession  for  us.” — Romans  vili.  34. 

Sermon  XI. — A Esalm  of  Remembrance 171 

“We  have  known  and  believed  the  love  of  God  hath  to  us.” — 

1 John  iv.  16. 

Sermon  XII. — The  Necessity  of  the  Spirit’s  Work  ....  186 
“And  I will  put  my  Spirit  within  you.”— Ezekiel  xxxvi.  27. 

Sermon  XIII.— Little  Sins 102 

“ Is  it  not  a little  one  ? ’’—Genesis  xix.  20. 

Sermon  XIV. — A Vision  of  the  latter-Day  Glories  . . . 216 

“ And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  that  the  mountain  of 
the  Lord’s  house  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and 
shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills  : and  all  nations  shall  flow  into  it.” — 
Isaiah  ii.  2,  and  Micah  iv.  1. 

Sermon  XV. — Covenant  Blessings 230 

“He  hath  given  meat  unto  them  that  fear  him:  he  will  ever  be 
mindful  of  his  covenant.” — Psalm  cxi.  5. 

Sermon  XVI. — The  Dew  of  Christ’s  Youth 249 

“ Thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth.” — Psalm  cx.  3. 

Sermon  XVII. — The  High  Rock 266 

“ From  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I cry  unto  thee,  when  my  heart  is 
overwhelmed  : lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I.”— Ps.  lxi.  2. 

Sermon  XVIII. — Spiritual  Religion 283 

“ It  Is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth  : the  flesh  profiteth  nothing.” — 
John  vi.  63. 

Sermon  XIX. — The  Saviour  resting  in  Dis  love  ....  297 
“ He  will  rest  in  his  love.”— Zepiianiah  iii.  17. 

Sermon  XX. — Suffering  without  the  Camp 309 

“Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify  the  people  with  his 
blood,  suffered  without  the  gate.  Hebrews  xiii.  12. 

Sermon  XXI. — Growth  in  Grace 319 

“ But  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.”— 2 Peter  iii.  18. 

Sermon  XXII .—Hypocrisy 334 

“ Beware  ye  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  which  is  hypocrisy.”— 
Luke  xii.  1. 


316 


list  of  spurgeoh’s  sermons, 


Sermon  XXIII. — Christ  Precious  to  Believers  . . . page  350 

“ Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  he  is  precious.” — 1 Peter  ii.  7. 

Sermon  XXIV. — The  MeeJe  and  lowly  One 366 

“ Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I will 
give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me  ; for  I am 
meek  aud  lowly  in  heart ; and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For 
my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light.” — Matt.  xi.  38-30. 

Sermon  XXV. — Weak  Hands  and  Feeble  Knees  ....  383 

“ Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees.” — 
Isaiah  xxx.  3. 

Sermon  XXVI. — The  Blind  Beggar 399 

“ And  they  came  to  Jericho : and  as  he  went  out  of  Jericho  with  his 
disciples  and  a great  number  of  people,  blind  Bartimeus,  the  son  of 
Timeus,  sat  by  the  highway  side  begging.  And  when  he  heard  that 
it  was  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  he  began  to  cry  out,  and  say,  Jesus,  thou 
son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me.  And  many  charged  him  that  he 
should  hold  his  peace  ; but  he  cried  the  more,  a great  deal,  Thou  son 
of  David,  have  mercy  on  me.  And  Jesus  stood  still,  and  commanded 
him  to  be  called.  And  they  call  the  blind  man,  saying  unto  him,  Be 
of  good  comfort,  rise  ; he  calleth  thee.  And  he,  casting  away  his  gar- 
ment, rose,  and  came  to  Jesus.  And  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto 
him,  What  wilt  thou  that  I should  do  unto  thee  ? The  blind  man  said 
unto  him.  Lord,  that  I might  receive  my  sight.  And  Jesus  said  unto 
him,  Go  thy  way ; thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole.  And  immediately 
he  received  his  sight,  and  followed  Jesus  in  the  w ay.”—  Mark  x.  46-53. 

Sermon  XXVII. — Christ’s  Manifestation  to  Mary  Magdalene.  413 

“ Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Touch  me  not ; for  I am  not  yet  ascended  to 
my  Father  ; but  go  to  my  brethren,  and  say  unto  them,  I ascend  unto 
my  Father  and  your  Father;  and  to  my  God  and  your  God.” — John 
xx.  17. 

Sermon  XXVTII. — The  Sight  of  Iniquity 422 

“ Why  dost  thou  show  me  iniquity,  and  cause  me  to  behold  griev- 
ance? ”— Hab.  i.  3. 

Sermon  XXIX. — The  Tabernacle  of  the  Most  High  . . . 437 

“ In  whom  ye  are  also  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit.”— Ephesians  ii.  22. 


SEVENTH  SERIES  OF  SERMONS. 

Sermon  1. — A Neiv  Year’s  Benediction 11 

“But  the  God  of  all  grace  who  hath  called  us  unto  his  eternal  glory 
by  Christ  Jesus,  after  that  ye  have  suftered  awhile,  make  you  perfect, 
establish,  strengthen,  settle  you.” — 1 Peter  v.  10. 

Sermon  II. — The  King’s  Highway  Opened 28 

“And  they  said,  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved,  and  thy  house.” — Acts  xvi.  31. 

Sermon  III.— Piety  Reproved  and  Justified 45 

“Then  David  returned  to  bless  his  household.  And  Michal  the 
daughter  of  Saul  came  out  to  meet  David,  and  said.  How  glorious  was 
the  kin^  of  Israel  to-day,  who  uncovered  himself  to-day  in  the  eyes 
of  handmaids  of  his  servants,  as  one  of  the  vain  fellows  shamelessly 
uncovereth  himself  ! And  David  said  unto  Michal,  It  was  before  the 
Lord,  which  chose  me  before  my  father,  and  before  all  his  house,  to 
appoint  me  ruler  over  the  people  of  the  Lord,  over  Israel , therefore 
will  I play  before  the  Lord.  And  I will  be  more  vile  than  thus,  and 
will  be  base  in  my  own  sight : and  of  the  maidservants  which  thou 
hast  spoken  of,  of  them  shall  I be  had  in  honor.”— 2 Samuel  vi.  20-23. 


317 


list  of  spurgeon’s  sermons. 


Sermon  TV  —The  Treasures  of  Grace page  62 

“The  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace.” — 
Ephesians  i.  7. 

Sermon  V. — Faith  Illustrated 79 

“For  the  which  cause  I also  suffer  these  things  : nevertheless  I am 
not  ashamed  ; for  I know  whom  I have  believed,  and  am  persuaded 
that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I have  committed  unto  him  against 
that  day.”— 2 Timothy  i.  12. 

Sermon  VI.— A Home  Question 94 

“But  are  there  not  with  you,  even  with  you,  sins  against  the  Lord 
your  God.”— 2 Chron.  xxviii.  10. 

Sermon  VII. — Christ  Triumphant 110 

“ And  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he  made  a show  of 
them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it.”— Colossians  ii.  15. 

Sermon  VIII. — Remember  Heath 126 

“ O that  they  were  wise,  that  they  understood  this,  that  they  would 
consider  their  latter  end.” — Deut.  xxxii.  29. 

Sermon  IX. — 3Iarhs  of  Faith 141 

“Then  said  Jesus  unto  him,  Except  ye  see  signs  and  wonders,  ye 
will  not  believe.” — John  iv.  48. 

Sermon  X. — The  Precious  from  the  Vile 160 

“That  ye  may  know  how  that  the  Lord  hath  put  a difference  be- 
tween the  Egyptians  and  Israel.” — Exodus  xi.  7. 

Sermon  XI. — A Rlast  against  False  Peace 177 

“ Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace.” — Jeremiah  vi.  14. 

Sermon  XII. — The  Resurrection . 194 

“ But  some  man  will  say,  How  are  the  dead  raised  up  ? and  with 
what  body  do  they  come.  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not 
quickened,  except  it  die  : and  that  which  thou  sowest,  thou  sowest 
not  that  body  that  shall  be,  but  bare  grain,  it  may  chance  of  wheat,  or 
of  some  other  grain  : but  God  givethlt  a body  as  it  hath  pleased  him, 
and  to  every  seed  his  own  body.” — 1 Cor.  xv.  35-38. 

Sermon  XIII.— The  Blood  of  the  Covenant 212 

“ The  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant.”— Hebrews  xiii.  20. 

Sermon  XIV. — A Revival  Sermon 227 

“Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  the  plowman  shall 
overtake  the  reaper,  and  the  trader  of  grapes  him  that,  soweth  seed  ; 
and  the  mountains  shall  drop  sweet  wine,  and  all  the  hills  shall  melt.” 
Amos  ix.  13. 

Sermon  XV. — Sin  Immeasurable 245 

“ Who  can  understand  his  errors.” — Psalm  xix.  12. 

Sermon  XVI. — Hone  but  Jesus . ........  259 

“ He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned.”— John  iii.  18. 

Sermon  XVII.— None  but  Jesus— Part  II 277 

“ He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned.”— John  iii.  18. 

Sermon  XVIII.—  The  Chaff  Driven  Away 293 

“The  ungodly  are  not  so;  but  are  like  the  chaff  which  the  wind 
driveth  away.”— Psalm  i.  4. 


318 


list  of  spurgeon’s  sermons. 


Sermon  XIX. — Cleansing  the  Leper page  311 

“And  if  a leprosy  break  out  abroad  in  the  skin,  and  the  leprosy 
cover  all  the  skin  of  him  that  hath  the  plague  from  his  head  even  to 
his  foot,  wheresoever  the  priest  looketh  ; then  the  priest  shall  con- 
sider : and,  behold,  if  the  leprosy  have  covered  all  his  flesh,  he  shall 
pronounce  him  clean  that  hath  the  plague : it  is  all  turned  white : he 
is  clean.”— Leviticus  xiii.  12,  13. 

Sermon  XX. — The  Wailing  of  Itisca 328 

“ Suddenly  are  my  tents  spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  a moment.” — 
Jeremiah  iv.  20. 

Sermon  XXI. — Come  and  Welcome 344 

“ And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come.  And  let  him  that  heareth 
say,  Come.  And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.  And  whosoever  will, 
let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely.”— Revelations  xxii.  17. 

SErmon  XXII.— The  First  Resurrection 361 

“ And  I saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them,  and  judgment  was 
given  unto  them  : and  I saw  the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for 
the.  witness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of  God,  and  which  had  not 
worshipped  the  beast,  neither  his  image,  neither  had  received  his 
mark  upon  their  foreheads,  or  in  their  hands  ; and  they  lived  and 
reigned  with  Christ  a thousand  years.  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived 
not  again  until  the  thousand  years  were  finished.  This  is  the  first  re- 
surrection. Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resur- 
rection ; on  such  the  second  death  hath  no  power,  but  they  shall  be 
priests  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with  him  a thousand 
years.” — Rev.  xx.  4,  5,  6. 

“ And  I saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God ; and  the 
books  were  opened;  and  another  "book  was  opened,  which  is  the 
book  of  life ; and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which 
were  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their  works.” — Rev.  xx.  12. 


EIGHTH  SERIES  OF  SERMONS. 

Sermon  I. — Baptismal  Regeneration.  ....  . . 11 

“And  he  said  unto  them,  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature.  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved  ; but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned.” — Mark  xvi.  15, 16. 

Sermon  II. — Children  Brought  to  Christ , not  to  the  Font  . 36 

“And  they  brought  young  children  unto  him,  that  he  should  touch 
them  : and  his  disciples  rebuked  those  that  brought  them.  But  when 
Jesus  saw  it,  he  was- much  displeased,  and  said  unto  them,  Suffer  the 
little  children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not:  for  of  such  i' 
the  kingdom  of  God.  Yerily  I say  unto  you,  Whosoever  shall  not 
receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a little  child,  he  shall  not  enter  there- 
in. And  he  took  them  up  in  his  arms,  put  his  hands  upon  them,  and 
blessed  them.” — Mark  x.  13-16. 

Sermon  III. — i(  Thus  Saith  the  Lord  )f 55 

“ Thus  saith  the  Lord.”— Ezekiel  xi.  5. 

Sermon  IY. — A.  Hearer  in  Disguise .79 

“ And  it  was  so,  when  Ahijah  heard  the  sound  of  her  fept,  as  she 
came  in  at  the  door,  that  he  said,  Come  in,  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam ; 
why  feignest  thou  thyself  to  be  another  ? for  I am  sent  to  thee  with 
heavy  tidings.”— 1 Kings  xiv.  6. 

Sermon  V. — Fxpiation 

“Thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin.”— Isaiah  liii.  10. 


96 


list  of  Spurgeon’s  sermons, 


319 


Sermon  VI.— The  Barley-Field  on  Fire  ....  page  112 

‘‘Absalom  sent  for  Joab,  to  have  him  sent  to  the  king,  but  he 
Would  not  come.  Therefore  he  said  unto  his  servants,  See,  Joab’s 
a ^ near  mine,  and  he  hath  barley  there : go  and  set  it  on  fire. 

And  Absalom  s servants  set  the  field  on  fire.  Then  Joab  arose,  and 
came  to  Absalom  unto  his  house,  and  said  unto  him,  Wherefore  have 
thy  servants  set  my  field  on  fire  ? ” — 2 Samuel  xiv.  29-31. 

Sermon  VII. — Christ  is  Glorious  : Bet  us  make  Him  Known.  131 

“ And  he  shall  stand  and  feed  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  in  the 
majesty  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God  ; and  they  shall  abide:  for 
now  shall  he  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.” — Micah  v.  4. 

Sermon  VIII. — Enduring  to  the  End 150 

“ He  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved.” — Matt.  x.  22. 

Sermon  IX.— Nothing  but  heaves . 168 

“He  found  nothing  but  leaves.” — Mark  xi.  13. 

Sermon  X. — The  Great  Liberator 187 

“ If  the  son  therefore  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed.” 

— JoHNviii.  36. 

Sermon  XI. — The  Sinner's  Friend 206 

“A  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.” — Matt.  xi.  19. 

Sermon  XII. — Flection  no  Discouragement  to  Seeking  Souls.  222 

“I  will  be  gracious  upon  whom  I will  be  gracious,  and  will  show 
mercy  upon  whom  I will  sl  w mercy.” — Exodus  xxxiii.  19. 

Sermon  XIII. — The  Cripple  at  Lystra  . . . . . .241 

“ The  same  heard  Paul  speak  : who  steadfastly  beholding  him,  and 
perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed,  said  with  a loud  voice, 
Stand  upright  on  thy  feet.  And  he  leaped  and  walked.” — Acts 
xiv.  9,  10. 

Sermon  XIV. — A.  Bundle  of  Jttyrrh 259 

“ A bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  me;  he  shall  lie  all 
night  betwixt  my  breasts.” — Canticles  i.  13. 

Sermon  XV.— The  Lamb:  The  Light 278 

“ And  the  citv  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine 
in  it : for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  lamb  is  the  light 
thereof.” — Rev.  xxi.  23. 

Sermon  XVI. — God's  Strange  Choice 297 

“ For  ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,  how  that  not  many  wise  men 
after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  called  ; but  God 
hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise ; 
and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the 
things  which  are  mighty  : and  base  things  of  the  world,  and  things 
which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and  things  which  are  not, 
to  set  at  nought  things  that  are:  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  his  • 
presence.”— 1 Cor.  i.  20-29. 

Sermon  XVII. — What  God  Can  Not  Do 316 

“ God,  that  cannot  lie.” — Titus  i.  2. 

Sermon  XVIII. — Labor  in  Vain 335 

“Jonah  said  unto  them,  take  me  up,  and  cast  me  forth  into  the  sea  ; 
so  shall  the  sea  becalm  unto  you  : for  1 know  that  for  my  sake  this 
great  tempest  is  upon  you.  Nevertheless  the  men  rowed  hard  to  bring 
it  to  the  land  ; but  they  could  not,  for  the  sea  wrought,  and  was  tem- 
pestuous against  them.” — Jonah  i.  12,  13. 

Sermon  XIX.— God  is  With  Us 354 

“ If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? ’’—Romans  viii.  31. 


320 


LIST  OF  SPURGEON’S  SERMONS. 


NINTH  SERIES  OF  SERMONS. 


Introduction. 


PAGE 

, 13 


Sermon  1. — Travailing  for  Souls  13 

“ As  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  her  children.” — 
Isaiah  lxvi.  8. 

Sermon  II. — “ Your  Own  Salvation’ ’ 34 

“ Your  own  salvation.” — Philippians  ii.  12. 

Sermon  III. — Continuance  with  Jesus  Possible  . .54 

“ But  Jesus  said  unto  them,  They  need  not  depart.” — Matt.  xiv.  16. 

Sermon  IV. — The  Sin  of  Gadding  About  . . . . .70 

“Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change  thy  way.”— Jere- 
miah ii.  36. 

Sermon  V. — The  Droad  Wall 89 

“ The  broad  wall.”— Nehemiah  iii.  8. 

Sermon  VI. — The  Star  of  Jacob 104 

“ There  shall  cornea  star  out  of  Jacob.” — Numbers  xxiv.- 17. 

Sermon  VII. — The  Unalterable  Statute 117 

“Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission.”— Hebrews 
ix.  22. 

Sermon  VIII . — Fathomless 131 

“ Thy  judgments  are  a great  deep.” — Psalm  xxxvi.  6. 

Sermon  IX. — Meat  Indeed  and  Drink  Indeed  ....  143 

“ For  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed.”— 
John  vi.  55. 

Sermon  X. — Thoughts  and  their  Fruit  ....*.  157 
“ The  fruit  of  their  thoughts.”— Jer.  vi.  19. 

Sermon  XI. — The  Covenant 172 

“ For  this  is  the  covenant  that  I will  make  with  the  house  of  Israel 
after  those  days,  saith  the  Lord  ; I will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind, 
and  write  them  in  their  hearts ; and  I will  be  to  them  a God,  and  they 
shall  be  to  me  a people.” — Hebrews  viii.  10. 

Sermon  XII. — A Sermon  to  Open  Neglectors  and  Nominal 

Followers  of  Iteligion 186 

“ But  what  think  ye  ? A certain  man  had  two  sons  ; and  he  came  ; 
to  the  first,  and  said.  Son,  go  work  to  day  in  my  vineyard.  He 
answered  and  said,  I will  not : but  afterward  he  repented,  and  went. 

And  he  came  to  the  second  and  said  likewise.  And  he  answered  and 
said,  I go,  sir  : and  went  not.  Whether  of  them  twain  did  the  will  of 
his  father  ? They  said  unto  him,  The  first.  Jesus  saith  unto  them, 
Verily  I say  unto  you,  That  the  publicans  and  the  harlots  go  into  the 
kingdom  of  God  before  you.  For  John  came  unto  you  in  the  way  of 
righteousness,  and  ye  believed  him  not:  but  the  publicans  and  the 
harlots  believed  him : and  ye,  when  ye  had  seen  it,  repented  not 
afterwards,  that  ye  might  believe  him.”— Matt.  xxi.  28-32. 

Sermon  XIII. — Ephraim  Bemoaning  Himself  ....  306 

“ I have  surely  heard  Ephraim  bemoaning  himself  thus  ; Thou  hast 
chastised  me,  and  I was  chastised,  as  a bullock  unaccustomed  to  the 
yoke : Turn  thou  me,  and  I shall  be  turned ; For  thou  art  the  Lord 
my  God.”— Jeremiah  xxxi.  18. 


list  of  spurgeon’s  sermons, 


321 


Sermon  XIV.—  Jesus  at  Bethesda ; or  Waiting  Changed  for 

Believing page  225 

“ After  this  there  was  a feast  of  the  Jews;  and  Jesus  went  up  to 
Jerusalem.  Now  there  is  at  Jerusalem  by  the  sheep  market  a pool, 
which  is  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Bethesda,  having  live  porches. 

In  these  lay  a great  multitude  of  impotent  folk,  of  blind,  halt, 
withered,  waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water.  For  an  angel  went 
down  at  a certain  season  into  the  pool,  and  troubled  the  water:  who- 
soever then  tirst  after  the  troubling  of  the  water  stepped  in  was  made 
whole  of  whatsoever  disease  he  had.  And  a certain  man  was  there, 
which  had  an  infirmity  thirty  and  eight  years.  When  Jesus  saw  him 
lie,  and  knew  that  he  had  been  a long  time  in  that  case,  he  saith  unto 
him,  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ? The  impotent  man  answe'red  him. 

Sir,  I have  no  man.  when  the  water  is  troubled,  to  put  me  into  the 
pool : but  while  I am  coming,  another  steppeth  down  before  me. 
Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Rise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk.  And  immedi- 
ately the  man  was  made  whole,  and  took  up  his  bed,  and  walked : and 
on  the  same  day  was  the  Sabbath.” — John  v.  1-9. 

Sermon  XV. — The  Unsearchable  Riches  of  Christ  . . . 245 

Unto  me,  who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this  grace 
given,  that  I preach  among  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ.” — Ephesians  iii.  8. 

Sermon  XVI.— The  End  of  the  Righteous  Desired  . . . 265 

“ Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like 
his  ! ” — Numbers  xxiii.  10. 

Sermon  XVII. — Number  One  Thousand  ; or,  (<  Bread  Enough 

and  to  Spare  ” 284 

“ And  when  he  came  to  himself,  he  said,  how  many  hired  servants 
of  my  father’s  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  I perish  with  hun- 
ger ? ” — Luke  xv.  17. 

Sermon  XVIII. — Love’s  Bogie 304 

“ We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us.”— 1 John  iv.  19. 

Sermon  XIX. — Altogether  Lovely 323 

“Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely.”— Canticles  v.  16. 

Sermon  XX. — The  Alarum 342 

“I  myself  will  awake  early.”— Psalm  lvii.  8. 

Sermon  XXI. — The  Withering  Work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  . . 362 

“ The  voice  said,  Cry. — And  he  said,  What  shall  I cry  ? All  flesh  is 
grass,— and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field  : the 

frass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth : because  the  spirit  of  the  Lord 
loweth  not  upon  it : surely  the  people  is  grass.  The  grass  wither- 
eth, the  flower  fadeth : but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  forever.” 
Isaiah  xl.  6-8. 

“ Being  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible, 
by  the  word  of  God,  which  livetli  and  abideth  forever.  For  all  flesh 
is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  of  the  grass.  The 
grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away  ; But  the  word  of 
the  Lord  endurcth  forever  And  this  is  the  word  which  by  the  gospel 
is  preached  unto  you.” — 1 Peter  i.  23-25. 

Sermon  XXII. — Mar  ah  ; or,  the  Bitter  Waters  Sweetened  . . 382 

“And  when  they  came  to  Marah,  they  could  not  drink  of  the  waters 
of  Marah,  for  they  were  bitter  : therefore  the  name  of  it  was  called 
Marah.  And  the  people  murmured  against  Moses,  saying,  what  shall 
we  drink  ? And  he  cried  unto  the  Lord  ; and  the  Lord  showed  him  a 
tree,  which  when  lie  had  cast  into  the  waters,  the  waters  were  made 
sweet.”— Exodus  xv.  23,  24,  25. 


322 


list  of  spurgeon’s  sermons, 


Sermon  XXIII. — Negotiations  for  Peace  . . . . page  402 

“ Preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ : (he  is  Lord  of  all).” — Acts  x.  36. 

Sermon  XXIV.— Jesus  Only 419 

“ And  when  they  had  lifted  up  their  eyes,  they  saw  no  man,  save 
Jesus  only.” — Matt.  xvii.  8. 

Sermon  XXV.  —2 lest,  Rest 436 


“ Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I will 
give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me  ; for  I am 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart ; and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls,  for 
my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light.”— Matt.  xi.  28-30. 

Sermon  XXVI. — Carried  by  Four  .......  456 

“ And  he  withdrew  himself  into  the  wilderness,  and  prayed.  And 
it  came  to  pass  on  a certain  day,  as  he  was  teaching,  that  there  were 
Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law  sitting  by,  which  were  come  out  of 
every  town  of  Galilee,  and  Judea,  and  Jerusalem  : and  the  power  of 
the  Lord  was  present  to  heal  them.  And,  behold,  men  brought  in  a 
bed  a man  which  was  taken  with  a palsy  : and  they  sought  means  to 
bring  him  in,  and  to  lay  him  before  him.  And  when  they  could  not 
find  by  what  way  they  might  bring  him  in  because  of  the  multitude, 
they  went  upon  the  house-top,  and  let  him  down  through  the  tiling 
with  his  couch  into  the  midst  before  Jesus.  And  when  he  saw  their 
faith  .he  said  unto  him,  Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.  And  the 
scribes  and  the  Pharisees  began  to  reason,  saying,  who  is  this  which 
speaketh  blasphemies  ? Who  can  forgive  sins,  but  God  alone  ? But 
when  Jesus  perceived  their  thoughts,  he  answering  said  unto  them. 

What  reason  ye  in  your  hearts  ? Whether  is  easier  to  say,  Thy  sins 
be  forgiven  thee  ; or  to  say,  Rise  up  and  walk  ? But  that  ye  may 
know  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  upon  earth  to  forgive  sins  (he 
said  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy),  I say  unto  thee,  Arise,  and  take  up 
thy  couch,  aud  go  into  thine  house.  And  immediately  he  rose  up  be- 
fore them,  and  took  up  that  whereon  he  lay,  and  departed  to  his  own 
house,  glorifying  God.  And  they  were  all  amazed,  and  they  glorified 
God,  and  were  filled  with  fear,  saying,  We  have  seen  strange  things 
to-day.” — Luke  v.  16-26. 

Sermon  XXVII. — Jesus  No  Phantom 476 

“ And  when  the  disciples  saw  him  walking  on  the  sea,  they  were 
troubled,  saying,  it  is  a spirit;  and  they  cried  out  for  fear.”— Matt. 
xiv.  26.  >. 

Sermon  XXVIII. — Very  Singular 496 

“ He  put  his  household  in  order  and  hanged  himself.”— 2 Samuel 
xvii.  28. 


TYPES  AND  EMBLEMS  : 

A COLLECTION  OF  SERMONS  PREACHED  ON  SUNDAY  AND 

THURSDAY  EVENINGS. 

Sermon  I.— The  Star  of  Jacob  .......  page  7 

“ There  shall  come  a star  out  of  Jacob.”— Numbers  xxxiv.  17. 


Sermon  II. — The  Proad  Wall  , 

“ The  broad  wall.”—  Nehemiah  iii.  8. 


22 


323 


LIST  OF  SPURGEONS  SERMOKS. 


Sermon  III. — The  Only  Door page  41 

“ I am  the  door  : by  me  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved,  and 


shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find  pasture.”— John  x.  9. 

Sermon  IV. — lioyal  Emblems  for  Royal  Subjects  ...  61 

“ And  he  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  morning,  when  the  sun  riseth, 
even  a morning  without  clouds;  as  the  tender  grass  siwingeth  out  of 
the  earth  by  clear  shining  after  rain.”— 2 Samuel  xxiii.  4. 

Sermon  V. — A Frail  Leaf 78 

“ Wilt  thou  break  a leaf  driven  to  and  fro  ?” — Job  xiii.  25. 

Sermon  VI.— The  Helmet 93 

“ And  for  a helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation.” — 1 Thess.  v.  8. 

Sermon  VII. — One  Trophy  for  Two  Exploits 112 

“For  by  thee  I have  run  through  a troop;  and  by  my  God  have  I 
leaped  over  a wall.” — Psalm  xviii.  29. 

Sermon  VIII. — Christ  the  Tree  of  Life 134 


“ In  the  midst  of  the  street  of  it,  and  on  either  side  of  the  river,  was 
there  the  tree  of  life,  which  bare  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and  yielded 
her  fruit  every  month  ; and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  were  for  the  healing 
of  the  nations.”  —Rev.  xxii.  2. 

# Sermon  IX. — A Silly  Dove 148 

“Ephraim  also  is  like  a silly  dove  without  heart.” — IIosea  vii.  2. 

Sermon  X.~Our  Danner * 164 

“ Thou  hast  given  a banner  to  them  that  fear  thee,  that  it  may  be 
displayed  because  of  the  truth.” — Psalm  lx.  4. 

Sermon  XI. — Our  Champion 179 

“And  Samson  lay  till  midnight,  and  arose  at  midnight,  and  took  the 
doors  of  the  gate  of  the  city,  and  the  two  posts,  and  went  away  with 
them,  bar  and  all,  and  put  them  upon  his  shoulders,  and  carried  them 
up  to  the  top  of  an  hill  that  is  before  Hebron.” — Judges  xvi.  3. 

Sermon  XII. — The  Fainting  Hero 194 

“ He  was  sore  athirst,  and  called  on  the  Lord,  and  said,  Thou  hast 
given  this  great  deliverance  into  the  hands  of  thy  servant : and  now 
shall  I die  for  thirst,  and  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  uncircumcised.” — 
Judges  xv.  18. 

Sermon  XIII.  Women’ s Rights . A Parable 209 

“ And  Moses  brought  their  cause  before  the  Lord.” — Num.  xxvii.  5. 

Sermon  XIV. — Black  Clouds  and  Bright  Blessings  . . . 225 

“ If  the  clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty  themselves  upon  the 
earth.” — Eccles.  xi.  3. 

Sermon  XV. — David’s  First  Victory 247 

“So  David  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a sling  and  with  a 
stone,  and  smote  the  Philistine,  and  slew  him  ; but  there  was  no 
sword  in  the  hand  of  David.” — 1 Samuel  xvii.  50. 

Sermon  XVI. — David  and  His  Volunteers 270 

“And  of  the  Gadites  there  separated  themselves  unto  David  into 
the  hold  of  the  wilderness,  men  of  might,  and  men  of  war  fit  for  the 
battle,  that  coirld  handle  shield  and  buckler,  whose  faces  were  like 
the  faces  of  lions,  and  were  as  swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains  ; 

Ezer  the  first,  Obadiah  the  second,  Eliab  the  third,  Mishmannah  the 
fourth,  Jeremiah  the  fifth,  Athai  the  sixth,  Eliel  the  seventh,  Johanan 
the  eighth,  Elzabad  the  ninth,  Jeremiah  the  tenth,  Machbanai  the 
eleventh.  These  were  the  sons  of  Gad,  captains  of  the  host : one 
of  the  least  was  over  an  hundred,  and  the  greatest  over  a thousand. 
These  are  they  that  went  over  Jordan  in  t he  first  month,  when  it  had 
overflown  all  his  banks  ; and  they  put  to  flight  all  them  of  the  valleys, 
both  toward  the  east  and  toward  the  west.”— 1 Ciiron.  xii.  8-15. 


324 


LIST  OF  SPURGEON’S  SERMONS 


THE  SAINT  AND  HIS  SAVIOUR; 


OR,  THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  SOUL  IN  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF 

JESUS. 

Preface. 

Chapter  I. — The  Despised*  Fr  iend  ...... 

“ We  esteemed  him  not.” — Isaiah  liii.  3. 

Chapter  II. — Faithf  ul  Wounds 

“ Faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a friend.” — Proverbs  xxvii.  6. 

Chapter  III. — Jesus  Desired 

“ O that  I knew  where  I might  find  him.” — Job  xxiii.  3. 

Chapter  IV. — Jesus  Pardoning 


TAGE 

9 

. 43 
. 99 
. 155 


‘‘The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.”— 

1 John  i.  7. 

Chapter  V. — Joy  at  Conversion • 175 

‘‘The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us  ; whereof  we  are  glad.” — 
Psalm  cxxvi.  3. 


Chapter  VI. — Complete  in  Christ 217 

“ Ye  are  complete  in  Him.” — Colossians  ii.  10. 

Chapter  VII. — Dove  to  Jesus 241 

“ Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things ; thou  knowest  that  I love  thee.” — 
John  xxi.  17. 

Chapter  VIII. — Dove’s  Dogic  .........  273 

“ The  upright  love  thee.” — Sol.  Song,  i.  4. 

Chapter  IX. — Jesus  in  the  Hour  of  Trouble 315 


“ Who  passing  through  the  valley  of  Baca  make  it  a well ; the  rain 
also  filleth  the  pools.”— Psalm  lxxxiv.  6. 

Chapter  X. — Jesus  Hiding  Himself 354 

‘‘Thou  didst  hide  thy  face,  and  I was  troubled.” — Psalm  xxx.  7. 

Chapter  XI . — The  Causes  of  Apparent  Desertion  . . . 378 

‘‘  Show  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me.” — Job  x.  2. 


Chapter  XII. — Communion  Preserved 413 

“ But  they  constrained  him,  saying,  Abide  with  us,  for  it  is  toward 
evening,  and  the  day  is  far  spent.”— Luke  xxiv.  29. 


In  addition  to  the  above  there  have  been  published  of  Spurgeon’s  Works 
in  this  country,  “ Morning  by  Morning,”  or  Daily  Readings  for  the 
Family  or  the  Closet.  For  each  day  of  the  year  is  selected  a passage 
of  Scripture,  with  practical  comments  on  it  to  the  extent  of  one  page. 

ft Evening  by  Evening,”  or  Readings  at  Eventide  for  the  Family 
or  the  Closet.  This  book  is  similar  to  “Morning  by  Morning.”  There  are 
probably  no  devotional  books  in  the  language  equal  to  them,  unless  it  be 
“ Jay’s  Exercises.” 

Dectures  to  my  Students,  being  Lectures  delivered  by  Mr.  Spurgeon 
to  the  Students  of  the  Pastor’s  College. 

John  Ploughman’s  Talks,  or  Plain  Advice  for  Plain  People. 


I 


* 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  May  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1 Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066 
(724)  779-2111 


* 


/ 


library  of  congress 


0 014  039  357  5 • 


