■ 

1 

1 

Wm 

^^^^^H 

wi^^^^^ 

aass_^E4: 


TO 


Book. 


C-r  3o 


Gopyriglitl^" 


COPmiCHT  DEPOSIT. 


CURRENT    EVENTS 

In  the  Light  of  the  Bible 


ARNO  d^AEBELEIN 

Editor  of  '*Our  Hope'*i  Author  of  The  Annotated  BibUp 
Exposition  of  Daniel,  Matthew,  etc. 


PUBLICATION  OFFICE  "OUR  HOPE" 

456  Fourth  Avenue  New  York 


Copyright,  by  Arno  C.  Gaebelein,  December,  1914 


fEB  24  1915 

r 


©cia;m):j727 
1^1 


^' 


? 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Preface     3 

Political  Events 7 

Religious  Apostasy 56 

Modern  Day  Delusions 98 

Social  Conditions    . 145 

The  Jews 186 

New  Discoveries 203 

Index 217 


Preface. 

"Current  Events,"  as  given  in  this  volume,  cover  a 
period  of  about  eight  years.  This  must  be  kept  in  mind 
for  it  makes  these  events  of  startling  interest.  The 
tremendous  armament  of  the  nations,  their  preparations 
on  sea,  land  and  the  air  is  repeatedly  pointed  out.  In 
our  comment  on  the  European  situation  we  showed  that 
peace  cannot  be  expected  in  the  present  age,  but  that 
all  these  preparations  mean  a  coming  great  European 
conflict.  This  awful  conflict  has  now  passed  into  history. 
Of  especial  interest  are  the  items  on  Russia,  Turkey  and 
the  Balkan  States.  These  and  others  will  be  helpful  in 
the  study  of  Prophecy. 

The  chapters  on  "Religious  Apostasy"  and  "Modern 
Day  Delusions"  show  the  drift  of  things  religiously. 
As  every  reader  of  the  New  Testament  knows  this  age 
does  not  end  with  a  universal  acceptance  of  the  faith 
delivered  unto  the  Saints,  but  in  a  universal  apostasy 
from  that  faith.  Before  the  day  of  the  Lord  comes, 
before  our  Lord  appears  the  second  time  there  will  be 
the  falling  away  (2  Thess.  ii:3).  "Nevertheless,  when 
the  Son  of  Man  cometh,  shall  He  find  the  faith  on  the 
earth.'*"  (Luke  xviii:8).  This  predicted  falling  away  has 
set  in  and  is  literally  rushing  forward  to  the  great  apos- 
tasy which  comes  after  the  true  church  has  been  caught 
up  to  meet  the  Lord.  Doctrines  of  demons  and  of 
seducing  spirits  are  therefore  multiplying  and  attracting 
thousands  who  never  received  the  love  of  the  Truth. 
All  this  is  pointed  out  in  "Current  Events." 


Of  equal  importance  are  the  paragraphs  found  under 
"Social  Conditions."  Rejection  of  the  revealed  truths 
of  the  Bible  lead  always  to  moral  declension  and  cor- 
ruption. Unrighteousness  is  increasing.  The  age  is  not 
advancing  in  righteousness. 

Of  special  interest  is  the  chapter  on  the  Jews.  They 
are  the  coming  people.  Their  future  is  revealed  in  the 
Prophetic  Word.  The  awakened  national  spirit,  reaching 
out  for  the  old  home-land,  their  efforts  to  regain  Palestine 
are  of  great  significance  at  the  present  world-crisis. 

At  the  end  the  reader  will  find  a  good  Index  by  which 
he  can  locate  the  difi'erent  items.  We  hope  and  pray 
that  the  volume  may  prove  very  helpful  to  preachers. 
Christian  workers,  teachers  and  all  Christians  who  love 
His  appearing.  Surely  the  time  of  His  Coming  must 
be  at  hand.  The  study  of  the  signs  of  the  times  will 
strengthen  this  conviction. 

A.  C.  Gaebelein. 


Political  Events. 


Peace,  Peace;  When  There  is  No  Peace.  In  the  days 
of  the  weeping  prophet,  Jeremiah,  the  optimistic  cry  of 
priests  and  people  was  "Peace — Peace!"  Yet  there  was 
no  peace  and  as  this  awful  self-deception  of  the  people 
increased  the  clouds  of  divine  judgment  and  wrath 
gathered  over  Jerusalem.  In  the  midst  of  the  backslid- 
ing and  secure  professing  people  of  God  stood  Jere- 
miah with  his  God  given  message,  that  there  was  no 
peace.  What  he  preached  was  the  very  opposite  from 
the  optimistic  imaginations  of  an  outwardly  prosperous 
people.     And  how  he  had  to  suffer  for  his  faithful  witness. 

In  our  days  likewise  the  popular  preaching  is  peace; 
peace,  progress  and  prosperity;  all  is  well.  What  God 
has  to  say  in  His  infallible  Word  concerning  coming 
judgments  is  ignored  and  in  spite  of  the  most  ominous 
signs  and  warnings  of  impending  troubles,  the  greater 
part  of  Christendom  believes  that  the  world  is  getting 
better,  universal  peace  is  in  sight  and  great  reform  move- 
ments will  bring  in  a  greater  righteousness. 

But  some  great  Statesmen  take  a  very  gloomy  view 
of  conditions.  Ex-Premier  Balfour  of  England  made 
recently  a  prophecy  in  the  presence  of  the  assembled 
editors  of  the  British  Empire.  He  said  that  the  nations 
would  have  to  fight  soon  a  great  battle,  most  likely  in 


8  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

the  German  Ocean.  At  the  same  time  Lord  Rosebery 
addressing  this  Imperial  Press  Congress  also  sounded  a 
note  of  warning. 

Lord  Rosebery  was  particularly  serious  in  his  reference 
to  the  European  situation,  pointing  out  that  whereas  all 
the  talk  is  of  peace  all  the  action  is  in  preparation  for  war. 
He  said  he  regarded  the  outlook  as  ominous,  almost  ap- 
palling. He  had  never  seen  the  condition  of  things  in 
Europe  so  remarkable  and  so  menacing  as  at  this  moment. 

There  were  features  of  this  general  preparation  for 
war,  he  declared,  which  must  cause  special  anxiety  to 
the  friends  of  the  British  Empire.  One  was  forced  to 
wonder  where  it  was  going  to  stop,  whether  it  would 
merely  bring  Europe  back  into  a  state  of  barbarism  or 
whether  it  would  cause  a  catastrophe  in  which  the  work- 
ingmen  of  the  world  would  say:  **We  will  have  no  more 
of  this  madness  and  this  foolery  which  is  grinding  us  to 
powder.*' 

This  does  not  sound  very  optimistic.  The  Word  of 
God  predicts  this  very  programme.  A  little  while  longer 
and  the  misguided  Christian  masses,  misguided  by  their 
teachers,  many  of  whom  are  alas!  blind  leaders  of  the 
blind,  will  have  to  lament  and  face  trouble,  disaster  and 
judgment.  "We  look  for  peace,  but  no  good  came; 
and  for  a  time  of  health,  and  behold  trouble!"  (Jerem. 
viii:15).  "For  when  they  shall  say.  Peace  and  safety; 
then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as  travail 
upon  a  woman  with  child;  and  they  shall  not  escape" 
(1  Thess.  v:3). 

Russia's  Threatening  Attitude  Toward  Turkey.  The 
leading  Russian  papers  have  of  late  assumed  a  very  hostile 
attitude.      The  government  organ,  Novoye  Vremya^  made 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  9 

recently  the  significant  statement  "that  Turkey  must  be 
wiped  off  the  map  of  Europe." 

For  nearly  a  year  past  the  belief  has  been  held  among 
usually  well-informed  statesmen  that  Russia  and  England 
have  come  to  an  understanding  hostile  to  Turkey.  They 
have  adopted  the  policy  which  they  agreed  on  in  the 
summer  of  1908  when  King  Edward  met  the  Czar  at 
Reval,  a  policy  that  was  the  immediate  cause  of  the 
Turkish  revolution  in  that  its  interference  in  the  internal 
affairs  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  offended  enough  politico- 
military  sentiment  in  Turkey  to  enable  the  committee  to 
overthrow  Abdul  Hamid. 

That  policy  was  left  in  abeyance  until  time  should  show 
whether  the  Young  Turks  and  their  constitutional  parlia- 
mentary system  could  produce  a  decent  administration. 
The  verdict  of  the  Russian  and  apparently  of  the  British 
Government  is  hostile. 

England  has  completely  reversed  her  old  time  policy 
toward  the  Turkish  Empire.  Toward  the  end  of  his  career 
the  late  Lord  Salisbury  said  that  in  the  Russo-Turkish 
problem  England  had  put  her  money  on  the  wrong  horse. 
Now  she  has  stopped  even  hedging  on  her  stake  and  gone 
over  to  the  Russian  and  the  original  Gladstonian  policy 
that  a  Turk  as  a  political  administrator  must  get  out  of 
Europe  bag  and  baggage.  How  soon,  how  easily  and  by 
what  steps  can  this  end  be  reached? 

Presented  graphically,  the  process  now  being  applied 
resembles  the  upper  and  nether  millstone  at  work  and 
Constantinople  being  ground  between  them.  Russia  in 
the  Macedonian  north  and  England  in  the  Arabian  south 
are  regarded  as  engaged  deliberately  in  destroying  the 


10  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

authority  of  the  Turkish  central  Government  at  Con- 
stantinople. 

The  motive  for  the  present  inflexible  hostility  of  the 
two  Governments  to  the  new  Turkish  regime  is  by  no 
means  based  on  altruistic  sympathy  with  oppressed  Chris- 
tian nationalities  nor  even  on  treaty  rights.  It  springs 
from  the  conviction  held  by  Russia  and  England  that 
Turkey  is  not  to  be  trusted.  Moreover  they  think  that 
she  is  not  to  be  feared. 

Her  sole  strength  in  the  way  of  prestige  is  the  German 
organization  of  her  army,  and  since  the  present  year  began 
this  newly  modelled  army  has  been  subjected  north  and 
south  to  continuous  humiliation.  Many  Russians  go  so 
far  as  to  hold  that  the  present  movement  will  finish  the 
Ottoman  Empire  and  the  Sublime  Porte,  that  the  Turkish 
administrative  system  as  it  exists  at  present  will  be 
relegated  to  Asia  Minor  with  its  capital  at  Bagdad,  and 
that  it  will  rank  approximately  with  Persia  among  the 
political  powers. 

The  student  of  Prophecy  concerning  the  time  of  the  end 
will  discover  in  these  political  manoeuverings  and  the  soon 
coming  collapse  of  the  Turkish  power  in  Europe  a  possible 
preparation  for  that  end.  Russia  must  ere  long  assume 
the  leadership  in  the  Eastern  question. 

War  Preparations.  Universal  peace  and  the  abolish- 
ment of  war  in  this  present  age  is  a  dream,  which  will 
never  be  realized.  There  is  not  a  single  verse  in  the 
Bible  which  promises  a  state  of  peace  for  this  poor  world 
in  this  age.  On  the  other  hand  there  are  numerous 
predictions  of  wars  to  continue  during  this  present 
age  and  at  the  close  nation  is  to  lift  up  sword  against 
nation  and  kingdom  against  kingdom  (Matthew  xxiv:7). 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  11 

Peace  on  earth  will  some  day  be  a  reality.  A  great  dis- 
armament is  bound  to  come.  Such  a  glorious  time  will 
come.  But  the  Prince  of  Peace,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
must  come  back  first  as  the  victorious  King.  He  will 
speak  peace  to  the  nations  and  they  shall  learn  war  no 
more.  This  age  is  almost  ended  and  one  of  the  signs  of 
the  end  are  the  great  war  preparations  going  on  now. 

The  Japanese  Government  is  beginning  to  erect  a 
gigantic  steel  plant  at  Tokio.  The  plant  will  be  fully 
equipped  to  manufacture  guns  of  all  sizes  and  will  make 
armor  plate  of  every  description.  They  are  learning  the 
art  of  war  in  an  astonishing  way  from  "the  Christian 
nations/' 

Our  friend  Mr.  Frank  S.  Weston,  Pastor  of  the  Emanuel 
Baptist  Church  in  Toronto,  sent  us  recently  an  interesting 
communication  on  this  matter,  which  we  print  herewith-. 

What  mean  these  fearful  munitions  which  are  being  prepared  on 
all  sides?     The  Word  which  is  our  lamp  says: 

"Proclaim  ye  this  among  the  nations:  Prepare  war,  wake  up 
the  mighty  men,  let  all  the  men  of  war  draw  near:  let  them  come 
up:  Beat  your  plowshares  into  swords  and  your  pruning  hooks 
into  spears:    let  the  weak  say  I  am  strong"  (Joel  iii:9,  10). 

The  Scriptures  repeatedly  proclaim  gigantic  warlike  prepara- 
tions just  before  the  coming  of  Jesus  Christ  to  reign  over  this  earth 
(Matt.  xxiv:7,  8;   Isa.  xvii:12). 

The  prophetic  declaration  is  that  the  war  spirit  will  prevail  over 
the  whole  earth.  Looking  at  the  present  condition  of  the  world  what 
do  we  see?  For  the  past  ten  years  there  has  been  an  unprecedented 
state  of  unrest.  Things  are  in  a  state  of  tension.  Expectancy  is 
on  all  hearts.  What  a  day  may  bring  forth  no  one  can  tell.  The 
whole  atmosphere  pulsates  with  danger.  No  one  can  be  certain 
for  a  day  that  some  new  issue  will  not  be  raised  which  will  involve 
every  nation  in  Europe  in  a  general  war.  The  present  hour  sees 
the  whole  area  of  the  Old  Roman  Empire  a  vast  camp,  with  27,- 
000,000  soldiers  enrolled  and  ready  for  war.     With  them  is. every 


12  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

deadly  engine,  instrument  and  agent  which  modern  science  and 
human  ingenuity  can  devise  for  the  destruction  of  human  life. 

Europe  has  never  witnessed  such  gigantic  armies  and  such 
colossal  war  preparations  as  at  present  exists. 

Europe  in  1867  could  mobilize  6,958,000  men.  In  1892  the 
aggregate  fighting  force  was  12,563,000. 

At  the  present  moment  "there  are  in  Europe  27,000,000  men 
ready  to  spring  to  arms  in  a  fortnight'*  (G.  O.  Morgan,  M.  P.). 

General  Miles,  of  U.  S.  Army,  says:  *'There  never  was  a  time  in 
the  history  of  the  world  when  such  energy,  ingenuity  and  wealth 
has  been  devoted  to  war  purposes.  The  resources  and  industries 
of  many  peoples  are  largely  devoted  to  maintaining  large  standing 
armies  and  formidable  navies." 

All  the  principal  arsenals  of  Europe  are  working  at  high  speed 
turning  out  orders.  Not  long  since  1  visited  Woolwich  and  saw 
16,000  men  at  work.     A  recent  heading  in  one  of  our  dailies  was 

ALL    EUROPE   IS   TO-DAY   BUYING   BIG   GUNS. 

The  London  Spectator  says:  "All  the  gunsmiths  in  the  world 
are  besieged  with  orders  for  breech-loaders  on  various  principles, 
each  warranted  by  its  inventors  to  slay  more  human  beings  than 
its  rival  weapons.  To  this  we  have  come  after  centuries  of  Chris- 
tianity and  morality  and  international  intercourse  and  commerce." 

To-day  it  costs  $930,000,000  per  year  to  maintain  the  peace  of 
Europe,  and  to  carry  out  the  program  of  naval  construction  de- 
termined will  require  an  outlay  of  $5,000,000,000. 

Scripture  knows  no  millennium  of  evolution,  but  rather  one  of 
revolution.  The  "Stone"  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands 
is  to  smite  the  powers  of  Earth  and  then  establish  a  kingdom  over 
all  the  globe. 

Many  voices  have  spoken  to  the  nations:  "Lay  down  your 
arms."  Christianity,  commerce,  socialism  all  have  commanded,  all 
have  pleaded.  But  the  warriors  have  only  gripped  their  swords 
more  tightly. 

Only  One  can  make  peace — Jesus  the  Christ.  The  earth  is 
awaiting  His  coming  and  rule  (Mic.  iv:3). 

Russia's  Preparation.  Russia  is  making  very  definite 
headway  with  the  building  of  a  powerful  navy  for  the 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  13 

Black  Sea.  In  this  she  is  rapidly  preparing  for  the  final 
part  she  will  have  to  take  in  the  closing  days  of  this 
present  age.  The  conquest  of  Turkey  and  her  provinces, 
Syria  and  Palestine,  is  Russia's  ambition.  Even  so  God's 
Word  predicts. 

A  credit  of  $60,000,000  was  granted  for  the  purpose  b^  the  Duma 
and  all  of  it  and  more  has  been  allocated  this  week.  The  addi- 
tional $10,000,000  necessitated  by  the  irreducible  figures  quoted  by 
the  contractors  will  doubtless  be  granted  when  the  House  meets. 

Two  Dreadnoughts  will  be  laid  down  on  October  1st  (old  style) 
at  the  new  yard  on  the  Black  Sea  prepared  by  a  combination  of 
Russian  metallurgical  companies  under  the  technical  and  managerial 
direction  of  the  British  firm  of  John  Brown  &  Company,  of  Shefiield 
and  Clydebank.  A  third  Dreadnought  will  be  laid  down  a  month 
later  at  the  Nicolaiefi"  yard,  also  on  the  Black  Sea,  and  its  construction 
will  be  under  the  supervision  of  the  British  firm  of  Vickers. 

It  was  first  intended  that  each  Dreadnought  should  be  25,000 
tons  displacement  and  have  24  knots  speed,  but  the  cost  would  have 
been  far  beyond  the  appropriation,  and  it  was  decided  that  they 
should  have  21,500  tons  displacement  and  from  21  to  2134  knots. 
Each  of  these  battleships  will  cost  rather  over  $14,000,000  and  yet 
will  be  about  $50  a  ton  cheaper  than  the  Dreadnoughts  built  at  St. 
Petersburg  for  the  Baltic  fleet.  The  economy  is  due  to  the  cheap- 
ness of  coal  at  the  Black  Sea  as  compared  with  the  north. 

The  remainder  of  the  new  Black  Sea  fleet,  which  is  doubtless 
intended  to  cope  with  Turkey  or  with  the  Powers  that  take  over  the 
reversion  of  Turkey's  strategic  position,  consists  of  nine  torpedo 
cruisers  and  destroyers  and  six  submarines.  Each  torpedo  cruiser 
will  have  1,050  tons  displacement  and  thirty-five  knots  speed  and 
each  will  cost  $1,325,000.  Each  of  the  six  submarines  will  cost 
$800,000. 

Peace  Confidence  is  Shaken.  The  universal  peace 
confidence  received  a  bad  setback  during  the  past  weeks. 

The  German  Emperor  in  a  speech  at  a  banquet  in 
Hamburg  said  recently  that  it  isn't  astonishing  that  the 


14  .  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

upward  movement  of  German  trade  has  inconvenienced 
many  parties.     He  continued: 

"World  competition  in  commerce  is  wholesome  for 
peoples  and  for  States  and  is  necessary  to  stimulate  them 
to  new  achievements.  But  that  competition  is  capable 
of  being  fought  out  peaceably. 

"Protection  to  our  trade  and  navigation  has  been 
provided  by  our  navy,  which  is  developing  powerfully 
and  distinguishing  itself  everywhere  by  its  good  behavior 
and  discipline.  It  represents  the  German  people's  desire 
for  salt  water. 

"I  think  that  I  can  assume  that  Hamburgers  desire 
that  the  navy  be  further  strengthened  so  as  to  insure 
that  nobody  wUl  dispute  that  place  in  the  world  which 
is  our  due." 

At  the  same  time  France  made  strong  declarations 
against  universal  peace.  All  France  endorses  the  policy 
of  resistance  to  Germany.  A  leading  French  official 
said,  "France  may  sometimes  have  yielded  to  the  illu- 
sion of  universal  peace,  but  she  has  now  ceased  to  con- 
sider a  European  conflict  as  an  impossibility."  Even 
the  most  sanguine  peace  promoters  realize  that  the  dreams 
of  peace  millennium  is  far  off". 

The  War  in  the  East.  The  war  in  the  Balkan  Peninsula 
has  been  the  leading  event.  In  a  very  short  time 
the  armies  moving  against  Turkey  were  success- 
ful. City  after  city,  fortress  after  fortress  fell,  till  in 
less  than  four  weeks  Constantinople  heard  the  booming 
guns,  and  the  victorious  warriors  encircled  the  city.  The 
accounts  read  like  some  of  the  wars  recorded  in  the  Word, 
when  God  moved  His  hosts  against  the  enemies  of  Israel. 
But  who  can   describe  the  horrors  of  this  present-day 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  15 

warfare!  The  newest  inventions,  powerful,  rapid-firing 
machine  guns  are  being  now  put  to  test  to  show  how  many 
hundreds  of  lives  they  can  cut  down  in  a  few  minutes. 
How  many  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  have  fallen,  no 
one  can  tell.  And  then  the  thousands  of  wounded  and 
maimed  men!  Oh!  the  horrors  of  war!  One  shudders 
in  thinking  of  the  young  men  and  even  boys,  drafted  to 
go  to  the  front,  and  the  heartaches,  tears,  pain  and  sorrow, 
connected  with  it  all.  Then  there  is  that  which  always 
follows,  famine  and  pestilence. 

As  we  write  this  the  outcome  of  all  is  still  in  the  balances. 
One  thing  seems  to  have  become  certain.  Great  changes 
will  result  and  new  kingdoms  and  alliances  will  be  formed. 
The  crescent  is  going  down;  Turkey  is  being  stripped  of  its 
power.  All  this,  all  enlightened  believers,  who  know  the 
Word,  watch  with  the  intensest  interest,  for  it  is  exactly 
that,  which  may  be  expected.  The  War  in  the  East  is  the 
most  solemn  sign  of  the  times,  the  Lord  has  given  to  His 
people. 

But  what  about  the  other  nations  .^^  What  about  the 
universal  war,  a  conflagration  of  Europe  .^^  We  give  an 
account,  which  was  cabled  from  London  by  a  well  informed 
correspondent  and  which  describes  the  situation. 

The  possibility  and  danger  of  a  greater  war  than  that  between  the 
Balkan  states  and  Turkey  absorbs  public  interest  far  more  than  the 
first  bout  of  diplomacy  between  the  belligerents  outside  of  Con- 
stantinople. 

The  steps  toward  mobilization  which  Austria  and  Russia  are 
taking,  although  but  preliminary  precautions,  have  made  possible 
a  vision  of  the  vast  consequences  which,  as  far  as  Great  Britain  is 
concerned,  are  considered  nothing  less  than  appalling. 

Apparently  the  British  public  has  no  desire  to  sacrifice  lives  and 
money,  paralyze  commerce  and  risk  the  navy  over  the  settlement  of 


16  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

the  Status  of  the  Balkan  peninsula.  Yet  it  is  uneasy.  It  is  ignorant 
of  how  far  Great  Britain's  diplomatic  engagements  with  France  and 
Russia  extend  in  the  direction  of  an  alliance  and  of  how  much  likeli- 
hood there  is  that  the  government  will  be  drawn  into  a  conflict  in 
which  one  or  both  its  partners  in  the  entente  may  be  engaged. 

The  liberal  press  is  unanimous  in  urging  Great  Britain  to  preserve 
neutrality.  The  majority  of  the  conservatives  demand  the  same 
policy.  The  Times,  declaring  that  none  of  the  European  peoples 
want  war,  says:  "Yet  that  is  whither  the  nations  are  blindly  drift- 
ing." It  asks,  "Then  who  makes  war.'*"  and  replies,  "There  is  to 
be  found  in  the  chancelleries  of  Europe  among  the  men  who,  too 
long,  have  played  with  human  lives  as  pawns  in  a  game  of  chess  and 
who  have  become  so  enmeshed  in  formulas  and  the  jargon  of  diplo- 
macy that  they  have  ceased  to  be  conscious  of  the  realities  with 
which  they  trifle." 

The  Pall  Mall  Gazette  almost  speaks  in  a  warlike  voice.  It  declares: 
"England  ought  to  act  firm  with  France  and  Russia  in  refusing  simply 
to  be  swept  aside.  If  the  conference  desired  by  the  British  govern- 
ment is  refused,  we  ought  to  face  the  alternative  and  stand  by  our 
friends." 

The  mobilization  of  the  Austrian  and  Russian  armies  requires 
weeks  to  bring  about  what  Germany  and  France  can  accomplish 
in  days.  In  Russia's  case  this  is  owing  to  the  great  distances  the 
troops  must  travel;  in  Austria's  because  the  units  of  the  army  are 
on  a  peace  footing,  which  is  only  one-third  of  its  war  strength. 
Therefore,  consideration  of  safety  compels  them  to  begin  when 
the  danger  signals  are  remote. 

England,  France  and  Germany  are  playing  a  peace  making  role. 
Their  efforts  are  directed  apparently  toward  keeping  the  powers 
together  in  a  compact  to  refrain  from  taking  up  the  question  which 
the  war  raises  and  defer  their  consideration  until  the  general  con- 
ference. 

The  withdrawal  of  the  Austrian  warships  at  Constantinople  to 
join  the  fleet  is  taken  as  an  unfavorable  sign,  and  the  imminent 
Servian  occupation  of  Durazzo,  on  the  Adriatic  Sea,  tends  further 
to  bring  Austria  and  Servia  toward  the  breaking  point. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  safe  arrival  at  Uskup  of  the  Austrian  consul, 
Prochaska,  who  it  was  feared  had  been  killed,  should  lessen  the 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  17 

tension,  and  the  fact  that  the  Austrian  ambassador  lunched  to-day 
with  the  Russian  emperor  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  relations 
between  these  two  powers  are  still  cordial. 

The  latest  news  received  here  to-night  foreshadows  the  break- 
down of  the  armistice  negotiations,  probably  over  the  demand  of 
the  Bulgarians  for  the  evacuation  of  Adrianople,  to  which  Turkey 
will  not  listen.  The  Turkish  view  is  that  while  the  allies  have  no 
more  reserves  which  they  can  draft  upon,  Turkey  is  drawing  a 
plentiful  supply  of  fresh  troops  from  Asia  and  is  able  to  continue 
the  war  for  another  year.  The  Turkish  military  authorities  assert 
that  Adrianople  can  hold  out  for  another  month  and  that  the 
Tchatalja  lines  are  impregnable.  Hence  Turkey's  position  is  not 
desperate  enough  to  warrant   her   accepting   humiliating  terms. 

What  may  take  place  no  one  knows.  The  situation 
seems  desperate.  What  would  result  if  the  great  nations 
would  go  to  war  is  beyond  description. 

The  Balkan  Situation.  Significant  developments  have 
taken  place  in  the  Balkan  States.  Montenegro,  Servia, 
Bulgaria  and  Greece  are  arising  against  Turkey  and 
these  States  seem  to  be  determined  to  make  an  end  of 
the  wicked  empire  and  drive  the  Turk  out  of  Europe. 
Every  student  of  modern  history  dating  back  fifty  years 
knows  the  horrible  record  of  Turkey.  It  is  a  record,  a 
crime,  cold-blooded  butcheries  of  thousands  of  innocent 
human  beings.  These  atrocities  are  of  such  a  nature, 
especially  those  committed  upon  women,  young  girls 
and  children,  that  they  cannot  be  mentioned  in  print. 
Within  our  lifetime  these  satanic  outrages  have  taken 
place  and  the  so-called  ''Concert  of  Europe,"  the  "Chris- 
tian" (!)  nations  have  stood  by  and  not  alone  refused  to 
interfere,  but  even  helped  that  hell-born  empire  to 
continue   in   them.     With   Italy's   attack   upon   Turkey 


18  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

the  death-knell  of  Turkey  seems  to  have  been  sounded. 
Thousands  of  Greeks,  Bulgars  and  others  are  returning 
from  our  shores  to  their  home  lands  to  engage  in  the 
coming  warfare,  which  they  term  a  holy  war.  The 
enthusiasm  and  self-sacrifice  reminds  one  of  the  crusades. 
On  account  of  this  ominous  situation  all  Europe  stands 
aghast.  The  great  nations  fear  now  a  universal  conflagra- 
tion, and  the  question  with  them  seems  to  be  chiefly 
who  is  to  come  out  ahead  of  the  game.  Germany's 
friendship  with  Turkey  is  well  known.  In  the  highest 
European  diplomatic  circles  the  opinion  prevails  that 
Germany  plays  a  tremendous  game  and  has  for  her  chief 
object  the  absolute  control  of  Europe.  One  of  the  most 
clever  students  of  the  situation  writes  from  Berlin  that  all 
Europe  has  been  plunged  into  the  darkest  pessimism 
bordering  on  despair.  Is  this  going  to  be  the  first  step 
towards  a  changed  map  of  Europe.^  Will  Turkey  at  last 
fall?  What  is  Russia  going  to  do?  What  will  be  the 
result  of  all  these  upheavals?  Will  the  predicted  revival 
of  the  Roman  Empire  with  its  ruling  little  horn  (Daniel 
vii)  be  the  outcome?  All  these  are  interesting  questions. 
But  we  are  not  called  upon  to  prophesy.  Only  God 
knows  what  the  near  future  will  bring.  But  surely  this 
much  we  can  say:  **It  will  be  foul  weather  for  the  sky 
is  red  and  lowering"  (Matthew  xvi:l-3).  A  friend 
writes  us:  "The  news  has  come  of  the  proposed  ulti- 
matum by  the  Balkan  States  to  Turkey.  If  so  the  match 
is  about  to  be  applied  to  the  powder  magazine.  It  seems 
inevitable  that  one  at  least  of  the  great  powers  will  be 
drawn  into  the  conflict;  and  if  one,  then  all.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Lord's  hour  may  not  have  arrived  as  yet. 
It  may  be  in  His  plan  to  restrain  the  violence  of  man  for 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  19 

yet  a  little  season.  However  that  may  be,  it  becomes 
increasingly  apparent  that  the  end  is  near  and  hastens 
greatly.  "Even  so,  come.  Lord  Jesus."  With  this  we 
agree  fully.  May  all  that  wait  for  His  coming  turn  more 
than  ever  to  the  Word  of  Prophecy,  especially  to  Daniel 
and  Revelation.  "Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they 
that  hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and  keep  those 
things  which  are  written  herein;  for  the  time  is  at  hand" 
(Rev.  i:3). 

Russia's  Attitude.  The  Russian  Empire  has  been  very 
much  in  the  foreground  of  late.  The  treaty  of  1832  was 
abolished  by  the  U.  S.  Senate.  This  was  mostly  brought 
about  by  Jewish  influences.  In  connection  with  this 
incident  the  Russian  bear  has  shown  its  teeth.  The 
hatred  against  the  Jewish  race  is  not  on  the  wane  in  the 
great  northern  empire.  Antisemitism  is  as  strong  as 
ever  and  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  when  other  fierce 
outbreaks  against  the  Jews  will  occur.  The  Word  of 
God  speaks  repeatedly  of  a  great  Northern  power,  of  the 
time  of  the  end,  the  enemy  of  Israel.  That  power  is 
Russia. 

Still  more  significant  is  Russia's  abominable  behavior 
against  Persia.  During  the  past  three  or  four  years 
Russia's  aim  has  been  to  extend  her  dominion  southward 
and  find  an  outlet  into  the  Indian  Ocean.  Steadily  she 
has  laid  her  plans  to  annex  Persia.  The  success  of  this 
movement  is  only  a  question  of  time  as  Russia's  troops 
are  already  in  possession  of  Persian  territory.  Recently 
they  massacred  hundreds  of  innocent  women  and  children. 
In  Ezekiel  xxxviii  is  found  an  unfulfilled  prophecy.  All 
students  of  the  prophetic  Word  are  agreed  that  Gog  and 
Magog,  the  chief  prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech  and  Tubal 


20  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

(xxxixil)  is  Russia.  Russia  during  the  end  of  the  age 
will  head  a  great  confederacy  of  nations  to  invade  Israel's 
land  once  more.  In  the  list  of  nations  which  are  joined 
to  Gog  and  Magog,  Persia  is  mentioned  (verse  5).  Russia 
by  her  fierce  hatred  of  the  Jews  and  forward  movement 
in  Central  Asia  is  preparing  for  her  destiny  and  final 
complete  overthrow. 

Germany's  National  Debt.  In  thirty-three  years 
Germany's  national  debt  has  swelled  from  twenty  million 
dollars  to  one  billion,  one  hundred  million  dollars — from 
twenty  million  dollars  to  eleven  hundred  million.  In 
1871,  Germany  had  forty-one  million  inhabitants  and 
in  1910  sixty-four  million,  an  increase  not  quite  sixty-four 
per  cent.  The  expenditure  for  armament,  responsible  for 
the  enormous  debt,  has  more  than  doubled.  If  this 
continues,  as  it  evidently  must,  a  terrible  condition  will 
soon  be  reached.     It  spells  revolution  and  lawlessness. 

The  Horrors  of  the  Eastern  War.  The  details  of  the 
wholesale  massacres  of  the  Christian  population  in  parts 
of  the  Balkan  peninsula,  are  just  coming  to  light.  Wicked 
Turkey  is  keeping  up  her  bloody  record,  and  the  end  is  not 
yet.  We  quote  from  a  report  sent  lately  by  an  army 
officer  stationed  at  Adrianople.  The  report  was  made 
to  the  President  of  the  Alliance  Universelle, 

"Human  speech  cannot  describe  the  agony  one's  soul  feels  on 
looking  back  over  the  seven  weeks  of  massacre  and  mutual  exter- 
mination in  which  30,000  were  butchered  here. 

"Like  lightning  from  a  clear  sky  came  the  sudden  announcement 
of  the  Balkan  Alliance  and  before  the  Turk  had  time  to  recover  from 
the  shock  given  him  the  war  was  declared. 

"The  gates  of  armories  and  barracks  were  swung  wide  open.  At 
the  barracks  at  the  Zljiler  Mahallelsy  I  heard  the  commanding  officer 
give  orders  to  kill  all  Christians. 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  21 

"At  last  that  terrible  Friday  night  came.  It  was  dusk.  As  I 
stood  at  the  window  at  the  Konah  of  Kendeli  Bey  I  saw  several 
imans  (Mohammedan  priests)  on  the  minaret.  I  was  suddenly 
startled  by  the  sharp  rattle  of  a  drum,  which  beckoned  the  setting 
of  the  first  watch  before  midnight.  A  few  minutes  had  elapsed 
when  the  tower  became  filled  with  men  moving  excitedly. 

"The  great  bell  of  the  Greek  orthodox  church  began  to  toll,  fol- 
lowed by  the  bells  of  the  other  Christian  churches. 

"Lights  appeared  everywhere,  windows  were  thrown  up,  the 
streets  were  crowded  with  men,  women  and  children,  their  hands 
filled  with  hastily  snatched  valuables,  making  toward  different 
churches  to  find  refuge. 

"Women  pressing  their  babies  to  their  breasts  rushed  to  the  win- 
dows that  overhung  the  streets,  already  inundated  with  human 
blood. 

"At  the  tepah,  near  the  well,  at  the  back  of  the  Greek  Bishop's 
diocese,  I  met  a  crowd  of  some  fifty  girls,  who,  frenzied  with  fear, 
turned  and  fled.  In  an  instant  they  were  surrounded  by  furious 
Moslems  and  butchered,  and  the  heartrending  shrieks  of  innocent 
children  added  to  the  already  terrible  scene.     All  was  chaos. 

"In  half  an  hour  the  outlying  city  was  completely  devastated, 
Meantime  the  Moslems  of  Adrianople,  re-enforced  by  the  outsiders, 
took  up  their  fiendish  work.  Toward  midnight  the  city  was  hell. 
The  roars  of  a  million  tigers  could  not  terrify  one  as  the  lamentations 
and  death  shrieks  of  the  unfortunate  thousands.  The  city  was  set 
on  fire  in  many  sections  and  thousands  were  enveloped  in  the  flames. 

"In  the  morning  the  streets  were  strewn  with  dead.  Thousands 
of  them  were  cast  in  the  river  and  have  been  washed  ashore  three 
miles  below. 

This  is  horrible  reading.  How  little  we,  who  are  living 
in  a  land  of  peace  and  plenty,  think  of  these  unfortunate 
thousands!  Most  of  us  give  it  just  a  passing  thought. 
We  should  pray  daily  for  these  suffering  ones,  no  doubt 
many  of  them  true  children  of  God.  And  oh!  Lord,  how 
long!  how  long!  It  seems  as  if  the  end  with  its  final 
struggles,  its  judgments  and  troubles,  cannot  be  far  off. 


22  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Is  the  War  to  be  Ended?  The  representatives  of 
Turkey  with  those  of  Bulgaria,  Montenegro,  Servia,  and 
Greece  are  engaged  in  London  with  peace  negotiations. 
Several  times  it  seemed  as  if  the  conference  would  suddenly 
end  and  hostilities  begin  again.  One  would  almost  wish 
that  the  victorious  allies  would  make  a  clean  sweep  and 
settle  the  Turkish  question  once  for  all,  by  driving  the 
Turk  out  of  Europe.  The  peace  demands  are  severe  and 
so  far  the  victors  have  yielded  but  little.  Turkey  itself 
knows  that  the  complete  dissolution  of  the  Ottoman 
Empire,  the  once  powerful  domain  of  the  Sultan,  is  at 
hand.  The  Turkish  press  has  been  optimistic.  One  of 
the  leading  papers  in  Constantinople  made  the  following 
remarks: 

"If  Constantinople  and  its  environs  alone  are  left  to  us,  we  can  no 
longer  defend  them.  What  remains  will  in  a  few  years  slip  out  of  our 
hands.     .     ,     . 

"After  this  Bulgaria  and  Servia  will  possess  navies.  Greece  will 
strengthen  and  increase  her  navy,  and  the  Ottoman  State  will  not 
only  be  unable  to  defend  Constantinople  and  its  environs,  but  it 
will  be  impossible  to  defend  the  coast  of  Anatolia  on  the  Mediter- 
ranean and  the  Black  Sea.  We  must  hereafter  have  a  navy  equal 
to  that  of  France  in  order  to  be  able  to  defend  our  coast  lines  against 
two  rivals.     Is  this  possible.?" 

What  the  immediate  outcome  of  all  will  be  only  our 
God  knows.  But  as  far  as  human  vision  goes  the  end  of 
Turkey  is  in  sight.  The  blow  which  the  so-called  "sick 
man  of  Europe"  has  received  will  finish  him.  It  is 
interesting  to  see  how  the  "Christian  nations"  stand  by 
and  watch  jealously  all  that  is  being  done  by  the  victorious 
Balkan  States.  Constantinople  is  the  coveted  goal  by 
all  of  them. 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  23 

This  war  in  the  East,  the  complete  breakdown  of  the 
Turkish  Empire,  remains  the  most  significant  sign  of  the 
times.  We  should  not  at  all  be  surprised  if  the  "Jewish 
Question"  and  Zionism  will  soon  loom  up  on  the  horizon 
of  these  present  day  events. 

The  Chaos  in  the  Balkans.  The  upheavals  in  the 
Balkan  States  have  been  followed  by  all  our  readers  in 
the  newspaper  reports.  The  allies  have  gone  to  war 
with  each  other.  Bloody  battles  have  been  fought 
amongst  themselves.  Greece  and  Servia  are  evidently 
successful  and  Bulgaria  has  suffered  severe  reverses. 
Roumania  has  also  gone  into  the  game  and  invaded 
Bulgaria.  Austria  and  Russia  stand  behind  it  all,  while 
the  other  great  Powers  look  on.  The  outcome  of  all 
must  now  be  awaited.  A  forecast  of  possible  events  is 
impossible.      Greed  for  possession  is  responsible  for  it  all. 

Uneasy  Europe.  Old  Europe  feels  uneasy.  Every 
Kingdom  and  Empire  is  filled  with  fear  and  trembling. 
How  will  it  end?  That  is  the  question  which  statesmen 
ask  and  the  uncertainty  is  depressing  every  industry. 
Some  nations,  like  Germany,  are  facing  bankruptcy. 
The  people  continue  to  hoard  their  silver  and  their  gold. 
Politicians  and  the  masses  of  the  people  feel  instinctively 
that  an  awful  crisis  is  coming  upon  the  whole  world.  The 
tension  in  the  United  States  is  even  more  marked.  Dis- 
trust prevails.  A  silent  panic  is  on.  Even  clever  men 
seem  to  be  at  their  wit's  end. 

Is  not  all  this  a  foretaste  of  that  which  is  coming?* 
"Upon  the  earth  distress  of  nations  with  perplexity;  the 
sea  and  the  waves  roaring;  men's  hearts  failing  them  for 
fear,  and  for  looking  after  those  things  which  are  coming 


24  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

on  the  earth;  for  the  powers  of  heaven  shall  be  shaken" 
(Luke  xxi:25-26). 

The  Human  Slaughter-House.  Such  is  the  title  of  a 
small  volume  which  appeared  recently  in  Germany  by  a 
hitherto  unknown  writer.  In  three  months  over  100,000 
copies  were  sold.  It  has  created  a  great  sensation  in 
Europe.  The  volume  contains  a  horrible  description  of 
the  battlefields  of  the  future.  Mechanical  invention  has 
changed  **the  field  of  honor"  into  a  "human  slaughter- 
house." According  to  this  realistic  description  of  the 
next  war,  machine  guns  will  mow  dow^n  whole  regiments 
and  dynamite  dropped  from  aeroplanes  during  the  night 
will  wipe  out  human  lives  by  the  thousands.  We  quote  a 
paragraph:  "Another  thing  we  know  is,  that  forty  years 
ago,  in  spite  of  inferior  guns  and  rifles,  over  a  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  dead  stayed  behind  on  the  field  of 
honor  (The  Franco-Prussian  war).  What  percentage  of 
the  living  will  modern  warfare  claim. ^  Armies  are  being 
marshalled  vaster  than  the  world  has  ever  seen.  Germany 
alone  can  put  six  million  soldiers  in  the  field;  France  as 
many.  Then  the  war  of  1870-71  was  nothing  more  than 
a  long-drawn  affair  of  outposts!  My  brain  reels  when  I 
try  to  visualize  these  masses — starting  to  march  against 
one  another;  I  seem  to  choke  for  breath."  We  do  not 
know  if  the  author  knows  anything  of  what  the  Bible 
predicts  concerning  the  end  of  the  age.  Such  terrible 
scenes  as  he  describes  will  some  day  be  witnessed  on  this 
earth.  A  little  prelude  was  the  awful  butcheries  of  the 
Balkan  war.  The  coming  rider  of  judgment  upon  the 
red  horse  (Rev.  vi:4)  will  take  peace  from  the  earth  "that 
they  should  kill  one  another." 

The  Balkan  War.     A  peace  treaty  between  Bulgaria  and 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  25 

her  former  allies  was  signed  during  August,  after  which 
a  big  religious  ceremony  took  place  in  the  Cathedral  of 
Bucharest.  But  will  this  peace  last?  Before  we  can 
publish  these  notes  on  current  events,  new  complications 
may  have  arisen  and  another  war  may  be  going  on.  We 
hope  not.  The  Balkan  war  has  been  one  of  the  most 
disastrous  in  the  history  of  this  blood-trenched  earth. 

A  correspondent  of  the  Corriere  delta  Sera,  now  in  Macedonia,  who 
has  visited  all  the  chief  centers  of  the  Balkan  war,  has  given  an 
approximate  table  of  the  losses  in  men  and  money  up  to  the  present 
of  the  combatant  nations.  For  the  first  war  his  estimate  is  as 
follows : 

Bulgaria— 350,000  soldiers  mobilized;   80,000  dead;  $300,000,000. 

Servia— 250,000  soldiers;    30,000  dead;    $160,000,000. 

Greece— 10,000  dead  out  of  150,000;   $70,000,000. 

Montenegro— 8,000  dead  out  of  30,000;    $4,000,000.  ^ 

Turkey— 450,000;    100,000  dead;    $400,000,000. 

For  the  second  war  his  figures  are: 

Bulgaria— 60,000  dead;   $180,000,000. 

Servia— 40,000;   $100,000,000. 

Greece— 30,000;   $50,000,000. 

When  the  number  of  persons  massacred  and  the  victims  of  the 
cholera  epidemics  are  added  to  the  totals  it  is  reckoned  that  nearly 
400,000  must  have  perished.  The  monetary  loss  all  told  is  said  to  be 
$1,360,000,000.  The  Boer  war  cost  England  20,000  dead  and 
$1,000,000,000. 

It  remains  now  to  be  seen  what  will  develop  out  of  all 
this  chaos. 

Balkan  Diplomacy.  The  following  paragraph  is  taken 
from  the  Nezv  Statesman  (London,  Eng.)  and  gives  a 
little  insight  into  the  diplomatic  manoeuvers  of  the  Balkan 
situation.  Russia,  as  we  have  often  predicted,  is  coming 
out  ahead  of  the  game.  She  also  requested  Germany  to 
join  Russia  to  force  Turkey  to  abandon  her  invasion  of 


^6  CURRENT    EVENtS. 

the  conquered  territory.     Germany  refused.     The    New 
Statesman  says: 

And  though  Servia  and  Greece  have  succeeded  in  joining  their 
frontiers,  let  no  one  imagine  that  this  will  necessarily  make  them 
permanent  friends.  Servia  will  continue  to  desire  a  direct  outlet 
to  the  sea  under  her  own  control.  If  she  becomes  as  strong  as  she 
hopes  in  the  Vardar  valley,  she  will  begin  to  think  more  and  more 
of  getting  Salonica  for  herself  in  the  end. 

Behind  all  this  prospect  of  unrest  in  the  Balkans  themselves,  there 
is  the  far  greater  question  of  the  effect  of  the  new  conditions  upon  the 
relations  of  Austria  and  Russia.  Thanks  mainly  to  M.  Hartwig,  the 
Czar's  minister  at  Belgrade,  Russia,  without  moving  a  regiment, 
has  secured  a  diplomatic  triumph  which  more  than  wipes  out  all 
the  effect  of  Count  Aehrenthal's  success  in  1909.  Roumania, 
Bulgaria  and  Servia  have  all  been  brought  more  definitely  under 
her  influence.  She  holds  an  incomparably  stronger  position  towards 
the  Balkans  than  at  any  time  since  1878. 

With  Austria  it  is  lamentably  different.  By  a  policy  of  Machiavel- 
lianism and  muddle  in  the  last  few  months  she  has  committed  every 
possible  error.  She  has  been  equally  useless  to  Bulgaria  and  Rou- 
mania.  The  results  of  her  own  manoeuvers  have  ended  in  that 
large  aggrandisement  of  Servia  which  it  was  the  chief  aim  of  Vienna 
to  prevent.  Serbs  and  Roumanians  alike  now  look  to  the  creation 
of  the  Greater  Servia  and  the  Greater  Roumania  by  the  disintegra- 
tion of  the  Dual  monarchy.  Its  present  shape  is  untenable.  The 
difficulties  of  reconstruction  are  enormously  increased. 

Yet  nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  the  downfall  of  Austria  in 
destroying  the  existing  equilibrium  of  Europe  would  totally  change  a 
good  deal  in  the  present  grouping  of  the  powers.  The  war  which 
ought  never  to  have  been  begun  will  not  now  be  closed  without  some 
worse  consequences  than  are  yet  generally  discussed. 

After  the  coming  pause  of  exhaustion  in  the  Balkans  anything  may 
happen  in  all  the  cast  of  Europe  beyond  the  German  frontier.  After 
the  elimination  of  the  Turk  the  situation  of  instability  is  wider  and 
more  dangerous  than  before. 

Little  Holland  Falling  in  Line.  The  Netherlands 
Defence   Commission,   now   sitting   at  The   Hague,   has 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  27 

recommended  that  Holland  should  build  nine  dread- 
noughts of  21,000  tons  each,  as  well  as  several  cruisers, 
destroyers  and  submarines,  for  service  in  the  waters  of 
the  Dutch  East  Indies.  The  full  scheme  is  not  to  be 
completed  for  thirty-five  years. 

The  plan  is  due  to  the  rise  of  Japan  and  the  possibility 
that  Java,  Sumatra  and  Dutch  Borneo  may  be  objects 
of  Japanese  ambition.  The  Dutch,  like  all  far-seeing 
people  here  or  in  the  Dominion  and  the  United  States, 
realize  that  every  Power  which  has  possessions  in  the 
Pacific  will  need  increased  naval  armaments  in  the  future. 

Thus  little  Holland  falls  in  line  with  the  other  great 
nations  to  prepare  for  war.  The  Hague  is  the  place 
where  the  "Peace  Court"  holds  forth  and  the  Peace 
palace  is  situated,  of  which  so  much  has  been  expected. 
And  now  they  recommend  from  that  very  place  the 
building  of  warships.     What  mockery! 

The  Austrian  Tragedy.  The  assassination  of  the  heir 
to  the  Austrian  throne  and  his  wife  adds  two  more  names 
to  the  list  of  murdered  rulers.  Servia  seems  to  have  been 
the  instigator  of  this  terrible  crime  and  behind  Servia  is 
seen  the  hand  of  Russia.  This  is  the  prevailing  opinion 
among  statesmen  in  Europe.  Russia  aims  at  a  great  Pan- 
Slavic  confederacy.  She  will  succeed  and  form  yet  a  still 
vaster  empire,  amalgamating  the  slavic  races.  The  Slavs 
are  nearly  half  the  population  of  the  Austrian  empire, 
numbering  24,388,413,  by  the  latest  estimate,  out  of  a 
total  population  of  51,356,465.  The  annexation  by 
Austria  of  Bosnia-Herzegovina  has  greatly  stirred  the 
Slavic  world.  With  the  Albanian  disorders,  the  re- 
organization of  the  Turkish  army,  Turkey  aiming  at  war 
with  Greece,  Russia  and  Servia  conspiring  against  Aus- 


28  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

tria,  the  unsettled  Eastern  question  is  bound  to  come 
into  prominence  again. 

The  Pope^s  Peace  Message.  Efforts  to  secure  universal 
peace,  and  to  produce  a  millennium,  apart  from  the  Return 
of  our  Lord  to  this  earth,  continue  in  many  directions.  Of 
late  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  has  taken  hold.  The 
Pope  has  issued  an  allocution  which  has  been  sent  to 
23,000  priests  in  the  United  States.  Rome  is  falling  in 
line  with  "Protestants"  in  the  different  reform  move- 
ments, like  Prohibition,  the  abolishment  of  the  social 
evil  and  universal  peace. 

The  Church  Peace  Union,  founded  in  February  by  Andrew  Car- 
negie with  an  endowment  of  $2,000,000,  will  begin  its  educational 
activities  in  behalf  of  disarmament  and  arbitration  among  the 
clergy  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  here  by  sending  to  each  of 
the  23,000  priests  of  the  United  States  and  Canada  a  copy  of  the 
allocution  of  Pope  Pius. 

The  allocution,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important  of  papal 
documents,  was  regarded  in  peace  circles  as  remarkable  for  its 
strong  expressions  on  the  subject  of  international  peace.  The 
Pope's  references  to  "men  of  distinction  and  force  planning  schemes 
for  preventing  the  calamities  of  war,  and  for  insuring  the  blessings 
of  peace"  were  the  subject  of  speculation  in  Rome.  It  was  sug- 
gested at  the  time  that  President  Wilson  and  Secretary  Bryan 
might  have  been  in  mind. 

The  plan  to  distribute  the  allocution  to  priests  was  worked  out 
by  Dr.  Frederick  Lynch,  Secretary  of  the  Carnegie  Union,  and 
Dr.  James  J.  Walsh,  the  well-known  physician  and  writer  on  Catholic 
subjects. 

"This  is  a  project  that  is  bound  to  be  appreciated  by  our  clergy,'* 
said  Dr.  Walsh  yesterday.  "Such  allocutions  are  delivered  in 
secret,  but  are  usually  published  for  the  purpose  of  making  clear 
the  attitude  of  the  Holy  See  on  a  given  question.  They  appear  in 
the  *Acta  Sanctae  Sedis,'  and  the  higher  dignitaries  of  the  church 
get  copies,  but  as  a  rule  the  text  of  the  allocutions  are  not  sent  out 
to  the  clergy  generally.     It  will  help  along  the  peace  idea  to  have  the 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  29 

parish  priest  in  every  part  of  the  country  have  the  papal  utterances 
on  the  question,  and  I  have  suggested  that  we  send  out  earlier 
papal  documents  on  the  subject  of  arbitration." 

This  sounds  very  nice.  There  is  no  doubt  Rome  joins 
hands  vi^ith  Protestants  for  a  specific  purpose  and  unpro- 
testing  Protestantism  dreaming  of  a  "united  Christendom" 
sees  in  all  this  a  hopeful  sign  of  a  glorious  future  and  follows 
willingly  her,  whom  God's  holy  Word  brands  ''the  mother 
of  harlots  and  of  the  abominations  of  the  eai;th"  (Rev. 
xvii:5).  The  sugar-coated  pill  is  easily  swallowed.  Rome 
is  double-faced.  She  advocates  peace  and  prosecutes 
those  who  dare  to  speak  out  against  her  abominations. 
She  joins  reform-movements  to  gain  her  sinister  end  and 
permits  certain  evils  in  her  midst.  Universal  peace  .^  Yes, 
a  mock-peace,  a  counterfeit  peace  may  come,  but  it  will 
not  last  long.  It  is  coming  to  blind  still  more  the  eyes  of 
them  who  believe  not.  The  next  paragraph  is  even  more 
significant. 

The  Trend  Toward  a  Single  World  Government.  Dif- 
ferent propositions  have  been  made  to  establish  somewhere 
a  great  world-center  and  to  have  the  nations  governed 
through  a  central  government.  Many  statesmen  advo- 
cate such  a  plan.  Different  monarchs  of  Europe  have 
declared  that  their  rule  *as  kings  may  terminate  soon. 
The  King  of  Italy  made  recently  such  a  statement.  Surely 
thrones  are  tottering  and  the  rule  by  the  people  is  rising. 

The  latest  plan  advocated  for  bringing  all  the  world 
under  one  government  is  the  "world-navy."  The  sug- 
gested scheme  is  as  follows: 

A  united  navy  supplied  by  the  great  powers  named — the  United 
States,  Japan,  Italy,  Austria,  France,  Great  Britain,  Germany  and 
Russia — would  mean,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  a  movement  in 


30  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

the  direction  of  a  World  Navy,  because  the  list  would  include  big 
war  vessels  enough  to  make  a  World  Navy  m  numbers  and  strength. 
A  World  Navy  would  be  logically  and  almost  certainly  followed 
by  a  World  Army  of  corresponding  strength,  including  the  same 
nations,  or  some  of  them,  with  perhaps  others  possessing  smaller 
armies — all  to  be  assembled,  through  the  initiative  and  by  the 
consent  of  the  nations  involved,  each  militant  branch  under  a  single 
commander,  and  to  be  moved,  whenever  necessary,  to  achieve  and 
maintain  the  peace  of  the  world  through  a  common  impulse,  under 
a  united  agreement  first  reached  by  a  Parliament  of  the  Nations. 

A  World  Navy  and  a  World  Army  would  necessarily  mean  a 
World  Government  for  the  creation,  assembling,  support,  manage- 
ment and  control  of  these  combined  militant  forces. 

A  World  Government,  in  order  to  be  practical,  complete,  com* 
prehensive,  effective  and  lasting,  would  need  to  be  invested  with  all 
and  every  attribute  of  a  single,  united,  consolidated,  supreme  govern- 
ing body,  adequate  to  the  overmastering  requirements  of  the  world 
in  all  large  and  essential  particulars.  It  would  necessarily  consist 
of  the  component  and  harmonious  branches  of  a  government  of  the 
people,  for  the  people  and  by  the  people  of  the  different  nations  of 
the  earth — all  of  them,  great  and  small,  if  possible. 

Such  a  government  would,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  have  to 
take  on  the  character  and  consist  of  the  features,  the  branches,  the 
departments  and  the  subdivisions  essential  to  the  securing  of  justice, 
efficiency,  harmony  in  control,  and  permanency.  Such  a  govern- 
ment would  require,  first  of  all,  in  its  composition,  the  legislative, 
executive  and  judicial  functions,  each  bearing  Its  proper  relation 
to  the  other,  and  all  so  welded  and  bound  together  as  to  constitute 
a  universal  governmental  device  of  world-wide  reach  and  solidarity. 

The  document  from  which  we  quote  these  paragraphs 
declares  also  that  this  world-government,  the  world-army 
and  world-navy  v/ould  look  after  and  guarantee  the 
peace  of  the  world,  to  fight  all  its  battles  ''if  any  should 
remain  to  be  fought."     Then  follow  other  suggestions. 

The  establishment  of  a  World  Government  would  of  course 
involve  the  selection,  establishment  and  possession  of  a  World 
Capital;  the  creation  of  the  necessary  buildings  and  appliances  for 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  31 

the  purpose;  the  creation  of  all  essential  civil  offices;  the  election, 
selection  or  appointment  of  all  necessary  civil,  judicial  and  other 
officers,  agents  and  employees;  and,  in  brief,  the  setting  up  and 
setting  in  motion  of  the  entire  machinery  of  a  government  adequate 
for  the  control  of  the  affairs  of  the  world,  not  its  international  and 
world-wide  affairs,  not  of  the  national  or  internal  affairs  of  the 
several  countries. 

There  would,  of  necessity,  be  a  striking  World  Flag,  bearing  upon 
its  resplendent  folds  the  national  insignia  of  each  and  every  country 
composing  the  alliance. 

And  last  but  not  least  of  all,  there  would  be  a  World  Harbor  or 
harbors-^adequate  ports  of  entry,  amply  guarded  and  protected 
by  the  World  Navy. 

All  these  things  are  possible,  and  half  a  dozen  of  the  greater 
nations  of  the  world  can  set  in  motion  and  establish  permanently 
this  Plan  for  Ending  Wars — this  Project  of  Universal  Peace. 

To  the  Intelligent  Christian,  who  has  a  clear  insight  in 
the  revealed  purposes  of  God,  who  "thinks  God's 
thoughts"  concerning  the  end  of  this  age,  this  trend 
towards  a  great  world-government  is  of  intense  interest. 
The  Word  of  God  predicts  a  final  Babylon,  the  concen- 
tration of  a  Godless  civilization  in  one  great  world  alliance. 
It  also  predicts  the  coming  battle  of  Armageddon.  When 
the  Lord  Jesus  comes  out  of  heaven  to  take  possession 
of  this  earth  and  to  become  its  king,  the  kings  of  the  earth 
and  of  the  whole  world  are  together,  they  form  a  world- 
army  and  world-navy;  they  are  gathered  to  the  battle 
of  the  great  day.  The  gathering  place  will  be  Armaged- 
don (Rev.  xvi:  14-16).  The  kings  of  the  earth  and  their 
armies  make  actually  war  against  the  Lord  (Rev.  xix:19). 
We  are  witnessing  the  planning  for  this  predicted  end. 
Plans  are  on  foot  to  produce  the  final  Babylon.  What  a 
solemn  indication  that  the  Lord  is  on  His  way  for  His 
people! 


32  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Russians  strength  and  Forward  Movement.    Ever  since 

the  Russo-Japanese  war,  the  great  northern  empire  has 
been  gaining  in  strength.  Persia  is  gradually  coming  un- 
der Russian  control,  while  throughout  Central  Asia  from 
the  Caspian  Sea  to  the  Gulf  of  Persia  the  influence  and  ex- 
pansion of  Russia  becomes  more  pronounced.  But  in  all 
probability  the  next  war  which  Russia  will  undertake  will 
be  in  the  Far  East.  Asia  and  Russia  are  arming,  and 
according  to  a  leading  military  authority  of  Germany, 
General  von  der  Boeck,  a  conflict  between  Japan  and 
Russia  is  unavoidable.  The  general  gives  in  a  German 
magazine  the  following  information: 

The  troops  which  Russia  possessed  in  the  Far  East  at  the  close 
of  the  war,  he  says,  have  been  largely  strengthened,  so  that  at  the 
present  time  they  cannot  be  short  of  a  peace  footing  of  200,000 
men,  a  force  which  if  war  should  break  out  could  easily  and  speedily 
be  raised  to  300,000  without  drawing  a  single  soldier  from  European 
Russia. 

Another  important  fact  noted  by  Gen.  von  der  Boeck  is  the 
strengthening  of  the  defences  of  Vladivostok,  which  has  been  raised 
to  the  rank  of  a  first  class  fortress.  But  the  weightiest  item  in  the 
development  of  Russian  power  in  the  Far  East,  according  to  this 
writer,   will   be  the  decision  to  build  the  Amur  railway. 

The  third  Duma,  in  view  of  the  importance  of  this  railway,  has 
unhesitatingly  devoted  the  necessary  funds.  The  Russian  Govern- 
ment's decision  to  double  the  track  of  the  Siberian  line  is  a  step 
the  gravity  of  which  cannot  be  overrated. 

Japan,  freed  for  the  present  from  maritime  cares,  is  similarly 
engaged  in  strengthening  her  position  on  land.  The  thirteen  divi- 
sions of  her  army  when  war  broke  out  have  been  raised  to  nineteen, 
so  that  at  the  present  moment  her  army  on  a  war  footing  would 
consist  of  550,000  men  and  120,000  horses.  And  as  there  is  on 
lack  of  men  in  the  Mikado's  empire  General  von  der  Boeck  believes 
that  were  war  now  to  be  declared  a  million  Japanese  soldiers  could 
take  the  field  within  a  few  weeks. 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  33 

A  most  important  factor  in  the  altering  circumstances  is  the 
renaissance  of  the  Chinese  military  power.  Japanese  instructors 
swarm  in  China,  and  are  swiftly  building  up  a  mighty  military 
engine  as  their  ally. 

The  original  plan  of  the  Chinese  Government  was  to  form  thirty- 
six  divisions,  each  of  10,000  men,  and  to  have  this  entire  force 
ready  to  take  the  field  force  the  year  1922,  but  it  is  perfectly 
evident  from  the  reports  which  have  filtered  through  to  Europe 
that  this  huge  army  will  be  ready  by  1912,  or  ten  years  earlier  than 
was  originally  intended. 

Russia  will  no  doubt  be  well  prepared  in  a  few  years  to 
undertake  the  awful  struggle.  She  may  come  out  of  it 
victoriously  for  another  destiny  is  marked  out  for  a  great 
northern  power  in  the  end  of  this  age.  According  to  the 
Word  of  God,  when  the  Jews  have  been  partially  restored 
to  Palestine,  that  land  will  be  invaded  by  a  powerful 
army  coming  from  the  north.  No  doubt  that  northern 
power  must  be  Russia. 

The  Death  of  the  King  and  the  Unrest  of  the  World. 

King  Edward  VII  passed  away  after  a  brief  illness. 
He  was  greatly  beloved  throughout  the  British  Empire. 
Other  nations  esteemed  him  for  his  great  tact  and  wisdom. 
His  death  came  at  a  time  when  England  is  in  the  midst 
of  a  great  crisis.  Great  Britain  is  facing  great  perplexities. 
How  the  desperate  struggle  between  democracy  and 
aristocracy,  between  socialism  and  imperialism  will 
end  is  hard  to  tell.  Humanly  speaking  a  man  like  the 
suddenly  cut  off  King  was  greatly  needed.  And  else- 
where throughout  the  world  there  is  a  great  and  significant 
unrest.     The  Missionary  Review  makes  mention  of  this: 

One  of  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  very  conspicuous,  is  the  world- 
wide unrest.     Never  has  this  been  more  general  if  not  universal. 


34  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

If  we  begin  at  the  Sunrise  Kingdom  and  go  westward,  we  shall 
find  almost,  if  not  quite,  every  nation  in  the  sun's  daily  course  in 
a  state  of  agitation  bordering  on  revolution.  In  Korea  there  is  a 
desperate  struggle  for  independence  and  freedom  from  Japanese 
domination.  In  Japan  itself  there  is  a  condition  of  practical  bank- 
ruptcy, the  nation  consumed  with  political  ambition  and  anxiety  to 
assert  and  maintain  supremacy  on  land  and  sea  and  yet  too  poor  to 
risk  further  indebtedness  and  outlay.  China  and  Manchuria  are 
restive  under  the  threatened  aggression  of  Russia  and  the  spirit  of 
reform  that  is  like  a  liquid  at  boiling-point.  India  has  not  been  so 
impatient  and  on  the  point  of  outbreak  since  the  battle  of  Plassey. 
Turkey  is  only  just  starting  upon  its  new  career  and  uncertain 
what  new  development  to-morrow  may  bring;  it  is  like  a  volcano 
between  two  eruptions.  Persia  is  in  the  very  throes  of  revolution, 
with  a  change  of  dynasty  and  an  entire  upturning  of  government. 
And  as  in  Asia  so  in  Europe.  Italy  is  far  from  being  at  rest; 
France  is  in  much  the  same  condition  as  before  the  tremendous 
civil  and  religious  disturbances  of  1793.  Russia,  for  the  time  quiet, 
seethes  under  the  surface  with  antagonisms  between  the  Czar  and 
his  people,  and  the  Church  and  the  lesser  sects. 

The  unrest  in  this  country  Is  becoming  even  greater 
than  that  of  the  European  nations.  A  leading  University- 
President  in  addressing  a  convention  said  recently  that 
the  present  age  is  the  most  decadent  in  history,  with 
the  possible  exception  of  the  days  just  before  the  fall  of 
the  Roman  Republic  and   before  the  French  Revolution. 

The  world  waits  for  a  great  leader,  a  great  master  mind, 
who  will  head  up  in  his  person  the  affairs  of  the  world  and 
lead  onward  in  the  consummation  of  this  age.  This 
person  is  clearly  described  in  the  Word  of  God.  A  great 
political  leader  will  appear  first  and  he  will  be  followed 
closely  by  a  religious  leader,  the  personal  Anti-christ  and 
man  of  sin.  All  is  now  ripe  for  the  welcome  of  the  two 
beasts.     For  all  we  know  the  persons  who  are  destined 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  35 

to  act  in  these  capacities  may  be  on  earth  already.     The 
Lord  only  knows  that. 

Nations  Armed  Camps.  In  addressing  employers  of 
labor  on  behalf  of  the  new  territorial  army,  War  Secre- 
tary Haldane  said  the  condition  of  international  affairs 
was  such  that  only  a  spark  was  needed  to  make  a  great 
war  possible.  Nations  nowadays  resembled  armed  camps 
rather  than  peoples  contemplating  peace. 

Great  Britain's  best  security  for  peace,  he  said,  was 
preparedness  for  war.  In  addition  to  the  possibility  of 
invasion  there  was  the  more  probable  contingency  that 
if  Britain  did  not  attend  to  the  matter  of  national  defence 
a  gust  of  panic  would  sweep  over  the  markets. 

And  yet  how  much  we  hear  of  "universal  peace"  and  the 
coming  together  of  the  "Christian"  nations.  The  world 
knows  no  peace,  nor  will  there  be  peace  till  He  comes. 

General  Bemhardi,  an  Eminent  German  Military 
Authority,  has  written  a  book  entitled  Germany  and  the 
Next  War,  in  which  he  maintains  the  right  to  make  war 
and  the  duty  to  make  war,  and  openly  advocates  the  policy 
of  aggression  and  invasion,  and  tells  his  countrymen  that 
they  must  fight  their  way  to  pre-eminence  among  the 
nations  regardless  of  the  rights  and  interests  of  other 
people,  and  that  agitation  in  favor  of  peace  is  poisonous. 
This  does  not  look  like  universal  peace  at  hand. 

Germany's  fleet  in  the  air.  The  great  nations  are 
making  many  preparations  for  battles  in  the  air.  Ger- 
many is  the  leader  in  this  respect.  She  has  not  only  the 
finest  army  on  land  and  building  up  the  most  forceful 
navy  on  the  sea,  but  has  the  finest  collection  of  dirigibles 


36  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

and  aeroplanes.  Recently  great  aerial  manoeuvers  were 
held  and  new  improvements  tested.  Machine  guns  were 
fired  from  the  air  and  experiments  made  with  wireless 
telegraphy.  The  Berlin  correspondent  of  the  Daily  Mail 
(London)  gave  of  late  interesting  information  on  Ger- 
many's flying  fleet. 

Fourteen  vessels  are  actually  in  commission.  Nine  others  are 
under  construction.  Ten  or  a  dozen  factories  and  dockyards  where 
airships  are  manufactured  on  systematic  lines  are  at  work.  Twelve 
or  fifteen  permanent  garages,  several  of  them  elaborately  equipped 
stations,  have  been  built  at  various  strategic  points  along  the  frontier, 
in  the  proximity  of  the  sea   and  at  inland  centres. 

A  special  battalion  of  nearly  1,000  officers,  engineers  and  men, 
trained  in  all  the  exigencies  of  aerial  navigation  has  been  organized. 
Germany's  great  ordnance  makers,  the  Krupps  and  Ehrhardts,  are 
perfecting  airship  destroying  artillery  and  experimenting  with  guns 
and  explosives  for  offensive  operations  from  a  height.  Airship 
manoeuvers  have  become  a  regular  feature  of  the  army's  work. 

The   Kaiser's   aerial  fleet  consists  to-day  of  the  following  com- 
pleted vessels: 
Name  and  Type.  Length.       Diameter.      Speed. 

Rigid.  Feet.  Feet.  Miles 

Zeppelin  I 453  37  25 

Zeppelin  II 453  43  28 

Zeppelin  III 453  43  30 

Semi-rigid. 

Gross  training  ship '.....  140  30  21 

Gross  1 250  40  28 

Gross  II 250  40  30 

Gross  III 277  41  37}^ 

Ruthenberg  1 139  21^  22j^ 

Non-rigid. 

Parseval  1 193  34  31^ 

Parseval  III 237  40}^  34 

Parseval  IV 200  31  27^ 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  37 

ParsevalV 133  25  22j^ 

Clouth  1 140  28  22 

Erbslohl 176  33  28j^ 

Each  of  the  above  vessels  is  of  demonstrated  capacity.  The  Zep- 
pelins have  traversed  Germany  from  end  to  end,  remained  aloft 
for  continuous  periods  of  from  twenty-eight  to  forty  hours,  and 
developed  a  radius  of  action  equivalent  to  a  flight  from  Berlin  to 
London.  The  Gross  and  Parseval  vessels  have  executed  continuous 
cruises  lasting  from  seventeen  to  twenty-four  hours  with  a  radius 
of  action  of  between  300  and  500  miles. 

German  vessels  are  building  which  represent  even  more  powerful 
types  than  the  fleet  already  afloat,  three  of  them  being  of  even 
larger  dimensions  than  any  of  the  Zeppelins  yet  launched.  One  of 
these  vessels,  Zeppelin  IV.,  is  intended  for  passenger  service.  Gross 
IV.  for  the  army,  Parseval  VI.  and  VII.  for  passenger  excursions 
this  summer  respectively  at  Munich  and  Berlin,  Parseval  VIII.  for 
the  German  Aerial  Navy  League  and  Parseval  IX.  for  exhibition 
flights  at  the  Brussels  Exposition. 

The  Treves  airship  is  the  most  remarkable  of  the  vessels  under 
construction,  the  distinguishing  feature  being  the  use  of  iron  in- 
stead of  the  aluminum,  steel  and  wood  of  other  systems.  Accord- 
ing to  the  designs  of  its  inventor,  Anton  Border,  it  will  be  an  im- 
mense air  cruiser  with  accommodation  for  fifty  or  sixty  persons. 

The  vessel  which  will  be  launched  within  the  next  few  weeks  is 
provided  with  five  motors  developing  altogether  480  horse-power. 
One  of  them,  of  eighty  horse-power,  drives  the  propeller,  which  is 
fitted  at  the  bows.  The  other  four  develop  100  horse-power  each 
and  are  utilized  to  set  in  motion  the  sixteen  vertical  and  eight  hori- 
zontal screw  planes  which  steer  the  vessel  upward  and  downward 
and  to  starboard  and  port.  They  also  control  the  motion  of  the 
ship  forward  and  astern. 

It  is  estimated  that  these  powerful  motors  will  give  the  vessel  a 
speed  of  at  least  forty-four  miles  an  hour  when  they  are  all  work- 
ing, and  it  is  even  thought  that  an  average  of  fifty  miles  an  hour 
will  be  attained.  The  entire  weight  of  the  framework,  motors  and 
equipment  is  thirty  tons,  without  the  gas  filling,  and  enormous  vol- 
ume of  gas  contained  by  the  vessel  when  fully  inflated  will  permit 
of  the  transport  of  ten  tons  of  freight  or  fifty  or  sixty  persons. 


38  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Krupps  have  designed  three  weapons  for  attacking  aerial  craft. 
For  all  the  Krupp  guns  a  time  fuse  is  used.  It  is  asserted  that  the 
fuse  is  perfectly  safe  to  handle,  yet  so  delicately  adjusted  that  it 
will  detonate  the  shell  immediately  on  piercing  the  hull  of  an  airship 
or  a  balloon.  The  Krupp  airship  destroying  guns  are  also  provided 
with  tracers  whereby  the  trajectory  can  be  followed  by  day  or 
night. 

The  Ehrhardt  airship  destroyer  is  designed  for  mounting  on  a 
motor  car.  It  is  a  rapid  fire  gun,  which  discharges  a  3.3  pound 
shell  by  means  of  a  time  fuse  over  a  range  of  8,800  yards,  or  at  an 
elevation  of  forty-three  degrees  to  a  height  of  4,750  yards. 

The  German  army's  scheme  of  aerial  defence,  says  the  Daily  Mail 
correspondent,  contemplates  a  chain  of  permanent  stations  which 
will  eventually  extend  in  a  sweeping  semi-circle  from  the  extreme 
western  corner  of  the  empire  through  the  north  and  east.  The 
idea  is  that  Germany  shall  be  fortified  in  the  air  along  her  entire 
French  and  Russian  frontiers  and  in  the  area  flanking  the  sea. 
Every  fortress  within  this  arc  is  to  be  provided  with  one  or  more 
vessels. 

At  present  the  military  airship  stations  are  at  Metz,  Cologne, 
Frankfort,  Berlin,  Friedrichshafen  and  Mannheim.  The  larger 
ones,  at  Metz,  Berlin  and  Friedrichshafen  can  accommodate  two 
or  more  vessels  of  the  largest  type.  Gas  generating  plants  are 
r.ttached  to  the  military  airship  stations,  which  are  to  be  duplicated 
gradually  at  all  strategic  points  as  the  fleet  grows. 

Why  then  all  this  astonishing  activity  .^^  Why  such 
schemes  and  preparations.'*  Are  these  the  harbingers  of 
universal  peace  or  universal  war.'*  One  must  be  blind  to 
say  that  universal  peace  is  in  sight.  The  age  is  getting 
ready  for  the  final  conflict  and  the  coming  crash. 

Aeroplanes  for  the  Coming  Wars.  It  seems  the  great 
nations  of  Europe  are  not  only  building  their  Dreadnoughts 
and  continually  improving  their  armies,  but  they  also  are 
building  an  aerial  navy.  Dirigibles  and  aeroplanes  are 
ready  to  enter  the  coming  warfare.     The  German  Press 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  39 

recently  published  statistics  of  the  dirigible  balloons  and 
aeroplanes. 

Germany  possesses  fourteen  dirigibles  of  six  different 
models,  namely  Gross,  Zeppelin,  Parseval,  Schutte,  Sle- 
mens-Shuckert  and  the  Rhine- Westphalian  airship,  and 
five  aeroplanes. 

France  has  seven  dirigibles  and  twenty-nine  aero- 
planes. 

Italy,  three  dirigibles  and  seven  aeroplanes. 

Russia,  three  dirigibles  and  six  aeroplanes. 

Austria  has  two  dirigibles  and  four  aeroplanes. 

England,  two  dirigibles  and  two  aeroplanes. 

Spain,  one  dirigible  and  three  aeroplanes. 

Altogether  European  nations  have  thirty-two  dirigibles 
and  fifty-six  aeroplanes  that  are  presumed  to  be  available 
for  service. 

What  days  of  horror  will  come  when  the  storm  at  last 
breaks  and  nation  will  lift  up  sword  against  nation  and 
kingdom  against  kingdom;  then  these  modern  inventions, 
more  or  less  inspired  and  controlled  by  the  god  of  this  age, 
will  be  used  to  execute  their  awful  work. 

When  the  Lord  comes  out  of  heaven  with  His  armies 
the  apostate  nations  of  Christendom  will  face  Him.  Read 
Revel.  xvi:16;  xvii:14;  xix:19.  The  thought  comes.  May 
not  the  airship  as  it  is  being  rapidly  improved  and  perfected 
play  an  important  part  when  the  nations  defy  Him  who 
comes  as  Lord  of  lords  out  of  heaven?  In  their  blindness 
under  the  satanic  leadership  of  the  Beast,  the  kings  of  the 
earth  will  gather  themselves  together  to  make  war  against 
Him,  who  comes  at  last  to  claim  His  inheritance.  When 
they  behold  up  in  the  air  the  fiery  rays  of  His  Glory  they 
may,  in  their  utter  blindness,  send  up  their  aeroplanes  with 


40  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

high  explosives  to  discharge  their  guns  at  Him,  who  comes 
to  deal  with  them  in  judgment,  while  the  armies  on  earth 
are  ready  to  oppose  Him.  The  use  of  the  airship  and  the 
fiercest  haste  to  perfect  it  and  use  it  in  warfare  is  very 
significant. 

Russia's  Advance  upon  Persia.  While  the  eyes  of  the 
world  have  been  centered  upon  Turkey  and  its  revolution, 
resulting  in  a  great  victory  for  constitutionalism,  the  revo- 
lution in  Persia  has  been  but  little  noticed.  A  great  struggle 
for  liberty  has  been  going  on  in  the  land  of  the  Shah.  That 
despot  has  been  trembling  for  his  throne  and  his  life. 
Thousands  have  been  killed  and  the  whole  Empire  seems 
to  be  in  a  fearful  chaotic  condition.  Russia,  the  "friendly" 
neighbor  of  Persia,  however,  has  upheld  the  government  in 
Persia,  both  by  money  and  soldiers.  The  Shah  appealed  to 
Russia  for  help  to  restore  order  and  Russia  has  answered 
But  this  will  be  the  pretext,  no  doubt,  of  a  permanent  occu- 
pation of  parts  of  Persia  by  the  Russian  army  and  govern- 
ment. Russian  political  papers  have  agitated  of  late  the 
seizure  of  points  in  Persia  which  would  enable  Russia  to 
control  the  Mediterranean  coasts  of  Asia  Mmor  and  make 
the  Persian  Gulf  her  highway  to  India.  The  Nashn, 
Gazeta  published  in  St.  Petersburg,  boldly  suggests  the 
occupation  of  Azerbaijan,  the  military  key  of  Armenia, 
and  the  Mesopotamian  outlet  to  Bagdad,  as  well  as  to  the 
waters  of  the  Persian  Gulf. 

Russia  will  succeed  in  extending  her  territory  into  Persia 
and  Armenia.  Thus  she  will  surround  the  holy  land, 
Palestine.  For  years  Russia  has  aimed  to  possess 
Palestine. 

All  this  is  of  deep  interest  to  the  student  of  the  Bible. 
Russia  is  Israel's  last  enemy.     Russia's  coming  invasion  of 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  41 

Palestine  and  the  awful  end  Russia  will  have,  Is  propheti- 
cally described  In  Ezeklel,  chapter  xxxvIII.  With  Russia 
are  seen  "many  people."  "Thou  shalt  ascend  and  come 
like  a  storm,  thou  shalt  be  like  a  cloud  to  cover  the  land, 
thou,  and  all  thy  bands,  and  many  people  with  thee" 
(verse  9).  Persia  is  mentioned  as  belonging  to  Russia  In 
that  day  of  Invasion.  The  Russian  advance  Into  Persia 
is  therefore  of  great  significance. 

Wars  and  Rumors  of  Wars.  The  complete  defeat  of  the 
Turkish  Empire  is  in  sight.  The  allied  armies  gain  victory 
upon  victory  and  we  should  not  be  at  all  surprised  If 
Constantinople  will  fall  in  their  hands.  History  is  being 
made  fast  In  these  days.  Then  there  are  the  rumors  of  a 
great  coming  European  war.  The  nations  are  preparing 
for  war.  Instead  of  turning  their  swords  Into  plowshares, 
they  turn  the  plowshares  into  swords.  Disarmament  is  an 
idle  dream.  The  revolution  in  Mexico  goes  on  with  all  its 
horrors  and  no  one  knows  how  It  all  will  end. 

The  days  our  Lord  predicted  are  upon  us.  Wars  and 
rumors  of  wars,  soon  to  be  followed  by  nation  lifting  up 
sword  against  nation  (Matthew  xxiv). 

The  United  States  and  Mexico.  There  is  no  need  to 
rehearse  all  the  details  of  recent  events  In  connection  with 
the  Mexican  situation.  Our  country  at  last  acted  upon  a 
trifling  Incident  in  comparison  with  the  many  outrages 
and  murders  committed  against  Americans  in  that  land  of 
bloodshed  and  crime — Mexico.  Warships  were  rushed 
South,  the  thousands  of  men  encamped  in  Southern  Texas 
were  rushed  to  the  borders  and  then  Mexico  itself  was 
invaded.  Vera  Cruz  was  taken.  About  four  hundred 
Mexicans  were  killed  in  battle  and  seventeen  American 
marines   lost    also   their   lives,    while    many    more   were 


42  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

wounded.  The  flag  of  this  country  now  floats  over  Vera 
Cruz.  And  yet  our  government  declares  that  there  is  on 
war  with  Mexico.  If  the  above  capture  of  Vera  Cruz 
is  not  warfare,  then  we  do  not  know  what  is  war. 

At  the  same  time  the  rebels  threatened  also  the  U.  S. 
and,  strange  to  say,  the  authorities  became  rather  friendly 
with  the  villainous  Villa  to  get  his  good  will.  This  man, 
according  to  reports,  is,  perhaps,  a  greater  criminal  than 
Huerta.  And  now  mediation  is  attempted.  Assurances 
are  given  that  no  war  will  come,  but  all  will  be  peaceably 
settled.  Yet  at  the  same  time  great  preparations  are 
made  for  war.  Thousands  of  men  are  ready  to  go  to 
battle.  Train-loads  of  supplies  and  ammunitions  are 
rushed  South.  The  Constitutionalists  threaten  to  con- 
tinue their  bloody  work.  One  leader  declared  that  he 
would  set  up  a  guillotine  in  one  of  the  public  parks  when 
Mexico  is  taken  and  10,000  of  the  better  class  would  be 
killed.  Lists  of  names  are  prepared  already  to  help  in 
these  executions.  Thus  the  French  revolution  is  repeated. 
Can  this  government  stand  by  and  look  on.^  How  will 
it  end.^  It  remains  to  be  seen,  and  we  hope  and  pray  that 
the  awful  events  which  threaten  may  be  averted.  Let  us 
not  forget  that  in  all  these  events  and  upheavals  God's 
Word  is  vindicated  once  more,  for  it  predicts  these  very 
scenes  down  to  the  end  of  the  age. 

The  United  States  of  Europe.  Sir  Max  Waechter,  of 
London,  has  been  spending  enormous  sums  of  late  adver- 
tising his  European  Unity  League.  He  is  financing 
personally  the  scheme  in  bringing  all  Europe  under  one 
central  government.  Here  is  the  plan,  which  he  is 
advocating: 

"If  we  are  to  abolish  war  and  tlic  ruinously  expensive  prepara- 
tions for  war  that  are  now  impoverishing  Europe  we  must  abolish 


POLITICAL   EVENTS.  43 

the  disunion  at  present  existing  among  the  great  powers.  The 
antagonistic  grouping  of  the  six  big  nations  into  the  triple  alliance 
(Germany,  Austria  and  Italy)  and  the  triple  entente  (Great  Britain. 
Russia  and  France),  which  has  produced  so  much  distrust  and 
jealousy  and  wild  competition  in  armaments,  must  give  way  to  the 
sextuple  alliance,  and  this  will  naturally  lead  to  a  general  federation 
of  European  countries — the  United  States  of  Europe.  Under 
present  conditions  all  attempts  to  restrict  armaments  are  bound 
to  end  in  failure.  Armaments  can  be  restricted  only  if  they  become 
unnecessary;  only  when  Europe  is  united. 

"Unification  should  take  place  on  a  federal  and  economic  basis — 
like  the  United  States  of  America — leaving  to  each  component 
nation  the  fullest  possible  measure  of  individual  liberty  and  enabling 
it  to  deal  with  its  own  affairs  in  its  own  way.  A  feature  of  the 
Federation  would  be  the  elimination  of  the  present  customs  boun- 
daries. All  Europe  should  form  one  great  free  trade  market  pro- 
tected by  a  proper  tariff  against  the  nations  without. 

"Under  the  federation  the  two  and  a  half  billion  dollars  now 
spent  by  Europe  annually  on  its  armies  and  navies  would  go  into 
the  channels  of  trade  and  commerce  and  the  five  million  soldiers 
and  sailors,  the  strongest  and  healthiest  men  of  their  races,  would  be 
released  to  re-enter  the  field  of  production  and  to  maintain  them- 
selves and  others  by  the  work  of  their  hands,  instead  of  being  main- 
tained by  the  rest  of  the  population.  In  America  enterprise  is 
greater  and  wages  are  higher,  largely  because  the  wealth  of  the 
country  is  not  drained  away  in  the  mad  race  for  armaments." 

Peace  by  Force.  One  thousand  million  dollars  is  the 
amount  spent  by  the  world  annually  on  armaments  in 
order  to  maintain  peace,  according  to  the  estimate  of 
Senator  Gervais,  a  leading  authority  on  military  matters, 
who  has  just  published  a  striking  article  dealing  with  the 
stupendous  growth  of  armies  and  navies  in  Europe. 

"At  the  very  moment  when  all  nations  profess  the 
strongest  aspirations  toward  universal  peace,"  he  says, 
"Europe  is  in  a  perfect  frenzy  over  military  preparations." 
He  points  out  that  aside  from  the  Balkan  trouble  and  the 


44  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

new  French  and  German  army  laws,  which  summon 
1,500,000  men  to  the  flag  yearly,  all  Parliaments  are 
confronted  with  projects  for  military  reorganization  and 
reinforcement. 

England  has  its  campaign  in  favor  of  compulsory  service 
and  a  stronger  territorial  force.  Spain's  Parliament  is 
discussing  a  bill  to  settle  the  problem  of  naval  recruitment. 
Belgium  is  occupied  with  problems  of  militia  and  the  best 
means  to  insure  the  country's  neutrality  in  the  event  of 
a  Franco-German  conflict  Italy's  Senate  is  engaged  on  a 
bill  for  army  recruiting,  which  has  already  passed  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  with  the  object  of  increasing  the 
peace  standing  by  25,000.  Austria's  War  Minister  is 
preparing  a  bill  for  raising  the  number  of  recruits  from 
197,000  to  220,000  in  1918,  and  the  total  peace  standing 
from  464,000  to  600,000,  while  radical  reforms  are  con- 
templated in  army  organization. 

Of  the  world's  expenditure  of  $1,000,000,000  for  the 
upkeep  of  armaments  France's  share  last  year  was  one- 
fifth.  M.  Gervais  points  out  that  the  French  army 
budget  this  year  amounts  to  $240,000,000.  But  does  the 
Word  of  God  promise  such  a  peace  by  force?  The  true 
peace  will  be  brought  to  this  restless  age  by  the  Coming  of 
of  the  Prince  of  Peace. 

The  Balkan  Chaos.  Although  it  was  early  in  August, 
1913,  that  a  treaty  of  peace  was  signed  at  Bucharest 
between  the  warring  Balkan  States,  an  outbreak  is  again 
probable  as  grave  trouble  is  reported  on  the  northern 
frontier  of  Albania  whither  Servia  is  sending  20,000  troops. 
The  agreement  between  Turkey  and  Bulgaria  and  the 
delay  in  an  agreement  between  the  Ottoman  and  Greek 
governments  is  worrying  the  Greeks,  who  are  afraid  that 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  45 

the  unexpectedly  rapid  agreement  between  Turkey  and 
Bulgaria  covers  an  aggressive  convention.  On  the  other 
hand,  pending  the  signature  of  the  Turco-Bulgarian  agree- 
ment, there  are  rumors  of  a  hitch  between  these  two 
countries  and  a  possible  reawakening  of  trouble. 

It  seems  now  only  the  question  of  time  when  the  third 
Balkan  War  will  break  out. 

The  Fears  of  a  Small  Country.  Belgium  is  one  of  the 
smallest  countries  in  Europe.  Situated  as  it  is  in  case  of 
a  universal  war  it  would  be  very  much  exposed  to  the  in- 
vasion of  different  armies.  Belgium  is  therefore  preparing 
for  the  worst. 

Belgium's  continued  activity  in  adopting  certain  well-defined 
measures  of  national  defence  and  protection  keeps  alive  in  every 
one's  mind  the  alarming  idea  that  armed  conflict  in  Europe  is  a  thing 
to  be  expected.  The  government  does  not  divulge  what  it  believes 
or  fears;  it  quietly  goes  ahead  with  its  preparations,  leaving  the 
people  to  speculate  as  they  will. 

The  Belgian  army  has  been  increased  to  a  peace  footing  abso- 
lutely without  precedent;  never  before  has  the  country  had  so 
many  men  under  arms  in  times  of  peace,  and  Antwerp,  on  the 
Scheldt,  already  one  of  the  strongest  fortresses  of  Europe,  is  rapidly 
being  strengthened,  evidently  with  the  idea  of  making  the  city  as 
near  impregnable  as  possible.  Belgium  has  a  gold  reserve  of 
$48,000,000;  this  is  the  national  treasure.  In  order  further  to  insure 
its  safety  a  large  part  of  this  money  has  been  moved  from  Brussels 
to  Antwerp,  the  reason  given  being  that  the  latter  city  is  more 
secure  in  case  of  war.  The  national  archives  also  have  been  trans- 
ferred to  the  fortified  metropolis  for  the  same  reason,  a  precaution 
which  would  not  ordinarily  be  taken  except  at  a  time  of  national 
anxiety.  These  events,  considered  in  connection  with  the  recent 
mobilization  and  seemingly  tending  to  show  that  the  international 
outlook  may  not  be  as  clear  as  is  generally  supposed,  have  caused 
much  comment  in  Belgium. 


46  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

It  is  a  striking  sign  of  the  times,  these  fears  of  all  the 
nations  of  the  civilized  world.  Our  Lord  announced  that 
at  the  close  of  this  age  there  should  be  "upon  the  earth 
distress  of  nations  with  perplexity."  Both  "distress  of 
nations"  and  "perplexity"  are  here.  During  1914  this 
distress  will  become  more  intense  and  widespread.  No 
relief  can  come  till  He  comes  who  will  speak  peace  to  the 
nations  and  who  maketh  wars  to  cease  (Ps.  xlvi:9). 

For  the  Peace  of  Christendom.  In  1895  there  existed  in 
England  a  nation-wide  demand  for  the  overthrow  of  the 
Turkish  empire.  This  demand  was  occasioned  by  the 
Armenian  massacres  in  which  many  thousands  of  Chris- 
tians lost  their  lives.  Lord  Salisbury  on  November  9th 
in  that  year  delivered  a  significant  address  on  the  situation, 
from  which  we  quote: 

"Turkey  is  in  that  remarkable  condition  that  it  has  stood  for  half  a 
century,  mainly  because  the  great  nations  of  the  world  have  deter- 
mined that  for  the  peace  of  Christendom  the  Ottoman  Empire  must 
stand.  They  came  to  that  decision  nearly  half  a  century  ago.  I  do 
not  think  they  have  altered  it  now.  The  danger,  if  the  Ottoman 
Empire  should  fall,  would  not  merely  be  the  danger  that  would 
threaten  the  territories  of  which  the  empire  consists;  it  would  be  the 
danger  that  the  fire  there  lit  would  spread  to  other  nations,  and  in- 
volve all  that  is  most  powerful  and  civilized  in  Europe  in  a  dangerous 
and  calamitous  conflict.  That  was  a  danger  that  was  present  to 
the  minds  of  our  Fathers  when  they  resolved  to  make  the  integrity 
and  independence  of  the  Ottoman  empire  a  matter  of  European 
treaty,  and  that  is  a  danger  that  has  not  passed  away." 

This  was  a  political  prophecy.  The  Ottman  empire  is 
going  to  pieces  and  for  months  Europe  has  hovered  on  the 
verge  of  the  most  awful  conflict  known  in  human  history. 
The  danger  is  not  passed.     The  crisis  is  still  on. 

The   Peace   Treaty.     An   Alliance    against   War.     On 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  47 

August  3,1912  treaties  of  unlimited  arbitration  between  the 
United  States  and  France  and  the  United  States  and 
England  were  signed.  That  this  is  an  event  of  great 
importance  as  well  as  of  deep  significance  no  one  doubts. 
A  New  York  daily  states  "the  event  marks  the  dawn  of 
a  new  and  auspicious  era  in  the  affairs  of  the  nations; 
it  means  that  the  two  greatest  republics,  together  with 
the  greatest  of  empires,  have  in  these  compacts  dedicated 
themselves  to  the  cause  of  international  peace  and  to 
that  end  have  given  a  pledge  that  all  controversies  arising 
among  them,  even  those  involving  questions  of  national 
honor,  shall  be  settled  in  high  courts  of  law  and  reason." 
Similar  treaties  with  the  German  Empire,  the  Netherlands, 
Sweden  and  Japan  are  passing  preliminary  stages.  The 
press,  especially  the  religious  and  semi-religious,  is  en- 
thusiastic about  this  great  step  towards  "their  millen- 
nium." Universal  peace  is  now  almost  in  sight,  they 
declare.  President  Taft  comes  in  for  the  greatest  share  of 
praise  for  this  great  achievement. 

"Man's  Day"  seems  now  to  have  reached  its  height. 
Could  this  present  evil  age,  as  it  is  termed  by  God's 
Spirit,  bring  forth  a  greater  achievement  than  a  universal 
peace,  without  Him,  who  is  the  Prince  of  Peace  .^  The  god 
of  this  age,  Satan,  is  a  being  of  wonderful  wisdom  and 
intelligence.  He  anticipates  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  to  establish  His  glorious  rule  of  righteousness  and 
peace  over  this  earth.  He  knows  that  the  kingdoms  of 
this  earth  which  he  still  controls  must  soon  become  the 
kingdoms  of  God  and  His  Christ.  He  knows  that  God 
has  appointed  a  day  in  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in 
righteousness  by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained; 
whereof  He  hath  given  assurance  unto  all,  in  that  He 


48  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  Satan  knows  that  when 
the  rightful  King  appears  the  second  time,  even  this  same 
Jesus,  He  will  teach  the  nations  to  learn  war  no  more. 
And  now  to  blind  the  eyes  of  them  that  believe  not,  he 
brings  about  a  movement  which  looks  like  a  coming 
universal  peace.  Peace  treaties,  signing  of  papers,  etc., 
do  not  mean  the  abolishment  of  war,  that  horrible,  fearful 
thing  of  which  a  great  general  said,  "War  is  hell."  War 
is  not  a  skin  disease  which  can  be  cured  by  a  few  strokes 
of  the  pen  and  a  few  resolutions. 

Peace  will  come.  It  must  come.  All  the  earth  will 
find  rest.  Nations  will  have  to  turn  their  swords  into 
pruning  hooks  and  their  spears  into  plowshares.  Uni- 
versal peace  is  bound  to  come  and  in  its  wake  blessings 
untold  for  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  How  do  we 
know.^  Certainly  not  from  the  literature  of  heathen 
nations,  nor  from  the  writings  of  poets  or  philosophers. 
The  Bible,  the  revelation  of  God,  tells  us  about  this  great 
coming  peace  and  blessing  for  the  earth.  But  how  will  it 
be  brought  about  .^  The  Bible  is  not  silent  on  that.  It 
gives  us  God's  purpose  and  method.  Man's  efforts  cannot 
secure  it.  The  present  age  called  '*Man's  Day"  (1  Cor. 
iv:3,  marg.  reading),  does  not  wind  up  with  a  universal 
peace  the  result  of  legislation,  nor  with  universal  right- 
eousness. The  same  Word  which  predicts  a  coming  peace 
also  predicts  an  apostasy,  increasing  unrighteousness  and 
fearful  judgments. 

Universal  peace,  universal  blessings  and  universal  right- 
eousness is  in  God's  holy  Word  closely  linked  with  the 
second  personal  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The 
result  of  His  glorious  manifestation  will  be  "peace  on 
earth."     His  coming,  however,  is  preceded  by  the  greatest 


POLITICAL    EVENTS. 


49 


upheavals  the  world  has  ever  seen.  With  His  coming 
judgments  are  bound  to  be  executed,  "for  when  thy  judg- 
ments are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will 
learn  righteousness"  (Isaiah  xxvi:9).  Peace  without  the 
Prince  of  Peace  is  a  delusion.  The  student  of  the  prophetic 
Word  will  find  in  these  peace  endeavors  a  striking  con- 
firmation of  the  predicted  coming  events.  First  a  seeming 
peace  established  by  political  schemes  and  then  that  false 
peace  will  be  taken  from  the  earth  (Rev.  vi:l-4). 

How  Will  It  All  End?  The  military  conditions  in  Europe 
are  staggering  to  say  the  least.  Germany,  France  and 
England  are  running  a  race,  each  outdoing  the  other  in 
military  expenditures.  They  say  it  is  needed  to  keep 
peace,  an  armed  peace.  It  has  been  figured  out  that  this 
"armed  peace"  is  about  as  expensive  as  war  itself.  We 
print  the  latest  statistics: 

Cost  of  Armies  and  Navies. 


Expended 

Country.  for  Army. 

Austria-Hungary.  .  .  $73,513,000 

France 187,632,000 

Germany 203,938,000 

Great  Britain 138,800,000 

Italy 81,033,000 

Japan 49,196,000 

Russia 265,642,000 

Spain 37,671,000 

Turkey 42,071,000 

United  States 162,357,000 

Totals $1,241,853,000 


Expended 
for  Navy. 

$13,731,000 
83,286,000 

114,508,000 

203,020,000 
39,643,000 
43,405,000 
54,128,000 
13,696,000 
6,223,000 

120,729,000 


Total 

Military 

Charge. 

$87,244,000 

270,918,000 

318,446,000 

341,820,000 

120,676,000 

92,601,000 

319,770,000 

51,367,000 

48,294,000 

283,086,000 


$692,369,000  $1,934,222,000 


50 


CURRENT    EVENTS. 


The  following  table  tells  still  another  tale: 


TJ 

u 

o 

o 

o 

o^ 

1  s 

o 

o 

Vrt 

o 

6  3 
*^  o 

>^ 

•^ 

Tf 

■^ 

00 

Ifl 

«3 

a>^ 

^1 

>> 

•^ 

irT 

«o" 

t-" 

-*-> 

05 

CO* 

o 

f£> 

O^ 

ca 

o 

6 


o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

~  ~  ~  ~  o  o  o 

lO  lO  o 


m  00  to 

Tj*   lO  Oi 

rt   Cr5   Oi 


o  o  o  o  o  o  o 
o  o  o  o  o  o  o 


(N  "^  t- 


CO  «£> 
U5  la 


1-1  05  (M 

(N  00  CO 

ca  00  Tij^ 

»-r  \0  rH 


N   »-<   rH   r-l   t- 

»a-  iH  N  ca 


o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

rjl'  00  CO  O  CO  O  «0 


00  «>  f  o 


00   r-«   O 


00  t-  ft  "^  N 

--   N  CO  CO 


Oi  CO 
tH  00 
CO  CO 


o  o  o  o  o  o 
o  o  o  o  o  ~ 


o  o  o  o 


■«^ 

o 

CO 

U5 

Oi 

T-t 

C<I 

00 

00 

o 

Tf 

lO 

t^ 

tH 

t> 

00 

Tj< 

-rf" 

kO 

iO 

00 

oc" 

CO 

o 

o 

Tf 

t> 

o 

w- 

C<l 

C<J 

tT 

d 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

t^  00  -'T  irT  t>  CO  oT 


o 

o 

c 

o 

o    c 

o 

c 

1 

o 

o 

c 

o 

o    c 

o 

o 

c 

c 

o 

o    c 

o 

CO*" 

"^ 

a 

co" 

Ifi 

Tf 

w-4 

00 

m 

c 

iO 

lO    oc 

U5 

Oi 

'^ 

C4 

'tt 

oc 

CD 

o^ 

CO 

CO 

Cs) 

co" 

<T 

CC 

CO* 

CO 

ifl 

c 

M 

-^ 

c 

lO 

lo 

«»■ 

CO 
«9- 

>. 

a 

bfl 
c 

C 

S 

> 

'5 

1 
1 

i2 
73 

.2 

8 

c 
E 

■4-> 

c« 

> 

a 

o 

9 

< 

9t 

& 

01 

C 

o 

^2 

u 

s 

POLITICAL   EVENTS.  51 

A  World  Center  Proposed.  Hendrik  Christian  Ander- 
son, the  Norwegian-American  sculptor  of  Newport,  R.  I., 
presented  to  King  Victor  Emmanuel  of  Italy,  during  a 
private  audience  to-day,  the  results  of  his  nine  years' 
labor  on  the  project  for  the  establishment  of  a  world 
center  for  international  interests. 

The  king  displayed  much  interest  in  the  scheme,  as 
one  of  the  sites  proposed  for  the  new  international  city, 
which  it  is  suggested  shall  be  capable  of  housing  1,000,000 
inhabitants,  is  in  Tripoli. 

It  has  been  suggested  here  that  this  project  might  be 
developed  in  co-operation  with  Secretary  of  State  Bryan's 
peace  propaganda,  in  which  it  is  proposed  that  the  differ- 
ences between  any  two  nations  shall  be  submitted  to  a 
commission  appointed  by  both,  which  shall  investigate 
the  controversy  and  make  findings  of  fact,  without  at- 
tempting to  pass  on  the  merits  of  the  case.  It  is  pointed 
out  that,  besides  Italy,  nine  other  nations  have  responded 
favorably  to  Secretary  Bryan's  suggestion. 

Thus  man  plans  during  "man's  day."  "Let  us  make  us 
a  name"  is  the  key  note  of  all  those  big  schemes.  They 
are  used  by  the  god  of  this  age,  Satan,  to  lull  a  secure 
world  to  sleep.  "Peace  and  safety"  is  what  the  world 
and  apostate  Christendom  wants  to  hear.  Sudden  judg- 
ment will  bring  some  day  the  terrible  awakening. 

The  Balkan  Situation.  While  peace  has  been  arranged 
between  Turkey  and  the  Balkan  Allies,  the  alliance  of  the 
States  has  ended  in  a  deplorable  failure.  The  Turks  were 
forced  to  surrender  all  their  European  territory,  with  the 
exception  of  Constantinople.  Other  questions  relating 
to  Albania  and  a  cash  indemnity  were  left  unsettled. 
Then  the  Allies  began  to  fight  among  themselves. 


52  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

"Without  waiting,  however,  to  conclude  peace  with 
Turkey,  the  Allies  began  to  quarrel  among  themselves, 
and  the.  press  dispatches  have  reported  actual  armed 
conflicts.  The  tone  of  the  press  in  all  the  Balkan  capitals 
is  defiant,  and  reports  say  the  military  preparations  are 
more  thorough  than  those  preceding  the  war.  Other 
dispatches  represent  the  Balkan  premiers  as  trying  to 
smooth  out  the  diflBculties  by  a  conference.  Servia  and 
Montenegro  both  claim  northern  Albania,  while  Greece 
and  Bulgaria  have  come  to  blows  over  the  territory  of 
Salonika,  the  most  precious  conquest  of  the  war.  The 
London,  Paris,  and  Berlin  correspondents  at  Sofia  say  the 
Greeks  provoked  the  battle  which  took  place  to  the  north 
of  Salonika  in  which  300  Bulgarians  were  slain." 

And  now  Servia  and  Bulgaria  are  fighting  each  other. 
A  fierce  war  between  the  two  seems  threatening.  Russia 
looks  on  as  if  awaiting  the  proper  moment  to  swoop  down 
upon  these  States.  Even  a  possible  outcome  cannot  be 
predicted.  Turkey,  as  far  as  Europe  is  concerned,  is 
ended.  We  shall  follow  the  developments  with  much 
interest. 

We  Stand  at  Armageddon  and  we  Battle  for  the  Lord. 
With  this  sentence  Mr.  Theodore  Roosevelt  closed  his 
famous  speech  in  Chicago,  where  he  was  nominated  candi- 
date for  the  Presidency  by  a  new  party.  This  statement 
has  since  then  been  heralded  all  over  the  country  with 
other  quotations  from  the  Word  of  God.  It  takes  with 
the  superficial  masses  ignorant  of  the  meaning  of  the  word 
"Armageddon."  Wc  fear  even  Mr.  Roosevelt  does  not 
know  the  truth  about  Armageddon.  That  battle  cannot 
be  fought  now.  When  this  age  closes  the  wicked  forces 
will  be  gathered  together  to  battle  against  the  Lord,  who 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  53 

is  about  to  come  out  of  Heaven  to  deliver  the  remnant 
of  His  people.  The  battle  of  Armageddon  will  therefore 
take  place  at  the  very  close  of  this  age  and  will  be  fought 
in  Palestine  and  not  in  the  United  States  When  the  day 
arrives  the  Lord  does  not  need  human  help  to  overthrow 
the  forces  of  evil,  Antichrist  and  the  apostate  nations. 
The  Lord  will  battle  and  win  the  victory.  "And  I  saw 
heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white  horse;  and  He  that  sat 
upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True,  and  in  righteous- 
ness He  does  judge  and  make  war"  (Rev.  xix:ll).  "And 
I  saw  the  beast  and  the  Kings  of  the  earth,  and  their 
armies  gathered  together  to  make  war  against  Him  that 
sat  on  the  horse  and  against  His  army"  (Rev.  xix:19).  He 
that  comes  out  of  the  Heaven  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
and  His  armies  are  composed  of  the  Saints  of  God  and  His 
holy  angels.  Then,  when  His  blessed  feet  stand  once 
more  upon  the  Mount  of  Olives,  He  will  fight  against  those 
nations  and  overthrow  their  power  (Zech.  xiv:l~5).  The 
battle  of  Armageddon  will  mark  the  beginning  of  "The 
Day  of  the  Lord."  The  statement  "We  stand  at  Arma- 
geddon and  we  battle  for  the  Lord"  is  a  catchword;  these 
politicians  do  not  stand  at  Armageddon  nor  can  they 
battle  for  the  Lord.  All,  however,  is  significant.  Matters 
are  hastening  on  rapidly  towards  the  appointed  end. 
Political,  commercial,  moral  corruption  and  every  other 
form  of  evil  will  increase  till  He  comes,  who  will  smite  the 
earth  with  His  righteous  judgment  and  deal  with  Satan 
and  his  deluded  victims. 

We  quote  in  connection  with  this  Armageddon  saying 
a  poem,  which  appeared  in  the  N,  Y.  Sun: 

Spake  the  One,  Supreme,  Eternal,  to  the  one  who  lives  a  day: 

Why  the  drum  beat  and  the  bugle  call  and  militant  array? 


54  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Why  the  blatant  voice  resounding?     Why  the  challenge  and  the 

boast?" 
And  the  transient  One  made  answer:     **I  have  generalled  Thy  host; 
I  have  taken  spear  and  buckler,  I  have  girded  on  my  sword, 
And  I  go  to  Armageddon  to  do  battle  for  the  Lord." 

Spake  the  One,  Supreme,  Eternal:    "Have  I  called  on  thee  to  save? 
Oh,  My  captains  must  be  humble  ere  they  clamor  to  be  brave. 
Not  for  Me  the  boasting  chieftain,  nor  the  one  who  seeks  his  own. 
Not  Goliath  and  his  armor,  but  the  lad  with  sling  and  stone. 
Yea!  'tis  he  who  asks  for  nothing  and  who  dreams  of  no  reward, 
Who  shall  fight  at  Armageddon  in  the  battle  of  the  Lord.'* 

Spake  the  One,  Supreme,  Eternal:     "Cast  thy  clanking  armor  by; 
Fling  thy  sword  to  those  who  gave  it;  drain  thy  braggart  fountain 

dry; 
Break  thy  sordid  dream  of  power;  set  thy  blinded  followers  free, 
Ere  thou  dare  to  raise  My  standard  or  presume  to  follow  Me; 
Pledge  thy  soul  to  all  disaster  to  fulfil  my  given  word. 
Then  go  forth  to  Armageddon  and  do  battle  for  the  Lord." 

The  Peace  Palace  Dedicated.  The  Peace  Palace  in  the 
Hague  has  at  last  been  dedicated.  It  is  a  magnificent 
structure,  beautiful  to  look  at.  If  universal  peace  could 
be  brought  about  by  Peace  conferences,  Peace  delegations, 
by  resolutions  or  the  dedication  of  a  magnificent  palace,  it 
surely  would  be  in  sight.  We  have  heard  much  of  the 
soon-coming  peace.  But  as  we  have  repeatedly  pointed 
out  in  these  columns,  the  nations  who  have  a  hand  in  the 
Peace  proclamations  continue  to  arm.  In  fact  such  im- 
mense preparations  for  war  as  are  being  made  now  outdo 
anything  and  everything  in  past  history.  Even  the 
Netherlands,  where  the  Peace  palace  is  situated,  prepare 
for  war.  Time  will  tell  what  will  become  of  the  Peace 
palace  and  what  will  happen  in  it.  We  know  from 
Scripture  how  Peace  will  come  at  last  (Ps.  xlvi:9;  Zech. 
ix:10). 


POLITICAL    EVENTS.  55 

A  New  Invention  for  Modem  Warfare.  A  new  machine 
has  been  invented  which  will  murder  hundreds  of  men  in 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye: 

The  deadly  fighting  machine  is  the  invention  of  a  Norwegian 
engineer  and  has  been  named  for  him  the  Aasen  mine.  It  consists 
of  a  metal  cylinder  with  a  cone-shaped  top.  Enclosed  in  this  are 
two  pounds  of  a  new  explosive  more  powerful  than  anything  now 
in  use,  and  four  hundred  projectiles  of  various  shapes  and  sizes. 

The  mine  is  buried  in  the  earth  and  attached  to  it  is  an  electric 
cable  which  can  be  extended  to  almost  any  distance.  An  explosion 
can  be  produced  only  by  sending  a  current  through  the  cable. 
Unless  the  mine's  mechanism  is  put  in  motion  by  an  electric  current 
it  remains  perfectly  harmless.  Rifle  bullets  can  even  be  fired  into- 
it  without  the  least  danger  of  its  exploding. 

But  the  minute  an  electrical  connection  is  made  at  the  other  end  of 
the  cable  the  mine  shoots  up  through  the  thin  layer  of  earth  which 
covers  it. 

In  tests  made  in  Norway  one  of  these  mines  worked  destruction 
over  an  area  more  than  eight  hundred  yards  square.  There  seems 
little  doubt  that  two  or  three  of  them  exploded  at  the  right  places 
could   annihilate  a   whole  army. 

The  small  size  of  these  mines  makes  them  easy  to  carry  for  long 
distances.  They  can  be  shipped  on  trains  or  steamers  in  perfect 
safety,  for  they  cannot  explode  unless  a  current  of  electricity  is  turned 
into  their  mechanism.  The  inventor  claims  that  they  can  remain 
buried  in  the  ground  for  years  without  deteriorating  in  the  slightest 
degree. 

French  army  officers  who  have  been  studying  this  new  invention 
declare  it  to  be  the  deadliest  weapon  yet  devised  and  that  it  makes 
individual  courage  a  factor  that  can  be  entirely  neglected  in  the 
wars  of  the  future. 

This  also  belongs  to  the  boasted  triumphs  of  the  twen- 
tieth century  civilization.  How  terrible  it  will  be  should 
these  new  explosives,  new  inventions,  high-power  machine 
guns  be  put  in  practice!  It  will  surely  come  during  that 
time  of  great  tribulation  with  which  the  present  age, 
according  to  divine  prediction,  will  end. 


Religious    Apostasy. 


No   Successors  of  Bradlaugh  and  Ingersoll?    In   an 

address  before  the  Central  Y.  M.  C.  A.  in  the  City  of 
Toronto,  Mr.  George  Jackson,  Pastor  of  the  Sherbourne 
Street  M.  E.  Church,  who  will  take  up  soon  a  professor- 
ship in  Victoria  College  of  that  denomination,  denied 
boldly  the  inspiration  of  the  accounts  given  in  Genesis 
concerning  the  Creation,  the  Fall,  the  Deluge,  etc.  He 
declared  that  these  accounts  are  neither  historic  nor 
scientific,  but  a  collection  of  legends  having  a  deep  religious 
meaning.  At  the  close  of  his  address  this  critic  made 
the  statement  that  neither  Bradlaugh  nor  Ingersoll  had 
had  successors,  and  they  never  would,  because  a  changed 
method  of  interpretation  had  robbed  them  of  their  miser- 
able stock  in  trade. 

There  is  some  truth  in  this;  but  this  preacher  does  not 
see  the  true  reason  why  Ingersoll  has  had  no  successor, 
nor  will  have  one.  It  is  not  true  that  Higher  Criticism  has 
robbed  infidels  of  their  stock  of  trade.  It  is  positively 
false.  The  truth  is  Higher  Criticism  has  accepted  the 
stock  of  trade  of  infidels  like  Thomas  Paine,  Renan,  Vol- 
taire, Bradlaugh  and  Ingersoll  and  the  professors  and 
preachers  who  deny  the  inspiration  and  revelation  of  the 
opening  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  the  chapters, 
which  contain  the  foundation  truths  of  the  entire  Bible,  are 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  57 

the  legitimate  successors  of  infidel  lecturers  like  the  for- 
gotten IngersolL  There  is  no  need  for  such  infidel  lec- 
turers in  our  times  because  hundreds  of  preachers  do  the 
same  work  more  successfully,  than  Ingersoll  ever  did.  Of 
the  two,  an  outspoken  infidel,  who  disowns  all  connection 
with  Christianity  and  a  man,  who  professes  Christianity 
but  undermines  the  faith  in  God's  Word  and  denies  the 
authority  of  the  Bible,  the  former  is  certainly  the  more 
honest  of  the  two.  The  hand  of  the  evil  master,  who 
stands  behind  these  continued  attacks,  is  seen  in  the  fact, 
that  these  men  with  their  '^infidel  stock  of  trade"  are  put 
into  a  position  where  they  can  reach  and  influence  the 
immature  minds  of  the  young.  We  have  of  late  heard 
of  other  men  of  the  same  stamp,  who  left  the  pastorate 
and  became  professors  to  teach  their  miserable  errors. 
We  are  thankful  that  our  friend.  Dr.  Elmore  Harris,  of 
Toronto,  wrote  such  a  vigorous  and  able  reply  to  the 
remarks  of  Mr.  Jackson.  Adr.  Harris  says  at  the  close  of 
his  remarks  the  following: 

As  one  whose  lifelong  interest  in  the  work  of  the  Young  Men's 
Christian  Association  is  well  known,  I  sincerely  hope  that  the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Central  Young  Men's  Christian  Associa- 
tion will  at  as  early  a  date  as  possible  repudiate  the  statements 
of  the  lecturer  who  under  their  auspices  has  recently  spoken  so 
disparagingly  of  a  portion  of  the  Word  of  God,  found  in  the 
Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  which  constituted  the  Bible 
of  our  Lord,  and  of  which  the  Greatest  Apostle  wrote:  "All  Scrip- 
ture is  given  by  inspiration  of  God."  Such  destructive  utter- 
ances regarding  a  portion  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  reveal  to  us  the 
absolute  impossibility  of  reconciling,  as  some  have  hoped  to  do,  the 
contending  parties  on  the  great  question  of  Biblical  criticism. 

We  have  not  heard  if  the  directors  of  the  Toronto  Y.  M* 
C.  A.  have  acted  on  this  request. 


58  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

**The  Time  Will  Come,"  remarked  a  skeptic  to  the 
philosopher,  'Vhen  men  will  no  more  believe  in  God  than 
they  now  believe  in  ghosts."  "Should  that  time  come/' 
was  the  rejoinder,  "they  will  begin  again  to  believe  in 
ghosts."  And  this  time  does  not  need  to  come.  It  is 
here  already. 

Christian  Endeavorers'  Convention.  Thousands  of 
Endeavorers  gathered  in  Atlantic  City,  N.  J.,  during 
July.  President  Taft  was  there  and  was  introduced  by 
Dr.  Clark.  Of  course  Mr.  Taft's  address  was  greeted 
with  tremendous  enthusiasm.  That  Mr.  Taft  is  an  out- 
spoken Unitarian,  who  denies  the  Lord  of  Glory,  is  too 
well  known  to  need  restatement.  The  Endeavor  move- 
ment is  evidently  corrupting  itself  and  must  be  looked 
upon  as  siding  with  the  apostasy. 

Triumphant  Romanism.  The  unsettled,  drifting  and 
apostate  conditions  of  Protestantism  are  now  constantly 
used  by  the  Romish  "church"  to  show  that  the  reforma- 
tion movement  is  a  tremendous  failure.  Roman  Catho- 
licism lifts  its  head  and  realizes  the  great  opportunity  it 
has  in  the  English  speaking  world.  Its  claims  become 
more  bold  and  vigorous.  It  is  the  beginning  of  that 
revival,  which  the  Word  predicts  for  the  end  time.  As 
reported  in  our  November  issue  the  Ecumenical  Con- 
ference on  Methodism  endorsed  more  or  less  the  destruc- 
tive Criticism,  which  is  so  prominent  in  that  denomination. 
A  leading  Roman  Catholic  periodical,  published  in 
Canada,  makes  the  following  comment: 

"We  can  well  remember  the  day  when  Catholics  throughout 
the  world  were  pictured  as  the  enemies  of  the  Bible,  simply  because 
the   Church   insisted   that  every  Tom,   Dick,   and   Harry  was   not 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  59 

competent  to  Interpret  it  as  they  pleased.  The  Toms,  Dicks, 
and  Harrys  of  our  Methodist  brethren  have  certainly  been  in- 
strumental In  creating  a  great  deal  of  confusion  in  their  own  fold, 
and,  after  we  have  read  their  utterances,  we  are  not  surprised  at 
The  Guardian'^ s  admission  that  Methodism  somehow  is  losing  its 
grip  all  along  the  line.  These  Methodist  critics  of  the  pulpit  who 
are  preaching  their  doubts  have  unsettled  the  simple  faith  of  the 
rank  and  file;  and,  in  the  course  of  the  debate,  the  pathetic  admis- 
sion stands  out  forcibly  that  the  people  sitting  in  the  pews  are  look- 
ing wistfully  and  vainly  to  the  pulpits  for  the  assurance  that  there 
is  at  least  some  one  thing  upon  which  Methodist  faith  can  rest." 

What  a  clever  argument!  The  next  thing  is  that 
"mother  church"  as  they  term  their  system  (the  Mother 
of  harlots  according  to  the  Bible)  alone  has  the  founda- 
tion upon  which  faith  rests.  And  such  language  blinds 
the  eyes  of  thousands  of  unsaved  "Protestants"  who 
sooner  or  later  will  be  swallowed  up  by  Rome.  Rome  is, 
has  been  and  ever  will  be  the  enemy  of  the  Bible. 

A  Common  Religion  as  the  Hope  of  the  World.  Some 
time  ago  there  was  held  in  London  the  "Universal  Races 
Congress."  One  of  the  leaders,  Sir  Harry  Hamilton 
Johnston,  Vice-President  of  the  Royal  Anthropological 
Institute,  suggests  now  in  The  Contemporary  Review  a 
universal  religion  for  all  races,  and  according  to  his  views 
such  a  religion  would  solve  forever  the  problems  of  race 
differences,  race  aversion,  hatred,  malice  in  strife.  It 
would  be  the  hope  of  the  human  race. 

"If  only  we  could  agree  upon  a  common  interracial  religion,  and 
that  the  most  simple,  undogmatic  form  of  Christianity — Chris- 
tianity without  the  creeds  that  were  unknown  to  Christ!  The 
Christian  principles  that  were  laid  down  in  the  authentic  gospels  and 
epistles  still  remain  unsurpassed  as  a  rule  of  conduct,  as  a  basis  of 
practical  ethics.  They  are  unconnected  with  totemism,  sabbaths, 
fetish-worship,  mysticism,  vexatious  observances,  litanies,  and  the 


60  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

disputable  adjuncts  of  a  religion.  If  we  could  agree  to  define  and 
adopt  such  a  basis  and  make  it  the  state  of  religion  of  every  country, 
with  leave  to  each  person  and  community  to  add,  on  their  own 
account,  the  elaborations  of  ritual  necessary  to  some  individualities, 
we  should  have  gone  far  to  establish  a  brotherhood  of  man,  a  brother- 
hood which  need  not  mean  necessarily  a  mingling  of  blood,  but  a 
common  sympathy  and  interest  in  the  development  of  humanity. 
Applying  Christian  principles,  the  white  man  would  treat  the  other 
races  of  mankind  with  kindness  and  justice,  without  scorn  or  harsh 
impatience;  and  they,  on  their  part,  would  co-operate  with  him  in 
the  tremendous  struggle  with  the  blind  and  heartless  forces  of 
nature  which  ever  and  again  seem  to  threaten  man's  very  existence.'* 

In  such  an  interracial  religion  in  which  Christian  princi- 
ples are  maintained,  he  sees  the  great  advancement  of 
the  nations  in  thus  bringing  them  together. 

"Japan  would  make  a  tremendous  step  forward  in  the  comity  of 
nations  if  to-morrow  she  declared  her  state  religion  to  be  undog- 
matic  Christianity.  The  only  hope  for  the  continued  survival  of  the 
Turkish  dynasty  and  empire  is  for  it  to  have  no  state  religion  at 
present,  so  that  Christianity  and  Judaism  may  be  placed  on  at  least 
an  equal  footing  with  Islam,  so  that  mass  may  once  more  be  sung 
at  St.  Sophia's,  and  Jerusalem  be  restored  to  the  Jews  as  a  religious 
center,  while  Christians  would  be  allowed  to  visit  Mecca  as  freely 
as  Mohammedans  are  permitted  to  enter  St.  Peter's,  St.  PauFs,  St. 
Mungo's  of  Glasgow,   or  St.   Sofia's   Church   at   Kief." 

But  what  is  this  **undogmatic  Christianity  .f^"  A  denial 
of  Christianity  itself.  Certain  ethical  teachings,  which 
are  also  found  in  some  heathen  religions,  arc  to  be  en- 
forced, but  Christianity  itself,  which  is  not  a  system  of 
ethics,  but  a  Person,  is  to  be  rejected.  All  civilized 
nations  surely  can  be  united  in  a  universal,  common 
religion,  which  excludes  the  Person  of  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Death  of  the  Cross  and  the  great  redemption  truths  made 
known  by  the  Holy  Spirit  come  down  from  heaven. 
Unitarianism,  Universalism,  Christian  Science,  Bahaism 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  61 

and  parts  of  Protestantism  which  endorse  the  New 
Theology  can  fall  in  line  with  such  a  scheme.  These 
suggestions  are  not  new.  But  never  before  have  things 
been  so  ready  for  a  practical  demonstration  as  now. 
Satan's  universal  church,  the  predicted  anti-Christian 
world-church  is  in  sight. 

Confusion  Worse  Confounded.  Zion  City,  founded  by 
the  late  deluded  John  Alexander  Dowie,  seems  to  have 
become  the  Mecca  of  all  the  cranks  of  the  different  fanati- 
cal and  fantastic  movements.  During  the  past  summer 
seventeen  religious  bodies,  representing  thousands  of 
adherents,  held  their  gatherings  in  Zion.  These  includde 
the  following: 

"Christian  Catholic  Apostolic  Church,  Overseer  Volivia; 
Christian  Catholic  Church,  Overseer  Daniel  Bryant; 
Original  Dowieite  Church,  Elder  Taylor;  Star  Christian 
Catholic  Church,  Overseer  J.  A.  Lewis;  Pentecostal 
Vineyard  Workers,  Elder  Brooks;  Parha mites,  Holy 
Rollers,  Christian  Assembly,  Seventh  Day  Adventists, 
Original  Methodist  Church,  Feet  Washers,  Free  Lovers, 
Colored  Dowieites,  Banner  Bearers  and  Latter  Day 
Saints." 

What  heresy,  confusion  and  wickedness  these  names 
represent!  Yet  they  all  seem  to  prosper  and  all  report 
numerical  and  financial  increase.  Besides  these  bodies 
there  are  scores  of  other  cults  which  belong  to  the. same 
class. 

A  Bishop's  Statements.  Among  the  many  reports 
sent  to  us  recently  about  men,  who  deny  the  faith  and 
reject  the  Bible  as  the  holy  and  infallible  Word  of  God, 
were  some  which  relate  to  the  utterances  of  Bishop  W.  F. 
McDowell  of  the    Methodist  Episcopal  Church.     In  the 


62  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

First  M.  E.  Church  of  Evanston,  111.,  he  boldly  defended 
the  modern  conception  of  the  Inspiration  of  the  Scriptures 
and  put  himself  on  the  side  of  ^'Higher  Criticism." 

"One  may  still  have  fellowship  with  God  and  surmise  that  the 
Pentateuch  was  riot  written  by  Moses;  that  the  Levitical  legisla- 
tion was  post-exilian;  that  the  book  of  Isaiah  is  of  composite  author- 
ship; that  the  book  of  Daniel  is  a  story  to  illustrate  how  God  keeps 
watch,  over  his  own;  that  the  book  of  Job  is  a  dramatic  putting 
of  the  problem  of  evil  in  the  world,  and  that  Jonah  is  an  allegory 
setting  forth  the  universality  of  God's  love. 

"We  may  even  go  farther  than  that.  We  may  admit  that  the 
Bible  as  we  have  it  is  a  book  derived  from  secondary  sources;  that 
the  autographs  of  the  evangelists  and  apostles  irrevocably  have 
been  lost;  that  there  are  omissions  and  interpolations,  glosses,  and 
misreadings  numerous  enough  to  be  discouraging;  that  genealogies 
and  chronologies,  are  hopelessly  confused;  and  that  there  are  dis- 
crepancies of  statement  about  matters  of  fact  which  are  not  to  be 
reconciled.  I  say  we  may  admit  all  that  and  still  realize  that  in  its 
central  feature  of  its  commission  as  a  veritable  word  of  God,  it  is 
so  full,  so  final,  so  clean  cut,  so  intelligible,  so  authoritative,  that  the 
wayfaring  man  has  to  be  a  superabundant  fool  who  seriously  errs  with 
respect  to  it." 

What  schoolboy  talk  this  Is!  As  one,  who  claims  a 
high  position  in  a  denomination  and  makes  such  state- 
ments, his  responsibility  certainly  is  great.  Yet  we  were 
told  that  he  used  to  be  a  believer  in  the  second,  pre- 
millennial  coming  of  Christ.  We  have  watched  others, 
who  gave  up  the  blessed  hope  some  years  ago  and  now 
they  have  lost  their  spiritual  conception  and  power  and 
follow  error. 

The  drift  downward  is  pronounced  in  Alcthodism. 
Some  of  their  Bishops,  professors  and  preachers  deny  the 
fundamentals.     One  of  their  book-agents  has  stated   in 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  63 

print  the  infidel  theories  of  Paine  and  Voltaire.  No 
wonder  that  many  loyal  preachers  and  members  of  that 
denomination  are  saddened  and  perplexed.  What  shall 
we  do?  This  question  has  often  been  put  to  us.  The 
Word  is  clear.  "From  such  turn  away."  Read  2  John, 
verses  9-11. 

Optimistic  Visions.  A  few  years  before  the  nineteenth 
century  closed  the  late  Dr.  Talmage  preached  a  sermon  on 
"a  revival  in  Washington."  He  predicted  that  before 
the  year  1900  would  begin,  a  great  revival  would  start  in 
Washington  and  sweep  over  the  entire  world.  We  came 
recently  across  a  quotation  from  that  sermon. 

The  Senators  of  the  United  States  will  announce  to  the  State 
Legislatures  that  sent  them  here,  and  members  of  the  House  of 
Representatives  will  report  to  the  congressional  districts  that  elected 
them,  and  the  many  thousands  of  men  and  women  now  and  here 
engaged  in  the  many  departments  of  national  service  will  write 
home,  telling  all  sections  of  the  country  that  the  Lord  is  here,  and 
that  he  is  on  the  march  for  the  redemption  of  America.  Hallelujah! 
the  Lord  is  coming!  I  hear  the  rumbling  of  His  chariot  wheels. 
I  feel  on  my  cheeks  the  breath  of  the  white  horses  that  draw  the 
victor!  I  see  the  flash  of  His  lanterns  through  the  whole  night  of 
the  world's  sin  and  sorrow!  .  .  .  Lord  God  of  Joshua!  Let 
the  sun  of  this  century  stand  still  above  Gibeon  and  the  moon  above 
the  valley  of  Ajalon  until  we  can  whip  out  the  five  kings  of  hell, 
tumbling  them  down  the  precipices  as  the  other  five  kings  went 
over  the  rocks  of  Bethhoran.  Ha!  Ha!  It  will  so  surely  be  done 
that  I  can  not  restrain  the  laugh  of  triumph. 

These  are  indeed  "great  swelling  words."  The  year 
1900  came,  but  the  revival  in  Washington  did  not  show 
up.  Since  then  we  have  heard  similar  predictions  of 
sweeping  revivals,  the  soon  coming  conversion  of  the 
world,  the  redemption  of  the  masses,  and  what  not.  But 
all  these  things  have  not  materialized  and  the  spiritual 


64  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

condition  of  Christendom  to-day  is  far  more  desperate 
than  it  was  ten  years  ago. 

Rome  Unchanged.  Rome  in  her  hatred  of  the  Gospel 
and  God's  Holy  Word  is  unchanged.  Abundant  evidence 
to  this  effect  can  easily  be  gathered  in  countries  where  she 
still  has  the  power.  Before  us  is  a  communication  from  a 
dear  brother  upon  whose  heart  it  was  laid  to  scatter  the 
Scriptures  and  preach  the  Gospel  in  the  Canary  Islands. 
The  priests  and  the  Romish  bishop,  hating  the  Gospel, 
brought  about  his  arrest,  and  he  was  put  into  a  vile 
dungeon  and  the  guard  was  told  to  beat  him  severely  in 
case  he  did  not  obey  in  all  things.     The  brother  writes: 

"The  dungeon  was  damp  and  dark  and  the  earthen  floor 
was  covered  with  filth,  so  that  the  stench  was  something 
awful.  There  was  no  chair,  not  even  a  straw  bed  to  lie 
upon.  After  groping  on  the  floor  I  discovered  two  men 
who  had  been  placed  in  the  dungeon  the  day  before. 
No  food  nor  even  a  drink  of  water  had  been  given  to  them, 
so  they  were  desperately  hungry  and  thirsty.  I  told  them 
later  that  I  would  pray  for  them.  But  hearing  this  they 
became  frightened  and  said,  O  Sir,  if  you  pray  the  guard 
will  come  and  beat  us  and  put  a  gag  in  your  mouth. 
One  of  the  prisoners  said  that  he  had  seen  instruments  of 
torture  as  they  used  in  the  days  of  the  inquisition,  and 
that  one  man  was  so  badly  beaten  that  he  died  immediately 
after  and  was  buried  like  a  dog." 

After  a  few  days  of  suffering  this  brother  was  released. 
He  also  says  that  he  was  arrested  three  times  during  his 
stay  in  the  islands,  spit  upon  and  stoned.  The  windows 
of  the  little  mission  and  the  furniture  were  broken,  etc. 
Similar  persecutions  take  place  almost  constantly  in 
Central  and  South  America.     "She  repents  not"  we  read 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  65 

of  her  in  the  book  of  Revelation.  If  Rome  had  the  power 
she  would  instigate  the  same  persecutions  in  this  country. 
And  she  is  reaching  out  for  that  power. 

Apostasy  Ripening.  Numerous  clippings  from  different 
parts  of  the  country  have  reached  us,  which  give  reports 
of  men  and  institutions  opposing  the  Bible  and  the  Truth 
of  God.  Many  of  our  readers  tell  us  in  letters  of  preachers 
who  deny  the  Bible  and  sneer  at  the  Gospel.  Every- 
where good  people  are  perplexed,  and  those  who  know  the 
truth  and  love  their  Bibles  are  greatly  burdened  and 
ask — What  is  to  be  done.^  The  conditions  of  apostasy 
are  upon  us.  They  cannot  be  changed.  The  tares  will 
be  in  the  field  till  the  harvest  comes,  which  is  the  end  of 
this  age.  God  expects  of  His  people  to  be  loyal  to  His 
Word  and  loyal  to  His  blessed  Son.  This  loyalty  must 
be  expressed  in  separation  from  evil.  May  He  help  us  in 
His  Grace  to  stand  boldly  for  His  Truth!  The  Reward 
is  in  sight. 

Making  Sport  with  God's  Law.  The  Holy  Law  of 
God  is  often  ridiculed.  Apostate  Jews  and  apostate 
Christians  laugh  at  the  divine  statement  that  God  wrote 
the  ten  commandments  upon  the  tables  of  stone.  Others 
speak  of  revising  the  commandments  and  recently  there 
appeared  in  the  daily  papers  humorous  ten  command- 
ments for  wives  and  a  similar  set  for  husbands,  mocking 
God's  commandment  and  law,  which  is  holy,  just  and 
good  (Rom.  vii:12).     All  this  shows  the  spirit  of  the  age. 

Death  and  Hell  Ridiculed.  "It  is  appointed  unto  men 
once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment"  (Heb,  ix:27).  This 
is  the  simple  declaration  of  the  Word  of  God.  The  wages 
of  sin  is  death.     "Through  one  man  sin  entered  into  the 


66  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

world  and  death  by  sin;  and  so  death  passed  upon  all 
men,  for  that  all  sinned"  (Rom.  v:12).  How  the  solemn 
fact  of  death  is  made  light  of  and  God's  revelation  con- 
cerning man's  condition  is  defied  may  be  learned  from 
the  organization  of  "The  Jolly  Pallbearers'  Club"  in 
St.  Louis,  Mo.: 

"The  Jolly  Pallbearers'  Club,"  whose  purpose  it  is  to  get  what  joy- 
there  is  out  of  a  funeral,  has  become  an  organized  body.  Chief 
mourners  were  delegated,  officers  were  elected  and  a  bit  of  crape  was 
decided  on  as  a  badge  of  membership. 

They  propose,  wholly  and  singly,  not  to  let  a  funeral  dirge  dampen 
the  ardor  of  their  spirits,  and  to  lay  a  club  companion  away  in  his 
final  resting  place  with  as  much  good  cheer  as  ever  characterizes 
the  initiation  of  a  new  member. 

A  clubhouse  has  been  provided  and  there  the  mutuality  of  life  and 
the  probability  of  death  will  be  lightsomely  discussed.  The  motto 
of  the  club  is  "Joy,"  with  a  band  of  crape  around  it. 

They  believe  in  the  words  of  Joe  Simmins,  one  of  the  promoters, 
that  "there's  too  much  gloom  in  grief,"  and  that  there  are  really 
attractive  chances  of  enjoyment  in  a  properly  conducted  funeral. 

Special  inducements  to  members  to  die  in  membership  will  be 
made,  so  that  the  club  may  enjoy  as  many  occasions  as  possible  for 
unconfined  mirth. 

Surely  this  outdoes  heathenism.  The  heathen  at  least 
acknowledge  the  solemnity  of  death  and  express  their 
sorrow.  But  here  are  people  who  would  make  the  wages 
of  sin  an  occasion  of  mirth  and  jollification.  What 
defiance! 

Still  worse  is  the  ever-increasing  denial  of  "judgment 
to  come"  and  the  punishment  of  the  wicked.  The  whole 
country  is  being  flooded  with  the  miserable  sheets  of 
Russell's  institution.  The  headlines  state  **Hell  Officially 
Abolished  in  Washington."  The  "Bible  Students"  of 
Millennial  Dawnism,  or,  as  they  call  themselves,  Inter- 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  67 

national  Bible  Student  Association,  held  a  meeting  in 
Washington  months  ago  and  passed  certain  resolutions 
about  their  denials  of  the  everlasting  punishment  of  the 
wicked.  Ever  since  they  have  sent  abroad  their  blas- 
phemous sheets.  How  any  sane  person  could  ever 
believe  that  "hell  can  be  officially  abolished  in  Wash- 
ington" we  cannot  understand.  But  multitudes  want 
to  believe  it,  for  they  live  in  sin. 

What  an  awful  awakening  will  come  ere  long!  When 
God  vindicates  His  Word  these  wicked  apostates  will 
know  that  "it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
living  God"  (Heb.  x:31). 

The  Riches  of  Rome.  Few  people  know  of  the  im- 
mense wealth  and  princely  luxuries  with  which  the  man  is 
surrounded,  who  claims  to  be  the  successor  of  Peter,  the 
poor  Galilean  fisherman.  The  revenue  of  the  present 
pope,  who  lives  in  a  magnificent  palace,  is  $3,000,000  a 
year.  The  following  gives  a  little  idea  of  the  treasures 
of  the  Vatican: 

According  to  an  approximate  valuation  made  several  years  ago 
the  treasures  of  the  Vatican,  including  the  Basilica  of  St.  Peter, 
and  the  Lateran  Museums,  as  well  as  the  papal  summer  residence 
at  Castel  Gandolfo,  which  also  enjoys  the  privilege  of  extra  terri- 
toriality, are  worth  considerably  over  $200,000,000.  The  following 
figures  are  given: 

Picture  galleries  of  the  Vatican $1,600,000 

Egyptian  Museum 12,200,000 

Numismatic  collection 5,000,000 

Museum  of  ancient  statuary 20,000,000 

Other  minor  collections 3,000,000 

Vatican  library 40,000,000 

Vatican  archives 16,000,000 

Ancient  furniture  in  the  Vatican 5,000,000 

Tapestry  and  other  stuffs 1,200,000 


68  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Jewelry  and  precious  stones 14,000,000 

St.    Peter's   Church   with   statuary,    marbles,    mosaics, 

sacred  objects,  and  vestments,  etc 40,000,000 

Lateran  museums,  including  the  treasures  and  relics  in 

in  St.  John  Lateran 20,000,000 

Papal  Palace  of  Castel  Gandolfo 3,000,000 

The  historical  interest  attaching  to  every  art  object  in  the  Vatican 
collections,  the  unique  character  of  most  of  the  ancient  statues, 
bas  reliefs  and  other  archaeological  specimens,  and  many  other 
similar  special  considerations  have  to  be  taken  into  account  in 
estimating  the  value  of  the  treasures  of  the  Holy  See.  It  is  obvious 
that  any  valuation  under  such  conditions  can  only  be  approximate. 

Rome  and  the  Vatican  are  prophetically  described  in 
Rev.  xvii  and  xviii.  Read  these  chapters  and  notice  the 
luxuries  mentioned.  Silver,  gold,  precious  stones,  pearls, 
every  article  of  ivory,  marble,  etc.,  are  enumerated.  The 
bodies  and  souls  of  men  are  also  found  there.  But  more 
than  that:  '*In  her  was  found  the  blood  of  prophets,  and 
of  saints,  and  of  all  that  had  been  slain  on  the  earth" 
(Rev.  xviii :24).  Some  day  she  will  be  remembered  and 
be  stripped  of  all  her  luxuries  and  glories  by  God's  own 
hand. 

Heathendom  and  Scoffing.  Paris  held  recently  a  great 
festival  in  honor  of  the  *'Sun."  Many  thousands  took 
part  in  it.  Eloquent  speeches  were  delivered  in  praise  of 
"the  Sun."  There  was  much  merry-making  and  ''Sun- 
dancing."  All  sports  and  ceremonies  were  in  honor  "of  the 
Sun.  With  it  there  was  much  debauchery  and  licentious- 
ness. An  old  heathen  sun-worshipper  of  past  ages  would 
have  delighted  in  it  and  would  have  been  perfectly  at 
home.  It  is  a  sure  return  to  the  idolatries  of  the  past,  a 
fact  which  the  Bible  predicts,  that  men  shall  turn  back  to 
the  fables  and  ceremonies  of  heathendom.     Read  Ezekiel 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  69 

viii:16.  That  was  one  of  Israel's  sins  before  the  Lord 
judged  Jerusalem.  In  the  United  States  there  are 
thousands  of  Sun-worshippers,  who  really  worship  the 
Sun.  Abdul-Baha,  the  leader  of  Bahaism,  is  an  idolator 
of  the  Sun.  This  heathen  spoke  in  "churches"  of  various 
denominations  in  our  country. 

And  Paris  scoffs  at  divine  things.  Of  late  the  fashion- 
able people  give  parties  in  honor  of  their  pet-dogs,  when 
they  are  '^baptized";  the  whole  thing  is  an  outright 
mockery.     How  long  will  God  stand  it.^ 

Sound    Doctrine    Abandoned  and  the    Itching    Ears. 

We  have  little  to  say  on  the  spiritual  conditions  of 
many  of  the  churches  in  this  land.  If  we  were  to  make 
use  of  all  we  see  and  hear,  as  well  as  the  many  news- 
paper clippings  and  personal  incidents  sent  to  us  by  our 
friends,  we  fear  we  would  have  to  devote  many  pages 
of  this  book  to  this  subject.  This  we  cannot  do  nor  do  we 
like  to  do  it.  Yet  it  is  necessary  to  call  attention  to  it. 
Many  of  the  modern  "churches"  are  nothing  else  than 
clubs  and  societies  for  social,  musical  and  intellectual 
entertainment.  The  men  who  pose  as  leaders  and  preachers 
are  at  best  self-seeking  men,  who  were  perhaps  never  born 
again,  blind  leaders  of  the  blind.  No  wonder  Rome 
laughs  and  with  a  sneer  points  to  Protiestantism  as 
"Babylon  (confusion)  the  Great." 

Before  us  is  a  newspaper  advertisement  from  Los 
Angeles.  The  pastor  of  the  Temple  Auditorium  an- 
nounces himself  as  "the  brilliant,  fearless,  earnest  preacher, 
who  makes  you  think."  His  topic  on  a  certain  even- 
ing was,  "The  Man  of  the  House;  Is  He  the  Head  of 
the  House  .^"     The  third  in  a  series,  "How  to  be  Happy 


70  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Though  Married."  A  special  solo  is  promised  entitled 
^^Daddy^  Another  preacher  declared  to  be  ''one  of  the 
most  brilliant  and  scholarly  pulpit  orators"  was  to  speak 
that  same  evening  on  "Doctor  S.  of  Denver."  What 
scholarship  is  needed  to  preach  on  Doctor  S.  of  Denver 
(what  it  means  we  do  not  know)  we  fail  to  see.  The 
advertisement  has  a  full-sized  portrait  of  the  preacher. 
The  entire  thing  is  nauseating.  But  1  John  iv:5  applies 
to  such  men,  ''They  are  of  the  world,  therefore  they 
speak  of  the  world  and  the  world  hears  them." 

While  in  Boston  a  few  weeks  ago  we  were  told  that 
Dr.  Johnson,  another  great  "divine"  (as  they  call  them) 
announced  that  he  would  speak  on  "the  hobble  skirt." 
Of  course  he  had  a  big  crowd  of  silly  women  and  men  as 
well  as  curiosity  seekers  and  cranks  of  every  description 
for  which  Boston  has  such  a  great  reputation.  According 
to  the  Boston  Globe^  this  is  what  he  said: 

"There  is  no  more  potent  influence  for  good  in  the  modern  com- 
munity to-day  than  feminine  fashion.  Not  only  are  the  ever  chang- 
ing fashions  of  women  one  of  the  chief  delights  of  civilized 
communities,  but  it  is  a  safe  statement  to  make  that  we  have  to-day 
no  more  conclusive  key  to  a  woman's  mental  and  moral  develop- 
ment than  the  clothes  she  wears.  The  man  or  woman  who  dresses 
the  best,  whose  personal  habits  are  the  most  irreproachable,  is,  in 
all  the  countries  of  the  earth,  the  man  or  woman  whose  mental 
and  moral  development  is  the  highest  advanced.  A  girl  or  a  woman 
who  is  self-respecting  will  always  dress  fashionably  and  well.  The 
hobble  skirt,  the  peach  basket  hat,  high-heeled  shoes,  and  all  the 
thousand  and  one  foibles  of  the  feminine  sex  are  entertaining  and 
products  of  good.  A  girl  who,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not  care 
about  dress  and  the  latest  fashions  is  not  a  normal  girl. 

"The  young  man  who  contemplates  marriage  nowadays  may  fight 
shy  of  the  girl  of  fashion,  but  he  makes  a  mistake.  He  may  be 
a  gainer  at  first  financially,  but  in  the  end  he  pays  a  terrible  price 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  71 

for  his  shortsightedness.  The  girl  who  is  lax  about  her  personal 
appearance  is  lax  mentally  and  morally.  She  is  not  made  of  the 
stuff  that  turns  out  self-respecting  children.  She  is  either  a  vision- 
ary, and  as  such  an  unreliable  element  in  the  community,  or  she  is 
downright  lax  and  shiftless.  In  either  race  she  is  not  a  safe  prop- 
osition for  the  ordinary  young  man.'* 

We  asked  our  Informant  if  this  man  has  anyone  to  hear 
him  and  were  told  that  "his"  church  is  packed.  What 
a  testimony  this  is  to  the  spiritual  conditions  of  the  pres- 
ent day.  These  men  make  of  the  unsaved  masses  who 
come  to  hear  them  "twofold  more  the  child  of  hell."  The 
Lord's  Word  is  meant  for  such  "Woe  unto  you,  ye  blind 
guides"  (Matthew  xxiii:16).  Poor  man!  does  he  not 
know  that  the  very  luxuries  he  mentions  have  been  the 
snare  and  are  the  snare  into  which  thousands  of  girls  fall 
every  year  to  the  destruction  of  their  bodies  and  souls. 

From  Detroit,  Mich.,  we  learn  that  a  moving  picture 
show  and  theatre  is  to  be  conducted  by  some  churches. 
They  have  not  yet  decided  whether  to  keep  open  on  Sun- 
day or  not.  The  Central  M.  E.  Church  of  that  city  is 
giving  occasionally  moving  picture  shows  for  their  young 
folk. 

But  this  will  suffice.  One  dislikes  to  hold  up  those  sad 
things  to  the  light.  Others  we  might  mention  we  gladly 
cover  up.  Still  God's  people  everywhere  should  be  re- 
minded that  the  time  has  come  of  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
speaks  in  2  Tim.  iv:3:  "For  the  time  will  come  when  they 
will  not  endure  sound  doctrine;  but  after  their  own  lusts 
shall  they  heap  to  themselves  teachers  having  itching 
ears."    That  time  is  here. 

The  Downward  Road  of  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  We  have 
called  attention  from  time  to  time  to  the  drifting  con- 


72  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

ditions  of  many  Y.  IM.  C.  A.  institutions.  Of  course  there 
are  many  associations  under  the  leadership  of  earnest 
secretaries,  spiritual  men  who  are  as  much  grieved  over 
these  sad  conditions  as  we  are,  but  they  seem  to  become 
less  in  number.  The  following  paragraph  is  taken  from 
the  "Christian  Sentinel,"  the  most  prominent  Christian 
Science  paper  in  the  country: 

Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  An  audience  that  occupied  about  all 
the  seat  space  in  the  Colonial  Theatre  heard  Miss  Mary  Brookins 
last  night  (June  17)  deliver  a  lecture  on  Christian  Science.  Oscar 
L.  Cox,  Secretary  of  the  Young  Men*s  Christian  Association  of  Salt 
Lake,  introduced  Miss  Brookins,  reading  from  a  carefully  prepared 
speech.     He  said  in  part: 

"Utah's  welfare  demands  the  spirit  of  religious  tolerance  which 
the  Christian  Science  church  has  shown  by  inviting  me  to  speak  a 
word  of  preface  this  evening,  for  I  am  one  whom  somewhat  careful 
thought  has  caused  to  accept  the  statement  of  religious  truth  as  put 
forth  by  another  denomination  than  your  own.  No  man  should 
fail  these  days  to  secure  active  identification  with  that  church  which 
stirs  his  heart  to  repentant  shame  for  yesterday's  failure  and  to 
courageous  planning  for  to-day's  victory.  He  need  not  attempt  to 
coerce  his  intellect  into  the  acceptance  of  his  present  or  any  other 
profession — the  intellect  cannot  be  coerced.  It  must  be  fed  with 
fact  and  then  followed. 

"I  am  glad  that  it  is  my  honor  to  present  the  speaker  of  the 
evening,  not  as  representing  my  personal  viewpoint  on  religious 
matters,  since  I  work  with  another  church  group,  but  because  she 
comes  to  us  with  the  ripe  culture  of  thought  and  study,  bringing 
the  Christian  Science  viewpoint  to  our  attention  in  such  a  manner 
that  we  may  be  intelligent  in  its  consideration." 

The  N.  Y.  Christian  Advocate  (Methodist)  comments  on 
this  as  follows: 

"That  secretary  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Associa- 
tion in  Salt  Lake,  surrounded  by  Mormonism  of  the  Bring- 
ham  Young  type,  which  is  far  from  Christianity  in  its 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  73 

doctrines  and  teachings,  has  himself  to  justify  for  intro- 
ducing Christian  Science  'as  a  church'  and  encouraging 
the  members  of  the  Christian  Science  organization  not  to 
make  any  particular  efforts  to  change  their  views.  He 
seems  not  to  understand  that  nineteen-twentieths  of  the 
evils  and  the  foolish  ideas  in  the  world  arise  from  one's 
own  disposition  and  desires  which  coerce  the  intellect. 

"Logically,  this  man,  representing  the  Young  Men's 
Christian  Association  of  Salt  Lake,  laid  a  platform  for 
hobnobbing  with  the  Mormons.  Every  word  that  he 
has  here  uttered  would  apply  to  them.  Christian  Science, 
in  several  respects,  is  as  far  from  Christianity  as  the 
Mormon  religion. 

"It  should  not  be  inferred  from  these  references  that  we 
would  suppress  by  law  or  by  mob  Spiritualists,  Christian 
Scientists,  non-polygamous  Mormons.  Citizens  can 
choose  their  own  religion.  The  question  is  what  a  pro- 
fessedly Christian  representative  of  a  Christian  organiza- 
tion for  the  benefit  of  young  men  should  do,  or  be  allowed 
to  do. 

"There  should  be  some  general  supervision  of  the  Young 
Men's  Christian  Association.  Not  infrequently  some 
secretary  or  other  oflScial  places  the  association  in  a  very 
bad  light." 

This  is  about  as  bad  as  we  have  heard  yet.  Some 
years  ago,  the  Pastor  of  the  Central  Congregational 
Church,  Winnipeg,  Manitoba,  presided  over  a  Christian 
Science  meeting,  the  first,  we  believe,  which  ever  was  held 
in  that  city.  He  wished  them  God's  speed.  That  city 
has  since  then  become  a  northwestern  stronghold  of  this 
anti-christian  cult.  Men  who  can  endorse  and  welcome 
Christian  Science  are  either  totally  ignorant  of  what  this 


74  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Science  falsely  so  called  stands  for,  or  they  have  never 
been  born  again,  possess  no  spiritual  life  and  therefore 
talk  as  natural  men.  We  believe  the  latter  is  more  the 
case  than  the  former. 

The  Brotherhood  Federation.  The  following  is  taken 
from  The  Daily  Mail  and  J? wpzV^,  published  in  Toronto: 

The  Brotherhood  Federation  of  Canada  bids  fair  to  prove  one 
of  the  greatest  organizations  in  connection  with  men's  societies 
of  the  Canadian  churches.  It  has  affiliated  with  it  the  Brother- 
hood of  St.  Andrew  and  Phillip,  the  Methodist  Young  Men's 
Association,  the  Baptist  Young  Men's  Association,  and  the  Con- 
gregational Brotherhood.  The  aims  of  the  federation  are  to 
promote  a  closer  relation  between  the  church  and  the  men,  and 
to  reach  the  great  masses  of  people  who  are  not  in  touch  with 
religion.  In  fact,  one  of  the  chief  characters  of  the  federation 
is  its  evangelicalism,  and  the  first  clause  in  the  constitution  of 
the  organization  is  that  no  society  may  affiliate  unless  it  recognizes 
this  important  phase.  Its  great  object  is  to  make  religion  attrac- 
tive to  the  average  man,  and  to  reach  out  individually  and  secure 
men  for  Christ.  The  Brotherhood  Federation  is  interdenomina- 
tional, and  invites  any  society  or  organization  to  affiliate  with  it 
who  will  respect  its  ideals,  and  lend  its  assistance  in  the  great 
evangelical  work. 

Federation  and  combination  is  the  program  of  "church- 
ism"  of  the  future.  All  kinds  of  associations,  alliances, 
brotherhoods,  clubs  and  societies  on  religious  ground 
were  started  during  the  last  twenty-five  years  and  now 
these  are  to  be  amalgamated  into  one  great  federation. 

The  words  "evangelical"  and  "evangelism"  are  main- 
tained, but  stripped  of  their  meaning.  Religion  of  some 
kind  is  put  in  the  place  of  salvation  and  religion  is  to 
be  made  attractive  to  the  average  man.  From  this  kind 
of  federation  it  is  expected  that  the  threatening  collapse 
of  churches,  which  have  a  name  to  live  but  are  dead, 
may  be  averted.     But  it  is  Babylon  pure  and  simple. 


RELIGIOUS   APOSTASY.  75 

"Not  by  might  or  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith 
the  Lord  of  Hosts"  (Zech.  iv:6).  It  is  significant  that 
the  Hebrew  word  translated  "might"  means  "a  host 
combined"  a  "team." 

World  Conference  for  Church  Union.  A  very  signifi- 
cant attempt  is  being  made  now  to  bring  all  Christendom 
together.  One  marked  feature  of  this  movement,  in  which 
it  has  departed  from  any  previous  effort,  is  its  Catholic 
nature.  It  is  not  an  attempt  of  Protestantism  to  ally  itself 
into  one  camp,  but  its  scope  includes  both  the  Roman 
Catholic  and  the  Greek  churches.  During  the  last  half  of 
June  commissions  of  English  and  American  preachers  met 
in  Lambeth  palace,.  London,  to  evolve  a  plan  whereby  the 
unity  of  Christendom  can  be  accomplished.  Lambeth 
palace  where  the  delegates  of  all  denominations  meet  is 
the  home  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  We  quote 
from  an  article  of  the  New  York  Sun  showing  the  attitude 
of  the  Roman  and  Greek  churches  towards  this  movement: 

At  an  interview  by  appointment  between  two  members  of  the 
commission  and  Cardinal  Gibbons  at  Baltimore  the  Roman  Catholic 
prelate  expressed  much  friendly  interest  in  the  subject,  a  desire  to 
be  kept  in  touch  with  the  progress  of  the  movement  and  a  convic- 
tion both  that  clear  statement  of  positions  would  show  them  to  be 
nearer  together  than  they  had  supposed  and  that  nothing  but  good 
could  come  of  the  effort  to  promote  the  spirit  in  which  such  a  con- 
ference should  be  undertaken.  The  interview  was  closed  with 
prayer  offered  by  the  Cardinal. 

Archbishop  Platon,  the  ruling  prelate  in  this  country  of  the 
Holy  Orthodox  Eastern  Church,  which  is  the  national  church  of 
Russia,  Greece  and  many  of  the  Eastern  Mediterranean  countries, 
was  equally  favorable  and  satisfactory  in  his  expressions  of  interest 
and  willingness  to  help.  The  Archbishop  said  very  plainly  that  the 
subject  should  have  his  best  attention;  that  he  would  co-operate 
in  every  way  possible  as  far  as  his  communion  in  America  was  con- 


76  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

cerned,  and  that  whenever  the  commission  should  communicate 
formally  with  him  with  regard  to  the  great  conference  he  would 
give  the  communication  cordial  approval  and  would  further  co- 
operate in   transmitting  it  to  the  Holy  Governing  Synod  in  Russia. 

Every  true  Christian,  who  knows  what  the  Bible  teaches 
concerning  the  ecclesiastical  conditions  in  the  close  of  the 
present  age,  will  at  once  realize  that  we  are  here  face  to 
face  with  a  most  significant  move.  Commercial,  political, 
ecclesiastical  federations  are  on  the  program  of  the  age. 
Babylon  is  almost  in  sight;  it  spells  "concentration  and 
confusion."  We  shall  keep  our  readers  informed  on  what 
is  done  by  this  world  conference. 

One  word  more.  In  looking  over  the  Presbyterian, 
Baptist,  etc.,  delegates,  who  are  interested  in  this  scheme, 
we  found  at  least  five  men,  who  say  they  believe  in  the 
second  premillennial  Coming  of  Christ  and  in  the  blessed 
Hope.  We  feel  sorry  for  them.  They  are  in  very  bad 
company. 

Put  Him  Out.  On  Easter  Sunday  evening  the  pastor  of 
one  of  the  largest  Methodist  churches  in  New  York  City 
preached  a  sermon  on  Socialism.  When  he  had  finished 
his  "sermon"  he  announced  that  all  those  who  wished 
could  stay  and  ask  questions.  The  whole  audience  re- 
mained and  a  Socialist  tried  to  explain  different  matters. 
A  tumult  followed  during  which  shouts  came  from  all  over 
the  house.  Then  a  man  arose,  the  daily  papers  stated  that 
he  is  a  member  of  the  church,  and  he  made  the  statement 
to  the  preacher:  '*Am  I  worshipping  in  the  house  of  God 
or  is  this  a  political  convention?"  The  pastor  upon  this 
plain  statement  got  furious.  "Put  that  man  out!"  he 
cried.  "Have  him  arrested!  I'll  sign  the  complaint 
myself  in  court  to-morrow."     The  head  usher  laid  hold 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  .  77 

on  the  man  who  had  made  the  pointed  protest  and  was 
hurried  down  the  aisle  and  out  into  the  street. 

Comment  is  hardly  necessary  on  this.  The  daily  Press 
ridiculed  this  sad  performance  and  rightly  so.  We  know 
of  other  cases  where  good  Christian  men  were  forced  out 
of  the  denominations  because  their  scriptural  testimony 
and  protest  against  false  teaching  was  obnoxious  to  the 
preachers  and  the  majority  of  their  adherents. 

The    Apostasy    as    seen  in  Missionary  Movements. 

During  the  past  year  in  great  missionary  meetings  a 
prominent  Unitarian  was  permitted  to  take  a  leading  part 
and  give  the  principal  addresses.  This  is  but  another 
betrayal  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  surely  the  Holy 
Spirit  cannot  sanction  movements  in  which  the  enemies  of 
the  Cross  of  Christ  are  recognized  and  fellowship  with  such 
is  fostered.  The  denier  of  the  Deity  of  our  blessed  Lord, 
though  he  be  a  prominent  person  is  a  lost  soul  just  like 
the  most  miserable  fetich  worshipper  in  Africa.  The 
World  Mission  Conference  in  different  ways  shows  the 
drift  of  the  times.  The  following  we  quote  from  "  The 
Nation'^  (London): 

The  freshest  and  most  striking  note  of  the  World  Mission  Con- 
ference is  the  ungrudging  tribute  it  paid,  with  one  or  two  orthodox 
caveats  thrown  in,  to  the  finer  elements  in  the  non-Christian  re- 
ligions of  the  East.  This  marks  a  great  advance.  A  generation 
back,  even  three-quarters  of  a  century  ago,  an  important  minority 
of  missionaries,  path-finders  in  the  science  of  comparative  religion, 
attached  great  weight  to  the  study  of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the 
East.  But  their  views  were  not  favored  by  the  rank  and  file  of 
their  fellow-workers.  The  average  missionary  was  afraid  of  flat- 
tering native  pride  and  discounting  the  authority  of  the  Christian 
religion  by  admitting  subordinate  and  collateral  revelations. 
Various  causes  have  contributed  to  the   great  change  of  which  the 


78  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Conference  is  a  witness.  The  doctrine  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood 
has  driven  the  reprobationary  theologian  into  obscurity,  and  en- 
couraged the  more  modern  men  to  search  native  literature  for 
"traces  of  the  light  that  lighteth  every  man."  Closer  intimacy  with 
native  life  has  compelled  those  who  have  cultivated  it  to  recognize 
that  the  non-Christian  world  has  saints  and  moralists,  and  that  the 
succession  has  not  failed.  Wider  experience  has  driven  the  mis- 
sionary worker  to  the  conclusion  that  the  lines  of  thought  already 
established  within  the  native  mind  must  be  followed,  if  a  vivid  and 
intelligible  presentation  of  his  own  faith  is  to  be  attained. 

The  spirit  of  anti-Christ  and  departure  from  the  faith 
delivered  to  the  saints  breathes  in  these  words  of  comment. 
According  to  these  statements  the  heathen  religions  of  the 
East  have  in  them  finer  elements,  that  they  also  possess 
"Sacred  Books,"  that  there  is  a  "Divine  Fatherhood" 
which  includes  all  the  heathen  and  that  they  possess  "the 
light  that  lighteth  every  man"  and  that  the  non-Christian 
religions  also  have  "Saints."  These  utterances  are  in 
full  line  with  the  famous,  or  rather  infamous  Congress  of 
the  World's  Religions  held  in  Chicago  during  the  great 
fair.  They  show  how  all  is  drifting  towards  Unitarianism 
and  Universalism.  If  these  things  are  true  as  stated 
above  in  the  quoted  paragraph,  then  why  go  to  the  heathen 
at  all  with  Christianity.^  Let  them  alone  if  the  great 
heathen  world  is  not  completely  lost  and  away  from  God. 
But  what  becomes  of  the  most  positive  declarations 
of  God's  revelation  concerning  the  condition  of  man- 
kind outside  of  Christ.^  These  solemn  declarations  are 
either  modified,  read,  as  they  tell  us  in  the  light  of  the 
Twentieth  Century,  or  completely  disbelieved  as  being  the 
inspired  Words  of  God.  The  denial  of  the  Inspiration  of 
the  Bible,  the  evil  seed  sown  by  the  destructive  Bible 
criticism,    is    bringing    a    harvest.     These    unscriptural 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  79 

conceptions  are  likewise  the  result  of  that  modern  dream, 
which  has  no  foundation  in  the  Bible,  that  the  world  must 
be  converted  in  this  age.  To  what  errors  and  corruption 
of  doctrine  has  not  Post-millennialism  led  its  adherents. 

The  '*New  Christianity"  again.  The  pleas  for  a  new 
religion,  a  new  Christianity  are  becoming  more  numerous, 
more  outspoken  and  they  are  finding  the  willing  ears  of  the 
great  mass  of  the  people.  During  the  past  weeks  and 
months  the  so-called  "Divinity  School"  of  the  Chicago 
University  has  come  to  the  front  with  some  very  bold 
infidel  utterances.  The  following  appeared  in  hundreds 
of  newspapers  all  over  the  land : 

Members  of  the  University  of  Chicago  Divinity  school 
faculty  have  defined  and  formulated  the  characteristics  of 
a  "new  Christianity." 

The  professors  note  the  arrival  of  a  new  type  of  religion 
in  an  official  editorial  in  the  current  of  the  Biblical  World, 
just  issued  by  the  university  press. 

In  the  anonymous  editorial,  responsibility  for  which  Is 
accepted  by  the  thirteen  editors,  the  university  authorities 
point  to  the  coming  of  the  "new  Christianity"  as  a  type 
of  faith  which  shall  result  in  the  releasing  of  man's  minds 
from  the  bonds  of  tradition  and  creed,  accept  the  results 
of  the  scientific  and  deal  in  every  day  works  more  than  in 
theological  subtleties.  The  religion  is  described  as 
'^scientific,  ethical,  practical  and  altruistic." 

After  stating  the  necessity  of  scientific  study  the  author 
of  the  editorial  proceeds: 

"If  there  be  a  controversy  between  Genesis  and  geology 
the  new  Christianity  will  stand  with  geology.  The  record 
left  in  the  strata  of  the  earth  cannot  be  impugned  by  the 
poet  of  the  prescientific  age,  even  though  that  poet  be  also 


80  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

a  prophet  of  a  higher  conception  of  God  than  had  before 
his  day  prevailed.  In  conformity  to  the  same  principle 
the  new  Christianity  will  accept  the  assured  result  of 
historical  readers  into  the  records  of  ancient  times. 
Religion  has  its  rights,  but  so  also  has  history,  and  one  of 
these  is  that  it  be  studied  by  historical  methods." 

Such  language  is  more  than  shocking.  It  is  Satanic! 
It  is  Anti-christ  coming  to  the  front  and  wishing  to  be 
heard.  The  new  Christianity,  that  child  of  the  pit  which 
rejects  both  an  infallible  Word  of  God  and  an  infallible 
Christ  is  bound  to  come.  A  little  while  longer  and  it  will 
sweep  everything  till  divine  judgment  sweeps  it  from  the 
earth  forever. 

The  Beatification  of  Joan  d'Arc. — Recently  the 
Pope  beatified  the  maid  of  Orleans,  Joan  d'Arc.  An  elab- 
orate ceremony  took  place.  The  Pope  kneeled  in  front  of 
the  relics,  which  were  upon  the  altar.  Immense  crowds 
witnessed  the  proceedings  and  all  the  church  bells  rang 
when  the  beatification  was  pronounced.  The  poor  crea- 
ture which  was  thus  honored  was  the  illiterate  daughter 
of  a  peasant.  She  had  hallucinations,  hearing  voices 
which  commanded  her  to  liberate  France,  which  was  then 
in  the  hands  of  the  English.  She  gained  access  to  the 
Court  of  Charles  II  and  was  put  at  the  head  of  an  army. 
She  raised  the  siege  of  Orleans  and  gained  a  great  victory 
over  the  English.  Later  she  was  captured,  and  in  her 
29th  year,  on  May  30,  1431,  burned  at  the  stake  as  a 
heretic  at  Rouen.  And  now  she  is  beatified.  Rome  is 
the  same  old  Rome.  Even  so  the  Lord  speaks  of  her  in 
the  Revelation:  "And  I  gave  her  space  to  repent  of  her 
fornication  and  she  repents  not"  (Rev.  ii:21).  Thyatira 
in  these  church  messages  stands  for  the  Romish  church. 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  81 

Her  wicked  doctrines,  idolatries  and  spiritual  fornica- 
tions are  unchanged. 

This  may  be  learned  from  a  book  published  by  the 
Excelsior  Catholic  Publ.  Co.  in  New  York.  The  book  is 
called  *The  Glories  of  Mary."     We  quote  from  it: 

"God  has  placed  the  whole  price  of  redemption  in  the  hands  of 
Mary  that  she  may  dispense  it  at  will.  Thou,  O  Mary,  art  the 
propitiary  of  the  whole   world."     Page  85. 

"Thou  art  the  only  advocate  of  sinners."     Page  95. 

"But  now  if  God  is  angry  with  a  sinner,  and  Mary  takes  him 
under  her  protection,  she  withholds  the  avenging  arm  of  her  Son 
and  saves  him."     Page  98. 

"The  only  hope  of  sinners."     Page  102. 

"I  worship  thy  holy  heart,  through  thee  do  I  hope  for  salva- 
tion."    Page  105. 

"Often  we  shall  be  heard  more  quickly  and  be  thus  preserved, 
if  we  have  recourse  to  Mary,  and  call  on  the  name  of  Jesus  our 
Saviour."     Page  112. 

"Many  things  are  asked  from  God,  and  are  not  granted;  they  are 
asked  from  Mary  and  are  obtained.  And  how  is  this?  It  is  be- 
cause God  has  thus  decreed  to  honor  his  Mother."     Page  113. 

"To  thee  does  it  belong,  says  St.  Bonaventure,  to  save  whom- 
soever thou  wiliest  to  be  saved.  Oh  then  help  me,  my  Queen;  my 
Queen  save  me;  O  salvation  of  those  who  call  upon  thee,  do  thou 
save  me."     Page  116. 

"In  vain  shall  we  seek  Jesus  unless  we  endeavor  to  find  him 
with  Mary."     Page  138. 

"Mary  was  made  the  mediatress  of  our  salvation."     Page  128. 

"The  way  of  salvation  is  open  to  none  otherwise  than  through 
Mary.     No  one  is  saved  but  through  thee."     Page  143. 

"Our  salvation  is  in  the  hands  of  Mary;  he  who  is  protected 
by  Mary  will  be  saved;  he  who  is  not,  will  be  lost;  our  salvation 
depends  on  thee."     Page  144. 

"There  is  no  one,  O  most  holy  Mary,  who  can  know  God,  but 
through  thee."     Page  145 

"She  is  the  whole  ground  of  my  hope."     Page  175. 


82  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

"Mary  is  the  whole  hope  of  our  salvation."     Page  1 48. 

"All  power  is  given  to  thee  in  Heaven,  and  on  earth,  and  noth- 
ing is  impossible  to  thee."     Page  154. 

"By  right  she  possesses  the  kingdom  of  her  Son."     Page  214. 

"It  is  impossible  for  any  sinner  to  be  saved  without  the  help  and 
favor  of  the  most  blessed  Virgin."     Page  197. 

"Thou  art  omnipotent  to  save  sinners."     Page  251. 

"She  effected  our  salvation  in  common  with  Christ."     Page  293. 

"We  are  all  God's  debtors,  but  He  is  a  debtor  to  thee."  (Mary.) 
Page  252. 

"There  is  no  one  saved  but  by  thee;  no  one  who  receives  a  gift 
of  God  but  through  thee."     Page  354. 

"Moreover  as  she  is  the  universal  advocate  of  all  men,  it  is  be- 
coming that  all  who  are  saved  should  obtain  salvation  by  her 
means."     Page  570. 

"Our  salvation  is  in  her  hands."     Page  576 . 

"At  the  command  of  Mary  all  obey,  even  God."     Page  155. 

We  feel  almost  guilty  in  reprinting  those  blasphemies. 

Even  so  she  who  calls  herself  "mother  church"  is  described 
in  another  part  of  Revelation:  "Full  of  names  of  blas- 
phemy is  she  the  mother  of  harlots''  (Rev.  xvii:3-5).  And 
where  is  Protestantism?  It  does  no  longer  protest. 
Protestantism,  a  veritable  Babel  itself,  confusion  of 
tongues,  is  drifting.  A  'part  of  Protestantism  is  swept 
by  Rationalism;  another  part  drifts  in  Ritualism  back 
to  Rome,  the  one  who  changes  not  but  goes  on  in  her 
wickedness. 

Church  Life  up  to  Date.  Our  attention  is  called  from 
time  to  time  to  the  "churches"  all  over  this  land,  which 
are  turning  their  edifices  into  playhouses  and  tolerate 
almost  everything  there,  but  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel. 
We  rarely  pay  attention  to  these  things.  They  are  only 
outward  symptoms.  But  a  Brooklyn  Congregational 
* 'church"    outdoes    a    good    many    of    those    modern 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  83 

"churches."  They  have  formed  classes  in  "Eugenics," 
to  instruct  young  men  and  young  women  whom  to  marry 
and  then,  how  to  have  children,  which  are  "well-born." 

A  progressive  programme  providing  for  classes  in  eugenics  was 
outlined  by  the  Rev.  Lewis  T.  Reed,  pastor  of  the  Flatbush  Con- 
gregational Church,  and  adopted  at  a  church  meeting  Monday 
night  by  a  majority  of  the  250  members  present,  but  not  without 
considerable  discussion  and  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  more 
conservative. 

Two  classes  are  planned,  one  for  young  men  and  one  for  the 
women,  with  well  known  physicians  as  instructors. 

There  are  to  be  weekly  dancing  classes  besides,  and  provisions 
for  billiards  and  pool,  bowling  alleys  and  other  recreations  for  the 
young  people  of  the  church.  It  is  planned  to  erect  a  $10,000  exten- 
sion to  the  parish  house  and  to  remodel  the  present  hall. 

The  church  will  also  organize  a  political  club,  and  twenty  clubs 
of  five  men  each  will  be  formed  to  compete  in  a  race  for  new  male 
membership. 

"Congregational  Church"?  No,  it  ought  to  be  "Con- 
gregational Club."  Many  of  these  "churches"  could 
not  exist  if  it  were  not  for  these  attractions,  catering  to  the 
tastes  of  the  natural  man. 

Church  of  England  Nearing  a  Crisis.    The  Dean  of  Ca  n- 

terbury  has  recently  raised  in  an  impassioned  manner  the 
cry  that  the  English  church  is  in  great  danger.  He  told  a 
great  convocation  in  Westminster  that  the  present  was  the 
most  critical  period  in  the  Church  of  England  since  the 
Reformation.  The  deepest  controversies  that  ever  divided 
the  church  are  now  in  progress. 

The  Dean  declared  that  there  is  an  active,  earnest  and 
powerful  body  among  the  clergy  which  is  avowedly  aiming 
to  bring  the  ceremonial  and  doctrine  of  the  church  in 
harmony  with  those  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  They  have 
advocated,  he  said,  the  reintroduction  of  the  invocation 


84  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

of  the  saints  and  the  worship  of  the  Virgin.  Those  on  his 
(the  Evangelical)  side  of  the  Church  would  exert  every 
power  they  possessed,  parliamentary  or  otherwise,  to 
prevent  such  changes,  one  effect  of  which  would  be  to 
preclude  forever  the  possibility  of  the  reunion  of  Christians 
in  England,  as  even  the  most  orthodox  Nonconformists 
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  a  Romanizing  of  the 
Church. 

The  Dean  said  he  did  not  know  whether  or  not  it  was 
too  late  to  secure  peace,  but  a  continuance  of  the  present 
line  was  certain  to  bring  civil  war  within  the  Church  and 
this  would  entail  its  national  ruin. 

The  Bible  Hated.  Postmaster-General  Mr.  Burleson, 
has  announced  that  the  Post-office  department  received 
a  petition  from  a  body  of  citizens,  urging  that  the  Bible 
be  excluded  from  the  United  States  mail,  on  the  ground 
that  it  contained  immoral  and  obscene  matter. 

We  do  not  know  who  the  petitioners  are.  They  may  be 
Romanists,  Destructive  Critics  or  Atheists.  But  we  know 
the  men  who  made  the  request  are  the  instruments. of 
Satan. 

''Progressive  Theology."*  "Progress"  is  a  word  that 
is  held  in  high  esteem  at  the  present  time.  To  call  a 
man  "progressive"  is  to  pay  him  a  high  compliment; 
and  when  people  speak  of  this  era  as  a  "progressive  age," 
they  have  bestowed  upon  it  the  highest  possible  praise. 
In  nothing  has  there  been  more  decided  progress  in  recent 
years  than  in  theology,  and  we  often  read  in  the  secular 
Press  items  of  news  with  reference  to  "progressive 
theology." 

*This  paragraph  is  by  Mr.  P.  Mauro. 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  85 

There  are  at  the  present  time  so  many  departures,  new 
theologies,  forward  movements,  and  other  religious  novel- 
ties, that  not  many  people  suspect  that  a  common  spirit 
is  actuating  them  all,  and  that,  however  different  on 
the  surface,  they  are  at  heart  the  same.  The  common 
principle  actuating  all  these  "advanced"  and  "new" 
theologies  is  the  doctrine  that  man  is  really  divine,  that 
humanity  and  divinity  are  identical;  or  as  Mr.  R.  J. 
Campbell  expresses  it,  "all  men  are  W  one  substance  with 
the  Father.'  "  This  religion  is  * 'Humanism,"  and  when 
fully  established  on  the  earth  (as  it  will  be  when  true 
believers  have  been  caught  away  "to  meet  the  Lord  in  the 
air")  it  will  be  headed  by  Anti-christ,  and  enforced  by  all 
the  political  power  of  the  revived  Roman  Empire  (the 
ten-horned  beast)  and  by  all  the  spiritual  power  of  the 
Dragon  (Rev.  xiii).  Those  who  pay  attention  to  the 
signs  of  the  times  should  carefully  note  the  progress 
of  "Humanism"  in  its  many  existing  forms. 

A  London  paper,  under  heading  "Progressive  The- 
ology" speaks  of  "an  interesting  announcement  regarding 
the  progressive  movement  in  theology  made  by  the 
^Christian  CommonwealM  a  weekly  newspaper  closely 
identified  with  the  teachings  of  the  City  Temple."  This 
is  the  apostate  church  presided  over  by  Mr.  R.  J.  Camp- 
bell, the  well  known  exponent  of  the  "New  Theology." 
This  is  the  announcement: 

"What  has  now  been  done  is  to  form  an  editorial  board 
under  the  chairmanship  of  Mr.  Campbell,  with  the  object 
of  giving  expression  as  far  as  possible  to  all  phases  of 
the  movement  which,  though  many-sided,  it  is  claimed,  is 
fundamentally  one.  ^Modernism  in  the  Church  of  Rome, 
the  Liberal  Movement  in  the  Church  of  England,  the  New 


86  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Theology  in  Non-conformity,  the  New  Spirit  in  Unitar- 
ianism,  the  Reform  Movement  in  Judaism,  the  Spirit  of 
Modem  Scientific  Enquiry  as  represented  by  Sir  Oliver 
Lodge,  are'  says  the  announcement  'all  more  or  less 
akin.'  The  new  editorial  board  is  to  demonstrate  the 
essential  unity  of  the  movement." 

Then  follows  a  long  list  of  the  names  of  prominent 
men,  leading  lights  of  various  denominations,  Oxford 
professors,  men  of  science,  etc.,  who  compose  this  edi- 
torial board.  This  announcement  speaks  volumes  regard- 
ing the  progress  of  theology  and  shows  that  the  "Spirit 
who  now  works  in  the  children  of  disobedience"  is  be- 
ginning to  consolidate  his  numerous  followers  into  one 
compact  body.  Surely  these  are  indeed  "the  last  days,'* 
and  on  any  one  of  them  that  other  body,  now  being  formed 
by  the  Spirit  of  God, — the  body  of  Christ — may  be 
caught  away  to  meet  its  already  glorified  Head. 

Dancing  in  Chvu-ches.  Our  readers  supplied  us  during 
the  past  few  weeks  with  newspaper  clippings  about  dancing 
classes  in  churches  and  dances  which  were  held  among  the 
young  people  of  several  denominations.  In  Episcopal, 
Congregational  and  Presbyterian  churches  in  different 
States  the  dance  as  the  means  to  keep  the  young  people 
"in  the  church"  has  been  resorted  to.  A  Presbyterian 
preacher  in  Wheaton,  111.,  is  reported  having  said  in  justi- 
fication of  dancing  in  the  church-basement  the  following: 

"Yes,  it  is  true  part  of  the  evening  was  spent  in  dancing.  A  little 
more  than  a  year  ago  members  of  the  church  provided  a  'social 
room'  in  the  basement.  This  was  done  at  a  cost  of  about  $1,800. 
It  was  fitted  up  with  a  small  stage  and  a  large  stone  fireplace. 

"One  of  the  first  entertainments  given  in  it  was  a  play  by  the 
young  people  of  the  congregation,  which  was  repeated  later.     A 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  87 

second  entertainment  of  the  same  general  nature  was  *Alice  in 
Wonderland*  by  the  older  children. 

"It  was  understood  before  the  money  was  raised  for  the  'social 
room'  that  it  would  be  used  for  dancing  under  certain  careful  restric- 
tions, and  there  has  been  no  serious  protest,  though  not  all,  of 
course,  are  in  sympathy  with  it. 

"The  department  was  introduced  because  of  the  belief  of  the  pastor 
and  the  people  that  one  of  the  most  pressing  problems  of  this  com- 
munity is  that  of  amusement  for  the  young  people.  And  on  last 
Wednesday  evening  there  was  a  splendid  patriotic  program,  lasting 
till  nearly  10  o'clock,  and  then  about  an  hour  was  spent  in  dancing; 
and  a  thing  that  is  frequently  seen  is  a  father  dancing  with  his 
daughter." 

What  else  can  be  expected  in  the  days  of  apostasy! 
This  worldliness  and  craze  for  amusement  is  only  a  symp- 
tom of  the  wicked  heart  which  has  never  received  the  love 
of  truth.  They  are  ^'lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers 
of  God."  It  will  get  worse  and  worse  and  ere  long  the 
professing  "church"  sowing  the  wind  will  reap  the  whirl- 
wind. But  what  is  the  dance,  the  popular  waltz?  How 
and  where  did  it  originate.'* 

The  waltz  was  invented  about  a  hundred  years  ago.  As 
might  have  been  guessed  or  prophesied  beforehand,  it  was 
born  of  the  licentious  stage,  and  is  twin  sister  of  the  ballet. 
This  amorous  and  gyratory  hugging  was  first  seen  in  a 
Vienna  theatre,  December  20,  1787,  and  for  a  time  was 
thought  to  be  too  indecent  to  be  tolerated  anywhere  else. 
After  a  time,  however,  it  was  introduced  into  houses  of 
doubtful  repute,  and  finally  into  German  society.  For  a 
long  time  even  Paris  resisted  the  licentious  libertinism  of 
the  thing,  and  it  was  not  until  the  nineteenth  century 
that  it  became  fashionable.  It  then  went  everywhere 
with  a  whirl,  of  course,  for  Paris  set  the  fashions  for  the 
world.     The  French  women  of  compromising  conscience 


88  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

went  Into  it  with  an  abandon  which  was  hit  off  by  a 
clever  writer  by  saying  before  the  waltz  "they  danced 
with  their  soles,"  after  it  "they  danced  with  their  souls"; 
aye,  and  soiled  and  wore  out  the  latter  as  effectually  as 
the  former. 

More  Mockery  of  Solemn  Truths.  Hallowe'en  night 
is  often  made  the  occassion  of  all  kinds  of  sports  in 
churches.  From  a  perfectly  reliable  source  we  hear  that  in 
connection  with  the  Haywood  Street  Church  of  a  Southern 
City,  with  lights  turned  low,  a  "chamber  of  horrors"  had 
been  fixed  up  for  the  entertainment  of  the  young  people. 
Amongst  the  "horrors"  the  pastor  of  the  Central  Methodist 
Church  (having  a  membership  of  a  thousand)  lay  in  a  cofifn 
representing  himself  dead,  while  the  pastor  of  the  Hay- 
wood Street  Church  delivered  a  spook  address.  In  due 
time  the  devil  put  in  his  appearance,  a  church  member 
dressed  up  in  the  shape  and  costume  of  Satan  as  cari- 
catured by  the  world.     Horrible,  is  it  not! 

But  these  wicked  mockeries  of  Death  and  the  awful 
author  of  sin  are  but  the  outward  results  of  the  inward 
departure  from  God  and  from  His  Word. 

The  pastor  of  the  above  Central  M.  E.  Church  in  a 
sermon  a  few  Sundays  before  he  "played  dead"  and 
mocked  death,  asserted  that  the  Lord  did  not  tell  Abraham 
to  slay  his  son  Isaac,  but,  living  in  an  idolatrous  age,  when 
his  neighbors  were  sacrificing  their  children  to  Moloch 
had  the  suggestion  made  to  his  mind  to  do  as  those  around 
him! 

We  marvel  at  two  things:  First,  how  real  Christians, 
men  and  women,  who  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  can 
tolerate  such  thinga  and  secondly,  we  marvel  at  the 
patience  of  God.     But  wrath  and  judgment  are  gathering 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  89 

fast.  God  grant  that  some  of  these  men  may  repent  and 
be  converted  before  it  is  too  late  and  they  become  "the 
wandering  stars  for  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness  and 
darkness  forever." 

The  Passion  Play  Once  More.  That  miserable  trav- 
esty known  as  the  Oberammergau  passion  play  is  now 
preached  about  and  talked  about  by  those  who  attended 
the  show.  A  certain  Evangelist  who  was  there  writes  to 
the  Christian  Standard,  published  in  Cincinnati: 

"I  am  thrilled  completely  with  the  Passion  Play.  Eight  hours  of 
the  most  intense  moments  of  my  life.  All  the  lectures  on  it  never 
do  it  justice,  and  it  is  almost  folly  to  attempt  it.  Even  Stoddard 
s  weak  on  it.  We  are  the  guests  of  Anton  Lang  and  he  is  a  won- 
der. I  have  met  all  the  apostles  and  principal  characters  and  my 
whole  being  pulsates  with  the  story  of  the  cross  as  never  before." 

A  woman  gave  an  account  of  it  in  the  Neza  York 
Christian  Advocate  (Methodist). 

Anton  Lang  plays  his  most  difficult  role  with  dignity  and  rever- 
ence and  tremendous  reserve.  He  never  offends  the  most  sensitive, 
He  does  not  simulate  the  agony  of  the  Saviour,  but  he  shows  forth 
the  lamb  led  to  the  slaughter,  patient,  silent,  innocent,  amid  a  wild 
storm  of  abuse.  It  is  heart-breaking  but  not  shocking.  The 
scourging  is  being  finished  as  the  curtains  are  drawn  back,  so  that 
only  the  last  flourish  of  the  cords  is  seen.  The  blindfolded,  half- 
naked,  fainting  victim,  enduring  without  a  cry  or  a  remonstrance, 
opens  the  fountain  of  tears.  Most  pitiful  is  the  bowed  form  falling 
by  the  way  beneath  the  heavy  cross  amid  the  infuriated  mob;  more 
pitiful  still,  Mary  the  mother  waiting  beside  the  way  to  know  the 
cause  of  the  commotion;  most  lovely  the  dear  Master's  recognition 
of  her  as  He  slowly  moves  on  with  Simon  of  Cyrene  bearing  the 
cross.  When  the  curtains  part  for  the  crucifixion  scene,  the  two 
thieves  are  already  hanging  from  their  crosses,  but  Jesus  is  stretched 
on  His,  still  on  the  ground.  We  had  heard  the  sound  of  the  ham- 
mer.    Slowly  the  cross  is  lifted  with  its  precious  weight." 

Again  we  say  what  a  blasphemy  it  is  to  depict  in  such 


90  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

a  way  the  sujBFering  of  the  holy  Son  of  God!  That  no 
protest  is  heard  against  this  Romish  playhouse  and  some  of 
those  who  should  protest,  known  by  the  name  (and  in 
name  only)  of  Protestants,  laud  the  wicked  travesty  to  the 
sky.  No  heart  which  loves  and  adores  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  can  have  any  sympathy  whatever  with  this  passion 
play.  We  understand  the  show  is  to  be  given  some  time 
by  the  actors  in  this  country  and  the  management  rests 
with  an  infidel  concern. 

The  Religious  Conditions  in  the  United  States.  The 
religious  conditions  on  this  continent,  according  to  the 
recent  census,  is  a  veritable  Babylon,  a  confusion  of 
tongues.  The  census  brings  out  the  fact  that  this  so- 
called  "Christian  nation"  has  now  a  steadily  increasing 
number  of  adherents  of  heathen  religions.  There  are 
now  seventy-four  temples  of  Buddhism  in  the  United 
States.  These  recognize  and  worship  three  idols,  the 
god  Kuan,  the  goddess  of  Fortune  and  the  goddess  of 
Mercy.  And  here  and  there  apostate  "Christians"  join 
in  this  idolatry.  Then  there  are  the  Vedanta  Societies 
of  the  Hindu  religions.  This  movement  is  one  of  the 
cursed  results  of  the  wicked  congress  of  religions  held 
during  the  world's  fair  in  Chicago  in  1893. 

Then  certain  Hindu  teachers  had  their  eyes  opened  not 
to  the  Gospel,  but  to  the  fact  that  this  "great.  Christian 
nation"  is  a  good  missionary  field  for  Hindu  demonism. 
They  started  then  the  Vedanta  Society.  It  means  "the 
end  of  all  wisdom."  It  is  non-sectarian  and  tries  to 
harmonize  all  religions.  It  succeeds  in  the  larger  cities 
by  gathering  in  the  Gospel-rejecting  apostates.  Another 
Oriental  demonized  system,  which  steadily  increases,  is 
Theosophy.     Then  there  is  Bahaism,  which  increases  at  a 


RELIGIOUS   APOSTASY.  91 

Still  greater  rate.     This  is  a  Persian  delusion  and  its  head 
claims  to  be  a  kind  of  Christ,  another  false  Messiah. 

The  division  among  Christian  believers,  according  to  the 
census,  to  be  issued  in  a  volume,  is  the  saddest  feature  of 
all.     Over  two  hundred  sects  and  parties  are  enumerated, 

"Th:  volume  will  tell  of  the  various  Christian  sects  which  are 
considered  more  purely  American,  and  will  show  the  various  branches 
thereof.  It  will  show  that  while  there  are  only  fifty-seven  main 
bodies  there  are  215  church  organizations,  many  of  them  professing 
a  faith  only  a  shade  different  from  others.  For  instance,  there  are 
seventeen  Baptist  bodies,  twenty-four  Lutheran,  fifteen  Methodist, 
and  twelve  Presbyterian.  The  same  is  true  of  less  known  organi- 
zations. There  are  fifteen  Mennonite,  seven  Adventist,  four 
Dunker  or  Dunkard,  and  four  Quaker  or  Friend  bodies. 

There  appears  no  division  in  either  the  Roman  Catholic  or  Protes- 
tant Episcopal  churches,  although  it  is  shown  that  efforts  to  modify 
their  creeds  have  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  independent 
bodies.  They  are  designated  as  the  Reformed  Catholic  and  the 
Reformed  Episcopal  churches  respectively.  The  Reformed  Catho- 
lics number  only  1,250  communicants,  while  of  the  Reformed 
Episcopalian  there  are  about  9,683. 

The  cause  of  origin  of  some  of  the  branches  is  indicated  by  the 
name.  For  instance,  there  are  General  Baptists,  Separate  Baptists, 
United  Baptists,  Free  Baptists,  Freewill  Baptists,  United  American 
Freewill  Baptists,  Primitive  Baptists,  General  Six-Principles  Bap- 
tists, Seventh  Day  Baptists,  Duck  River  Baptists,  and  Two-Seed-in- 
the-Spirit  Predestination  Baptists. 

The  civil  war  caused  splits,  giving  rise  to  Southern  Methodist 
and  Southern  Baptist  bodies.  In  these  churches  there  is  also  color 
division.  Two  or  three  churches  came  into  existence  just  after  the 
close  of  the  war  as  a  protest  against  political  preaching.  Many  of 
the  branches  of  the  Lutheran  church  are  due  to  difference  in 
nationality. 

Of  other  branches,  besides  the  Duck  River  Baptists,  owing  their 
names  to  localities,  are  the  River  Brethren  and  the  Yorkers,  both 
branches  of  the  Brethren  denomination.  The  former  began  exist- 
ence on  the  Susquehanna  River;  the  latter  in  York  County,  Penn. 


92  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

The  Brinsers,  also  Brethren,  are  called  after  their  first  Bishop,  as 
also    the    Schweckenfelders. 

Three  of  the  newest  churches  mentioned  are  composed  largely  of 
colored  communicants.  One  of  these,  the  Church  of  God  and 
Saints  of  Christ,  accepts  the  Ten  Commandments  as  a  positive 
guide  to  salvation,  and  uses  only  scriptural  names  for  its  members. 
The  "Church  of  the  Living  God"  began  business  in  1899,  and  already 
has  three  branches.  The  Free  Christian  Zion  Church  of  Christ, 
founded  in  1905,  protests  against  all  attempts  to  tax  members  for 
the  support  of  churches. 

There  are  about  seven  hundred  organizations  in  the  main  branch 
of  the  Salvation  Army,  with  a  membership  of  about  23,000.  There 
were  455  organizations  of  Spiritualists  with  over  35,000  members. 

The  report  records  the  rapid  disappearance  of  communistic  so- 
cieties, showing  that  of  eight  organizations  mentioned  in  the  census 
of  1890  only  two  are  left,  the  survivors  being  remnants  of  the  Shakers 
and  of  the  Amana  Society. 

That  this  condition  is  beyond  remedy  must  be  apparent 
to  every  intelligent  Christian.  This  confusion  of  tongues 
will  grov^  worse.  The  different  "Pentecostal  movements'' 
claiming  a  restoration  of  the  apostolic  gifts  are  not  men- 
tioned in  the  above.  There  are  a  number  of  these  errorist 
movements,  which  prove  clearly  by  dividing  Christians 
into  sects  and  parties,  that  it  is  the  work  of  the  fliesh 
and  not  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  while  all  this  cannot 
be  changed  and  these  conditions  will  keep  on  till  the 
harvest  comes,  every  child  of  God  can  walk  individually 
according  to  the  Word  of  God,  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  we  are  called  and  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bond  of  peace. 

Christian  Science  in  Y.  M.  C.  A.  The  following  is  a 
clipping  from  the  Evanston  Index. 

A  distinct  addition  to  Evanston  attractions  is  the  new  reading 
room  of  the  First  Church  of  Christ,  Scientist,  in  the  Y.  M.  C.  A. 
building.     They  have  the  store  on  the  first  floor  that  was  occupied 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  93 

by  the  Public  Service  company  which  gives  them  window  room 
that  invites,  with  dainty,  fresh  flowers  and  well  bound  books,  and 
within  there  is  a  delightful  atmosphere  of  ease  and  rest. 

All  of  the  tones  are  gray,  except  the  rug  of  rose.  The  walls  are  of 
soft  gray  paper  merging  into  a  figured  frieze  with  but  little  more 
color  and  divided  by  panels  of  white.  The  furniture  is  all  of  gray 
finished  oak  with  a  bit  of  brighter  color  here  and  there  in  the  rattan 
chair  upholstering  which  invites  one  to  rest  and  when  the  invitation 
is  accepted  proves  so  satisfactory  that  one  longs  to  stay  there 
indefinitely. 

It  is  Strange  that  the  directors  and  Secretaries  of  a 
Y.  M.  C.  A.  building  can  permit  such  a  thing.  Perhaps 
they  are  ignorant  of  what  Christian  Science  stands  for. 
In  that  case  they  are  unfit  to  hold  such  positions.  This 
Y.  M.  C.  A.  Christian  Science  room  is  made  as  attractive 
as  possible,  and  we  doubt  not  many  young  men  will  be 
cauight  in  this  trap  of  Satan.  ,  It  is  sad  to  see  such  a  thing 
done,  but  it  only  shows,  as  we  have  pointed  out  before, 
that  many  Y.  M.  C.  Associations  are  right  in  with  the 
apostasy.  It  does  not  surprise  us  at  all  that  some  of  the 
secretaries  who  have  departed  from  the  faith  ask  us  to 
stop  sending  them  "Our  Hope."  They  want  to  keep  the 
Gospel  out  of  the  institution  as  much  as  possible.  Yet 
there  are  many  Secretaries  who  have  no  sympathy  what- 
ever with  this  spirit  and  who  hold  firmly  to  the  Gospel. 

Apostasy  in  Methodism.  The  Apostacy  is  nowhere  so 
marked  as  in  Methodism.  A  few  months  ago  Dr.  George 
P.  Mains,  a  Methodist  preacher  who  holds  one  of  the 
foremost  official  positions  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church,  published  through  the  Methodist  Bookconcern 
(Eaton  &  Mains)  a  volume  of  which  he  is  the  author. 
In  this  book  he  advocates  all  the  wicked  claims  of  the 
destructive  criticism  of  Astruc,  Eichhorn  and  Wellhausen. 


94  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Our  friend  L.  W.  Munhall  has  written  a  pamphlet  on  Dr. 
Mains'  production,  and  Mr.  Munhall  shows  that  Tom 
Paine  and  Voltaire  taught  and  believed  what  Mr.  Mains 
states  in  his  book.  The  correspondencies  between  Tom 
Paine  and  Dr.  Mains  are  so  marked  that  it  looks  almost 
as  if  the  Methodist  preacher  quoted  from  Paine.  We 
make  a  few  quotations  from  the  pamphlet: 

Voltaire  said  "The  Pentateuch  could  not  be  from  Moses"  (Ex. 
of  Lord  Bolingbroke.  .  .  .).  "Those  best  acquainted  with 
antiquity  think  that  these  books  (the  Pentateuch)  were  written  more 
than  seven  hundred  years  after  Moses"  (Dialogue  16). 

Dr.  Mains  says,  "In  the  common  thought  Genesis  has  been 
received  as  the  oldest  Hebrew  literature.  It  has  been  assumed 
that  Moses  was  its  author.  .  .  .  But  in  the  sense  in  which 
these  assumptions  were  held  they  are  denied,  and  universally  so, 
by  modern  critical  thought.  .  .  .  Genesis,  in  its  compilation 
and  present  form,  is  one  of  the  most  recent  books  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. .  .  .  The  book  was  not,  and  could  not  have  been, 
written  by  the  hand  of  Moses"  (p.  98). 

Paine  said,  "The  book  of  Genesis,  though  it  is  placed  first  in  the 
Bible  and  ascribed  to  Moses,  has  been  manufactured  by  some 
unknown  person  after  the  Book  of  Chronicles  was  written,  which  was 
not  until  at  least  eight  hundred  and  sixty  years  after  the  time  of 
Moses"  (p.  99).  "The  first  book  in  the  Bible  is  not  so  ancient  as 
the  book  of  Homer  by  more  than  three  hundred  years  and  h  about 
the  same  age  with  Aesop's  Fables"  (p.  92). 

Paine  also  said,  "The  Book  of  Genesis,  instead  of  being  the  oldest 
book  in  the  world,  as  the  Bishop  called  it,  has  been  the  last  written 
book  of  the  Bible,  and  that  the  cosmogony  it  contains  has  been 
manufactured"  (Reply  to  the  Bishop  of  Llandaff,  pp.  256,  257). 

Dr.  Mains  says,  "It  is  now  indubitably  proven  that  many  of  the 
stories  which  appear  in  the  earlier  records  of  the  Old  Testaaent 
were  simply  taken  over  and  adapted  from  older  mythical  or  legen- 
dary sources,  and  that  they  are  not  to  be  taken  at  face  value  as 
sober  and  measured  history"  (p.  98). 

Paine  said,  "Take  away  from  Genesis  the  belief  that  Moses  was 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  95 

its  author,  on  which  only  the  strange  belief  that  it  is  the  word  of 
God  has  stood,  and  there  remains  nothing  in  Genesis  but  an  anony- 
mous book  of  stories,  fables  and  traditionary  or  invented  absurd- 
ities or  down-right  lies"  (p.  86). 

Voltaire  also  said,  "Is  it  not  plain  that  Geensis  was  taken  from 
the  ancient  fables  of  their  (the  Jewish)  neighbors"  (Ex.  of  Lord 
Bolingbroke). 

Dr.  Mains  says,  "It  is  clear,  say  our  modern  authorities,  that 
he  (Moses)  could  not  have  been  the  author  of  this  book  (Deuter- 
onomy). For  reasons  equally  convincing,  it  is  evident  that  the 
book  must  be  the  product  of  a  period  or  periods  far  later  than  that 
of  Moses"  (p.  118).  "The  date  of  its  origin  is  probably  not  far 
from  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century  B.  C."  (p.  120). 

Paine  said,  "In  Deuteronomy  the  style  and  manner  of  writing 
marks  more  evidently  than  the  former  books  that  Moses  is  not 
the  writer"  (p.  81).  "Though  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  know  iden- 
tically who  the  writer  of  Deuteronomy  was,  it  is  not  difficult  to  dis- 
cover him  professionally,  that  he  was  some  Jewish  priest  who  lived, 
as  I  shall  show  in  the  course  of  this  work,  at  least  850  years  after 
Moses"  (p.  83). 

Dr.  Mains  says,  "The  writers  of  Genesis  had  no  authentic  know- 
ledge of  a  flood"  (p.  103).  He  quotes,  approvingly,  from  Professor 
Driver  as  follows:  "We  are  forced,  consequently,  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  flood,  as  described  by  the  biblical  writers  is  unhistorical" 
(p.    106). 

Paine  said,  "The  story  of  Eve  and  the  serpent,  of  Noah  and  the 
Ark,  drop  to  the  level  with  the  Arabian  tales,  without  being  as 
entertaining"  (p.  12). 

As  face  answers  to  face  in  water,  so  Dr.  Mains  answers  to  Tom 
Paine.  Their  business  is  the  same.  Their  method  and  principles 
are  the  same.  Their  end  and  results  are  the  same.  Their  purpose 
may  not  be  the  same;  but  that  makes  no  difference,  since  they  do 
the  same.  Paine  was  only  earlier  at  work,  but  following  the  same 
rationalistic  and  infidel  wake,  like  Dr.  Mains. 

Mr.  Mains  of  course  denies  the  authenticity  of  Isaiah 
and  of  the  Book  of  Daniel.  The  entire  Methodist  Church 
is  honeycombed  with  this  most  subtle  infidelity.     A  good 


96  ,  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

deal  of  their  Sunday-school  literature  is  tainted  with  this 
subtle  infidelity.  Mr.  Munhall  closes  his  pamphlet  with 
the  following  paragraph: 

Dr.  Mains  says,  "Whatever  may  be  concluded  concerning  the 
historic  personality  of  Abraham,  the  story  stands  for  a  great  truth" 
(p  96);  and  "Abraham  was  an  ideal  character*'  (p.  115).  That  is  to 
say,  Dr.  Mains  accepts  the  "Abraham  myth"  theory  of  the  radically 
destructive  critics.  If  this  theory  is  correct,  the  "traditional  faith*' 
— the  "faith  once  for  all  delivered  unto  the  saints" — is  no  more. 
The  covenant  of  grace,  as  fulfilled  in  the  atoning  work  of  our  risen 
Lord  and  His  priestly  mediation,  together  with  Paul's  sublime 
arguments  concerning  the  same,  are  thereby  swept  away.  Will 
the  Methodist  Church  stand  for  such  teaching  If  she  does,  as 
sure  as  God's  Word  is  true,  will  He  remove  her  candlestick  and 
Ichabod  will  be  written  upon  her. 

The  question  Mr.  Munhall  asks,  **Will  the  Methodist 
Church  stand  for  such  teachmg  "  was  answered  by  the 
recent  General  Conference  when  it  elected  Dr.  Mains 
by  a  large  majority  to  fill  the  same  position  he  has  held 
before.  Dr.  Munhall  sent  a  copy  of  the  exposure  of 
Mains'  book  to  each  delegate,  and  yet  the  majority  voted 
for    him. 

**Ichabod"  (the  Glory  is  departed)  does  not  need  to  be 
written  upon  Methodism,  it  is  written  there  already. 
But  in  Methodism  there  are  nevertheless  thousands  of 
Bible-loving  Christians.  What  are  they  going  to  do  about 
it.'^  Are  they  going  to  uphold  this  kind  of  thing  and  thus 
become  partakers  of  these  evil  deeds  .^  May  their  con- 
sciences be  aroused. 

The  Progress  of  Roman  Catholicism.  Catholics  have  so 
increased  In  number  here  that  the  United  States  now  ranks 
as  one  of  the  foremost  Catholic  countries.  It  has  more  of 
that  faith  by  two  to  one  than  the  British  empire  and  it 


RELIGIOUS    APOSTASY.  97 

approximates  even  Italy  itself.  The  official  Catholic 
directory,  copyright  by  P.  J.  Kennedy  &  Sons,  sets  forth 
the  following: 

Catholic  population,  United  States,  23,329,000;  Austria, 
23,796,000;  Germany,  23,821,000;  Spain,  19,503,000; 
British  Empire,  12,968,000;   Italy,  30,500,000. 

Since  American  occupation  of  the  Philippines  there  has 
been  steady  improvement  in  Catholic  Church  conditions 
and  growths  in  numbers,  the  Philippines  figures  being 
7,131,000. 

Last  year  Catholics  in  continental  United  States  built 
373  new  churches.  They  now  have  14,312.  There  are 
17,945  priests.  About  one  in  four  of  the  priests  are  mem- 
bers of  Jesuits,  Paulists,  Benedictines  or  other  orders. 
This  proportion  holds  good  in  New  York,  the  large 
majority  here  being  directly  under  Cardinal  Farley. 
Besides  priests  there  are  6,169  young  men  studying  in 
seminaries.     There  are  57,000  women  in  religious  orders. 

There  are  more  than  900  colleges  and  academies,  by  far 
the  larger  number  for  girls,  and  5,256  parochial  schools. 
No  fewer  than  514  parishes  in  New  York  State  now  have 
schools  attached,  and  in  them  are  223,875  boys  and  girls. 
Children  in  Catholic  institutions  in  the  whole  country 
number  1,600,000.  And  this  great  increase  is  not  at  all 
altogether  through  immigrations.  Large  numbers  of 
"Protestants"  turn  to  the  Roman  church.  The  work  of 
the  Jesuits  and  Paulist  fathers  in  holding  "Missions  for 
Protestants"  bears  fruit. 


Modern  Day  Delusions. 

Growth  of  Christian  Science.  We  call  attention 
to  the  rapid  growth  of  the  Science  cult  on  the 
Pacific  Coast.  It  is  equally  marked  in  other  parts 
of  the  country  and  throughout  the  civilized  world.  Re- 
cently the  "mother  church"  held  its  annual  meeting  in 
Boston: 

The  announcement  of  the  formation  of  102  new  churches  and  the 
unexampled  growth  of  membership  during  the  last  year  were  fea- 
tures of  the  annual  business  meeting  of  the  Christian  Science  Mother 
Church. 

Several  thousand  persons  attended  the  meeting,  at  the  church  on 
Falmouth  Street,  including  members  from  several  foreign  countries. 
Frederick  Dixon  of  London  was  announced  as  president  of  the 
church  for  the  coming  year. 

Reports  indicated  that  the  Christian  Science  movement  has 
spread  through  the  civilized  world.  The  list  of  new  churches 
formed  includes  several  in  Germany,  Switzerland,  Australia,  New 
Zealand  and  Porto  Rico. 

An  interesting  report  was  that  covering  New  York  City,  where 
now  reading  rooms  have  been  established,  including  one  in  the 
financial  district.  The  report  of  the  board  of  lectureship  showed 
that  over  850,000  persons  attended  lectures  given  under  the  aus- 
pices of  the  board  last  year,  an  increase  of  100,000  over  the  preceding 
year. 

From  Sweden  came  the  report  of  the  official  recognition  of  the 
church  by  the  government;  from  England  word  of  the  church's 
growth  there;  and  from  Germany  and  other  countries  the  news 
of  lectures  in  foreign  languages. 

From  Ohio  thanks  were  returned  for  the  financial  aid  rendered 
to  the  sufferers  from  the  recent  floods. 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  99 

Another  World  Bureau.  We  have  repeatedly  called 
in  public  attention  to  the  rapid  progress  spirit- 
ualism is  making  under  the  disguised  name  of  "Psychi- 
cal Research."  In  England  and  in  America  some  of  the 
best  known  men,  like  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  many  univer- 
sity professors,  have  united  with  this  movement  and  ex- 
pressed a  strong  belief  that  asking  of  the  dead  is  a  pos- 
sibility. They  were  led  to  this  belief  by  experiments 
through  mediums  which  produced  manifestations  unex- 
plainable  by  natural  causes.  We  are  convinced  that 
this  movement  will  grow  and  that  their  godless  research 
will  be  rewarded  by  communications  from  unseen  and 
intelligent  beings,  the  host  of  demons,  whose  existence 
is  so  clearly  taught  in  God's  Word.  Intercourse  with 
them  is  a  possibility.  Matters  are  rapidly  advancing  in 
this  direction.  There  is  an  activity  and  eagerness  to  in- 
trude into  these  things  which  is  astonishing,  no  doubt 
the  reflex  action  of  the  wicked  spirits  who  are  eager  to 
possess  men  and  women  and  drag  them  down  to  ruin  and 
perdition. 

W.  T.  Stead  of  the  Review  of  Reviews  has  lately  come 
out  for  this  evil  thing  and  has  made  a  remarkable  sug- 
gestion. He  has  announced  that  he  intends  to  open  a 
bureau  for  communication  with  the  other  world.  He 
expects  to  carry  out  this  enterprise  with  the  help  of  a 
friend,  who  died  years  ago  and  with  whom  he  has  had 
spirit  intercourse.  Mr.  Stead  speaks  of  all  this  in  the 
Fortnightly  Review,  The  friend,  he  says,  is  a  Miss  Ames 
who  was  formerly  one  of  the  editors  of  the  Union  Signal 
of  Chicago,  the  organ  of  the  W.  C.  T.  U.  He  claims  that 
this  lady  sent  him  a  long  appeal  from  the  "other 
world." 


100  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Following  is  the  text  of  the  proposal  which  his  dead 
friend  is  supposed  to  have  sent  to  him: 

"I  wanted  to  ask  you  if  you  can  help  me  at  all  in  a  matter  in  which 
I  am  much  interested.  I  have  long  wanted  to  establish  a  place 
where  those  who  have  passed  over  could  communicate  with  the 
loved  ones  behind.  At  present  the  world  is  full  of  spirits  long- 
ing to  speak  to  those  from  whom  they  have  been  parted.  It  is 
a  strange  spectacle.  On  your  side,  souls  full  of  anguish  for  be- 
reavement; on  this  side,  souls  full  of  sadness  because  they  can 
not  communicate  with  those  whom  they  love.  What  can  be  done 
to  bring  these  somber,  sorrow-laden  souls  together.^ 

**What  is  wanted  is  a  Bureau  of  Communication  between  the  two 
sides.  Could  you  not  establish  some  such  sort  of  office  with  one 
or  more  trustworthy  mediums.?  If  only  it  were  to  enable  the  sor- 
rowing on  the  earth  to  know,  if  only  for  once,  that  their  so-called 
dead  live  nearer  than  ever  before,  it  would  help  to  dry  many  a  tear 
and  soothe  many  a  sorrow.  I  think  you  could  count  upon  the  eager 
co-operation  of  all  on  this  side. 

**We  on  this  side  are  full  of  joy  at  the  hope  of  this  coming  to 
pass.  Imagine  how  grieved  we  must  be  to  see  so  many  whom  we 
love,  sorrowing  without  hope,  when  those  for  whom  they  sorrow 
are  trying  in  vain  every  means  to  make  them  conscious  of  their 
presence.  And  many  also  are  racked  with  agony,  imagining  that 
their  loved  ones  are  lost  in  hell,  whpn,  in  reality,  they  have  been 
found  in  the  all-embracing  arms  of  the  love  of  God.  See  what 
can  be  done.  It  is  the  most  important  thing  there  is  to  do.  For 
it  brings  with  it  the  trump  of  the  Archangel,  when  those  that  were 
in  their  graves  shall  awake  and  walk  forth  once  more  among  men." 

Mr.  Stead  gives  much  evidence  which  satisfies  him  that 
this  communication  is  genuine  and  came  from  Miss  Ames. 
To  us  it  is  equally  evident  that  the  communication  is 
genuine,  but  that  it  emanates  from  a  demon.  That 
demons  love  to  personify  departed  men  and  women  and 
play  the  parts  of  deceivers  has  often  been  proven.  The 
above  words  Mr.  Stead  claims  to  have  received  from  the 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  101 

unseen  world  are  words  of  deception.  They  show  the 
cunning  of  a  wicked  spirit.  Taking  on  a  pious  garb  this 
demon  talks  very  piously,  but  the  demon  reveals  his 
identity  in  the  closing  sentences.  He  wants  to  prove  that 
the  loved  ones,  who  some  imagine  are  in  hell,  are  "in  the 
all  embracing  arms  of  the  love  of  God."  This  demon 
like  other  demons,  who  have  produced  all  kinds  of  theories, 
tries  to  deceive  people  about  the  great  Scripture  revela- 
tion, the  eternal  and  conscious  punishment  of  the  wicked. 
This  is  invariably  the  tenor  of  these  "spirit  communi- 
cations" that  the  state  of  all  the  departed  is  one  of  blis^ 
and  happiness.  Christian  Science,  Millennial  Dawnism 
and  other  "isms"  which  deny  future  and  eternal  punish- 
ment for  those  who  reject  Christ  are  the  movements 
of  the  latter  times,  the  theories  of  seducing  spirits,  the 
doctrines  of  demons  (1  Tim.  iv:l).  A  Millennial  Dawnist 
told  us  some  time  ago  when  we  asked  him  "Are  you 
saved?"  "No,"  was  his  answer  and  "that  is  why  I 
am  a  believer  in  Mr.  Russell's  teaching  for  I  can  live 
as  I  please  and  have  another  chance."  They  say  some- 
times that  the  everlasting  punishment  of  the  wicked  is 
a  horrible,  God  dishonoring  doctrine.  Then  it  must  be 
an  invention  of  the  devil.  How  is  it  then  that  these 
demons  are  so  anxious  to  impress  upon  those  to  whom 
they  give  communications,  that  there  is  nothing  but  bliss 
and  joy  in  the  other  world  .^  But  we  read  in  the  Word 
of  God  that  the  demons  cried  out  saying,  What  have 
we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  God?  Art  thou 
come  hither  to  torment  us  before  the  time  (Matt,  viii: 
29)?     Mr.  Stead  then  speaks  of  the  problem  itself: 

"The   problem   is   a  serious   one.     The   proposal  to  construct   a 
bridge  across  the  abyss  will  stagger  most  people  by  its  audacity. 


102  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Some  will  regard  It  as  profane.  But  all  those  who  have  taken  any 
intelligent  interest  in  the  progress  of  psychical  research  will  admit 
that  the  time  is  at  hand  when  such  an  enterprise  ought  to  be  taken 
in  hand  by  serious  investigators,  and  resolutely  prosecuted  to  its 
final  conclusion. 

"The  only  question  is,  what  are  the  facts?  Can  we  or  can  we 
not  organize  such  a  service  of  trustworthy  persons  whose  eyes  have 
been  opened,  to  undertake  the  guidance  of  the  pioneers  who  are 
endeavoring  to  build  the  bridge  between  the  living  and  the  dead? 

"I  think  that  with  patience  and  perseverance  it  can  be  done. 
Julia,  who  fifteen  years  ago  first  insisted  upon  the  duty  of  opening 
such  a  bureau  of  intercommunication,  has  now  undertaken  to 
direct  its  operations  from  day  to  day. 

**It  may  amaze  some  people  that  I  should  thus  gravely  write  of 
the  possibility  of  opening  an  office  in  the  heart  of  a  great  capital 
which  can  only  succeed — if  it  succeed — by  the  constant,  conscious 
direction  of  the  invisible  intelligence  of  a  human  being  who  died 
and  was  buried  seventeen  years  ago.  But  if  there  be  any  truth  in 
the  fundamental  doctrine  of  modern  spiritualism,  there  is  nothing 
incredible  in  this.  Certainly  I  should  not  dream  of  undertaking  a 
duty  so  onerous,  entailing  such  certainty  of  ridicule  and  abuse, 
were  I  not  firmly  convinced  that  we  can  confidently  depend  upon 
the  business-like  co-operation  of  those  on  the  other  side?" 

Then  follov^s  a  suggestion  how  this  bureau  is  to  be 
managed: 

**A  directory  of  competent  sensitives,  a  muster-roll  of  those 
whose  eyes  are  opened,  will  be  compiled  after  careful  and  con- 
tinued investigation,  test,  and  experiment.  When  any  one  who 
has  lost  a  beloved  friend  or  relative  wishes  to  ascertain  whether 
ornot  he  can  communicate  with  him,  and  applies  to  the  bureau,  he 
will  be  informed  of  the  conditions  under  which  alone  such  an 
attempt  can  be  made.  Should  he  assent,  the  sanction  of  the 
director  must  then  be  obtained.  It  will  be  refused  to  all  who  do 
not  seek  to  hear  from  those  whom  they  have  loved  and  lost,  etc." 

One  is  amazed  indeed  to  read  such  things  coming  from 
the  pen  of  an  intelligent  person  of  literary  attainment. 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  103 

The  end  is  not  yet.  Success  will  come;  their  efforts  to 
communicate  with  evil  spirits  will  be  successful  and 
through  it  the  great  master  mind  of  the  Devil  will  work 
out  his  own  purposes.  God  permits  all  this  because  men 
have  not  received  the  love  of  the  truth  that  they  might 
be  saved.  The  strong  delusion  that  they  should  be- 
lieve a  lie  is  fast  approaching  and  this  "psychical  research," 
spiritualism,  the  plain  wicked  necromancy  bids  fair  to 
play  a  leading  part  in  it. 

More  Psychical  Research  Discoveries.  Ever  since  the 
modern  wave  of  Spiritualism,  or  as  it  should  be  called 
Demonism,  was  started  by  the  Fox  sisters  over  fifty  years 
ago,  increasing  evidences  have  been  furnished  that  there  is 
a  connection  possible  between  the  world  and  the  wicked 
spirits,  the  fallen  angels  and  demons.  A  belief  in  this  is 
biblical.  Why  should  God  have  forbidden  the  inter- 
course with  the  dead,  the  asking  of  those  who  have  familiar 
spirits,  if  all  this  were  not  reality?  Why  should  God  have 
announced  the  death  penalty  upon  those  who  practice 
the  consultation  of  evil  spirits  if  such  a  consultation  were 
impossible.^  But  Spiritualism  with  its  evil  practices  has 
appeared  under  a  more  polite  name.  It  goes  now  by  the 
name  'Tsychical  Research."  It  attracts  the  cultured, 
the  educated  and  permeates  the  so-called  "better  classes" 
of  society,  professors,  teachers,  physicians,  literary  men, 
lawyers  and  not  a  few  preachers  have  gone  upon  the  for- 
bidden, yet  fascinating  territory.  It  was  shown  in  our 
last  issue  how  Spiritualism  in  this  garb  has  joined  hands 
with  science  and  what  an  evil  work  the  demon  powers  are 
accomplishing.  All  this  goes  on  secretly.  No  one  knows 
what  goes  on  in  the  dark  and  the  poor  victims  of  one  of 
the  devil's  most  subtle  delusions  do  not  know  themselves 


104  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

how  Satan  will  lead  them  on  and  use  them  in  his  own 
dreadful  work. 

Recently  the  following  paragraph  appeared  in  the 
Associated  Press: 

Edmund  Scribner  Stevens,  who  uses  the  stationery  of  the  United 
States  Senate,  proclaims  himself  as  **The  Revealer  of  Secret  Things" 
in  communications  received  by  the  Metropolitan  Psychical  Research 
Society. 

His  connection  with  the  national  Legislature  does  not  appear, 
and  although  Mr.  Stevens  has  franked  envelopes  he  does  not  avail 
himself  of  the  privilege  they  convey,  but  pays  postage. 

*'I  have  in  my  possession,"  he  writes,  "more  than  one  hundred 
written  communications  signed  by  persons  who  have  passed  into 
the  hereafter  life.  I  have  proved  their  signatures  to  be  genuine 
in  the  Library  of  Congress  and  they  are  open  to  inspection  to  all 
who  wish  to  know  the  truth. 

"These  letters  were  directed  to  me  in  person  by  my  own  name 
by  such  persons  as  Franklin,  Swedenborg,  John  Bunyan,  St.  John 
the  Evangelist,  Dante,  Luther,  and  the  Rev.  Dr.  P.  M.  Griffin,  of 
Perth  Amboy,  N.  L 

"Also  telegraphic  messages  are  received  in  my  own  room  between 
the  hours  of  one  and  seven  A.  M.  I  am  awakened  from  sound 
sleep  and  get  up  and  write  them  from  such  men  as  Emerson,  William 
Penn,  Franklin,  Morse,  the  telegraphic  inventor  and  Galileo,  the 
astronomer.  Galileo,  in  a  communication  of  five  pages  written  in 
ink,  tells  me  what  the  planets  are  made  of  and  what  they  are.'* 

Mr.  Stevens  asks  that  the  society  place  $5,000  in  a  Washington 
bank  to  his  credit,  to  be  claimed  by  him  as  soon  as  he  gives  one 
conclusive  test  of  his  ability  as  a  Revealer  of  Secret  Things. 

We  believe  that  these  Psychical  Researchers  are  going  to 
discover  new  and  startling  things.  This  they  claim  is  their 
object.  But  these  startling  discoveries  will  be  nothing 
less  than  lying  signs  and  wonders,  with  which  Satan  will 
completely  blind  the  eyes  of  them  that  believe  not. 

The  International  Club  for  Psychical  Research.  The 
Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  a  rival  organization  in 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  105 

the  International  Club  for  Psychical  Research,  which  has 
been  founded  by  Mrs.  Annie  Besant.  The  headquarters 
of  the  new  society  are  in  Picadilly  Circus,  London. 

Arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  development  of 
promising  mediums  and  there  are  appliances  and  apparatus 
"for  the  study  of  the  physical  effects  of  mediumship  and 
other  kindred  subjects."  Here  also  are  special  rooms  for 
rapping  manifestations  with  tables  so  constructed  that 
even  the  youngest  and  most  inexperienced  spook  could 
rap  lightly  upon  them  with  every  prospect  of  receiving 
immediate  attention. 

The  club  membership  represents  almost  all  classes  of 
advanced  thought.  Esoteric  Buddhists,  theosophists  of 
both  the  Besant  and  the  Tingley  type,  adherents  of  W.  T. 
Stead  and  his  schemes  for  the  encouragement  of  bureaus 
of  communication  between  the  spirit  world  and  London, 
A.  D.,  1911,  people  who  believe  that  there  are  more  things 
in  heaven  and  earth  than  are  dreamed  of  in  their  phil- 
osophy and  are  willing  to  devote  time  and  money  to 
searching  them  out,  and  young  men  and  women  brought 
up  in  the  faddist  atmosphere  which  permeates  London 
to-day,  are  all  represented  in  the  organization. 

Mrs.  Annie  Besant  i?  the  head  of  the  society  and  she 
opened  the  building  dedicated  to  its  use  on  Monday  with 
a  speech  urging  the  necessity  of  avoiding  superstition  and 
narrowness  in  all  intercourse  with  the  unseen  world.  The 
research  work  begins  next  week. 

Among  the  foundation  members  who  have  helped  to  set 
this  organization  on  foot  are:  Robert  Colgate  of  New 
York,  Lyman  J.  Gage,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  in  Mr. 
McKinley's  Cabinet;  Col.  Count  Gleichen,  D.  S.  O.,  a 
cousin  of  the  late   King  Edward;    Sir  Francis  Young- 


106  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

husband,  British  Resident  in  Kashmir,  and  Major-Gen. 
Sir  Alfred  Turner,  K.  C.  B,—N.  Y.  Sun. 

The  same  story,  "Turning  their  ears  away  from  the 
Truth  they  are  turned  unto  fables." 

The  Monistic  Church.  A  Startling  Movement.  About 
two  years  ago  Prof.  Ernest  Haeckel,  the  well-known 
naturalist  and  advocate  of  biological  evolution,  started  the 
Monistic  League  of  Germany.  Monism  is  a  system  of 
thought  which  seeks  to  deduce  all  the  varied  phenomena  of 
both  the  physical  and  spiritual  worlds  from  a  single  princi- 
ple. It  is  theory  that  there  is  but  one  substance,  either 
mind  or  matter,  or  something  which  is  neither.  This 
philosophical  movement,  which  of  course  denies  all 
Revelation,  has  had  a  most  rapid  growth  in  Germany; 
many  cities  have  organized  branches  of  this  infidel  league. 
It  has  also  spread  to  Switzerland,  Holland  and  Austria. 
It  has  produced  great  uneasiness  in  Germany  and  the 
headquarters  of  this  Monistic  League  or  church  move- 
ment, situated  in  Berlin,  reports  a  constant  growth  in 
numbers,  power  and  influence.  Attempts  are  now  being 
made  to  organize  it  in  this  country.  An  American 
sympathizer  of  this  movement,  who  hopes  for  an  early 
establishment  of  the  Monistic  League  in  this  country  and 
predicts  for  it  great  and  widespread  success,  has  made 
on  it  the  following  remarks: 

Ex-President  Eliot's  recent  pronouncement  on  "The  Religion  of 
the  Future,"  which  he  says  will  be  a  Monistic  religion,  is  only  one 
of  the  signs  of  the  times,  showing  the  irresistible  tendency  in  modern 
thought  and  life  toward  a  monistic  conception  of  the  constitution 
and  character  of  the  universe  and  a  momistic  philosophy  and 
religion  of  life.  All  this  is  the  inevitable  and  natural  outcome 
of  the  rapid  and  revolutionary  progress  of  modern  science  and 
philosophy.     Dualism  and  pluralism  are  dying  at  the  very  roots.     A 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  107 

monistic  and  therefore  a  democratic  conception  of  the  constitution 
and  character  of  the  universe  is  rapidly  taking  the  place  of  the 
old,  orthodox,  dualistic,  monarchical  and  aristocratic  one.  Modern 
science  and  philosophy  are  revealing  the  world  to  us  as  a  real 
democracy  and  commonwealth  of  all  being  as  one.  It  is  a  spiritual 
commonwealth,  a  divine  democracy,  a  real  republic  of  all  being  as 
one;  self-existent,  self-governing  and  self-guiding  from  within;  in 
which  all  conscious  and  rational  beings,  like  man,  are  equal,  sov- 
ereign, divine  and  spiritual  citizens.  Science  and  philosophy  reveal- 
ing man  to  us  as  the  sovereign,  spiritual  citizen  of  a  divine  democ- 
racy and  a  spiritual  republic,  and  not  as  the  servile  spiritual  subject 
of  an  absolute  spiritual  monarchy,  as  orthodox  dualistic  religion 
does. 

The  mission  of  monism  is  to  make  war  not  only  on  the  belief  in 
a  dualistic  God  but  also  and  more  on  the  belief  in  a  pluralistic, 
egoistic  and  individualistic  man;  to  purge  and  purify  religion  of 
every  superstition  and  hypocrisy;  to  elevate  man's  conception  of 
himself  to  the  plane  of  a  true  and  natural  divinity  and  dignity;  to 
arouse  an  enthusiasm  of  humanity,  which  is  also  at  the  same  time 
an  enthusiasm  of  divinity;  to  give  man  a  vision  of  the  world  as  a 
vast,  living,  striving,  conscious  and  spiritual  organism,  of  which 
he  is  one  of  the  highest,  noblest  and  most  significant  organs. 

Monism  is  the  only  religion  that  can  ever  hope  to  destroy  human 
selfishness.  No  dualistic  or  pluralistic  religion  can  do  this,  for  their 
appeal  must  always  be  to  that  petty,  partial  and  fractional  self,  the 
belief  in  which  is  the  root  cause  of  all  human  selfishness,  in  so 
far  as  it  is  deliberate  and  intentional.  It  is  the  only  religion  that 
can  ever  hope  to  destroy  the  devil,  for  the  real  devil  of  this  world 
is  the  devil  of  self.  It  is  the  only  religion  that  can  ever  hope  to 
realize  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  on  earth,  and  to  inaugurate  the 
reign  of  the  true  and  living  God. 

Monism  is  the  true  religion  of  the  future,  and  the  movement 
which  has  taken  firm  root  in  the  Fatherland  of  Martin  Luther  is 
the  "New  Reformation"  and  the  "New  Christianity."  Monism  is 
also  the  "Coming  Catholicism,"  of  which  we  have  lately  heard  from 
Dr.  Newman  Smyth,  for  the  only  Catholicism  that  is  possible  for  the 
future  in  this  modern  and  scientific  world  is  the  Catholicism  of 
science  and  reason  and  of  the  institutions  that  are  founded  upon 


108  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

science  and  reason.  It  knows  nothing  of  nations,  races  and  bound- 
ary lines.  The  sciences  are  the  same  the  world  over  and  they  are 
the  same  for  all  intelligent  and  unbiased  minds.  They  are  universal 
and  catholic  in  character.  So  it  will  eventually  be  with  a  truly 
scientific,  philosophic  and  rational  religion.  Monism  will  be  the 
religion  of  the  world's  democracies,  the  social  religion  of  the 
world's  true  commonwealth,  the  scientific  religion  of  a  scientific 
age,  and  the  unselfish,  loving,  brotherly  and  Godlike  religion  of  the 
true  and  only  living  God. 

Here  is  a  bold  and  very  significant  language.  This 
philosophical  system  denies  everything.  The  Person  of 
our  blessed  Lord  is  not  even  mentioned.  It  is  heralded  to 
be  the  "New  Reformation,"  "the  New  Christianity,"  the 
"new  religion."  It  is  the  religion  which  will  destroy  the 
devil  and  establish  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth  and 
inaugurate  the  reign  of  the  free  and  living  God.  What 
awful  blindness! 

This  monistic  movement  is  no  doubt  the  thing.  Unitari- 
anism  will  fall  at  once  into  line.  Reformed  Judaism  and 
Christian  Science  as  well  as  the  masses  of  Protestant  and 
Catholic  Christians  who  are  like  so  much  driftwood,  will 
side  with  it.  It  is  the  thing  of  the  future.  The  master- 
mind of  the  devil  is  revealed  in  this  scheme;  he  prepares 
the  way  for  his  final  work.  All  seems  to  be  waiting  in  the 
camp  of  apostasy  for  a  leader.  Such  a  one  will  soon  ap- 
pear. But  it  seems  to  us,  if  we  have  open  eyes,  that  we 
can  read  in  this  monistic  church  movement,  the  initial 
history  of  the  complete  apostasy.  All  is  ready  for  a  great 
"world-church"  which  will  unite  all  who  have  not  received 
the  love  of  the  Truth.  Oh  Lord,  keep  us  closer  to  Thyself 
in  these  perilous  times! 

Abdul  Baha  Branded  a  Deceiver.  Abdul  Baha,  the 
leader  of  the  new  cult  of  Bahaism,  idolized  by  thousands 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  109 

of  cultured  and  intelligent  (?)  American  women,  has 
been  branded  as  a  deceiver  by  his  own  nephew.  On  this 
The  Continent  saith: 

"Abdul  Baha,  or  as  he  is  also  called,  Abbas  Effendi,  is 
lecturing  in  different  parts  of  the  United  States,  informing 
people  that  Bahaism  is  the  final  perfected  religion  destined 
to  comprehend  and  unify  all  the  world's  other  forms  of 
religious  faith.  But  Bahaism  seems  not  to  have  any 
more  magic  charm  of  unity  about  it  than  the  faiths  it 
proposes  to  consolidate;  it  is  unable  even  to  unify  itself. 
Sectarianism  is  no  more  a  stranger  under  the  Bahaist 
banner  than  under  the  symbols  of  either  cross  or  crescent. 
There  lives  in  Pasadena,  California,  a  nephew  of  Abbas, 
son  of  his  younger  brother  Mohammed,  who  avers  that 
the  Venerable  prophet'  now  touring  America  is  totally 
recreant  to  the  teachings  of  the  father  Baha  Ullah — ^The 
Manifestation  of  God" — who  is  ostensibly  reverenced  as 
the  founder  of  the  whole  cult.  The  Pasadena  member  of 
the  family  claims  that  Baha  (his  grandfather)  wrote 
down  in  the  'Book  of  My  Covenant' — the  Bahai  Bible— 
that  after  himself  no  new  'manifestation'  would  arise 
for  a  thousand  years.  Yet  Abbas,  the  son,  poses  as  a 
'manifestation.'  Baha  is  quoted:  'Whosoever  claimeth 
a  mission  before  the  completion  of  a  thousand  years  from 
this  manifestation  is  a  lying  impostor' — and  that,  accord- 
ing to  Nephew  Shua  of  Pasadena,  is  exactly  what  Uncle 
Abdul  Baha  is.  The  teachings  of  Abbas  are  pronounced 
his  own  only,  and  quite  contrary  to  true  Bahaism  as  the 
rest  of  the  family  claim  to  have  preserved  it  pure  from  the 
father's  lips  and  writings." 

We  caught  a  glimpse  of  this  deceiver  last  fall  in  the 
Union  Station  of  Denver.     One  look  into  the  face  of 


110  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

the  fat  old  man  ought  to  be  enough  to  convince  anyone 
that  he  is  all  and  more,  his  own  nephew  charges  him 
with. 

A  German  Rebuke  to  Monism.  We  called  attention 
to  the  great  monistic  movement  which  has  had  such  a 
remarkable  growth  in  the  Fatherland.  It  is  gratifying 
to  repoit  now  that  throughout  Germany  there  has  been 
an  uprising  from  the  side  of  German  Evangelical  Chris- 
tians against  this  satanic  cult.  In  Berlin  alone  20,000 
assembled  to  listen  to  leading  men,  who  defended  the 
faith,  delivered  unto  the  saints.  As  the  building  would 
hold  scarcely  half  that  number,  there  was  a  great  over- 
flow meeting  in  the  square,  where  Luther's  hymn  was  sung 
and  addresses  were  delivered.  The  cathedral  nearby  was 
thrown  open  and  was  immediately  crowded  to  the  doors, 
many  being  turned  away.  Here  again  powerful  addresses 
were  delivered  and  the  great  audience  repeated  the 
Apostles'  Creed  in  concert.  Thus  it  seems  that  the 
skeptical  attack  has  resulted  in  such  an  arousing  of 
evangelical  feeling  as  the  German  capital  has  not  seen  in 
a  (fentury.  The  Lokal  Anzeiger^  the  great  Berlin  news- 
paper, spoke  of  the  demonstration  as  "a  milestone  in  the 
history  of  the  intellectual  and  religious  life  of  the  city. 

Mormonism's  Pernicious  Work.  Throughout  this 
country  they  are  sneaking,  generally  in  pairs,  the  messen- 
gers of  the  so-called  "Latter  Day  Saints."  What  this 
system  is  and  what  it  stands  for  is  well  known.  Under- 
neath its  claims  of  a  new  revelation,  its  satanic  perversions 
of  the  truth  of  God  are  covered  up  the  most  abominable 
things,  the  leader  of  it  polygamy.  These  false  teachers 
and  lying  ministers  claim  that  polygamy  has  been  aban- 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  Ill 

doned,  but  their  statements  are  false.  Polygamy  is  so 
closely  interwoven  with  this  Satan  cult  that  it  cannot  be 
given  up.  Thousands  of  converts  are  yearly  gained  over 
this  land,  but  the  chief  recruiting  places  are  the  foreign 
countries. 

Sweden,  Norway,  Denmark,  Finland  and  Germany 
have  all  furnished  young  women  for  the  "Mormon  Faith." 
But  the  discovery  has  been  made  of  late  that  from  Great 
Britain  hundreds  of  girls  disappear  yearly,  and  are  months 
later  heard  from,  after  they  joined  the  Mormons.  Start- 
ling things  have  been  brought  to  light. 

The  citizens  of  Liverpool,  the  port  from  which  hundreds  of  girls 
are  sent  every  year  to  swell  the  Mormon  colonies  of  Utah  and  other 
polygamous  colonies  in  America,  have  arisen  in  vehement  protest 
against  the  alarming  growth  of  Mormonism  in  England  and  es- 
pecially in  Liverpool.  After  a  series  of  special  meetings,  resolutions 
have  been  adopted  by  the  townspeople  appealing  to  the  Home 
Secretary  and  demanding  immediate  restrictive  legislation, 

This  move  to  stay  the  trafficking  in  young  girls  has  the  sanction 
oi  the  bishop  of  Liverpool,  who,  it  is  understood,  is  the  instigator 
of  the  open  crusade  against  the  Mormons.  England  has  for  some 
time  been  the  chosen  field  of  the  activities  of  the  missionaries  and 
Mormonism  here  finds  many  converts  who  have  left  their  homes 
lured  away  by  the  mysterious  attractions  of  polygamy.  Although 
the  movement  is  directed  from  headquarters  in  a  little  building  near 
Hyde  Park,  missionary  work  is  done  in  province  and  small  towns 
where  "canvassers"  go  from  house  to  house  delivering  tracts  and 
teaching  the  doctrines  of  Joseph  Smith. 

But  Liverpool  is  the  Mormon  stronghold,  for  there  they  must 
unite  their  forces  to  secure  the  unmolested  transportation  of  the 
newly  made  converts.  To  do  this  they  have  hit  upon  an  ingenious 
scheme.  Elder  Charles  W.  Penrose,  who  fathers  the  movement  in 
Liverpool,  secured  an  accredited  position  in  the  immigration  bureau 
of  the  White  Star  Line.  By  acting  as  agent  for  that  company  he 
has  been  able  to  secure  transportation  for  hundreds  of  girls  to 
America  on  the  pretext  of  their  becoming  servants  and  filling  other 


112  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

minor  positions.  The  passage  money  was  paid  by  generous  contribu- 
tions from  friends  of  the  movement  here  and  the  loyal  supporters 
in  the  United  States. 

It  has  just  been  discovered  that  the  Mormons  have  rented  a  home 
in  Liverpool,  where  the  girls  are  kept  until  the  sailings.  The  Mor- 
mons have  also  an  elaborate  printing  plant  at  Bootle,  near  Liver- 
pool, where  all  their  religious  literature  is  printed  and  where  a 
weekly  paper  is  published.  The  work  of  the  sect  is  carried  on  with 
such  secrecy  that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  the  authorities  to  obtain 
tangible  evidence  against  them. 

Young  girls  and  many  married  women  simply  disappear  from  their 
homes  and  are  not  heard  of  for  months,  until  a  letter  or  perhaps  a 
post  card  bearing  an  American  stamp  notifies  friends  and  relatives 
that  they  have  embraced  the  Mormon  faith.  All  religious  bodies 
have  now  combined  to  stamp  out  Mormonism,  and  it  is  known  that 
the  Home  Secretary  who  has  been  investigating  the  conditions  on 
his  own  account,  is  heartily  in  accord  with  the  crusade.  Several 
members  of  Parliament  who  are  interested  are  now  preparing  a  bill 
to  present  at  the  next  session  excluding  Mormons  from  the  United 
Kingdom. 

God  grant  that  our  English  brethren  may  be  successful 
in  stopping  this  wicked  system. 

A  Mosque  for  London.  The  "London  Globe"  reports 
the  following: 

It  is  proposed  to  erect  a  mosque  in  the  capital  of  Great 
Britain,  and  the  only  surprising  feature  of  the  project  is 
that  it  has  not  been  executed  before.  The  building  is  to 
cost  £100,000,  to  which  the  Aga  Kahn  has  already  con- 
tributed £5,000.  The  committee  in  control  of  the  scheme 
is  presided  over  by  Amir  Ali  and  includes  the  Turkish 
and  Persian  Ministers,  as  well  as  three  members  of  the 
Council  of  India. 

Buddhism's  Progress  in  Europe.  Buddhism  has  been 
making  great  strides  in  Europe  of  late.  The  member- 
ship of  the  Buddhist  Society  of  Great  Britain  and  Ire- 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  113 

land  is  now  counted  by  hundreds  and  branches  have  been 
established  in  Liverpool  and  Edinburgh.  Prof.  Rhys 
Davit,  the  writer  on  Pali  and  Buddhist  literature,  is  its 
president  and  among  the  vice-presidents  is  the  Earl  of 
Mexborough.  A  Scottish  convert  to  Buddhism  who  is 
now  a  monk  in  Burma  is  shortly  coming  to  England  as  first 
resident  missionary. 

Great  progress  has  also  been  made  by  the  German  Bud- 
dhist Society,  which  has  two  important  press  organs,  in 
Leipzig  and  Breslau.  Buddhist  propagandists  have  been 
especially  active  in  Hungary,  where  five  editions  of  Sub- 
hadra  Bhikku's  Buddhistic  Catechism  have  been  exhausted. 

For  the  first  time  in  Europe  an  attempt  has  been  made 
there  to  get  Buddhism  officially  recognized  by  the  State, 
so  that  it  could  be  taught  in  the  schools.  The  plan  was 
not  successful  owing  to  the  opposition  of  the  Roman 
Catholics. 

In  Switzerland  and  Italy  the  number  of  adherents  of 
the  ancient  Oriental  faith  is  also  growing  steadily.  At 
Lugano  appears  the  Coenobium^  one  of  the  most  important 
Buddhist  publications  in  Europe.  New  Buddhistic  col- 
onies, it  is  announced,  will  shortly  be  formed  near 
Lausanne  and  also  in  the  Italian  province  of  Umbria. 

What  else  does  all  this  mean,  but  back  to  Heathendom! 
The  great  Buddhistic  world  is  hopeful.  And  Islam  is 
rapidly  spreading  throughout  Africa.  Indeed  the  spread 
of  the  Gospel  stands  no  comparison  with  that  of  Moham- 
medanism. 

Back  to  the  Ethical  Systems  of  Heathendom.  A  few 
weeks  ago  when  the  Editor  was  in  Boston  a  well  known 
lecturer  spoke  in  the  Lowell  Institute  of  that  city  on  "the 
Philosophy,    Metaphysics    and    Ethics    of    the    Ancient 


114  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Greeks."  The  learned  lecturer  bewailed  modern  life  and 
praised  Greek  culture.  Among  other  things  said  was  the 
statement,  that  when  the  time  comes  when  men  will  be 
no  longer  led  by  revelation  and  will  reject  miracle  and 
prophecy  and  determine  to  be  led  by  mere  light  of  reason, 
if  such  an  age  lays  aside  the  Christian  faith,  there  still 
remain  the  ethical  principles  of  Zeno  and  Epicureus.  In 
other  words  revelation  as  contained  in  God's  Holy  Word 
when  given  up  may  be  substituted  by  the  ethical  systems 
of  Zeno  and  Epicureus.  The  time,  however,  is  already 
here.  Much  of  the  preaching  in  Boston  and  New  England 
is  nothing  less  than  a  reproduction  of  the  principles  of 
Zeno  and  Epicureus.  The  Word  of  God  has  predicted  for 
almost  2,000  years  that  this  very  thing  should  happen. 
Sound  doctrines  given  up,  revelation  and  prophecy  no 
longer  believed,  must  result  in  turning  to  fables  (2  Tim. 
iv:l-4). 

The  "Soul"  Hospital  in  London.  Our  friend,  Mr. 
Philip  Mauro,  sent  us  recently  an  interesting  communica- 
tion to  our  "Current  Events"  on  the  Soul  Hospital  in 
London.     Mr.  Mauro  writes: 

Among  the  significant  events  of  the  day  a  prominent  place  must 
be  assigned  to  a  group  of  movements  whereof  the  so-called  "Em- 
manuel Movement"  is  the  best  known.  The  words  'Tsychic"  and 
"Psycho" — are  becoming  very  common  in  current  literature  and 
conversation.  The  expression  also  occurs  in  the  Bible,  but  is 
disguised  in  our  common  versions  because  it  is  there  generally 
rendered  "natural."  It  is  particularly  pertinent  in  these  days  to 
notice  the  unqualified  statement  of  1  Cor.  ii:14.  "The  psychical 
man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  But  this 
psychical  man  is  now  being  specially  stimulated,  encouraged,  and 
trained  to  get  into  communication  with  the  world  of  spirits,  that 
is  of  demons  who  arc  in  the  service  of  "the  spirit  that  now  works 
in  the  children  of  disobedience"  (Eph.  ii:2). 


n 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  115 

To  this  end  two  great  objects  are  being  presented  in  the  most 
attractive  way,  first,  communication  with  the  departed,  second, 
physical  healing.  And  from  two  directions  is  this  terrible  danger 
advancing  upon  ignorant,  credulous  and  superstitious  humanity, 
from  the  churches,  and  from  "Science."  Who  can  be  surprised 
if  millions  are  deceived  and  swept  headlong  into  the  delusions 
fostered   by  "seducing  spirits"? 

Of  all  the  healing  systems  which  have  been  brought  forward 
as  substitutes  for  simple  faith  in  God,  that  known  as  "Psycho- 
therapy" (hideous  name!)  is  perhaps  the  most  dangerous,  for  the 
reason  that  it  is  accredited  both  by  clergy  and  by  doctors.  The 
inadequacy  of  medical  treatment  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  deca- 
dence of  the  churches  on  the  other,  create  a  situation  wherein  the 
latter  are  ready  to  seize  upon  anything  which  promises  to  aid 
them  in  regaining  their  lost  ground.  The  spread  of  this  movement 
is  indicated  by  the  establishment  of  a  "soul  hospital"  in  London, 
where  patients  are  treated  by  pyscho-therapeutic"  methods.  Among 
those  who  administer  the  treatment  is  a  lady  whose  name  is  in 
the  peerage.  The  diseases  are  diagnosed  by  a  physician  who  goes 
into  a  sort  of  trance,  during  which,  by  the  aid  of  "spirit  guides" 
he  is  able  to  see  what   is  the  matter  with  the  patient. 

Here  is  a  new  and  most  serious  danger,  to  which  people  un- 
taught in  the  word  of  truth,  are  now  exposed  in  these  increasingly 
"perilous  times."  Who  would  have  dreamed,  a  few  years  ago, 
of  this  ominous  alliance  of  medical  science,  clerisy  and  spiritism? 
But  there  has  been  recently  consummated  a  yet  more  ominous 
alliance  of  spiritism  with  physical  science  in  the  attempt  to  com- 
municate with  the  human  spirits  of  the  dead.  Of  this  we  will 
speak  at  another  time  "if  God  permit." 

The  Dream  of  the  World.  The  world  dreams  on  of 
progress,  advance,  conquest  and  prosperity.  Universal 
peace,  they  tell  us,  is  in  sight.  The  world  is  about  to 
enter  upon  its  greatest  epoch.  God  and  His  Christ  are 
forgotten.  Many  preachers  advocate  a  great  Peace 
parliament  for  1913.  A  New  York  newspaper  wants 
the  great  congress  held  in  that  city. 

This  city  alone  is  able  to  offer  ample  and  elegant  accommoda- 


116  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

tions  to  the  2,500  distinguished  men  who  make  up  the  parliaments 
of  the  world.  It  is  one  of  the  great  cities  of  the  world.  It  is  the 
metropolis  and  representative  city  of  a  Nation  consecrated  to 
peace.  If  the  representative  bodies  of  New  York,  its  great  organ- 
izations, its  statesmen,  its  publicists,  its  newspapers,  and  its  people 
would  ask  Congress  to  extend  the  invitation  for  1913,  Congress 
would  not  fail  to  do  so.  The  invitation  would,  in  all  human  proba- 
bility, be  accepted  in  full  and  hearty  spirit  by  the  parliaments  of 
the  world.  The  cost  of  a  single  battleship  would  pay  ten  times 
over  the  entire  cost  of  the  vast  occasion.  America's  greatest  city 
would  play  the  host  to  the  greatest  and  noblest  assembly  ever 
gathered  in  the  history  of  the  human  race.  And  the  cause  of 
universal  peace  would  be  advanced  from  a  beautiful  promise  of  the 
century  to  a  glowing  realization  of  the  decade  in  which  we  live. 

Will  it  come  to  this?  No  doubt  it  will.  But  listen,  child 
of  God!  What  does  the  Word  say?  "For  when  they  shall 
say,  Peace  and  Safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh 
upon  them,  as  travail  upon  woman  with  child,  and  they 
shall  not  escape."  (1  Thessal.  v:3.)  That  time  cannot  be 
far  away. 

The  **New  Thought  Movement." — For  some  years  the 
New  Thought  movement  has  been  rapidly  coming  to  the 
front.  Its  advertisements  are  seen  everywhere  and  "new 
thought"  literature  is  circulated  far  and  wide.  Mr.  Frank 
S.  Weston,  of  Toronto,  who  has  thoroughly  locked  into  this 
movement,  has  sent  us  the  following  interesting  com- 
munication on  the  "new  thought"  delusion: 

A  religious  movement  has  sprung  up  in  the  United  States  which 
bids  fair  to  make  such  a  sweep  of  thought  as  has  never  been  wit- 
nessed on  this  continent.  Of  recent  origin  it  has  made  its  way 
across   the    sea. 

The  leaders  are  educated  men  and  women,  including  scientists, 
editors,  physicians,  lawyers  and  novelists. 

Their  headquarters  are  in  New  York,  having  recently  been 
changed  from   Boston.     A   sympathetic  writer  in  the  "Review  of 


I 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  117 

Reviews"  says:  "This  cult  stands  for  practical  every  day  working 
philosophy  that  takes  the  place  of  religion.  The  movement  has  for 
its  basic  purpose  nothing  less  than  a  lively  realization  of  the  meta- 
physical truth  at  the  base  of  all  religion  and  philosophy,  not  as 
a  mystical  or  intellectual  abstraction  merely,  but  as  a  working 
force  In  actual  life,  eligible  to  all  men  everywhere." 

This  movement  began  about  twenty  years  ago,  but  it  is  only 
within  five  years  that  its  power  has  been  felt. 

The  periodical  literature  of  this  new  thought  has  grown  until 
now  more  than  one  hundred  monthly  and  weekly  publications 
exist  in  the  United  States  alone. 

I.  Its  Foundation  Principles.  One  of  Its  writers  says:  "The 
reality  in  being  of  an  Infinite,  eternal  and  intelligent  energy,  prin- 
ciple or  substance  perceptible,  active  everywhere,  and  always  in  the 
phenomena  we  call  life,  is  its  basic  premise.  This  energy.  Intelli- 
gence, substance,  law  or  principle,  while  itself  the  absolute  and 
unmanifest,  is  the  great  first  cause  of  all  manifestation  of  every 
order  in  the  phenomenal  world.  .  .  .  Many  call  this  immanent 
power  God.  Others  are  content  with  Spencer's  phrase  ^Infinite 
and  Eternal  Energy,'  still  others  are  partial  to  the  term  *Being.'  " 

We  quote  as  follows  from  the  new  thought  creed  as  formulated 
at  the  last  convention:  "God  universal  spirit,  mind,  principle — is 
omnipresent,  omniscient,  omnipotent.  Man  is  the  individual  ex- 
pression of  God,  possessing  inherently  and  capable  of  manifesting, 
all  the  aspects  of  God.  Man  unfolds  to  a  continuously  expanding 
consciousness  and  manifestation  of  these  aspects  through  right 
thinking  and  right  living." 

What  do  these  words  mean.^  The  language  is  nebulous  and 
mystifying. 

Terms  contradictory  and  antagonistic  are  jumbled  together. 

I  turn  to  Henry  Wood  for  light  on  the  first  great  question  con- 
cerning any  system,  "What  Is  God.''" 

In  his  book  I  read  these  words:  "Nature  has  stored  up  in  the 
universe  an  infinite  amount  of  energy.  The  eternal  recipient  and 
transmitter  of  this  energy  Is  the  ether.  .  .  .  Now  call  this 
energy  God's  mind  and  the  ether  God's  body,  then  you  have  the 
secret  of  eternal  life  and  the  process  of  cosmic  evolution.  God 
in  the  ether  is  no  more  strange  than  a  soul  in  a  body."     God  is 


118  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

energy,  a  force  by  which  things  act.  What  does  this  language 
mean? 

This  man  is  giving  us  under  new  terms  oriental  pantheism. 
Such  is  the  "new  thought"  on  God  presented  to  the  20th  Century 
intelligence. 

Mr.  Tyner  outlines  new  thought  in  the  following  words:  "The 
absolute  is  the  great  first  cause  of  all  manifestations.  If  it  is  not 
as  obvious  in  the  little  things  of  our  personal  life  as  in  the  cosmic 
process  that  this  infinite  intelligence  is  ever  a  power  making  for 
righteousness  the  fault  is  one's  own  consciousness,  a  lack  of  recog- 
nition of  one's  own  oneness  with  the  One  Life."  This  system 
emphasizes  the  inter-dependence  of  mental  and  physical  and  the 
power  of  mind  over  body. 

"The  present  movement  is  in  a  large  degree  the  result  of  an 
attempt  to  account  for  mental  healing  and  to  give  a  lucid  and 
rational  interpretation  as  well  as  a  scientific  basis." 

Philosophically  it  is  the  offspring  of  Kant's  speculations  modified 
by  New  England  transcendentalism.  In  its  development  it  has 
taken  up  into  itself  a  number  of  contributory  elements,  viz.:  popular 
science,  evolutionism  and  Hinduism. 

It  recognizes  the  teaching  of  Christ  in  part,  Emerson  is,  however, 
its  Bible.  He  is  its  great  prophet.  A  subtile  pantheism  is  its 
foundation.  As  one  writer  says  it  is  "the  recognition,  realization 
and  manifestation  of  the  God  in  me."  Although  new  thought 
teachers  often  use  Christian  terminology,  one  has  but  to  read 
carefully  to  see  new  meanings  are  put  into  the  old  terms. 

II.  What  is  the  system  in  morals.^ — It  is  a  scheme  of  self- 
preservation  and  salvation  through  the  power  of  will.  The  leaders 
of  this  faith  have  a  firm  belief  in  the  all-saving  power  of  healthy 
mind  attitudes.     Mind  is  the  all-conquering  power. 

There  is  a  recognition  of  man's  bondage  but  freedom  is  man's 
accomplishment,  not  Christ's.  "The  first  step  after  discovering  that 
we  are  enslaved,  is  the  conviction  that  we  are  of  worth  to  the  uni- 
verse, the  ideal  of  gradual  attainment  of  freedom  through  the 
strengthening  of  individuality."  Salvation  by  human  will,  this 
is  the  gist  of  it.  On  the  title  page  of  one  of  their  books  are  these 
words:  "Within  yourself  lies  the  cause  of  whatever  enters  into 
your  life.     To  come   into   the   full   realization   of  your   awakened 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  119 

interior  powers  is  to  be  able  to  condition  your  life  in  exact  accord 
with  what  you  would  have  it."  The  general  system  of  the  book 
may  be  discovered  by  a  quotation. 

"The  great  central  fact  of  the  universe  is  that  Spirit  of  Infinite 
Life  and  Power  that  is  back  of  all,  that  animates  all,  that  manifests 
itself  in  and  through  all;  that  self-existent  principle  of  life  from 
which  all  has  come  and  from  which  all  is  continually  coming." 

"This  Spirit  of  Infinite  Life  and  Power  that  is  back  of  all  I  call 
God  .  .  .  God  then  is  this  Infinite  Spirit  which  fills  all  the 
universe  with  Himself  alone,  so  that  all  is  from  Him  and  in  Him 
and  there  is  nothing  that  is  outside." 

"We  are  partakers  of  the  life  of  God  and  though  we  differ  from 
Him  in  that  we  are  individualized  spirits  while  He  is  the  Infinite 
Spirit,  including  us  as  well  as  all  else  beside,  yet  in  essence  the 
life  of  God  and  the  life  of  man  are  identically  the  same  and  so  are 
one.     They  differ  not  in  essence;   they  differ  in  degree." 

III.  Its  Relations  to  the  Word  of  God.  The  leaders  of  this 
movement  say;  "It  antagonizes  no  sect  or  denomination  as  such. 
It  has  no  dogma  to  enforce — recognizing  good  everywhere  it  seeks 
the  co-operation  of  people  of  any  or  no  religious  forms.  Embracing 
the  good  in  every  religion  and  philosophy  it  excludes  none." 

Yet  the  same  writer  says,  "It  takes  the  place  of  religion  and 
is  indeed  to  those  people  the  only  possible  religion."  This  is  the 
Devil's  soft  sly  way  to  overthrow  the  truth  of  God.  He  means 
no  harm  and  at  the  same  time  he  is  taking  the  foundation  from 
under  your  house. 

It  is  easily  seen  by  this  able  explanation  of  the  new 
thought  movement  that  it  belongs  to  the  great  anti- 
Christian  wave,  which  is  sweeping  over  Christendom, 
constantly  gaining  in  volume.  Soon  the  person  will  appear 
who  will  unite  them  all,  Higher  Criticism,  Spiritism,  Chris- 
tian Science,  Theosophy,  New  Thought,  etc.  That  person 
will  be  the  final  Anti-christ. 

Krishnamurti  the  new  Messiah.  "The  Order  of  the 
Star  of  the  East"  has  spread  all  over  Christendom.  Even 
from  small  towns  and  villages  we  hear  that  tl^is  theosophi- 


120  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

cal  society  is  circulating  its  pamphlets  and  finds  some 
adherents.  Our  readers  will  remember  that  this  Order  of 
the  Star  of  the  East  announces  the  soon  coming  of  a  great 
world-teacher;  the  order  was  founded  by  Miss  Besant, 
the  high-priestess  of  Theosophy,  to  prepare  the  way  and  a 
welcome  for  this  great  coming  leader.  Not  only  Theos- 
ophists  are  asked  to  unite,  but  others  as  well.  The  whole 
thing  is  of  satanic  cunning  as  we  have  shown  in  our  columns 
two  years  ago  and  Mr.  Mauro's  exposure  published  four 
months  ago  laid  bare  the  scheme  once  more. 

And  now  comes  the  news  that  the  world  teacher  of  that 
woman  and  her  order  of  the  Star  of  the  East  is  about  to  be 
ntroduced  to  the  world.  He  is  coming  to  America.  His 
name  is  Krishnamurti,  a  sixteen  year  old  Hindu  boy  with  a 
most  beautiful  face.  He  is  regarded  by  Theosophists  as 
the  new  Messiah,  a  spiritual  being,  through  whom  Christ 
is  to  speak  when  He  returns  to  this  earth.  Men  and 
women  are  kneeling  already  before  him.  He  is  at  present 
living  in  luxurious  seclusion  at  the  country  home  of  Lady 
De  la  Warr  in  Sussex,  England. 

Though  under  the  most  aristocratic  influences  Krish- 
namurti is  designed  to  be  the  Messiah  of  all,  showing  the 
way  to  perfect  brotherhood.  One  may  get  the  best  idea 
of  the  remarkable  hopes  centred  in  Krishnamurti  by 
quoting  from  the  sworn  statement  in  a  suit  now  pending 
before  a  District  Judge  in  Chingleput,  Madras.  A  Hindu 
Government  pensioner  seeks  to  regain  from  Miss  Annie 
Besant  his  two  sons,  Krishnamurti  and  Nitayanda.  It 
was  Miss  Besant  who  discovered  the  lads  and  won  the 
father's  consent  to  take  them  to  England.  In  a  very 
singular  legal  document  filed  in  court  the  father  declares 
that  last  year  the  boys  were  making  rapid  spiritual  prog- 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  121 

ress,  and  were  approaching  "initiation  by  the  masters." 
He  also  submits  that  Miss  Besant  "has  been  stating  that 
the  first  boy,  who  is  named  Alcyone,  is  or  is  going  to  be 
Lord  Christ,  with  the  result  that  the  boy  is  deified  and 
that  a  number  of  respectable  persons  prostrate  before  him 
and  show  other  signs  of  worship. 

The  following  information  is  given  by  this  woman, 
Annie  Besant: 

"Indeed  there  are  more  than  25,000  cultured  men  and  women  in 
the  United  States  who  wear  a  little  silver  star  with  five  points. 
This  is  the  emblem  of  the  order  of  the  Star  in  the  East,  originated 
by  Krishnamurti  as  if  in  acceptance  of  the  belief  that  he  is  to  fulfill 
a  high  destiny.  The  members  of  the  order  are  not  necessarily 
theosophists,  in  fact  many  are  not.  But  they  are  all  eager  for  the 
time  to  come  when  Krishnamurti  shall  begin  to  execute  what  they 
believe  to  be  his  mission  as  the  Messiah  of  the  new  cycle  of  the 
world's  history.  There  are  two  theories  as  to  his  future.  One 
is  that  the  Christ  will  incarnate  and  come  in  person  to  found  the 
great  new  religion.  Another  is  that  the  Christ  will  select  a  disciple 
through  whom  he  will  manifest  at  the  great  hour. 

"Krishnamurti  may  be  the  chosen  one  through  his  superior 
spirituality,  or  he  may  be  the  one  to  declare  Christ  to  the  world. 
At  the  least  the  Hindu  boy  will  bear  the  relation  of  a  John  the 
Baptist  to  the  expected  revelation.  It  is  from  the  mystic  Himalayas 
that  the  masters  of  wisdom,  who  are  in  these  days  as  the  three 
wise  kings,"  have  proclaimed  the  coming  forth  again  of  the  Christ 
to  unify  all  people,  and  that  the  child  is  now  on  earth  who  is  to  be 
the  instrument  of  this  wondrous  power  as  was  the  disciple  Jesus 
for  the  great  Christ  in  the  past.  That  is  the  way  we  Theosophists 
explain  it. 

"What  manner  of  boy  is  Krishnamurti?  Early  in  his  birthplace 
in  Northern  India  he  began  to  attract  notice  as  a  prodigy.  It  is 
declared  that  his  history  has  been  traced  back  for  thousands  of  years. 
What  are  described  as  his  marvellous  purity  of  nature  and  character 
were  responsible  for  the  Theosophists  believing  that  very  early  were 
manifested  traits  of  the  spiritual  soul.     And  when  he  was  twelve — 


122  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

significant  age — the  boy  wrote  a  book  in  English  after  studying  the 
language  several  months.  It  is  called  *At  the  Feet  of  the  Master.' 
Within  a  year  after  its  first  publication  it  was  translated  into  four- 
teen different  languages  and  read  eagerly  by  thousands  and  thousands 
of  people.  It  is  declared  that  *no  one,  be  he  Christian,  Buddhist, 
Jew  or  Mohammedan,  can  take  up  this  small  book  without  realiz- 
ing that  in  extraordinarily  simple  and  beautiful  English  is  contained 
the  essence  of  life,  and  vital  truth,  for  attaining  the  facts  of  Initiation 
unto  the  Christ  consciousness.'  " 

Horrible  blasphemy;!  Yet  this  boy  Krishnamurti  is 
the  special  care  of  a  group  of  intellectual  (!)  society  women 
of  England,  among  whom  are  Viscountess  Churchill  and 
Lady  Emily  Lutgens.  During  the  absence  of  Miss  Besant 
in  India  the  guardian  of  the  boy  is  Mrs.  Jacob  Bright,  the 
widow  of  a  noted  English  statesman.  And  these  persons 
prostrate  themselves  before  a  Hindu  boy!  Thousands  of 
women  in  this  country  are  looking  eagerly  forward  to  the 
proposed  visit  of  this  boy! 

Two  years  ago  when  it  was  announced  that  Abdul  Baha, 
the  Persian  Anti-Christ  and  deceiver  was  to  come  to  this 
country,  we  predicted  for  him  a  great  success.  How  he 
was  received  with  open  arms  throughout  this  country  is 
well  known  to  our  readers.  Now  if  this  Hindu  boy  comes 
to  our  shores  to  lecture  he  will  even  receive  a  greater  wel- 
come. We  expect  that  he  too,  like  Abdul  Baha,  will 
address  audiences  in  Baptist,  Methodist,  Congregational 
and  Episcopal  ^^church"  buildings. 

Reginald  Campbell,  the  friend  and  admirer  of  Abdul 
Baha,  came  first  to  this  country.  Campbell,  in  spite  of  his 
denials  of  the  Son  of  God,  received  an  enthusiastic  welcome 
and  hundreds  of  preachers  complimented  the  man  and  his 
message.  Then  Abdul  Baha  and  now  another  one!  How 
true  the  Word  of  God  is!     "Because  they  received  not  the 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  123 

love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might  be  saved,  and  for  this 
cause  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they 
should  believe  a  lie,  that  they  all  might  be  damned,  who 
believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteous- 
ness" (2  Thess.  ii:10-12).  Abdul  Baha  and  Krishnamurti 
are  forerunners  of  the  Man  of  Sin.  He  will  be,  when  he 
comes,  received  with  open  arms  by  apostate  Christendom. 
We  are  privileged  to  see  strange  things.  God's  Word  is 
being  increasingly  vindicated  by  the  signs  of  the  times. 

Mrs.  Besant  Unmasked.  The  following  is  an  extract 
from  the  ^^ London  Times^  As  Mrs.  Annie  Besant  and  her 
wicked  cult,  as  well  as  "the  Order  of  the  Star  of  the  East," 
have  found  a  widespread  acceptance,  we  print  it  as  a 
whole,  hoping  that  thereby  some  of  the  poor  dupes  of 
that  woman  may  be  delivered.  Our  readers  will  remem- 
ber that  this  boy  Krishnamurthi  was  announced  by  Mrs. 
Besant  as  "the  great  coming  world-leader."  What 
rottenness  must  be  underneath  the  whole  thing  may  be 
learned  from  the  following: 

In  the  Madras  High  Court  Justice  Bakewell  delivered  judgment 
in  favor  of  Mr.  G.  Narayan  Iyer  In  a  suit  which  he  brought  against 
Mrs.  Besant,  president  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  for  the  custody 
of  his  two  sons,  who  are  at  present  studying  In  this  country.  The 
suit  was  filed  in  October  last,  and  has  attracted  much  attention  in 
India,  where  Mrs.  Besant,  the  foundress  of  the  Central  Hindu 
College  at  Benares,  has  been  working  for  some  years  to  raise  its 
status  to  that  of  a  Hindu  University  for  the  whole  country. 

The  plaintiff,  a  Government  pensioner  residing  in  Triplicane, 
stated  in  his  plaint  that  In  1909  he,  being  a  member  of  the  Theosoph- 
ical Society,  Adyar,  was  invited  by  Mrs.  Besant  to  do  the  work  of 
assistant  correspondence  secretary  of  the  esoteric  section,  which 
office  he  accepted  without  remuneration.  He  took  his  two  sons, 
J.  Krishnamurthi,  aged  seventeen,  and  J.  Milyananda,  aged  four- 
teen, and  lived  at  the  theosophical  quarters  in  South  Adyar.     Mr. 


124  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

W.  L.  Leadbeater,  of  the  Theosophlcal  Society,  undertook  the  edu- 
cation of  the  boys.  Soon  after,  the  plaintiff  became  dissatisfied 
with  the  moral  and  intellectual  education  they  were  receiving  and 
with  Mr.  Leadbeater's  influence  upon  them.  In  her  written  reply 
Mrs.  Besant  denied  the  allegations  made  against  Mr.  Leadbeater 
and  submitted  that  the  suit  has  been  undertaken  from  political 
motives  and  personal  malice,  because  she  had  sought  to  inspire 
the  student  population  with  loyalty  to  the  Empire. 

In  his  evidence  the  plaintifi"  alleged  misconduct  by  Mr.  Leadbeater 
towards  his  sons,  and  as  the  charges  were  too  indecent  to  be  given 
orally  the  witness  wrote  out  a  portion  of  his  evidence  and  handed 
it  to  the  Court.  The  witness  complained  to  Mrs.  Besant  on  several 
occasions  without  success,  but  in  March,  1911,  she  took  the  boys  to 
Benares  and  thence  to  London,  but  returned  in  the  autumn.  Be- 
tween October  and  December,  1911,  Mrs.  Besant  told  the  witness 
that  his  boys  were  making  rapid  progress  spiritually,  and  that  for 
their  advancement  in  that  direction  she  proposed  to  keep  them  with 
Mr.  Leadbeater  in  a  cool  place  like  Ootacamund.  On  his  remon- 
strating against  the  boys  being  kept  with  Mr.  Leadbeater,  Mrs. 
Besant  told  him  not  to  be  silly.  Mr.  Leadbeater  and  the  boys  went 
to  Benares,  whither  the  witness  followed  them,  and  where  he  heard 
further  allegations  of  Mr.  Leadbeater's  conduct  toward  his  boys. 
On  December  31,  1911,  he  demanded  that  the  boys  should  be  com- 
pletely separated  from  Mr.  Leadbeater.  Mrs.  Besant  refused, 
saying  that  they  had  been  together  in  their  past  lives,  that  he  was 
taking  an  interest  in  the  boys,  that  he  was  Anarhat  and  should  not 
be  talked  about  lightly. 

Mr.  Leadbeater  described  the  allegations  against  him  by  the 
plaintiff  as  an  atrocious  falsehood.  He  said  that  he  treated  Krish- 
namurthi,  who  was  being  trained  as  a  Sanyasi,  with  great  respect 
and  reverence.  In  cross-examination,  the  witness  said  that  he  had 
been  conducting  certain  clairvoyant  experiments  with  Airs.  Besant; 
he  had  heard  her  call  him  **a  man  on  the  threshold  of  divinity." 
He  had  seen  things  in  Mars  and  Mercury.  It  was  true  he  had 
stood  face  to  face  with  **the  Supreme  Director  of  Evolution."  In 
order  to  escape  the  effect  of  thoughts,  forms  and  certain  astral 
aspects,  in  the  case  of  two  or  three  boys,  the  advice  he  was  alleged 
by  witnesses  for  the  plaintiff  to  have  given.     When  he  gave  the 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  125 

advice  he  treated  the  problem  as  physiological  rather  than  moral. 
He  still  held  the  same  views,  but  in  deference  to  Mrs.  Besant's 
wishes  he  had  promised  not  to  give  this  advice  any  longer.  He 
still  adhered  to  what  he  had  said,  that  he  did  not  care  for  the  pru- 
deries of  convention  but  only  took  into  account  the  realities  of  life. 
He  had  been  entrusted  with  the  work  of  training  theosophical 
aspirants  by  the  super-human  beings  who  were  the  real  leaders 
of  the  theosophists. 

Mrs.  Besant's  Argximents. 
Mrs.  Besant  conducted  her  own  case,  and  In  giving  evidence 
said  she  took  Krishnamurthi  to  England  to  train  him  for  the  spiritual 
leadership  of  the  world.  He  was  to  be  devoted  to  the  religious  life, 
and  the  reason  for  separating  him  from  others  was  that  he  might 
not  be  suddenly  roused  from  his  trance,  which  would  endanger 
his  life.  She  intended  both  the  boys  to  go  to  Oxford,  and  they  had 
been  accepted  from  October,  1912.  They  were  both  to  lead  celi- 
bate lives.  Subsequently  addressing  the  Court  she  argued  that 
the  welfare  of  the  boys  was  sure  to  be  better  looked  after  by  her 
than  by  the  plaintiff.  She  would  admit  the  absolute  control  of  a 
father  over  his  boys  only  up  to  the  fourteenth  year.  She  urged 
that  a  letter  written  by  the  plaintiff  in  March,  1910,  was  a  complete 
waiver  of  his  rights  over  his  boys.  The  elder  boy  would  be  of  age 
in  a  few  weeks  and  would  then  be  free  to  return  to  his  father  if  he 
chose.  The  younger  boy  was  a  brilliant  youth  with  high  ambi- 
tions, and  it  would  be  a  piece  of  cruelty  to  stop  him  from  prosecuting 
his  studies  in  England. 

The  Judgment. 

Mr.  Justice  Bakewell,  in  delivering  judgment,  held  that  the  evi- 
dence against  Mr.  Leadbeater  in  respect  to  the  boy  Krishnamurthi 
was  unsatisfactory.  But,  while  concluding  that  the  serious  charges 
against  Mr.  Leadbeater  had  not  been  established,  his  Lordship 
held  that  from  the  evidence  he  had  given,  Mr.  Leadbeater  was 
certainly  an  immoral  person  and  was  highly  unfit  to  be  in  charge 
of  the  boys.  The  plaintiff  was  right  m  saying  that  his  sons  should 
not  be  allowed  to  associate  with  him.  His  Lordship  also  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  plaintiff  had  every  right  to  take  back  his 
sons,  notwithstanding  the  deed  which  he  had  executed  transferring 


126  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

their  guardianship  to  Mrs.  Besant.  For  the  welfare  of  the  boys 
they  must  be  placed  under  their  father's  protection,  and  must  be 
declared  wards  of  the  Court.  He  accordingly  directed  Mrs.  Besant 
to  hand  over  the  boys  to  the  plaintiff  on  or  before  May  26. 

American  Shrine  of  Bahaism.  Everything  seems  to  be 
found  on  the  Pacific  Coast — Christian  Scientists,  Theoso- 
phists,  Spiritualists,  and  a  dozen  other  cults  flourish  there. 
The  financial  sects  and  parties  of  deluded  people  can 
hardly  be  counted.  Los  Angeles  has  now  also  a  "sacred 
shrine"  of  Bahaism.  The  first  convert  to  that  Oriental 
delusion  was  a  man  by  name  of  Thornton  Chase.  The 
wicked  leader  of  Bahaism  has  designated  his  grave  a 
sacred  shrine.  The  Persian  prime  minister  to  the  United 
States  and  other  adherents  to  Bahaism  are  now  preparing 
to  rear  a  memorial  and  a  chapel  at  the  grave  of  this  man 
Chase,  with  the  intention  that  it  be  an  international 
meeting  place  for  centuries  to  come.  Charles  M.  Remy, 
of  Washington,  son  of  Rear-Admiral  Remy,  has  charge  of 
the  erection  of  the  memorial.  He  is  one  of  the  prominent 
leaders  of  Bahaism  and  is  devoting  his  wealth  and  energy 
to  advance  Bahaism.  The  converts  to  Bahaism  include 
men  and  women  of  national  and  international  reputation. 

Bahaism  is  one  of  the  predicted  Satan-cults  of  the  end 
time.  It  is  a  way  preparer  for  Anti-christ.  Its  American 
supporters  are  those  who  never  knew  Christ  as  their 
Saviour.  It  is  a  striking  fulfillment  of  2  Tim.  iv:4: 
**And  they  shall  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  Truth,  and 
shall  be  turned  unto  fables." 

He  Has  Come.  He  has  come — the  counterfeit  mes- 
senger of  Peace,  Abdul  Baha,  head  of  the  Bahaistic  cult.  I 
Most  of  his  followers  believe  him  to  be  a  reincarnation  ' 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  worship  him  as  such.     His 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  127 

success  in  England  has  been  tremendous.  It  will  be 
greater  in  this  country.  This  Oriental  travels  with  a 
private  physician  to  watch  over  his  health.  His  first 
public  appearance  in  America  was  made  in  an  aristocratic 
Episcopal  church  in  New  York. 

Garbed  in  the  white  robe  and  tarboosh  or  Oriental 
priesthood,  Abdul  Baha,  son  of  the  founder  of  the  Bahai 
cult,  preached  a  message  of  religious  unity  and  universal 
peace  from  the  pulpit  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church 
of  the  Ascension,  at  Fifth  Avenue  and  Tenth  Street, 
yesterday  morning.  Following  his  sermon  he  stood  at  the 
altar  and  facing  the  East  after  the  manner  of  sun  wor- 
shippers ofi"ered  a  prayer  in  Persian. 

Is  it  possible!  A  sun  worshipper,  for  such  he  is,  in  a 
"Christian  Church"  offering  a  prayer  in  Persian!  What  will 
hundreds  of  true  Christians  say  to  this  who  are  members 
of  this  denomination.^  No  doubt  this  poor,  blinded,  lost 
soul  will  be  welcomed  by  other  Evangelical  "churches"  to 
offer  a  prayer  in  Persian  and  to  give  his  message  of  a  false 
peace,  a  false,  satanic  unity.  There  is  no  question  the 
apostasy  is  on  and  develops  rapidly.  The  eyes  of  the 
millions  of  church  members,  without  Christ  and  without 
the  Gospel  are  being  fast  blinded  by  the  god  of  this  age, 
through  his  chosen  instruments,  R.  J.  Campbell,  Abdul 
Baha  and  others.  Peace  and  safety,  all  is  well!  This  is 
their  message.  It  precedes  the  sudden  judgmxcnt  of  God. 
How  long  will  God  permit  the  obnoxious  thing  to  go  on? 
How  long  will  He  hold  back  His  wrath?  Surely  it  must 
soon  come. 

All  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  stand  for  the 
faith  have  but  one  way  before  them  in  these  dark  days. 
They  must  separate  themselves  from  the  apostate  thing 


128  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

and  refuse  fellowship  to  that  which  dishonors  Christ  and 
His  work.     This  is  the  only  way. 

The  Spread  of  Mormonism.  In  1890  there  were  144,352 
Mormons  in  the  United  States,  now  there  are  said  to  be 
400,000  in  the  United  States,  and  20,000  in  other  lands. 
In  1910  over  16,000  new  members  were  gained  by  birth, 
more  than  half  of  the  total,  and  by  proselyting.  Two 
thousand  Mormon  missionaries  are  at  work  (about  800 
in  the  United  States),  who  visit  about  2,000,000  homes 
annually  and  distribute  their  literature,  and  hold  some 
50,000  meetings.  Mormonism  is  paganism  veneered  with 
Christian  terminology.  It  teaches  that  there  are  many 
gods,  who  were  formerly  men  and  women,  have  flesh  and 
bones,  are  sinners,  and  often  live  in  polygamy;  that  there 
is  no  Trinity,  but  that  Christ  is  a  polygamist  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  a  fluid;  that  Adam  is  the  god  of  this  world  and 
each  world  has  its  own  god;  that  sin  is  a  necessity  for  all; 
that  there  is  a  ^'priesthood,"  which  constitutes  "the  only 
right  government"  and  receives  continuous  revelation 
which  supersedes  all,  if  desired;  that  there  are  four 
Bibles;   and  so  on. 

No  reader  of  these  tenets  of  Mormonism  can  fail  to  see 
the  necessity  of  preaching  the  Gospel  to  its  adherents,  even 
if  he  is  not  conscious  of  the  evil  and  moral  degradation 
which  follow  in  the  train  of  Mormonism. 

Another  Warning  on  Bahaism.  The  wicked  Abdul 
Baha  with  his  smooth  message  of  unity  and  peace  is 
making  through  his  increasing  followers  a  rapid  progress 
with  the  spread  of  his  delusive  system.  We  have  sounded 
the  warning  for  several  years.  We  saw  recently  a  very 
strong  exposure  of  Bahaism  by  a  Persian  missionary  of 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  129 

excellent  standing.  Mr.  Peter  F.  Easton,  of  Tabriz, 
has  the  following  to  say  on  this  delusion: 

"I  am  firmly  convinced  that  strong  utterances  should  be  made 
to  awaken  American  Christians  to  the  truth  of  Abdul  Baha's  propa- 
ganda. Bahaism  is  not  Christian,  it  is  not  Mohammedan,  on  the 
contrary  it  is  essentially  anti-Christian  and  anti-Mohammedan 
and  the  manner  in  which  men  like  Dr.  Campbell  and  Archdeacon 
Wilberforce  in  England  have  taken  up  Abdul  Baha  simply  proves 
them  to  be  as  credulous  as  the  lawyer  in  a  pending  case  who  sent 
five-pound  notes  to  spirits.  I  greatly  fear  that  this  cult  of  Baha- 
ism may  find  fruitful  ground  in  the  United  States  and  I  am  anxious 
to  raise  my  voice  and  urge  Christians  to  crush  it  in  its  infancy. 

"Last  September  I  called  on  Abdul  Baha,  the  head  of  the  Baha- 
istic  sect  in  London,  to  tell  me  what  v/as  the  creed,  a  new  gospel 
or  what.  I  found  him  a  man  of  great  affability  and  courtesy.  He 
was  glad  to  meet  with  an  Occidental  who  could  talk  with  him  in 
Tatar  Turkish,  the  language  of  Azerbeijan,  Persia,  in  which  and 
in  the  adjoining  Caucasus  I  have  been  laboring  as  a  missionary 
since  1873. 

"After  some  introductory  conversation  I  asked  him  what  this 
message  was,  had  he  anything  to  add  to  the  New  Testament  teach- 
ing of  repentance  toward  God  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.? 

"Instead  of  answering  my  question  he  turned  the  conversation 
into  another  channel.  Several  times  I  endeavored  to  bring  it  back 
to  the  original  topic,  but  beyond  certain  general  statements  as  to 
his  belief  in  all  the  prophets  I  could  get  no  definite  reply.  So  far, 
therefore,  as  an  answer  to  my  question  was  concerned  my  visit  was 
a  failure. 

"It  is  a  pantheistic,  not  a  Christian,  not  even  a  Mohammedan 
movement;  one  of  the  long  series  of  such  movements  beginning 
with  the  very  beginning  of  Persian  history  and  continuing  to  the 
present  day,  a  movement  likewise  akin  to  the  pantheistic  sects  of 
other  lands  such  as  Mormons,  Spiritists,  Theosophists,  Christian 
Scientists,  etc.  What  then  is  the  essential  characteristic  of  Pan- 
theism.? It  is  the  doctrine  that  there  is  no  personal  God  who 
creates,  governs  and  controls  all  things,  but  only  a  divine  essence 
out  of  which  all  things  are  evolved,  the  various  orders  of  the  word 


130  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

marking  the  stages  of  evolution — first  mineral,  then  plant,  animal 
and  finally  man. 

"Who  then  in  this  Behai  movement  is  this  head?  Is  it  Abbas 
Effendi  Abdul  Baha,  the  present  leader?  No,  for  Abdul  Baha 
means  the  servant  of  Baha,  the  father  of  the  present  leader,  who 
died  at  Acre,  Syria,  in  1892.  The  movement  is  also  called,  from 
him,  the  Bahal  movement. 

"What  sort  of  man  was  this  Baha?  His  first  prominent  role  was 
that  of  an  Absolom.  After  the  death  of  the  Bab,  the  founder  of 
the  movement,  in  1850  Baha's  half-brother,  Suth-i-Ezel,  became 
the  head  of  the  sect,  holding  undisputed  and  absolute  sway  over 
the  Babis  Church.  Baha,  joining  him  after  his  flight  to  Bagdad  in 
1852  was  entrusted  by  Suth-i-Ezel  with  the  practical  direction  of 
affairs,  a  position  which  Baha  used  to  steal  the  hearts  of  his  brother's 
followers. 

"When  banished  to  Acre  along  with  some  of  the  followers  of 
Suth-i-Ezel,  who  were  sent  there  by  the  Turkish  Government  to 
watch  his  movements,  every  one  of  these  men  was  assassinated  by 
the  followers  of  Baha.  The  same  is  true  of  almost  all  the  promi- 
nent leaders  of  EzeFs  movement,  who  one  by  one  disappeared  by 
foul  play  on  the  part  of  too  zealous  Behais. 

"His  next  role,  that  in  which  he  was  above  all  pre-eminent,  was 
that  of  a  blasphemer.  These  are  some  of  the  titles  that  were  applied 
to  him— *Our  God  El  Abha,'  *The  Everlasting  Father,'  The  Lord 
of  the  Vineyard.'  One  of  hi  followers  was  allowed  to  address  him 
with  the  saying  that  it  was  a  shame  to  compare  God  to  him.  In 
short  he  was  a  moral  and  spiritual  monster  who  exalted  himself 
against  all  that  is  called  God  or  that  is  worshipped.  To  become  a 
Bahal  means  to  put  this  antichrist  in  the  place  of  God  and  Father 
of  Our  Lord.  That  is  what  the  people  of  Great  Britain  and  the 
United  States  are  invited  to  do. 

"I  hope  I  have  said  enough  to  rouse  the  Christians  of  America  to 
a  sense  of  danger  in  encouraging  or  tolerating  Abdul  Baha's  propa- 
ganda.    It  strikes  at  the  basis  of  Christianity." 

Expansion  and  Increase  of  ^'Christian  Science.'*  A 
few  years  ago  when  Mrs.  Eddy  died  the  prediction  was 
made  by  many  that  the  Christian  Science  cult  would  soon 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  131 

die  out.  The  opposite  has  come  to  pass.  It  is  expanding 
and  increasing  constantly  It  must  be  so,  for  this  Science, 
falsely  so  called  (1  Tim.  vi:20)  has  in  it  all  the  elements  of 
anti-Christianity  and  is  a  masterpiece  of  Satan.  We  were 
astonished  at  the  strength  this  cult  has  attained  on  the 
Pacific  Coast.  It  is  increasing  more  rapidly  in  the  Pacific 
States  than  perhaps  anywhere  else.  During  our  visit  to 
the  Coast  we  gave  a  testimony  against  it  and  showed  the 
true  character  of  this  movement.  Each  time  we  did 
"Christian  Science"  leaders  attacked  us  in  the  public 
press,  charging  us  with  misrepresentations  and  claiming 
that  "Christian  Science"does  not  deny  the  Deity  of  Christ, 
etc.  Some  of  these  newspaper  attacks  were  very  bitter. 
One  of  these  was  answered  by  a  brother  in  North 
Yakima.     We  quote  part  of  his  reply: 

What  Mr.  Gaebelein  did  in  his  lecture  on  "Modern  Day  Delusions** 
was  to  lay  down  the  foundations  of  Christian  faith.  These  in  brief 
were  four:  1st,  "That  the  Bible  is  God's  Word  and  all  of  God's 
Word  to  us;  that  it  is  true  and  inerrant."  2nd,  That  Jesus  Christ 
was  the  eternal  Son  of  God  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  before  the 
world  was;  that  by  Him  and  for  Him  all  things  were  made;  that 
He  was  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God. 
3rd,  That  He  died  upon  the  Cross  to  save  lost  sinners;  that  He  made 
peace  with  God  for  us  through  the  blood  of  His  cross;  that  He  bore 
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  Cross;  that  through  faith  in  His 
blood,  we  are  freely  justified  and  saved.  4th,  That  man  must  be 
born  again,  by  true  faith  in  Christ  crucified  for  him,  in  order  to  be 
saved,  and  that  if  he  is  not  born  again  but  dies  in  his  sins, 
where  Christ  is  he  cannot  go,  but  that  he  is  lost  for  all  eternity 
and  the  wrath  of  God  abides  upon  him.  H  we  line  up  Christian 
faith  it  shows  that  the  saints  of  God  from  the  earliest  days  have 
believed  these  things.  The  apostles  believed  and  taught  them, 
while  infidels  and  unbelievers  denied  them,  and  the  Christian 
Science,  theosophy,  spiritualism,  higher  criticism,  new  thought, 
etc.,  were  each  in  their  turn  measured  by  this  standard.     Their 


132  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

own  statements  were  taken  regardin  the  divinity  of  Christ,  His 
death,  His  bodily  resurrection.  Jesus  said,  **This  cup  i-  the  New 
Testament  in  my  blood  which  is  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins," 
and  his  disciple  John  says  that  "the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's 
Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Now  every  one  of  the  above  men- 
tioned cults  boldly  declare  that  they  do  not  believe  these  things. 
Mrs.  Eddy  says,  "That  the  sacrifice  of  one  man  no  matter  how  great 
can  never  answer  for  another  man's  sins."  No  misrepresen- 
tation of  any  one  of  these  beliefs  was  made;  in  fact,  they  were  truly 
represented  by  their  own  utterances  and  shown  to  believe  contrary 
to  the  Bible.  If  your  faith  cannot  stand  before  the  written  word, 
what  will  it  do  when  it  comes  into  the  presence  of  the  living  Word  at 
judgment? 

"Christian  Science"  will  continue  to  draw  to  itself  the 
large  mass  of  ignorant  "church  members"  who  were  never 
born  again.  As  the  end  approaches  it  will  become  more 
powerful  and  more  influential.  It  is  one  of  the  leading 
delusions  of  the  last  days,  a  delusion  which  God  permits 
that  those  who  hardened  their  hearts  against  the  Gospel 
may  believe  the  He. 

Giving  Heed  to  Seducing  Spirits.  The  daily  press  has 
of  late  announced  the  arrival  of  an  Italian  medium,  a 
woman  with  the  high  sounding  name  of  Eusapia  Paladino. 
She  is  described  by  the  psychical  researchers,  the  polite 
name  for  spiritualists,  as  a  perfect  wonder.  She  "con- 
verted" the  late  Cesare  Lombroso  to  spiritualism  and 
shook  the  doubting  Cammille  Flammarion  and  has  been, 
so  it  is  said,  the  puzzle  of  the  psychologists,  physiologists 
and  other  scientific  men  of  the  world.  Her  converts  are 
some  of  the  leading  scientists.  This  peasant  woman  has 
been  brought  to  America  to  give  a  number  of  seances.  Her 
price  for  a  single  sitting  Is  $250.  Among  those  who  are 
backing  her  up  and  shall  investigate  her  powers  are  pro- 
fessors of  Columbia  and  Harvard  Universities,  a  president 


1 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  133 

of  another  university,  physicians  and  private  individuals. 
No  doubt  this  imported  medium  will  have  lots  of  work 
to  do  and  make  thousands.  She  refuses  to  give  exhibitions 
before  large  crowds,  only  a  few  are  permitted  to  be  present. 
In  Italy  she  has  been  detected  in  trickeries,  such  as 
practiced  by  other  mediums.  Among  the  "wonderful" 
things  stated  is  a  scar,  which  she  has  on  the  forehead  aind 
from  which,  during  a  seance,  there  blows  a  cold  breeze, 
which  is  strong  enough  to  move  a  sheet  of  paper  when  held 
in  front  of  it. 

That  a  lying  spirit  possesses  this  poor  woman  seems 
evident.  The  poor  professors,  who  have  no  use  for  the 
miracks  of  the  Bible,  who  reject  the  miracles  of  our  Lord 
as  unscientific,  these  men  become  the  dupes  of  possessed 
women  and  can  believe  that  a  cold  breeze  blows  from  an 
old  scar!  How  the  predictions  of  the  Bible  concerning  the 
last  days  are  increasingly  fulfilled.  The  Bible,  God's 
Holy  Word,  rejected,  men  and  women  turn  to  fables  and 
give  heed  to  seducing  spirits.  Those  seducing  spirits 
become  more  numerous  and  more  powerful  and  all  who 
depart  from  the  Truth  will  become  the  prey  of  them  sooner 
or  later.  Like  King  Saul  apostate  Christendom  has 
rejected  the  Word  of  God  and  turns  to  those  who  have 
familiar  spirits  (1  Chronicles  x:13-I4). 

Still  Another  Cult.  Still  another  cult,  or  rather  the 
same  old  dem^onism,  known  as  Spiritualism,  is  being 
dished  up  by  another  deceiving  name.  The  new  cult  was 
launched  recently  in  Chicago  by  the  "very  Rev."  Sam. 
Fallows,  bishop  of  the  Reformed  Episcopal  Church  in 
Chicago  and  head  of  the  Emmanuel  (falsely  so-called) 
movement  in  Chicago.  He  calls  his  new  cult  "Immor- 
talism,  the  science  religion."     According  to  this  bishop 


134  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

the  cult  is  "the  science  of  communication  with  the  spirits 
of  the  departed."  The  man  denies  that  it  is  spiritualism. 
The  devil  always  likes  to  hide  his  deception  and  produce 
his  old  lies  in  new  garbs.  He  has  done  so  in  Christian 
Science  and  its  twin  the  Emmanuel  delusion,  and  he  does 
so  continually  with  spiritualism.  He  works  the  latter 
more  than  anything  else.  He  has  a  reason  for  it  The 
"departed  friends"  who  give  messages  from  the  unseen 
are  disguised  demons.  Through  these  demons  Satan 
gets  possession  of  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men  and  women 
who  expose  themselves  to  these  influences.  No  wonder  he 
works  this  scheme.  He  will  work  it  still  more  in  the 
future,  and  will  gladly  assist  professors,  clergymen  and 
bishops  in  making  communication  with  evil  spirits  a 
reality.  This  Bishop  Fallows  said  "Geography  and 
arithmetic  are  parts  of  a  business  education.  Com- 
munications with  spirits  will  be  much  broader  in  its 
influence  and  so  much  more  valuable  that  it  must  also 
be  a  part  of  the  curriculum  of  colleges  and  schools.  Im- 
mortalism  is  destined  to  become  generally  accepted  by  the 
intellectual  world  of  the  future." 

"Telepathy  is  already  an  established  fact,  and  it  is  but  a 
part  of  immortalism.  There  are  those  who  are  already  in 
touch  with  the  spirit  world.  They  do  not  advertise  the 
fact,  for  they  might  be  called  insane  and  unbalanced.  But 
observe  the  unerring  judgment  of  certain  men  of  great 
success;  they  seem  to  have  the  experience  of  a  thousand 
lifetimes  behind  them  and  a  vision  into  the  future.  Why 
should  not  others  also  have  those  powers  through  the  aid 
of  those  who  have  lived  out  those  thousand  lives,  and  who 
may,  for  all  we  know,  see  into  the  future?  Who  but  the 
spirits  of  the  dead  know  those  things.''     Some  day  we  shall 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  135 

talk  to  our  dead  friends  and  they  will  help  us.  It  is  not 
more  impossible  than  the  wireless  telegraph,  the  tele- 
phone and  other  inventions  that  would  have  been  termed 
witchcraft  a  hundred  years  ago." 

No  doubt  the  new  spiritualistic  movement  started  by  a 
bishop  of  the  Reformed  Episcopal  church  will  be  success- 
ful.    Surely  the  enemy  is  coming  in  like  a  flood. 

The  Revival  of  an  Old  Delusion.  About  one  hundred 
years  ago  there  lived  in  England  a  poor  religious  fanatic  by 
the  name  of  Joanna  Southcott.  Originally  she  was  a 
domestic  servant.  She  became  a  Methodist,  and,  pre- 
tending divine  revelations,  dictated  prophecies  in  hum- 
drum poetry.  Then  she  proclaimed  herself  the  woman 
of  Revel,  xii  who  was  to  be  delivered  of  a  man  child.  In 
her  sixty-fourth  year  she  affirmed  to  be  delivered  of  that 
man  child,  a  second  Christ,  whom  she  called  Shiloh.  She 
named  the  date,  October  14,  1814,  but  died  ten  days  later 
of  dropsy.  She  was  one  of  the  saddest  delusionists  and 
her  claims  were  sheer  blasphemies. 

Somebody  sent  us  from  England  two  volumes  entitled 
"The  Express."  We  read  different  parts  of  these  two 
large  volumes.  They  contained  the  sayings,  poems  and 
prophecies  of  this  Joanna  Southcott.  It  is  claimed  that 
she  foretold  that  one  hundred  years  later  these  books 
were  to  be  published  by  a  woman.  The  title  page  has  this 
inscription:  "My  Express  Must  Fly — ^The  Spirit  of 
Truth!  As  foretold  one  hundred  years  ago,  to  be  pub- 
lished by  the  hand  of  a  woman  in  the  tenth  year  of  the 
century  and  containing  the  Life  and  Divine  Writings  of 
the  late  "Joanna  Southcott."  A  woman  then  has  ful- 
filled this  prophecy  and  is  used  to  revive  the  blasphemous 
claims  of  that  deluded  person. 


136  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

More  than  once  we  shuddered  as  we  read  the  words  of 
this  woman  Southcott  and  closed  the  book  with  an  un- 
speakable horror.  She  claimed  that  she  had  conceived 
like  Mary  by  the  Power  of  God  and  that  the  birth  of  her 
child  would  mean  more  for  the  world  than  the  birth  of 
Christ.  She  claimed  that  the  Lord  told  her,  "I  suffered 
for  the  transgression  of  Man;  in  child-bearing  thou  wilt 
suffer  for  the  transgression  of  Woman."  Awful!  Our  pen 
refuses  to  copy  more.  And  these  abominable  delusions, 
these  hallucinations  out  of  the  pit  are  printed  and  pub- 
lished in  England  by  a  Teputable  press.  We  hope  this 
hundred-year-old  delusion  will  be  completely  ignored. 
We  do  not  see  how  a  sane  person  could  for  a  moment 
believe  this  delusion. 

Church  of  Humanity.  Still  Worse.  A  friend  sent 
us  a  copy  of  a  sheet,  which,  he  informs  us,  was  placed 
recently  in  hundreds  of  homes  in  the  City  of  Buffalo. 
The  name  of  the  paper  is  "The  Truth  about  God  and 
Life,"  published  in  a  little  Kansas  town.  The  first 
paragraph  gives  an  outline  for  what  this  sheet  of  abomina- 
tion stands. 

"A  cheerful  greeting  and  best  wishes  for  a  long,  happy, 
healthy,  and  wealthy  life  to  all.  This  little  educator  is 
distributed  by  the  Church  of  Humanity  to  introduce  to  all 
people  Kerr's  great  discovery  in  nature  that  the  universe 
contains  no  real  god  in  nature,  that  man  contains  no  soul 
and  that  life  is  ended  forever  in  each  person  at  death. 
That  all  gods,  saviors,  souls,  saints,  devils,  spirits,  angels, 
heaven,  hell,  purgatory,  etc.,  are  purely  mythical,  having 
no  real  existence  whatever  in  nature.  This  church  has 
over  three  hundred  members  in  the  United  States  and  is 
duly    organized    and    incorporated    to    teach    these    dis- 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  137 

coveries,"  etc.  The  writer  of  these  words  of  wickedness 
is  evidently  a  very  ignorant  man.  Every  inch  of  the  sheet 
is  a  blasphemy  against  God  and  His  Revelation.  It  is, 
however,  so  outspoken  in  its  infidelity  that  the  large 
majority  of  people  will  throw  it  aside.  Yet  it  shows  that 
the  predicted  days  of  evil  are  upon  us  and  that  the  "man 
of  sin"  *Vho  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  above  all 
that  is  called  God" — cannot  be  far  away. 

A  Few  Words  on  Russellism.  How  does  "Pastor 
Russell"  win  the  crowd  and  get  the  money?  He  is 
literally  drawing  the  crowd  and  he  is  also  getting  the 
money  in  vast  sums,  for  his  advertising  schemes  are 
world-wide,  and  entail  expenditures  that  stagger  the 
minds  of  those  who  know  the  cost  of  such  efforts. 

Now  for  the  how  and  why.  The  world  is  full  of  super- 
ficial people,  who  want  a  sleasy  (lacking  firmness  of 
texture  or  substance;  thin,  flimsy)  religion.  That  Mil- 
lennial Dawnism  is  about  the  flimsiest  that  has  ever  been 
unloaded  on  a  gullible  humanity  is  hardly  a  question 
for  debate.  It  is  a  clever  reproduction  of  all  the  heresies 
of  past  ages,  put  on  the  modern  market  under  a  brand 
new  label,  that  fairly  shines. 

It  seems  as  though  in  his  earlier  years,  in  his  haber- 
dasher's shop  in  Allegheny,  when  business  was  dull,  or 
after  business  hours,  Russell  had  gathered  together  all 
the  scraps  and  remnants  of  ancient  errors,  such  as  Gnosti- 
cism (know-it-all-ism),  Manicheism,  Arianism,  Sabel- 
lianism,  Apollinarianism,  Nestorianism,  Eutychianism, 
Pelagianism,  etc.,  etc.,  and  had  cast  them,  one  and  all, 
into  the  fusing  pot  of  his  own  great  and  fervid  imagination, 
and  that  '^Millennial  Dawnism"  came  forth  to  enlighted 
(?)   benighted  humanity;    though  to  give  all  the  side- 


138  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

lights  in  the  case  as  to  the  authorship  of  this  clever  system 
of  untruth,  it  should  be  stated  that  RusselFs  divorced 
wife  claims  to  have  written  most  of  it. 

At  any  rate,  here  it  is,  and  surely  it  is  succeeding  beyond 
Russell's   highest   dreams. 

Give  the  average  man  a  guarantee  that  there  is  no  hell, 
and  you  will  tickle  him  in  the  right  place.  Tell  him  that 
the  heathen  are  not  lost,  and  it  meets  his  heartiest  ap- 
proval. Show  him  that  the  worst  the  very  wicked 
(Russell's  few  incorrigibles,  for  it  seems  that  even  he 
is  not  equal  to  saving  all  sinners)  need  expect  is  non- 
existence after  death,  and  he  is  ''with  you."  He  will  wax 
eloquent  in  expatiating  upon  and  in  defending  such  an 
easy-going,  "common-sense,"  satisfying  religion,  and 
will  subscribe  handsomely  and  voluntarily  for  its  pro- 
mulgation. 

We  have  observed  Russellism  for  a  long  time  and  have 
never  yet  known  an  unregenerate  person  who  looked 
into  it,  but  who  liked  it.  It  is  a  religion  made  strictly 
for  the  fleshy  man,  and  is  a  perfect  fit. 

But  how  is  it  that  all  these  great  Millennial  Dawn 
revelations  have  been  so  long  in  reaching  us.^ 

Is  it  not  a  pity  that,  after  the  Lord  had  kept  them  secret 
for  so  long  a  time,  that  'Tastor  Russell"  should  now 
expose  them.^ 

Just  one  sample  of  "Pastor  Russell's"  brilliant  (!) 
exegesis.  It  is  based  on  1  Timothy  ii:6,  (Christ  Jesus) 
"who  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  all  to  be  testified  in  due 
time."  He  uses  this  as  one  of  the  foundation  stones  of 
his  system,  dwelling  on  the  "ransom  for  all"  as  the  ground 
for  belief  in  a  universal  salvation,  making  the  testifying 
to  be  his  (Russell's)  own  in  this  the  "due  time."     This, 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  139 

to  be  sure,  is  an  absurd  rendering,  and  should  forever  shut 
him  off  from  serious  consideration,  for  even  the  slightest 
study  will  reveal  the  meaning  of  the  passage  to  be  as 
follows:  "(Christ  Jesus)  who  gave  Himself  as  the 
redemption  price  for  all — a  fact  testified  to  at  its  own 
appointed  time"  (that  is,  when  Christ  hung  on  the  cross) 
(Weymouth's  translation). 

But  the  main  point  at  which  we  are  now  aiming  in  order 
to  show  Russell's  inconsistency  is  this,  that  while  here 
claiming  that  Christ  died  for  all,  yet  he  is  not  long  in 
stumbling  over  the  "incorrigibles;"  so  hopeless  are  these 
that  even  Russell  must  consign  them  to  judgment, 
which  in  his  hands  amounts  to  annihilation.  But  see 
into  what  a  trap  of  his  own  making  Russell  has  fallen, 
for  his  all  is  not  all,  after  all. 

His  own  "incorrigibles"  mar  the  allness  of  his  argument. 
Now,  if  Russell's  all  is  not  all,  surely  orthodoxy  may 
be  allowed  the  same  privilege  of  making  exceptions,  and 
this  it  does  by  affirming,  on  the  basis  of  many  Scripture 
passages,  that  while  Christ  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for 
all,  only  those  who  accept  Him  become  the  beneficiaries 
of  His  saving  grace. 

Finally,  let  us  ask,  suppose  Russell  is  wrong .^  Suppose 
that,  notwithstanding  his  assurances,  there  is  a  hell  of 
torment  for  the  ungodly.^  Suppose  it  is  true  "that 
he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,"  and  that 
"the  wicked  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment?" 
Suppose  there  is  a  "lake  of  fire?"  The  Scriptures  affirm 
all  these  things.  Suppose  the  Bible  as  it  has  been  under- 
stood by  godly,  gifted  men  for  centuries,  is  right  and 
Russell  is  wrong?  Only  suppose  this,  and  the  possibili- 
ties of  the   harm  resulting  from  Russell's  influence  in 


140  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

blindly  leading  the  blind  is  too  horrible  for  contemplation. 
— Episcopal  Recorder. 

Christian  Science  Heaven.  It  is  painful  to  find  when 
one  speaks  against  the  Christian  Science  cult,  that  here 
and  there  persons  who  have  leanings  towards  this  master- 
piece of  Satan  deny  that  it  is  in  any  way  against  the 
Gospel.  These  **church  members"  who  make  such 
assertions  are  ignorant  of  the  Gospel  and  equally  ignorant 
of  what  "Christian  Science"  is.  Recently  some  of  these 
unsaved  church  members,  who  dabble  in  Christian  Science, 
told  us  that  they  knew  Christian  Science  teachers  held  the 
same  truth  about  Christ  and  Heaven  as  evangelical 
Christians  hold. 

It  happened  that  a  few  days  after  we  saw  the  July 
number  of  the  Christian  Science  Journal.  The  leading 
article  in  this  issue  is  from  the  pen  of  the  prominent 
teacher  of  that  system.  This  is  what  he  has  to  say  about 
heaven: 

Christian  Science  puts  aside  the  mythologic  concept  of  heaven 
as  a  place,  and  shows  it  to  be  a  state  or  condition  of  mind.  It 
follows,  therefore,  that  its  attainment  depends  upon  the  mental 
processes  of  the  individual.  In  other  words,  it  affirms  that  right 
thinking  which  leads  to  right  living  is  the  sure  passport  to  heaven. 

What  foolish  nonsense  this  is!  If  the  Word  of  God 
teaches  anything,  it  teaches  that  heaven  is  a  place,  "the 
Father's  house  with  many  mansions."  Heaven  is  a  place 
where  the  throne  of  God  is,  and  upon  the  Father's  throne 
there  sits  now  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  All  this  is  denied 
by  this  wicked  system.  Not  right  thinking  and  right 
living  is  the  passport  to  heaven,  but  the  blood  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  That  precious  blood  is  not  alone 
rejected   by   Christian   Science,   but  ridiculed   and   bias- 


MODERN    DAY    DELUSIONS.  141 

phemed.  Hebrews  x:29  applies  to  them,  "Of  how  much 
greater  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought 
worthy,  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God, 
and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith 
he  was  sanctified,  an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite 
to  the  Spirit  of  Grace?"  Men  and  women  who  accept 
Christian  Science  are  simply  lost  souls. 

Serpent  Worshippers.  The  worship  of  the  serpent  is 
the  worst  form  of  idolatry.  According  to  the  revelation 
of  the  first  chapter  in  Romans  the  history  of  idolatry  is  as 
follows:  "Professing  themselves  wise  they  became  fools." 
That  is,  the  Gentile  world  had  originally  a  knowledge  of 
God.  This  was  given  up  and  in  their  own  wisdom  they 
tried  to  find  out  things  by  searching;  thus  they  became 
fools.  "And  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God 
into  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds, 
and  four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things"  (Rom. 
1:22-23). 

The  Moki  Indians  in  Arizona  hold  yearly  the  "Snake 
Dance."  They  worship  the  snake  and  their  abominable, 
vile  ceremonies  are  held  to  induce  the  big  snake  to  send 
rain.  When  they  liberate  many  snakes,  it  is  that  they 
should  tell  the  big  snake  to  send  rain.  The  Snake  repre- 
sents Satan  and  the  smaller  snakes,  the  demons.  Mis- 
sionaries assure  us  that  these  religious  heathen  ceremonies 
are  followed  by  the  vilest  orgies,  corresponding  to  the 
divine  record  in  the  first  chapter  of  Romans. 

The  Editor  spent  in  August  a  week  in  Arizona  only  a 
short  distance  from  where  these  wild  dances  were  executed. 
It  is  sad  to  think  that  "Christian"  men  and  women  can  go 
and  witness  these  snake  dances.  Scores  of  white  people 
attend  every  year,  and  these  poor  lost  heathen,  in  the 


142  ?  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

midst  of  our  land,  have  been  so  encouraged  in  their  wicked 
ways,  that  they  hold  these  orgies  every  year,  instead  of 
every  four  years.  Few  of  these  white  men  and  women, 
not  even  Colonel  Roosevelt,  who  attended  this  year,  seem 
to  realize  that  by  witnessing  these  degrading  dances,  they 
help  keeping  these  lost  souls  in  the  devil's  grip.  The 
Missionaries  at  work  in  these  reservations  are  deeply 
grieved  over  the  thoughtless  curiosity  of  so  many  profess- 
ing Christians,  who  become  partakers  of  the  evil  deeds  of 
these  lowest  of  all  idolators. 

*  Taster"  Russell.  Inasmuch  as  this  man,  the  self- 
styled  "great  preacher  and  expositor"  continues  to  parade 
through  this  country,  scattering  his  evil  teachings  and 
doing  great  harm,  we  are  obliged  to  continue  our  warning. 

The  Brooklyn  Daily  Eagle  has  taken  special  care  to 
investigate  the  record  of  this  man  and  to  expose  him. 
That  his  wife  received  a  divorce  from  him  is  well  known. 
The  following  extract  from  the  Eagle  gives  additional 
information: 

"The  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  to  which  Mrs.  Russell  appealed 
for  alimony,  denied  Pastor  Russell's  plea  that  he  was  penniless. 
The  court  heard  evidence  showing  that  he  had  transferred  property 
worth  $317,000  to  the  Watch  Tower  Bible  and  Tract  Society,  of 
which  he  is  the  president.  Referring  to  one  transaction  involving 
a  sheriff's  sale  of  property  worth  $20,000  for  less  than  $200,  the 
court  said: — *The  purpose  of  this  whole  transaction  was  to  deprive 
the  wife  of  her  dower  interest  and  was  a  fraud  on  her.'  The 
evidence  produced  against  him  in  the  alimony  case  was  that  he 
accumulated  a  fortune  through  stock  speculation  and  donations 
from  his  followers,  who  arc  taught  to  believe  that  the  millennium 
is   due  in   October,    1914/* 

Such  is  the  man,  who  poses  as  "a  great  one,"  as  special 
servant  of  God  to  teach  God's  Word  and  feed  the  flock 


MODERN    DAY   DELUSIONS.  143 

of  Christ.  It  is  enough  evidence  to  open  the  eyes  of  every 
decent  man  and  woman. 

The   Work   of   Satan   in   the    Mission   Fields.    The 

Satanic  delusions  of  the  latter  days  are  not  confined  to 
America  and  England.  They  are  being  successfully  propa- 
gated in  heathen  lands.  "Millennial  Dawnism"  with  its 
blasphemies  against  our  Lord  and  general  counterfeiting 
of  the  Truth  of  God  circulates  its  literature  in  India,  China 
and  elsewhere.  Christian  Science  and  other  evil  systems 
do  the  same.  Still  worse,  however,  is  it  when  the  "New 
Theology"  and  "Higher  Criticism"  send  their  adherents  to 
the  Mission  field.  Certain  societies  send  out  men,  who 
deny  the  Christ  of  God  and  the  Blood.  Their  damnation 
is  a  thousand  times  worse  than  the  damnation  of  the 
heathen  they  try  to  civilize.  A  large  number  of  mis- 
sionaries have  of  late  sent  out  an  appeal,  part  of  which 
appeared  in  "The  Christian,"  (London)  from  which  we 
quote. 

It  is  a  matter  of  grave  concern  and  one  which  should  cause  to  all 
who  are  loyal  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  deep  heart-searchings  and 
true  humility,  as  they  realize  how  sadly  the  Church's  testimony  has 
been  weakened  and  her  Lord  betrayed  by  those  purporting  to  be  of 
the  "household  of  faith." 

The  paralyzing  results  of  Higher  Criticism  and  the  New  Theology 
affect,  not  only  the  great  body  of  Christians  in  the  home  lands,  but 
indirectly,  yet  definitely,  through  the  inevitable  outcome,  retrench- 
ment, also  the  efforts  being  put  forth  in  the  foreign  field.  This, 
however,  is  but  the  beginning  of  a  sea  of  trouble,  the  roar  of  whose 
angry  waves  is  already  to  be  heard,  for  the  cries  of  assured  victory, 
hailing  from  the  walls  of  Doubting  Castle,  are  echoing  and  re- 
echoing from  pulpit,  platform,  and  Press  throughout  this  land.     .     . 

In  reference  to  certain  statements  made,  practically  denymg  the 
Godhead  of  Christ,  some  three  years  ago,  a  few  Indian  pastors 
wrote:     "These  things  have  naturally  disturbed  Indian  Christians. 


144  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

and  have  also  given  a  handle  to  non-Christians  to  believe  that, 
after  all,  Christians  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  their  own  view 
of  the  Person  of  Christ  is  not  very  diflPerent  from  that  which  is  held 
by  the  Unitarians  and  the  Prathana  Samajists."  Comment  is 
superfluous. 

Realizing  the  extreme  gravity  of  the  position  in  Western  and 
other  parts  of  India,  we  write  to  express  our  deep  concern  at  the 
efforts  being  put  forth  to  propagate  the  teachings  of  Higher  Criticism 
and  the  New  Theology,  which,  in  the  home  lands,  have  destroyed 
the  faith  of  so  many  in  the  Bible,  and  have  attacked  the  truth  of  the 
Deity  of  Christ;  which,  also  in  the  foreign  field,  are  a  grave  menace 
to  true  unity  in  Gospel  service.  We  would  also  "set  to  our  seal 
that  God  is  true,"  and  that  we  **are  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of 
Christ"  which  *'is  the  power  unto  God  unto  salvation";  it  being  our 
firm  conviction  that  the  Gospel,  as  unfolded  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  inspired  Word,  is  to-day  India's  one  great  need. 

We  would  call  upon  Christians  to  beware  of  sending  out  men 
and  women  in  the  capacity  of  missionaries,  who  are  not  "sound  in 
the  faith"  or  who  are  still  "halting  between  two  opinions."  India 
to-day  needs  men  and  women,  who  through  faith  and  experience 
have  deep  convictions,  and  who  by  life  and  lip  will  preach  "Christ 
and  Him  crucified." 

Such  is  Satan's  work.  He  attempts  a  worldwide  over" 
throw  of  the  faith  delivered  unto  the  Saints.  Christians 
should  be  very  careful  in  the  support  of  missions,  less 
they  become  partakers  of  the  wicked  deeds  of  critics  and 
deniers  of  the  faith,  whom  different  societies  send  out. 


Social    Conditions. 


A  Bad  Outlook  for  Reformers.  Before  us  is  the  latest 
report  of  the  United  States  Commissioner  of  Internal 
Revenue.  He  reports  an  astounding  increase  in  the  sale 
of  cigarettes  and  intoxicants.  During  the  three  months, 
from  July  1  to  October  1,  the  past  year,  this  nation 
consumed  a  million  more  cigarettes  than  during  the  same 
period  of  1911.  Worse  is  the  increase  in  alcoholic  bever- 
ages. The  nation  drank  during  these  three  months 
three  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  more  barrels  of  beer 
and  four  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  more  gallons  of 
whiskey  than  during  the  same  three  months  of  1911. 
This  increase  is  the  more  appalling  in  view  of  the  great 
eflForts  made  by  the  reformers  and  prohibitionists,  who 
make  the  foolish  claim,  that  this  nation  is  about  to  stop 
the  manufacturing  and  sale  of  all  alcoholic  drinks.  And 
preachers  can,  in  spite  of  all  these  evidences,  continue 
to  speak  of  "this  Christian  nation"  and  how  the  church 
is  rapidly  changing  the  moral  condition  of  the  world. 
These  false  prophets  are  ignorant  of  what  God's  Word 
predicts  about  the  end  of  this  age  and  they  are  equally 
ignorant  of  existing  conditions. 

Lawlessness,  Violence  and  Murder.  The  confession 
of  the  McNamara  brothers  has  brought  to  light  an  awful 
condition  of  things.     It  seems  these  men  for  years  resorted 


146  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

to  deeds  of  violence  and  are  responsible  for  the  lives  of  a 

number  of  people.  Behind  them  others  stood  who  are 
equally  responsible.  What  the  investigation  now  in 
progress  will  bring  to  light  remains  to  be  seen.  The 
current  of  anarchy  is  far  stronger  than  it  is  generally 
known.  We  quote  from  one  of  the  leading  dailies  of  New 
York  City: 

American  Socialism  made  a  fool  of  itself  over  the  McNamara 
case,  and  a  very  dangerous  fool  at  that.  The  McNamaras  were  not 
Socialists,  but  no  labor  leaders  were  so  virulent  as  the  Socialists  in 
denouncing  the  arrests.  No  labor  leaders  used  such  incendiary 
language  as  the  Socialists  in  seeking  to  convince  the  country  that 
these  men  were  martyrs  who  were  about  to  be  murdered  by  a 
bloodthirsty  capitalism. 

Mr.  Debs  practically  defied  the  courts  to  convict  the  McNamaras. 
Immediately  after  their  arrest,  the  "Call,"  the  organ  of  the  Socialists 
in  New  York,  said:  "The  same  attempt  is  made  to  arouse  public 
fury  not  so  much  that  the  McNamaras  may  be  murdered,  but  in 
order  that  the  working  class  may  be  beaten  into  submission.'* 
Everywhere  Socialists  seized  upon  the  incident  to  preach  a  more 
vindictive  gospel  of  class  war. 

Even  when  the  stunning  confession  became  public,  no  Socialist 
leader  expressed  the  faintest  degree  of  horror  at  the  crimes  that 
had  been  committed.  They  were  all  engaged  in  reviling  the  con- 
fession as  a  "plant"  to  injure  the  Socialist  ticket  in  the  Los  Angeles 
election.  It  was  not  until  the  country  had  begun  to  appreciate  the 
full  significance  of  the  pleas  of  guilty  that  Socialist  leaders  suddenly 
discovered  that  they  were  opposed  to  the  use  of  dynamite  in  advanc- 
ing their  doctrines.  But  they  had  been  preaching  a  class  war 
in  language  that  led  logically  to  dynamite  and  murder.  If  social 
and  economic  conditions  in  this  country  are  one-tenth  part  as  bad 
as  Socialist  orators  and  writers  pretend,  workingmen  would  be 
justified  in  resorting  to  any  weapons  to  release  themselves  from  an 
intolerable  slavery. 

The  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  under  its  irresponsible  leadership 
American  Socialism  has  been  dealing  in  an  incendiary  dcmagogisra 
that  must  inevitably  turn  such  minds  as  those  of  the  McNamaras. 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  147 

Socialism  cannot  shirk  its  share  of  the  responsibility  and  throw  all 
the  blame  upon  organized  labor.  Its  language  has  consistently 
given  the  lie  to  its  own  doctrines. 

Socialistic  Sunday  Schools.  The  remarkable  rise  and 
spread  of  Socialism  is  baffling  the  statesmen  of  all  nations. 
In  this  country,  In  Germany,  England  and  other  lands 
the  rising  generation  Is  being  taught  systematically  the 
principles  of  Socialism  and  the  hatred  of  the  rich.  The 
following  Is  a  report  of  what  Is  done  In  this  direction 
In  England: 

"The  character  of  the  ideas  taught  in  the  Socialist  Sunday  Schools 
established  in  England  for  the  purpose  of  making  Socialists  out  of 
children  has  served  as  a  basis  for  protests  to  the  newspapers.  One 
writer  asserts  that  this  conversation  took  place  in  such  an  insti- 
tution: 

The  Teacher — Can  a  boy  socialist  be  a  Boy  Scout. '^ 

Answer — No,  comrade. 

The  Teacher — Why  cannot  a  boy  socialist  be  a  Boy  Scout. f* 

Answer — -Because  a  Boy  Scout  has  to  salute  the  Union  Jack. 

The  Teacher — Why  must  not  a  boy  socialist  salute  the  Union  Jack.? 

Answer — Because  the  Union  Jack  is  an  emblem  of  oppression 
and   slavery." 

It  Is  dreadful  to  think  what  the  harvest  will  be  ere 
long  from  this  kind  of  seed.  "Despising  authorities  and 
speaking  evil  of  dignities"  (Jude  vll)  Is  one  of  the  predicted 
marks  of  the  apostasy.  Utter  lawlessness  cannot  be  far 
away.  The  restraining  power  In  the  world,  the  Holy 
Spirit,  holds  It  still  In  check. 

The  Solemn  Lessons  of  a  Great  Disaster.  The  most 
magnificent  steamship  ever  built,  the  Titanic^  collided 
during  a  clear  night  with  an  Iceberg  and  sunk  In  a  few 
hours.  Over  1,500  human  beings  lost  their  lives  and  were 
swept  suddenly  Into  eternity.  Among  the  passengers 
were  some  of  the  wealthiest  men  of  the  world,  as  well  as 


148  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Others  well  known  in  the  sphere  of  literature,  art  and 
science.  Perhaps  never  before  a  ship  sailed  the  ocean 
which  carried  such  prominent  men,  leaders  of  society 
and  the  financial  world.  Their  baggage  contained 
millions  of  dollars  worth  of  precious  stones,  pearls  and 
other  treasures.  A  few  hours  only  and  this  proud  mon- 
arch of  the  ocean  found  a  grave  and  resting  place  some 
12,000  feet  below  the  water  level.  Many  of  the  great 
men  perished  with  all  their  wealth.  But  a  few  of  their 
bodies  were  recovered.  It  was  on  a  Sunday  night  when 
the  Titanic,  going  at  a  high  speed,  hurled  itself  against 
an  immense  wall  of  ice.  Different  witnesses  declared 
that  it  was  a  night  of  merry-making.  A  ball  was  going 
on  and  the  band  played  at  its  best,  while  others  were 
engaged  in  card-playing.  Even  when  the  crash  came 
few  realized  the  danger.  The  officers  for  a  time  laughed 
down  the  idea  that  the  ship  could  sink.  And  then  the 
horrible  scenes  which  followed  and  the  deathwail  of  the 
hundreds  which  went  into  the  watery  grave.  But  there 
is  no  need  to  describe  the  details  of  this  greatest  sea 
disaster  of  the  world.  Our  friends  are  sufficiently  familiar 
with  it  from  the  reports  of  the  daily  papers.  We  turn  our 
attention  to  a  few  of  the  lessons  this  terrible  event  teaches. 
We  are  convinced  that  our  God  has  given  a  solemn 
warning  to  this  age  in  the  sinking  of  the  Titanic.  We  feel 
that  this  dreadful  disaster  was  permitted  by  our  Lord  for 
a  wise  and  great  purpose.  The  age,  which  is  socn  to 
close  is  "Man's  Day."  It  is  the  age  of  boasting  and  the 
age  of  defiance  of  God  and  Mis  laws  as  the  Creator.  As 
all  intelligent  readers  of  the  Word  of  God  know,  the  god 
of  this  age  is  ''Satan''  (2  Cor.  iv:4);  and  he  blinds  the  eyes 
of  them  that  believe  not.  His  object  is  to  make  men 
believe   that   this   age   is   constantly   improving,   getting 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  149 

better  and  will  thus  go  on  indefinitely.  God's  Word 
declares  that  it  is  an  evil  age,  an  age  of  unrighteousness 
and  that  its  end  will  come  suddenly  in  great  and  mighty 
judgments  of  God.  Satan,  as  the  god  of  this  age,  has 
used  the  progress,  inventions  and  achievements  of  late 
years  to  back  up  his  lies.  He  uses  the  supposed  fireproof 
skyscrapers,  earthquakeproof  buildings,  unsinkable  ships, 
wireless  telegraphy  and  other  things  to  blind  the  world  to 
the  real  conditions  of  things  in  this  age  and  lulls  thereby 
the  great  mass  of  people  into  a  false  security.  And  now 
one  of  the  greatest  achievements  of  this  age,  a  great 
swimming  palace  of  immense  size,  filled  with  all  the 
luxurious  appointments  to  satisfy  the  lusts  of  the  flesh 
and  the  eye,  a  marvellous  structure  in  which  a  thousand 
modern  day  inventions  were  united,  an  "unsinkable  ship," 
is  wiped  out  of  existence  on  its  maiden  trip!  Surely  God 
has  spoken.  God,  so  to  speak,  calls  a  halt  to  this  age  in 
its  mad  race  for  progress  and  improvement.  The  warn- 
ing is  a  solemn  one.  Man's  boasted  progress  cannot 
keep  back  disaster  and  judgment.  That  in  a  night,  clear 
and  calm,  such  a  catastrophe  should  have  happened  is 
more  than  striking.  It  is  a  warning  that  still  greater 
disasters  w^ill  come.  God  has  written  it  in  His  Word 
that  judgments  will  be  visited  upon  this  age,  when  it  has 
reached  its  heights,  judgments  such  as  the  world  has 
never  known  before.  The  sinking  of  the  *  Titanic"  is 
God's  warning  that  He  is  not  mocked  and  that  He  will 
deal  soon  in  judgment  with  this  age.  If  one  looks  at 
downtown  New  York  and  sees  upon  this  narrow  strip 
of  land  the  great  awe-inspiring  structures,  perhaps  greater 
than  the  towxr  of  Babylon  ever  was,  one  thinks  what 
an  awful  catastrophe  if  some  day  an  earthquake  should 


150  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

shake  this  island.     Who  knows  but  that  may  be  the  next 
to  humble  man  with  his  proud  achievements. 

The  false  security  of  the  passengers  and  the  absolute 
trust  in  the  unsinkable  ship  gives  us  another  solemn 
lesson.  All  reports  said  that  there  was  no  alarm  when 
the  collision  occurred,  officers  and  stewards  allayed  the 
fears  of  the  passengers.  The  wireless  operators  joked 
about  sending  out  the  extreme  danger  signals  calling  for 
help.  Even  when  the  lifeboats  were  commanded  to  be  in 
readiness  and  to  be  launched,  only  a  few  women  went  into 
the  first  one.  And  when  the  danger  became  more  appar- 
ent men  could  stand  about  and  believe  in  the  absolute 
safety  of  the  ship  and  trusted  in  the  statement,  "She 
cannot  sink."  Then  suddenly  the  great  ocean  liner 
plunged  forward  and  the  poor  souls  hoping  against  hope 
were  swept  away  by  the  seas  or  sunk  into  the  terrible 
depths  with  the  doomed  vessel.  Then  what  happened? 
Let  an  eyewitness  give  us  the  story. 

"Then  there  happened  the  most  terrible  thing.  I  do  not  believe, 
as  long  as  I  live,  that  I  shall  ever  be  able  to  get  out  of  my  ears,  my 
mind  and  my  heart,  the  terrible  cries  of  the  sixteen  hundred  doomed 
souls  which  floated  to  us  across  the  water. 

"For  an  hour,  through  the  darkness  of  the  night,  we  heard  them, 
the  pitiful  heartrending  wailings  of  those  dying  in  the  water,  for 
whom  there  was  to  be  no  help  on  earth.  Then  gradually  one  by 
one  they  died  down,  and  we  heard  them  no  more. 

"It  was  sad,  sad,  and  we  could  do  nothing  for  them.  The  cold, 
a  bitter,  numbing  cold,  which  palsied  nerves  and  muscles  alike,  had 
done  its  work  and  the  sea  had  claimed  those  who  had  no  right  to 
die.  I  am  told  that  one  or  two  bodies  were  seen  in  the  water 
afterward  of  persons  frozen,  and  doubled  stiffly  by  the  awful  cold." 

In  reading  all  this  how  one  is  reminded  of  that  which  is 
yet  to  come.  "For  when  they  shall  say  Peace  and  Safety, 
then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them"  (1  Thessal. 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  151 

v:3).  This  disaster  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  little  sample 
of  what  is  coming  for  this  world  with  its  mass  of  nominal 
Christians,  unsaved  and  pleasure-seeking.  Peace  and 
Safety!  This  is  the  delusion  Satan  tries  to  strengthen, 
and  he  does  it  not  alone  by  using  the  great  achievements 
of  the  age  but  also  by  such  lying  "isms"  like  Christian 
Science,  the  New  Theology,  Bahaism  and  others.  Peace 
and  Safety — then  sudden  destruction!  What  a  wail  of 
despair  when  God's  judgments  overtake  this  world  at 
last!  Then  they  will  say  to  the  mountains  and  to  the 
rocks,  Fall  on  us  and  hide  us;  the  great  day  of  His  Wrath 
is  come,  and  who  shall  be  able  to  stand    (Rev.  vi:15-17). 

How  gladly  the  multi-millionaires  would  have  sacrificed 
their  millions,  the  wealthy  women  their  gems  and  magnifi- 
cent gowns,  if  only  they  might  have  been  saved.  But 
all  had  lost  its  value.  They  had  no  more  use  for  it  all. 
Perhaps  not  once  they  remembered  the  beautiful  idols 
of  silver  and  gold.  Death  stared  them  in  the  face  and  after 
death,  as  God's  holy  Word  tells  us,  the  judgment. 

All  has  its  lessons  and  is  but  a  little  prelude  what 
will  be  in  the  day  when  Jehovah  deals  in  judgment  with 
this  earth.  Then  "they  shall  cast  their  sUver  in  the 
streets,  and  their  gold  shall  be  removed;  their  silver  and 
their  gold  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  them  in  the  day  of 
the  wrath  of  the  Lord;  they  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls, 
neither  fill  their  bowels"  (Ezek.  vii:19).  "And  I  will 
bring  distress  upon  men,  that  they  shall  walk  like  blind 
men,  because  they  have  sinned  against  the  Lord,  and 
their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  like  dust,  andtheir  flesh 
as  the  dung.  Neither  their  silver  nor  their  gold  shall 
be  able  to  deliver  them  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  wrath" 
(Zeph.  i:17-18). 


152  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

But  will  the  world  heed  the  warning  of  this  disaster? 
Will  the  unsaved  masses  profit  thereby?  Will  the  rush 
of  the  age  after  the  things  of  this  passing  age  be  arrested? 
A  few  weeks  have  passed  since  the  great  disaster  and  the 
above  questions  are  answered.  All  goes  on  in  its  usual 
way.  New  plans  are  made  to  overcome  difficulties  and 
danger.  There  is  no  sign  of  repentance,  no  sign  of  turning 
to  God  and  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

May  we,  His  people,  give  heed  to  the  solemn  lessons  of 
this  great  disaster.  Judgment  will  be  God's  next  work. 
We  praise  Him  for  His  Mercy  which  hath  delivered  us  and 
will  deliver  us  from  the  wTath  to  come.  May  we  use  the 
time  and  our  privileges  as  long  as  our  Lord  still  waits  in 
patience. 

China's  Hungry  Millions.  Another  great  famine  has 
come  to  poor  China.  The  last  great  famine  a  number 
of  years  ago  claimed  nine  million  victims,  and  it  is  now 
feared  that  the  present  one  may  assume  similar  propor- 
tions. What  such  a  famine  really  is  and  means,  w^e,  in  a 
land  of  plenty,  can  hardly  realize.  We  quote  from  one 
who  spent  almost  twenty  years  in  China: 

"It  is  difficult  for  us  to  realize  the  real  horror  of  these  extensive 
famines,  confined  almost  wholly  to  China,  India  and  Russia.  Under 
the  best  conditions,  the  Chinese  live  but  a  sordid  life  devoid  of 
many  thmgs  we  would  regard  as  necessary  to  existence,  and  with 
every  form  of  luxury  unknown.  What  the  Chinese  know  as  pros- 
perity, we  should  regard  as  the  severest  hardship,  as  it  means  a 
coarse  and  meagre  living,  a  cramped  and  cheerless  hut,  and  the 
most  trying  toil  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  until  the  fall  of  dark- 
ness. 

"Milk  and  butter  are  practically  unknown;  meat  is  rarely  tasted 
oftener  than  once  a  week,  and  then  only  under  prosperous  con- 
ditions, and  in  the  fat  years  there  is  little  surplus  to  be  saved  for 
the  lean  years  of  famine.     Hence,  when  drought  or  flood  destroy 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  153 

the  crops,  there  is   nothing  for  the   hard-working  farmers   to  fall 
back  upon. 

"In  the  case  of  a  man  of  means,  he  sells  first  his  cow,  the  water 
buffalo  that  ploughs  his  fields,  then  his  farm  utensils,  and  finally 
his  household  goods.  One  by  one,  all  are  *eaten  up,*  as  he  would 
say.  Then  the  doors  and  windows  are  taken  from  the  mud-brick 
hut  and  carried  to  market,  and  at  last  the  few  timbers  that  support 
the  roof  go  to  nourish  the  family.  Left  at  last  without  a  roof, 
they  join  the  endless  procession  of  refugees,  some  to  drop  and  die 
where  they  fall,  and  others  to  struggle  and  stagger  onward,  in  the 
hope  of  reaching  some  more  prosperous  region.  Often  they  are 
huddled  into  tiny  huts,  hardly  larger  than  a  half-barrel,  cut  end- 
wise, and  made  of  cheap  matting,  and  in  these  camps  pestilence 
soon  finds  its  way,  often  in  the  form  of  relapsing  fever,  frequently 
the  deadly  typhus,  and  also  in  small-pox.'* 

How  thankful  we  ought  to  be  for  God's  goodness  to  us 
in  our  own  land.  And  some  day  God  will  visit  the 
countries  so  privileged  with  sore  judgments,  including 
famines.  Read  Rev.  vi:5-8.  When  one  thinks  of  the 
luxurious  living  and  the  sinful  waste,  which  goes  on  in 
this  land  of  plenty,  as  well  as  the  ingratitude  to  God,  one 
feels  that  judgment  must  come  some  day.  And  too  little 
compassion  there  is  for  the  suffering  millions  on  the 
other  side  of  the  globe. 

The  Socializing  of  Christianity.  When,  a  few  years 
ago,  the  American  Institute  of  Social  service  began  to 
issue  the  "kingdom  lessons"  introducing  social  questions 
into  the  Sunday  School,  we  sounded  a  warning  in  our  edi- 
torial remarks.  We  predicted  that  the  Gospel  and  the 
Bible  would  surely  be  crowded  out.  A  few  years  only 
and  now  we  see  an  interdenominational  movement  in  the 
council  of  church  federation,  adopting  a  creed,  which 
ignores  the  Gospel  of  our  salvation  and  substitutes  the 
social  questions  of  the  day.     Everywhere  one  hears  the 


154  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

Statements,  that  the  business  of  the  church  is  to  throw 
herself  into  the  social  side  of  things  and  that  the  old  way 
of  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  is  no  longer  sufficient. 
We  could  fill  many  pages  with  reports  of  meetings,  utter- 
ances by  preachers  and  others,  which  reveal  the  almost 
universal  drift  of  Christendom  towards  the  socialistic 
idea.  In  the  Brooklyn  Methodist  preachers  meeting  a 
Jewish  Rabbi  delivered,  as  the  press  gave  it,  "A  New 
Epistle   from   the   Hebrews." 

Rabbi  Nathan  Krass,  of  Brooklyn,  gave  the  Methodist  ministers' 
meeting  last  Monday  a  lively  "Epistle  from  a  Hebrew,"  emphasizing 
the  new  social  religion  as  a  plane  upon  which  Jew  and  Christian  may 
unite  in  behalf  t)f  humanity  and  "make  this  world  an  antechamber 
of  the  world  to  come." 

"Too  much  time  is  spent  in  discussing  doctrine,"  said  the  rabbi, 
"and  not  enough  in  applying  it.  Preachers  speculate  a  lot  on  how 
many  angels  can  dance  upon  the  point  of  a  needle  and  forget  about 
his  angels  who  are  suffering  for  the  necessities  of  life.  They  split 
hairs   on    matters   of   theology. 

"This  is  a  new  age,  and  the  great  emphasis  of  thought  is  upon 
human  welfare.  Theology  has  given  away  to  sociology.  Men  are 
beginning  to  find  out  that  God  has  great  concern  for  humanity.  His 
book  does  not  have  much  about  the  world  to  come,  but  has  a  lot 
about  this  world.  That  is  where  the  emphasis  is,  and  we  must  make 
the  world  an  antechamber  to  the  divine  dwelling — transform  the 
present  world.  And  that  is  where  the  Jew  and  the  Christian  can 
get  together. 

"You  cannot  convert  me  and  I  cannot  convert  you,  but  we  can 
unite  in  an  overture  for  our  fellow  men.  If  we  can't  get  together 
on  creeds  we  can  get  together  in  behalf  of  humanity.  But  what 
are  we  doing  together.^  There  are  problems  too  shocking  to  name — 
there  is  the  social  evil.  We  can  leave  the  Police  department  to 
those  who  are  investigating  it,  though  we  have  learned  some  things 
about  it  we  did  not  know  before. 

"There  are  the  same  evils  on  Fifth  avenue  as  on  the  east  side.  I 
overheard  the  butler  of  one  of  these  castles  of  wealth,  and  what  he 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  155 

said  could  not  be  repeated  even  before  you  men;  but  I  do  not  refer 
to  that;  what  they  do  behind  their  closed  doors  we  cannot  prevent. 
But  there  are  places  where  we  can  protect  the  girls,  where  they  are 
underpaid  for  their  work  and  driven  to  the  streets.  We  can  tackle 
the  procurers,  the  white  slavers  and  those  who  build  the  brothels  and 
bring  innocent  girls  to  them.  Many  of  these  girls  are  weak,  but  we 
can  prevent  most  of  them  from  going  into  such  places. 

"Have  you  seen  the  play,  ^Milestones'?  I  have,  and  its  movement 
illustrates  the  movement  of  religious  thought.  There  was  the  age  of 
great  faith,  of  theology,  of  eschatology — milestones — and  now  it  is 
the  age  of  sociology. 

"And  this  is  the  epistle  from  a  Hebrew — the  heart-to-heart  talk  of 
a  Jew  to  his  Christian  brethren." 

He  received  the  usual  vote  of  thanks  and  compliments 
for  his  address.  A  few  years  more  and  where  will  this 
thing  lead  to?  We  firmly  believe  this  socializing  of 
Christianity,  this  reform-movement,  this  progressive- 
ecclesiastical  endeavor  to  rule  out  and  vote  out  vices  and 
present  day  evils,  this  coming  together  for  social  service, 
is  the  finest  game  Satan  is  playing.  He  stands  behind 
this  whole  business  and  is  satisfied  with  it,  as  long  as  he 
can  achieve  his  great  object.  His  aim  is  against  the  Son 
of  God  and  against  the  Gospel.  There  is  no  room  for 
Christ,  no  room  for  Salvation  by  Grace  in  this  social 
movement. 

The  Increasing  Unrest  of  the  World.  This  is  an 
editorial  from  a  daily  published  on  the  Pacific  coast,  it 
gives  the  present  unrest  of  the  world.  Daily  papers  have 
their  eyes  far  more  wide  open  than  some  of  the  "religious 
leaders"  with  their  optimistic  programs. 

Since  the  message  of  peace  was  borne  on  academic  lips  to  the  world, 
war  has  gradually  become  the  order  of  the  day;  until  now  all  the 
world  is  at  war,  or  at  least  preparing  for  it. 

In  Europe  the  smaller  nations  have  been  at  war  for  some  time, 


156  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

while  the  greater  ones  but  wait  an  open  chance  to  get  Into  the 
conflict. 

In  Asia,  Persia  is  in  anarchy,  expecting  dissolution.  In  India, 
unrest  has  eaten  into  the  very  fibre  of  its  people.  In  China,  a  newer 
revolution  is  arising  from  the  ashes  of  the  last,  and  the  extent  of  its 
rebellion  cannot  be  gauged.  In  Africa,  the  rioting  which  is  taking 
place  in  Johannesburg  merely  exemplifies  the  anarchical  state  of 
that  country,  and  the  deadly  danger  it  incurs  from  the  countless 
colored  people  in  the  land. 

In  Australia,  the  united  resistance  to  authority  will  create  a 
condition  of  affairs  in  which  all  will  feel  hostile  to  freedom,  here 
run  riot. 

But  it  is  with  matters  more  nearly  at  home  that  we  are  concerned. 
Within  the  past  few  weeks  certain  European  nations  have  seen  fit  to 
interest  themselves  in  American  affairs  and  presume  to  dictate  to 
this  continent.  Relying  on  their  presumption,  an  Asian  nation 
again  stepped  into  untimely  prominence,  and  has  been  hailed  by  a 
people  of  this  country  as  their  deliverer. 

Mexico  thus  becomes  to  us  of  more  immediate  concern  than  the 
many  warrings  of  the  nations.  In  result,  in  almost  every  quarter 
of  the  earth  war  is  in  swift  preparation,  according  to  the  wisdom  of 
the  rulers.  But  the  prospective  national  wars  are  of  small  concern 
in  comparison  with  the  fermenting  and  rebellious  nature  of  each 
people. 

National  strikes  are  on  all  sides  in  progress  and  indirectly  retard 
the  effective  outlet  of  military  operations.  Thus  internal  wars  may 
prevent  international  conflagrations.  This  is  the  condition  of  the 
world's  peace  so  noisily  out  heralded." 

This  ever  increasing  unrest  forebodes  nothing  good.  It 
is  the  murmuring  of  the  approaching  storm,  which  will 
soon  sweep  in  unprecedented  fury  over  the  earth. 

Fire  Losses  by  Suffragettes.  The  following  taken  from 
the  Times  is  a  list  of  the  principal  fire  losses  caused  by- 
suffragettes  this  year:  Eight  private  houses,  three  cricket 
pavilions,  two  churches,  two  railroad  depots,  two  race 
stands  and  a  boathouse  were  destroyed  or  damaged. 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  157 

Estimated 

Date                     Property                             Locality  Loss 

Mar.      9 .  .  Railway  St Croxley  Green $6,500 

April     4.  .Priv.  House Norwich 10,000 

"        5 .  .  Racestand Ayr 10,000 

"      11.  .Cricket  Pav Tunbridge  Wells 6,000 

"      15.  .Priv.  House St.  Leonards 25,000 

"      27.  .Cricket  Pav Perth 6,250 

May      6.  .Church Hatcham 75,000 

"        9.  .Priv.  House Barrow 30,000 

"      10,  .Priv.  House Dundee 50,000 

"      12..  Boathouse Nottingham 8,000 

June      4.  .Priv.  House Bradford,  Wilts. 35,000 

5.  .Cricket  Pav Muswell  Hill 5,000 

"        8.  .Racestand Hurst  Park 30,000 

"      10.  .Priv.  House Edinburgh 12,500 

"      18.  .Church Rowley  Regis 30,000 

"      30.  .Ballikinrain  Castle..  .Stirlingshire 125,000 

"      30.  .Railway  Station Leuchars  Junct 10,000 

July      7..  Bungalow .  Rivington,  Lane 100,000 


Total  estimated  loss $574,250 

Several  other  fires  have  to  be  added  and  the  end  is  not 
yet.  There  is  only  one  explanation  of  all  this,  these 
wicked  women  are  possessed  by  demons. 

The  Progress  of  Moral  Corruption.  During  July  a 
prize-fight  occurred  in  London,  England.  Two  men 
slugged  away  at  each  other  for  money  which  was  offered 
to  them.  This  wicked,  barbaric  sport  was  witnessed  by 
thousands  of  people.  The  master  of  ceremonies,  who 
stood  up  to  announce  the  combatants  was  an  English 
"clergyman,"  a  certain  "Reverend"  J.  K.  Boudier.  At 
least  twenty  more  gentlemen  of  "the  cloth"  with  their 
peculiar  collars  were  in  the  audience  to  applaud  the 
nasty,  ungodly  scene.  We  quote  from  the  special  cable 
despatch. 


158  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

The  scene  about  the  ringside  was  one  never  to  be  forgotten  by 
those  privileged  to  see  the  coronation  of  a  new  lightweight  monarch. 
The  group  of  tight  collared  ministers  in  evening  dress  was  but 
a  trifle  more  dignified  in  behavior  than  the  lords  and  dukes  sur- 
rounding them.  They  applauded  as  heartily,  if  slightly  less  vocifer- 
ously, the  introductions  of  the  champion  and  the  challenger.  And 
throughout  the  heated  duel  even  the  clergy  so  far  forgot  the  straight 
and  narrow  path  as  to  vent  a  hearty  British  cheer  for  some  telling 
blow  well  sped. 

Into  bold  relief  these  occasional  slight  indignities  of  the  dignified 
threw  the  merry,  mad  abandon  with  which  the  richly  gowned 
ladies  voiced  cheir  appreciation  of  the  struggle.  Bejewelled  matrons 
and  budding  debutantes  who  never  would  forget  the  stern  mandates 
of  decorum  in  the  drawing  room  had  an  occasion  here  to  turn  back 
the  leaves  of  time  to  the  less  civilized  past.  They  exhorted,  they 
applauded,  they  cheered;  at  times  they  waved  their  graceful  arms 
or  shrugged  their  pretty,  bare  shoulders  as  either  pugilist  rallied 
to  turn  the  tide  of  battle. 

More  than  a  thousand  women,  among  them  many  of  the  most 
exclusive  aristocracy,  saw  the  titanic  struggle.  And  in  their  favor 
be  it  said  they  showed  a  shade  more  sportsmanship  than  the  male 
element.  For  the  men,  like  all  men  with  money  down,  rooted  loyal 
for  the  success  of  their  respective  choice,  while  the  ladies — and  some 
of  them  wagered  as  enthusiastically  as  their  escorts — applauded 
without  favor  the  skill  of  either  man. 

We  cannot  find  words  strong  enough  to  condemn  a 
scene  like  this.  These  '^tight-collared''  sports  should 
hide  their  faces  in  shame.  That  women  were  so  prominent 
is  in  fullest  keeping  with  their  emancipation  schemes. 
Their  corruption  is  surely  the  worst  the  world  has  ever 
seen.  Surely  in  such  scenes  all  is  fulfilled  that  God  has 
revealed  about  the  last  days,  the  days  of  peril  and  un- 
righteousness. **Lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of 
God."  May  God  have  mercy  on  some  of  them  and  open 
their  eyes  before  it  is  too  late. 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  159 

Great  Wealth  and  Luxuries  the  Foreninners  of  Judg- 
ment. We  read  recently  an  interesting  volume  on  the 
"The  influence  of  wealth  in  Imperial  Rome."*  It  depicts 
from  different  sources  the  great  accumulation  of  wealth, 
the  world-wide  commerce,  the  astounding  extravagances 
and  vices  of  the  Roman  Empire,  as  well  as  the  miserable 
conditions  of  the  poor  and  how  all  these  things  brought 
about  in  the  end  the  fall  of  the  great  world  empire.  The 
Roman  Empire  had  its  capitalists,  its  bankers,  a  Wall 
Street  and  a  vast  financial  system.  The  commercial  pace 
was  furious — almost  as  furious — if  it  can  be  possible — 
as  in  the  twentieth  century.  This  book  declares  that 
Alexandria,  for  instance,  had  a  commercial  pre-eminence 
not  possessed  by  even  London  or  New  York  to-day,  not  to 
mention  Hamburg  or  the  European  capitals.  The  Roman 
commerce  extended  all  over  the  known  world  as  the  find- 
ing of  Roman  coins  in  India,  Ceylon,  China  and  other  dis- 
tant parts  witness.  As  a  result  immense  fortunes  were 
obtained  and  money  began  to  control  everything.  Sensu- 
ality, so  declares  a  Roman  writer,  effeminacy,  prodigal 
display  of  wealth  went  hand  in  hand  with  soulless  money 
grasping.  A  gilded  vice  stifled  all  morality.  Money  was 
sought  frantically,  because  it  was  needed  for  what  the 
fashionable  world  called  enjoyment.  After  the  fiercest 
rush  for  wealth,  we  find  coming  into  the  Roman  world, 
so  says  the  author  of  this  volume,  the  fiercest  rush  for 
excite m.ent,  for  something  new  to  feed  the  sated  senses, 
hence  the  scattering  of  fortunes  on  tasteless  palaces,  race 
horses,  pretty  slaves,  elaborate  suppers,  perfumes  and 
pearls  and  many  things  worse.  In  conclusion  Prof.  Davis 
says:    "Its  citizens  served  Mammon  in  the  place  of  God, 

*By  Professor  W.  S.  Davis,  University  of  Minnesota. 


160  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

with  more  than  usual  consistency.  The  power  they  wor- 
shipped carried  them  a  certain  way — then  delivered  them 
over  to  their  own  rottenness,  and  to  the  resistless  enemy. 
Their  fall  was  great,  for  their  empire  with  their  social 
structure  still  looms  as  the  greatest  fabric  ever  reared  by 
human  ingenuity;  while  the  lesson  of  their  fall  lies  patent 
to  the  Twentieth  Century." 

But  will  the  Twentieth  Century  read  the  awful  lesson 
which  is  ineffaceably  written  on  the  pages  of  history  ?  Will 
that  which  is  now  occupying  the  territory  of  the  Roman 
Empire  and  our  own  great  continent  profit  by  the  condi- 
tions prevailing  in  that  Empire,  which  led  up  to  its  fall? 
We  think  not;  but  history  repeats  itself.  If  one  beholds 
the  surging  masses  in  our  great  cities,  the  mad  race  after 
the  dollar,  the  even  greater  rush  for  pleasures  and  excite- 
ments to  gratify  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes 
and  the  pride  of  life,  one  trembles  in  view  of  what  is  bound 
to  come.  And  the  great  mass  of  people  do  not  see  that 
judgment  is  hastening.  They  do  not  realize  that  a  civili- 
zation which  is  built  upon  unrighteousness,  which  leads  to 
extravagance,  luxuries  and  its  attending  evils,  must 
sooner  or  later  be  swept  away  and  fall  like  others  fell. 
How  successfully  the  god  of  this  age  has  blinded  the  eyes 
to  the  real  conditions  of  things.  Great  commerce,  great 
wealth,  great  progress,  great  inventions — but  they  cannot 
save. 

But  we  do  not  need  the  lessons  of  past  great  empires, 
their  wealth,  their  luxuries  and  fearful  ruin  and  fall.  The 
Word  of  God  in  which  we  implicitly  believe  foretells  an 
end  of  judgment  for  the  present  age. 

Ominous  Gatherings.  Recently  on  the  anniversary  of 
the  death  of  Prof.   Francesco  Ferrer,  who  was  shot  in 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  161 

Spain  in  connection  with  the  anarchistic  movement  in  that 
country,  meetings  commemorating  his  death  were  held  in 
all  the  larger  cities.  In  New  York  5,000  persons  gathered 
in  Cooper  Union  and  over  5,000  more  outside.  Three 
other  meetings  in  different  parts  of  the  city  were  held 
to  inflame  the  people  against  law  and  order,  God  and  the 
church.     We  quote  from  an  exchange. 

Inside  the  Cooper  Union  speeches  extolling  the  worth  of  Ferrer 
were  made  in  English,  German,  Italian,  Spanish,  Bohemian  and 
Yiddish.  When  the  woman  Emma  Goldman  took  the  platform 
she  attacked  God,  denounced  the  churches,  especially  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church,  and  the  public  schools.  She  ejaculated:  "I  came 
here  to-night  to  commemorate  the  death  of  a  great  man  and  to  attend 
three  funerals — that  of  the  Church,  for  it  dominates  the  human 
mind;  that  of  Capitalism,  for  it  dominates  human  needs;  and  that 
of  Government,  for  it  dominates  human  conduct."  This  is  fine 
phrasing.  Many  are  so  intoxicated  by  phrases  that  they  cannot 
discern  true  from  false  or  what  is  from  what  is  not.  Leonard 
Abbott,  chairman,  said  that  within  a  year  Ferrer's  name  would  be 
as  well  known  as  Theodore  Roosevelt's,  and  within  one  hundred 
years  as  well  known  as  Jesus  Christ^s! 

Ernest  Haeckel,  of  Germany,  who,  whatever  he  says  in  his  heart, 
says  in  public,  "There  is  no  God,"  sent  a  communication. 

Ferrer  Sunday  Schools  have  been  set  up  in  this  city  and  about 
one  hundred  boys  and  girls  from  the  Ferrer  Sunday  Schools  came 
on  the  stage,  sang  and  decorated  the  portrait  with  flowers.  It  was 
explained  that  these  Sunday  Schools  are  the  forerunners  of  a  big 
public  daily  school.  Alexander  Berkmann,  the  anarchist,  who 
served  a  prison  term  for  shooting  Henry  Frick,  the  iron  multi- 
millionaire of  Pittsburgh,  and  who  was  afterward  the  "companion" 
of  Emma  Goldman,  is  superintendent  of  the  largest  of  these  schools. 
It  was  claimed  that  the  Ferrer  Association  has  about  $40,000  in 
hand  for  the  construction  of  this  daily  school." 

The  worst  feature  of  the  Cooper  Union  gathering  was 
that  a  number  of  influential  men  federated  with  these 
anarchists.     Many  thousands  of  Jewish  young  men  are 


162  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

outspoken  anarchists.  The  agitation  for  an  out  and  out 
overthrow  of  all  existing  orders  and  laws  grows  at  an 
appalling  rate.  Well  do  great  statesmen  fear  and  tremble 
for  the  future.  The  lawless  One  looms  up  more  promi- 
nently. When  at  last  the  great  upheaval  comes  it  will 
produce  such  suffering  and  tribulation,  that  the  world 
has  never  seen  before.     Even  so  God's  Word  tells  us. 

The  Food  Problems  the  Result  of  Greed.  The  enor- 
mous prices  charged  for  the  necessary  articles  of  food  3uch 
as  eggs,  butter,  milk,  meat,  flour,  etc.,  have  of  late  called 
forth  a  vigorous  and  almost  universal  outcry  from  the 
suffering  masses..  Hundreds  of  thousands  pledged  them- 
selves to  abstain  from  certain  kinds  of  food  till  the  prices 
are  lowered.  The  cause  of  these  conditions  is  sought  in 
different  directions.  The  greed  of  large  and  influential 
trusts  is  no  doubt  at  the  bottom  of  it  all.  God  has  been 
good  in  giving  rich  and  plentiful  harvests,  but  the  greed 
and  selfishness  of  man  hoards  it  up  and  produces  situations 
such  as  we  have  been  witnessing. 

We  think  of  the  message  of  Amos  given  at  a  time  of 
similar  conditions,  when  in  days  of  luxuries,  the  extrava- 
gant living  of  the  rich,  the  poor  were  trodden  down.  Then 
the  Prophet  declared  that  the  sellers  of  the  wheat  made 
the  ephah  small  (a  small  measure)  and  th^  shekel  war^  made 
great  (a  big  price  charged),  they  also  falsified  the  bal- 
ances by  deceit.  The  refuse  of  the  wheat  was  sold  (Amos 
viii:4-6).  And  God,  who  considereth  the  poor,  announced 
judgment:  '*!  will  never  forget  any  of  their  works."  The 
Lord  will  surely  deal  with  all  these  evils  in  His  day.  But 
before  that  day  comes  these  conditions  will  become  worse. 
The  present  day  combinations  and  trusts  are  the  fore- 
runners of  that  which  we  read  in  Rev.  xiii:16-17:  "And  he 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  163 

(the  anti-Christ)  causeth  all,  both  small  and  great,  rich 
and  poor,  free  and  bond,  to  receive  a  mark  in  their  right 
hand,  or  on  their  foreheads;  and  that  no  man  might  buy  or 
sell,  save  he  that  had  the  mark,  or  the  name  of  the  beast, 
or  the  number  of  his  name." 

The  White  Slave  Traffic.  The  exposures  of  this  in- 
fernal twentieth  century  traffic,  which  recently  have  been 
made  in  New  York  City  and  elsewhere,  are  simply  terrible. 
Our  great  cities  are  sinks  of  vice  and  immoralities  which 
would  make  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  blush.  It  seems  evi- 
dent that  Jews,  apostatized  from  the  faith  of  their  fathers, 
have  a  good  deal  to  do  with  this  awful  curse,  though 
wicked  Gentiles  are  just  as  prominent  in  it.  One  Lewin- 
son,  who  confessed  to  this  crime  of  luring  girls  of  fifteen 
and  sixteen  years  into  a  life  of  shame,  made  the  statement 
that  the  five-cent  picture  shows  are  the  places  where  this 
work  is  most  successfully  done.  The  nasty  details  of  the 
seductions  we  care  not  to  reprint  in  our  pages.  On  an 
average,  as  shown  by  the  police  reports,  from  eight  to  ten 
young  girls  disappear  daily  mysteriously  in  New  York. 
And  this  evil  is  not  confined  to  the  Metropolis,  it  is  as 
bad  in  all  the  larger  "Christian  cities."  What  a  mockery, 
"Christian  cities!" 

"As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot  so  shall  it  be  when  the  Son 
of  Man  Cometh." 

Sources  of  Discontent  Among  the  Masses.  There  is  a 
growing  and  widespread  discontent  among  the  masses. 
The  high  cost  of  living,  the  oppression  from  the  side  of 
selfish  employers  resulting  in  the  grinding  of  the  poor, 
produce  this  unhappy  condition.  One  leading  cause  is 
the  extravagances  and  luxuries  of  the  wealthy  class. 
Recently   some  eight   society   ladies  gave   an  expensive 


164  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

luncheon  to  their  eight  pet  dogs.  A  special  caterer  had 
been  hired  for  the  occasion  and  there  were  special  deco- 
rations and  other  costly  arrangements,  all  in  honor  of 
eight  society  dogs.  One  of  these  creatures,  it  is  said, 
cost  about  $25,000.  Such  an  affair  creates  the  most 
bitter  feeling  among  the  poorer  classes  and  feeds  the 
smouldering  flames  of  rebellion  and  anarchy.  Some  day 
there  will  be  an  outburst  of  lawlessness  which  will  deal 
a  fearful  blow  to  the  rich.  Then  their  miser>^  will  surely 
come  upon  them  as  predicted  in  the  Word  of  God:  *'.Come 
now,  ye  rich,  weep  and  howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall 
come  upon  you"  (James  v.l). 

The  Great  Anti-Romish  Agitation.  That  Rome,  the 
corruptress  of  nations,  is  passing  through  a  severe  crisis 
is  known  to  all  readers  of  present  day  events.  France  has 
completely  revolted  against  that  powerful  institution 
which  claims  to  be  ''the''  church.  And  now  Spain  has 
joined  the  same  revolt  against  the  Vatican.  What  con- 
ditions exist  in  priest-ridden  Spain  is  learned  from  the 
"Statesman's  Year  Book." 

"The  national  Church  of  Spain  is  the  Roman  Catholic,  and  the 
whole  population  of  the  kingdom  adhere  to  that  faith,  except  about 
30,000 — Protestants  (about  7,000),  Jews  (about  4,000),  Rationalists, 
etc.  Within  the  Peninsula,  apart  from  Portugal,  there  are  nine 
metropolitan  sees  and  forty-seven  suffragan  sees,  the  chief  being 
Toledo,  whose  archbishop  bears  likewise  the  title  of  Patriarch  of  the 
West  Indies.  The  Constitution  requires  the  nation  to  support  the 
clergy  and  the  buildings,  etc.,  of  the  Church,  and  for  this  purpose 
the  State  expends  annually  about  41,000,000  pesetas  ($8,200,000) 
*  *  *  The  relation  between  the  Church  and  the  State,  and  the 
position  of  the  religious  orders,  are  regulated  by  the  Concordat  of 
1851.  A  restricted  liberty  of  worship  is  allowed  to  Protestants, 
but  it  has  to  be  entirely  in  private.  The  communities  of  the  religious 
orders  arc  numerous  and  influential  in  Spain.     Many  of  them  have 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  165 

schools,  and  about  5,200  of  their  members  are  engaged  in  teaching 
boys  of  the  upper  and  middle  classes,  while,  within  many  of  their 
establishments,  industries  of  all  kinds  are  carried  on.  The  number 
of  religious  orders  in  Spain  is  about  3,253,  of  which  597  are  for  men 
and  2,656  are  for  women.  Of  those  for  men,  294  are  devoted  to 
education,  92  to  the  training  of  missionaries,  and  97  to  the  train- 
ing of  priests.  The  total  number  of  monks  is  about  10,630  (in- 
cluding 840  foreigners).  The  orders  for  women  comprise  910  for 
education,  1,029  for  charity,  and  717  for  a  contemplative  life.  The 
,  number  of  nuns  is  about  40,040  (including  1,360  foreign  women)." 

Besides  these  facts  others  could  be  stated  which  give 
the  reasons  why  such  an  agitation  is  in  existence.  But 
while  Rome  is  losing  ground  and  is  thus  being  spoiled  in 
the  lands  which  tolerated  her  abominations  for  centuries, 
she  makes  great  headway  in  England  and  in  America. 
The  stronghold  of  Rome  to-day  are  the  countries  which 
boast  of  being  Protestant.  Protestantism  is  so  completely 
stripped  of  its  power  to  protest  that  it  slumbers  in  the 
lap  of  Delilah.  "Back  to  Rome"  seems  to  be  the  drift  in 
the  two  great  English  speaking  countries.  More  tolera- 
tion! We  are  all  brethren!  Away  with  the  narrowness  of 
past  ages! — are  some  of  the  Protestant  shouts  we  hear 
about  us.  But  Rome  remains  the  same.  She  has  still  a 
great  future,  though  brief,  before  her.  This  is  revealed  in 
the  last  book  of  the  Bible.  Once  more  Rome  will  become 
the  great  mistress  of  the  world.  Her  coming  and  final 
doom  is  faintly  outlined  in  what  is  happening  to  her  in 
France  and  in  Spain.  The  political  revival  of  the  old 
Roman  Empire  will  give  her  again,  in  the  coming  closing 
years  of  this  age,  the  supremacy.  But  the  ten  Kings  will 
turn  against  her.  It  is  written:  "And  the  ten  horns 
(ten  Kings),  which  thou  sawest  upon  the  beast  (the 
revived   Roman    Empire),    these    shall    hate   the   whore 


166  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

(Rome)  and  shall  make  her  desolate  and  naked  and  shall 
eat  her  flesh  and  burn  her  with  fire.  For  God  hath  put  in 
their  hearts  to  fulfill  His  will,  and  to  agree  and  to  give 
their  kingdom  to  the  beast,  until  the  words  of  God  shall 
be  fulfilled.  And  the  woman  which  thcu  sawest  is  that 
great  city,  which  reigneth  over  the  Kings  of  the  earth" 
(Rev.  xvii:16-18). 

'*A  Youth  of  Nineteen,  Nervously  Unsettled  by  a  Try- 
ing Occupation,  sought  recreation  at  a  moving-picture 
show  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  The  "entertainment"  in 
eluded  a  realistic  suicide  by  gas-inhalation,  enact- 
ed with  vivid  and  horrible  detail.  The  boy  went  to  his 
lodgings,  stopped  keyhole  and  door  cracks  as  the  pictured 
suicide  had  done,  turned  on  the  illuminating  gas,  and  set 
his  soul  adrift  into  the  great  darkness.  He  was  found 
dead  on  Sunday  morning.  If  a  manhole  cover  in  the  high- 
way is  ofi",  the  authorities  put  up  a  warning  or  a  barrier, 
lest  a  brute  fall  in  and  suffer  harm.  But  the  moving-pic- 
ture show  had  a  license  from  the  authorities  to  keep  its 
more  dangerous  pitfall  open  on  the  public  way,  and  to 
lure  men  into  it.  This  is  a  sensational  case,  but  it  shows 
at  the  worst  a  baneful  influence  which  is  being  allowed 
almost  free  course  for  the  corruption  of  youth  under  the 
guise  of  harmless  amusement." 

Thus  speaks  the  N,  Y,  Christian  Advocate  on  this  fright- 
ful evil  and  we  endorse  every  word  of  it.  But  we  add 
also  that  not  the  half  has  been  told.  Covering  the  country 
as  we  do  we  have  heard  and  seen  considerable  more  of  the 
disastrous  influence  these  moving-picture  shows  have  upon 
the  minds  of  the  young.  Thefts  and  even  unnamable 
crimes  have  been  committed  because  the  suggestions  came 
from  these  miserable  shows.     But  what  shall  we  say  to  the 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  167 

professing  church  here  and  there  endorsing  this  instru- 
mentality of  the  devil?  In  several  places  "churches  have 
rented  the  airdomes"  (moving-picture  exhibitions  in  the 
open  air)  to  hold  their  services  there  and  make  the  summer 
Lord's  day  evening  meetings  attractive  by  moving- 
pictures.  Of  course  the  pictures  are  of  a  **religious" 
nature;  nevertheless  the  whole  is  an  endorsement  of  these 
places.  Last  year  while  South,  in  a  small  southern  Georgia 
town,  we  were  told  of  a  preacher  who  offered  for  an  induce- 
ment to  attend  the  prayer  meeting  a  free  moving-picture 
show  at  the  close  of  the  prayer  meeting.  When  that 
service  was  concluded  he  took  the  people  across  the  street 
to  the  show  and  treated  them  old  and  young.  He  belongs 
to  the  largest  evangelical  denomination  on  this  continent. 
And  what  about  Christian  men  and  women  being  stock- 
holders in  these  concerns?  But  such  is  the  case.  Cor- 
ruption increases  on  all  sides.  An  insane  desire  for 
pleasure  and  a  good  time  seems  to  have  seized  all  classes. 
What  an  awful  awaking  there  must  soon  come! 

A  Socialistic  Preacher.  The  pastor  of  the  First  Congre- 
gational Church  of  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  became  the 
socialist  mayor  of  that  city.  He  went  from  bad  to  worse 
in  his  political  career.  His  congregation  at  last  asked 
him  to  resign.  The  New  York  Sun  had  a  sarcastic 
editorial  on  this  matter,  which  we  print  herewith: 

"Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  the  indignation  that  over- 
swept  the  preacher-mayor  of  Schenectady  when  the  congregation 
for  whose  spiritual  welfare  he  is  responsible  voted  him  out  of  his 
pulpit  on  the  mean  and  petty  ground  that  he  had  neglected  his 
ministerial  duties.  The  contemptible  nature  of  their  attack  is 
evidenced  by  the  specific  charges  against  him.  These  include  the 
subjoined  allegations: 

*'That  the  sacraments  of  the  Church  are  no  longer  observed. 


168  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

"That  we  have  no  pastor  who  visits  the  sick,  buries  our  dead, 
or  who  offers  the  consolation  of  our  Christian  faith  to  its  bereaved 
or  distressed   members. 

"That  the  minister  now  serving  denies  his  belief  in  the  orthodox 
Christian  faith  and  ridicules  those  churches  that  hold  these  doctrines. 

"To  refute  these  accusations  the  preacher-mayor  has  only  to 
point  to  his  record.  Has  he  not  got  himself  arrested  in  Little  Falls? 
Has  he  not  run  for  Congress  on  the  Socialist  ticket.?  Has  he  not 
acquired  without  cost  to  himself  several  acres  of  press  notices  and 
an  amount  of  sympathy  far  greater  than  could  have  been  got  in 
any  pulpit  or  sickroom?  Finally,  is  he  not  to  be  put  on  trial  on 
February  17  for  incitement  to  riot? 

"It  is  difficult  to  keep  patience  with  persons  who  so  completely 
misunderstand  the  functions  of  a  preacher-socialist-mayor  as  do 
the  members  of  the  First  Congregationalist  Church  of  Schenectady. 
They  must  be  reactionaries.  By  way  of  punishment  they  should 
be  compelled  to  sit  under  their  present  preacher  all  their  lives.*' 

If  our  Lord  tarries  just  a  few  years  longer  we  shall  see 
hundreds  of  men  who  call  themselves  ^^clergymen"  and 
who  are  following  the  socialistic,  progressive,  political 
platform  of  the  federation  of  the  churches.  The  essential 
thing,  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  they  cast  to  the  winds; 
the  faith  they  give  up.  But  at  best  they  are  the  laughing 
stock  of  the  world. 

Increasing  Immorality.  That  the  great  centers  ot 
Christendom  are  sinks  of  iniquity  and  vice  is  well  known. 
Investigation  has  partly  uncovered  the  existence  of 
unspeakable  abominations.  Well  meaning  men  like 
John  D.  Rockefeller,  Jr.,  have  offered  large  sums  of 
money  to  combat  the  evil.  How  hopeless  this  task  is, 
may  be  learned  from  the  report  of  an  expert  investigator. 

Samuel  H.  London,  the  vice  investigator  who  has  testified  before 
the  Curran  committee,  announced  last  night  that  he  intended  to 
make  known  some  new  and  startling  information  in  regard  to  the 
social  evil  in  this  city.      He  said  that  this  evil  is  not  confined  alone 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  169 

to  the  middle  or  lower  classes,  but  that  it  exists  in  the 
very    highest. 

"When  I  turn  loose  my  information  on  the  social  evil  and  its  gold 
lined,  jewel  studded  ramifications  in  this  city,"  he  said,  "the  decent 
citizens  of  New  York  will  turn  an  amazed  'right  about  face'  in  the 
sadly  incomprehensive  idea  of  this  important  and  growing  problem.** 

There  is  no  vice  trust  here,  according  to  Mr.  London,  for  he  says 
that  girls  auction  themselves  off  for  the  privilege  of  working  in  a 
number  of  the  cheaper  class  of  disorderly  houses  here.  For  this 
they  bid,  he  says,  from  $6  to  $16,  the  money  going  to  the  procurer. 

"If  John  D.  Rockefeller,  Jr.,  hopes  to  discourage  prostitution 
materially  by  seeking  to  reform  unfortunate  women  his  task  is 
hopeless,  for  the  number  of  women  whose  careers  can  be  turned 
to  the  right  road  is  infinitesimal,"  is  one  of  the  statements  he  makes. 

He  declares  that  prostitution  in  Brooklyn  is  increasing  at  a 
remarkable  rate  and  is  encroaching  even  upon  the  best  of  the  resi- 
dential sections.  The  sam.e  conditions,  he  says,  are  met  with  in 
the  Borough  of  Richmond. 

Mr.  London's  figures,  backed  up  by  numerous  reports  of  Federal 
agents  who  worked  under  his  direction,  show  that  women  earn  and 
turn  over  to  their  procurers  in  this  city  $57,000,000  each  year. 
In  New  York  City  he  has  found  aged  women  who  have  acquired 
wealth  by  teaching  young  girls  how  most  successfully  to  pursue 
this  vocation. 

The  outlook  for  these  reformers  must  be  gloomy  indeed. 
Corruption  through  lust  is  in  the  world.  Immoralities  will 
increase  as  men  and  women  turn  away  from  God's  revela- 
tion. The  constantly  increasing  immoralities  are  the 
result  of  the  rejection  of  the  Word  of  God. 

The  Moral  Conditions  of  the  German  Capital.  The 
Berlin  Correspondent  of  an  English  paper  has  recently 
given  a  sad  description  of  the  moral  degradation  into  which 
Berlin,  the  capital  of  the  German  Empire,  has  fallen. 
Germany  used  to  be  to  a  certain  extent  morally  cleaner 
than  the  other  European  nations,  but  now  their  larger 
cities  become  more  and  more  modern  Babylons.  We 
give  a  part  of  the  article: 


170  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Serious  German  writers  are  raising  their  voices  and  pointing  out 
that  their  great  capital  of  four  millions,  once  the  centre  of  hard 
work  and  frugality  and  pristine  German  virtues,  is  now  clothed 
in  fine  linen  and  purple  and  scarlet,  and  decked  with  gold  and 
precious  stones  and  pearls,  and  has  become  "the  habitation  of 
devils  and  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird." 

It  is  not  a  pleasant  task  to  point  ouc  the  faults  of  the  great  city  in 
which  one  has  lived  so  long,  in  which  one  has  found  sterling  friend- 
ship, and  in  which  there  are  magnificent  and  powerful  elements 
for  good;  but  the  startling  developments  of  Berlin  in  evil  things 
during  recent  years  must  not  be  left  out  of  account  by  anyone  who 
would  follow  the  rise,  progress  and  decay  of  nations.  The  rapid 
growth  of  Berlin  in  wealth  and  population  has  followed  the  mar- 
vellous development  of  the  German  empire  during  the  past  forty 
years.  Wealth  has  poured  into  the  capital,  and  with  this  wealth 
has  come  vice  and  corruption  of  a  character  surpassing  in  grossness 
anything  to  be  met  with  in  the  older  capitals  of  Europe.  May  I 
examine  a  few  of  the   phenomena  which  force  me  to  this  conclusion? 

I  take  up  the  newspapers  of  the  past  fortnight.  Hardly  a  day 
of  these  fourteen  has  passed  without  its  tale  of  murder.  A  landlord 
shoots  a  tenant  in  most  brutal  fashion  because  the  tenant  insists 
on  leaving  without  paying  his  rent;  the  owner  of  a  shady  hotel, 
resorted  to  by  vicious  persons  of  both  sexes,  shoots  an  indignant 
father  who  protests  against  the  methods  employed  in  conducting 
the  hotel.  There  are  scores  of  these  hotels  in  Berlin.  They  are 
known  to  the  police,  but  whilst  the  Berlin  police  show  extraordinary 
activity  in  hunting  down  Socialists  who  make  themselves  obnoxious, 
they  close  their  eyes  to  these  plague  spots.  Two  women  of  about 
forty  were  murdered  by  their  lovers;  a  husband  who  had  been 
wronged  shot  the  man  who  wronged  him;  a  woman  of  fifty  was 
slaughtered  by  her  husband  in  bed,  the  murderer  using  a  hatchet 
for  his  deed;  a  poor  seamstress  was  murdered  in  a  wood  outside 
Berlin  by  a  ruffian  who  was  a  professional  marriage  swindler;  a 
bath  attendant  murdered  the  woman  who  owned  the  baths  because 
they  had  quarrelled  about  a  bet  on  a  horse.  This  by  no  means 
exhausts  the  list,  but  it  shows  its  character  and  variety.  The 
criminality  of  Berlin  not  only  mounts,  as  far  as  numbers  are  con- 
cerned, but  shows  a  tendency  to  increasing  brutality. 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  171 

As  ominous  in  another  direction  is  the  appalling  number  of  suicides 
which  fill  the  papers.  Girls  drown  themselves  because  of  unrequited 
affection;  young  people  commit  suicide  because  they  have  received 
bad  marks  at  school,  or  have  failed  in  their  examinations;  nearly 
every  day  we  read  of  family  tragedies,  where  fathers  in  money 
difhcukies  make  a  cowardly  exit  from  life.  And,  leaving  the  chapter 
of  murders  and  suicides,  the  recent  cases  are  innumerable  where 
men  in  positions  of  trust  betray  the  confidence  placed  in  them  and 
decamp  as  defaulters. 

Berlin  at  night  is  one  of  the  most  disgusting  sights  in  Europe. 
When  you  speak  to  an  ordinary  Berliner  you  gather  the  impression 
that  he  is  rather  proud  of  what  he  calls  the  "Nachtleben"  of  his 
city.  Of  what  does  this  ''night-life"  consist.^  It  consists  of  nnu- 
merable  resorts  in  various  quarters  of  the  city — cabarets,  cafes, 
variety  theatres,  dancing  rooms,  etc.,  glittering  in  meretricious 
splendor,  which  are  the  resorts  of  the  depraved  and  vicious  of  both 
sexes,  and  where  vice  in  its  grossest  and  most  ghastly  forms  has 
free  course.  These  haunts  of  vice  are  practically  open  all  night, 
and  are  crammed  to  the  door  with  the  youth  of  both  sexes  who 
believe  that  in  these  hells  they  are  seeing  life. 

I  know  a  score  of  places,  and  more  in  the  best  parts  of  the  city, 
where  young  men  and  women  with  decent  bringing-up,  with  honest 
and  clean  homes,  are  being  rapidly  ruined,  and,  save  in  the  feeblest 
way,  hardly  a  protest  is  raised  against  this  awful  iniquity.  If  you 
venture  to  speak  about  it  in  ordinary  society  you  are  voted  a  bore 
and  a  Puritan,  and  are  told  that  the  twentieth  century  has  other 
ideas  than  those  which  prevailed  in  the  seventeenth.  .  .  . 
There  are,  of  course,  purity  associations  here,  and  numerous  faithful 
men  and  women  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal,  but  their 
voices  are  not  heard  in  the  raucous  noises  of  Babylon.  All  over 
the  city  glittering  cafes  are  being  built,  decked  out  with  crystal 
and  gilding,  with  comfortable  chairs,  with  beautiful  music,  which 
are  open  all  night  long,  and  are  resorted  to  by  the  clerks  and  shop- 
girls in  their  thousands.  You  can  see  them  sitting  there  until 
two  and  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  sipping  their  beer  or  their 
coffee,  and  making  one  another's  acquaintance.  These  places 
also  are  the  resort  of  more  doubtful  characters  of  both  sexes. 

The  Enormous  Waste.     In  a  recently  issued  work,  'The 


172  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Price  of  Inefficiency/'  the  writer  shows  that  in  this  country- 
ten  billions  of  dollars  are  annually  wasted.  It  is  hard  to 
grasp  the  meaning  of  this  enormous  sum  of  money.  But 
it  means  that  forty  cents  on  every  dollar  goes  for  nothing. 
We  quote  a  few  of  the  principal  items,  which  are  well 
worth  studying.  Mr.  Frank  Koester  in  hie  book  gives 
us  the  following  figures: 

We  waste  $50,000,000  and  sacrifice  fifty  lives  a  year  in  forest 
fires,  and  have  been  doing  it  for  over  a  generation,  while  in  some 
years  the  loss  amounts  to  $200,000,000  in  money.  In  addition 
the  young  growth  destroyed  by  fire  is  far  more  valuable  than  the 
merchantable  timber  burned. 

We  waste  350  lives  and  the  cost  of  2,700  accidents  in  transpor- 
tation in  New  York  City  alone,  with  a  proportionate  loss  in  other 
cities  throughout  the  country.  These  losses  involve  in  addition 
great  expenditures  in  litigation,  the  total  of  which  is  probably  not 
less  than  $25,000,000  annually. 

We  waste  $30,000,000  horse-power  every  year  by  failure  to  utilize 
our  water  power.  At  $20  per  horse-power  per  annum,  which  is 
below  the  average  price,  being  less  than  one  per  cent,  horse-power 
per  hour,  this  waste  amounts  to  $600,000,000.  This  is  far  in  excess 
of  the  value  of  all  coal  used  annually,  and  if  this  power  were  utilized 
coal  could  be  conserved  for  future  uses,  for  heating  and  purposes 
where  the  power  would  not  be  serviceable. 

We  waste  $238,000,000  in  losses  through  floods  and  freshets. 
The  most  of  this  could  be  prevented  by  proper  engineering  in  the 
erection  of  levees  and  dams. 

We  waste  $500,000,000  a  year  in  soil  erosion.  Through  the 
neglect  of  farmers  to  properly  work  their  land  and  to  prevent  the 
formation  of  gullies,  the  fertility  of  the  soil  is  washed  into  the  low- 
lands and  seas. 

We  waste  $659,000,000  a  year  through  losses  to  growing  crops, 
fruit  trees,  grain  in  storage,  etc.,  by  noxious  insects,  whose  muhi- 
plication  is  largely  due  to  careless  methods  of  agriculture. 

We  waste  $267,000,000  a  year  through  the  attacks  of  flies,  ticks 
and  other  insects  on  animal  life.     A  greater  loss  is  caused  by  the 


I 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  173 

enormous  sacrifice  of  human  life  due  to  mosquitoes,  flies,  fleas  and 
other  germ  carrying  insects. 

We  waste  $100,000,000  annually  in  losses  to  live  stock  and  crops  by 
wolves,  rats,  mice  and  other  depredatory  mammals. 

We  waste  $93,000,000  a  year  in  losses  of  live  stock  due  to  disease, 
of  which  $40,000,000  is  chargeable  to  Texas  fever,  while  tuberculosis, 
scabies  and  cholera  are  next  in  importance,  all  of  which  are  largely 
preventable  if  not  eradicable. 

We  waste  $2,490,500  a  year  in  the  form  of  1,465  lives  (using  the 
figure  $1,700  as  the  economic  value  of  a  human  life,  the  Govern- 
mental estimate  later  referred  to)  in  coal  mino  accidents  which  are 
almost  wholly  preventable. 

We  waste  10,585  lives  and  the  cost  of  169,538  injuries  in  railroad 
accidents. 

But  who  can  stop  this  enormous  loss?  It  must  go  on 
for  it  is  mostly  all  the  result  of  sin.  Man  cannot  control 
these  conditions.  However,  we  know  a  better  day  is 
coming  for  this  world  when  this  waste  will  be  stopped. 

Religious  Census  of  Japan.  We  have  heard  much  in 
recent  years  about  Japan  being  almost  a  ^'Christian 
nation."  The  Japanese  Bureau  of  Religion  has  lately 
published  an  official  list  of  the  religious  bodies  in  the 
empire.  These  statistics  must  be  very  disheartening 
to  those  who  always  speak  about  the  '^Gospel-leaven" 
doing  its  work  rapidly  in  the  conversion  of  the  world. 
The  religious  Census  is  as  follows: 

Christians 140,000 

Buddhists 29,420,000 

Believing  Buddhists 18,910,000 

Shintoists 19,390,000 

Believing  Shintoists 710,000 

Temples  with  priests 72,128 

Temples  without  priests 37,417 

The  140,000  Christians  include  Catholics,  Greeks, 
Protestant    sects,    Christian    Scientists,    etc.     Believing 


174  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Buddhists  and  Shintoists  mean  such  who  practice  these 
religions.  The  others  simply  call  themselves  Buddhists 
and  Shintoists  without  believing  these  systems.  They 
have  abandoned  these  heathen  rites  and  are  nothing.  This 
class  numbers  29,190,000  souls.  We  heard  it  stated  that 
Japan  is  rapidly  becoming  an  infidel  nation.  The  number 
of  Christians  is  surprisingly  small. 

The  Increase  of  Insanity.  Attention  has  been  called  in 
several  medical  conventions  to  the  frightful  increase  of 
insanity.  The  statistics  show  such  an  increase.  Fifty 
years  ago  there  was  one  lunatic  in  575  of  the  population, 
now  there  is  one  in  236.  If  this  rate  should  continue  in  a 
certain  time  there  would  be  more  insane  than  sane  people 
in  the  world.  Insane  asylums  in  many  parts  of  the 
country  are  filled  to  their  utmost  capacities.  What  is 
responsible  for  these  sad  conditions.^  Sin.  Fast  living, 
worry,  anxiety,  religious  extravagances  and  numerous 
other  things  lead  often  to  an  unbalanced  mind.  How 
much  the  influence  of  demons  has  to  do  with  insanity 
no  one  knows.  May  we  remember  that  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  came  the  first  time  He  found  large  numbers  possessed 
by  demons.  It  will  be  so  when  He  comes  the  second 
time. 

The  Outrageous  Mrs.  Pankhurst.  As  it  is  well  known 
to  all  readers  of  the  newspapers  this  woman  belongs  to  a 
criminal  class  and  is  the  leader  of  a  number  of  women  who 
delight  in  using  the  torch  and  the  bomb.  The  New  York 
Christian  Advocate  has  an  excellent  editorial  on  her 
behavior  in  this  country,  which  we  pass  on  to  our  readers: 

The  moral  obliquity  of  Mrs.  Pankhurst  and  her  absurd  satellites 
makes  it  impossible  any  longer  to  ascribe  their  disorderly  conduct 
to  hysteria.      Excessive  nervo\is  irritability   might  account  for  the 


II 


i 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  175 

smashing  of  windows,  the  hurling  of  bombs  and  the  violation  of 
ordinary  propriety  in  public  assemblies,  but  it  will  not  explain 
the  distribution  of  filthy  printed  matter  in  England  or  America. 

A  broad  charity  has  led  many  persons  to  invest  the  militant 
suffragettes  with  a  serious  character,  and  to  ascribe  to  them  purity 
of  motives,  while  none  the  less  condemning  their  outbreaks  against 
the  public  peace.  Though  by  these  preposterous  antics  they  have 
retarded  the  movement  for  granting  suffrage  to  women  in  their  own 
country  and  in  the  United  States,  it  was  felt  that  something  in  their 
favor  must  be  set  down  to  the  natural  indignation  aroused  in  their 
hearts  by  the  refusal  of  the  British  government  to  make  concessions 
to  their  appeals.  But  granting  that  publicity  is  an  indispensable 
element  to  such  a  movement,  there  can  be  no  justification  for  seeking 
notoriety  through  the  issuing  of  publications  that  are  or  oughtto  be 
contraband  in  any  civilized  country. 

This  nastiness  of  the  Pankhurst  propaganda  has  created  a  revul- 
sion of  feeling  which  cannot  miss  even  the  dull  moral  consciences 
of  its  supporters.  Criminal  proceedings  having  been  instituted 
in  New  York  for  the  suppression  of  the  malodorous  stuff  which  the 
Pankhurst  coterie  has  been  striving  to  shovel  puon  the  American 
public,  the  persons  responsible  for  its  distribution  instantly  withdrew 
from  their  contemptible  task  and  shipped  what  remained  of  the 
putrid  material  to  the  West,  where  we  trust  it  will  receive  the  same 
sharp  and  ready  rebuke  which  befell  it  here. 

What  sort  of  ethics  must  a  woman  have  who,  when  she  has  been 
proffered  the  hospitality  of  a  country  by  the  interference  of  its 
chief  magistrate  with  a  law  which  would  have  barred  her  entrance, 
proceeds  at  once  to  abuse  her  privilege  by  peddling  mental  poison 
to  the  people  of  the  first  city  she  visits  .f^ 

Increase  of  Iniquities  and  Corruption.  Statistics  show 
that  there  is  a  frightful  increase  all  over  this  continent, 
both  In  the  States  and  In  Canada,  of  all  kinds  of  crimes  and 
Iniquities.  Suicides  have  Increased  over  those  of  previous 
years.  Suicides  of  children  are  no  longer  a  rarity,  but  have 
become  common.  The  papers  contain  dally  the  reports  of 
robberies,     murders    and     assaults.     Unnatural    crimes. 


176  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

crimes  against  women  and  small  children,  have  become  so 
frequent  that  they  excite  but  little  comment.  Oppression 
and  injustice  are  seen  on  all  sides.  Of  late  the  so-called 
"white  slave  traffic"  has  been  unearthed  with  all  its 
abominable  features.  It  seems  clear  that  it  flourishes 
through  political  corruptions.  How  much  is  being  covered 
up,  how  many  crimes  never  come  to  light  and  the  cor- 
ruption, which  goes  on  in  secret,  only  God  knows.  Surely 
the  Lord's  words,  * 'iniquity  shall  abound,"  words  which 
He  spoke  concerning  the  end  of  this  present  age,  are 
being  amply  verified.  The  worst  is  yet  to  come.  How 
our  post  millennial  friends,  with  their  optimistic  dreams 
can  dream  on  and  continue  to  speak  of  the  glories  of  the 
present  age,  and  the  increasing  righteousness  of  the 
age,  when  all  about  us  goes  the  other  way,  seems  strange 
indeed. 

Ye  have  Lived  in  Pleasure  on  the  Earth.  "Ye  have 
lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and  been  wanton"  (James 
v:5).  A  better  translation  is  "Ye  have  lived  luxuriously." 
Luxurious  living  is  one  of  the  signs  of  the  last  days. 

The  importation  of  luxuries  into  the  United  States  was 
larger  in  the  fiscal  year  1910  than  in  any  earlier  year  in  the 
history  of  our  commerce.  Figures  prepared  by  the 
Bureau  of  Statistics  of  the  Department  of  Commerce  and 
Labor  covering  the  commerce  of  the  full  fiscal  year  show 
the  importation  of  fully  $250,000,000  worth  of  articles 
which  may  properly  be  classed  as  luxuries,  that  total 
exceeding  by  more  than  $25,000,000  the  figures  of  the 
former  high  record  year,  1907,  and  being  actually  more 
than  double  those  of  the  year  1900. 

Diamonds,  jewelry,  laces  and  embroidery,  furs,  feathers, 
bead*  and  perfumery  on  the  one  hand,  and  cigars  and 


4 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  177 

tobacco,  wines  and  liquors  and  automobiles  on  the  other 
are  the  principal  articles  forming  the  $250,000,000  worth 
of  luxuries  imported,  though  to  these  great  groups  must 
be  added  a  third  which  includes  art  works,  decorated  china 
and  bisque,  musical  instruments,  toys  and  orchids,  palms, 
etc. 

What  a  wailing  there  will  be  some  day  when  all  these 
pleasant  things  perish.  ''Go  to  now  ye  rich  men,  weep  and 
howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come  upon  you.  Your 
riches  are  corrupted,  and  your  garments  are  moth  eaten. 
Your  gold  and  silver  is  cankered;  and  the  rest  of  them 
shall  be  a  witness  against  you  and  shall  eat  your  flesh 
as  if  it  were  fire.  Ye  have  heaped  treasures  together  for 
the  last  days''  (James  v:l-3). 

The  Appalling  Increase  of  Suicides.  The  recent  statis- 
tics of  the  United  States  concerning  self-destruction  tell  a 
terrible  tale.  The  Government  report  shows  that  during 
1909  fourteen  persons  in  every  100,000  killed  themselves. 
A  magazine  gives  on  this  the  follov/ing  information: 

"The  Government  vita  statistics  for  the  registration  area,  which 
includes  about  one-half  of  the  whole  population,  return  8,332 
suicides  for  1908,  or  18.5  per  100,000  of  population.  The  regis- 
tration area,  however,  includes  all  of  the  large  cities,  in  which  the 
suicide  rate  is  higher  than  in  the  rural  districts,  although  the  diifer- 
ence  in  the  rate  is  not  as  pronounced  as  is  generally  assumed.  As- 
suming that  a  rate  of  only  10  per  100,000  of  population  prevailed 
among  the  41,845,000  of  estimated  population  in  the  non-regis- 
tration area  (including  a  large  negro  population),  the  probable 
number  of  suicides  in  this  area  would  be  4,185,  which,  in  addition 
to  the  8,332  in  the  registration  area,  gives  a  total  of  12,517  suicides 
for  the  whole  Uniteu  States  for  1909. 

"Statistics  show  that  poison  is  the  favorite  means  for  suicide, 
fire  arms  a  second  choice,  and  hanging  a  third,  according  to  The 
Spectator. 


178  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

"The  method  of  suicide  has  an  important  bearing  upon  the 
subject  in  its  larger  aspects,  for  suicides  are  unquestionably,  to  a 
considerable  extent,  the  result  of  suggestion.  Granted  convenient 
or  easy  facilities  for  self-murder,  the  deed  is  done  before  there  has 
been  time  for  reflection  It  is  nothing  short  of  an  indictment  of 
our  sense  of  community  responsibility  that  facilities  for  suicide 
should  be  as  common  as  they  are.  Regardless  of  efforts  which 
have  been  made  to  suppress  the  sale  of  poisons  and  weapons,  there 
is  nothing  easier  than  to  secure  the  means  of  self-murder  at  a  con- 
venient drugstore,  hardware  store,  pawnshop,  etc.,  as  the  case  may 
be. 

"In  fact,  an  examination  of  the  pistols  or  revolvers  with  which  a 
very  large  number  of  suicides  have  been  committed  in  Philadelphia, 
and  which  are  on  exhibition  in  the  Coroner's  office,  proves  that 
most  of  the  weapons  are  cheap  affairs,  probably  bought  in  pawnshops 
for  a  few  dollars,  including  the  necessary  small  amount  of  ammu- 
nition. 

"The  general  suicide  rate  in  the  registration  area  for  this  period 
was   14.0  per  100,000." 

And  who  is  responsible  for  this  frightful  condition? 
That  the  influence  of  wicked  spirits  stands  behind  these 
suicides  is  beyond  question.  Unbelief,  rejection  of  the 
Truth  of  God,  the  mad  rush  after  material  things,  fast 
living  and  other  matters  are  responsible  for  this  increase. 
And  it  will  not  become  better.  If  one  watches  in  the 
larger  cities  the  surging  masses  of  humanity,  without 
God  and  without  hope,  one  wonders  that  the  number  of 
suicides  is  not  largei. 

Socialism  and  Crime.  The  increase  of  Socialism  in 
Germany  has  been  phenomenal.  With  the  revival  of 
the  industrial  conditions  in  that  land,  Socialism  also 
gained  in  power.  The  increase  of  crime  in  Germany 
keeping  step  with  Socialism  is  significant.  We  quote  from 
a   Berlin   report: 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  179 

Socialists  are  fond  of  proclaiming  that  their  creed  furnishes  a 
complete  substitute  for  religion  and  for  morals  as  taught  by  religion 
in  its  law-abiding  effect  upon  the  people.  German  socialists, 
moreover,  have  asserted  that  criminality  is  due  largely  to  the  illu- 
sion and  hypocrisy  of  religion,  and  that  it  decreases  as  socialism 
advances. 

That  contention  is  disproved  by  a  series  of  statistical  figures  just 
made  public,  which  show  that  criminality  in  Germany  has  increased 
in  rapid  ratio  with  the  spread  of  socialism.  In  Prussia,  where  the 
socialist  vote  increased  from  seven  per  cent,  in  1884  to  twenty-six 
per  cent,  in  1907,  criminality  increased  from  1,023  per  100,000 
population  to  1,215. 

In  Berlin,  where  there  has  been  a  socialist  increase  of  from  thirty- 
four  per  cent,  to  sixty-six  per  cent,  in  the  same  period,  criminality 
has  increased  from  1,216  to  1,522.  In  the  Rhine  Province  the 
socialist  increase  from  seven  per  cent,  to  twenty  per  cent,  has  been 
accompanied  by  a  growth  in  crime  from  673  to  1,270. 

In  Bremen,  where  the  socialist  vote  rose  from  twenty-three  per 
cent,  of  the  total  population  to  fifty-one  per  cent.,  criminality 
jumped  in  the  same  period  from  1,295  to  2,101.  In  Posen,  on  the 
other  hand,  where  the  socialist  vote  is  only  one  per  cent.,  crime 
shows  a  decrease  from  1,679  to  1,449.  In  Saxony,  where  socialism 
increased  from  thirty-five  per  cent,  to  fifty-eight  per  cent.,  criminality 
shows  but  a  slight  increase,  928  to  960. 

In  all  Germany  the  socialist  vote  in  the  period  named  has  in- 
creased twenty-nine  per  cent,  and  crime  twenty  per  cent.  The 
statistics  quoted  show  that  instances  of  bodily  injury  inflicted 
increased  fifty  per  cent,  throughout  the  empire,  while  robbery, 
larceny  and  swindling  increased  seventy-five  per  cent.,  with  a 
particularly  large  growth  m  strong  socialist  centres  as  against  a 
comparatively  small  increase  in  places  where  religion  is  still  a  strong 
factor. 

While  it  is  not  asserted  that  the  increase  in  criminality  is  due 
to  the  spread  of  socialism,  it  is  declared  by  students  of  these  figures 
that  they  do  show  that  socialism  has  failed  to  prove,  in  Germany 
at  all  events,  that  it  is  equal  to  or  an  adequate  substitute  for  religion 
as  a  moral  and  law  enforcing  factor  in  the  welfare  of  a  nation. 

This  is  not  at  all  surprising  if  one  takes  into  considera- 


180  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

tion  that  the  German  socialists  are  especially  very  bitter 
against  the  church  and  the  truth  of  God.  This  increase  in 
crime  is  a  little  sample  of  what  is  yet  in  store  for  this 
earth  when  the  Lawless  One  will  be  in  power. 

Great  Progress  and  Preparations.  The  wonderful  way 
in  which  the  ends  of  the  earth  are  brought  together 
through  commerce  and  the  great  railroads  which  are  in 
operation  and  others  which  are  being  planned  is  really 
astonishing  and  significant. 

As  the  result  of  the  Franco-German  settlement  of  the 
Morocco-French  Congo  questions,  a  proposal  is  under 
consideration  for  the  construction  of  a  vast  Trans-African 
railway,  to  do  for  the  African  Continent  what  the  Union 
Pacific  has  done  for  the  Western  States  of  America. 
The  Trans-African  line  would  have  two  branches — one 
running  from  the  Desert  of  Sahara  to  Nigeria,  joining 
West  Africa  with  Algeria;  and  the  other  connecting  the 
Western  Mediterranean  section  of  the  continent  with  the 
Indian  Ocean  by  means  of  the  Uganda  Railway.  The 
British  have  already  built  1,860  miles  of  the  Cape-to- 
Cairo  line,  the  Belgians  have  laid  310  miles  of  track, 
and  the  French  in  Algeria  372  miles.  It  is  6,572  miles 
from  Algiers  to  the  Cape.  This  leaves  about  4,000  miles 
to  be  built.  A  distinguished  ex-member  of  the  French 
Chamber  regards  this  as  a  perfectly  feasible  scheme, 
considering  the  Trans-Siberian  Railway  from  Moscow 
to  Vladivostok,  which  is  5,332  miles  long. 

We  may  well  look  upon  this  activity  as  being  in  prep- 
aration of  that  great  world-wide  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
of  the  Kingdom  before  the  end  comes.  However,  the 
preaching  of  the  final  message,  as  every  careful  student 
of  the  Word  knows,  is  not  done  by  the  church,  but  by  a 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  181 

converted  Jewish  Remnant.  The  scaling  of  this  rem- 
nant and  their  work  is  described  in  Revelation  vii.  All 
this  takes  place  after  the  true  church  has  left  the  earth. 
The  great  railroads  will  no  doubt  be  put  to  good  use  at 
the  end  of  the  age  for  the  heralding  of  the  coming  King 
and  the  coming  judgments. 

Unhappy  China.  What  a  terrible  struggle  has  set  in 
throughout  the  prominent  provinces  o\  the  Chinese 
Empire!  It  is  estimated  that  nearly  50,000  beings  have 
been  killed  so  far  and  there  is  no  end  in  sight.  The 
"Dragon,"  the  emblem  of  China,  is  showing  his  power 
and  in  the  little  time  which  is  left  to  him  he  is  trying  to 
fill  that  dark  country  with  suffering,  bloodshed  and 
violence.  But  his  time  is  short.  A  better  day  will  dawn 
for  China  and  the  other  heathen  nations  enslaved  by 
Satan.  The  deceiver  of  the  nations,  the  god  of  this  age 
and  prince  of  the  power  in  the  air  will  be  chained  by 
Him,  who  has  conquered  him;  then  he  can  deceive  the 
nations  no  more  (Rev.  xx:3).  He  knows  his  time  is 
short,  that  soon  the  King  of  Kings  will  come  to  dethrone 
him. 

We  should  pray  at  this  time  earnestly  for  the  mis- 
sionaries in  China  and  for  the  thousands  of  native  Chris- 
tians, whose  lives  are  in  danger  and  whom  the  Dragon 
hates  in  a  special  manner. 

Dark  Figures.  In  spite  of  the  heroic  work  done  by  the 
Prohibition  movement  and  its  supposed  victory,  the  sale 
of  intoxicants  is  increasing  at  a  rapid  rate.  The  recent 
Internal  Revenue  report  for  1911  is  a  revelation. 

The  annual  report  of  Royal  E.  Cabell,  Commissioner  of  Internal 
Revenue,  given  out,  makes  several  startling  declarations.  All 
records  were  broken  in  the  past  fiscal  year  in  the  production  of 
alcoholic  liquors. 


182  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

The  smoking  of  opium  is  a  widespread  vice  in  this  country,  and 
opium  "joints"  exist  in  every  city  of  considerable  size. 

The  double  system  of  taxing  oleomargarine  is  corrupting  grocers 
and  gross  frauds  are  being  perpetrated  on  the  butter-buying  public. 

The  internal  revenue  receipts  last  year  were  $322,526,899,  the 
greatest  in  the   history  of  the  government. 

Corporations  making  returns  under  the  new  corporation  tax 
law  numbered  270,202,  with  an  aggregate  capital  of  $67,886,- 
430,519.  The  aggregate  net  income  to  the  stockholders  was 
$3,306,250,642. 

The  year's  production  of  distilled  spirits  amounted  to  175,402,395 
gallons,  nearly  7,000,000  gallons  more  than  in  the  previous  banner 
year — 1907.  The  production  of  beer,  ale,  etc.,  amounted  to 
63,216,851  barrels,  nearly  4,000,000  more  than  in  the  previous 
record  year — 1910. 

The  amount  of  liquor  held  in  bonded  warehouses  for  ripening 
now  reaches  the  enormous  total  of  249,279,346  gallons. 

Things  seem  hopeless  in  this  direction.  The  only  hope 
is  the  Coming  of  the  Lord.  With  that  event  the  things 
which  offend  will  be  gathered  out  of  this  Kingdom. 
Violence  and  vice  will  terminate  then.  May  the  glorious 
day  be  hastened.     Even  so,  Come  Lord  Jesus. 

America's  Darkest  Crime.  We  have  waited  before 
commenting  on  the  awful  deed  done  several  months  ago 
in  the  town  of  Coatesville,  Pennsylvania.  A  few  weeks 
after  this  wicked  crime  a  similar  Satan-inspired  mob, 
including  five  hundred  women  and  children,  in  Oklahoma, 
burned  also  an  unhappy  negro  to  death.  The  terrible 
crime  of  Coatesville  was  one  of  the  most  fiendish  ever 
perpetrated  in  the  history  of  the  United  States.  It  is 
now  time  that  the  North  should  stop  slandering  the 
South.  The  crime  was  committed  on  Sunday  evening. 
Every  protestant  preacher  of  the  town  (seven)  was  away 
on  a  vacation.     When  the  mob  rushed  in  the  hospital  to 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  183 

take  the  half  dead  victim  only  the  nurses  were  there  to 
shield  the  wounded  negro.  An  investigator,  who  went  a 
day  or  two  after  the  crime  to  Coatesville,  writes,  "Nothing 
in  the  Coatesville  conditions  depressed  me  more  than  the 
city's  apparent  callousness  to  the  enormity  of  its  offence. 
Their  talk  was  mostly  of  the  business  men's  annual  picnic 
on  the  morrow."  Three  days  after  this  foul  deed  two 
train  loads  of  people  went  on  the  picnic.  The  same 
man   gives   the   following   information: 

"The  one  leading  citizen  who  is  actively  indignant  over  the  city's 
shame  told  me  candidly  that  the  most  he  thought  should  be  done 
would  be  to  put  some  of  the  young  men  in  jail  for  a  few  years; 
and  he  was  frankly  troubled  over  the  fact  that  certain  members  of 
prominent  families  are  involved.  At  the  suggestion  that  the  lynch- 
ers might  be  indicted  for  murder,  he  promptly  protested,  and  said 
he  would  use  all  his  influence  to  prevent  it." 

We  quote  from  two  periodicals  which  have  been  out- 
spoken in  their  condemnation.  We  endorse  every  word. 
The  first  is  from  the  N.  Y.  Christian  Advocate  (Methodist). 

"The  sickening  atrocity  of  the  Coatesville  lynching  was  enacted 
by  white  men  in  a  Northern  State,  at  the  very  moment  when  con- 
ventions of  Southern  Negroes  were  giving  evidence  of  their  rise 
from  the  conditions  of  bondage.  At  the  hour  of  Sabbath  evening 
worship  a  cowardly  mob  dragged  a  helpless  colored  man  from  the 
hospital  and  burned  him  with  accompaniments  of  unspeakable 
horror.  That  the  victim  had  slain  a  man  does  not  excuse  his 
murderers.  Escape  for  him  was  impossible,  and  Pennsylvania  justice 
would  have  been  visited  upon  him,  w^ithout  delay.  In  taking  the 
law  into  their  own  hands  these  American  citizens — for  they  were 
not  aliens — disgraced  their  State,  and  by  the  fiendish  manner  in 
which  they  wreaked  their  vengeance  they  put  a  blot  upon  common 
humanity.  Negro-burning  is  an  American  white  man's  crime,  and 
there  is  no  worse  under  the  sun. 

"Shame  upon  Pennsylvania  if  her  justice  is  too  blind  to  discover 
the  leaders  of  this  foul  mob,  or  her  arm  shortened  so  that  she  can- 
not punish  those  who  have  made  a  mockery  of  her  laws." 


184  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

The  Continent  (Chicago)  entered  more  fully  In  this 
matter,  showing  the  religiousness  of  the  town  and  its 
inhabitants. 

"Coatesvllle  Is  a  more  than  ordinarily  religious  town.  That  fact 
is  written  not  in  cynicism  but  in  sincerity.  *There  is  a  strong  and 
real  spiritual  life  here,'  one  friend  assured  me.  Thanks  largely 
to  the  work  of  William  H.  Ridgway,  the  community  is  especially 
active  along  Sunday-School  lines.  One  man's  Bible-class  has  200 
members,  another  100,  two  others  fifty  each.  These  men  have  been 
studying  Jeremiah  this  month — and  practicing  Zedekiah.  In  evan- 
gelistic work  the  town  is  notable.  It  is  the  home  of  the  Huston 
brothers,  both  of  whom  were  absent  on  black  Sunday.  There  are 
seven  Protestant  churches  and  one  Roman  Catholic  in  the  borough. 
In  the  hour  of  trial,  they  all  failed.  With  deep  sorrow  it  must  be 
written  of  Coatesville,  as  doubtless  of  hundreds  of  other  small 
cities  in  like  conditions,  that  there  was  not  enough  vital  Christian 
force  in  the  community  to  withhold  a  majority  of  the  American 
citizens  from  assentmg  to  a  most  horrible  violation  of  the  com- 
mandment, *Thou  shalt  not  kill.'  There  is  blood  upon  the  doorsteps 
of   Coatesville's   churches   and   schools   and   homes. 

"Grim  and  ghastly,  here  is  a  symptomatic  condition  for  the 
preachers  of  the  gospel,  for  the  Men  and  Religion  Movement,  for 
the  organized  adult  Bible-classes,  for  the  Young  Men's  Christian 
Association  (the  Coatesville  association  has  400  members  and  a 
$60,000  building),  for  Christian  Endeavor,  for  the  Presbyterian 
evangelistic  committee,  and  for  the  American  home  to  ponder. 
The  situation  calls  for  a  season  of  fasting,  rather  than  for  a  picnic, 
or  for  the  despicable  maneuvering  of  ^practical'  politicians. 

"Law  failed  in  Coatesville.  Our  boasted  American  self-govern- 
ment collapsed  completely  when  put  to  a  test.  The  Chinese,  Japa- 
nese, Hindu,  Turkish,  European,  and  British  editors  who  comment 
upon  this  terrible  tragedy  as  proof  of  the  breakdown  of  the  Ameri- 
can system  cannot  easily  be  gainsaid." 

Well  said.  It  shows  too  plainly  what  is  under  the  thin 
veneer  of  religious  profession.  It  shows  a  great  deal  more. 
In  spite  of  a  boasted  ''Christian  civilization"  there  is  the 
spirit  of  lawlessness.     Some  day  it  will  break  out  in  an- 


SOCIAL    CONDITIONS.  185 

Other  form  and  the  results  will  be  of  an  indescribable 
nature.  "And  there  went  out  another  horse  that  was 
red  and  power  was  given  to  him  that  sat  thereon  to  take 
peace  from  the  earth  and  that  they  should  kill  one  another 
and  there  was  given  unto  him  a  great  sword"  (Rev.  vl:6). 


The    Jews. 


The  Marvellous  Revival  of  Palestine.  Twenty  years 
ago  30,000  Jews  lived  in  Palestine;  to-day  almost  175,000 
live  in  the  land.  Turkey's  attitude  towards  the  Jews  has 
completely  changed.  Large  and  successful  colonies  are 
in  existence.  ^*The  Continent,"  published  in  Chicago,  had 
recently  an  interesting  article  on  these  developments  from 
which  we  quote: 

"Twenty-five  years  ago  one  heard  little  of  the  Hebrew  tongue 
in  Jerusalem's  streets  or  elsewhere  in  the  land,  because  the  Jew 
found  it  much  safer  to  conceal  his  identity  under  the  language  of 
the  country  from  which  he  chanced  to  come.  But  to-day  Hebrew 
is  used  everywhere — in  the  market,  the  banks,  and  most  especially 
in  thousands  of  schools.  It  is  one  of  the  cardinal  aims  of  the  Zionists 
again  to  make  this  the  language  of  the  ancient  homeland,  and 
it  will  not  be  long  before  other  nationalities  and  religions  will  have 
to  learn  Hebrew  or  simply  be  shut  out  of  the  commercial  centers 
of  the  city  and  country.  Only  recently  a  German  society  for 
helping  the  Jews  attempted  to  keep  the  German  language  in  its 
schools.  One  of  the  results  was  a  riot,  and  the  matter  was  settled 
in  favor  of  those  who  clamored  for  the  Hebrew. 

"Those  who  have  visited  Jerusalem  in  former  years  will  remember 
the  thousands  of  pitifully  poor  Jews  of  all  nationalities  who  lived 
on  alms  in  the  city.  It  is  said  on  good  authority  that  not  less  than 
5,000,000  francs  ($1,000,000)  is  now  coming  into  the  land  annually 
for  their  relief.  But  each  year  brings  a  better  class  of  immigrants, 
and  that  means  less  and  less  need  for  alms.  The  fifty  or  sixty 
colonics  lately  established  wear  a  much  more  hopeful  appearance. 


THE    JEWS.  187 

"Those  about  Jaffa  and  in  the  Plains  of  Sharon  show  every  appear- 
ance of  wealth  and  prosperity.  The  orange  trade  of  Jaffa  has 
increased  greatly  and  will  soon  be  largely  in  the  hands  of  Jews. 
Out  of  1,500,000  boxes  handled  this  year  at  that  port,  at  least 
one-third,  or  500,000  boxes,  are  from  the  colonies  or  in  the  control 
of  the  Jews.  While  other  nationalities,  and  especially  Christians 
of  all  lands,  are  busy  trying  to  circumvent  one  another  in  appro- 
priating legendary  and  sacred  sites,  the  Jews  are  in  a  common-sense 
way  buying  up  agricultural  land.  It  is  not  possible  to  make  any 
accurate  estimate  of  what  has  been  done  in  this  line,  but  it  is  a 
well-known  fact  that  no  tract,  small  or  large,  within  a  hundred 
miles  of  Jerusalem,  east  or  west  of  the  Jordan,  can  be  offered  for 
sale  without  attracting  Jewish  buyers.  Colonies,  societies,  and 
banks  exist  for  this  very  business,  and  thousands  of  all  nationalities 
and  religions  are  in  the  trade  for  gain.  Every  day  brings  some 
fresh  surprises  of  phenomenal  purchases.  This  is  one  of  the  most 
striking  features  of  the  present  commercial  life  of  Palestine.  The 
colonies  are  encouraging  this  agricultural  conquest  of  the  land, 
and  meanwhile  industrial  schools  under  the  patronage  of  wealthy 
societies  and  individuals  are  attempting  a  revival  of  Jewish  arts 
and  handicrafts  with  some  credible  results." 

The  well  known  Rothschild  visited  recently  Palestine 
and  studied  the  situation.  He  is  backing  the  colonies. 
He  is  a  French  banker,  and  Turkey  has  looked  mostly  to 
France  for  a  great  loan. 

"While  Turkey  is  still  pressing  for  a  great  loan  from  France, 
and  France  is  demanding  guaranties  that  the  money  will  be  spent 
for  the  betterment  of  what  remains  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,  the 
visit  of  Mr.  Rothschild  at  this  time  can  not  fail  to  benefit  Syria 
in  a  special  way.  The  great  loans  call  for  concessions  for  harbors 
at  Tripoli,  Haifa,  and  Jaffa,  and  contemplates  in  the  city  of  Jerusa- 
lem itself  a  French  concession  for  a  water-supply,  electric  light, 
and  an  electric  tramway  to  Bethlehem.  We  may  be  sure  that 
none  of  these  things  will  be  forgotten  by  the  great  Jewish  banking- 
house  which  will  no  doubt  furnish  a  large  part  of  that  loan." 

Still  more  interesting  are  the  following  statements  on 
the  establishment  of  the  Jewish  State. 


188  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

"Austria  and  Germany  are  most  powerful  in  the  trade  of  Jeru- 
salem and  its  vicinity;  France  in  high  politics  and  finance.  Of  the 
influences  from  within  the  Arab  element  is  almost  nil,  the  Christian 
element  too  busy  with  trifles,  the  Jewish  seriously  and  powerfully 
predominant.  Certain  churches  and  enterprises  represent  one  or 
another  of  the  European  nations,  but  rarely  more  than  one.  But 
the  Jewish  element  for  one  reason  or  another,  draws  power  from 
all  nations.  Leaders  of  the  Zionist  movement  differ  sharply  on 
many  points;  misunderstandings  separate  powerful  interests;  motives 
are  attacked  and  as  vigorously  defended.  But  underneath  all  the 
outward  clash  of  theories,  the  heart  and  soul  of  the  Jewish  race 
does  unitedly  hope  and  expect  to  establish  a  great  Jewish  state 
which,  sitting  at  the  juncture  of  three  continents,  in  the  seat  of  their 
ancient  glory,  shall  levy  tribute  from  the  great  nations  of  the  earth. 

"Some  speak  of  it  as  to  be  a  state  without  a  religion,  in  the  sense 
that  the  United  States  has  no  official  faith  or  state  religion.  The 
devoutly  orthodox  Jews,  however,  can  not  tolerate  this  idea,  and 
hope  for  Israel's  ancient  glory.  Perhaps  the  greater  mass  of  Jews 
throughout  the  world,  though,  are  without  ambition  to  be  citizens 
of  such  a  restored  Israel.  While  willing  to  pray  for  this  great 
enterprise  and  to  give  of  their  abundance  toward  it,  they  adopt 
the  attitude  of  one  member  of  the  London  house  of  Rothschilds  who, 
after  listening  to  a  glowing  picture  of  the  future  greatness  and  glory 
of  the  Jewish  people  in  the  Palestinian  state,  is  said  to  have  answered: 
*Yes,  I  hope  it  may  all  come  to  pass.  I  pray  for  Jerusalem.  I  may 
even  work  for  its  reality.  But  when  it  does  come  to  pass,  I  ask  no 
greater  favor  and  privilege  than  to  represent  the  Jewish  state  at 
the  Court  of  St.  James.*  '* 

Thus  we  learn,  as  we  have  pointed  out  so  often  for 
twenty  years  in  our  columns,  that  the  Jewish  Hope  is 
not  dead,  but  being  revived.  It  is  the  sign  of  all  signs  of 
the  approaching  end  of  the  ages.  The  Word  of  God  has 
predicted  this  revival  and  its  attending  events.  However, 
the  fair  picture  of  a  partially  restored  nation  will  be 
marred  by  that  time  of  trouble,  Jacob's  trouble,  the  great 
tribulation,  when  once  more  Israel   is  plunged   in  deep 


THE    JEWS.  189 

distress.  Then  He  comes  who  alone  can  save  them,  the 
true  Hope  of  Israel,  the  King  of  Glory.  He  will  gather 
them  all  back  and  make  His  land  the  Glory-land.  How 
this  ought  to  interest  every  Christian! 

The  Onward  March  of  Zionism.  The  eleventh  Inter- 
national Zionist  Congress,  held  this  fall  in  Vienna,  brought 
together  once  more  large  numbers  of  Jews  from  every 
part  of  the  world. 

The  Zionists  are  interested  in  establishing  in  Palestine 
an  influential  Jewish  settlement.  Operations  in  the  Holy 
Land  are  carried  on  through  the  Anglo-Palestine  Banking 
Corporation  and  the  Jewish  National  Fund,  with  head- 
quarters in  Cologne.  The  National  Fund  has  sixty-five 
per  cent,  of  its  capital  of  $750,000  invested.  The  Palestine 
Anglo-Palestine  Company  acts  as  a  strictly  commercial 
bank,  but  is  prepared  to  underwrite  enterprises  of  national 
value. 

The  organization  has  created  an  agency  known  as  the 
Palestine  Land  and  Development  Company,  w^hich  pre- 
pares land  for  settlement  by  Jews,  and  in  addition  Zionists 
as  individuals  have  bought  considerable  land  and  maintain 
a  number  of  schools,  and,  especially  in  the  United  States, 
several  colonizing  groups  have  been  formed  which  intend 
to  settle  in  Palestine  as  agriculturists. 

As  it  is  well  knov/n  this  great  national  movement  was 
founded  by  Dr.  Herzl,  who  hopes  to  accomplish  his  purpose 
by  entering  into  political  negotiations  with  Turkey,  which 
would  enable  him  to  bring  a  big  settlement  of  Jews 
in  Palestine.  Herzl  died  before  he  could  attain  his  object. 
Since  his  death  in  1904  conditions  in  the  Ottoman  Empire 
have  altered.  A  Parliament  has  taken  the  place  of  an 
absolute  monarchy,  and  the  Ottoman  Government  has 


190  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

been  distracted  and  harassed  by  eternal  foes.  The  oppor- 
tunity seemed  ripe  for  the  immediate  penetration  of 
Palestine  by  the  Jews. 

This  opportunity  a  party  in  Zionism,  led  by  Ussischkin, 
a  Moscow  engineer,  w^as  determined  to  exploit.  The 
Ussischkin  party  failed,  however,  to  displace  another 
scheme  until  two  years  ago,  when  a  committee  of  five 
Ussischkinites  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Zionist 
organization.  The  eleventh  congress  has  been  trying  to 
perfect  Ussischkin's  control. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  much  discussion  has  arisen  among 
the  Zionists.  But  in  spite  of  it  the  movement  records  big 
progress.  Its  finances  are  in  the  best  possible  condition. 
It  has  a  working  membership  of  almost  150,000  with  a 
million  or  more  sympathizers.  It  owns  two  and  one- 
half  per  cent,  of  the  land  in  Palestine.  The  Jewish 
population  of  Palestine  has  doubled  in  the  course  of  two 
years.  The  schools  are  making  rapid  headway.  A  great 
Jewish  University  is  being  planned  with  headquarters  at 
Jerusalem.  Another  most  interesting  fact  is  that  the 
Turkish  government  has  put  the  crown  lands  of  Syria  and 
Palestine  in  the  market.  They  are  offered  for  sale  and  we 
understand  that  negotiations  have  already  been  opened 
by  prominent  Jews  to  purchase  these  lands.  Surely  all 
this  is  to  be  expected  at  the  close  of  this  present  age. 
Israel  is  homeward  bound  and  all  is  rapidly  shaping  in 
such  a  way  which  brings  the  fulfilment  of  predicted  events 
concerning  the  tribulation  and  the  Coming  of  the 
Lord  in  sight.  May  God's  people  turn  more  than  ever 
to  the  study  of  Prophecy  and  have  their  lamps  trimmed, 
for  He  is  coining. 

What  is  Zionism?    The  Interesting  Answer  of  an  Ortho- 


THE    JEWS.  191 

dox  Rabbi.  Orthodox  Jews,  who  hold  strictly  to  the  faith 
of  their  fathers  and  believe  in  the  Messianic  hope,  while 
being  partly  favorable  to  Zionism,  look  farther  than  the 
modern  Zionists.  Rabbi  Pereira  Mendes,  the  head  of 
Jewish  Orthodoxy  of  America,  a  learned  gentleman,  wrote 
recently  an  excellent  letter  to  the  N.  Y.  Times,  which  will 
be  read  with  much  interest  by  everybody. 

"The  official  declaration  of  modern  Zionism  is  that  it  is  a  move- 
ment to  obtain  *a  legally  assured  home  in  Palestine,'  and  it  devotes 
itself  to  the  material  development  of  that  country.  It  countenances, 
promotes,  and  organizes  colonization,  orange  groves,  olive  planta- 
tions, trade  schools,  banking  enterprises,  such  as  the  Colonial  Trust, 
the  National  Fund,  Anglo-Palestine  Bank,  etc.,  for  the  promotion 
of  such  purposes,  and  has  achieved  much  practical  good  in  the 
direction  of  materialities.  Its  latest  proposition  is  to  found  a 
university  in  Palestine. 

"Naturally,  there  have  been  diversities  of  opinion  as  to  details, 
but  the  names  of  such  leaders  as  Drs.  Herzl,  Nordau,  Marmorek, 
Gaster,  and  Wolfsohn;  Profs.  Warburg  and  Gotthiel,  Messrs.  Usiskin, 
Cowen,  Greenberg,  and  a  score  more  will  long  h?.  remembered  with 
respect. 

"But  this  is  the  modern  Zionism,  as  popularly  understood,  and  it 
includes  'political  Zionism,'  or  Zionism  with  political  aspirations; 
'practical  Zionism,'  or  Zionism  devoted  to  such  practical  purposes 
as  above  mentioned;  'humanitarian  Zionism,'  or  Zionism  that  will 
provide  a  refuge  for  the  oppressed  in  Russia,  Rumania,  etc.;  and 
'educational  Zionism,'  or  Zionism  which  seeks  to  educate  Jewish 
public  op'nion  in  Jewish  directions. 

"It  is  not  the  ancient  Zionism  of  the  prophets  of  the  Bible,  which 
includes  these  to  a  certain  extent,  but  which  emphasizes  the  spirit- 
ualities. This  Zionism  demands  not  'a  legally  assured  home  in 
Palestine,'  but  'a  legally  assured  home  in  Palestine  for  the  spiritual 
as  well  as  the  material  benefit  of  all  mankind,  not  of  the  Jews  alone.' 
This  is  the  Zionism  of  the  Bible,  of  our  liturgy,  and  of  our  poets. 
'Also  the  sons  of  the  stranger  that  joins  themselves  unto  the  Lord 
.  even  these  will  I  bring  to  My  holy  mountain,  .  .  .  for 
My  house  shall  be  called  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  the  nations" 


192  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

(Isaiah  Ivi).  ^Therefore  we  hope  in  Thee  ...  to  establish 
the  world  under  Thy  almighty  kingdom,  so  that  all  Thy  mortal 
children  shall  appeal  to  Thee  .  .  .  and  receive  upon  them  the 
yoke  of  Thy  government,  for  Thine  is  the  kingdom,'*  etc.  (Ritual). 
*A11  the  nations  which  Thou  hast  made  shall  come  and  worship 
Thee"   (Psalm  Ixxxvi). 

"This  spiritual  Zionism  is  to-day  enunciated  by  such  leaders  as 
Achad  Ha'am.  It  includes  such  Bible  ideals  for  the  weal  of  all 
mankind  as  a  Court  for  International  Arbitration,  a  Temple  for 
Universal  Worship,  provision  for  an  education  that  shall  fill  the 
earth,  not  Palestine  only,  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  or  Love, 
Justice,  and  Righteousness  (Jeremiah  ix:23)  'as  the  waters  cover 
the  sea'   (Isaiah  ii:3-4;  lvi:7;  xi:9). 

"This  is  Zionism,  that  it  is  as  old  as  Isaiah,  in  whose  day  Rome 
was  founded.  It  is  older,  for  it  is  as  old  as  Abraham,  the  founder 
of  the  Hebrew  nation,  who  was  told  that  'through  thy  seed  shall  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed'  (Genesis  xxii:18). 

"Modern  Zionism  builds  the  church  building.  Bible  Zionism 
the  cathedral  for  all;  and  more  tha  i  that,  it  creates  a  world  con- 
gregation and  inspires  ministers  for  the  weal  of  the  world." 

The  Rabbi  sees  something  about  the  Kingdom  to  come. 
Alas!  that  he  does  not  see  Him,  who  alone  can  bring  Israel 
back  to  the  homeland  and  in  Whom  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  will  be  blest. 

Jews  Fleeing  from  Russia.  The  inhuman  laws  of 
Russia  continue,  according  to  the  report,  to  make  the 
empire  of  the  Czar  the  darkest  spot  on  the  Jewish  horizon. 
During  1909,  6v5,000  Russian  Jews  fled  their  country  for 
America.  This  exodus  of  the  oppressed  was  swelled  by 
another  35,000  Jews  from  other  countries. 

A  recent  report  gives  graphic  figures  illustrating  how  the 
Russian  laws  are  breeding  Jewish  paupers,  although  the 
Jewish  population  of  roundly  6,000,000  constitutes  only  a 
little  over  four  per  cent,  of  the  entire  Russian  population. 
Ninety-three  per  cent,  of  all  the  Jews  in  Russia  arc  per- 


THE    JEWS.  193 

mitted  to  dwell  only  in  twenty-five  of  the  sixty  Govern- 
ment districts,  comprising  altogether  only  one-sixth  of  the 
total  area  of  the  empire.  The  consequence  of  this  over- 
crowding in  the  western  and  southern  provinces,  especially 
in  Russian  Poland,  is  that  in  such  regions  as  Odessa  and 
Warsaw  the  Jews  constitute,  respectively,  eleven  and  four- 
teen per  cent,  of  the  population,  and  wholesale  poverty  is 
an  inevitable  result. 

At  Easter  time  in  1909,  60,000  Jews  were  reduced  to 
dependence  on  public  charity,  while  15,000  families,  num- 
bering 75,000  persons,  were  in  the  same  condition  in  War- 
saw. 

In  Galicia  and  Roumania  the  conditions  are  somewhat 
better  than  in  Russia,  but  there,  too,  the  Jews  suffer  under 
serious  disabilities  and  outside  assistance  is  constantly 
needed. 

An  association  is  carrying  on  important  w^ork  through- 
out the  Turkish  Empire,  especially  in  Palestine.  At  Haifa, 
near  Jerusalem,  the  cornerstone  will  shortly  be  laid  of  a 
fine  technical  college  endowed  principally  through  the 
munificence  of  Jacob  H.  Schiff  of  New  York.  Numerous 
other  educational  projects  are  supported  in  the  Orient  with 
a  special  view  to  making  the  Turkish  Jews  valuable 
citizens  of  their  own  country  and  removing  the  causes  for 
emigration.  Special  attention  is  devoted  to  the  teaching 
of  the  Turkish  national  language  in  order  that  the  genera- 
tion of  young  Jews  may  grow  up  equipped  to  play  their 
part  in  the  rejuvenation  of  new  Turkey. 

The  condition  of  the  Jews  in  the  Russian  Empire,  the 
land  of  the  North  in  Prophecy,  will  not  alone  remain  the 
same  as  it  has  been,  but  the  persecutions  and  periodical 
massacres  will  increase  and  become  more  and  more  severe. 


194 


CURRENT    EVENTS. 


Eventually  there  will  be  a  large  exodus  of  Jews  from  Rus- 
sia and  the  direction  they  take  will  not  be  the  Western 
land,  which  so  many  reformed  Jews  call  their  Palestine, 
but  they  will  go  East  to  their  real  home  land.  Such  an 
exodus  is  predicted  in  Zechariah  ii:6.  ''Ho,  ho,  come  forth 
and  flee  from,  the  land  of  the  North,  saith  Jehovah." 
Zionism  in  its  finest  type  and  deepest  longing  is  found  in 
Russia. 

The  Progress  of  Zionism.  During  the  past  few  weeks 
the  movements  among  the  Jewish  people  towards  the 
accomplishment  of  the  Zionistic  scheme  have  been  almost 
startling.  The  successful  Young  Turk  movement  has  had 
the  liberal  support  of  the  Jews  and  in  return  this  interesting 
and  more  than  significant  coup  d'etat  favors  strongly  the 
establishment  of  the  Jewish  state  according  to  Herzl's 
plan.  We  reported  recently  that  Jews  were  invited  offici- 
ally to  return  in  large  numbers  to  Palestine.  This  invi- 
tation has  been  repeated  a  few  days  ago.  The  President 
of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  in  Constantinople  visited  the 
head  of  the  Jews  living  in  Turkey  and  in  behalf  of  the 
Turkish  Government  extended  an  invitation  to  the  Jews 
of  Russia  and  Roumania  to  emigrate  to  Turkey.  The 
government  has  promised  to  abolish  all  restrictions  against 
Jewish  immigration  to  Palestine  and  other  parts  of  the 
Empire  and  furthermore  to  confer  full  citizenship  on 
Jewish  immigrants  immediately  on  their  arrival  in  Turkey. 
It  is  rumored  that  very  important  negotiations  are  under 
way  which  may  bring  about  far-reaching  results. 

The  prominence  of  the  Jews  in  Turkey  is  seen  from  the 
fact  that  the  first  address  in  Parliament  was  delivered  by  a 
Jewish  deputy.  Another  Jew  was  in  the  commission  that 
announced  to  Abdul  Hamid  the  decision  of  the  committee 


THE    JEWS.  195 

to  have  him  deposed.  The  palace  in  which  the  wicked 
Sultan  is  held  prisoner  belongs  to  an  Italian-Jewish  family, 
the  wealthy  Alatini  brothers. 

The  attempt  of  the  Jewish  territorial  organization,  Israel 
ZangwIU,  President,  to  secure  Mesopotamia  as  a  monster 
Jewish  colony  and  spent  one  hundred  million  dollars  for 
irrigation,  will  undoubtedly  miscarry  as  similar  attempts  in 
East  Africa  and  North  Africa  failed.  Palestine,  nothing 
less  than  Palestine,  is  the  watchword  of  the  great  Jewish 
national  revival. 

And  how  significant  it  is!  Well  may  God's  waiting 
people  watch  this  sign  of  all  the  signs  of  the  times.  Such  a 
restoration  of  a  part  of  the  Jewish  race  to  Palestine,  before 
the  last  stage  of  their  sad  history  will  be  reached  is  de- 
manded by  predicted  events.  This  restoration  has  set 
in.  It  indicates  that  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  drawing 
to  a  close. 

We  shall  watch  with  much  interest  the  coming  conven- 
tion of  the  American  Federation  of  Zionism  to  be  held  in 
New  York.  Over  1,000  delegates  are  expected.  Under 
"Notes  on  Prophecy  and  the  Jews"  the  reader  will  find 
additional  Information. 

Zionism  to  the  Front.  In  connection  with  this  signifi- 
cant situation  in  the  Balkan  peninsula  and  the  apparent 
solution  of  the  Eastern  question,  Zionism,  the  great 
Jewish  national  revival,  Is  coming  to  the  front  once 
more.  It  is  being  forced  upon  the  statesmen  of  Europe, 
We  quote  from  a  recent  article  in  one  of  the  papers: 

Among  German  statesmen  the  opinion  is  steadily  growing  stronger 
that  the  trend  of  political  events  in  the  near  East  is  tending  to  further 
the  interests  of  Zionism,  and  that  the  return  of  the  Jews  to  Palestine 
may  not  be  very  far  off. 


196  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

A  glance  at  the  map  will  show  that  Palestine  is  the  corner  stone  of 
three  continents.  The  Mediterranean  nations  are  stirring  as  they 
have  never  done  in  modern  history.  The  near  East,  the  Middle 
East  present  European  statesmen  with  great  problems.  There  is 
the  Bagdad  railroad,  there  is  the  railroad  from  Cape  to  Cairo, 
that  is,  to  the  very  door  of  Palestine.  For  that  part  of  the  world 
which  has  Palestine,  to  speak  broadly,  as  its  center  there  must  be  a 
great  awakening  in  a  very  near  future. 

All  the  Powers  of  Europe  will  either  be  directly  or  indirectly 
interested  in  that  happening,  and  one  of  them  cannot  permit  any 
other  to  occupy  the  pre-eminent  position  or  wield  predominant 
power  in  Palestine,  the  key  to  vast  lands  now  stirring  in  their  slumber, 
the  corner  stone  to  countries  with  amazing  undeveloped  possibilities. 

What  the  interests  of  Germany  as  well  as  of  all  the  other  European 
Powers  require  is  a  buffer  state,  and  the  enterprises  which  will  be 
engaged  in  and  around  Palestine  appear  to  suggest  that  in  that  state 
will  be  required  the  brains,  the  business  acumen  and  the  wealth  of 
the  Jews,  that  there  will  be  a  favorable  outlet  for  all  three,  and  that 
advantageous  use  can  be  made  for  all  concerned. 

All  this  is  deeply  interesting.     What  a  privilege  it  is  to 
see  and  watch  these  startling  developments  at  the  close  of       _ 
1912!  Mm 

The  Unsolved  Problem.  The  condition  of  the  Jews  in 
Russia  becomes  more  desperate.  About  6,000,000  He- 
brews live  there  and  they  are  being  harassed  and  driven 
about  as  never  before.  The  first  decade  of  the  much 
Ir.uded  twentieth  century  began  with  the  awful  massacres 
in  which  thousands  of  Jews,  men,  women  and  children 
lost  their  lives.  They  were  time.>  of  sorrow  and  tribu- 
lation which  remind  of  the  French  Revolution  a  hundred 
years  previous.  At  the  end  of  the  first  decade  Russia  is 
still  at  it,  though  in  a  different  way.  A  New  York  rabbi 
made  recently  the  following  remarks: 

*'The  status  of  the  Jew  in  Russia  to-day  calls  not  for  vain  com- 
plaint or   murmuring,   but  for  the   presentation  of  the  grim   facts 


THE    JEWS.  197 

as  they  are.  These  facts  constitute  the  indictment  of  Russia,  and 
mark,  alas!  the  unutterable  humiliation  of  Israel. 

"The  former  policy  of  massacre  instigated  by  the  state  and  exe- 
cuted by  its  servants  has  been  succeeded  by  the  less  dramatic  but 
not  less  tragic  method  of  'peaceful  extermination.'  Instead  of  the 
blood-letting  massacres  which,  unhappily  for  the  Russian  govern- 
ment, stir  the  conscience  of  the  world,  a  system  of  merciless  Jew- 
ish repression  and  degradation  has  been  carried  on  throughout  the 
past  year  not  less  terrible  in  its  ultimate  effect.  A  Jewish  society 
in  England  lately  admitted  that  its  budget  included  an  item  for 
possible  massacres.  What  a  withering  comment  upon  Jewish  power 
and  Jewish  prestige,  as  upon  the  genuineness  of  our  present  day 
civilization. 

"The  Jewish  question  in  Russia  has  ceased  to  be  a  Jewish  ques- 
tion and  a  Russian  question.  It  is  become  a  world  question — a 
problem  of  humanity.  What  is  needed  is  the  protest  of  the  aroused 
conscience  of  the  world  against  the  monstrous  crimes  which  Russia 
is  committing  upon  its  own  defenseless  population.  It  is  not  the 
least  indictment  of  the  war  craze  that  in  order  partially  to  neutralize 
the  military  prowess  of  Germany,  England  shoul4  strike  hands 
with  a  band  of  murderers  in  the  high  places  in  Russia.  For  a 
decade  or  more  it  was  French  finances  that  enabled  Russia  to 
continue  its  foul  career.  To-day  it  is  Great  Britain  that  by  the 
Reval  pact  did  much  to  bolster  the  falling  fortunes  of  the  Russian 
government,  and  by  so  much  to  betray  its  own  history  and  the 
hope  of  humanity." 

How  true  all  this  Is.  The  Jewish  question  has  indeed 
become  a  world  question  and  is  the  problem  of  humanity. 
But  the  aroused  conscience  of  the  world  can  never  settle 
this  question.  There  is  no  remedy  for  the  humiliation  of 
Israel,  no  solution  of  that  question  from  the  side  of  man. 
God  in  His  Word  predicted  thousands  of  years  ago  that 
such  would  be  the  condition  of  His  people  as  a  result  of 
their  unbelief  and  the  rejection  of  Him,  who  is  their  King. 
It  has  all  come  true.  But  God's  Word  also  predicts  the 
end  of  all  their  wanderings  and  tribulation.     It  gives  the 


198  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

solution  of  the  Jewish  question.  God  Himself  in  the  Per- 
son of  His  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  root  and  off- 
spring of  David  will  in  His  own  appointed  time  deliver 
His  earthly  people  and  have  mercy  upon  Zion.  None 
other  than  the  once  rejected  King  in  the  day  of  His  second 
visible  manifestation  will  solve  "this  problem  of  human- 
ity." But  it  will  also  mean  the  punishment  of  the 
enemies  of  His  people.  Russia's  present  attitude  towards 
the  Jews  and  future  judgment  is  written  in  the  Bible. 
The  developments  of  the  Jewish  question  ought  to  be 
followed  with  deepest  interest  by  all  Christians,  who  love 
His  appearing. 

Jewish  Sympathy  for  Turkey.  Jewish  sympathy  in 
the  Italian-Turkish  war  is  altogether  on  the  side  of  Turkey. 
Especially  marked  is  this  interest  among  the  millions  of 
Jews  living  in  Russia.  A  number  of  young  Jews  departed 
recently  from  Kieff  to  enhst  in  the  Turkish  army  at 
Constantinople. 

The  formation  of  similar  groups  is  also  reported  from 
Lodz  and  Warsaw.  Jewish  sympathy  with  Turkey  is  not 
confined  to  Zionist  circles.  Although  every  allowance  is 
made  for  the  exemplary  treatment  of  Hebrews  in  Italy, 
the  Jews  in  Russia  feel  that  the  blindness  of  European 
diplomacy  to  a  sense  of  wrong  is  also  responsible  for  the 
indifference  of  the  latter  towards  their  own  suiferings. 

The  Russian  press,  true  to  its  tradition,  regards  the 
war  as  a  product  of  Jewish  intrigue.  The  Sviet  asserts 
that  the  Young  Turk  Committee,  'Vith  its  Jewish 
majority,  has  brought  about  the  war."  M.  Menushikoff 
(in  the  Novoe  Vremyd)  states  that  Abdul  Hamid's  refusal 
to  grant  Palestine  to  Dr.  Herzl  cost  him  his  throne,  and 


I 


THE    JEWS.  199 

now  the  Young  Turks,  in  this  turn,  pay  for  their  failure 
to  satisfy  the  Zionists. 

Zionistic  Activities  and  Progress  in  Palestine.  Recently 
the  tenth  annual  convention  of  the  American  Federa- 
tion of  Zionism  was  held  in  New  York  City.  Hundreds 
of  delegates  were  present  and  the  enthusiasm  was  marked. 
A  feature  of  this  congress  was  a  Zionistic  Junior  League 
Meeting.  Whoever  saw  the  bright  and  sparkling  eyes 
of  young  Jewry  all  aglow  for  Zionism  will  realize  the 
genuineness  of  this  striking  national  revival.  Mr. 
Strauss  expressed  in  the  opening  meeting  the  hope  that 
the  young  Turks,  who  have  battled  for  their  own  free- 
dom, will  not  be  slow  in  helping  the  Jews  in  their  great 
and  glorious  aims. 

Dr.  Harry  Friedenwald,  the  President  of  the  Federa- 
tion of  American  Zionism,  gave  an  enthusiastic  address. 
He  said  in  part: 

The  great  event  of  the  past  year  which  has  completely  changed 
conditions,  the  importance,  and  far  reaching  results  of  which  it  is 
difficult  even  now  to  estimate,  is  the  Turkish  revolution.  The 
subversion  of  the  most  despotic  of  absolute  monarchies  into  a 
modern,  liberal,  constitutional  government,  the  failure  of  the 
counter  revolution  and  the  firmer  entrenchment  of  the  forces  that 
stand  for  progress  and  for  freedom  are  of  the  deepest  political 
interest  to  the  world. 

Even  during  the  former  regime  the  Jews  of  Turkey  enjoyed  the 
same  measure  of  liberty  as  the  non-Jews  and  were  spared  the  dis- 
criminating injustice  of  neighboring  countries.  Now  the  Jews — 
who  have  taken  their  proper  stand  in  the  movement  for  progress 
— are  given  every  encouragement  and  we  again  see  Turkey  as  of 
old  inviting  the  Jews  oppressed  in  other  lands  to  immigrate  and 
help  in  the  upbuilding  of  the  empire.  We  have  a  profound  satisfac- 
tion in  the  consciousness  that  some  of  the  Jewish  leaders  of  the 
Revolution  are  also  ardent  Zionists  and  that  the  Zionist  awakening 
in  Turkey  is  widespread  and  augurs  well. 


200  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

We  shall  bring  later  additional  information  about  this 
interesting  gathering.  Great  things  are  expected  from 
the  next  world  congress  of  Zionism  to  be  held  in  December. 

At  the  same  time  great  progress  in  the  affairs  of  Pales- 
tine is  reported.  Commerce  is  enlarging  and  the  im- 
migration constantly  increasing.  The  following  is  from 
the  Daily  Consular  and  Trade  Reports: 

Consul-General  G.  Bie  Ravndal,  of  Beirut,  says  that  the  linking 
of  Egypt  and  Syria  by  a  railway  is  certain  to  be  seriously  consid- 
ered, as  its  advantages  are  obvious.  He  writes  concerning  the 
project:  "Mr.  Almagia,  a  prominent  Italian  contractor  in  Alex- 
andria, informs  the  Egyptian  Gazette  that  he  asked  the  Ottoman 
and  Egyptian  governments  to  allow  him  to  make  plans  for  a  rail- 
way line  by  way  of  El  Arish  to  Jaffa.  The  idea  is  that  the  line, 
after  crossing  the  Suez  Canal,  should  run  along  the  coast  to  the 
frontier  at  El  Arish  and  then  on  to  its  terminus  at  Jaffa,  where  it 
would    connect   with    the   Jerusalem    railway." 

All  this  is  an  indication  that  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
are  drawing  to  a  close.  Soon  the  Lord's  Word  will  be 
accomplished.  ^'Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down  by  the 
Gentiles  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled" 
(Luke  xxi:24). 

Jews  Suffering  in  European  Turkey.  There  are  many 
thousands  of  Hebrews  living  in  the  war-zone  of  European 
Turkey.  They  have  come  in  for  the  severest  sufferings. 
An  appeal  for  help  has  been  sent  to  this  country.  The 
appeal  is  signed  by  H.  Nahoum,  Grand  Rabbi  of  Turkey; 
J.  Fernandez,  President  of  the  Turkish  Israelitish  Alli- 
ance and  Dr.  D.  F.  Markus,  Chief  Rabbi  of  the  Ash- 
kenazim  Jews.     We  quote  part  of  the  document. 

The  Balkan  war  has  laid  everything  waste  which  was  in  Jewish 
possession  in  all  the  cities  and  villages  of  European  Turkey,  with  the 
exception  of  Constantinople,  Salonika  and  Adrianople.  Fields  and 
houses,   hostelries   and   stores,   and   even  personal  belongings,   have 


1 


THE    JEWS.  201 

been  swept  away  like  an  earthquake  by  sword  and  fire.  Number- 
less peaceful  and  innocent  lives  have  already  fallen  victims  to  this 
orgy  of  blood. 

Terrified  to  death,  half  naked,  deprived  of  the  sheerest  necessities, 
driven  out  into  the  terrible  isolation  of  the  winter  nights,  our  unfor- 
tunate brethren  have  attempted  to  save  their  lives  in  wild  flight. 
Frozen,  half-starved,  wounded  and  desperate,  they  have  crowded 
like  wild  beasts  into  overfilled  railway  cars,  or  these  failing  them, 
have  tottered  on  foot  until  they  have  at  last  reached  the  capital. 
Helpless  mothers,  pale  children,  gray  beards,  helped  along  by 
beggars*  staffs,  men  in  the  prime  of  life,  ruined  and  despairing,  have 
crowded  like  a  flood  of  terror  and  necessity  into  the  Jewish  quarter 
of  our  city,  already  over-crowded  in  ordinary  times. 

This  is  but  another  chapter  in  the  story  of  Israel's 
suffering  and  tribulation.  This  night  of  woe  has  lasted 
long.  It  will  surely  end,  when  the  Son  of  David  appears 
in  His  Glory  and  the  Rejected  One,  like  Joseph,  will 
deliver  His  brethren  according  to  the  flesh  out  of  all  their 
sufferings.  But  before  that  happens,  the  darkest  hour 
in  their  history  must  come.  That  will  be  the  time  of 
Jacob's  trouble  (Jerem.  xxx:4).  Everything  is  getting 
ready  for  it. 

A    National    Jewish    University    in    Palestine.    The 

American  Federation  of  Zionists  in  their  recent  annual 
convention  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  strongly  recommended 
the  establishment  of  a  Jewish  University  in  Jerusalem. 
Resolutions  to  that  effect  were  adopted  by  the  federation. 
It  was  after  a  paper  on  the  proposed  National  Jewish 
University  was  read  by  Professor  Horace  Kallen,  of  the 
University  of  Wisconsin,  and  a  discussion  that  the  resolu- 
tion to  establish  such  an  institution  in  Jerusalem  was 
adopted.  The  plan  also  embraces  further  colonization 
and  the  establishment  of  schools  for  Jews  in  Palestine. 


202  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

It  was  resolvefl  to  send  word  to  the  International 
Congress  of  Zionists  at  Vienna  to  push  the  project  of  a 
National  Jewish  University. 

This  surely  shows  great  progress  in  the  program  of 
Zionism,  the  great  modem  national  movement  among 
the  Hebrews.  The  fate  of  Palestine  is  still  in  the  balances. 
While  it  yet  rests  in  the  hands  of  the  Turkish  government, 
the  rightful  owners  of  the  land,  the  Jews,  are  constantly 
increasing.  Jewish  capital  is  financing  the  different 
enterprises.  The  language  of  the  country,  the  ancient 
Hebrew,  is  being  wonderfully  revived.  Remnants  of 
Hebrews,  some  of  them  belonging  to  the  so-called  "lost 
tribes,"  are  gathering  back  to  the  land.  All  this  has 
significance.  A  great  change  for  that  land  of  hallowed 
memories  and  glorious  destiny  is  impending.  From 
the  prophetic  Word  we  know  what  it  all  means.  Pales- 
tine will  yet  belong  to  the  Jews  and  Jerusalem  will  become 
the  great  center  for  the  land  once  more  The  predicted 
partial  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  Palestine  and  Palestine 
to  the  Jews,  is  in  progress. 


New  Discoveries. 


New  Records  Found.  Recently  the  British  Museum 
received  a  new  cylinder  of  baked  clay  containing  the 
achievements  of  Sennacherib  in  cuneiform  inscriptions. 
It  has  been  translated  and  has  been  found  to  contain  the 
record  what  Sennacherib  did  for  the  city  of  Nineveh.  The 
Old  Testament  tells  us  what  a  great  and  beautiful  city 
Nineveh  was.  The  newly  discovered  record  says,  among 
other  things,  this: 

He  tells  first  of  the  rebuilding  of  his  palace.  "Bull  colossi  of 
white  stone  *  *  *  they  quarried  as  supports  for  the  doors 
thereof.  In  order  to  construct  rafts  great  trees  in  the  woods  through- 
out the  whole  of  their  land  they  cut  down.  In  the  month  of  Ivyar, 
at  the  time  of  the  spring  floods,  on  mighty  rafts  they  brought  them 
across  with  difficulty  to  the  other  side.  In  the  crossing  of  the 
quay  wall  the  great  vessels  sank  deeper  and  their  crews  groaned 
and  were  distressed  in  spirit,  but  by  might  and  tribulation  they 
brought  them  with  difficulty  and  set  them  up  in  their  gates. 

It  is  a  wonderful  picture  of  the  building  of  one  of  the  great 
cities  of  old  when  human  labor  was  so  cheap  that  Nebuchadnezzar, 
for  instance,  was  able  to  build  a  magnificent  temple  in  fifteen  days. 

Sennacherib's  tale  continues  in  this  fashion:  "I  altered  the  struc- 
ture of  the  palace  and  enlarged  its  site.  Palaces  of  gold,  silver, 
bronze,  malachite,  breccia,  alabaster,  ivory,  cedar,  cypress,  pine 
for  my  lordly  habitation  I  constructed.  Beams  of  cedar  and  cypress, 
whose  scent  is  pleasant,  the  products  of  Amanus  and  Serara,  the 
snowcapped  mountains,  I  arranged  in  place  above  them.  Doors  of 
cedar,  cypress,  pine  and  sindu  wood  with  a  plating  of  silver  and 


204  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

copper,  I  found.  Female  colossi  of  alabaster  and  ivory,  wearing 
horned  headdresses,  having  bent  talons,  clothed  with  strength  and 
vigor,  full  of  splendor,  I  set  up  in  their  doorways  and  made  them 
a  wonder  to  behold.  With  brickwork,  Ka  stone  and  lapis  lazuli 
I  decorated  the  ramparts,  the  cornices  and  all  the  copings."  It  is 
a  vision  of  barbaric  splendor  that  approaches  the  description  of 
Solomon's  temple.  "The  palace  that  has  no  rival,"  Sennacherib 
called  his  habitation. 

The  King's  proudest  record  is  of  the  casting  of  bronze  lions, 
colossi  which  had  been  moulded  in  clay  "as  in  casting  half  shekel 
pieces."     It  was  evidently  an  unprecedented  achievement. 

In  the  eyes  of  many  people  this  will  be  another  confirma- 
tion of  the  Old  Testament  and  its  trustworthiness.  But 
why  not  turn  it  around  and  say  instead  of  "These  records 
prove  certain  parts  of  the  Bible  true,"  say  which  is  more 
according  to  truth,  "These  records  are  trustworthy  because 
the  Bible  says  so".^  Without  the  Bible  these  records 
would  have  no  meaning  at  all. 

But  Sennacherib's  beautiful  residence  is  a  heap  of  ruins. 
God's  Word  predicted  this  and  it  has  come  to  pass  of 
Nineveh.  Nahum  said  in  Jehovah's  name,  "Woe  to  the 
bloody  city,  it  is  full  of  lies  and  robbery,  the  prey  departeth 
not.  .  .  .  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  all  they  that 
look  upon  thee  shall  flee  from  thee,  and  say,  Nineveh  is 
laid  waste;  who  will  bemoan  her?  Whence  shall  I  seek 
comforters  for  thee?"  (Nah.  iii:l,  7).  And  this  present 
age  likewise,  with  its  great  cities  and  magnificent  palaces, 
awaits  a  predicted  judgment,  when  the  works  of  man  will 
crumble  into  dust  and  Jehovah  will  be  exalted. 

An  Interesting  Recovery.  Most  interesting  and  impor- 
tant excavations  are  being  made  in  ancient  Ethiopia, 
showing  a  high  state  of  civilization  and  an  empire  of  great 
wealth,  which  existed  there  several  thousand  years  ago. 


NEW    DISCOVERIES.  205 

Meroe  is  the  name  of  the  ancient  capital.  Queen  Candace 
reigned  there  (Acts  viii:27);  but  even  then  Meroe  was 
hundreds  of  years  old.  We  quote  from  the  report  of  the 
excavations : 

The  story  of  Queen  Candace's  ancient  capital  should  make  inter- 
esting reading  when  the  excavations  now  in  progress  under  Pro- 
fessor Garstang  are  completed.  The  royal  city  of  Meroe  lies 
between  Aaraba  and  Khartum,  on  the  Nile. 

The  story  of  these  discoveries  is  indeed  one  of  the  most  romantic 
pages  of  modern  research;  no  one,  unless  it  were  Professor  Sayse, 
had  imagined  or  could  have  inferred  how  extensive  the  ruins  of 
the  city  were,  nor  how  remarkable  in  character.  When  the  excava- 
tors first  arrived,  three  or  four  seasons  ago,  the  only  visible  trace 
of  ancient  handiwork  was  a  simple  line  of  wall  and  three  or  four 
carved  stone  rams  in  the  same  vicinity. 

Now,  however,  all  is  changed;  the  stone  rams  are  found  to  line  the 
avenue  of  approach  toward  the  great  Temple  of  Ammon,  which  in 
more  ancient  history  was  one  of  the  chief  features  of  the  city.  The 
stone  wall  which  rose  in  isolated  ruin  is  found  to  be  only  a  portion 
of  a  great  enclosure,  inside  which  there  are  coming  to  light  the  stone 
built  palaces,  official  buildings  and  the  royal  baths  which  form  the 
royal  city  of  tradition. 

The  broken  potsherds  begin  to  tell  their  story  and  to  disclose  to 
expert  examination  three  main  successive  periods  of  local  activity; 
the  first  subject  to  Egyptian  influence,  the  second  marked  by  an 
influx  of  Greek  ideas,  and  the  third  suggesting  a  Roman  occupation 
or  colony. 

The  historical  material  confirms  these  evidences,  showing  the 
city  to  have  been  founded  about  the  eighth  century  B.  C,  possibly 
when  the  Ethiopian  power  in  Egypt  began  to  decline  before  the 
advance  of  Assyria,  impelling  the  king  and  his  court  to  seek  the 
security  of  a  refuge  further  up  the  Nile  than  their  previous  capital 
of  Napata   afforded. 

Many  tombs  of  the  Necropolis  have  been  examined  and  show 
that  the  development  of  local  funerary  art  and  customs  pursued 
a  parallel  course.  These  are  archaeologically  divisible  into  three 
separate  groups  corresponding  to  the  main  historical  divisions, 
land,  it  would  appear,  to  the  groups  of  pyramids. 


206  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

Another  Evidence  for  Daniel.  In  our  exposition  of 
Daniel  we  have  made  the  statement  that  this  magnificent 
book  has  been  completely  vindicated  and  has  proven  an 
anvil  upon  which  the  critics'  hammers  have  been  broken 
to  pieces.  This  vindication  still  goes  on.  We  quote  the 
following  from  an  Exchange: 

It  is  reported  that  Greek  and  Cypriote  vases  have  been  discovered 
among  Hittite  remains  at  Carchemish.  What  does  this  mean? 
In  a  word,  that,  during  the  period  1100  to  600  B.C.,  works  of  art 
from  the  lands  of  the  Levant  had  been  carried  into  the  great  empires 
on  the  Euphrates.  Having  regard  to  the  extraordinary  commercial 
activity  of  the  ancient  East,  this  is  a  proposition  quite  easy  to 
understand.  Yet,  again  and  again,  in  order  to  "bring  down*'  the 
date  of  Daniel,  and  support  the  theory  that  the  Book  was  not 
written  by  the  prophet  of  that  name,  it  has  been  objected  that 
musical  instruments  with  Greek  names  are  mentioned  in  the  record 
as  having  been  used  in  Babylon!  And  why  not?  Now  at  length 
the  objection  is  shattered;  for  if  Greek  works  of  art  were  imported 
into  "the  land  of  the  Hittites,"  as  we  now  find  to  have  been  the  case, 
they  cannot  for  one  moment  be  regarded  as  unknown  in  Babylon, 
at  a  still  later  date! 

The  Limit  of  Earth's  Resources  will  Soon  be  Reached. 

A  leading  English  Scientist  made  a  few  weeks  ago  before 
the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science 
some  interesting  statements.  Within  a  century,  he  esti- 
mates, the  resources  of  the  world  will  be  taxed  to  their 
full  capacity. 

Civilized  man  is,  or  ought  to  be,  beginning  to  realize 
that  in  reducing  more  and  more  of  the  surface  of  the  earth 
to  what  he  considers  a  habitable  condition  he  is  making  so 
much  progress  and  making  it  so  rapidly  that  the  problem  of 
finding  suitable  accommodation  for  his  increasing  numbers 
must  become  urgent  within  a  few  generations. 


NEW    DISCOVERIES.  207 

He  also  referred  to  the  wheat  acreage  as  not  keeping  pace 
with  the  increase  in  population,  and  added: 

"If  prophecies  based  on  population  statistics  are  trust- 
worthy the  crisis  will  be  upon  us  before  the  end  of  the 
century. 

"We  must  either  depend  upon  some  substitute  to  reduce 
our  consumption  per  head,  or  we  must  take  to  intensive 
farming  of  the  most  strenuous  sort." 

We  doubt  not  these  fears  are  fully  justified.  Problems 
arise  on  all  sides  and  man  is  helpless  to  solve  them.  The 
world  is  rapidly  approaching  what  may  be  called  a  great 
bankruptcy.  Tremendous  upheavals  of  a  physical  and 
social  nature  will  surely  come.  God's  hand  will  be  felt 
in  mighty  judgments.  But  we  know  more  than  that.  The 
Word  of  God  holds  out  the  blessed  hope  of  better  things  for 
this  earth  with  its  ever  increasing  groans.  That  hope  can 
only  be  realized  in  the  Coming  of  the  Lord,  who  is  both 
Creation's  Lord  and  Creation's  Redeemer.  He  did  not 
wear  the  thorns,  the  emblems  of  the  course,  in  vain  upon 
His  blessed  brow.  With  His  Coming  a  new  era,  a  new 
age,  will  begin  for  this  earth.  The  nearness  of  this  age 
introduced  by  His  manifestation  seems  indicated  by  the 
fact  that  the  limit  of  the  resources  of  this  earth  will  soon 
be   reached. 

Beth-Shemesh  has  been  Found.  There  have  recently 
been  discovered  in  Palestine  by  Dr.  D.  Mackenzie  and 
F.  G.  Newton  the  remains  of  Beth-Shemesh,  which  had 
been  lying  forgotten  for  2,614  years.  Beth-Shemesh  was 
possibly  one  of  the  high  places  that  King  Hezekiah  over- 
turned, as  described  in  2  Kings  xviii:4. 

A  mound  in  the  valley  of  Sorek,  known  as  Ain  Shems,  which, 
from  its  position  on  the  main  road  between  Jerusalem  and  the  sea, 
would  have  formed  an  important  point  of  defense  for  the  Holy 


208  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

City,  was  thought  to  cover  the  Beth-Shemesh  of  old.  There  was 
little  indication  on  the  surface  of  what  lay  buried  beneath.  Trial 
shafts,  says  Claire  Gaudet,  in  an  article  in  The  Graphic ^  wert  sunk 
with  satisfactory  results,  the  walls  of  the  city  were  traced  and  laid 
bare,  and  the  ashes  which  have  covered  these  walls  probably  since 
the  Assyrian  invasion  in  the  year  701  B.  C.  have  now  been  forced 
to  give  up  the  secrets  they  hid.  The  city,  however,  had  been 
completely  destroyed  by  fire  on  a  former  occasion — it  is  thought 
in  the  days  of  King  Ahaz,  at  the  time  of  the  Philistine  invasion. 

The  first  year  the  explorers  pitched  their  camp  beneath  an  olive 
grove  close  to  what  is  probably  a  very  ancient  road  which  crossed 
the  Tell,  dividing  it  into  two,  the  eastern  part  being  Ain  Shems  and 
the  western  Rumeileh,  where  the  buried  city  proved  to  be.  Close 
to  this  road  is  the  shrine  of  Abu  Meizar,  which,  according  to  tra- 
dition, is  associated  with  Samson.  The  shrine  is  built  on  a  rock, 
and  its  position  forms  a  natural  halting  place  for  travelers  crossing 
the   valley. 

Mr.  Newton  points  out  the  probability  that  this  is  the  very  spot 
where  the  Ark  rested  on  its  arrival  from  Ekron,  for  the  surroundings 
correspond  exactly  with  the  description  in  the  first  book  of  Samuel 
vi:14  even  to  a  great  stone  which  is  to  be  seen  close  by,  in  front 
of  the  shrine. 

Well  may  we  all  be  thankful  for  these  continued  con- 
firmations of  sacred  history.  Infidelity  and  its  cousin, 
"Higher  Criticism,"  may  laugh  for  a  time;  the  last 
laugh  belongs  to  faith.  Let  them  dig  on.  The  spade 
will  turn  up  other  things.  Happy  are  we,  that  we  believe 
in  the  Bible  apart  from  any  of  these  archaeological  finds. 

The  Claims  and  Twaddle  of  Science.    The  so-called 

"scientific  worW  was  recently  startled  by  the  claims  of 
a  Mexican  professor,  Mr.  Herrera,  of  having  succeeded 
in  forming  a  human  embryo  by  chemical  combination. 
Science  has  for  a  long  time  wrestled  with  the  problem 
of  life  and  has  more  than  once  attempted  to  produce  life 
artificially.     That  the  claim  of  this  Mexican  scientist  is 


NEW    DISCOVERIES.  209 

another  fake  needs  hardly  to  be  stated.     In  connection 
with  this  alleged  discovery  a  scientific  paper  says: 

It  would  be  impossible  of  course  to  set  a  limit  to  the  scope  of 
scientific  research  and  investigation  which  in  reality  covers  the 
universe  itself;  and  what  the  professor  believes  he  has  accomplished 
is  after  all  only  what  the  free  play  of  natural  forces  brought  about 
in  a  natural  way  some  100,000,000  (more  or  less)  years  ago. 

We  refer  to  what  is  known  as  spontaneous  generation  or  the 
passage  from  non-living  to  living  matter — from  the  inorganic  to  the 
organic.  This  must  have  taken  place  under  a  transitory  set  of  con- 
ditions existing  toward  the  end  of  the  azoic  or  lifeless  period  of 
our  planet.  At  that  precise  time  the  earth's  physical  condition 
was  entirely  different  from  what  it  is  now.  Although  still  warm, 
as  compared  with  subsequent  stages,  it  had  cooled  down  sufficiently 
to  enable  the  enveloping  vapors  to  condense  and  form  water,  with- 
out which   any  known   form   of  life  would   have  been  impossible. 

There  is  no  doubt  whatever  that  on  strict  analysis  it  will  be 
found  that  the  bodies  of  all  living  things — animals  and  plants — 
are  made  up  of  elements  all  of  which  are  included  in  the  earth's 
composition;  and  out  of  a  few  of  these,  such  as  carbon  hydrogen, 
nitrogen,  oxygen,  and  sulphur,  united  into  a  proximate  compound, 
is  formed  a  substance  called  protoplasm,  which  is  the  physical 
basis  of  life  in  all  its  forms. 

The  first  formation  of  this  substance  under  special  conditions — 
chemical,  electrical,  thermal,  and  aquatic — probably  took  place  in 
the  shallow  margins  and  lagoons  of  the  Laurenthian  seas.  This 
was  the  starting  point  of  life,  and  if  through  any  fortuitous  cause 
it  failed  to  develop  under  the  conditions  then  obtaining,  it  is  in  the 
highest  degree  improbable  that  life  could  have  originated  in  a 
natural  way  at  any  subsequent  stage  of  the  earth's  evolution,  as 
the  requisite  conditions  are  wanting,  and  can  no  more  be  recalled 
now  than  we  can  recall  our  individual  childhood  state.  Both  have 
passed  and  gone  never  to  return. 

It,  therefore,  follows  that  we  need  not  expect  to  see  at  the  pres- 
ent stage  of  the  earth's  evolution  any  such  thing  as  abiogenesis  or 
spontaneous  generation  through  a  natural  operation.  But  this  does 
not  preclude  the  possibility  of  an  artificial  production  of  living  sub- 


210  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

Stance  in  the  laboratory  of  the  chemist  or  experimental  physicist 
some  day.  But  it  is  exceedingly  doubtful  if  any  artificial  organism 
would  be  able  to  survive  the  strain  of  adaptation  to  what  would 
most  likely  be  an  unsuitable  environment.  Whether  the  organism's 
life  would  be  a  "merry"  one  or  not  is  doubtful;  but  it  would  certainly 
be  "short"! 

This  sounds  all  very  learned  and  plausible,  but  is  it 
truth?  Certainly  not.  It  is  simply  the  speculation  of 
man,  who  rejects  God's  revelation  concerning  the  origin  of 
this  earth.  No,  life  cannot  be  manufactured.  In  the 
above  article  the  first  beginning  of  life  is  given  as  100,- 
000,000  years — more  or  less.  That  is  how  exact  science 
is  in  its  miserable  guesswork.  One  only  needs  to  put 
together  the  different  estimates  of  well-known  scientists 
to  find  out  how  much  at  sea  they  are  in  regard  to  the  age 
of  our  planet.  Here  are  a  few  guesses  about  the  age  of  the 
earth: 

Lord  Kelvin,  1862,  20,000,000  to  400,000,000  years, 
probably  98,000,000. 

Clarence  King  and  Carl  Barus,  1893,  24,000,000. 

Lord  Kelvin,  1897,  20,000,000  to  40,000,000. 
\    De  Lapparent,   1890,  67,000,000  to  90,000,000. 

Charles  D.  Walcott,  Secretary  of  the  Smithsonian  In- 
stitution, 1893,  maximum,  70,000,000. 

J.  Joly,  1899,  age  of  the  ocean,  80,000,000  to  90,000,000. 

W.  J.  SoUas,  1909,  age  of  the  ocean,  80,000,000  to  150,-- 
000,000. 

Messrs.  Becker  and  Clarke  of  the  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey, 
not  above  70,000,000  and  not  below  55,000,000  years. 

A  few  million  years  apart,  that  is  all.  What  a  sure 
foundation  and  perfect  knowledge  we  possess  by  direct 
revelation  in  Genesis  i.  That  blessed  opening  chapter 
after  centuries  of  scientific  investigation,  discoveries  and 


NEW    DISCOVERIES.  211 

theories  stands  still  unimpeached.  It  can  never  be  shaken. 
The  earth  itself  and  the  heavens  may  pass  away,  but  His 
Word  never. 

The  Guess  Work  of  Science.  The  age  of  the  earth 
has  been  over  and  over  again  estimated  by  the  men  who 
call  themselves  Scientists.  Not  two  of  them  agree,  but 
they  differ  a  few  million  years  and  more.  Recently  a 
geological  publication  of  the  University  of  Chicago  made 
the  statement  that  the  age  of  the  earth  is  about  400,000,000 
years.  Others  are  equally  sure,  say  that  the  age  is  100,- 
000,000,000  years.  What  folly!  But  turning  from  the 
Scriptures  these  "great"  men  professing  themselves  to  be 
wise  become  fools. 

Some  years  ago  a  skull  was  found  at  Gibraltar  and  was 
termed  a  prehistoric  skull.  After  spending  months  of 
study  on  the  skull  Prof.  Keith  of  London  has  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  it  belongs  to  a  woman  who  lived  600,000 
years  ago.  This  great  Professor  has  discovered  that  nuts 
and  roots  were  the  chief  diet  of  that  woman  and  that  her 
palate  was  one-third  larger  than  that  of  the  woman  to- 
day. Oh,  how  smart!  But — some  other  scientist  will  be 
certain  that  the  skull  is  not  more  than  2,000  years  old.  And 
this  flimsy  thing  called  science  is  used  in  colleges  and  in- 
stitutions to  ridicule  the  Word  of  God,  that  sublime 
revelation,  which  tells  us  of  the  beginning  of  all  things. 
Yet  with  all  these  attacks  the  solid  rock  foundation  of 
God's  Word  stands  and  ever  will  stand :  "In  the  beginning 
God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth." 

Still  Another  Theory.  A  professor  in  one  of  the  New 
York  Colleges  gave  recently  his  explanation  of  how  life 
came  to  be  upon  this  planet. 

"The  theory  of  spontaneous  generation,  having  been  proved  im- 


212  CURRENT   EVENTS. 

possible,  we  are  reduced  to  believing  that  all  life  comes  from  pre- 
ceding life,  and  since  our  earth  was  originally  in  a  condition  abso- 
lutely inimicable  to  life,  it  must  have  come  from  other  worlds. 

"One  theory  maintains  that  meteors  falling  upon  our  earth 
brought  germs  of  life.  This  idea,  however,  is  not  plausible.  Meteors 
become  white  hot  on  passing  through  our  atmosphere,  which 
would  destroy  any  life  which  might  have  existed  upon  them. 

"About  the  only  other  thing  which  arrives  on  this  earth  from 
far  away  globes  is  light.  This  form  of  energy,  rushing  through 
space  at  186,000  miles  per  second,  became  the  carrier  of  the  first 
life  which  took  root  on  the  earth.  In  the  form  of  tiny  spores,  life 
germs,  they  were  planted  upon  fertile  soil,  and  through  the  process 
of  evolution  eventually  became  even  man  himself." 

How  the  tiny  spores  and  life  germs  came  into  existence 
originally  he  does  not  tell  us  nor  can  he  answer  other 
questions  about  his  "explanation,"  which  explains  noth- 
ing. Yet  boys  and  girls  have  to  listen  to  such  nonsense 
and  their  poor  hearts  are  a  good  soil  for  this  seed  of 
infidelity.  The  rejection  of  the  light  given  by  revelation 
and  moral  declension  go  hand  in  hand.  What  dark  days 
are  ahead  for  this  poor  world! 

Artificial  Creation  Once  More.  During  the  last  ten 
years  different  scientists  have  claimed  that  life  can  be 
produced  in  an  artificial  way.  Prof.  Edward  Albert 
Schaefer,  of  Edinburgh  University,  president  of  the 
British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  in 
his  annual  address  to  that  body  at  Dundee  recently  as- 
serted again  that  life  can  be  produced  artificially.  This 
is  mere  guesswork.  Life  can  never  be  produced  by  a 
chemical  process.  It  is  amusing  to  read  what  some  of 
the  leading  men  of  science  have  to  say  on  this  question: 

Sir  Edwin  Ray  Lankester,  a  former  president  of  the 
British  Association,  remarks:  ''Professor  Schaefer  cast  no 
bombshell  into  the  ranks  of  men  of  science.     Those  who 


NEW    DISCOVERIES.  213 

arc  engaged  in  research  are  in  complete  agreement  with 
him.  Opposition  can  only  come  from  metaphysical 
Philosophers.  The  public  should  refrain  from  excite- 
ment as  to  Professor  Schaefer's  vision  of  the  ultimate 
production  of  a  life-compound  by  the  chemist.  The 
evolution  of  a  synthetic  human  is  probably  a  hundred 
million  years  in  front  of  us. 

Professor  D'Arcy  W.  Thompson  observes:  ^'Though 
we  push  such  explanations  to  the  uttermost,  and  learn 
much  in  so  doing,  they  will  not  touch  the  heart  of  the 
great  problems  that  lie  deeper  than  the  physical  plane. 
Over  the  ultimate  problem  and  causes  of  natality  we  shall 
be  left  wondering  still." 

Professor  Elie  Metchnikoff,  Director  of  the  Pasteur 
Institute  in  Paris,  declares  that  the  artificial  production 
of  life  is  not  within  the  present  range  of  practical  chemis- 
try. He  says:  ''I  do  not  think  such  a  step  will  be  made 
in  cur  epoch,  certainly  not  in  my  lifetime.  Chemists 
have  applied  themselves  to  the  task  of  synthesizing 
living  matter  for  many  years,  but  there  are  great  difficul- 
ties which  must  still  be  overcome.  The  composition  of 
living  matter  is  not  yet  sufficiently  known,  and  chemists 
have  yet  to  complete  their  analysis  of  the  albuminoids 
which  form  the  living  cell  before  they  can  hope  to  build 
up  life.  That  task  is  certainly  one  of  the  greatest 
difficulty." 

Alfred  Russel  Wallace  is  prone  to  ridicule  the  proposals 
of  Professor  Schaefer,  whose  arguments,  he  says,  "are 
the  same  as  those  of  Haeckel  and  all  the  great  agnostics, 
but  he  does  not  really  get  over  the  difficulties  one  iota 
more  than  they  did.  So  there  is  nothing  in  what  he  says 
that  one  can  call  new.     He  begins  by  stating,  as  if  it  were 


214  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

his  point  of  view,  that  the  problems  of  life  are  essentially 
problems  of  matter,  and  that  we  cannot  conceive  of  life 
in  a  scientific  sense  as  existing  apart  from  matter.  He 
puts  down  what  he  could  conceive  and  could  not  conceive 
as  a  datum,  without  any  attempt  to  prove  it.  A  little 
further  on  he  tries  to  show  the  similarity  of  the  process 
of  reproduction  in  living  and  non-living  matter,  and  the 
only  thing  he  brings  forward  is  crystals.  He  says  that 
crystals  grow  and  multiply  and  reproduce  their  life,  and 
therefore  he  appears  to  be  utterly  ignorant  that  a  crystal 
is  simply  added  to  on  the  outside,  whereas  life  is  a  thing 
of  wonderful  and  complex  structure  and  is  added  to  on 
the  inside.  That,  I  consider,  is  a  wonderful  case  of  bad 
reasoning,  of  begging  the  question." 

A  believer  in  the  Word  of  God  can  read  all  such  state- 
ments in  calmness  of  soul,  knowing  that  all  these  efforts 
will  prove  a  complete  failure  in  the  end. 

An  Interesting  Discovery.  Dr.  Vilhjalmar  Stefansson, 
of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  has  returned 
after  the  discovery  of  a  tribe  of  2,000  white  persons  lost 
for  more  than  400  years  in  the  arctic  regions.  He  travelled 
10,000  miles  on  foot  during  four  years,  and  found  the  long- 
lost  descendants  of  the  Norsemen  who  800  years  ago  went 
to  Newfoundland  with  "Lief  the  Lucky"  from  the  shores 
of  Norway. 

The  discovery  is  ranked  by  ethnologists  as  the  most 
important  of  the  kind  that  could  be  made,  with  the  single 
exception  of  the  discovery  of  the  history  of  the  lost  tribes 
of  Israel. 

This  tribe,  living  yet  in  stone  age  style,  has  its  habitat 
about  Coronation  gulf  and  Victoria  Land,  regions  the 
doctor  was  warned   to  avoid  before  he  started  on  his 


NEW    DISCOVERIES.  215 

expedition.  All  maps  which  he  had  showed  the  country 
as  uninhabited. 

But  he  found  a  white  race  of  fair  complexion,  half  of 
whom  have  red  hair  and  white  eyebrows.  They  bear  no 
trace  of  Asiatic  or  the  Eskimo,  but  resemble  in  many 
respects  the  Scandinavians  from  whom  they  descended. 

Prof.  Stefansson  accounts  for  their  existence  by  the 
fact  that  in  the  year  982  Greenland  was  discovered  and 
settled  by  3,000  Icelanders.  One  thousand  of  these  people 
sailed  from  Norway  and  missed  Greenland,  but  landed  on 
the  coast  of  Newfoundland.  The  Norsemen  settled  in 
two  colonies,  one  on  the  north  and  one  on  the  south  side  of 
Newfoundland. 

How  remarkable  that  this  race  should  have  been  hidden 
so  long  and  now  be  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  civilized 
world!  But  God  knew  them  and  knew  their  abode.  The 
so-called  "lost  tribes"  are  equally  known  to  God.  May 
the  Gospel  now  be  speedily  carried  to  this  white  race  of 
the  far  North. 

The  Missing  Link  Still  Missing.  During  an  animal 
show  in  Chicago,  a  dark  skinned  being,  which  had  no  ar- 
ticulate speech  was  exhibited.  The  poor  creature  was 
advertised  as  the  "ape  man,"  a  "cannibal"  and  as  the 
"missing  link"  of  the  evolution  theory.  The  being,  a 
mere  boy,  was  called  "Congo"  and  his  exhibitors  told  a 
graphic  story  how  he  was  captured  in  Central  Africa  and 
what  dangers  were  connected  with  his  capture.  Many 
thousands  looked  at  the  boy  and  not  a  few  believed  that 
he  must  be  the  long  looked  for  missing  link. 

But  it  has  now  been  discovered  and  legally  decided  by 
Judge  Windes,  that  the  poor  fellow  is  not  the  missing  link, 


216  CURRENT    EVENTS. 

but  an  imbecile  Louisiana  negro  boy,  who  never  saw  Africa. 
The  Judge  has  awarded  his  custody  to  the  mother. 

The  scientists,  professors  and  preachers,  whose  creed  is 
the  Darwinian  evolution  theory,  must  keep  on  looking  for 
the  missing  link.  It  is  still  missing  and  will  never  be 
found. 


INDEX 


Page 

Airships 38,  39 

America's  Darkest  Crime 182 

Antichrist 34,  78,  80,  122,  127 

Anti-Romish  Agitation 164 

Anti-Semitism 19 

Apostasy 65,  77,  93 

Armageddon 52,  53 

Armies  of  Nations 49,  50 

Artificial  Creation 212 

Atrocities 17,  20 

Austria 16,  27 

Bahaism 60,  108,  126,  127,  128 

Balkan  Situation 16,  44,  51 

Balkan  Wars 22,  24,25 

Belgium 45 

Berlin,  Corruption  of 169 

Bernhardi,  von 35 

Besant,  Mrs.  Anna 121,  123,  125 

Bible  Criticism 56,  57,  73,  94 

Bible  Hatred 84 

Buddhism  in  Europe 112 

Christian  Science.  .  60,  92,  98, 130, 140 

Christianity  Socialized 153 

Church  of  England 83 

Church,  Corruption  of  the.  ,82,  86,  87 

Church  Union 75 

Coming  of  the  Lord ....  19,  47,  48,  53 

Concert  of  Europe 17 

Confederacy  of  Europe 29,  42,  43 

Confusion  of  Zion  City,  Ills 61 

Constantinople 9,  22 

Crime,  Increase  of  .145,  178,  182,  210 

Criticism,  Higher 56,  57,  73,  94 

Cult,  A  New 133 

Dancing  in  Churches 86,  87 

Daniel 206 

Delusions 99,  100,  103 

Demons 100 

Discontent  of  Nations 163 

Discoveries 203,  204,  207,  214 

Dream  of  the  World 115 

Earth's  Resources  Exhausted 206 

Edward  VII,  King 9,  33 


Page 

England 9,  16,  35,  39,  49,  50 

England  and  Russia 9,  10 

Ethical  Systems 113 

Europe  Buying  Guns 12 

Europe  Uneasy 23 

Federation 74 

Food  Problems 162 

France 14,  16,  39,  49,  50 

German  Answer  to  Monism 110 

German  Commerce 14 

German  Control  of  Europe 18 

German  Emperor 13 

German  Fleet  of  the  Air 35,  36 

German  National  Debt 20 

Germany  and  Turkey 18 

Ghosts 58 

Gog  and  Magog 19,  20 

Heathendom,  Revival  of 68 

Hell  Ridiculed 65 

Holland  in  Line 26 

Hospital,  The  Soul 114 

Human  Slaughter  House 24 

Humanity,  Church  of 136 

IngersoU,  No  Successor  to 56 

Intemperance 145,  181 

Insanity,  Increase  of 174 

Italy 17 

Japan 11,  173 

Jerusalem 8,201 

Jews,  The 

186,  189,  190,  192,  196,  199,  200 

Jews  and  Russia 193 

Jews  and  Turkey 198 

Jewish  State 187 

Jewish  University 201 

Joan  d' Arc 80 

Krishnamurti 119,  120,  121,  124 

Krupp  Guns 38 

Lawlessness 145 

Licentiousness 168,  169 

Life,  The  Problem  of 208,  211 


INDEX 


Page 

Mains,  Dr.  George  P 94 

Methodism 62,  88,  93,  95 

Mexico 41,  42 

Millennial  Dawnism.67,  101,  137,  138 
142,  143 

Missing  Link 215 

Missionary  Apostasy 78 

Modern  Warfare 55 

Modernism 85 

Monism 106 

Moral  Corruption 157 

Mormonism 110,  128 

Mosque  in  London 112 

Navies  of  the  Nations 49,  50 

New  Christianity 79 

New  Theology 80,  84,  86 

New  Thought 116,  118 

Old  Roman  Empire 11 

Optimism,  False 8,  63 

Palestine 40,  186,  199 

Pankhurst,  Mrs 174 

Passion  Play 89 

Peace  Confidence  Shaken 13 

Peace,  No 8 

Peace  Palace 54 

Peace  Treaty 46 

Peace,  Universal 11,  43,  44,  48 

Persia 10,  19,  40 

Pleasures,  Increase  of 176 

Pope,  The  Peace  Message  of  the. .  .28 

Progress,  Great 180 

Psychical  Research 103,  104 

Put  Him  Out 76 

Religion,  A  Common  .59 

Religions  in  U.  S .    .00 

Revolution,  The  French 34 

Roman  Catholicism  .  .  .  .28,  29,  64,  96 

Roman  Empire  Revival 18 

Uomanism  Triumphant 58 

Kome's  Riches 67 


Page 

Roosevelt,  Theodore 52,  142 

Russell,  Pastor 66,  101,  138,  142 

Russellism 67,  101,  137 

Russia 19,  26 

Russia  and  Eastern  Question 10 

Russia's  Strength 32 

Russia's  Preparations 13 

Russia's  Threatening  Attitude 8 

Satan's  Work 143 

Science,  Guesses  of 210,  211 

Serpent  Worshippers 141 

Signs  of  the  Times 18 

Single  World  Government 29,  30 

Social  Decline 175,  176 

Socialism 146,  147,  161,  167,  178 

Sound  Doctrine  Abandoned 69,  70 

Southcott,  J 135 

Spiritualism 99,  100,  103,  132 

Stead,  W.  T 99 

Sun  Worshippers 68 

Suicides 175,  177 

Titanic  Disaster 148 

Turkey 9,  13,  22,  199,  200 

Turkish  Question 22 

United  States  of  Europe 42 

Universal  Peace 7 

Unrest  of  the  World 33,  155 

Waechter,  Sir 42,  43 

War,  Preparations  for 10,  35 

War,  Horrors  of 15 

Waste,  Enormous 172 

Wealth,  Great 159 

White  Slave  Traffic 163 

World  Bureau,  The  Other 99,  100 

World  Center 51 

World  Government 30 

Y    M.  C.  A.,  Downward  Road  of 

71,  72,  92 

Zeppelins 36 

Zionism 23, 189, 190, 194, 195, 199 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  April  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111 


I 


: 


