UBRARY  OF  PRINCETON 


m 


DEC    18    2003 


EOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


^fe  BV  4811  .S676 

^r  Spurgeon,  C.  H.  1834-1892 

^K   Daily  help 

t 


Daily  Help 


\     ■■  ■';  ^'^  v^Af;aiJ 


YT     -jS  J^j!G0JC3HT 


LIBRARY  OF  PRINCETON 


DEC    18    2003 


THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


^rmnnrmnrmnnnnnnn^ 

I  Daily  Help  | 

I  BY  § 

JC    REV.  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON     3 


COMPILED  AND  EDITED  BY 

GEORGE  PERRY  DIXON 

PUB  LISHE  RS 

Gr asset  &  Dunlap 

NEW     YORK 


PRINTED    IN    THE    UNITED    STATES    OF    AMERICA 


T)<^iXT  jrej^T 


JANUARY  1. 

CljiJE  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee.  We  will 
^^  not  open  the  gates  of  the  year  to  the  dolorous 
notes  of  the  sackbut,  but  to  the  sweet  strains  of  the 
harp  of  joy.  "O  come,  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord: 
let  us  make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  rock  of  our 
salvation."  What  heavens  are  laid  up  in  Jesus! 
What  rivers  of  infinite  bliss  have  their  source,  ay, 
and  every  drop  of  their  fullness  in  Him !  Since,  O 
sweet  Lord  Jesus,  Thou  art  the  present  portion  of 
Thy  people,  favor  us  this  year  with  such  a  sense  of 
Thy  preciousness,  that  from  its  first  to  its  last  day, 
we  may  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  Thee. 

JANUARY  2. 

gy/^E  who  lives  without  prayer — he  who  lives 
^■^  with  little  prayer — he  who  seldom  reads  the 
Word — he  who  seldom  looks  up  to  heaven  for  a 
fresh  influence  from  on  high — he  will  be  the  man 
whose  heart  will  become  dry  and  barren ;  but  he  who 
calls  in  secret  on  his  God — who  spends  much  time 
in  holy  retirement — who  delights  to  meditate  on  the 
words  of  the  Most  High — whose  soul  is  given  up  to 
Christ — such  a  man  must  have  an  overflowing  heart  • 
and  as  his  heart  is,  such  will  his  life  be. 


JANUARY  3. 

y^LL  my  springs  are  in  thee,  and  if  thou  hast 
'^-^-^  all  thy  springs  in  God,  thy  heart  will  be  full 
enough.  If  thou  dost  go  to  the  foot  of  Calvary, 
there  will  thy  heart  be  bathed  in  love  and  gratitude 
If  thou  dost  frequent  the  vale  of  retirement,  and 
there  talk  with  thy  God,  it  is  there  that  thy  heart 
shall  be  full  of  calm  resolve.  If  thou  goest  out  with 
thy  master  to  the  hill  of  OH  vet,  and  dost  with  him 
look  down  upon  a  wicked  Jerusalem,  and  weep  over 
it  with  him.  then  will  thy  heart  be  full  of  love  for 
never-dying  souls. 


JANUARY  4. 

(HJ^EEP  not  back  part  of  the  price.  Make  a  full 
-^  V.  surrender  of  every  motion  of  thy  heart;  labor 
to  have  but  one  object  and  one  aim,  and  for  this 
purpose  give  God  the  keeping  of  thine  heart.  Cry 
out  for  more  of  the  divine  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  so  that  when  thy  soul  is  preserved  and 
protected  by  Him  it  may  be  directed  into  one  chan- 
nel, and  one  only,  that  thy  life  may  run  deep  and 
pure,  and  clear  and  peaceful ;  its  only  banks  being 
God's  will,  its  only  channel  the  love  of  Christ  and 
a  desire  to  please  Him. 


JANUARY  5. 

^\r  EVER,  never  neglect  the  word  of  God ;  that 
^  \^j  will  make  thy  heart  rich  with  precept,  rich 
with  understanding ;  and  then  thy  conversation,  when 
it  flows  from  thy  mouth,  will  be  like  thine  heart, 
rich,  unctious  and  savory.  Make  thy  heart  full  of 
rich,  generous  love,  and  then  the  stream  that  flows 
from  thy  hand  will  be  just  as  rich  and  generous  as 
thine  heart.  Oh!  go.  Christian,  to  the  great  mine 
of  riches,  and  cry  unto  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  thy 
heart  rich  unto  salvation.  So  shall  thy  life  and 
conversation  be  a  boon  to  thy  fellows;  and  when 
they  see  thee,  thy  face  shall  be  as  the  angel  of  God. 

JANUARY  6. 

rHERE  is  not  a  spider  hanging  on  the  king's 
wall  but  hath  its  errand;  there  is  not  a  nettle 
that  groweth  in  the  corner  of  the  churchyard  but 
hath  its  purpose;  there  is  not  a  single  insect  flut- 
tering in  the  breeze  but  accomplisheth  some  divine 
decree ;  and  I  will  never  have  it  that  God  created  any 
man,  especially  any  Christian  man,  to  be  a  blank, 
and  to  be  a  nothing.  He  made  you  for  an  end.  Find 
out  what  that  end  is;  find  out  your  niche,  and  fill 
it.  If  it  be  ever  so  little,  if  it  is  only  to  be  a  hewer 
of  wood  and  a  drawer  of  water,  do  something  in 
this  great  battle  for  God  and  truth. 


JANUARY  7. 

OUPPOSE  you  see  a  lake,  and  there  are  twenty 
(2y  or  thirty  streamlets  running  into  it :  why,  there 
will  not  be  one  strong  river  in  the  whole  country; 
there  will  be  a  number  of  little  brooks  which  will  be 
dried  up  in  the  summer,  and  will  be  temporary  tor- 
rents in  winter.  They  will  every  one  of  them  be 
useless  for  any  great  purpose,  because  there  is  not 
water  enough  in  the  lake  to  feed  more  than  one  great 
stream.  Now,  a  man's  heart  has  only  enough  life 
in  it  to  pursue  one  object  fully.  Ye  must  not  give 
half  your  love  to  Christ,  and  the  other  half  to  the 
world.    No  man  can  serve  God  and  mammon. 


JANUARY  8. 

CT)RAYER  is  the  rustling  of  the  wings  of  the 
"^  angels  that  are  on  their  way  bringing  us  the 
boons  of  heaven.  Have  you  heard  prayer  in  your 
heart?  You  shall  see  the  angel  in  your  house. 
When  the  chariots  that  bring  us  blessings  do  rumble, 
their  wheels  do  sound  with  prayer.  We  hear  the 
prayer  in  our  own  spirits,  and  that  prayer  becomes 
the  token  of  the  coming  blessings.  Even  as  the 
cloud  foreshadoweth  rain,  so  prayer  foreshadoweth 
the  blessing;  even  as  the  green  blade  is  the  be- 
ginning of  the  harvest,  so  is  prayer  the  prophecy  of 
the  blessing  that  is  about  to  come. 


JANUARY  9. 

/nMNIPOTENCE  may  build  a  thousand  worlds, 
^^  and  fill  them  with  bounties ;  Omnipotence  may 
powder  mountains  into  dust,  and  burn  the  sea,  and 
consume  the  sky,  but  Omnipotence  cannot  do  an  un- 
loving thing  toward  a  believer.  Oh  !  rest  quite  sure, 
Curistian,  a  hard  thing,  an  unloving  thing  from  God 
toward  one  of  his  own  people  is  quite  impossible. 
He  is  as  kind  to  you  when  he  casts  you  into  prison 
as  when  he  takes  you  into  a  palace;  He  is  as  good 
when  he  sends  famine  into  your  house  as  when  he 
fills  your  barns  with  plenty.  The  only  question  is, 
Art  thou  his  child?  If  so,  he  hath  rebuked  thee  in 
affection,  and  there  is  love  in  his  chastisement. 

JANUARY  10. 

CT\  O  you  not  know  that  God  is  an  eternal  self- 
-^-^  existent  Being ;  that  to  say  he  loves  now,  is,  in 
fact,  to  say  he  always  did  love,  since  with  God  there 
is  no  past,  and  can  be  no  future.  What  we  call  past, 
present,  and  future,  he  wraps  in  one  eternal  nov/. 
And  if  you  say  he  loves  you  now,  you  say  he  loved 
yesterday ;  he  loved  in  the  past  eternity ;  and  he  will 
love  forever;  for  now  with  God  is  past,  present, 
and  future. 

Christ's  love  is  the  sun  and  our  love  is  the  moon- 
light, which  we  are  able  to  give  forth  because  the 
sun  hath  looked  upon  us. 


JANUARY  11. 

/F  any  one  should  ask  me  for  an  epitome  of 
the  Christian  reHgion,  I  should  say,  it  is  in 
that  one  word — ''prayer."  If  I  should  be  asked, 
*What  will  take  in  the  whole  of  Christian  ex- 
perience?" I  should  answer,  "prayer."  A  man 
must  have  been  convinced  of  sin  before  he  could 
pray;  he  must  have  had  some  hope  that  there  was 
mercy  for  him  before  he  could  pray.  All  the 
Christian  virtues  are  locked  up  in  the  word,  prayer. 
In  troublous  times  our  best  communion  with  God 
will  be  carried  on  by  supplication.  Tell  Him  thy 
case ;  search  out  His  promise,  and  then  plead  it  with 
holy  boldness.  This  is  the  best,  the  surest,  the 
speediest  way  of  relief. 

JANUARY  12. 

O INNER,  let  this  be  thy  comfort,  that  God  sees 
Qj  thee  when  thou  beginnest  to  repent.  He  does 
not  see  thee  with  his  usual  gaze,  with  which  he 
looks  on  all  men,  but  he  sees  thee  with  an  eye  of 
intense  interest.  He  has  been  looking  on  thee  in  all 
thy  sin,  and  in  all  thy  sorrow,  hoping  that  thou 
wouldst  repent;  and  now  he  sees  the  first  gleam  of 
grace,  and  he  beholds  it  with  joy.  Never  warder 
on  the  lonely  castle  top  saw  the  first  gray  light  of 
morning  with  more  joy  than  that  with  which  God 
beholds  the  first  desire  in  thv  heart. 


JANUARY  13. 

y/"S  sure  as  God  is  God,  if  you  this  day  are 
^^-^  seeking  tiim  aright,  through  Christ,  the  day 
shall  come  when  the  kiss  of  full  assurance  shall  be 
on  your  lip,  when  the  arms  of  sovereign  love  shall 
embrace  you,  and  you  shall  know  it  to  be  so.  Thou 
mayest  have  despised  him,  but  thou  shalt  know  him 
yet  to  be  thy  Father  and  thy  friend.  Thou  mayest 
have  broken  his  Sabbaths  and  despised  his  Word; 
the  day  is  coming  when  the  Sabbath  shall  be  thy 
delight,  and  his  Word  thy  treasure. 

JANUARY  14. 

7"^  HE  great  King,  immortal,  invisible,  the  Divine 
person,  called  the  Koly  Ghost,  the  Holy  Spirit : 
it  IS  he  that  quickens  the  soul,  or  else  it  would  lie 
dead  forever;  it  is  he  that  makes  it  tender,  or  else 
it  would  never  feel ;  it  is  he  that  imparts  efficacy  to 
the  Word  preached,  or  else  it  could  never  reach 
further  than  the  ear ;  it  is  he  who  breaks  the  heart, 
it  is  he  who  makes  it  whole. 

There  dwells  upon  this  earth  a  mysterious  Being, 
whose  office  is  to  renew  the  fallen  and  restore  the 
wandering.  We  cannot  see  Him,  or  hear  Him,  yet 
He  dwells  in  some  of  us  as  Lord  of  our  nature. 
His  chosen  residence  is  a  broken  heart  and  a  contrite 
spirit. 


JANUARY   15. 

CT^ELIGHT  in  divine  service  is  a  token  of  ac- 
-^-^  ceptance.  Those  who  serve  God  with  a  sad 
countenance,  because  they  do  what  is  unpleasant  to 
them,  are  not  serving  Him  at  all;  they  bring  the 
form  of  homage,  but  the  life  is  absent.  That 
obedience  which  is  not  voluntary  is  disobedience,  for 
the  Lord  looketh  at  the  heart,  and  if  He  seeth  that 
we  serve  Him  from  force,  and  not  because  we  love 
Him,  He  will  reject  our  offering.  Service  coupled 
with  cheerfulness  is  heart-service,  and  therefore 
true.  Take  away  joyful  willingness  from  the 
Christian,  and  you  have  removed  the  test  of  his 
sincerity. 

Cheerfulness  is  the  support  of  our  strength;  in 
the  joy  of  the  Lord  are  we  strong. 

JANUARY  16. 

rHE  river  of  God  is  full  of  water;  but  there  is 
not  one  drop  of  it  that  takes  its  rise  in  earthly 
springs.  God  will  have  no  strength  used  in  his  own 
battles  but  the  strength  which  he  himself  imparts; 
and  I  would  not  have  you  that  are  now  distressed 
discouraged  by  it.  Your  emptiness  is  but  the  prep- 
aration for  your  being  filled ;  and  your  casting  down 
is  but  the  making  ready  for  your  lifting  up. 

Unexpected  help  shall  come  to  us  when  affairs 
are  at  their  worst. 

Let  us  learn  from  our  Master  to  reckon  upoh 
forces  invisible. 


JANUARY  17. 

T  GAZE  on  beauty,  and  may  be  myself  deformed 
-*  I  admire  the  light,  and  may  yet  dwell  in  dark- 
ness ;  but  if  the  light  of  the  countenance  of  God  rests 
upon  me,  I  shall  become  like  unto  Him;  the  linea- 
ments of  His  visage  will  be  on  me,  and  the  great 
outlines  of  His  attributes  will  be  mine.  Oh, 
wondrous  glass,  which  thus  renders  the  beholder 
lovely.  Oh,  admirable  mirror,  which  reflects  not 
self  with  its  imperfections,  but  gives  a  perfect  image 
to  those  that  are  uncomely. 

If  thou  dost  continually  draw  thine  impulse,  thy 
life,  the  whole  of  thy  being  from  the  Holy  Spirit, 
then  shalt  thou  see  God  and  Jesus  face  to  face. 

JANUARY  18. 

^^\/*  OTHING  gives  the  believer  so  much  joy  as 
^  \^_^  fellozvship  nith  Christ.  He  has  enjoyment 
as  others  have  in  the  common  mercies  of  life,  he  can 
be  glad  both  in  God's  gifts  and  God's  works ;  but 
in  all  these  separately,  yea,  and  in  all  of  them  added 
together,  he  doth  not  find  such  substantial  delight  as 
in  the  matchless  person  of  his  Lord  Jesus. 

Where  can  such  sweetness  be  found  as  we  have 
tasted  in  communion  with  our  Beloved  ? 

If  you  know  anything  of  the  inner  life,  you  will 
confess  that  our  highest,  purest,  and  most  enduring 
joys  must  be  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  which  is 
in  the  midst  of  the  Paradise  of  God 


JANUARY  19. 

CT/^OW  encouraging  is  the  thought  of  the  Re 
^-^  deemer's  never-ceasing  intercession  for  us. 
When  we  pray,  He  pleads  for  us ;  and  when  we  are 
not  praying,  He  is  advocating  our  cause,  and  by  His 
supplications  shielding  us  from  unseen  dangers. 
We  little  know  what  we  owe  to  our  Saviour's 
prayers.  When  we  reach  the  hill-tops  of  heaven,  and 
look  back  upon  all  the  way  whereby  the  Lord  our 
God  hath  led  us,  how  we  shall  praise  Him  who,  be- 
fore the  eternal  throne,  has  pleaded  our  cause 
against  our  unseen  enemies.  ^'But  I  liave  prayed 
for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not." 

JANUARY  20. 

/ESUS  answered  and  said,  I  thank  Thee,  O 
Father."  It  was  the  habit  and  life  of  Jesus  to 
talk  with  God.  May  we  likewise  have  silent  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father,  so  that  often  we  may  answer 
Him,  and  though  the  world  wotteth  not  to  whom  we 
speak,  may  we  be  responding  to  that  secret  voice 
unheard  of  any  other  ear,  which  our  own  ear,  opened 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  recognizes  with  joy.  What 
a  privilege  is  intimate  communion  with  the  Father 
of  our  spirits !  It  is  a  secret  hidden  from  the  world, 
a  joy  with  which  even  the  nearest  friend  inter- 
meddleth  not. 

This  very  day  may  our  hearts  be  in  such  a  state, 
that  when  God  speaks  to  us,  we,  like  Jesus,  may  be 
prepared  at  once  to  answer  Him. 


JANUARY  21, 

(^ELOVED,  while  we  do  not  neglect  external 
-^^  things,  which  are  good  enough  in  themselves, 
we  ought  also  to  see  to  it  that  we  enjoy  living, 
personal  fellowship  with  Jesus.  See  to  it  that  sit- 
ting at  the  Saviour's  feet  is  not  neglected,  even 
though  it  be  under  the  specious  pretext  of  doing  Him 
service.  The  first  thing  for  our  soul's  health,  the 
first  thing  for  His  glory,  and  the  first  thing  for  our 
own  usefulness,  is  to  keep  ourselves  in  perpetual 
communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  to  see  that  the 
vital  spirituality  of  our  religion  is  maintained  over 
and  above  everything  else  in  the  world. 

Friendship  is  one  of  the  sweetest  joys  of  life. 

JANUARY  22. 

^7)OLDLY  come  unto  the  King  of  kings,  from 
-^  whom  no  sincere  petitioner  ever  was  dismissed 
unheard. 

Whenever  there  is  a  heart  big  with  sorrow,  where- 
ever  there  is  an  eye  suffused  with  tears,  wherever 
there  is  a  lip  quivering  with  agony,  wherever  there 
is  a  deep  groan,  or  a  penitential  sigh,  the  ear  of 
Jehovah  is  wide  open.  He  puts  our  prayers,  like 
rose  leaves,  between  the  pages  of  His  book  of  re- 
membrance, and  when  the  volume  is  opened  at  last, 
there  shall  be  a  precious  fragrance  springing  up 
therefrom. 


JANUARY  23. 

/T  is  well  to  be  the  sheep  of  God's  pasture,  even 
if  we  have  been  wandering  sheep.  The  stray- 
ing sheep  has  an  owner,  and  however  far  it  may 
stray  from  the  fold,  it  ceases  not  to  belong  to  that 
owner.  I  believe  that  God  will  yet  bring  back  into 
the  fold  every  one  of  His  own  sheep,  and  they  shall 
all  be  saved.  It  is  something  to  feel  our  wander- 
ings, for  if  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  lost,  we  shall 
certainly  be  saved ;  if  we  feel  ourselves  to  have 
wandered,  we  shall  certainly  be  brought  back. 


JANUARY  24. 

/F  you  might  go  to  Heaven  and  hold  communion 
with  some  person  whom  you  dearly  loved,  you 
would  often  be  found  there.  But  here  is  Jesus,  the 
King  of  Heaven,  and  He  gives  you  that  which  can 
open  the  gates  of  Heaven  and  let  you  in  to  be  with 
Him,  and  yet  you  live  without  meditating  upon  His 
work,  meditating  upon  His  person,  meditating  upon 
His  offices,  and  meditating  upon  His  glory.  Ah! 
there  is  nothing  that  can  so  console  your  spirits,  and 
reheve  all  your  distresses  and  troubles,  as  the  feeling 
that  now  you  can  meditate  on  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ. 


JANUARY  25. 

/N  the  very  beginning,  when  this  great  universe 
lay  in  the  mind  of  God,  hke  unborn  forests  in 
the  acorn-cup;  long  ere  the  echoes  walked  the 
solitudes ;  before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth ; 
and  long  ere  the  light  flashed  through  the  sky,  God 
loved  His  chosen  creatures.  Before  there  was 
creatureship — when  the  aether  was  not  fanned  by 
the  angel's  wing;  when  space  itself  had  not  an  ex- 
istence ;  when  there  was  nothing  save  God  alone ; 
even  then,  in  that  loneliness  of  Deity,  and  in  that 
deep  quiet  and  profundity,  His  love  moved  for  His 
chosen.  Their  names  were  written  on  His  heart, 
and  then  were  they  dear  to  His  soul. 

JANUARY  26. 

/^OD  is  love  in  its  highest  degree.  He  is  love 
y  rendered  more  than  love.  Love  is  not  God, 
but  God  is  love;  He  is  full  of  grace,  He  is  the  pleni- 
tude of  mercy — He  delighteth  in  mercy. 

I  believe  that  every  flower  in  a  garden,  which  is 
tended  by  a  wise  gardener,  could  tell  of  some 
particular  care  that  the  gardener  takes  of  it.  He 
does  for  the  dahlia  what  he  does  not  for  the  sun- 
flower; somewhat  is  wanted  by  the  rose  that  is  not 
required  by  the  lily ;  and  the  geranium  calls  for  an 
attention  which  is  not  given  to  the  honeysuckle. 
Each  flower  wins  from  the  gardener  a  special 
culture. 

He  loves  us  better  than  we  love  ourselveC- 


JANUARY  27. 

CTJ^'E  who  would  be  happy  here  must  have 
^-^  friends ;  and  he  who  would  be  happy  here- 
after, must  above  all  things,  find  a  friend  in  the 
world  to  come,  in  the  person  of  God,  the  Father  of 
His  people. 

True  friendship  can  only  be  made  between  true 
men.  Hearts  are  the  soul  of  honor.  There  can  be 
no  lasting  friendship  between  bad  men.  Bad  men 
may  pretend  to  love  each  other,  but  their  friendship 
is  a  rope  of  sand,  which  shall  be  broken  at  any  con- 
venient season;  but  if  a  man  have  a  sincere  heart 
within  him,  and  be  true  and  noble,  then  we  may  con- 
fide in  him, 

JANUARY  28. 

rHE  imagination  will  sometimes  fly  up  to  God 
with  such  a  power  that  eagles'  wings  cannot 
match  it.  It  sometimes  has  such  might  that  it  can 
almost  see  the  King  in  His  beauty,  and  the  land 
which  is  very  far  off.  But  if  it  is  potent  one  way, 
it  is  another,  for  imagination  has  taken  us  down  to 
the  lowest  plains  of  earth.  But  I  rejoice  and  think 
of  one  thing,  that  I  can  cry  out  when  this  imagina- 
tion comes  upon  me.  So  it  is  with  the  Christian. 
If  he  cries  out,  there  is  hope.  Can  you  chain  your 
imagination  ?  No ;  but  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
can.  Ah,  it  shall  do  it!  and  it  does  do  it  at  last,  it 
does  it  even  on  earth. 


JANUARY  29. 

y^HE  hour  is  coming,  and  it  may  be  even  now 
is,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  be  poured  out 
again  in  such  a  wonderful  manner,  that  many  shall 
run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be  increased — 
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth  as 
the  waters  cover  the  surface  of  the  great  deep; 
when  His  kingdom  shall  come,  and  His  will  shall 
be  done  on  earth  even  as  it  is  in  heaven ;  when  every 
one  will  see  that  verily  the  Spirit  is  poured  out  like 
water,  and  the  rains  are  descending  from  above. 
For  that  let  us  pray ;  let  us  continually  labor  for  it, 
•ind  seek  it  of  God. 


JANUARY  30, 

/'^OD'S  Holy  Spirit  and  man's  sip  cannot  live 
\J  together  peaceably;  they  may  both  be  in  the 
same  heart,  but  they  cannot  both  reign  there,  nor 
can  they  both  be  quiet  there ;  for  *'the  Spirit  lusteth 
against  the  flesh,  and  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the 
Spirit;"  they  cannot  rest,  but  there  will  be  a  per- 
petual warring  in  the  soul,  so  that  the  Christian  will 
have  to  cry,  "O  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  But  in 
due  time:  the  Spirit  will  drive  out  all  sin,  and  will 
present  us  blameless  before  the  throne  of  Hi? 
Majesty  with  exceeding  great  >oy. 


JANUARY  31. 

OIMEON  called  Jesus  the  consolation  of  Israel; 
QJ  and  so  He  was.  Before  His  actual  appearance, 
His  name  was  the  day-star ;  cheering  the  darkness, 
and  prophetic  of  the  rising  sun.  To  Him  they 
looked  with  the  same  hope  which  cheers  the  nightly 
watcher,  when  from  the  lonely  castle-top  he  sees  the 
fairest  of  the  stars,  and  hails  her  as  the  usher  of 
the  morn.  When  He  was  on  earth.  He  must  have 
been  the  consolation  of  all  those  who  were  privileged 
to  be  His  companions.  Like  children  they  would 
tell  Him  of  their  griefs,  and  consider  Him  as  their 
Father. 


FEBRUARY  1. 

>OH !  it  must  have  been  sweet  to  have  lived  v^ith 
^^  Christ.  Surely,  sorrows  were  then  but  joys 
in  masks,  because  they  gave  an  opportunity  to  go  to 
Jesus  to  have  them  removed.  Oh !  would  to  God, 
some  of  us  may  say,  that  we  could  have  lain  our 
weary  heads  upon  the  bosom  of  Jesus,  and  that  our 
birth  had  been  in  that  happy  era,  when  we  might 
have  heard  His  kind  voice,  when  he  said,  "Let  the 
weary  ones  come  unto  me."  But  hear  how  kindly 
Jesus  speaks:  "I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless, 
for  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  He  will  send  you 
another  Comforter,  that  He  may  abide  with  you 
forever." 

FEBRUARY  2. 

/JfJUR  world  has  two  forces;  it  has  one  tendency 
^^  to  run  off  at  a  tangent  from  its  orbit;  but  the 
sun  draws  it  by  a  centripetal  power,  and  attracts  it 
to  itself.  Oh !  Christian,  thou  wilt  never  walk 
aright,  and  keep  in  the  orbit  of  truth,  jf  it  be  not 
for  the  influence  of  Christ  perpetually  attracting 
thee  to  the  center.  Christ  is  drawing  thee  to  him- 
self, to  his  likeness,  to  his  character,  to  his  love,  to 
his  bosom,  and  in  that  way  thou  art  kept  from  thy 
natural  tendency  to  fly  off  and  to  be  lost  in  the  wide 
fields  of  sin.  Bless  God,  that  Christ  lifted  up  draws 
all  his  DeoDle  unto  him. 


FEBRUARY  3. 

^ETTER  have  two  lights  than  only  one.  The 
-^  light  of  creation  is  a  bright  light.  God  may  be 
seen  in.  the  stars;  his  name  is  written  in  gilt  letters 
on  the  brow  of  night;  you  may  discover  his  glory 
in  the  ocean  waves,  yea,  in  the  trees  of  the  field ;  but 
it  is  better  to  read  it  in  two  books  than  in  one.  You 
will  find  it  here  more  clearly  revealed;  for  he  has 
written  this  book  himself,  and  he  has  given  you  the 
key  to  understand  it,  if  you  have  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Ah,  beloved,  let  us  thank  God  for  this  Bible ;  let  us 
love  it ;  let  us  count  it  more  precious  than  much  fine 
gold. 


FEBRUARY  4. 

/F  we  had  che  blessings  without  asking  for  them, 
we  should  think  them  common  things ;  but 
prayer  makes  the  common  pebbles  of  God's  temporal 
bounties  more  precious  than  diamonds ;  and  spiritual 
prayer  cuts  the  diamond,  and  makes  it  glisten  more. 
When  thou  art  wrestling,  like  Jacob  with  the 
angel,  and  are  nearly  thrown  down,  ask  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  nerve  thine  arm.  Consider  how  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  the  chariot-wheel  of  prayer.  Prayer  may 
be  the  chariot,  the  desire  may  draw  it  forth,  but  the 
S-pirit  is  the  very  wheel  wherebv  it  moveth. 


FEBRUARY  5. 

rHERE  are  moments  when  the  eyes  glisten  with 
joy :  and  we  can  say,  "we  are  persuaded,  con- 
fident, certain."  I  do  not  wish  to  distress  anyone 
who  is  under  doubt.  Often  gloomy  doubts  will 
prevail;  there  are  seasons  when  you  fear  you  have 
not  been  called,  when  you  doubt  your  interest  in 
Christ.  Ah !  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  it  is  not  your 
hold  of  Christ  that  saves  you,  but  his  hold  of  you ! 
What  a  sweet  fact  that  it  is  not  how  you  grasp  his 
hand,  but  his  grasp  of  yours,  that  saves  you. 

The  Lord's  promise  once  given  is  never  recalled. 


FEBRUARY  6. 

rHE  gospel  is  the  sum  of  wisdom ;  an  epitome 
of  knowledge;  a  treasure-house  of  truth;  and 
a  revelation  of  mysterious  secrets.  Our  meditation 
upon  it  enlarges  the  mind;  and  as  it  opens  to  our 
soul  in  successive  flashes  of  glory,  we  stand 
astonished  at  the  profound  wisdom  manifest  in  it. 
Ah,  dear  friends !  if  ye  seek  wisdom,  ye  shall  see  it 
displayed  in  all  its  greatness.  But  turn  aside  and 
see  this  great  sight — an  incarnate  God  upon  the 
cross;  a  substitute  atoning  for  mortal  guilt;  a 
sacrifice  satisfying  the  vengeance  of  Heaven,  and 
delivering  the  rebellious  sinner.  Here  is  essentia^ 
wisdom ;  enthroned,  crowned,  glorified. 


FEBRUARY  7. 

^y^OST  thou  know,  O  saint,  how  much  the  Holy 
-^-^  Spirit  loves  thee  ?  Canst  thou  measure  the  love 
of  the  Spirit?  Dost  thou  know  how  great  is  the 
affection  of  his  soul  towards  thee?  Go  measure 
heaven  with  thy  span;  go  weigh  the  mountains  in 
the  scales;  go  take  the  ocean's  water,  and  tell  each 
drop ;  go  count  the  sand  upon  the  sea's  wide  shore ; 
and  when  thou  hast  accomplished  this,  thou  canst 
tell  how  much  he  loveth  thee.  He  has  loved  thee 
long,  he  has  loved  thee  well,  he  loved  thee  ever,  and 
he  still  shall  love  thee;  surely  he  is  the  person  to 
comfort  thee,  because  he  loves. 

FEBRUARY  8. 

OOME  persons  say  they  cannot  bear  to  be  an 
Qj  hour  in  solitude;  they  have  got  nothing  to  do, 
nothing  to  think  about.  No  Christian  will  ever  talk 
so,  surely;  for  if  I  can  but  give  him  one  word  to 
think  of — Christ — let  him  spell  that  over  forever; 
let  me  give  him  the  word  Jesus,  and  only  let  him  try 
to  think  it  over,  and  he  shall  find  that  an  hour  is 
naught,  and  that  eternity  is  not  half  enough  to  utter 
our  glorious  Saviour's  praise. 

From  a  sweet  fountain  of  thought  we  shall  have 
sweet  v/aters  of  talk.  It  is  sweet  to  live  in  the 
<^houghts  of  those  we  love. 


FEBRUARY  9. 

rHE  canon  revelation  is  closed ;  there  is  no  more 
to  be  added ;  God  does  not  give  a  fresh  revela- 
tion, but  he  rivets  the  old  one.  When  it  has  beet) 
forgotten,  and  laid  in  the  dusty  chamber  of  our 
memory,  he  brings  it  forth  and  cleans  the  picture^ 
but  does  not  paint  a  new  one.  It  is  not  by  any  new 
revelation  that  the  Spirit  comforts.  He  does  so  by 
telling  us  old  things  over  again;  he  brings  a  fresh 
lamp  to  manifest  the  treasures  hidden  in  Scripture; 
he  unlocks  the  strong  chests  in  which  the  truth  has 
long  lain,  and  he  points  to  secret  chambers  filled 
with  untold  riches ;  but  he  coins  no  more,  for  enough 
is  done. 

FEBRUARY   10. 

<T\y/^OST  of  the  grand  truths  of  God  have  to  be 
^-^^  ^  learned  by  trouble ;  they  must  be  burned  into 
us  with  the  hot  iron  of  affliction,  otherwise  we  shall 
not  truly  receive  them.  No  man  is  competent  to 
judge  in  matters  of  the  kingdom,  until  first  he  has 
been  tried ;  since  there  are  many  things  to  be  learned 
in  the  depths  which  we  can  never  know  in  the 
heights.  He  shall  best  meet  the  wants  of  God's 
people  who  has  had  those  wants  himself ;  he  shall 
best  comfort  God's  Israel  who  has  needed  comfort; 
and  he  shall  best  preach  salvation  who  has  felt  his 
own  need  of  it. 


FEBRUARY  11. 

/F  I  desired  to  put  myself  in  the  most  likely- 
place  for  the  Lord  to  meet  with  me,  I  should 
prefer  the  house  of  prayer,  for  it  is  in  preaching, 
that  the  Word  is  most  blessed ;  but  still  I  think  I 
should  equally  desire  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures; 
for  I  might  pause  over  every  verse,  and  say,  "Such 
a  verse  was  blessed  to  so  many  souls ;  then,  why  not 
to  me?  I  am  at  least  in  the  pool  of  Bethesda;  I  am 
walking  amongst  its  porches,  and  who  can  tell  but 
that  the  angel  will  stir  the  pool  of  the  Word,  whilst 
I  lie  helplessly  by  the  side  of  it,  waiting  for  the 
blessing  ?" 


FEBRUARY  12. 

/JfJ  H  1  it  is  a  happy  way  of  smoothing  sorrow  when 
^^  we  can  say,  "We  will  wait  only  upon  God." 
Oh,  ye  agitated  Christians,  do  not  dishonor  your 
religion  by  always  wearing  a  brow  of  care;  come, 
cast  your  burden  up  on  the  Lord.  I  see  ye  stagger- 
ing beneath  a  weight  which  He  would  not  feel. 
What  seems  to  you  a  crushing  burden,  would  be  to 
him  but  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance.  See !  the 
Almighty  bends  his  shoulders,  and  he  says,  ''Here 
out  thy  troubles  here." 

"Come  unto  Me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.'* 


\ 


FEBRUARY  13. 


/^HRIST  is  the  chariot  in  which  souls  are  drawn 
L/  to  heaven.  The  people  of  the  Lord  are  on  their 
way  to  heaven ;  they  are  carried  in  everlasting  arms ; 
and  those  arms  are  the  arms  of  Christ.  Christ  is 
carrying  them  up  to  his  own  house,  to  his  own 
throne;  by-and-by  his  prayer,  ''Father,  I  will  that 
they  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  me  where  I 
am,'*  shall  be  wholly  fulfilled.  The  cross  is  the 
great  covenant  transport  which  will  weather  out  the 
storms,  and  reach  its  desired  heaven.  This  is  the 
chariot,  the  pillars  wherewith  are  of  gold ;  it  is  lined 
with  the  purple  of  the  atonement  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ, 

FEBRUARY  14. 

<n^ Y^HAT !  is  Christ  thy  Brother,  and  does  he  live 
'^^  in  thine  house,  and  yet  thou  hast  not  spoken 
to  him  for  a  month?  I  fear  there  is  little  love  be- 
tween thee  and  thy  Brother,  for  thou  hast  had  no 
conversation  with  him  for  so  long.  What !  is  Christ 
the  Husband  of  his  Church,  and  has  she  had  nc 
fellowship  with  him  for  all  this  time  ? 

Prayer  is  the  outcome  of  that  sense  of  need  which 
arises  from  the  new  life;  a  man  would  not  pray  to 
God  if  he  did  not  feel  that  he  had  urgent  need  of 
blessings  which  only  the  Lord  can  bestow. 

Prayer  is  the  autograph  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon 
the  renewed  heart. 


FEBRUARY  15. 

rO  know  one's  self  to  be  foolish  is  to  stand 
upon  the  door-step  of  the  temple  of  wisdom ;  to 
understand  the  wrongness  of  any  position  is  half 
way  towards  amending  it;  to  be  quite  sure  that  our 
self-confidence  is  sin  and  folly,  and  an  offense 
towards  God,  is  a  great  help  towards  the  absolute 
casting  of  our  self-confidence  away,  and  the  bringing 
di  our  souls,  in  practice  as  well  as  in  theory,  to  rely 
wholly  upon  the  power  of  God's  Holy  Spirit. 

Nobody  will  err  about  the  way  to  God  if  he  really 
resolves  to  follow  that  way.  The  Spirit  of  God  will 
guide  those  whose  hearts  are  set  upon  coming  to 
God. 

FEBRUARY  16. 

YOU  cannot,  though  you  may  think  you  can, 
preserve  a  moderation  in  sin.  If  you  commit 
one  sin,  it  is  like  the  melting  of  the  lower  glacier 
upon  the  Alps ;  the  others  must  follow  in  time.  As 
certainly  as  you  heap  one  stone  upon  the  cairn  to- 
day, the  next  day  you  will  cast  another,  until  the 
heap,  reared  stone  by  stone,  shall  become  a  very 
Dyramid.  Set  the  coral  insect  at  work,  you  cannot 
decree  where  it  shall  stay  its  work.  It  will  not  build 
its  rock  just  as  high  as  you  please;  it  will  not  stay 
until  there  shall  be  soil  upon  it,  and  an  island  shall 
je  created  by  tmy  creatures.  Sin  cannot  be  held 
in  with  bit  and  l^ridle. 


FEBRUARY   17. 

(H^pROM  the  cross  of  Calvary,  where  the  bleed- 
J  ing  hands  of  Jesus  drop  mercy;  from  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane,  the  cry  comes,  "Look  unto 
me,  and  be  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  From 
Calvary's  summit,  where  Jesus  cries,  *'It  is  finished," 
I  hear  a  shout,  "Look,  and  be  saved."  But  there 
comes  a  cry  from  our  soul,  "Nay,  look  to  yourself !" 
Ah,  look  to  yourself,  and  you  will  be  lost.  As  long 
as  you  look  to  yourself  there  is  no  hope  for  you.  It 
is  not  a  consideration  of  what  you  are,  but  a  con- 
sideration of  what  God  is,  and  what  Christ  is,  that 
can  save  you. 


FEBRUARY  18. 

/F  you  know  these  two  things — yourself  a  sin- 
ner and  Christ  a  Saviour  it  is  looking  from 
yourself  to  Jesus.  Oh !  there  be  men  that  quite  mis- 
understand the  gospel ;  they  think  that  righteousness 
qualifies  them  to  come  to  Christ;  whereas  sin  is  the 
only  qualification  for  a  man  to  come  to  Jesus.  Good 
old  Crisp  says,  "Righteousness  keeps  me  from 
Christ :  the  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician,  but 
they  that  are  sick.  Sin  makes  me  come  to  Jesus, 
when  sin  is  felt ;  and  in  coming  to  Christ,  the  more 
sin  I  have  the  more  cause  I  have  to  hope  for  mercy." 


FEBRUARY  19. 

//"S  a  man  does  not  make  himself  spiritually 
""•^^  alive,  so  neither  can  he  keep  himself  so.  He 
can  feed  on  spiritual  food,  and  so  preserve  his  spirit- 
ual strength;  he  can  walk  in  the  commandments  of 
the  Lord,  and  so  enjoy  rest  and  peace,  but  still  the 
inner  life  is  dependent  upon  the  Spirit  as  much  for 
its  after  existence  as  for  its  first  begetting.  No  man 
himself,  even  when  converted,  hath  any  power,  ex- 
cept as  that  power  is  daily,  constantly,  and  per- 
petually infused  into  him  by  the  Spirit. 

The  motive-power  of  action  to  a  believing  man 
lies  hard  by  the  realization  that  God,  for  Christ's 
sake,  hath  forgiven  his  iniquities. 

FEBRUARY  20. 

/CULTIVATE  a  cheerful  disposition ;  endeavor, 
v-^  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,  always  to  bear  a  smile 
about  with  you;  recollect  that  this  is  as  much  a 
command  of  God  as  that  one  which  says,  "Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  with  all  thy  heart." 

Let  us  take  the  pure  gold  of  thankfulness  and  the 
jewels  of  praise  and  make  them  into  another  crown 
for  the  head  of  Jesus. 

When  it  is  the  Lord's  work  in  which  we  rejoice, 
we  need  not  be  afraid  of  being  too  glad. 

Cheerfulness  is  most  becoming  in  Christian  men. 

Contentment  is  the  crown  jewel  of  a  happy  life. 


FEBRUARY  21. 

you  may  think  of  a  doctrine  forever,  and  get 
no  good  from  it,  if  you  are  not  already 
saved;  but  think  of  the  person  of  Christ,  and  that 
will  give  you  faith.  Take  him  everywhere, 
wherever  you  go,  and  try  to  meditate  on  him  in  your 
leisure  moments,  and  then  he  will  reveal  himself  to 
you,  and  give  you  peace. 

We  should  all  know  more,  live  nearer  to  God  and 
grow  in  grace,  if  we  were  more  alone.  Meditation 
chews  the  cud  and  extracts  the  real  nutriment  from 
the  mental  food  gathered  elsewhere. 

Read  the  Bible  carefully,  and  then  meditate  and 
meditate  and  meditate. 


FEBRUARY  22. 

'jP  HERE  is  no  loss  in  being  a  Christian,  and  mak- 
"^  ing  God  the  first  object;  but  make  anything 
else  your  goal,  and  with  all  your  running,  should  you 
run  ever  so  well,  you  shall  fall  short  of  the  mark ;  or 
if  you  gain  it,  you  shall  fall  uncrowned,  unhonored  to 
the  earth.     ''My  soul,  wait  thou  only  upon  God." 

He  that  serves  God  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  to  the 
utmost  of  his  power,  finds  new  power  given  to  him 
hour  by  hour,  for  God  opens  to  him  fresh  springs. 

The  ideal  Christian  is  one  who  has  been  made 
alive  with  a  life  which  he  lives  for  God. 


FEBRUARY  23. 

'Y*  HE  book  of  nature  is  an  expression  of  the 
thoughts  of  God.  We  have  God's  terrible 
thoughts  in  the  thunder  and  Hghtning ;  God's  loving 
thoughts  in  the  sunshine  and  the  balmy  breeze; 
God's  bounteous,  prudent,  careful  thoughts  in  the 
waving  harvest  and  in  the  ripening  meadow.  We 
have  God's  brilliant  thoughts  in  the  wondrous  scenes 
which  are  beheld  from  mountain-top  and  valley ;  and 
we  have  God's  most  sweet  and  pleasant  thoughts  of 
beauty  in  the  little  flowers  that  blossom  at  our  feet. 
"God  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy." 


FEBRUARY  24. 

/T  may  be,  that  during  a  sermon  two  men  are 
listening  to  the  same  truth;  one  of  them  hears 
as  attentively  as  the  other,  and  remembers  as  much 
of  it;  the  other  is  melted  to  tears  or  moved  with 
solemn  thoughts;  but  the  one  though  equally  at- 
tentive, sees  nothing  in  the  sermon,  except,  may  be, 
certain  important  truths  well  set  forth;  as  for  the 
other,  his  heart  is  broken  within  him  and  his  soul  is 
melted.  Ask  me  how  it  is  that  the  same  truth  has  an 
effect  upon  this  one,  and  not  upon  the  other :  because 
the  mysterious  Spirit  of  the  living  God  goes  with  the 
truth  to  one  heart  and  not  to  the  other. 


FEBRUARY  25. 

,  'T^HERE  are  some  that  are  like  what  is  fabled 
•^  of  the  swan.  The  ancients  said  that  the  swan 
never  sang  in  his  lifetime,  but  always  sang  just 
when  he  died.  Now,  there  are  many  of  God's 
desponding  children,  who  seem  to  go  all  their  life 
I  under  a  cloud;  but  they  get  a  swan's  song  before 
they  die.  The  river  of  their  life  comes  running 
down,  perhaps  black  and  miry  with  troubles,  and 
when  it  begins  to  touch  the  white  foam  of  the  sea 
there  comes  a  little  glistening  in  its  waters.  So,  be- 
loved, though  we  may  have  been  very  much  dispirited 
by  reason  of  the  burden  of  the  way,  when  we  get 
to  the  end  we  shall  have  sweet  songs. 

FEBRUARY  26. 

/T  is  marvelous  that  the  men  who  most  of  all 
rail  at  faith,  are  remarkable  for  credulity.  Not 
caring  to  have  God  in  their  hearts,  forsaking  the 
living  fountain,  they  have  hewn  out  to  themselves 
cisterns  which  are  broken,  and  hold  no  water.  Oh, 
that  we  may  each  of  us  be  more  wise,  that  we  may 
not  forsake  the  good  old  path,  nor  leave  the  way 
that  God  hath  prepared  for  us.  What  wonder  we 
should  travel  amongst  thorns  and  briars,  and  rend 
our  own  flesh,  or  worse  than  that,  fall  among  dark 
mountains,  and  be  lost  among  the  chasms  thereof, 
if  we  despise  the  guidance  of  our  unerring  Father 


FEBRUARY  27. 

(^EHOLD,  him  whom  thou  canst  not  behold! 
-'-^  Lift  up  thine  eyes  to  heaven  and  see  ye  him, 
who  stretched  the  heavens  hke  a  tent  to  dwell  in, 
and  then  did  weave  into  their  tapestry,  with  golden 
needle,  stars  that  glitter  in  the  darkness.  Mark  ye 
him  who  spread  the  earth,  and  created  man  upon  it. 
He  is  all-sufficient,  eternal,  self -existent,  un- 
changeable !  Wilt  thou  not  reverence  him  ?  He  is 
good,  he  is  loving,  he  is  kind,  he  is  gracious !  See 
the  bounties  of  his  providence;  behold  the  plenitude 
of  his  grace!  Wilt  thou  not  love  Jehovah,  because 
he  is  Jehovah  ? 

FEBRUARY  28. 

/JfJH !  ye  kind  and  affectionate  hearts,  who  are  not 
^^  rich  in  wealth,  but  who  are  rich  in  love — and 
that  is  the  world's  best  wealth — put  this  golden  coin 
among  your  silver  ones,  and  it  will  sanctify  them. 
,  The  love  of  Christ  casts  not  out  the  love  of 
relatives,  but  it  sanctifies  our  loves,  and  makes  them 
sweeter  far.  Remember  the  love  of  men  and 
women  is  very  sweet.  Oh !  to  have  the  love  of 
Christ  1  for  his  love  is  "strong  as  death  and  mightier 
Ihan  the  grave." 

The  most  overpowering  thought  of  all  is  that  He 
loved  us  when  there  was  nothing  good  in  us  what- 
ever. 


MARCH  1. 

CTJ^ RAVEN  is  a  place  of  complete  victory  and 
^ -^  triumph.  This  is  the  battle-field ;  there  is 
the  triumphal  procession.  This  is  the  land  of  the 
sword  and  the  spear ;  that  is  the  land  of  the  wreath 
and  the  crown.  Oh,  what  a  thrill  of  joy  shall  shoot 
through  the  hearts  of  all  the  blessed  when  their  con- 
quests shall  be  complete  in  heaven,  when  death  itself, 
the  last  of  foes,  shall  be  slain — when  Satan  shall 
be  dragged  captive  at  the  chariot  wheels  of  Christ — 
when  he  shall  have  overthrown  sin — when  the  great 
shout  of  universal  victory  shall  rise  from  the  hearts 
of  all  the  redeemed ! 

MARCH  2. 

OALVATION  is  God's  highest  glory.  He  is 
QJ  glorified  in  every  dewdrop  that  twinkles  to 
the  morning  sun.  He  is  magnified  in  every  wood 
flower  that  blossoms  in  the  copse,  although  it  live  to 
blush  unseen  and  waste  its  sweetness  in  the  forest 
air.  But  sing,  sing,  O  Universe,  till  thou  hast  ex- 
hausted thyself,  thou  canst  not  afiford  a  song  so 
sweet  as  the  song  of  Incarnation.  There  is  more  in 
that  than  in  creation,  more  melody  in  Jesus  in  the 
manger,  than  there  is  in  worlds  on  worlds  rolling 
their  grandeur  round  the  throne  of  the  Most  High. 


MARCH  3. 

'Y  ^  HE  saints  in  Jesus,  when  their  bodies  sleep  in 
peace,  have  perpetual  fellowship  with  him — ay, 
better  fellowship  than  we  can  enjoy.  We  have  but 
the  transitory  glimpse  of  his  face;  they  gaze  upon 
it  every  moment.  We  see  him  **in  a  glass,  darkly ;" 
they  behold  him  "face  to  face."  We  sip  of  the 
brook  by  the  way;  they  plunge  into  the  very  ocean 
of  unbounded  love.  We  look  up  sometimes,  and  see 
our. Father  smile;  look  whenever  they  may,  his  face 
is  always  full  of  smiles  for  them.  We  get  some 
drops  of  comfort,  but  they  get  the  honeycomb  itself. 
They  are  full  of  peace,  full  of  joy  for  ever.  They 
"sleep  in  Jesus." 

MARCH  4. 

rHIS  city  of  refuge  had  round  it  suburbs  of  a 
very  great  extent.  Two  thousand  cubits  were 
allowed  for  grazing  land  for  the  cattle  of  the  priests, 
and  a  thousand  cubits  within  these  for  fields  and 
vineyards.  Now,  no  sooner  did  the  man  reach  the 
outside  of  the  city,  the  suburbs,  than  he  was  safe;  it 
was  not  necessary  for  him  to  get  within  the  walls, 
but  the  suburbs  themselves  were  sufficient  protection. 
Learn,  hence,  that  if  ye  do  but  touch  the  hem  of 
Christ's  garment,  ye  shall  be  made  whole;  if  ye  do 
but  lay  hold  of  him  with  "faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard 
seed,"  with  faith  which  is  scarcely  a  believing,  but  is 
truly  a  believing,  you  are  safe. 


.  MARCH  5. 

I 

(^TDEHOLD  the  unpillared  arch  of  heaven ;  see  how 
-^  it  stretches  its  gigantic  span;  and  yet  it  falleth 
not,  though  it  is  unpropped  and  unbuttressed.  "He 
hangeth  the  world  upon  nothing."  What  chain  is 
it  that  bindeth  up  the  stars,  and  keepeth  them  from 
falhng?  A  Christian  should  be  a  second  exhibition 
of  God's  universe ;  his  faith  should  be  an  unpillared 
confidence,  resting  on  the  past,  and  on  the  eternity 
to  come,  as  the  sure  groundwork  of  its  arch.  His 
faith  should  be  like  the  world,  it  should  hang  on 
nothing  but  the  promise  of  God,  needing  nothing  to 
uphold  him  but  the  right  hand  of  his  Father. 


MARCH  6. 

/JfJH !  how  did  heaven  wonder!  how  did  the  stars 
^^  stand  still  with  astonishment !  and  how  did  the 
angels  stay  their  songs  a  moment,  when  for  the 
first  time,  God  showed  how  he  might  be  just,  and 
yet  be  gracious  !  Oh  !  sinner,  my  heart  hath  devised 
it ;  my  Son,  the  pure  and  perfect,  shall  stand  in  thy 
stead,  and  be  accounted  guilty,  and  thou,  the  guilty, 
shalt  stand  in  my  Son's  stead  and  be  accounted 
righteous !"  It  would  make  us  leap  upon  our  feet 
in  astonishment  if  we  did  but  understand  this 
thoroughly — the  wonderful  mystery  of  the  transposi 
tion  of  Christ  and  the  sinner. 


MARCH  7. 

/F  little  things  have  done  great  things,  let  us 
try  to  do  great  things  also.  You  know  not, 
ye  atoms,  but  that  your  destiny  is  sublime.  Try  and 
make  it  so  by  faith;  and  the  least  of  you  may  be 
mighty  through  the  strength  of  God.  Oh,  for  grace 
to  trust  God,  and  there  is  no  telling  what  ye  can  do. 
Spirit  of  the  living  God !  we  want  thee.  Thou  art 
the  life,  the  soul,  thou  art  the  source  of  thy  people's 
success ;  without  thee  they  can  do  nothing,  with  thee 
they  can  do  everything.  "It  is  not  by  armies,  nor  by 
power  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord." 

MARCH  8. 

/JTJH !  who  shall  measure  the  heights  of  the 
^■^  Saviour's  all-sufficiency?  First,  tell  how  high 
is  sin,  and,  then,  remember  that  as  Noah's  flood  pre- 
V-ailed  over  the  tops  of  earth's  mountains,  so  the 
flood  of  Christ's  redemption  prevails  over  the  tops 
of  the  mountains  of  our  sins.  In  heaven's  courts 
there  are  to-day  men  that  once  were  sinners,  but 
they  have  been  washed — they  have  been  sanctified. 
Ask  them  whence  the  brightness  of  their  robes  hath 
come,  and  where  their  purity  hath  been  achieved, 
and  they,  with  united  breath,  tell  you  that  they  have 
washed  their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb. 


MARCH  9. 

/T  will  not  save  me  to  know  that  Christ  is  a 
Saviour ;  but  it  will  save  me  to  trust  him  to  be 
my  Saviour.  I  shall  not  be  delivered  from  the  wrath 
to  come,  by  bdieving  that  his  atonement  is  sufficient ; 
but  I  shall  be  saved  by  making  that  atonement  my 
trust,  my  refuge,  and  my  all.  The  pith,  the  essence 
of  faith  lies  in  this — a  casting  oneself  on  the  promise. 
It  is  not  the  life  buoy  on  board  ship  that  saves  the 
man  when  he  is  drowning,  nor  is  it  his  belief  that  it 
is  an  excellent  and  successful  invention.  No!  he 
must  have  it  around  his  loins,  or  his  hand  upon  it, 
or  else  he  will  sink. 

MARCH  10. 

you  see  yonder  ship.  After  a  long  voyage, 
it  has  neared  the  haven,  but  is  much  in- 
jured; the  sails  are  rent  to  ribbons.  That  is  like 
the  righteous  being  "scarcely  saved."  But  do  you 
see  that  other  ship?  It  has  made  a  prosperous 
voyage;  and  now,  laden  to  the  water's  edge,  with 
the  sails  all  up  and  with  the  white  canvas  filled  with 
the  wind,  it  rides  into  the  harbor  joyously  and  nobly. 
That  is  an  "abundant  entrance;"  and  if  you  and  1 
are  helped  by  God's  Spirit  to  add  to  our  faith,  virtue, 
and  so  on,  we  shall  have  at  the  last  an  "abundant 
entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ'* 


MARCH  11. 

•TT^EAR  friends,  the  last  song  in  this  world,  the 
-^-^  song  of  triumph,  shall  be  full  of  God,  and  of  no 
one  else.  Here  you  praise  the  instrument;  to-day 
you  look  on  this  man  and  on  that,  and  you  say, 
"Thank  God  for  this  minister,  and  for  this  man!" 
But  in  that  day,  forgotten  shall  their  names  be  for 
a  season,  even  as  the  stars  refuse  to  shine  when  the 
sun  himself  appeareth.  The  song  shall  be  unto 
Jehovah,  and  Jehovah  only;  **Unto  him  that  loved 
us,  and  hath  washed  u?  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood,  unto  him  be  glory  forever  and  ever.    Amen.'* 


MARCH  12. 

^Tr/7HEN  no  eye  seeth  you  except  the  eye  of  God, 
^'^^  when  darkness  covers  you,  when  you  are  shut 
up  from  the  observation  of  mortals,  even  then  be 
ye  like  Jesus  Christ.  Remember  his  ardent  piety, 
his  secret  devotion — how,  after  laboriously  preach- 
ing the  whole  day,  he  stole  away  in  the  midnight 
shades  to  cry  for  help  from  his  God.  Recollect 
how  his  entire  life  was  constantly  sustained  by  fresh 
inspirations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  derived  by  prayer. 
Take  care  of  your  secret  life :  let  it  be  such  that  you 
will  not  be  ashamed  to  read  at  the  last  great  day. 


MARCH  13. 

rHE  death  of  the  saints  is  precious  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord.  On  their  account  we  have  cause 
rather  to  rejoice  than  to  weep.  Yes,  we  have  the 
fond  and  firm  persuasion  that  already  their  redeemed 
spirits  liave  flown  up  to  the  eternal  throne.  We  do 
believe  that  they  are  at  this  moment  joining  in  the 
hallelujahs  of  paradise,  feasting  on  the  fruits  of  the 
tree  of  life,  and  walking  by  the  side  of  the  "river, 
the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the  heavenly  city 
of  our  God."  We  know  they  are  supremely  blest; 
we  think  of  them  as  glorified  spirits  above,  who  are 
present  with  the  Lord  Jesus. 


MARCH  14. 

"XT'  E  have  lost  your  friends  some  of  you,  come  to 
^  the  grave  of  your  best  friend — your  brother, 
yea,  one  who  "sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  Come 
thou  to  the  grave  of  thy  dearest  relative,  O  Chris- 
tian, for  Jesus  is  thy  husband.  ''Thy  maker  is  thy 
husband,  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  his  name."  Doth  not 
afifection  draw  you?  Do  not  the  sweet  lips  of  love 
woo  you  ?  Is  not  the  place  sanctified  where  one  so 
well  beloved  slept,  although  but  for  a  moment) 
Surely  ye  need  no  eloquence.  I  have  but  the  power, 
in  simple,  but  earnest  accents,  to  repeat  the  words, 
"Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay." 


MARCH  15. 

/QH !"  cries  one,  "I  wish  I  could  escape  the  wrath 
^  of  the  law!  Oh  that  I  knew  that  Christ  did 
keep  the  law  for  me !"  Stop,  then,  and  I  will  tell 
you.  Do  you  feel  to-day  that  you  are  guilty,  lost, 
and  ruined?  Do  you,  with  tears  in  your  eyes,  con- 
fess that  none  but  Jesus  can  do  you  good  ?  Are  you 
willing  to  give  up  all  trusts,  and  cast  yourself  alone 
on  him  who  died  upon  the  cross?  Can  you  look  to 
Calvary,  and  see  the  bleeding  sufferer,  all  crimson 
with  streams  of  gore?  Then  he  kept  the  law  for 
you,  and  the  law  cannot  condemn  whom  Christ  has 
absolved. 


MARCH  16. 

rHE  Bible  is  a  vein  of  pure  gold,  unalloyed  by 
quartz,  or  any  earthly  substance.  This  is  a 
star  without  a  speck ;  a  sun  without  a  blot ;  a  light 
without  darkness ;  a  moon  without  its  paleness ;  a 
glory  without  a  dimness.  O  Bible!  it  cannot  be 
said  of  any  other  book,  that  it  is  perfect  and  pure; 
but  of  thee  we  can  declare  all  wisdom  is  gathered  up 
in  thee,  without  a  particle  of  folly.  This  is  the 
judge  that  ends  the  strife,  where  wit  and  reason  fail. 
This  is  the  book  untainted  by  any  error ;  but  is  pure, 
unalloyed,  perfect  truth. 


MARCH  17. 

CT)OOR  sinner,  do  take  heart,  remember  God 
•*■  knows,  as  we  know  not,  where  thou  art.  If 
thou  art  in  the  deepest  pit  in  the  forest,  his  almighty 
eye  can  see  to  the  bottom.  Ay,  and  in  one  of  the 
favored  moments  of  the  day  of  salvation — ^that  time 
accepted — he  will  send  home  a  promise  so  sweetly 
that  all  thy  fetters  shall  break  off  in  an  instant — 
thy  night  shall  be  scattered — thy  dawn  begin;  and 
he  will  give  thee  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning  and  the 
garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness.  Be- 
lieve  now,  and  thou  shalt  be  comforted  now ;  for  the- 
time  of  faith  is  the  time  of  comfort. 

MARCH  18. 

^\/*  O  inferior  hand  hath  sketched  even  so 
^  \^^  much  as  the  most  minute  parts  of  provi- 
dence. It  was  all  marked  out,  designed,  and  planned 
by  the  mind  of  the  all-wise,  all-knowing  God. 
Hence,  not  even  Christ's  death  was  exempt  from  it. 
He  that  wings  an  angel  and  guides  a  sparrow,  he 
that  counts  the  hairs  of  our  head,  was  not  likely, 
when  he  took  notice  of  such  little  things,  to  omit  the 
greatest  wonder  of  earth's  miracles,  the  death  of 
Christ.  No;  the  blood-stained  page  of  that  book, 
the  page  which  makes  both  past  and  future  glorious 
with  golden  words — that  blood-stained  page,  I  say, 
was  as  much  written  of  Jehovah  as  any  other. 


MARCH  19. 

<^y^AN  cannot  please  God  without  bringing  him- 
■^-^^^  self  a  great  amount  of  happiness;  for  if 
any  man  pleases  God,  it  is  because  God  accepts 
him  as  his  son,  gives  him  the  blessings  of  adoption, 
pours  upon  him  the  bounties  of  his  grace,  makes 
him  a  blessed  man  in  this  hfe,  and  insures  him  a 
crown  of  everlasting  life,  which  he  shall  wear,  and 
which  shall  shine  with  unfading  luster,  when  the 
wreaths  of  earth's  glory  have  all  been  melted  away ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  if  a  man  does  not  please 
God,  he  inevitably  brings  upon  himself  sorrow  and 
suffering  in  this  life. 

MARCH  20. 

/^HRIST  is  the  same;  Christ's  person  never 
v_y  changes.  Should  he  come  on  earth  to  visit 
us  again,  as  sure  he  will,  we  should  find  him 
the  same  Jesus ;  as  loving,  as  approachable,  as  gen- 
erous, as  kind,  and  though  arrayed  in  nobler 
garments  than  he  wore  when  first  he  visited  earth, 
though  no  more  the  Man  of  Sorrows  and  grief's 
acquaintance,  yet  he  would  be  the  same  person,  un- 
changed by  all  his  glories,  his  triumphs,  and  his 
joys.  We  bless  Christ  that  amid  his  heavenly  splen- 
dors his  person  is  just  the  same,  and  his  nature  un- 
affected. "J^sus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and 
to-day,  and  forever." 


MARCH  21. 

CT^VT  two  opinions  in  the  matter  of  soul-religion 
-^  you  cannot  hold.  If  God  be  God,  serve  him, 
and  do  it  thoroughly ;  but  if  this  world  be  God,  serve 
it,  and  make  no  profession  of  religion.  If  you  think 
the  things  of  the  world  the  best,  serve  them.  But 
remember,  if  the  Lord  be  your  God,  you  cannot  have 
Baal  too ;  you  must  have  one  thing  or  else  the  other. 
"No  man  can  serve  two  masters."  If  God  be  served, 
he  will  be  a  master;  and  if  the  devil  be  served,  he 
will  not  be  long  before  he  will  be  a  master ;  and  "ye 
cannot  serve  two  masters.''  Oh !  be  wise,  and  think 
not  that  the  two  can  be  mingled  together. 

MARCH  22. 

CT\TD  you  ever  think  of  the  love  which  Christ 
•^-^  will  manifest  to  you,  when  he  shall  present 
you  without  spot,  or  blemish,  or  any  such  thing,  be- 
fore his  Father's  throne?  Well,  pause  and  re- 
member, that  he  loves  you  at  this  hour  as  much  as 
he  will  love  you  then;  for  he  will  be  the  same  for- 
ever as  he  is  to-day,  and  he  is  the  same  to-day  as 
he  will  be  forever.  "As  the  Father  hath  loved  me, 
even  so  have  I  loved  you;"  and  a  higher  degree  of 
love  we  cannot  imagine.  The  Father  loves  his  Son 
infinitely,  and  even  so  to-day,  believer,  doth  th^ 
Son  of  God  love  thee. 


MARCH  23. 

/Q  CHILDREN  of  God !  death  hath  lost  its  sting. 
^^  It  is  sweet  to  die;  to  lie  upon  the  breast  of 
Christ,  and  have  one's  soul  kissed  out  of  one's  body 
by  the  lips  of  divine  affection.  And  you  that  have 
lost  friends,  or  that  may  be  bereaved,  sorrow  not  as 
those  who  are  without  hope.  What  a  sweet  thought 
the  death  of  Christ  brings  us  concerning  those  who 
are  departed  !  They  are  gone,  my  brethren ;  but  do 
you  know  how  far  they  have  gone?  The  distance 
between  the  glorified  spirits  in  heaven  and  the 
militant  saints  on  earth  seems  great;  but  it  is  not 
so.    We  are  not  far  from  home. 

MARCH  24. 

rHERE  is  one  great  event,  which  every  day 
attracts  more  admiration  than  do  the  sun,  and 
moon,  and  stars.  That  event  is  the  death  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To  it  the  eyes  of  all  the  saints 
who  lived  before  the  Christian  era  were  always 
directed;  and  backwards,  through  the  thousand 
years  of  history,  the  eyes  of  all  modern  saints  are 
looking.  Upon  Christ,  the  angels  in  heaven  perpetu- 
ally gaze.  "Which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look 
into,"  said  the  apostle.  Upon  Christ,  the  eyes  of 
the  redeemed  are  perpetuallv  fixed ;  and  thousands 
of  pilgrims,  through  this  world  of  tears,  have  no 
higher  obiect  for  their  faith. 


I  MARCH  2>. 

you  have  sometimes  seen  how  the  ship  cuts 
through  the  billows,  leaving  a  white  furrow 
behind  her,  and  causing  the  sea  to  boil  around  her. 
Such  is  life,  says  Job,  "like  the  swift  ships."  I  can- 
not stop  its  motion ;  I  may  direct  it  with  the  rudder  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit;  but  nevertheless,  like  a  swift 
ship,  my  life  must  speed  on  its  way  until  it  reaches 
its  haven.  Where  is  that  haven  to  be?  Shall  it  be 
found'in  the  land  of  bitterness  and  barrenness,  that 
dreary  region  of  the  lost?  Or  shall  it  be  that  sweet 
haven  of  eternal  peace? 

MARCH  26. 

'T^HE  holiest  men,  the  most  free  from  impurity, 
have  always  felt  it  most.  He  whose  garments 
are  the  whitest,  will  best  perceive  the  spots  upon 
them.  He  whose  crown  shineth  the  brightest,  will 
know  when  he  hath  lost  a  jewel.  He  who  giveth 
the  most  light  to  the  world,  will  always  be  able  to 
discover  his  own  darkness.  The  angels  of  heaven 
veil  their  faces;  and  the  angels  of  God  on  earth, 
his  chosen  people,  must  always  veil  their  faces  with 
humility,  when  they  think  of  what  they  were. 

As  you  grow  downward  in  humility  seek  also  to 
grow  upward,  having  nearer  approaches  to  God  in 
prayer  and  more  intimate  fellowship  with  Jesus. 


MARCH  27. 

/QH!  there  is  nothing  that  can  so  advantage  you, 
^^  nothing  can  so  prosper  you,  so  assist  you,  so 
make  you  walk  towards  heaven  rapidly,  so  keep 
your  head  upwards  towards  the  sky,  and  your  eyes 
radiant  with  glory,  like  the  imitation  of  Jesus  Christ. 
It  is  when,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  you  are 
enabled  to  walk  with  Jesus  in  his  very  footsteps,  and 
tread  in  his  ways,  you  are  most  happy  and  you  are 
most  known  to  be  the  sons  of  God.  For  your  sake, 
my  brethren,  I  say,  be  like  Christ. 

To  draw  him  nearer  to  me,  and  myself  nearer  to 
him,  is  the  innermost  longing  of  my  soul. 


MARCH  28. 

(ST/^  E  that  loveth  much  must  weep  much ;  much 
^-^  love  and  much  sorrow  must  go  together  in 
this  vale  of  tears.  Oftimes  tears  are  the  index  ot 
strength.  There  are  periods  when  they  are  the 
noblest  thing  in  the  world.  The  tears  of  penitents 
are  precious;  a  cup  of  them  were  worth  a  king's 
ransom.  It  is  no  sign  of  weakness  when  a  man 
weeps  for  sin;  it  shows  that  he  hath  strength  of 
mind ;  nay,  more,  that  he  hath  strength  imparted  by 
God,  which  enables  him  to  forswear  his  lusts  and 
overcome  his  passions,  and  to  turn  unto  God  with 
full  purpose  of  heart. 


\ 


MARCH  29. 

/^  MY'  heart,  I  bid  thee  now  put  tny  treasure  wnere 
^  thou  canst  never  lose  it.  Put  it  in  Christ ;  put 
all  thine  affections  in  his  person,  all  thy  hope  in  his 
glory,  all  thy  trust  in  his  efficatious  blood,  all  thy 
joy  in  his  presence,  and  then  thou  wilt  have  pul 
thyself  and  put  thine  all  where  thou  canst  never 
lose  anything,  because  it  is  secure.  Go,  tell  thy 
secrets  to  that  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a 
brother.  My  heart,  I  charge  thee,  trust  all  thy  con- 
cerns with  him  who  never  can  be  taken  from  ihee, 
who  will  never  let  thee  leave  him,  even  "J^sus 
Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  forever.'* 

MARCH  30. 

/F  any  of  your  desire  to  be  saved  by  worKS^ 
remember  one  sin  will  spoil  your  righteous- 
ness; one  dust  of  this  earth's  dross  will  spoil  the 
beauty  of  that  perfect  righteousness  which  God  re- 
quires at  your  hands.  If  ye  would  be  saved  by 
works,  ye  must  be  as  holy  as  the  angels,  ye  must  be 
as  pure  and  as  immaculate  as  Jesus ;  for  the  law  re- 
quires perfection. 

The  pov/er  to  receive  is  scarcely  a  power,  and 
yet  it  is  the  only  power  needed  for  salvation.  Come 
along  and  take  what  Christ  doth  freely  give  you. 

Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  believe  in 
tensely. 


MARCH  31. 

'X'HOSE  who  have  not  to  work  hard,  think  the> 
JL  will  love  heaven  as  a  place  of  service.  That 
js  very  true.  But  to  the  working  man,  to  the  man 
who  toils  with  his  brain  or  with  his  hands,  it  must 
ever  be  a  sweet  thought  that  there  is  a  land  where 
we  shall  rest.  Oh!  weary  sons  and  daughters  of 
Adam,  ye  shall  be  still,  ye  shall  be  quiet,  ye  shall 
rest  yourselves,  for  all  are  rich  in  heaven,  all  are 
happy  there,  all  are  peaceful.  Toil,  trouble,  travail, 
and  labor,  are  words  that  cannot  be  spelled  in  heaven ; 
thev  have  no  such  things  there,  for  they  always  rest 


APRIL  1. 

/C^OME,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay."  Surely 
V-^  ye  need  no  argument  to  move  your  feet  in  thq 
direction  of  the  holy  sepulcher;  but  still  we  will  usf 
the  utmost  power  to  draw  your  spirit  thither.  Asli 
me  the  greatest  man  who  ever  lived — I  tell  you  the 
man  Christ  Jesus  was  "anointed  with  the  oil  of  glad- 
ness above  his  fellows/'  If  ye  seek  a  chamber 
honored  as  the  resting-place  of  Jesus,  turn  in  hither ; 
if  ye  would  worship  at  the  grave  of  holiness,  comr 
ve  here;  if  ye  would  see  the  hallowed  spot,  com^ 
with  me,  Christian,  to  that  quiet  garden,  hard  b^f 
fhe  walls  of  Jerusalem. 

APRIL  2. 

/C^OMING  to  Christ  is  just  the  one  essential  thing 
v_y  for  a  sinner's  salvation.  He  that  cometh  not 
to  Christ  is  yet  in  "the  gall  of  bitterness  and  in  the 
bowds  of  iniquity."  Coming  to  Christ  is  the  very 
hr.^t  effect  of  regeneration.  No  sooner  is  the  soul 
quickened  than  it  at  once  discovers  its  lost  estate, 
locks  out  for  a  refuge,  and  believing  Christ  to  be 
the  only  one,  flies  to  him  and  reposes  in  him.  Where 
there  is  not  this  coming  to  Christ,  it  is  certain  that 
there  is  as  yet  no  quickening;  where  there  is  no 
quickening,  the  soul  is  dead  in  trespass  and  sins, 
and  being  dead  it  cannot  enter  into  the  kmgdom  of 
heaven 


APRIL  3. 

O  INNER,  unconverted  sinner,  thou  hast  often 
(iy  tried  to  save  thyself  ;  but  thou  hast  often  failed. 
Thou  hast,  by  thine  own  power  and  might,  sought 
to  curb  thy  evil  passions  and  sins ;  with  thee,  I 
lament  that  all  thine  efforts  have  been  unsuccessful. 
And  I  warn  thee,  it  will  be  unsuccessful,  for  thou 
never  canst  by  thine  own  might  save  thyself ;  with 
all  the  strength  thou  hast,  thou  never  canst  regen- 
erate thine  own  soul ;  thou  canst  never  cause  thyself 
to  be  born  again.  And  though  the  new  birth  is 
absolutely  necessary,  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to 
thee,  unless  God  the  Spirit  shall  do  it. 

APRIL  4. 

CT)RAYER  is  the  certain  forerunner  of  salvation. 
"^  Sinner,  thou  canst  not  pray  and  perish ;  prayer 
■and  perishing  are  two  things  that  never  go  together. 
T  ask  you  not  what  your  prayer  is ;  it  may  be  a  groan, 
it  may  be  a  tear,  but  if  it  be  a  prayer  from  the  in- 
most heart  thou  shalt  be  saved;  yet  if  from  thine 
heart  thou  hast  learned  to  pray — 

"Prayer  is  the  breath  of  God  in  man, 
Returning  whence  it  came" — 

And  thou  canst  not  perish  with  God's  breath  in  thee. 
"Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  saved !" 


[ 


APRIL  5. 


/O  ET  not  your  exertions  end  in  tears,  mere  weep- 
'^^^  ing  will  do  nothing  without  action.  Get  on 
your  feet;  ye  that  have  voices  and  might,  go  forth 
and  preach  the  gospel,  preach  it  in  every  street  and 
lane  of  this  huge  city ;  ye  that  have  wealth,  go  forth 
and  spend  it  for  the  poor,  and  sick,  and  needy,  and 
dying,  the  uneducated,  the  unenlightened;  ye  that 
have  time,  go  forth  and  spend  it  in  deeds  of  good- 
ness; ye  that  have  power  in  prayer  go  forth  and 
pray; — every  one  to  his  post,  every  one  of  you  to 
your  gun  in  this  day  of  battle;  now  for  God  and 
for  his  truth;  for  God  and  for  the  right;  let  every 
one  of  us  who  knows  the  Lord  seek  to  fight  under 
his  banner! 

APRIL  6. 

(i7)Y  the  sweet  drawing  of  the  Spirit,  the  sinner 
-^  finds  **a  peace  with  God  which  passeth  all  un- 
derstanding, which  keeps  his  heart  and  mind  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Now,  you  will  plainly 
perceive  that  all  this  may  be  done  without  any  com- 
pulsion. Man  is  as  much  drawn  willingly,  as  if  he 
were  not  drawn  at  all;  and  he  comes  to  Christ  with 
full  consent,  with  as  full  a  consent  as  if  no  secret 
influence  had  ever  been  exercised  in  his  heart.  But 
that  influence  must  be  exercised,  or  else  there  never 
has  been  and  there  never  will  be,  any  man  who  either 
can  or  will  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 


APRIL  7. 

/WILL  help  thee.  That  is  very  little  for  me 
to  do,  to  help  thee.  Consider  what  I  have  done 
already.  What !  not  help  thee  ?  Why,  I  bought  thee 
with  my  blood.  What !  not  help  thee  ?  I  have  died 
for  thee;  and  if  I  have  done  the  greater,  will  I  not 
do  the  less  ?  Help  thee,  my  beloved !  It  is  the  least 
thing  I  will  ever  do  for  thee.  I  have  done  more, 
and  I  will  do  more.  Before  the  day-star  first  began 
to  shine  I  chose  thee.  "I  will  help  thee."  I  made 
the  covenant  for  thee,  and  exercised  all  the  wisdom 
of  my  eternal  mind  in  the  plan  of  salvation.  "I  will 
help  thee." 

APRIL  8. 

/C^HRIST  longed  for  the  cross,  because  he  looked 
^^  for  it  as  the  goal  of  all  his  exertions.  He 
could  never  say  *'It  is  finished"  on  his  throne :  but 
on  his  cross  he  did  cry  it.  He  preferred  the  suffer- 
ings of  Calvary  to  the  honors  of  the  multitude  who 
crowded  round  about  him;  for  bless  and  heal  them 
as  he  might,  still  was  his  work  undone.  "I  long  for 
my  sufferings,  because  they  shall  be  the  completion 
of  my  great  work  of  grace."  It  is  the  end  that 
bringeth  the  honor;  it  is  the  victory  that  crowneth 
the  warrior  rather  than  the  battle.  And  so  Christ 
longed  for  this,  his  death,  that  he  might  see  the 
completion  of  his  labor. 


APRIL  9. 

/^AN  ye  think  what  must  have  been  the  greatness 
L/  of  the  atonement  which  was  the  substitution 
for  all  this  agony  which  God  would  have  cast  upon 
us,  if  he  had  not  poured  it  upon  Christ? 

And  can  you  grasp  the  thought  of  the  greatness 
of  your  Saviour's  mediation  when  he  paid  your  debt, 
and  paid  it  all  at  once ;  so  that  there  now  remaineth 
not  one  farthing  of  debt  owing  from  Christ's  people 
to  their  God,  except  a  debt  of  love.  Christ  did  pay 
it  all,  so  that  man  is  set  free  from  all  punishment, 
through  what  Jesus  hath  done.  Think  ye,  then,  how 
great  his  atonement  if  he  hath  done  all  this. 

APRIL  10. 

rHE  old  saying  is,  "Go  from  nature  up  to 
nature's  God;"  but  it  is  hard  working  up  hill. 
The  best  thing  is  to  go  from  nature's  God  down  to 
nature ;  and,  if  you  once  get  to  nature's  God,  and  be- 
lieve Him,  and  love  Him,  it  is  surprising  how  easy  it 
is  to  hear  music  in  the  waves,  and  songs  in  the  wild 
whisperings  of  the  winds ;  to  see  God  everywhere, 
in  the  stones,  in  the  rocks,  in  the  rippling  brooks, 
and  hear  him  everywhere  in  the  lowing  of  cattle,  in 
the  rolling  of  thunders,  and  in  the  fury  of  tempests. 
Get  Christ  first,  put  him  in  the  right  place,  and  you 
will  find  him  to  be  the  wisdom  of  God  in  your  own 
experience. 


APRIL  11. 

<nr/7HEREVER  the  church  is,  there  is  God.  Goc 
^^  is  pleased,  in  his  mercy  and  condescension! 
to  stoop  from  the  highest  heavens  to  dwell  in  thi^ 
lower  heaven — the  heaven  of  his  church.  It  is  here, 
among  the  household  of  faith,  he  deigns — let  me  sa}^ 
it  with  sacred  reverence — to  unbend  himself,  and 
hold  familiar  intercourse  with  those  round  about 
him  whom  he  hath  adopted  into  his  family.  He  may 
be  a  consuming  fire  abroad,  but  when  he  comes  into 
his  own  house  he  is  all  mercy,  mildness,  and  love. 
Abroad  he  does  great  works  of  power ;  but  at  home 
in  his  own  house  he  does  great  works  of  grace. 

APRIL  12. 

cny^ANY  men  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  God, 
^^^  but  they  do  not  love  that  belief.  But  to  the 
Christian  the  thought  that  there  is  a  God  is  the  sun- 
shine of  his  existence.  His  intellect  bows  before  the 
Most  High ;  like  the  angel  who  prostrates  himself  be- 
cause he  loves  to  adore  his  Maker.  His  intellect  is 
as  fond  of  God  as  his  imagination.  "Oh !"  he  saith, 
"my  God,  I  bless  thee  that  thou  art;  for  thou  art 
my  highest  treasure,  my  richest  and  my  rarest  de- 
light. I  love  thee  with  all  my  intellect;  I  have 
neither  thought  nor  judgment,  nor  conviction,  nor 
reason,  which  I  do  not  lay  at  thy  feet,  and  consecrate 
to  thine  honor." 


APRIL  13. 

i  (^ACH  of  God's  saints  is  sent  into  the  world  to 
^  prove  some  part  of  the  divine  character.  In 
heaven  we  shall  read  the  great  book  of  the  experience 
of  all  the  saints,  and  gather  from  that  book  the  whole 
of  the  divine  character  as  having  been  proved  and 
lillustrated.  Each  Christian  man  is  a  manifestation 
and  display  of  some  position  or  other  of  God ;  a 
different  part  may  belong  to  each  of  us,  but  when  the 
whole  shall  be  combined,  when  all  the  rays  of 
evidence  shall  be  brought,  as  it  were,  into  one  great 
sun,  and  shine  forth  with  meridian  splendor,  we 
shall  see  in  Christian  experience  a  beautiful  revela- 
tion of  our  God. 

APRIL  14. 

/F  I  once  wandered  on  yon  mountain  top,  and 
Jesus  climbed  up  and  caught  me,  and  put  me 
on  his  shoulders,  and  carried  me  home,  I  cannot  and 
dare  not  doubt  that  He  is  my  Shepherd.  If  I  had 
belonged  to  some  other  sheep  owner,  he  would  not 
have  sought  me.  And  from  the  fact  Aat  He  did 
seek,  I  learn  that  He  must  be  my  Shepherd.  Could 
I  trace  my  deliverance  to  the  hand  of  a  creature,  I 
should  think  that  some  creature  might  be  my  shep- 
herd; but  since  he  who  has  been  reclaimed  of  God 
must  confess  that  God  alone  has  done  it,  such  a  one 
will  feel  persuaded  that  the  Lord  must  be  his 
Shepherd,  because  He  brought  him,  He  delivereti 
him. 


APRIL  15. 

//"H !  if  we  did  but  love  Christ  better,  my 
^^-'-  brothers  and  sisters,  if  we  lived  nearer  to  the 
cross,  if  we  knew  more  of  the  value  of  his  blood,  if 
we  wept  like  him  over  Jerusalem,  if  we  felt  more 
what  it  was  for  souls  to  perish,  and  what  it  was  for 
men  to  be  saved, — if  we  did  but  rejoice  with  Christ  in 
the  prospect  of  his  seeing  the  travail  of  his  soul, 
and  being  abundantly  satisfied, — if  we  did  but  de- 
light more  in  the  divine  decree,  that  the  kingdoms 
of  this  world  shull  be  given  to  Christ,  I  am  sure  we 
should  all  of  us  find  more  ways  and  more  means  for 
the  sending  forth  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

APRIL  16. 

^nf-P  EAVEN     singeth     evermore.       Before    the 
^^  throne  of  God  angels  and  redeemed  saints 

extol  his  name.  And  this  world  is  singing  too; 
sometimes  with  the  loud  noise  of  the  rolling  thunder, 
of  the  boiling  sea,  of  the  dashing  cataract,  and  of 
the  lowing  cattle;  and  often  with  that  still,  solemn 
harmony  which  floweth  from  the  vast  creation,  when 
in  its  silence  it  praiseth  God. 

In  heaven  they  sing,  'The  Lord  be  exalted;  let 
his  name  be  magnified  forever."  And  the  earth 
singeth  the  same :  "Great  art  thou  in  thy  works, 
O  Lord !  and  unto  thee  be  glory." 


APRIL  17. 

/OOVE  to  Christ  smooths  the  path  of  duty,  and 
°^^  wings  the  feet  to  travel  it :  it  makes  the  life 
[of  sincere  devotion. 

Love  has  a  clear  eye ;  but  it  can  see  only  one  thing, 
— it  is  blind  to  every  interest  but  that  of  its  Lord; 
I  it  seeth  things  in  the  light  of  his  glory,  and  v^^eigheth 
actions  in  the  scales  of  his  honor;  it  counts  royalty 
but  drudgery  if  it  cannot  reign  for  Christ,  but  it 
delights  in  servitude  as  much  as  in  honor,  if  it  can 
thereby  advance  the  Master's  kingdom;  its  end 
sweetens  all  its  means;  its  object  lightens  its  toil, 
and  removes  its  weariness. 

APRIL  18. 

/N  nature,  after  evening  time  there  cometh  night. 
The  sun  hath  had  its  hour  of  journeying;  the 
fiery  steeds  are  weary;  they  must  rest.  Lo,  they 
descend  the  azure  steeps  and  plunge  their  burning 
fetlocks  in  the  western  sea,  while  night  in  her  ebon 
chariot  follows  at  their  heels.  God,  however,  over- 
steps the  rule  of  nature.  He  is  pleased  to  send  to 
his  people  times  when  the  eye  of  reason  expects  to 
see  no  more  day,  but  fears  that  the  glorious  land- 
scape of  God's  mercies  will  be  shrouded  in  the  dark- 
ness of  his  forgetfulness.  But  instead  thereof,  God 
overleapeth  nature,  and  declares  that  at  evening 
time,  instead  of  darkness,  there  shall  be  light. 


APRIL  19.  . 

(Hr/^HEN  Jesus  Christ  came  to  build  his  temple,  hei 
^^  found  no  mountain  on  which  to  build  it ;  he 
had  no  mountain  in  our  nature,  he  had  to  find  a 
mountain  in  his  own,  and  the  mountain  upon  which 
he  has  built  his  Church  is  the  mountain  of  his  own 
unchangeable  affection,  his  own  strong  love,  his  own 
omnipotent  grace  and  infallible  truthfulness.  It  is 
this  that  constitutes  the  mountain  upon  which  the 
Church  is  built,  and  on  this  the  foundation  hath  been 
digged,  and  the  great  stones  laid  in  the  trenches  with 
oaths  and  promises  and  blood  to  make  them  stand 
secure,  even  though  earth  should  rock  and  all  crea- 
tion suffer  decay. 

APRIL  20. 

rHERE  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given 
among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved,  but 
Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified.  There  were  not  two 
arks,  but  one  ark :  so  there  are  not  two  Saviours, 
but  one  Saviour.  There  was  no  other  means  of 
salvation  except  the  ark:  so  there  is  no  plan  of 
deliverance  except  by  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour  of 
sinners.  In  vain  you  climb  the  lofty  top  of  Sinai.  In 
vain  you  climb  to  the  highest  pinnacles  of  your  self- 
conceit  and  your  worldly  merit :  ye  shall  be  drowned 
— for  "other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that 
which  is  laid — Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified." 


APRIL  21. 

/QH  new-born  soul,  trembling  with  anxiety,  if 
^^  thou  hast  not  yet  beheld  the  fair  face  of  thy 
beloved,  if  thou  canst  not  as  yet  delight  in  the 
majesty  of  his  offices,  and  the  wonders  of  his  person, 
let  thy  soul  be  fully  alive  to  the  richness  of  his  grace, 
and  the  preciousness  of  his  blood.  These  thou  hast 
in  thy  possession,  the  pledges  of  thine  interest  in 
him;  love  him  then  for  these,  and  in  due  time  he 
will  discover  unto  thee  fresh  wonders  and  glories, 
so  that  thou  shalt  be  able  to  exclaim,  "O  staff  of  my 
life  and  strength  of  my  heart,  I  will  sit  and  sing 
under  thy  shadow,  yea,  I  will  sing  a  song  of  loves 
touchinfif  MY  Well-beloved." 


APRIL  22. 

/T  is  the  highest  stage  of  manhood  to  have  no 
wish,  no  thought,  no  desire,  but  Christ — to  feel 
that  to  die  were  bliss,  if  it  were  for  Christ — that  to 
live  in  penury,  and  woe,  and  scorn,  and  contempt, 
and  misery,  were  sweet  for  Christ — to  feel  that  it 
matters  nothing  what  becomes  of  one's  self,  so  that 
our  Master  is  but  exalted — to  feel  that  though,  like  a 
sere  leaf,  we  are  blown  in  the  blast,  we  are  quite 
careless  whither  we  are  going,  so  long  as  we  feel 
that  the  Master's  hand  is  guiding  us  according  t(;» 
His  will. 


APRIL  23. 

/TGED  and  mellow  saints  have  so  sweet  a  savor 
^^-^  of  Christ  in  them  that  their  conversation  is 
sweetly  refreshing  to  him  who  delights  to  hear  of 
the  glories  of  redeeming  love.  They  have  tried  the 
anchor  in  the  hour  of  storm,  they  have  tested  the 
armor  in  the  day  of  battle,  they  have  proved  the 
shadow  of  the  great  rock  in  the  burning  noontide 
in  the  weary  land;  therefore  do  they  talk  of  those 
things,  and  of  Him  who  is  all  these  unto  them. 
We  must  dive  into  the  same  waters  if  we  would 
bring  up  the  same  pearls. 

APRIL  24. 

y^N  honored  saint  was  once  so  ravished  with 
^^'*-  a  revelation  of  his  Lord's  love,  that  feeling 
his  mortal  frame  to  be  unable  to  sustain  more  of 
such  bliss,  he  cried,  "Hold,  Lord,  it  is  enough,  it  is 
enough!"  In  heaven  we  shall  be  able  to  see  the 
bottomless  well  of  love  to  our  lips,  and  drink  on  for- 
ever. Ah,  that  will  be  love  indeed  which  shall  over- 
flow our  souls  forever  in  our  Father's  house  above ! 
Who  can  tell  the  transports,  the  raptures,  the  amaze- 
ments of  delight  which  that  love  shall  beget  in  us? 
and  who  can  guess  the  sweetness  of  the  song,  or  the 
swiftness  of  the  obedience  which  will  be  the  heavenly 
expressions  of  love  made  perfect? 


APRIL  2S, 

nr^  HE  best  enjoyments  of  Christ  on  earth  are  but 
"^       as  the  dipping  of  our  finger  in  water  for  the 

ooling  of  our  thirst;  but  heaven  is  bathing  in  sea^ 
of  bliss :  even  so  our  love  here  is  but  one  drop  of 
the  same  substance  as  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  but 
not  comparable  for  magnitude  or  depth.  Oh,  how 
sweet  it  will  be  to  be  married  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
to  enjoy  forever,  and  without  any  interruption,  the 
heavenly  delights  of  His  society!  Surely,  if  a 
glimpse  of  Him  melteth  our  soul,  the  full  fruition 
of  Him  will  be  enough  to  burn  up  our  hearts  with 
affection. 


APRIL  26. 

iT//HEN  the  soul  is  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
^^  take  a  clear  view  of  Jesus  in  his  various 
offices,  how  speedily  the  heart  is  on  fire  with  love! 
To  see  him  stooping  from  his  throne  to  become  man, 
next  yielding  to  suffering  to  become  man's 
sympathizing  friend,  and  then  bowing  to  death  itself 
to  become  his  ransom,  is  enough  to  stir  every  passion 
of  the  soul.  To  discern  him  by  faith  as  the  propitia- 
tion for  sin,  sprinkling  his  own  blood  within  the 
veil,  and  nailing  our  sins  to  his  cross,  is  a  sight  which 
never  fails  to  excite  the  reverent,  yet  rapturous  ad- 
miration of  the  beholder. 


APRIL  27. 

/^HRIST  never  lifigers  long  with  dumb  souls-, 
^-^  if  there  be  no  crying  out  to  him,  he  departs. 
What  a  marvelous  influence  prayer  has  upon  our 
fellowship  with  Jesus !  We  may  always  measure 
one  by  the  other.  Those  pray  most  fervently  and 
frequently  who  have  been  constant  attendants  on 
the  kind  Intercessor ;  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
those  who  wrestle  the  hardest  in  supplication  will 
hold  the  angel  the  longest.  Joshua's  voice  stayed  the 
sun  in  the  heavens  for  a  few  hours ;  but  the  voice  of 
prayer  can  detain  the  Sun  of  righteousness  for 
months  and  even  years. 


APRIL  28. 

CT)  EMEMBER,  that  in  proportion  to  the  fuU- 
-^  \^^  ness  of  thine  heart  will  be  the  fullness  of  thy 
life.  Be  empty-hearted  and  thy  life  will  be  a  meager, 
skeleton  existence.  Be  full-hearted  and  thy  life  will 
be  full  and  strong,  a  thing  that  will  tell  upon  the 
world.  Keep,  then,  thy  peace  with  God  firm  within 
thee.  Keep  thou  close  to  this,  that  Jesus  Christ  hath 
made  peace  between  thee  and  God.  And  keep  thy 
conscience  still ;  then  shall  thy  heart  be  full  and  thy 
soul  strong  to  do  thy  Master's  work.  Keep  thy  peace 
with  God.    This  will  keep  thy  heart  pure. 


APRIL  29. 

Cjr\0  not  be  afraid,  Christ  is  your  strength  and 
-^-^  righteousness.  A  wave  comes  against  the  side 
of  the  ship,  but  it  does  not  hurt  the  ship,  it  only 
drives  the  wedges  in  tighter.  The  Master  is  at  the 
helm — will  not  that  assure  your  heart  ?  It  has  floated 
over  so  many  billows — will  not  that  increase  your 
confidence  ?  It  must,  indeed,  be  a  strong  billow  that 
will  sink  it  now;  there  never  shall  be  such  an  one. 
Christ  presents  the  perfect  number  of  all  his 
people  to  the  Father  in  the  last  day;  not  one  shall 
perish.  The  ark  of  our  salvation  shall  bring  all 
its  living  freight  into  the  haven  of  everlasting  rest. 

APRIL  30. 

rHIS  morning  our  desires  go  forth  for  growth 
in  our  acquaintance  with  the  Lord  Jesus.  This 
was  most  blessedly  perfect  long  before  we  had  the 
slightest  knowledge  of  him.  Before  we  had  a  being 
in  the  world  we  had  a  being  in  his  heart.  When  we 
were  enemies  to  him,  he  knew  us,  our  misery  and 
our  wickedness.  When  we  wept  bitterly  in  despair- 
ing repentance,  and  viewed  him  only  as  a  judge  and 
a  ruler,  he  viewed  us  as  his  brethren  well  beloved 
He  never  mistook  his  chosen,  but  always  beheld  them 
ds  objects  of  his  infinite  affection.  "The  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  his." 


MAY  1. 

T/'OU  have  no  place  in  which  to  pour  your 
•*■  troubles  except  the  ear  of  God.  If  you  tell 
them  to  your  friends,  you  but  put  your  troubles  out 
a  moment,  and  they  will  return  again.  Roll  your 
burden  unto  God,  and  you  have  rolled  it  into  a  great 
deep,  out  of  which  it  will  never  by  any  possibility 
rise.  Cast  your  troubles  where  you  cast  your  sins ; 
you  have  cast  your  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea, 
there  cast  your  troubles  also.  Never  keep  a  trouble 
half  an  hour  on  your  own  mind  before  you  tell  it  to 
God.  As  soon  as  the  trouble  comes,  quick,  the  first 
thing,  tell  it  to  your  Father. 

MAY  2. 

T  S  my  conscience  at  peace  ?  For,  if  my  heart 
"*  condemn  me  not,  God  is  greater  than  my  heart, 
and  doth  know  all  things ;  if  my  conscience  bear  wit- 
ness with  me,  that  I  am  a  partaker  of  the  precious 
grace  of  salvation,  then  happy  am  I !  I  am  one  of 
those  to  whom  God  hath  given  the  peace  which 
passeth  all  understanding.  Now,  why  is  this  called 
"the  peace  of  God  ?"  Because  it  comes  from  God — 
because  it  was  planned  by  God — because  God  gave 
his  Son  to  make  the  peace — because  God  gives  his 
Spirit  to  give  the  peace  in  the  conscience — because, 
indeed,  it  is  God  himself  in  the  soul. 


MAY  3. 

OOLDIER  of  the  cross  !  the  hour  is  coming  when 
Cy  the  note  of  victory  shall  be  proclaimed  through- 
out the  world.  The  battlements  of  the  enemy  must 
soon  succumb ;  the  swords  of  the  mighty  must  soon 
be  given  up  to  the  Lord  of  lords.  What !  soldier  of 
the  cross !  in  the  day  of  victory  wouldst  thou  have 
it  said  that  thou  didst  turn  thy  back  in  the  day  ol 
battle?  Dost  thou  not  wish  to  have  a  share  in  the 
conflict,  that  thou  mayest  have  a  sha  re  in  the  victory  ? 
If  thou  hast  even  the  hottest  part  of  the  battle,  wilt 
thou  falter?  Thou  shalt  have  the  brightest  part 
of  the  victory,  if  thou  art  in  the  fiercest  of  the  con- 
flict. 


MAY  4. 

/T  is  often  remarked  that  after  soul  sorrow  our 
pastors  are  more  gifted  with  words  in  season, 
and  their  speech  is  more  full  of  savor :  this  is  to  be 
accounted  for  by  the  sweet  influence  of  grief  when 
sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Blessed  Redeemer, 
we  delight  in  thy  love,  and  thy  presence  is  the  light 
of  our  joys;  but  if  thy  brief  withdrawals  qualify  us 
for  glorifyng  thee  in  cheering  thy  saints,  we  thank 
thee  for  leaving  us ;  as  we  seek  thee  by  night,  it  shall 
somewhat  cheer  us  that  thou  art  blessing  us  when 
thou  takest  away  thy  richest  blessing. 


MAY  5. 

/T  certainly  is  not  possible  for  us  to  be  in  a 
position  where  Omnipotence  cannot  assist  us. 
God  hath  servants  everywhere.  There  are  ''treasures 
hid  in  the  sand,"  and  the  Lord's  chosen  shall  eat 
thereof.  When  the  clouds  hide  the  mountains  they 
are  as  real  as  in  the  sunshine;  so  the  promise  and 
the  Providence  of  God  are  unchanged  by  the 
obscurity  of  our  faith,  or  the  difficulties  of  our 
position.  There  is  hope,  and  hope  at  hand,  there- 
fore, let  us  be  of  good  cheer. 

When  we  are  at  our  worst  let  us  trust  with 
unshaking  faith.  Recollect  that  then  is  the  time 
when  we  can  most  glorify  God  by  faith. 

MAY  6. 

nn  HE  cross  of  Christ  is  Christ's  glory.  Man 
seeks  to  win  his  glory  by  the  sacrifice  of  others 
— Christ  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself :  men  seek  to 
get  crowns  of  gold — he  sought  a  crown  of  thorns : 
men  think  that  glory  lieth  in  being  exalted  over 
others — Christ  thought  that  his  glory  did  lie  in 
becoming  "a  worm  and  no  man,"  a  scoff  and 
reproach  amongst  all  that  beheld  him.  He  stooped 
when  he  conquered ;  and  he  counted  that  the  glory 
lay  as  much  in  the  stooping  as  in  the  conquest. 

Our  God  has  made  the  day  spring  from  on  high 
to  visit  us.  Our  life  is  blight  with  these  visits  as 
the  sky  with  stars. 


r 


MA\ 


O TARS  maj  be  seen  from  the  bottom  of  a  deep 
Qy  well  when  they  cannot  be  discerned  from  the 
top  of  a  mountain :  so  are  many  things  learned  in 
adversity  which  the  prosperous  man  dreams  not  of. 
We  need  affliction  as  the  trees  need  winter,  that  we 
may  collect  sap  and  nourishment  for  future  blossoms 
and  fruit.  Sorrow  is  as  necessary  for  the  soul  as 
medicine  is  to  the  body : 

"The  path  of  sorrow,  and  that  path  alone, 
Leads  to  the  land  where  sorrow  is  unknown." 

The  adversities  of  to-day  are  a  preparatory  school 
for  the  higher  learning. 

MAY  8. 

(TT/^HEN  heaven  smiles  and  pours  down  its 
^^  showers  of  grace,  then  they  are  precious 
things;  but  without  the  celestial  rain  we  might  as 
much  expect  water  from  the  arid  waste,  as  a  real 
blessing  in  the  use  of  them.  "All  my  springs  are 
in  Thee,"  is  the  believer's  daily  confession  to  his 
Lord — a  confession  which  until  death  must  ever  be 
upon  his  lips.  As  love  comes  from  heaven,  so  it 
must  feed  on  heavenly  bread.  It  cannot  exist  in  the 
wilderness  unless  it  be  fed  by  manna  from  on  high. 
Love  must  feed  on  love.  The  very  soul  and  life  of 
our  love  to  God  is  his  love  to  us.. 


MAY  9. 

'T^HE  choicest  communications  ever  made  of 
J-  human  minds  are  those  which  have  com.e  from 
the  Great  Father.  Say,  poor  soul,  what  get  you  in 
Christ  whenever  you  go  to  him?  Can  you  not  say, 
Oh !  I  get  more  love  to  him  than  I  had  before ;  I 
never  approached  near  to  him  but  I  gained  a  large 
draught  and  ample  fill  of  love  of  God.  Out  of  his 
fullness  we  receive  grace  for  grace,  and  love  for 
love.  In  a  word,  by  faith  we  behold  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  as  in  a  glass,  and  are  changed  into  the  same 
image — and  the  image  of  God  is  love.  Live  upon 
Christ,  who  is  the  daily  manna,  and  you  will  live 
well. 

MAY  10. 

/QNLY  love  seeks  after  love.  If  I  desire  the 
^^  love  of  another  it  can  surely  only  be  because 
I  myself  have  love  toward  him.  We  care  not  to  be 
loved  by  those  whom  we  do  not  love.  It  were  an 
embarrassment  rather  than  an  advantage  to  receive 
love  from  those  to  whom  we  would  not  return  it. 
When  God  asks  human  love,  it  is  because  God  is 
love.  Whatever  our  frame  or  feeling,  the  heart  of 
Jesus  is  full  of  love — love  which  was  not  caused  by 
our  good  behavior,  and  is  not  diminished  by  our 
follies — love  which  is  as  sure  in  the  night  of  dark- 
ness as  in  the  brightness  of  the  day  of  joy. 


MAY  11. 

/F  you  would  find  God,  he  dwelleth  on  ever} 
hill-top  and  in  every  valley;  God  is  every- 
where in  creation ;  but  if  you  want  a  special  display 
of  him,  if  you  would  know  what  is  the  secret  place 
of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Most  High,  the  inner 
chamber  of  divinity,  you  must  go  where  you  find  the 
church  of  true  believers,  for  it  is  here  he  makes  his 
continual  residence  known — in  the  hearts  of  the 
humble  and  contrite,  who  tremble  at  his  word. 
Every  church  is  to  our  Lord  a  more  sublime  thing 
than  a  constellation  in  the  heavens ;  as  he  is  precious 
to  his  saints,  so  are  they  precious  to  him. 

^  MAY  12. 

Cf/f)Y.  love  Jesus  when  we  are  advanced  m  the 
^^  divine  life,  from  a  participation  with  him  in 
the  great  work  of  his  incarnation.  We  long  to  see 
our  fellowmen  turned  from  darkness  to  light,  and 
we  love  him  as  the  sun  of  righteousness,  who  can 
alone  illuminate  them.  We  hate  sin,  and  therefore 
we  rejoice  in  him  as  manifested  to  take  away  sin. 
We  pant  for  holier  and  happier  times,  and  therefore 
we  adore  him  as  the  coming  Ruler  of  all  lands,  who 
will  bring  a  millennium  with  him  in  the  day  of  his 
appearing.  Love  the  soul  of  every  man  with  all  the 
intensity  of  thy  being. 


MAY  13. 

'T^HERE  was  never  a  soul  yet  that  sincerely 
•^  sought  the  Saviour,  who  perished  before  he 
found  him.  No ;  the  gates  of  death  shall  never  shut 
on  thee  till  the  gates  of  grace  have  opened  for  thee ; 
till  Christ  has  washed  thy  sins  away  thou  shalt 
never  be  baptized  in  Jordan's  flood.  Thy  life  is 
secure,  for  this  is  God's  constant  plan — he  keeps  his 
own  elect  alive  till  the  day  of  his  grace,  and  then  he 
takes  them  to  himself.  And  inasmuch  as  thou 
knowest  thy  need  of  a  Saviour,  thou  art  one  of  his, 
and  thou  shalt  never  die  until  thou  hast  found  him. 
God  sends  the  right  messenger  to  the  right  man. 


MAY  14. 

cnr/^E  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  Her«. 
^'  is  the  starting  point  of  love's  race.  This  is* 
the  rippling  rill  which  afterwards  swells  into  a  river^ 
the  torch  with  v/hich  the  pile  of  piety  is  kindled. 
The  emancipated  spirit  loves  the  Saviour  for  the 
freedom  which  he  has  conferred  upon  it;  it  beholds 
the  agony  with  which  the  priceless  gift  was  pur- 
chased, and  it  adores  the  bleeding  sufferer  for  the 
pains  which  he  so  generously  endured. 

On  taking  a  survey  of  our  whole  life,  we  see  that 
the  kindness  of  God  has  run  all  through  it  like  3 
silver  thread. 


MAY  \5. 

/F  Christ  is  more  excellent  at  one  time  than 
another  it  certainly  is  in  "the  cloudy  and  dark 
day."  We  can  never  so  well  see  the  true  color  of 
Christ's  love  as  in  the  night  of  weeping.  Christ  in 
the  dungeon,  Christ  on  the  bed  of  sickness,  Christ 
in  poverty,  is  Christ  indeed  to  a  sanctified  man.  No 
vision  of  Christ  Jesus  is  so  truly  a  revelation  as  that 
which  is  seen  in  the  Patmos  of  suffering.  This  he 
proves  to  his  beloved,  not  by  mere  words  of  promise, 
but  by  actual  deeds  of  affection.  As  our  sufferings 
abound,  so  he  makes  our  consolations  to  abound. 

MAY  16. 

SUNLIGHT  is  never  more  grateful  than  after 
Qj  a  long  watch  in  the  midnight  blackness; 
Christ's  presence  is  never  more  acceptable  than  after 
a  time  of  weeping,  on  account  of  his  departure.  It 
is  a  sad  thing  that  we  should  need  to  lose  our  mercies 
to  teach  us  to  be  grateful  for  them;  let  us  mourn 
over  this  crookedness  of  our  nature;  and  let  us 
strive  to  express  our  thankfulness  for  mercies,  so 
that  we  may  not  have  to  lament  their  removal.  If 
thou  desirest  Christ  for  a  perpetual  guest,  give  him 
all  the  keys  of  thine  heart;  let  not  one  cabinet  be 
locked  up  from  him;  give  him  the  range  of  every 
room,  and  the  key  of  every  chamber ;  thus  you  will 
constrain  him  to  remain. 


MAY  17. 

Cf4)'E  never  live  so  well  as  when  we  live  on  the 
^^  Lord  Jesus  simply  as  he  is,  and  not  upon  our 
enjoyments  and  raptures.  Faith  is  never  more 
likely  to  increase  in  strength  than  in  times  which 
seem  adverse  to  her.  When  she  is  lightened  of 
trust  in  joys,  experiences,  frames,  feelings,  and  the 
like,  she  rises  the  nearer  heaven.  Trust  in  thy 
Redeemer's  strength,  thou  benighted  soul;  exercise 
what  faith  thou  hast,  and  by  and  by  he  shall  rise 
upon  thee  with  healings  beneath  his  wings.  Go 
from  faith  to  faith  and  thou  shalt  receive  blessing 
upon  blessing. 

MAY  18. 

/UST  so  far  as  the  Lord  shall  give  us  grace  to 
suffer  for  Christ,  to  suffer  with  Christ,  just 
so  far  does  he  honor  us.  Afflictions  cannot  sanctify 
us,  except  as  they  are  used  by  Christ,  as  his  mallet 
and  his  chisel.  Our  joys  and  our  efforts  cannot 
make  us  ready  for  heaven,  apart  from  the  hand  of 
Jesus  who  fashioneth  our  hearts  aright,  and  pre- 
pareth  us  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light.  Our  griefs  cannot  mar  the  melody 
of  our  praise;  we  reckon  them  to  be  the  bass  part 
of  our  life's  song.  This  vale  of  tears  is  but  the 
pathway  to  the  better  country;  this  world  of  woe 
is  but  the  stepping-stone  to  a  world  of  bliss. 


MAY  19. 

X^ONSIDER  the  history  of  the  Redeemer's  love 
L/  and  a  thousand  enchanting  acts  of  affection 
will  suggest  themselves,  all  of  which  have  had  for 
their  design  the  weaving  of  the  heart  into  Christ 
and  the  intertwisting  of  the  thoughts  and  emotions 
of  the  renewed  soul  with  the  mind  of  Jesus. 
Nearness  of  life  towards  the  Lamb  will  necessarily 
involve  greatness  of  love  to  him.  As  nearness  to 
the  sun  increases  the  temperature  of  the  various 
planets,  so  close  communion  with  Jesus  raises  the 
heat  of  the  affections  towards  him.  This  alone  is 
the  true  life  of  a  Christian — its  source,  its  sus- 
tenance, its  fashion,  its  end,  all  gathered  up  in  one 
word — Christ  Jesus. 

MAY  20. 

/C^HOICE  discoveries  of  the  wondrous  love  and 
vJ/  grace  of  Jesus  are  most  tenderly  vouchsafed 
unto  believers  in  the  times  of  grief.  Then  it  is  that 
he  lifts  them  up  from  his  feet,  where,  like  Mary,  it 
is  their  delight  to  sit,  and  exalts  them  to  the  position 
of  the  favored  John,  pressing  them  to  his  breast  and 
bidding  them  lean  on  his  bosom. 

The  love  of  Christ  in  its  sweetness,  its  fullness, 
its  greatness,  its  faithfulness,  passeth  all  human 
comprehension. 

Heaven  on  earth  is  abounding  love  to  Jesus.  This 
is  the  first  and  last  of  true  delight — to  love  him  who 
is  the  first  and  the  last.  To  love  Jesus  is  another 
name  for  paradise. 


MAY  21. 

CTJRAYER  is  the  lisping  of  the  believing  infant, 
-^  the  shout  of  the  fighting  behever,  the  requiem 
of  the  dying  saint  falling  asleep  in  Jesus.  It  is  the 
breath,  the  watchword,  the  comfort,  the  strength  and 
honor  of  a  Christian. 

Spiritual  mercies  are  good  things,  and  not  only 
good  things,  but  the  best  things,  so  that  you  may 
well  ask  for  them ;  for  if  no  good  things  will  be  with' 
holden,  much  more  will  none  of  the  best  things. 

If  you  want  power  in  prayer  you  must  have  puritj 
in  life. 

If  our  faith  is  to  grow  exceedingly  we  must 
maintain  constant  intercourse  with  God. 

MAY  22. 

/T  CHRISTIAN  ought  to  be  a  comforter,  with 
^^-^  kind  words  on  his  lips  and  sympathy  in  his 
heart;  he  should  carry  sunshine  wherever  he  goes 
and  diffuse  happiness  around  him.  If  you  see 
Jesus  and  abide  in  the  light  of  his  countenance 
habitually,  your  faces,  your  characters,  your  lives, 
will  grow  resplendent,  even  without  your  knowing 
it.  If  the  tender  mercy  of  God  has  visited  us,  and 
done  so  much  more  for  us  than  I  can  tell  or  than 
you  can  hear,  let  us  ourselves  exhibit  tender  mercy 
in  our  dealings  with  our  fellow-men.  He  lives  most 
and  lives  best  who  is  the  means  of  imparting  spiritual 
life  to  others. 


MAY  23. 

/T  CLEAR  proof  of  the  divine  origin  of  scrip- 
^•^^  ture  is  afforded  by  its  portrait  of  the  Perfect 
Man.  Jesus  is  sinless  in  thought,  and  word,  and 
deed ;  his  enemies  are  unable  to  find  a  fault  in  him 
either  of  excess  or  defect.  Nowhere  else  in  the 
world  have  we  such  another  portrait  of  man;  it 
would  be  superfluous  to  say  that  nowhere  have  we 
such  another  man.  Jesus  is  unique;  he  is  original, 
with  peculiarities  all  his  own,  but  without  any 
divergence  from  the  straight  line  of  rectitude.  He 
is  not  a  recluse,  whose  character  would  have  few 
relationships,  and  therefore  few  tests,  but  one  living 
in  the  fierce  light  of  a  King  among  men,  coming  into 
relation  with  the  world  in  a  thousand  ways. 

MAY  24. 

X^ONCERNING  the  consciousness  of  evil  in  the 
V^  past  of  our  lives  and  the  tendency  to  wrong- 
doing in  our  nature,  the  Bible  is  very  clear,  and  it 
is  most  admirably  explicit  as  to  God's  way  of 
removing  this  barrier  to  our  future  progress.  In 
Holy  Scripture  we  see  a  most  wise  and  gracious 
method  for  the  putting  away  of  guilt,  without  injury 
to  the  divine  justice.  The  atonement  offered  by  the 
Lord  Jesus,  who  is  the  essence  of  the  revelation  of 
God,  is  an  eminently  satisfactory  solution  of  the 
soul's  sternest  problem.  Our  feeling  is  that  God; 
the  universal  Ruler,  must  do  right,  and  must  not, 
even  for  mercy's  sake,  relax  the  rule  that  evil  done 
must  bring  evil  as  its  consequence. 


MAY  1^.  I 

(Sni^EADOWS  may  be  occasionally  flooded,  but 
^-^^^  the  marshes  are  drowned  by  the  tide  at 
every  return  thereof." 

There  is  all  this  difference  between  the  sins  of  the 
righteous  and  those  of  the  ungodly.  Surprised  by 
temptation,  true  saints  are  flooded  with  a  passing 
outburst  of  sin;  but  the  wicked  delight  in  trans- 
gression and  live  in  it  as  in  their  element.  The  saint 
in  his  errors  is  a  star  under  a  cloud,  but  the  sinner 
is  darkness  itself.  The  gracious  may  fall  into 
iniquity,  but  the  graceless  run  into  it,  wallow  in  it, 
and  again  and  again  return  to  it. 

MAY  26. 

c^ETWEEN  the  revelation  of  God  in  his  word 
-^-^  and  that  in  his  works,  there  can  be  no  actual 
discrepancy.  The  one  may  go  farther  than  the 
other,  but  the  revelation  must  be  harmonious. 
Between  the  interpretation  of  the  Works  and  the 
interpretation  of  the  Word,  there  may  be  very  great 
differences.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  men  of 
the  Book  have  sometimes  missed  its  meaning.  Nay, 
more :  it  is  certain  that,  in  their  desire  to  defend  their 
Bible,  devout  persons  have  been  unwise  enough  to 
twist  its  words.  If  they  had  always  labored  to 
understand  what  God  said,  in  his  book,  and  had 
steadfastly  adhered  to  its  meaning,  they  would  have 
been  wise. 


MAY  27. 

(^L^OREOVER,  we  may  not  refuse  reliance 
^^^^^  upon  God  on  the  ground  of  our  insig- 
nificance ;  for  it  is  not  conceivable  that  anything  can 
be  too  little  for  God.  The  wonders  of  the  micro- 
scope are  quite  as  remarkable  as  those  of  the 
telescope;  we  may  not  set  a  bound  to  the  Lord  in 
one  direction  any  more  than  in  the  other.  He  can 
and  will  show  his  divine  skill  in  a  man's  life,  as  well 
as  in  a  planet's  circuit. 

Witnesses  are  alive  to  testify  to  the  Lord's  making 
bare  his  arm  on  the  behalf  of  them  that  trust  him. 
Any  man  may  also  put  the  principle  to  the  test  in 
his  own  instance ;  and  it  is  memorable  that  none  hav^ 
done  so  in  vain. 

MAY  28. 

/T  has  been  asserted  that  God  cannot  be  known. 
Those  who   say  this   declare  that  they  them- 
selves know  nothing  but  phenomena. 

He  who  made  the  world  was  certainly  an  intelli- 
gent being,  in  fact  the  highest  intelligence;  for  in 
myriads  of  ways  his  works  display  the  presence  of 
profound  thought  and  knowledge.  Lord  Bacon  said, 
*T  had  rather  believe  all  the  fables  of  the  Talmud 
and  the  Koran  than  that  this  universal  frame  is 
without  a  mind,"  This  being  so,  we  do  in  that  very 
fact  know  God  in  a  measure;  ay,  and  in  such  a 
measure  that  we  are  prepared  to  trust  him.  He  that 
•*nade  all  things  is  more  truly  an  object  of  confidenc«» 
than  all  thing^s  that  he  has  made. 


MAY  29. 

O ELF-RELIANCE  is  inculcated  as  a  moral 
£/  virtue,  and  in  a  certain  sense,  with  due  sur- 
roundings, it  is  so.  Observation  and  experience 
show  that  it  is  a  considerable  force  in  the  world.  He 
who  questions  his  own  powers,  and  does  not  know 
his  own  mind,  hesitates,  trembles,  falters,  fails";  his 
diffidence  is  the  author  of  his  disappointment.  The 
self-reliant  individual  hopes,  considers,  plans,  re- 
solves, endeavors,  perseveres,  succeeds ;  his  assurance 
of  victory  is  one  leading  cause  of  his  triumph.  A 
man  believes  in  his  own  capacity,  and  unless  he  is 
altogether  a  piece  of  emptiness  he  gradually  con- 
vinces others  that  his  estimate  is  correct. 

MAY  30. 

C^T^ELOVED  reader,  what  is  thy  desperate  case? 
■^-^  What  heavy  matter  hast  thou  in  hand  this 
evening  ?  Bring  it  hither.  The  God  of  the  prophets 
lives,  and  lives  to  help  his  saints.  He  will  not  suffer 
thee  to  lack  any  good  thing.  Believe  thou  in  the 
Lord  of  Hosts !  Approach  him  pleading  the  name 
of  Jesus;  thou  too  shalt  see  the  finger  of  God 
working  marvels  for  his  people.  According  to  thy 
faith  be  it  unto  thee.  In  our  hours  of  bodily  pain 
and  mental  anguish,  we  find  ourselves  as  naturally 
driven  to  prayer  as  the  wreck  is  driven  upon  the 
shore  by  the  waves. 

Faith,  then,  we  choose,  rather  than  doubt,  as  the 
mainspring  of  our  life. 


MAY  31. 

uTJRAYER  must  not  be  our  chance  work  but  oui 
■^  daily  business,  our  habit,  and  vocation.  As 
artists  give  themselves  to  their  models,  and  poets  to 
their  classical  pursuits,  so  must  we  addict  ourselves 
to  prayer.  We  must  be  immersed  in  prayer  as  in 
our  element,  and  so  pray  without  ceasing.  Lord, 
teach  us  to  pray  that  we  may  be  more  prevalent  in 
supplication. 

The  common  fault  with  the  most  of  us  is  our 
readiness  to  yield  to  distractions.  Our  thoughts  go 
roving  hither  and  thither,  and  we  make  little  pro- 
gress towards  our  desired  end.  Like  quicksilver, 
our  mind  will  not  hold  together,  but  rolls  off  this 
way  and  that.  How  great  an  evil  this  is  !  It  injures 
us,  and,  what  is  worse,  it  insults  our  God. 


JUNE  i. 

/QNE  of  the  marvels  of  the  Bible  is  its  singular 
^^  fullness.  It  is  not  a  book  of  gold  leaf  beaten 
thin,  as  most  books  are  as  to  thought;  but  its  sen- 
tences are  nuggets  of  unalloyed  truth.  The  book  of 
God  is  clearly  the  god  of  books,  for  it  is  infinite. 
Well  said  a  German  author,  "In  this  little  book  is 
contained  all  the  wisdom  of  the  world." 

"  We  search  the  world  for  truth ;  we  cull 
The  good,  the  pure,  the  beautiful 
From  graven  stone  and  written  scroll, 
From  all  old  flower-fields  of  the  soul; 
And,  weary  seekers  of  the  best, 
We  come  back  laden  from  the  quest, 
To  find  that  all  the  sages  said 
Is  in  the  Book  our  mothers  read." 

JUNE  2. 

/'T  has  been  well  said,  "Nothing  is  easier  than 
to  doubt.  A  man  of  moderate  ability  or  learn- 
ing can  doubt  more  than  the  wisest  men  believe." 
Faith  demands  knowledge,  for  it  is  an  intelligent 
grace,  able  and  anxious  to  justify  itself  ;  but  infidelity 
is  not  required  to  give  a  reason  for  the  doubt  that 
is  in  it ;  a  defiant  mien  and  a  blustering  tone  answer 
its  purpose.  The  acme  of  unbelief  is  to  know  noth- 
ing. What  is  this  but  the  apotheosis  of  ignorance? 
A  man  may  glide  into  agnosticism  insensibly,  and 
remain  in  it  languidly;  but  to  believe  is  to  be  alive. 
Those  who  think  faith  to  be  a  childish  business  will 
have  to  make  considerable  advance  toward  manlineSvS 
before  they  are  able  to  test  their  own  theory. 


JUNE  3. 

rHE  most  important  part  of  human  life  is  not 
its  end,  but  its  begmning.  Our  death  day  is 
the  child  of  the  past,  but  our  opening  years  are  the 
sires  of  the  future.  At  the  last  hour  men  summon 
to  their  bedside  a  solemnity  of  thought  which 
arrives  too  late  for  any  practical  result.  The  hush 
and  awe  and  far-away  look,  so  frequent  in  departing 
moments,  should  have  come  much  sooner.  Commend 
u?  to  the  example  of  the  Hebrew  king,  who  fasted 
and  wore  sackcloth  while  the  child  was  yet  alive. 
Wisely  did  he  foresee  the  uselessness  of  lamenting 
when  the  scene  should  close.  *'Can  I  bring  him  back 
again?"  is  one  of  the  most  serious  of  questions. 


JUNE  4. 

/DADEN  boughs  hang  low.  The  nettle  mounteth 
°^^  above  its  fellow  weeds,  but  the  violet  lieth 
shrouded  under  its  leaves,  and  is  only  found  out  by 
its  own  scent."  Walking  one  day  by  a  stream  we 
were  conscious  of  a  delicious  perfume,  and  only  then 
did  we  perceive  the  little  blue  eyes  which  were  look- 
ing up  to  us  so  meekly  from  the  ground  on  which 
we  stood.  Virtue  is  always  modest,  and  modesty  is 
itself  a  virtue.  He  who  is  discovered  by  his  real 
excellence,  and  not  by  his  egotistical  advertisements 
of  his  own  perfections,  is  a  man  worth  knowing. 


JUNE  5, 

TT'OU  may  have  sunk  low  in  despondency,  and 
-^  even  despair ;  but  if  your  soul  has  any  longing 
towards  Christ,  and  if  you  are  seeking  to  rest  in 
his  finished  work,  God  sees  the  "light."  He  not  only 
sees  it,  but  he  also  preserves  it  in  you.  *'I,  the  Lord, 
do  keep  it."  Sometimes  we  cannot  see  the  light,  but 
God  always  sees  the  light,  and  that  is  much  better 
than  our  seeing  it.  If  the  Lord  has  given  you  light, 
dear  reader,  he  looks  on  that  light  with  peculiar 
interest;  for  not  only  is  it  dear  to  him  as  his  own 
handiwork,  but  because  it  is  like  himself,  for  "he  is 
light." 

JUNE  6. 

(Siy^ANY  can  bring  the  Scriptures  to  the  mind, 
^-^^^  but  the  Lord  alone  can  prepare  the  mind 
to  receive  the  Scriptures.  Our  Lord  Jesus  differs 
from  all  other  teachers;  they  reach  the  ear,  but  he 
instructs  the  heart ;  they  deal  with  the  outward  letter, 
but  he  imparts  an  inward  taste  for  the  truth,  by 
which  we  perceive  its  savor  and  spirit.  The  most 
unlearned  of  men  become  ripe  scholars  in  the  school 
of  grace  when  the  Lord  Jesus  by  his  Holy  Spirit 
unfolds  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  to  them,  and 
grants  the  divine  anointing  by  which  they  are 
enabled  to  behold  the  invisible.  Happy  are  we  if 
we  have  had  our  understandings  cleared  and 
strengthened  by  the  Master! 


JUNE  7. 

CJ/f)'E  are  never  out  of  the  reach  of  temptation. 
^^  Both  at  home  and  abroad,  we  are  hable  to 
meet  with  allurements  to  evil;  the  morning  opens 
with  peril,  and  the  shades  of  evening  find  us  still  in 
jeopardy.  They  are  well  kept  whom  God  keeps,  but 
woe  unto  those  who  go  forth  into  the  world,  or  even 
dare  to  walk  their  own  house  unarmed.  Those  who 
think  themselves  secure,  are  more  exposed  to  danger 
than  any  others.  The  armor-bearer  of  Sin  is  Self- 
confidence.  Be  not  secure.  We  need  a  watchman 
for  the  night,  as  well  as  a  guardian  for  the  day. 
Oh,  for  the  constraining  love  of  Jesus  to  keep  us 
active  and  useful ! 

JUNE  8. 

(TTY^HEN  the  beams  of  the  sun  are  contracted  by 
-^^  a  burning-glass,  upon  one  spot,  then  they 
cause  fire,  so  when  our  thoughts  are  concentrated  on 
one  object  they  warm  the  heart  and  at  last  burn  the 
truth  into  it." 

There  are  many  rays  of  light,  but  they  are 
scattered.  We  get  a  little  upon  many  things,  while 
what  is  wanted  is  one  great  truth,  and  so  much 
upon  it  as  shall  fix  it  on  the  heart,  and  set  the  soul 
blazing  with  it.  This  is  the  fault  of  many  lives; 
they  are  squandered  upon  a  dozen  objects,  whereas 
if  they  were  economized  for  one,  they  would  be 
mighty  lives,  known  in  the  present  and  honored  in 
the  future. 


JUNE  9. 

'7^  HE  unsoundness  of  a  vessel  is  not  seen  when 
it  is  empty ;  but  when  it  is  filled  with  water,  then 
we  shall  see  whether  it  will  leak  or  no." 

It  is  in  our  prosperity  that  we  are  tested.  Men  are 
not  fully  discovered  to  themselves  till  they  are  triea 
by  fullness  of  success.  Praise  finds  pride,  wealth 
reveals  selfishness,  and  learning  discovers  the  leak  of 
unbelief.  Success  is  the  crucible  of  character. 
Hence  the  prosperity  which  some  welcome  as  an 
unmixed  favor  may  far  more  rightly  be  regarded 
as  an  intense  form  of  test.  O  Lord,  preserve  us 
when  we  are  full  as  much  as  when  we  are  empty. 

JUNE  10. 

/T  GARRISON  is  not  free  from  danger  while 
^-^^     it  hath  an  enemy  lodged  within." 

You  may  bolt  all  your  doors,  and  fasten  all  your 
windows,  but  if  the  thieves  have  placed  even  a  little 
child  within  doors,  who  can  draw  the  bolts  for  them, 
the  house  is  still  unprotected.  All  the  sea  outside 
a  ship  cannot  do  it  damage  till  the  water  enters 
within  and  fills  the  hold.  Hence,  it  is  clear,  our 
greatest  danger  is  from  within.  All  the  devils  in 
hell  and  tempters  on  earth  could  do  us  no  injury  if 
there  were  no  corruption  in  our  nature.  Alas,  our 
heart  is  our  greatest  enemy ;  this  is  the  little  home- 
born  thief. 


JUNE  11. 

CJ/f)  E  are  not  exacting  when  we  demand  that  each 
^^  candid  man  should  read  the  Bible  for  himself. 
In  testing  a  book,  which  professes  to  be  the  reve- 
lation of  God's  mind,  we  shall  act  unworthily  if  we 
trust  to  others,  be  they  who  they  may.  Second- 
hand information  lacks  assurance  and  vividness ;  a 
personal  investigation  is  far  more  satisfactory  and 
beneficial.  Many  other  books  have  been  warmly 
praised  by  their  readers ;  but  we  have  never  yet 
met  with  any  other  volume  which  has  commanded 
such  frequent  enthusiasm  and  such  devoted  affection 
as  the  Bible:  neither  have  we  heard  of  one  which 
answers  so  many  and  such  divers  purposes  in  con- 
nection with  the  lives  of  men. 

JUNE  12. 

/C^HRIST  had  no  transgressions  of  his  own;  he 
v>^  took  ours  upon  his  head;  he  never  committed 
a  wrong,  but  he  took  all  my  sin,  and  all  yours,  if  ye 
are  believers ;  concerning  all  his  people,  it  is  true,  he 
bore  their  griefs  and  carried  their  sorrows  in  his 
own  body  on  the  tree.  Sin  may  drag  thee  ever  so 
low,  but  Christ's  great  atonement  is  still  under  all. 
You  may  have  descended  into  the  deeps,  but  you 
cannot  have  fallen  so  low  as  "the  uttermost;"  and 
to  the  uttermost  he  saves. 

To-day  the  world's  one  and  only  remedy  is  the 
cross. 


JUNE  13.  , 

CTF^JJT  we  do  not  observe  God's  hand  as  much  as 
■^-^  we  should.  Our  good  puritanic  forefathers, 
when  it  rained,  used  to  say,  that  God  had  unstopped 
the  bottles  of  heaven.  When  it  rains  nowadays,  we 
think  the  clouds  have  become  condensed.  If  they 
had  a  field  of  hay  cut,  they  used  to  plead  of  the  Lord 
that  he  would  bid  the  sun  shine.  We,  perhaps,  are 
wiser,  as  we  think ;  and  we  consider  it  hardly  worth 
while  to  pray  about  such  things,  thinking  they  will 
come  in  the  course  of  nature.  They  believed  that 
God  was  in  every  storm ;  nay,  in  every  cloud  of  dust. 
They  used  to  speak  of  a  present  God  in  everything, 

JUNE  14. 

CJ^IJT  how  is  this  to  be?    How  is  the  world  to  be 
brousrht  back?    How  is  it  to  be  restored?    We 


answer,  the  reason  why  there  was  this  original 
harmony  between  earth  and  heaven  was  because 
there  was  love  between  them  twain,  and  our  great 
reason  for  hoping  that  there  shall  be  at  last  re- 
established an  undiscordant  harmony  between  heaven 
and  earth  is  simply  this,  that  God  hath  already 
manifested  his  love  toward  us,  and  that  in  return, 
hearts  touched  by  his  grace  do  even  now  love  him; 
and  when  they  shall  be  multiplied,  and  love  re- 
established, then  shall  harmony  be  complete. 


JUNE  15. 

/DOSSES,  too,  are  frequently  the  means  God  uses 
^^^^  to  fetch  home  his  wandering  sheep;  hKe  fierce 
dogs,  they  bring  wanderers  back  to  the  shepherd. 
How  often  have  we  seen  the  Christian  rendered 
obedient  to  his  Lord's  will  by  straightness  of  bread 
and  hard  labor.  When  rich  and  increased  with 
goods,  many  professors  carry  their  heads  much  too 
loftily,  and  speak  much  too  boastfully.  Like  David, 
they  boast:  "My  mountain  standeth  fast;  it  shall 
never  be  moved."  When  the  Christian  groweth 
wealthy,  is  in  good  repute,  hath  good  health,  and  a 
happy  family,  he  too  often  wanders  away.  If  he  be 
a  true  child  of  God,  there  is  a  rod  preparing  for 
him. 

JUNE  16. 

C^RIENDSHIP  is  the  only  thing  in  the  world 
^  concerning  the  usefulness  of  which  all  mankind 
are  agreed.  Friendship  seems  as  necessary  an  ele- 
ment of  a  comfortable  existence  in  this  world  as  fire 
and  water,  or  even  air  itself.  A  man  may  drag 
along  a  miserable  existence  in  proud  solitary  dignity, 
but  his  life  is  scarce  life ;  it  is  nothing  but  an  exist- 
ence, the  tree  of  life  being  stripped  of  the  leaves  of 
hope  and  the  fruits  of  joy.  He  who  would  be  happy 
here  must  have  friends ;  and  he  who  would  be  happy 
hereafter,  must,  above  all  things,  find  a  friend  in  the 
world  to  come,  in  the  person  of  God,  the  Father  of 
his  people. 


JUNE  17. 

OOMETIMES    Saul   was   among  the  prophets, 
QJ    easily  turned  into  a  prophet,  and  then  after- 
wards among  the  witches ;  sometimes  in  one  place'" 
and  then  another,  and  insincere  in  everything.    How' 
many  such  we  have  in  every   Christian  assembl}' ; 
men    who    are    very    easily    molded       They    have 
affectionate  dispositions,  very  likely  a  tender  con-, 
science;  but  then  the  conscience  is   so  remarkably 
tender,  that  when  touched  it  seems  to  give,  and  you 
are  afraid  to  probe  deeper ;  it  heals  as  soon  as  it  is ' 
wounded.    You  may  press  them  whichever  way  you 
wish,  they  are  so  elastic  you  can  always  effect  your 
purpose,  but  then  they  are  not  fixed  in  character  and 
soon  return  to  be  what  they  were  before. 

JUNE  18. 

/TBIDE  with  us,  for  the  day  is  far  spent.'* 
^"^■^  Beloved,  remember  what  you  have  heard  of 
your  Lord  Jesus,  and  what  he  has  done  for  you; 
make  your  heart  the  golden  pot  of  manna  to  pre- 
serve the  memorial  of  the  heavenly  bread  whereon 
you  have  fed  in  days  gone  by.  Let  your  memory 
treasure  up  everything  about  Christ  which  you  have 
either  felt,  or  known,  or  believed,  and  then  let  your 
fond  affections  hold  him  fast  forevermore.  Love 
the  person  of  your  Lord !  Bring  forth  the  alabaster 
box  of  your  heart,  even  though  it  be  broken,  and  let 
all  the  precious  ointment  of  your  affection  come 
streaming  on  his  pierced  feet 


JUNE  19. 

CTJRAY  God  to  send  a  few  men  with  what  the 
-^       Americans  call  "grit"  in  them ;  men,  who  when 

they  know  a  thing  to  be  right,  will  not  turn  away, 
or  turn  aside,  or  stop;  men  who  will  persevere  all 
the  more  because  there  are  difficulties  to  meet  or  foes 
to  encounter;  who  stand  all  the  more  true  to  theii* 
Master  because  they  are  opposed;  who,  the  more 
they  are  thrust  into  the  fire,  the  hotter  they  become, 
who,  just  like  the  bow,  the  further  the  string  is 
drawn  the  more  powerfully  it  sends  forth  its  arrows, 
and  so  the  more  they  are  trodden  upon,  the  more 
mighty  will  they  become  in  the  cause  of  truth  against 
error. 

JUNE  20. 

CT)  ETURN  unto  thy  rest,  O  my  soul,  for  the 
-^\^_^  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifully  with  thee."  It 
was  at  the  still  hour,  when  the  gates  of  the  day  were 
closing,  that  with  weary  wing  the  dove  came  back 
to  her  master :  O  Lord,  enable  me  this  evening  thus 
to  return  to  Jesus.  She  could  not  endure  to  spend 
a  night  hovering  over  the  restless  waste,  nor  can  I 
bear  to  be  even  for  another  hour  away  from  Jesus, 
the  rest  of  my  heart,  the  home  of  my  spirit.  She 
did  not  merely  alight  upon  the  roof  of  the  ark,  she 
"came  into  him;"  even  so  would  my  longing  spirit 
look  into  the  secret  of  the  Lord,  pierce  to  the  interior 
of  truth,  enter  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil,  and 
reach  to  my  Beloved  in  very  deed. 


JUNE  21. 

67jr^AITHFULNESS  to  us  in  our  faults  is  a 
J  certain  sign  of  fidelity  in  a  friend.  You  may 
depend  upon  that  man  who  will  tell  you  of  your 
faults  in  a  kind  and  considerate  manner.  Give  me 
for  a  friend  a  man  who  will  speak  honestly  of  me 
before  my  face;  who  will  not  tell  first  one  neighbor, 
and  then  another,  but  who  will  come  straight  to  my 
house  and  say :  "I  feel  there  is  a  wrong  in  you,  my 
brother,  I  must  tell  you  of."  That  man  is  a  true 
friend ;  he  has  proved  himself  to  be  so ;  for  we  never] 
get  any  praise  for  telling  people  of  their  faults;  we 
rather  hazard  their  dishke;  a  man  will  sometimes 
thank  you  for  it ;  but  he  does  not  often  like  you  any 
the  better. 

JUNE  22. 

''Ty^HAT  we  are  taught  to  seek  or  shun  in  prayer, 
we  should  equally  pursue  or  avoid  in  action. 
Very  earnestly,  therefore,  should  we  avoid  temp- 
tation, seeking  to  walk  guardedly  in  the  path  of 
obedience.  We  are  not  to  enter  the  thicket  in  search 
of  the  lion.  This  lion  may  cross  our  path,  or  leap 
upon  us  from  the  thicket ;  but  we  have  nothing  to  do 
with  hunting  him.  He  that  meeteth  with  him,  even 
though  he  winneth  the  day,  will  find  it  a  stern 
struggle.  Let  the  Christian  pray  that  he  may  be 
spared  the  encounter.  Our  Saviour,  who  had  ex- 
perience of  what  temptation  meant,  thus  earnestly 
admonished  his  disciples  :  "Pray  that  ye  enter  not 
into  temptation." 


JUNE  23. 

\/'OU  know  in  a  wheel  there  is  one  portion  that 
^  never  turns  round,  that  stands  steadfast,  and 
that  is  the  axle.  So,  in  God's  Providence  there  is 
an  axle  which  never  moves.  Christian,  here  is  a 
sweet  thought  for  thee  !  Thy  state  is  ever  changing : 
sometimes  thou  art  exalted,  and  sometimes  de- 
pressed ;  yet  there  is  an  unmoving  point  in  thy  state. 
What  is  that  axle?  What  is  the  pivot  upon  which 
all  the  machinery  revolves?  It  is  the  axle  of  God's 
everlasting  love  towards  his  covenant  people.  The 
exterior  of  the  wheel  is  changing;  but  the  center 
stands  forever  fixed.  Other  things  may  move;  but 
God's  love  never  moves ;  it  is  the  axle  of  the  wheel, 
and  will  endure. 

JUNE  24. 

(TTT^IRST,  then,  here  is  what  they  are  to  tell. 
^  It  is  to  be  a  story  of  personal  experience.  "Go 
home  to  thy  friends  and  tell  them  how  great  things 
the  Lord  has  done  for  thee,  and  hath  had  compassion 
on  thee."  Not  what  you  have  believed,  but  what 
you  have  felt;  what  you  really  know  to  be  your  own ; 
not  what  great  things  you  have  read,  but  what  great 
things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  you;  not  alone  what 
you  have  seen  done  in  the  great  congregation,  and 
how  great  sinners  have  turned  to  God,  but  what  the 
Lord  has  done  for  yon.  And  mark  this :  There  is 
never  a  more  interesting  story  than  that  which  a  man 
tells  about  himself. 


JUNE  2$. 

p  VER  to  be  remembered  is  that  best  and  brightest 
^  of  hours  when  first  we  saw  the  Lord,  lost  our 
burden,  received  the  roll  of  promise,  rejoiced  in  full 
salvation,  and  went  on  our  way  in  peace.  It  was 
spring  time  in  the  soul ;  the  winter  was  past.  Then 
the  flowers  appeared  in  our  heart:  hope,  love,  peace' 
and  patience  sprung  from  the  sod;  and  our  resolve 
was,  "Lord,  I  am  thine,  wholly  thine ;  all  I  am,  and 
all  I  have,  I  would  devote  to  thee.  Thou  hast  bought 
me  with  thy  blood ;  let  me  spend  myself  and  be  spent 
in  thy  service.  In  life  and  in  death  let  me  be  con- 
secrated to  thee."    How  have  we  kept  this  resolve^ 


JUNE  26. 

When  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he 
shall  see  his  seed. — Isa.  liii.  10. 

/QUR  Lord  Jesus  has  not  died  in  vain.  His 
^^  death  was  sacrificial;  he  died  as  our  substitute, 
because  death  was  the  penalty  of  our  sins,  and  be- 
cause his  substitution  was  accepted  of  God.  He  has 
saved  those  for  whom  he  made  his  soul  a  sacrifice. 
By  death  he  became  like  the  corn  of  wheat,  which 
bringeth  forth  much  fruit. — There  must  be  a  suc- 
cession of  children  to  Jesus ;  he  is  ''the  Father  of  the 
everlasting  age."  He  shall  say,  "Behold,  I  and  the 
children  whom  thou  hast  given  me." 


JUNE  27. 

^Tl/^Y  own  sight  of  the  precious  blood  is  for  my 
^^^^  comfort;  but  it  is  the  Lord's  sight  of  it 
which  secures  my  safet}^  Even  when  I  am  unable 
to  behold  it,  the  Lord  looks  at  it,  and  passes  over 
me  because  of  it.  None  can  tell  His  delight  in  Jesus. 
Now  rest  we  in  calm  security.  We  have  God's 
sacrifice  and  God's  word  to  create  In  us  a  sense  of 
perfect  security.  He  will.  He  must,  pass  over  us, 
because  He  spared  not  our  glorious  substitute. 
Justice  joins  hands  with  love  to  provide  everlasting 
salvation  for  all  the  blood-besprinkled  ones. 


JUNE  28. 

n^'HE  branch  is  not  only  ever  near  the  stem,  buc 
ever  receiving  Hfe  and  fruitfulness  from  it.  All 
true  believers  abide  in  Christ  in  a  sense;  but  there 
is  a  higher  meaning  and  this  we  must  know  before 
we  gain  unlimited  power  at  the  throne.  "Ask  what 
ye  will"  is  for  Enochs  who  walk  with  God,  for  Johns 
who  lie  in  the  Lord's  bosom,  for  those  whose  union 
with  Christ  leads  to  constant  communion. 

If  you  would  be  mighty  in  your  pleadings,  the 
Lord  himself  must  abide  in  you,  and  you  in  Him. 


JUNE  29. 

Be  careful  for  nothing;  but  in  everything  by  prayer  and 
supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made 
known  unto  God.  And  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 
understajtding,  shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through 
Christ  Jesus. — Phil.  iv.  6,  7. 

^\/*  O  care  but  all  prayer.  No  anxiety,  but 
^  \^^  much  joyful  communion  with  God.  Carry 
your  desires  to  the  Lord  of  your  life,  the  guardian 
of  your  soul.  Go  to  Him  with  two  portions  of 
prayer,  and  one  of  fragrant  praise.  Do  not  pray 
doubtfully,  but  thankfully.  Consider  that  you  have 
your  petitions,  and,  therefore,  thank  God  for  His 
Grace. 


JUNE  30. 

When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  He  maketh  even  hii 
enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him. — Prov.  xvi.  7. 

/MUST  see  that  my  ways  please  the  Lord. 
Even  then  I  shall  have  enemies ;  and,  perhaps 
all  the  more  certainly  because  I  endeavored  to  do 
that  which  is  right.  But  what  a  promise  this  is ! 
The  Lord  will  make  the  wrath  of  men  to  praise  Him, 
and  abate  it  so  that  it  shall  not  distress  me.  When 
I  meet  death,  who  is  called  the  last  enemy,  I  pray 
that  I  may  be  at  peace.  Only  let  my  great  care  be 
to  please  the  Lord  in  all  things. 


JULY   1. 

Cn  ETURN  unto  the  Lord  thy  God."  Where 
-^\^^^  we  first  found  salvation  we  shall  find  it 
again.  At  the  foot  of  Christ's  cross,  confessing  sin. 
Moreover,  the  Lord  will  have  us  obey  His  voice 
according  to  all  that  He  has  commanded  us,  and  we 
must  do  this  with  all  our  heart  and  all  our  soul,  and 
then  our  captivity  shall  end. 

Often  depression  of  spirit  and  great  misery  of 
soul  are  removed  as  soon  as  we  quit  our  idols  and 
bow  ourselves  to  obedience  before  the  living  God. 
We  may  return  to  Zion's  citizenship,  and  that  speed- 
ily.    Lord,  turn  our  captivity! 

JULY  2. 

(STpRIENDSHIP,  however,  though  very  pleasing 
J  and  exceedingly  blessed,  has  been  the  cause  of 
the  greatest  misery  to  men  when  it  has  been  un- 
worthy and  unfaithful;  for  just  in  proportion  as  a 
good  friend  is  sweet,  a  false  friend  is  full  of  bitter- 
ness. "A  faithless  friend  is  sharper  than  an  adder's 
tooth."  It  is  sweet  to  repose  in  some  one ;  but  O ! 
how  bitter  to  have  that  support  snapped,  and  to 
receive  a  grievous  fall  as  the  effect  of  your  confi- 
dence. Solomon  declares  that  ''there  is  a  friend  that 
sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  That  friend,  I  sup- 
pose, he  never  found  in  the  pomps  and  vanities  of 
the  world.  He  had  tried  them  all,  but  he  found  them 
empty;  he  passed  through  all  their  joys. 


JULY  3. 

/C^OULD  faith  believe  in  a  Being  more  answer- 
vJ^  able  to  all  our  needs,  more  helpful  to  our 
noblest  longings?  Allied  to  Jesus,  we  confidently 
aspire  to  such  likeness  to  our  Creator  as  it  is  possible 
for  a  creature  to  bear.  Nor  is  the  advantage  less 
in  the  other  direction,  for  here  is  a  Man,  bound  to 
us  by  relationship  and  affection  the  most  intense,' 
who  is  not  only  tender  to  the  last  degree  of  our 
suffering  nature,  but  is  also  as  wise  as  he  is 
brotherly,  and  as  mighty  to  subdue  our  faults  as  he 
is  gentle  to  bear  with  our  frailties.  His  Manhood 
brings  Jesus  down  to  us,  but  united  with  the  divine 
nature  it  lifts  us  up  to  God,  The  Lord  Jesus  thus 
not  only  ministers  to  our  comfort,  but  to  our  better- 
ment, the  greater  concern. 

JULY  4. 

y^LL  they  that  heard  it  wondered  at  those 
^^-^  things."  We  must  not  cease  to  wonder  at 
the  great  marvels  of  our  God.  It  would  be  very 
difficult  to  draw  a  line  between  holy  wonder  and  real 
worship;  for  when  the  soul  is  overwhelmed  with  the 
majesty  of  God's  glory,  though  it  may  not  express 
itself  in  song,  or  even  utter  its  voice  with  bowed 
head  and  humble  prayer,  yet  it  silently  adores.  Our 
incarnate  God  is  to  be  worshiped  as  "the  Wonder- 
ful." That  God  should  consider  his  fallen  creature, 
man,  and  should  himself  undertake  to  be  man's 
Redeemer,  and  to  pay  his  ransom  price,  is^  indeed 
marvelous ! 


JULY  5. 

^^^HRIST  will  be  master  of  the  heart,  and  sin 
L/  must  be  mortified.  If  your  life  is  unholy  your 
heart  is  unchanged;  you  are  an  unsaved  person.  If 
the  Saviour  has  not  sanctified  you,  renewed  you, 
given  you  a  hatred  of  sin  and  a  love  of  holiness,  the 
grace  which  does  not  make  a  man  better  than  others 
is  a  worthless  counterfeit.  Christ  saves  his  people, 
not  in  their  sins,  but  from  them.  ''Without  holiness 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  "Let  every  one  that 
nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity.'* 
If  not  saved  from  sin,  how  shall  we  hope  to  be 
counted  among  his  people.  Lord,  save  me  even 
now  from  all  evil,  and  enable  me  to  honor  my 
Saviour. 

JULY  6. 

tf^y*  E  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more 
^-^  fruit."  If  you  bring  forth  fruit,  you  will 
have  to  endure  affliction.  But  this  affliction  works 
out  such  precious  results,  that  the  Christian  who  is 
the  subject  of  it  must  learn  to  rejoice  in  tribulations, 
because  as  his  tribulations  abound,  so  his  con- 
solations abound  by  Christ  Jesus.  Rest  assured,  if 
you  are  a  child  of  God,  you  will  be  no  stranger  to 
the  rod.  Sooner  or  later  every  bar  of  gold  must  pass 
through  the  fire.  You  will  be  delivered  from  cling- 
ing to  the  present,  and  made  to  long  for  those  eternal 
things  which  are  so  soon  to  be  revealed  to  you. 


JULY  7. 

/^^OD  ordains  with  accurate  wisdom  the  most 
\j  fitting  time  for  the  redeemed  to  abide  below. 
Surely,  if  there  could  be  regrets  in  heaven,  the 
saints  might  mourn  that  they  did  not  live  longer  here 
to  do  more  good.  Oh,  for  more  sheaves  for  my 
Lord's  garner!  more  jewels  for  his  crown!  But 
how,  unless  there  be  more  work?  When  we  are 
fully  serving  God,  and  he  is  giving  us  to  scatter 
precious  seed,  and  reap  a  hundredfold,  we  would 
even  say  it  is  well  for  us  to  abide  where  we  are. 
Whether  our  Master  shall  say  "go,"  or  "stay,"  let 
us  be  equally  well  pleased,  so  long  as  he  indulges  us 
with  his  presence. 

JULY  8. 

/f^  an  encouragement  cheerfully  to  offer  inter- 
^^-^  cessory  prayer,  remember  that  such  prayer  is 
the  sweetest  God  ever  hears,  for  the  prayer  of  Christ 
is  of  this  character.  His  intercession  must  be  the 
most  acceptable  of  all  supplications — and  the  more 
like  our  prayer  is  to  Christ's,  the  sweeter  it  will  be ; 
thus  while  petitions  for  ourselves  will  be  accepted, 
our  pleadings  for  others,  having  in  them  more  of 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  more  love,  more  faith,  more 
brotherly  kindness,  will  be,  through  the  precious 
merits  of  Jesus,  the  sweetest  oblation  that  we  can 
offer  to  God,  the  very  fat  of  our  sacrifice.  Remem- 
ber, again,  that  intercessory  prayer  is  exceedingly 
prevalent.    What  wonders  it  has  wrought! 


JULY  9. 

/T  is  true  I  am  weak  in  faith,  and  prone  to  fall, 
but  my  very  feebleness  is  the  reason  why  I 
should  always  be  where  thou  feedest  thy  flock,  that 
I  may  be  strengthened  and  preserved  in  safety  be- 
side the  still  waters.  Why  should  I  turn  aside? 
There  is  no  reason  why  I  should,  but  there  are  a 
thousand  reasons  why  I  should  not,  for  Jesus 
beckons  me  to  come.  If  he  withdraw  himself  a  little, 
it  is  but  to  make  me  prize  his  presence  more.  Now 
that  I  am  grieved  and  distressed  at  being  away  from 
him,  he  will  lead  me  yet  again  to  that  sheltered  nook 
where  the  lambs  of  his  fold  are  sheltered  from  the 
burning  sun. 

JULY  10. 

^^Ty^ITHOUT  him  we  can  do  nothing,  but  by  his 
almighty  energy  the  most  extraordinary  re- 
sults can  be  produced :  everything  depends  upon  his 
manifesting  or  concealing  his  power.  Do. we  always 
look  up  to  him  both  for  our  inner  life  and  our  out- 
ward service  with  the  respectful  dependence  which 
is  fitting?  Do  we  not  too  often  run  before  his  call 
and  act  independently  of  his  aid?  Let  us  humble 
ourselves  this  day  for  past  neglects,  and  now  en- 
treat the  heavenly  dew  to  rest  upon  us,  the  sacred  oil 
to  anoint  us,  the  celestial  flame  to  burn  within  us. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  no  temporary  gift,  he  abides 
with  the  saints.  We  have  but  to  seek  him  aright 
and  he  will  be  found  of  us. 


JULY  11.  ' 

•y  *HE  sovereign  choice  of  the  Father,  by  which 
^  he  elected  us  unto  eternal  life,  or  ever  the  earth 
was,  is  a  matter  of  vast  antiquity,  since  no  date  can 
be  conceived  for  it  by  the  mind  of  man.  We  were 
chosen  from  before  the  foundations  of  the  world. 
Everlasting  love  went  with  the  choice,  for  it  was 
not  a  bare  act  of  divine  will  by  which  we  were 
set  apart,  but  the  divine  affections  were  concerned. 
The  Father  loved  us  in  and  from  the  beginning. 
Here  is  a  theme  for  daily  contemplation.  The 
eternal  purpose  to  redeem  us  from  our  foreseen  ruin, 
to  cleanse  and  sanctify  us,  and  at  last  to  glorify  us, 
was  of  infinite  antiquity,  and  runs  side  by  side  with 
immutable  love  and  absolute  sovereignty. 

JULY  12. 

CJ/iyE  have  not  so  clear  a  view  of  him  as  we  could 
^^  wish ;  we  know  not  the  heights  and  depths  of 
his  love ;  but  we  know  of  a  surety  that  he  is  too  good 
to  withdraw  from  a  trembling  soul  the  gift  which 
it  has  been  able  to  obtain.  If  we  have  faith  as  a 
grain  of  mustard  seed,  salvation  is  our  present  and 
eternal  possession.  If  we  cannot  clasp  the  Lord  in 
our  hands  with  Simeon,  if  we  dare  not  lean  our 
heads  upon  his  bosom  with  John,  yet  if  we  can 
venture  in  the  press  behind  him,  and  touch  the  hem 
of  his  garment,  we  are  made  whole.  Courage,  timid 
one  !  thy  faith  hath  saved  thee ;  go  in  peace.  ''Being 
justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God." 


JULY   13. 

(TTY; HEREBY  they  have  made  thee  glad."  And 
yy  who  are  thus  privileged  to  make  the  Saviour 
glad?  His  Church — his  people.  But  is  it  possible? 
He  makes  us  glad,  but  how  can  %ioe  make  him  glad? 
By  our  love.  See,  loving  heart,  how  he  delights  in 
you.  When  you  lean  your  head  on  his  bosom,  you 
not  only  receive,  but  you  give  him  joy;  when  you 
gaze  with  love  upon  his  all-glorious  face,  you  not 
only  obtain  comfort,  but  impart  delight.  Our  praise, 
too,  gives  him  joy — not  the  song  of  the  lips  alone, 
but  the  melody  of  the  heart's  deep  gratitude.  He 
loves  us,  not  for  the  value  of  what  we  give,  but  for 
the  motive  from  which  the  gift  springs. 

JULY  14. 

TF  the  Lord  be  with  us  through  life,  we  need 
not  fear  for  our  dying  confidence ;  for  when  we 
come  to  die,  we  shall  find  that  "the  Lord  is  there;" 
where  the  billows  are  most  tempestuous,  and  the 
water  is  most  chill,  we  shall  feel  the  bottom,  and 
know  that  it  is  good :  our  feet  shall  stand  upon  the 
Rock  of  Ages  when  time  is  passing  away.  Beloved, 
from  the  first  ol  a  Christian's  life  to  the  last,  the 
only  reason  why  he  does  not  perish  is  because  "the 
Lord  is  there!'  When  the  God  of  everlasting  love 
shall  change  and  leave  his  elect  to  perish,  then  may 
the  Church  of  God  be  destroyed;  but  noc  till  then, 
because  it  is  written,  Jehovah  Shammah,  ''the 
Lord  is  there" 


JULY  15. 

/C^OMMON,  too  common  is  the  sin  of  forgetting 
y^  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  folly  and  ingratitude. 
He  deserves  well  at  our  hands,  for  He  is  good,  su- 
premely good.  As  God,  He  is  good  essentially.  He 
shares  in  the  threefold  ascription  of  Holy,  holy,  holy, 
which  ascends  to  the  Triune  Jehovah.  Unmixed 
purity,  and  truth,  and  grace  is  He.  He  is  good 
benevolently,  tenderly  bearing  with  our  wayward- 
ness, striving  with  our  rebellious  wills ;  quickening 
us  from  our  death  in  sin,  and  then  training  us  for 
the  skies  as  a  loving  nurse  fosters  her  child.  How 
generous,  forgiving,  and  tender  is  this  patient  Spirit 
of  God. 

JULY  16. 

C7/^  E  first  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon."  Let 
^-^  thy  religion  begin  at  home,  have  a  care  to 
put  forth  the  sweetest  fruit  of  spiritual  life  and 
testimony  in  thine  own  family.  You  may  be  very 
deficient  in  talent  yourself,  and  yet  you  may  be  the 
means  of  drawing  to  Christ  one  who  shall  become 
eminent  in  grace  and  service.  Ah !  dear  friend,  you 
little  know  the  possibilities  which  are  in  you.  You 
may  but  speak  a  word  to  a  child,  and  in  that  child 
there  may  be  slumbering  a  noble  heart  which  shall 
stir  the  Christian  church  in  years  to  come.  Andrew 
has  only  two  talents,  but  he  finds  Peter.  Go  thou 
and  do  likewise. 


JULY  17. 

TT  is  quite  certain  that  those  whom  Christ  has 
washed  in  His  precious  blood  need  not  make 
a  confession  of  sin,  as  culprits  or  criminals,  before 
God  the  Judge,  for  Christ  has  forever  taken  away 
all  their  sins,  so  that  they  no  longer  stand  where 
they  can  be  condemned ;  but  having  become  children, 
and  offending  as  children,  ought  they  not  every  day 
to  go  before  their  heavenly  Father  and  confess  their 
sin,  and  acknowledge  their  iniquity  ?  Nature  teaches 
that  it  is  the  duty  of  erring  children  to  make  a  con- 
fession to  their  earthly  father,  and  the  grace  of  God 
in  the  heart  teaches  us  that  we,  as  Christians,  owe 
the  same  duty  to  our  heavenly  Father. 

JULY  18. 

CJyi^E  should  be  abler  teachers  of  others,  and  less 
'^^  liable  to  be  carried  about  by  every  wind  of 
doctrine,  if  we  sought  to  have  a  more  intelligent 
understanding  of  the  Word  of  God.  As  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Author  of  the  Scriptures,  is  He  who 
alone  can  enlighten  us  rightly  to  understand  them, 
we  should  constantly  ask  His  teaching,  and  His 
guidance  into  all  truth. 

Therefore  if,  for  your  own  and  others'  profiting, 
you  desire  to  be  "filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God's 
will  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding,"  re- 
member that  prayer  is  your  best  means  of  study. 
You  may  force  your  way  through  anything  with  the 
leverage  of  prayer. 


JULY  19. 

rHE  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  and  great  in  power/* 
but  the  greatness  of  His  power  brings  us 
mercy.  Dear  reader,  what  is  your  state  this  day? 
Can  you  by  humble  faith  look  to  Jesus  and  say, 
"My  substitute.  Thou  art  my  rock,  my  trust"? 
Then,  beloved,  be  not  afraid  of  God's  power;  for 
now  that  you  are  forgiven  and  accepted,  now  that 
by  faith  you  have  fled  to  Christ  for  refuge,  the  power 
of  God  need  no  more  terrify  you,  than  the  shield 
and  sword  of  the  warrior  need  terrify  those  whom  he 
loves.  Rather  rejoice  that  He  who  is  ''great  in 
power"  is  your  Father  and  Friend. 

JULY  20. 

you  have  not  the  making  of  your  own  cross, 
your  cross  is  prepared  and  appointed  for 
you  by  divine  love,  and  you  are  cheerfully  to  accept 
it.  This  day  Jesus  bids  you  submit  your  shoulder 
to  His  easy  yoke.  Jesus  was  a  cross-bearer ;  He 
leads  the  way  in  the  path  of  sorrow.  Surely  you 
could  not  desire  a  better  guide!  And  if  He  carries 
a  cross,  what  nobler  burden  would  you  desire  ?  The 
Via  Crucis  is  the  way  of  safety;  fear  not  to  tread 
its  thorny  paths. 

It  is  a  wooden  cross,  and  a  man  can  carry  it,  for 
the  Man  of  Sorrows  tried  the  load.  Take  up  your 
cross,  and  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  you 
will  soon  love  it. 


JULY  21. 

rHERE  are  occasions  when  God's  servants 
shrink  from  duty.  But  what  is  the  consequence  ? 
They  lose  the  presence  and  comfortable  enjoyment 
of  God's  love.  When  we  obey  our  Lord  Jesus  as  be- 
lievers should,  our  God  is  with  us ;  and  though  we 
have  the  wdiole  world  against  us,  if  we  have  God 
with  us,  what  does  it  matter?  But  the  moment  we 
start  back,  and  seek  our  own  inventions,  we  are  at 
sea  without  a  pilot.  Then  may  we  bitterly  lament 
and  groan  out,  "O  my  God,  where  hast  thou  gone? 
How  could  I  have  been  so  foolish  as  to  lose  all  the 
bright  shinings  of  thy  face?  This  is  a  price  too 
high.  Let  me  return  to  my  allegiance,  that  I  may 
rejoice  in  thy  presence." 

JULY  22. 

(^^/^HEN  God  seems  most  to  leave  his  church, 
'^^  his  heart  is  warm  towards  her.  History 
shows  us  that  whenever  God  uses  a  rod  to  chasten 
his  servan,:j,  he  always  breaks  it  afterwards,  as  if 
he  loathed  the  rod  which  gave  his  children  pain. 
"Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord 
pitieth  them  that  fear  him."  His  blows  are  no 
evidences  of  want  of  love.  You  may  fear  that  the 
Lord  has  passed  you  by,  but  it  is  not  so :  he  who 
counts  the  stars,  and  calls  them  by  their  names,  is 
in  no  danger  of  forgetting  his  own  children.  He 
knows  your  case  as  thoroughly  as  if  you  were  the 
only  creature  he  ever  made,  or  the  only  saint  he 
ever  loved.    Approach  him  and  be  at  peace. 


JULY  23. 

rr'HOSE  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old, 
from  everlasting."  The  Lord  Jesus  had  go- 
ings forth  for  his  people,  as  their  representative 
before  the  throne,  long  before  they  appeared  upon 
the  stage  of  time.  It  was  "from  everlasting"  that  he 
signed  the  compact  with  his  Father,  that  he  would 
pay  blood  for  blood,  suffering  for  suffering,  agony 
for  agony,  and  death  for  death,  in  the  behalf  of  his 
people ;  it  was  "from  everlasting"  that  he  gave  him- 
self up,  without  a  murmuring  word.  His  goings 
forth  as  our  Surety  were  from  everlasting.  Pause, 
my  soul,  and  wonder !  Thou  hadst  goings  forth  in 
the  person  of  Jesus  "from  everlasting." 

JULY  24. 

^ /*  OT  only  when  thou  wast  born  into  the  world 
^  \^^  did  Christ  love  thee,  but  his  delights  were 
with  the  sons  of  men  before  there  were  any  sons  of 
men.  Often  did  he  think  of  them ;  from  everlasting 
to  everlasting  he  had  set  his  affections  upon  them.  I 
am  sure  he  would  not  have  loved  me  so  long  if 
he  had  not  been  a  changeless  Lover.  If  he  could 
grow  weary  of  me  he  would  have  been  tired  of  me 
long  before  now.  If  he  had  not  loved  me  with  a 
love  as  deep  as  life  and  as  strong  as  death,  he  would 
have  turned  from  me  long  ago.  Oh,  joy  above  all 
joys,  to  know  that  I  am  his  everlasting  and  inalien- 
able inheritance,  given  to  him.  bv  his  Father. 


JULY  25. 

CTV^IGHT  not  Jesus  well  say  to  us,  "I  have 
^^^^  somewhat  against  thee,  because  thou  hast 
left  thy  first  love  ?"  Alas !  it  is  but  little  we  have 
done  for  our  Master's  glory.  Our  winter  has  lasted 
all  too  long.  We  give  to  God  pence  when  he  de- 
serveth  pounds,  nay,  deserveth  our  heart's  blood  to 
be  coined  in  the  service  of  his  church  and  of  his 
truth.  But  shall  we  continue  this?  O  Lord,  after 
thou  hast  so  richly  blessed  us,  shall  we  be  ungrateful, 
and  become  indifferent  to  thy  good  cause  ana  work  ? 

0  quicken  us  that  we  may  return  to  our  first  love, 
and  do  our  first  works !  Send  us  a  genial  spring,  O 
Sun  of  Righteousness. 

JULY  26. 

(S^LESSED  Lord  Jesus,  be  with  me,  reveal  thy- 
"'-^   self,  and  abide  with  me  all  night,  so  that  when 

1  awake,  I  may  be  still  with  thee.  I  note  that  the 
dove  brought  in  her  mouth  an  olive  branch  plucked 
off,  the  memorial  of  the  past  day,  and  a  prophecy 
of  the  future.  Have  I  no  pleasing  record  to  bring 
home?  No  pledge  and  earnest  of  loving-kindness 
yet  to  come?  Yes,  my  Lord,  I  present  thee  my 
grateful  acknowledgements  for  tender  mercies  which 
have  been  new  every  morning  and  fresh  every  eve- 
ning ;  and  now,  I  pray  thee,  put  forth  thy  hand  and 
take  thy  dove  into  thv  bosom. 


JULY  27. 

/f^  the  Spirit  of  God  descended  upon  the  Lord 
^^■^  Jesus,  the  head,  so  he  also,  in  measure,  de- 
scends upon  the  members  of  the  mystical  body.  His 
descent  is  to  us  after  the  same  fashion  as  that  in 
which  it  fell  upon  our  Lord.  There  is  often  a 
singular  rapidity  about  it;  or  ever  we  are  aware, 
we  are  impelled  onward  and  heavenward  beyond  all 
expectation.  The  brooding  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
upon  the  face  of  the  deep,  first  produced  order  and 
life,  and  in  our  hearts  he  causes  and  fosters  new 
life  and  light.  Blessed  Spirit,  as  thou  didst  rest 
upon  our  dear  Redeemer,  even  so  rest  thou  upon 
us  from  this  time  forward  and  forever. 

JULY  28. 

_  The  barrel  of  meal  wasted  not,  neither  did  the  cruse  of 
oil  fail,  according  to  the  ivord  of  the  Lord,  which  He  spake 
by  Elijah. 

XT'  OU,  dear  reader,  have  daily  necessities,  and 
because  they  come  so  frequently,  you  are 
apt  to  fear  that  the  barrel  of  meal  will  one  day  be 
empty,  and  the  cruse  of  oil  will  fail  you.  Rest  as- 
sured that,  according  to  the  Word  of  God,  this  shall 
not  be  the  case.  Each  day,  though  it  bring  its 
trouble,  shall  bring  its  help;  and  though  you  should 
live  to  outnumber  the  years  of  Methuselah,  and 
though  your  needs  should  be  as  many  as  the  sands  of 
the  seashore,  yet  shall  God's  grace  and  mercy  last 
through  all  your  necessities,  and  you  shall  never 
know  a  real  lack. 


JULY  2^. 

^T/^ORDS  cannot  set  forth  the  preciousness  of 
^^  the  Lord  Jesus  to  his  people.  Dear  reader, 
what  wouldst  thou  do  in  the  world  without  him, 
in  the  midst  of  its  temptations  and  its  cares?  What 
wouldst  thou  do  in  the  morning  without  him,  when 
thou  wakest  up  and  lookest  forward  to  the  day's 
battle?  What  wouldst  thou  do  at  night,  when  thou 
comest  home  jaded  and  weary,  if  there  were  no  door 
of  fellowship  between  thee  and  Christ?  Blessed  be 
his  name,  he  will  not  suffer  us  to  try  our  lot  with- 
out him,  for  Jesus  never  forsakes  his  own.  Yet, 
let  the  thought  of  w]iat  life  would  be  without  him, 
enhance  his  preciousness. 

JULY  30. 

<^DE  not  content  with  an  interview  now  and  then, 
but  seek  always  to  retain  his  company,  for  only 
in  his  presence  hast  thou  either  comfort  or  safety. 
Jesus  should  not  be  unto  us  a  friend  who  calls  upon 
us  now  and  then,  but  one  with  whom  we  walk  ever- 
more. Thou  hast  a  difficult  road  before  thee;  see, 
O  traveler  to  heaven,  that  thou  go  not  without  thy 
guide.  Thou  hast  to  pass  through  the  fiery  furnace ; 
enter  it  not,  unless,  like  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and 
Abednego,  thou  hast  the  Son  of  God  to  be  thy 
companion.  In  every  condition  thou  wilt  need  Jesus. 
Keep  close  to  thy  Best  Friend,  and  he  will  refresh 
and  cheer  thee 


JULY  31. 

rF'HERE  is  a  time  appointed  for  weakness  and 
•^  sickness,  when  we  shall  have  to  glorify  God  by 
suffering,  and  not  by  earnest  activity.  There  is  no 
single  point  in  which  we  can  hope  to  escape  from 
the  sharp  arrows  of  affliction;  out  of  our  few  days 
there  is  not  one  secure  from  sorrow.  Beloved  reader, 
set  not  your  affections  upon  things  of  earth ;  but  seek 
those  things  which  are  above,  for  here  the  moth  de- 
voureth,  and  the  thief  breaketh  through,  but  there 
all  joys  are  perpetual  and  eternal.  The  path  of 
trouble  is  the  way  home.  Lord,  make  this  thought 
a  pillow  for  many  a  weary  head ! 


AUGUST  1. 

/^^OMMUNION  with  Christ  is  a  certain  cur 
^^  for  every  ill.  Whether  it  be  the  wormwootl 
of  woe,  or  the  cloying  surfeit  of  earthly  delight, 
close  fellowship  with  the  Lord  Jesus  will  take  bitter- 
ness from  the  one,  and  satiety  from  the  other.  Live 
near  to  Jesus,  Christian,  and  it  is  matter  of  second- 
ary importance  whether  thou  livest  on  the  mountain 
of  honor  or  in  the  valley  of  humiliation.  Living 
near  to  Jesus,  thou  art  covered  with  the  wings  of 
God,  and  underneath  thee  are  the  everlasting  arms. 
Let  nothing  keep  thee  from  that  hallowed  inter- 
course, which  is  the  choice  privilege  of  a  soul  wedded 

to   THE  WELL-BELOVED. 

AUGUST  2. 

(TT^OUBTLESS  the  reader  has  been  tried  with  the 
•^-^  temptation  to  rely  upon  things  which  are  seen, 
instead  of  resting  alone  upon  the  invisible  God. 
Christians  often  look  to  man  for  help  and  counsel, 
and  mar  the  noble  simplicity  of  their  reliance  upon 
their  God.  Does  this  portion  meet  the  eye  of  a 
child  of  God  anxious  about  temporals,  then  would 
we  reason  with  him  a  while.  You  trust  in  Jesus, 
and  only  in  Jesus,  for  your  salvation;  then  why  are 
you  troubled?  ''Because  of  my  great  care."  Is  it 
not  written,  "Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord?" 
"Be  careful  for  nothing,  but  in  everything  by  prayer 
and  supplication  make  known  your  wants  untn  God." 


AUGUST  3. 

^  HOUGH  the  host  that  feeds  at  Jehovah's  table 
•^  is  countless  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  yet  each 
one  has  his  portion  of  meat.  Think  how  much  grace 
one  saint  requires;  so  much  that  nothing  but  the 
Infinite  could  supply  him  for  one  day;  and  yet  the 
Lord  spreads  his  table,  not  for  one,  but  many  saints ; 
not  for  one  day,  but  for  many  years.  The  guests  at 
mercy's  banquet  are  satisfied,  nay,  more  "abundantly 
satisfied ;"  and  that  not  with  ordinary  fare,  but  with 
fatness,  the  peculiar  fatness  of  God's  own  house ;  and 
such  feasting  is  guaranteed  by  a  faithful  promise  to 
all  those  children  of  men  who  put  their  trust  under 
the  shadow  of  Jehovah's  wings. 

AUGUST  4. 

^^HIS  is  no  unusual  occurrence;  it  is  the  general 
"^  rule  of  the  moral  universe  that  those  men 
prosper  who  do  their  work  with  all  their  hearts, 
while  those  are  almost  certain  to  fail  who  go  to  their 
labor  leaving  half  their  hearts  behind  them.  God 
does  not  give  harvests  to  idle  men,  except  harvests 
of  thistles,  nor  is  he  pleased  to  send  wealth  to  those 
who  will  not  dig  in  the  field  to  find  its  hid  treasure. 
It  is  universally  confessed  that  if  man  would  prosper, 
he  must  be  diligent  in  business.  It  is  the  same  in 
religion  as  it  is  in  other  things.  If  you  would 
prosper  in  your  work  for  Jesus,  let  it  be  heart  work, 
and  let  it  be  done  with  all  your  heart 


AUGUST  S. 

C7P  OW  constantly  our  Master  used  the  title,  the 
^^  "Son  of  Man!"  If  he  had  chosen,  he 
might  always  have  spoken  of  himself  as  the  Son  of 
God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Wonderful,  the 
Counselor,  the  Prince  of  Peace ;  but  behold  the  low- 
liness of  Jesus !  He  prefers  to  call  himself  the  Son 
of  man.  Let  us  learn  a  lesson  of  humility  from  our 
Saviour.  Jesus  loved  manhood  so  much,  that  he 
delighted  to  honor  it;  and  since  it  is  a  high  honor, 
and,  indeed,  the  greatest  dignity  of  manhood,  that 
Jesus  is  the  Son  of  man,  he  is  wont  to  display  this 
name,  that  he  may,  as  it  were,  hang  royal  stars  upon 
the  breast  of  manhood,  and  show  forth  the  love  of 
God  to  Abraham's  seed. 

AUGUST  6. 

^7/i7HENEVER  we  are  privileged  to  eat  of  the 
^''^  bread  which  Jesus  gives,  we  are  satisfied  with 
the  full  and  sweet  repast.  When  Jesus  is  the  host, 
no  guest  goes  empty  from  the  table.  Our  head  is 
satisfied  with  the  precious  truth  which  Christ  re- 
veals; our  heart  is  content  with  Jesus,  our  hope  is 
satisfied,  for  whom  have  we  in  heaven  but  Jesus? 
and  our  desire  is  satiated,  for  what  can  we  wish  for 
more  than  "to  know  Christ  and  to  be  found  in  him?" 
Jesus  fills  our  conscience ,  till  it  is  at  perfect  peace; 
our  judgment  with  the  certainty  of  his  teachings ;  our 
memory  with  recollections  of  what  he  has  done,  and 
our  imagination  with  the  prospects  of  what  he  is  yet 
to  do. 


AUGUST  7. 

"Canst  thou  hind  the  sweet  influences  of  Pleiades^  or  loose 
ihe  bands  of  Orion?" 

<nL/^^  looses  the  bands  of  Orion,  and  none  but 
^^  he.    W^hat  a  blessing  it  is  that  he  can  do  it! 

O  that  he  would  perform  the  wonder  to-night! 
Lord,  end  my  winter,  and  let  my  spring  begin.  I 
cannot,  with  all  my  longings,  raise  my  soul  out  of 
her  death  and  dullness,  but  all  things  are  possible 
with  thee.  I  need  celestial  influences,  the  clear 
shinings  of  thy  love,  the  beams  of  thy  grace,  the 
light  of  thy  countenance ;  these  are  the  Pleiades  to 
me.  I  suffer  much  from  sin  and  temptation;  these 
are  my  wintry  signs,  my  terrible  Orion.  Lord,  work 
wonders  in  me,  and  for  me.    Amen. 

AUGUST  8. 

rHE  Saviour  was  "a  man  of  sorrows,"  but  every 
thoughtful  mind  has  discovered  the  fact  that 
down  deep  in  His  innermost  soul  He  carried  an  in- 
exhaustible treasury  of  refined  and  heavenly  joy. 
Of  all  the  human  race,  there  was  never  a  man  who 
had  a  deeper,  purer,  or  more  abiding  peace  than  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  *'He  was  anointed  with  the  oil 
of  gladness  above  His  fellows."  His  vast  benevo- 
lence must  have  afforded  Him  the  deepest  possible 
delight,  for  benevolence  is  joy.  There  were  a  few 
remarkable  seasons  when  this  joy  manifested  itself. 
"At  that  hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in  spirit,  and  said,  I 
thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth." 


AUGUST  9. 

CrpOUD  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe/' 
^ ^  Having  prayed,  you  must  also  watch ;  guard- 
ing every  thought,  word,  and  action  with  holy  jeal- 
ousy. Do  not  expose  yourself  unnecessarily ;  but  if 
called  to  exposure,  if  you  are  bidden  to  go  where 
the  darts  are  flying,  never  venture  forth  without  your 
shield;  for  the  devil  will  rejoice  that  his  hour  of 
triumph  is  come,  and  will  soon  make  you  fall  down 
wounded  by  his  arrows.  Though  slain  you  cannot 
be,  wounded  you  may  be.  "Be  sober,  be  vigilant; 
danger  may  be  in  an  hour  when  all  seemeth  securest 
to  thee."  Therefore  take  heed  to  thy  ways,  and 
watch  unto  prayer.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  guide  us 
in  all  our  ways. 

AUGUST  10. 

OON  OF  MAisr — whenever  He  said  that  word,  He 
Qj  shed  a  halo  round  the  head  of  Adam's  children. 
Jesus  Christ  called  Himself  the  Son  of  man  to  ex- 
press His  oneness  and  sympathy  with  His  people. 
He  thus  reminds  us  that  He  is  one  whom  we  may 
approach  without  fear.  As  a  man,  we  may  take  to 
Him  all  our  griefs  and  troubles,  for  He  knows  them 
by  experience;  in  that  He  Himself  hath  suffered  as 
the  "Son  of  man,"  He  is  able  to  succor  and  comfort 
us.  All  hail.  Thou  blessed  Jesus !  inasmuch  as  Thou 
art  evermore  using  the  sweet  name  which 
acknowledges  that  Thou  art  a  brother  and  a  near 
kinsman,  it  is  to  us  a  dear  token  of  Thy  grace,  Thy 

Viiimili'tv.  Th'v*  loA'^e. 


AUGUST  11. 

<!7y7HOLE-HEARTEDNESS  shows  itself  in 
^^  perseverance ;  there  may  be  failure  at  first, 
but  the  earnest  worker  will  say,  *'It  is  the  Lord's 
work,  and  it  must  be  done;  my  Lord  has  bidden 
me  do  it,  and  in  His  strength  I  will  accomplish  it." 
Christian,  art  thou  thus  "with  all  thine  heart'* 
serving  thy  Master?  Remember  the  earnestness  of 
Jesus !  Think  what  heart-work  was  His  !  He  could 
say,  "The  zeal  of  Thine  house  hath  eaten  Me  up." 
When  He  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  it  was  no 
light  burden  he  had  to  carry  upon  those  blessed 
shoulders ;  and  when  He  poured  out  His  heart,  it 
was  no  weak  effort  He  was  making  for  the  salvation 
of  His  people. 

AUGUST  12. 

CTY^HETHER  we  speak  of  the  active  or  passive 
^^  righteousness  of  Christ  there  is  an  equal 
fragrance.  There  was  a  sweet  savor  in  His  active 
life  by  which  He  honored  the  law  of  God,  and  made 
every  precept  to  glitter  like  a  precious  jewel  in  the 
pure  setting  of  His  own  person.  Such,  too,  was 
His  passive  obedience,  when  He  endured,  with  un- 
murmuring submission,  hunger  and  thirst,  cold  and 
nakedness,  and  at  length  was  fastened  to  the  cruel 
cross  that  He  might  suffer  the  wrath  of  God  in  our 
behalf.  These  two  things  are  sweet  before  the  Most 
High ;  and  for  the  sake  of  His  doing  and  His  dying, 
His  substitutionary  sufferings  and  His  vicarious 
obedience,  the  Lord  our  God  accepts  us. 


^ 


AUGUST  13. 

S  the  Father  loves  the  Son,  in  the  same  man- 
ner Jesus  loves  His  people.  He  loved  Him 
without  beginning,  and  thus  Jesus  loves  us.  "I  have 
loved  thee  zvith  an  everlasting  love."  You  can  trace 
the  beginning  of  human  affection ;  you  can  easily  find 
the  beginning  of  your  love  to  Christ,  but  His  love 
to  us  is  a  stream  whose  source  is  hidden  in  eternity. 
God  the  Father  loves  Jesus  without  any  change. 
Christian,  take  this  for  your  comfort,  that  there  is 
no  change  in  Jesus  Christ's  love  to  those  who  rest 
in  Him.  Yesterday  you  were  on  the  mount  and  you 
said,  "He  loves  me :"  to-day  you  are  in  the  valley 
of  humiliation,  but  He  loves  you  still  the  same. 

AUGUST  14. 

And  she  said,  Truth,  Lord:  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs 
which  fall  from  their  masters    fafe/^.— Matthew  xv.  27. 

(TJiyfy^  sins  are  many,  but  oh!  it  is  nothing  to 
^^^  Jesus  to  take  them  all  away.  "It  will  be  but 
a  small  thing  for  him  to  give  me  full  remission,  al- 
though it  will  be  an  infinite  blessing  for  me  to  receive 
it."  The  woman  opens  her  soul  wide,  expectmg 
great  things  of  Jesus,  and  he  fills  it  with  his  love. 
Dear  reader,  do  the  same.  She  laid  fast  hold  upon 
him,  drew  arguments  even  out  of  his  words;  she 
believed  great  things  of  him,  and  she  thus  overcame 
him.  She  won  the  victory  by  believing  in  him. 
Her  case  is  an  instance  of  prevailing  faith ;  and  ii 
we  would  conquer  like  her,  we  must  imitate  her. 


AUGUST  15. 

n^  O  whom  belongest  thou  ?"  Readei ,  let  me  assist 
'*'  you  m  your  response.  Have  you  been  ''horn 
again" f  If  you  have,  you  belong  to  Christ;  but 
v»rithout  the  new  birth  you  cannot  be  his.  In  zvhom 
do  you  trust?  For  those  who  believe  in  Jesus  are 
the  sons  of  God.  Whose  zvork  are  you  doing f 
You  are  sure  to  serve  your  master,  for  he  whom  you 
serve  is  thereby  owned  to  be  your  lord,  llliat  is 
your  conversation f  Is  it  heavenly,  or  is  it  earthly? 
What  have  you  learned  of  your  master?  If  you 
have  served  your  time  with  Jesus,  it  will  be  said  of 
you,  as  it  was  of  Peter  and  John,  'They  took 
knowledge  of  them  that  they  had  been  with  Jesus." 

AUGUST  16. 

rHE  lives  of  some  of  God's  people  fill  us  with 
holy  astonishment.  Strange  and  marvelous 
are  the  ways  which  God  used  in  their  case  to  find 
his  own.  Blessed  be  his  name,  he  never  relinquishes 
the  search  until  the  chosen  are  sought  out  effectu- 
ally. They  are  not  a  people  sought  to-day  and  cast 
away  to-morrow.  Almightiness  and  wisdom  com- 
bined will  make  no  failures;  they  shall  be  called 
''Sought  out!"  That  any  should  be  sought  out, 
IS  matchless  grace,  but  that  tve  should  be  sought  out 
is  grace  beyond  degree !  We  can  find  no  reason  for 
it  but  God's  own  sovereign  love,  and  can  only  lift 
up  our  heart  in  wonder,  and  praise  the  Lord  that  this 
day  we  wear  the  name  of  "Sought  out.'" 


AUGUST  17. 

<»J/f)E  have  sat  at  the  table  of  the  Lord's  love,  and 

'^^  said,  "Nothing  but  the  infinite  can  satisfy 
me ;  I  am  such  a  great  sinner  that  I  must  have  in- 
finite merit  to  wash  my  sin  away ;"  but  we  have  had 
our  sin  removed,  and  found  that  there  was  merit  to 
spare ;  we  have  had  our  hunger  relieved  at  the  feast 
of  sacred  love,  and  found  that  there  was  a  re- 
dundance of  spiritual  meat  remaining.  Yes,  there 
are  graces  to  which  we  have  not  attained ;  places  of 
fellowship  nearer  to  Christ  which  we  have  not 
reached;  and  heights  of  communion  which  our  feet 
have  not  climbed.  At  every  banquet  of  love  there 
are  many  baskets  of  fragments  left.  Let  us  magnify 
the  liberality  of  our  glorious  Redeemer. 

AUGUST  18. 

(TT/^EARIED  out  with  her  wanderings,  the  dove 
'^^  returns  at  length  to  the  ark  as  her  only  rest- 
ing place.  Noah  has  been  looking  out  for  his  dove 
all  day  long,  and  is  ready  to  receive  her.  She  has 
just  strength  to  reach  the  edge  of  the  ark,  when 
Noah  puts  forth  his  hand  and  pulls  her  in  unto  him. 
She  did  not  fly  right  in  herself,  but  was  too  fearful, 
or  too  wxary,  to  do  so.  She  flew  as  far  as  she  could, 
and  then  he  put  forth  his  hand  and  pulled  her  in 
unto  him.  Just  as  she  was  she  was  pulled  into  the 
ark.  So  you,  seeking  sinner,  with  all  your  sin,  will 
be  received.  "Only  return" — these  are  God's  two 
gracious  words — "only  return." 


AUGUST  19. 

/f^  this  hour  the  church  expects  to  walk  in 
^^-^  sympathy  with  her  Lord  along  a  thorny  road ; 
through  much  tribulation  she  is  forcing  her  way  to 
the  crown.  To  bear  the  cross  is  her  office,  and  yet 
the  church  has  a  deep  well  of  joy,  of  which  none  can 
drink  but  her  own  children.  There  are  stores  of 
wine,  and  oil,  and  corn,  hidden  in  the  midst  of  our 
Jerusalem,  upon  which  the  saints  of  God  are  ever- 
more sustained  and  nurtured ;  and  sometimes,  as  in 
our  Saviour's  case,  we  have  our  seasons  of  intense 
delight,  for  "There  is  a  river,  the  streams  whereof 
shall  make  glad  the  city  of  our  God."  Exiles  though 
we  be,  we  rejoice  in  our  King;  yea,  in  him  we  ex- 
ceedingly rejoice. 

AUGUST  20. 

'T^  HE  Father  loves  the  Son  zvithout  any  end, 
-^  and  thus  does  the  Son  love  his  people.  Rest 
confident  that  even  down  to  the  grave  Christ  will  go 
with  you,  and  that  up  again  from  it  he  will  be  your 
guide  to  the  celestial  hills.  Moreover,  the  Father 
loves  the  Son  without  any  measure,  and  the  same 
immeasurable  love  the  Son  bestows  upon  his  chosen 
ones.  The  whole  heart  of  Christ  is  dedicated  to  his 
people.  He  "loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us." 
His  is  a  love  which  passeth  knowledge.  Ah!  we 
have  indeed  a  precious  Saviour,  one  who  loves  with- 
out measure,  without  change,  without  beginning, 
without  end.  even  as  the  Father  loves  him.' 


AUGUST  21. 

/f  LITTLE  stay  on  earth  will  make  heaven  more 
^^-^  heavenly.  Nothing  makes  rest  so  sweet  as 
toil.  Our  battered  armor  and  scarred  counte- 
nances will  render  more  illustrious  our  victory  above, 
when  we  are  welcomed  to  the  seats  of  those  who 
have  overcome  the  world.  We  should  not  have  full 
fellowship  with  Christ  if  we  did  not  for  a  while 
sojourn  below,  for  he  was  baptized  with  a  baptism 
of  suffering  among  men,  and  we  must  be  baptized 
with  the  same  if  we  would  share  his  kingdom.  Fel- 
lowship with  Christ  is  so  honorable  that  the  sorest 
sorrow  is  a  light  price  by  which  to  procure  it. 

AUGUST  22. 

^y^  I  VINE  ornniscience  affords  no  comfort  to  the 
-^-^  ungodly  mind,  but  to  the  child  of  God  it  over- 
flows with  consolation.  God  is  always  thinking  upon 
us  never  turns  aside  his  mind  from  us,  for  it  would 
be  dreadful  to  exist  for  a  moment  beyond  the  ob- 
servation of  our  heavenly  Father.  His  thoughts 
are  always  tender,  loving,  far-reaching,  and  they 
bring  to  us  countless  benefits.  The  Lord  always 
did  think  upon  his  people:  hence  their  election  and 
the  covenant  of  grace  by  which  their  salvation  is 
secured ;  he  always  will  think  upon  them :  hence  their 
final  perseverance  by  which  they  shall  be  brought 
safely  to  their  final  rest. 


AUGUST  23. 

/F,  trained  by  the  Great  Teacher,  we  follow 
where  he  leads,  we  shall  find  good,  even  while 
in  this  dark  abode.  But  where  shall  this  wisdom  be 
found?  Many  have  dreamed  of  it,  but  have  not 
possessed  it.  Where  shall  we  learn  it?  Let  us 
listen  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  declared 
the  secret;  he  hath  revealed  to  the  sons  of  men 
wherein  true  wisdom  lieth,  and  we  have  in  it  the 
text,  "Whoso  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  happy  is  he." 
The  true  way  to  handle  a  matter  zvisely  is  to  trust 
in  the  Lord.  This  is  the  sure  clue  to  the  most  in- 
tricate labyrinths  of  life.  Lord,  in  this  sweet  even- 
tide walk  with  me  in  the  garden,  and  teach  me  the 
wisdom  of  faith. 

AUGUST  24. 

/T  is  well  for  us  when  prayers  about  our  sor- 
rows are  linked  wtih  pleas  concerning  our  sins 
— when,  being  under  God's  hand,  we  are  not  wholly 
taken  up  with  our  pain,  but  remember  our  offences 
against  God.  It  is  well,  also  to  take  both  sorrow 
and  sin  to  the  same  place.  It  was  to  God  that  David 
carried  his  sorrow :  it  was  to  God  that  David  con- 
fessed his  sin.  Observe,  then,  we  must  take  our 
sorrozvs  to  God.  Even  your  little  sorrows  you  may 
roll  upon  God,  for  he  counteth  the  hairs  of  your 
head;  and  your  great  sorrows  you  may  commit  to 
him.  for  he  holdeth  the  ocean  in  the  hollow  of  his 


AUGUST  25. 

CTJRAYER  sometimes  tarrieth  like  a  petitioner  at 
■^  the  gate,  until  the  King  cometh  forth  to  fill  her 
bosom  with  the  blessings  which  she  seeketh.  The 
Lord,  when  he  hath  given  great  faith,  has  been 
known  to  try  it  by  long  delayings.  He  has  suf- 
fered his  servants'  voices  to  echo  in  their  ears  as 
from  a  brazen  sky.  Unanswered  petitions  are  not 
unheard.  By  and  by  thy  suit  shall  prevail.  Canst 
thou  not  be  content  to  wait  a  little?  Will  not  thy 
Lord's  time  be  better  than  thy  time?  By  and  by 
he  will  comfortably  appear,  to  thy  soul's  joy,  and 
make  thee  put  away  the  sackcloth  and  ashes  of  long 
waiting,  and  put  on  the  scarlet  and  fine  linen  of  full 
fruition. 

AUGUST  26. 

/N  all  our  wanderings  the  watchful  glance  of  the 
Eternal  Watcher  is  evermore  fixed  upon  us — 
we  never  roam  beyond  the  Shepherd's  eye.  In  our 
sorrows  he  observes  us  incessantly,  and  not  a  pang 
escapes  him ;  in  our  toils  he  marks  all  our  weariness, 
and  writes  in  his  book  all  the  struggles  of  his  faith- 
ful ones.  These  thoughts  of  the  Lord  encompass 
us  in  all  our  paths,  and  penetrate  the  innermost 
region  of  our  being. 

Dear  reader,  is  this  precious  to  you?  then  hold 
to  it.  The  Lord  liveth  and  thinketh  upon  us,  this 
is  a  truth  far  too  precious  for  us  to  be  lightly  robbed 
of  it.  If  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  us,  all  is  well,  and 
we  may  rejoice  evermore. 


AUGUST  27. 

C^EHOLD  the  epitaph  of  all  those  blessed  saints 
-'-^  who  fell  asleep  before  the  coming  of  our  Lord ! 
It  matters  nothing  how  else  they  died,  this  one  point, 
in  which  they  all  agree,  is  the  most  worthy  of  record, 
"they  all  died  in  faith."  In  faith  they  lived — it  was 
their  comfort,  their  guide,  their  motive,  and  their* 
support;  and  in  the  same  spiritual  grace  they  died, 
ending  their  life-song  in  the  sweet  strain  in  which 
they  had  so  long  continued.  They  did  not  die  rest- 
ing in  the  flesh  or  upon  their  own  attainments ;  they 
made  no  advance  from  their  first  way  of  acceptance 
with  God,  but  held  to  the  way  of  laith  to  the  end. 

AUGUST  28. 

Cl^fK  are  so  little,  that  if  God  should  manifest  his 
^^  greatness  without  condescension,  we  should 
be  trampled  under  his  feet ;  but  God,  who  must  stoop 
to  view  the  skies,  and  bow  to  see  what  angels  do, 
turns  his  eye  yet  lower,  and  looks  to  the  lowly  and 
contrite,  and  makes  them  great. 

"Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great."  How 
marvelous  has  been  our  experience  of  God's  gentle- 
ness !  How  gentle  have  been  his  corrections !  How 
gentle  his  teachings !  How  gentle  his  drawings ! 
Meditate  upon  this  theme,  O  believer.  Let  gratitude 
be  awakened ;  let  humility  be  deepened ;  let  love  be 
quickened,  ere  thi«  day  close. 


AUGUST  29. 

(^/^OW  independent  of  outward  circumstances 
^ -^  the  Holy  Ghost  can  make  the  Christian ! 
What  a  bright  Hght  may  shine  within  us  when  it  is 
all  dark  without !  How  firm,  how  happy,  how  calm, 
how  peaceful  we  may  be,  when  the  world  shakes  to 
and  fro,  and  the  pillars  of  the  earth  are  removed ! 
Even  death  itself,  with  all  its  terrible  influences,  has 
no  power  to  suspend  the  music  of  a  Christian's  heart, 
but  rather  makes  that  music  become  more  sweet, 
more  clear,  more  heavenly,  till  the  last  kind  act  which 
death  can  do  is  to  let  the  earthly  strain  melt  into  the 
heavenly  chorus,  the  temporal  joy  into  the  eternal 
bliss ! 

AUGUST  30. 

/QUR  Lord  Jesus,  by  his  death,  did  not  purchase 
^^  a  right  to  a  part  of  us  only,  but  to  the  entire 
man.  He  contemplated  in  his  passion  the  sanctifica- 
tion  of  us  wholly,  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  It  is  the 
business  of  the  new-born  nature  which  God  has  given 
to  the  regenerate  to  assert  the  rights  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  My  soul,  so  far  as  thou  art  a  child 
of  God,  thou  must  conquer  all  the  rest  of  thyself 
which  yet  remains  unblest;  thou  must  subdue  all 
thy  powers  and  passions  to  the  silver  scepter  of 
Jesus'  gracious  reign,  and  thou  must  never  be 
satisfied  till  he  who  is  king  by  purchase  becomes 
also  king  by  gracious  coronation  and  reigns  in  thee 
supreme. 
I 


AUGUST  31. 

CJ/ WISDOM  is  man's  true  strength;  and,  under  its 
^^  guidance,  he  best  accomplishes  the  ends  of  his 
being.  Wisely  handling  the  matter  of  life,  gives  to 
man  the  richest  enjoyment,  and  presents  the  noblest 
occupation  for  his  powers;  hence  by  it  he  finds 
good  in  the  fullest  sense.  Without  wisdom,  man  is 
as  the  wild  ass's  colt,  running  hither  and  thither, 
wasting  strength  which  might  be  profitably  employed. 
W^isdom  is  the  compass  by  which  man  is  to  steer 
across  the  trackless  waste  of  life;  without  it  he  is 
a  derelict  vessel,  the  sport  of  winds  and  waves.  A 
man  must  be  prudent  in  such  a  world  as  this,  or  he 
will  find  no  good,  but  be  betrayed  into  unnumbered 
ills. 


/ 


SEPTEMBER  1. 

T  is  easy  work  to  pray  when  we  are  grounded, 
as  to  our  desires,  upon  God's  own  promise. 
How  can  he  that  gave  the  word  refuse  to  keep  it? 
Immutable  veracity  cannot  demean  itself  by  a  lie, 
and  eternal  faithfulness  cannot  degrade  itself  by 
neglect.  God  must  bless  His  Son,  his  covenant  binds 
him  to  it.  That  which  the  Spirit  prompts  us  to  ask 
for  Jesus,  is  that  which  God  decrees  to  give  Him. 
Whenever  you  are  praying  for  the  kingdom  of 
Christ,  let  your  eyes  behold  the  dawning  of  the 
blessed  day  which  draweth  near,  when  the  Crucified 
shall  receive  His  coronation  in  the  place  where  men 
rejected  him. 

SEPTEMBER  2. 

/F  we  fear  the  Lord,  we  may  look  for  timely 
interpositions  when  our  case  is  at  its  worst. 
Angels  are  not  kept  from  v.s  by  storms,  or  hindered 
by  darkness.  Seraphs  think  it  no  humiliation  to 
visit  the  poorest  of  the  heavenly  family.  If  angels' 
visits  are  few  and  far  between  at  ordinary  times, 
they  shall  be  frequent  in  our  nights  of  tempest  and 
tx)ssing. 

Dear  reader,  is  this  an  hour  of  distress  with  you? 
Then  ask  for  peculiar  help.  Jesus  is  the  angel  of  the 
covenant,  and  if  his  presence  be  now  earnestly 
sought,  it  will  not  be  denied.  What  that  presence 
brings  is  heart  cheer 


SEPTEMBER  3. 

^T^YING  in  faith  has  distinct  reference  to  the 
-^-^  past.  They  believed  the  promises  which  had 
gone  before,  and  were  assured  that  their  sins  were 
blotted  out  through  the  mercy  of  God.  Dying  in 
faith  has  to  do  \vith  the  present.  These  saints  were 
confident  of  their  acceptance  with  God,  they  en- 
joyed the  beams  of  His  love,  and  rested  in  His  faith- 
fulness. Dying  in  taith  looks  into  the  future.  They 
fdl  asleep,  affirming;  that  the  Messiah  would  surely 
come.  Thy  course,  through  grace,  is  one  of  faith, 
and  sight  seldom  cheers  thee :  this  has  also  been 
the  pathway  of  the  brightest  and  the  best. 

SEPTEMBER  4. 

/T  is  exceedingly  beneficial  to  our  souls  to  mount 
above  this  present  evil  world  to  something 
nobler  and  better.  It  would  be  well  if  the  dwellers 
in  the  valley  could  frequently  leave  their  abodes 
•among  the  marshes  and  the  fever  mists,  and  inhale 
the  bracing  element  upon  the  hills.  It  is  to  such  an 
exploit  of  climbing  that  I  now  invite  you.  May  the 
Spirit  of  God  assist  us  to  leave  the  mists  of  fear 
and  the  fevers  of  anxiety,  and  all  the  ills  which 
gather  in  this  valley  of  earth,  and  to  ascend  the 
mountains  of  anticipated  joy  and  blessedness.  May 
God  the  Holy  Spirit  cut  the  cords  that  keep  u?  liere 
below,  and  assist  us  to  mount. 


SEPTEMBER  5. 

^*TJ^  courageous  concerning  this,  O  Christian!  be 
•'-^  not  dispirited,  as  though  your  spiritual  enemies 
could  never  be  destroyed;  thou  art  Christ's,  and 
sin  has  no  right  to  thee. 

You  are  able  to  overcome  them — not  in  your  own 
strength — the  weakest  of  them  would  be  too  much 
for  you  in  that;  but  you  can  and  shall  overcome 
them  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Do  not  ask, 
''ilow  shall  I  dispossess  them,  for  they  are  greater 
and  mightier  than  I  ?"  But  go  to  the  strong  for 
strength,  wait  humbly  upon  God,  and  the  mighty 
God  of  Jacob  will  surely  come  to  the  rescue,  and  you 
shall  sing  of  victory  through  His  grace. 

SEPTEMBER  6. 

rO  this  man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  poor 
and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  trembleth  at  My 
word."  Stoop  if  you  would  climb  to  heaven.  Do 
we  not  say  of  Jesus,  "He  descended  that  He  might 
ascend  ?"  So  must  you.  You  must  grow  downwards, 
that  you  may  grow  upwards ;  for  the  sweetest  fellow- 
ship with  heaven  is  to  be  had  by  humble  souls,  and 
by  them  alone.  God  will  deny  no  blessing  to  a 
thoroughly  humbled  spirit.  Humility  makes  us 
ready  to  be  blessed  by  the  God  of  all  grace,  and  fits 
us  to  deal  efficiently  with  our  fellow-men.  Whether 
it  be  prayer  or  praise,  whether  it  be  work  or  suffer- 
ing, the  genuine  salt  of  humility  cannot  be  used 
in  excess. 


SEPTEMBER  7.  ^ 

CT /^ALLOWED  be  thy  name;  thy  kingdom 
^-*  come;  thy  will  be  done  in  earth  as  it  is  in 
heaven."  Let  not  your  prayers  be  all  concerning 
your  own  sins,  your  own  wants,  your  own  imperfec- 
tions, your  own  trials,  but  let  them  climb  the  starry 
ladder,  and  get  up  to  Christ  himself,  and  then,  as 
you  draw  nigh  to  the  blood-besprinkled  mercy-seat, 
offer  this  prayer  continually,  ''Lord,  extend  the  king- 
dom of  thy  dear  Son."  Such  a  petition,  fervently 
presented,  will  elevate  the  spirit  of  all  your  devo- 
tions. Mind  that  you  prove  the  sincerity  of  your 
prayer  by  laboring  to  promote  the  Lord's  glory. 

SEPTEMBER  8. 

OEARCH  the  Scriptures."  The  Greek  word 
(y  here  rendered  search  signifies  a  strict,  close, 
diligent  search,  such  as  men  make  when  they  are 
seeking  gold,  or  hunters  when  they  are  in  earnest 
after  game.  We  must  not  rest  content  with  having 
given  a  superficial  reading  to  a  chapter  or  two,  but 
with  the  candle  of  the  Spirit  we  must  deliberately 
seek  out  the  hidden  meaning  of  the  word.  Holy 
Scripture  requires  searching — much  of  it  can  only  be 
learned  by  careful  study.  No  man  who  merely 
fkims  the  book  of  God  can  profit  thereby;  we  must 
'  lig  and  mine  until  we  obtain  the  hid  treasure.  The 
Scriptures  claim  searching. 


SEPTEMBER  9. 

rHE  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation/'  Here 
is  personal  interest,  ''my  light/'  ''my  salva- 
tion;"  the  soul  is  assured  of  it,  and  therefore  de- 
clares it  boldly.  Into  the  soul  at  the  new  birth  divine 
light  is  poured  as  the  precursor  of  salvation.  Where 
there  is  not  enough  light  to  reveal  our  own  darkness, 
and  to  make  us  long  for  the  Lord  Jesus,  there  is  no 
evidence  of  salvation.  After  conversion  our  God  is 
our  joy,  comfort,  guide,  teacher,  and  in  every  sense 
our  light:  he  is  light  within,  light  around,  light  re- 
flected from  us,  and  light  to  be  revealed  to  us.  He, 
then,  who  by  faith  has  laid  hold  upon  God,  has  all 
covenant  blessings  in  his  possession. 

SEPTEMBER  10. 

CpURELY  if  there  be  a  happy  verse  in  the  Bible. 
QJ  it  is  this — *'My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am 
his."  So  peaceful,  so  full  of  assurance,  so  over- 
running with  happiness  and  contentment  is  it,  that 
it  might  well  have  been  written  by  the  same  hand 
which  penned  the  twenty-third  Psalm.  The  verse 
savors  of  him  who,  an  hour  before  he  went  to  Geth- 
semane,  said,  'Teace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace 
I  give  unto  you:  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  1 
unto  you."  "In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation: 
but  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome  the  world." 
Let  us  ring  the  silver  bell  again,  for  its  notes  are 
exquisitely  sweet:  "My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I 
am  h:2." 


SEPTEMBER  11. 

c\  /*  O  Christian  is  safe  when  his  soul  is  slothful, 
^  \^^  and  his  God  is  far  from  him.  Every 
Christian  is  always  safe  as  to  the  great  matter  of  his 
standing  in  Christ,  but  he  is  not  safe  as  regards  his 
experience  in  hoHness,  and  communion  with  Jesus 
in  this  life.  Satan  does  not  often  attack  a  Christian 
who  is  living  near  God.  It  is  when  the  Christian 
departs  from  his  God,  becomes  spiritually  starved, 
and  endeavors  to  feed  on  vanities,  that  the  devil 
discovers  his  vantage  hour.  He  may  sometimes 
stand  foot  to  foot  with  the  child  of  God  who  is 
active  in  his  Master's  service,  but  the  battle  is  gen- 
erally short.  Oh  for  grace  to  walk  humbly  with 
our  God! 

SEPTEMBER  12. 

^*LJ^E  draws  us  to  closer  communion  with  him- 
self. We  have  been  sitting  on  the  doorstep 
of  God's  house,  and  he  bids  us  advance  into  the 
banqueting  hall  and  sup  with  him,  but  we  decline  the 
honor.  There  are  secret  rooms  not  yet  opened  to 
us ;  Jesus  invites  us  to  enter  them,  but  we  hold  back. 
Shame  on  our  cold  hearts !  We  are  but  poor  lovers 
of  our  sweet  Lord  Jesus,  not  fit  to  be  his  servants, 
much  less  to  be  his  brides,  and  yet  he  hath  exalted 
us  to  be  bone  of  his  bone,  and  flesh  of  his  flesh,  mar- 
ried to  him  by  a  glorious  marriage  covenant  Here- 
i:3  is  love! 


SEPTEMBER  13. 

(Tjr  /^0\N  blessed  to  feel  assured  that  the  Lord 
^^^^  is  with  us  in  all  our  ways,  and  condescends 
to  go  down  into  our  humiliations  and  banishments 
with  us !  Even  beyond  the  ocean  our  Father's  love 
beams  like  the  sun  in  its  strength.  We  cannot 
hesitate  to  go  where  Jehovah  promises  his  presence. 
"Fear  not,"  is  the  Lord's  command  and  his  divine 
encouragement  to  those  who  at  his  bidding  are 
launching  upon  new  seas ;  the  divine  presence  and 
preservation  forbid  so  much  as  one  unbelieving  fear. 
Without  our  God  we  should  fear  to  move ;  but  when 
he  bids  us  go  it  would  be  dangerous  to  tarry. 
Reader,  go  forward,  and  fear  not. 

SEPTEMBER  14. 

^  HE  love  which  the  early  Christians  felt  towards 
■^  the  Lord  was  not  a  quiet  emotion  which  they 
hid  within  themselves  in  the  secret  chamber  of  their 
souls,  and  which  they  only  spake  of  when  they  met 
on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  and  sang  hymns  in 
honor  of  Christ  Jesus  the  crucified,  but  it  was  a 
passion  with  them  of  such  a  vehement  and  all-con- 
suming energy,  that  it  was  visible  in  their  actions, 
spoke  in  their  common  talk,  and  looked  out  of  their 
eyes  even  in  their  commonest  glances.  Love  to 
Jesus  was  a  flame  which  fed  upon  the  core  and  heart 
of  their  being;  and,  therefore,  from  its  own  force 
burned  its  wav  into  the  outer  man,  and  shone  there. 


SEPTEMBER  15.  ? 

/DOOK  at  thy  possessions,  O  believer,  and  com- 
°^  pare  thy  portion  with  the  lot  of  thy  fellow- 
men.  Some  of  them  have  their  portion  in  the  field  ; 
they  are  rich  and  their  harvests  yield  them  a  golden 
increase;  but  what  are  harvests  compared  with  thy 
God,  who  is  the  God  of  harvests?  What  are  burst- 
ing granaries  compared  with  him,  who  is  the  Hus- 
bandman, and  feeds  thee  with  the  bread  of  heaven? 
Some  have  their  portion  in  the  city;  their  wealth  is 
abundant,  and  flows  to  them  in  constant  streams, 
until  they  become  a  very  reservoir  of  gold ;  b;it  what 
is  gold  compared  with  thy  God?  ''Thou  ari  my 
portion,  O  Lord." — Psalm  cxix. 

SEPTEMBER  16. 

jTESUS  is  the  great  teacher  of  lowliness  of  heart. 
J  We  need  daily  to  learn  of  him.  See  the  Master 
taking  a  towel  and  washing  his  disciples'  feet !  Fol- 
lower of  Christ,  wilt  thou  not  humble  thyself  ?  See 
him  as  the  Servant  of  servants,  and  surely  thou 
canst  not  be  proud !  "He  humbled  himself  !"  Was 
he  not  on  earth  always  stripping  off  first  one  robe 
of  honor,  and  then  another,  till,  naked,  he  was 
fastened  to  the  cross?  and  there  did  he  not  empty 
out  his  inmost  self,  pouring  out  his  life-blood,  giving 
up  for  all  us?  How  low  was  our  dear  Redeemer 
brought !    How,  then,  can  we  be  proud  ? 


SEPTEMBER  17. 

We  would  see  Jesus. — John  xii.  21. 

/S  this  thy  condition,  my  reader,  at  this  moment? 
Hast  thou  but  one  desire,  and  is  that  after 
Christ?  Then  thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  Hast  thou  but  one  wish  in  thy  heart, 
and  that  one  wish  that  thou  mayest  be  washed  from 
all  thy  sins  in  Jesus'  blood?  Canst  thou  really  say, 
"I  would  give  all  I  have  to  be  a  Christian ;  I  would 
give  up  everything  I  have  and  hope  for,  if  I  might 
but  feel  that  I  have  an  interest  in  Christ?"  Then, 
despite  all  thy  fears,  be  of  good  cheer,  the  Lord 
loveth  thee,  and  thou  shalt  come  out  into  daylight 
soon,  and  rejoice  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ 
makes  men  free. 

SEPTEMBER  18. 

/ESUS  gave  his  blood  for  us;  what  shall  we 
give  to  him?  We  are  his,  and  all  that  we 
have,  for  he  has  purchased  us  into  himself — can 
we  act  as  if  we  were  our  own?  Oh  for  more  con- 
secration! and  to  this  end,  oh  for  more  lovet 
Blessed  Jesus,  thou  dost  receive  with  favor  the 
smallest  sincere  token  of  affection!  Thou  dost  re- 
ceive our  poor  forget-me-nots  and  love-tokens,  as 
though  they  were  intrinsically  precious,  though  in- 
deed they  are  but  as  the  bunch  of  wild  flowers  which 
the  child  brings  to  its  mother.  We  will  give  thee 
the  first  fruits  of  our  increase,  and  pay  thee  tithes 
of  all,  and  then  we  will  confess  "of  thine  own  have 
we  given  thee." 


SEPTEMBER  19. 

CTj^E  have  each  of  us  peculiar  gifts  and  special 
^^  manifestations;  but  the  one  object  God  has 
in  view  is,  the  perfecting  of  the  whole  body  of  Christ. 
We  must,  therefore,  bring  our  spiritual  possessions 
and  lay  them  at  the  apostles'  feet,  and  make  dis- 
tribution unto  all  of  what  God  has  given  to  us. 
Keep  back  no  part  of  the  precious  truth,  but  speak 
what  you  know,  and  testify  what  you  have  seen. 
Let  not  the  toil,  or  darkness,  or  possible  unbelief  of 
your  friends,  weigh  one  moment  in  the  scale.  Up, 
and  be  marching  to  the  place  of  duty,  and  there  tell 
what  great  things  God  has  shown  to  your  soul.  We 
too  must  bear  our  witness  concerning  Jesus. 

SEPTEMBER  20. 

/T  is  well  with  the  righteous — well  upon  divine 
authority;  the  mouth  of  God  speaks  the  com- 
forting assurance.  Blessed  be  God  for  a  faith  which 
enables  us  to  believe  God  when  the  creatures  con- 
tradict him.  It  is,  says  the  word,  at  all  times  well 
with  thee,  thou  righteous  one ;  then,  beloved,  if  thou 
canst  not  see  it,  let  God's  word  stand  thee  in  stead 
of  sight;  yea,  believe  it  on  divine  authority  more 
confidently  than  if  thine  eyes  and  thy  feeling  told 
it  to  thee.  Whom  God  blesses  is  blest  indeed,  and 
what  his  lip  declares  is  truth  most  sure  and  stead- 


SEPTEMBER  21. 

/ESUS  wears  all  the  glory  which  the  pomp  ot 
heaven  can  bestow  upon  him,  which  ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand  angels  can  minister  to 
him.  You  cannot  with  your  utmost  stretch  of 
imagination  conceive  his  exceeding  greatness :  yet 
there  will  be  a  further  revelation  of  it  when  he  shall 
descend  from  heaven  in  great  power,  with  all  the 
holy  angels — "Then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of 
his  glory."  Oh,  the  splendor  of  that  glory!  Nor 
is  this  the  close,  for  eternity  shall  sound  his  praise. 
"Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  forever  and  ever  !'*  Reader, 
if  you  would  joy  in  Christ's  glory  hereafter,  he 
must  be  glorious  in  your  sight  now.    Is  he  so? 

SEPTEMBER  22. 

^Ty^HEN  the  two  disciples  had  reached  Emmaus, 
^  and  were  refreshing  themselves  at  the  evening 
meal,  the  mysterious  stranger  who  had  so  enchanted 
them  upon  the  road,  took  bread  and  brake  it,  made 
himself  known  to  them,  and  then  vanished  out  of 
their  sight.  They  had  constrained  him  to  abide  with 
them,  because  the  day  was  far  spent;  but  now, 
although  it  was  much  later,  their  love  was  a  lamp 
to  their  feet,  yea,  wings  also ;  they  forgot  the  dark- 
ness, their  weariness  was  all  gone,  and  forthwith 
they  journeyed  back  the  threescore  furlongs  to  tell 
the  gladsome  news  of  a  risen  Lord,  who  had  ap- 
peared to  them  by  the  way. 


SEPTEMBER  23. 

/^>0D  neither  chose  us  nor  called  us  because  we 
y  were  holy,  but  he  called  us  that  we  might  be 
holy,  and  holiness  is  the  beauty  produced  by  his 
workmanship  in  us.  The  excellencies  which  we  see  in 
a  believer  are  as  much  the  work  of  God  as  the  atone- 
ment itself.  Thus  is  brought  out  very  sweetly  the 
fullness  of  the  grace  of  God.  Salvation  must  be  of 
grace,  because  the  Lord  is  the  author  of  it.  Salva- 
tion must  be  of  grace,  because  the  Lord  works  in 
such  a  manner  that  our  righteousness  is  forever  ex- 
cluded. Such  is  the  believer's  privilege — a  present 
salvation;  such  is  the  evidence  that  he  is  called  to 
it — a  holy  life. 

SEPTEMBER  24. 

CTDELIEVER,  do  you  remember  that  rapturous  day 
"^  when  you  first  realized  pardon  through  Jesus 
the  sin-bearer?  Can  you  not  make  glad  confession, 
and  say,  "My  soul  recalls  her  day  of  deliverance 
with  delight.  Laden  with  guilt  and  full  of  fears,  I 
saw  my  Saviour  as  my  Substitute,  and  I  laid  my 
hand  upon  him ;  oh !  how  timidly  at  first,  but  courage 
grew,  and  confidence  was  confirmed,  until  I  leaned 
my  soul  entirely  upon  him;  and  now  it  is  my  un- 
ceasing joy  to  know  that  my  sins  are  no  longer 
imputed  to  me,  but  laid  upon  him,  and  like  the  debts 
of  the  wounded  traveller,  Jesus,  like  the  good 
Samaritan,  has  said  cf  all  my  future  sinfulness, 
*Stt  that  to  my  account^  "^ 


SEPTEMBER  25. 

CT\OST  thou  think,  O  Christian,  that  thou  canst 
-^-^  measure  the  love  of  Christ?  Think  of  what 
His  love  has  brought  thee — justification,  adoption, 
sanctification,  eternal  life !  The  riches  of  His  good- 
ness are  unsearchable !  Oh,  the  breadth  of  the  love 
of  Christ !  Shall  such  a  love  as  this  have  half  our 
hearts?  Shall  Jesus'  marvelous  loving-kindness 
and  tender  care  meet  vi^ith  but  faint  response  and 
tardy  acknowledgment?  O  my  soul,  tune  thy  heart 
to  a  glad  song  of  thanksgiving !  Go  through  the  day 
rejoicing,  for  thou  art  no  desolate  wanderer,  but  a 
beloved  child,  watched  over,  cared  for,  supplied, 
and  defended  by  thy  Lord. 

SEPTEMBER  26. 

r^NDEAVOR  to  know  the  Father,  bury  your 
^  head  in  his  bosom  in  deep  repentance,  and 
confess  that  you  are  not  worthy  to  be  called  his  son ; 
receive  the  kiss  of  his  love ;  let  the  ring  which  is  the 
token  of  his  eternal  faithfulness  be  on  your  finger; 
sit  at  his  table  and  let  your  heart  make  merry  in 
his  grace.  Then  press  forward  and  seek  to  know 
much  of  the  Son  of  God ;  know  him  as  eternal  God, 
and  yet  suffering,  finite  man ;  follow  him  as  he  walks 
the  waters  with  the  tread  of  deity,  and  as  he  sits 
upon  the  well  in  the  weariness  of  humanity.  Be 
not  satisfied  unless  you  know  much  of  Jesus  Christ 
as  your  Friend,  your  Brother,  your  Husband,  your 
all. 


SEPTEMBER  27. 

/f"HT)  he  is  full  of  truth.  True  have  his 
^-^-^  promises  been ;  not  one  has  failed.  I  want 
none  beside  him.  In  life  he  is  my  life,  and  in  death 
he  shall  be  the  death  of  death ;  in  poverty  Christ  is 
my  riches ;  in  sickness  he  makes  my  bed ;  in  dark- 
ness he  is  my  star,  and  in  brightness  he  is  my  sun; 
He  is  the  manna  of  the  camp  in  the  wilderness,  and 
he  shall  be  the  new  corn  of  the  host  when  they  come 
to  Canaan.  Jesus  is  to  me  all  grace  and  no  wrath, 
all  truth  and  no  falsehood :  and  of  truth  and  grace 
he  is  full,  infinitely  full.  My  soul,  this  day,  bless 
with  all  thy  might  "the  only  Begotten." 

SEPTEMBER  28. 

CT/^OW  comprehensive  is  the  love  of  Jesus! 
^-^  There  is  no  part  of  his  people's  interests 
which  he  does  not  consider,  and  there  is  nothing 
which  concerns  their  welfare  which  is  not  important 
to  him.  "The  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by 
the  Lord :  and  he  delighteth  in  his  way."  Believer, 
rest  assured  that  the  heart  of  Jesus  cares  about  your 
meaner  affairs.  The  breadth  of  his  tender  love  is 
such  that  you  may  resort  to  him  in  all  matters ;  for 
in  all  your  afflictions  he  is  afflicted,  and  like  as  a 
father  pitieth  his  children,  so  doth  he  pity  you.  The 
meanest  interests  of  all  his  saints  are  all  borne  upon 
the  broad  bosom  of  the  Son  of  God. 


SEPTEMBER  29. 

/QUR  God's  tender  love  for  his  serv^ants  makes 
^-^  him  concerned  for  the  state  of  their  inward 
feelings.  He  desires  them  to  be  of  good  courage. 
Some  esteem  it  a  small  thing  for  a  believer  to  be 
vexed  with  doubts  and  fears,  but  God  thinks  not 
so.  Our  Master  does  not  think  so  lightly  of  our 
unbelief  as  we  do.  Our  Lord  loveth  not  to  see  our 
countenance  sad.  It  was  a  law  of  Ahasuerus,  that 
no  one  should  come  into  the  king's  court  dressed  in 
mourning;  this  is  not  the  law  of  the  King  of  kings, 
for  we  may  come  mourning  as  we  are;  but  still  he 
would  have  us  pu;  off  the  spirit  of  heaviness,  and 
put  on  the  garment  of  praise,  for  there  is  much 
reason  to  rejoice. 

SEPTEMBER  30. 

/F  his  dark  nights  are  as  bright  as  the  world's 
days,  what  shall  his  days  be  ?  If  even  his  star- 
light is  more  splendid  than  the  sun,  what  must  his 
sunlight  be?  If  he  can  praise  the  Lord  in  the  fires, 
how  will  he  extol  him  before  the  eternal  throne !  If 
evil  be  good  to  him  now,  what  will  the  overflowing 
goodness  of  God  be  to  him  then?  Oh,  blessed  "after- 
ward!" Who  would  not  be  a  Christian?  Who 
would  not  bear  the  present  cross  for  the  crown  which 
Cometh  afterwards?  But  herein  is  work  for 
patience,  for  the  rest  is  not  for  to-day,  nor  the  tri- 
umph for  the  present,  but  "afterward."  Wait,  O 
soul,  and  let  patience  have  her  perfect  work. 


OCTOBER  1. 

^T/7HAT  is  your  desire  this  day?  Is  it  set  upon 
^^  heavenly  things?  Do  you  desire  Hberty  in 
close  communication  with  God?  Do  you  aspire  to 
know  the  heights,  and  depths,  and  lengths,  and 
breadths  ?  Then  you  must  draw  near  to  Jesus  ;  you 
must  get  a  clear  sight  of  him  in  his  preciousness 
and  completeness.  He  who  understands  Christ,  re- 
ceives an  anointing  from  the  Holy  One,  by  which 
he  knows  all  things.  Are  you  saying,  ''O  that  he 
would  dwell  in  my  bosom  ?"  "Would  that  he  would 
make  my  heart  his  dwelling-place  forever?"  Open 
the  door,  beloved,  and  he  will  come  into  your  souls. 
He  has  long  been  knocking,  and  he  will  sup  with 
you,  and  you  with  him. 

OCTOBER  2. 

cry  OOR  souls  !  forget  not  the  present  Saviour,  who 
'-  bids  you  look  unto  him  and  be  saved.  He  could 
heal  you  at  once,  but  you  prefer  to  wait  for  an  angel 
and  a  wonder.  To  trust  him  is  a  sure  way  to  every 
blessing,  and  he  is  worthy  of  the  most  implicit  con- 
fidence; but  unbelief  makes  you  prefer  the  cold 
porches  of  Bethesda  to  the  warm  bosom  of  his  love. 
O  that  the  Lord  may  turn  his  eye  upon  the  multitudes 
who  are  in  this  case  to-day;  may  he  forgive  the 
slights  which  they  have  put  upon  his  divine  power^ 
^nd  call  them  by  that  sweet  constraining  voice,  to 
rise  from  the  bed  of  despair,  and  in  the  energy  of 
faith  take  up  their  bed  and  walk. 


OCTOBER  b. 

/CHRISTIANS  are  not  to  be  praised  for  neglected 
V^  duties  under  the  pretense  of  having  secret  fel- 
lowship with  Jesus :  it  is  not  sitting,  but  sitting  at 
Jesus'  feet,  which  is  commendable.  Do  not  think 
that  activity  is  in  itself  an  evil :  it  is  a  great  blessing 
and  a  means  of  grace  to  us.  Those  who  have  most 
fellowship  with  Christ  are  not  recluses  or  hermits, 
but  indefatigable  laborers  who  are  toiling  for  Jesus, 
and  who,  in  their  toil,  have  him  side  by  side  with 
them,  so  that  they  are  workers  together  with  God. 
Let  us  remember,  then,  in  anything  we  have  to  do  for 
Jesus,  that  we  can  do  it,  and  should  do  it,  in  close 
communion  with  him. 

OCTOBER  4. 

Clji)E  must  manifest  the  spirit  of  Christ  in  meek- 
^^  ness,  gentleness,  and  forgiveness.  Let  us 
search  and  see  if  we  truly  suffer  with  Jesus.  And 
if  we  do  thus  suffer,  what  is  our  "light  affliction" 
compared  with  reigning  with  him?  Oh,  it  is  so 
blessed  to  be  in  the  furnace  with  Christ,  and  such 
an  honor  to  stand  in  the  pillory  with  him,  that  if 
there  were  no  future  reward,  we  might  count  our- 
selves happy  in  present  honor :  but  when  the  recom- 
pense is  so  eternal,  so  infinitely  more  than  we  had 
any  right  to  expect,  shall  we  not  take  up  the  cross 
with  alacrity,  and  go  on  our  way  rejoicing? 


OCTOBER  5. 

<^/^  E  has  been  good  to  me  in  all  my  needs,  trials, 

^ ^  struggles,  and  sorrows.  Never  could  there 
be  a  better  Master,  for  his  service  is  freedom,  his 
rule  is  love.  The  ancient  saints  proved  him  to  be 
a  good  Master,  and  each  of  them  rejoiced  to  sing, 
*'I  am  thy  servant,  O  Lord !"  I  will  bear  this  wit- 
ness before  my  friends  and  neighbors,  for  possibly 
they  may  be  led  by  my  testimony  to  seek  my  Lord 
Jesus  as  their  Master.  Oh  that  they  would  do  so ! 
They  would  never  repent  so  wise  a  deed.  If  the)- 
would  but  take  his  easy  yoke,  they  would  find  them- 
selves in  so  royal  a  service  that  they  would  enlist  in 
it  forever. 

OCTOBER  6. 

(STL^Y  soul,  hearken  to  the  voice  of  thy  God.  He 
^^^^  is  always  ready  to  speak  with  thee  when 
thou  art  prepared  to  hear.  If  there  be  any  slowness 
to  commune,  it  is  not  on  his  part,  but  altogether  on 
thine  own;  for  he  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks, 
and  if  his  people  will  but  open,  he  rejoices  to  enter. 
But  in  what  state  is  my  heart,  which  is  my  Lord's 
garden?  May  I  venture  to  hope  that  it  is  bringing 
forth  fruit  fit  for  him  ?  If  not,  he  will  have  much  to 
reprove;  but  still  I  pray  him  to  come  unto  me,  for 
nothing  can  so  certainly  bring  my  heart  into  a  right 
condition  as  the  presence  of  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness, who  brings  healing  in  his  wings. 


OCTOBER  7. 

^7_/^E  sups  with  you  because  you  find  the  house 
^^  or  the  heart,  and  you  with  him  because  he 

brings  the  provision.  He  could  not  sup  with  you 
if  it  were  not  in  your  heart;  nor  could  you  sup  with 
him  if  he  did  not  bring  the  provision  with  him. 
Fling  wide,  then,  the  portals  of  your  soul.  He  will 
come  with  that  love  which  you  long  to  feel ;  he  will 
come  with  that  joy  into  which  you  cannot  work  your 
poor  depressed  spirit ;  he  will  bring  the  peace  which 
now  you  have  not.  Only  open  the  door  to  him,  and 
he  will  dwell  there  forever.  Oh,  wondrous  love, 
that  brings  such  a  guest  to  dwell  in  such  a  heart ! 

OCTOBER  8. 

ClTpAITH  in  Jesus  is  more  than  a  match  fbr 
^  worldly  trials,  temptations,  unbelief,  and  over- 
comes them  all.  The  same  absorbing  principle  shines 
in  the  faithful  service  of  God;  with  an  enthusiastic 
love  for  Jesus,  difficulties  are  surmounted,  sacrifices 
become  pleasures,  sufferings  are  honors.  But  if  reli- 
gion is  thus  a  consuming  passion  in  the  heart,  then  it 
follows  that  there  are  many  persons  who  profess  re- 
ligion, but  have  it  not;  for  what  they  have  will  not 
bear  this  test.  Examine  yourself,  my  reader,  on  this 
point.  Aaron's  rod  proved  its  heaven-given  power. 
Is  your  religion  doing  so?  If  Christ  be  anything, 
he  must  be  everything.  Oh,  rest  not  till  love  and 
faith  in  Jesus  be  the  master  passions  of  your  soul! 


OCTOBER  9. 

/T  is  well  wtih  the  righteous  always.  From  the 
beginning  of  the  year  to  the  end  of  the  year, 
rfrom  the  first  gathering  of  evening  shadows  until  the 
day-star  shines,  in  all  conditions,  and  under  all  cir- 
cumstances, it  shall  be  well  with  the  righteous.  It  is 
so  well  with  him  that  we  could  not  imagine  it  to  be 
better,  for  he  is  well  fed,  he  feeds  upon  the  flesh  and 
blood  of  Jesus ;  he  is  well  clothed,  he  wears  the  im- 
puted righteousness  of  Christ;  he  is  well  housed, 
he  dwells  in  God ;  he  is  well  married,  his  soul  is  knit 
in  bonds  of  marriage  union  to  Christ;  he  is  well 
provided  for,  for  the  Lord  is  his  Shepherd;  he  is 
well  endowed,  for  heaven  is  his  inheritance. 

OCTOBER  10. 

OHOULD  it  happen  that,  in  the  providence  of 
Cy  God,  you  are  a  loser  by  conscience,  you  shall 
find  that  if  the  Lord  pays  you  not  back  in  the  silver 
of  earthly  prosperity,  he  will  discharge  his  promise 
in  the  gold  of  spiritual  joy.  Remember  that  a  man's 
life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  that  which 
he  possesseth.  To  wear  a  guileless  spirit,  to  have  a 
heart  void  of  offence,  to  have  the  favor  and  smile  of 
God,  is  greater  riches  than  the  mines  of  Ophir  could 
yield,  or  the  traffic  of  Tyre  could  win.  ''Better  is 
a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love  is,  than  a  stalled  ox 
and  inward  contention  therewith."  An  ounce  of 
heart's-ease  is  worth  a  ton  of  gold- 


OCTOBER  11. 

(n4)E  must  not  imagine  that  zve  are  suffering  for 
\  ^^  Christ,  and  zvith  Christ,  if  we  are  not  in  Christ. 
:  Beloved  friend,  are  you  trusting  to  Jesus  only?    If 
not,  whatever  you  may  have  to  mourn  over  on  earth, 
i  you  are  not  "suffering  with  Christ,"  and  have  no 
,  hope  of  regaining  with  him  in  heaven.     Neither  are 
I  we  to  conclude  that  all  a  Christian's  sufferings  are 
sufferings  with  Christ,  for  it  is  essential  that  he  he 
called  by  God  to  suffer.     If  we  are  rash  and  im- 
prudent, and  run  into  positions  for  which  neither 
providence  nor  grace  has  fitted  us,  we  ought  to  ques- 
tion whether  we  are  not  rather  sinning  than  commun- 
ing with  Jesus. 

L  OCTOBER  12. 

/^OME,  O  Lord  my  God;  my  soul  invites  thee 
t^  earnestly,  and  waits  for  thee  eagerly.  Come 
to  me,  O  Jesus,  my  well  beloved,  and  plant  fresh 
flowers  in  my  garden,  such  as  I  see  blooming  in 
such  perfection  in  thy  matchless  character!     Come, 

0  my  Father,  who  art  the  Husbandman,  and  deal 
with  me  in  thy  tenderness  and  prudence !  Come,  O 
Holy  Spirit,  and  bedew  my  whole  nature,  as  the  herbs 
are  now  moistened  with  the  evening  dews.  Oh,  that 
God  would  speak  to  me!  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy 
servant  heareth.     Oh,  that  he  would  walk  with  me ; 

1  am  ready  to  give  up  my  whole  heart  and  mind  to 
him.    I  am  only  asking  what  he  delights  to  give. 


OCTOBER  13. 
/^OT>  is  glorified  by  our  serving  him  in  our  proper 
\y  vocations.  Every  lawful  trade  may  be  sancti- 
fied by  the  gospel  to  noblest  ends.  Turn  to  the 
Bible,  and  you  v^^ill  find  the  most  menial  forms  of 
labor  connected  either  with  most  daring  deeds  of 
faith,  or  with  persons  whose  lives  have  been  illus- 
trious for  holiness.  Therefore  be  not  discontented 
with  your  calling.  Whatever  God  has  made  your 
position,  or  your  work,  abide  in  that,  unless  you  are 
quite  sure  that  he  calls  you  to  something  else.  Let 
your  first  care  be  to  glorify  God  to  the  utmost  of 
your  power  where  you  are.  Fill  your  present  sphere 
to  his  praise,  and  if  he  needs  you  in  another  he  will 
show  it  you. 

OCTOBER  14. 

^\/*  O  human  mind  can  adequately  estimate  the 
^  \^_^  infinite  value  of  the  divine  sacrifice,  for 
great  as  is  the  sin  of  God's  people,  the  atonement 
which  takes  it  away  is  immeasurably  greater.  There- 
for the  believer,  even  when  sin  rolls  like  a  black 
flood,  and  the  remembrance  of  the  past  is  bitter,  can 
yet  stand  before  the  blazing  throne  of  the  great  and 
holy  God,  and  cry,  "Who  is  he  that  condemneth? 
It  is  Christ  that  died;  yea,  rather,  that  hath  risen 
again."  While  the  recollection  of  his  sin  fills  him 
with  shame  and  sorrow,  he  at  the  same  time  makes 
it  a  foil  to  show  the  brightness  of  mercy — guilt  is 
the  dark  night  in  which  the  fair  star  of  divine  love 
ihines  with  serene  solendor. 


OCTOBER  15. 

/T  is  a  happy  thing  when  we  can  address  the 
Lord  with  the  confidence  which  David  mani- 
fests; it  gives  us  great  power  in  prayer,  and  comfort 
in  trial.  ''On  thee  do  I  wait  all  the  day."  Patience 
is  the  fair  handmaid  and  daughter  of  faith;  we 
cheerfully  wait  when  we  are  certain  that  we  shall 
not  wait  in  vain.  It  is  our  duty  and  our  privilege 
to  wait  upon  the  Lord  in  service,  in  worship,  in 
expectancy,  in  trust,  all  the  days  of  our  life.  Our 
faith  will  be  tried  faith,  and  if  it  be  of  the  true  kind, 
it  will  bear  continued  trial  without  yielding.  We 
shall  not  grow  weary  of  waiting  upon  God  if  we 
remember  how  long  and  how  graciously  he  once 
waited  for  us. 

OCTOBER  16. 

OEEING  that  we  have  such  a  God  to  trust  to, 
£y  let  us  rest  upon  him  with  all  our  weight;  let 
us  resolutely  drive  out  all  unbelief,  and  endeavor  to 
^ct  rid  of  doubts  and  fears,  which  so  much  mar  our 
comfort;  since  there  is  no  excuse  for  fear  where 
God  is  the  foundation  of  our  trust.  A  loving  parent 
would  be  sorely  grieved  if  his  child  could  not  trust 
him;  and  how  ungenerous,  how  unkind  is  our  con- 
duct when  we  put  so  little  confidence  in  our  heavenly 
Father,  who  has  never  failed  us,  and  who  never  will ! 
We  have  been  in  many  trials,  but  we  have  never  yet 
been  cast  where  we  could  not  find  in  our  God  all 
that  we  needed. 


OCTOBER  17. 

"He  appeared  first  to  Mary  Magdalene." — Mark  16:9. 

/F  we  would  see  much  of  Christ,  let  us  serve 
him.  Tell  me  who  they  are  that  sit  oftenest 
under  the  banner  of  his  love,  and  drink  deepest 
draughts  from  the  cup  of  communion,  and  I  am  sure 
they  will  be  those  who  give  most,  who  serve  best,^' 
and  who  abide  closest  to  the  bleeding  heart  of  their, 
dear  Lord.  But  notice  how  Christ  revealed  himself 
to  this  sorrowing  one — by  a  word,  **Mary."  It 
needed  but  one  word  in  his  voice,  and  at  once  she 
knew  him,  and  her  heart  owned  allegiance  by  another 
word,  her  heart  was  too  full  to  say  more.  That  one 
word  most  fitting.  It  implies  obedience.  She  said, 
''Master/' 

OCTOBER  18. 

/C^HRISTIAN  man!  learn  to  comfort  thyself  in 
^^  God's  gracious  dealing  toward  the  church. 
That  which  is  so  dear  to  thy  Master,  should  it  not 
be  dear  above  all  else  to  thee?  What  though  thy 
way  be  dark,  canst  thou  not  gladden  thine  heart  with 
the  triumphs  of  his  cross  and  the  spread  of  his  truth  ? 
Our  own  personal  troubles  are  forgotten  while  we 
look,  not  only  upon  what  God  has  done,  and  is  doing 
for  Zion,  but  on  the  glorious  things  he  will  yet  do  for 
his  church.  Try  this  receipt,  O  believer,  whenever 
thou  art  sad  of  heart  and  in  heaviness  of  spirit: 
"Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,"  and  thine  own 
soul  shall  be  refreshed. 


OCTOBER  19. 

/^OD  is  for  me."  He  was  "for  us"  or  he  would 
y  not  have  given  his  well  beloved  Son.  And 
because  he  is  "for  us,"  the  voice  of  prayer  will 
always  insure  his  help.  ''When  I  cry  unto  thee,  then 
shall  mine  enemies  he  turned  back/'  This  is  no 
uncertain  hope,  but  a  well-grounded  assurance — 
''this  I  know."  I  will  direct  my  prayer  unto  thee, 
and  will  look  up  for  the  answer,  assured  that  it  will 
come,  "for  God  is  for  me."  O  behever,  how  happy 
art  thou  with  the  King  of  kings  on  thy  side.  How 
safe  with  such  a  Protector !  How  sure  thy  cause, 
pleaded  by  such  an  Advocate !  If  God  be  for  thee, 
who  can  be  against  thee  ? 

OCTOBER  20. 

'T^HE  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us 
J-.  from  all  sin"  not  only  from  sin,  but  "from  all 
sin."  Reader,  I  cannot  tell  you  the  exceeding  sweet- 
ness of  this  word,  but  I  pray  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  give  you  a  taste  of  it.  Manifold  are  our  sins 
against  God.  Whether  the  bill  be  little  or  great,  the 
same  receipt  can  discharge  one  as  the  other.  I'he 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  as  blessed  and  divine  a 
payment  for  the  transgressions  of  blaspheming  Peter 
as  for  the  shortcomings  of  loving  John ;  our  iniquity 
is  gone,  all  gone  at  once,  and  all  gone  forever. 
Blessed  completeness  !  What  a  sweet  theme  to  dwell 
upon  as  one  begins  another  day. 


OCTOBER  21. 

/J  TRUE  believer,  called  by  grace  and  washed  in 
^^-^  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus,  thou  hast  tasted 
of  better  drink  than  the  river  of  this  world's  pleasure 
can  give  thee ;  thou  hast  had  fellowship  with  Christ ; 
thou  hast  obtained  the  joy  of  seeing  Jesus,  and  lean- 
ing thine  head  upon  His  bosom.  Do  the  trifles,  the 
songs,  the  honors,  the  merriment  of  this  earth  con- 
tent thee  after  that?  If  thou  art  wandering  after 
the  waters  of  Egypt,  oh,  return  quickly  to  the  one 
living  fountain:  the  waters  of  Sihor  may  be  sweet 
to  the  Egyptians,  but  they  will  prove  only  bitterness 
to  thee.  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  them?  Jes''is 
asks  thee  this  question — what  wilt  thou  answer 
Him? 

OCTOBER  22. 

"  Why  go  I  mourning  f" — Psalm  xlii.  9. 

/C^ANST  thou  answer  this,  believer?  Can't  thou 
^^  find  any  reason  why  thou  art  so  often  mourn- 
ing instead  of  rejoicing?  Why  yield  to  gloomy  an- 
ticipations? Who  told  thee  that  the  night  would 
never  end  in  day?  Who  told  thee  that  the  winter 
of  thy  discontent  would  proceed  from  frost  to  frost, 
from  snow  and  ice,  and  hail,  to  deeper  snow,  and 
yet  more  heavy  tempest  of  despair?  Knowest  thou 
not  that  day  follows  night,  that  flood  comes  after 
ebb,  that  spring  and  summer  succeed  to  winter? 
Hope  thou  then !  Hope  thou  ever !  for  God  fails 
thee  not. 


OCTOBER  23. 

/F  there  be  one  place  where  our  Lord  Jesus  most 
fully  becomes  the  joy  and  comfort  of  His 
people,  it  is  where  He  plunged  deepest  into  the 
depths  of  woe.  Come  hither,  gracious  souls,  and 
behold  the  Man  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane ;  behold 
His  heart  so  brimming  with  love  that  He  cannot  hold 
it  in — so  full  of  sorrow  that  it  must  find  a  vent. 
Behold  the  Man  as  they  drive  the  nails  into  His 
hands  and  feet.  Look  up,  repenting  sinners,  and  see 
the  sorrowful  image  of  your  suffering  Lord.  If  we 
would  live  aright,  it  must  be  by  the  contemplation  of 
His  death;  if  we  would  rise  to  dignity,  it  must  be 
by  considering  His  humiliation  and  His  sorrow. 


W 


OCTOBER  24. 

HO  can  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's 
Elect  ?"  Most  blessed  challenge !  How  un- 
answerable it  is !  Every  sin  of  the  elect  was  laid 
upon  the  great  Champion  of  our  salvation,  and  by 
the  atonement  carried  away.  There  is  no  sin  in 
God's  book  against  His  people.  When  the  guilt  of 
sin  was  taken  away,  the  punishment  of  sin  was  re- 
moved. For  the  Christian  there  is  no  stroke  from 
God's  angry  hand — nay,  not  so  much  as  a  single 
frown  of  justice.  The  believer  may  be  chastised  by 
his  Father,  but  God  the  Judge  has  nothing  to  say 
to  the  Christian,  except  *T  have  absolved  thee :  thou 
art  acquitted." 


OCTOBER  2S, 

And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day.** 
Genesis  i.  5. 

rHE  evening  was  "darkness"  and  the  morning 
was  "light,"  and  yet  the  two  together  are  called 
by  the  name  thut  is  given  to  the  light  alone!  In 
every  believer  there  is  darkness  and  light,  and  yet 
he  is  not  a  sinner  because  there  is  sin  in  him,  but  he 
is  a  saint  because  he  possesses  some  degree  of  holi- 
ness. This  will  be  a  most  comforting  thought  to 
those  who  ask,  "Can  I  be  a  child  of  God  while  there 
is  so  much  darkness  in  me?"  Yes;  for- you,  like  th^ 
day,  take  not  your  name  from  the  evening,  but  from 
the  morning ;  and  you  are  spoken  of  in  the  word  of 
God  as  if  you  were  even  now  perfectly  holy. 

OCTOBER  26. 

/QF  the  Saviour,  and  only  of  the  Saviour,  is  it  true 
^^  in  the  fullest,  broadest,  and  most  unqualified 
sense.  "He  went  about  doing  good.  From  this 
description  it  is  evident  that  He  did  good  personally. 
The  evangelists  constantly  tell  us  that  He  touched 
the  leper  with  His  own  finger,  that  He  anointed  the 
eyes  of  the  blind,  and  that  in  cases  where  He  was 
asked  to  speak  the  word  only  at  a  distance.  He  did 
not  usually  comply,  but  went  Himself  to  the  sick 
bed,  and  there  personally  wrought  the  cure.  A 
lesson  to  us,  if  he  would  do  good,  to  do  it  ourselves. 
'*He  hath  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow 
in  His  steps." 


OCTOBER  27. 

/GIVE  unto  my  sheep,"  saith  he,  "eternal  life , 
and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any 
man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand."  What  sayest 
thou  to  this,  O  trembling  feeble  mind?  Is  not  this 
a  precious  mercy,  that  coming  to  Christ,  thou  dost 
not  come  to  one  who  will  treat  thee  well  for  a  little 
while,  and  then  send  thee  away,  but  he  will  receive 
thee  and  make  thee  his  bride,  and  thou  shalt  be  his 
forever.  Receive  no  longer  the  spirit  of  bondage 
again  to  fear,  but  the  spirit  of  adoption  whereby  thou 
shalt  cry,  Abba,  Father!  Oh,  the  grace  of  these, 
words,  "I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out !" 


OCTOBER  28. 

"Thou  crownest  the  year  with  thy  goodness." — Psalm  Ixv.  11 
^^LL  the  year  round,  every  hour  of  every  day, 
^^-^  God  is  richly  blessing  us ;  both  when  we  sleep 
and  when  we  wake  his  mercy  waits  upon  us.  The 
sun  may  leave  us  a  legacy  of  darkness,  by  our  God 
never  ceases  to  shine  upon  his  children  with  beams 
of  love.  Like  a  river,  his  loving  kindness  is  always 
flowing  with  a  fullness  inexhaustible  as  his  own 
nature.  Like  the  atmosphere  which  constantly  sur- 
rounds the  earth,  and  is  always  ready  to  support  the 
life  of  man,  the  benevolence  of  God  surrounds  all 
his  creatures ;  in  it,  as  in  their  element,  they  live,  and 
move,  and  have  their  being. 


OCTOBER  29. 

/F  the  most  precious  are  tried  in  the  fire,  are  we 
to  escape  the  crucible?  If  the  diamond  must 
be  vexed  upon  the  wheel,  are  we  to  be  made  perfect 
without  suffering?  Who  hath  commanded  the  wind 
to  cease  from  blowing  because  our  bark  is  on  the 
deep?  Why  and  wherefore  should  we  be  treated 
better  than  our  Lord?  The  First-born  felt  the  rod, 
and  why  not  the  younger  brethren?  It  is  pride 
which  would  choose  a  downy  pillow  and  a  silken 
couch  for  a  soldier  of  the  cross.  Wiser  far  is  he 
who,  being  first  resigned  to  the  divine  will,  groweth 
by  the  energy  of  grace  to  be  pleased  with  it,  and  so 
learns  to  gather  lilies  at  the  cross-foot,  and,  like 
Samson,  to  find  honey  in  the  lion. 

OCTOBER  30. 

/F  our  Lord  is  so  ready  to  heal  the  sick  and  bless 
the  needy,  then,  my  soul,  be  not  thou  slow  to 
put  thyself  in  his  way,  that  he  may  smile  on  thee. 
Be  not  slack  in  asking,  if  he  be  so  abundant  in 
bestowing.  Give  earnest  heed  to  his  word  now,  that 
Jesus  may  speak  through  it  to  thy  heart.  Where  he 
is  to  be  found,  there  make  thy  resort,  that  thou 
mayest  obtain  his  blessing.  When  he  is  present  to 
heal,  may  he  not  heal  thee  ?  But  surely  he  is  present 
even  now,  for  he  always  comes  to  hearts  which  need 
him.  And  dost  not  thou  need  him?  Ah,  he  knows 
how  much!  Thou  Son  of  David,  turn  thine  eye 
and  look  upon  the  distress  which  is  now  before  thee 
and  make  thy  suppliant  whole. 


OCTOBER  31. 

"The  Lord  trieth  the  righteous." — Psalm  xi.  5. 
/^LL  events  are  under  the  control  of  Provi- 
^-^-^  dence ;  consequently  all  the  trials  of  our  out- 
ward life  are  traceable  at  once  to  the  great  First 
Cause.  All  providences  are  doors  to  trials.  Even 
our  mercies,  like  roses,  have  their  thorns.  Our 
mountains  are  not  too  high,  and  our  valleys  are  not 
too  low,  for  temptations:  trials  lurk  on  all  roads. 
Everywhere,  above  and  beneath,  we  are  beset  and 
surrounded  with  dangers.  Yet  no  shower  falls  un- 
permitted from  the  threatening  cloud ;  every  drop 
has  its  order  ere  it  hastens  to  the  earth.  The  trials 
which  come  from  God  are  sent  to  prove  and 
.strengthen  us. 


NOVEMBER  1. 

/DET  me  command  to  you  a  life  of  trust  in  God 
°~  in  temporal  things.  Walk  in  your  path  of 
integrity  with  steadfast  steps,  and  show  that  you  are 
invincibly  strong  in  the  strength  which  confidence  in 
God  alone  can  confer.  Thus  you  will  be  delivered 
from  carking  care,  you  will  not  be  troubled  with  evil 
tidings,  your  heart  will  be  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord. , 
How  pleasant  to  float  along  the  stream  of  providence !  \ 
There  is  no  more  blessed  way  of  living  than  a  life  of 
dependence  upon  a  covenant-keeping  God.  We  have 
no  care,  for  he  careth  for  us ;  we  have  no  troubles, 
because  we  cast  our  burdens  upon  the  Lord. 

NOVEMBER  2. 

gT/^  EAL  my  soul,  for  I  have  sinned  against 
^  -^  thee."  For  this  also  the  godly  praise  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  saying,  "He  healeth  all  our 
diseases."  What  a  transcendent  comfort  it  is  that 
in  the  person  of  Jesus  "dwelleth  all  the  fullness  of 
the  Godhead  bodily!"  My  soul,  whatever  thy 
disease  may  be,  this  great  Physician  can  heal  thee. 
If  He  be  God,  there  can  be  no  limit  to  his  power. 
Come  just  as  thou  art,  for  he  who  is  God  can 
certainly  restore  thee  of  thy  plague.  None  shall  re- 
strain the  healing  virtue  which  proceeds  from  Jesus 
our  Lord.  All  his  patients  have  been  cured  in  the 
past,  and  shall  be  in  the  future,  and  thou  shalt  be 
one  among  them,  my  friend,  if  thou  wilt  but  rest 
thyself  in  him. 


NOVEMBER  3. 

"I J  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light."— 1  John  i.  7 
/fS  he  is  in  the  h'ght!  Can  we  ever  attain  to 
^^^  this  ?  Shall  we  ever  he  able  to  walk  as  clearly 
in  the  light  as  he  is  whom  we  call  *'Our  Father,"  of 
whom  it  is  written,  "God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no 
darkness  at  all  ?"  Certainly,  this  is  the  model  which 
is  set  before  us,  for  the  Saviour  himself  said,  **Be 
ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven  is 
perfect;"  and  although  we  may  feel  that  we  can 
never  rival  the  perfection  of  God,  yet  we  are  to  seek 
after  it,  and  never  be  satisfied  until  we  attain  to  it. 


NOVEMBER  4. 

CTT^O'R.  thou  art  my  strength."  What  an  inex- 
^  pressible  sweetness  is  to  be  found  in  these 
few  words !  How  joyfully  may  we  encounter  toils, 
and  how  cheerfully  may  we  endure  sufferings,  when 
we  can  lay  hold  upon  celestial  strength.  He  is  a 
happy  man  who  has  such  matchless  might  engaged 
upon  his  side.  Our  own  strength  would  be  of 
little  service  when  embarrassed  in  the  nets  of  base 
cunning,  but  the  Lord's  strength  is  ever  available; 
we  have  but  to  invoke  it,  and  we  shall  find  it  near 
at  hand.  If  by  faith  we  are  depending  alone  upon 
the  strength  of  the  mighty  God  of  Israel,  we  may 
use  our  holy  reliance  as  a  plea  in  supplication. 


NOVEMBER  5. 

^n  HOUGH  we  have  brought  forth  some  fruit 
^  unto  Christ,  and  have  a  joyful  hope  that  we  are 
"plants  of  his  own  right  hand  planting,"  yet  there 
are  times  when  we  feel  very  barren.  Prayer  is  life- 
less, love  is  cold,  faith  is  weak,  each  grace  in  the 
garden  of  our  heart  languishes  and  droops.  We  are 
like  flowers  in  the  hot  sun,  requiring  the  refreshing 
shower.  In  such  a  condition  what  are  we  to  do? 
''Sing,  O  barren,  break  forth  and  cry  aloud/'  Sing, 
believer,  for  it  will  cheer  thine  own  heart,  and  the 
hearts  of  other  desolate  ones.  Sing  on,  for  now  that 
God  makes  thee  loth  to  be  without  fruit  he  will  soon 
cover  thee  with  clusters. 

NOVEMBER  6. 

"Ourselves  also,  which  have  the  first  fruits  of  the  Spirit.*' 
Romans  viii.  23. 

CjyUT  the  first  fruits  ivere  not  the  harvest,  and  the 
-^^  works  of  the  Spirit  in  us  at  this  moment,  are 
not  the  consummation — the  perfection  is  yet  to 
come.  We  must  not  boast  that  we  have  attained, 
and  so  reckon  the  wave-sheaf  to  be  all  the  produce 
of  the  year :  we  must  hunger  and  thirst  after  right- 
eousness, and  pant  for  the  day  of  full  redemption. 
Dear  reader,  this  day  open  your  heart  wide,  and  God 
will  fill  it.  Groan  within  yourself  for  higher  degrees 
of  consecration,  and  your  Lord  will  grant  them  to 
you,  for  he  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above 
what  we  ask,  or  even  think. 


NOVEMBER  7. 

/^^OD  makes  no  difference  in  his  love  to  his 
y  children.  A  child  is  a  child  to  him;  he  will 
not  make  him  a  hired  servant;  but  he  shall  feast 
upon  the  fatted  calf,  and  shall  have  the  music  and 
the  dancing  as  much  as  if  he  had  never  gone  astray. 
No  chains  are  worn  in  the  court  of  King  Jesus.  Our 
admission  into  full  privileges  may  be  gradual,  but 
it  is  sure.  Perhaps  our  reader  is  saying,  "I  wish  I 
could  enjoy  the  promises,  and  walk  at  liberty  in  my 
Lord's  commands."  "If  thou  believest  with  all  thine 
heart,  thou  mayest."  Loose  the  chains  of  thy  neck, 
O  captive  daughter,  for  Jesus  makes  thee  free. 


NOVEMBER  8. 

^jpO  know  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him — oh,  this 
^  is  life,  this  is  joy,  this  is  marrow  and  fatness. 
His  unsearchable  riches  will  he  best  known  in  eter^ 
nity.  He  will  give  you,  on  the  way  to  heaven,  all  you 
need;  your  place  of  defense  shall  be  the  munitions 
of  rocks,  your  bread  shall  be  given  you,  and  your 
waters  shall  be  sure;  but  it  is  there,  there,  where 
you  shall  hear  the  song  of  them  that  triumph,  the 
shout  of  them  that  feast,  and  shall  see  the  glorious 
and  beloved  One.  The  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ!  Lord,  teach  us  more  and  more  of  Jesus, 
and  we  will  tell  out  the  good  news  to  others. 


NOVEMBER  9. 

(7DEYOND  measure  it  is  desirable  that  we,  as 
•^-^  believers,  should  have  the  person  of  Jesus  con« 
stantly  before  us,  to  inflame  our  love  towards  Him, 
and  to  increase  our  knowledge  of  Him,  But  to  have 
Jesus  ever  near,  the  heart  must  be  full  of  Him, 
welling  up  with  His  love,  even  to  overrunning; 
hence  the  apostle  prays  "that  Christ  may  dwell  in 
your  hearts!'  See  how  near  he  would  have  Jesus 
to  be!  "That  He  uiay  dzvell-/'  not  that  He  may  call 
upon  you  sometimes,  as  a  casual  visitor  enters  into 
a  house  and  tarries  for  a  night,  but  that  He  may 
dwell,  that  Jesus  may  become  the  Lord  and  Tenant 
of  your  heart. 

NOVEMBER  10. 

'T^  HE  believer  commits  his  soul  to  the  hand  of 
"^  his  God;  it  came  from  Him,  it  is  His  own,  He 
has  aforetime  sustained  it,  He  is  able  to  keep  it,  and 
it  is  most  fit  that  He  should  receive  it.  All  things 
are  safe  in  Jehovah's  hands ;  what  we  entrust  to  the 
Lord  will  be  secure,  both  now  and  in  that  day  of 
days  towards  which  we  are  hastening.  It  is  peace- 
ful living  and  glorious  dying  to  repose  in  the  care 
of  Heaven.  At  all  times  we  should  commit  our  all 
to  Jesus'  faithful  hand;  then,  though  life  may  hang 
on  a  thread,  and  adversities  may  multiply  as  the 
sands  of  the  sea,  our  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease,  and 
deH^ht  itself  in  quiet  resting  places. 


,  NOVEMBER  11. 

■  ^'The  how  shall  he  seen  in  the  cloud." — Genesis  ix.  14. 
CJyfJHEN  may  we  expect  to  see  the  token  of  the 
^^  covenant?  The  rainbow  is  only  to  be  seen 
painted  upon  a  cloud.  Beloved,  our  God,  who  is  as 
the  sun  to  us,  always  shines,  but  we  do  not  always 
see  Him — clouds  hide  His  face ;  but  no  matter  what 
drops  may  be  falling,  or  what  clouds  may  be 
threatening,  if  He  does  but  shine,  there  will  be  a 
rainbow  at  once.  It  is  said  that  when  we  see  the 
rainbow  the  shower  is  over.  Certain  it  is,  that  when 
Christ  comes  our  troubles  remove,  when  we  behold 
Jesus  our  sins  vanish,  and  our  debts  and  fears 
subside.  When  Jesus  walks  the  waters  of  the  sea. 
how  profound  the  calm ! 

NOVEMBER  12. 

rHE  bow  shall  be  in  the  cloud;  and  /  will  look 
upon  it,  that  /  may  remember  the  everlasting 
covenant."  Oh,  it  is  not  my  remembering  God,  it 
is  God's  remembering  me,  which  is  the  ground  of 
my  safety ;  it  is  not  my  laying  hold  of  his  covenant, 
but  his  covenant's  laying  hold  on  me.  Glory  be  to 
God !  the  whole  of  the  bulwarks  of  salvation  are 
secured  by  divine  power,  and  even  the  minor  towers, 
which  we  may  imagine  might  have  been  left  to  man, 
are  guarded  by  almighty  strength.  Even  the  remem- 
brance of  the  covenant  is  not  left  to  our  memories, 
for  ive  might  forget ;  but  our  Lord  cannot  forget  the 
saints  whom  he  has  graven  on  the  palms  of  his 
hands. 


NOVEMBER  13. 

(iT^EHOLD  one  of  the  great  Physician's  mightiest 
-^  arts ;  he  has  power  to  forgive  sin !  Before  the 
ransom  had  been  paid,  before  the  blood  had  been 
literally  sprinkled  on  the  mercy  seat,  he  had  power 
to  forgive  sin.  Hath  he  not  power  to  do  it  now  that 
he  hath  died?  He  has  boundless  power  now  that 
he  has  finished  transgression  and  made  an  end  of 
sin.  Hear  him  pleading  before  the  eternal  Father, 
pointing  to  his  wounds,  urging  the  merit  of  his 
sacred  passion !  What  power  to  forgive  is  here ! 
"He  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  and 
remission  of  sins."  The  most  crimson  sins  arc 
removed  by  the  crimson  of  his  blood. 

NOVEMBER  14. 

"And  I  will  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh." — Ezekiel  xxxvi.  26. 
'T^HE.  hard  heart  does  not  love  the  Redeemer, 
■^  but,  the  renewed  heart  burns  with  affection 
towards  him.  Many  are  the  privileges  of  this 
renewed  heart :  "  'Tis  here  the  Spirit  dwells,  'tis 
here  that  Jesus  rests."  It  is  fitted  to  receive  every 
spiritual  blessing,  and  every  blessing  comes  to  it.  It 
is  prepared  to  yield  every  heavenly  fruit  to  the 
honor  and  praise  of  God,  and  therefore  the  Lord 
delights  in  it.  A  tender  heart  is  the  best  defense 
against  sin,  and  the  best  preparation  for  heaven. 
A  renewed  heart  stands  on  its  watertower  looking 
for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Have  you  this 
heart  of  flesh  ? 


NOVEMBER  15. 

rHERE  is  no  elevation  of  grace,  no  attainment 
of  spirituality,  no  clearness  of  assurance,  no 
post  of  duty,  which  is  not  open  to  you  if  you  have 
but  the  power  to  beheve.  Lay  aside  your  sackcloth 
and  ashes,  and  rise  to  the  dignity  of  your  true 
position.  The  golden  throne  of  assurance  is  waiting 
for  you!  The  crown  of  communion  with  Jesus  is 
ready  to  bedeck  your  brow.  Wrap  yourself  in 
scarlet  and  fine  linen  and  fare  sumptuously  every 
day ;  if  thou  believest,  thy  land  shall  flow  with  milk 
and  honey,  and  thy  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  with 
marrow  and  fatness.  Gather  golden  sheaves  of  grace, 
for  they  await  thee  in  the  fields  of  faith.  "All 
things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." 

NOVEMBER  16. 

'7  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye  me  in  vain." 
Isaiah  xlv.  19. 

/^>OD  has  clearly  revealed  that  He  will  hear  the 

^Z"  prayer  of  those  who  call  upon  him,  and  that 

declaration    cannot    be    contravened.      He    was    so 

firmly,    so   truthfully,    so   righteously   spoken,   that 

there  can  be  no  room  for  doubt.    He  does  not  reveal 

his    mind    in   unintelligible    words,    but    he    speaks 

plainly  and  positively,  "Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive." 

Believe,   O  trembler,   this   sure  truth — that  prayer 

must  and  shall  be  heard,  and  that  never,  even  in  the 

secrets   of   eternity,   has   the   Lord   said   unto   any 

living  soul,  "Seek  ye  Me  in  vain." 


NOVEMBER  17. 

OINCE  the  first  hour  in  which  goodness  came 
Qj  into  conflict  with  evil,  it  has  never  ceased  to 
be  true  in  spiritual  experience,  that  Satan  hinders  us. 
If  we  toil  in  the  field,  he  seeks  to  break  the  plough- 
share; if  we  build  the  wall,  he  labors  to  cast  down 
the  stones;  if  we  would  serve  God  in  suflfering  or 
in  conflict,  everywhere  Satan  hinders  us.  He  hinders 
us  when  we  are  first  coming  to  Jesus  Christ.  Fierce 
conflicts  we  had  with  Satan  when  we  first  looked 
to  the  cross  and  lived.  Now  that  we  are  saved,  he 
endeavors  to  hinder  the  completeness  of  our  personal 
character.  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take 
heed  lest  he  fall." 

NOVEMBER  18- 

/TT  this  moment,  dear  reader,  whatever  thy 
^^•^  sinfulness,  Christ  has  power  to  pardon, — 
power  to  pardon  thee,  and  millions  such  as  thou  art. 
A  word  will  speak  it.  He  has  nothing  more  to  do 
to  win  thy  pardon ;  all  the  atoning  work  is  done.  He 
can,  in  answer  to  thy  tears,  forgive  thy  sins  to-day, 
and  make  thee  know  it.  He  can  breathe  into  thy 
soul  at  this  very  moment  a  peace  with  God  which 
passeth  all  understanding,  which  shall  spring  from 
perfect  remission  of  thy  manifold  iniquities.  Dost 
thou  believe  that?  I  trust  thou  believest  it.  Mayst 
thou  experience  now  the  power  of  Jesus  to  forgive 
sin! 


NOVEMBER  19. 

<;7^0UNTE0US  is  Jehovah  in  his  nature;  to  give 
^  is  his  dehght.  His  gifts  are  beyond  measure 
precious,  and  are  as  freely  given  as  the  light  of  the 
sun.  He  gives  grace  to  his  elect  because  he  wills 
it,  to  his  redeemed  because  of  his  covenant,  to  the 
called  because  of  his  promise,  to  believers  because 
they  seek  it,  to  sinners  because  they  need  it.  He 
gives  grace  abundantly,  seasonably,  constantly, 
readily,  sovereignly;  doubly  enhancing  the  value  of 
the  boon  by  the  manner  of  its  bestowal.  Reader, 
how  blessed  it  is,  as  the  years  roll  round,  and  the 
leaves  begin  again  to  fall,  to  enjoy  such  an  unfading 
promise  as  this.     "The  Lord  will  give  grace." 

NOVEMBER  20. 

'T^HE  dispensation  of  the  old  covenant  was  that 
'^  of  distance.  When  God  appeared  even  to  his 
servant  Moses,  he  said,  "Draw  not  nigh  hither:  put 
off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet ;"  and  when  he  mani- 
fested himself  upon  Mount  Sinai  to  his  own  chosen 
and  separated  people,  one  of  the  first  commands  was, 
"Thou  shalt  set  bounds  about  the  mount."  When 
the  gospel  came,  we  were  placed  on  quite  another 
footing.  The  word  "Go"  was  exchanged  foi 
"Come,"  distance  was  made  to  give  place  to  nearness, 
and  we  who  aforetime  were  afar  off,  were  made 
nigh  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  "Come  unto 
Me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will 
give  you  rest." 


NOVEMBER  21. 

yJfJH,  how  precious  is  Christ !  How  can  it  be  thai 
^^  I  have  thought  so  Httle  of  him!  How  is  it  I 
can  go  abroad  for  joy  and  comfort  when  he  is  so 
full,  so  rich,  so  satisfying?  Fellow-believer,  make 
a  covenant  with  thine  heart,  and  ask  thy  Lord  to 
ratify  it.  Bid  him  set  thee  as  a  signet  upon  his 
finger,  and  as  a  bracelet  upon  his  arm.  The  sparrow 
hath  made  a  house,  and  the  swallow  a  nest  for  her- 
self where  she  may  lay  her  young,  even  thine  altars, 
O  Lord  of  hosts,  my  King  and  my  God ;  and  so  too 
would  I  make  my  nest,  my  home,  in  thee,  and  never 
from  thee  may  the  soul  of  thy  turtle  dove  go  forth 
again,  but  may  I  nestle  close  to  thee,  O  Jesus,  my 
true  and  only  rest. 

NOVEMBER  22. 

/^>0D  employs  his  people  to  encourage  one 
y  another.  We  should  be  glad  that  God  usually 
works  for  man  by  man.  It  forms  a  bond  of  brother- 
hood, and  being  mutually  dependent  on  one  another, 
we  are  fused  more  completely  into  one  family. 
Brethren,  take  the  text  as  God's  message  to  you. 
Aim  to  comfort  the  sorrowful,  and  to  animate  the 
desponding.  Speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is 
weary,  and  encourage  those  who  are  fearful  to  go 
on  their  way  with  gladness.  God  encourages  you  by 
his  promises ;  Christ  encourages  you  as  he  points  to 
the  heaven  he  has  won  for  you,  and  the  Spirit  en- 
courages you  as  he  works  in  you  to  will  and  to  do 
of  His  own  will  and  pleasure. 


cjr* 


NOVEMBER  2'-^. 
'OST  of  us  know  what  it  is  to  be  over- 
whelmed in  heart.  Disappointments  ana 
heartbreaks  will  do  this  when  billow  after  billov\' 
rolls  over  us,  and  we  are  like  a  broken  shell  hurled 
to  and  fro  by  the  surf.  Blessed  be  God,  at  such 
seasons  we  are  not  without  an  all-sufficient  solace; 
our  God  is  the  harbor  of  weather-beaten  sails,  the 
hospice  of  forlorn  pilgrims.  Higher  than  we  are  is 
he,  his  mercy  higher  than  our  sins,  his  love  higher 
than  our  thoughts.  A  rock  he  is  since  he  changes 
not,  and  a  high  rock,  because  the  tempests  which 
overwhelm  us  roll  far  beneath  at  his  feet.  O  Lord, 
our  God,  by  thy  Holy  Spirit,  teach  us  thy  way  of 
faith,  lead  us  unto  thy  rest. 

NOVEMBER  24. 

C7  lERY  bitter  is  the  enmity  of  the  world 
^  against  the  people  of  Christ.  Men  will 
forgive  a  thousand  faults  in  others,  but  they  will 
magnify  the  most  trivial  offense  in  the  follower  of 
Jesus.  Instead  of  vainly  regretting  this,  let  us  turn 
it  to  account,  and  since  so  many  are  watching  for 
our  halting,  let  this  be  a  special  motive  for  walking 
very  carefully  before  God.  If  we  live  carelessly, 
the  lynx-eyed  world  will  soon  see  it,  and  they  will 
shout  triumphantly,  "See  how  these  Christians  act !" 
The  cross  of  Christ  is  in  itself  an  offense  to  the 
world;  let  us  take  heed  that  we  add  no  offense  of 
our  own,  for  thus  can  much  damage  be  done  to  the 
cause  of  Christ,  and  much  insult  offered  to  his 
name. 


NOVEMBER  25. 

CT\0'ES  Christ  receive  us  when  we  come  to  him, 
•^-^  notwithstanding  all  our  past  sinfulness  ?  Does 
he  never  chide  us  for  having  tried  all  other  retuges 
first?  And  is  there  none  on  earth  Hke  him?  Is  he 
the  best  of  all  the  good,  the  fairest  of  all  the  fair? 
Oh,  then  let  us  praise  him  !  Daughters  of  Jerusalem, 
extol  him  with  timbrel  and  harp!  Now  let  the 
standards  of  pomp  and  pride  be  trampled  under 
foot,  but  let  the  cross  of  Jesus,  which  the  world 
frowns  and  scoffs  at,  be  lifted  on  high.  Oh  for  a 
throne  of  ivory  for  our  King!  Let  him  be  set  on 
high  forever,  and  let  my  soul  sit  at  his  footstool,  and 
kiss  his  feet,  and  wash  them  with  my  tears. 

NOVEMBER  26. 

'y  'HIS  Man  receiveth  sinners;"  not,  however, 
'^  that  they  may  remain  sinners,  but  he  receives 
them  that  he  may  pardon  their  sins,  justify  their 
persons,  cleanse  their  hearts  by  his  purifying  word, 
preserve  their  souls  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  enable  them  to  serve  him,  to  show  forth 
his  praise,  and  to  have  communion  with  him.  Into 
his  heart's  love  he  receives  sinners,  takes  them  from 
darkness,  and  wears  them  as  jewels  in  his  crown ; 
plucks  them  as  brands  from  the  burning,  and  pre- 
serves them  as  costly  monuments  of  his  mercy. 
None  are  so  precious  in  Jesus'  sight  as  the  sinners 
for  whom  he  died. 


NOVEMBER  27. 

OUCCESS  is  certain  when  the  Lord  has  promised 
QJ  it.  Although  you  may  have  pleaded  month 
after  month  without  evidence  of  answer,  it  is  not 
possible  that  the  Lord  should  be  deaf  when  his 
people  are  earnest  in  a  matter  which  concerns  his 
glory.  Delayed  answers  often  set  the  heart  search- 
ing itself,  and  so  lead  to  contrition  and  spiritual 
reformation. 

Reader,  do  not  fall  into  the  sin  of  unbelief,  but 
continue  in  prayer  and  watching.  Plead  the  precious 
blood  with  unceasing  importunity,  and  it  shall  be 
with  you  according  to  your  desire. 

NOVEMBER  28. 

CJji)K  are  none  of  us  so  much  awake  as  we  should 
^^  be.  With  a  perishing  world  around  us,  to  sleep 
is  cruel.  Oh,  that  we  may  leave  forever  the  couch 
of  ease,  and  go  forth  with  flaming  torches  to  meet 
the  coming  Bridegroom !  Aly  heart  waketh.  This 
is  a  happy  sign.  Life  is  not  extinct,  though  sadly 
smothered.  When  our  renewed  heart  struggles 
against  our  natural  heaviness,  we  should  be  grateful 
to  sovereign  grace  for  keeping  a  little  vitality  within 
the  body  of  this  death.  Jesus  will  hear  our  hearts, 
will  help  our  hearts,  will  visit  our  hearts;  for  the 
voice  of  the  wakeful  heart  is  really  the  voice  of  our 
Beloved,  saying,  "Open  to  me."  Holy  zeal  will 
surelv  unbar  the  door. 


NOVEMBER  29. 

/N  the  evening  of  the  day  opportunities  are 
plentiful :  men  return  from  their  labor,  and 
the  zealous  soul-winner  finds  time  to  tell  abroad  the 
love  of  Jesus.  Have  I  no  evening  work  for  Jesus  ? 
If  I  have  not,  let  me  no  longer  withhold  my  hand 
from  a  service  which  requires  abundant  labor.  Jesus 
gave  both  his  hands  to  the  nails ;  how  can  I  keep 
back  one  of  mine  from  his  blessed  work?  Night 
and  day  he  toiled  and  prayed  for  me;  how  can  I 
give  a  single  hour  to  selfish  indulgence?  Up,  idle 
heart;  stretch  out  thy  hand  to  work,  or  uplift  it  to 
pray :  heaven  and  hell  are  in  earnest ;  let  me  be  so, 
and  this  evening  sow  good  seed  for  the  Lord  my 
God. 

NOVEMBER  30. 

"Now  on  whojn  dost  thou  trust/' — Isaiah  xxxvi.  5. 
CT>  EADER,  this  is  an  important  question. 
-^  \^^  Listen  to  the  Christian's  answer,  and  see  if 
it  is  yours.  "On  whom  dost  thou  trust?"  **I  trust," 
•says  the  Christian,  the  Son — the  man  Christ  Jesus. 
I  trust  in  him  to  take  away  all  my  sins  by  his  own 
sacrifice,  and  to  adorn  me  with  his  perfect  right- 
eousness. I  trust  him  to  be  my  Intercessor,  to 
present  my  prayers  and  desires  before  his  Father's 
throne,  and  I  trust  him  to  be  my  Advocate  at  the 
last  great  day,  to  plead  my  cause,  and  to  justify  me. 
I  trust  him  for  what  he  is,  for  what  he  has  done, 
and  for  what  he  has  promised  yet  to  do. 


DECEMBER  1. 

rHIS  age  is  peculiarly  the  dispensation  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  in  which  Jesus  cheers  us  not  by  his 
personal  presence,  as  he  shall  do  by  and  by,  but  by 
the  indwelling  and  constant  abiding  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  is  evermore  the  Comforter  of  the  church. 
It  is  his  office  to  console  the  hearts  of  God's  people. 
He  convinces  of  sin;  he  illuminates  and  instructs; 
but  still  the  main  part  of  his  work  lies  in  making 
glad  the  hearts  of  the  renewed,  in  confirming  the 
weak,  and  lifting  up  all  those  that  be  bowed  down 
He  does  this  by  revealing  Jesus  to  them.  The  Holy 
Spirit  consoles,  but  Christ  is  the  consolation. 

DECEMBER  2. 

7"S,  then,  your  calling  a  high  calling?  Has  it 
ennobled  your  heart,  and  set  it  upon  heavenly 
things?  Has  it  elevated  your  hopes,  your  tastes, 
your  desires?  If  man  alone  call  thee,  thou  art  un- 
called. Is  thy  calling  of  God  ?  Is  it  a  call  to  heaven 
as  well  as  from  heaven  ?  Unless  thou  art  a  stranger 
here,  and  heaven  thy  home,  thou  hast  not  been  called 
with  a  heavenly  calling;  for  those  who  have  been 
so  called,  declare  that  they  look  for  a  city  which  hath 
foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God.  Is 
thy  calling  thus  holy,  high,  heavenly  ?  Then,  beloved, 
thou  hast  been  called  of  God,  for  such  is  the  calling 
wherewith  God  doth  call  his  people. 


DECEMBER  3. 

(STL^ANY  in  waiting  upon  the  Lord  find  im 
^^^  ^  mediate  delight,  but  this  is  not  the  case  with 
all.  A  deeper  sense  of  sin  may  be  given  to  you 
instead  of  a  sense  of  pardon,  and  in  such  a  case  you 
will  have  need  of  patience  to  bear  the  heavy  blow. 
Ah !  poor  heart,  though  Christ  beat  and  bruise  thee, 
or  even  slay  thee,  trust  him ;  though  he  should  give 
thee  an  angry  word,  believe  in  the  love  of  his  heart. 
Do  not,  I  beseech  thee,  give  up  seeking  or  trusting 
my  Master  because  thou  hast  not  yet  obtained  the 
conscious  joy  which  thou  longest  for.  Cast  thyself 
an  him,  and  perseveringly  depend  even  where  thou 
:anst  not  rejoicingly  hope. 

DECEMBER  4. 

//  any  mnn  sin,  we  hare  an  advocate  with  the  Father, 
Jesus  Christ  the  righteous." — I  John  ii.  1. 

CJyi) HAT  words  of  tenderness,  what  sentences  of 
^^  persuasion,  will  the  anointed  use  when  he 
stands  up  to  plead  for  me !  *7^sus  Christ  the  right- 
eous/' This  is  not  only  his  character,  but  his  plea. 
It  is  his  character,  and  if  the  Righteous  One  be  my 
advocate,  then  my  cause  is  good,  or  he  would  not 
have  espoused  it.  It  is  his  plea,  for  he  meets  the 
charge  of  unrighteousness  against  me  by  the  plea 
that  He  is  righteous.  He  declares  himself  my  substi- 
tute, and  puts  his  obedience  to  my  account.  My  soul, 
thou  hast  a  friend  well  fitted  to  be  thine  advocate; 
he  cannot  but  succeed;  leave  thyself  entirely  in  his 
hands. 


DECEMBER  5. 

cy^(^  not  dissociate  Jesus  from  our  common  man- 
-^-^  hood.  It  is  a  dark  room  which  you  are  going 
through,  but  Jesus  went  through  it  before.  It  is  a 
sharp  fight  which  you  are  waging,  but  Jesus  has 
stood  foot  to  foot  with  the  same  enemy.  Let  us 
be  of  good  cheer — Christ  has  borne  the  load  before 
us,  and  the  blood-stained  footsteps  of  the  King  of 
glory  may  be  seen  along  the  road  which  we  traverse 
at  this  hour.  There  is  something  sweeter  yet — 
Jesus  was  tempted,  but  Jesus  never  sinned.  Then, 
my  soul,  it  is  not  needful  for  thee  to  sin,  for  Jesus 
was  a  man,  and  if  one  man  endured  these  tempta- 
tions and  sinned  not,  then  in  his  power  his  members 
may  also  cease  from  sin. 

DECEMBER  6. 

iJJ)R  shall  never  sing  Gloria  in  excelsis  except  we 
'^^  pray  to  God  De  profiindis:  out  of  the  depths 
must  we  Q.ry,  or  we  shall  never  behold  glory  in  the 
highest.  Prayer  should  be  perfumed  with  love, 
saturated  with  love — love  to  our  fellow-saints,  and 
love  to  Christ.  A  man  prevails  in  prayer  only  as  he 
believes.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  author  of  faith, 
and  strengthens  it  so  that  we  pray  believing  God's 
promise.  Oh  that  this  blessed  combination  of 
excellent  graces,  priceless,  and  sweet  as  the  spices 
of  the  merchant,  might  be  fragrant  within  us  because 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  in  our  hearts !  Most  blessed 
Comforter,  exert  thy  mighty  power  within  us,  help- 
ing our  infirmities  in  prayer. 


DECEMBER  7. 

And  I  will  deliver  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the  zvicked,  and 
I  imU  redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the  terrible." 
— Jer.  XV.  21 

^\/*  OTE  the  glorinus  personality  of  the  prom- 
^  \^^  ise — I  will,  /  will.  The  Lord  Jehovah 
himself  interposes  to  deliver  and  redeem  his  people. 
He  pledges  himself  personally  to  rescue  them.  His 
own  arm  shall  do  it,  that  he  may  have  the  glory. 
Neither  our  strength  nor  our  weakness  is  taken  into 
the  account,  but  the  lone  /,  like  the  sun  in  the 
heavens,  shines  out  resplendent  in  all-sufficiency. 
Why  then  do  we  cakulate  our  forces,  and  consult 
with  flesh  and  blood  to  our  grievous  wounding? 
Peace,  ye  unbelieving  thoughts,  be  still,  and  know 
that  the  Lord  reigneth. 

DECEMBER  8. 

cnOE  it  ever  in  your  remembrance,  that  to  keep 
-^  strictly  in  the  path  of  your  Saviour's  command 
is  better  than  any  outward  form  of  religion ;  and  to 
hearken  to  his  precept  with  an  attentive  ear  is  better 
than  to  bring  the  fat  of  rams,  or  any  other  precious 
thing,  to  lay  upon  his  altar.  If  you  are  failing  to  keep 
the  least  of  Christ's  commands  to  his  disciples,  I 
pray  you  be  disobedient  no  longer.  "To  obey," 
even  in  the  slightest  and  smallest  thing,  "is  better 
than  sacrifice."  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  teachable 
as  a  little  child,  but  it  is  a  much  more  blessed  thing, 
when  one  has  been  taught  the  lesson,  to  carry  it  out 
to  the  letter. 


DECEMBER  9. 

/QUR  good  Shepherd  has  In  his  flock  a  variety  of 
^^  experiences ;  some  are  strong  in  the  Lord,  and 
others  are  weak  in  faith;  but  he  is  impartial  in  his 
care  for  all  his  sheep,  and  the  weakest  lamb  is  as 
dear  to  him  as  the  most  advanced  in  the  flock. 
Lambs  are  wont  to  lag  behind,  prone  to  wander,  and 
apt  to  grow  weary;  but  from  all  the  danger  of  these 
infirmities  the  Shepherd  protects  them  with  his  arm 
of  power.  He  finds  new-born  souls,  like  your  lambs, 
ready  to  perish, — he  nourishes  them  till  life  becomes 
vigorous;  he  finds  weak  minds  ready  to  faint  and 
die — ^he  consoles  them  and  renews  their  strength. 

DECEMBER  10. 

'V^HERE  are  times  in  our  spiritual  experience 
'*'  when  human  counsel  or  sympathy,  or  religious 
ordinances,  fail  to  comfort  or  help  us.  Why  does 
our  gracious  God  permit  this  ?  Perhaps  it  is  because 
we  have  been  living  too  much  without  him,  and  he 
therefore  takes  away  everything  upon  which  we  have 
been  in  the  habit  of  depending,  that  he  may  drive 
us  to  himself.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  live  at  the 
fountain  head.  Having  nothing  of  our  own  to  trust 
to,  but  resting  upon  the  merits  of  Jesus.  Beloved, 
when  we  are  brought  to  a  thirsting  condition,  we 
are  sure  to  turn  to  the  fountain  of  life  with  eager- 
ness. 


DECEMBER  11. 

/T  was  a  divine  song,  which  Habakkuk  sang, 
when  in  the  night  he  said,  ''Although  the  fig 
tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the 
vines ;  the  labor  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields 
shall  yield  no  meat;  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from 
the  fold,  and  there  shall  be  no  herd  in  the  stalls : 
yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of 
my  salvation."  No  man  can  make  a  song  in  the 
night  of  himself ;  he  may  attempt  it,  but  he  will  find 
that  a  song  in  the  night  must  be  divinely  inspired. 
O  thou  chief  musician,  let  us  not  remain  songless 
because  affliction  is  upon  us,  tune  thou  our  lips 
to  the  melody  of  thanksgiving. 

DECEMBER  12. 

'T^HERE  are  times  when  all  the  promises  and 
•*'  doctrines  of  the  Bible  are  of  no  avail,  unless 
a  gracious  hand  shall  apply  them  to  us.  To  meet 
this  need  there  is  one,  even  the  Spirit  of  truth,  who 
takes  of  the  things  of  Jesus,  and  applies  them  to 
us.  Think  not  that  Christ  hath  placed  his  joys  on 
heavenly  shelves  that  we  may  climb  up  to  them  for 
ourselves,  but  he  draws  near,  and  sheds  his  peace 
abroad  in  our  hearts.  O  ChrisHan,  if  thou  art  to- 
day laboring  under  deep  distresses,  thy  Father  does 
not  give  thee  promises  and  then  leave  thee  to  draw 
them  from  the  word,  but  the  promises  he  has  written 
in  the  word  he  will  write  anew  on  vour  heart. 


DECEMBER  13. 

/^^OD  says  to  you,  **Fear  not,  I  am  thy  shield,  and 
y^  thy  exceeding  great  reward."  Believer,  grasp 
the  divine  word  with  a  personal,  appropriating  faith. 
Think  that  you  hear  Jesus  say,  "I  have  prayed  for 
thee  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  Think  you  see  him 
walking  on  the  waters  of  thy  trouble,  for  he  is  there, 
and  he  is  saying,  "Fear  not,  it  is  I ;  be  not  afraid." 
Oh,  those  sweet  words  of  Christ !  May  the  Holy 
Ghost  make  you  feel  them  as  spoken  to  yon;  for- 
get the  others  for  a  while — accept  the  voice  of  Jesus 
as  addressed  to  you,  and  say,  **Jesus  whispers  con- 
solation; I  cannot  refuse  it;  I  will  sit  under  his 
shadow  with  great  delight." 

DECEMBER  14. 

CJyd)HEN  is  the  Christian  most  liable  to  sleep? 
^^  Is  it  not  when  his  temporal  circumstances 
are  prosperous?  Have  you  not  found  it  so?  When 
you  had  daily  troubles  to  take  to  the  throne  of  grace, 
were  you  not  more  wakeful  than  you  are  now? 
Another  dangerous  time  is  zvhen  all  goes  pleasantly 
in  spiritual  matters.  There  is  no  temptation  half 
so  dangerous  as  not  being  tempted.  The  distressed 
soul  does  not  sleep ;  it  is  after  we  enter  into  peace- 
ful confidence  and  full  assurance  that  we  are  in 
danger  of  slumbering.  The  disciples  fell  asleep 
after  they  had  seen  Jesus  transfigured  on  the  moun- 
tain top.  Take  heed,  joyous  Christian;  be  as  happ)! 
as  you  will,  only  be  watchful. 


DECEMBER  15. 

V^O  give  to  others  is  but  sowing  seed  for  our- 
•^  selves.  He  who  is  so  good  a  steward  as  to  be 
willing  to  use  his  substance  for  his  Lord,  shall  be 
intrusted  with  more.  Friend  of  Jesus,  art  thou 
rendering  him  according  to  the  benefit  received? 
Much  has  been  given  thee — what  is  thy  fruit? 
Hast  thou  done  all  ?  Canst  thou  not  do  more  ?  To 
be  selfish  is  to  be  wicked.  God  forbid  that  any  of 
us  should  follow  the  ungenerous  and  destructive 
policy  of  living  unto  ourselves.  Jesus  pleased  not 
himself.  All  fullness  dwells  in  him,  but  of  his  full- 
ness have  we  all  received.  O  for  Jesus'  spirit,  that 
henceforth  we  may  live  not  unto  ourselves ! 

DECEMBER  16. 

^ut  their  eyes  were  holden  that  they  shotild  not  know  him. 
— Luke  xxiv.  16. 

'X^HE  disciples  had  heard  his  voice  so  often,  and 

J.      gazed  upon  that  marred   face  so   frequently, 

that  it  is  wonderful  they  did  not  discover  him.    Yet 

is  it  not  so  with  you  also  ?    You  have  not  seen  Jesus 

lately.     You  have  been  to  his  table,  and  you  have 

not  met  him  there.     You  are  in  a  dark  trouble  this 

day,  and  though  he  plainly  says,  "It  is  I,  be  not 

afraid,"  yet  you  cannot  discern  him.     Dear  child  of 

God,  are  you  in  this  state?     Faith  alone  can  bring 

us  to  see  Jesus.     Make  it  your  prayer,  "Lord,  open 

thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  see  my  Saviour  present 

with  me," 


DECEMBER  17. 

iOUR  Lord  would  have  all  his  people  rich  in  high 
^^  and  happy  thoughts  concerning  his  blessed 
person.  As  a  help  to  high  thoughts  of  Christ,  re- 
member the  estimation  that  Christ  is  had  in  beyond 
the  skies.  Think  how  God  esteems  the  only  be- 
gotten, his  unspeakable  gift  to  us.  Consider  what 
the  angels  think  of  him,  as  they  count  it  their  highest 
honor  to  veil  their  faces  at  his  feet.  Think  of  the 
mighty  love  which  drew  him  from  his  throne  to  die 
upon  the  cross !  See  him  risen,  crowned,  glorified ! 
Bow  before  him  as  the  Wonderful,  the  Counselor, 
the  mighty  God,  for  only  thus  will  your  love  to 
him  be  what  it  should. 

DECEMBER  18. 

/Q  CHRISTIAN,  do  you  doubt  as  to  whether  God 
^^  will  fulfill  his  promise?  Shall  the  munitions  of 
rock  be  carried  by  storm  ?  Shall  the  storehouses  of 
heaven  fail?  Do  you  think  that  your  heavenly 
Father,  though  he  knoweth  that  you  have  need  of 
food  and  raiment,  will  yet  forget  you?  When  not 
a  sparrow  falls  to  the  ground  without  your  Father, 
and  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered, 
will  you  mistrust  and  doubt  him  ?  Full  many  there 
be  who  have  been  tried  till  at  last  they  have  been 
driven  to  exercise  faith  in  God,  and  the  moment 
of  their  faith  has  been  the  instant  of  their  de 
liverance. 


DECEMBER  19. 

/^RE  you  willing,  dear  reader,  to  receive  Christ: 
^^-^  then  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the  way;  Christ 
will  be  your  guest;  his  own  power  is  working  with 
you,  making  you  willing..  What  an  honor  to  enter- 
tain the  Son  of  God  !  The  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  him,  and  yet  he  condescends  to  find  a  house 
within  our  hearts !  We  are  not  worthy  that  he 
should  come  under  our  roof,  but  what  an  unutterable 
privilege  when  he  condescends  to  enter !  for  then  he 
makes  a  feast,  and  causes  us  to  feast  with  him 
upon  royal  dainties ;  we  sit  at  a  banquet  where  he 
gives  immortality  to  those  who  feed  thereon.  Blessed 
among  the  sons  of  Adam  is  he  who  entertains  the 
Lord. 

DECEMBER  20. 

/N  order  to  learn  how  to  discharge  your  duty 
as  a  witness  for  Christ,  look  at  His  example. 
He  is  always  witnessing:  by  the  well  of  vSamaria, 
or  in  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem :  by  the  lake  of  Gen- 
nesaret,  or  on  the  mountain's  brow.  He  witnesses 
so  clearly  and  distinctly  that  there  is  no  mistake  in 
Him.  Christian,  make  your  life  a  ckar  testimony. 
Be  you  as  the  brook  wherein  you  may  see  every  stone 
at  the  bottom.  You  need  not  say,  *'I  am  tiue;"  he 
true.  Study  your  great  Exem.plar,  and  be  filled  with 
His  Spirit.  Remember  that  you  need  much  teach- 
ing, much  upholding,  much  grace,  and  much  humility, 
if  your  witnessing  is  to  be  to  your  Master's  glory. 


DECEMBER  21. 

rHE  more  you  know  about  Christ,  the  less  will 
you  be  satisfied  with  superficial  views  of  Him; 
and  the  more  deeply  you  study  His  life  and  the  full- 
ness of  His  Grace  which  shines  in  all  His  offices,  the 
more  truly  will  you  see  the  King  in  his  beauty.  Long 
more  and  more  to  see  Jesus.  Meditation  and  con- 
templation  are  often  like  windows  of  agate,  and 
gates  of  carbuncle,  through  which  we  behold  the 
Redeemer.  Meditation  puts  the  telescope  to  the  eye, 
and  enables  us  to  see  Jesus  better  than  we  could 
have  seen  him  if  we  had  lived  in  the  days  of  his 
flesh.  Would  that  we  were  more  taken  up  with  the 
person,  the  work,  the  beauty  of  our  incarnate  Lord. 

DECEMBER  22. 

/T  is  our  wisdom,  as  well  as  our  necessity,  to 
beseech  God  continually  to  strengthen  that 
which  he  has  wrought  in  us.  We  often  forget  that 
the  Author  of  our  faith  must  be  the  Preserver  of  it 
also.  The  lamp  which  was  burning  in  the  temple  was 
never  allowed  to  go  out,  but  it  had  to  be  daily  re- 
plenished with  fresh  oil;  in  like  manner,  our  faith 
can  only  live  by  being  sustained  with  the  oil  of 
grace,  and  we  can  only  obtain  this  from  God  him- 
self. 

Let  us,  then,  day  by  day,  go  to  our  Lord  for  the 
grace  and  strength  we  need.  We  have  a  strong 
argument  to  plead,  for  it  is  his  own  work  of  grace 
which  we  ask  him  to  strengthen.  Only  let  your 
faith  take  hold  of  his  strength. 


DECEMBER  23. 

rHE  distinguishing  mark  of  a  Christian  is  his 
confidence  in  the  love  of  Christ,  and  the  yield- 
ing of  his  affections  to  Christ  in  return.  First,  faith 
sets  her  seal  upon  the  man  by  enabling  the  soul  to 
say  with  the  apostle,  "Christ  loved  me  and  gave 
himself  for  me."  Then  love  gives  the  countersign, 
and  stamps  upon  the  heart  gratitude  and  love  to 
Jesus  in  return.  *'We  love  him  because  he  first  loved 
us/'  In  those  grand  old  ages,  which  are  the  heroic 
period  of  the  Christian  religion,  this  double  mark 
was  clearly  to  be  seen  in  all  believers  in  Jesus ;  they 
were  men  who  knew  the  love  of  Christ,  and  rested 
upon  it  as  a  man  leaneth  upon  a  staff  whose  trusti- 
ness he  has  tried. 

DECEMBER  24. 

/nUR  heavenly  Father  often  draws  us  with  the 
*^ cords  of  love.  How  slowly  do  we  respond  to  his 
gentle  impulse!  He  draws  us  to  exercise  a  more 
simple  faith  in  him;  but  we  have  not  yet  attained  to 
Abraham's  confidence ;  we  do  not  leave  our  worldly 
cares  with  God.  Our  meager  faith  brings  leanness 
into  our  souls;  we  do  not  open  our  hearts  wide, 
though  God  has  promised  to  fill  them.  Does  he  not 
this  day  draw  us  to  trust  him?  Can  we  not  hear 
him  say,  "Come,  my  child,  and  trust  me.  The  veil 
is  rent ;  enter  into  my  presence,  I  am  worthy  of  thy 
fullest  confidence ;  cast  thy  cares  on  me.  Shake  thy- 
self from  the  dust  of  thy  cares,  and  put  on  thy 
beautiful  garments  of  joy." 


DECEMBER  25. 

CJJJ'E  esteem  every  day  alike,  but  still,  as  the 
y^  season  suggests  thoughts  of  Jesus,  let  us  joy* 
fully  remember  our  dear  Redeemer's  glorious  birth. 
Who  but  He  was  ever  longed  for  by  such  a  multitude 
of  hearts?  When  did  angels  indulge  in  midnight 
songs,  or  did  God  hang  a  new  star  in  the  sky?  To 
whose  cradle  did  rich  and  poor  make  so  willing  a 
pilgrimage,  and  offer  such  hearty  and  unsought  ob- 
lations? Well  may  earth  rejoice;  well  may  all  men 
cease  their  labor  to  celebrate  "the  great  birthday"  of 
Jesus.  Let  gladness  rule  the  hour ;  let  holy  song  and 
sweet  heart  music  accompany  our  soul  in  the  rap- 
tures of  joy. 

DECEMBER  26. 

^T/^HAT  bliss  to  be  a  perfectly  pardoned  soul! 
^^  My  soul  dedicates  all  her  powers  to  Him 
who,  of  His  own  unpurchased  love,  became  my 
surety,  and  wrought  out  for  me  redemption  through 
His  blood !  What  riches  of  grace  does  free  for- 
giveness exhibit !  To  forgive  at  all,  to  forgive  fully, 
to  forgive  freely,  to  forgive  ever !  Here  is  a  con- 
stellation of  wonders;  and  when  I  think  of  how 
great  my  sins  were,  how  dear  were  the  precious  drops 
which  cleansed  me  from  them  I  am  in  a  maze  of 
wondering,  worshiping  affection.  I  bow  before 
the  throne  which  absolves  me;  I  clasp  the  cross 
which  delivers  me ;  I  serve  henceforth  the  Incarnate 
God,  through  whom  I  am  this  day  a  pardoned  sovl 


DECEMBER  27. 

>^T  this  hour  we  rest  in  the  promises  of  our 
^■^-^  faithful  God,  knowing  that  his  words  are  full 
of  truth  and  power ;  we  rest  in  the  doctrines  of 
his  word,  which  are  consolation  itself ;  we  rest  in 
the  covenant  of  his  grace,  which  is  a  haven  of  de- 
light. The  person  of  Jesus  is  the  quiet  resting  place 
of  his  people ;  and  when  we  draw  near  to  him  in  the 
breaking  of  bread,  in  the  hearing  of  the  word,  the 
searching  of  the  Scriptures,  prayer,  or  praise,  we 
find  any  form  of  approach  to  him  to  be  the  return 
of  peace  to  our  spirits.  The  God  of  Peace  gives 
perfect  peace  to  those  whose  hearts  are  stayed  upon 
him. 

DECEMBER  28. 

^^\/*  OTHING  can  satisfy  the  entire  man  but 
^  \^_^the  Lord's  love,  and  the  Lord's  own  self. 
To  embrace  our  Lord  Jesus,  to  dwell  in  His  love, 
and  be  fully  assured  of  union  with  Him — this  is  all 
in  all.  Dear  reader,  you  need  not  try  other  forms 
of  life  in  order  to  see  whether  they  are  better  than 
the  Christian's :  if  you  roam  the  world  around,  you 
will  see  no  sights  like  a  sight  of  the  Saviour's  face ; 
if  you  could  have  all  the  comforts  of  life,  if  you 
lost  your  Saviour,  you  would  be  wretched;  but  if 
you  win  Christ,  you  would  find  it  a  paradise ;  should 
you  live  in  obscurity,  or  die  with  famine,  you  will 
yet  be  satisfied  with  favor,  and  full  of  the  goodness 
I  f  the  Lord. 


DECEMBER  29. 

^TJ^IS  presence  ivill  he  most  realised  by  those 
'^  zvho  are  most  like  him.  If  you  desire  to  see 
Christ,  you  must  grow  in  conformity  to  him.  Bring 
yourself,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  into  union  with 
Christ's  desires,  and  motives,  and  plans  of  action, 
and  you  will  be  in  fellowship  with  him.  Remember 
his  presence  may  be  had.  His  promise  is  as  true  as 
ever.  He  delights  to  be  with  us.  If  he  doth  not 
come,  it  is  because  we  hinder  him  by  our  indif- 
ference. He  will  reveal  himself  to  our  earnest 
prayers,  and  graciously  suffer  himself  to  be  detained 
by  our  entreaties,  and  by  our  tears,  for  these  are 
the  golden  chains  which  bind  Jesus  to  his  people. 

DECEMBER  30. 

/^HRIST  appears  as  a  Shepherd  to  his  own  sheep, 
w^  not  to  others.  As  soon  as  he  appears,  his  own 
sheep  perceive  him — they  trust  him,  they  are  pre- 
pared to  follow  him ;  he  knows  them,  and  they  know 
him — there  is  a  mutual  knowledge — there  is  a  con- 
stant connection  between  them.  Thus  the  one  mark, 
the  sure  mark,  the  infallible  mark  of  regeneration 
and  adoption  is  a  hearty  faith  in  the  appointed  Re- 
deemer. Reader,  are  you  in  doubt,  are  you  uncertain 
whether  you  bear  the  secret  mark  of  God's  children? 
Then  let  not  an  hour  pass  over  your  head  till  you 
have  said,  "Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  mv  heart/ 


DECEMBER  31. 

yJfJN  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of  the  feast 
^^  Jesus  stood  and  cried,  saying,  if  any  man  thirst, 
let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink !"  No  other  dis- 
tinction is  made  but  that  of  thirst.  No  waiting  or 
preparation  is  so  much  as  hinted  at.  Drinking 
represents  a  reception  for  which  no  fitness  is  re- 
quired. Sinful  lips  may  touch  the  stream  of  divine 
love,  they  cannot  pollute  it,  but  shall  themselves  be 
purified.  Jesus  is  the  fount  of  hope.  Dear  reader, 
hear  the  dear  Redeemer's  loving  voice  as  he  cries  to 
each  of  us,  "If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto 
me  and  drink." 


liiiil 


