Or, DANIEL, MAN OF GOD 


BY 


D. Rh. MOODY. 


“And Daniel * * * kneeled upon his knees three times a day. 


_and prayed, and gave thanks before his God.'’—DAaNIEt. vi: 10. 


CHIGAGO: 
LF. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON. ST. 


Publisher of. Evangelical Literature. : 


DANIEL tas PROPHET. 


Or, DANIEL, MAN OF GOD 


BY 


D. L. MOODY. 


Fo 


1884 


CHICAGO: 
F. H. Reveut, 148.& 150 MADISON STREET. 


PUBLISHER OF EVANGELICAL LITERATURE, 


“PO 


PAGE 
I. 

THE CAPTIVES IN BABYLON ‘. 4 % eS 
II. 

“THOU ART THE HEAD OF GOLD!” . é . 2 
TIL. 

NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S IMAGE ‘ ‘ . - 18 
IV. 

NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S SECOND DREAM P FA - 29 
V. 

THE HANDWRITING ON THE WALL ‘ ‘ - 35 
VI. 

THE EDICT OF DARIUS . é ~ - - 4t 
VII. 


THE DEN OF LIONS es . ° - » §2 


DANIEL’S BAND. 


STANDING by a purpose true, 
Heeding God’s command, 
Honor them, the faithful few ! 
All hail to Daniel’s Band ! 


Dare to be a Daniel ! 
Dare to stand alone ! 

Dare to have a purpose firm, 
Dare to make it known ! 


Many mighty men are lost, 
Daring not to stand, 

Who for God had been a host, 
By joining Daniel’s Band. 


Many giants, great and tall, 
Stalking through the land, 

Headlong to the earth would fall, 
If met by Daniel’s Band! 


Hold the Gospel banner high! 
On to victory grand ! 

Satan and his host defy, 
And shout for Daniel’s Band! 


P. P. Buss, 


DANIEL THE PROPHET. 


I. 
THE CAPTIVES IN BABYLON. 


‘But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself 
with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the wine which he 
drank ; therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he 
might not defile himself’? (Dan. i. 8). 


ALWAYS delight to study the life of “Daniel the 
Prophet.” The name DaNniEL means “ God .is 
my judge.” God is my judge: not the public is 
my judge; not my fellow-men, but God. So 
Daniel held himself responsible to God. Some may ask, Who 

was Daniel? Listen. About six hundred years before the 

time of Christ, the sins of the kings of Judah had brought 
down upon them and upon the people the judgments of God. 

Jehoiakim had succeeded Jehoahaz; and Jehoiachin had suc- 

ceeded Jehoiakim ; and he again was succeeded by Zedekiah ; 

and of each of these kings the record runs just the same: “he 

did evil in the sight of the Lord.” 

No wonder that in the days of Jehoiakim, about six hun- 
dred years before the time of Christ, Nebuchadnezzar, King of 


’ Babylon, was permitted of God to come up against Jerusalem, 


and to lay siege against it and overcome it. It was probably 


6 DANIEL AND HIS THREE FRIENDS. 


at this time that Daniel, with some of the young princes, was 
carried away captive. A few years later, Jehoiachin being 
king, Nebuchadnezzar again came up against Jerusalem, and 
overcame it; when he bare away many of the temple vessels, 
and made several thousand captives. 

And still later on, when Zedekiah was king, Nebuchad- 
nezzar came a third time against Jerusalem to besiege it ; and 
this time he burnt the city with fire; broke down its walls; 
slaughtered many of the people; and probably bore away 
another batch of captives to the banks of the Euphrates. 


Among the earlier captives taken by the King of Babylon 
in the days of Jehoiakim, were four young men. Like Timothy 
in later times, they may have had godly mothers, who taught 
them the law of the Lord. Or they may perhaps have 
been touched by the words of Jeremiah, the “weeping pro- 
phet,” whom God had sent to the people of Judah. So, 
when the nation was rejecting the God of Israel, the God of 
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Moses, these young men took Him 
as their God: they received Him into their hearts. 

Many may have mocked at Jeremiah’s warnings, when he 
lifted up his voice against the sins of the people; they may 
have laughed at his tears, and have told him to his face— 
just as people say nowadays of earnest preachers—that he was 
causing undue excitement. But these four young men would 
seem to have listened to the prophet’s voice ; and they had the 
strength to come out for God. . 

And now they are in Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar the 
king commands that a certain number of the most promising 
of the young Jewish captives should be picked out, who might 
be taught the Chaidean tongue and instructed in the learning 
of Babylon. And the king further ordered that there should 
be daily set before them portions of meat from his table, and 
a supply of the same wine as he himself drank; and this was 


IN THE CITY. | 5 


to go on for three years. And at the end of three years these 
young men were to stand before the great monarch, at that 
time the ruler over the whole world. Daniel and his three 
young friends were amongst those thus selected. 

No young man ever goes from a country home to a large 
city—say, to a great metropolis—without grave temptations 
crossing his path on his entrance. And just at this turning- 
point in his life, as in Daniel’s, must lie the secret of his 
success or his failure. The cause of many of the failures that 
we see in life is, that men do not start right. Now, this young 
‘man started right. He took a character with him up to Baby- 
lon; and he was not ashamed of the religion of his mother 
and his father. He was not ashamed of the God of the Bible. 
, Up there among those heathen idolaters he was not ashamed 
to let his light shine. The young Hebrew captive took his 
stand for God as he entered the gate of Babylon, and doubt- 
less he cried to God to keep him steadfast. And he needed to 
cry hard, for he had to face great difficulties : as we shall see. 
| Soon comes a testing time. The king’s: edict goes forth, 
that these young men should eat the meat from the king’s table. 
Some of that food would in all probability consist of meats 
prohibited by the Levitical law —the flesh of animals, of birds, 
and of fishes, which had been pronounced “unclean,” and 
were consequently forbidden: or in the preparation, some 
portion might not perhaps have been thoroughly drained of 
the blood, concerning which it had been declared, “ Ve shall 
eat the blood of no manner of flesh”; or some part of the food 
may have been presented as an offering to Bel or some other 
Babylonish god. Some one of th2se circumstances, or possibly 
all of them united, may have determined Daniel’s course of 
action. I do not think it took young Daniel long to make up 
his mind. “He purposed in his heart ”—IN HIS HEART, mark 
that |—that he would not defile himself with the portion of 
the king’s meat.” 


8 SUGGESTIONS OF COMPROMISE. 


If some modern Christians could have advised Daniel. 
they would have said, ‘‘ Do not act like that; do not set aside 
the king’s meat: that is an act of Pharisaism. The moment 
you take your stand, and say you will not eat it, you say in 
effect that you are better than other people.” Oh, yes; that 
is the kind of talk too often heardnow. Men say, “ When you 
are in Rome you must do as Rome does;” and such people 
would have pressed upon the poor young captive that, though 
he might obey the commandments of God while in his own 
country, yet that he could not possibly do so here in Babylon 
—that he could not expect to carry his religion with him into 
the land of his captivity. Ican imagine men saying to Daniel, 
“ Look here, young man, you are too puritanical. Don’t be too 
particular; don’t have too many religious scruples. Bear in 
mind you are not now in Jerusalem. You will have to get 
over these notions, now you are here in Babylon. You are 
not now surrounded by friends and relatives. You are nota 
Jerusalem prince now. You are not surrounded by the royal 
family of Judah. Vou have been brought down from your 
high position. You are now a captive. And if the monarch 
hears about your refusing to eat the same kind of meat that 
he eats, and to drink the same kind of wine that he drinks, 
your head will soon roll from on your shoulders. You had 
better be a little politic.” 

But this young man had piety and religion deep down in 
his heart: and that is the right place for it; that is where it 
will grow; that is where it will have power; that is where it 
will regulate the life. Daniel had not joined the company 
of the ‘“‘church,” the faithful few in Jerusalem— because he 
wanted to get into “society,” and attain a position : that was 
not the reason. It was because of the love he had toward 
the Lord God of Israel. 

I can imagine the astonishment of that officer, Melzar, 
when Daniel told him he could not eat the king’s meat or 


REFUSING THE KING’S MEAT. 9 


drink his wine. “Why, what do you mean? Is there any- 
thing wrong with it? Why, it is the best the land can pro- 
duce!” 

“No,” says Daniel, “ there is nothing wrong with it in that 
way; but take it away, I cannot eat it.” Then Melzar tried 
to reason Daniel out of his scruples; but no, there stood 
the prophet, youth though he was at that time, firm as a 
rock. 

So, thank God, this young Hebrew and his three friends 
said they would not eat the meat or drink the wine; and 
requesting that the portions might be taken away, they endea- 
voured to persuade the overseer to bring them pulse instead. 

“Take away this wine, and take away this meat. Give us 
pulse and water.” The prince of the eunuchs probably trem- 
bled for the consequences. But, yielding to their importunity, 
he eventually consented to let them have pulse and water. for 
ten days. And lo! at the end of the ten days his fears were 
dispelled ; for the faces of Daniel and his young friends were | 
fairer and fatter than the faces of any of those who had 
partaken of the king’s meat. The four young men had not 
noses, like those of too many men nowadays seen in our 
streets, as red as if they were just going to blossom. It is 
God’s truth—and Daniel and his friends tested it—that cold 
water, with a clear conscience, is better than wine. They had 
a clear conscience; and the smile of God was upon them. 
The Lord had blessed their obedience, and the four Hebrew 
youths were allowed to have their own way; and in God’s 
time they were brought into favour, not only with the officer 
set over them, but with the court and the king. 

Daniel thought more of his principles than he did of 
earthly honour, or the esteem of men. Right was right 
with him. He was going to do right To-pay, and let the 
morrows take care of themselves. That firmness of purpose, in 
the strength of God, was the secret of his success. Right 


10 STARTING RIGHT, 


there, that very moment, he oveecame. And from that hour, 
from that moment, he could go on conquering and to con- 
quer, because he had started right. 

Many a man is lost because he does not start right. He 
makes a bad start. A young man comes from his country 
home, and enters upon city life: temptation arises, and he 
becomes false to his principles. He meets with some scoffing, 
sneering man, who jeers at him because he goes to a church 
service; or because he is seen reading his Bible; or because 
he is known to pray to God—to that God to whom Daniel 
prayed in Babylon. And the young man proves to be weak- 
kneed: he cannot stand the scoffs, and the sneers, and the 
jeers, of his companions; and so he becomes untrue to his 
principles, and gives them up. 

I want to say here to young men, that when a young man 
makes a wrong start, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred it 
is ruin to him. The first game of chance; the first betting 
transaction ; the first false entry in the books; the first quarter- 
dollar taken from the cash-box or the till; the first night spent 
in evil company—either of these may prove the turning-point ; 
either of these may represent a wrong start. 

If ever any persons could be said to have had a good excuse 
for being unfaithful to their principles, these four young men 
might. They had been torn away from the associations of their 
childhood and their youth; had been taken away from the 
religious influences which centred in Jerusalem, away from 
the temple services and sacrifices; and had been put down in 
Babylon among the idols and idolaters, among the wise men 
and soothsayers, and the whole nation was against them. They 
went right against the current of the whole world. 


BUT GOD WAS WITH THEM. 


And when a man, for the sake of principle and conscience, 
goes against the current of the whole world, God is with him; 


BABYLON THE GREAT. I 


and he need not stop to consider what the consequences will 
be. Right is right. 


But our testimony for God is not limited to a single act: 
it has to last all through our lives. So we must not imagine 
for a moment that Daniel had only one trial to undergo. The 
word to the Lord’s servants is the same in all ages, “Be thou 
faithful unto death.” 


This city of Babylon was a vast place. I suppose it to 
have been the largest city the world has ever seen. It is said 
to have been sixty miles round, and is understood to have 
consisted of an area of two hundred square miles.* A line 
drawn through the city in either direction would measure 
fifteen miles. The walls are said to have had an elevation of 
three hundred and fifty feet: they would therefore be nearly 
on a level with the dome of St. Paul’s Cathedral. The 
breadth of the walls is said to have been over eighty feet, and 
on the top eight chariots could run abreast. Babylon was like 
Chicago—so flat, that for ornamentation men had to construct 
artificial mounds ; and, like Chicago in another particular, the 
products of vast regions flowed right into and through it. 


* “Herodotus gives the circumference of Babylon as sixty miles; the 
whole forming a quadrangle, of which each side was fifteen miles. M. Oppert 
confirms.this by examinations on the spot, which show’an area within the walls 
of two hundred square miles"’ (Fawsset’s Bible Cyclopedia, p. 67). A cisarer 
idea of the enormous extent of Babylon will be formed if we understand that it 
probably occupied ‘an area nearly doudle the extent of modern London. 
It must not, however, be supposed that Babylon contained a popula- 
tion comparable with that of London in point of numbers. The inhab- 
itants of the former city probably numbered 1,200,000. 


II. 
“THOU ART THE HEAD OF GOLD!” 


* Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, 
and his sleep brake from him” (Dan. ii. 1). 


alae E hear of Daniel again some few years later on, 
W235 and under new conditions. The King of Babylon 
had a dream ; and his dream greatly disturbed him. 
He musters before him the magicians, the astro- 
logers, the soothsayers, and the Chaldeeans (or 
learned men), and requires from them the interpretation of this 
night-vision of his. He either cannot or will not narrate to 
them the incidents of the vision, but demands an explanation 
without detailing what he had seen in his dream. ‘The thing 
is gone from me: if ye will not make known unto me the 
dream, with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, 
and your houses shall be made a dunghill.” 

That was a pretty unreasonable demand. It is true that 
he offered them rewards and honours if they succeeded. But 
of course they failed. And they admitted their failure. 
“There is not a man upon the earth that can show the king’s 
matter: therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler that asked 
such things of any magician, astrologer, or Chaldean. And it 
is a rare thing that the king requireth ; and there is none other 
that can show it before the king, except the gods, whose 
dwelling is not with men,” 

“Except the gods.” They did not mean the God of 
heaven—Daniel’s God. He could have revealed the secret 


PRAVING IN BABYLON. 13 


quick enough. They meant the idol-gods of Babylon, with 
whom these so-called “wise men” thought, and wrongly 


‘thought, the power of interpretation lay. 


“There is not a man upon the earth that can show the 
king’s matter.” They were wrong there; and that they soon 
found out. “The king was angry and very furious, and com- 
manded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon; and the 
decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and they 
sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.” 

The king’s officer came to Daniel; but Daniel was not 
afraid.. Says the officer to him, “You are classed among the 
wise men; and our orders are to take you out and execute 
you.” ‘ Well,” says the young Hebrew captive, “the king 
has been very hasty. But let him only give me a little time ; 
and I will show the interpretation.” 

He had read the law of Moses; and he was one of those 
who believed that what Moses had written concerning secret 
things was true: “The secret things belong unto the Lord 
our God ; but the things that are revealed belong unto us, and 
to our children.” He probably said to himself, ““My God 
knows that secret; and I will trust to Him to reveal it to me.” 
And he may have called together his three friends; and have 
held a prayer-meeting—perhaps the first prayer-meeting ever 
held in Babylon. They dealt with the threatening message 
of the King of Babylon just as Hezekiah had dealt with the 
threatening letter of the King of Assyria a hundred years 
before. They “spread it before the Lord.” And they prayed 
that this secret might be revealed to them. And after they 
had prayed, and made their request to God—and the answer 
did not come right off, then and there—they went off to bed, 
and fell asleep. 

I do not think that you or I would have slept much, if we 
had thought that our heads were in danger of coming off in 
the morning. Daniel slept: for we are told the matter was 


14 THE DREAM, 


revealed to him in a dream or night-vision. Daniel’s faith was 
strong: so he could sleep calmly in the prospect of death. If 
his friends did not sleep through the night it is most likely 
they were praying. 


DANIEL STANDS BEFORE THE KING. 


In the morning Daniel pours out his heart in thanksgiving. 
He “blessed the God of heaven” He had got into the 
spirit of Psalm citi. : ‘ Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that 
is within me, bless His holy name!” Paul and Silas had the 
same spirit of thanksgiving when they were in the prison at 
Philippi. Daniel makes his way to the palace, goes into the 
guard-room, and says to the officer: “ Bring me in before the 
king; and I will show unto the king the interpretation.” He 
stands in the presence of Nebuchadnezzar; and, like Joseph 
before Pharaoh, before proceeding to unfold the dream, he 
gives glory to God: ‘‘ There is a God in heaven that revealeth 
secrets.” Daniel took his place as nobody: he himself was 
nothing. He did not wish the king to think highly of him. 
That is the very highest type of p'ety—when a man hides him- 
self, as it were, out of the way; and seeks to exalt his God and 
lift up his Redeemer, and not himself. And then he proceeds 
to describe the dream: “ Thou, O king, sawest ; and behold, a 
great image! This great image, whose brightness was excel- 
lent, stood before thee; and the form thereof was terrible.” 

I can imagine how the king’s eyes flashed out at those 
opening words; and I can fancy him crying out, “ Yes, that is 
it: the whole thing comes back to me now.” 

“This image’s head was of fine gold; his breast and his 
arms of silver; his belly and his thighs of brass; his legs of 
iron ; his feet, part of iron and part of clay.” 

“Ves. that is it exactly,” says the king; “I recollect all 
that now. But surely there was something more.” 

And Daniel goes on: “ Thou sawest till that a stone was 


, 


AND THE INTERPRETATION. : 15 


cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet 
that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. .. . This 
is the dream: and we will tell the interpretation thereof before 
the king.” 

And then, amidst death-like stillness, Daniel went on to 
unfold the interpretation ; and he told the king that the golden 
head of the great image was none other than himself. ‘Thou 
art this head of gold!” He then goes on to tell of another 
kingdom that should arise—not so beautiful, but stronger ; as 
silver is stronger than gotd: that described the Medo-Persian._ 
empire. But the arms of silver were to overthrow the head 
of gold. And Daniel himself lived to see the day when that 
part of the prophetic dream came to pass.. He lived to see 
Cyrus overthrow the Chaldean power. He lived to see 
the sceptre of empire pass into the hands of the Medes and 
Persians. And after them came a mighty Grecian conqueror, 
Alexander the Great, who overthrew the Persian dynasty ; 
and for awhile Greece ruled the world. Then came the 
Ceesars, and founded the empire of Rome—symbolized by the 
legs of iron—the mightiest power the world had ever known : 
and for centuries Rome sat on those seven hills, and swayed 
the sceptre over the nations of the earth. And then, in its 
turn, the Roman power was broken; and the mighty empire 
split up into ten kingdoms corresponding to the ten toes of 
the prophetic figure. 

I believe in the literal fulfilment, so far, of Daniel’s: God- 
given words; and in the sure fulfilment of the final prophecy 
of the “stone cut out of the mountain, without hands,” that 
by and by shall grind the kingdoms of this world into dust, 
and bring in the kingdom of peace. 

Whilst the feet were of clay, there was some of the strength 
of the iron remaining in them. At the present day we have 
got down to the toes, and even to the extremities of these. 
Soon, very soon, the collision may occur; and then will come 


16 THE COMING KING. 


the end. The “stone cut out without hands” is surely 
coming—and it may be very soon. 

What does Ezekiel say, prophesying within some few years 
of the time of this very vision >“ Remove the diadem, and 
take off the crown. .... I will overturn, overturn, overturn ; 
and it shall be no more, until He come whose right it is: and 
I will give it Him.” | 

What does St. Paul say ?—“ The appearing of our Lord 
Jesus Christ; which in His time He shall show, who is the 
blessed and only Potentate; the King of kings; and Lord of 
lords; .... to whom be honour and power everlasting.” 

Yes, the Fifth Monarchy is coming: and it may be very 
soon. Hail, thou Fifth Monarch, who art to rule the world in 
righteousness, and sway the sceptre “from the river unto the 
ends of the earth.” Shortly the cry, “ Christ is come!” will be 
ringing through the earth. It is only a ‘“‘little while.” Cheer 
up, ye children of God; our King will be back by and by! 
And to those who have not as yet given their hearts to Christ, 
I would say, Lose no time! If you want a part and lot in that 
coming kingdom of the Lord you had better press into it now 
while the door is open. By and by “Too late! too late!” 
will be the cry. 


When King Nebuchadnezzar heard the full description 
of his dream and listened to its interpretation, he was 
satisfied that at last he had found a really wise man. 
He gave Daniel many great gifts, and raised him— just 
as Pharaoh had raised Joseph ages before—to a place 
near the throne. And when Daniel was raised to position and 
power he did not forget his friends; he requested of the 
king that they should be promoted; and they also were 
put in positions of honour and trust. God blessed them sig- 
nally ; and—what is more—He kept them true to Him in 
their prosperity, as they had been in their adversity. 


DANIEL PROMOTED. 17 


From that moment Daniel becomes a great man. He is 
set over the province of Babylon: he is lifted right out of 
bondage; right out of servitude. He was a young man, 
probably not more than twenty-two years old: and there he is 
—set over a mighty empire; is made, you might say, practi- 
cally ruler over the whole of the then known world. And God 
will exalt us when the right time comes. We need not try 
to promote ourselves; we n2ed_ not struggle for position. Let 
God put'us in our true places And it is a good deal better 
for a man to be right with God, even if he hold no position 
down here. Then he can look up and know that God is 
pleased with him : that is enough. 


“FIGHT THE GOOD FIGHT!” 


** How goes the fight with thee— 
The life-long battle with all evil things? 
Thine no low strife, and thine no selfish aim 3 
It is the war of giants and of kings. 


** Goes the fight well with thee— ; 
This living fight with death and death’s dark power ? 
Is not the Stronger than the strong one near, 
With thee and for thee in the fiercest hour? 


** Dread not the din and smoke, 
The stifling poison of the fiery air ; 
Courage! it is the battle of thy God : 
Go, and for Him learn how to do and dare! 


** What though ten thousand fall, 
And the red field with the dear dead be strewn! 
Grasp but more bravely thy bright shield and sword ; 
Fight to the last, although thou fight’st alone. 


** What though ten thousand faint, 
Desert, or yield, or in weak terror flee? 
Heed not the panic of the multitude ; 
Thine be the Captain’s watchword—Vicrtory !” 
Dr. H. Bonar. 


2 


III. 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S IMAGE. 


““Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height 
was three-score cubits : he set it up in the plains of Dura in the pro- 
vince of Babylon ” (Dan. iii. 1). 
gape IME went on—possibly several years; and now we 
reach a crisis indeed. Whether or not that dream 
of a gigantic human figure continued to haunt 
Nebuchadnezzar we cannot say; but it is quite 
possible that the dream may have in some sort 
suggested Nebuchadnezzar’s next proceeding. He ordered the 
construction of an immense image. It was to be of gold 
—not simply gilded, but actually of gold. Gold is a symbol 
of prosperity ; and at this time Babylon was prosperous. In 
like manner in the prosperous days of Jerusalem gold was 
abundant. And it may have been that some of the precious 
metal, carried as the spoils of war from the Jewish capital, 
was used in the construction of this image of gold. It was 
of colossal size—over ninety feet high, and between nine and 
ten feet wide. This gigantic image was set up in the plain of 
Dura, near to the city. I suppose Nebuchadnezzar wanted to 
gratify his imperial vanity by inaugurating a universal religion. 

When the time came for the dedication, Daniel was not 


SENT Peck Dae ATRL ARPT TATE BRON ENCS TNS Od 


Fa Cacho Neat ct AN 


THE PLAIN OF DURA. | 19 


there. He may have been away in Egypt ; or in some one of 
the many provinces, attending to the affairs of the empire. If 
he had been there we should have heard of him. Satraps, 
princes, governors, councillors, high secretaries, judges, were 
ordered to be present at the dedication of the image. What 
a gathering that morning! It was the fashionable thing to be 
seen that morning driving to the plain of Dura. Of course it 
was: all the great people, and all the rich people, were to be 
there. Now hark! the trumpet sounds; the herald shouts: 
“To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages, 
that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, 
sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye fall 
down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the 
king hath set up: and whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, 
shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery 
furnace.” 

Perhaps a part of the ceremony consisted in “the unveiling 
of the statue,” as we say. One thing, however, is certain : that 
at the given signal all the people were required to fall to the 
earth, and worship. . 

But in the law of God there was something against that: 
God’s voice had spoken at Sinai; God’s finger had written on 
the table of stone—“ THOU SHALT HAVE NONE OTHER GODS 
BEFORE Me.” God’s law went right against the king’s. I said 
Daniel was not on the plain of Dura. But his influence was 
there. He had influenced those three friends of his—Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abednego. They were there; and they were 
actuated by the same spirit as Daniel. Their position brought 
them here at the hour of the dedication. 

Now mark you, no man can be true for God, and live for 
Him, without at some time or other being unpopular in this 
world. Those men who are trying to live for both worlds 
make a wreck of it; for at some time or other the collision is 
sure tocome. Ah, would all of us have advised Daniel’s three 


20 THE THREATENED PENALTY, 


friends to do the right thing at any hazard? Are there not 
some of us with so little backbone that we would have coun- 
selled these three just to bow down a little, so that no one 
could take notice—to merely bow down, .but not to worship ? 
Daniel and his friends, when they first came to Babylon, per- 
ceived that the two worlds—the present world and the world 
to come—would be in collision: and they ‘‘went for” the 
world to come; they “ went for” things unseen: they did not 
judge for the time being only ; they took their stand right there. 
Even if it cost them their lives, what of that! It would only 
hasten them to the glory; and they would receive the greater 
reward. They took their stand for God and for the unseen 
world. The faithful three utterly refused to bend the knee to 
a god of gold. a. 

A terrible penalty was associated with disobedience to the 
king’s command: ‘ Whoso falleth not down and worshippeth 
shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery 
furnace. ”* 

How many would cry out in this city—in every city—“ Give 
me gold, give me money; and I will do anything.” Some people 
may think and say that the men of Nebuchadnezzar’s day ought 
not to have bowed down toa golden idol; but they themselves 
are every day doing just that very thing. Money is their god; 
social position their golden image. There are plenty of men 
to-day who are bowing down to the golden image that the 
world has set up. ‘Give me gold! give me gold; and you 


* Not a mere empty threat. It was a sentence in harmony with the cha- 
racter and the practice of the ferocious and cruel king. ‘‘ The Lord make them 
like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the King of Babylon ROASTED IN THE 
FIRE” (Jer. xxix. 22). 

It is well for us to remember that the burning of living beings has not been 
confined to a distant country and a barbarous age. Some three hundred years 
ago, an English queen, whose name has become a proverb, caused to be 
roasted alive in England, during her short reign of five years and five months, 
no less than 277 persons ; of whom fifty-five were women, and four were 


children. 


PSD nant Wak ir tha ie ca iN Ak a St ia iy 


Riek) dh eel RMD REED 


THE GOLDEN IMAGE. 21 


may have heaven. Give me position; and you may have the 
world to come. Give me worldly honour; and I will sell 
out my hopes of heaven. Give me the thirty pieces of silver ; 
and I will give you Christ.” That is the cry of the world 
to-day. . 

And now the order is given—very probably by the king 
himself—that the bands should strike up; just the same as on 
public occasions bands of music do now. The music could 
be heard afar off; and when the first notes burst forth all were 
to bow down to the golden image. LEarth’s great ones and 
mighty ones bowed down at the king’s command. But there 
were three with stiff knees which did not bend. Those were 


_Daniel’s three friends, who knew well that to do the king’s 


bidding would be to break the law of their God; and they at 
all events will not fall down and worship. At the king’s 
command they had come to the dedication: there might be 
nothing wrong in that: but they will not bow down. They 
were too stiff in the backbone for that. They remembered 
the command, “Thou shait have none other gods before 
Me.” These are the kind of servants God wants—men who 
will stand up bravely and fearlessly for Him. 

Like all the servants of the Lord, and all who walk in the 
atmosphere of heaven, these three Hebrews had enemies. 
There were some who bore them a bitter grudge. Very pos- 
sibly they were thought to have had undue preference in being ~ 
promoted to office. So there were some others, besides the 
three young Hebrews, who did not worship as commanded. 
Do you know what they were doing? They were watching to 
see Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. If they themselves 
had bowed their faces to the ground, according to Nebu- 
chadnezzar’s command, they would not have seen that Daniel's 
three friends refused to bow: they would not have seen the 
three young Hebrews standing up, erect, straight. There 
were those Chaldeans looking out of the corners of their 


22 THE THREE YOUNG HEBREWS, 


eyes, and watching the three young men. These young Jews 
had so carried themselves, and had so lived in Babylon, that 
their watchers felt sure they would not bow down. They 
knew well that the three would not sacrifice principle. They 
would go as far as it was lawful in obeying the king's com- 
mands; but a time would come when they would draw the 
line. When the commands of the earthly sovereign come in 
conflict with the commands of the God of heaven they will 
not yield. The watchers watched; but the young men did 
not bow. 

Thank God, they had backbone, if you will allow me the 
expression. Something held their knees firm; they would 
not give in: there they stood as firm as rock. They did not 
get half-way down, and just make believe that they were going 
to worship the image: there was nothing of that kind: they 
stood up erect and firm. 

Some of those Chaldeans wished to get rid of these young 
Hebrews: they perhaps wanted their places: they were after 
their offices. Men have been the same in all ages. There 
were, no doubt, a goou many men in Babylon who wanted to. 
get their posts. These three men had high positions; there 
was a good deal of honour attached to their offices: and their 
enemies wanted to oust them, and to succeed to their offices. 
It is a very bad state of things when men try to pull down 
others in order to obtain their places; and there is a good 
deal of that, you know, in this world. Many a man has had 
his character blasted and ruined by some person or other who 
wanted to step into his place and position. 

So away went those men to the king to lay an information. 
They duly rendered the salutation, “O king, live for ever !” 
and then they went on to tell him of those rebellious Hebrews 
who would not obey the king’s order. “Do you know, 
O king, that there are three men in your kingdom who will 
not obey your command ?” 


**OUR GOD IS ABLE TO DELIVER.” 23 


“Three men in my kingdom who will not obey me!” roars 
Nebuchadnezzar; “no! who are they? what are their 
names ?” 

“Why, those three Hebrew slaves whom you set over 
us—Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. When the music 
struck up they did not bow down; and it is noised all around: 
the people know it. And if you allow them to go unpunished, 
it will not be long before your law will be perfectly worthless.” 

I can imagine the king almost speechless with rage, and 
just gesturing his commands that the men should be brought 
before him. 

“Ts it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that you 
would not bow down and worship the golden image which I 
set up in the plain of Dura?” 

“It is true, quite true,” says one of them—perhaps 
Shadrach. “ Quite true, O king.” 

One last chance Nebuchadnezzar resolved to give them. 
““Now, if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of 
the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all 
kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the image which I 
have made—well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the 
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. And 
who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?” 

That is pretty plain speaking, is it not? There is no 


mincing or smoothing over matters. Do this, and live; donot - 


do it, and you die. But the threat that the king held out had 
few terrors for them. They turned and said to the king: “O 
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this 
matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver 
us from the burning fiery furnace; and He will deliver us out 
of thine hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto thee, O 
king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden 
image which thou hast set up.” 

And that is plain speaking, too. The king of Babylon 


Ke. 


24 “WE WILL NOT!” 


had not been accustomed to be talked to like that. And he 
did not like it. We are told he was “ full of fury.” 

These Hebrews spoke respectfully, but firmly. And mark, 
they did not absolutely say that God zwou/d deliver them from 
the burning fiery furnace; but they declared that He was adle 
to deliver them. They had no doubt about His ability to do 
it. They believed that He would do it; but they did not 
hide from themselves the possibility of Nebuchadnezzar being 
allowed to carry out his threats. Still, that did not greatly 
move them. “ But zfzot”—if in His inscrutable purposes He 
allows us to suffer—still our resolve is the same: “we will 
not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou 
hast set up.” They were not afraid to pass from the presence 
of the king of Babylon to the presence of the King of kings. 
They had courage, those men. I wonder if there could be 
found three such brave men in New York, or in Boston, or in 
Baltimore, or in Chicago, now. How settled they were in 
their minds! Thank God for such courage! thank God for 
such boldness! A few such men, brave and fearless for God, 
“ would soon turn the world upside down. Nowadays they 
would be thought fanatics: they would be advised to bow 
down outwardly, and never to mind the “worship” of the 
image. But even the semblance of worshipping an image was — 
too much for them ; and they were determined to avoid even 
the appearance of evil. 

Look at the king! Ican imagine him in his fury, trem- 
bling like an aspen leaf, and turning pale as death with rage. 
“What ! disobey me, the great and mighty king? Call in the 
mighty men; and let them bind these rebels hand and foot. 
Heat the furnace seven times hotter than its wont; and then 
in with these rebellious fellows! They shall not live.” 

“Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, 
and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into 
the midst of the burning fiery furnace.” 


“720. 7 SEE FOUR MEN! . 25 


The command was instantly executed; and they were 
hurled into the terrible blaze. The fire was so furious that the 
flames consumed the officers who thrust them in.* The three 
young Hebrews “ fell down bound into the midst of the burn- 
ing fiery furnace ;” and it seemed as if they were in a bad case 
then. From his royal seat the king peered forth, looking out 
to see the rebels burnt to ashes. But when Nebuchadnezzar 
gazed, expecting the gratification of his vengeance, to his great 
amazement he saw the men walking about in the midst of the 
flames ; walking, mind you—they were not running— walking 
as if in the midst of green pastures or on the margin of stil! 
waters. ‘There was no difference in them, except that their 
bonds were burnt off. Ah, it does my heart good to think that 
the worst the devil is allowed to do is to burn off the bonds of 
God’s children. If Christ be with us, the direst afflictions can 
only loosen our earthly bonds, and set us free to soar the 
higher. ; 
Nebuchadnezzar beheld strange things that day. ‘There, 
through the flames, he saw rour men walking in the midst of 
the fire, although only three had been cast therein. How was 
this? The Great Shepherd in yonder heaven saw that three of 
His lambs were in trouble ; and He leaped down from there 
right into the fiery furnace. And when Nebuchadnezzar looked 
in, a fourth form was to be seen. a 

“Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the 
fire? They answered and said unto the king, True, O king. 


* Those who have stood upon the ‘‘ feed ” platform of a great fron-smelting 
furnace, and have felt the enormous pressure of the atmosphere as it rushes 
forward to fill up the vacuum caused by the rarefaction of the air from the 
furnace, and have experienced the szck or draw towards the edge of the plat- 
form which is felt when the furnace doors are thrown open, will easily under- 
stand how perilous a near approach to the mouth would be likely to prove ; 
and how easily Nebuchadnezzar’s ‘‘ mighty men"’ would themselves be drawn 
into the power of the flames, if they once ventured within the range of their 
attraction, 


_ 26 “DARE TO DO RIGHT.” — 


He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in 
the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of 
the fourth is like the Son of God.” 

It was doubtkss the Son of God.* That Great Shepherd 
of the sheep saw that three of His true servants were in peril; 
and He came from His Father’s presence and His Father’s 
bosom to be with them in it. There had been One watching 
that terrible scene of attempting to burn the faithful; and His 
tender pitying eye saw that men were condemned to death 
because of their loyalty to Him. With one great leap He 
‘sprang from the Father’s presence, from His palace in glory, 
right down into the fiery furnace, and was by their side before 
the heat of the fire could come near unto them. Jesus was 
with His servants as the flames wreathed around them. And 
not a hair of their heads was singed ; they were not scorched ; 
not even the smell of fire was upon them. JI can almost fancy 
‘I hear them chanting: ‘“ When thou passest through the 
waters I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall 
not overflow thee ; when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt 
not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.” 

God can take care of us when we pass through the waters ; 
God can take care of us when we pass through the fires. God 
is able to take care of us, if we will but stand up for Him: God 
will take care of us, if we will but stand up for Him. Young 
man, honour God; and God will honour you. What you 
have to do is to take your stand upon God's side. And if 
you have to go against the whole world, take that stand. 
Dare to do right; dare to be true; dare to be honest: 
let the consequences be what they may. You may have 
to forfeit your situation; because you cannot, and will 

* That the fourth was the Lord Jesus Christ—He who appeared to 
Abraham, and who wrestled with Jacob—has been an accepted truth with 
almost every one who ministers the word. It is only fair to say that in the 


original the definite article is absent ; and the sentence reads, ‘' like a son of 
gods.” 


DELIVERANCE, 27 


not, do something which your employer requires you to 
do, but which your conscience tells you is wrong. Give 
up your situation then, rather than give up your principles. 
If your employer requires you to sell goods by means 
of misrepresentation, fraud, or falsehood, give up your 
situation, and say, “I will rather die a pauper; I will rather 
die in a poorhouse; than be unfaithful to my principles.” That 
is the kind of stuff those men were made of. These glorious 
heroes braved even death because God was with them. O 
friends, we want to be Christians with the same backbone: 
men and women who are prepared to stand up for the right, 
heeding not what the world may say or what the world may 
think. 

“Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the 
burning fiery furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of the Most High 
God, come forth, and come hither.” And they walked 
out, untouched by the fire. They came out, like 
giants in their conscious strength. I can.fancy how the 
princes, the governors, the counsellors, and the great men, 
crowded around them to see such an unheard-of sight. 
Their garments showed no trace of fire; their. hair even was 
not singed—as if God would teach that He guards even 
“the very hairs of our head.” Nebuchadnezzar had defied 
God; and had been conquered. God had proved Himself 
“able” to deliver His servants out of the king’s hand. 
Nebuchadnezzar accepted his defeat. And he makes a 
decree: ‘‘That every people, nation, and language, which 
speak anything against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be 
made a dunghill: because there is no other God that can 
deliver after this sort.” 

And he promoted these three witnesses to higher place 
and position, and put greater honour upon them. God stood 


28 STAND FIRM! 


by them because they had stood by Him. He will have us 
learn to do a thing just because it is right, and not because 
itis popular. The outlook may appear like death: but do the 
right; and, if we stand firm, God will bring everything for the 


best. 
That is the last we hear of these three men. God sent 


them to Babylon to shine and they shone. 


“LIVING! WORKING! WAITING!” 


*° Who would not Zwve for Jesus, 
Rejoicing, glad and free? 

The music of a ransomed life 
Ts all He asks from thee. 


*© Who would not work for Jesus, , 
When service is but song ?— 
The rippling of a stream of love 
That bears thy soul along ? 


** Who would not de for Jesus, 
When death is victory ?— 
The grand, o’ershadowing portal-gate 
Guarding eternity ? 


** Who would not cwazt for Jesus, 
And waiting, sweeily sing? 
Hushing their heart with promises 
While tarrying for their King?” 


Eva TRAVERS POOLE. 


Iv. 
NEBUCHADNEZZAR'S SECOND DREAM. 


*¢*T, Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest in mine house, and flourishing 
in my palace: I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts 
upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me ” (Dan. iv. 5). 


1Y AND BY Nebuchadnezzar had another dream. 
Surely this man will be brought to see God’s 
hand at last. How many signs and wonders has 
he seen, fitted to convince him of God’s mighty 
power! This time he remembers the particulars of 
the dream well enough: they stand out vivid and clear to his 
mind. Again he calls in the four classes of men on whom 
he counts to make dark things light, and hidden things plain; 
and he recounts to them the incidents of this dream. But the 
- magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldzans, and the soothsayers, 
are all at fault: they cannot tell him the interpretation. 
When called upon to interpret his former dream they all stood 
silent. And they stood silent again as the second dream is 
unfolded to them. There was something in these dreams of 
the king which stopped their mouths-—usually so ready with 
some plausible interpretation. With these royal dreams it was 
no use: they .were beaten. 

It would appear that Nebuchadnezzar had _ half-forgotten 
the man who had recounted to him his former dream, and 
given its interpretation. He says, “ At last Daniel came before 
me.” And he proceeds to address Daniel by his Chaldean 
name of Belteshazzar. ‘‘O Belteshazzar, master of the 


30 THE SECOND VISION. 


magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is 
in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell.me the visions of my 
dream that I have seen, and the interpretation thereof. Thus 
were the visions of mine head in my bed; I saw, and behold 
a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was 
great. The tree grew, and was strong ; and the height thereof 
reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the 
earth: the leaves thereof were fair and the fruit thereof much, 
and in it was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow 
under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs 
thereof, and all flesh was fed of it. I saw in the visions of my 
head upon my bed; and behold, a watcher and an holy one 
came down from heaven: he cried aloud, and said thus, Hew 
down the tree and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, 
and scatter his fruit : let the beasts get away from under it, and 
the fowls from his branches: nevertheless leave the stump of 
his roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in 
the tender grass of the field ; and let it be wet with the dew of 
heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of 
the earth: let his heart be changed from man’s, and let a 
beast’s heart be given unto him ; and let seven times pass over 
him. This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the 
demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the 
living may know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of 
men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will, and setteth up over 
it the basest of men. This dream I, King Nebuchadnezzar, 
have seen. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpre- 
tation thereof, forasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom 
are not able to make known unto me the interpretation: but 
thou art able: for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.” 

As soon as the prophet appears upon the scene the king 
feels sure that he will now get the meaning of the dream. 

For a time Daniel stands still and motionless. Does his 
heart fail him? The record simply says he “ was astonied for 


Ba 


Re 
~ 
7 

om 
4 


“DANIEL BEFORE THE KING. 31 


one hour; and his thoughts troubled him.” He saw what 
was meant by the royal dream—that the king was to have 
a terrible fall; and that the kingdom was, at least for a 
season, to be taken from this proud monarch. The ready 
words rush to his lips; but he hates to let them out. He 
does not want to tell Nebuchadnezzar that his kingdom and 
his mind are both about to depart from him; and that he is 
to wander forth to eat grass like a beast. The king, too, 
hesitates : a dark foreboding for a time gets the better of his 
curiosity. But soon he nerves himseif to hear the worst; and 
in kindly words desires Daniel to proceed, to tell out all he 
knows. And Daniel breaks the silence. He does not smooth 
over the matter; but speaks out plainly. There and then he 
preached righteousness to the king. A very good sermon it 
was too that he preached. If we had more of the same sort 
now it would be the better for us. He entreats the king to 
“break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by 
showing mercy to the poor: if it may be a lengthening of thy 
tranquillity.” . 

Perhaps he told him, for his encouragement, how the 
King of Nineveh, more than two centuries before, had repented 
at the preaching of Jonah. He unfolds the full meaning of the 
dream. He tells the king that the great and strong tree 
symbolizes Nebuchadnezzar himself; and that just as the tree 
was hewn down and destroyed, so will he himself be shorn of 
power and robbed of strength. Daniel tells him that he will — 
be driven from among men, and have to herd with the beasts 
of the field: yet that nevertheless the kingdom should in the 
end revert to him, just as the great watcher had spared the 
stump of the tree. 

- Repentance might have deferred, or even averted, the threat- 
ened calamity. But at that time he “repented not.” And twelve 
months afterwards the king. heedless of the prophetic warning, 
and lifted up with pride, walked either through the corridors 


32 “THE KINGDOM IS DEPARTED.” 


of his great palace, or out upon its roof; looked forth upon 
the city’s vast extent; gazed at those hanging gardens which 
counted as one of the wonders of the world; and said: “Is 
not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the 
kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my 
majesty?” 

A voice from heaven instantly cried, “The kingdom is 
departed from thee.” And then and there God touched his 
reason: it reeled and tottered on its throne, and fled. He 
was driven forth from men; he herded with animals; his body 
was wet with the dew of heaven. This greatest of princes 
had gone clean mad. It would not take me fifteen minutes 
to-day to prove that the world has gone clean mad; and the 
mass of professing Christians too. Do not men think and talk 
as if everything were done by their own power? Is not God 
completely forgotten? Do not men neglect every warning 
that He in mercy sends? Yes, men are mad, and nothing 
short of it. 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S REPENTANCE. 


But Nebuchadnezzar’s kingdom had not passed away from” 


him irrevocably ; for, according to the prophet’s word, at the 
close of the “‘ seven times ” his understanding returned to him ; 
he resumed his throne and his authority ; and his counsellors 
and officers again gathered around him. His power has been 
given back to him; and he is now a very different man. Of a 
truth the king’s reason has returned to him: and he is pos- 
sessed of a very different spirit. He sends forth a new pro- 
clamation giving honour to the Most High, and extolling the 
God of heaven. Its closing words show his repentance, and tend 
to prove that Daniel had brought this mighty king to God. - 
It is interesting to go over the different proclamations of 
Nebuchadnezzar, and note the change that takes place in them. 
He sent out one proclamation setting forth what other people 


PRAISING GOD. 33 


ought to do, and how they should serve the God of these 
Hebrews. But the truth did not get home to himself until 
now. Here is his closing proclamation: ‘‘ At the end of the 
days, I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, 
and mine understanding returned unto me; and I blessed 
the Most High, and I praised and honoured Him that 
liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, 
and His kingdom is from generation to generation. At the 
same time my reason returned unto me: and for the glory of 
my Kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me ; 
and my counsellors, and my lords sought unto me: and I was 
established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added 
unto me. Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and 
honour the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and 
His ways judgment: and those that walk in pride He is able 
to abase.” 

When you find that a man has got to praising God itis a 
good sign. The earlier edict said much about other people’s 
duty towards the God of the Hebrews, but nothing about what 
the king himself should do. Oh, let us get to personal love, 
personal praise! That is what is wanted in the church in the 
present day. Nebuchadnezzar passes from the stage: this is 
the last record we have of him. But we may surely hope 
that, like that of the Corinthians, his was a “repentance to sal- 
vation not to be repented of.” And if this were so we may . 
well believe that to-day Nebuchadnezzar the king and Daniel 
the captive are walking the crystal pavement of heaven arm-in- 
arm together; and, it may be, talking over the old times in 
Babylon. Now, if the young prophet had been of a vacillating 
character ; if he had been of a willowy growth, liable to be 
shaken by every wind, and had not stood there in that city 
like a great oak—do you "think he would have won this mighty 
monarch to his religion and hisGod? Asa result of that young 
man going to that heathen city and standing firm for his God, 

3 


34 A PURPOSE FIRM. 


and the God of the Bible, the Lord honoured him, and gave 
him that mighty monarch as a star in his crown. We may 
fairly say that King Nebuchadnezzar was led to the God of the 
Hebrews through the faith of this Hebrew’s love—just because 
he had 


. **a purpose firm, 
And dared to make it known,” 


THE MASTER’S SERVICE, 


** Service of Jesus! Oh, service of sweetness ! 
There are no bonds in that service for me ; . 
Full of delight and most perfect compleicn-ss : 
Evermore His, yet so joyously free! 


“* Service of Jesus! Oh, service of power ! 
Sharing His glory, while sharing His shame ! 
All the best blessings the Master can shower 
Rest on the servant exalting His name, 


** Service of Jesus! Oh, service joy-giving } 
Melting our hearts into rivers of love ; 
Secret of life and the sweetness of living, 
Joy felt on earth that will fill us above 


‘* Service of Jesus! Oh, service of praising ! 
Such as redeemed ones rejoicing can sing, 
Daily and hourly their voices upraising, 
Landing their Saviour, extolling their King.” 


Eva Travers Poo.e, 


Vv. 


THE HANDWRITING ON THE WALL. 


*‘ Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and 
drank wine before the thousand” (Dan. v. 1). 


=]ND now, for twenty long years or more, we lose 
sight of Daniel. He may possibly have been for 
a portion of the interval living in retirement; but 
at the end of it hestill appears to be holding some 
appointment at the Babylonish court; although 
most likely occupying a less prominent position than of yore. 
Nebuchadnezzar had died; and there was now ruling in 
Babylon, or it may be acting in some such position as 
“Regent,” a young man whose name was Belshazzar.* This 
youthful ruler “made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, 


* Tt is thought by scholars that Belshazzar was admitted to a share of the 
sovereignty in conjunction with his father Nabonadius, in much the same wa 
as, years previously, Nebuchadnezzar had reigned in association with his 
father. It has been further stated that Nabonadius had shortly before 
fought a battle with Cyrus, been worsted, and had taken refuge in Borsippa. 
Consequently, Belshazzar was acting in his father’s stead. But what a time 
for revelry, with a victorious enemy at the gates, and a tather shut up ina 
bel: aguered fortress! The siege of Paris going on at the same time as the 
investment of Metz, presents something like a modern paral el to the position 
of affairs. : 

Reverting fora moment to Nebuchadnezzar, the fact that for a time he shared 
in his father’s kingly authority, befure becoming sole sovereign, explains some 
apparent difficulty as to dates. For example, Nebuchadnezzar is termed 
‘“‘ King of Babylon,” when he first lays siege to Jerusalem (Dan. i. 1; 2 Kings 
xxiv, 1; 2 Chron. xxavi. 6). He carries away Daniel and other captives as 


36 4A GREAT FEAST. 


and drank wine before the thousand.” Of this prince we only © 
get a single glimpse. This scene of the feast is the first and 
last view we have of him; and it is enough. How long that 
banqueting lasted we do not know; but in the East feasts 
often extend over many days. Amongst the Jews seven days 
was not an unusual time for the duration of a feast, and occa- 
sionally the time was extended to twice seven days, z.¢., four- 
teen days. It was a “great feast.” The king caroused with 
his satraps and princes, his lords, and the mighty men of 
Babylon, together with his wives and concubines, drinking 
and rioting, and praising the “gods of gold, and of silver, of 
brass, ef iron, of wood, and of stone.” That is pretty much 
what men are doing to-day, if they are bowing their knee to 
the god of this world. Cyrus, the great Persian general, is 
outside the gates, besieging the city, just as Nebbchadnezzar 
had besieged Jerusalem. And this Belshazzar fancies him- 
self secure behind the lofty and massive walls that encompass 
Babylon. 

The revellers wax daring and wanton. They had for- 
gotten the power of the God of the Hebrews, as shown in the 
days of Nebuchadnezzar. Heated with wine and lifted up 
with pride, they laid their sacrilegious hands on the golden 
hostages, and returns to Babylon. He then commands that the education 
and training of the four young Hebrews is to be effected, and allots three years 
for the purpose. Three years are passed in their instruction ; and they are then 
admitted into the order of the magi, or wise men. (Compare Dan. i. 5; i. 18; 
ii. 13.) And yet, although between three and four years have elapsed since 
the siege of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar’s dream is said to have occurred in 
the ‘‘ second year” of his reign. There is a seeming discrepancy here. But 
let it be understood that the term ‘‘second year” in Dan. ii. 1, refers to the 
time subsequent to his father’s death, during which he had reigned alone ; and 
the difficulty is removed. 

The instance of the ‘‘ regency” in England, during which period the Prince 
Regent acted with large powers, ‘‘in all but name a king,” although George 
III. still lived, will serve partially to illustrate the position of Nebuchadnezzar 
at one time, and of Belshazzar at another; although the parallel is by no 
means complete. , 


THE “ FINGERS OF A MAN’S HAND.” 37 


vessels which had been brought out of the temple of the house 
of God which was at Jerusalem; and out of those sacred cups 
they drank. And as they drank to their idols, one can readily 
believe that they scoffed at the God of Israel. I could almost 
picture the scene before me now, and can imagine I hear 
them blaspheming His holy name. Now they make merry; 
now they are in the midst of their boisterous revelry. But 
lo! stop! What is the matter? The king is struck by some- 
thing that he sees! Huis countenance has changed. He has 
turned deadly pale! The wine cup has fallen from his grasp ! 
His knees smite together. He trembles from head to foot. 
I should not wonder if his lords and nobles did not laugh 
in their sleeve at him, thinking he was drunk. — But, there, 
along the wall, standing out in living light, are seen letters of 
strange and unintelligible shape. ‘In the same hour came 
forth fingers of a man’s hand, and wrote over against the 
candlestick upon the plaster of the wall of the king’s palace ; 
and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.” 

Above the golden candlestick,* on a bare space of the 
wall,t Belshazzar beholds that mysterious handwriting. He 
distinctly discerns the tracing of those terrible words. Was that 
writing on the palace wall the work of the same hand that 
had traced the tables of stone at Sinai? Or did some angel- 


* A recent writer says: ‘‘ The fingers ‘wrote over against the candlestick.” 
What candlestick ? ‘The candlestick of gold, with the lamps thereof,’ which. 
Solomon had made. It was there exhibited in mockery and triumph ; as, 
ages after, its counterpart adorned the triumph of the Roman emperor, and 
was sculptured in bas-relief on the Arch of Titus, to be seen in Rome this very 
day.”—-DANIEL : STATESMAN AND PkOPHET, Page 160. 

+ The writing was traced on the plain plaster on the walls of the banquet- 
room ; such as, notwithst inding the then prevailing taste for ornament, is still 
found on the palaces of Nineveh. Those who have seen Mr. Layard’s large 
and magnificent drawings of Assyrian antiquities, will remember that elaborate 
decoration extends only to a certain height. Above that line the wall is quite 
plain, and is, to this day, coated with lime."—DaNIEL: STATESMAN AND 
PROPHET, Page 160. 


38 THE HANDWRITING ON THE WALL, 


messenger execute the Divine commission? The words, 
“fingers of a man’s hand,” seem to imply the latter. 

The king cries aloud, and commands that the astrologers, 
the Chaldzans, and the soothsayers, should be brought for- 
ward. They come trooping in ; and he says to them: “ Who- 
soever shall read this writing, and show me the interpretation 
thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet (or purple), and have a 
chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler* in 
the kingdom.” 

One after another tries to spell out that writing; but they 
fail to understand it. They are skilled in Chaldzean learning ; 
but this inscription baffles them. They cannot make out 
the meaning, any more than an unrenewed man can make out 
the Bible. They do not understand God’s writing: they 
- cannot comprehend it. A man must be born of the Spirit 
before he can understand God’s Book or God’s writing. No 
uncircumcised eyes could decipher those words of fire. 

The queen t hears of the state of affairs, and comes in to 
encourage and advise. She salutes the king with the words, 
“‘O king, live for ever! let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor 
let thy countenance be changed”; and then she goes on to 
tell him that there is one man in the kingdom who will be 
able to read the writing, and teil out its meaning. She proceeds 
to say that in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, “light, and under- 
standing, and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found 
in him”; and advises that Daniel shall be summoned. 

For some—perhaps several—years he may have been com- 
paratively little known: may have “dropped out of notice,” 
as we say. But now, for the third time, he stands before a 
Babylonian ruler to interpret and to reveal, when the powers 


* “The third ruler,” mark that! Belshazzar’s father, Nabonadius, pro- 
bably counting as the f7s¢; Belshazzar, the associate-king, as the second ; and 


the successful interpreter, as the zhzrd. 
+ From the authority with which she speaks, it has been conjectured that 


this was the queen-inother. 


PLAIN WORDS. 30, 


of its magicians and astrologers have utterly failed. Daniel 
comes in; and his eye lights up as he sees the letters upon 
the wall. Hecan read the meaning of the words. The king 
puts forth his offer of rewards; but Daniel is unmoved: “ Let 
thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another: yet I 
will read the writing unto the king, and make known to him 
the interpretation.” 

But before he reads the words upon the wall he gives the . 
king a bit of his mind. Perhaps he had been long praying for 
an opportunity of warning him; and now he has it, he will not 
let it slip, although all those mighty lords are there. So he 
reminds the king of the lessons he ought to have learned from 
the visitation that fell upon the mighty Nebuchadnezzar : of how 
that monarch had been humbled, brought down, and deposed 
from his kingly throne, because ‘‘ his heart was lifted up, and his 
mind hardened in pride ;” until at length he came to repent- 
ance, and realized that the Most High God ruleth in the 
kingdom of men. “And thou his son,* O Belshazzar, hast 
not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this; but 
hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven.” 

Then looking up at the mystic words standing forth in 
their lambent light, he reads : 


“MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN:” 
MENE: God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it. . 
TEKEL: Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found 

wanting. 
UPHARSIN:+ Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the 
Medes and Persians. 


* Here, as in several other instances, ‘‘ son” is used for ‘‘ grandson” ; ancl 
‘father ” is used for ‘' grandfat! er.” 

+ In interpreting, Daniel reads PERES, which is the singular form of the 
word of which PHARSIN is the plural. The vu is the prefixed conjunction 
“and.” (See ‘‘DANIEL: STATESMAN AND PROPHET,” pp. I77—2,) 


40 IN THAT NIGHT! 


How the word of doom must have rung through the palace, 
that night! There was an awful warning. Sinner, it is for 
you. What if God should put you in the balance, and you 
without Christ! What would become of your soul? Take 
warning by Belshazzar’s fate. 

The destruction did not tarry. The king thought he was 
perfectly secure: he considered that the walls of Babylon were 
impregnable. But “in that night,” at the very hour when 
Daniel was declaring the doom of the king, Cyrus, the conquer- 
ing Persian, was turning the Euphrates from its regular course 
and channel, and was bringing his army within those gigantic 
walls: the guard around the palace is beaten back; the 
Persian soldiers force their way to the banqueting-hall; and 
Belshazzar’s blood flows mingling with the outpoured wine 
upon the palace floor. 

It was Belshazzar’s last night. One short chapter gives us 
all we know of that young monarch. His life was short. The 
wicked do not live out half their days. An impious young 
man, he had neglected or forgotten the holy Daniel: he had 
set aside his father’s counsellor and friend: he had turned 
away from the best adviser and most faithful servant that 
Nebuchadnezzar had ever had—one who probably had done 
more than any one else to build up and consolidate his king- 
dom. And this is his end. 

O sinners, take warning: Death and hell are right upon 
you—death and hell, I say. And they are just as close, it may 
be, as was the sword of the slayer to those midniglit revellers, 


VI, 


THE EDICT OF DARIUS, 


**To establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that 
whosoever shall ask a petition of any god or man for thirty days, save 
of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.” (Dan. vi. 7.) 


F|E find that Darius—who was probably one of the 
high military commanders engaged in the siege of 
Babylon—takes the kingdom, while Cyrus is off 
conquering other parts of the world. As soon 
as he attains the throne he makes his arrange- 
ments for governing the country. He divides the kingdom 
into one hundred and twenty provinces; and he appoints a 
prince or ruler over each province; and over the princes he 
puts three presidents to see that these rulers do no damage to 
the king, and do not swindle the government. And over these 
three he places Daniel, as president of the presidents. Very 
possibly Darius knew the man. He may have been in former _ 
days at the court of Nebuchadnezzar ; and if so, he probably 
considered Daniel an able and conscientious statesman. Any- 
how, the king either knew, or was told, sufficient to justify his 
confidence. And now Daniel is again in office. He held in 
that day the highest position, under the sovereign, that any 
one could hold. He was next to the throne. If you will allow 
me the expression, he was the Bismarck or the Gladstone of the 
empire. He was Prime Minister ; he was Secretary of State; 
and all important matters would pass through his hands. 


42 DANIEL’S ENEMIES, 


We do not know how long he held .that position. But 
sooner or late the other presidents and the princes grew jealous, 
and wanted Daniel out of the way. It was as if they had said, 
“Let us see if we cannot get this sanctimonious Hebrew 
removed : he has ‘ bossed’ us long enough.” You see he was 
so impracticable: they could do nothing with him. There 
were plenty of collectors and treasurers; but he kept sucha 
close eye on them that they only made their salaries. There 
was no chance of plundering the government while he was at 
the head. He was president, and probably.all the revenue 
accounts passed before him. No doubt these enemies wanted 
to form a “‘ring.” And they may have talked somewhat after 
this fashion: “If it were not for this man we could form a 
‘ring’; and then, in three or four years, we could make enough 
to enable us to retire from office, and have a villa on the banks 
of the Euphrates; or we could go down to Egypt, and see 
something of the world. We could have plenty of money—all 
we should ever want, or our children either—if we could only 
just get control of the government, and manage things as we 
should like to. As things go now we only just get our exact 
dues ; and it will take years and years for them to mount up to 
anything respectable. If we had matters in our own hands it 
would be different ; for King Darius does not know half as 
much about the affairs of this empire as does this old Hebrew: 
and he watches our accounts so closely that we can get no 
advantage over the Government. Down with this pious Jew !” 

Perhaps they worked matters so as to get an investigating 
committee, hoping to catch him in his accounts. But it was 
no use. If he had put any relatives in office unfairly it would 
have been found out. And if he had been guilty of pecula- 
tion, or in any way broken the unalterable laws of the kingdom,, 
the matter would have come to light. 

Now I want to call your attention to the fact that one of the 
highest eulogies ever paid to a man on earth was pronounced 


«WO OCCASION AGAINST HIM.” 43 


upon Daniel at this time by hisenemies. These men were con- 
nected with the various parts of the kingdom, and on laying 
their heads together they came to this conclusion—that they 
could “ find no occasion against this Daniel, except they found 
it against him concerning the law of his God.” What a 
testimony from his bitterest enemies! Would that it could be 
said of all of us! He had never taken a bribe: he had never 
been connected with a “ring”: he had never planted a friend 
into some fat office with the design of sharing the plunder and 
enriching himself. If he had been guilty in any of these things. 
these scrutineers would have found it out: they had a keen 
scent: they were sharp men: they knew all about his actions 
and his history: and they would have been glad to have found 
out something — anything — which would have led to his 
removal from his high position. But they said—and said 
with regret: “ We shall not find any occasion against him.” 
Ah, how his name shines! He had commenced to shine in his 
early manhood ; and he shone right along. Now he is an old 
man, an old statesman ; and yet this is their testimony. There 
had been no sacrifice of principle in order to catch votes; no 
buying up of men’s votes or men’s consciences; no “counting 
in” or “counting out.” There had been none.of that. He 
had walked right straight along. 

Young man, character is worth more than money. Cha- 
racter is worth more than anything else in the wide world. 
I would rather in my old age have such a character us that 
which Daniel’s enemies gave him than have raised over my dead 
body a monument of gold reaching from earth to sky. I would 
rather have such a testimony as that borne of Daniel than have 
all that this world can give. 

The men said, ‘We will get him out of the way. We 
will get the king to sign a decree; and we will propose a 
penalty. It shall not be the fiery furnace this time. We 
will have a lions’ den—a den of angry lions; and they will 


44 EVIL COUNSEL. 


soon make away with him.” Probably these plotters met 
at night, for it generally happens that if men want to do 
any downright mean business they meet at night: darkness 
suits them best. The chief-president himself was not there: 
he had not been invited to meet them. Very likely some 
lawyer, who understood all about the laws of the Medes and 
Persians, stuod up, and talked something after this fashion: 
“Gentlemen, I have got, I think, a plan that will work well, 
by which we may get rid of this old Hebrew. You know he 
will not serve any but the God of Abraham and of Isaac.” 

We know that very well. And if aman had gone to Babylon 
in those days he would not have had to ask if Daniel loved the 
God of the Bible. I pity any man who lives so that people 
have to ask, “Is he a Christian?” Let us so live that no one 
need ask that question about us. These men knew very well 
that- Daniel worshipped none other than the God of the Bible, 
the God of the Hebrews, the God of Abraham, and the God 
of Moses ; the God who had brought His people Israel out of 
Egypt, through the Red Sea, and into the Promised Land: 
they knew that very well. 

And these plotters said one to another, “ Now, let us get 
Darius to sign a decree that if any man make a request of 
any God or man—except of the King Darius—for thirty 
days, he shall be put into the lions’ den. And let us all 
keep perfectly still about this matter, so that it won’t get 
out. We must not tell our wives, for fear the news may get 
about the city: Daniel would find it all out ; and he has more 
influence with the king than all the rest of us put together. 
The king would never sign the decree if he found out what the 
object was.” Then they may have said, “‘ We must draw it so 
tight that Darius will not be able to get out of it after he has 
once signed. We must make it so binding that if the king 
once signs we shall have that Daniel in the lions’ den: and we 
will take good care that the lions shall be hungry.” 


THE DECREE. 45 


When the mine is all ready, the conspirators come to the 
king, and open their business with flattering speech: “ King 
Darius, live for ever!” When people approach me with smooth 
and oily words, I know they have something else coming —I 
know they have some purpose in telling me I am a good man. 
These plotters, perhaps, go on to tell the king how prosperous 
the realm is, and how much the people think of him. And 
then, perhaps, in the most plausible way, they tell him that if 
he signs this decree he will be remembered by their children’s 
children—that it would be a memorial for ever of his greatness 
and goodness. ‘‘What is this decree that you wish me to 
sign?” And running his eye over the document he says, “I 
don’t see any objection to that.” ‘Will you put your signet to 
it, and make it law?” He puts his signature to the decree, 
and seals it with his seal. And one of them says, “The law. 
of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not?” and the 
king answers, “Oh, yes; the law of the Medes and Persians: 
that is it.” In the pleasure of granting the request of these 
people he thinks nothing about Daniel; and the presidents 
and princes carefully refrain from jogging his memory. They 
had told the king a lie, too; for they said, “ ALL the presi- 
dents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes, the 
ccunsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to 
establish a royal statute”; although the chief-president knew 
nothing at all about it. 

There was probably a long preamble, telling him how 
popular he was; saying that he was liked better than Nebu- 
chadnezzar or Belshazzar. They most likely tickled his vanity, 
and told him that he was the most popular man that had ever 
reigned in Babylon; and then they may have gone on to tell 
him how attached they were to him and his rule, and that they 
had been consulting together what they could do to increase 
his popularity and make him more beloved; and now they 
had hit upon a plan that was almost sure to do it. They 


46 ‘FOR THIRTV DAYS.” 


would point out that if no one called upon any god for thirty 
days, but only on him, the king, making him a god, it would 
render him the most popular monarch that had ever reigned 
in Babylonia; and his name would be handed down to pos- 
terity. And if he could get men to call upon his name for 
thirty days they would probably keep it up, and so permanently 
reckon him among the gods. 

If you touch a man’s vanity he will do almost anything ; 
and Darius was hke most of the human race. They touched 
his vanity by intimating that this would make him great. He 
thought it a very wise suggestion, and’ he agreed with them 
exactly. 

It was not only Daniel they were thus going to get out 
of the way, but every conscientious Jew. There was not a 
true Jew in the whole of that wide empire who would bow 
down and worship Darius ; and these men knew that: and so 
they were going to sweep away at a stroke all the Jews who 
were true to their faith. They hated them. 

And I want to tell you that the world does not love 
Christians nowadays. The world will persecute a man if he 
attempts to live the life of a true Christian. The world is no 
friend to true grace: mark that! A man may live for the world, 
and like the world, and escape persecution. But if the world 
has nothing to say against you, it is a pretty sure sign that God! 
has not much to say for you ; because if you do seek to live unto’ 
Christ Jesus you must go against the current of the world. 

And now they are ready to let the news go forth; and it is 
not long before it spreads through the highways of Babylon.’ 
The men of the city knew the man: knew that he would not 
vacillate. They knew that the old man with the grey locks would 
not turn to the right hand or the left: they knew that if his 
enemies caught him in that way, he would not deny his God 
or turn away from Him: they knew that he was going to be 
true to his God. 


MORAL COURAGE. 47 


Daniel was none of your sickly Christians of the nineteenth 
century: he was none of your weak-backed, none of your 
weak-kneed Christians: he had moral stamina and courage. 
I can imagine that aged white-haired Secretary of State sitting 
at his table going over the accounts of some of these rulers 
of provinces. Some of the timid, frightened Hebrews come 
to him, and say: 

‘Oh, Daniel, have you heard the latest news?” 

“No. What is it?” 

“What! have you not been to the king’s palace this 
morning ?” 

‘“‘No! I have not been to the palace to-day. What is the 
matter?” 

“ Well, there is a conspiracy against you. A lot of those 
princes have induced King Darius to sign a decree that if any 
man shall call upon any God in his kingdom within thirty days 
he shall be thrown to the lions. Their object is to have you 
cast into the den. Now if you can only get out of the way 
for a little time—if you will just quit Babylon for thirty days— 
it will advance both your own and the public interest. You are 
the chief secretary and treasurer—in fact, you are the principal 
member of the government: you are an important man, and 
can do as you please. Well now, just you get out of Babylon. 
Or, if you will stay in Babylon, do not let any one catch 
you on your knees. In any case do not pray at the window 
which looks towards Jerusalem; as you have been doing 
for the last fifty years. And if you will pray, close that 
window, draw a curtain over it; shut the door, and stop 
up every crevice. People are sure to be about your house 
listening.” 

And some of our nineteenth century Christians would 
have advised after the same fashion :—“ Cannot you find out 
some important business to be done down in Egypt, and 
so take a journey to Memphis? or can you not think of 


48 FALSE SHAME, 


something that needs being looked after in Syria, and so hurry 
off to Damascus? Or, surely you can make out there is a need 
for your going to Assyria, and you can make a stay at Nineveh. 
Or why not get as far as Jerusalem, and see what changes 
fifty or sixty years have wrought? Any way, just be out of 
Babylon for the next thirty days, so that your enemies may not 
catch you: for, depend upon it, they will all be on the watch. 
And, whatever you do, be sure they do not catch you on your 
knees.” 

How many men there are who are ashamed to be caught 
upon their knees! Many a man, if found upon his knees 
by the wife of his bosom, would jump right up and walk 
around the room as if he had no particular object in view. 
How many young men there are who come up from the 
country and enter upon city life, and have not the moral 
courage to go down on their knees before their room-mates ! 
How many young men say, “ Don’t ask me to get down on 
my knees at this prayer-meeting.” Men have not the moral 
courage to be seen praying. They lack moral courage. Ah! 
thousands of men have been lost for lack of moral courage; 
have been lost because at some critical moment they shrank 
from going on their knees, and being seen and known as 
being worshippers of God—as being on the Lord’s side. Ah, 
the fact is—we are a pack of cowards: that is what we are. 
Shame on the Christianity of the nineteenth century! it isa 
weak and sickly thing. Would to God that we had a host of 
men like Daniel living to-day ! 

I can picture that aged man, with his grey hairs upon him, 
listening to the words of these “miserable counsellors,” who 
would tempt him to “ trim,” and “ hedge,” and shift—to ‘‘ save 
his skin,” as men say, at the cost of his conscience. And’ 
their counsel falls flat and dead. I can fancy how Daniel 
- would receive a suggestion that he should eyen seemingly be 
ashamed of the God of his fathers, Will he be ashamed or 


TIME FOR PRAYER. 49 


afraid? Not likely! You know he will not; and I know he 
will not. 

“ They will be watching you ; they will have their spies all 
around. But if you are determined to go on praying, shut up 
your window; close all your curtains ; stop up the keyhole, so 
that no one can look through to see you on your knees, and 
so that no one can overhear a single word. Accommodate 
yourself just a little. Compromise just a little.” 

That is just the cry of the world to-day ! It is, “‘ Accommo- 
date yourself to the times. Compromise just a little here; and 
deviate just a little there, just to suit the opinions and views of 
a mocking world.” Do you think that Daniel, after having 
walked with God for half a century or more, is going to turn 
round like that? Ten thousand times, No! 

True as steel, that old man goes to his room three times a 
day. Mark you, he had time to pray. ‘There is many a 
business man to-day who will tell you he has no time to pray: 
his business is so pressing that he cannot call his family around 
him, and ask God to blessthem. He is so busy that he cannot 
ask God to keep him and them from the temptations of the 
present life—the temptations of every day. . “ Business is so 
pressing.” I am reminded of the words of an old Methodist 
minister: “If you have so much business to attend to that you 
have no time to pray, depend upon it you have more business 
on hand than God ever intended you should have.” But look 
at this man. He had the whole, or nearly the whole, of the 
king’s business to attendto. He was Prime Minister, Secretary 
of State, and Secretary of the Treasury, all in one. He had 
to attend to all his own work; and to give an eye to the work 
of lots of other men And yet he found time to pray: not 
just now and then, nor once in a way, not just when he 
happened to have a few moments to spare, mark you—but 
“three times a day.” Yes, he could take up the words of the 


fifty-fifth Psalm, and say: 
4 


59 DANIEL’S WINDOWS OPEN, 


* As for me, I will call upon God ; 
And the Lord shall save me. 
Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray and cry aloud; 
And He shall hear my voice.” 

Busy as he was, he found time to pray. And a man whose 
habit it is to call upon God saves time, instead of losing it. 
He has a clearer head, a more collected mind, and can act 
with more decision when circumstances require it. 

So Daniel went to his room three times a day: he trod 
that path so often that the grass could not grow upon it. 1 
would be bound to say those plotters knew whereabouts he 
would be going to pray: they knew the place where l)aniel's 
prayer was wont to be made; and they were sure they should 
find him there at his usual hours. And now again he has 


‘fa purpose firm, 
And dares to make it known.” 


He goes to pray as aforetime ; and he has his windows open. 
Like Paul, in later days, he “knew whom he had believed”; 
like Moses, he ‘ saw Him who is invisible.” He knew whom 
he worshipped. There was no need to trace back the church 
records for years to find out whether this man had ever made 
a profession of religion. See him as he falls upon his knees, 
He is not careful to inquire whether there are any outsiders, 
or whether they can hear. In tones not one atom softer or 
quieter than his custom, he pours out his prayer to the God 
of his life; to the God of his people; to the God of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob. He does not omit to pray for the king. It 
is right to pray for our rulers. If we cease praying for our 
rulers, our country will go to pieces. The reason they are not 
better is oftentimes because we do not pray for them. Does 
Daniel pray to Darius? Not he! He prays jor Darius, but 
not Zo him. 

There are men listening there near the open window: the 
hundred and twenty princes have taken good ‘care of that. 


LISTENERS. 51 


They themselves are their own witnesses, and some of them 
gather together as listeners, so doing their own vile work. If 
‘there had been any newspaper reporters in that day, how 
anxious they would have been to have got hold of every word 
of that prayer! Give them the smallest chance; and they would 
have taken it down, and telegraphed it all over the world, inside 
of twenty-four hours. 

After: Daniel has prayed, “and given thanks,”—* given 
thanks,” mark that !—he goes out, and walks along the street 
with a firm step. He is undaunted. If it be the will of God 
that he shall pass from earth to heaven by the way of the den 
of lions, he is prepared for that. God’s presence is with him. 
Like Enoch, -he bore within himself this testimony—“ that he 


pleased God.” 


Ido you see the Hebrew captive kneeling, 
At morning, noon, and night, to pray? 

In his chamber he remembers Zion, 
Though in exile far away. 


Do not fear to tread the fiery furnace, 
Nor shrink the lions’ den to share ; 

For the God of Daniel will deliver, 
He will send His angel there. 


Children of the living God, take couraze, 
Your great deliverance sweetly sing ; 
Set your faces toward the hill of Zion, 
Thence to hail your coming King! 
Are your windows open toward Jerusalem, 
Though as captives here “ 4 little while’’ we stay ? 


For the eoming of the King in His glory, 
Are you watching day by day. 


Vil. 


THE DEN OF LIONS. 


“¢Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him 
into the den of lions” (Dan. vi. 16). 


([aweaa| LLERE must have been great excitement in the city . 
Le. then: all Babylon knew that this man was not 
going to swerve. They knew very well that this old 
statesman was a man of iron will; and that it was 
not at all likely he would yield. The lions’ den had 
few terrors to him. He would rather be in the lions’ den with 
God, than out of it without Him. And it is a thousand times 
better, friends, to be in the lions’ den with God, and hold to 
principle—than to be out of it, and have money, but no prin- 
ciple. I pity those men who have gained their money dis- 
honestly ; I pity those men who have obtained their positions 
in life dishonestly ; I pity any politician who has acquired his 
office dishonestly — how his conscience will lash him at times! 
And how the Word of God lashes such! “Your gold and 
silver is cankered ; and the rust of them shall be a witness 
against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire.” It does 
not pay to be false; it pays to be true. It is best to be 
honest; even if it means having very little money in our 
pocket, and very little position in the world. It is best to 
have God with us, and to know that we are on the right side. 
I venture to say that man Daniel was worth more than any 
other man Darius had in his empire—yes, worth more than 


THE LAW OF THE MEDES AND PERSIANS. 53 


forty thousand men who wanted to get him out of the way. 
He was true to the king. He prayed for him; he loved him; 
and he did for that king everything he could that did not 
conflict with the law of his God. 

And now the spies rush off to the king, and cry, 

‘*O Darius, live for éver! Do you know there is a man in 
your kingdom who will not obey you?” 

‘A man who won’t obey me! Who is he?” 

“Why, that man Daniel. That Hebrew whom you set 
over us. He persists in calling upon his God.” 

And the moment they mention the name of Daniel, a 
frown arises upon the king’s brow; and the thought flashes into 
his mind: “Ah! I have made a mistake: I ought never to 
have signed that decree. I might have known that Daniel 
would never ‘call’ upon me. I know very well whom he serves : 
he serves the God of his fathers.” So, instead of blaming 
Daniel he blames himself: instead of condemning Daniel he 
condemns himself. And then he casts about in his mind as to 
how he could manage to preserve him unharmed. All that 
day, if you could have looked into the palace, you would have 
seen the king walking up and down the halls and corridors, 
greatly troubled with the thought that this man must lose his 
life before the sun sets on that Chaldean plain; for if Daniel 
were not in the lions’ den by sundown the law of the Medes 
and Persians would be broken: and come what will, that law 
must be observed and kept. 

Darius loved Daniel; and he sought in his heart to deliver 
him. All day he sought for some plan by which he might 
save Daniel, and yet preserve the Median law unbroken. But he 
did not love Daniel as much as your King loved you: he did 
not love him as much as Christ loved us: for if he had he 
would have proposed to have gone into the lions’ den in his 
stead. Let us remember that Christ “tasted death” for us. 
I can imagine those plotters having a suspicion as to the king’s 


54 DANIEL CAST INTO THE DEN. 


feelings ; and saying to him, ‘‘1f you break the law which you 

yourself have made, respect for the laws of the Medes and 
Persians will be gone: your subjects will no longer obey you; 
and your kingdom will depart from you.” So Darius is at last 
compelled to give him up; and he speaks the word for the 
officers to seize him and take him. to the den. And his 
enemies would take good care that the den is filled with the 
hungriest beasts in Babylon. 

You might have seen those officers going out to bind that 
old man with the white flowing hair: they march to his 
dwelling; and they bind his hands together. And those 
Chaldzean soldiers lead captive the man who a few hours before 
ranked next to the king; the noblest statesman Babylon had 
ever. possessed. They guard him along the way that leads to 
the lions’ den. “Look at him as he is led along the streets. 
He treads with a firm and steady step, bearing himself like a 
conqueror. He trembles not. His knees are firm: they do 
not smite together. ‘The light of heaven shines in his calm 
face. And all heaven is interested in that aged man. Dis- 
graced down here upon earth, he is the most popular 
man in heaven. Angels are delighted in him: how they love 
him up there! He had stood firm; he had not deviated; he 
had not turned away from the God of the Bible. And he 
walks with a giant’s tread to the entrance of the lions’ den; 
and they cast him in. They roll a great stone to the mouth of 
the den; and the king puts his seal upon it. And so the law 
is kept. t 

Daniel is cast into the den; but the angel of God flies 
down, and God’s servant lights unharmed at the bottom. The 
lions’ mouths are stopped: they are as harmless as lambs. 
And if you could have looked into that den, you would have 
found a man as calm as a summer evening. I do not doubt 
that at his wonted hour of prayer he knelt ‘down as if he 
had been in his own chamber. And if he could get the 


DARIUS FASTS THAT NICHT 85 


points of the compass in.that den, he prayed with his face 
toward Jerusalem. He loved that city; he loved the temple: 
and probably with his face toward the city of Jerusalem, he 
prayed and gave thanks. And later on I can imagine him just 
laying his head on one of the lions, and going to sleep: and if 
that were so, no one in Babylon slept more sweetly than Daniel 
in the den of lions. 

But there was one man in Babylon who had no rest that 

. hight. If you could have looked into the king’s palace, you 
would have seen one man in great trouble. Darius did not 
have in his musicians to play to him that night. Away with 
music and singing! There was no feast that night: he could 
eat nothing. The servants brought him dainty food; but he 
had no appetite for it. He felt troubled: he could not sleep. 
He had put in that den of lions the best man in his kingdom ; 
and he upbraided himself for it. - He said to himself, “‘ How 
could I have been a party to such an act as that?” . 

And early in the morning— probably in the grey dawn, 
before the sun has risen—the men of Babylon could have 
heard the wheels of the king’s chariot rolling over the pave- 
ment; and King Darius might have been seen driving in hot 
haste to the lions’ den. I see him alight from his chariot in 
eager haste, and hear him cry down through the mouth of 
the den: “O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, 

_whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the 
lions ? ” . 

Hark! a voice gives answer —why, it is like a resurrection 
voice—and from the depths come up to the king’s ear the 
words of Daniel: “ O king, live for ever! My God hath sent 
fis angel, and hath shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not 
hurt me: forasmuch as before Him innocency was found in 
ine; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.” 

The lions could not harm him. The very hairs of his head » 
were. numbered. I tell you, that whenever a man stands by 


a 


86 “ VO MANNER OF HURT!” 


God, God will stand by him It was well for Daniel that he 
did not swerve. Oh, how his name shines! What a blessed 
character he was! 

The king gives command that Daniel should be taken up 
out of the den. And, as he reaches the top, I fancy I see them 
embracing one another ; and that then Daniel mounts the king’s 
chariot, and is driven back with him to the royal palace. There 
were two happy men in Babylon that morning. Most likely 
they sat down at meat together, thankful and rejoicing. 

“No manner of hurt was found upon him.” The God who 
had preserved Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the fiery 
furnace, so that ‘‘no smell of fire had passed on them,” had 
preserved Daniel from the jaws of the lions. 

But Daniel’s accusers fared very differently. So to speak, 
they “ digged a pit for him ; and are fallen into it themselves.” 
The king orders that Daniel’s accusers shall be delivered to 
the same ordeal. And they were cast into the den; “and the 
lions had the mastery of them, and brake all their bones in 
pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the den.” 

Young men, let us come out from the world; let us trample 
it under our feet ; let us be true to God; let us stand in rank, 
and keep step, and fight boldly for our King! And our 
“crowning time” shall come by and by. Yes, the reward will 
come by and by; and then it may perhaps be said of one, 
or another, of us: “O man, greatly beloved!” Young men, 
your moral character is more than money, mark that! It is 
worth more than the honour of the world: that is fleeting, 
and will soon be gone. It is worth more than earthly position : 
that is transient, and will soon be gone. But to have God 
with you, and to be with God—what a grand position! It is 
an eternal inheritance. 


I should like to say a few more words about Daniel. If 
you will refer to the tenth chapter, you will read that an angel 


* 


t 


“A MAN GREATLY BELOVED.” | 5? 


came to him, and told him he was “a man greatly beloved.” 
Another angel had on a previous occasion brought him a 
similar message. Many are of opinion that the one described 
in the tenth chapter as appearing to Daniel is none other than 
the one “like unto the Son of Man,” who visited John when 
he was banished to the Isle of Patmos. People thought that 
John was sent off to that island by himself; but no! the angel 
of God was with him. And so it was with Daniel, taken from 
his own country and his own people. Here in this chapter we 
read: ‘‘ Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked; and behold 
a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with 
fine gold of Uphaz..... And he said unto me, O Daniel, 
a man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak 
unto thee ; and stand upright : for unto thee am I now sent.” 

It was Daniel’s need that brought this angel from the glory- 
land. And it was the Son of God right by his side in that city 
of Babylon. As I said before, that was the second time the 
word had come to him that he was “greatly beloved.” Aye, 
and even ¢hree ¢zmes did a messenger come from the throne of 
God to tell him this. 

I love that precious verse in the eleventh chapter : “The 
people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.” 
And also those two verses of the twelfth chapter: “ Many of 
them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake: some to 
everlasting life ; and some to shame and everlasting contempt. 
And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the 
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the 
stars for ever and ever.” 

This was. the consolation the angel bore to Daniel; and 
great consolation it was. The fact concerning all of us is that 
we like to shine. There is no doubt about that. Every 
mother likes her‘child to shine. If her boy shines at school by 
getting to the head of his class, the proud mother tells all the 
neighbours ; and she has a right to do so. 


58 “AS THE STARS.” 


But it is not the great of this world who will shine the 
brightest. Fora few years they may shed bright light: but 
they go out in darkness ; they have no inner light. Shining for 
a time, they go out in the blackness of darkness Where are 
the great men who did not know Daniel’s God? Did they 
shine long? Why, we know of Nebuchadnezzar and the rest 
of them scarcely anything, except as they fill in the story about 
these humble men of God. We are not told that statesmen 
shall shine: they may for a few days or years; but they are 
soon forgotten. Look at those great ones who passed away in 
the days of Daniel. How wise in council they were! how 
mighty and victorious over many nations! what gods upon 
earth they were! Yet their names are forgotten, and written 
in the sand. Philosophers, falsely so-called, do they live? 
Behold men of science—scientific men, they call themselves— 
going down into the bowels of the earth, hammering away at 
some rock, and trying to make it talk against the voice of 
God. They shall go down to death by and by; and their 
names shall rot. But the man of God shines. Yes, it is he 
who shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. This Daniel 
has been gone for 2,500 years; but still increasing millions 
read of his life and actions. And so it shall be to the end. 
He will only get better known and better loved ; he will only 
shine the brighter as the world grows older. Of a truth, 
“they that be wise” and “turn many to righteousness” shall 
shine on, like stars, to eternity. 

And this blessed, thrice blessed, happiness, of shining in 
the glory, is like all the blessings of God’s kingdom, for every 
one. Even without the least claim to education or refinement 
you can shine if you will. A poor working man, or a poor sailor 
before the mast, can shine for ever, if he only works for the King- 
dom of God. The Bible does not say the great shall shine, but 
“they that turn many to righteousness.” A false impression has 
got hold of many of God's people. They have formed the idea 


“70 EVERY MAN HIS WORK.” ‘59 


that only a few can speak on behalf of God. If anything is to be 
done for the souls of men, nine-tenths of the people say, ‘‘ Oh, 
the ministers must do it.” It does not enter into the thoughts 
of many people that they have any-part in the matter. It is the 
devil’s work to keep Christians from the blessed privilege of 
winning souls to God. ANy ONE CAN DO THIS WORK, 

Do you not see how that little mountain rill keeps swelling 
till it carries everything before it? Little trickling streams have 
tun into it till now, a mighty river, it has great cities on its 
banks, and the commerce of all nations floating on its waters. 
So when a single soul is won to Christ you cannot see the 
result. A single one multiplies to a thousand ; and the thou- 
sand into ten thousand. Perhaps a million shall be the fruit. 
We cannot tell. We only know that the Christian who has 
turned “ many to righteousness” shall indeed shine for ever and 
ever. Look at those poor, unlettered fishermen, the disciples 
of Jesus. They were not learned men, but they were great in 
winning souls. And there is not a child but can work for God. 

The one thing that keeps people from working for God is 
that they have not the desire todo so. Ifa man has this desire 
God soon qualifies him. And what we want is God’s qualifica- 
tion: it must come from Him. 

In our large meetings there are frequently three thousand 
Christians present. Would-it be too much to expect if these 
were living in communion with Christ that they should each 
lead one soul to the Lord with a month? The.Son of God — 
gave His life for them—shall they refuse to work for Him 
when He supplies the needed power? What results should 
we see in souls saved if every one did his or her work. How 
many times have I watched at the close of a meeting to see 
if Christians would speak to the sorrowing ones. If we only 
had open eyed watchers for souls there would be multitudes of 
inquirers where now there are individual cases. Every church 


60 WORKING FOR GOD. 


would need an inquiry meeting after every gospel service, 
and these inquiry rooms would be crowded. These inquiring 
ones are at every meeting, just anxious to have warm-hearted 
Christians lead them to Christ. They are timid, but will 
always listen to one speaking to them about Christ. Let the 
prayer of every Christian be, “Oh God, give me souls for my 
hire.” What would be the result if this were the case with 
us? Multitudes would be sending up shouts of praise to 
God, and making heaven glad. Where there is an anxious 
sinner, there is the place for the Christian. 


“WHAT ART THOU DOING?” 


‘© What art ¢how doing, Christian? { ‘‘ What doest thou, redeemed one, 


Is it work for Christ thy Lord? Child of a mighty King? 
Art thou winning many sinners What glory to thy Father 
By thy life, thy pen, thy word? Doth thy princely bearing 
When the solemn question com- bring? 
eth, If no one brought Him honour, 
What will thine answer be? And no one gave Him praise, 
Canst thou point to something To thee it appertaineth 
finished ?— The psean-note to raise. 
Saying—‘‘ Lord, my work for 
Thee !” ‘© What doest thou here? Where- 
ever 
‘© What doest thou in service >— Thine earthly lot be cast, 
Art thou taking active part ? * Oh, let each hour and moment 
Are life and tongue in earnest, In gladsome work be pass d! 
Outflow of loving heart ? Here! thou may’st do a life- 
Or art thou idly gazing work ; 
While others toil and sow, Here ! thou may’st win a crown, 
Content with simply praising Starlit and gem-surrounded, 


The earnestness they show? To cast before the throne.” 


Eva TRAVERS POOLE, 


A SELECTION FROM THE CATALOGUE 


— OFr— 


FLEMING H. REVELL, 


Publisher of Evangelical Literature, 


148 & 1s0 MADISON STREET, CHICAGO. 


The Following Books sent Post-paid on Receipt of Price. 


HELPS IN BIBLE STUDY. 


Notes and Suggestions for Bible Readings. Seventeenth thousand, 
Compiled by S. R. Brices and J. H. ELLiorr. Acknowledged to 
be the very best help for Bible readings in print. Containing, in 
addition to twelve introductory chapters on plans and methods of 
Bible study and Bible readings, over six hundred outlines of Bible 
readings by many of the most eminent Bible students of the day. 

Large 12mo, 262 pages, with complete index, cloth, fine library 
style, $1.00; Flexible cloth, travelers’ edition, 75c; Cheap edition, 
paper covers, 5ac. 

This is a book which every Bible student should possess. Those 
_ who conduct Bible readings will find it most suggestive.—Cfrés- 
tian Progress, 


Symbols and Systems in Bible Readings. By Rev. W. F. Crarts. 


Giving a plan of Bible reading, with fifty verses definitely assigned 
for each day, the Bible being arranged with much labor in the order 
of its events. The entire symbolism of the Bible also explained 
concisely and clearly. 100 hints upon Bible markings and Bible 
readings are added. 

A year of work upon such a system would yield rich harvests of 
Bible knowledge and spiritual experience.—S 5S. World. 


The True Tabernacle. A series of lectures on the Jewish Tabernacle 


and its typical signification. By GEorGE C. NEEDHAM. Illustrated, 
cloth, neat, 75c. 


“C. H. M.’s” Notes. By C. H. McIntTosH. Genesis, 75c; Exodus, 75c; 


Leviticus, 75c; Numbers, 75c; Deuteronomy, 2 vols, each, 75c. 
The notes breathe a very sweet and reverential spirit, and the 
author shows wonderful insight into the heart of truths.— Zvangelist, 
Mr. D. L. Moody says of these books: “They have been to me 
a very key to the Scriptures.” 
Major D. W. Whittle says: “Under God they have blessed me 
more than any books, outside of the Bible itself, that I have ever 
read, and have led me to a love of the Bible that is proving an 


unfailing source of profit.” 


HELPS IN BIBLE STUDY. 


Life and Times of David, King of Israel; or, The Life of Faith 
Exemplifed. By “C. H. M.” Third edition, revised. r2mo, 200 
pp., Cloth, 6oc. 


The Gospel According to Moses, as seen in the Tabernacle and its 
Various Services. By GkorGE RocEers. New edition, enlarged 
16mo, 124 pp. Paper, soc; Cloth, 75c. 

No preacher or teacher should be ignorant of the truth which 
this small volume very simply but forcibly enunciates.— The Record. 


Outline of the Books of the Bible. By Rev. J. H. Brooxgs, D. D. 
Invaluable to the young student of the Bible as a * First Lessons” 
in the study of the Bible. 180 pp., cloth, 50c; Paper covers, 25c. 


Ruth, the Moabitess ; or, Gleanings in the Book of Ruth. By Henry 
MooreHouSE. A characteristic series of Bible readings, full of 
suggestions and instruction. 

Neat 16mo, paper covers, 20c; cloth, gilt stamped, 4oc. 

Contains many fresh and original remarks, all tending to practical 
usefulness ; a capital bit of commenting on a favorite book. —Spur- 
feon's Sword and Trowel. 


Bible Readings. By Henry MoorrnHouse. A series of eleven ser- 
mons of comment and exposition, by one pre-eminently the man of 
one book-—an incessant, intense, prayerful student of the Bible. 

Neat, 16mo, paper covers, 30c; cloth, gilt stamped, 6oc. 


Current Discussions in aa th By the Professors of Chicago 
Theological Seminary, Vol. I, cloth, 12mo, 248 pp., $1.00; paper 
covers, 50c. Vol. II, 328 pp., cloth, $1.5 oO. 

There is nothing in our language of ae kind. The American 
student has had to choose between the exhaustive and unremitting 
labors which are the price of first-hand knowledge, and reviews 
which rarely fail of being colored with partiality or prejudice. The 
volume before us is a helpful, fair and trustworthy statement of the 
present position and recent movements of theology.— Zhe Jnde- 
pendent, 

It may be safely said that from no one book in the English 
language can ministers gather so much recent information con- 
cerning the topics treated.—Fresbyterian Witness. 


The Date of Our Gospels. A critical argument and examination of 
evidences, particularly regarding their authenticity and avthorship. 
By SAMUEL Ives Curtiss, D. D., Union Park Theological Semi- 
nary, Chicago. : 
Sq. 16mo, neat, flexible cloth, 50c; paper edition, 25c. 
The argument is winnowed of superfluous words, and presents a 
luminous and brief case.—Mew York (ntependent. 


A New Catechism. By Rev. J. T Hypz. A manual of instruction 
for students and other thoughtful inquirers. 
Cloth, 12mo, $1.00. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST. 


AIDS IN CHRISTIAN WORK. 


Children’s Meetings and Howto Conduct Them. By I.ucy J. RIDER 
and NELLIE M. CARMAN, Introduction by Rev. J. H. VINCENT, 
D.D. Contains contributions from over forty well-known workers 
among children, and gives the cream of their experience. The out- 


line lessons (over sixty in number), diagrams, and music will: 


especially commend it to the thoughtful teacher. Pp. 208, cloth, 
net $1.00. 

It is a good book, that suggests something in addition to that 
which it conveys.—Fournzal and Messenger. ' 

The volume will be heartily welcomed by many having this most 
important part of the religious instruction of the young in hand. 
—Zion’s Herald, 


Secret Power ; or, the Secret of Success in Christian Life and Christian 


Work. By D. L. Moopy. Fifty-fifts thousand. 12mo volume, 
116 pp., rich gilt and black stamp, cloth, 60c; cheap edition, paper 
cover, 30c. 

Every page is full of stimulating thought for Christian workers.— 
Christian Commonwealth, 


The Work of Preaching Christ. By Bishop CHarLes PETTITT Mc- 


ILvaInE, A revised edition of an important little work. Paper 
covers, 15¢. 


The Prayer Meeting and Its Improvement. By Rev. Lewis O. 


THOMPSON, with introduction by Rev. A, EF. Kittredge, D. D. 
Sixth edition, Revised. An attractive volume. 12mo, pp. 256, $1.25. 

A valuable, because a very suggestive book.—-S, S. Times. 

* * * “This is so good a book that we wish we could afford to 
give a copy of it to every young minister. Revive your prayer meet- 
ings and the churches will be revived. Mr, Thompson says some 
capital things in a telling manner, and, as his pages are full of fire 
and gunpowder, we hope certain old, worn-out things among us 
will be exploded, and good things set on fire. A brother who has 
this book handy will be helped to lead lively meetings, conducting 


them in varied ways, and expatiating on different topics, so as to ‘ 


keep up freshness, and avoid monotony and dullness.—C. H, Spur- 
Leon. 


Revivals; Their Place and Power. By Rev. HERRICK JOHNSON, D. 


D,. Cloth, flexible, 25c. 

An admirable discussion of the subject.—/z¢eror. 

We know of no publication that covers the ground so briefly and 
satisfactorily.-_Baltimore Presbyterian. 

Dr. Johnson’s experience has qualified him to speak upon this 
subject.—/udependent. 


To the Work! To the Work! By D. L. Moopy. Exhortations to 


Christians. Paper covers, 30c; Cloth boards, gilt dies, 60c. Just 
published, 

This new work by Mr. Moody, is in the line of his most success- 
ful efforts, that of stirring Christians to active, personal, aggressive 
work for the Master. Mr. Moody has frequently been heard to say 
that it was much better to set 100 men to work than to do the work 
of roomen, This little volume will, we confidently believe, be a 
means of inspiring not hundreds but thousands to more efficient 
effort in Christian life. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST. 
_ 3 


PRE-MILLENNIAL LITERATURE, 


Pre- Millennial Essays. A series of papers on prophetical subjects by 
eminent writers. Edited by NATHANIEL WEST, D. D. Issued in 
one large 12mo volume of 500 pages, $1.50. 

Those who desire to have, within the compass of a single volume, 
all that is necessary to an intelligent consideration of the subject, 
will find it here in a very readable form. It is certainly the ablest 
work that has appeared on the pre-millennial side.—Canada Pres- 
byterian, 

The best treatment of this subject from the pre-millenial side that 
has ever been published.— The Standard. _ 

It is pious, elaborate and fraternal. We are pleased with the 
forcible, yet candid style of argumentation.—Zion’s Herald. 


Maranatha; or, the Lord Cometh. By Rev. J. H. Brookes, D. D. 
Pp. 445, cloth, $1.25 ; paper, 50c. 

Present Truth; being the Testimony of the Holy Ghost on the Second 
Coming of the Lord, the Divinity of Christ, and the Personality of 
the Holy Ghost. By Rev. J. H. Brooxes, D. D. 250 pp., fine 
cloth, 75c. Cheap edition, paper cover, 25c. 


Second Coming of Christ. By Rev. J. H. Brookes, D.D. Price, 15c. 


The Blessed Hope; or, The Glorious Coming of the Lord. By 
WILLIs Lorp, D. D. New and cheaper edition. A practical treat- 
ise; a volume well adapted to lead to a more joyous Christian life. - 
250 pp., cloth, $1.00. Cheap edition, for circulation, paper covers 
only, 25c. 


Second Coming of Christ. By GEORGE MULLER, of Bristol, Eng. 
A neat little tract of 32 pages, suitable for circulation. Per dozen, 
40c3 100 copies, $2.50. 


Jesus Is Coming. By W. E.B. A most popular hand book, Séx- 
teenth thousand. Giving seven arguments in favor of the pvre-mil- 
lennial coming—stating the distinction between the Rapture and 
the Revelation, and between the Church and the Kingdom—and 
containing a diagram, with explanations. New, enlarged edition, 
160 pp., cloth, 5cc; paper covers, I5c. 


Twenty Reasons for Believing that the Second Coming of the Lord 
is Near. 34 pages and cover, neat, 15c. Per dozen, $1.00. 
Epiphainia. A study in Prophecy. By E. J. EDGREN, Professor of 
Biblical Interpretation in the Morgan Park Theological Seminary. 
16mo, I12 pp., cloth, neat, 75c. 
Dr. Edgren writes as one who both loves and reveres the Sacred 
Word. He has altogether made a book creditable in a literary not 
less than in an evangelical point of view.—C&icago Standard, 


Waiting for the Morning, and Other Poems. By the author of 
“Twenty Reasons for Believing the Coming of the Lord is Near.” 
Sq. 16mo, pp. 54, red line, cloth, elegant, 5oc, Cheap edition, paper 
covers, neat, 25c. 


The Second Coming of Christ. By D. L. Moony. Revised. 
Forty-second thousand, 32 pp. and cover, toc. Per dozen, $1.00. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST. 


“HELPS FOR INQUIRERS. 


. Grace and Truth Under Twelve Different Aspects. By W. P. Mackay, 
M.A Fforty-eighth thousand of American edition. The English 
edition has reached a sale of over two hundred thousand, besides 
being translated into German, Spanish, Swedish. Arabic, Italian, 
Dutch, Gaelicand Welsh. 12mo, pp. 282, paper, 35c; cloth, fine, 75c. 

Mr. -Moody says of this work: ~ I know of no book in print better 
adapted to aid in the work of him who would be a winner of souls, 
or to place in the hands of the unconverted.” 


My Inquiry Meeting; or Plain Truths for Anxious Souls. By ROBERT 
Boyp, D. D. Being the experience of a pastor during many years 
of personal dealing with anxious and careless souls. Pp. 64, 15c. 

For simplicity, clearness, and force of statement we have met with 
nothing that equals this little volume. We can think of no better 
service a pastor could render to Sunday-school teachers, and other 
guides of souls, than to secure their reading of these pages. Nor 
could inquirers have any better help in their search for truth.—7%e 
Interior. 


Glad Tidings. By Roserr Boyp, D. D. A book for inquirers. 

12mo, pp. 100, cloth, neat, joc. Cheap edition, for circulation, 25c. 

This book has been used largely in connection with the great revival 
meetings both in Great Britain and this land. 


The Soul and Its Difficulties. By H. W. SottTau. Paper, pp. 
108, Sc. 

How to Be Saved; or, the Sinner Directed to the Saviour. By J. H. 
Brookes, D. D. Pp. 120, paper cover, 25c; cloth, Soc. 

The Way to God and Howto FindIt. By D. L. Moopy. 
fifty-fifth thousand. A book for the inquirer and Christian 
worker. Cloth, rich black and gold stamp, 60c; paper, tinted 
covers, 30¢. 

The way of salvation is made as clear as simple language and forci- 
ble, pertinent illustration can makeit. In two features it is equal to 
anything that Mr. Moody has produced—in close adherence to the 
Word of God, and in profound earnestness—while in simplicity, 
directness of appeal and originality it is superior. It is a great 
matter to send such a work, so full of Christ, all over the churches, 
where it may, by the work of the Spirit, arrest the careless and 
move the ungodly.—Lutheran Observer. 

God’s Way of Salvation. By ALEXANDER MARSHALL. A brief 
statement of the Way of Life, with answers to popular objec- 
tions. Each brief page complete in itself, and containing a sermon 
in a nutshell... 48 pages and covers, 5c. Per hundred, $2.50. 

Doubts Removed. By Ca@sar Matan, D:D. Paper covers, 5c; per 
dozen, 5oc. 

“Tt contains the clearest statements and illustrations on the sub- 
ject treated we have ever read.” 


Welcome to Jesus. By Rev. C. H. Spurcron. A series of 4 page 
tracts, with first page in attractive, illuminated designs, etc. Four 
different series, each containing 32 assortments, Price, per pack- 
age, 25c. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST. 


5 


POPULAR DEVOTIONAL BOOKS. 


Prevailing Prayer: What Hinders It? By D. L. Moopy. Cloth, 
uniform with To the Work! Heaven, etc., 60c; paper covers, 30c. 

An earnest and solemn work, full of helpful hints on the aids and 
hindrances to prevailing prayer. 

“This great subject has been the theme of apostles and prophets, 
and of all good men in all ages of the world; and my desire in send- 
ing forth this little volume is to encourage God’s children to seek 
by prayer ‘to move the arm that moves the world.’ "—Zixtract from 


Preface. 


The. Christian’s Secret of a Happy Life By Hannan WHITALL 
SmiTH; author of “A Happy Life.” Revised edition, from entirely 
new plates. 12mo, 240 pp., cloth, black and gold stamp, $1.00; 
paper cover, soc. 

A book we unhesitatingly recommend. We have not for years 
read a book with more delight and profit.—Southwestern Chris- 
tian Advocate. 

We are delighted with the book. It reaches the very core of 
Christian experience.—Saptist Weekly. 

Worthy of universal circulation.—CAristzan Union, 


Life, Warfare and Victory. By Maj. D. W. WHITTLE. Cloth, neat, 
124 pp., 60c; paper, 30Cc. 

This book has been prepared in the midst of evangelistic work, 
to meet the wish often expressed to the writer—that instruction 
given in Bible readings to young converts might be made available 
for their more careful study and permanent use.—£ixtract from 
Preface, 


Christ and the Scriptures. By Rev. ADOLPH SAPHIR. Cloth, 16mo, 
neat, 75c. 

To all disciples of Jesus this work commends itself at once by its 
grasp of truth, its insight, the life in it, and its spiritual force.— 
Christian Work, 

“tin these days of doubt and hypercriticism such a volume, breath- 
ing a spirit of earnest devotion, lifting the mind to a better con- 
ception of the immeasureable worth of the Person and the Word, and 
written, too, by a son of Israel, cannot but be welcome and helpful.” 


The Holy Life. A book for Christians seeking the “ Rest of Faith.” 
By Rev. Evan H. Hopkins. Fifth thousand, 18mo, 115 pages, 
cloth, beveled edge, 6oc. 


Walking Worthy of God. A reprint from the works of Rev. JoHN 
FLAVELL, with an introduction by (and published at the request 
of) Maj. D. W. Whittle. A valuable book for circulation—an 
incentive to Christian living. 

Sq. 16mo, pp. 43, 15¢. 

Gems from Northfield. A Record of the Best Thoughts exchanged 
at the Conference for Bible Study, convened at Northfield, by D. 
L. Moopy. 

I2mo, pp. 116. Price $1.00. 
The thoughts and expositions of Scripture which are presented in 
this volume are of rare practical value.—Herald and Presbyter. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST, 


POPULAR DEVOTIONAL BOOKS. 


My Morning Word. A book of texts for every day in the year. 
Cloth, plain, 75c; Cloth, gilt edges, $1.00; Calf, flexible, gilt, $1.75. 
The several texts for every day each contain the ‘‘Morning Word,” 
this single word being the key-word by means ef which the texts 
are called to mind. 


Birth-Day Memorial Text-Book. 

A handsome little volume with a short text for every day in the 
year, with blank space opposite for autographs. Especially 
attractive for children. 

32mo, cloth, black and gold stamp, 25c; per dozen, $2 50. 


The. Practice of the Presence of God. By “ Brother LAWRENCE.” 
Being a small collection of remarkable letters and “conversations” 
of a monk, 
Pp. 64, 24mo, paper cover, 10c; per dozen, 75c. 


Grace Sufficient. By Rev. HENRY Roissy. An extremely helpful work 
for the closet, with counsel and comfort for the Way of Life. Pp. 
265, cloth, $1.25. 


Clifton Springs Bible Readings. Containing the Bible Readings and 
Addresses given at the Conference of Believers at Clifton Springs, 
N. Y., by Messrs. Brookes, Erdman, Whittle, Needham, Parsons, 
Clark, Marvin and others. 
Sq. 16mo, 144 pp., cloth, fine, 50c; paper covers, 25c. 


The Scarlet Line. A most suggestive tract upon Joshua JI and VI, - 
showing the close connection between the type of the Old Testa- 
ment and the Antitype of the New. 

36 pages and cover, 5c; per hundred, $3.00, 


Envelope Series of Tracts. By H. W. S., from “The Christian’s 

Secret of a Happy Life,” comprising the following: 

How to Enter into the Life. 

Difficulties Concerning Consecration. 

Difficulties Concerning Guidance, 

Difficulties Concerning Faith. 

Faith: What it is. 

Is God in Everything ? 

The Joy of Obedience. 

Practical Results. 

Sold only in packets of one dozen copies. May be had either 
assorted or all of the same kind. Price, per packet, 2o0c. 

“ They will form an excellent collection of tracts for distribution 
by those who wish their friends to share the ‘ Life that is hid with 
Christ.’ ” 


Words of Worth, from the Chicago Christian Convention. A verbatim 
report of the addresses before the Convention of October, 1882. 
I2mo, pp. 134, paper, 25¢. 
The addresses by such men as Rev. Marcns Rainsford, Rev. Chas. 
Spurgeon, Dr. W. P. Mackay, Rev. A. T. Pierson, D. D., and 
others, will be welcomed by many. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST, 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


Recollections of Henry Moorehouse, Evangelist. By GrorGeE C. 
NEEDHAM. Pp. 240, 15mo, cloth, beveled, $1.00. 
Mr. Moorehouse, the young English evangelist, was well-known 
throughout this country, and the volume is the most interesting 
biographical sketch of this remarkable man—a real inspiration. 


Plain Talks About the Theater. By Rev. Herrick JoHNson, D. 
D. Fifth Thousand. Pp, 84, cloth, soc.; paper, 2oc. 

Probably the modern theatre never received such a raking fire. 
—Zion’s Herald. 

As crushing as a charge of cavalry, and as convincing as logic can 
make truth. A terrific indictment of the theater.—7he Advance. 

May Christians Dance? By Rev. J. H. Brooxgss, D. D. 

Pp. 144, 16mo, cloth, 50c.; paper covers, 25. 

An able and wholesome consideration of the question from a 
Christian point of view.—Zion’s Herald, . 

Fred’s Dark Days. By Rosr HarTwick THORPE. A story of hero- 
ism in boyhood, written in an attractive style by the author of 
‘Curfew Must Not Ring To-night,” and ‘‘The Yule Log.” An 
excellent book for the young. 

Pp. 139, cloth, 75c. 

Fifty Years and Beyond; or, Old Age and How to Enjoy It. Com- 
piled by Rev. S. G. LATHROP, Fifteenth Thousaud. 

One large 1z2mo volume of over 400 pages, $1.00; presentation 
edition, gilt edges, $1.50. 

The object of this volume is to give to that great army who are 
fast hastening toward the “‘great beyond” some practical hints and 
helps as to the best way to make the most of the remainder of ¢he 
life that now is, and to give comfort and help as to the life that ts 
to come. 

Songs for the Service of Prayer. Compiled by R. S. THAIN, assisted 
by A. E, KirtrepGE, D. D., E. P. Goopwin, D. D., and W. M. 
LAWRENCE, D. D. A book specially adapted for use in the social 
meetings of the church. 

Cloth, pp. 240, 60c. Spccial terms to churches for introduction. 

Revell’s Record for Church Treasurers. The most convenient record 
yet published. Weekly envelope system. Simple, practical and 
systematic. 

Bound in half leather, quarto, $1.50. 

The Man-Traps of the City. By Rev. THos. E. GREEN. 


A book of timely warnings, where sin and crime are shorn of their 
mask. The life of the profligate is not presented in attractive 
colors, but in such a way as to stand forth in its true light—a 
thing to be abhorred. 

140 pages, cloth, rich goldstamp, 75c. Same in illuminated paper 
covers, 35. 

Woman’s Ministry, and other Expository addresses. By Mrs. GEORGE 
C. NEEDHAM. 

137 pp-, 16mo, cloth, 75c. 

The first expository address gives character to this book. Itis 
literally an exposition bearing on the question of woman’s relation 


to preaching and teaching. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST. 


NOTICE.—AII former books (before this series), issued in 
Mr. Moody’s name, have been mere compilations 
from newspaper reports of his sermons, 


issued without his consent and 
notwithstanding his protest, 


WORKS BY 
MR. D..L. MOODY, 


PUBLISHED BY 


* 


F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST., 
CHICAGO. 


("The following Books sent pcstpaid on receipt of price.) 


Over 850,000 copies of these works have already been sold, 
the greater portion within the last three years. 


To the Work! To. the Work! By D. L. Moopv. Exhortations to 
Christians. 

‘Tinted covers, 30c.; cloth boards, gilt dies, 6oc. 

Just published. 

This new work by Mr. Moody is in the line of his most successful 
efforts, that of stirring christians to active, personal, aggressive work 
for the Master. Mr. Moody has frequently been heard to say that 
it was much better to set 100 men to work than to do the work 
of 100 men. This little volume will we confidently believe be a 
means of inspiring not hundreds, but ¢Housands to more efficient 
effort in Christian life. 


Secret Power, or The Secret of Success in Christian Life and Christian 
Work. By D. L. Moony. Fifty-fifth Thousand. 

“This work, so full of inspiration and suggestion, has been re- 
printed in England, and has also been translated into French and 
Italian. Through the kindness of a consecrated lady, a copy of the 
book has been presented to every Protestant minister in Italy, | 
while another friend sends the English edition to every Presbyterian | 
minister in Ireland. 

Every page is full of stimulating thought for Christian workers.— 
Christian Commonwealth. i : 

It isa good statement of the secret of success in Christian Life, 
by one who has some claim to speak on such a theme.— The Outlook. 

This series of earnest and solemn Addresses. bear throughout that 
stamp of honest, eager earnestness, which is so striking 2 character- 
istic of the writer’s labors as a preacher.—Clerical World, 


WORKS BY D. L. MOODY. 


The Way to God, and How to Findit. Fifty-fifth Thousand. 

It consists of nine chapters of the kind only D. L. Moody can 
write. The little volume contains the most convincing argument 
ever framed for the nse of common people. It is a good book to 
drop into the sacliel of your boy or girl; good to send to some friend 
at a distance in whom you have an interest, and good upon your own 
study table.—Jrter Ocean, 

“The Way to God” is a theme upon which the Evangelist has 
been wont to dwell. Here in nine chapters he grasps together words 
of advice regarding that path which it is the happy privilege of the 
minister to continually make plain.— Chicago Standard, 

They are characterized by his usual simplicity, directness, fervor 
and exceptional power of vivid illustration. — Christian Herald. 

They are sharply to the point, plainly practical, and orthodox in a 
good, simple and true sense.—Christian Advocate. 

It will lead sinners to trust in God, and fire the hearts of layman 
and minister to noble works for the Master.—Aagtist Reflector. 

It puts the way so plain that he who runs may read.—LXeligious 
Telescope, 

It is an excellent manual for the soul winners, and for the awak- 
ened seeker, and we trust will be the means of leading thousands to 
Christian hope and heaven.—Zion’s Herald. 

Very earnest and powerful, abounding in apt illustrations, striking 
thoughts, and helpful, encouraging words. This book is written in 
the same plain, simple and pointed style that lends such force to his 
spoken words. The volume should find many readers. Those that 
buy it will not be disappointed.—WVational Baptist. 


Daniel, the Prophet. An Amplification and Extension of Mr. Moody’s 
various Lectures on the Life of Daniel. 

Tinted covers, 20c.; cloth, 4oc. 

A small book; but big as regards the truth it contains. Every 
worker in the Lord’s vineyard would be helped by reading it.—Raé?- 
way Signal, 

The Way and The Word. By D.L. Moopy. Forty-fifth Thousand. 

Paper, 15c.; cloth, 25c. 

This little work contains a very clear statement on the important 
subject, Regeneration, to which is added Mr. Moody’s valuable hints 
on Bible Reading. 

Mr. Moody has used this book by the thousand, placing them in 
the hands of young converts at the close of his meetings. 


The Second Coming of Christ. By D. L. Moopy. Fortieth Thon- 
sand. Tinted covers, roc. 

‘*The moment a man takes hold of the truth that Jesus is coming 
back again to receive His followers to Himself, this world loses its 
hold upon him. Gas stocks and water stocks, and stocks in banks 
and railroads, are of very much less consequence to him then. His 
heart is free, and he looks for the blessed appearing of the Lord, 
who at His coming, will take him into His blessed Kingdom.”— 
Lixtract, 

How to Conduct Inquiry Meetings. By D. L.-Moopy, and The 
Use of the Bible in Inquiry Meetings. By D. W. WHITTLE. 
40 pages and cover. Price r5c. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST. 


2 


WORKS BY D. L. MOODY. 


Prevailing Prayer, What Hinders it? By D. L. Moopy. 

Cloth, uniform with “To the Work,” ‘‘Heaven,” &c., 60c. 
Paper covers, 30¢. 

An earnest and solemn work, full of helpful hints on the aids and 
hindrances to prevailing prayer. 

‘‘This great subject has been the theme of apostles and prophets, 
and of all good men in al! ages of the world; and my desire in send- 
ing forth this little volume is to encourage God’s children to seek 
by prayer ‘to move the arm that moves the world,’ "—Lxtract from 
Preface. 

Heaven; Where It Is; Its Inhabitants, and How to Get There. By D. 

L. Moopy. 88th Thousand. 

While adapted to the humble capacity, it will command the atten- 
tion of the mature and thoughtful.—Wettonal Presbyterian, 

Mr. Moody is sure of an audience, and well deserves a large one 
for this book.—Presbytertan Witness. 

Mr. Moody’s unfaltering faith and rugged enthusiasm are mani- 
fested on every page.—Christian Advocate, 

Eminently scriptural, earnest and impressive, will be welcomed 
by thousands.—Zz02's Herald, 

Characterized by his apt, homely illustrations and not a few pithy 
anecdotes, such as few can equal.— 7he Advance, 

A most acceptable monogram in its author’s own short, pointed, 
monosyllabic, Anglo-saxon style.—Ferald of Truth, California. 

Abounds in apt and telling illustrations.— 7 ke Standard, Chicago. 

Anything from.the pen of this renowed evangelist will be read 
with interest.—/udex, Atlanta, Ga. ; 

The clear, Scriptural, common sense treatment of this subject by 
Mr. Moody has been commended in the highest terms by leading 
theologians in Europe and America, while the common people have 
heard them everywhere with gladness.—Centra/ Baptist. 


Twelve Select Sermons. By D. L. Moopy. r1oth Thouwand. 

This volume contains those special sermons, which have appeared 
to be most useful, and under which there have been the greatest 
results. 

Carefully revised by: Mr. Moody, they present a volume of choice 
and striking addresses, sure to command a large sale. 

With the effect of these addresses when spofex, the whole land is 
acquainted, and now that they are wrsttez, they will tend to keep 
in force the impressions they have already made.—Methodist. 

Mr. Moody’s happy style, abounding in striking anecdote and 
illustration, make it a most readable and convincing volume.— Ze 
Watchman. OS 

Full of earnest enthusiasm which characterizes everything Mr. 
Moody does, and will be read with interest.—Detroit Free Press. 

There are few who heard any one of these sermons who will fail 
to be delighted with this opportunity of making a calm acquaint- 
ance with it again.— Daily Review. 

This book is one of pre-eminent interest, as containing an author- 
ized record of the teaching under which, along with other means, 
such great and extensive religious impressions have been recently 
produced in this country.— 7e Messenger. 

Will be read by thousands with memorable interest.—Record. 


CHICAGO: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON ST.. 


ii 


H 


Cc 


Ss 


ER 


NV 


2 
) 


< 


neh 


sh er 


2 abet aie S27 


Le de i ae 
ee Oren 2. 


= ces nomena A 


CHICAGO | 


hi a 


= 48 458 146 


AUTHORIZED WORKS BY D. L. MOODY. ioe 


The Way to God, and How to Find It. - 2 

It puts the wav so plainly that ‘‘he who runs ny read.”—Religious - 

Telescope, 

An excellent manual for the soul-winner and the awakened sinne.., , 
which we trust will be the means of leading thousands to Christian life 
and heaven.— Zion's Herald. 

Heaven, and How to Get There. 


While adapted to the hunblest capacity, it will command the atten- - 
tiomof the mature and thoughtful.— AY ational Presbyterian. 


Secret Power; or, The Secret of Success in Christian Life 
and Work. 


Every page is full of stimulating thonghé for Christian workers. 
—Christian Conemon Wealth. 


ae 


Twelve Select Sermons. 


With the effect of these addresses, when spoken, the whole Innd is 
nequainted, and aw that they are printed. they Wil tend to keep 
in torce the a ession they have already made.—Methodist. 


The above books, wi'?. rich black and gol side Lup, very hand- ° 
somely bound, ev: sh, - - - : - - - Ge. ge 

Cheap edition, paper covers, each, - - - - - ~ - . 80G~ 4. 7 Ries 

How to Study the Bible. Revised. A valuable little work 
which shonld be carefully read .nd studied by all who desire to enjoy 


the study of the Wor d. Cloth Hextniey 5 5 = - $0 15 
Paper cover, - SR oe cee pe O10. 
Per dozen, paper, - - - - - - - - - 100 0 
The Way and fhe Word. 
Paper, - S> U 2 a Fos Z 3 - Oo 
Cloth, - : - 0 25. 


Compr: ising “Regener ation” and “How to Study the Bible. ds 


Second Coming of Christ (The). By D. L. Moody. Re-. 
vised fron original notes. 


32 Pages and cover, - - - - 7 - - - - = 016 
Per dozen, - - = - - - - -. 100 


‘There ate three vreat facts forctold in the Word of God: First. 
That’ arist should come; that has been fulfilled. Su:‘onp. That 
. the Holy Ghost should come; that was fulfilled at Pentecost, and 
the Church is able to testify to it by its experience of His saving 
grace. Tairp. The return of our Lord from Fleaven; for tliis we 
are told to watch and wait, “till He come.”—Hs tract. 


Inquiry Meetings. By Messrs. Moody and Whittle. Compris- 
ing ‘‘How to Conduct Inqniry Meetings,” by D. I. Moody, and.-'The 
Use of the Bible in nGiry: Meghines: : ay D. W. Whittle. 40 pages 
and cover. Price, - ” - - - $0 15 
Per dozen, - - - - - - = - - +1 95 

The Full Assurance of Faith. A most eoarineing and helpful 
little book upon one of Mr. Moody’s favorite theres. 

Price, paper cover, lic.; Cloth; flexible, gilt stani, 15e. | 

Daniel, The Prophet. A series of addresses ‘ou the iife of Danici. 

Price, in | paper covers,. 20¢. ; cloth, flexible, 40c. = 


- Cincaco: F. H. REVELL, 148 & 150 MADISON. St. 


Any of the above sent post free to any addr e88 ON Feet! of price. 


of . a ee es 


